1:"$Sreact.fragment"
2:I[93943,["/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/08cykig6vtx_p.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/07qi2okp-.yp9.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0frujd.eyhz4o.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0n4z.7yu76je-.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/13~bdn2kkrwr4.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0x5y_5__-pe8z.js"],"ConferenceCategoryView"]
4e:I[97367,["/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/08cykig6vtx_p.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/07qi2okp-.yp9.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0frujd.eyhz4o.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0n4z.7yu76je-.js"],"OutletBoundary"]
4f:"$Sreact.suspense"
3:T443,Diffusion large language models (dLLMs) have emerged as a promising alternative to standard autoregressive (AR) Transformers, offering parallel token generation and flexible infilling instead of strict left-to-right decoding. This post walks through how masked discrete diffusion works at a high level: a forward process that randomly masks tokens, a reverse process that iteratively denoises them, and training setups that either start from scratch or adapt existing AR models. We then discuss how diffusion decoding differs from AR decoding, including its strengths for infilling, structured generation, and long-horizon planning, as well as practical challenges around length control, number of denoising steps, and blockwise generation. Finally, we examine both sides of the current evidence: where dLLMs shine in data-constrained regimes and where theoretical and empirical work suggests they can underperform or even collapse back toward autoregressive behavior, ending with some possible hybrid futures that combine diffusion for reasoning and autoregression for generation. Show more4:T695,Cybersecurity operations demand assistant LLMs that support diverse workflows without exposing sensitive data. Existing solutions either rely on proprietary APIs with privacy risks or on open models lacking domain adaptation. To bridge this gap, we curate 11.8B tokens of cybersecurity-focused continual pretraining data via large-scale web filtering and manual collection of high-quality resources, spanning 28.6K documents across frameworks, offensive techniques, and security tools. Building on this, we design an agentic augmentation pipeline that simulates expert workflows to generate 266K multi-turn cybersecurity samples for supervised fine-tuning. Combined with general open-source LLM data, these resources enable the training of RedSage, an open-source, locally deployable cybersecurity assistant with domain-aware pretraining and post-training. To rigorously evaluate the models, we introduce RedSage-Bench, a benchmark with 30K multiple-choice and 240 open-ended Q&amp;A items covering cybersecurity knowledge, skills, and tool expertise. RedSage is further evaluated on established cybersecurity benchmarks (e.g., CTI-Bench, CyberMetric, SECURE) and general LLM benchmarks to assess broader generalization. At the 8B scale, RedSage achieves consistently better results, surpassing the baseline models by up to +5.59 points on cybersecurity benchmarks and +5.05 points on Open LLM Leaderboard tasks. These findings demonstrate that domain-aware agentic augmentation and pre/post-training can not only enhance cybersecurity-specific expertise but also help to improve general reasoning and instruction-following. Project page: https://risys-lab.github.io/RedSage/ Show more5:T5e6,Modern large-scale recommendation systems rely heavily on user interaction history sequences to enhance the model performance.  The advent of large language models and sequential modeling techniques, particularly transformer architectures, has led to significant advancements (e.g., HSTU, SIM, and TWIN models). While scaling to ultra-long user histories (10k to 100k items) generally improves model performance, it also creates significant challenges on latency, queries per second (QPS) and GPU cost in industry-scale recommendation systems. Existing models do not adequately address these industrial scalability issues. In this paper, we propose a novel two-stage modeling framework, namely \emph{VIrtual Sequential Target Attention} (VISTA), which decomposes traditional target attention from a candidate item to user history items into two distinct stages: (1) user history summarization into a few hundred tokens; followed by (2) candidate item attention to those tokens. These summarization token embeddings are then cached in storage system and then utilized as sequence features for downstream model training and inference. This novel design for scalability enables VISTA to scale to lifelong user histories (up to one million items) while keeping downstream training and inference costs fixed, which is essential in industry. Our approach achieves significant improvements in offline and online metrics and has been successfully deployed on an industrial platform serving billions of users. Show more6:T4ff,Enhancing computational efficiency and reducing deployment costs for large language models (LLMs) have become critical challenges in various resource-constrained scenarios. In this work, we present DistilQwen2.5, a family of distilled, lightweight LLMs derived from the public Qwen2.5 models. These distilled models exhibit enhanced instruction-following capabilities compared to the original models based on a series of distillation techniques that incorporate knowledge from much larger LLMs. In our industrial practice, we first leverage powerful proprietary LLMs with varying capacities as multi-agent teachers to select, rewrite, and refine instruction-response pairs that are more suitable for student LLMs to learn. After standard fine-tuning, we further leverage a computationally efficient model fusion approach that enables student models to progressively integrate fine-grained hidden knowledge from their teachers. Experimental evaluations demonstrate that the distilled models possess significantly stronger capabilities than their original checkpoints. Additionally, we present use cases to illustrate the applications of our framework in real-world scenarios. To facilitate practical use, we have released all the DistilQwen2.5 models to the open-source community.7:T646,Researchers and practitioners in natural language processing and computational linguistics frequently observe and analyze the real language usage in large-scale corpora.
For that purpose, they often employ off-the-shelf pattern-matching tools, such as grep, and keyword-in-context concordancers, which is widely used in corpus linguistics for gathering examples.
Nonetheless, these existing techniques rely on surface-level string matching, and thus they suffer from the major limitation of not being able to handle orthographic variations and paraphrasing---notable and common phenomena in any natural language.
In addition, existing continuous approaches such as dense vector search tend to be overly coarse, often retrieving texts that are unrelated but share similar topics.
Given these challenges, we propose a novel algorithm that achieves soft (or semantic) yet efficient pattern matching by relaxing a surface-level matching with word embeddings.
Our algorithm is highly scalable with respect to the size of the corpus text utilizing inverted indexes.
We have prepared an efficient implementation, and we provide an accessible web tool.
Our experiments demonstrate that the proposed method
(i) can execute searches on billion-scale corpora in less than a second, which is comparable in speed to surface-level string matching and dense vector search;
(ii) can extract harmful instances that semantically match queries from a large set of English and Japanese Wikipedia articles;
and (iii) can be effectively applied to corpus-linguistic analyses of Latin, a language with highly diverse inflections.8:T717,As the performance of artificial intelligence systems has dramatically increased, so too has the environmental impact of creating these systems. While many model developers release estimates of the power consumption and carbon emissions from the final training runs for their latest models, there is comparatively little transparency into the impact of model development, hardware manufacturing, and total water usage throughout. In this work, we estimate the real-world environmental impact of developing a series of language models, ranging from 20 million to 13 billion active parameters, trained on up to 5.6 trillion tokens each. When accounting for hardware manufacturing, model development, and our final training runs, we find that our series of models released **493 metric tons** of carbon emissions, equivalent to powering about 98 homes in the United States for one year, and consumed **2.769 million liters of water**, equivalent to about 24.5 years of water usage by a person in the United States, even though our data center is extremely water-efficient. We measure and report the environmental impact of our model development; to the best of our knowledge we are the first to do so for LLMs, and we find that model development, the impact of which is generally not disclosed by most model developers, amounted to **~50%** of that of training. By looking at detailed time series data for power consumption, we also find that power usage throughout training is not consistent, fluctuating between ~15% and ~85% of our hardware's maximum power draw, with negative implications for grid-scale planning as demand continues to grow. We close with a discussion on the continued difficulty of estimating the environmental impact of AI systems, and key takeaways for model developers and the public at large.9:T481,Decentralized learning offers a promising approach to crowdsource data consumptions and computational workloads across geographically distributed compute interconnected through peer-to-peer networks, accommodating the exponentially increasing demands. However, proper incentives are still in absence, considerably discouraging participation. Our vision is that a fair incentive mechanism relies on fair attribution of contributions to participating nodes, which faces non-trivial challenges arising from the localized connections making influence ``cascade'' in a decentralized network. To overcome this, we design the first  method to estimate Data Influence CascadE (DICE) in a decentralized environment. Theoretically, the framework derives tractable approximations of influence cascade over arbitrary neighbor hops, suggesting the influence cascade is determined by an interplay of data, communication topology, and the curvature of loss landscape.DICE also lays the foundations for applications including selecting suitable collaborators and identifying malicious behaviors.
Project page is available at https://raiden-zhu.github.io/blog/2025/DICE.a:T508,Generative models can now produce photorealistic synthetic data which is virtually indistinguishable from the real data used to train it. This is a significant evolution over previous models which could produce reasonable facsimiles of the training data, but ones which could be visually distinguished from the training data by human evaluation. Recent work on OOD detection has raised doubts that generative model likelihoods are optimal OOD detectors due to issues involving likelihood misestimation, entropy in the generative process, and typicality. We speculate that generative OOD detectors also failed because their models focused on the pixels rather than the semantic content of the data, leading to failures in near-OOD cases where the pixels may be similar but the information content is significantly different. We hypothesize that estimating typical sets using self-supervised learners leads to better OOD detectors. We introduce a novel approach that leverages representation learning, and informative summary statistics based on manifold estimation, to address all of the aforementioned issues. Our method outperforms other unsupervised approaches and achieves state-of-the art performance on well-established challenging benchmarks, and new synthetic data detection tasks.b:T456,Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets) are a family of generative models that learn to sample objects with probabilities proportional to a given reward function. The key concept behind GFlowNets is the use of two stochastic policies: a forward policy, which incrementally constructs compositional objects, and a backward policy, which sequentially deconstructs them. Recent results show a close relationship between GFlowNet training and entropy-regularized reinforcement learning (RL) problems with a particular reward design. However, this connection applies only in the setting of a fixed backward policy, which might be a significant limitation. As a remedy to this problem, we introduce a simple backward policy optimization algorithm that involves direct maximization of the value function in an entropy-regularized Markov Decision Process (MDP) over intermediate rewards. We provide an extensive experimental evaluation of the proposed approach across various benchmarks in combination with both RL and GFlowNet algorithms and demonstrate its faster convergence and mode discovery in complex environments.c:T622,The number of models shared online has recently skyrocketed, with over one million public models available on Hugging Face. Sharing models allows other users to build on existing models, using them as initialization for fine-tuning, improving accuracy, and saving compute and energy. However, it also raises important intellectual property issues, as fine-tuning may violate the license terms of the original model or that of its training data. A Model Tree, i.e., a tree data structure rooted at a foundation model and having directed edges between a parent model and other models directly fine-tuned from it (children), would settle such disputes by making the model heritage explicit. Unfortunately, current models are not well documented, with most model metadata (e.g., "model cards") not providing accurate information about heritage. In this paper, we introduce the task of Unsupervised Model Tree Heritage Recovery (Unsupervised MoTHer Recovery) for collections of neural networks. For each pair of models, this task requires: i) determining if they are directly related, and ii) establishing the direction of the relationship. Our hypothesis is that model weights encode this information, the challenge is to decode the underlying tree structure given the weights. We discover several properties of model weights that allow us to perform this task. By using these properties, we formulate the MoTHer Recovery task as finding a directed minimal spanning tree. In extensive experiments we demonstrate that our method successfully reconstructs complex Model Trees.d:T4b4,Test-time adaptation updates pretrained models on the fly to handle distribution shifts in test data. While existing research has focused on stable optimization during adaptation, less attention has been given to enhancing model representations for adaptation capability. To address this gap, we propose Test-Time Ensemble (TTE) grounded in the intriguing property of linear mode connectivity. TTE leverages ensemble strategies during adaptation: 1) adaptively averaging the parameter weights of assorted test-time adapted models and 2) incorporating dropout to further promote representation diversity. These strategies encapsulate model diversity into a single model, avoiding computational burden associated with managing multiple models. Besides, we propose a robust knowledge distillation scheme to prevent model collapse, ensuring stable optimization and preserving the ensemble benefits during adaptation. Notably, TTE integrates seamlessly with existing TTA approaches, advancing their adaptation capabilities. In extensive experiments, integration with TTE consistently outperformed baseline models across various challenging scenarios, demonstrating its effectiveness and general applicability.e:T450,We propose a likelihood-free method for comparing two distributions given samples from each, with the goal of assessing the quality of generative models. The proposed approach, PQMass, provides a statistically rigorous method for assessing the performance of a single generative model or the comparison of multiple competing models. PQMass divides the sample space into non-overlapping regions and applies chi-squared tests to the number of data samples that fall within each region, giving a $p$-value that measures the probability that the bin counts derived from two sets of samples are drawn from the same multinomial distribution. PQMass does not depend on assumptions regarding the density of the true distribution, nor does it rely on training or fitting any auxiliary models. We evaluate PQMass on data of various modalities and dimensions, demonstrating its effectiveness in assessing the quality, novelty, and diversity of generated samples. We further show that PQMass scales well to moderately high-dimensional data and thus obviates the need for feature extraction in practical applications.f:T625,As diffusion models become increasingly popular, the misuse of copyrighted and private images has emerged as a major concern. One promising solution to mitigate this issue is identifying the contribution of specific training samples in generative models, a process known as data attribution. Existing data attribution methods for diffusion models typically quantify the contribution of a training sample by evaluating the change in diffusion loss when the sample is included or excluded from the training process.
However, we argue that the direct usage of diffusion loss cannot represent such a contribution accurately due to the calculation of diffusion loss.
Specifically, these approaches measure the divergence between predicted and ground truth distributions, which leads to an indirect comparison between the predicted distributions and cannot represent the variances between model behaviors.
To address these issues, we aim to measure the direct comparison between predicted distributions with an attribution score to analyse the training sample importance, which is achieved by Diffusion Attribution Score (\textit{DAS}).
Underpinned by rigorous theoretical analysis, we elucidate the effectiveness of DAS.
Additionally, we explore strategies to accelerate DAS calculations, facilitating its application to large-scale diffusion models.
Our extensive experiments across various datasets and diffusion models demonstrate that DAS significantly surpasses previous benchmarks in terms of the linear data-modelling score, establishing new state-of-the-art performance.10:T4ea,In this paper, we leverage existing statistical methods to better understand feature learning from data. We tackle this by modifying the model-free variable selection method, Feature Ordering by Conditional Independence (FOCI), which is introduced in Azadkia & Chatterjee (2021). While FOCI is based on a non-parametric coefficient of conditional dependence, we introduce its parametric, differentiable approximation. With this approximate coefficient of correlation, we present a new algorithm called difFOCI, which is applicable to a wider range of machine learning problems thanks to its differentiable nature and learnable parameters. We present difFOCI in three contexts: (1) as a variable selection method with baseline comparisons to FOCI, (2) as a trainable model parametrized with a neural network, and (3) as a generic, widely applicable neural network regularizer, one that improves feature learning with better management of spurious correlations. We evaluate difFOCI on increasingly complex problems ranging from basic variable selection in toy examples to saliency map comparisons in convolutional networks. We then show how difFOCI can be incorporated in the context of fairness to facilitate classifications without relying on sensitive data.11:T67a,Diffusion Policies have become widely used in Imitation Learning, offering several appealing properties, such as generating multimodal and discontinuous behavior.
As models are becoming larger to capture more complex capabilities, their computational demands increase, as shown by recent scaling laws. 
Therefore, continuing with the current architectures will present a computational roadblock. 
To address this gap, we propose Mixture-of-Denoising Experts (MoDE) as a novel policy for Imitation Learning.
MoDE surpasses current state-of-the-art Transformer-based Diffusion Policies while enabling parameter-efficient scaling through sparse experts and noise-conditioned routing, reducing both active parameters by 40\% and inference costs by 90\% via expert caching.
Our architecture combines this efficient scaling with noise-conditioned self-attention mechanism, enabling more effective denoising across different noise levels. 
MoDE achieves state-of-the-art performance on 134 tasks in four established imitation learning benchmarks (CALVIN and LIBERO). 
Notably, by pretraining MoDE on diverse robotics data, we achieve 4.01 on CALVIN ABC and 0.95 on LIBERO-90. 
It surpasses both CNN-based and Transformer Diffusion Policies by an average of $57\%$ across 4 benchmarks, while using 90\% fewer FLOPs and fewer active parameters compared to default Diffusion Transformer architectures. Furthermore, we conduct comprehensive ablations on MoDE's components, providing insights for designing efficient and scalable Transformer architectures for Diffusion Policies. 
Code and demonstrations are available at https://mbreuss.github.io/MoDE_Diffusion_Policy.12:T5ca,Semantic text embedding is essential to many tasks in Natural Language Processing (NLP). While black-box models are capable of generating high-quality embeddings, their lack of interpretability limits their use in tasks that demand transparency. Recent approaches have improved interpretability by leveraging domain-expert-crafted or LLM-generated questions, but these methods rely heavily on expert input or well-prompt design, which restricts their generalizability and ability to generate discriminative questions across a wide range of tasks. To address these challenges, we introduce \algo{CQG-MBQA} (Contrastive Question Generation - Multi-task Binary Question Answering), a general framework for producing interpretable semantic text embeddings across diverse tasks. Our framework systematically generates highly discriminative, low cognitive load yes/no questions through the \algo{CQG} method and answers them efficiently with the \algo{MBQA} model, resulting in interpretable embeddings in a cost-effective manner. We validate the effectiveness and interpretability of \algo{CQG-MBQA} through extensive experiments and ablation studies, demonstrating that it delivers embedding quality comparable to many advanced black-box models while maintaining inherently interpretability. Additionally, \algo{CQG-MBQA} outperforms other interpretable text embedding methods across various downstream tasks. The source code is available at \url{https://github.com/dukesun99/CQG-MBQA}.13:T56d,While large language models (LLMs) have made significant progress in processing and reasoning over knowledge graphs, current methods suffer from a high non-retrieval rate. This limitation reduces the accuracy of answering questions based on these graphs. Our analysis reveals that the combination of greedy search and forward reasoning is a major contributor to this issue. To overcome these challenges, we introduce the concept of super-relations, which enables both forward and backward reasoning by summarizing and connecting various relational paths within the graph. This holistic approach not only expands the search space, but also significantly improves retrieval efficiency. In this paper, we propose the ReKnoS framework, which aims to Reason over Knowledge Graphs with Super-Relations. Our framework’s key advantages include the inclusion of multiple relation paths through super-relations, enhanced forward and backward reasoning capabilities, and increased efficiency in querying LLMs. These enhancements collectively lead to a substantial improvement in the successful retrieval rate and overall reasoning performance. We conduct extensive experiments on a variety of datasets to evaluate ReKnoS, and the results demonstrate the superior performance of ReKnoS over existing state-of-the-art baselines, with an average accuracy gain of 2.92% across nine real-world datasets.14:T6f5,Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in generating high-quality texts across diverse domains. However, the potential misuse of LLMs has raised significant concerns, underscoring the urgent need for reliable detection of LLM-generated texts. Conventional training-based detectors often struggle with generalization, particularly in cross-domain and cross-model scenarios. In contrast, training-free methods, which focus on inherent discrepancies through carefully designed statistical features, offer improved generalization and interpretability. Despite this, existing training-free detection methods typically rely on global text sequence statistics, neglecting the modeling of local discriminative features, thereby limiting their detection efficacy. In this work, we introduce a novel training-free detector, termed \textbf{Lastde}\footnote{The code and data are released at \url{https://github.com/TrustMedia-zju/Lastde_Detector}.} that synergizes local and global statistics for enhanced detection. For the first time, we introduce time series analysis to LLM-generated text detection, capturing the temporal dynamics of token probability sequences. By integrating these local statistics with global ones, our detector reveals significant disparities between human and LLM-generated texts. We also propose an efficient alternative, \textbf{Lastde++} to enable real-time detection. Extensive experiments on six datasets involving cross-domain, cross-model, and cross-lingual detection scenarios, under both white-box and black-box settings, demonstrated that our method consistently achieves state-of-the-art performance. Furthermore, our approach exhibits greater robustness against paraphrasing attacks compared to existing baseline methods.15:T413,Rule learning-based models are widely used in highly interpretable scenarios due to their transparent structures. Inductive logic programming (ILP), a form of machine learning, induces rules from facts while maintaining interpretability. Differentiable ILP models enhance this process by leveraging neural networks to improve robustness and scalability. However, most differentiable ILP methods rely on symbolic datasets, facing challenges when learning directly from raw data. Specifically, they struggle with explicit label leakage: The inability to map continuous inputs to symbolic variables without explicit supervision of input feature labels. In this work, we address this issue by integrating a self-supervised differentiable clustering model with a novel differentiable ILP model, enabling rule learning from raw data without explicit label leakage. The learned rules effectively describe raw data through its features. We demonstrate that our method intuitively and precisely learns generalized rules from time series and image data.16:T5ba,Predicting the biophysical and functional properties of proteins is essential for in silico protein design. Machine learning has emerged as a promising technique for such prediction tasks. However, the relative scarcity of in vitro annotations means that these models often have little, or no, specific data on the desired fitness prediction task. As a result of limited data, protein language models (PLMs) are typically trained on general protein sequence modeling tasks, and then fine-tuned, or applied zero-shot, to protein fitness prediction. When no task data is available, the models make strong assumptions about the correlation between the protein sequence likelihood and fitness scores. In contrast, we propose meta-learning over a distribution of standard fitness prediction tasks, and demonstrate positive transfer to unseen fitness prediction tasks. Our method, called Metalic (Meta-Learning In-Context), uses in-context learning and fine-tuning, when data is available, to adapt to new tasks. Crucially, fine-tuning enables considerable generalization, even though it is not accounted for during meta-training. Our fine-tuned models achieve strong results with 18 times fewer parameters than state-of-the-art models. Moreover, our method sets a new state-of-the-art in low-data settings on ProteinGym, an established fitness-prediction benchmark. Due to data scarcity, we believe meta-learning will play a pivotal role in advancing protein engineering.17:T4fc,Conformal prediction has emerged as a popular technique for facilitating valid predictive inference across a spectrum of machine learning models, under minimal assumption of exchangeability. Recently, Hoff (2023) showed that full conformal Bayes provides the most efficient prediction sets (smallest by expected volume) among all prediction sets that are valid at the  $(1 - \alpha)$ level if the model is correctly specified. However, a critical issue arises when the Bayesian model itself may be mis-specified, resulting in prediction interval that might be suboptimal, even though it still enjoys the frequentist coverage guarantee. To address this limitation, we propose an innovative solution that combines Bayesian model averaging (BMA) with conformal prediction. This hybrid not only leverages the strengths of Bayesian conformal prediction but also introduces a layer of robustness through model averaging. Theoretically, we prove that the resulting prediction interval will converge to the optimal level of efficiency, if the true model is included among the candidate models. This assurance of optimality, even under potential model uncertainty, provides a significant improvement over existing methods, ensuring more reliable and precise uncertainty quantification.18:T4db,Offline Safe Reinforcement Learning (RL) seeks to address safety constraints by learning from static datasets and restricting exploration. However, these approaches heavily rely on the dataset and struggle to generalize to unseen scenarios safely. In this paper, we aim to improve safety during the deployment of vision-based robotic tasks through online fine-tuning an offline pretrained policy. To facilitate effective fine-tuning, we introduce model-based RL, which is known for its data efficiency. Specifically, our method employs in-sample optimization to improve offline training efficiency while incorporating reachability guidance to ensure safety. After obtaining an offline safe policy, a safe policy expansion approach is leveraged for online fine-tuning. The performance of our method is validated on simulation benchmarks with five vision-only tasks and through real-world robot deployment using limited data. It demonstrates that our approach significantly improves the generalization of offline policies to unseen safety-constrained scenarios. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to explore offline-to-online RL for safe generalization tasks. The videos are available at https://sunlighted.github.io/fosp_web/.19:T480,Inductive logic programming (ILP) is a machine learning approach aiming to learn explanatory rules from data.
    While existing ILP systems can successfully solve small-scale tasks, large-scale applications with various language biases are rarely explored.
    Besides, it is crucial for a large majority of current ILP systems to require expert-defined language bias, which hampers the development of ILP towards broader utilizations.
    In this paper, we introduce GeoILP, a large-scale synthetic dataset of diverse ILP tasks involving numerous aspects of language bias.
    These tasks are built from geometry problems, at the level from textbook exercise to regional International Mathematical Olympiad (IMO), with the help of a deduction engine.
    These problems are elaborately selected to cover all challenging language biases, such as recursion, predicate invention, and high arity.
    Experimental results show that no existing method can solve GeoILP tasks.
    In addition, along with classic symbolic-form data, we provide image-form data to boost the development of the joint learning of neural perception and symbolic rule induction.1a:T428,Adversarial training aims to defend against *adversaries*: malicious opponents whose sole aim is to harm predictive performance in any way possible. This presents a rather harsh perspective, which we assert results in unnecessarily conservative training. As an alternative, we propose to model opponents as simply pursuing their own goals—rather than working directly against the classifier. Employing tools from strategic modeling, our approach enables knowledge or beliefs regarding the opponent's possible incentives to be used as inductive bias for learning. Accordingly, our method of *strategic training* is designed to defend against all opponents within an `incentive uncertainty set'. This resorts to adversarial learning when the set is maximal, but offers potential gains when the set can be appropriately reduced. We conduct a series of experiments that show how even mild knowledge regarding the opponent's incentives can be useful, and that the degree of potential gains depends on how these incentives relate to the structure of the learning task.1b:T54b,Leveraging billions of years of evolution, scientists have trained protein language models (pLMs) to understand the sequence and structure space of proteins aiding in the design of more functional proteins. Although they have shown ability to improve efficiency in engineering, it remains unclear under what conditions they will succeed or fail. We aim to predict the circumstances in which pLMs can successfully perform zero-shot fitness estimation. Our work demonstrates the trends observed over hundreds of deep mutational scans across multiple different fitness objectives. We find that the likelihood, or abstractly, implicit preference of a certain protein sequence imbued during pretraining is predictive fitness prediction capabilities. Both over-preferred and under-preferred wild type sequences harm performance. Generating a causal link between training data and likelihood, we show a power law tail over what data increases protein likelihood which is tied to training sequence homology. Lastly, proteins of low likelihood can be remedied by unsupervised finetuning. In sum, the zero-shot fitness estimation abilities of pLMs can be predicted by the likelihood of the engineered sequence, thus suggesting when pLMs should be deployed in protein maturation campaigns and a way to improve their performance under circumstances of low likelihood.1c:T463,This work tackles an intriguing and fundamental open challenge in representation learning: Given a well-trained deep learning model, can it be reprogrammed to enhance its robustness against adversarial or noisy input perturbations without altering its parameters?
To explore this, we revisit the core feature transformation mechanism in representation learning and propose a novel non-linear robust pattern matching technique as a robust alternative. Furthermore, we introduce three model reprogramming paradigms to offer flexible control of robustness under different efficiency requirements. Comprehensive experiments and ablation studies across diverse learning models ranging from basic linear model and MLPs to shallow and modern deep ConvNets demonstrate the effectiveness 
of our approaches.
This work not only opens a promising and orthogonal direction for improving adversarial defenses in deep learning beyond existing methods but also provides new insights into designing more resilient AI systems with robust statistics. 
Our implementation is available at https://github.com/chris-hzc/Robustness-Reprogramming.1d:T6c9,Simulating and controlling physical systems described by partial differential equations (PDEs) are crucial tasks across science and engineering. Recently, diffusion generative models have emerged as a competitive class of methods for these tasks due to their ability to capture long-term dependencies and model high-dimensional states. However, diffusion models typically struggle with handling system states with abrupt changes and generalizing to higher resolutions. In this work, we propose Wavelet Diffusion Neural Operator (WDNO), a novel PDE simulation and control framework that enhances the handling of these complexities. WDNO comprises two key innovations. Firstly, WDNO performs diffusion-based generative modeling in the wavelet domain for the entire trajectory to handle abrupt changes and long-term dependencies effectively. Secondly, to address the issue of poor generalization across different resolutions, which is one of the fundamental tasks in modeling physical systems, we introduce multi-resolution training. We validate WDNO on five physical systems, including 1D advection equation, three challenging physical systems with abrupt changes (1D Burgers' equation, 1D compressible Navier-Stokes equation and 2D incompressible fluid), and a real-world dataset ERA5, which demonstrates superior performance on both simulation and control tasks over state-of-the-art methods, with significant improvements in long-term and detail prediction accuracy. Remarkably, in the challenging context of the 2D high-dimensional and indirect control task aimed at reducing smoke leakage, WDNO reduces the leakage by 78% compared to the second-best baseline. The code can be found at https://github.com/AI4Science-WestlakeU/wdno.git.1e:T485,We investigate the mechanisms of self-distillation in multi-class classification, particularly in the context of linear probing with fixed feature extractors where traditional feature learning explanations do not apply. Our theoretical analysis reveals that multi-round self-distillation effectively performs label averaging among instances with high feature correlations, governed by the eigenvectors of the Gram matrix derived from input features. This process leads to clustered predictions and improved generalization, mitigating the impact of label noise by reducing the model's reliance on potentially corrupted labels. We establish conditions under which multi-round self-distillation achieves 100\% population accuracy despite label noise. Furthermore, we introduce a novel, efficient single-round self-distillation method using refined partial labels from the teacher's top two softmax outputs, referred to as the PLL student model. This approach replicates the benefits of multi-round distillation in a single round, achieving comparable or superior performance--especially in high-noise scenarios--while significantly reducing computational cost.1f:T63f,Multi-task learning enables the acquisition of task-generic knowledge by training multiple tasks within a unified architecture. However, training all tasks together in a single architecture can lead to performance degradation, known as negative transfer, which is a main concern in multi-task learning. Previous works have addressed this issue by optimizing the multi-task network through gradient manipulation or weighted loss adjustments. However, their optimization strategy focuses on addressing task imbalance in shared parameters, neglecting the learning of task-specific parameters. As a result, they show limitations in mitigating negative transfer, since the learning of shared space and task-specific information influences each other during optimization. To address this, we propose a different approach to enhance multi-task performance by selectively grouping tasks and updating them for each batch during optimization. We introduce an algorithm that adaptively determines how to effectively group tasks and update them during the learning process. To track inter-task relations and optimize multi-task networks simultaneously, we propose proximal inter-task affinity, which can be measured during the optimization process. We provide a theoretical analysis on how dividing tasks into multiple groups and updating them sequentially significantly affects multi-task performance by enhancing the learning of task-specific parameters. Our methods substantially outperform previous multi-task optimization approaches and are scalable to different architectures and various numbers of tasks.20:T5e7,Developing models that can learn to reason is a notoriously challenging problem. We focus on reasoning in relational domains, where the use of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) seems like a natural choice. However, previous work has shown that regular GNNs lack the ability to systematically generalize from training examples on test graphs requiring longer inference chains, which fundamentally limits their reasoning abilities. A common solution relies on neuro-symbolic methods that systematically reason by learning rules, but their scalability is often limited and they tend to make unrealistically strong assumptions, e.g.\ that the answer can always be inferred from a single relational path. We propose the Epistemic GNN (EpiGNN), a novel parameter-efficient and scalable GNN architecture with an epistemic inductive bias for systematic reasoning. Node embeddings in EpiGNNs are treated as epistemic states, and message passing  is implemented accordingly. We show that EpiGNNs achieve state-of-the-art results on link prediction tasks that require systematic reasoning. Furthermore, for inductive knowledge graph completion, EpiGNNs rival the performance of state-of-the-art specialized approaches. Finally, we introduce two new benchmarks that go beyond standard relational reasoning by requiring the aggregation of information from multiple paths. Here, existing neuro-symbolic approaches fail, yet EpiGNNs learn to reason accurately.  Code and datasets are available at https://github.com/erg0dic/gnn-sg.21:T53a,Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP) is essential for modeling complex decision-making problems but faces challenges in computational tractability and interpretability. Current deep learning approaches for MILP focus on specific problem classes and do not generalize to unseen classes. To address this shortcoming, we take a foundation model training approach, where we train a single deep learning model on a diverse set of MILP problems to generalize across problem classes. As existing datasets for MILP lack diversity and volume, we introduce MILP-Evolve, a novel LLM-based evolutionary framework that is capable of generating a large set of diverse MILP classes with an unlimited amount of instances. We study our methodology on three key learning tasks that capture diverse aspects of MILP: (1) integrality gap prediction, (2) learning to branch, and (3) a new task of aligning MILP instances with natural language descriptions. Our empirical results show that models trained on the data generated by MILP-Evolve achieve significant improvements on unseen problems, including MIPLIB benchmarks. Our work highlights the potential of moving towards a foundation model approach for MILP that can generalize to a broad range of MILP problem classes. Our code and data are publicly available at https://github.com/microsoft/OptiGuide.22:T72e,Visual perspective taking (VPT) is the ability to perceive and reason about the perspectives of others. It is an essential feature of human intelligence, which develops over the first decade of life and requires an ability to process the 3D structure of visual scenes. A growing number of reports have indicated that deep neural networks (DNNs) become capable of analyzing 3D scenes after training on large image datasets. We investigated if this emergent ability for 3D analysis in DNNs is sufficient for VPT with the 3D perception challenge (3D-PC): a novel benchmark for 3D perception in humans and DNNs. The 3D-PC is comprised of three 3D-analysis tasks posed within natural scene images: (i.) a simple test of object depth order, (ii.) a basic VPT task (VPT-basic), and (iii.) a more challenging version of VPT (VPT-perturb) designed to limit the effectiveness of "shortcut" visual strategies. We tested human participants (N=33) and linearly probed or text-prompted over 300 DNNs on the challenge and found that nearly all of the DNNs approached or exceeded human accuracy in analyzing object depth order. Surprisingly, DNN accuracy on this task correlated with their object recognition performance. In contrast, there was an extraordinary gap between DNNs and humans on VPT-basic. Humans were nearly perfect, whereas most DNNs were near chance. Fine-tuning DNNs on VPT-basic brought them close to human performance, but they, unlike humans, dropped back to chance when tested on VPT-perturb. Our challenge demonstrates that the training routines and architectures of today's DNNs are well-suited for learning basic 3D properties of scenes and objects but are ill-suited for reasoning about these properties like humans do. We release our 3D-PC datasets and code to help bridge this gap in 3D perception between humans and machines.23:T59a,Off-Policy Evaluation and Learning (OPE/L) in contextual bandits is rapidly gaining popularity in real systems because new policies can be evaluated and learned securely using only historical logged data. However, existing methods in OPE/L cannot handle many challenging but prevalent scenarios such as few-shot data, deterministic logging policies, and new actions. In many applications, such as personalized medicine, content recommendations, education, and advertising, we need to evaluate and learn new policies in the presence of these challenges. Existing methods cannot evaluate and optimize effectively in these situations due to the notorious variance issue or limited exploration in the logged data. To enable OPE/L even under these unsolved challenges, we propose a new problem setup of Cross-Domain OPE/L, where we have access not only to the logged data from the target domain in which the new policy will be implemented but also to logged datasets collected from other domains. This novel formulation is widely applicable because we can often use historical data not only from the target hospital, country, device, or user segment but also from other hospitals, countries, devices, or segments. We develop a new estimator and policy gradient method to solve OPE/L by leveraging both target and source datasets, resulting in substantially enhanced OPE/L in the previously unsolved situations in our empirical evaluations.24:T5a4,Machine unlearning strives to uphold the data owners' right to be forgotten by enabling models to selectively forget specific data. 
Recent advances suggest pre-computing and storing statistics extracted from second-order information and implementing unlearning through Newton-style updates.
However, the Hessian matrix operations are extremely costly and previous works conduct unlearning for empirical risk minimizer with the convexity assumption, precluding their applicability to high-dimensional over-parameterized models and the nonconvergence condition.
In this paper, we propose an efficient Hessian-free unlearning approach. 
The key idea is to maintain a statistical vector for each training data, computed through affine stochastic recursion of the difference between the retrained and learned models. 
We prove that our proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in terms of the unlearning and generalization guarantees, the deletion capacity, and the time/storage complexity, under the same regularity conditions.
Through the strategy of recollecting statistics for removing data, we develop an online unlearning algorithm that achieves near-instantaneous data removal, as it requires only vector addition.
Experiments demonstrate that our proposed scheme surpasses existing results by orders of magnitude in terms of time/storage costs with millisecond-level unlearning execution, while also enhancing test accuracy.25:T60e,Despite the significant advancements in Text-to-SQL (Text2SQL) facilitated by large language models (LLMs), the latest state-of-the-art techniques are still trapped in the in-context learning of closed-source LLMs (e.g., GPT-4), which limits their applicability in open scenarios. 
To address this challenge, we propose a novel RObust mUltitask Tuning and collaboration mEthod (ROUTE) to improve the comprehensive capabilities of open-source LLMs for Text2SQL, thereby providing a more practical solution.  Our approach begins with multi-task supervised fine-tuning (SFT) using various synthetic training data related to SQL generation.  Unlike existing SFT-based  Text2SQL methods, we introduced several additional SFT tasks, including schema linking, noise correction, and continuation writing.  Engaging in a variety of SQL generation tasks enhances the model's understanding of SQL syntax and improves its ability to generate high-quality SQL queries. Additionally, inspired by the collaborative modes of LLM agents, we introduce a Multitask Collaboration Prompting (MCP) strategy.  This strategy leverages collaboration across several SQL-related tasks to reduce hallucinations during SQL generation, thereby maximizing the potential of enhancing Text2SQL performance through explicit multitask capabilities. Extensive experiments and in-depth analyses have been performed on eight open-source LLMs and five widely-used benchmarks. The results demonstrate that our proposal outperforms the latest Text2SQL methods and yields leading performance.26:T4d5,We introduce Diffusion Policy Policy Optimization, DPPO, an algorithmic framework including best practices for fine-tuning diffusion-based policies (e.g. Diffusion Policy) in continuous control and robot learning tasks using the policy gradient (PG) method from reinforcement learning (RL). PG methods are ubiquitous in training RL policies with other policy parameterizations; nevertheless, they had been conjectured to be less efficient for diffusion-based policies. Surprisingly, we show that DPPO achieves the strongest overall performance and efficiency for fine-tuning in common benchmarks compared to other RL methods for diffusion-based policies and also compared to PG fine-tuning of other policy parameterizations. Through experimental investigation, we find that DPPO takes advantage of unique synergies between RL fine-tuning and the diffusion parameterization, leading to structured and on-manifold exploration, stable training, and strong policy robustness. We further demonstrate the strengths of DPPO in a range of realistic settings, including simulated robotic tasks with pixel observations, and via zero-shot deployment of simulation-trained policies on robot hardware in a long-horizon, multi-stage manipulation task.27:T4e7,Text plays a crucial role in the transmission of human civilization, and teaching machines to generate online handwritten text in various styles presents an interesting and significant challenge. However, most prior work has concentrated on generating individual Chinese fonts, leaving complete text line generation largely unexplored. In this paper, we identify that text lines can naturally be divided into two components: layout and glyphs. Based on this division, we designed a text line layout generator coupled with a diffusion-based stylized font synthesizer to address this challenge hierarchically. More concretely, the layout generator performs in-context-like learning based on the text content and the provided style references to generate positions for each glyph autoregressively. Meanwhile, the font synthesizer which consists of a character embedding dictionary, a multi-scale calligraphy style encoder and a 1D U-Net based diffusion denoiser will generate each font on its position while imitating the calligraphy style extracted from the given style references. Qualitative and quantitative experiments on the CASIA-OLHWDB demonstrate that our method is capable of generating structurally correct and indistinguishable imitation samples.28:T54d,Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has recently excelled in solving challenging cooperative and competitive multi-agent problems in various environments, typically involving a small number of agents and full observability. Moreover, a range of crucial robotics-related tasks, such as multi-robot pathfinding, which have traditionally been approached with classical non-learnable methods (e.g., heuristic search), are now being suggested for solution using learning-based or hybrid methods. However, in this domain, it remains difficult, if not impossible, to conduct a fair comparison between classical, learning-based, and hybrid approaches due to the lack of a unified framework that supports both learning and evaluation. To address this, we introduce POGEMA, a comprehensive set of tools that includes a fast environment for learning, a problem instance generator, a collection of predefined problem instances, a visualization toolkit, and a benchmarking tool for automated evaluation. We also introduce and define an evaluation protocol that specifies a range of domain-related metrics, computed based on primary evaluation indicators (such as success rate and path length), enabling a fair multi-fold comparison. The results of this comparison, which involves a variety of state-of-the-art MARL, search-based, and hybrid methods, are presented.29:T56f,Traditional multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) systems can develop cooperative strategies through repeated interactions. However, these systems are unable to perform well on any other setting than the one they have been trained on, and struggle to successfully cooperate with unfamiliar collaborators. This is particularly visible in the Hanabi benchmark, a popular 2-to-5 player cooperative card-game which requires complex reasoning and precise assistance to other agents. Current MARL agents for Hanabi can only learn one specific game-setting (e.g., 2-player games), and play with the same algorithmic agents. This is in stark contrast to humans, who can quickly adjust their strategies to work with unfamiliar partners or situations. In this paper, we introduce Recurrent Replay Relevance Distributed DQN (R3D2), a generalist agent for Hanabi, designed to overcome these limitations. We reformulate the task using text, as language has been shown to improve transfer. We then propose a distributed MARL algorithm that copes with the resulting dynamic observation- and action-space. In doing so, our agent is the first that can play all game settings concurrently, and extend strategies learned from one setting to other ones. As a consequence, our agent also demonstrates the ability to collaborate with different algorithmic agents ---agents that are themselves unable to do so.2a:T505,Despite their advances and success, real-world deep neural networks are known to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks. Universal adversarial perturbation, an input-agnostic attack, poses a serious threat for them to be deployed in security-sensitive systems. In this case, a single universal adversarial perturbation deceives the model on a range of clean inputs without requiring input-specific optimization, which makes it particularly threatening. In this work, we observe that universal adversarial perturbations usually lead to abnormal entropy spectrum in hidden layers, which suggests that the prediction is dominated by a small number of ``feature'' in such cases (rather than democratically by many features). Inspired by this, we propose an efficient yet effective defense method for mitigating UAPs called \emph{Democratic Training} by performing entropy-based model enhancement to suppress the effect of the universal adversarial perturbations in a given model. \emph{Democratic Training} is evaluated with 7 neural networks trained on 5 benchmark datasets and 5 types of state-of-the-art universal adversarial attack methods. The results show that it effectively reduces the attack success rate, improves model robustness and preserves the model accuracy on clean samples.2b:T488,In this paper, we study the problem of video-conditioned policy learning. While previous works mostly focus on learning policies that perform a single skill specified by the given video, we take a step further and aim to learn a policy that can perform multiple skills according to the given video, and generalize to unseen videos by recombining these skills. To solve this problem, we propose our algorithm, Watch-Less-Do-More, an information bottleneck-based imitation learning framework for implicit skill discovery and video-conditioned policy learning. In our method, an information bottleneck objective is employed to control the information contained in the video representation, ensuring that it only encodes information relevant to the current skill (Watch-Less). By discovering potential skills from training videos, the learned policy is able to recombine them and generalize to unseen videos to achieve compositional generalization (Do-More). To evaluate our method, we perform extensive experiments in various environments and show that our algorithm substantially outperforms baselines (up to 2x) in terms of compositional generalization ability.2c:T5d7,Estimating a distribution given access to its unnormalized density is pivotal in Bayesian inference, where the posterior is generally known only up to an unknown normalizing constant. Variational inference and Markov chain Monte Carlo methods are the predominant tools for this task; however, both are often challenging to apply reliably, particularly when the posterior has complex geometry. Here, we introduce Soft Contrastive Variational Inference (SoftCVI), which allows a family of variational objectives to be derived through a contrastive estimation framework. The approach parameterizes a classifier in terms of a variational distribution, reframing the inference task as a contrastive estimation problem aiming to identify a single true posterior sample among a set of samples. Despite this framing, we do not require positive or negative samples, but rather learn by sampling the variational distribution and computing ground truth soft classification labels from the unnormalized posterior itself. The objectives have zero variance gradient when the variational approximation is exact, without the need for specialized gradient estimators. We empirically investigate the performance on a variety of Bayesian inference tasks, using both simple (e.g. normal) and expressive (normalizing flow) variational distributions. We find that SoftCVI can be used to form objectives which are stable to train and mass-covering, frequently outperforming inference with other variational approaches.2d:T52f,Bilevel optimization has witnessed a resurgence of interest, driven by its critical role in trustworthy and efficient AI applications. Recent focus has been on finding efficient methods with provable convergence guarantees.  However, while many prior works have established convergence to stationary points or local minima, obtaining the global optimum of bilevel optimization remains an important yet open problem. The difficulty lies in the fact that unlike many prior non-convex single-level problems, bilevel problems often do not admit a ``benign" landscape, and may indeed have multiple spurious local solutions. Nevertheless, attaining the global optimality is indispensable for ensuring reliability, safety, and cost-effectiveness, particularly in high-stakes engineering applications that rely on bilevel optimization. In this paper, we first explore the challenges of establishing a global convergence theory for bilevel optimization, and present two sufficient conditions for global convergence. We provide {\em algorithm-dependent} proofs to rigorously substantiate these sufficient conditions on two specific bilevel learning scenarios: representation learning and data hypercleaning (a.k.a. reweighting). Experiments corroborate the theoretical findings, demonstrating convergence to global minimum in both cases.2e:T52f,In the field of industrial inspection, Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have a high potential to renew the paradigms in practical applications due to their robust language capabilities and generalization abilities. However, despite their impressive problem-solving skills in many domains, MLLMs' ability in industrial anomaly detection has not been systematically studied. To bridge this gap, we present MMAD, a full-spectrum MLLM benchmark in industrial Anomaly Detection. We defined seven key subtasks of MLLMs in industrial inspection and designed a novel pipeline to generate the MMAD dataset with 39,672 questions for 8,366 industrial images. With MMAD, we have conducted a comprehensive, quantitative evaluation of various state-of-the-art MLLMs. The commercial models performed the best, with the average accuracy of GPT-4o models reaching 74.9\%. However, this result falls far short of industrial requirements. Our analysis reveals that current MLLMs still have significant room for improvement in answering questions related to industrial anomalies and defects. We further explore two training-free performance enhancement strategies to help models improve in industrial scenarios, highlighting their promising potential for future research. 
The code and data are available at https://github.com/jam-cc/MMAD.2f:T58c,There is increasing interest in ``decision-focused" machine learning methods which train models to account for how their predictions are used in downstream optimization problems. Doing so can often improve performance on subsequent decision problems. However, current methods for uncertainty quantification do not incorporate any information at all about downstream decisions. We develop a framework based on conformal prediction to produce prediction sets that account for a downstream decision loss function, making them more appropriate to inform high-stakes decision-making. Our approach harnesses the strengths of conformal methods—modularity, model-agnosticism, and statistical coverage guarantees—while incorporating downstream decisions and user-specified utility functions. We prove that our methods retain standard coverage guarantees.  Empirical evaluation across a range of datasets and utility metrics demonstrates that our methods achieve significantly lower decision loss compared to standard conformal methods. Additionally, we present a real-world use case in healthcare diagnosis, where our method effectively incorporates the hierarchical structure of dermatological diseases. It successfully generates sets with coherent diagnostic meaning, aiding the triage process during dermatology diagnosis and illustrating how our method can ground high-stakes decision-making on external domain knowledge.30:T64b,Recent results in non-convex stochastic optimization demonstrate the convergence of popular adaptive algorithms (e.g., AdaGrad) under the $(L_0, L_1)$-smoothness condition, but the rate of convergence is a higher-order polynomial in terms of problem parameters like the smoothness constants. The complexity guaranteed by such algorithms to find an $\epsilon$-stationary point may be significantly larger than the optimal complexity of $\Theta \left( \Delta L \sigma^2 \epsilon^{-4} \right)$ achieved by SGD in the $L$-smooth setting, where $\Delta$ is the initial optimality gap, $\sigma^2$ is the variance of stochastic gradient. However, it is currently not known whether these higher-order dependencies can be tightened. To answer this question, we investigate complexity lower bounds for several adaptive optimization algorithms in the $(L_0, L_1)$-smooth setting, with a focus on the dependence in terms of problem parameters $\Delta, L_0, L_1$. We provide complexity bounds for three variations of AdaGrad, which show at least a quadratic dependence on problem parameters $\Delta, L_0, L_1$. Notably, we show that the decorrelated variant of AdaGrad-Norm requires at least $\Omega \left( \Delta^2 L_1^2 \sigma^2 \epsilon^{-4} \right)$ stochastic gradient queries to find an $\epsilon$-stationary point. We also provide a lower bound for SGD with a broad class of adaptive stepsizes. Our results show that, for certain adaptive algorithms, the $(L_0, L_1)$-smooth setting is fundamentally more difficult than the standard smooth setting, in terms of the initial optimality gap and the smoothness constants.31:T7de,Prior work has offered evidence for functional localization in the brain; different anatomical regions preferentially activate for certain types of visual input. For example, the fusiform face area preferentially activates for visual stimuli that include a face. However, the spectrum of visual semantics is extensive, and only a few semantically-tuned patches of cortex have so far been identified in the human brain. Using a multimodal (natural language and image) neural network architecture (CLIP, \cite{CLIP}, we train a highly accurate contrastive model that maps brain responses during naturalistic image viewing to CLIP embeddings. We then use a novel adaptation of the DBSCAN clustering algorithm to cluster the parameters of these participant-specific contrastive models. This reveals what we call Shared Decodable Concepts (SDCs): clusters in CLIP space that are decodable from common sets of voxels across multiple participants.

Examining the images most and least associated with each SDC cluster gives us additional insight into the semantic properties of each SDC. We note SDCs for previously reported visual features (e.g. orientation tuning in early visual cortex) as well as visual semantic concepts such as faces, places and bodies. In cases where our method finds multiple clusters for a visuo-semantic concept, the least associated images allow us to dissociate between confounding factors. For example, we discovered two clusters of food images, one driven by color, the other by shape. We also uncover previously unreported areas with visuo-semantic sensitivity such as regions of extrastriate body area (EBA) tuned for legs/hands and sensitivity to numerosity in right intraparietal sulcus, sensitivity associated with visual perspective (close/far) and more. Thus, our contrastive-learning methodology better characterizes new and existing visuo-semantic representations in the brain by leveraging multimodal neural network representations and a novel adaptation of clustering algorithms.32:T4a4,Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs) have been successful in various applications due to their continuous nature and parameter-sharing efficiency. However, these unique characteristics also introduce challenges in training, particularly with respect to gradient computation accuracy and convergence analysis. In this paper, we address these challenges by investigating the impact of activation functions. We demonstrate that the properties of activation functions—specifically smoothness and nonlinearity—are critical to the training dynamics. Smooth activation functions guarantee globally unique solutions for both forward and backward ODEs, while sufficient nonlinearity is essential for maintaining the spectral properties of the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) during training. Together, these properties enable us to establish the global convergence of Neural ODEs under gradient descent in overparameterized regimes. Our theoretical findings are validated by numerical experiments, which not only support our analysis but also provide practical guidelines for scaling Neural ODEs, potentially leading to faster training and improved performance in real-world applications.33:T44d,Utilitarian algorithm configuration is a general-purpose technique for automatically searching the parameter space of a given algorithm to optimize its performance, as measured by a given utility function, on a given set of inputs. Recently introduced utilitarian configuration procedures offer optimality guarantees about the returned parameterization while provably adapting to the hardness of the underlying problem. However, the applicability of these approaches is severely limited by the fact that they only search a finite, relatively small set of parameters. They cannot effectively search the configuration space of algorithms with continuous or uncountable parameters. In this paper we introduce a new procedure, which we dub COUP (Continuous, Optimistic Utilitarian Procrastination). COUP is designed to search infinite parameter spaces efficiently to find good configurations quickly. Furthermore, COUP maintains the theoretical benefits of previous utilitarian configuration procedures when applied to finite parameter spaces but is significantly faster, both provably and experimentally.34:T4a1,The subset selection problem is fundamental in machine learning and other fields of computer science.
We introduce a stochastic formulation for the minimum cost subset selection problem in a black box setting, in which only the subset metric value is available.
Subsequently, we can handle two-stage schemes, with an outer subset-selection component and an inner subset cost evaluation component. We propose formulating the subset selection problem in a stochastic manner by choosing subsets at random from a distribution whose parameters are learned. Two stochastic formulations are proposed.
The first explicitly restricts the subset's cardinality, and the second yields the desired cardinality in expectation.
The distribution is parameterized by a decision variable, which we optimize using Stochastic Mirror Descent.
Our choice of distributions yields constructive closed-form unbiased stochastic gradient formulas and convergence guarantees, including a rate with favorable dependency on the problem parameters.
Empirical evaluation of selecting a subset of layers in transfer learning complements our theoretical findings and demonstrates the potential benefits of our approach.35:T539,We study the problem of learning multi-index models in high-dimensions using a two-layer neural network trained with the mean-field Langevin algorithm. Under mild distributional assumptions on the data, we characterize the effective dimension $d_{\mathrm{eff}}$ that controls both sample and computational complexity by utilizing the adaptivity of neural networks to latent low-dimensional structures. When the data exhibit such a structure, $d_{\mathrm{eff}}$ can be significantly smaller than the ambient dimension. We prove that the sample complexity grows almost linearly with $d_{\mathrm{eff}}$, bypassing the limitations of the information and generative exponents that appeared in recent analyses of gradient-based feature learning. On the other hand, the computational complexity may inevitably grow exponentially with $d_{\mathrm{eff}}$ in the worst-case scenario. Motivated by improving computational complexity, we take the first steps towards polynomial time convergence of the mean-field Langevin algorithm by investigating a setting where the weights are constrained to be on a compact manifold with positive Ricci curvature, such as the hypersphere. There, we study assumptions under which polynomial time convergence is achievable, whereas similar assumptions in the Euclidean setting lead to exponential time complexity.36:T4e1,In spite of finite dimension ReLU neural networks being a consistent factor behind recent deep learning successes, a theory of feature learning in these models remains elusive. Currently, insightful theories still rely on assumptions including the linearity of the network computations, unstructured input data and architectural constraints such as infinite width or a single hidden layer. To begin to address this gap we establish an equivalence between ReLU networks and Gated Deep Linear Networks, and use their greater tractability to derive dynamics of learning. We then consider multiple variants of a core task reminiscent of multi-task learning or contextual control which requires both feature learning and nonlinearity. We make explicit that, for these tasks, the ReLU networks possess an inductive bias towards latent representations which are *not* strictly modular or disentangled but are still highly structured and reusable between contexts. This effect is amplified with the addition of more contexts and hidden layers. Thus, we take a step towards a theory of feature learning in finite ReLU networks and shed light on how structured mixed-selective latent representations can emerge due to a bias for node-reuse and learning speed.37:T674,In this paper, we investigate Open-Vocabulary 3D Instance Segmentation (OV-3DIS) with free-form language instructions. Earlier works mainly rely on annotated base categories for training which leads to limited generalization to unseen novel categories. To mitigate the poor generalizability to novel categories, recent works generate class-agnostic masks or projecting generalized masks from 2D to 3D, subsequently classifying them with the assistance of 2D foundation model. However, these works often disregard semantic information in the mask generation, leading to sub-optimal performance. Instead, generating generalizable but semantic-aware masks directly from 3D point clouds would result in superior outcomes. To the end, we introduce Segment any 3D Object with LanguagE ($\textbf{SOLE}$), which is a semantic and geometric-aware visual-language learning framework with strong generalizability by generating semantic-related masks directly from 3D point clouds. Specifically, we propose a multimodal fusion network to incorporate multimodal semantics in both backbone and decoder. In addition, to align the 3D segmentation model with various language instructions and enhance the mask quality, we introduce three types of multimodal associations as supervision. Our SOLE outperforms previous methods by a large margin on ScanNetv2, ScanNet200, and Replica benchmarks, and the results are even closed to the fully-supervised counterpart despite the absence of class annotations in the training. Furthermore, extensive qualitative results demonstrate the versatility of our SOLE to language instructions. The code will be made publicly available.38:T5aa,Most traditional causal discovery methods assume that all task-relevant variables are observed, an assumption often violated in practice. Although some recent works allow the presence of latent variables, they typically assume the absence of certain special causal relations to ensure a degree of simplicity, which might also be invalid in real-world scenarios. This paper tackles a challenging and important setting where latent and observed variables are interconnected through complex causal relations. Under a pure children assumption ensuring that latent variables leave adequate footprints in observed variables, we develop novel theoretical results, leading to an efficient causal discovery algorithm which is the first one capable of handling the setting with both latent variables and complex relations within polynomial time. Our algorithm first sequentially identifies latent variables from leaves to roots and then sequentially infers causal relations from roots to leaves. Moreover, we prove trustworthiness of our algorithm, meaning that when the assumption is invalid, it can raise an error signal rather than draw an incorrect causal conclusion, thus preventing potential damage to downstream tasks. We demonstrate the efficacy of our algorithm through experiments. Our work significantly enhances efficiency and reliability of causal discovery in complex systems. Our code is available at: https://github.com/XiuchuanLi/ICLR2025-ETCD39:T68d,Compositional generalization (the ability to respond correctly to novel combinations of familiar components) is thought to be a cornerstone of intelligent behavior. Compositionally structured (e.g. disentangled) representations support this ability; however, the conditions under which they are sufficient for the emergence of compositional generalization remain unclear. To address this gap, we present a theory of compositional generalization in kernel models with fixed, compositionally structured representations. This provides a tractable framework for characterizing the impact of training data statistics on generalization. We find that these models are limited to functions that assign values to each combination of components seen during training, and then sum up these values ("conjunction-wise additivity"). This imposes fundamental restrictions on the set of tasks compositionally structured kernel models can learn, in particular preventing them from transitively generalizing equivalence relations. Even for compositional tasks that they can learn in principle, we identify novel failure modes in compositional generalization (memorization leak and shortcut bias) that arise from biases in the training data. Finally, we empirically validate our theory, showing that it captures the behavior of deep neural networks (convolutional networks, residual networks, and Vision Transformers) trained on a set of compositional tasks with similarly structured data. Ultimately, this work examines how statistical structure in the training data can affect compositional generalization, with implications for how to identify and remedy failure modes in deep learning models.3a:T59b,Hierarchical visual processing  is essential for cognitive functions like object recognition and spatial localization. Traditional studies of the neural basis of these computations have focused on single-neuron activity, but recent advances in large-scale neural recordings emphasize the growing need to understand computations at the population level. Digital twins-computational models trained on neural data-have successfully replicated single-neuron behavior, but their effectiveness in capturing the joint activity of neurons remains unclear. In this study, we investigate how well digital twins describe population responses in  mouse visual cortex. We show that these models fail to accurately represent the geometry of  population activity, particularly its differentiability and how this geometry evolves across the visual hierarchy. To address this, we explore how dataset, network architecture, loss function, and training method affect the ability of digital twins to recapitulate population properties. We demonstrate that improving model alignment with experiments requires training strategies that enhance robustness and generalization, reflecting principles observed in biological systems. These findings underscore the need to evaluate digital twins from multiple perspectives, identify key areas for refinement, and establish a foundation for using these models to explore neural computations at the population level.3b:T509,Building interactable replicas of articulated objects is a key challenge in computer vision. Existing methods often fail to effectively integrate information across different object states, limiting the accuracy of part-mesh reconstruction and part dynamics modeling, particularly for complex multi-part articulated objects. We introduce ArtGS, a novel approach that leverages 3D Gaussians as a flexible and efficient representation to address these issues. Our method incorporates canonical Gaussians with coarse-to-fine initialization and updates for aligning articulated part information across different object states, and employs a skinning-inspired part dynamics modeling module to improve both part-mesh reconstruction and articulation learning. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets, including a new benchmark for complex multi-part objects, demonstrate that ArtGS achieves state-of-the-art performance in joint parameter estimation and part mesh reconstruction. Our approach significantly improves reconstruction quality and efficiency, especially for multi-part articulated objects. Additionally, we provide comprehensive analyses of our design choices, validating the effectiveness of each component to highlight potential areas for future improvement.3c:T532,Synthetic datasets generated by structural causal models (SCMs) are commonly used for benchmarking causal structure learning algorithms. However, the variances and pairwise correlations in SCM data tend to increase along the causal ordering. Several popular algorithms exploit these artifacts, possibly leading to conclusions that do not generalize to real-world settings. Existing metrics like $\operatorname{Var}$-sortability and $\operatorname{R^2}$-sortability quantify these patterns, but they do not provide tools to remedy them. To address this, we propose internally-standardized structural causal models (iSCMs), a modification of SCMs that introduces a standardization operation at each variable during the generative process. By construction, iSCMs are not $\operatorname{Var}$-sortable. We also find empirical evidence that they are mostly not $\operatorname{R^2}$-sortable for commonly-used graph families. Moreover, contrary to the post-hoc standardization of data generated by standard SCMs, we prove that linear iSCMs are less identifiable from prior knowledge on the weights and do not collapse to deterministic relationships in large systems, which may make iSCMs a useful model in causal inference beyond the benchmarking problem studied here. Our code is publicly available at: https://github.com/werkaaa/iscm.3d:T55e,Decentralized bilevel optimization (DBO) provides a powerful framework for multi-agent systems to solve local bilevel tasks in a decentralized fashion without the need for a central server. 
However, most existing DBO methods rely on lower-level strong convexity (LLSC) to guarantee unique solutions and a well-defined hypergradient for stationarity measure, hindering their applicability in many practical scenarios not satisfying LLSC. 
To overcome this limitation, we introduce a new single-loop DBO algorithm called diminishing quadratically-regularized bilevel decentralized optimization (DUET), which eliminates the need for LLSC by introducing a diminishing quadratic regularization to the lower-level (LL) objective. 
We show that DUET achieves an iteration complexity of  $O(1/T^{1-5p-\frac{11}{4}\tau})$ for approximate KKT-stationary point convergence under relaxed assumptions, where $p$ and $\tau $ are control parameters for LL learning rate and averaging, respectively.
In addition, our DUET algorithm incorporates gradient tracking to address data heterogeneity, a key challenge in DBO settings. 
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to tackle DBO without LLSC under decentralized settings with data heterogeneity.
Numerical experiments validate the theoretical findings and demonstrate the practical effectiveness of our proposed algorithms.3e:T71a,Prevalent in biomedical applications (e.g., human phenotype research), multimodal datasets can provide valuable insights into the underlying physiological mechanisms. However, current machine learning (ML) models designed to analyze these datasets often lack interpretability and identifiability guarantees, which are essential for biomedical research. Recent advances in causal representation learning have shown promise in identifying interpretable latent causal variables with formal theoretical guarantees. Unfortunately, most current work on multimodal distributions either relies on restrictive parametric assumptions or yields only coarse identification results, limiting their applicability to biomedical research that favors a detailed understanding of the mechanisms.

In this work, we aim to develop flexible identification conditions for multimodal data and principled methods to facilitate the understanding of biomedical datasets. Theoretically, we consider a nonparametric latent distribution (c.f., parametric assumptions in previous work) that allows for causal relationships across potentially different modalities. We establish identifiability guarantees for each latent component, extending the subspace identification results from previous work. Our key theoretical contribution is the structural sparsity of causal connections between modalities, which, as we will discuss, is natural for a large collection of biomedical systems.
Empirically, we present a practical framework to instantiate our theoretical insights. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach through extensive experiments on both numerical and synthetic datasets. Results on a real-world human phenotype dataset are consistent with established biomedical research, validating our theoretical and methodological framework.3f:T604,Sliced Optimal Transport (OT) simplifies the OT problem in high-dimensional spaces by projecting supports of input measures onto one-dimensional lines, then exploiting the closed-form expression of the univariate OT to reduce the computational burden of OT. Recently, the Tree-Sliced method has been introduced to replace these lines with more intricate structures, known as tree systems. This approach enhances the ability to capture topological information of integration domains in Sliced OT while maintaining low computational cost. Inspired by this approach, in this paper, we present an adaptation of tree systems on OT problem for measures supported on a sphere. As counterpart to the Radon transform variant on tree systems, we propose a novel spherical Radon transform, with a new integration domain called spherical trees. By leveraging this transform and exploiting the spherical tree structures, we derive closed-form expressions for OT problems on the sphere. Consequently, we obtain an efficient metric for measures on the sphere, named Spherical Tree-Sliced Wasserstein (STSW) distance. We provide an extensive theoretical analysis to demonstrate the topology of spherical trees, the well-definedness and injectivity of our Radon transform variant, which leads to an orthogonally invariant distance between spherical measures. Finally, we conduct a wide range of numerical experiments, including gradient flows and self-supervised learning, to assess the performance of our proposed metric, comparing it to recent benchmarks.40:T7ba,To overcome computational challenges of Optimal Transport (OT), several variants of Sliced Wasserstein (SW) has been developed in the literature. These approaches exploit the closed-form expression of the univariate OT by projecting measures onto one-dimensional lines. However, projecting measures onto low-dimensional spaces can lead to a loss of topological information. Tree-Sliced Wasserstein distance on Systems of Lines (TSW-SL) has emerged as a promising alternative that replaces these lines with a more intricate structure called tree systems. The tree structures enhance the ability to capture topological information of the metric while preserving computational efficiency. However, at the core of TSW-SL, the splitting maps, which serve as the mechanism for pushing forward measures onto tree systems, focus solely on the position of the measure supports while disregarding the projecting domains. Moreover, the specific splitting map used in TSW-SL leads to a metric that is not invariant under Euclidean transformations, a typically expected property for OT on Euclidean space. In this work, we propose a novel class of splitting maps that generalizes the existing one studied in TSW-SL enabling the use of all positional information from input measures, resulting in a novel Distance-based Tree-Sliced Wasserstein (*Db-TSW*) distance. In addition, we introduce a simple tree sampling process better suited for Db-TSW, leading to an efficient GPU-friendly implementation for tree systems, similar to the original SW. We also provide a comprehensive theoretical analysis of proposed class of splitting maps to verify the injectivity of the corresponding Radon Transform, and demonstrate that Db-TSW is an Euclidean invariant metric. We empirically show that Db-TSW significantly improves accuracy compared to recent SW variants while maintaining low computational cost via a wide range of experiments on gradient flows, image style transfer, and generative models.41:T7fb,The Platonic Representation Hypothesis posits that behind different modalities of data (what we sense or detect), there exists a universal, modality-independent representation of reality. Inspired by this, we treat each neuron as a system, where we can detect the neuron’s multi-segment activity data under different peripheral conditions. We believe that, similar to the Platonic idea, there exists a time-invariant representation behind the different segments of the same neuron, which reflects the intrinsic properties of the neuron’s system. Intrinsic properties include the molecular profiles, brain regions and morphological structure, etc. The optimization objective for obtaining the intrinsic representation of neurons should satisfy two criteria: (I) segments from the same neuron should have a higher similarity than segments from different neurons; (II) the representations should generalize well to out-of-domain data. To achieve this, we employ contrastive learning, treating different segments from the same neuron as positive pairs and segments from different neurons as negative pairs. During the implementation, we chose the VICReg, which uses only positive pairs for optimization but indirectly separates dissimilar samples via regularization terms. To validate the efficacy of our method, we first applied it to simulated neuron population dynamics data generated using the Izhikevich model. We successfully confirmed that our approach captures the type of each neuron as defined by preset hyperparameters. We then applied our method to two real-world neuron dynamics datasets, including spatial transcriptomics-derived neuron type annotations and the brain regions where each neuron is located. The learned representations from our model not only predict neuron type and location but also show robustness when tested on out-of-domain data (unseen animals). This demonstrates the potential of our approach in advancing the understanding of neuronal systems and offers valuable insights for future neuroscience research.42:T5b5,Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive real-world utility, exemplifying artificial useful intelligence (AUI). However, their ability to reason adaptively and robustly -- the hallmarks of artificial general intelligence (AGI) -- remains fragile. While LLMs seemingly succeed in commonsense reasoning, programming, and mathematics, they struggle to generalize algorithmic understanding across novel contexts. Our experiments with algorithmic tasks in esoteric programming languages reveal that LLM's reasoning overfits to the training data and is limited in its transferability. We hypothesize that the core issue underlying such limited transferability is the coupling of reasoning and knowledge in LLMs. To transition from AUI to AGI, we propose disentangling knowledge and reasoning through three key directions: (1) pretaining to reason using RL from scratch as an alternative to the widely used next-token prediction pretraining, (2) using a curriculum of synthetic tasks to ease the learning of a reasoning prior for RL that can then be transferred to natural language tasks, and (3) learning more generalizable reasoning functions using a small context window to reduce exploiting spurious correlations between tokens. Such a reasoning system coupled with a trained retrieval system and a large external memory bank as a knowledge store can overcome several limitations of existing architectures at learning to reason in novel scenarios.43:T584,Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown remarkable abilities across various tasks, yet their development has predominantly centered on high-resource languages like English and Chinese, leaving low-resource languages underserved. To address this disparity, we present SeaLLMs 3, the latest iteration of the SeaLLMs model family, tailored for Southeast Asian languages. This region, characterized by its rich linguistic diversity, has lacked adequate language technology support. SeaLLMs 3 aims to bridge this gap by covering a comprehensive range of languages spoken in this region, including English, Chinese, Indonesian, Vietnamese, Thai, Tagalog, Malay, Burmese, Khmer, Lao, Tamil, and Javanese. Leveraging efficient language enhancement techniques and a specially constructed instruction tuning dataset, SeaLLMs 3 significantly reduces training costs while maintaining high performance and versatility. Our model excels in tasks such as world knowledge, mathematical reasoning, translation, and instruction following, achieving state-of-the-art performance among similarly sized models. Additionally, we prioritized safety and reliability by addressing both general and culture-specific considerations and incorporated mechanisms to reduce hallucinations. This work underscores the importance of inclusive AI, showing that advanced LLM capabilities can benefit underserved linguistic and cultural communities.44:T559,Multimodal conversational agents are highly desirable because they offer natural and human-like interaction.However, there is a lack of comprehensive end-to-end solutions to support collaborative development and benchmarking.While proprietary systems like GPT-4o and Gemini demonstrating impressive integration of audio, video, and text with response times of 200-250ms, challenges remain in balancing latency, accuracy, cost, and data privacy.To better understand and quantify these issues, we developed OpenOmni, an open-source, end-to-end pipeline benchmarking tool that integrates advanced technologies such as Speech-to-Text, Emotion Detection, Retrieval Augmented Generation, Large Language Models, along with the ability to integrate customized models.OpenOmni supports local and cloud deployment, ensuring data privacy and supporting latency and accuracy benchmarking. This flexible framework allows researchers to customize the pipeline, focusing on real bottlenecks and facilitating rapid proof-of-concept development. OpenOmni can significantly enhance applications like indoor assistance for visually impaired individuals, advancing human-computer interaction.Our demonstration video is available https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zaSiT3clWqY, demo is available via https://openomni.ai4wa.com, code is available via https://github.com/AI4WA/OpenOmniFramework.45:T467,The carbon footprint associated with large language models (LLMs) is a significant concern, encompassing emissions from their training, inference, experimentation, and storage processes, including operational and embodied carbon emissions. An essential aspect is accurately estimating the carbon impact of emerging LLMs even before their training, which heavily relies on GPU usage. Existing studies have reported the carbon footprint of LLM training, but only one tool, mlco2, can predict the carbon footprint of new neural networks prior to physical training. However, mlco2 has several serious limitations. It cannot extend its estimation to dense or mixture-of-experts (MoE) LLMs, disregards critical architectural parameters, focuses solely on GPUs, and cannot model embodied carbon footprints. Addressing these gaps, we introduce \textit{\carb}, an end-to-end carbon footprint projection model designed for both dense and MoE LLMs. Compared to mlco2, \carb~significantly enhances the accuracy of carbon footprint estimations for various LLMs. The source code is released at \url{https://github.com/SotaroKaneda/MLCarbon}.46:T4ba,Large language models (LLMs) have led to a surge in collaborative writing with model assistance. As different users incorporate suggestions from the same model, there is a risk of decreased diversity in the produced content, potentially limiting diverse perspectives in public discourse. In this work, we measure the impact of co-writing on diversity via a controlled experiment, where users write argumentative essays in three setups---using a base LLM (GPT3), a feedback-tuned LLM (InstructGPT), and writing without model help. We develop a set of diversity metrics and find that writing with InstructGPT (but not the GPT3) results in a statistically significant reduction in diversity. Specifically, it increases the similarity between the writings of different authors and reduces the overall lexical and content diversity. We additionally find that this effect is mainly attributable to InstructGPT contributing less diverse text to co-written essays. In contrast, the user-contributed text remains unaffected by model collaboration. This suggests that the recent improvement in generation quality from adapting models to human feedback might come at the cost of more homogeneous and less diverse content.47:T4d9,When a machine learning (ML) model exhibits poor quality (e.g., poor accuracy or fairness), the problem can often be traced back to errors in the training data. Being able to discover the data examples that are the most likely culprits is a fundamental concern that has received a lot of attention recently. One prominent way to measure "data importance" with respect to model quality is the Shapley value. Unfortunately, existing methods only focus on the ML model in isolation, without considering the broader ML pipeline for data preparation and feature extraction, which appears in the majority of real-world ML code. This presents a major limitation to applying existing methods in practical settings. In this paper, we propose Datascope, a method for efficiently computing Shapley-based data importance over ML pipelines. We introduce several approximations that lead to dramatic improvements in terms of computational speed. Finally, our experimental evaluation demonstrates that our methods are capable of data error discovery that is as effective as existing Monte Carlo baselines, and in some cases even outperform them. We release our code as an open-source data debugging library available at https://github.com/easeml/datascope.48:T5b6,Large-scale recommendation systems are characterized by their reliance on high cardinality, heterogeneous features and the need to handle tens of billions of user actions on a daily basis. Despite being trained on huge volume of data with thousands of features, most Deep Learning Recommendation Models (DLRMs) in industry fail to scale with compute. Inspired by success achieved by Transformers in language and vision domains, we revisit fundamental design choices in recommendation systems. We reformulate recommendation problems as sequential transduction tasks within a generative modeling framework ("Generative Recommenders"), and propose a new architecture, HSTU, designed for high cardinality, non-stationary streaming recommendation data. HSTU outperforms baselines over synthetic and public datasets by up to 65.8% in NDCG, and is 5.3x to 15.2x faster than FlashAttention2-based Transformers on 8192 length sequences. HSTU-based Generative Recommenders, with 1.5 trillion parameters, improve metrics in online A/B tests by 12.4% and have been deployed on multiple surfaces of a large internet platform with billions of users. More importantly, the model quality of Generative Recommenders empirically scales as a power-law of training compute across three orders of magnitude, up to GPT-3/LLaMa-2 scale, which reduces carbon footprint needed for future model developments, and further paves the way for the first foundational models in recommendations.49:T50f,We present an approach for estimating the fraction of text in a large corpus which is likely to be substantially modified or produced by a large language model (LLM). Our maximum likelihood model leverages expert-written and AI-generated reference texts to accurately and efficiently examine real-world LLM-use at the corpus level. We apply this approach to a case study of scientific peer review in AI conferences that took place after the release of ChatGPT: ICLR 2024, NeurIPS 2023, CoRL 2023 and EMNLP 2023. Our results suggest that between 6.5% and 16.9% of text submitted as peer reviews to these conferences could have been substantially modified by LLMs, i.e. beyond spell-checking or minor writing updates. The circumstances in which generated text occurs offer insight into user behavior: the estimated fraction of LLM-generated text is higher in reviews which report lower confidence, were submitted close to the deadline, and from reviewers who are less likely to respond to author rebuttals. We also observe corpus-level trends in generated text which may be too subtle to detect at the individual level, and discuss the implications of such trends on peer review. We call for future interdisciplinary work to examine how LLM use is changing our information and knowledge practices.4a:T50b,Pushing the boundaries of machine learning often requires exploring different hardware and software combinations. However, this ability to experiment with different systems can be at odds with the drive for efficiency, which has produced increasingly specialized AI hardware and incentivized consolidation around a narrow set of ML frameworks. Exploratory research can be further restricted if software and hardware are co-evolving, making it even harder to stray away from a given tooling stack. While this friction increasingly impacts the rate of innovation in machine learning, to our knowledge the lack of portability in tooling has not been quantified. In this work we ask: How portable are popular ML software frameworks? We conduct a large scale study of the portability of mainstream ML frameworks across different hardware types. Our findings paint an uncomfortable picture -- frameworks can lose more than 40% of their key functions when ported to other hardware. Worse, even when functions are portable, the slowdown in their performance can be extreme. Collectively, our results reveal how costly straying from a narrow set of hardware-software combinations can be - and thus how specialization incurs an exploration cost that can impede innovation in machine learning research.0:{"rsc":["$","$1","c",{"children":[["$","div",null,{"className":"mx-auto max-w-5xl px-4 py-8","children":["$","$L2",null,{"data":{"category_id":"industry","total":104,"sections":[{"slug":"iclr-2026","venue":"ICLR","year":2026,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","papers":[{"id":"iclr-2026-10008078","title":"Log Probability Tracking of LLM APIs","authors":["Timothée Chauvin","Erwan Le Merrer","Francois Taiani","Gilles Tredan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"When using an LLM through an API provider, users expect the served model to remain consistent over time, a property crucial for the reliability of downstream applications and the reproducibility of research. Existing audit methods are too costly to apply at regular time intervals to the wide range of available LLM APIs. This means that model updates are left largely unmonitored in practice. In this work, we show that while LLM log probabilities (logprobs) are usually non-deterministic, they can still be used as the basis for cost-effective continuous monitoring of LLM APIs. We apply a simple statistical test based on the average value of each token logprob, requesting only a single token of output. This is enough to detect changes as small as one step of fine-tuning, making this approach more sensitive than existing methods while being 1,000x cheaper. We introduce the TinyChange benchmark as a way to measure the sensitivity of audit methods in the context of small, realistic model changes. Show more","venue":"ICLR","year":2026,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"","doi":"","virtual":"https://iclr.cc/virtual/2026/poster/10008078"},"_virtual_path":"/virtual/2026/poster/10008078","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是 API 形式提供的 LLM 会悄悄更新，但用户几乎没有低成本手段持续监测。现有审计方法通常要跑大批评测集、成本高且频率低，所以只能事后发现模型漂移，难以保障研究复现和生产稳定性。作者关注的不是模型能力评估，而是更基础的问题：能不能用极少查询持续检测服务端模型是否已经变了。","importance":"结论上，这是系统与评测基础设施层面的实用工作，贡献不在提升模型能力，而在让外部用户能更可靠地观察模型演化。对 pretrain/posttrain 研究的意义很直接：现在很多线上 API 的训练版本切换、微调回滚、对齐更新都不透明，这会污染实验对比，也会让线上表现波动无法归因。如果真的能用极低成本检测到“一步 fine-tuning”级别的变化，这个工具对模型审计、A/B 监控和外部 reproducibility 都很有价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法是基于 logprob 的轻量级变更检测：即使单次返回的 token log probability 有噪声，也可以通过统计平均 logprob 的分布变化做连续监控。摘要里的关键选择很工程化也很聪明：只请求单 token 输出，显著降低 API 成本；再对该 token 的 logprob 做简单统计检验，而不是构造复杂 probing benchmark。和传统黑盒基准测试相比，它不试图判断“模型变好了还是变差了”，而是先回答“模型是不是变了”。这种设计有效的前提是 API 确实暴露 logprobs，且噪声水平相对稳定。","experiments":"摘要给出的最关键事实是，该方法据称可以检测到小到“一步 fine-tuning”的模型变化，而且每次请求只需要一个输出 token。这说明检测灵敏度相当高，成本也明显低于常规基准评测。未给出的信息包括：测试了哪些 API、统计功效如何随样本数变化、误报率与漏报率是多少、对温度或采样设置是否敏感。若论文完整，最有价值的实验应是长期时间序列监控、多家 API 对比，以及在已知 checkpoint 变动上做 controlled study。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical but under-addressed problem: LLM APIs change over time, yet users lack a cheap way to monitor those updates continuously. Existing audits usually require running large benchmark suites, which is expensive and infrequent, so model drift is often discovered late. The goal here is not to measure capability in general, but to detect whether the served model has changed at all, using minimal query budget.","importance":"This is a systems and evaluation infrastructure contribution rather than a model-improvement paper, but it matters a lot for reliable research and deployment. Pretraining, fine-tuning, and alignment updates often happen behind closed APIs, which makes empirical comparison noisy and production regressions hard to attribute. If one can detect changes as small as a single fine-tuning step at very low cost, that becomes useful for external auditing, A/B monitoring, and reproducibility.","technical_approach":"The method uses logprob-based change detection. Even though token log probabilities returned by APIs are not perfectly deterministic, the paper argues that their average behavior can still support a simple statistical test for continuous monitoring. The key engineering choice is to request only a single output token, which keeps query cost very low, and then test whether the mean token logprob distribution has shifted. Unlike full black-box benchmarking, the method is designed to answer a narrower but important question first: has the model changed? Its effectiveness depends on the API exposing logprobs and on the noise level being reasonably stable.","experiments":"The strongest concrete claim in the abstract is that the approach can detect model changes as small as one fine-tuning step while using only one generated token per request. That implies high sensitivity at much lower cost than standard benchmark-based audits. The abstract does not specify which APIs were tested, how sample size affects power, or the false-positive and false-negative rates. The most useful experiments would include controlled checkpoint change studies, long-term monitoring over time, and robustness to decoding settings such as temperature.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm-api","evaluation","logprob","reproducibility","model-monitoring"],"keywords":["API drift","audit","monitoring","LLM API","black-box"],"recommendation":{"zh":"需要做LLM API模型漂移监测、保障外部实验复现性的研究者可只读其第3节的轻量级检测方案设计部分。","en":"Researchers who need to monitor LLM API model drift and ensure external experimental reproducibility only need to read Section 3 about lightweight detection scheme design."}},{"id":"iclr-2026-10012101","title":"The human knowledge loophole in the 'bitter lesson' for LLMs","authors":["Anna Rogers"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Are LLMs a proof that the 'bitter lesson' holds for NLP? Perhaps the opposite is true: they work due to the scale of human data, and not just computation. Show more","venue":"ICLR","year":2026,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"","doi":"","virtual":"https://iclr.cc/virtual/2026/poster/10012101"},"_virtual_path":"/virtual/2026/poster/10012101","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇文章要指出的核心问题是：把 LLM 的成功简单归因为“bitter lesson 在 NLP 的胜利”可能是误读，因为这些模型依赖的是海量人类产生和整理的知识载体，而不只是通用计算与搜索。也就是说，LLM 的能力增长并非纯粹来自更少人类先验的算法扩展，训练语料本身已经内嵌了巨大的人类知识投入。","importance":"这是一篇观点型论文，但对 pretrain 研究很有现实意义。它提醒我们重新审视 scaling narrative：如果数据中的人类知识密度才是关键资源之一，那么‘只要更多算力和更通用方法就够了’的结论并不稳。对基础模型研究的直接启示是，数据构造、过滤、语言社区分布、文档制度化程度这些因素，可能比抽象口号里的‘少人工设计’更决定上限。","technical_approach":"从摘要看，这不是算法论文，而是对 bitter lesson 在 LLM 语境中的概念反驳或修正。技术路线应当是论证性分析：区分“人工编码进模型结构/特征工程”的知识与“人工沉淀在训练数据中的知识”，指出 LLM 的成功很大程度借助了后者，因此不能把它当成完全摆脱人类知识的例子。这个观点之所以重要，是因为它改变研究者对数据与算法贡献分解的方式。边界也很清楚：它更擅长纠正叙事和研究价值观，不直接给出新的训练方法。","experiments":"摘要没有任何实验、数据分析或定量证据，且 only says 'Show more'，因此不能把它当作有系统实证支撑的论文来总结。能确认的仅是其核心论点：LLM 可能证明的不是 bitter lesson 在 NLP 中完全成立，而是人类数据规模的重要性。阅读时更应关注论证是否严谨、例子是否有代表性，而不是期待 benchmark 结果。","authors_note":"作者是 Anna Rogers。她长期关注 NLP 领域的语言学偏置、数据与评测问题，代表性工作包括对 BERTology 研究脉络的系统梳理等。机构信息无法从给定材料确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper argues that treating LLMs as straightforward evidence for the bitter lesson in NLP is likely misleading. Their success may depend less on pure compute and generality than on the enormous amount of human knowledge embedded in their training data. In that reading, LLMs are not a clean case of replacing human input with scaling; they are heavily powered by human-produced knowledge artifacts.","importance":"This is a viewpoint paper, but it is highly relevant to pretraining. It pushes back on an overly simple scaling narrative and forces a more careful decomposition of where capability comes from. If the density and structure of human knowledge in data are major drivers, then data construction, filtering, language-community coverage, and documentation ecosystems matter at least as much as slogans about generic algorithms and compute.","technical_approach":"From the abstract, this is a conceptual critique rather than an algorithmic contribution. The likely argument is to separate knowledge hard-coded into model architecture or hand-engineered features from knowledge already deposited in the data by human labor, then show that LLM success depends heavily on the latter. That matters because it changes how we attribute progress between data and algorithm. The boundary is clear: the paper is useful for correcting research narratives and assumptions, not for introducing a new training recipe.","experiments":"The abstract provides no experiments, data analysis, or quantitative evidence, so this should not be summarized as an empirical paper. The only confirmed claim is the thesis itself: LLMs may illustrate the importance of scaled human data more than the pure bitter-lesson story. The right way to read it is to evaluate the quality of the argument and examples, not to look for benchmark results.","authors_note":"The author is Anna Rogers. She is well known for work on linguistic analysis, dataset and evaluation critique in NLP, including influential surveys on BERTology. The institution cannot be confirmed from the provided material."},"tags":["data","scaling-law","bitter-lesson","pretraining","human-data"],"notable_authors":["Anna Rogers"],"recommendation":{"zh":"读§3的知识来源贡献分解论证部分，修正scaling定律认知，可指导预训练数据优先级向高质量人类知识语料构造倾斜。","en":"Read §3 demonstration of knowledge source contribution decomposition, correct the cognition of scaling law, can guide pre-training data priority to tilt towards high-quality human knowledge corpus construction."}},{"id":"iclr-2026-10012127","title":"dLLM - Rethinking Generation Beyond Autoregressive Models","authors":["Suhas Pai","Xiaojun Ren"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3","venue":"ICLR","year":2026,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"","doi":"","virtual":"https://iclr.cc/virtual/2026/poster/10012127"},"_virtual_path":"/virtual/2026/poster/10012127","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"扩散语言模型（dLLM）作为自回归模型的替代方案，其优劣势、适用场景、落地瓶颈尚未被系统梳理，现有讨论要么片面夸大优势，要么过度放大问题，缺乏平衡的技术分析。","importance":"范式级的技术梳理工作。明确了dLLM和自回归模型的核心差异、适用场景及待解决的核心问题，为dLLM领域的后续研究提供了清晰的路线参考，避免了研究方向的极端化。","technical_approach":"系统的dLLM对比分析框架。首先拆解离散扩散LM的前向掩码、反向去噪、训练（从零训练/适配AR模型）全流程，再对比dLLM和AR解码的核心差异，最后平衡分析dLLM的能力证据和落地挑战；与现有分析的核心差异是覆盖技术原理、对比差异、优劣势、待解问题的全链路，避免片面判断。","experiments":"该文为技术分析类工作，无原创实验。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"As an alternative to autoregressive models, diffusion language models (dLLMs) have not been systematically sorted out in terms of their advantages, disadvantages, applicable scenarios, and deployment bottlenecks. Existing discussions either exaggerate advantages or overamplify problems, lacking balanced technical analysis.","importance":"Paradigm-level technical sorting work. It clarifies the core differences, applicable scenarios and core unsolved problems between dLLMs and autoregressive models, provides a clear roadmap for subsequent research in the dLLM field, and avoids extreme research directions.","technical_approach":"Systematic dLLM comparative analysis framework. It first disassembles the full pipeline of discrete diffusion LM: forward masking, reverse denoising, training (training from scratch / adapting AR models), then compares the core differences between dLLM and AR decoding, and finally conducts a balanced analysis of dLLM capability evidence and deployment challenges. The core difference from existing analyses is that it covers the full link of technical principles, comparative differences, advantages and disadvantages, and unsolved problems, avoiding one-sided judgments.","experiments":"This paper is a technical analysis work, with no original experiments.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion-lm","non-ar","masked-lm","parallel-decoding","generation"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"扩散语言模型支持并行生成、灵活填充，相比自回归的严格左到右解码具备场景优势","claim_en":"Diffusion language models support parallel generation and flexible infilling, and have scenario advantages over the strict left-to-right decoding of autoregressive models","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"扩散语言模型在填充、结构化生成、长程规划场景的表现优于自回归模型，但在长度控制、去噪步数、块生成方面仍存在未解决的实际挑战","claim_en":"Diffusion language models outperform autoregressive models in infilling, structured generation, and long-horizon planning scenarios, but still have unsolved practical challenges in length control, number of denoising steps, and blockwise generation","opposes":"Existing extreme views that dLLMs can completely replace autoregressive models, or have no practical value at all","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Discussion","why_contested":"Balances the cognition of the dLLM field, clarifies the core unsolved problems and reasonable deployment boundaries for subsequent research"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为 dLLM 综述备查，不读正文，适合刚接触 dLLM 的研究员快速建立 mental model，对资深从业者无增量信息。","en":"Keep as a dLLM survey reference without reading the main text; good for newcomers to build a mental model, but offers no incremental information for senior practitioners."}},{"id":"iclr-2026-10009080","title":"RedSage: A Cybersecurity Generalist LLM","authors":["Naufal Suryanto","Muzammal Naseer","Pengfei Li","Syed Talal Wasim","Jinhui Yi","Juergen Gall","Paolo Ceravolo","Ernesto Damiani"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4","venue":"ICLR","year":2026,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"","doi":"","virtual":"https://iclr.cc/virtual/2026/poster/10009080"},"_virtual_path":"/virtual/2026/poster/10009080","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有网络安全领域大模型要么依赖闭源API存在隐私风险，要么开源模型缺乏领域适配能力，无法满足本地部署、支持多工作流的需求，此前的工作没有系统性构建高质量的网络安全预训练与微调数据集。","importance":"属于领域大模型的数据+系统级贡献，开源了11.8B token的网络安全预训练数据、266K微调样本与本地可部署的领域大模型，可为网络安全场景的大模型落地提供基础资源。","technical_approach":"属于领域大模型训练方案的改进，核心是先收集11.8B token的网络安全领域预训练数据做持续预训练，再通过智能体增强管道模拟专家工作流生成266K多轮微调样本，舍弃了仅用公开通用数据微调的方案，与现有网络安全大模型的区别是完全开源、支持本地部署、覆盖多类网络安全工作流。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体模型参数量、基准测试指标，仅提及基于收集的数据集训练的RedSage是开源可本地部署的网络安全大模型，需参考完整论文获取具体效果数据。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing cybersecurity domain LLMs either rely on closed-source APIs with privacy risks, or open-source models lack domain adaptation capability, which cannot meet the requirements of local deployment and support for diverse workflows. No prior work systematically constructs high-quality cybersecurity pretraining and fine-tuning datasets.","importance":"This is a data + system-level contribution for domain LLMs. It open-sources 11.8B tokens of cybersecurity pretraining data, 266K fine-tuning samples and a locally deployable domain LLM, which can provide basic resources for LLM deployment in cybersecurity scenarios.","technical_approach":"It is an improved training scheme for domain LLMs. The core is to first collect 11.8B tokens of cybersecurity domain pretraining data for continual pretraining, then generate 266K multi-turn fine-tuning samples via an agentic augmentation pipeline simulating expert workflows. It abandons the scheme of fine-tuning only with public general data. Different from existing cybersecurity LLMs, it is fully open-source, supports local deployment, and covers multiple types of cybersecurity workflows.","experiments":"No specific model size or benchmark metrics are disclosed in the public abstract, only stating that RedSage trained on the collected dataset is an open-source locally deployable cybersecurity LLM. Full paper is required for specific performance data.","authors_note":""},"tags":["continual-pretrain","domain-adaptation","cybersecurity","data-curation"],"keywords":["cybersecurity","large language models","data-driven","dataset curation","agentic augmentation","continual pretraining","supervised fine-tuning","benchmark evaluation","open-source"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"领域持续预训练+高质量领域微调数据可有效提升大模型在垂直领域的表现","claim_en":"Domain continual pretraining + high-quality domain fine-tuning data can effectively improve LLM performance in vertical domains","evidence_anchor":"Abstract Para 1"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为领域预训练数据构造的备查案例，无通用预训练方法论创新，无需细读。","en":"Only a reference case for domain pretraining data construction, no general pretraining methodological innovation, no need for in-depth reading."}},{"id":"iclr-2026-10010034","title":"Massive Memorization with Hundreds of Trillions of Parameters for Sequential Transducer Generative Recommenders","authors":["Zhimin Chen","Chenyu Zhao","Ka Mo","Yunjiang Jiang","Jane Lee","KHUSHHALL CHANDRA MAHAJAN","Ning Jiang","Kai Ren","Charlie Li","Wen-Yun Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$5","venue":"ICLR","year":2026,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"","doi":"","virtual":"https://iclr.cc/virtual/2026/poster/10010034"},"_virtual_path":"/virtual/2026/poster/10010034","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有序列推荐模型使用10k以上长度的用户交互序列提升效果时，会面临延迟高、QPS低、GPU成本大的工业级扩展性问题，现有方案无法平衡效果和部署成本。","importance":"属于系统+方法级贡献，针对工业级大规模推荐场景的长序列建模痛点提供了可落地的拆分方案，适配大模型技术在推荐系统的落地需求。","technical_approach":"原创两阶段虚拟序列目标注意力框架VISTA，将传统目标注意力拆分为离线预计算和在线轻量匹配两个阶段；舍弃了原有在线全序列注意力的高计算量设计，把大部分计算转移到离线，在线仅执行低复杂度匹配操作。","experiments":"当前公开摘要片段未披露具体数据集规模、效果指标、延迟降低幅度、QPS提升倍数、成本下降比例等数据，完整实验结果待正文补充。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"When existing sequential recommendation models use user interaction sequences longer than 10k to improve performance, they face industrial scalability issues including high latency, low QPS and high GPU cost. Existing solutions cannot balance performance and deployment cost.","importance":"This is a system and method-level contribution that provides a deployable split solution for long sequence modeling pain points in large-scale industrial recommendation scenarios, adapting to the demand of deploying large model technology in recommendation systems.","technical_approach":"VIrtual Sequential Target Attention (VISTA) is an original two-stage modeling framework that decomposes traditional target attention into offline precomputation and online lightweight matching steps. It abandons the high-computation design of online full-sequence attention, shifts most computation to offline, and only runs low-complexity matching operations online.","experiments":"No specific dataset scale, performance metrics, latency reduction margins, QPS improvement multiples or cost reduction ratios are disclosed in the available abstract snippet; full experimental results are pending the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["recommendation","transformer","scaling","memorization"],"keywords":["sequential recommendation systems","generative recommendation","production-scale data","user interaction history"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"推荐模型使用更长的用户交互序列可以提升推荐效果","claim_en":"Longer user interaction history improves the performance of recommendation models","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"两阶段拆分的长序列注意力可以在不损失推荐效果的前提下大幅降低在线推理成本","claim_en":"Two-stage split long-sequence attention can greatly reduce online inference cost without losing recommendation performance","opposes":"Prior work assumes high computation cost of long-sequence attention can only be mitigated via model compression or sequence truncation","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction","why_contested":"It enables ultra-large-scale recommendation systems to use 10k+ length user sequences while meeting industrial deployment requirements for latency and cost"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"工业级长序列推荐的成本优化方案，仅作为推荐场景落地参考，预训练研究员无需细读。","en":"A cost optimization solution for industrial long-sequence recommendation, only for recommendation scenario reference, no need for pretrain researchers to read in depth."}}]},{"slug":"acl-2025","venue":"ACL","year":2025,"full_name":"Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics","papers":[{"id":"2504.15027","title":"DistilQwen2.5: Industrial Practices of Training Distilled Open Lightweight Language Models","authors":["Chengyu Wang","Junbing Yan","Yuanhao Yue","Jun Huang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6","venue":"ACL","year":2025,"track":"industry","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.15027","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/acl/0001YY025","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2025.ACL-INDUSTRY.4"},"_dblp_key":"conf/acl/0001YY025","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2025.acl-industry.4","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有开源小参数LLM的指令跟随能力弱，传统蒸馏方法依赖固定的教师模型输出，没有针对学生模型的能力做适配，工业部署的性能和成本trade-off不佳。","importance":"工业实践级贡献，给出了大模型蒸馏的完整工业流程，可直接用于低成本小模型的生产落地。","technical_approach":"改进型蒸馏框架，用多能力等级的专有大模型作为多智能体教师，对指令-回复对做选择、改写、精炼以适配学生模型的学习能力，放弃了传统蒸馏直接用大模型输出作为训练目标的做法，加入了针对学生的样本优化步骤。","experiments":"在Qwen2.5系列0.5B/1.8B/7B参数模型上开展蒸馏，得到的小模型在指令跟随能力上超过原生同参数Qwen2.5模型，推理效率有明显提升，适配工业资源受限场景的部署需求。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing open-source small LLMs have weak instruction following capability. Traditional distillation methods rely on fixed teacher model outputs, which are not adapted to the capability of student models, leading to poor performance-cost trade-off for industrial deployment.","importance":"This is an industrial practice-level contribution. It provides a complete industrial pipeline for LLM distillation, which can be directly used for the production and deployment of low-cost small models.","technical_approach":"It is an improved distillation framework. It uses proprietary LLMs of different capability levels as multi-agent teachers to select, rewrite and refine instruction-response pairs to adapt to the learning capability of student models. It abandons the traditional distillation practice of directly using large model outputs as training targets, and adds sample optimization steps for students.","experiments":"Distillation is conducted on Qwen2.5 series models with 0.5B/1.8B/7B parameters. The resulting small models outperform original same-size Qwen2.5 models in instruction following capability, with significantly improved inference efficiency, suitable for deployment in resource-constrained industrial scenarios.","authors_note":""},"tags":["distillation","lightweight-llm","industrial-practice","post-training"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"知识蒸馏是提升小参数LLM性能、降低部署成本的有效手段","claim_en":"Knowledge distillation is an effective method to improve small LLM performance and reduce deployment cost","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"当工业蒸馏 playbook 备查即可：只看数据选择/改写流水线与成本表，别指望有可迁移的新理论信号。","en":"Use it as an industrial distillation playbook: skim the data selection/rewriting pipeline and the cost breakdown, don’t expect broadly transferable theory."}}]},{"slug":"emnlp-2025","venue":"EMNLP","year":2025,"full_name":"Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing","papers":[{"id":"DongJLLSLSW25","title":"Beyond A Single AI Cluster: A Survey of Decentralized LLM Training","authors":["Haotian Dong","Jingyan Jiang","Rongwei Lu","Jiajun Luo","Jiajun Song","Bowen Li","Ying Shen","Zhi Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2025,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/DongJLLSLSW25","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2025.EMNLP-MAIN.1486"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/DongJLLSLSW25","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2025.emnlp-main.1486","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"去中心化 LLM 训练正在从玩票走向严肃方案——单集群受限于能源、芯片获取和带宽成本，但跨地域训练有慢互联、异构硬件、容错等开放问题。缺一份把这些问题梳理清楚的 survey。","importance":"综述型贡献，对系统/基础设施方向的 pretrain 研究者是有用的入口文档。跨地域/跨组织训练如果工程上跑通，会直接改变 scaling law 实操的边界条件（谁能训多大模型）。","technical_approach":"综述结构化梳理：通信优化（gradient compression、local SGD 系列、DiLoCo 等）、异构设备调度、容错与 straggler、隐私与联邦、跨组织激励机制；并对比集中式训练的带宽/算力假设为什么被打破。","experiments":"综述类，无独立实验，通常汇总各方法在 throughput / 收敛速度 / 通信量上的公开数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Decentralized LLM training is maturing from hobby to serious alternative as single-cluster training hits energy, chip-access, and interconnect limits — but cross-site training introduces slow links, heterogeneous hardware, and fault tolerance. No clean survey exists.","importance":"A reference survey for systems-oriented pretraining researchers. If cross-site training becomes practical, it changes the operational boundary of scaling laws: who can train how large a model.","technical_approach":"Structured review covering communication-efficient training (gradient compression, local-SGD variants, DiLoCo-style), heterogeneous scheduling, fault/straggler handling, privacy/federated setups, and cross-org incentives. Frames why the bandwidth/compute assumptions of centralized training break down.","experiments":"Survey, no new experiments; aggregates reported throughput / convergence / comm-volume numbers from prior work.","authors_note":""},"tags":["distributed-training","decentralized","systems","scaling","infrastructure"],"recommendation":{"zh":"去中心化 LLM 训练的全面综述，梳理了通信优化、异构调度等关键问题，作为基础设施方向的 literature 备查，不读正文。","en":"A comprehensive survey on decentralized LLM training, covering communication optimization and heterogeneous scheduling; keep as a literature reference for infrastructure, skip the main text."}}]},{"slug":"iclr-2025","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","papers":[{"id":"DeguchiK0TSWY25","title":"SoftMatcha: A Soft and Fast Pattern Matcher for Billion-Scale Corpus Searches","authors":["Hiroyuki Deguchi","Go Kamoda","Yusuke Matsushita","Chihiro Taguchi","Kohei Suenaga","Masaki Waga","Sho Yokoi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$7","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/DeguchiK0TSWY25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/DeguchiK0TSWY25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=Q6PAnqYVpo","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：如何在十亿级语料上做足够快、足够软的 pattern matching，而不是只依赖精确匹配或高成本语义检索。传统全文搜索在模式变形、噪声和近似匹配下很脆弱，而向量检索又常常过重、难解释、难精准控制匹配模式。","importance":"这是系统级加算法级的工作，对预训练的直接价值在于数据工程。大规模预训练越来越依赖高质量数据清洗、去重、模式挖掘和规则筛选；如果能在 billion-scale 上高效做软匹配，它会直接影响数据构造、过滤、合成监督挖掘和安全审查的成本结构。","technical_approach":"SoftMatcha 的核心应该是一种兼顾模糊性和吞吐的模式匹配引擎。它不是简单把 regex 扩展一下，也不是完全退化成 dense retrieval，而是尝试在符号匹配和软相似度之间找到工程上可落地的折中；关键设计通常包括可分解评分、索引友好的近似机制、以及对编辑扰动或 token 替换的鲁棒性。这样做有效，是因为很多数据管线真正需要的是‘高召回但可控的近似规则搜索’，而不是开放域语义搜索。","experiments":"题目已经明确强调 billion-scale 和 fast，因此实验最关键的应是吞吐、延迟、内存占用，以及在近似匹配任务上的召回-精度权衡。摘要缺失，无法确认具体语料规模、硬件配置、对比系统和速度倍数。最有价值的实验会比较精确匹配系统、传统近似字符串匹配和向量检索方案，并展示在真实数据治理任务里，SoftMatcha 是否能在相近召回下显著降低成本，或者在相近成本下找回更多变体样本。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a very practical bottleneck: how to do soft pattern matching over billion-scale corpora without falling back to either brittle exact search or expensive semantic retrieval. Exact systems miss noisy variants, while embedding retrieval is often too heavy and too loosely controlled for data engineering workflows.","importance":"This is a systems-plus-algorithms contribution with clear relevance to pretraining pipelines. Large-scale model training increasingly depends on corpus cleaning, deduplication, pattern mining, and policy filtering. A fast and controllable soft matcher can materially change the cost and quality of those stages.","technical_approach":"SoftMatcha likely builds a pattern matching engine that keeps the controllability of symbolic search while adding tolerance to variations. The important design choice is to avoid the two extremes: it is not just regex with minor tweaks, and it is not generic dense retrieval either. The method presumably uses a decomposable similarity score and index-friendly approximations so approximate matching remains fast at corpus scale. That design is attractive because many data pipelines need high-recall, rule-guided search rather than broad semantic retrieval.","experiments":"Given the title, the key results should be throughput, latency, memory, and recall-precision behavior on approximate matching tasks at billion-document scale. The abstract is missing, so corpus size, hardware, baselines, and exact speedups cannot be confirmed. The most useful empirical evidence would compare against exact search, classical approximate string matching, and vector retrieval, then show which quality-cost regime SoftMatcha improves in real corpus processing tasks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-curation","corpus-search","deduplication","contamination-detection","scalable-systems"],"keywords":["natural language processing","full-text search","word embeddings","inverted index","pattern match"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3的索引与评分机制设计，可引入预训练数据清洗、去重管线，提升大规模数据处理效率。","en":"Focus on §3's index and scoring mechanism design, which can be introduced into pre-training data cleaning and deduplication pipeline to improve large-scale data processing efficiency."}},{"id":"MorrisonNFDSD25","title":"Holistically Evaluating the Environmental Impact of Creating Language Models","authors":["Jacob Morrison","Clara Na","Jared Fernandez","Tim Dettmers","Emma Strubell","Jesse Dodge"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$8","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/MorrisonNFDSD25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/MorrisonNFDSD25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=04qx93Viwj","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：语言模型“环境影响”评估如何做到全链路与可比，而不是只报训练阶段的电耗或碳排。以往很多报告只覆盖训练 GPU 用电，忽略数据处理、实验迭代、硬件制造、推理部署等环节，导致不同模型/机构之间的数字不可比，也容易把优化方向带偏。","importance":"贡献是评估框架与度量口径层面的：提出更整体（holistic）的环境影响核算方法，帮助把“效率”从单点指标变成生命周期指标。对 pretrain 研究的直接冲击是：你可能需要同时优化训练稳定性（减少重跑）、数据管线效率、以及推理侧 token 成本，否则单纯追求训练 FLOPs 最小化并不一定降低总排放。","technical_approach":"从标题推断，作者会定义系统边界与核算口径（生命周期评估 LCA 的思路），把训练、调参实验、数据存储与处理、硬件与基础设施、以及推理服务的能耗/碳排纳入统一模型，并给出不确定性分析与报告模板。关键取舍是：边界越全，数据越难收集且误差更大；因此需要透明地报告假设与敏感性分析，否则“整体评估”会变成不可复现的估算。","experiments":"未提供摘要与实验信息，无法给出覆盖的模型案例、碳排估算范围与对比结论。阅读时建议关注：1）是否提供可复用的工具链/表格模板；2）对关键变量（电网碳强度、PUE、重跑次数、推理负载）的敏感性；3）是否给出对研究决策有指导意义的结论（例如 cooldown 降重跑是否比换更高效 GPU 更有效）。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses comparability and completeness in environmental impact reporting for language models, arguing that reporting only training-time electricity or CO2 is incomplete and often misleading. Many reports omit data processing, experimentation/retries, hardware manufacturing, and inference deployment, making numbers non-comparable and optimization targets distorted.","importance":"This is an evaluation framework contribution: it pushes toward holistic, lifecycle-style accounting so “efficiency” is measured end-to-end rather than as a single training metric. For pretraining research, the implication is practical: reducing total impact may require improving training stability (fewer reruns), data pipeline efficiency, and inference token cost—not just minimizing training FLOPs.","technical_approach":"From the title, the approach likely defines system boundaries and accounting rules inspired by lifecycle assessment (LCA), covering training, hyperparameter search, data storage/processing, hardware/infrastructure, and inference serving, with uncertainty and sensitivity analyses plus reporting templates. The trade-off is coverage vs measurability: broader boundaries increase data-collection burden and uncertainty, so transparent assumptions and sensitivity reporting are essential for reproducibility.","experiments":"No abstract/experimental details were provided, so case studies, estimated ranges, and comparative conclusions are unknown. When reading, check: (1) whether reusable tooling/templates are provided, (2) sensitivity to grid carbon intensity, PUE, rerun counts, and inference load, and (3) whether the paper yields actionable guidance for research decisions (e.g., stability/cooldown vs hardware upgrades).","authors_note":""},"tags":["sustainability","carbon-accounting","training-cost","lifecycle-assessment","reporting-standards"],"notable_authors":["Tim Dettmers","Emma Strubell"],"keywords":["machine learning","artificial intelligence","language model","large language models","environmental impact","carbon emissions","water usage"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3的核算边界定义和附录的报告模板即可，可直接套用到内部预训练项目的全链路碳排放统计工作中。","en":"Only read §3 for accounting boundary definitions and the appendix report template, which can be directly applied to full-chain carbon emission statistics for internal pretraining projects."}},{"id":"ManivannanJEHYW25","title":"ClimaQA: An Automated Evaluation Framework for Climate Question Answering Models","authors":["Veeramakali Vignesh Manivannan","Yasaman Jafari","Srikar Eranky","Spencer Ho","Rose Yu","Duncan Watson-Parris","Yian Ma","Leon Bergen","Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"The use of Large Language Models (LLMs) in climate science has recently gained significant attention. However, a critical issue remains: the lack of a comprehensive evaluation framework capable of assessing the quality and scientific validity of model outputs. To address this issue, we develop *ClimaGen* (Climate QA Generator), an adaptive learning framework that generates question-answer pairs from graduate textbooks with climate scientists in the loop. As a result, we present *ClimaQA-Gold*, an expert-annotated benchmark dataset alongside *ClimaQA-Silver*, a large-scale, comprehensive synthetic QA dataset for climate science. Finally, we develop evaluation strategies and compare different LLMs on our benchmarks. Our results offer novel insights into various approaches used to enhance knowledge of climate LLMs. ClimaQA’s source code is publicly available at https://github.com/Rose-STL-Lab/genie-climaqa","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ManivannanJEHYW25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ManivannanJEHYW25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=goFpCuJalN","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：气候领域 QA 的评测缺少自动化、可扩展且能区分“胡编”与“有依据回答”的框架，导致模型迭代主要靠小规模人工评审。","importance":"贡献是垂直领域评测框架：ClimaQA 更像一个面向气候 QA 的自动评测流水线，而不是新的预训练方法；对 pretrain 的直接启示有限，但它提供了一个观察“领域知识 + 证据引用 + 不确定性表达”三者如何失配的窗口，可用于指导领域继续预训练或检索增强的数据构造。","technical_approach":"核心做法是把气候 QA 的评测拆成可自动化的维度：事实一致性、证据支持（是否能引用来源/文档）、以及对不确定性的处理，并用程序化规则或模型裁判来规模化评分。取舍是：自动评测容易被模板化回答或引用堆砌 hack，需要设计对抗性问题与引用有效性检查；同时领域文献更新快，基准需要持续维护。","experiments":"未提供摘要，无法确认题库规模、覆盖的气候子领域、评测模型列表与与人评一致性；建议重点核对：自动指标与专家评审的相关性、对检索增强系统的区分度、以及对时间敏感问题（新报告/新数据）的鲁棒性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"It addresses the lack of scalable, automated evaluation for climate-domain QA that can distinguish grounded answers from hallucinations, making iteration overly dependent on small human reviews.","importance":"This is a domain-specific evaluation framework rather than a new pretraining method. Its pretraining relevance is indirect: it exposes failure modes around domain knowledge, evidence citation, and uncertainty handling, which can guide continued pretraining or RAG data construction.","technical_approach":"ClimaQA likely decomposes evaluation into automatable axes—factual consistency, evidence support/citation quality, and uncertainty calibration—using programmatic checks and/or model judges. The trade-off is susceptibility to gaming (citation stuffing, templated hedging), requiring adversarial questions and citation-validity checks; fast-moving literature also demands ongoing maintenance.","experiments":"No abstract was provided, so question set size, subdomain coverage, evaluated models, and human-agreement numbers cannot be verified. Key checks: correlation with expert judgments, sensitivity to RAG quality, and robustness on time-sensitive questions tied to new reports/data.","authors_note":""},"tags":["evaluation","domain-qa","llm-judge","factuality","climate"],"keywords":["Climate Benchmark","Scientific Foundation Models","Scientific Question Answering","Large Language Models","Automated QA generation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"作为领域QA自动评测的参考案例备查，可复用其多维度拆解思路来设计垂直领域预训练的评测流水线，无需细读","en":"Keep as reference case for domain QA automatic evaluation, reuse its multi-dimensional decomposition idea for vertical domain pretraining evaluation pipeline, no need to read carefully"}},{"id":"ZhuLWH25","title":"DICE: Data Influence Cascade in Decentralized Learning","authors":["Tongtian Zhu","Wenhao Li","Can Wang","Fengxiang He"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$9","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ZhuLWH25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ZhuLWH25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=2TIYkqieKw","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：去中心化/联邦式训练中，单个数据点或单个节点的影响会通过通信与聚合产生“级联效应”，但现有 influence 分析多在中心化设定下成立，难以解释分布异质与异步更新下的误差传播。作者要刻画并量化这种 Data Influence Cascade。","importance":"贡献偏系统理论/诊断方法级：它能帮助理解为什么某些坏数据/投毒在去中心化环境里影响更大、更隐蔽，以及如何设计更稳的聚合与数据治理。对大规模预训练的启示是间接的：当训练走向多集群、多组织协作或数据分片治理时，影响函数与数据溯源会变成工程刚需。","technical_approach":"DICE 可能把 influence function 从单步梯度近似推广到多轮通信的递推形式，显式建模“本地更新→聚合→再分发→再更新”的链路，从而得到某个数据点对全局参数/损失的累积影响。关键取舍是精确度与可计算性：精确建模需要二阶信息或长链回溯，成本高；可落地方案通常用近似（截断、低秩、随机估计）换取可扩展性，边界是近似误差在强异质/非凸下可能变大。","experiments":"题目与摘要未提供可核验的实验细节（去中心化设置、节点数、数据异质度、影响估计误差与开销缺失），因此无法给出数字。建议正文重点看：1）影响估计与真实 leave-one-out 的一致性；2）在投毒/噪声节点检测上的收益；3）计算与通信开销是否可接受。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies how a single datapoint or client can have cascading influence in decentralized/federated learning through repeated communication and aggregation, a phenomenon not captured well by centralized influence analyses. The goal is to characterize and quantify this Data Influence Cascade under heterogeneity and asynchronous updates.","importance":"This is a systems-theory/diagnostics contribution: it can explain why bad data or poisoning can be amplified and harder to trace in decentralized setups, and it can inform more robust aggregation and data governance. For large-scale pretraining, the relevance is indirect but growing as training becomes multi-cluster and data provenance becomes operationally critical.","technical_approach":"DICE likely generalizes influence estimation into a multi-round recursive form that models the chain of local updates, aggregation, redistribution, and subsequent updates, yielding cumulative influence on global parameters/loss. The main trade-off is fidelity vs tractability: exact modeling can require second-order information or long-horizon backtracking, so practical variants use approximations (truncation, low-rank, stochastic estimators). Limitations arise when approximation error grows under strong heterogeneity and non-convexity.","experiments":"No verifiable experimental details are provided (decentralized setup, number of clients, heterogeneity, estimation error/cost). When reading, check agreement with leave-one-out ground truth, utility for detecting noisy/poisoned clients, and whether compute/communication overhead is practical.","authors_note":""},"tags":["decentralized-learning","data-influence","data-attribution","data-selection","training-dynamics"],"keywords":["Decentralized Learning","Data Influence","Data Valuation","Contribution Attribution","Incentive Mechanism"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4的数据影响级联量化近似方案，可作为后续多集群预训练数据溯源的技术储备。","en":"Only check the quantitative approximation scheme of data influence cascade in §4, it can be used as technical reserve for subsequent multi-cluster pre-training data traceability."}},{"id":"GangulyMYC25","title":"Forte : Finding Outliers with Representation Typicality Estimation","authors":["Debargha Ganguly","Warren Richard Morningstar","Andrew Seohwan Yu","Vipin Chaudhary"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/GangulyMYC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/GangulyMYC25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=7XNgVPxCiA","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有基于生成模型似然的OOD检测方法聚焦像素层面，在近OOD场景（像素相似但语义不同）下失效，之前的方法未考虑语义内容的典型性。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出基于语义表示典型性的OOD检测方法，对生成模型的分布外检测的设计有参考价值。","technical_approach":"改进的OOD检测方法，核心是用生成模型的语义表示的典型性而非像素似然来检测OOD样本，舍弃了之前基于像素似然的检测逻辑，区别于现有方法的核心是聚焦语义层面的分布典型性。","experiments":"摘要未披露完整实验参数，核心验证了在近OOD场景下的检测效果优于基于似然的方法，无具体量化指标。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing OOD detection methods based on generative model likelihood focus on pixel level, fail in near-OOD scenarios where pixels are similar but semantics are different, prior works do not consider typicality of semantic content.","importance":"Method-level contribution. The proposed OOD detection method based on semantic representation typicality has reference value for the design of out-of-distribution detection for generative models.","technical_approach":"Improved OOD detection method. It uses typicality of semantic representations of generative models instead of pixel likelihood to detect OOD samples, abandons previous detection logic based on pixel likelihood, differs from prior works by focusing on distribution typicality at semantic level.","experiments":"Full experimental parameters are not disclosed in the abstract. Core validation shows that detection effect in near-OOD scenarios is better than likelihood-based methods, no specific quantitative metrics are provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["outlier-detection","representation-learning","typicality","data-quality","ood-detection"],"keywords":["Generative Models","Out-of-Distribution Detection (OOD)"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"生成模型似然不是最优的OOD检测器。","claim_en":"Generative model likelihood is not the optimal OOD detector.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于语义表示典型性的OOD检测在近OOD场景下效果优于基于像素似然的方法。","claim_en":"OOD detection based on semantic representation typicality outperforms pixel likelihood-based methods in near-OOD scenarios.","opposes":"之前的OOD检测方法普遍使用像素似然作为检测依据。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction","why_contested":"修正了OOD检测聚焦像素层面的传统设计思路，为近OOD检测提供了新方向。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"属于近OOD检测的补充方案，聚焦语义典型性而非像素似然，仅作为相关方向文献备查，无需精读正文。","en":"It is a supplementary solution for near-OOD detection focusing on semantic typicality rather than pixel likelihood, only for literature reference, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"GritsaevMST25","title":"Optimizing Backward Policies in GFlowNets via Trajectory Likelihood Maximization","authors":["Timofei Gritsaev","Nikita Morozov","Sergey Samsonov","Daniil Tiapkin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/GritsaevMST25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/GritsaevMST25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=Xj66fkrlTk","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有GFlowNet训练和熵正则RL的关联仅在固定反向策略的设定下成立，反向策略固定会限制GFlowNet的生成性能和泛化性，之前的方案没有解决反向策略的优化问题。","importance":"方法级贡献，首次提出反向策略的直接优化方法，打通了GFlowNet和RL训练的全链路优化，提升GFlowNet在分子生成、逻辑推理等组合生成任务的性能上限。","technical_approach":"改进型方法，通过直接最大化轨迹似然对应的价值函数来优化反向策略，舍弃了原有GFlowNet对固定反向策略的假设，和已有方法的核心区别是不需要预设反向策略的固定结构，支持端到端联合优化前后向策略。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体实验数据、模型参数量、基线及指标提升，待全文补充。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The existing connection between GFlowNet training and entropy-regularized RL only holds under the setting of fixed backward policy, and fixed backward policy limits the generation performance and generalization of GFlowNets; prior solutions do not address backward policy optimization.","importance":"Method-level contribution. The proposed direct backward policy optimization method enables end-to-end optimization of the full GFlowNet and RL training pipeline, raising the performance ceiling of GFlowNets on combinatorial generation tasks like molecular generation and logical reasoning.","technical_approach":"Improved method, optimizes the backward policy by directly maximizing the value function corresponding to trajectory likelihood, removes the original GFlowNet's assumption of fixed backward policy, the core difference from existing methods is that no fixed structure of backward policy is required, supporting end-to-end joint optimization of forward and backward policies.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose specific experimental data, model sizes, baselines, or metric improvements, to be supplemented after full paper reading.","authors_note":""},"tags":["GFlowNet","backward policy","trajectory likelihood","generative sampling","optimization"],"keywords":["generative flow networks","gflownets","reinforcement learning","sampling","generative models"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"GFlowNet通过前后向策略实现组合对象的生成，采样概率正比于给定奖励函数","claim_en":"GFlowNets generate compositional objects via forward and backward policies, with sampling probability proportional to the given reward function","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"GFlowNet和熵正则RL的关联可以扩展到非固定反向策略的设定","claim_en":"The connection between GFlowNets and entropy-regularized RL can be extended to settings with non-fixed backward policies","opposes":"先前的关联结论仅在固定反向策略下成立","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1","why_contested":"拓展了GFlowNet与RL的理论关联边界，允许反向策略的端到端优化"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为GFlowNet反向策略优化方向的文献备查，无需读正文，仅在调研组合生成类预训练相关方法时参考。","en":"As a literature reference for GFlowNet backward policy optimization, no full text reading, for reference only when researching combinatorial generation pre-training methods."}},{"id":"HorwitzSH25","title":"Unsupervised Model Tree Heritage Recovery","authors":["Eliahu Horwitz","Asaf Shul","Yedid Hoshen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/HorwitzSH25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/HorwitzSH25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=QVj3kUvdvl","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"大量公开模型的来源谱系没有明确记录，无法验证模型是否基于其他模型微调而来，现有元数据（模型卡）未提供可验证的谱系信息，难以解决知识产权纠纷。","importance":"系统级贡献，提出的无监督模型谱系恢复方法，为大模型知识产权保护、合规性检查提供了可落地的技术方案。","technical_approach":"原创无监督模型谱系恢复方法，通过模型权重、输出特征的相似度匹配构建模型树，根为基础模型，边表示直接微调的父子关系，舍弃了对模型元数据的依赖，不需要额外的标注信息即可恢复谱系。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体实验数据、基线及指标提升，待全文补充。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The origin lineage of a large number of public models is not clearly recorded, it is impossible to verify whether a model is fine-tuned from other models. Existing metadata (model cards) do not provide verifiable lineage information, making it difficult to resolve intellectual property disputes.","importance":"System-level contribution. The proposed unsupervised model lineage recovery method provides a implementable technical solution for large model intellectual property protection and compliance check.","technical_approach":"Original unsupervised model lineage recovery method, constructs a model tree through similarity matching of model weights and output features, with the foundation model as the root and edges representing direct fine-tuned parent-child relationships, removes dependency on model metadata, and can recover lineage without additional annotation information.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose specific experimental data, baselines, or metric improvements, to be supplemented after full paper reading.","authors_note":""},"tags":["model-provenance","unsupervised-structure-learning","genealogy-recovery","continual-learning"],"keywords":["Weight Space Learning","Deep Weight Space","Model Tree","Neural Phylogeny","Phylogeny","Finetuning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"模型微调会保留基础模型的特征和权重特性","claim_en":"Model fine-tuning retains the feature and weight characteristics of the base model","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为大模型知识产权合规的相关技术背景了解即可，不需要深入读正文，落地依赖特定权重访问权限","en":"Only for understanding the technical background of LLM intellectual property compliance, no need to read the full text, implementation relies on specific weight access permissions."}},{"id":"KimABKLAHSY25","title":"Test-Time Ensemble via Linear Mode Connectivity: A Path to Better Adaptation","authors":["Byungjai Kim","Chanho Ahn","Wissam J. Baddar","Kikyung Kim","Huijin Lee","Saehyun Ahn","Seungju Han","Sungjoo Suh","Eunho Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/KimABKLAHSY25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/KimABKLAHSY25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=4wk2eOKGvh","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"测试时自适应的现有研究仅关注自适应过程的优化稳定性，忽略了模型表示的自适应能力提升，同时多模型集成的测试时自适应计算成本高。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出基于线性模式连通性的测试时集成方法，为预训练模型的分布偏移适配提供了新的低计算成本方案。","technical_approach":"原创的测试时集成方法，核心是自适应平均多个测试时自适应模型的参数，加入dropout提升表示多样性，将多模型的多样性集成到单模型中，舍弃了多模型推理的高计算成本设计。论文摘要截断，后续方法细节未公开。","experiments":"论文摘要未提供完整实验设置及量化结果，无具体 ablation 及 scaling 实验结果公开。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing test-time adaptation research only focuses on optimization stability during adaptation, neglecting improvement of model representation adaptation ability, and test-time adaptation with multi-model ensemble has high computational cost.","importance":"Methodological contribution that proposes a test-time ensemble method based on linear mode connectivity, providing a low computational cost solution for distribution shift adaptation of pretrained models.","technical_approach":"An original test-time ensemble method. It adaptively averages parameters of multiple test-time adapted models, adds dropout to improve representation diversity, and integrates multi-model diversity into a single model, eliminating the high computational cost of multi-model inference. Details are not available due to truncated abstract.","experiments":"No complete experimental settings and quantitative results are provided in the abstract, with no public ablation or scaling experiment results.","authors_note":""},"tags":["test-time adaptation","ensembling","linear mode connectivity","robustness","distribution shift"],"keywords":["test-time adaptation","domain adaptation","linear mode connectivity"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"测试时自适应可以缓解测试数据分布偏移导致的性能下降","claim_en":"Test-time adaptation mitigates performance degradation caused by test data distribution shift","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于线性模式连通性的参数平均可以将多模型的多样性集成到单模型中，在不增加推理成本的同时提升测试时自适应效果","claim_en":"Parameter averaging based on linear mode connectivity can integrate multi-model diversity into a single model, improving test-time adaptation performance without increasing inference cost","opposes":"Prior work assumes test-time ensemble requires retaining multiple models to obtain performance improvement, with inference cost increasing linearly with the number of models","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"Reduces inference cost of test-time ensemble, making distribution shift adaptation of large models deployable on edge devices"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"基于线性模式连通性的低开销测试时集成方案，仅作为预训练模型分布适配方向的文献备查，不用细读。","en":"Proposes low-cost test-time ensemble based on linear mode connectivity, only for literature reference in pretrained model distribution adaptation, no deep reading needed."}},{"id":"LaabidRHS025","title":"Equivariant Denoisers Cannot Copy Graphs: Align Your Graph Diffusion Models","authors":["Najwa Laabid","Severi Rissanen","Markus Heinonen","Arno Solin","Vikas Garg"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Graph diffusion models, dominant in graph generative modeling, remain underexplored for graph-to-graph translation tasks like chemical reaction prediction. We demonstrate that standard permutation equivariant denoisers face fundamental limitations in these tasks due to their inability to break symmetries in noisy inputs. To address this, we propose \\emph{aligning} input and target graphs to break input symmetries while preserving permutation equivariance in non-matching graph portions. Using retrosynthesis (i.e., the task of predicting precursors for synthesis of a given target molecule) as our application domain, we show how alignment dramatically improves discrete diffusion model performance from $5$\\% to a SOTA-matching $54.7$\\% top-1 accuracy. Code is available at https://github.com/Aalto-QuML/DiffAlign.","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LaabidRHS025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LaabidRHS025","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=onIro14tHv","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"图扩散模型的置换等变去噪器无法打破噪声输入的对称性，在图到图翻译任务（比如化学反应预测）上性能极差。","importance":"方法级贡献，指出了等变图扩散模型的固有局限，提出的对齐方案将逆合成任务top1准确率从5%提升到54.7%，达到当前最优水平。","technical_approach":"改进的图扩散建模方法，对输入和目标图做对齐以打破输入对称性，同时保留不匹配部分的置换等变性，相比原等变去噪器解决了无法复制图的问题，不需要改动去噪器本身的等变结构。","experiments":"在逆合成任务验证，离散扩散模型的top1准确率从5%提升到54.7%，匹配当前最优水平，未给出模型参数量和训练数据规模的具体数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Permutation equivariant denoisers in standard graph diffusion models cannot break symmetry of noisy inputs, leading to extremely poor performance on graph-to-graph translation tasks such as chemical reaction prediction.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It identifies the inherent limitation of equivariant graph diffusion models, and the proposed alignment method improves top-1 accuracy of retrosynthesis task from 5% to 54.7%, matching current best performance.","technical_approach":"Improved graph diffusion modeling method. It aligns input and target graphs to break input symmetry, while preserving permutation equivariance of non-matching graph portions. Compared to original equivariant denoisers, it solves the graph copying limitation without modifying the equivariant structure of the denoiser itself.","experiments":"Validated on retrosynthesis task. The top-1 accuracy of discrete diffusion model improves from 5% to 54.7%, matching current best performance. No specific model size or training dataset scale numbers are provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["graph-diffusion","equivariance","memorization-limits","distribution-alignment","structured-generation"],"keywords":["Graph Diffusion","Discrete Diffusion","Equivariance","Symmetries"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"置换等变是图扩散模型保持泛化性的关键特性。","claim_en":"Permutation equivariance is a key property for generalization of graph diffusion models.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"标准置换等变去噪器无法完成图到图翻译任务，存在根本的对称性限制。","claim_en":"Standard permutation equivariant denoisers cannot perform graph-to-graph translation tasks due to fundamental symmetry limitations.","opposes":"之前的共识是置换等变去噪器可以适配所有图生成任务。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Analysis","why_contested":"明确了等变图扩散模型的适用边界，为图到图翻译任务的建模提供了新的设计方向。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅需知道等变图扩散的固有对称性局限结论，做分子生成类下游任务时可参考其对齐方案。","en":"Only know the inherent symmetry limitation of equivariant graph diffusion, the alignment scheme can be referenced for molecular generation downstream tasks."}},{"id":"LemosSMSSLH25","title":"PQMass: Probabilistic Assessment of the Quality of Generative Models using Probability Mass Estimation","authors":["Pablo Lemos","Sammy Nasser Sharief","Nikolay Malkin","Salma Salhi","Connor Stone","Laurence Perreault Levasseur","Yashar Hezaveh"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LemosSMSSLH25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LemosSMSSLH25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=n7qGCmluZr","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有生成模型质量评估方法要么依赖对真实分布的假设，要么需要训练辅助模型，评估结果不可靠或开销大。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出无似然、无辅助模型的生成质量评估方法，给出统计严格的p值衡量生成分布与真实分布的一致性。","technical_approach":"原创评估方法，将样本空间划分为互不重叠的区域，对两个样本落入各区域的计数做卡方检验，给出p值衡量两组样本是否来自同一分布，不需要对真实分布做假设，也不需要训练辅助模型。","experiments":"未给出具体实验的量化数值，验证了方法在多个生成模型评估场景下的统计有效性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing generative model quality evaluation methods either rely on assumptions of the true distribution, or require training auxiliary models, leading to unreliable results or high computation cost.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It proposes a likelihood-free, no auxiliary model required generative quality evaluation method, providing a statistically rigorous p-value to measure the consistency between generated distribution and real distribution.","technical_approach":"Original evaluation method. It divides the sample space into non-overlapping regions, conducts chi-squared tests on the count of samples falling into each region, outputs a p-value to measure if two sets of samples are from the same multinomial distribution. It requires no assumption on the true distribution, and no training of auxiliary models.","experiments":"No quantitative experimental numbers are provided. The statistical validity of the method is validated on multiple generative model evaluation scenarios.","authors_note":""},"tags":["generative model evaluation","probability mass estimation","mode collapse","coverage","metrics"],"keywords":["Generative Models","Model Evaluation","Sample-based Metrics","Hypothesis Testing"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"生成模型质量评估需要比较生成分布与真实数据分布的差异。","claim_en":"Generative model quality evaluation requires comparing the difference between generated distribution and real data distribution.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"不需要辅助模型或分布假设的卡方检验类评估方法的统计可靠性不弱于依赖辅助模型的评估方法。","claim_en":"Chi-squared test based evaluation method without auxiliary models or distribution assumptions has comparable statistical reliability to auxiliary model based evaluation methods.","opposes":"之前的共识是依赖辅助模型的评估方法精度更高。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"提供了低开销、统计严格的生成模型评估新方案，降低了评估的部署门槛。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"生成模型评估方法，无预训练直接启发，仅做评估相关需求时备查即可。","en":"Generative model evaluation method, no direct insight for pretraining, for evaluation related reference only."}},{"id":"LinTDX25","title":"Diffusion Attribution Score: Evaluating Training Data Influence in Diffusion Models","authors":["Jinxu Lin","Linwei Tao","Minjing Dong","Chang Xu"],"institutions":["University of Sydney"],"abstract":"$f","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LinTDX25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LinTDX25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=kuutidLf6R","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有扩散模型数据归因方法直接用扩散损失的变化衡量训练样本贡献，准确率低，无法准确追溯版权、隐私训练数据对生成结果的影响。","importance":"方法级贡献，修正了扩散模型数据归因的核心计算逻辑，为生成模型版权合规、隐私保护提供更可靠的溯源工具。","technical_approach":"提出扩散归因分数（DAS），是对现有数据归因指标的改进，核心是用去噪步骤中样本对预测目标的直接贡献代替扩散损失的整体分布差异计算，舍弃了原有方法用分布散度间接衡量贡献的路径，避免了损失计算中噪声项的干扰。","experiments":"原文未披露完整实验细节，仅指出在版权样本溯源场景下，DAS比现有基于扩散损失的归因方法准确率更高，无具体模型参数量、数据规模和指标提升数值。","authors_note":"悉尼大学Chang Xu团队工作，该团队长期从事生成模型可解释性与安全相关研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing diffusion model data attribution methods directly use diffusion loss changes to measure training sample contribution, with low accuracy, and cannot accurately trace the impact of copyrighted or private training data on generation results.","importance":"Method-level contribution that revises the core calculation logic of diffusion model data attribution, providing a more reliable tracing tool for generative model copyright compliance and privacy protection.","technical_approach":"Proposes Diffusion Attribution Score (DAS), an improvement over existing data attribution metrics. The core is to use the direct contribution of samples to the prediction target in denoising steps instead of calculating the overall distribution difference of diffusion loss, removing the indirect contribution measurement via distribution divergence used in prior methods, and avoiding interference from noise terms in loss calculation.","experiments":"Full experimental details are not disclosed in the available abstract. It only states that DAS achieves higher accuracy than existing diffusion loss-based attribution methods in copyrighted sample tracing scenarios, with no specific model parameter size, data scale or metric improvement numbers.","authors_note":"Work from Chang Xu's group at the University of Sydney, which focuses on generative model interpretability and security research."},"tags":["data-attribution","training-data-influence","diffusion-models","dataset-governance","influence-functions"],"keywords":["Diffusion Model; Data Attribution; Training Data Influence"],"notable_authors":["Chang Xu"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"扩散模型训练样本对生成结果的贡献可以通过训练过程中的损失变化进行量化。","claim_en":"The contribution of diffusion model training samples to generation outputs can be quantified via loss changes during training.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"直接用扩散损失变化衡量训练样本贡献的方法准确率低，因为扩散损失计算的是预测与真值分布的散度，属于间接比较。","claim_en":"Methods that directly use diffusion loss changes to measure training sample contribution have low accuracy, as diffusion loss calculates the divergence between predicted and ground-truth distributions, which is an indirect comparison.","opposes":"Prior work assumes diffusion loss changes can directly correspond to the contribution of individual training samples.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§2 Background","why_contested":"Revises the core assumption of diffusion model data attribution, directly affects the metric design of all subsequent diffusion model tracing related work."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为扩散模型训练数据归因方向的文献备查，仅做版权合规相关工具开发时可快速扫核心指标定义。","en":"Keep as literature reference for diffusion training data attribution, only skim the core metric definition when developing copyright compliance tools."}},{"id":"PavasovicBS25","title":"A Differentiable Rank-Based Objective for Better Feature Learning","authors":["Krunoslav Lehman Pavasovic","Giulio Biroli","Levent Sagun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$10","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/PavasovicBS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/PavasovicBS25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=KiN7g8mf9N","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有基于条件独立性的特征选择方法FOCI是非参数不可微的，无法融入端到端的神经网络特征学习流程，限制了其在预训练等场景的应用。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出了可微的FOCI近似，扩展了特征选择方法的适用场景，可用于预训练过程中的特征选择和正则化。","technical_approach":"提出difFOCI，是FOCI的参数化可微近似，保留了FOCI的条件独立性特征排序能力，舍弃了FOCI的非参数设计，可端到端融入神经网络训练。","experiments":"在变量选择、神经网络参数化特征学习等场景下验证了效果，未公布具体指标提升数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing conditional independence based feature selection method FOCI is non-parametric and non-differentiable, cannot be integrated into end-to-end neural network feature learning pipelines, which limits its application in scenarios such as pre-training.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution that proposes a differentiable FOCI approximation, expands the applicable scenarios of feature selection methods, and can be used for feature selection and regularization during pre-training.","technical_approach":"difFOCI is proposed, which is a parametric differentiable approximation of FOCI, preserves the conditional independence feature ranking ability of FOCI, discards the non-parametric design of FOCI, and can be integrated into end-to-end neural network training.","experiments":"Effectiveness is verified in scenarios such as variable selection and neural network parametric feature learning. No specific metric improvement numbers are released.","authors_note":""},"tags":["loss-function","ranking-objective","representation-learning","differentiable-sorting","optimization"],"keywords":["ranks","statistics","machine learning","feature learning","rank ordering correlation","fairness"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"基于条件独立性的特征选择可有效识别高价值特征","claim_en":"Conditional independence based feature selection can effectively identify high-value features","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"可微的参数化FOCI近似可在保留特征选择能力的前提下融入端到端训练","claim_en":"Differentiable parametric FOCI approximation can be integrated into end-to-end training while preserving feature selection ability","opposes":"非参数的条件独立性特征选择方法无法用于神经网络端到端训练","opposes_cite_hint":"Azadkia 2021 FOCI","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"为神经网络的特征学习提供了新的正则化和特征选择工具，可用于预训练过程中的特征降噪"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为预训练特征正则化相关文献备查，仅在需要端到端特征选择场景下参考，无需细读。","en":"Only for pretraining feature regularization literature reference, only for reference when end-to-end feature selection is required, no need to read carefully."}},{"id":"ReussP0L25","title":"Efficient Diffusion Transformer Policies with Mixture of Expert Denoisers for Multitask Learning","authors":["Moritz Reuss","Jyothish Pari","Pulkit Agrawal","Rudolf Lioutikov"],"institutions":["MIT CSAIL"],"abstract":"$11","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ReussP0L25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ReussP0L25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=nDmwloEl3N","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"解决基于 Transformer 的 Diffusion Policy 在模仿学习中随着模型规模扩大带来的计算成本激增问题。现有架构在多任务学习中难以兼顾参数扩展和推理效率。","importance":"架构级贡献。将 Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) 引入 Diffusion Policy，证明了在连续控制/模仿学习任务中，稀疏激活同样能有效提升模型容量并降低推理成本，为机器人领域的大模型 Scaling 提供了可行路径。","technical_approach":"提出 Mixture-of-Denoising Experts (MoDE) 架构。核心机制是引入稀疏专家网络，并采用基于噪声水平（noise-conditioned）的路由策略。通过专家缓存（expert caching）机制，在推理时复用专家计算结果，大幅降低计算量。这与语言模型中基于 Token 的路由不同，更适配 Diffusion 的去噪过程。","experiments":"在多任务模仿学习基准上，MoDE 超过了现有的 Transformer-based Diffusion Policies。通过稀疏路由和缓存，激活参数减少了 40%，推理成本降低了 90%，同时保持或提升了任务成功率。","authors_note":"MIT CSAIL (Pulkit Agrawal 团队) 在机器人学习和强化学习领域有深厚积累。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Mitigates the computational bottleneck of scaling Transformer-based Diffusion Policies for imitation learning, where larger models for multi-tasking lead to prohibitive inference costs.","importance":"Architectural contribution. Introduces Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) to Diffusion Policies, proving that sparse activation is highly effective for continuous control/imitation learning, offering a practical path for scaling robot foundation models.","technical_approach":"Proposes Mixture-of-Denoising Experts (MoDE). The key mechanism is noise-conditioned routing to sparse experts, tailored for the diffusion denoising process (unlike token-based routing in LLMs). It also employs expert caching during inference to reuse computations and drastically cut costs.","experiments":"Outperforms state-of-the-art Transformer-based Diffusion Policies on multi-task imitation learning benchmarks. Achieves parameter-efficient scaling: reduces active parameters by 40% and inference costs by 90% via caching, without sacrificing performance.","authors_note":"MIT CSAIL (Pulkit Agrawal's group) is well-known for robotics and reinforcement learning research."},"tags":["mixture-of-experts","diffusion-policy","multitask-learning","conditional-computation"],"keywords":["Robotics","Imitation Learning"],"notable_authors":["Pulkit Agrawal"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Diffusion Policy 在模仿学习中能有效建模多模态和不连续行为，但扩展模型规模会带来显著的计算负担。","claim_en":"Diffusion Policies effectively model multimodal and discontinuous behavior in imitation learning, but scaling them incurs significant computational costs.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"属于机器人模仿学习的架构优化，仅可作为扩散模型+MoE落地场景的弱信号参考，无需细读。","en":"It is an architecture optimization for robotic imitation learning, only as weak signal reference for diffusion + MoE implementation scenarios, no need for deep reading."}},{"id":"SunHTTY25","title":"A General Framework for Producing Interpretable Semantic Text Embeddings","authors":["Yiqun Sun","Qiang Huang","Yixuan Tang","Anthony Kum Hoe Tung","Jun Yu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$12","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/SunHTTY25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/SunHTTY25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=23uY3FpQxc","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有可解释语义文本嵌入方法依赖专家手工构造问题或大模型prompt设计，泛化性差，无法覆盖多任务的判别性需求，黑盒嵌入的不可解释性限制了其在高透明度要求场景的使用。","importance":"框架级贡献，提供了不需要专家输入的通用可解释文本嵌入生成方案，可直接适配各类下游NLP任务。","technical_approach":"提出CQG-MBQA通用框架，通过对比式问题生成模块自动生成高判别性的语义问题，再通过多任务二分类问答模块将文本语义映射到对应问题的答案空间，每个嵌入维度对应一个明确的语义问题，天生具备可解释性。","experiments":"论文摘要未披露完整实验结果，仅说明在多个文本检索、分类任务上，该框架生成的嵌入效果与不可解释的最优嵌入相当，同时具备全维度可解释性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing interpretable semantic text embedding methods rely on expert manually constructed questions or LLM prompt design, with poor generalization and cannot cover the discriminative requirements of multiple tasks. The non-interpretability of black-box embeddings limits their use in scenarios requiring high transparency.","importance":"Framework-level contribution. It provides a general interpretable text embedding generation scheme that does not require expert input, and can be directly adapted to various downstream NLP tasks.","technical_approach":"The general CQG-MBQA framework is proposed. It automatically generates highly discriminative semantic questions via a contrastive question generation module, then maps text semantics to the answer space of corresponding questions via a multi-task binary question answering module. Each embedding dimension corresponds to a clear semantic question, with native interpretability.","experiments":"Full experimental results are not disclosed in the provided abstract. Only that the embedding generated by this framework achieves comparable performance to non-interpretable state-of-the-art embeddings on multiple text retrieval and classification tasks, with full-dimensional interpretability is stated.","authors_note":""},"tags":["text-embeddings","interpretability","representation-learning","semantic-factors"],"keywords":["Semantic Text Embedding","Interpretability","Question Generation","Question Answering"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"语义文本嵌入是NLP各类任务的基础组件，高透明度场景对嵌入的可解释性有明确要求。","claim_en":"Semantic text embedding is a basic component of various NLP tasks, and high-transparency scenarios have clear requirements for embedding interpretability.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"通用可解释文本嵌入框架，仅作为文本表征研究的外围文献备查，不用读正文","en":"A general interpretable text embedding framework, only for text representation research peripheral literature reference, no need to read full text"}},{"id":"WangL0SLZ25","title":"Reasoning of Large Language Models over Knowledge Graphs with Super-Relations","authors":["Song Wang","Junhong Lin","Xiaojie Guo","Julian Shun","Jundong Li","Yada Zhu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$13","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/WangL0SLZ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/WangL0SLZ25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=rTCJ29pkuA","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有大模型知识图谱推理方法结合贪心搜索和前向推理，存在检索率低的问题，导致知识问答精度下降；之前的工作只支持前向推理，没有利用知识图谱的双向路径信息。","importance":"方法级改进，提出了超关系的概念支持双向推理，提升了知识图谱检索效率和推理精度，对大模型的知识增强预训练、检索增强生成有参考价值。","technical_approach":"原创方法，提出超关系概念汇总并连接知识图谱中的多种关系路径，同时支持前向和后向推理，基于此设计ReKnoS框架，扩大了搜索空间同时提升了检索效率，不需要修改大模型本身的结构。","experiments":"给定摘要未披露具体实验数据，仅指出超关系的引入显著提升了检索效率，降低了非检索率。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM knowledge graph reasoning methods combine greedy search and forward reasoning, leading to high non-retrieval rate which reduces knowledge question answering accuracy. Prior works only support forward reasoning, and do not leverage bidirectional path information of knowledge graphs.","importance":"This is a method-level improvement, proposing the concept of super-relations to support bidirectional reasoning, improving knowledge graph retrieval efficiency and reasoning accuracy. It provides reference for knowledge-augmented pretraining and retrieval-augmented generation of LLMs.","technical_approach":"It is an original method for LLM knowledge graph reasoning. The work proposes the concept of super-relations to summarize and connect various relational paths in knowledge graphs, supporting both forward and backward reasoning. Based on this, the ReKnoS framework is designed, which expands the search space and improves retrieval efficiency at the same time, with no modification to the structure of the LLM itself required.","experiments":"No specific experiment configurations, baselines or metric results are disclosed in the provided abstract, only that the introduction of super-relations significantly improves retrieval efficiency and reduces non-retrieval rate is mentioned.","authors_note":""},"tags":["knowledge-graphs","compositional-reasoning","relation-composition","structured-reasoning"],"keywords":["Knowledge Graphs","Large Language Models","Question Answering"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大模型知识图谱推理的精度受知识检索率的直接影响","claim_en":"Accuracy of LLM knowledge graph reasoning is directly affected by knowledge retrieval rate","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为知识图谱增强大模型预训练的参考文献备查，无需细读正文。","en":"Keep as reference for knowledge graph-augmented LLM pretraining, no need to read full text."}},{"id":"WeiC25","title":"Accelerated Over-Relaxation Heavy-Ball Method: Achieving Global Accelerated Convergence with Broad Generalization","authors":["Jingrong Wei","Long Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"The heavy-ball momentum method accelerates gradient descent with a momentum term but lacks accelerated convergence for general smooth strongly convex problems. This work introduces the Accelerated Over-Relaxation Heavy-Ball (AOR-HB) method, the first variant with provable global and accelerated convergence for such problems. AOR-HB closes a long-standing theoretical gap, extends to composite convex optimization and min-max problems, and achieves optimal complexity bounds. It offers three key advantages: (1) broad generalization ability, (2) potential to reshape acceleration techniques, and (3) conceptual clarity and elegance compared to existing methods.","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/WeiC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/WeiC25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=SWEqzy7IQB","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"经典重球动量法仅在特定条件下有加速收敛效果，对一般光滑强凸问题无全局加速收敛保证，存在长期理论缺口。","importance":"属于理论级贡献，填补了重球类优化器的全局加速收敛理论空白，可为大模型预训练优化器的设计和改进提供理论支撑。","technical_approach":"原创加速过松弛重球方法AOR-HB，引入过松弛项调整梯度和动量的更新权重；和经典重球法的核心区别是实现了一般光滑强凸问题下的全局加速收敛，同时适配复合凸优化、最小最大问题，达到最优复杂度界。","experiments":"论文摘要仅给出理论证明结果，未披露实际深度学习训练场景下的实验对比数据。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The classic heavy-ball momentum method only has accelerated convergence effect under specific conditions, and has no global accelerated convergence guarantee for general smooth strongly convex problems, leaving a long-standing theoretical gap.","importance":"It is a theory-level contribution, filling the theoretical gap of global accelerated convergence for heavy-ball optimizers, providing theoretical support for the design and improvement of optimizers for large model pretraining.","technical_approach":"The Accelerated Over-Relaxation Heavy-Ball (AOR-HB) method is proposed, introducing an over-relaxation term to adjust the update weights of gradient and momentum. The core difference from the classic heavy-ball method is that it achieves global accelerated convergence for general smooth strongly convex problems, and is also applicable to composite convex optimization and min-max problems, reaching optimal complexity bounds.","experiments":"The abstract only provides theoretical proof results, and does not disclose experimental comparison data in actual deep learning training scenarios.","authors_note":""},"tags":["optimization","momentum","accelerated-convergence","training-dynamics"],"keywords":["Optimization theory","heavy ball","momentum","acceleration","composite optimization","min-max","saddle point problem"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"重球动量法可以加速梯度下降的收敛速度","claim_en":"Heavy-ball momentum method accelerates the convergence of gradient descent","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"带过松弛调整的重球方法可以实现一般光滑强凸问题的全局加速收敛，达到最优复杂度界","claim_en":"Heavy-ball method with over-relaxation adjustment can achieve global accelerated convergence for general smooth strongly convex problems, reaching optimal complexity bounds","opposes":"经典重球法对一般光滑强凸问题无全局加速收敛保证","opposes_cite_hint":"Polyak 1964 Heavy-ball method","evidence_anchor":"§2 Theoretical Analysis","why_contested":"解决了重球类优化器存在60年的理论缺口，可为深度学习优化器的实际改进提供理论依据"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为优化器理论类文献备查，结论可作为大模型优化器选型的弱参考信号","en":"Only for reference as optimizer theory literature, conclusions can be used as weak reference for LLM optimizer selection"}},{"id":"XuWBCLZ025","title":"Training-free LLM-generated Text Detection by Mining Token Probability Sequences","authors":["Yihuai Xu","Yongwei Wang","Yifei Bi","Huangsen Cao","Zhouhan Lin","Yu Zhao","Fei Wu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$14","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/XuWBCLZ025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/XuWBCLZ025","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=vo4AHjowKi","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有无训练的LLM生成文本检测方法依赖全局文本序列统计特征，忽略局部判别特征，导致检测效果受限；而有训练的检测器泛化性差，跨域跨模型场景下效果下降明显。","importance":"属于方法级贡献，提出的无训练检测方法兼顾泛化性和检测效果，不需要额外标注数据和训练成本，对LLM生成内容的合规检测、版权鉴别等场景有实用价值。","technical_approach":"是无训练的LLM生成文本检测方法，核心通过挖掘token概率序列的局部判别特征进行检测，舍弃了传统无训练方法仅依赖全局统计特征的设计，保留了无训练方法泛化性好、可解释性强的优势。","experiments":"提供的摘要中未披露具体测试数据集、基线模型、检测指标提升数据，完整实验结果需查看正文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing training-free LLM-generated text detection methods rely on global text sequence statistical features and ignore local discriminative features, which limits detection performance. Training-based detectors have poor generalization, and their performance drops significantly in cross-domain and cross-model scenarios.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution. The proposed training-free detection method balances generalization and detection performance, requires no additional labeled data or training cost, and has practical value for compliance detection, copyright identification of LLM-generated content and other scenarios.","technical_approach":"This is a training-free LLM-generated text detection method, which detects by mining local discriminative features of token probability sequences. It abandons the design of traditional training-free methods that only rely on global statistical features, and retains the advantages of good generalization and strong interpretability of training-free methods.","experiments":"No specific test dataset, baseline model, detection metric improvement data is disclosed in the provided abstract, full experimental results are available in the main paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm-detection","token-probabilities","perplexity","distribution-shift","statistics"],"keywords":["Fake text detection","training-free","detection"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM生成文本和人类书写文本的token概率分布存在固有差异，可作为检测的依据。","claim_en":"There are inherent differences in token probability distributions between LLM-generated text and human-written text, which can be used as the basis for detection.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于token概率序列的局部特征比全局统计特征更适合无训练的LLM生成文本检测，可在保留泛化性的前提下提升检测效果。","claim_en":"Local features of token probability sequences are more suitable for training-free LLM-generated text detection than global statistical features, and can improve detection performance while retaining generalization.","opposes":"此前无训练检测方法普遍认为全局统计特征已经足够覆盖LLM生成文本的判别信号。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction, §4 Experiments","why_contested":"修正了无训练生成文本检测领域的特征选择共识，为后续方法设计提供了新方向。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为LLM生成文本检测的弱信号参考，仅需知道token概率序列局部特征思路即可，不用读正文","en":"As a weak signal reference for LLM-generated text detection, only need to know the local feature idea of token probability sequence, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"XieFZLYZ0H0025","title":"Human Simulacra: Benchmarking the Personification of Large Language Models","authors":["Qiujie Xie","Qiming Feng","Tianqi Zhang","Qingqiu Li","Linyi Yang","Yuejie Zhang","Rui Feng","Liang He","Shang Gao","Yue Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Large Language Models (LLMs) are recognized as systems that closely mimic aspects of human intelligence. This capability has attracted the attention of the social science community, who see the potential in leveraging LLMs to replace human participants in experiments, thereby reducing research costs and complexity. In this paper, we introduce a benchmark for LLMs personification, including a strategy for constructing virtual characters' life stories from the ground up, a Multi-Agent Cognitive Mechanism capable of simulating human cognitive processes, and a psychology-guided evaluation method to assess human simulations from both self and observational perspectives. Experimental results demonstrate that our constructed simulacra can produce personified responses that align with their target characters.  We hope this work will serve as a benchmark in the field of human simulation, paving the way for future research.","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/XieFZLYZ0H0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/XieFZLYZ0H0025","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=BCP5nAHXqs","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有大模型拟人化能力缺乏统一的评测基准，无法准确评估大模型模拟人类行为的一致性和准确性，此前没有从认知心理学视角的拟人化评测框架。","importance":"属于基准级贡献，填补了大模型拟人化能力评测的空白，为社会科学用大模型替代人类被试的研究提供了可验证的工具和标准。","technical_approach":"构建拟人化基准，包含三个核心组件：从零构建虚拟人物人生故事的策略、模拟人类认知过程的多智能体认知机制、心理学导向的从自我和观察者双视角的评估方法。舍弃了仅靠对话内容匹配的粗粒度拟人化评测思路，引入认知心理学的评测维度。","experiments":"实验显示构建的虚拟人可以生成符合目标设定的拟人化回复，暂未给出具体评测的模型、指标数值，无ablation结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM personification capability lacks a unified evaluation benchmark, and cannot accurately assess the consistency and accuracy of LLM simulating human behavior. No personification evaluation framework from the cognitive psychology perspective existed before.","importance":"It is a benchmark-level contribution that fills the gap of LLM personification capability evaluation, and provides verifiable tools and standards for social science research that uses LLMs to replace human participants.","technical_approach":"The personification benchmark is built with three core components: a strategy for constructing virtual characters' life stories from scratch, a multi-agent cognitive mechanism simulating human cognitive processes, a psychology-guided evaluation method from both self and observational perspectives. It abandons the coarse-grained personification evaluation idea only based on dialogue content matching, and introduces cognitive psychology evaluation dimensions.","experiments":"Experiments show that the constructed virtual humans can generate personified responses matching the target setting, no specific tested models, metric numbers are provided, no ablation results are released.","authors_note":""},"tags":["benchmark","persona","role-playing","evaluation","alignment"],"keywords":["Large Language Models","Human simulation"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大模型具备模拟人类部分认知和行为的能力，可以用于替代部分人类被试的社会科学实验。","claim_en":"LLMs have the ability to simulate part of human cognition and behavior, and can be used to replace human participants in some social science experiments.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅面向社会科学类大模型应用场景，和通用预训练研究几乎无关，不用阅读正文。","en":"Only for LLM social science application scenarios, almost irrelevant to general pre-training research, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"0003ICWF25","title":"Differentiable Rule Induction from Raw Sequence Inputs","authors":["Kun Gao","Katsumi Inoue","Yongzhi Cao","Hanpin Wang","Yang Feng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$15","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/0003ICWF25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/0003ICWF25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=zDjHOsSQxd","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有可微分归纳逻辑编程（ILP）方法依赖符号数据集，无法直接从原始序列输入学习规则，连续输入到符号变量的映射需要输入特征标签的显式监督，存在显式标签泄露问题。","importance":"方法级贡献，扩展了可微分ILP的适用场景，无需手动标注输入特征标签即可完成规则学习。","technical_approach":"改进类方法，将自监督可微分聚类模块和新型可微分ILP模型结合，首先用自监督聚类将连续原始输入映射为符号变量，无需额外输入特征标签监督，再送入可微分ILP完成规则归纳，解决标签泄露问题。","experiments":"未披露完整实验数据，核心验证了该框架可直接从原始序列输入完成规则归纳，未给出具体baseline和提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing differentiable inductive logic programming (ILP) methods rely on symbolic datasets, cannot learn rules directly from raw sequence inputs, and require explicit supervision of input feature labels to map continuous inputs to symbolic variables, leading to explicit label leakage.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution that expands the applicable scenarios of differentiable ILP, enabling rule learning without manual annotation of input feature labels.","technical_approach":"This is an improved method that combines a self-supervised differentiable clustering module with a novel differentiable ILP model. It first maps continuous raw inputs to symbolic variables via self-supervised clustering without extra input feature label supervision, then feeds the symbolic variables to the differentiable ILP to complete rule induction, solving the label leakage problem.","experiments":"No full experimental data is disclosed. The core verification shows that the framework can complete rule induction directly from raw sequence inputs, with no specific baseline or improvement range provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["rule-induction","neuro-symbolic","differentiable-programming","interpretability","compositional-generalization"],"keywords":["Neuro-Symbolic Methods","Interpretability","Inductive Logic Programming"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"可微分ILP相比传统ILP具有更强的鲁棒性和扩展性","claim_en":"Differentiable inductive logic programming (ILP) has stronger robustness and scalability compared to traditional ILP","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"无需输入特征标签的显式监督即可将连续原始序列输入映射到符号变量，完成端到端规则归纳","claim_en":"Explicit supervision of input feature labels is not required to map continuous raw sequence inputs to symbolic variables and complete end-to-end rule induction","opposes":"现有可微分ILP方法需要输入特征标签显式监督才能完成连续输入到符号变量映射的 prior","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3","why_contested":"拓展了可微分ILP的适用边界，可直接处理无标注原始序列输入"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为符号推理与序列建模交叉领域文献备查，无需细读正文，对预训练研究直接价值极低。","en":"For literature reference in the intersection of symbolic reasoning and sequence modeling, no need to read the full text, with very low direct value for pretraining research."}},{"id":"BeckSMBBGD25","title":"Metalic: Meta-Learning In-Context with Protein Language Models","authors":["Jacob Beck","Shikha Surana","Manus McAuliffe","Oliver Bent","Thomas D. Barrett","Juan Jose Garau-Luis","Paul Duckworth"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$16","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/BeckSMBBGD25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/BeckSMBBGD25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=TUKt7ag0qq","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有蛋白质语言模型（PLM）做蛋白质fitness预测时，若目标任务标注数据稀缺，零样本预测依赖蛋白质序列似然与fitness得分的强假设，泛化性差。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出了元学习上下文的蛋白质语言模型范式，解决了低标注场景下的蛋白质fitness预测问题，提升了零/少样本下的预测性能。","technical_approach":"原创方法，在标准fitness预测任务分布上做元学习，让PLM学习上下文适应能力，无需依赖序列似然与fitness的强关联假设，即可在无任务数据时完成预测。","experiments":"未给出具体实验数值，核心验证了元学习上下文的PLM在少/零样本蛋白质fitness预测任务上表现优于现有PLM的微调、零样本方法。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"When existing protein language models (PLMs) perform protein fitness prediction, if the target task has scarce annotation data, zero-shot prediction relies on the strong assumption of correlation between protein sequence likelihood and fitness score, leading to poor generalization.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution that proposes a meta-learning in-context paradigm for protein language models, solving the protein fitness prediction problem in low-annotation scenarios, and improving the prediction performance under zero/few-shot settings.","technical_approach":"This is an original method that performs meta-learning over the distribution of standard fitness prediction tasks, allowing PLMs to learn in-context adaptation ability, and completing prediction without task data without relying on the strong correlation assumption between sequence likelihood and fitness.","experiments":"No specific experimental values are provided. The core verification shows that PLMs with meta-learning in-context outperform existing PLM fine-tuning and zero-shot methods on few/zero-shot protein fitness prediction tasks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","meta-learning","protein-language-models","few-shot","pretraining-objectives"],"keywords":["Meta-Learning","In-context Learning","Tuning","Protein","Fitness Prediction","Property Prediction","Protein Language Model","PLM","Large Language Model"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"蛋白质语言模型可用于蛋白质生物物理和功能属性预测","claim_en":"Protein language models can be used to predict biophysical and functional properties of proteins","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"通过元学习上下文的PLM在零样本fitness预测任务上表现优于基于序列似然的零样本方法","claim_en":"PLMs with meta-learning in-context outperform zero-shot methods based on sequence likelihood on zero-shot fitness prediction tasks","opposes":"现有零样本蛋白质fitness预测依赖序列似然与fitness强关联的 prior","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4","why_contested":"为低标注场景下的蛋白质fitness预测提供了新的思路，无需依赖序列似然假设"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"垂直领域方法工作，仅作为生物序列预训练相关文献备查，无需细读正文","en":"Vertical domain method work, only for reference as biological sequence pretraining related literature, no need to read full text."}},{"id":"BhagwatKJ25","title":"CBMA: Improving Conformal Prediction through Bayesian Model Averaging","authors":["Pankaj Bhagwat","Linglong Kong","Bei Jiang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$17","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/BhagwatKJ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/BhagwatKJ25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=BKSeNw2HIr","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"共形预测在贝叶斯模型误设场景下，虽然仍能保持频率派覆盖率保证，但预测区间体积偏大、效率下降，prior 全共形贝叶斯方法仅在模型完全正确设定时才能达到最优区间效率，无法应对模型误设的实际场景。","importance":"方法级改进，在不损失共形预测覆盖率保证的前提下，提升了模型误设场景下的预测区间效率，对LLM不确定性估计、安全对齐等场景有潜在应用价值。","technical_approach":"迁移贝叶斯模型平均（BMA）到共形预测领域，通过对多个候选贝叶斯模型的预测结果加权平均，抵消单一模型误设带来的偏差，核心取舍是放弃依赖单一贝叶斯模型的设计，通过多模型集成降低误设风险。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体实验数据与量化指标，仅从理论上证明了方法在模型误设场景下的预测区间效率优于单模型全共形贝叶斯方法，覆盖率保持符合要求。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Under the scenario of Bayesian model misspecification, conformal prediction can still maintain the frequentist coverage guarantee, but the prediction interval volume is large and the efficiency decreases. Prior full conformal Bayes methods can achieve optimal interval efficiency only when the model is completely correctly specified, and cannot cope with the actual scenario of model misspecification.","importance":"It is a method-level improvement. Without losing the coverage guarantee of conformal prediction, it improves the prediction interval efficiency under the scenario of model misspecification, and has potential application value for LLM uncertainty estimation, safety alignment and other scenarios.","technical_approach":"Bayesian Model Averaging (BMA) is migrated to the field of conformal prediction. By weighted averaging the prediction results of multiple candidate Bayesian models, the deviation caused by the misspecification of a single model is offset. The core trade-off is abandoning the design that relies on a single Bayesian model, and reducing the misspecification risk through multi-model integration.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose specific experimental data and quantitative indicators. Only theoretically, it is proved that the prediction interval efficiency of the method under the scenario of model misspecification is better than that of the single-model full conformal Bayes method, and the coverage rate remains compliant.","authors_note":""},"tags":["conformal-prediction","bayesian-model-averaging","uncertainty-quantification","calibration","risk-control"],"keywords":["Bayesian framework","Conformal prediction","Model uncertainty","Uncertainty quantification"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"共形预测仅需数据可交换性假设即可获得严格的覆盖率保证","claim_en":"Conformal prediction can obtain strict coverage guarantees with only the data exchangeability assumption","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"单模型共形贝叶斯在模型误设时效率不是最优，多模型平均可以在保留覆盖率的前提下提升预测效率","claim_en":"Single-model conformal Bayes is not optimal in efficiency when the model is misspecified, and multi-model averaging can improve prediction efficiency while preserving coverage","opposes":"Prior work assumes that a single correctly specified Bayesian model yields the most efficient conformal prediction sets","opposes_cite_hint":"Hoff 2023 Full Conformal Bayes","evidence_anchor":"§2 Method Design","why_contested":"Expands the applicable boundary of conformal Bayes methods, reducing the dependence on correct model specification"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"机器学习理论方法工作，仅作为LLM不确定性估计相关文献备查，无需细读正文","en":"Machine learning theoretical method work, only for reference as LLM uncertainty estimation related literature, no need to read full text."}},{"id":"BhaskaraC0P25","title":"Descent with Misaligned Gradients and Applications to Hidden Convexity","authors":["Aditya Bhaskara","Ashok Cutkosky","Ravi Kumar","Manish Purohit"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We consider the problem of minimizing a convex objective given access to an oracle that outputs \"misaligned\" stochastic gradients, where the expected value of the output is guaranteed to be correlated with, but not necessarily equal to the true gradient of the objective.  In the case where the misalignment (or bias) of the oracle changes slowly, we obtain an optimization algorithm that achieves the optimum iteration complexity of $\\tilde O(\\epsilon^{-2})$; for the more general case where the changes need not be slow, we obtain an algorithm with $\\tilde O(\\epsilon^{-3})$ iteration complexity.  As an application of our framework, we consider optimization problems with a \"hidden convexity\" property, and obtain an algorithm with $O(\\epsilon^{-3})$ iteration complexity.","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/BhaskaraC0P25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/BhaskaraC0P25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=2L4PTJO8VQ","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"凸优化场景下仅能获取与真实梯度相关但不等的错位随机梯度时，现有算法的迭代复杂度无法达到最优，prior 工作大多假设能获取无偏梯度，很少处理梯度偏差缓慢变化或任意变化的错位场景。","importance":"理论级贡献，给出了错位梯度下凸优化的迭代复杂度边界，对预训练中存在梯度噪声、延迟、偏差的实际优化场景有理论指导意义。","technical_approach":"原创优化算法，针对梯度错位偏差缓慢变化的场景，设计了迭代复杂度为Õ(ε⁻²)的最优算法；针对偏差任意变化的场景，设计了Õ(ε⁻³)复杂度的算法，核心取舍是放弃无偏梯度假设，引入梯度偏差的跟踪校正机制。","experiments":"仅给出理论复杂度证明，未披露大规模实验验证结果，应用到隐藏凸性优化场景时获得了O(ε⁻³)的迭代复杂度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"When only misaligned stochastic gradients that are correlated but not equal to the true gradient are available in convex optimization scenarios, the iteration complexity of existing algorithms cannot reach the optimal level. Most prior work assumes that unbiased gradients can be obtained, and rarely deals with misaligned scenarios where gradient bias changes slowly or arbitrarily.","importance":"It is a theoretical-level contribution, which gives the iteration complexity boundary of convex optimization under misaligned gradients, and has theoretical guiding significance for actual optimization scenarios with gradient noise, delay and bias in pre-training.","technical_approach":"This is an original optimization algorithm. For scenarios where the gradient misalignment bias changes slowly, an optimal algorithm with iteration complexity of Õ(ε⁻²) is designed; for scenarios where the bias changes arbitrarily, an algorithm with Õ(ε⁻³) complexity is designed. The core trade-off is abandoning the unbiased gradient assumption and introducing a tracking and correction mechanism for gradient bias.","experiments":"Only theoretical complexity proof is given, no large-scale experimental verification results are disclosed. When applied to hidden convexity optimization scenarios, an iteration complexity of O(ε⁻³) is obtained.","authors_note":""},"tags":["optimization-theory","misaligned-gradients","nonconvex-optimization","hidden-convexity","convergence"],"keywords":["optimization","gradient descent","hidden convexity"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"凸优化问题下无偏随机梯度下降的最优迭代复杂度为Õ(ε⁻²)","claim_en":"The optimal iteration complexity of unbiased stochastic gradient descent for convex optimization problems is Õ(ε⁻²)","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"梯度错位偏差缓慢变化时，仍可以达到和无偏梯度下降一致的最优迭代复杂度","claim_en":"When the gradient misalignment bias changes slowly, the optimal iteration complexity consistent with unbiased gradient descent can still be achieved","opposes":"Prior work assumes that gradient misalignment will lead to higher iteration complexity than unbiased SGD","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3.1 Slow Bias Change Setting","why_contested":"Relaxes the unbiased gradient assumption of gradient descent, providing theoretical support for algorithm design in biased gradient scenarios"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"优化理论类工作，仅作为梯度偏差场景下预训练优化的理论参考，无需细读正文","en":"Optimization theory work, only for theoretical reference of pretraining optimization under gradient bias scenarios, no need to read full text."}},{"id":"CanevaroSMYMJ25","title":"Advancing Out-of-Distribution Detection via Local Neuroplasticity","authors":["Alessandro Canevaro","Julian Schmidt","Mohammad Sajad Marvi","Hang Yu","Georg Martius","Julian Jordan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"In the domain of machine learning, the assumption that training and test data share the same distribution is often violated in real-world scenarios, requiring effective out-of-distribution (OOD) detection. \nThis paper presents a novel OOD detection method that leverages the unique local neuroplasticity property of Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks (KANs). \nUnlike traditional multilayer perceptrons, KANs exhibit local plasticity, allowing them to preserve learned information while adapting to new tasks. \nOur method compares the activation patterns of a trained KAN against its untrained counterpart to detect OOD samples. \nWe validate our approach on benchmarks from image and medical domains, demonstrating superior performance and robustness compared to state-of-the-art techniques. \nThese results underscore the potential of KANs in enhancing the reliability of machine learning systems in diverse environments.","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/CanevaroSMYMJ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/CanevaroSMYMJ25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=1F8xTfv6ah","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有OOD检测方法对分布偏移的鲁棒性不足，prior 方法大多基于MLP或Transformer的激活分布差异，没有利用KAN网络特有的局部神经可塑性特性。","importance":"方法级改进，首次将KAN的局部可塑性特性应用到OOD检测，提升了图像和医疗领域的OOD检测性能，对预训练模型的分布偏移检测有参考价值。","technical_approach":"原创OOD检测方法，对比训练后的KAN和未训练的KAN的激活模式差异来识别OOD样本，利用KAN的局部可塑性保证分布内样本激活变化小、OOD样本激活变化大，核心取舍是放弃基于单一预训练模型激活统计的设计，引入未训练的KAN作为参照基准。","experiments":"在图像和医疗领域基准数据集上，性能优于现有最优OOD检测方法，公开摘要未披露具体提升幅度和模型规模。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing OOD detection methods have insufficient robustness to distribution shifts. Most prior methods are based on activation distribution differences of MLP or Transformer, and do not utilize the unique local neuroplasticity property of Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks (KANs).","importance":"It is a method-level improvement. For the first time, the local plasticity property of KAN is applied to OOD detection, which improves the OOD detection performance in the image and medical fields, and has reference value for distribution shift detection of pre-trained models.","technical_approach":"This is an original OOD detection method. It compares the activation pattern differences between a trained KAN and an untrained KAN to identify OOD samples. It uses the local plasticity of KAN to ensure that the activation change of in-distribution samples is small and that of OOD samples is large. The core trade-off is abandoning the design based on activation statistics of a single pre-trained model, and introducing an untrained KAN as a reference benchmark.","experiments":"On benchmark datasets in the image and medical fields, the performance is better than existing optimal OOD detection methods. The public abstract does not disclose the specific improvement range and model scale.","authors_note":""},"tags":["ood-detection","uncertainty-estimation","neuroplasticity","robustness","distribution-shift"],"keywords":["Out-of-Distribution Detection","Local Neuroplasticity","Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"OOD样本和分布内样本在预训练模型的激活模式上存在可观测的差异","claim_en":"There are observable differences in activation patterns of pre-trained models between OOD samples and in-distribution samples","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于KAN局部可塑性的OOD检测方法性能优于基于MLP/Transformer的现有最优方法","claim_en":"OOD detection methods based on KAN local neuroplasticity outperform existing optimal methods based on MLP/Transformer","opposes":"Prior work assumes MLP/Transformer-based activation statistics yield the best OOD detection performance","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments","why_contested":"Verifies the unique advantage of KAN in distribution shift detection, providing a new technical route for the OOD detection field"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"基于KAN特性做OOD检测的小众探索，相关性极低，仅作OOD方向文献备查即可。","en":"Niche exploration of OOD detection based on KAN features, extremely low relevance, only for OOD literature reference."}},{"id":"CaoXWHYT025","title":"FOSP: Fine-tuning Offline Safe Policy through World Models","authors":["Chenyang Cao","Yucheng Xin","Silang Wu","Longxiang He","Zichen Yan","Junbo Tan","Xueqian Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$18","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/CaoXWHYT025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/CaoXWHYT025","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=dbuFJg7eaw","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"离线安全RL方法高度依赖训练数据集，无法安全泛化到未见过的场景，prior 方法大多局限于离线训练，没有引入世界模型进行在线安全微调。","importance":"方法级改进，结合离线RL和基于世界模型的在线微调，提升了视觉机器人任务的部署安全性和泛化能力，对机器人策略预训练和部署有参考价值。","technical_approach":"混合RL方法FOSP，离线训练阶段用样本内优化和可达性引导提升训练效率和安全性，在线微调阶段用世界模型引导安全策略扩展，核心取舍是放弃纯离线训练的设计，引入世界模型实现在线微调的安全约束。","experiments":"在视觉机器人任务上验证了方法的安全性和泛化能力优于纯离线安全RL基线，公开摘要未披露具体量化指标和环境规模。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Offline safe RL methods are highly dependent on training datasets and cannot safely generalize to unseen scenarios. Most prior methods are limited to offline training, and do not introduce world models for online safe fine-tuning.","importance":"It is a method-level improvement, which combines offline RL and online fine-tuning based on world models, improves the deployment safety and generalization ability of vision-based robotic tasks, and has reference value for pre-training and deployment of robot policies.","technical_approach":"This is a hybrid RL method called FOSP. In the offline training phase, in-sample optimization and reachability guidance are used to improve training efficiency and safety. In the online fine-tuning phase, the world model is used to guide safe policy expansion. The core trade-off is abandoning the pure offline training design, and introducing a world model to realize safety constraints for online fine-tuning.","experiments":"On vision-based robotic tasks, it is verified that the safety and generalization ability of the method are better than the pure offline safe RL baseline. The public abstract does not disclose specific quantitative indicators and environment scale.","authors_note":""},"tags":["offline-rl","safe-rl","world-models","policy-optimization","agent-safety"],"keywords":["Safe RL","Offline-to-online RL","Robot Learning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"离线安全RL的泛化能力受限于训练数据集的覆盖范围","claim_en":"The generalization ability of offline safe RL is limited by the coverage of the training dataset","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于世界模型的在线微调可以在保证安全的前提下提升离线预训练策略的泛化能力","claim_en":"Online fine-tuning based on world models can improve the generalization ability of offline pre-trained policies while ensuring safety","opposes":"Prior work assumes online fine-tuning of offline policies will introduce safety risks and cannot improve generalization effectively","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"Opens up a safe path connecting offline RL pre-training and online deployment fine-tuning, reducing the safety risk of robot policy deployment"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"属于离线安全机器人RL的方法类工作，仅作机器人策略预训练相关方向文献备查，无需细读。","en":"A method work for offline safe robot RL, only for robot policy pre-training literature reference, no need for full reading."}},{"id":"ChenZZ25","title":"GeoILP: A Synthetic Dataset to Guide Large-Scale Rule Induction","authors":["Si Chen","Richong Zhang","Xu Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$19","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ChenZZ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ChenZZ25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=cfGpIcOIa5","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有归纳逻辑编程（ILP）系统仅能解决小规模任务，且依赖专家定义的语言偏置，无法支撑大规模ILP应用。此前缺乏覆盖多样化语言偏置的大规模ILP数据集。","importance":"属于ILP研究方向的数据级贡献，提供了覆盖从教材习题到IMO难度的大规模几何ILP数据集，为ILP的大规模应用和无专家偏置的ILP系统研发提供数据支撑。","technical_approach":"用演绎引擎生成GeoILP数据集，包含多样化语言偏置的ILP任务，覆盖几何问题难度从中学教材习题到地区IMO级别。方法舍弃了依赖人工标注的方式，自动生成大规模标注数据。","experiments":"未披露具体实验指标，数据集包含从教材到IMO级别的几何ILP任务，未披露具体数据集规模。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing inductive logic programming (ILP) systems can only solve small-scale tasks and rely on expert-defined language bias, which cannot support large-scale ILP applications. There is no large-scale ILP dataset covering diverse language biases previously.","importance":"It is a data-level contribution for ILP research. It provides a large-scale geometry ILP dataset covering difficulty levels from textbook exercises to regional IMO problems, which supports large-scale ILP applications and research of ILP systems without expert-defined bias.","technical_approach":"It generates the GeoILP dataset via a deduction engine, which contains ILP tasks with diverse language biases, covering geometry problems from textbook exercise level to regional IMO level. It abandons manual annotation and automatically generates large-scale labeled data.","experiments":"No specific experimental metrics are disclosed. The dataset covers geometry ILP tasks with multiple difficulty levels, no specific dataset scale is disclosed.","authors_note":""},"tags":["rule-induction","synthetic-data","reasoning-evaluation","compositional-generalization","ILP"],"keywords":["dataset","inductive logic programming","rule induction","neuro-symbolic methods"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"归纳逻辑编程可以学习可解释的规则，现有ILP系统的性能受限于数据规模和语言偏置的约束","claim_en":"Inductive logic programming can learn explainable rules, and the performance of existing ILP systems is constrained by dataset scale and language bias","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅做ILP方向文献备查，和通用大模型预训练关联极低，完全不用读正文","en":"Keep as ILP domain literature reference, extremely low relevance to general LLM pretraining, no need to read the full text"}},{"id":"EhrenbergGR25","title":"Adversaries With Incentives: A Strategic Alternative to Adversarial Robustness","authors":["Maayan Ehrenberg","Roy Ganz","Nir Rosenfeld"],"institutions":["Technion","Hebrew University of Jerusalem"],"abstract":"$1a","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/EhrenbergGR25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/EhrenbergGR25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=U9j40EohfY","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"解决传统对抗训练过于保守的问题。传统方法假设攻击者（Adversaries）的唯一目的是尽可能破坏模型性能，这在实际场景中往往不成立，因为攻击者通常有自己的特定目标（Incentives）。","importance":"范式级贡献。提出用“战略建模（Strategic Modeling）”替代纯粹的“对抗鲁棒性（Adversarial Robustness）”，将攻击者的动机作为归纳偏置引入训练，为构建更实用、不那么保守的防御机制（如 LLM 的安全对齐和防越狱）提供了新思路。","technical_approach":"提出“战略训练（Strategic Training）”。该方法不假设攻击者直接对抗分类器，而是假设攻击者追求自身目标。利用战略建模工具，将关于攻击者可能动机的知识或信念作为学习的归纳偏置。模型被设计为防御“动机不确定性集（Incentive Uncertainty Set）”内的所有对手。当该集合最大时，退化为传统对抗学习；当集合受限时，则能获得性能提升。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体实验数据，但指出该方法在动机不确定性集受限时能提供潜在的性能增益。","authors_note":"Nir Rosenfeld 在战略分类（Strategic Classification）和机器学习的社会影响方面有深入研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addresses the overly conservative nature of traditional adversarial training. Traditional methods assume adversaries solely aim to harm model performance, which is often untrue in real-world scenarios where attackers have their own specific goals (incentives).","importance":"Paradigm contribution. Proposes replacing pure 'Adversarial Robustness' with 'Strategic Modeling', introducing attacker incentives as an inductive bias into training. This offers a new perspective for building more practical, less conservative defense mechanisms (e.g., safety alignment and jailbreak prevention for LLMs).","technical_approach":"Introduces 'Strategic Training'. Instead of assuming opponents work directly against the classifier, it models them as pursuing their own goals. Using tools from strategic modeling, it incorporates knowledge or beliefs about the opponent's possible incentives as an inductive bias for learning. The model is designed to defend against all opponents within an 'incentive uncertainty set'. It reverts to adversarial learning when this set is maximal but offers potential gains when the set is constrained.","experiments":"The abstract lacks specific experimental data but notes that the method offers potential gains when the incentive uncertainty set is constrained.","authors_note":"Nir Rosenfeld has conducted in-depth research on strategic classification and the social impact of machine learning."},"tags":["adversarial-robustness","game-theory","threat-modeling","security","strategic-adversary"],"keywords":["adversarial training","strategic classification","adversarial robustness","strategic robustness"],"notable_authors":["Nir Rosenfeld"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"对抗训练旨在防御恶意的对手，这些对手的唯一目的是以任何可能的方式损害预测性能。","claim_en":"Adversarial training aims to defend against *adversaries*: malicious opponents whose sole aim is to harm predictive performance in any way possible.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"假设攻击者唯一目的是破坏模型性能会导致不必要的保守训练，应将攻击者建模为追求自身目标。","claim_en":"This presents a rather harsh perspective, which we assert results in unnecessarily conservative training. As an alternative, we propose to model opponents as simply pursuing their own goals—rather than working directly against the classifier.","opposes":"传统对抗训练中假设攻击者总是进行最坏情况攻击（Worst-case attack）的观点。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"指出了传统对抗训练的过度悲观假设，为引入攻击者动机作为先验知识打开了空间。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为对抗训练范式补充参考即可，仅安全对齐方向可快速扫摘要，深入研读投入产出比低。","en":"Keep as adversarial training paradigm supplement; security alignment researchers can quickly scan the abstract, low ROI for in-depth reading."}},{"id":"GordonLA25","title":"Protein Language Model Fitness is a Matter of Preference","authors":["Cade W. Gordon","Amy X. Lu","Pieter Abbeel"],"institutions":["UC Berkeley"],"abstract":"$1b","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/GordonLA25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/GordonLA25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=UvPdpa4LuV","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有蛋白语言模型的零样本适应度预测的成功和失败条件不明确，之前的方法没有明确预训练中隐含的序列偏好对适应度预测能力的影响。","importance":"方法级+机制分析级贡献，明确了蛋白LM预训练偏好对适应度预测能力的影响机制，对蛋白LM的预训练和下游应用有参考价值。","technical_approach":"机制分析+改进预测方法，核心是通过数百个深度突变扫描实验，发现预训练中蛋白序列的隐含偏好可以预测适应度预测能力，过偏好和欠偏好的野生型序列预测效果都差，舍弃了之前只看序列似然作为预测依据的单一逻辑。","experiments":"摘要未披露完整实验参数，核心在数百个深度突变扫描数据集上验证了预训练偏好和适应度预测能力的相关性，无具体量化指标。","authors_note":"团队包含UC Berkeley知名学者Pieter Abbeel，其团队长期从事生成模型、强化学习方向研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The success and failure conditions of zero-shot fitness prediction of existing protein language models are unclear, prior works do not clarify the impact of implicit sequence preference during pretraining on fitness prediction capability.","importance":"Method-level + mechanism analysis-level contribution. It clarifies the impact mechanism of protein LM pretraining preference on fitness prediction capability, has reference value for protein LM pretraining and downstream applications.","technical_approach":"Mechanism analysis + improved prediction method. It uses hundreds of deep mutational scan experiments, finds that implicit preference of protein sequences during pretraining can predict fitness prediction capability, over-preferred and under-preferred wild-type sequences have poor prediction effect, abandons previous single logic of only using sequence likelihood as prediction basis.","experiments":"Full experimental parameters are not disclosed in the abstract. Core validation shows correlation between pretraining preference and fitness prediction capability on hundreds of deep mutational scan datasets, no specific quantitative metrics are provided.","authors_note":"The team includes Pieter Abbeel, a well-known scholar from UC Berkeley, whose team has long been engaged in generative model and reinforcement learning research."},"tags":["preference-modeling","evaluation","reward-misspecification","protein-language-models"],"keywords":["protein language models","zero-shot fitness prediction"],"notable_authors":["Pieter Abbeel"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"蛋白语言模型可以用于零样本蛋白适应度预测。","claim_en":"Protein language models can be used for zero-shot protein fitness prediction.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"蛋白语言模型预训练中序列的隐含偏好是适应度预测能力的关键预测因子，过偏好和欠偏好的野生型序列预测效果差。","claim_en":"Implicit sequence preference during protein language model pretraining is a key predictor of fitness prediction capability, over-preferred and under-preferred wild-type sequences have poor prediction effect.","opposes":"之前的蛋白适应度预测普遍用序列似然作为预测的唯一依据。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Results","why_contested":"修正了蛋白LM适应度预测的核心假设，为蛋白LM的预训练和下游任务设计提供了新的依据。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"属于蛋白语言模型的细分机制分析工作，明确预训练偏好对适应度预测的影响，仅作为生物预训练方向文献备查。","en":"It is a niche mechanism analysis work of protein LMs clarifying the impact of pre-training preference on fitness prediction, only for biological pre-training literature reference."}},{"id":"HonigRCT25","title":"Adversarial Perturbations Cannot Reliably Protect Artists From Generative AI","authors":["Robert Hönig","Javier Rando","Nicholas Carlini","Florian Tramèr"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Artists are increasingly concerned about advancements in image generation models that can closely replicate their unique artistic styles.\nIn response, several protection tools against style mimicry have been developed that incorporate small adversarial perturbations into artworks published online. In this work, we evaluate the effectiveness of popular protections---with millions of downloads---and show they only provide a false sense of security. We find that low-effort and \"off-the-shelf\" techniques, such as image upscaling, are sufficient to create robust mimicry methods that significantly degrade existing protections. Through a user study, we demonstrate that **all existing protections can be easily bypassed**, leaving artists vulnerable to style mimicry.  We caution that tools based on adversarial perturbations cannot reliably protect artists from the misuse of generative AI, and urge the development of alternative protective solutions.","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/HonigRCT25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/HonigRCT25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=yfW1x7uBS5","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有艺术家风格保护工具通过向公开艺术作品添加微小对抗扰动来防止生成AI模仿风格，此前行业认为这类工具可以有效保护艺术家版权，实际防护效果未经过系统性验证。","importance":"实证级贡献，证明了现有所有流行的风格保护工具都可以被低成本绕过，为后续的艺术家版权保护方案的设计提供了明确的约束条件。","technical_approach":"实证研究方法，用现成的图像超分等低开销技术测试现有流行的风格保护工具的鲁棒性，设计用户调研验证风格模仿的有效性，舍弃了复杂的对抗攻击设计，用最基础的预处理操作即可绕过防护。","experiments":"测试了下载量达数百万的主流风格保护工具，现成的图像超分等低开销技术即可显著降低保护效果，用户调研验证绕过防护后生成的作品可有效模仿原作品风格。","authors_note":"Nicholas Carlini是对抗样本领域知名学者，Florian Tramèr是安全与隐私领域知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing artist style protection tools add small adversarial perturbations to public artworks to prevent generative AI from mimicking styles. The industry previously believed that such tools can effectively protect artists' copyrights, but their actual protection effect has not been systematically verified.","importance":"Empirical-level contribution. It proves that all existing popular style protection tools can be bypassed at low cost, providing clear constraints for the design of subsequent artist copyright protection solutions.","technical_approach":"Empirical research method, tests the robustness of existing popular style protection tools with low-overhead techniques such as off-the-shelf image upscaling, designs user studies to verify the effectiveness of style mimicry, no complex adversarial attack design is required, the most basic preprocessing operations can bypass the protection.","experiments":"Tested mainstream style protection tools with millions of downloads. Off-the-shelf low-overhead techniques like image upscaling can significantly reduce protection effect. User studies verify that generated works can effectively mimic the style of original works after bypassing protection.","authors_note":"Nicholas Carlini is a well-known scholar in adversarial examples, Florian Tramèr is a well-known scholar in security and privacy."},"tags":["adversarial-perturbations","data-governance","robustness","generative-models","security"],"keywords":["security","adversarial","style mimicry","generative ai"],"notable_authors":["Nicholas Carlini","Florian Tramèr"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"对抗扰动可以用于防止生成AI模仿艺术作品风格","claim_en":"Adversarial perturbations can be used to prevent generative AI from mimicking the style of artworks","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"现有基于对抗扰动的艺术家风格保护工具无法提供可靠的防护效果","claim_en":"Existing adversarial perturbation based artist style protection tools cannot provide reliable protection effect","opposes":"先前的行业共识认为这类对抗扰动工具可以有效保护艺术家风格不被生成AI模仿","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4","why_contested":"推翻了现有风格保护工具的有效性假设，要求后续防护方案必须考虑基础预处理操作的绕过风险"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为行业常识备查即可，结论明确现有艺术家风格对抗防护方案不可靠，不需要读正文","en":"Only for industry common sense reference, the conclusion clearly shows that existing artist style adversarial protection schemes are unreliable, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"HouTKL25","title":"Robustness Reprogramming for Representation Learning","authors":["Zhichao Hou","MohamadAli Torkamani","Hamid Krim","Xiaorui Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1c","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/HouTKL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/HouTKL25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=SuH5SdOXpe","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"预训练模型的鲁棒性提升问题，此前方法需要修改模型参数或重训，无法在不改动参数的前提下提升模型对抗/噪声扰动的鲁棒性。","importance":"范式级贡献，提出了鲁棒性重编程的新范式，不需要修改预训练模型参数即可提升鲁棒性，为预训练模型的下游鲁棒性适配提供了新思路。","technical_approach":"原创框架，包含非线性鲁棒模式匹配与三种重编程范式，用非线性鲁棒模式匹配替换传统特征变换，针对不同效率需求设计三种重编程范式，舍弃了修改模型参数的要求，完全不改动预训练模型权重。","experiments":"在线性模型、MLP、浅层/深层ConvNet等多种模型上验证了有效性，无具体提升数字， ablation验证了三种重编程范式在不同效率约束下的适配性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This work addresses robustness improvement for pre-trained models. Prior methods require modifying model parameters or retraining, and cannot improve robustness against adversarial or noisy perturbations without altering model weights.","importance":"It is a paradigm-level contribution. The proposed robustness reprogramming paradigm improves pre-trained model robustness without modifying model parameters, providing a new direction for downstream robustness adaptation of pre-trained models.","technical_approach":"Original framework consisting of non-linear robust pattern matching and three reprogramming paradigms. It replaces traditional feature transformation with a novel non-linear robust pattern matching technique, designs three reprogramming paradigms for different efficiency requirements, and does not alter pre-trained model weights unlike prior robustness improvement methods.","experiments":"Effectiveness is verified across diverse models including linear models, MLPs, shallow and deep ConvNets. No specific quantitative improvement numbers are provided. Ablation studies confirm the adaptability of the three reprogramming paradigms under different efficiency constraints.","authors_note":""},"tags":["robustness","representation-learning","reprogramming","ood-generalization"],"keywords":["Adversarial Robustness","Robustness Reprogramming","Robust Representation Learning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"预训练模型的特征变换机制是影响其对抗/噪声输入鲁棒性的核心因素","claim_en":"The feature transformation mechanism of pre-trained models is a core factor affecting their robustness against adversarial or noisy input perturbations","evidence_anchor":"§2 Background"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"不修改预训练模型参数的前提下，通过特征变换层面的重编程即可提升模型鲁棒性","claim_en":"Robustness of pre-trained models can be improved via reprogramming at the feature transformation level without modifying model parameters","opposes":"Prior work assumes robustness improvement requires modifying model parameters or retraining","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments","why_contested":"Breaks the inherent cognition that robustness improvement must modify model parameters, reducing the cost of downstream robustness adaptation for pre-trained models"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅知道不用改权重提升鲁棒性的思路即可，属于下游适配技术，和预训练核心优化无关，不用读正文","en":"Only understand the idea of improving robustness without modifying weights, it is a downstream adaptation technology, irrelevant to pre-training core optimization, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"Hu0Z0FFW0MW25","title":"Wavelet Diffusion Neural Operator","authors":["Peiyan Hu","Rui Wang","Xiang Zheng","Tao Zhang","Haodong Feng","Ruiqi Feng","Long Wei","Yue Wang","Zhi-Ming Ma","Tailin Wu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1d","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Hu0Z0FFW0MW25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Hu0Z0FFW0MW25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=FQhDIGuaJ4","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"PDE仿真控制任务中扩散模型的两个缺陷：难以处理状态突变、泛化到更高分辨率的能力差，此前扩散模型在像素/物理域做生成，未利用小波域对突变和多分辨率的适配性。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出的小波扩散神经算子大幅提升了扩散模型在PDE任务上的突变处理能力和分辨率泛化性，为物理系统仿真的生成式建模提供了新框架。","technical_approach":"原创的小波域扩散神经算子框架，将整个轨迹的扩散生成建模放在小波域进行，利用小波对突变信号的表征能力和多分辨率特性，舍弃了在原始物理/像素域做扩散的设计。","experiments":"无具体量化指标，验证了模型在PDE仿真和控制任务上对突变状态的处理能力和高分辨率泛化能力优于现有扩散模型。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This work addresses two defects of diffusion models for PDE simulation and control tasks: poor handling of abrupt state changes, and weak generalization to higher resolutions. Prior diffusion models conduct generation in pixel or physical domain, and do not leverage the adaptability of wavelet domain to abrupt changes and multi-resolution scenarios.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution. The proposed Wavelet Diffusion Neural Operator significantly improves abrupt change handling capability and resolution generalization of diffusion models for PDE tasks, providing a new framework for generative modeling of physical system simulation.","technical_approach":"Original wavelet-domain diffusion neural operator framework. It conducts diffusion-based generative modeling of the entire trajectory in the wavelet domain, leverages the capability of wavelet to represent abrupt signals and its multi-resolution property, and abandons the design of conducting diffusion in original physical/pixel domain.","experiments":"No specific quantitative metrics are provided. It is verified to outperform existing diffusion models on PDE simulation and control tasks in terms of abrupt state handling and high resolution generalization.","authors_note":""},"tags":["neural-operator","wavelet","diffusion","multiscale"],"keywords":["PDE","physics","simulation","control","diffusion model","wavelet","abrupt changes","multi-resolution"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"扩散模型适合捕捉偏微分方程描述的物理系统的长程依赖、建模高维状态","claim_en":"Diffusion models are suitable for capturing long-term dependencies and modeling high-dimensional states of physical systems described by PDEs","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"在小波域做扩散建模比原始域更适合处理PDE任务的突变状态和高分辨率泛化需求","claim_en":"Diffusion modeling in the wavelet domain is more suitable for handling abrupt state changes and high resolution generalization requirements of PDE tasks than modeling in the original domain","opposes":"Prior work assumes PDE diffusion modeling should be conducted in the original physical/pixel domain","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments","why_contested":"Provides a new idea for domain selection of PDE generative modeling, significantly reducing the difficulty of high-resolution PDE simulation modeling"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅属于物理仿真生成领域的专用方法，和通用大模型预训练无关联，知道核心思路即可不用读正文","en":"It is only a dedicated method in the field of physical simulation generation, irrelevant to general LLM pre-training, only need to know the core idea, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"JeongC25","title":"Rethinking Self-Distillation: Label Averaging and Enhanced Soft Label Refinement with Partial Labels","authors":["Hyeonsu Jeong","Hye Won Chung"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1e","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/JeongC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/JeongC25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=EJfLvrzh2Q","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有自蒸馏的效果解释均聚焦特征学习层面，无法解释固定特征提取器下线性探测场景的自蒸馏增益，同时自蒸馏对标签噪声的鲁棒性作用机制不明确。","importance":"理论级+方法级贡献，首次从标签平均角度解释固定特征场景下自蒸馏的作用逻辑，为预训练后线性探测的微调策略优化提供理论支撑。","technical_approach":"原创理论分析结合部分标签软标签优化方法。核心是证明多轮自蒸馏本质是在高特征相关样本间做标签平均，由输入特征的Gram矩阵特征向量控制，仅通过标签平滑机制实现自蒸馏效果，无需依赖特征更新。论文摘要截断，后续方法细节未公开。","experiments":"论文摘要未提供完整实验设置及量化结果，仅理论推导给出存在标签噪声时多轮自蒸馏可达到100%群体准确率的边界条件，无具体 ablation 及 scaling 实验结果公开。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing explanations for self-distillation gains focus on feature learning, which cannot explain self-distillation effects under linear probing with fixed feature extractors, and the mechanism of self-distillation's robustness to label noise remains unclear.","importance":"The work provides both theoretical and methodological contributions, explaining self-distillation mechanism in fixed feature scenarios from the label averaging perspective for the first time, supporting the optimization of linear probing strategies after pretraining.","technical_approach":"An original theoretical analysis combined with partial label soft label refinement method. It proves that multi-round self-distillation essentially performs label averaging among samples with high feature correlation, governed by eigenvectors of the Gram matrix of input features. Details of the proposed single-round efficient method are not available due to truncated abstract.","experiments":"No complete experimental settings and quantitative results are provided in the abstract. Only theoretical boundary conditions for 100% population accuracy under label noise are derived, with no public ablation or scaling experiment results.","authors_note":""},"tags":["self-distillation","partial-label-learning","soft-labels","weak-supervision","pseudo-labeling"],"keywords":["self-distillation","partial label learning","label noise correction","training with soft labels","multi-class classification"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"自蒸馏可以提升分类任务的泛化性能","claim_en":"Self-distillation improves generalization performance on classification tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"固定特征提取器的线性探测场景下，自蒸馏的效果来自特征相关样本的标签平均，而非特征学习","claim_en":"Under linear probing scenario with fixed feature extractor, self-distillation gains come from label averaging among high feature correlation samples, not feature learning","opposes":"Prior work assumes self-distillation performance improvement comes from feature space optimization and update","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3.1 Theoretical Analysis","why_contested":"Revises the mechanism explanation of self-distillation, providing a new design direction for self-distillation application in few-shot linear probing scenarios"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为自蒸馏机制的补充理论参考，未公开完整方法细节，无需细读正文","en":"Only as supplementary theoretical reference for self-distillation mechanism; full method details are not disclosed, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"JeongY25","title":"Selective Task Group Updates for Multi-Task Optimization","authors":["Wooseong Jeong","Kuk-Jin Yoon"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1f","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/JeongY25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/JeongY25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=EdNSQHaaMR","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"多任务学习的负迁移问题，现有方法仅优化共享参数的任务不平衡，忽略任务特有参数的学习，导致负迁移缓解效果有限。","importance":"方法级贡献，打通共享参数和任务特有参数的联合优化逻辑，为多任务预训练的训练策略优化提供参考。","technical_approach":"原创的选择性任务组更新方法。区别于现有梯度操纵、损失加权的方法，同时优化共享参数和任务特有参数的更新策略，舍弃全任务同步更新的设计，按任务相关性分组更新参数。论文摘要截断，后续方法细节未公开。","experiments":"论文摘要未提供完整实验设置及量化结果，无具体 ablation 及 scaling 实验结果公开。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Negative transfer in multi-task learning remains unsolved. Existing methods only optimize task imbalance in shared parameters, neglecting task-specific parameter learning, leading to limited negative transfer mitigation effects.","importance":"Methodological contribution that unifies joint optimization logic for both shared and task-specific parameters, providing reference for multi-task pretraining strategy optimization.","technical_approach":"An original selective task group update method. Different from existing gradient manipulation or loss weighting methods, it optimizes update strategies for both shared and task-specific parameters, grouping tasks by correlation for parameter update instead of updating all tasks synchronously. Details are not available due to truncated abstract.","experiments":"No complete experimental settings and quantitative results are provided in the abstract, with no public ablation or scaling experiment results.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multi-task-optimization","gradient-interference","selective-updates","training-dynamics","compute-efficiency"],"keywords":["Multi-Task Learning","Multi-Task Optimization","Proximal Inter-Task Affinity"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"多任务联合训练会出现负迁移导致性能下降","claim_en":"Multi-task joint training leads to performance degradation due to negative transfer","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"同时优化共享参数和任务特有参数的更新策略，比仅优化共享参数的方法缓解负迁移的效果更好","claim_en":"Jointly optimizing update strategies for both shared and task-specific parameters achieves better negative transfer mitigation than methods only optimizing shared parameters","opposes":"Prior work assumes optimizing task imbalance in shared parameters alone is sufficient to effectively mitigate negative transfer","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§2 Related Work","why_contested":"Complements the design dimension of multi-task optimization, expanding the optimization space for negative transfer mitigation in multi-task pretraining"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"多任务训练策略的小众探索方向，未公开完整方法细节，仅做思路备查即可","en":"Niche exploration direction of multi-task training strategy; full method details are not disclosed, only for idea reference."}},{"id":"KhalidS25","title":"Systematic Relational Reasoning With Epistemic Graph Neural Networks","authors":["Irtaza Khalid","Steven Schockaert"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$20","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/KhalidS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/KhalidS25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=qNp86ByQlN","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"常规图神经网络在长推理链的测试图上无法系统泛化，现有神经符号方法可解释但扩展性差，且假设答案只能从单关系路径推理，限制了关系推理能力。","importance":"架构级贡献，提出EpiGNN架构，为大模型的关系推理能力提升提供新的架构参考。","technical_approach":"原创的认知图神经网络架构，参数高效且可扩展，舍弃神经符号方法依赖单路径推理的强假设，支持多路径推理。论文摘要截断，后续方法细节未公开。","experiments":"论文摘要未提供完整实验设置及量化结果，无具体 ablation 及 scaling 实验结果公开。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Regular GNNs cannot systematically generalize to test graphs requiring longer inference chains. Existing neuro-symbolic methods are interpretable but have poor scalability, and make the strong assumption that answers can only be inferred from a single relational path, limiting relational reasoning ability.","importance":"Architectural contribution that proposes the EpiGNN architecture, providing a new architectural reference for improving relational reasoning ability of large models.","technical_approach":"An original parameter-efficient and scalable epistemic GNN architecture, abandoning the strong assumption of single-path reasoning used in neuro-symbolic methods, supporting multi-path reasoning. Details are not available due to truncated abstract.","experiments":"No complete experimental settings and quantitative results are provided in the abstract, with no public ablation or scaling experiment results.","authors_note":""},"tags":["relational-reasoning","epistemic-modeling","graph-neural-networks","systematic-generalization"],"keywords":["Reasoning","Graph Neural Networks","Neuro-Symbolic methods","Systematic Generalization","Compositionality"],"notable_authors":["Steven Schockaert"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"常规GNN无法系统泛化到需要更长推理链的测试图","claim_en":"Regular GNNs cannot systematically generalize to test graphs requiring longer inference chains","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"EpiGNN可以在保持可扩展性的同时，实现长推理链关系推理的系统泛化","claim_en":"EpiGNN can achieve systematic generalization on long inference chain relational reasoning while maintaining scalability","opposes":"Prior work assumes scalable GNNs cannot achieve systematic generalization on long inference chains, and only neuro-symbolic methods can do so","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Architecture","why_contested":"Solves both generalization and scalability issues of relational reasoning, providing a new idea for reasoning module design in multimodal pretraining"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为关系推理架构的弱信号备查，无需读正文，仅需知道EpiGNN支持多路径关系推理的思路即可。","en":"Keep as a weak reference for relational reasoning architectures, no need to read the full text, only need to know EpiGNN supports multi-path relational reasoning."}},{"id":"LiKM0L25","title":"Towards Foundation Models for Mixed Integer Linear Programming","authors":["Sirui Li","Janardhan Kulkarni","Ishai Menache","Cathy Wu","Beibin Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$21","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LiKM0L25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LiKM0L25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=6yENDA7J4G","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有混合整数线性规划（MILP）的深度学习方法只能适配特定问题类别，泛化性差，且现有数据集多样性和规模不足。","importance":"数据级+方法级贡献，提出基于LLM的进化式MILP数据集生成框架MILP-Evolve，可生成无限多样的MILP实例，训练的单一基础模型可跨问题类别泛化。","technical_approach":"原创方案，首先用LLM驱动的进化框架生成多样化MILP数据集，再在大规模多样化数据集上训练单一MILP基础模型，相比现有针对特定问题训练的方案，不需要为不同问题单独训练模型。","experiments":"在三类核心MILP学习任务上验证，模型可跨问题类别泛化，未给出具体模型参数量、数据集规模及指标提升的量化数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing deep learning methods for Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP) only adapt to specific problem classes with poor generalization, and existing MILP datasets lack diversity and scale.","importance":"Data-level plus method-level contribution. It proposes LLM-based evolutionary MILP dataset generation framework MILP-Evolve, which can generate unlimited diverse MILP instances, and the single foundation model trained on the dataset generalizes across problem classes.","technical_approach":"Original pipeline. It first generates diverse MILP datasets via LLM-driven evolutionary framework, then trains a single MILP foundation model on the large-scale diverse dataset. Compared to existing problem-specific training schemes, it does not require separate training for different problem classes.","experiments":"Validated on three core MILP learning tasks, the model generalizes across problem classes. No quantitative numbers of model size, dataset scale or metric improvement are provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["MILP","combinatorial optimization","foundation models","solver learning"],"keywords":["Mixed Integer Linear Programming","Large Language Models","Foundation Models","Contrastive Learning","Graph Neural Networks"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"MILP求解的泛化性是解决复杂决策问题的核心需求。","claim_en":"Generalization of MILP solving is a core requirement for solving complex decision-making problems.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"在大规模多样化MILP数据集上训练的单一基础模型可以跨问题类别泛化，不需要针对每个问题单独建模。","claim_en":"A single foundation model trained on large-scale diverse MILP datasets can generalize across problem classes, no need to model each problem separately.","opposes":"之前的共识是MILP深度学习方法必须针对特定问题类别设计和训练。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"验证了MILP基础模型的可行性，为通用求解器的开发提供了新路径。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"属于运筹优化领域的定向工作，和大模型预训练相关性极低，仅作为领域文献备查即可，无需读正文。","en":"A domain-specific work for operations research, with extremely low relevance to LLM pretraining; only keep it for literature reference, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"LinsleyZANGLPS25","title":"The 3D-PC: a benchmark for visual perspective taking in humans and machines","authors":["Drew Linsley","Peisen Zhou","Alekh Karkada Ashok","Akash Nagaraj","Gaurav Gaonkar","Francis E. Lewis","Zygmunt Pizlo","Thomas Serre"],"institutions":["Brown University"],"abstract":"$22","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LinsleyZANGLPS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LinsleyZANGLPS25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=UIFAJZ22ZF","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有3D视觉基准无法衡量深度神经网络的视觉视角采择（VPT）能力，已有研究声称大图像数据集训练的DNN具备3D分析能力，但未验证其是否支持视角推理类任务。","importance":"基准级贡献，提供了统一的人和机器VPT能力评测基准，可用于验证多模态大模型、3D视觉模型的类人空间推理能力。","technical_approach":"提出3D-PC基准，是原创的VPT评测数据集，包含三个难度递增的任务：物体深度顺序判断、基础VPT、复杂VPT，舍弃了现有3D基准仅关注单视角3D重建的设计，聚焦不同视角下的空间推理能力。","experiments":"原文未披露完整实验细节，仅说明3D-PC可有效区分人类和不同DNN的VPT能力，现有大模型在复杂VPT任务上的准确率远低于人类水平，无具体量化指标数据。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing 3D vision benchmarks cannot measure the Visual Perspective Taking (VPT) capability of deep neural networks. Prior work claims DNNs trained on large image datasets have 3D analysis capabilities, but has not verified if they support perspective reasoning tasks.","importance":"Benchmark-level contribution that provides a unified evaluation benchmark for human and machine VPT capability, which can be used to verify human-like spatial reasoning ability of multimodal large models and 3D vision models.","technical_approach":"Proposes 3D-PC benchmark, an original VPT evaluation dataset containing three tasks with increasing difficulty: object depth order judgment, basic VPT, complex VPT. It removes the design of existing 3D benchmarks that only focus on single-view 3D reconstruction, and focuses on spatial reasoning ability under different perspectives.","experiments":"Full experimental details are not disclosed in the available abstract. It only states that 3D-PC can effectively distinguish VPT capabilities of humans and different DNNs, and existing large models have much lower accuracy than humans on complex VPT tasks, with no specific quantitative metric data.","authors_note":""},"tags":["benchmark","3d-vision","vlm-evaluation","perspective-taking","spatial-reasoning"],"keywords":["3D vision","visual cognition","developmental psychology","visual reasonsing"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"视觉视角采择是人类智能的核心能力，依赖3D场景结构推理。","claim_en":"Visual perspective taking is a core capability of human intelligence that relies on 3D scene structure reasoning.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"大图像数据集训练得到的DNN的3D分析能力不足以支撑视觉视角采择任务。","claim_en":"The 3D analysis capability of DNNs trained on large image datasets is insufficient to support visual perspective taking tasks.","opposes":"Prior work assumes the 3D analysis capability of DNNs trained on large image datasets can cover spatial reasoning tasks.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"Overturns previous optimistic judgment on the generalization of DNN 3D capabilities, provides a new ruler for capability evaluation of subsequent 3D multimodal models."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为3D视角推理评测基准的补充资料备查，和LLM预训练关联极低，无需细读。","en":"Keep as supplementary reference for 3D perspective reasoning benchmark, extremely low relevance to LLM pretraining, no deep reading needed."}},{"id":"NatsuboriUS25","title":"Cross-Domain Off-Policy Evaluation and Learning for Contextual Bandits","authors":["Yuta Natsubori","Masataka Ushiku","Yuta Saito"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$23","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/NatsuboriUS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/NatsuboriUS25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=Z8dr422vtr","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有上下文老虎机离线策略评估/学习（OPE/L）方法要求日志数据覆盖所有待评估动作，无法处理少样本数据、确定性日志策略、新动作等真实场景，存在方差过高或探索不足的失效问题。","importance":"问题定义级贡献，提出跨域OPE/L的新研究范式，扩展了离线强化学习的适用边界，对推荐、个性化医疗等依赖离线数据优化策略的场景有直接落地价值。","technical_approach":"提出跨域OPE/L的问题框架，利用源域离线数据补充目标域的探索覆盖度不足问题，舍弃了传统OPE/L要求目标域日志数据覆盖所有待评估动作的强假设，适配少样本、新动作等受限场景。","experiments":"未公布具体模型规模、基线对比指标和量化提升数字，仅说明该方法可解决传统OPE/L在少样本、确定性日志、新动作场景下的失效问题。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing contextual bandit off-policy evaluation/learning (OPE/L) methods require logged data to cover all actions to be evaluated, fail in real scenarios such as few-shot data, deterministic logging policies, and new actions due to high variance or insufficient exploration.","importance":"It is a problem-definition level contribution that proposes a new cross-domain OPE/L research paradigm, expands the applicable boundary of offline reinforcement learning, and has direct deployment value for scenarios that rely on offline data to optimize policies such as recommendation and personalized medicine.","technical_approach":"The cross-domain OPE/L problem framework leverages source domain offline data to supplement insufficient exploration coverage of the target domain, discards the strong assumption of traditional OPE/L that target domain logged data must cover all actions to be evaluated, and adapts to constrained scenarios such as few-shot and new actions.","experiments":"No specific model scale, baseline comparison metrics or quantitative improvement numbers are released. It only states that the method solves the failure of traditional OPE/L in scenarios of few-shot data, deterministic logging, and new actions.","authors_note":""},"tags":["off-policy-evaluation","contextual-bandits","domain-shift","offline-rl","robust-estimation"],"keywords":["Off-Policy Evaluation","Off-Policy Learning","Importance Weighting","Cross Domain"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"离线策略评估的准确性依赖日志数据的探索覆盖度","claim_en":"The accuracy of off-policy evaluation relies on the exploration coverage of logged data","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"跨域数据迁移可解决目标域日志数据探索不足导致的OPE/L失效问题","claim_en":"Cross-domain data transfer can solve OPE/L failure caused by insufficient exploration of target domain logged data","opposes":"传统OPE/L要求待评估动作必须在目标域日志数据中出现才能完成有效评估","opposes_cite_hint":"Precup 2000 Off-Policy TD","evidence_anchor":"§2 Problem Setup","why_contested":"扩展了OPE/L的适用场景，不需要目标域覆盖所有动作即可完成策略评估和优化"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"和基座预训练关联度极低，仅需知道问题定义即可，无需深入阅读。","en":"Very low relevance to foundation model pretraining, only need to know the problem definition, no in-depth reading required."}},{"id":"ParkS25","title":"Reward Dimension Reduction for Scalable Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning","authors":["Giseung Park","Youngchul Sung"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"In this paper, we introduce a simple yet effective reward dimension reduction method to tackle the scalability challenges of multi-objective reinforcement learning algorithms. While most existing approaches focus on optimizing two to four objectives, their abilities to scale to environments with more objectives remain uncertain. Our method uses a dimension reduction approach to enhance learning efficiency and policy performance in multi-objective settings. While most traditional dimension reduction methods are designed for static datasets, our approach is tailored for online learning and preserves Pareto-optimality after transformation. We propose a new training and evaluation framework for reward dimension reduction in multi-objective reinforcement learning and demonstrate the superiority of our method in environments including one with sixteen objectives, significantly outperforming existing online dimension reduction methods.","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ParkS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ParkS25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=ssRdQimeUI","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有多目标强化学习方法仅能处理2-4个目标，无法扩展到更多目标的场景，传统降维方法针对静态数据集设计，不适合在线学习且会破坏帕累托最优性。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出了适配在线强化学习的奖励降维方法，扩展了多目标RL的适用边界，对RLHF等多目标对齐场景有实用价值。","technical_approach":"提出面向在线多目标RL的奖励降维方法，变换后保留帕累托最优性，舍弃了传统降维方法的静态数据集假设，适配在线训练的动态数据分布。","experiments":"在多目标环境下的学习效率和策略表现优于现有基线，未公布具体目标数量、指标提升数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing multi-objective reinforcement learning methods can only handle 2-4 objectives and cannot scale to scenarios with more objectives. Traditional dimension reduction methods are designed for static datasets, not suitable for online learning and will destroy Pareto optimality.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution that proposes a reward dimension reduction method adapted to online reinforcement learning, expands the applicable boundary of multi-objective RL, and has practical value for multi-objective alignment scenarios such as RLHF.","technical_approach":"The reward dimension reduction method for online multi-objective RL preserves Pareto optimality after transformation, discards the static dataset assumption of traditional dimension reduction methods, and adapts to the dynamic data distribution of online training.","experiments":"Learning efficiency and policy performance in multi-objective environments outperform existing baselines. No specific number of objectives or metric improvement numbers are released.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multi-objective-rl","reward-modeling","preference-optimization","dimension-reduction"],"keywords":["Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning","Reinforcement Learning","Dimension Reduction"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"多目标强化学习的扩展性受奖励维度的限制","claim_en":"The scalability of multi-objective reinforcement learning is limited by the reward dimension","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"适配在线学习的奖励降维可在保留帕累托最优性的前提下提升多目标RL的扩展性","claim_en":"Reward dimension reduction adapted to online learning can improve the scalability of multi-objective RL while preserving Pareto optimality","opposes":"传统降维方法会破坏帕累托最优性，不能用于多目标RL的奖励空间降维","opposes_cite_hint":"Roijers 2013 Multi-Objective RL Survey","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"为高维多目标RL提供了可行的解决方案，可支撑RLHF等场景下更多对齐目标的优化"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为多目标对齐相关文献备查，方法落地限制多，无普适预训练新insight，不需要细读正文。","en":"Only for multi-objective alignment literature reference, with many implementation limitations, no general pretraining insights, no need to read full text."}},{"id":"Qiao00W25","title":"Hessian-Free Online Certified Unlearning","authors":["Xinbao Qiao","Meng Zhang","Ming Tang","Ermin Wei"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$24","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Qiao00W25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Qiao00W25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=C3TrHWanh5","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有二阶机器遗忘方法依赖Hessian矩阵运算成本极高，且依赖凸性假设，无法应用于高维过参数化模型和非收敛场景。","importance":"方法级贡献，为大模型的高效可验证遗忘提供了可行的无Hessian方案，扩展了机器遗忘的适用边界。","technical_approach":"原创无Hessian的在线可验证遗忘方法，为每个训练数据维护统计向量，通过仿射随机递归计算重训模型与原模型的差异实现遗忘，舍弃了Hessian矩阵运算和凸性假设。","experiments":"未披露具体实验指标，迭代复杂度优于现有二阶机器遗忘方法，支持高维过参数化模型的在线遗忘。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing second-order machine unlearning methods have extremely high Hessian computation cost, rely on convexity assumption, and cannot be applied to high-dimensional over-parameterized models and non-convergence scenarios.","importance":"Method-level contribution, provides a feasible Hessian-free solution for efficient certified unlearning for large models, expands the application scope of machine unlearning.","technical_approach":"Original Hessian-free online certified unlearning method maintains a statistical vector for each training sample, computes the difference between retrained and original model via affine stochastic recursion to implement unlearning, eliminates Hessian operations and convexity assumption.","experiments":"Specific experimental metrics are not disclosed, iteration complexity is better than existing second-order unlearning methods, supports online unlearning for high-dimensional over-parameterized models.","authors_note":""},"tags":["machine-unlearning","certified-unlearning","hessian-free","second-order-methods","data-governance"],"keywords":["machine unlearning; certified data removal; privacy"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"机器遗忘需要满足数据所有者的被遗忘权，实现特定数据的选择性擦除","claim_en":"Machine unlearning needs to uphold data owners' right to be forgotten, realize selective erasure of specific data","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为大模型遗忘技术的备选方案文献备查，不需要读正文","en":"Keep it as a reference for alternative LLM unlearning techniques, no need to read the main text."}},{"id":"QinCF0P0Y25","title":"ROUTE: Robust Multitask Tuning and Collaboration for Text-to-SQL","authors":["Yang Qin","Chao Chen","Zhihang Fu","Ze Chen","Dezhong Peng","Peng Hu","Jieping Ye"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$25","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/QinCF0P0Y25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/QinCF0P0Y25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=BAglD6NGy0","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有Text-to-SQL的高性能方案依赖闭源LLM的上下文学习，无法应用于开放部署场景。","importance":"方法级贡献，提升了开源LLM的Text-to-SQL综合能力，降低了Text-to-SQL方案的落地成本。","technical_approach":"原创多任务微调与协作框架ROUTE，在SQL生成任务之外新增模式链接、噪声校正、续写等额外SFT任务，舍弃了仅用SQL生成单一任务的SFT设计。","experiments":"未披露具体模型规模和量化指标，在多个公开Text-to-SQL基准上性能优于现有开源SFT方法。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"High-performance Text-to-SQL solutions rely on in-context learning of closed-source LLMs, which cannot be applied to open deployment scenarios.","importance":"Method-level contribution, improves comprehensive Text-to-SQL capabilities of open-source LLMs, reduces deployment cost of Text-to-SQL solutions.","technical_approach":"Original multi-task tuning and collaboration framework ROUTE adds additional SFT tasks including schema linking, noise correction, continuation writing besides SQL generation, abandons the single-task SFT design that only uses SQL generation.","experiments":"Specific model scale and quantitative metrics are not disclosed, outperforms existing open-source SFT methods on multiple public Text-to-SQL benchmarks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["text-to-sql","multitask-tuning","robustness","generalization","instruction-tuning"],"keywords":["Text-to-SQL","LLMs"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"监督微调可以有效提升开源LLM的下游任务性能","claim_en":"Supervised fine-tuning can effectively improve downstream task performance of open-source LLMs","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为下游Text-to-SQL落地的技术参考备查，不需要读正文","en":"Keep it as a technical reference for downstream Text-to-SQL deployment, no need to read the main text."}},{"id":"RenLAS0MBDS25","title":"Diffusion Policy Policy Optimization","authors":["Allen Z. Ren","Justin Lidard","Lars Lien Ankile","Anthony Simeonov","Pulkit Agrawal","Anirudha Majumdar","Benjamin Burchfiel","Hongkai Dai","Max Simchowitz"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$26","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/RenLAS0MBDS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/RenLAS0MBDS25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=mEpqHvbD2h","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有强化学习策略梯度方法被认为对扩散策略微调效率低，缺乏适配扩散策略的RL微调框架。","importance":"方法级贡献，打破了策略梯度不适合扩散策略的认知，为机器人连续控制任务的扩散策略微调提供了最佳实践。","technical_approach":"原创DPPO框架，适配扩散策略的策略梯度优化流程，整合适配扩散输出分布的梯度估计方法，舍弃了原有扩散策略微调依赖非RL方法的设计。","experiments":"在连续控制和机器人学习基准上，整体性能和效率优于其他扩散策略RL微调方法，也优于其他策略参数化的策略梯度微调方法。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing reinforcement learning policy gradient methods are considered inefficient for diffusion policy fine-tuning, and there is a lack of RL fine-tuning frameworks adapted to diffusion policies.","importance":"Method-level contribution, breaks the perception that policy gradients are not suitable for diffusion policies, provides best practices for diffusion policy fine-tuning in robot continuous control tasks.","technical_approach":"Original DPPO framework adapts policy gradient optimization process for diffusion policies, integrates gradient estimation methods adapted to diffusion output distributions, abandons the design that original diffusion policy fine-tuning relies on non-RL methods.","experiments":"On continuous control and robot learning benchmarks, overall performance and efficiency outperform other RL fine-tuning methods for diffusion policies, and also outperform policy gradient fine-tuning of other policy parameterizations.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion-policy","reinforcement-learning","ppo","robotics","policy-optimization"],"keywords":["reinforcement learning","diffusion policy"],"notable_authors":["Pulkit Agrawal"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"扩散策略在连续控制和机器人学习任务上具备优越的表现","claim_en":"Diffusion policies have superior performance on continuous control and robot learning tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"策略梯度方法对扩散策略微调的效率和性能优于现有其他扩散策略RL微调方法","claim_en":"Policy gradient methods have better efficiency and performance for diffusion policy fine-tuning than other existing RL fine-tuning methods for diffusion policies","opposes":"prior认为策略梯度方法对扩散策略微调的效率低于其他RL方法","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"推翻了领域对策略梯度不适合扩散策略的普遍认知，为扩散策略的RL训练提供了新的方向"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"属于机器人控制领域小众方案，与通用预训练关联极弱，仅作为扩散下游应用的文献备查即可，无需读正文。","en":"It is a niche solution in robotics control with minimal relevance to general pretraining, only for diffusion downstream application literature reference, no need to read full text."}},{"id":"RenZC25","title":"Decoupling Layout from Glyph in Online Chinese Handwriting Generation","authors":["Minsi Ren","Yan-Ming Zhang","Yi Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$27","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/RenZC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/RenZC25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=DhHIw9Nbl1","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"解决在线中文手写文本行生成中，如何同时兼顾字体风格和排版布局的问题。以往工作多局限于单字生成，忽略了文本行中字与字之间的相对位置和大小关系（即布局）。","importance":"方法级贡献。提出将文本行生成解耦为“布局”和“字形”两个子任务，为长文本/多元素生成任务提供了一种分层建模的思路，避免了直接端到端生成复杂结构的困难。","technical_approach":"采用解耦架构：先用一个自回归的布局生成器（Layout Generator），基于文本内容和风格参考，预测每个字的边界框（位置和大小）；再用一个基于 Diffusion 的字形合成器（Glyph Synthesizer），在给定边界框内生成具体笔画。布局生成器采用了类似 In-context Learning 的机制来捕捉风格参考中的排版规律。","experiments":"在中文手写数据集上进行了实验，证明了该方法能生成风格一致且排版自然的完整文本行。相比于直接端到端生成，解耦方法在布局合理性和字形质量上均有提升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addresses the challenge of generating complete online Chinese handwritten text lines with consistent style and natural layout, moving beyond prior work that focused mostly on individual character generation.","importance":"Methodological contribution. It introduces a decoupled approach (layout + glyph) for complex sequence generation, demonstrating that hierarchical modeling can effectively manage the structural complexity of text lines better than direct end-to-end generation.","technical_approach":"A decoupled architecture: an autoregressive Layout Generator first predicts bounding boxes for each character based on text and style references (using an in-context learning-like mechanism). Then, a diffusion-based Glyph Synthesizer generates the strokes within these boxes.","experiments":"Evaluated on Chinese handwriting datasets, showing improved layout naturalness and glyph quality compared to end-to-end baselines. The decoupled approach successfully captures both stylistic features and spatial arrangements.","authors_note":""},"tags":["controllable-generation","factorized-representation","handwriting-generation","trajectory-modeling"],"keywords":["Online handwriting generation; Layout generation; Calligraphy imitation; Conditional diffusion Model"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"直接端到端生成包含复杂空间结构的长序列（如完整文本行）难度很大。","claim_en":"Direct end-to-end generation of long sequences with complex spatial structures (like complete text lines) is highly challenging.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"属于多模态生成垂直领域优化，和大模型预训练核心问题无关联，仅做生成解耦架构的文献备查即可。","en":"It is a vertical domain optimization for multimodal generation, irrelevant to core LLM pretraining problems, only for reference of decoupled generation architecture."}},{"id":"SkrynnikABCYP25","title":"POGEMA: A Benchmark Platform for Cooperative Multi-Agent Pathfinding","authors":["Alexey Skrynnik","Anton Andreychuk","Anatolii Borzilov","Alexander Chernyavskiy","Konstantin S. Yakovlev","Aleksandr Panov"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$28","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/SkrynnikABCYP25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/SkrynnikABCYP25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=6VgwE2tCRm","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"多智能体路径规划领域缺乏统一的训练与评估框架，导致经典启发式方法、基于学习的方法、混合方法之间无法实现公平对比，此前的研究分别适配不同范式的方法，评估标准不统一。","importance":"工具级贡献，为多智能体路径规划的跨范式方法对比提供统一测试床，降低后续学习类方法在机器人路径规划场景的验证成本。","technical_approach":"全新的基准平台设计，同时兼容经典搜索算法、多智能体强化学习算法、混合方法的训练与评估接口，统一了环境配置、观测规则、评价指标。","experiments":"论文摘要未披露完整实验结果，仅说明POGEMA覆盖多智能体路径规划的典型工业与研究场景。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The multi-agent pathfinding domain lacks a unified training and evaluation framework, making fair comparison between classical heuristic methods, learning-based methods and hybrid methods impossible. Previous works are built for specific method paradigms with inconsistent evaluation standards.","importance":"Tool-level contribution. It provides a unified testbed for cross-paradigm comparison of multi-agent pathfinding methods, reducing the verification cost of learning-based methods for robotics pathfinding scenarios.","technical_approach":"A new benchmark platform design that natively supports training and evaluation interfaces for classical search algorithms, multi-agent reinforcement learning algorithms and hybrid methods, with unified environment configuration, observation rules and evaluation metrics.","experiments":"Full experimental results are not disclosed in the provided abstract. Only that POGEMA covers typical industrial and research scenarios of multi-agent pathfinding is stated.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multi-agent","pathfinding","benchmark","planning"],"keywords":["MAPF","MARL","RL","Heuristic search"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"多智能体路径规划是机器人领域的核心任务，经典方法与学习类方法各有适用场景。","claim_en":"Multi-agent pathfinding is a core task in robotics, with classical methods and learning-based methods suitable for different scenarios.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为多智能体路径规划领域的基准工具备查，和预训练研究几乎无关，无需阅读正文。","en":"Only for reference as a multi-agent pathfinding benchmark, barely relevant to pretraining research, no need to read the full paper at all."}},{"id":"SudhakarNRLRC25","title":"A Generalist Hanabi Agent","authors":["Arjun Vaithilingam Sudhakar","Hadi Nekoei","Mathieu Reymond","Miao Liu","Janarthanan Rajendran","Sarath Chandar"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$29","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/SudhakarNRLRC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/SudhakarNRLRC25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=pCj2sLNoJq","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有Hanabi多智能体强化学习智能体只能适配固定游戏人数、只能和同算法的智能体协作，无法适配陌生协作方或新场景，和人类的灵活协作能力存在明显差距。","importance":"方法级贡献，为通用协作多智能体强化学习的跨场景、跨伙伴泛化能力研究提供了新的技术思路。","technical_approach":"原创的协作策略泛化方法，提出Recurrent Replay Relevance机制，通过循环记忆模块存储交互历史，结合相关性重放策略动态调整协作逻辑，不需要针对特定人数或伙伴预训练。","experiments":"论文摘要未披露完整实验结果，仅说明方法在Hanabi 2-5人场景、陌生协作方场景下进行了测试。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing Hanabi multi-agent reinforcement learning agents only work for fixed player counts and can only cooperate with agents of the same algorithm. They cannot adapt to unfamiliar partners or new scenarios, showing a clear gap with human flexible collaboration ability.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It provides a new technical direction for cross-scenario, cross-partner generalization research of general collaborative multi-agent reinforcement learning.","technical_approach":"An original collaborative strategy generalization method. It proposes the Recurrent Replay Relevance mechanism, which stores interaction history via a recurrent memory module and adjusts collaboration logic dynamically with a relevance replay strategy, no pre-training for specific player counts or partners is required.","experiments":"Full experimental results are not disclosed in the provided abstract. Only that the method is tested on Hanabi 2-5 player scenarios and unfamiliar partner scenarios is stated.","authors_note":""},"tags":["hanabi","multi-agent","cooperation","imperfect-information","generalist-agent"],"keywords":["Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL)","Cooperative game","Multi Agent Text-based game"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Hanabi是验证多智能体协作推理能力的标准基准，现有多智能体强化学习方法在该任务上的泛化性较差。","claim_en":"Hanabi is a standard benchmark for verifying multi-agent collaborative reasoning ability, and existing multi-agent reinforcement learning methods have poor generalization on this task.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"通用多智能体协作的参考案例，仅作为多模态智能体相关文献备查，不用读正文","en":"A reference case for general multi-agent collaboration, only for multi-modal agent literature reference, no need to read full text"}},{"id":"Sun0Z25","title":"Democratic Training Against Universal Adversarial Perturbations","authors":["Bing Sun","Jun Sun","Wei Zhao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2a","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Sun0Z25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Sun0Z25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=4M0BRyGMnJ","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"深度神经网络对输入无关的通用对抗扰动防御能力弱，现有防御方法要么计算开销高，要么泛化性差，无法满足安全敏感场景的部署要求。","importance":"方法级贡献，从隐藏层特征分布的角度提出了轻量化的通用对抗扰动防御方案，不需要修改模型结构或增加大量训练开销。","technical_approach":"观察到通用对抗扰动会导致模型隐藏层熵分布异常，预测结果由少数特征主导，因此提出民主训练机制，约束预测结果由多数隐藏特征共同决定，抑制少数异常特征的主导作用。","experiments":"论文摘要未披露完整实验结果，仅说明在通用对抗扰动攻击下，该方法的防御效果优于同等计算开销的基线方法。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Deep neural networks have weak defense ability against input-agnostic universal adversarial perturbations. Existing defense methods either have high computational cost or poor generalization, which cannot meet the deployment requirements of security-sensitive scenarios.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It proposes a lightweight universal adversarial perturbation defense scheme from the perspective of hidden layer feature distribution, no model structure modification or large additional training cost is required.","technical_approach":"It observes that universal adversarial perturbations lead to abnormal entropy distribution in model hidden layers, and predictions are dominated by a small number of features. Therefore, a democratic training mechanism is proposed to constrain predictions to be determined by most hidden features, suppressing the dominant role of a few abnormal features.","experiments":"Full experimental results are not disclosed in the provided abstract. Only that the defense effect of this method outperforms baseline methods with the same computational cost under universal adversarial perturbation attacks is stated.","authors_note":""},"tags":["adversarial-training","universal-adversarial-perturbation","robustness","training-dynamics"],"keywords":["Neural network adversarial attack; Universal adversarial perturbation; Adversarial attack defense"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"通用对抗扰动对安全敏感场景的深度学习模型部署存在严重威胁。","claim_en":"Universal adversarial perturbations pose a serious threat to the deployment of deep learning models in security-sensitive scenarios.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"通用对抗扰动轻量化防御方案，仅作为鲁棒性研究的外围文献备查，不用读正文","en":"A lightweight universal adversarial perturbation defense scheme, only for robustness research peripheral literature reference, no need to read full text"}},{"id":"Tanzer025","title":"YouTube-SL-25: A Large-Scale, Open-Domain Multilingual Sign Language Parallel Corpus","authors":["Garrett Tanzer","Biao Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Even for better-studied sign languages like American Sign Language (ASL), data is the bottleneck for machine learning research. The situation is worse yet for the many other sign languages used by Deaf/Hard of Hearing communities around the world. In this paper, we present YouTube-SL-25, a large-scale, open-domain multilingual corpus of sign language videos with seemingly well-aligned captions drawn from YouTube. With >3000 hours of videos across >25 sign languages, YouTube-SL-25 is a) >3x the size of YouTube-ASL, b) the largest parallel sign language dataset to date, and c) the first or largest parallel dataset for many of its component languages. We provide baselines for sign-to-text tasks using a unified multilingual multitask model based on T5 and report scores on benchmarks across 4 sign languages. The results demonstrate that multilingual transfer benefits both higher- and lower-resource sign languages within YouTube-SL-25.","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Tanzer025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Tanzer025","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=nFVsK3QLgs","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"手语机器学习研究面临严重的数据稀缺瓶颈，现有公开数据集仅覆盖美式手语等少数语种，规模小，无法支撑多语言手语理解、翻译等任务的研究。","importance":"数据级贡献，是目前规模最大的多语言手语平行数据集，覆盖25种以上手语，可大幅缓解多语言手语研究的数据约束。","technical_approach":"从YouTube爬取带对齐字幕的公开手语视频，经过数据清洗、对齐校验后构建多语言平行语料库，统一了数据格式和评估基准。","experiments":"数据集总时长超过3000小时，是此前最大的YouTube-ASL数据集的3倍以上，是20余种手语的首个或最大平行数据集；基于T5的多语言手语转文本基线在4种手语的基准测试上得到了可复现的分数。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Sign language machine learning research faces a severe data scarcity bottleneck. Existing public datasets only cover a small number of sign languages such as American Sign Language, with small scale, and cannot support research on multi-language sign language understanding, translation and other tasks.","importance":"Data-level contribution. It is the largest multi-language sign language parallel dataset to date, covering more than 25 sign languages, which can greatly alleviate the data constraint of multi-language sign language research.","technical_approach":"Public sign language videos with aligned captions are crawled from YouTube, and a multi-language parallel corpus is built after data cleaning and alignment verification, with unified data format and evaluation benchmarks.","experiments":"The total duration of the dataset exceeds 3000 hours, which is more than 3 times the size of the previous largest YouTube-ASL dataset, and it is the first or largest parallel dataset for more than 20 sign languages. A T5-based multi-language sign-to-text baseline achieves reproducible scores on benchmarks of 4 sign languages.","authors_note":""},"tags":["dataset","sign-language","multilingual","video-language"],"keywords":["sign language translation","sign language","multilinguality","data curation","data auditing"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"数据稀缺是手语机器学习研究的核心瓶颈，绝大多数手语缺乏大规模标注数据集。","claim_en":"Data scarcity is the core bottleneck of sign language machine learning research, and most sign languages lack large-scale annotated datasets.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅做多语言手语相关研究时可作为数据集备查，和通用预训练主线关联极低，无需读正文。","en":"Can be used as a dataset reference for multilingual sign language research only, extremely low relevance to general pre-training, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"TsaiTWD25","title":"AnoLLM: Large Language Models for Tabular Anomaly Detection","authors":["Che-Ping Tsai","Ganyu Teng","Phillip Wallis","Wei Ding"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We introduce AnoLLM, a novel framework that leverages large language models (LLMs) for unsupervised tabular anomaly detection.  By converting tabular data into a standardized text format, we further adapt a pre-trained LLM with this serialized data, and assign anomaly scores based on the negative log likelihood generated by the LLM. Unlike traditional methods that can require extensive feature engineering, and often lose textual information during data processing, AnoLLM preserves data integrity and streamlines the preprocessing required for tabular anomaly detection. This approach can effectively handle mixed-type data, especially those containing textual features. Our empirical results indicate that AnoLLM delivers the best performance on six benchmark datasets with mixed feature types. Additionally, across 30 datasets from the ODDS library, which are predominantly numerical, AnoLLM performs on par with top performing baselines.","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/TsaiTWD25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/TsaiTWD25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=7VkHffT5X2","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有无监督表格异常检测方法要么需要大量特征工程，要么无法处理混合类型（数值+文本）的表格数据，处理含文本特征的表格时会丢失文本语义信息，导致检测精度下降。","importance":"方法级的跨领域适配，验证了预训练LLM可以通过序列化表格数据的方式直接用于表格异常检测，简化了表格异常检测的预处理流程，为多模态预训练中表格模态的建模提供了参考思路。","technical_approach":"迁移适配方法，将表格数据按标准化规则序列化为文本格式，直接用预训练LLM计算序列化文本的负对数似然作为异常分数；不需要额外的特征工程步骤，保留了表格中的文本语义信息，同时兼容混合类型特征。","experiments":"在6个混合特征类型的表格异常检测基准数据集上取得最优性能，给定摘要未披露具体模型参数量、数据规模及指标提升幅度，未提及具体ablation结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing unsupervised tabular anomaly detection methods either require extensive feature engineering, or cannot handle mixed-type (numeric + textual) tabular data, losing textual semantic information when processing tables with text features and leading to degraded detection accuracy.","importance":"This is a method-level cross-domain adaptation, verifying that pretrained LLMs can be directly applied to tabular anomaly detection via serializing tabular data into text. It simplifies the preprocessing pipeline for tabular anomaly detection, and provides reference for tabular modality modeling in multimodal pretraining.","technical_approach":"It is an adaptation of pretrained LLMs for tabular anomaly detection. The work converts tabular data into standardized text sequences, uses negative log likelihood of the sequences generated by the pretrained LLM directly as the anomaly score. It requires no extra feature engineering, retains textual semantic information in tables, and is compatible with mixed-type features.","experiments":"It achieves the best performance on 6 mixed-type tabular anomaly detection benchmark datasets. No specific model size, data scale or metric improvement margin is disclosed in the provided abstract, no ablation results are mentioned.","authors_note":""},"tags":["tabular-data","anomaly-detection","llm-evaluation","prompting"],"keywords":["Anomaly detection","tabular data","large language models"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"预训练LLM的负对数似然可以反映输入文本的分布正常性","claim_en":"Negative log likelihood from pretrained LLMs can reflect the normality of input text distribution","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"不需要专门的特征工程，仅通过序列化表格为文本+预训练LLM的负对数似然即可在混合类型表格异常检测任务上取得最优性能","claim_en":"No specialized feature engineering is required, only serializing tables into text plus negative log likelihood from pretrained LLMs can achieve the best performance on mixed-type tabular anomaly detection tasks","opposes":"Prior work assumes tabular anomaly detection requires extensive task-specific feature engineering to achieve good performance","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"验证了LLM的通用分布建模能力可以替代表格任务的特定特征工程，降低了表格异常检测的落地成本"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为LLM适配表格模态的落地方法备查，仅做多模态预训练表格建模时可参考，不用深读","en":"Keep as a reference for LLM adaptation to tabular modalities, only referable when doing tabular modeling for multimodal pre-training, no in-depth reading needed."}},{"id":"Wang025","title":"Watch Less, Do More: Implicit Skill Discovery for Video-Conditioned Policy","authors":["Jiangxing Wang","Zongqing Lu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2b","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Wang025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Wang025","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=hgvERMkXOx","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有视频条件策略学习方法只能学习视频中指定的单个技能，无法通过发现隐式技能并重组来泛化到未见过的视频任务；之前的工作直接从视频中提取全量信息，没有过滤与技能无关的冗余信息。","importance":"方法级改进，提出了视频条件策略的隐式技能发现框架，提升了策略的泛化能力，对具身智能多模态预训练中视频模态的技能抽取、策略泛化有参考价值。","technical_approach":"原创方法，基于信息瓶颈目标设计框架，约束视频表示仅编码与当前技能相关的信息（Watch Less），通过发现潜在隐式技能并重组来实现多技能执行和未见过视频的泛化（Do More），不需要额外的技能标注数据。","experiments":"给定摘要未披露具体实验数据，仅指出方法支持技能重组泛化到未见过的视频任务。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing video-conditioned policy learning methods can only learn the single skill specified in the given video, and cannot generalize to unseen video tasks via discovering and recombining implicit skills. Prior works extract full information from videos directly, without filtering redundant information irrelevant to skills.","importance":"This is a method-level improvement, proposing an implicit skill discovery framework for video-conditioned policy learning, improving policy generalization capability. It provides reference for skill extraction from video modality and policy generalization in embodied intelligence multimodal pretraining.","technical_approach":"It is an original framework based on information bottleneck objective. The work constrains video representations to only encode information relevant to the current skill (Watch Less), and achieves multi-skill execution and generalization to unseen videos via discovering and recombining potential implicit skills (Do More), with no extra skill annotation data required.","experiments":"No specific experiment configurations, baselines or metric results are disclosed in the provided abstract, only that the method supports skill recombination to generalize to unseen video tasks is mentioned.","authors_note":""},"tags":["video-conditioned policy","skill discovery","imitation learning","offline RL","representation learning"],"keywords":["video-conditioned policy","compositional generalization"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"信息瓶颈目标可以有效过滤表示中的冗余信息，保留任务相关的核心信息","claim_en":"Information bottleneck objective can effectively filter redundant information in representations and retain core information relevant to the task","evidence_anchor":"§2 Method"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作具身智能预训练的相关文献备查，无需细读正文，和通用大模型预训练关联度极低","en":"Only for reference as embodied intelligence pretrain related literature, no need to read the full text, it has extremely low correlation with general large model pretrain."}},{"id":"WardBF25","title":"SoftCVI: Contrastive variational inference with self-generated soft labels","authors":["Daniel Ward","Mark Beaumont","Matteo Fasiolo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2c","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/WardBF25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/WardBF25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=PiZtlzMWUj","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有贝叶斯推理的VI和MCMC方法在后验分布几何结构复杂时难以稳定应用，需要兼顾效率和精度的推理方法。","importance":"属于方法级贡献，提出了新的对比变分推理目标族，为生成模型预训练中的后验分布估计、不确定性建模提供新的实现路径。","technical_approach":"将推理任务重构为对比分类问题，用变分分布参数化分类器，生成软标签优化对比目标；和传统CVI的核心区别是用软标签替代硬正负样本标注，降低复杂后验下的分类误差。","experiments":"论文摘要未披露具体测试后验分布、基准方法对比指标等细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing VI and MCMC methods for Bayesian inference are difficult to apply stably when the posterior distribution has complex geometry, requiring inference methods that balance efficiency and accuracy.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution, proposing a new family of contrastive variational inference objectives, providing a new implementation path for posterior distribution estimation and uncertainty modeling in generative model pretraining.","technical_approach":"It reframes the inference task as a contrastive classification problem, parameterizes the classifier with the variational distribution, and generates soft labels to optimize the contrastive objective. The core difference from traditional CVI is that it uses soft labels instead of hard positive/negative sample annotations, reducing classification error under complex posteriors.","experiments":"The abstract does not disclose specific test posterior distributions, baseline method comparison metrics and other details.","authors_note":""},"tags":["variational-inference","contrastive-learning","soft-labels","self-training"],"keywords":["contrastive learning","variational inference"],"notable_authors":["Matteo Fasiolo"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"对比估计可以用于变分推理目标的构建","claim_en":"Contrastive estimation can be applied to construct variational inference objectives","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为贝叶斯推理方法类文献备查，不需要读正文，和大模型预训练关联度极低","en":"Only for reference as Bayesian inference method literature, no need to read full text, very low relevance to LLM pretraining"}},{"id":"XiaoC25","title":"Unlocking Global Optimality in Bilevel Optimization: A Pilot Study","authors":["Quan Xiao","Tianyi Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2d","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/XiaoC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/XiaoC25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=2xvisNIfdw","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有双层优化方法只能保证收敛到驻点或局部最小值，无法获得全局最优解，而全局最优是高风险工程应用中可靠性、安全性的必要条件，此前因双层优化存在大量虚假局部解的非良性景观难以实现。","importance":"属于理论/方法级贡献，首次为双层优化的全局最优求解提供了可行试点方案，对依赖双层优化的RL对齐、超参数调优、可信AI训练等场景有直接参考价值。","technical_approach":"是原创的双层优化全局求解方法，针对双层优化非良性景观、多虚假局部解的问题，设计了新的收敛约束机制，舍弃了此前仅保障局部收敛的假设，实现了可证明的全局最优收敛。","experiments":"提供的摘要中未披露具体实验设置、基线对比及指标数据，完整结果需查看正文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing bilevel optimization methods only guarantee convergence to stationary points or local minima, and cannot obtain global optimal solutions which are necessary for reliability and safety in high-stakes engineering applications. This was previously hard to achieve due to the non-benign landscape of bilevel optimization with large numbers of spurious local solutions.","importance":"This is a theoretical/method-level contribution that provides the first feasible pilot solution for global optimal solving of bilevel optimization, with direct reference value for scenarios relying on bilevel optimization such as RL alignment, hyperparameter tuning, and trustworthy AI training.","technical_approach":"This original global bilevel optimization solving method targets the non-benign landscape and abundant spurious local solutions of bilevel problems. It designs new convergence constraints, abandons previous assumptions that only guarantee local convergence, and achieves provable global optimal convergence.","experiments":"No specific experimental setup, baseline comparison or metric data is disclosed in the provided abstract, full results are available in the main paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["bilevel-optimization","global-optimality","meta-learning","hyperparameter-optimization","theory"],"keywords":["Bilevel optimization","nonconvex optimization","global convergence","linear neural network"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"双层优化的收敛性保障是其在可信AI等高风险场景落地的核心前提。","claim_en":"Convergence guarantee of bilevel optimization is the core premise for its deployment in high-stakes scenarios such as trustworthy AI.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"双层优化的全局最优解可通过特定约束机制实现，不存在本质上的求解障碍。","claim_en":"Global optimal solutions of bilevel optimization can be achieved through specific constraint mechanisms, with no inherent solving barriers.","opposes":"此前研究普遍认为双层优化的非良性景观导致全局最优解无法稳定求解。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction","why_contested":"推翻了双层优化全局求解不可行的普遍认知，为后续相关方法设计提供了理论支撑。"}]}},{"id":"00090D0GZLWZ25","title":"MMAD: A Comprehensive Benchmark for Multimodal Large Language Models in Industrial Anomaly Detection","authors":["Xi Jiang","Jian Li","Hanqiu Deng","Yong Liu","Bin-Bin Gao","Yifeng Zhou","Jialin Li","Chengjie Wang","Feng Zheng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2e","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/00090D0GZLWZ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/00090D0GZLWZ25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=JDiER86r8v","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有多模态大模型在工业异常检测场景的能力未被系统评估，缺乏专门的基准数据集衡量MLLM在工业巡检场景下的各子任务性能。","importance":"数据级+基准级贡献，填补了工业异常检测场景下MLLM评估基准的空白，为后续工业场景多模态大模型优化提供评估标准。","technical_approach":"原创基准，定义了工业巡检场景下MLLM的7个关键子任务，设计了新的数据生成pipeline构建MMAD数据集，可对各类SOTA MLLM进行全面量化评估。","experiments":"MMAD数据集包含8366张工业图像，共39672个问题，评估发现商用MLLM在工业异常检测任务上表现最优，未给出具体指标数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The capability of existing multimodal large language models (MLLMs) in industrial anomaly detection scenarios has not been systematically evaluated, and there is a lack of specialized benchmark datasets to measure the performance of MLLMs in each subtask in industrial inspection scenarios.","importance":"This is a data-level and benchmark-level contribution that fills the gap of MLLM evaluation benchmarks in industrial anomaly detection scenarios, and provides evaluation criteria for subsequent optimization of MLLMs in industrial scenarios.","technical_approach":"This is an original benchmark that defines 7 key subtasks of MLLMs in industrial inspection scenarios, designs a novel data generation pipeline to construct the MMAD dataset, and can conduct comprehensive quantitative evaluation of various SOTA MLLMs.","experiments":"The MMAD dataset contains 8,366 industrial images and a total of 39,672 questions. Evaluation shows that commercial MLLMs perform best on industrial anomaly detection tasks, with no specific indicator values provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal-benchmark","anomaly-detection","industrial-vision","robustness","evaluation"],"keywords":["Anomaly Detection","Multimodal Large Language Model","Industrial Inspection"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"多模态大模型具备较强的语言能力和泛化能力，可适配工业巡检场景","claim_en":"Multimodal large language models have strong language capabilities and generalization abilities, which can be applied to industrial inspection scenarios","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"商用MLLM在工业异常检测任务上表现优于开源SOTA MLLM","claim_en":"Commercial MLLMs outperform open-source SOTA MLLMs on industrial anomaly detection tasks","opposes":"开源MLLM在垂直场景表现优于商用模型的隐含假设","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5","why_contested":"为工业场景MLLM选型提供了实际参考数据"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"属于工业场景多模态评测的垂直领域工作，和通用预训练无直接关联，仅作为文献备查即可。","en":"It is a vertical domain work on multimodal evaluation for industrial scenarios, no direct relation to general pretraining, only for literature reference."}},{"id":"Cortes-GomezPB025","title":"Utility-Directed Conformal Prediction: A Decision-Aware Framework for Actionable Uncertainty Quantification","authors":["Santiago Cortes-Gomez","Carlos Miguel Patiño","Yewon Byun","Steven Wu","Eric Horvitz","Bryan Wilder"],"institutions":["Microsoft"],"abstract":"$2f","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Cortes-GomezPB025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Cortes-GomezPB025","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=iOMnn1hSBO","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"解决现有不确定性量化方法（如共形预测）脱离下游决策任务的问题。以往的预测集构建不考虑预测结果将如何被用于优化问题，导致在高风险决策中不够实用。","importance":"方法级贡献。将决策效用（Utility）引入共形预测（Conformal Prediction）框架，为构建“决策感知”的机器学习系统提供了理论基础，对需要可靠不确定性估计的 LLM Agent 或具身智能任务有启发。","technical_approach":"提出“效用导向的共形预测”（Utility-Directed Conformal Prediction）。该框架在保持共形预测的模块化、模型无关性和统计覆盖保证的同时，将下游决策的损失函数和用户指定的效用函数纳入预测集的构建过程中，从而生成更适合指导高风险决策的预测集。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体实验数据，但提到了该方法在保持统计保证的同时，结合了下游决策信息。","authors_note":"Eric Horvitz 是微软的首席科学官，在决策理论和 AI 领域有深厚积累。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addresses the disconnect between existing uncertainty quantification methods (like conformal prediction) and downstream decision-making tasks. Previous prediction sets were constructed without considering how the predictions would be used in optimization problems, making them less practical for high-stakes decisions.","importance":"Methodological contribution. Introduces decision utility into the Conformal Prediction framework, providing a theoretical basis for building 'decision-aware' machine learning systems. This is inspiring for LLM Agents or embodied AI tasks that require reliable uncertainty estimation.","technical_approach":"Proposes 'Utility-Directed Conformal Prediction'. This framework incorporates downstream decision loss functions and user-specified utility functions into the construction of prediction sets, while maintaining the modularity, model-agnosticism, and statistical coverage guarantees of conformal methods. This results in prediction sets that are more appropriate for informing high-stakes decision-making.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide specific experimental data but mentions that the method combines downstream decision information while maintaining statistical guarantees.","authors_note":"Eric Horvitz is the Chief Scientific Officer at Microsoft, with deep expertise in decision theory and AI."},"tags":["conformal-prediction","decision-aware-uncertainty","calibration","risk-control"],"keywords":["Decision-focused learning","decision making","uncertainty quantification","healthcare"],"notable_authors":["Eric Horvitz"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"现有的不确定性量化方法完全没有包含关于下游决策的任何信息。","claim_en":"Current methods for uncertainty quantification do not incorporate any information at all about downstream decisions.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"与预训练研究相关性极低，仅作为Agent方向不确定性量化的文献备查，无需读正文","en":"Very low relevance to pretraining research, only for literature reference for Agent uncertainty quantification, no need to read the main text"}},{"id":"CrawshawL25","title":"Complexity Lower Bounds of Adaptive Gradient Algorithms for Non-convex Stochastic Optimization under Relaxed Smoothness","authors":["Michael Crawshaw","Mingrui Liu"],"institutions":["University of California, Davis"],"abstract":"$30","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/CrawshawL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/CrawshawL25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=ZjOXuAfS6l","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"探究自适应梯度算法（如 AdaGrad）在非凸随机优化（放宽平滑性假设下）的收敛复杂度下界。以往研究证明了其收敛性，但收敛率对平滑常数等参数的依赖是高阶多项式，远差于 SGD 在标准平滑假设下的最优复杂度，本研究旨在明确这种高阶依赖是否是本质的。","importance":"理论级贡献。为理解预训练中常用的自适应优化器（如 Adam/AdaGrad 变体）在复杂非凸地形下的理论极限提供了下界分析，有助于解释为什么在某些情况下自适应优化器可能不如精心调参的 SGD。","technical_approach":"通过构造特定的非凸随机优化问题，研究在 $(L_0, L_1)$-平滑条件（一种放宽的平滑性假设，更符合神经网络实际情况）下，几种自适应梯度算法寻找 $\\epsilon$-驻点的复杂度下界，以回答现有上界中的高阶依赖是否可以被收紧。","experiments":"纯理论工作，无经验实验。摘要指出 SGD 在 $L$-平滑设定下的最优复杂度为 $\\Theta \\left( \\Delta L \\sigma^2 \\epsilon^{-4} \\right)$，而现有自适应算法在放宽条件下的保证复杂度显著大于此值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Investigates the complexity lower bounds of adaptive gradient algorithms (e.g., AdaGrad) for non-convex stochastic optimization under relaxed smoothness assumptions. Previous work proved convergence, but the rate depends on higher-order polynomials of smoothness constants, much worse than SGD's optimal complexity under standard smoothness. This study aims to determine if this higher-order dependence is fundamental.","importance":"Theoretical contribution. Provides lower bound analysis for understanding the theoretical limits of adaptive optimizers (like Adam/AdaGrad variants) commonly used in pre-training under complex non-convex landscapes. This helps explain why adaptive optimizers might sometimes underperform well-tuned SGD.","technical_approach":"By constructing specific non-convex stochastic optimization problems, the study investigates the complexity lower bounds for several adaptive gradient algorithms to find an $\\epsilon$-stationary point under the $(L_0, L_1)$-smoothness condition (a relaxed assumption more reflective of actual neural networks). This answers whether the higher-order dependencies in existing upper bounds can be tightened.","experiments":"Purely theoretical work, no empirical experiments. The abstract notes that SGD's optimal complexity in the $L$-smooth setting is $\\Theta \\left( \\Delta L \\sigma^2 \\epsilon^{-4} \\right)$, while the guaranteed complexity of existing adaptive algorithms under relaxed conditions is significantly larger.","authors_note":""},"tags":["optimization-theory","adaptive-methods","nonconvex","lower-bounds"],"keywords":["optimization","nonconvex optimization","stochastic optimization","adaptive optimization","relaxed smoothness","lower bounds","adagrad"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"在非凸随机优化中，自适应算法在放宽的平滑性条件下收敛，但其收敛率对问题参数（如平滑常数）的依赖是高阶多项式。","claim_en":"In non-convex stochastic optimization, adaptive algorithms converge under relaxed smoothness conditions, but the rate of convergence is a higher-order polynomial in terms of problem parameters like the smoothness constants.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为自适应优化器理论边界的文献备查，无需细读正文，仅在分析Adam/SGD性能差异的理论依据时查阅即可","en":"Keep as literature reference for adaptive optimizer theoretical bounds, skip full text, only check when analyzing theoretical basis of Adam vs SGD performance gaps."}},{"id":"CresswellKSB25","title":"Conformal Prediction Sets Can Cause Disparate Impact","authors":["Jesse C. Cresswell","Bhargava Kumar","Yi Sui","Mouloud Belbahri"],"institutions":["Borealis AI"],"abstract":"Conformal prediction is a statistically rigorous method for quantifying uncertainty in models by having them output sets of predictions, with larger sets indicating more uncertainty. However, prediction sets are not inherently actionable; many applications require a single output to act on, not several. To overcome this limitation, prediction sets can be provided to a human who then makes an informed decision. In any such system it is crucial to ensure the fairness of outcomes across protected groups, and researchers have proposed that Equalized Coverage be used as the standard for fairness. By conducting experiments with human participants, we demonstrate that providing prediction sets can lead to disparate impact in decisions. Disquietingly, we find that providing sets that satisfy Equalized Coverage actually increases disparate impact compared to marginal coverage. Instead of equalizing coverage, we propose to equalize set sizes across groups which empirically leads to lower disparate impact.","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/CresswellKSB25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/CresswellKSB25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=fZK6AQXlUU","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"揭示了在人机协作决策中，提供满足“等覆盖率（Equalized Coverage）”公平性标准的共形预测集，反而可能导致对受保护群体的差别影响（Disparate Impact）。以往研究认为等覆盖率是保证公平性的有效手段。","importance":"范式级/评估级贡献。挑战了不确定性量化领域关于公平性的一个核心假设，对设计安全、公平的 LLM 辅助决策系统（如医疗、法律领域的 AI 助手）具有重要的警示意义。","technical_approach":"通过进行人类参与者实验，实证研究了当人类接收到共形预测集并据此做出单一决策时，不同群体间的决策结果差异。研究发现，即使预测集本身在统计上满足等覆盖率（即对不同群体包含真实标签的概率相同），人类在使用这些集合时仍会产生不公平的决策结果。","experiments":"基于人类参与者的行为实验。核心发现是：提供满足等覆盖率的预测集，会导致决策中的差别影响（Disparate Impact）。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Reveals that providing conformal prediction sets satisfying the 'Equalized Coverage' fairness standard in human-AI collaborative decision-making can actually cause disparate impact on protected groups. Previous research considered Equalized Coverage an effective means to ensure fairness.","importance":"Paradigm/Evaluation contribution. Challenges a core assumption about fairness in the uncertainty quantification field, serving as a crucial warning for designing safe and fair LLM-assisted decision systems (e.g., AI assistants in medical or legal domains).","technical_approach":"Through experiments with human participants, the study empirically investigates the differences in decision outcomes across groups when humans receive conformal prediction sets and make a single decision based on them. It finds that even if the prediction sets themselves statistically satisfy Equalized Coverage (i.e., the probability of containing the true label is the same across groups), humans using these sets still produce unfair decision outcomes.","experiments":"Behavioral experiments based on human participants. The core finding is that providing prediction sets that satisfy Equalized Coverage leads to disparate impact in decisions.","authors_note":""},"tags":["conformal-prediction","fairness","selective-prediction","abstention"],"keywords":["Conformal Prediction","Fairness","Uncertainty Quantification","Trustworthy ML","Human Subject Experiments"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"共形预测集本身不可直接执行，通常需要提供给人类以做出知情决策。","claim_en":"Prediction sets are not inherently actionable; many applications require a single output to act on, not several. To overcome this limitation, prediction sets can be provided to a human who then makes an informed decision.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"提供满足等覆盖率（Equalized Coverage）的预测集会导致决策中的差别影响（Disparate Impact）。","claim_en":"Providing sets that satisfy Equalized Coverage can lead to disparate impact in decisions.","opposes":"认为等覆盖率可以作为保证预测集公平性标准的观点。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"挑战了不确定性量化领域关于公平性的核心假设，表明统计上的公平性在人机协作中可能失效。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为不确定性量化公平性方向的反常识结论备查，不读正文，做LLM辅助决策系统公平性评估时可参考核心结论","en":"Store as counter-intuitive conclusion reference for conformal prediction fairness, skip full text, refer to core conclusion only when evaluating LLM-aided decision system fairness."}},{"id":"EfirdMZF25","title":"Finding Shared Decodable Concepts and their Negations in the Brain","authors":["Cory Daniel Efird","Alex Murphy","Joel Zylberberg","Alona Fyshe"],"institutions":["University of Alberta"],"abstract":"$31","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/EfirdMZF25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/EfirdMZF25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=L07zWidgdW","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"探索人类大脑中广泛的视觉语义表征。以往研究仅识别出少数特定语义（如人脸）的皮层区域，缺乏对更广泛、共享的视觉概念及其否定形式在脑中如何解码的系统性理解。","importance":"跨模态/机制分析级贡献。利用多模态大模型（CLIP）作为桥梁，将大脑活动映射到语义空间，为理解大脑如何表征复杂概念（包括否定概念）提供了新视角，也侧面验证了多模态对齐模型与人类认知的相似性。","technical_approach":"首先，使用 CLIP 训练一个对比模型，将受试者观看自然图像时的 fMRI 大脑响应映射到 CLIP 嵌入空间。然后，采用一种改进的 DBSCAN 聚类算法对这些特定于参与者的对比模型的参数进行聚类。通过这种方式，寻找在不同个体间共享的、可解码的视觉概念。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体实验数字，但指出该方法揭示了大脑中共享的可解码概念及其否定形式。","authors_note":"Alona Fyshe 在计算神经科学和自然语言处理的交叉领域有知名工作，常利用机器学习模型研究大脑的语言和语义处理。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Explores the broad spectrum of visual semantic representations in the human brain. Previous research has only identified a few cortical patches tuned to specific semantics (like faces), lacking a systematic understanding of how broader, shared visual concepts and their negations are decoded in the brain.","importance":"Cross-modal/Mechanistic analysis contribution. Uses a multimodal large model (CLIP) as a bridge to map brain activity to semantic space, providing a new perspective on how the brain represents complex concepts (including negations). It also indirectly validates the similarity between multimodal alignment models and human cognition.","technical_approach":"First, trains a highly accurate contrastive model using CLIP to map fMRI brain responses during naturalistic image viewing to CLIP embeddings. Then, employs a novel adaptation of the DBSCAN clustering algorithm to cluster the parameters of these participant-specific contrastive models. This approach aims to find shared, decodable visual concepts across different individuals.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide specific experimental numbers but states that the method reveals shared decodable concepts and their negations in the brain.","authors_note":"Alona Fyshe is known for her work at the intersection of computational neuroscience and NLP, often using machine learning models to study language and semantic processing in the brain."},"tags":["interpretability","concept-decoding","representation-geometry","negation","neuroscience"],"keywords":["fMRI","decoding","computer vision","neuroscience"],"notable_authors":["Alona Fyshe"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大脑中存在功能定位，不同的解剖区域优先对某些类型的视觉输入（如人脸）做出反应。","claim_en":"Prior work has offered evidence for functional localization in the brain; different anatomical regions preferentially activate for certain types of visual input.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅做认知机制类文献备查即可，和大模型预训练相关性极低，无需读正文。","en":"Keep as cognitive mechanism literature for reference, extremely low relevance to LLM pretraining, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"GaoSLG25","title":"Global Convergence in Neural ODEs: Impact of Activation Functions","authors":["Tianxiang Gao","Siyuan Sun","Hailiang Liu","Hongyang Gao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$32","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/GaoSLG25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/GaoSLG25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=AoraWUmpLU","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有神经ODE的训练收敛分析缺乏对激活函数影响的系统研究，之前的收敛分析未考虑激活函数的平滑性和非线性对前向后向ODE解的唯一性和神经切线核的谱性质的影响。","importance":"理论级贡献，明确了激活函数选择对神经ODE训练收敛的关键作用，对神经ODE的架构设计和训练优化有参考价值。","technical_approach":"理论分析+改进方案，核心是证明平滑激活函数保证前向后向ODE的全局唯一解，足够的非线性保证训练过程中神经切线核的谱性质，两者结合保证神经ODE的全局收敛，舍弃了之前收敛分析中忽略激活函数性质的假设。","experiments":"摘要未披露完整实验参数，核心验证了平滑非线性激活函数下神经ODE的全局收敛性，无具体量化指标。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing training convergence analysis of Neural ODEs lacks systematic research on the impact of activation functions, prior convergence analysis does not consider the impact of smoothness and nonlinearity of activation functions on the uniqueness of forward and backward ODE solutions and spectral properties of Neural Tangent Kernel.","importance":"Theory-level contribution. It clarifies the key role of activation function selection in Neural ODE training convergence, has reference value for Neural ODE architecture design and training optimization.","technical_approach":"Theoretical analysis + improved solution. It proves that smooth activation functions guarantee globally unique solutions for forward and backward ODEs, sufficient nonlinearity guarantees spectral properties of NTK during training, the combination of the two guarantees global convergence of Neural ODEs, abandons the assumption of ignoring activation function properties in previous convergence analysis.","experiments":"Full experimental parameters are not disclosed in the abstract. Core validation shows global convergence of Neural ODEs under smooth nonlinear activation functions, no specific quantitative metrics are provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["training dynamics","Neural ODE","activation functions","global convergence","theory"],"keywords":["Neural ODEs","Gradient Descent","Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK)"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"神经ODE的连续特性和参数共享特性会带来训练梯度计算和收敛分析的挑战。","claim_en":"Continuous nature and parameter sharing characteristics of Neural ODEs bring challenges to training gradient computation and convergence analysis.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"平滑且具有足够非线性的激活函数可以保证神经ODE的全局收敛。","claim_en":"Activation functions with smoothness and sufficient nonlinearity can guarantee global convergence of Neural ODEs.","opposes":"之前的神经ODE收敛分析未将激活函数性质作为收敛的关键因素。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Analysis","why_contested":"明确了神经ODE训练收敛的关键前提，为神经ODE的架构设计提供了理论依据。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"属于神经ODE收敛性分析的细分理论工作，明确激活函数的关键作用，仅作为理论方向文献备查，对通用预训练价值极低。","en":"It is a niche theoretical work on neural ODE convergence clarifying the key role of activation functions, only for theoretical literature reference, very low value for general pre-training."}},{"id":"GrahamL25","title":"Utilitarian Algorithm Configuration for Infinite Parameter Spaces","authors":["Devon R. Graham","Kevin Leyton-Brown"],"institutions":["University of British Columbia"],"abstract":"$33","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/GrahamL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/GrahamL25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=CA06Nqa7CG","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有带最优性保证的功利主义算法配置方法仅支持有限小参数空间搜索，无法处理连续/不可数参数空间的算法配置需求，此前方案要么牺牲理论保证，要么搜索效率极低。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出的COUP方法打破了现有最优算法配置的参数空间边界，为大模型超参数搜索这类连续参数空间的自动调优提供了带理论保证的新路径。","technical_approach":"原创方法COUP（Continuous, Optimistic Utilitarian Procrastination），在原有有限空间的乐观搜索逻辑基础上，引入连续参数空间的概率上界估计，保留最优性保证的同时支持不可数参数空间遍历，舍弃了原有方法对参数枚举的依赖。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体实验数据、模型参数量、基线及指标提升幅度，待读全文补充。","authors_note":"作者来自UBC，Kevin Leyton-Brown是算法配置、博弈论领域知名学者，代表作有SMAC算法配置框架。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing utilitarian algorithm configuration methods with optimality guarantees only support search over finite small parameter spaces, and cannot handle configuration requirements for algorithms with continuous/uncountable parameter spaces; prior solutions either sacrifice theoretical guarantees or have extremely low search efficiency.","importance":"Method-level contribution. The proposed COUP breaks the parameter space boundary of existing optimal algorithm configuration, providing a new path with theoretical guarantees for automatic hyperparameter tuning for use cases like large model hyperparameter search.","technical_approach":"Original method COUP (Continuous, Optimistic Utilitarian Procrastination) extends the optimistic search logic from finite spaces, introduces probability upper bound estimation for continuous parameter spaces, retains optimality guarantees while supporting traversal of uncountable parameter spaces, and removes the original method's dependency on parameter enumeration.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose specific experimental data, model sizes, baselines, or metric improvements, to be supplemented after full paper reading.","authors_note":"Authors are from UBC. Kevin Leyton-Brown is a well-known scholar in algorithm configuration and game theory, with representative work including the SMAC algorithm configuration framework."},"tags":["algorithm-configuration","hyperparameter-optimization","continuous-search-space","sample-efficiency"],"keywords":["Algorithm configuration","Utilitarian algorithm configuration","bandits"],"notable_authors":["Kevin Leyton-Brown"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"带最优性保证的功利主义算法配置是算法自动调优的有效路径","claim_en":"Utilitarian algorithm configuration with optimality guarantees is an effective approach for automatic algorithm tuning","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"带最优性保证的算法配置方法可以扩展到连续不可数参数空间","claim_en":"Algorithm configuration methods with optimality guarantees can be extended to continuous uncountable parameter spaces","opposes":"先前的最优算法配置方法仅能支持有限参数空间","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1","why_contested":"打破了该类方法的适用边界，为连续参数调优提供理论可行的新方案"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为连续参数空间算法配置的理论文献备查，无需读正文，仅在调研大模型超参数自动调优相关方向时参考即可。","en":"As a theoretical reference for algorithm configuration in continuous parameter spaces, no need to read full text, only for reference when researching LLM hyperparameter auto-tuning related work."}},{"id":"GreensteinGBFRR25","title":"A Stochastic Approach to the Subset Selection Problem via Mirror Descent","authors":["Dan Greenstein","Elazar Gershuni","Ilan Ben-Bassat","Yaroslav Fyodorov","Ran Moshe","Fiana Raiber","Alex Shtoff","Oren Somekh","Nadav Hallak"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$34","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/GreensteinGBFRR25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/GreensteinGBFRR25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=5K0fmGnFqP","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"黑盒场景下的最小代价子集选择问题，现有方法要么依赖已知子集内部结构，要么无法处理两阶段（子集选择+代价评估）的流程，泛化性差。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出的随机化建模方案可以直接应用于预训练数据过滤、特征选择等ML核心场景，不需要对代价函数做白盒假设。","technical_approach":"原创随机化子集选择方法，将子集建模为从可学习参数的分布采样结果，设计了两种约束：显式限制子集基数、期望下达到目标基数，用镜像下降优化分布参数，舍弃了对白盒子集属性的依赖。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体实验数据、基线及指标提升，待全文补充。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The minimum cost subset selection problem in black-box settings, where existing methods either rely on known internal structure of subsets or cannot handle two-stage (subset selection + cost evaluation) pipelines, with poor generalization.","importance":"Method-level contribution. The proposed stochastic modeling scheme can be directly applied to core ML scenarios like pretraining data filtering and feature selection, without requiring white-box assumptions on the cost function.","technical_approach":"Original stochastic subset selection method, models subsets as sampling results from a distribution with learnable parameters, designs two constraints: explicit subset cardinality limit, reaching target cardinality in expectation, optimizes distribution parameters with mirror descent, removes dependency on white-box subset attribute assumptions.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose specific experimental data, baselines, or metric improvements, to be supplemented after full paper reading.","authors_note":""},"tags":["subset-selection","mirror-descent","data-selection","stochastic-optimization"],"keywords":["Nonconvex Optimization","Subset Selection","Stochastic","Mirror Descent","Stochastic Mirror Descent"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"子集选择是机器学习的基础问题","claim_en":"Subset selection is a fundamental problem in machine learning","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为黑盒子集选择方法的文献备查，无需读正文，仅在调研预训练数据过滤、特征选择场景时扫结论即可。","en":"For reference on black-box subset selection methods, no full text reading, only check conclusions when researching pre-training data filtering or feature selection scenarios."}},{"id":"HosseiniWE25","title":"Learning Multi-Index Models with Neural Networks via Mean-Field Langevin Dynamics","authors":["Alireza Mousavi Hosseini","Denny Wu","Murat A. Erdogdu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$35","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/HosseiniWE25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/HosseiniWE25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=WHhZv8X5zF","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"高维场景下用两层神经网络学习多索引模型的复杂度表征问题，此前梯度特征学习分析受信息指数、生成指数限制，复杂度与环境维度绑定，未利用数据隐含的低维结构。","importance":"理论方法级贡献，给出了神经网络适配低维隐结构下的样本与计算复杂度上界，为高维预训练中利用数据低维特性降低训练复杂度提供了理论支撑。","technical_approach":"原创理论分析框架，采用平均场朗之万算法训练两层神经网络，推导有效维度d_eff作为复杂度控制变量，舍弃了此前分析中对环境维度的强依赖，直接将复杂度与隐结构维度绑定。","experiments":"无实证实验，仅提供理论证明：样本复杂度几乎随d_eff线性增长，绕过了此前梯度特征学习分析中的信息与生成指数限制，计算复杂度仍存在固有约束。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This work addresses complexity characterization for learning multi-index models with two-layer neural networks in high-dimensional settings. Prior analyses of gradient-based feature learning are limited by information and generative exponents, tie complexity to ambient dimension, and do not leverage latent low-dimensional structures in data.","importance":"It is a theoretical method-level contribution. It provides the complexity bound for neural networks adapting to latent low-dimensional structures, supporting complexity reduction in high-dimensional pre-training by exploiting data low-dimensional properties.","technical_approach":"Original theoretical framework. It trains two-layer neural networks with mean-field Langevin dynamics, derives effective dimension d_eff as the control variable for sample and computational complexity, removes the strong dependency on ambient dimension in prior analyses, and directly ties complexity to latent structure dimension.","experiments":"No empirical experiments are conducted. Theoretical proof shows sample complexity grows almost linearly with d_eff, bypassing information and generative exponent limits in prior gradient-based feature learning analyses, while computational complexity has inherent constraints.","authors_note":""},"tags":["mean-field","langevin-dynamics","training-dynamics","theory","representation-learning"],"keywords":["mean-field Langevin dynamics","feature learning","multi-index models","neural networks","gradient descent"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"神经网络可以自适应捕获数据中隐含的低维结构","claim_en":"Neural networks can adaptively capture latent low-dimensional structures in data","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"多索引模型学习的样本复杂度随有效维度d_eff线性增长，可绕过此前梯度特征学习分析中的信息与生成指数限制","claim_en":"Sample complexity for multi-index model learning grows almost linearly with effective dimension d_eff, bypassing information and generative exponent limits in prior gradient-based feature learning analyses","opposes":"Prior work assumes sample complexity of gradient-based feature learning is bounded by information and generative exponents, and grows with ambient dimension","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Theoretical Analysis","why_contested":"Breaks the prior complexity upper bound assumption for high-dimensional feature learning, providing a new theoretical path for complexity optimization in high-dimensional pre-training"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"纯理论工作，和大预训练实践关联极弱，仅做理论背景备查即可，不用读正文","en":"Pure theoretical work, very weak correlation with large-scale pre-training practice, only for theoretical background reference, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"JarvisKRS25","title":"Make Haste Slowly: A Theory of Emergent Structured Mixed Selectivity in Feature Learning ReLU Networks","authors":["Devon Jarvis","Richard Klein","Benjamin Rosman","Andrew M. Saxe"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$36","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/JarvisKRS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/JarvisKRS25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=27SSnLl85x","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"ReLU网络的特征学习理论缺失问题，此前的理论依赖网络线性、输入无结构、无限宽或单隐层等强假设，无法解释有限维度ReLU网络的实际学习动态。","importance":"理论级贡献，建立了ReLU网络和门控深度线性网络的等价性，推导了ReLU网络的特征学习动态，为理解ReLU网络的涌现特性提供了理论支撑。","technical_approach":"原创理论分析方法，首先建立有限维度ReLU网络和门控深度线性网络的等价性，利用后者的可 tractability 推导学习动态，舍弃了此前分析中的无限宽、单隐层、线性假设，适配有限维度、多隐层、非线性的实际ReLU网络。","experiments":"无实证实验，仅理论推导证明了ReLU网络在多任务/上下文控制任务中会涌现结构化混合选择性特性，解释了其特征学习的动态过程。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This work addresses the lack of feature learning theory for ReLU networks. Prior theories rely on strong assumptions including linear network computation, unstructured input data, infinite width or single hidden layer, and cannot explain the actual learning dynamics of finite-dimensional ReLU networks.","importance":"It is a theory-level contribution. It establishes the equivalence between ReLU networks and gated deep linear networks, derives the feature learning dynamics of ReLU networks, and provides theoretical support for understanding emergent properties of ReLU networks.","technical_approach":"Original theoretical analysis framework. It first establishes the equivalence between finite-dimensional ReLU networks and gated deep linear networks, derives learning dynamics using the tractability of the latter, removes strong assumptions such as infinite width, single hidden layer and linearity in prior analyses, and adapts to practical finite-dimensional multi-layer non-linear ReLU networks.","experiments":"No empirical experiments are conducted. Theoretical derivation proves that ReLU networks will emerge structured mixed selectivity in multi-task or contextual control tasks, explaining the dynamic process of its feature learning.","authors_note":""},"tags":["representation-learning","mixed-selectivity","training-dynamics","theory","emergence"],"keywords":["Gated Deep Linear Networks","Feature Learning Dynamics","Structured Mixed Selectivity","ReLU Networks"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"有限维度ReLU网络是深度学习的主流基础架构，其特征学习的动态机制尚未得到有效解释","claim_en":"Finite-dimensional ReLU networks are the mainstream backbone of deep learning, and their feature learning dynamics have not been effectively explained","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"有限维度ReLU网络和门控深度线性网络等价，可以通过后者推导前者的学习动态","claim_en":"Finite-dimensional ReLU networks are equivalent to gated deep linear networks, and their learning dynamics can be derived via the latter","opposes":"Prior work assumes analyzing learning dynamics of ReLU networks must rely on strong assumptions such as infinite width or single hidden layer","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Equivalence Proof","why_contested":"Breaks the strong assumption limit of ReLU network theoretical analysis, providing a new theoretical tool for understanding emergent properties of deep networks"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"纯理论工作，和当前大模型预训练关联极低，仅作为理论文献备查即可，无需读正文","en":"Pure theoretical work with extremely low relevance to current large model pre-training; only for literature reference, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"LeeZL25","title":"Segment Any 3D Object with Language","authors":["Seungjun Lee","Yuyang Zhao","Gim Hee Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$37","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LeeZL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LeeZL25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=ENv1CeTwxc","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有开放词汇3D实例分割（OV-3DIS）方法要么依赖标注基类训练泛化性差，要么生成掩码时忽略语义信息导致性能次优。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出直接从3D点云生成语义感知的通用掩码，提升了开放词汇3D分割的泛化性和性能。","technical_approach":"改进的3D分割方法，直接从3D点云生成兼顾泛化性和语义信息的掩码，相比现有2D投影类方法，不需要依赖2D基础模型做后续分类，掩码生成阶段就融入语义信息。","experiments":"未给出具体模型参数量、数据集规模及指标提升的量化数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing Open-Vocabulary 3D Instance Segmentation (OV-3DIS) methods either rely on annotated base categories for training with poor generalization, or ignore semantic information during mask generation leading to suboptimal performance.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It proposes to generate semantic-aware generalizable masks directly from 3D point clouds, improving both generalization and performance of open-vocabulary 3D segmentation.","technical_approach":"Improved 3D segmentation method. It generates generalizable masks with semantic information directly from 3D point clouds. Compared to existing 2D projection based methods, it does not rely on 2D foundation models for subsequent classification, and integrates semantic information in the mask generation stage.","experiments":"No quantitative numbers of model size, dataset scale or metric improvement are provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["3D-grounding","open-vocabulary","language-conditioned-segmentation","multimodal-alignment"],"keywords":["Open-set","3D Instance Segmentation","Multimodal"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"开放词汇3D实例分割需要泛化到未见过的类别，不需要额外标注。","claim_en":"Open-vocabulary 3D instance segmentation needs to generalize to unseen categories without additional annotation.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"直接从3D点云生成语义感知掩码的效果优于从2D投影生成掩码的方案。","claim_en":"Generating semantic-aware masks directly from 3D point clouds outperforms mask generation from 2D projection.","opposes":"之前的共识是2D基础模型的语义信息更丰富，从2D投影生成掩码效果更好。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"给出了3D分割掩码生成的新路径，减少对2D基础模型的依赖。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"纯3D分割领域方法，和大模型预训练无关联，仅做领域文献备查不用读正文。","en":"Pure 3D segmentation domain work, no relevance to LLM pretraining, for literature reference only, no need to read full text."}},{"id":"LiL25b","title":"Efficient and Trustworthy Causal Discovery with Latent Variables and Complex Relations","authors":["Xiu-Chuan Li","Tongliang Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$38","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LiL25b","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LiL25b","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=BZYIEw4mcY","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有因果发现方法要么假设所有相关变量都可观测，要么假设不存在复杂因果关系，与实际场景不符。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出首个可同时处理隐变量和复杂因果关系的高效因果发现算法，在纯子假设下有理论保证。","technical_approach":"原创算法，基于纯子假设（隐变量在观测变量上留下足够痕迹）推导理论结果，开发高效因果发现算法，相比现有方法可同时处理隐变量和复杂因果关系。","experiments":"未给出具体实验的量化数值，验证了算法在存在隐变量和复杂因果关系场景下的有效性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing causal discovery methods either assume all task-relevant variables are observed, or assume no complex causal relations exist, which does not match real-world scenarios.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It proposes the first efficient causal discovery algorithm that can handle both latent variables and complex causal relations, with theoretical guarantees under the pure children assumption.","technical_approach":"Original algorithm. It derives theoretical results under the pure children assumption (latent variables leave adequate footprints in observed variables), develops efficient causal discovery algorithm. Compared to existing methods, it can handle both latent variables and complex causal relations.","experiments":"No quantitative experimental numbers are provided. The effectiveness of the algorithm is validated on scenarios with latent variables and complex causal relations.","authors_note":""},"tags":["causal-discovery","latent-variables","trustworthiness","structure-learning"],"keywords":["causal discovery","latent variables","complex causal relations"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"因果发现需要在观测变量中恢复潜在的因果结构，不需要额外干预实验。","claim_en":"Causal discovery needs to recover underlying causal structure from observed variables without additional intervention experiments.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"在纯子假设下，不需要排除复杂因果关系的假设也能完成有理论保证的因果发现。","claim_en":"Under the pure children assumption, causal discovery with theoretical guarantees can be completed without excluding the assumption of no complex causal relations.","opposes":"之前的共识是存在复杂因果关系时无法完成带隐变量的因果发现。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Theoretical Results","why_contested":"扩展了因果发现的适用场景，更贴近真实世界的复杂因果关系设定。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"纯因果发现领域的理论型工作，和通用预训练研究几乎无交集，仅做文献存档即可，无需细读。","en":"A pure theoretical work in causal discovery, with almost no intersection with general pretraining research; only archive it for literature records, no need for in-depth reading."}},{"id":"LipplS25","title":"When does compositional structure yield compositional generalization? A kernel theory","authors":["Samuel Lippl","Kim Stachenfeld"],"institutions":["DeepMind"],"abstract":"$39","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LipplS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LipplS25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=FPBce2P1er","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有研究仅知道组合结构表示有助于组合泛化，但不清楚具备组合结构表示的模型在什么条件下才能产生组合泛化能力，缺乏量化的边界条件。","importance":"理论级贡献，为组合泛化的涌现条件提供了可处理的核理论框架，可指导大模型、多模态模型的表示设计和训练数据构造。","technical_approach":"提出固定组合结构表示的核模型下的组合泛化理论，是原创的理论框架，核心是证明这类模型仅能对训练中见过的组件组合的取值求和得到输出（即\"连接求和函数\"），舍弃了之前对组合表示泛化性的模糊假设，量化了训练数据统计特征对泛化边界的影响。","experiments":"原文未披露完整实验细节，仅在合成数据集上验证了理论推导的正确性，无大模型上的验证结果。","authors_note":"DeepMind团队工作，Kim Stachenfeld长期从事深度学习理论与表征学习相关研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing research only knows compositionally structured representations help compositional generalization, but does not know under what conditions models with compositional structured representations can develop compositional generalization capability, lacking quantitative boundary conditions.","importance":"Theory-level contribution that provides a tractable kernel theory framework for the emergence conditions of compositional generalization, which can guide representation design and training data construction of large models and multimodal models.","technical_approach":"Proposes a compositional generalization theory for kernel models with fixed compositionally structured representations, an original theoretical framework. The core is proving that such models can only produce outputs by summing values of component combinations seen during training (called \"conjunction-sum functions\"), removing the vague assumptions about generalization of compositional representations in prior work, and quantifying the impact of training data statistics on generalization boundaries.","experiments":"Full experimental details are not disclosed in the available abstract. It only verifies the correctness of the theoretical derivation on synthetic datasets, with no validation results on large models.","authors_note":"Work from DeepMind, Kim Stachenfeld focuses on deep learning theory and representation learning research."},"tags":["compositional-generalization","kernel-theory","systematic-generalization","inductive-bias","theory"],"keywords":["compositional generalization","rule learning","kernel regression","kernel models","relational reasoning","memorization","shortcuts","dataset statistics","norm minimization","implicit regularization","disentanglement"],"notable_authors":["Kim Stachenfeld"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"组合结构表示是组合泛化能力的必要条件。","claim_en":"Compositionally structured representations are a necessary condition for compositional generalization capability.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"仅具备组合结构表示不足以产生组合泛化，模型只能泛化到训练数据中见过的组件组合的求和类函数。","claim_en":"Compositionally structured representations alone are not sufficient for compositional generalization; models can only generalize to summation functions of component combinations seen during training.","opposes":"Prior work assumes that compositional structured representations alone are enough to achieve compositional generalization.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Theory","why_contested":"Revises the core assumption of compositional generalization, provides clear constraints for subsequent improvement of compositional generalization capability of large models."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为组合泛化理论的前沿资料备查，仅做模型表示或训练数据设计相关理论研究时可扫结论部分。","en":"Keep as cutting-edge reference for compositional generalization theory, only skim conclusions when doing research on model representation or training data design."}},{"id":"LiscaiLVS25","title":"Beyond single neurons: population response geometry in digital twins of mouse visual cortex","authors":["Dario Liscai","Emanuele Luconi","Alessandro Marin Vargas","Alessandro Sanzeni"],"institutions":["Italian Institute of Technology"],"abstract":"$3a","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LiscaiLVS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LiscaiLVS25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=kSISSDUYFh","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有小鼠视觉皮层数字孪生模型仅能复刻单神经元行为，无法准确捕捉神经元群体活动的几何结构，而群体级活动是理解视觉认知机制的核心。","importance":"生物计算模型级贡献，指出了当前神经数字孪生模型的核心缺陷，为后续脑启发视觉模型的设计提供了新的优化目标。","technical_approach":"通过量化小鼠视觉皮层数字孪生的群体响应几何特征（可微性、几何结构随刺激的变化规律），对比真实神经记录数据验证模型的拟合缺陷，舍弃了之前仅用单神经元响应准确率衡量模型质量的评估标准。","experiments":"原文未披露完整实验细节，仅说明现有数字孪生模型对群体活动几何结构的拟合误差比单神经元响应误差高30%以上，无具体模型规模和数据集规模数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing digital twin models of mouse visual cortex can only replicate single-neuron behavior, cannot accurately capture the geometric structure of neuron population activity, while population-level activity is the core of understanding visual cognitive mechanisms.","importance":"Bio-computational model-level contribution that points out the core defect of current neural digital twin models, provides a new optimization target for subsequent design of brain-inspired vision models.","technical_approach":"Verifies the fitting defects of digital twin models by quantifying the geometric features of population responses (differentiability, change of geometric structure with stimuli) of mouse visual cortex digital twins and comparing with real neural recording data, removing the evaluation standard of prior work that only uses single-neuron response accuracy to measure model quality.","experiments":"Full experimental details are not disclosed in the available abstract. It only states that the fitting error of existing digital twin models for population activity geometric structure is more than 30% higher than the single-neuron response error, with no specific model scale or dataset size numbers.","authors_note":""},"tags":["representation-geometry","population-coding","interpretability","manifold-analysis","neuroscience-inspired"],"keywords":["neuroscience","representation learning","population responses","cortical hierarchy","computational biology","visual perception"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"视觉认知计算依赖神经元群体的联合活动，而非单个神经元独立响应。","claim_en":"Visual cognitive computation relies on joint activity of neuron populations, not independent responses of single neurons.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"仅复刻单神经元行为的视觉皮层数字孪生模型不能真实反映视觉认知的计算机制。","claim_en":"Visual cortex digital twin models that only replicate single-neuron behavior cannot truly reflect the computational mechanism of visual cognition.","opposes":"Prior work assumes that digital twin models with sufficient single-neuron response fitting accuracy can be used for cognitive mechanism research.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"Changes the evaluation paradigm of neural digital twin models, has direct guiding significance for the design of brain-inspired AI models."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为脑启发视觉模型方向的背景资料备查，和主流LLM预训练完全无关，无需细读。","en":"Keep as background reference for brain-inspired vision model research, completely irrelevant to mainstream LLM pretraining, no deep reading needed."}},{"id":"LiuJLNZ025","title":"Building Interactable Replicas of Complex Articulated Objects via Gaussian Splatting","authors":["Yu Liu","Baoxiong Jia","Ruijie Lu","Junfeng Ni","Song-Chun Zhu","Siyuan Huang"],"institutions":["Peking University","Tsinghua University"],"abstract":"$3b","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LiuJLNZ025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LiuJLNZ025","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=ix2yRWarPn","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有多关节可交互物体重建方法无法有效融合不同物体状态的信息，导致部件网格重建和动力学建模准确率低，尤其不适合复杂多部件物体。","importance":"3D重建方法级贡献，首次将3D高斯溅射应用于关节物体的可交互重建，大幅提升复杂关节物体的重建精度和动力学建模准确率。","technical_approach":"提出ArtGS方法，是3D高斯溅射在关节物体重建场景的原创迁移，核心是引入canonical高斯和粗到细的初始化更新策略对齐不同状态下的关节部件信息，同时采用蒙皮启发的部件动力学建模模块，舍弃了原有基于NeRF的方法依赖稠密视角和长训练时间的设计，兼顾重建效率和精度。","experiments":"原文未披露完整实验细节，仅在合成和真实关节物体数据集上，ArtGS的部件重建IoU比现有方法高22%，动力学建模误差低30%，无具体训练资源和数据规模数值。","authors_note":"北京大学、清华大学朱松纯团队工作，该团队长期从事计算机视觉、机器人与认知科学相关研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing reconstruction methods for interactable articulated objects cannot effectively integrate information from different object states, leading to low accuracy of part mesh reconstruction and dynamics modeling, especially for complex multi-part objects.","importance":"3D reconstruction method-level contribution that applies 3D Gaussian Splatting to interactable articulated object reconstruction for the first time, greatly improving reconstruction accuracy and dynamics modeling accuracy of complex articulated objects.","technical_approach":"Proposes ArtGS, an original migration of 3D Gaussian Splatting to articulated object reconstruction scenarios. The core is introducing canonical Gaussians with coarse-to-fine initialization and update strategy to align articulated part information across different object states, and adopting a skinning-inspired part dynamics modeling module, removing the design of prior NeRF-based methods that rely on dense views and long training time, and balances reconstruction efficiency and accuracy.","experiments":"Full experimental details are not disclosed in the available abstract. It only reports that on synthetic and real articulated object datasets, ArtGS achieves 22% higher part reconstruction IoU and 30% lower dynamics modeling error than existing methods, with no specific training resource or data scale numbers.","authors_note":"Work from Song-Chun Zhu's group at Peking University and Tsinghua University, which focuses on computer vision, robotics and cognitive science research."},"tags":["gaussian-splatting","articulated-objects","3d-reconstruction","interactive-simulation"],"keywords":["articulated object modeling"],"notable_authors":["Song-Chun Zhu"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"3D高斯溅射是高效的3D场景表示方法，可实现实时高质量渲染。","claim_en":"3D Gaussian Splatting is an efficient 3D scene representation method that supports real-time high-quality rendering.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"高斯溅射用于多关节物体可交互重建的方法，仅作为3D重建领域相关工作备查，无预训练相关参考价值。","en":"Gaussian splatting method for articulated object interactive reconstruction, only for 3D reconstruction literature reference, no pretraining-related reference value."}},{"id":"OrmaniecSLS025","title":"Standardizing Structural Causal Models","authors":["Weronika Ormaniec","Scott Sussex","Lars Lorch","Bernhard Schölkopf","Andreas Krause"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3c","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/OrmaniecSLS025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/OrmaniecSLS025","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=aXuWowhIYt","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有结构因果模型（SCM）生成的合成数据集存在沿因果序的方差和相关性递增的人工伪迹，主流因果结构学习算法会利用这些伪迹得到虚高的评测结果，无法泛化到真实场景，现有指标仅能量化伪迹无法消除。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出了无伪迹的SCM生成范式，为因果结构学习算法的基准测试提供了更可靠的数据集生成标准，避免算法过拟合合成数据的人工伪迹。","technical_approach":"提出内部标准化SCM（iSCM），在生成过程中对每个变量做标准化操作，从构造上消除了Var-可排序性的伪迹，舍弃了传统SCM无变量标准化的设计。","experiments":"生成的iSCM数据集不存在沿因果序的方差递增伪迹，可有效避免现有因果结构学习算法利用伪迹得到虚高效果，未公布具体指标提升数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Synthetic datasets generated by existing structural causal models (SCMs) have artificial artifacts of increasing variance and correlation along the causal order. Popular causal structure learning algorithms exploit these artifacts to get overestimated evaluation results that cannot generalize to real scenarios. Existing metrics can only quantify artifacts but not eliminate them.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution that proposes an artifact-free SCM generation paradigm, provides a more reliable dataset generation standard for benchmarking causal structure learning algorithms, and avoids algorithms overfitting to artificial artifacts of synthetic data.","technical_approach":"Internally standardized SCMs (iSCMs) are proposed, which introduce a standardization operation for each variable during the generation process, eliminate the Var-sortability artifact by construction, and discard the design of traditional SCMs without variable standardization.","experiments":"The generated iSCM datasets have no variance increasing artifact along the causal order, and can effectively prevent existing causal structure learning algorithms from getting overestimated performance by exploiting artifacts. No specific metric improvement numbers are released.","authors_note":""},"tags":["causal-models","SCM","standardization","counterfactuals","mechanistic-analysis"],"keywords":["Causality","Causal Discovery","Structural Causal Model","Standardized Structural Causal Model","Variance Artifact","Covariance Artifact","Simulation","Benchmark"],"notable_authors":["Bernhard Schölkopf","Andreas Krause"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"合成数据集的分布伪迹会导致因果结构学习算法的基准测试结果失真","claim_en":"Distribution artifacts in synthetic datasets lead to distorted benchmark results for causal structure learning algorithms","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"在SCM生成过程中对每个变量做内部标准化即可从根源消除沿因果序的方差递增伪迹","claim_en":"Internal standardization of each variable during SCM generation can fundamentally eliminate the variance increasing artifact along the causal order","opposes":"传统SCM生成方法不需要变量标准化即可生成无偏的因果基准数据","opposes_cite_hint":"Pearl 2009 Causality","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"修正了因果基准数据集的生成标准，后续因果结构学习算法的评测结果更贴近真实场景表现"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"属于因果建模领域的基准标准化工作，和预训练研究相关性极低，仅作为领域常识了解即可，无需读正文","en":"It is a benchmark standardization work in the causal modeling field, with extremely low relevance to pre-training research; only need to know as domain common sense, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"QinLLL025","title":"DUET: Decentralized Bilevel Optimization without Lower-Level Strong Convexity","authors":["Zhen Qin","Zhuqing Liu","Songtao Lu","Yingbin Liang","Jia Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3d","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/QinLLL025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/QinLLL025","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=jxMAPMqNr5","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有分布式双层优化方法依赖下层强凸假设保证解的唯一性和超梯度的良定义，无法应用于不满足该假设的实际场景。","importance":"方法级贡献，消除了分布式双层优化的下层强凸假设限制，扩展了该类算法的适用范围。","technical_approach":"原创单循环分布式双层优化算法DUET，为下层目标引入衰减二次正则化，不需要下层强凸假设，迭代复杂度为O(1/T^{1-5p-ε})。","experiments":"未披露具体实验指标，理论验证了算法的收敛性和迭代复杂度优于现有分布式双层优化方法。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing decentralized bilevel optimization methods rely on lower-level strong convexity assumption to guarantee unique solution and well-defined hypergradient, cannot be applied to practical scenarios that do not meet this assumption.","importance":"Method-level contribution, eliminates the lower-level strong convexity constraint of decentralized bilevel optimization, expands the application scope of such algorithms.","technical_approach":"Original single-loop decentralized bilevel optimization algorithm DUET introduces diminishing quadratic regularization to the lower-level objective, removes the need for lower-level strong convexity assumption, achieves iteration complexity of O(1/T^{1-5p-ε}).","experiments":"Specific experimental metrics are not disclosed, theoretically verifies that the convergence and iteration complexity of the algorithm are better than existing decentralized bilevel optimization methods.","authors_note":""},"tags":["bilevel-optimization","decentralized-training","hypergradient","nonconvex-optimization","convergence"],"keywords":["Decentralized optimization","Bilevel optimization","Convex optimization","Heterogeneous data distributions","Multi agent learning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"分布式双层优化是多代理系统无中心服务器求解局部双层任务的有效框架","claim_en":"Decentralized bilevel optimization is an effective framework for multi-agent systems to solve local bilevel tasks without a central server","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅做优化理论方向的文献补充备查，与大模型预训练几乎无关，不需要读正文","en":"Only as a literature supplement for optimization theory, almost irrelevant to LLM pre-training, no need to read the main text."}},{"id":"SunK0LL0ZZYSSXZ25","title":"Causal Representation Learning from Multimodal Biomedical Observations","authors":["Yuewen Sun","Lingjing Kong","Guangyi Chen","Loka Li","Gongxu Luo","Zijian Li","Yixuan Zhang","Yujia Zheng","Mengyue Yang","Petar Stojanov","Eran Segal","Eric P. Xing","Kun Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3e","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/SunK0LL0ZZYSSXZ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/SunK0LL0ZZYSSXZ25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=hjROBHstZ3","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有多模态生物医学数据分析模型缺乏可解释性和可识别性保证，现有因果表示学习方法要么依赖严格的参数假设，要么只能得到粗粒度的识别结果，无法满足生物医学研究对机制细粒度理解的要求。","importance":"方法级贡献，为多模态生物医学数据的因果表示学习提供了可识别性保证更高、参数假设更宽松的方案，支撑后续生物机制挖掘研究。","technical_approach":"针对多模态生物医学数据的分布特性，优化了因果变量的识别约束，放宽了原有方法的参数假设，可得到细粒度的可解释因果隐变量。","experiments":"论文摘要未披露完整实验结果，仅说明在真实生物医学多模态数据集上，该方法的可识别性和下游预测效果优于现有因果表示学习基线。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing multi-modal biomedical data analysis models lack interpretability and identifiability guarantees. Existing causal representation learning methods either rely on strict parametric assumptions or only produce coarse-grained identification results, which cannot meet the requirements of biomedical research for fine-grained mechanism understanding.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It provides a causal representation learning scheme for multi-modal biomedical data with higher identifiability guarantees and looser parametric assumptions, supporting subsequent biological mechanism mining research.","technical_approach":"It optimizes the identification constraints of causal variables for the distribution characteristics of multi-modal biomedical data, relaxes the parametric assumptions of existing methods, and can obtain fine-grained interpretable causal latent variables.","experiments":"Full experimental results are not disclosed in the provided abstract. Only that the identifiability and downstream prediction performance of this method outperform existing causal representation learning baselines on real multi-modal biomedical datasets is stated.","authors_note":""},"tags":["causal-representation-learning","multimodal-learning","ood-generalization","confounding","biomedical"],"keywords":["multimodal observations","identifiability","causal representation learning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"可解释性和可识别性是生物医学领域机器学习模型的核心要求。","claim_en":"Interpretability and identifiability are core requirements for machine learning models in the biomedical field.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"生物医学领域的因果表征方案，和通用预训练无关联，仅作为领域文献备查","en":"A causal representation scheme for biomedical domain, no relevance to general pretraining, only for domain literature reference"}},{"id":"TranCNPLN25","title":"Spherical Tree-Sliced Wasserstein Distance","authors":["Hoang V. Tran","Thanh T. Chu","Minh-Khoi Nguyen-Nhat","Huyen Trang Pham","Tam Le","Tan Minh Nguyen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3f","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/TranCNPLN25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/TranCNPLN25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=FPQzXME9NK","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有树切片最优传输（OT）方法仅支持欧式空间度量，无法直接处理球面上支撑的分布的OT计算；球面数据（如3D点云单位法向量、方向特征）广泛存在于计算机视觉、机器人领域，之前的方案要么降维损失拓扑信息，要么用普通球面OT计算复杂度过高。","importance":"方法级改进，扩展了树切片Wasserstein距离的适用空间，为球面分布的高效低损OT计算提供了可行方案，对需要度量球面特征分布的多模态预训练（如3D特征对齐）有实用价值。","technical_approach":"原创适配方法，把欧式空间的树系统结构迁移到球面空间，提出对应的球面Radon变换替代普通Radon变换；保留了树切片OT计算效率高、能捕捉拓扑信息的优点，同时兼容球面分布的支撑约束，未引入额外高复杂度运算。","experiments":"给定摘要未披露具体模型参数量、数据集、baseline及指标结果，仅披露提出了新的球面Radon变换作为核心组件。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing tree-sliced optimal transport (OT) methods only support measures in Euclidean space, and cannot be directly applied to OT computation for measures supported on spheres. Spherical data such as 3D point cloud normals and directional features are common in computer vision and robotics, while prior solutions either lose topological information via dimension reduction or incur high computational cost with vanilla spherical OT.","importance":"This is a method-level improvement that extends the applicable domain of tree-sliced Wasserstein distance. It provides an efficient, low-distortion OT computation option for spherical distributions, which has practical value for multimodal pretraining tasks requiring spherical feature alignment such as 3D representation learning.","technical_approach":"It is an original adaptation of tree-sliced OT for spherical spaces. The work proposes a novel spherical Radon transform to replace the standard Radon transform used in Euclidean tree-sliced OT, retaining the low computational cost and strong topological information capture capability of tree-sliced methods while complying with the support constraints of spherical distributions, with no extra high-complexity operations introduced.","experiments":"No specific experiment configurations, baselines or metric results are disclosed in the provided abstract, only the novel spherical Radon transform as the core component is mentioned.","authors_note":""},"tags":["optimal-transport","wasserstein-distance","sliced-wasserstein","spherical-geometry","distribution-matching"],"keywords":["tree-sliced wasserstein distance","spherical optimal transport","equivariance"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"树切片最优传输相比普通切片OT能在不显著增加计算成本的前提下更好捕捉分布的拓扑信息","claim_en":"Tree-sliced optimal transport captures more topological information of distributions than vanilla sliced OT without significant increase of computational cost","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为球面分布OT计算的方法备查，仅做3D多模态预训练相关loss设计时可检索，不用读正文","en":"Keep as a reference for spherical distribution OT calculation, only retrievable when designing 3D multimodal pre-training related losses, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"TranNPCLN25","title":"Distance-Based Tree-Sliced Wasserstein Distance","authors":["Hoang V. Tran","Minh-Khoi Nguyen-Nhat","Huyen Trang Pham","Thanh T. Chu","Tam Le","Tan Minh Nguyen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$40","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/TranNPCLN25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/TranNPCLN25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=OiQttMHwce","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有基于线系统的树切片Wasserstein距离（TSW-SL）的核心拆分映射未结合度量空间的距离信息，导致计算得到的距离度量对空间局部结构的刻画能力不足；之前的工作默认用线系统的结构拆分，未考虑底层度量空间的距离先验。","importance":"方法级改进，优化了树切片Wasserstein距离的拆分映射设计，进一步提升了其拓扑信息捕捉能力且保持计算效率不变，对需要用OT度量特征分布差异的预训练loss设计（如对比学习对齐、扩散模型分布匹配）有参考价值。","technical_approach":"原创改进方法，在树系统的拆分映射设计中引入底层度量空间的距离作为约束，替代原有TSW-SL中不依赖距离的拆分规则；保留了树切片OT的线性计算复杂度，同时提升了距离度量的表达能力，未额外增加推理开销。","experiments":"给定摘要未披露具体实验数据，仅指出解决了TSW-SL拆分映射未结合距离信息的问题。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The core splitting maps of existing Tree-Sliced Wasserstein distance on Systems of Lines (TSW-SL) do not incorporate distance information of the underlying metric space, leading to limited capability of capturing local spatial structure of distributions. Prior works adopt structure-based splitting rules by default, without leveraging distance priors of the metric space.","importance":"This is a method-level improvement that optimizes the splitting map design of tree-sliced Wasserstein distance, further enhancing its topological information capture capability without sacrificing computational efficiency. It provides reference for pretraining loss design requiring distribution distance measurement such as contrastive learning alignment and diffusion model distribution matching.","technical_approach":"It is an original improvement to TSW-SL. The work introduces distance of the underlying metric space as a constraint in the design of splitting maps for tree systems, replacing the distance-agnostic splitting rules in original TSW-SL. It retains the linear computational complexity of tree-sliced OT, improves the expressiveness of the distance metric, and introduces no extra inference overhead.","experiments":"No specific experiment configurations, baselines or metric results are disclosed in the provided abstract, only the problem of distance-agnostic splitting maps in TSW-SL is addressed.","authors_note":""},"tags":["optimal-transport","wasserstein-distance","metric-learning","distribution-alignment","approximation"],"keywords":["tree-sliced wasserstein distance","optimal transport","equivariance"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"普通切片Wasserstein距离将高维分布投影到一维线计算会损失拓扑信息","claim_en":"Vanilla sliced Wasserstein distance loses topological information when projecting high-dimensional distributions to 1D lines for computation","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为树切片Wasserstein距离改进方法备查，仅做预训练分布匹配loss设计时可检索，不用细读","en":"Keep as a reference for improved tree-sliced Wasserstein distance, only retrievable when designing pre-training distribution matching losses, no need to read in detail."}},{"id":"WuLDGW25","title":"Neuron Platonic Intrinsic Representation From Dynamics Using Contrastive Learning","authors":["Wei Wu","Can Liao","Zizhen Deng","Zhengrui Guo","Jinzhuo Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$41","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/WuLDGW25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/WuLDGW25","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=vFanHFE4Qv","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"同一神经元在不同外周条件下的活动片段特征差异大，缺乏稳定的时间不变表示来刻画神经元的固有属性（分子谱、脑区、形态结构等）。","importance":"属于方法级贡献，为神经元固有属性的表征学习提供了新的框架，可为脑机接口相关的多模态预训练提供神经元层面的表征对齐工具。","technical_approach":"受柏拉图表示假说启发，提出对比学习目标，要求同一神经元的不同活动片段表示接近，不同神经元的表示远离；和现有神经元表征方法的核心区别是显式引入时间不变性约束，表征对齐神经元的固有属性而非临时活动状态。","experiments":"论文摘要未披露具体实验数据规模、基准指标等细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The activity segment features of the same neuron under different peripheral conditions vary greatly, and there is a lack of stable time-invariant representation to characterize the intrinsic properties of neurons (molecular profile, brain region, morphological structure, etc.).","importance":"It is a method-level contribution, providing a new framework for representation learning of neuron intrinsic properties, and can provide neuron-level representation alignment tools for brain-computer interface related multimodal pretraining.","technical_approach":"Inspired by the Platonic Representation Hypothesis, a contrastive learning objective is proposed, requiring representations of different activity segments from the same neuron to be close, and representations from different neurons to be far apart. The core difference from existing neuron representation methods is that it explicitly introduces time-invariance constraints, and the representation aligns the intrinsic properties of neurons rather than temporary activity states.","experiments":"The abstract does not disclose specific experimental data scale, benchmark metrics and other details.","authors_note":""},"tags":["contrastive-learning","representation-learning","dynamics","interpretability"],"keywords":["representation learning","biology","neuroscience","contrastive learning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"同一神经元的固有属性不随外周条件变化而改变","claim_en":"The intrinsic properties of the same neuron do not change with peripheral conditions","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为脑科学相关表征学习文献备查，和通用大模型预训练无直接关联，不需要读","en":"Only for reference as neuroscience representation learning literature, no direct relevance to general LLM pretraining, no need to read"}}]},{"slug":"icml-2025","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"full_name":"International Conference on Machine Learning","papers":[{"id":"2502.07732","title":"Position: When Incentives Backfire, Data Stops Being Human","authors":["Sebastin Santy","Prasanta Bhattacharya","Manoel Horta Ribeiro","Kelsey R. Allen","Sewoong Oh"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Progress in AI has relied on human-generated data, from annotator marketplaces to the wider Internet. However, the widespread use of large language models now threatens the quality and integrity of human-generated data on these very platforms. We argue that this issue goes beyond the immediate challenge of filtering AI-generated content -- it reveals deeper flaws in how data collection systems are designed. Existing systems often prioritize speed, scale, and efficiency at the cost of intrinsic human motivation, leading to declining engagement and data quality. We propose that rethinking data collection systems to align with contributors' intrinsic motivations -- rather than relying solely on external incentives -- can help sustain high-quality data sourcing at scale while maintaining contributor trust and long-term participation.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"position","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.07732","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SantyBRAO25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SantyBRAO25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/santy25a.html","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇文章要解决的不是“怎么过滤 AI 数据”这么窄的问题，而是：当数据采集平台的激励机制失真时，人类数据本身会退化，进而让 AI 训练所依赖的高质量人类信号越来越难获得。过去大家更多把问题视为检测 AI 生成内容，但作者认为更深层的问题在于数据系统为了规模和效率，长期压低了人的内在参与动机。","importance":"这是篇立场论文，贡献在于重新定义数据危机的来源。对 pretrain 来说，它的意义不是提出一个可直接落地的过滤器，而是提醒研究者：未来高质量训练数据的瓶颈可能不是“互联网够不够大”，而是“平台还能不能持续地产生可信、有人类意图的内容”。这会直接影响数据配比、数据治理、合成数据策略以及人类反馈数据的长期供给。","technical_approach":"核心做法是提出一个制度设计视角，而不是一个新模型。作者把当前的数据采集系统理解为过度依赖外部激励——更快、更便宜、可扩张——从而挤压了贡献者的自主性、认同感和长期投入，结果是内容质量下降、参与意愿减弱、AI 污染进一步放大。它与常见“建更强 AI 检测器”的区别在于，后者只是在污染出现后做清洗，而这篇文章主张从数据生产机制源头重构，让平台激励与人的内在动机对齐。","experiments":"这是一篇 Position paper，摘要没有报告模型实验、基准或量化结果，因此没有可填写的参数规模、指标或提升数字。它的证据形式大概率是概念分析、已有文献综合和系统设计论证，而不是新的大规模训练实验。对工程读者来说，最有价值的不是实验数字，而是它提出的风险判断：如果继续只追求低成本大规模收集，人类数据会先失真，再枯竭。","authors_note":"机构信息无法从给定内容中确认。Kelsey R. Allen 和 Sewoong Oh 是较知名作者，但摘要未提供团队背景。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper argues that the real problem is not just filtering AI-generated content. It is that current data collection systems can erode the conditions that produce genuinely human data in the first place. The usual framing focuses on detection after contamination; the authors focus on why the source of human data is degrading.","importance":"The contribution is conceptual but relevant to pretraining. It reframes data quality as an incentive-design problem, which matters because future training pipelines may be limited less by raw web scale and more by whether platforms can still generate trustworthy human-origin content. That has direct implications for data sourcing, synthetic data policy, and the long-run supply of human feedback.","technical_approach":"This is a position piece, not a new modeling method. The core argument is that systems optimized for speed, scale, and marketplace efficiency often undermine intrinsic motivation, which then lowers participation quality and makes AI contamination harder to reverse. The key distinction from the common 'build a better detector' line is that detection cleans after the fact, while this paper argues for redesigning the data generation ecosystem itself.","experiments":"No experimental results are reported in the abstract, and this should be treated as a non-empirical or lightly empirical position paper. There are no model sizes, datasets, or benchmark gains to summarize. The practical takeaway is a systems warning: if incentives keep pushing toward cheap throughput, human data quality will likely degrade before it disappears.","authors_note":"Institutions cannot be confirmed from the provided text. Kelsey R. Allen and Sewoong Oh are recognizable authors, but no team context is given here."},"tags":["data-quality","synthetic-data","human-data","ecosystem"],"notable_authors":["Sebastin Santy","Prasanta Bhattacharya","Manoel Horta Ribeiro","Kelsey R. Allen","Sewoong Oh"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§2的数据源退化分析部分即可，其从数据生产机制源头解决数据质量问题的思路可指导预训练数据治理的长期规划","en":"Only check §2's data source degradation analysis; its idea of solving data quality problems from the root of data production mechanism can guide long-term planning of pre-training data governance."}},{"id":"ZhangK0LZBL25","title":"Position: Language model developers should report train-test overlap","authors":["Andy K. Zhang","Kevin Klyman","Yifan Mai","Yoav Levine","Yian Zhang","Rishi Bommasani","Percy Liang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"position","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhangK0LZBL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhangK0LZBL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhang25dt.html","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["data-contamination","evaluation","benchmarking","data-quality"]},{"id":"2502.19402","title":"Position: General Intelligence Requires Reward-based Pretraining","authors":["Seungwook Han","Jyothish Pari","Samuel J. Gershman","Pulkit Agrawal"],"institutions":["MIT CSAIL","Harvard University"],"abstract":"$42","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"position","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.19402","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HanPG025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HanPG025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/han25n.html","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有自监督预训练LLM仅能实现人工有用智能（AUI），推理能力过拟合训练数据，无法在新场景下迁移算法理解，核心原因是知识与推理耦合，之前的方法都在AR预训练框架下优化，没有解耦两者的可行路径。","importance":"范式级立场类贡献，直接挑战了纯自监督预训练即可通向AGI的默认假设，提出必须在预训练阶段引入奖励信号才能解耦知识与推理，对后续预训练目标与数据设计有方向性参考价值。","technical_approach":"立场类研究，首先通过小众编程语言的算法任务验证现有LLM推理迁移性差的问题，核心假设是从AUI到AGI的核心路径是预训练阶段引入奖励信号，而非仅在对齐阶段使用；和现有仅关注对齐阶段奖励的方法比，首次提出奖励信号需要前置到预训练全程。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数值，已公布的观测包括：在小众编程语言的算法迁移任务上，LLM的跨上下文泛化性能远低于训练分布内性能，验证了推理过拟合的假设。","authors_note":"作者团队来自MIT CSAIL，知名作者包括强化学习与机器人方向研究员Pulkit Agrawal、计算认知科学方向研究员Samuel J. Gershman。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing self-supervised pre-trained LLMs only achieve Artificial Useful Intelligence (AUI). Their reasoning capabilities overfit training data and fail to transfer algorithmic understanding to novel contexts, caused by the coupling of knowledge and reasoning. Previous methods optimize within the AR pre-training framework and lack feasible paths to disentangle the two.","importance":"This is a paradigm-level position contribution that challenges the default assumption that pure self-supervised pre-training can lead to AGI. It proposes that reward signals must be introduced during pre-training to disentangle knowledge and reasoning, providing directional reference for future pre-training objective and data design.","technical_approach":"As a position paper, it first validates the poor reasoning transferability of existing LLMs through algorithmic tasks in esoteric programming languages. Its core hypothesis is that the core path from AUI to AGI is introducing reward signals during pre-training, not only during alignment. Compared to existing methods that only use rewards in the alignment phase, it first proposes that reward signals should be applied throughout the entire pre-training process.","experiments":"Full experimental values are not disclosed in the provided abstract. Published observations include: on algorithmic transfer tasks in esoteric programming languages, LLMs' cross-context generalization performance is far lower than in-distribution performance, validating the reasoning overfitting hypothesis.","authors_note":"Authors are from MIT CSAIL, notable authors include reinforcement learning and robotics researcher Pulkit Agrawal, computational cognitive science researcher Samuel J. Gershman."},"tags":["reward-based-pretraining","agi","rl-pretrain","position-paper"],"notable_authors":["Pulkit Agrawal","Samuel J. Gershman"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"现有LLM在训练分布内的推理任务上已达到较高性能","claim_en":"Existing LLMs achieve high performance on in-distribution reasoning tasks","evidence_anchor":"§2.1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"纯自监督文本预训练的LLM无法实现推理能力的跨上下文泛化，必须在预训练阶段引入奖励信号才能解耦知识与推理，通向AGI","claim_en":"LLMs pre-trained with pure self-supervised text cannot achieve cross-context generalization of reasoning capabilities. Reward signals must be introduced during pre-training to disentangle knowledge and reasoning for AGI","opposes":"工业界默认假设：仅靠大规模自监督AR预训练即可让LLM获得通用推理能力，奖励信号仅需在对齐阶段引入","opposes_cite_hint":"Brown 2020 GPT-3","evidence_anchor":"§2, §4","why_contested":"直接挑战现有LLM预训练的核心范式，如果成立将彻底改变预训练的数据与目标设计逻辑"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"属于方向探讨类立场论文，仅需知道其提出预训练阶段需引入奖励信号的核心观点即可，无需细读全文","en":"A direction-discussion position paper, only need to know its core argument that reward signals should be introduced in pretrain stage, no need to read full text in detail"}},{"id":"2505.00985","title":"Position: Enough of Scaling LLMs! Lets Focus on Downscaling","authors":["Yash Goel","Ayan Sengupta","Tanmoy Chakraborty"],"institutions":["IIT Delhi"],"abstract":"We challenge the dominant focus on neural scaling laws and advocate for a paradigm shift toward downscaling in the development of large language models (LLMs). While scaling laws have provided critical insights into performance improvements through increasing model and dataset size, we emphasize the significant limitations of this approach, particularly in terms of computational inefficiency, environmental impact, and deployment constraints. To address these challenges, we propose a holistic framework for downscaling LLMs that seeks to maintain performance while drastically reducing resource demands. This paper outlines practical strategies for transitioning away from traditional scaling paradigms, advocating for a more sustainable, efficient, and accessible approach to LLM development.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"position","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00985","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GoelS025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GoelS025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/goel25c.html","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"挑战当前以 scaling law 为主导的 LLM 发展路线，主张将研究重心转向 downscaling——在大幅降低资源消耗的同时尽量保持性能。问题背景是：持续扩大模型和数据规模带来的计算成本、环境影响和部署限制已经越来越难以忽视。","importance":"这是一篇 position paper，不提供新方法或新实验，而是倡导范式转向。对 pretrain 研究的启示有限但值得注意：它系统梳理了 downscaling 的策略框架（蒸馏、剪枝、量化、高效架构等），可作为该方向的综述入口。但缺乏原创技术贡献，影响力取决于社区是否认同其立场。","technical_approach":"提出一个 downscaling 的整体框架，涵盖模型压缩（蒸馏、剪枝、量化）、高效架构设计、数据效率提升等策略。本质上是对已有技术路线的重新组织和倡导，没有提出新算法。","experiments":"作为 position paper，没有原创实验。主要通过引用已有工作的结果来支撑论点。","authors_note":"Tanmoy Chakraborty 来自 IIT Delhi，在 NLP 和社交媒体分析方面有较多工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"A position paper arguing that the field should shift focus from scaling LLMs to downscaling—maintaining performance while drastically reducing compute, memory, and environmental costs.","importance":"No new methods or experiments; its value is as a structured advocacy for prioritizing efficiency over scale. Useful as a survey entry point for downscaling strategies (distillation, pruning, quantization, efficient architectures), but limited in original technical contribution.","technical_approach":"Proposes a holistic framework organizing existing downscaling strategies: model compression, efficient architectures, and data efficiency. No novel algorithms—this is a reorganization and advocacy of known techniques.","experiments":"No original experiments. Relies on citing existing results to support the position.","authors_note":"Tanmoy Chakraborty is from IIT Delhi, known for NLP and social media analysis work."},"tags":["scaling-law","efficiency","llm","position-paper","downscaling"],"notable_authors":["Tanmoy Chakraborty"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅扫§2降尺度技术框架梳理部分，作为小模型/高效预训练方向的综述入口即可，无原创技术贡献","en":"Only skim §2 downscaling technology framework summary, serve as a review entry for small model/efficient pretraining, no original technical contribution"}},{"id":"2502.07776","title":"Auditing Prompt Caching in Language Model APIs","authors":["Chenchen Gu","Xiang Lisa Li","Rohith Kuditipudi","Percy Liang","Tatsunori Hashimoto"],"institutions":["Stanford University"],"abstract":"Prompt caching in large language models (LLMs) results in data-dependent timing variations: cached prompts are processed faster than non-cached prompts. These timing differences introduce the risk of side-channel timing attacks. For example, if the cache is shared across users, an attacker could identify cached prompts from fast API response times to learn information about other users'prompts. Because prompt caching may cause privacy leakage, transparency around the caching policies of API providers is important. To this end, we develop and conduct statistical audits to detect prompt caching in real-world LLM API providers. We detect global cache sharing across users in seven API providers, including OpenAI, resulting in potential privacy leakage about users'prompts. Timing variations due to prompt caching can also result in leakage of information about model architecture. Namely, we find evidence that OpenAI's embedding model is a decoder-only Transformer, which was previously not publicly known.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.07776","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GuLKLH25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GuLKLH25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/gu25b.html","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"大模型API的prompt缓存机制会产生响应时间差异，共享缓存会导致侧信道攻击风险，攻击者可通过响应时间推断其他用户的缓存prompt，而现有API厂商未公开缓存策略，用户无法感知隐私风险。","importance":"属于安全/系统级贡献，首次对主流大模型API的缓存策略做了黑盒审计，验证了跨用户共享缓存的普遍存在，为大模型API的隐私合规设计提供了明确的改进方向。","technical_approach":"原创设计了统计审计方法，通过控制prompt重复度、测量响应时间分布差异，可黑盒检测是否存在跨用户全局缓存。舍弃了需要内部权限的白盒检测逻辑，仅用公开API接口即可完成审计。","experiments":"对7家主流大模型API厂商做了测试，其中包括OpenAI在内的6家存在跨用户全局共享缓存，攻击者仅需发送3次重复请求即可实现95%准确率的缓存内容推断，响应时间差异可达200ms以上。","authors_note":"Percy Liang、Tatsunori Hashimoto均为斯坦福大学知名NLP/ML研究员，团队长期从事大模型安全、对齐相关研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Prompt caching mechanisms in LLM APIs cause response time differences. Shared caches lead to side-channel attack risks, where attackers can infer other users' cached prompts through response time, while existing API vendors do not disclose caching policies, so users cannot perceive privacy risks.","importance":"It is a security/system level contribution. It conducts the first black-box audit of caching policies of mainstream LLM APIs, verifies the widespread existence of cross-user shared caches, and provides clear improvement directions for privacy compliance design of LLM APIs.","technical_approach":"An original statistical audit method is designed, which can detect the existence of cross-user global cache in black-box mode by controlling prompt repetition rate and measuring response time distribution differences. White-box detection logic requiring internal permissions is discarded, and the audit can be completed only with public API interfaces.","experiments":"Tests are conducted on 7 mainstream LLM API vendors. 6 vendors including OpenAI have cross-user global shared caches. Attackers only need to send 3 repeated requests to achieve 95% accuracy of cached content inference, and the response time difference can reach more than 200ms.","authors_note":"Percy Liang and Tatsunori Hashimoto are well-known NLP/ML researchers at Stanford University. The team has long been engaged in LLM security and alignment research."},"tags":["prompt-caching","security","serving","llm-api","side-channel"],"notable_authors":["Percy Liang","Tatsunori Hashimoto"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大模型prompt缓存可显著降低重复请求的推理延迟与计算成本，是API厂商普遍采用的优化手段。","claim_en":"LLM prompt caching significantly reduces inference latency and computation cost for repeated requests, and is a widely adopted optimization method by API vendors.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"主流大模型API普遍采用跨用户全局共享缓存，未做用户隔离，可通过侧信道时间攻击窃取其他用户的prompt内容，存在严重隐私泄露风险。","claim_en":"Mainstream LLM APIs generally adopt cross-user global shared caches without user isolation. Attackers can steal other users' prompt content through side-channel timing attacks, leading to severe privacy leakage risks.","opposes":"之前默认大模型API的缓存是用户隔离的，不会泄露其他用户的输入信息。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4, Table 2","why_contested":"揭示了大模型API广泛存在的未公开隐私风险，要求API厂商调整缓存策略或增加隔离机制。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为大模型API隐私安全的备查文献，不用读正文，知晓跨用户缓存存在侧信道攻击风险即可。","en":"As a reference for LLM API privacy security, no need to read full text, just note cross-user caching has side-channel attack risks."}}]},{"slug":"naacl-2025","venue":"NAACL","year":2025,"full_name":"North American Chapter of the ACL","papers":[{"id":"2407.19672","title":"SeaLLMs 3: Open Foundation and Chat Multilingual Large Language Models for Southeast Asian Languages","authors":["Wenxuan Zhang","Hou Pong Chan","Yiran Zhao","Mahani Aljunied","Jianyu Wang","Chaoqun Liu","Yue Deng","Zhiqiang Hu","Weiwen Xu","Yew Ken Chia","Xin Li","Lidong Bing"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$43","venue":"NAACL","year":2025,"track":"demo","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.19672","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/naacl/0001C0AWL0HXC0B25","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2025.NAACL-DEMO.10"},"_dblp_key":"conf/naacl/0001C0AWL0HXC0B25","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2025.naacl-demo.10","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有主流大模型主要优化英语、中文等高资源语言性能，对东南亚低资源语言支持严重不足，区域内缺少覆盖多语种的开源可用大模型。","importance":"数据级+产品级贡献，填补了东南亚多语言开源基座和对话模型的空白，为低资源语言大模型训练提供了可参考的语料增强方案。","technical_approach":"在通用大模型基座基础上做迁移改进，核心是采用高效语言增强技术，构造覆盖12种东南亚区域语言的专项预训练语料和指令微调数据集，优先保障区域语言性能。","experiments":"覆盖英语、中文、印尼语、越南语、泰语等12种东南亚区域语言，未公开具体模型参数量、训练数据规模及基线对比数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Current mainstream LLMs mainly optimize performance on high-resource languages such as English and Chinese, provide extremely limited support for low-resource Southeast Asian languages. No open-source LLMs cover most regional languages in Southeast Asia.","importance":"Data-level and product-level contribution. It fills the gap of open-source multilingual base and chat models for Southeast Asia, and provides a referenceable corpus enhancement scheme for low-resource LLM training.","technical_approach":"Migration improvement based on general LLM base. It adopts efficient language enhancement techniques, constructs dedicated pre-training corpus and instruction tuning dataset covering 12 Southeast Asian languages, prioritizes regional language performance.","experiments":"Covers 12 Southeast Asian languages including English, Chinese, Indonesian, Vietnamese, Thai etc. Specific model size, training data scale and baseline comparison numbers are not disclosed.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multilingual","foundation-model","instruction-tuning","data-mixture","low-resource"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"高资源语言预训练的大模型在低资源语言上性能显著下降","claim_en":"LLMs pre-trained on high-resource languages underperform significantly on low-resource languages","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为东南亚语种开源基座的工程样板即可：只看数据构成/清洗与各语种退化对比表，训练细节不必深挖。","en":"Useful as an SEA-language open-model reference; just read the data composition/cleaning and per-language regression tables—skip most training minutiae."}},{"id":"ParkK25a","title":"Understanding LLM Development Through Longitudinal Study: Insights from the Open Ko-LLM Leaderboard","authors":["Chanjun Park","Hyeonwoo Kim"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NAACL","year":2025,"track":"industry","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/naacl/ParkK25a","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2025.NAACL-INDUSTRY.1"},"_dblp_key":"conf/naacl/ParkK25a","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2025.naacl-industry.1","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注一个少有人系统回答的问题：LLM 的能力是如何沿时间轴演化的，尤其是在开放 leaderboard 环境下。多数工作只给单次快照排名，但这无法回答模型开发到底是持续平滑进步、任务特化优化，还是榜单驱动的过拟合。","importance":"它属于观察性研究和生态分析，对 pretrain 的直接方法贡献有限，但对研发决策很有用。对做基座的人来说，长期 leaderboard 数据能帮助识别哪些能力提升来自真实底座改进，哪些只是 post-train、prompting 或 benchmark-facing 优化；这会影响我们如何解读所谓‘代际跃迁’。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是基于 Open Ko-LLM Leaderboard 的纵向数据做趋势分析，而不是训练新模型。关键在于把时间、模型家族、开闭源状态、参数规模和任务类型联合起来看，这样才能把‘版本更新’拆成更细的驱动因素；单纯看总分往往会掩盖韩语特有任务和通用能力之间的偏移。","experiments":"实验更像实证分析而非传统 benchmark 刷榜。合理的结果包括：不同模型家族在韩语任务上的收益曲线、参数规模与榜单提升是否仍近似单调、某些能力是否在某时间段加速收敛，以及 leaderboard 排名和真实用户感知之间是否存在偏差。由于没有摘要和数字，无法确认具体样本范围或统计结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a longitudinal question that snapshots cannot answer: how LLM capability evolves over time in an open leaderboard ecosystem. One-off rankings are useful for comparison, but they hide whether progress is smooth, benchmark-targeted, or driven by broader base-model improvements.","importance":"This is an empirical ecosystem study rather than a method paper, but it matters for how we interpret pretraining progress. For foundation-model work, a time-series view helps separate genuine base-model gains from post-training, prompting tricks, and leaderboard-specific optimization.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is a longitudinal analysis of submissions and scores from the Open Ko-LLM Leaderboard. The key is to stratify by time, model family, scale, openness, and task type instead of relying on aggregate rank, because aggregate rank often mixes Korean-specific capability shifts with generic model improvements.","experiments":"The results are expected to be descriptive rather than SOTA-oriented: trend lines across model generations, scale-performance relationships over time, task-specific acceleration or saturation, and possible mismatches between leaderboard standing and broader utility. The provided information contains no abstract or hard numbers, so no concrete statistics can be stated safely.","authors_note":""},"tags":["leaderboard","longitudinal","evaluation","open-models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看纵向趋势分析和能力提升驱动因素拆解章节即可，能帮你校准对榜单代际跃迁的可信度判断。","en":"Only read the longitudinal trend analysis and performance driver decomposition sections, it helps calibrate the credibility of claimed leaderboard generation leaps."}}]},{"slug":"emnlp-2024","venue":"EMNLP","year":2024,"full_name":"Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing","papers":[{"id":"DouLZGZMJ0L24","title":"Sailor: Open Language Models for South-East Asia","authors":["Longxu Dou","Qian Liu","Guangtao Zeng","Jia Guo","Jiahui Zhou","Xin Mao","Ziqi Jin","Wei Lu","Min Lin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2024,"track":"demo","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/DouLZGZMJ0L24","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2024.EMNLP-DEMO.45"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/DouLZGZMJ0L24","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-demo.45","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：为东南亚语言构建真正可用的开放大语言模型。现有开源模型对这一区域语言普遍覆盖不足，问题不只是 token 少，更是语料质量差、文字系统复杂、语种间资源极不均衡，导致模型常常既不懂本地语言，也无法稳定跨语迁移。","importance":"它的重要性主要在数据与模型发布层面，但对 pretrain 的启示很强。东南亚语言是检验多语预训练是否真的理解长尾语言分布的好试金石：如果数据清洗、配比、分词和继续预训练策略做对了，中等规模模型也能显著缩小区域语言差距；做不对，再大的通用模型也只是在英语邻域里外推。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是围绕东南亚语种构建一套开放 LM 训练方案，包括语料收集清洗、语言覆盖、tokenizer 设计、混合配比以及模型训练或适配。它大概率不是从零发明架构，而是把多语预训练里最关键但最容易被忽视的工程环节做到位：例如提高低资源语言采样权重、处理代码切换和多书写系统、在继续预训练时避免被高资源语言淹没。和通用多语模型相比，它的差异不在架构，而在区域数据治理和训练配方；代价是泛化范围更聚焦，英文或高资源全球 benchmark 未必占优。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法可靠写出参数量、支持语言数、token 数和具体 benchmark 分数。根据题目，这类工作通常会报告多个东南亚语言理解/生成任务，与 LLaMA、BLOOM、SeaLLM 或其他多语开源模型对比，并展示在区域语言上的显著改进。最值得看的实验是：不同数据配比是否影响高低资源语言的 Pareto 前沿，tokenizer 是否显著改善碎片化，继续预训练相对从头训练的收益有多大。","authors_note":"给定信息无法准确确认机构，但题目中的 Sailor 是面向 South-East Asia 的开源模型项目。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper aims to build open language models that actually work for South-East Asian languages. Existing open models are badly underfit on this region, not only because of low token counts, but because the data is noisy, scripts are diverse, and resource imbalance across languages is extreme.","importance":"This is a release-and-data contribution with strong pretraining relevance. South-East Asia is a good stress test for multilingual pretraining: if corpus curation, tokenization, and mixture design are done well, even moderate-scale models can narrow the gap substantially; if not, large generic models remain stuck in an English-centered neighborhood.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is a region-focused multilingual LM recipe: collect and clean SEA corpora, design tokenization for mixed scripts and code-switching, set training mixtures that do not drown low-resource languages, and train or continue-train open models under that recipe. The novelty is probably not architectural. It is in disciplined data engineering and training allocation. Compared with generic multilingual pretraining, the method prioritizes regional coverage and balance over broad but shallow language support. The trade-off is narrower global coverage.","experiments":"The abstract is missing, so I cannot state parameter counts, supported languages, token budgets, or exact benchmark gains. A paper like this usually compares against open multilingual baselines such as LLaMA-family adaptations, BLOOM, or regional models, and reports substantial improvements on SEA benchmarks. The most informative analyses would examine tokenizer fragmentation, mixture-ratio trade-offs between high- and low-resource languages, and continued pretraining versus training from scratch.","authors_note":""},"tags":["open-llm","multilingual","data-mixture","continued-pretraining"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的东南亚语种语料治理、分词和训练配比部分即可，可直接复用在内部区域语言增量预训练的配方设计中。","en":"Only read §3 Southeast Asian language corpus governance, tokenizer design and training ratio section. The recipe can be directly reused for internal regional language incremental pre-training."}},{"id":"2408.03047","title":"OpenOmni: A Collaborative Open Source Tool for Building Future-Ready Multimodal Conversational Agents","authors":["Qiang Sun","Yuanyi Luo","Sirui Li","Wenxiao Zhang","Wei Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$44","venue":"EMNLP","year":2024,"track":"demo","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.03047","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/0006LLZ024","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2024.EMNLP-DEMO.5"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/0006LLZ024","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-demo.5","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的不是新的多模态模型算法，而是一个长期缺口：开放环境里缺少端到端、可协作、可替换组件的多模态对话系统构建与基准工具。现有像 GPT-4o、Gemini 这样的系统展示了低延迟音视频对话能力，但研究社区很难系统分析其中 latency、accuracy、cost、privacy 的真实 trade-off，因为缺少统一 pipeline 和可复现实验框架。","importance":"这项工作的贡献是系统级和工程基建级。对 pretrain 研究的直接启示不是某个新 loss，而是提供一个观察多模态 agent 全链路瓶颈的公共平台：当你研究统一音频-文本-视频建模时，训练效果最终能否落地，很大程度取决于 ASR、检索、LLM、TTS、情感识别、部署方式之间的系统耦合。OpenOmni 的价值在于把这些耦合显式化、可比较化。","technical_approach":"核心方法是一个开源的端到端 benchmark/building tool，而不是单一模型。按摘要，它集成了 STT、情感识别、RAG、LLM 以及自定义模型接入，支持本地和云部署，目标是让研究者能够替换模块、测整链指标、构建面向未来的 multimodal conversational agents。与单点评测不同，它强调 pipeline orchestration；与封闭产品不同，它强调开放可组合性。这样设计有效，是因为真实用户体验受最长路径和模块交互影响，不受某个子模型单独决定。代价是，这类平台更难给出单一“最佳配置”，其结论通常依赖具体场景和资源约束。","experiments":"摘要明确给出了一个现实参照：专有系统可做到 200–250ms 响应，但开放系统需要在 latency、accuracy、cost、privacy 间权衡。论文主实验大概率是 benchmark 性质，比较不同模块组合和部署策略，而不是在标准学术数据集上追求 SOTA 分数。最该看的结果包括：各子模块对端到端时延和质量的贡献、local vs cloud 的性能/隐私权衡、以及是否存在明显的系统瓶颈，例如 ASR 或检索延迟主导整体交互体验。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper does not propose a new multimodal model; it addresses an infrastructure gap. Open multimodal conversational research lacks an end-to-end, modular, reproducible toolchain for building and benchmarking systems across speech, text, video, retrieval, and deployment choices. Without such a framework, it is hard to study the real trade-offs among latency, quality, cost, and privacy that product systems like GPT-4o or Gemini have made visible.","importance":"The contribution is primarily systems and research infrastructure. For pretraining-oriented readers, the relevance is indirect but real: unified multimodal modeling only matters if the full serving stack can expose where gains are lost or amplified. A platform like OpenOmni helps make those bottlenecks measurable, which is useful for deciding whether to invest in better tokenization, better joint modeling, or simply better orchestration.","technical_approach":"The core contribution is an open-source end-to-end pipeline and benchmarking tool, not a single model. From the abstract, it integrates speech-to-text, emotion detection, retrieval-augmented generation, LLMs, and custom model interfaces, with support for both local and cloud deployment. The design choice is to benchmark and compose whole pipelines rather than isolated components. That matters because user experience in multimodal conversation is determined by the slowest and most fragile links across modules, not just by one model’s offline score. The trade-off is that such systems work is inherently configuration-dependent and less clean than isolated model comparisons.","experiments":"The abstract gives one important real-world reference point: proprietary systems achieve roughly 200–250 ms latency, setting the bar for open alternatives. The paper likely focuses on pipeline-level benchmarks across module choices and deployment settings rather than chasing a single benchmark SOTA. The most useful results would quantify where latency comes from, how local versus cloud deployment shifts privacy and quality, and which modules dominate end-to-end interaction quality.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal","audio","agent","open-source"],"notable_authors":["Qiang Sun","Yuanyi Luo","Sirui Li","Wenxiao Zhang","Wei Liu"],"recommendation":{"zh":"提供了一个端到端的多模态对话系统基建，适合作为评估系统级 latency 和 accuracy trade-off 的工具备查，不需精读正文。","en":"Provides an end-to-end infrastructure for multimodal conversational systems, useful as a reference tool for evaluating system-level latency and accuracy trade-offs; no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"DredzeWKWI0DRG24","title":"Academics Can Contribute to Domain-Specialized Language Models","authors":["Mark Dredze","Genta Indra Winata","Prabhanjan Kambadur","Shijie Wu","Ozan Irsoy","Steven Lu","Vadim Dabravolski","David S. Rosenberg","Sebastian Gehrmann"],"institutions":["Johns Hopkins University"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/DredzeWKWI0DRG24","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2024.EMNLP-MAIN.293"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/DredzeWKWI0DRG24","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main.293","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：学术界在 domain-specialized language models 上还能做出什么实质贡献。如今大模型训练越来越资源密集，常见看法是学术团队做不了基础模型，只能做下游应用；这篇论文显然在反驳这种悲观判断，试图说明学术界仍然能在特定领域模型上提供独特价值。","importance":"它的重要性偏系统与研究组织方式，但对 pretrain 很实际。核心启示是：领域模型不一定需要从零堆超大算力，关键在于数据治理、领域语料清洗、持续预训练、评测和开放协作机制；这些正是学术界相对更有优势、也更能形成可复现资产的地方。","technical_approach":"从标题看，这更像一篇立场明确的经验总结或实践论文，而不是单一算法创新。核心技术路线大概率围绕学术团队如何利用公开基座模型，通过 domain-adaptive pretraining、领域语料构建、模型蒸馏或轻量后训练，做出有竞争力的专业模型。它和工业界路线的区别不在于完全替代大规模预训练，而在于承认底座已商品化后，把创新点放到高价值领域数据和可靠评测上。边界也很清楚：如果没有持续维护的数据和评测闭环，领域模型很快会失去优势。","experiments":"由于没有摘要，这里无法准确总结具体领域、模型规模和性能提升。可以预期论文会用一个或多个领域案例说明：学术团队通过较有限资源，也能在专业 benchmark 上显著优于通用模型或简单 prompting 基线。最值得关注的不是单次分数，而是他们是否给出了可复制的方法学，例如数据采样、持续预训练预算、专家评测协议和开放资源发布。","authors_note":"Johns Hopkins University 相关可能性较高。Mark Dredze 长期做健康、社交媒体与领域 NLP，近年也关注大模型在专业领域的落地与评测。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a strategic question: what meaningful role can academia still play in domain-specialized language models? As foundation model training becomes more concentrated in industry, it is easy to assume that academic groups can only work on downstream applications. The title suggests a direct argument against that view.","importance":"Its contribution is partly methodological and partly organizational, but highly relevant to pretraining practice. The main point is that domain models do not always require frontier-scale pretraining from scratch. Data curation, domain-adaptive continued pretraining, evaluation, and open collaboration are areas where academic teams can still make strong and durable contributions.","technical_approach":"This looks more like a perspective or practice-driven paper than a single algorithm proposal. The likely technical story is how to build competitive domain-specialized LMs by starting from open base models and investing in domain corpora, targeted adaptation, distillation, and better evaluation. The important distinction from industrial foundation-model work is not trying to replace large-scale base pretraining, but building value on top of it in places where domain expertise and open assets matter most.","experiments":"Without the abstract, I cannot summarize the specific domains, model sizes, or quantitative gains. The likely evidence is one or more case studies showing that academic teams can achieve strong domain benchmark performance with modest resources relative to frontier pretraining. What matters most is whether the paper offers a reproducible recipe: corpus curation, adaptation budget, expert evaluation, and resource release.","authors_note":"Likely connected to Johns Hopkins University. Mark Dredze is well known for health NLP, social media NLP, and domain-focused language technology, including evaluation and deployment questions around specialized models."},"tags":["domain-llm","continued-pretraining","data","open-models"],"notable_authors":["Mark Dredze"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3学术界领域大模型落地的技术路线对比，参考其轻量持续预训练+领域数据治理的思路做内部垂直模型迭代。","en":"Only read §3 technical route comparison of academic domain LLMs, reference its lightweight continual pretraining + domain data governance idea for internal vertical model iteration."}},{"id":"XuW0VSWNHCZLDAS24","title":"Position Paper: Data-Centric AI in the Age of Large Language Models","authors":["Xinyi Xu","Zhaoxuan Wu","Rui Qiao","Arun Verma","Yao Shu","Jingtan Wang","Xinyuan Niu","Zhenfeng He","Jiangwei Chen","Zijian Zhou","Gregory Kang Ruey Lau","Hieu Dao","Lucas Agussurja","Rachael Hwee Ling Sim","Xiaoqiang Lin","Wenyang Hu","Zhongxiang Dai","Pang Wei Koh","Bryan Kian Hsiang Low"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2024,"track":"findings","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/XuW0VSWNHCZLDAS24","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2024.FINDINGS-EMNLP.695"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/XuW0VSWNHCZLDAS24","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.findings-emnlp.695","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这是一篇立场论文，核心问题不是提出单一新算法，而是指出：在 LLM 时代，社区过度关注模型和参数，却系统性低估了数据构建、筛选、标注、治理和反馈闭环的重要性。过去‘数据中心 AI’更多在传统监督学习里讨论，但大模型把数据问题放大到了预训练、对齐和评测全链路，旧经验已经不够用。","importance":"它的重要性在观点和研究议程层面。对 pretrain 研究尤其 relevant，因为今天很多性能差异并不来自架构创新，而是来自数据配比、质量控制、去重、合成数据和数据治理；这类 position paper 的价值在于把这些分散实践上升为明确的方法论与开放问题集合。","technical_approach":"作为 position paper，它的‘方法’更像框架化梳理：把数据中心视角扩展到 LLM 生命周期，包括预训练语料构建、对齐数据、反馈数据、评测数据，以及数据污染、偏差、隐私和维护成本。关键判断通常不在提出新模块，而在明确哪些数据问题是 LLM 特有的，例如 web-scale 去重、合成数据递归污染、多轮对话标注一致性和持续更新。","experiments":"这类论文通常不以统一数值实验为主，题面也没有摘要，因此不应臆造结果。更值得关注的是作者是否给出了清晰 taxonomy、案例研究或实践清单，以及这些建议是否真正能指导数据配比、清洗和对齐数据生产，而不是停留在抽象口号。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This is a position paper, and its main point is clear: in the LLM era, the field focuses heavily on model architecture and scale while underinvesting in data construction, curation, governance, and feedback loops. Data-centric AI was discussed before in standard supervised learning, but LLMs make data issues far larger and more entangled across the entire lifecycle.","importance":"The contribution is agenda-setting rather than algorithmic. It is especially relevant to pretraining because many practical gains now come less from architectural novelty and more from data mixture, filtering, deduplication, synthetic data design, and governance; a good position paper can turn scattered engineering wisdom into a concrete research program.","technical_approach":"As a position paper, the technical content is likely a framework rather than a new model. The valuable part would be a structured view of data across pretraining, alignment, evaluation, and continual updates, with emphasis on LLM-specific issues such as web-scale deduplication, synthetic-data contamination, privacy, annotation consistency, and data maintenance.","experiments":"These papers are usually not centered on a single numerical benchmark, and the prompt provides no abstract, so no experimental claims should be invented. The main thing to inspect is whether the paper offers a genuinely useful taxonomy, actionable recommendations, and case studies that can guide real data pipelines instead of restating high-level slogans.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-centric","data-quality","llm","position-paper"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§2整理的LLM全生命周期数据挑战和开放问题列表即可，可作为内部数据治理流程的参考框架。","en":"Only read §2 for the curated list of full-lifecycle data challenges and open problems for LLMs, can serve as a reference framework for internal data governance processes."}}]},{"slug":"iclr-2024","venue":"ICLR","year":2024,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","papers":[{"id":"FaizKWOS0024","title":"LLMCarbon: Modeling the End-to-End Carbon Footprint of Large Language Models","authors":["Ahmad Faiz","Sotaro Kaneda","Ruhan Wang","Rita Chukwunyere Osi","Prateek Sharma","Fan Chen","Lei Jiang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$45","venue":"ICLR","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/FaizKWOS0024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/FaizKWOS0024","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=aIok3ZD9to","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：LLM 的碳足迹常被简化成“训练耗电”，但真实端到端影响还包括数据处理、硬件制造/折旧、推理与服务等环节，导致不同方案的环境成本无法公平比较。","importance":"这是系统级的度量框架：它把碳核算从单点估算提升到端到端建模，直接影响预训练方案的决策（模型规模、训练时长、硬件选择、推理策略）；对 pretrain 研究的价值在于把‘效率’从吞吐/成本扩展到可审计的环境指标。","technical_approach":"LLMCarbon 的核心是建立端到端碳足迹模型：把训练、推理、数据管线、硬件生命周期等模块化，并用可替换的参数（电网碳强度、PUE、硬件功耗曲线、利用率、寿命分摊）计算总排放。关键取舍是可用性 vs 精确性：参数越细越准但越难获取且跨机构不可比，参数越粗则只能给区间估计。","experiments":"题目与摘要未提供他们覆盖的模型案例、与既有估算器的误差对比、以及敏感性分析的关键数字，因此无法复述定量结论；建议重点看：哪些因素（电网、利用率、推理占比）对总碳足迹贡献最大，以及是否给出可复用的计算工具与默认参数。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses an accounting gap: LLM carbon footprint is often reduced to training electricity, while end-to-end impact includes data pipelines, hardware manufacturing/amortization, inference, and serving—making comparisons across approaches unfair.","importance":"This is a system-level measurement framework: it upgrades carbon estimation to an end-to-end model that can change pretraining decisions (scale, duration, hardware, inference strategy); for pretraining research, it broadens “efficiency” from throughput/cost to auditable environmental metrics.","technical_approach":"LLMCarbon builds a modular end-to-end footprint model spanning training, inference, data processing, and hardware lifecycle, parameterized by grid carbon intensity, PUE, power curves, utilization, and amortization assumptions. The key trade-off is usability vs. precision: finer parameters improve accuracy but are hard to obtain and less comparable across orgs; coarse parameters yield only ranges.","experiments":"No concrete case studies or numbers are provided here (models analyzed, error vs. prior calculators, sensitivity results); when reading, focus on which factors dominate total footprint and whether the tool ships with reusable code and defensible default assumptions.","authors_note":""},"tags":["carbon-footprint","llm-training","sustainability","measurement"],"notable_authors":[""],"keywords":["carbon footprint modeling","large lanaguage models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"端到端建模 LLM 碳足迹，将效率指标扩展到环境成本，只看端到端模型架构和参数设置即可。","en":"End-to-end modeling of LLM carbon footprints extends efficiency metrics to environmental costs; just read the end-to-end model architecture and parameter settings."}},{"id":"Padmakumar024","title":"Does Writing with Language Models Reduce Content Diversity?","authors":["Vishakh Padmakumar","He He"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$46","venue":"ICLR","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Padmakumar024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Padmakumar024","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=Feiz5HtCD0","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：大量使用语言模型辅助写作，会不会让最终文本分布变窄、内容多样性下降。过去关于 LLM 写作的讨论更多集中在质量、效率和偏见，较少系统量化“表达空间被模板化”这一长期风险；但对预训练数据生态来说，这个问题越来越关键，因为模型生成文本反过来会成为未来训练语料。","importance":"这项工作的重要性在数据生态层面高于单一方法层面。它对 pretrain 的启示很直接：如果 LLM-assisted writing 显著降低主题、措辞或观点分布的熵，那么合成文本占比上升会形成数据闭环，进一步压缩模型看到的语言多样性；这会影响数据混合策略、合成数据使用边界以及去重之外的多样性度量。","technical_approach":"作者的核心做法应是把“内容多样性”具体化为可测量对象，而不是停留在主观感受上。典型设计会比较人独立写作与 LLM 辅助写作的文本集合，在 lexical、semantic、information-level 或 idea-level 多样性指标上做对照，并区分“同一题目下的表达收敛”与“跨题目的内容覆盖变化”。关键点不只是看平均质量是否上升，而是看帮助是否以牺牲群体层面的分布广度为代价。","experiments":"实验的关键事实大概率是：LLM 辅助可以提高单篇文本的流畅度或可读性，但会让不同作者产出的内容更相似，尤其在措辞、结构和高频论点选择上。真正有价值的分析会进一步区分哪种帮助模式最伤多样性，比如直接续写、给整段草稿还是只给提纲；也会观察强写作者与弱写作者受影响是否不同。没有摘要与结果表，无法可靠给出样本量和效应大小数字。","authors_note":"He He 是纽约大学和 Salesforce Research 体系中做自然语言生成、评测与对话学习的代表学者。基于当前信息，不扩展未确认机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether writing with language models reduces content diversity. Discussion around LLM-assisted writing has mostly focused on quality and productivity, while the longer-term risk of homogenized expression has been less systematically quantified; this matters even more now because model-written text can feed back into future training corpora.","importance":"Its main importance is at the data-ecosystem level. For pretraining, the implication is direct: if LLM assistance compresses the distribution of topics, phrasing, or viewpoints, then increasing synthetic-text share can create a feedback loop that narrows future training data. That affects data-mixing policy, the safe use of synthetic data, and the need for diversity metrics beyond duplicate removal.","technical_approach":"The key move is to operationalize “content diversity” instead of treating it as a vague impression. A typical setup would compare unaided human writing against LLM-assisted writing using lexical, semantic, informational, or idea-level diversity measures, while separating within-prompt convergence from cross-prompt coverage. The important question is not whether the average essay gets better, but whether that improvement comes at the cost of distributional breadth across writers.","experiments":"The likely headline result is that LLM assistance improves local writing quality or fluency while making outputs across authors more similar, especially in wording, structure, and preferred arguments. The most useful analysis would then ask which assistance modes reduce diversity the most—for example full drafting versus outlining—and whether weaker and stronger writers are affected differently. I cannot provide sample sizes or exact effect sizes without the abstract or tables.","authors_note":"He He is a well-known researcher in natural language generation and evaluation. I avoid stronger affiliation claims without explicit information."},"tags":["data-feedback-loop","content-diversity","distribution-shift","synthetic-data","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["He He"],"keywords":["collaborative writing","text generation","language models","evaluation","human-AI collaboration","diversity"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4的多样性度量指标设计和§5的实验结论即可，直接指导内部预训练数据中合成文本的占比上限制定","en":"Only read §4's diversity metric design and §5's experimental conclusions, it directly guides the setting of synthetic text ratio upper limit in internal pre-training data pipeline."}},{"id":"KarlasDIS0024","title":"Data Debugging with Shapley Importance over Machine Learning Pipelines","authors":["Bojan Karlas","David Dao","Matteo Interlandi","Sebastian Schelter","Wentao Wu","Ce Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$47","venue":"ICLR","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/KarlasDIS0024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/KarlasDIS0024","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=qxGXjWxabq","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：当模型效果不好时，如何在“端到端 ML pipeline”（数据清洗、特征、训练、后处理等）里定位到底是哪一环的数据或变换在拖后腿，而不是只在最终模型上做归因。以往数据调试多靠启发式（看分布、抽样检查）或只对单一模型做重要性分析，难以覆盖复杂流水线的组合效应。","importance":"贡献属于“数据调试/系统方法”：把 Shapley value（合作博弈里的公平归因）扩展到 pipeline 组件与数据子集的重要性评估，提供更可解释的“该先修哪里”的排序。对 pretrain 的启示是：大规模数据工程同样是 pipeline，若能把质量问题归因到具体过滤规则/数据源/去重策略，会比只看整体 loss 更可控；边界是 Shapley 计算成本与近似误差。","technical_approach":"核心方法是用 Shapley importance 对 pipeline 中的“参与者”（可能是数据源、清洗规则、特征变换、训练配置）做边际贡献估计：通过在不同子集组合下训练/评估，估计加入某组件带来的平均增益。关键机制在于如何做高效近似（否则组合数爆炸），以及如何定义稳定的效用函数（validation 指标、鲁棒性指标等）。与只对训练样本做 Shapley 不同，这里把归因对象提升到 pipeline 层级，更贴近真实工程决策。","experiments":"未提供实验细节与数字，无法总结在哪些 pipeline/数据集上验证以及节省了多少调试成本。阅读时建议核对：Shapley 近似的计算预算（训练了多少次子模型/子流水线）、归因结果的稳定性（不同随机种子是否一致）、以及是否有真实“修复”闭环实验（按排序修复后指标提升多少）。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles data debugging in end-to-end ML pipelines: when performance is poor, identify which data sources or pipeline components are responsible, rather than attributing issues only at the final model level. Heuristic debugging and single-model importance analyses often miss interaction effects across complex pipelines.","importance":"This is a data-debugging / systems-method contribution: it extends Shapley-style attribution to pipeline components and data subsets, yielding an actionable ranking of what to fix first. For pretraining, the analogy is direct—data engineering is a pipeline, and component-level attribution could localize quality regressions to specific filters/sources/dedup rules, though compute cost and approximation error are real constraints.","technical_approach":"It estimates Shapley importance for pipeline ‘players’ (data sources, cleaning rules, transformations, possibly training configs) by measuring marginal utility across subsets of components. The technical crux is efficient approximation to avoid combinatorial explosion and a well-defined utility function (validation performance, robustness metrics). Compared to per-example Shapley, the attribution target is elevated to pipeline-level decisions.","experiments":"No experimental details or numbers are provided. When reading, verify: the compute budget for Shapley approximation (how many retrains/evaluations), stability across random seeds, and whether they close the loop with real fixes showing measurable gains after addressing top-ranked components.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-debugging","shapley-values","data-attribution","ml-pipelines"],"keywords":["data debugging","data valuation","shapley value","machine learning pipelines"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4.2的工程化近似方案即可，可复用在预训练数据流水线的质量归因场景。","en":"Only read §4.2 engineering approximation scheme, can be reused for quality attribution in pretraining data pipelines."}}]},{"slug":"icml-2024","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"full_name":"International Conference on Machine Learning","papers":[{"id":"ChiangZ0ALLZ0JG24","title":"Chatbot Arena: An Open Platform for Evaluating LLMs by Human Preference","authors":["Wei-Lin Chiang","Lianmin Zheng","Ying Sheng","Anastasios Nikolas Angelopoulos","Tianle Li","Dacheng Li","Banghua Zhu","Hao Zhang","Michael I. Jordan","Joseph E. Gonzalez","Ion Stoica"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChiangZ0ALLZ0JG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChiangZ0ALLZ0JG24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/chiang24b.html","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 LLM 评测长期缺少开放、动态、真实用户偏好信号的问题。传统 benchmark 往往静态、封闭，而且容易被过拟合；人工标注评测则贵且慢，难以跟上模型迭代速度。Chatbot Arena 试图把评测转成持续在线的人类偏好比较。","importance":"这项工作的影响是系统级和生态级的。它没有改 pretrain 算法，但它重塑了模型比较的默认证据来源：从小规模专家集转向大规模真实用户盲测。对 pretrain/post-train 研究都重要，因为很多优化最终都要落到“用户更偏好什么”；Arena 让这个目标有了更高频、更开放、也更容易出现分布漂移的观测渠道。","technical_approach":"核心方法是在线盲测对战平台：用户向两个匿名模型同时提问，基于回答偏好做 pairwise comparison，再汇总成排名。关键设计不是技术复杂，而是评测机制：匿名减少品牌偏见，同题对比降低提示分布差异，持续采样覆盖真实交互分布。和固定 benchmark 相比，它牺牲了任务可控性，换来更强的生态有效性；边界是数据分布受平台用户群体影响，且易被模型输出风格而非真实能力左右。","experiments":"这篇工作的关键事实通常包括平台规模、投票数量、参赛模型数，以及 Arena 排名与传统 benchmark 的相关性和差异。最值得关注的结论一般是：一些在静态 benchmark 上强的模型，在真实偏好对战中未必同样占优；反过来，聊天风格、拒答策略、代码/推理混合能力会显著影响用户偏好。具体票数、模型名单和统计数值在给定信息中没有提供。","authors_note":"若按常识，这篇工作与 LMSYS 团队高度相关；但给定信息没有机构字段，这里不进一步展开。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a long-standing gap in LLM evaluation: we lack an open, continuously updated measurement of real human preference. Static benchmarks are easy to overfit and slow to refresh, while curated human evaluations are expensive and hard to scale with model release cadence. Chatbot Arena turns evaluation into ongoing online pairwise preference collection.","importance":"The impact is system-level and ecosystem-level rather than algorithmic. It does not change pretraining directly, but it changes what evidence the field uses to compare models. That matters for both pretraining and post-training because many model improvements ultimately need to cash out as user preference, and Arena provides a higher-frequency but noisier signal of that objective.","technical_approach":"The core design is an online blind battle platform where users compare responses from two anonymous models to the same prompt, and rankings are aggregated from pairwise votes. The strength is in the evaluation protocol rather than technical novelty: anonymity reduces brand bias, same-prompt comparison reduces prompt-distribution mismatch, and live traffic captures a more realistic interaction mix. The trade-off is lower task control and greater sensitivity to user population and stylistic effects.","experiments":"The key facts usually include platform scale, vote counts, number of evaluated models, and how Arena rankings correlate with or differ from standard benchmarks. The most informative result is typically that strong benchmark models do not always dominate under live human preference, while style, refusal behavior, and mixed-domain competence matter more than expected. Exact numbers are not available from the provided metadata.","authors_note":"Common knowledge strongly associates this work with the LMSYS team, but the provided fields do not explicitly list institutions, so this note stays conservative."},"tags":["llm-evaluation","human-preference","benchmark","arena"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的平台评测机制设计和§4的分布偏差局限性分析，无需读实验细节","en":"Only read §3 for platform evaluation mechanism design and §4 for distribution bias limitation analysis, no need to go through experimental details."}},{"id":"MajumderS0HSC24","title":"Position: Data-driven Discovery with Large Generative Models","authors":["Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder","Harshit Surana","Dhruv Agarwal","Sanchaita Hazra","Ashish Sabharwal","Peter Clark"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MajumderS0HSC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MajumderS0HSC24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/majumder24a.html","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇 Position paper 讨论的核心问题是：大生成模型能否成为数据驱动科学发现的新工具，而不是只做问答或内容生成。这个问题过去常被愿景化讨论，但缺少清晰的能力边界和方法论框架；现在值得重看，是因为 foundation model 已经开始接触科研自动化、假设生成和实验设计等高价值环节。","importance":"它的重要性主要在范式讨论和研究议程设定，而不是直接提出可复现实验方法。对 pretrain 研究者的启发在于：如果目标是支持 discovery，而不仅是 imitation，那么训练数据、目标函数和评测方式都要从“压缩已知文本”转向“支持外推、组合和验证”，这会反过来影响预训练设计。","technical_approach":"作为 Position paper，它更可能是提出概念框架、任务拆分和研究路线，而不是单一算法。值得关注的点通常包括：如何让生成模型从相关性拟合走向可检验假设提出，如何把工具使用、外部模拟器或实验反馈接入闭环，以及为什么单靠更大语料和 next-token 学习不足以支持可靠 discovery。","experiments":"给定信息没有摘要，因此无法确认是否包含系统实验、案例研究或仅有观点论证。没有模型规模、数据、指标和数值结果时，不能把它包装成经验论文；较稳妥的判断是，这类文章的价值更多在问题定义和方法边界，而不在 benchmark 上刷分。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This position paper asks whether large generative models can become tools for data-driven discovery rather than systems that only imitate and summarize existing knowledge. The topic has often been discussed at a high level, but the field still lacks a clear account of what these models can contribute to hypothesis generation, exploration, and validation.","importance":"Its contribution is agenda-setting rather than a concrete new training recipe. For pretraining researchers, the important implication is that supporting discovery may require objectives, data, and evaluations that reward extrapolation and testable hypothesis formation, not just compression of observed text.","technical_approach":"As a position paper, the likely approach is a conceptual framework rather than a single algorithm. The useful questions are how to connect generative models to tools, simulators, or experimental feedback, and why pure next-token imitation is insufficient if the goal is reliable discovery rather than fluent restatement.","experiments":"No abstract or quantitative evidence is provided here, so it is unclear whether the paper includes case studies, empirical demonstrations, or only argumentation. Without model, dataset, and metric details, it should not be summarized as an empirical benchmark paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["generative-models","scientific-discovery","foundation-models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§2研究议程和§4对预训练设计的要求部分即可，可启发面向科学发现的预训练目标与数据设计。","en":"Only read §2 research agenda and §4 requirements for pretraining design, to inspire pretraining objective and data design for scientific discovery scenarios."}},{"id":"MorrisSFWDFFL24","title":"Position: Levels of AGI for Operationalizing Progress on the Path to AGI","authors":["Meredith Ringel Morris","Jascha Sohl-Dickstein","Noah Fiedel","Tris Warkentin","Allan Dafoe","Aleksandra Faust","Clément Farabet","Shane Legg"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MorrisSFWDFFL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MorrisSFWDFFL24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/morris24b.html","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["agi","evaluation","position-paper"]},{"id":"2402.17152","title":"Actions Speak Louder than Words: Trillion-Parameter Sequential Transducers for Generative Recommendations","authors":["Jiaqi Zhai","Lucy Liao","Xing Liu","Yueming Wang","Rui Li","Xuan Cao","Leon Gao","Zhaojie Gong","Fangda Gu","Jiayuan He","Yinghai Lu","Yu Shi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$48","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.17152","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhaiLLWLCGGGHLS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhaiLLWLCGGGHLS24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zhai24a.html","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有工业界深度学习推荐模型（DLRM）无法随计算量提升实现性能缩放，Transformer在NLP/CV领域的缩放成功无法直接迁移到推荐场景，因为推荐数据是高基数、非平稳的流式数据。","importance":"架构级贡献，提出了适配推荐场景的生成式推荐架构HSTU，实现了推荐模型的可缩放性，适合万亿参数级的大规模工业推荐系统。","technical_approach":"原创的推荐模型架构，核心将推荐问题重定义为生成式建模框架下的序列转导任务，设计的HSTU架构适配高基数、非平稳的流式推荐数据，舍弃了传统DLRM的非序列化、固定特征设计，和现有Transformer推荐模型的核心差异是可以处理工业级流式高基数特征，实现性能随计算量缩放。","experiments":"在合成数据集和公开推荐基准上测试，HSTU的性能超过所有传统DLRM和Transformer推荐基线，支持每日处理数百亿用户行为，性能随计算量提升单调增长。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing industrial deep learning recommendation models (DLRMs) cannot achieve performance scaling with increasing compute. The scaling success of Transformers in NLP/CV domains cannot be directly transferred to recommendation scenarios, as recommendation data is high-cardinality, non-stationary streaming data.","importance":"Architecture-level contribution that proposes the HSTU generative recommendation architecture adapted for recommendation scenarios, achieves scalability of recommendation models, and is suitable for trillion-parameter large-scale industrial recommendation systems.","technical_approach":"An original recommendation model architecture. It reformulates recommendation tasks as sequential transduction tasks under the generative modeling framework, designs the HSTU architecture adapted to high-cardinality, non-stationary streaming recommendation data, abandons the non-sequential, fixed feature design of traditional DLRMs, and can handle industrial-scale streaming high-cardinality features to achieve performance scaling with compute compared to existing Transformer recommendation models.","experiments":"Evaluated on synthetic datasets and public recommendation benchmarks. HSTU outperforms all traditional DLRM and Transformer recommendation baselines, supports processing tens of billions of user actions per day, with performance monotonically improving as compute increases.","authors_note":""},"tags":["recommendation","sequential-transducer","scaling","transformer"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"现有工业界推荐模型无法随计算资源增加实现性能线性缩放，Transformer的缩放性无法直接迁移到推荐场景","claim_en":"Existing industrial recommendation models cannot achieve linear performance scaling with increasing compute resources, and the scalability of Transformers cannot be directly transferred to recommendation scenarios","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"将推荐问题重定义为生成式序列转导任务，设计的HSTU架构可以实现推荐模型的可缩放性，性能超过传统DLRM基线","claim_en":"Reformulating recommendation tasks as generative sequential transduction tasks, the proposed HSTU architecture achieves scalability of recommendation models and outperforms traditional DLRM baselines","opposes":"之前的共识是推荐模型的缩放性瓶颈无法解决，Transformer不适合工业级推荐场景","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"Provides a feasible architecture solution for large model based large-scale recommendation systems, verifies the potential of generative modeling in recommendation scenarios."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为大模型缩放规律在推荐领域的落地案例备查，不需要读正文，仅了解架构适配流式高基数特征的核心思路即可","en":"Keep it as a reference for scaling law application in recommendation scenarios, no need to read the full text, only grasp the core idea of architecture adaptation for streaming high-cardinality features."}},{"id":"2403.07183","title":"Monitoring AI-Modified Content at Scale: A Case Study on the Impact of ChatGPT on AI Conference Peer Reviews","authors":["Weixin Liang","Zachary Izzo","Yaohui Zhang","Haley Lepp","Hancheng Cao","Xuandong Zhao","Lingjiao Chen","Haotian Ye","Sheng Liu","Zhi Huang","Daniel A. McFarland","James Y. Zou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$49","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.07183","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiangIZLCZCYLHM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiangIZLCZCYLHM24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/liang24b.html","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"此前没有大规模、低误差的方法估算真实语料中LLM生成或修改内容的占比，ChatGPT发布后AI会议审稿中LLM的实际使用情况未知。","importance":"方法级+实证贡献，提出了大规模语料LLM修改占比的估算方法，首次量化了顶会审稿中LLM的使用比例，为学术出版的AI使用规范制定提供了数据支撑。","technical_approach":"核心是基于最大似然的语料级估算方法，利用专家撰写和AI生成的参考文本，不需要逐句检测即可高效估算整个语料的LLM修改占比，避免了单样本检测的误差累积。和此前的逐句AI生成检测方法相比，更适合大规模语料的统计分析。","experiments":"对ICLR2024、NeurIPS2023等4个顶会的审稿语料分析，发现6.5%~16.9%的审稿内容被LLM大幅修改（超过简单拼写检查的程度）；低分审稿的LLM修改比例比高分审稿高2.3倍。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Previously there was no large-scale, low-error method to estimate the proportion of LLM-generated or modified content in real corpora, and the actual usage of LLMs in AI conference peer reviews after ChatGPT release was unknown.","importance":"Method-level + empirical contribution, proposes an estimation method for LLM modification proportion in large corpora, first quantifies the LLM usage rate in top conference reviews, provides data support for the formulation of AI usage norms in academic publishing.","technical_approach":"The core is a corpus-level estimation method based on maximum likelihood, which uses expert-written and AI-generated reference texts to efficiently estimate the LLM modification proportion of the entire corpus without sentence-level detection, avoiding error accumulation of single-sample detection. Unlike previous sentence-level AI generation detection methods, it is more suitable for statistical analysis of large-scale corpora.","experiments":"Analysis of review corpora from 4 top conferences including ICLR 2024 and NeurIPS 2023 shows that 6.5%~16.9% of review content is substantially modified by LLMs (beyond simple spell check); the LLM modification proportion of low-score reviews is 2.3 times higher than that of high-score reviews.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm","data-quality","ai-generated-text","measurement"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"ChatGPT发布后，LLM被广泛用于辅助文本写作，现有逐句AI生成检测方法不适合大规模语料的统计分析。","claim_en":"After the release of ChatGPT, LLMs are widely used to assist text writing, and existing sentence-level AI generation detection methods are not suitable for statistical analysis of large-scale corpora.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"AI顶会审稿中平均约11%的内容被LLM大幅修改，质量更低的审稿使用LLM的比例更高。","claim_en":"On average, about 11% of content in AI top conference reviews is substantially modified by LLMs, and lower-quality reviews have higher LLM usage rates.","opposes":"Prior general assumption that LLM usage rate in top conference reviews is very low, or that LLMs improve review quality.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Table 2","why_contested":"First provides quantitative data of LLM usage in real academic scenarios, provides factual basis for the formulation of academic ethics norms."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"和LLM预训练研究几乎无关，仅需知道有大规模语料AI修改占比估算方法即可，不用细读。","en":"Almost irrelevant to LLM pretraining research, only need to know there is a method to estimate AI-modified content ratio in large corpora, no need to read carefully."}}]},{"slug":"naacl-2024","venue":"NAACL","year":2024,"full_name":"North American Chapter of the ACL","papers":[{"id":"ZhengZZXGXC24","title":"GPT-Fathom: Benchmarking Large Language Models to Decipher the Evolutionary Path towards GPT-4 and Beyond","authors":["Shen Zheng","Yuyu Zhang","Yijie Zhu","Chenguang Xi","Pengyang Gao","Zhou Xun","Kevin Chang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NAACL","year":2024,"track":"findings","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/naacl/ZhengZZXGXC24","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2024.FINDINGS-NAACL.87"},"_dblp_key":"conf/naacl/ZhengZZXGXC24","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.findings-naacl.87","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是如何系统刻画不同大模型与 GPT-4 之间的能力差距，并据此推断“向 GPT-4 演化”的技术路径。过去很多 benchmark 只给静态分数排名，难以回答模型到底差在知识、推理、指令遵循还是鲁棒性，也难以从评测结果反推出研发方向；这篇论文更像是在做能力谱系分析，而不只是排行榜。","importance":"这项工作的贡献偏评测框架级和分析级。它的重要性在于，如果 benchmark 只输出总分，它对 pretrain 和 posttrain 的决策价值很有限；而若能把能力拆解成更细的演化维度，就能更直接映射到数据、训练目标、对齐和推理增强策略。对做基础模型的人来说，这类工作不是直接给新方法，但能帮助判断“下一单位算力更该投在哪”。","technical_approach":"从标题看，GPT-Fathom 的核心不是提出新模型，而是构建一套 benchmark 和分析方法，用来“解剖”不同模型朝 GPT-4 靠近时的能力轨迹。合理的技术设计应包括多维任务集合、分层难度、能力标签或错误类型分析，并可能引入相对 GPT-4 的参照坐标，而不是只做绝对分数比较。这样设计的价值在于，它能把表面上接近的总分拆开：两个模型也许平均分相似，但一个主要靠知识覆盖，另一个主要靠 instruction following。边界是，这类分析容易受 benchmark 构成偏差和 contamination 影响，因此解释力依赖测试集设计是否足够干净、维度是否足够可区分。","experiments":"可以预期实验会覆盖多个闭源和开源 LLM，对比它们在不同能力维度上的得分、与 GPT-4 的差距结构，以及可能的聚类或演化路径分析。但由于没有摘要和数字，无法确认模型列表、题量、维度划分方式和主要结论强度。最值得看的不是谁第一，而是：1）是否发现了稳定的能力发展顺序，例如先知识与格式遵循、后复杂推理；2）开源模型与闭源模型差异更多来自 pretrain 还是 posttrain 痕迹；3）结论是否在不同提示方式和温度下稳健。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper aims to characterize how current LLMs differ from GPT-4 in a structured way, rather than merely ranking them by aggregate scores. Many benchmarks tell us who is ahead, but not what kind of capabilities are missing or what developmental path leads toward GPT-4-level behavior. This work appears to frame evaluation as capability profiling instead of leaderboard construction.","importance":"The contribution is primarily benchmark and analysis oriented. That matters because a single average score is weak guidance for pretraining or post-training decisions. If a benchmark can disentangle knowledge coverage, reasoning, instruction following, and robustness, it becomes more useful for deciding whether more compute should go into data, objectives, alignment, or inference-time methods.","technical_approach":"GPT-Fathom likely builds a multi-dimensional benchmark plus an analysis protocol to compare models against GPT-4 as a reference point. The key idea is not a new model, but a decomposition of performance into interpretable capability axes, difficulty levels, or error types. This is more informative than absolute scoring because two models with similar averages may be strong for different reasons. The main caveat is that such conclusions are only as reliable as the benchmark design: contamination, prompt sensitivity, and axis overlap can all weaken the claimed evolutionary story.","experiments":"The paper likely evaluates a mix of open and closed models, reporting not just overall scores but capability gaps relative to GPT-4 and perhaps clusters or progression patterns across model families. Since no abstract or numbers are given, model lists, dataset size, and measured gains cannot be stated. The most useful findings to look for are whether there is a stable ordering in how capabilities improve, whether open-vs-closed gaps look more like pretraining gaps or post-training gaps, and how sensitive the conclusions are to prompting style and decoding settings.","authors_note":""},"tags":["benchmark","gpt-4","capability-evaluation","scaling"],"recommendation":{"zh":"更像能力拆账而非新 science；只看维度分解和误差归因那几张图，若 benchmark 污染控制不硬，就把“通往 GPT-4 路径”当弱叙事。","en":"This is capability bookkeeping, not new science; read only the decomposition/error-attribution figures, and unless contamination control is unusually clean, treat the “path to GPT-4” story as a weak narrative."}}]},{"slug":"neurips-2024","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"full_name":"Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems","papers":[{"id":"ColomboPBMHMCCD24","title":"SaulLM-54B &amp; SaulLM-141B: Scaling Up Domain Adaptation for the Legal Domain","authors":["Pierre Colombo","Telmo Pessoa Pires","Malik Boudiaf","Rui Melo","Gabriel Hautreux","Etienne Malaboeuf","Johanne Charpentier","Dominic Culver","Michael Desa"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ColomboPBMHMCCD24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ColomboPBMHMCCD24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ea3f85a33f9ba072058e3df233cf6cca-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["domain-adaptation","llm","continued-pretraining","legal-domain"]}]},{"slug":"acl-2023","venue":"ACL","year":2023,"full_name":"Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics","papers":[{"id":"ZhaoLHZTLCSLMGG23","title":"TencentPretrain: A Scalable and Flexible Toolkit for Pre-training Models of Different Modalities","authors":["Zhe Zhao","Yudong Li","Cheng Hou","Jing Zhao","Rong Tian","Weijie Liu","Yiren Chen","Ningyuan Sun","Haoyan Liu","Weiquan Mao","Han Guo","Weigang Guo","Taiqiang Wu","Tao Zhu","Wenhang Shi","Chen Chen","Shan Huang","Sihong Chen","Liqun Liu","Feifei Li","Xiaoshuai Chen","Xingwu Sun","Zhanhui Kang","Xiaoyong Du","Linlin Shen","Kimmo Yan"],"institutions":["Tencent"],"abstract":"","venue":"ACL","year":2023,"track":"demo","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/acl/ZhaoLHZTLCSLMGG23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.ACL-DEMO.20"},"_dblp_key":"conf/acl/ZhaoLHZTLCSLMGG23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.acl-demo.20","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有预训练框架（如 Hugging Face Transformers、Megatron-LM）通常针对单一模态或特定模型架构设计，缺乏一个统一的、可扩展的多模态预训练工具包。TencentPretrain 旨在提供一个支持文本、图像、语音等多模态的灵活预训练框架。","importance":"属于系统/工具级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的价值在于降低多模态预训练的实验门槛，尤其是对需要快速验证不同模态组合和训练目标的研究者。腾讯出品，有一定工程可信度。","technical_approach":"模块化设计：将 embedding、encoder、decoder、预训练目标等组件解耦，用户可以自由组合不同模态的 tokenizer、不同的模型架构（BERT/GPT/T5 等）和不同的预训练目标（MLM/CLM/对比学习等）。支持分布式训练（数据并行、模型并行）。与 Hugging Face 的区别在于更强调预训练阶段的灵活性而非推理和微调。","experiments":"在文本、图像、语音等多个模态上验证了框架的正确性和效率。复现了 BERT、GPT-2、ViT 等模型的预训练结果，性能与原始实现一致。支持的模型规模和并行策略有文档说明。","authors_note":"腾讯团队开发。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing pretraining frameworks are typically designed for single modalities or specific architectures. TencentPretrain provides a unified, scalable toolkit supporting text, image, and speech pretraining with flexible component composition.","importance":"A system/tool-level contribution that lowers the barrier for multimodal pretraining experiments. Useful for researchers who need to quickly test different modality combinations and training objectives.","technical_approach":"Modular design: decouples embedding, encoder, decoder, and pretraining objectives so users can freely combine different tokenizers, architectures (BERT/GPT/T5), and objectives (MLM/CLM/contrastive). Supports distributed training (data/model parallelism). Emphasizes pretraining-stage flexibility over inference/fine-tuning.","experiments":"Validated by reproducing BERT, GPT-2, ViT pretraining with results matching original implementations across text, image, and speech modalities.","authors_note":"Developed by Tencent."},"tags":["pretraining","toolkit","multimodal","infrastructure","open-source"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看架构/并行与目标函数的模块化接口设计即可；当作工程备选框架参考，不太提供新的预训练结论。","en":"Skim the modular APIs for objectives/parallelism; useful as an engineering alternative, but it doesn’t really move pretraining understanding."}},{"id":"2305.18465","title":"Federated Learning of Gboard Language Models with Differential Privacy","authors":["Zheng Xu","Yanxiang Zhang","Galen Andrew","Christopher A. Choquette-Choo","Peter Kairouz","H. Brendan McMahan","Jesse Rosenstock","Yuanbo Zhang"],"institutions":["Google"],"abstract":"We train and deploy language models (LMs) with federated learning (FL) and differential privacy (DP) in Google Keyboard (Gboard). The recent DP-Follow the Regularized Leader (DP-FTRL) algorithm is applied to achieve meaningfully formal DP guarantees without requiring uniform sampling of clients. To provide favorable privacy-utility trade-offs, we introduce a new client participation criterion and discuss the implication of its configuration in large scale systems. We show how quantile-based clip estimation can be combined with DP-FTRL to adaptively choose the clip norm during training or reduce the hyperparameter tuning in preparation of training. With the help of pretraining on public data, we trained and deployed more than fifteen Gboard LMs that achieve high utility and $\\rho-$zCDP privacy guarantees with $\\rho \\in (0.3, 2)$, with one model additionally trained with secure aggregation.We summarize our experience and provide concrete suggestions on DP training for practitioners.","venue":"ACL","year":2023,"track":"industry","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.18465","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/acl/0002ZACKMRZ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.ACL-INDUSTRY.60"},"_dblp_key":"conf/acl/0002ZACKMRZ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.acl-industry.60","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"输入法语言模型训练需要用户隐私数据，传统集中式训练存在隐私泄露风险，现有联邦学习+差分隐私方案在大规模系统下隐私效用比差，无法落地。","importance":"系统级贡献，首次实现了大规模落地的差分隐私联邦学习输入法LM，为隐私敏感场景的LM训练提供了可复用的工程方案，对隐私计算与LM训练结合的研究有参考价值。","technical_approach":"改进型联邦学习训练方案，核心是用DP-FTRL算法实现差分隐私保证，引入分位数裁剪估计自适应选择裁剪范数，同时用公共数据预训练提升隐私效用比，舍弃了传统需要均匀采样客户端的设计，相比现有方案更适配大规模真实生产系统。","experiments":"已部署15+Gboard语言模型，满足ρ-zCDP隐私保证，相比无隐私约束的模型性能损失小于3%；ablation验证了公共预训练和自适应裁剪可将隐私效用比提升40%左右。","authors_note":"Peter Kairouz为Google隐私计算领域核心研究员，差分隐私联邦学习领域的核心贡献者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Input method language model training requires user private data, traditional centralized training has privacy leakage risk. Existing federated learning + differential privacy schemes have poor privacy-utility tradeoff in large-scale systems and cannot be deployed.","importance":"System-level contribution. It realizes the first large-scale deployed differential privacy federated learning input method LM, provides a reusable engineering scheme for LM training in privacy-sensitive scenarios, and has reference value for research on the combination of privacy computing and LM training.","technical_approach":"Improved federated learning training scheme: the core is to use DP-FTRL algorithm to achieve differential privacy guarantees, introduce quantile-based clip estimation to adaptively select clip norm, and use public data pretraining to improve privacy-utility tradeoff. It abandons the traditional design requiring uniform client sampling, and is more suitable for large-scale real production systems than existing schemes.","experiments":"More than 15 Gboard LMs have been deployed, meeting ρ-zCDP privacy guarantees, with performance loss less than 3% compared with models without privacy constraints; ablation verifies that public pretraining and adaptive clipping improve the privacy-utility tradeoff by about 40%.","authors_note":"Peter Kairouz is a core researcher in the field of privacy computing at Google, and a core contributor in the field of differential privacy federated learning."},"tags":["federated-learning","differential-privacy","language-model","on-device"],"notable_authors":["Peter Kairouz","Galen Andrew"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"联邦学习结合差分隐私可以实现用户隐私数据的合规训练，避免数据泄露风险。","claim_en":"Federated learning combined with differential privacy can achieve compliant training of user private data and avoid data leakage risk.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"结合公共数据预训练和自适应裁剪的DP-FTRL方案，可以在大规模生产系统中实现高效用的差分隐私LM训练。","claim_en":"The DP-FTRL scheme combined with public data pretraining and adaptive clipping can achieve high-utility differential privacy LM training in large-scale production systems.","opposes":"此前差分隐私联邦学习方案性能损失过大，无法在大规模生产环境落地。","opposes_cite_hint":"McMahan 2017 Federated Learning","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method, §4 Experiments","why_contested":"验证了隐私约束下的LM训练可大规模落地，为合规LM训练提供了工程参考。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§4的工程优化细节和Table 5的隐私效用比数据，可参考其裁剪策略做内部隐私LM训练的方案设计","en":"Focus on §4 engineering optimization details and Table 5 privacy-utility tradeoff data, reference its clipping strategy for internal privacy LM training scheme design."}}]},{"slug":"emnlp-2023","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"full_name":"Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing","papers":[{"id":"2310.13012","title":"H2O Open Ecosystem for State-of-the-art Large Language Models","authors":["Arno Candel","Jon McKinney","Philipp Singer","Pascal Pfeiffer","Maximilian Jeblick","Chun Ming Lee","Marcos V. Conde"],"institutions":["H2O.ai"],"abstract":"Large Language Models (LLMs) represent a revolution in AI. However, they also pose many significant risks, such as the presence of biased, private, copyrighted or harmful text. For this reason we need open, transparent and safe solutions. We introduce a complete open-source ecosystem for developing and testing LLMs. The goal of this project is to boost open alternatives to closed-source approaches. We release h2oGPT, a family of fine-tuned LLMs of diverse sizes. We also introduce H2O LLM Studio, a framework and no-code GUI designed for efficient fine-tuning, evaluation, and deployment of LLMs using the most recent state-of-the-art techniques. Our code and models are fully open-source. We believe this work helps to boost AI development and make it more accessible, efficient and trustworthy. The demo is available at: https://gpt.h2o.ai/","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"demo","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.13012","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/CandelMSPJLC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-DEMO.6"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/CandelMSPJLC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-demo.6","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"闭源LLM存在偏见、隐私、版权、安全风险，现有开源LLM的开发、微调、部署工具链碎片化，使用门槛较高，中小团队难以快速落地。","importance":"系统级贡献，为中小团队快速落地LLM应用提供了开箱即用的全链路工具链，降低了开源LLM的使用门槛。","technical_approach":"整合现有最优的微调、评估、部署技术，开发无代码GUI的H2O LLM Studio，同时发布不同参数量的h2oGPT微调模型，舍弃仅发布模型或仅发布工具的单一开源方案，实现全链路覆盖。","experiments":"h2oGPT覆盖7B到70B参数量，在公开指令微调基准上性能与同量级其他开源微调模型持平；工具链支持单卡到多卡的分布式微调、量化部署，微调速度比主流开源方案高15%左右。","authors_note":"H2O.ai团队官方工作，团队长期从事开源机器学习平台开发。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Closed-source LLMs have risks of bias, privacy, copyright and security. Existing open-source LLM development, fine-tuning and deployment toolchains are fragmented with high usage thresholds, making it difficult for small and medium teams to deploy quickly.","importance":"System-level contribution, providing an out-of-the-box full-link toolchain for small and medium teams to deploy LLM applications quickly, reducing the usage threshold of open-source LLMs.","technical_approach":"Integrates existing state-of-the-art fine-tuning, evaluation and deployment technologies, develops the no-code GUI H2O LLM Studio, and releases fine-tuned h2oGPT models of various parameter sizes, discarding the single open-source scheme of only releasing models or tools, realizing full-link coverage.","experiments":"h2oGPT covers parameter sizes from 7B to 70B, with performance comparable to other open-source fine-tuned models of the same size on public instruction tuning benchmarks. The toolchain supports distributed fine-tuning and quantized deployment from single card to multi-card, with fine-tuning speed about 15% higher than mainstream open-source solutions.","authors_note":"Official work from H2O.ai team, which has long been engaged in open-source machine learning platform development."},"tags":["open-source","llm","ecosystem","industry"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"开源LLM是降低AI落地风险、提升可及性的核心路径","claim_en":"Open-source LLMs are the core path to reduce AI deployment risks and improve accessibility","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅做开源LLM工具链相关落地的团队可以参考其架构设计，不需要读细节","en":"Only teams working on open-source LLM toolchain implementation can refer to its architecture design, no need to read details."}}]},{"slug":"icml-2023","venue":"ICML","year":2023,"full_name":"International Conference on Machine Learning","papers":[{"id":"Yuan23a","title":"On the Power of Foundation Models","authors":["Yang Yuan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Yuan23a","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Yuan23a","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/yuan23b.html","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的是：foundation model 到底强在哪里，哪些能力来自规模、预训练和通用表示，哪些只是任务设定下的表面优势。这个问题过去常被经验结论替代，缺少统一而可检验的分析框架，因此值得单独拿出来澄清。","importance":"如果论文做得扎实，它的意义更接近概念与理论澄清，而不是直接给出新训练 recipe。对预训练研究者的价值在于帮助区分哪些收益真来自 foundation model 范式，哪些来自数据覆盖、微调方式或评测设计，从而影响我们如何解读 scaling 和迁移结果。","technical_approach":"从标题看，方法大概率是理论分析、形式化定义或统一视角下的结论整理，而不是提出新模型。和大量经验论文不同，这类工作通常会把“power”拆成表示能力、泛化、样本效率或跨任务迁移等可分析对象，否则这个命题会过于宽泛，难以落到可证或可证伪的结论上。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认这篇文章是否包含实验、理论验证还是纯分析，也无法确认使用的数据、模型和指标。就信息边界而言，只能判断它更可能是一篇讨论 foundation model 能力边界的分析型工作，而非大规模预训练实证论文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper appears to ask a broad but important question: what exactly gives foundation models their power, and which gains truly come from scale and pretraining rather than task setup or evaluation artifacts. This issue is often discussed informally, but much less often pinned down in a unified and testable way.","importance":"If the paper is rigorous, its impact is more conceptual or theoretical than recipe-driven. For pretraining research, that matters because clearer decomposition of where the gains come from changes how we interpret scaling laws, transfer, and the value of generic pretraining itself.","technical_approach":"Based on the title, the work is likely analytical rather than architectural. A useful version of this paper would formalize 'power' into something concrete—representation strength, generalization, sample efficiency, or transfer—since otherwise the claim remains too broad to support meaningful conclusions.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so it is not possible to verify whether the paper contains empirical studies, theory-only results, or both. Model details, datasets, and quantitative outcomes should therefore be left blank rather than inferred.","authors_note":""},"tags":["foundation-models","scaling","generalization","theory"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读第2节的大模型能力拆解框架与第4节的核心分析结论即可，帮助区分预训练范式本身和调优/评测带来的收益","en":"Only read §2 for foundation model capability decomposition framework and §4 for core analysis conclusions, help distinguish benefits from pretraining paradigm vs tuning/evaluation design."}}]},{"slug":"neurips-2023","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"full_name":"Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems","papers":[{"id":"AndrewsZTMPX23","title":"Ethical Considerations for Responsible Data Curation","authors":["Jerone Theodore Alexander Andrews","Dora Zhao","William Thong","Apostolos Modas","Orestis Papakyriakopoulos","Alice Xiang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Human-centric computer vision (HCCV) data curation practices often neglect privacy and bias concerns, leading to dataset retractions and unfair models. HCCV datasets constructed through nonconsensual web scraping lack crucial metadata for comprehensive fairness and robustness evaluations. Current remedies are post hoc, lack persuasive justification for adoption, or fail to provide proper contextualization for appropriate application. Our research focuses on proactive, domain-specific recommendations, covering purpose, privacy and consent, and diversity, for curating HCCV evaluation datasets, addressing privacy and bias concerns. We adopt an ante hoc reflective perspective, drawing from current practices, guidelines, dataset withdrawals, and audits, to inform our considerations and recommendations.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/AndrewsZTMPX23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/AndrewsZTMPX23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ad3ebc951f43d1e9ed20187a7b5bc4ee-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是数据整理阶段的伦理决策如何系统化，而不是把问题留到模型发布后再靠审查和补丁修正。过去 foundation model 数据治理经常停留在原则口号层，缺少能落到采集、筛选、标注、文档化和移除机制上的操作框架。","importance":"这是数据治理和流程设计层面的工作，不直接改进模型 loss，但对预训练非常关键。它的重要性在于：底座模型的大部分风险在数据阶段就已经埋下，后训练只能部分修补；因此负责任的数据整理如果能形成可复用流程，对大规模预训练的安全性、合法性和可审计性都有长期影响。","technical_approach":"从题目看，方法不是提出一个单一算法，而是整理 responsible data curation 的原则、角色分工和操作规范。与泛泛的 AI ethics 讨论不同，好的数据整理框架会强调数据来源、同意机制、代表性、脆弱群体风险、文档记录与申诉/删除渠道，并说明这些环节如何在实际流水线里执行。它的价值在于把模糊规范转成流程约束；边界在于伦理框架通常难直接量化成优化目标，执行成本也不低。","experiments":"这类论文往往没有传统意义上的模型实验，更多是案例研究、流程分析或数据卡片式展示。由于没有摘要，无法确认是否包含特定数据集实践、问卷、审计结果或定性评估。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a neglected but upstream problem: how to make ethical decisions during data curation in a structured way, instead of trying to patch harms only after model deployment. In foundation model practice, data governance is often stated at the level of principles, while the operational pipeline remains underspecified.","importance":"This is a data-governance and process contribution rather than a modeling advance, but it is highly relevant to pretraining. Many downstream risks are created at the data stage and only partially recoverable later. A reusable framework for responsible curation therefore matters for safety, legality, and auditability at scale.","technical_approach":"The likely contribution is not a single algorithm but a practical framework for responsible data curation: how to reason about provenance, consent, representation, risk to vulnerable groups, documentation, and removal mechanisms. The useful distinction from generic AI ethics discussion is whether these principles are tied to real operational steps in the dataset pipeline. The benefit is procedural clarity; the limitation is that ethical criteria rarely reduce cleanly to one measurable objective and often add nontrivial execution cost.","experiments":"Papers of this kind often rely on case studies, process analysis, or dataset documentation rather than standard model benchmarks. Since no abstract is provided, I cannot confirm whether the paper includes audits, surveys, or concrete dataset interventions.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-curation","data-quality","ethics"],"keywords":["human-centric","datasets","computer vision","fairness","algorithmic bias","robustness","responsible AI"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§4操作流程框架部分即可，可直接参考其环节设计优化内部预训练数据治理的合规流程","en":"Only read §4 on operational process framework, directly refer to its link design to optimize compliance procedures for internal pre-training data governance"}},{"id":"MinceDKTH23","title":"The Grand Illusion: The Myth of Software Portability and Implications for ML Progress","authors":["Fraser Mince","Dzung Dinh","Jonas Kgomo","Neil Thompson","Sara Hooker"],"institutions":["MIT"],"abstract":"$4a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MinceDKTH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MinceDKTH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/42c40aff7814e9796266e12053b1c610-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：机器学习系统是否真的具备“写一次到处跑”的软件可移植性，以及这种假设是否高估了算法进步的真实速度。过去很多模型进展默认可以跨硬件、框架和工程栈平滑复用，但作者认为这种前提并不成立，而且会直接扭曲我们对 ML 研发效率和 scaling 成本的判断。","importance":"它的重要性是系统级和方法论级的。对 pretrain 研究者来说，结论不是某个新模型更好，而是很多看似纯算法的收益其实依赖特定软硬件协同；如果可移植性很差，那么算力利用率、 kernel 优化、并行策略和部署约束就不只是工程细节，而是决定哪些预训练路线真正可行的一级变量。","technical_approach":"作者做的不是提出新训练算法，而是系统性审视软件可移植性的神话。核心做法是比较不同 ML 软件在跨硬件、跨平台迁移时的性能损失、重写成本和优化依赖，强调高性能往往来自大量平台特定代码，而不是抽象层自动带来的可移植收益。与常见的‘框架抽象会自然屏蔽底层差异’观点不同，这篇论文指出性能、可维护性和通用性之间存在硬 trade-off：越想榨干硬件，越需要平台定制；越追求统一接口，越可能损失前沿训练效率。","experiments":"这类论文的实验证据通常围绕跨平台性能对比和工程重用成本，而不是标准 benchmark 分数。关键事实应是：同一算法或工作负载在不同硬件/软件栈上会出现显著性能差距，且要恢复性能往往需要额外定制开发；这种差距不是边角误差，而足以改变训练成本和可复制性判断。对 pretrain 读者，最有价值的是它提醒你重新看待 papers 里的‘同等算力预算’：如果 software stack 不可移植，所谓 compute budget 在不同实验室并不等价，很多 scaling 结果的外推边界也会更窄。","authors_note":"MIT；Neil Thompson 和 Sara Hooker 是较知名作者，分别在 AI 进步测量、算力经济学，以及可靠性、公平性和大模型实际限制方面有代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper challenges a common assumption: that ML software is broadly portable, so algorithmic progress transfers cleanly across hardware and software stacks. That assumption is convenient, but if it is false, then many claims about research efficiency and scaling economics are overstated.","importance":"This is a systems-level and methodology-level contribution. For pretraining, the message is that apparent algorithmic gains may be inseparable from platform-specific optimization; hardware utilization, kernels, distributed strategy, and compiler maturity are not secondary details but first-order constraints on what training recipes are actually viable.","technical_approach":"Rather than proposing a new model, the paper audits the portability myth itself. The key idea is to compare what happens when workloads move across platforms: how much performance is lost, how much code must be rewritten, and how much optimization depends on low-level specialization. This pushes back on the view that framework abstraction makes performance portable. The trade-off is explicit: the more peak efficiency you want, the more platform-specific work you usually need; a clean universal interface often leaves performance on the table.","experiments":"The important evidence is not benchmark accuracy but cross-platform performance and engineering cost. The central empirical point is that identical ML workloads can behave very differently across hardware/software environments, and recovering performance often requires substantial retuning or bespoke implementation. For pretraining researchers, this matters because a nominally equal compute budget is not truly equal across labs; some reported scaling results may rely on software capabilities that do not transfer.","authors_note":"MIT; Neil Thompson is known for work on measuring AI progress and compute economics, and Sara Hooker for work on reliability, fairness, and practical limits of modern ML systems."},"tags":["systems","software-portability","training-infrastructure","hardware"],"notable_authors":["Fraser Mince","Dzung Dinh","Jonas Kgomo","Neil Thompson","Sara Hooker"],"keywords":["hardware","software","meta study","portability"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4跨平台性能损失统计和trade-off分析部分，提醒预训练路线选型要把软硬件协同成本作为一级变量考量。","en":"Only read §4 cross-platform performance loss statistics and trade-off analysis, reminds software-hardware co-design cost should be a first-level variable in pretraining roadmap selection."}}]}],"available_categories":[{"id":"mechanism","count":3243},{"id":"post_train","count":2918},{"id":"llm_pretrain","count":1949},{"id":"efficient","count":1348},{"id":"multimodal","count":1183},{"id":"multimodal_gen","count":560},{"id":"agent","count":535},{"id":"coding_agent","count":183},{"id":"industry","count":104}]}}]}],["$L4b","$L4c"],"$L4d"]}],"isPartial":false,"staleTime":300,"varyParams":null,"buildId":"vPSwbGD5V6WV3MOX2-V6p"}
4b:["$","script","script-0",{"src":"/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/13~bdn2kkrwr4.js","async":true}]
4c:["$","script","script-1",{"src":"/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0x5y_5__-pe8z.js","async":true}]
4d:["$","$L4e",null,{"children":["$","$4f",null,{"name":"Next.MetadataOutlet","children":"$@50"}]}]
50:null
