1:"$Sreact.fragment"
2:I[44048,["/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0u8r51s9xyykl.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0d3shmwh5_nmn.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0eajwm.uf2h.~.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/03ne4hgh5k61l.js"],"ConferenceView"]
89:I[97367,["/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0u8r51s9xyykl.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0d3shmwh5_nmn.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0eajwm.uf2h.~.js"],"OutletBoundary"]
8a:"$Sreact.suspense"
3:T435,Language Models (LMs) pre-trained with self-supervision on large text corpora have become the default starting point for developing models for various NLP tasks. Once the pre-training corpus has been assembled, all data samples in the corpus are treated with equal importance during LM pre-training. However, due to varying levels of relevance and quality of data, equal importance to all the data samples may not be the optimal choice. While data reweighting has been explored in the context of task-specific supervised learning and LM fine-tuning, model-driven reweighting for pre-training data has not been explored. We fill this important gap and propose PRESENCE, a method for jointly reweighting samples by leveraging self-influence (SI) scores as an indicator of sample importance and pre-training. PRESENCE promotes novelty and stability for model pre-training. Through extensive analysis spanning multiple model sizes, datasets, and tasks, we present PRESENCE as an important first step in the research direction of sample reweighting for pre-training language models.4:T622,Modern ML systems ingest data aggregated from diverse sources, such as synthetic, human-annotated, and live customer traffic. Understanding \textit{which} examples are important to the performance of a learning algorithm is crucial for efficient model training. Recently, a growing body of literature has given rise to various"influence scores,"which use training artifacts such as model confidence or checkpointed gradients to identify important subsets of data. However, these methods have primarily been developed in computer vision settings, and it remains unclear how well they generalize to language-based tasks using pretrained models. In this paper, we explore the applicability of influence scores in language classification tasks. We evaluate a diverse subset of these scores on the SNLI dataset by quantifying accuracy changes in response to pruning training data through random and influence-score-based sampling. We then stress-test one of the scores --"variance of gradients"(VoG) from Agarwal et al. (2022) -- in an NLU model stack that was exposed to dynamic user speech patterns in a voice assistant type of setting. Our experiments demonstrate that in many cases, encoder-based language models can be finetuned on roughly 50% of the original data without degradation in performance metrics. Along the way, we summarize lessons learned from applying out-of-the-box implementations of influence scores, quantify the effects of noisy and class-imbalanced data, and offer recommendations on score-based sampling for better accuracy and training efficiency.5:T40a,How to reduce compute and memory requirements of neural networks (NNs) without sacrificing performance? Many recent works use sparse Mixtures of Experts (MoEs) to build resource-efficient large language models (LMs). Here we introduce several novel perspectives on MoEs, presenting a general framework that unifies various methods to approximate two-layer NNs (e.g., feedforward blocks of Transformers), including product-key memories (PKMs). Leveraging insights from this framework, we propose methods to improve both MoEs and PKMs. Unlike prior work that compares MoEs with dense baselines under the compute-equal condition, our evaluation condition is parameter-equal, which is crucial to properly evaluate LMs. We show that our MoEs are competitive with the dense Transformer-XL on both the WikiText-103 and enwiki8 datasets at two different scales, while being much more resource efficient. This demonstrates that MoEs are relevant not only to extremely large LMs but also to any-scale resource-efficient LMs. Our code is public.6:T4dc,In this study, we highlight the importance of enhancing the quality of pretraining data in multilingual language models. Existing web crawls have demonstrated quality issues, particularly in the context of low-resource languages. Consequently, we introduce a new multilingual pretraining corpus for 16 African languages, designed by carefully auditing existing pretraining corpora to understand and rectify prevalent quality issues. To compile this dataset, we undertake a rigorous examination of current data sources for thirteen languages within one of the most extensive multilingual web crawls, mC4, and extract cleaner data through meticulous auditing and improved web crawling strategies. Subsequently, we pretrain a new T5-based model on this dataset and evaluate its performance on multiple downstream tasks. Our model demonstrates better down-stream effectiveness over existing pretrained models across four NLP tasks, underscoring the critical role data quality plays in pretraining language models in low-resource scenarios. Specifically, on cross-lingual QA evaluation, our new model is more than twice as effective as multilingual T5. All code, data and model are publicly available at https: //github.com/castorini/AfriTeVa-keji .7:T42a,We propose Speculative Decoding (SpecDec), for the first time ever, to formally study exploiting the idea of speculative execution to accelerate autoregressive (AR) decoding. Speculative Decoding has two innovations: Spec-Drafter -- an independent model specially optimized for efficient and accurate drafting -- and Spec-Verification -- a reliable method for verifying the drafted tokens efficiently in the decoding paradigm. Experimental results on various seq2seq tasks including machine translation and abstractive summarization show our approach can achieve around $5\times$ speedup for the popular Transformer architectures with comparable generation quality to beam search decoding, refreshing the impression that the draft-then-verify paradigm introduces only $1.4\times$$\sim$$2\times$ speedup. In addition to the remarkable speedup, we also demonstrate 3 additional advantages of SpecDec, revealing its practical value for accelerating generative models in real-world applications. Our models and codes are available at https://github.com/hemingkx/SpecDec.8:T400,Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive performance on a range of Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks. Unfortunately, the immense amount of computations and memory accesses required for LLM training makes them prohibitively expensive in terms of hardware cost, and thus challenging to deploy in use cases such as on-device learning. In this paper, motivated by the observation that LLM training is memory-bound, we propose a novel dynamic quantization strategy, termed Dynamic Stashing Quantization (DSQ), that puts a special focus on reducing the memory operations, but also enjoys the other benefits of low precision training, such as the reduced arithmetic cost. We conduct a thorough study on two translation tasks (trained-from-scratch) and three classification tasks (fine-tuning). DSQ reduces the amount of arithmetic operations by $20.95\times$ and the number of DRAM operations by $2.55\times$ on IWSLT17 compared to the standard 16-bit fixed-point, which is widely used in on-device learning.9:T4fc,Recent work suggests that large language models (LLMs) achieve higher accuracy on multi-step reasoning tasks when prompted to generate intermediate reasoning steps, or a chain of thought (CoT), before their final answer. However, it is unclear how exactly CoTs improve LLMs’ accuracy, and in particular, if LLMs use their CoTs to reason to their final answers. This paper tries to answer this question with respect to arithmetic word problems, by (i) evaluating the correctness of LLMs’ CoTs, and (ii) using causal abstraction to assess if the intermediate tokens produced as part of a CoT causally impact LLMs’ final answers, in line with the reasoning described by the CoT. We find that for CoT-prompted LLMs, correct answers to arithmetic problems are highly correlated with correct CoTs, and that when LLMs produce correct CoTs, they realize to a fairly large extent the causal models suggested by their CoTs. Higher degrees of realization also seem associated with better overall accuracy on the arithmetic problems. These findings suggest that some CoT-prompted LLMs may do better on multi-step arithmetic reasoning at least partly because they use their CoTs to reason to their final answers. However, for some LLMs, other internal processes may also be involved.a:T532,The curse of multilinguality in training multi-lingual pretrained language models (mPLMs) refers to the negative interference between languages, especially when the capacity is limited. While increasing the capacity may appear intuitive for overcoming this curse, it negatively affects both training and inference costs. Our distinction is pursuing the competing goals of reducing negative interference, while keeping the capacity per each language more or less the same. Specifically, we first scale the model to reduce interference, then search for a per-language subnetwork, or a lottery ticket, with comparable performance to the full model. According to lottery ticket hypothesis, this scale-then-find-ticket approach alleviates interfering signals as in the scaled model, but redistributes parameters to keep the parameters reduced. Finally, to avoid the cost of multiple retraining for searching multilingual tickets, we explore zero-shot neural architecture search (NAS) methods. We investigate the most appropriate zero-shot NAS method to find multilingual tickets. Our proposed multilingual tickets reduce the inference cost of models for each languages, while boosting the performances. The ticket search cost is negligible and tickets found qualitatively preserve linguistic similarity. Our code is publicly available.b:T57a,Fine-tuning on instruction data has been widely validated as an effective practice for implementing chat language models like ChatGPT. Scaling the diversity and quality of such data, although straightforward, stands a great chance of leading to improved performance. This paper aims to improve the upper bound of open-source models further. We first provide a systematically designed, diverse, informative, large-scale dataset of instructional conversations, UltraChat, which does not involve human queries. Our objective is to capture the breadth of interactions that a human might have with an AI assistant and employs a comprehensive framework to generate multi-turn conversation iteratively. UltraChat contains 1.5 million high-quality multi-turn dialogues and covers a wide range of topics and instructions. Our statistical analysis of UltraChat reveals its superiority in various key metrics, including scale, average length, diversity, coherence, etc., solidifying its position as a leading open-source dataset. Building upon UltraChat, we fine-tune a LLaMA model to create a powerful conversational model, UltraLLaMA. Our evaluations indicate that UltraLLaMA consistently outperforms other open-source models, including Vicuna, the previously recognized state-of-the-art open-source model. The dataset and the model will be publicly released\footnote{\url{https://github.com/thunlp/UltraChat}}.c:T5aa,Transformer-based language models (LMs) are known to capture factual knowledge in their parameters. While previous work looked into where factual associations are stored, only little is known about how they are retrieved internally during inference. We investigate this question through the lens of information flow. Given a subject-relation query, we study how the model aggregates information about the subject and relation to predict the correct attribute. With interventions on attention edges, we first identify two critical points where information propagates to the prediction: one from the relation positions followed by another from the subject positions. Next, by analyzing the information at these points, we unveil a three-step internal mechanism for attribute extraction. First, the representation at the last-subject position goes through an enrichment process, driven by the early MLP sublayers, to encode many subject-related attributes. Second, information from the relation propagates to the prediction. Third, the prediction representation"queries"the enriched subject to extract the attribute. Perhaps surprisingly, this extraction is typically done via attention heads, which often encode subject-attribute mappings in their parameters. Overall, our findings introduce a comprehensive view of how factual associations are stored and extracted internally in LMs, facilitating future research on knowledge localization and editing.d:T506,Variational autoencoders (VAEs) are a popular family of generative models with wide applicability. Training VAEs, especially for text, often runs into the issue of posterior collapse, resulting in loss of representation quality. Deterministic autoencoders avoid this issue, and have been explored particularly well for images. It is however unclear how to best modify a deterministic model designed for images into a successful one for text. We show that with suitable adaptations, we can significantly improve on batch-normed VAEs (BN-VAEs), a strong benchmark for language modeling with VAEs, by replacing them with analogous deterministic models. We employ techniques from contrastive learning to control the entropy of the aggregate posterior of these models to make it Gaussian. The resulting models skip reparametrization steps in VAE modeling and avoid posterior collapse, while outperforming a broad range of VAE models on text generation and downstream tasks from representations. These improvements are shown to be consistent across both LSTM and Transformer-based VAE architectures. Appropriate comparisons to BERT/GPT-2 based results are also included. We also qualitatively examine the latent space through interpolation to supplement the quantitative aspects of the model.e:T41e,Large language models (LLMs) have been applied in various applications due to their astonishing capabilities. With advancements in technologies such as chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting and in-context learning (ICL), the prompts fed to LLMs are becoming increasingly lengthy, even exceeding tens of thousands of tokens. To accelerate model inference and reduce cost, this paper presents LLMLingua, a coarse-to-fine prompt compression method that involves a budget controller to maintain semantic integrity under high compression ratios, a token-level iterative compression algorithm to better model the interdependence between compressed contents, and an instruction tuning based method for distribution alignment between language models. We conduct experiments and analysis over four datasets from different scenarios, i.e., GSM8K, BBH, ShareGPT, and Arxiv-March23; showing that the proposed approach yields state-of-the-art performance and allows for up to 20x compression with little performance loss. Our code is available at https://aka.ms/LLMLingua.f:T54e,Despite the remarkable ability of large language models (LMs) to comprehend and generate language, they have a tendency to hallucinate and create factually inaccurate output. Augmenting LMs by retrieving information from external knowledge resources is one promising solution. Most existing retrieval augmented LMs employ a retrieve-and-generate setup that only retrieves information once based on the input. This is limiting, however, in more general scenarios involving generation of long texts, where continually gathering information throughout generation is essential. In this work, we provide a generalized view of active retrieval augmented generation, methods that actively decide when and what to retrieve across the course of the generation. We propose Forward-Looking Active REtrieval augmented generation (FLARE), a generic method which iteratively uses a prediction of the upcoming sentence to anticipate future content, which is then utilized as a query to retrieve relevant documents to regenerate the sentence if it contains low-confidence tokens. We test FLARE along with baselines comprehensively over 4 long-form knowledge-intensive generation tasks/datasets. FLARE achieves superior or competitive performance on all tasks, demonstrating the effectiveness of our method. Code and datasets are available at https://github.com/jzbjyb/FLARE.10:T554,Instruction tuning (IT) achieves impressive zero-shot generalization results by training large language models (LLMs) on a massive amount of diverse tasks with instructions. However, how to select new tasks to improve the performance and generalizability of IT models remains an open question. Training on all existing tasks is impractical due to prohibiting computation requirements, and randomly selecting tasks can lead to suboptimal performance. In this work, we propose active instruction tuning based on prompt uncertainty, a novel framework to identify informative tasks, and then actively tune the models on the selected tasks. We represent the informativeness of new tasks with the disagreement of the current model outputs over perturbed prompts. Our experiments on NIV2 and Self-Instruct datasets demonstrate that our method consistently outperforms other baseline strategies for task selection, achieving better out-of-distribution generalization with fewer training tasks. Additionally, we introduce a task map that categorizes and diagnoses tasks based on prompt uncertainty and prediction probability. We discover that training on ambiguous (prompt-uncertain) tasks improves generalization while training on difficult (prompt-certain and low-probability) tasks offers no benefit, underscoring the importance of task selection for instruction tuning.11:T6f2,A key technology for the development of large language models (LLMs) involves instruction tuning that helps align the models' responses with human expectations to realize impressive learning abilities. Two major approaches for instruction tuning characterize supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF), which are currently applied to produce the best commercial LLMs (e.g., ChatGPT). To improve the accessibility of LLMs for research and development efforts, various instruction-tuned open-source LLMs have also been introduced recently, e.g., Alpaca, Vicuna, to name a few. However, existing open-source LLMs have only been instruction-tuned for English and a few popular languages, thus hindering their impacts and accessibility to many other languages in the world. Among a few very recent work to explore instruction tuning for LLMs in multiple languages, SFT has been used as the only approach to instruction-tune LLMs for multiple languages. This has left a significant gap for fine-tuned LLMs based on RLHF in diverse languages and raised important questions on how RLHF can boost the performance of multilingual instruction tuning. To overcome this issue, we present Okapi, the first system with instruction-tuned LLMs based on RLHF for multiple languages. Okapi introduces instruction and response-ranked data in 26 diverse languages to facilitate the experiments and development of future multilingual LLM research. We also present benchmark datasets to enable the evaluation of generative LLMs in multiple languages. Our experiments demonstrate the advantages of RLHF for multilingual instruction over SFT for different base models and datasets. Our framework and resources are released at https://github.com/nlp-uoregon/Okapi.12:T501,Representational spaces learned via language modeling are fundamental to Natural Language Processing (NLP), however there has been limited understanding regarding how and when during training various types of linguistic information emerge and interact. Leveraging a novel information theoretic probing suite, which enables direct comparisons of not just task performance, but their representational subspaces, we analyze nine tasks covering syntax, semantics and reasoning, across 2M pre-training steps and five seeds. We identify critical learning phases across tasks and time, during which subspaces emerge, share information, and later disentangle to specialize. Across these phases, syntactic knowledge is acquired rapidly after 0.5% of full training. Continued performance improvements primarily stem from the acquisition of open-domain knowledge, while semantics and reasoning tasks benefit from later boosts to long-range contextualization and higher specialization. Measuring cross-task similarity further reveals that linguistically related tasks share information throughout training, and do so more during the critical phase of learning than before or after. Our findings have implications for model interpretability, multi-task learning, and learning from limited data.13:T50d,Recursion is a prominent feature of human language, and fundamentally challenging for self-attention due to the lack of an explicit recursive-state tracking mechanism. Consequently, Transformer language models poorly capture long-tail recursive structure and exhibit sample-inefficient syntactic generalization. This work introduces Pushdown Layers, a new self-attention layer that models recursive state via a stack tape that tracks estimated depths of every token in an incremental parse of the observed prefix. Transformer LMs with Pushdown Layers are syntactic language models that autoregressively and synchronously update this stack tape as they predict new tokens, in turn using the stack tape to softly modulate attention over tokens -- for instance, learning to"skip"over closed constituents. When trained on a corpus of strings annotated with silver constituency parses, Transformers equipped with Pushdown Layers achieve dramatically better and 3-5x more sample-efficient syntactic generalization, while maintaining similar perplexities. Pushdown Layers are a drop-in replacement for standard self-attention. We illustrate this by finetuning GPT2-medium with Pushdown Layers on an automatically parsed WikiText-103, leading to improvements on several GLUE text classification tasks.14:T417,Language Models (LMs) have shown impressive performance in various natural language tasks. However, when it comes to natural language reasoning, LMs still face challenges such as hallucination, generating incorrect intermediate reasoning steps, and making mathematical errors. Recent research has focused on enhancing LMs through self-improvement using feedback. Nevertheless, existing approaches relying on a single generic feedback source fail to address the diverse error types found in LM-generated reasoning chains. In this work, we propose Multi-Aspect Feedback, an iterative refinement framework that integrates multiple feedback modules, including frozen LMs and external tools, each focusing on a specific error category. Our experimental results demonstrate the efficacy of our approach to addressing several errors in the LM-generated reasoning chain and thus improving the overall performance of an LM in several reasoning tasks. We see a relative improvement of up to 20% in Mathematical Reasoning and up to 18% in Logical Entailment.15:T43f,The Universal Transformer (UT) is a variant of the Transformer that shares parameters across its layers. Empirical evidence shows that UTs have better compositional generalization than Vanilla Transformers (VTs) in formal language tasks. The parameter-sharing also affords it better parameter efficiency than VTs. Despite its many advantages, scaling UT parameters is much more compute and memory intensive than scaling up a VT. This paper proposes the Sparse Universal Transformer (SUT), which leverages Sparse Mixture of Experts (SMoE) and a new stick-breaking-based dynamic halting mechanism to reduce UT's computation complexity while retaining its parameter efficiency and generalization ability. Experiments show that SUT achieves the same performance as strong baseline models while only using half computation and parameters on WMT'14 and strong generalization results on formal language tasks (Logical inference and CFQ). The new halting mechanism also enables around 50\% reduction in computation during inference with very little performance decrease on formal language tasks.16:T778,Large language models (LLMs) pretrained on vast source code have achieved prominent progress in code intelligence. However, existing code LLMs have two main limitations in terms of architecture and pretraining tasks. First, they often adopt a specific architecture (encoder-only or decoder-only) or rely on a unified encoder-decoder network for different downstream tasks. The former paradigm is limited by inflexibility in applications while in the latter, the model is treated as a single system for all tasks, leading to suboptimal performance on a subset of tasks. Secondly, they often employ a limited set of pretraining objectives which might not be relevant to some downstream tasks and hence result in substantial performance degrade. To address these limitations, we propose ``CodeT5+'', a family of encoder-decoder LLMs for code in which component modules can be flexibly combined to suit a wide range of downstream code tasks. Such flexibility is enabled by our proposed mixture of pretraining objectives to mitigate the pretrain-finetune discrepancy. These objectives cover span denoising, contrastive learning, text-code matching, and causal LM pretraining tasks, on both unimodal and bimodal multilingual code corpora. Furthermore, we propose to initialize CodeT5+ with frozen off-the-shelf LLMs without training from scratch to efficiently scale up our models, and explore instruction-tuning to align with natural language instructions. We extensively evaluate CodeT5+ on over 20 code-related benchmarks in different settings, including zero-shot, finetuning, and instruction-tuning. We observe state-of-the-art (SoTA) model performance on various code-related tasks, such as code generation and completion, math programming, and text-to-code retrieval tasks. Particularly, our instruction-tuned CodeT5+ 16B achieves new SoTA results on HumanEval code generation task against other open code LLMs.17:T465,We present an empirical study of adapting an existing pretrained text-to-text model for long-sequence inputs. Through a comprehensive study along three axes of the pretraining pipeline -- model architecture, optimization objective, and pretraining corpus, we propose an effective recipe to build long-context models from existing short-context models. Specifically, we replace the full attention in transformers with pooling-augmented blockwise attention, and pretrain the model with a masked-span prediction task with spans of varying length. In terms of the pretraining corpus, we find that using randomly concatenated short-documents from a large open-domain corpus results in better performance than using existing long document corpora which are typically limited in their domain coverage. With these findings, we build a long-context model that achieves competitive performance on long-text QA tasks and establishes the new state of the art on five long-text summarization datasets, often outperforming previous methods with larger model sizes. Our code has been released at https://github.com/facebookresearch/bart_ls.18:T542,We investigate the predictability of large language model (LLM) capabilities: given records of past experiments using different model families, numbers of parameters, tasks, and numbers of in-context examples, can we accurately predict LLM performance on new experiment configurations? Answering this question has practical implications for LLM users (e.g., deciding which models to try), developers (e.g., prioritizing evaluation on representative tasks), and the research community (e.g., identifying hard-to-predict capabilities that warrant further investigation). We study the performance prediction problem on experiment records from BIG-bench. On a random train-test split, an MLP-based predictor achieves an $R^2$ score greater than 95%, indicating the presence of learnable patterns within the experiment records. We then formulate the problem of searching for"small-bench,"an informative subset of BIG-bench tasks from which the performance on the full set can be maximally recovered. We find a subset as informative as BIG-bench Hard for evaluating new model families, while being $3\times$ smaller. Additionally, we find competitive subsets by clustering task representations learned by our MLP-based predictor and selecting tasks close to cluster centroids, highlighting the importance of task diversity in constructing"small-bench."19:T61d,Pre-trained language models have been shown to encode linguistic structures, e.g. dependency and constituency parse trees, in their embeddings while being trained on unsupervised loss functions like masked language modeling. Some doubts have been raised whether the models actually are doing parsing or only some computation weakly correlated with it. We study questions: (a) Is it possible to explicitly describe transformers with realistic embedding dimension, number of heads, etc. that are capable of doing parsing -- or even approximate parsing? (b) Why do pre-trained models capture parsing structure? This paper takes a step toward answering these questions in the context of generative modeling with PCFGs. We show that masked language models like BERT or RoBERTa of moderate sizes can approximately execute the Inside-Outside algorithm for the English PCFG [Marcus et al, 1993]. We also show that the Inside-Outside algorithm is optimal for masked language modeling loss on the PCFG-generated data. We also give a construction of transformers with $50$ layers, $15$ attention heads, and $1275$ dimensional embeddings in average such that using its embeddings it is possible to do constituency parsing with $>70\%$ F1 score on PTB dataset. We conduct probing experiments on models pre-trained on PCFG-generated data to show that this not only allows recovery of approximate parse tree, but also recovers marginal span probabilities computed by the Inside-Outside algorithm, which suggests an implicit bias of masked language modeling towards this algorithm.1a:T60e,Recent diagnostic datasets on compositional generalization, such as SCAN (Lake and Baroni, 2018) and COGS (Kim and Linzen, 2020), expose severe problems in models trained from scratch on these datasets. However, in contrast to this poor performance, state-of-the-art models trained on larger and more general datasets show better generalization ability. In this work, to reconcile this inconsistency, we conduct an empirical analysis by training Transformer models on a variety of training sets with different data factors, including dataset scale, pattern complexity, example difficulty, etc. First, we show that increased dataset complexity can lead to better generalization behavior on multiple different generalization challenges. To further understand this improvement, we show two axes of the benefit from more complex datasets: they provide more diverse examples so compositional understanding becomes more effective, and they also prevent ungeneralizable memorization of the examples due to reduced example repetition frequency. Finally, we explore how training examples of different difficulty levels influence generalization differently. On synthetic datasets, simple examples invoke stronger compositionality than hard examples do. On larger-scale real language datasets, while hard examples become more important potentially to ensure decent data coverage, a balanced mixture of simple and hard examples manages to induce the strongest generalizability. The code and data for this work are available at https://github.com/owenzx/data4comp1b:T553,While Diffusion Generative Models have achieved great success on image generation tasks, how to efficiently and effectively incorporate them into speech generation especially translation tasks remains a non-trivial problem. Specifically, due to the low information density of speech data, the transformed discrete speech unit sequence is much longer than the corresponding text transcription, posing significant challenges to existing auto-regressive models. Furthermore, it is not optimal to brutally apply discrete diffusion on the speech unit sequence while disregarding the continuous space structure, which will degrade the generation performance significantly. In this paper, we propose a novel diffusion model by applying the diffusion forward process in the \textit{continuous} speech representation space, while employing the diffusion backward process in the \textit{discrete} speech unit space. In this way, we preserve the semantic structure of the continuous speech representation space in the diffusion process and integrate the continuous and discrete diffusion models. We conduct extensive experiments on the textless direct speech-to-speech translation task, where the proposed method achieves comparable results to the computationally intensive auto-regressive baselines (500 steps on average) with significantly fewer decoding steps (50 steps).1c:T5e3,Large language models (LLMs) that do not give consistent answers across contexts are problematic when used for tasks with expectations of consistency–e.g. question-answering, explanations, etc. Our work presents an evaluation benchmark for self-consistency in cases of under-specification where two or more answers can be correct. We conduct a series of behavioral experiments on the OpenAI model suite using an ambiguous integer sequence completion task. We find that average consistency ranges from 67% to 82%, far higher than would be predicted if a model’s consistency was random, and increases as model capability improves. Furthermore, we show that models tend to maintain self-consistency across a series of robustness checks, including prompting speaker changes and sequence length changes. These results suggest that self-consistency arises as an emergent capability without specifically training for it. Despite this, we find that models are uncalibrated when judging their own consistency, with models displaying both over- and under-confidence. We also propose a nonparametric test for determining from token output distribution whether a model assigns non-trivial probability to alternative answers. Using this test, we find that despite increases in self-consistency, models usually place significant weight on alternative, inconsistent answers. This distribution of probability mass provides evidence that even highly self-consistent models internally compute multiple possible responses.1d:T4ea,Language models (LMs) exhibit and amplify many types of undesirable biases learned from the training data, including gender bias. However, we lack tools for effectively and efficiently changing this behavior without hurting general language modeling performance. In this paper, we study three methods for identifying causal relations between LM components and particular output: causal mediation analysis, automated circuit discovery and our novel, efficient method called DiffMask+ based on differential masking. We apply the methods to GPT-2 small and the problem of gender bias, and use the discovered sets of components to perform parameter-efficient fine-tuning for bias mitigation. Our results show significant overlap in the identified components (despite huge differences in the computational requirements of the methods) as well as success in mitigating gender bias, with less damage to general language modeling compared to full model fine-tuning. However, our work also underscores the difficulty of defining and measuring bias, and the sensitivity of causal discovery procedures to dataset choice. We hope our work can contribute to more attention for dataset development, and lead to more effective mitigation strategies for other types of bias.1e:T50a,With their increasing size, large language models (LLMs) are becoming increasingly good at language understanding tasks. But even with high performance on specific downstream task, LLMs fail at simple linguistic tests for negation or quantifier understanding. Previous work on quantifier understanding in LLMs show inverse scaling in understanding few-type quantifiers. In this paper, we question the claims of of previous work and show that it is a result of inappropriate testing methodology. We also present alternate methods to measure quantifier comprehension in LLMs and show that LLMs are able to better understand the difference between the meaning of few-type and most-type quantifiers as their size increases, although they are not particularly good at it. We also observe inverse scaling for most-type quantifier understanding, which is contrary to human psycho-linguistic experiments and previous work, where the model’s understanding of most-type quantifier gets worse as the model size increases. We do this evaluation on models ranging from 125M-175B parameters, which suggests that LLMs do not do as well as expected with quantifiers. We also discuss the possible reasons for this and the relevance of quantifier understanding in evaluating language understanding in LLMs.1f:T4d7,The Backpack is a Transformer alternative shown to improve interpretability in English language modeling by decomposing predictions into a weighted sum of token sense components. However, Backpacks’ reliance on token-defined meaning raises questions as to their potential for languages other than English, a language for which subword tokenization provides a reasonable approximation for lexical items. In this work, we train, evaluate, interpret, and control Backpack language models in character-tokenized Chinese, in which words are often composed of many characters. We find that our (134M parameter) Chinese Backpack language model performs comparably to a (104M parameter) Transformer, and learns rich character-level meanings that log-additively compose to form word meanings. In SimLex-style lexical semantic evaluations, simple averages of Backpack character senses outperform input embeddings from a Transformer. We find that complex multi-character meanings are often formed by using the same per-character sense weights consistently across context. Exploring interpretability-through control, we show that we can localize a source of gender bias in our Backpacks to specific character senses and intervene to reduce the bias.20:T520,Large language models (LLMs) achieved remarkable performance across various tasks. However, they face challenges in managing long documents and extended conversations, due to significantly increased computational requirements, both in memory and inference time, and potential context truncation when the input exceeds the LLM's fixed context length. This paper proposes a method called Selective Context that enhances the inference efficiency of LLMs by identifying and pruning redundancy in the input context to make the input more compact. We test our approach using common data sources requiring long context processing: arXiv papers, news articles, and long conversations, on tasks of summarisation, question answering, and response generation. Experimental results show that Selective Context significantly reduces memory cost and decreases generation latency while maintaining comparable performance compared to that achieved when full context is used. Specifically, we achieve a 50\% reduction in context cost, resulting in a 36\% reduction in inference memory usage and a 32\% reduction in inference time, while observing only a minor drop of .023 in BERTscore and .038 in faithfulness on four downstream applications, indicating that our method strikes a good balance between efficiency and performance.21:T48c,Current variational dialog models have employed pre-trained language models (PLMs) to parameterize the likelihood and posterior distributions. However, the Gaussian assumption made on the prior distribution is incompatible with these distributions, thus restricting the diversity of generated responses. These models also suffer from posterior collapse, i.e., the decoder tends to ignore latent variables and directly access information captured in the encoder through the cross-attention mechanism. In this work, we propose Dior-CVAE, a hierarchical conditional variational autoencoder (CVAE) with diffusion priors to address these challenges. We employ a diffusion model to increase the complexity of the prior distribution and its compatibility with the distributions produced by a PLM. Also, we propose memory dropout to the cross-attention mechanism, which actively encourages the use of latent variables for response generation. Overall, experiments across two commonly used open-domain dialog datasets show that our method can generate more diverse responses without large-scale dialog pre-training. Code is available at https://github.com/UKPLab/dior-cvae.22:T4d1,Instruction-based multitasking has played a critical role in the success of large language models (LLMs) in multi-turn dialog applications. While publicly available LLMs have shown promising performance, when exposed to complex instructions with multiple constraints, they lag against state-of-the-art models like ChatGPT. In this work, we hypothesize that the availability of large-scale complex demonstrations is crucial in bridging this gap. Focusing on dialog applications, we propose a novel framework, CESAR, that unifies a large number of dialog tasks in the same format and allows programmatic induction of complex instructions without any manual effort. We apply CESAR on InstructDial, a benchmark for instruction-based dialog tasks. We further enhance InstructDial with new datasets and tasks and utilize CESAR to induce complex tasks with compositional instructions. This results in a new benchmark called InstructDial++, which includes 63 datasets with 86 basic tasks and 68 composite tasks. Through rigorous experiments, we demonstrate the scalability of CESAR in providing rich instructions. Models trained on InstructDial++ can follow compositional prompts, such as prompts that ask for multiple stylistic constraints.23:T42c,To tackle the high inference latency exhibited by autoregressive language models, previous studies have proposed an early-exiting framework that allocates adaptive computation paths for each token based on the complexity of generating the subsequent token. However, we observed several shortcomings, including performance degradation caused by a state copying mechanism or numerous exit paths, and sensitivity to exit confidence thresholds. Consequently, we propose a Fast and Robust Early-Exiting (FREE) framework, which incorporates a shallow-deep module and a synchronized parallel decoding. Our framework enables faster inference by synchronizing the decoding process of the current token with previously stacked early-exited tokens. Furthermore, as parallel decoding allows us to observe predictions from both shallow and deep models, we present a novel adaptive threshold estimator that exploits a Beta mixture model to determine suitable confidence thresholds. We empirically demonstrated the superiority of our proposed framework on extensive generation tasks.24:T4a6,Augmenting pretrained language models with retrievers to select the supporting documents has shown promise in effectively solving common NLP problems, including language modeling and question answering, in an interpretable way. In this paper, we first study the strengths and weaknesses of different retriever-augmented language models (REALM, $k$NN-LM, FiD coupled with DPR, and ATLAS and Flan-T5 coupled with Contriever) in reasoning over the retrieved statements in different tasks. We show how the retrieve-then-read models' limitations in reasoning are rooted both in the retriever module as well as the language model. Our experimental results demonstrate that the similarity metric used by the retrievers is generally insufficient for reasoning tasks. Additionally, we show that the language models in retriever-augmented models do not take the complicated relations between the statements into account, which leads to poor reasoning performance even when using the larger models. Moreover, we analyze the reasoning performance of large language models using multihop retrieval but we only observe minor improvements. Overall, this shows great room for further research in this area.25:T5ae,Existing sentence ordering approaches generally employ encoder-decoder frameworks with the pointer net to recover the coherence by recurrently predicting each sentence step-by-step. Such an autoregressive manner only leverages unilateral dependencies during decoding and cannot fully explore the semantic dependency between sentences for ordering. To overcome these limitations, in this paper, we propose a novel Non-Autoregressive Ordering Network, dubbed \textit{NAON}, which explores bilateral dependencies between sentences and predicts the sentence for each position in parallel. We claim that the non-autoregressive manner is not just applicable but also particularly suitable to the sentence ordering task because of two peculiar characteristics of the task: 1) each generation target is in deterministic length, and 2) the sentences and positions should match exclusively. Furthermore, to address the repetition issue of the naive non-autoregressive Transformer, we introduce an exclusive loss to constrain the exclusiveness between positions and sentences. To verify the effectiveness of the proposed model, we conduct extensive experiments on several common-used datasets and the experimental results show that our method outperforms all the autoregressive approaches and yields competitive performance compared with the state-of-the-arts. The codes are available at: \url{https://github.com/steven640pixel/nonautoregressive-sentence-ordering}.26:T41b,We show that LLMs hallucinate because their output is not constrained to be synonymous with claims for which they have evidence: a condition that we call evidential closure. Information about the truth or falsity of sentences is not statistically identified in the standard neural probabilistic language model setup, and so cannot be conditioned on to generate new strings. We then show how to constrain LLMs to produce output that does satisfy evidential closure. A multimodal LLM must learn about the external world (perceptual learning); it must learn a mapping from strings to states of the world (extensional learning); and, to achieve fluency when generalizing beyond a body of evidence, it must learn mappings from strings to their synonyms (intensional learning). The output of a unimodal LLM must be synonymous with strings in a validated evidence set. Finally, we present a heuristic procedure, Learn-Babble-Prune, that yields faithful output from an LLM by rejecting output that is not synonymous with claims for which the LLM has evidence.27:T418,Webpages have been a rich, scalable resource for vision-language and language only tasks. Yet only pieces of webpages are kept in existing datasets: image-caption pairs, long text articles, or raw HTML, never all in one place. Webpage tasks have resultingly received little attention and structured image-text data left underused. To study multimodal webpage understanding, we introduce the Wikipedia Webpage suite (WikiWeb2M) containing 2M pages with all of the associated image, text, and structure data. We verify its utility on three generative tasks: page description generation, section summarization, and contextual image captioning. We design a novel attention mechanism Prefix Global, which selects the most relevant image and text content as global tokens to attend to the rest of the webpage for context. By using page structure to separate such tokens, it performs better than full attention with lower computational complexity. Extensive experiments show that the new data in WikiWeb2M improves task performance compared to prior work.28:T404,Transformer-based encoder-decoder models that generate outputs in a left-to-right fashion have become standard for sequence-to-sequence tasks. In this paper, we propose a framework for decoding that produces sequences from the"outside-in": at each step, the model chooses to generate a token on the left, on the right, or join the left and right sequences. We argue that this is more principled than prior bidirectional decoders. Our proposal supports a variety of model architectures and includes several training methods, such as a dynamic programming algorithm that marginalizes out the latent ordering variable. Our model sets state-of-the-art (SOTA) on the 2022 and 2023 shared tasks, beating the next best systems by over 4.7 and 2.7 points in average accuracy respectively. The model performs particularly well on long sequences, can implicitly learn the split point of words composed of stem and affix, and performs better relative to the baseline on datasets that have fewer unique lemmas (but more examples per lemma).29:T550,While Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable performance in many tasks, much about their inner workings remains unclear. In this study, we present novel experimental insights into the resilience of LLMs, particularly GPT-4, when subjected to extensive character-level permutations. To investigate this, we first propose the Scrambled Bench, a suite designed to measure the capacity of LLMs to handle scrambled input, in terms of both recovering scrambled sentences and answering questions given scrambled context. The experimental results indicate that most powerful LLMs demonstrate the capability akin to typoglycemia, a phenomenon where humans can understand the meaning of words even when the letters within those words are scrambled, as long as the first and last letters remain in place. More surprisingly, we found that only GPT-4 nearly flawlessly processes inputs with unnatural errors, even under the extreme condition, a task that poses significant challenges for other LLMs and often even for humans. Specifically, GPT-4 can almost perfectly reconstruct the original sentences from scrambled ones, decreasing the edit distance by 95%, even when all letters within each word are entirely scrambled. It is counter-intuitive that LLMs can exhibit such resilience despite severe disruption to input tokenization caused by scrambled text.2a:T4f6,Transformer-based language models (LMs) are powerful and widely-applicable tools, but their usefulness is constrained by a finite context window and the expensive computational cost of processing long text documents. We propose to adapt pre-trained LMs into AutoCompressors. These models are capable of compressing long contexts into compact summary vectors, which are then accessible to the model as soft prompts. Summary vectors are trained with an unsupervised objective, whereby long documents are processed in segments and summary vectors from all previous segments are used in language modeling. We fine-tune OPT models on sequences of up to 30,720 tokens and show that AutoCompressors can utilize long contexts to improve perplexity. We evaluate AutoCompressors on in-context learning by compressing task demonstrations. We find that summary vectors are good substitutes for plain-text demonstrations, increasing accuracy while reducing inference cost. Finally, we explore the benefits of pre-computing summary vectors for large corpora by applying summary vectors to retrieval-augmented language modeling. Overall, AutoCompressors emerge as a simple and inexpensive solution for extending the context window of LMs while speeding up inference over long contexts.2b:T45d,Previous studies observed that finetuned models may be better base models than the vanilla pretrained model. Such a model, finetuned on some source dataset, may provide a better starting point for a new finetuning process on a desired target dataset. Here, we perform a systematic analysis of this intertraining scheme, over a wide range of English classification tasks. Surprisingly, our analysis suggests that the potential intertraining gain can be analyzed independently for the target dataset under consideration, and for a base model being considered as a starting point. This is in contrast to current perception that the alignment between the target dataset and the source dataset used to generate the base model is a major factor in determining intertraining success. We analyze different aspects that contribute to each. Furthermore, we leverage our analysis to propose a practical and efficient approach to determine if and how to select a base model in real-world settings. Last, we release an updating ranking of best models in the HuggingFace hub per architecture https://ibm.github.io/model-recycling/.2c:T557,Retrieval-augmented language models show promise in addressing issues like outdated information and hallucinations in language models (LMs). However, current research faces two main problems: 1) determining what information to retrieve, and 2) effectively combining retrieved information during generation. We argue that valuable retrieved information should not only be related to the current source text but also consider the future target text, given the nature of LMs that model future tokens. Moreover, we propose that aggregation using latent variables derived from a compact latent space is more efficient than utilizing explicit raw text, which is limited by context length and susceptible to noise. Therefore, we introduce RegaVAE, a retrieval-augmented language model built upon the variational auto-encoder (VAE). It encodes the text corpus into a latent space, capturing current and future information from both source and target text. Additionally, we leverage the VAE to initialize the latent space and adopt the probabilistic form of the retrieval generation paradigm by expanding the Gaussian prior distribution into a Gaussian mixture distribution. Theoretical analysis provides an optimizable upper bound for RegaVAE. Experimental results on various datasets demonstrate significant improvements in text generation quality and hallucination removal.2d:T50a,Model alignment with human preferences is an essential step in making Large Language Models (LLMs) helpful and consistent with human values. It typically consists of supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) stages. However, RLHF faces inherent limitations stemming from a complex training setup and its tendency to align the model with implicit values that end users cannot control at run-time. Moreover, reward models in RLHF stage commonly rely on single-dimensional feedback as opposed to explicit, multifaceted signals that indicate attributes such as helpfulness, humor, and toxicity. To address these limitations, we propose SteerLM, a supervised fine-tuning method that empowers end-users to control responses during inference. SteerLM conditions responses to conform to an explicitly defined multi-dimensional set of attributes, thereby empowering a steerable AI capable of generating helpful and high-quality responses while maintaining customizability. Experiments show that SteerLM trained on open source datasets generates responses that are preferred by human and automatic evaluators to many state-of-the-art baselines trained with RLHF while being much easier to train. Try SteerLM at https://huggingface.co/nvidia/SteerLM-llama2-13B2e:T532,Most NLP tasks are modeled as supervised learning and thus require labeled training data to train effective models. However, manually producing such data at sufficient quality and quantity is known to be costly and time-intensive. Current research addresses this bottleneck by exploring a novel paradigm called zero-shot learning via dataset generation. Here, a powerful LLM is prompted with a task description to generate labeled data that can be used to train a downstream NLP model. For instance, an LLM might be prompted to"generate 500 movie reviews with positive overall sentiment, and another 500 with negative sentiment."The generated data could then be used to train a binary sentiment classifier, effectively leveraging an LLM as a teacher to a smaller student model. With this demo, we introduce Fabricator, an open-source Python toolkit for dataset generation. Fabricator implements common dataset generation workflows, supports a wide range of downstream NLP tasks (such as text classification, question answering, and entity recognition), and is integrated with well-known libraries to facilitate quick experimentation. With Fabricator, we aim to support researchers in conducting reproducible dataset generation experiments using LLMs and help practitioners apply this approach to train models for downstream tasks.2f:T58c,In-context learning (ICL) is an emerging capability of large autoregressive language models where a few input-label demonstrations are appended to the input to enhance the model's understanding of downstream NLP tasks, without directly adjusting the model parameters. The effectiveness of ICL can be attributed to the strong language modeling capabilities of large language models (LLMs), which enable them to learn the mapping between input and labels based on in-context demonstrations. Despite achieving promising results, the causal nature of language modeling in ICL restricts the attention to be backward only, i.e., a token only attends to its previous tokens, failing to capture the full input-label information and limiting the model's performance. In this paper, we propose a novel ICL method called Repeated Demonstration with Sliding Causal Attention, (RdSca). Specifically, we duplicate later demonstrations and concatenate them to the front, allowing the model to `observe' the later information even under the causal restriction. Besides, we introduce sliding causal attention, which customizes causal attention to avoid information leakage. Experimental results show that our method significantly improves the input-label mapping in ICL demonstrations. We also conduct an in-depth analysis of how to customize the causal attention without training, which has been an unexplored area in previous research.30:T56d,The advent of large pre-trained language models in the domain of Code Synthesis has shown remarkable performance on various benchmarks, treating the problem of Code Generation in a fashion similar to Natural Language Generation, trained with a Language Modelling (LM) objective. In addition, the property of programming language code being precisely evaluable with respect to its semantics -- through the use of Unit Tests to check its functional correctness -- lends itself to using Reinforcement Learning (RL) as a further training paradigm. Previous work has shown that RL can be applied as such to improve models' coding capabilities; however, such RL-based methods rely on a reward signal based on defined Unit Tests, which are much harder to obtain compared to the huge crawled code datasets used in LM objectives. In this work, we present a novel approach to automatically obtain data consisting of function signatures and associated Unit Tests, suitable for RL training of Code Synthesis models. We also introduce a straightforward, simple yet effective Actor-Critic RL training scheme and show that it, in conjunction with automatically generated training data, leads to improvement of a pre-trained code language model's performance by up to 9.9% improvement over the original underlying code synthesis LM, and up to 4.3% over RL-based models trained with standard PPO or CodeRL.31:T40f,In-context learning (ICL), the ability of large language models to perform novel tasks by conditioning on a prompt with a few task examples, requires these examples to be informative about the test instance. The standard approach of independently ranking and selecting the most similar examples selects redundant examples while omitting important information. In this work, we show that BERTScore-Recall (BSR) selects better examples that demonstrate more of the salient aspects, e.g. reasoning patterns, of the test input. We further extend BSR and many standard metrics to easily optimizable set-level metrics, giving still better coverage of those salient aspects. On 15 datasets spanning 6 tasks and with 7 diverse LLMs, we show that (1) BSR is the superior metric for in-context example selection across the board, and (2) for compositional tasks, set selection using Set-BSR outperforms independent ranking by up to 17 points on average and, despite being training-free, surpasses methods that leverage task or LLM-specific training.32:T5d4,Editing model parameters directly in Transformers makes updating open-source transformer-based models possible without re-training (Meng et al., 2023). However, these editing methods have only been evaluated on statements about encyclopedic knowledge with a single correct answer. Commonsense knowledge with multiple correct answers, e.g., an apple can be green or red but not transparent, has not been studied but is as essential for enhancing transformers' reliability and usefulness. In this paper, we investigate whether commonsense judgments are causally associated with localized, editable parameters in Transformers, and we provide an affirmative answer. We find that directly applying the MEMIT editing algorithm results in sub-par performance and improve it for the commonsense domain by varying edit tokens and improving the layer selection strategy, i.e., $MEMIT_{CSK}$. GPT-2 Large and XL models edited using $MEMIT_{CSK}$ outperform best-fine-tuned baselines by 10.97% and 10.73% F1 scores on PEP3k and 20Q datasets. In addition, we propose a novel evaluation dataset, PROBE SET, that contains unaffected and affected neighborhoods, affected paraphrases, and affected reasoning challenges. $MEMIT_{CSK}$ performs well across the metrics while fine-tuning baselines show significant trade-offs between unaffected and affected metrics. These results suggest a compelling future direction for incorporating feedback about common sense into Transformers through direct model editing.33:T742,Large language models (LLMs) have shown remarkable reasoning capabilities, especially when prompted to generate intermediate reasoning steps (e.g., Chain-of-Thought, CoT). However, LLMs can still struggle with problems that are easy for humans, such as generating action plans for executing tasks in a given environment, or performing complex math, logical, and commonsense reasoning. The deficiency stems from the key fact that LLMs lack an internal $\textit{world model}$ to predict the world $\textit{state}$ (e.g., environment status, intermediate variable values) and simulate long-term outcomes of actions. This prevents LLMs from performing deliberate planning akin to human brains, which involves exploring alternative reasoning paths, anticipating future states and rewards, and iteratively refining existing reasoning steps. To overcome the limitations, we propose a new LLM reasoning framework, $\underline{R}$easoning vi$\underline{a}$ $\underline{P}$lanning $\textbf{(RAP)}$. RAP repurposes the LLM as both a world model and a reasoning agent, and incorporates a principled planning algorithm (based on Monto Carlo Tree Search) for strategic exploration in the vast reasoning space. During reasoning, the LLM (as agent) incrementally builds a reasoning tree under the guidance of the LLM (as world model) and task-specific rewards, and obtains a high-reward reasoning path efficiently with a proper balance between exploration $\textit{vs.}$ exploitation. We apply RAP to a variety of challenging reasoning problems including plan generation, math reasoning, and logical inference. Empirical results on these tasks demonstrate the superiority of RAP over various strong baselines, including CoT and least-to-most prompting with self-consistency. RAP on LLAMA-33B surpasses CoT on GPT-4 with 33% relative improvement in a plan generation setting.34:T4cf,As one of the most exciting features of large language models (LLMs), in-context learning is a mixed blessing. While it allows users to fast-prototype a task solver with only a few training examples, the performance is generally sensitive to various configurations of the prompt such as the choice or order of the training examples. In this paper, we for the first time theoretically and empirically identify that such a paradox is mainly due to the label shift of the in-context model to the data distribution, in which LLMs shift the label marginal $p(y)$ while having a good label conditional $p(x|y)$. With this understanding, we can simply calibrate the in-context predictive distribution by adjusting the label marginal, which is estimated via Monte-Carlo sampling over the in-context model, i.e., generation of LLMs. We call our approach as generative calibration. We conduct exhaustive experiments with 12 text classification tasks and 12 LLMs scaling from 774M to 33B, generally find that the proposed method greatly and consistently outperforms the ICL as well as state-of-the-art calibration methods, by up to 27% absolute in macro-F1. Meanwhile, the proposed method is also stable under different prompt configurations.35:T589,Fine-tuning all parameters of large language models (LLMs) requires significant computational resources and is time-consuming. Recent parameter-efficient tuning methods such as Adapter tuning, Prefix tuning, and LoRA allow updating a small subset of parameters in large language models. However, they can only save approximately 30% of the training memory requirements because gradient computation and backpropagation are still necessary for these methods. This paper proposes a novel parameter-efficient tuning method for LLMs without calculating their gradients. Leveraging the discernible similarities between the parameter-efficient modules of the same task learned by both large and small language models, we put forward a strategy for transferring the parameter-efficient modules derived initially from small language models to much larger ones. To ensure a smooth and effective adaptation process, we introduce a Bridge model to guarantee dimensional consistency while stimulating a dynamic interaction be-tween the models. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method using the T5 and GPT-2 series of language models on the SuperGLUE benchmark. Our method achieves comparable performance to fine-tuning and parameter-efficient tuning on large language models without needing gradient-based optimization. Additionally, our method achieves up to 5.7 × memory reduction compared to parameter-efficient tuning.36:T46f,Large language models (LLMs) have great potential for synthetic data generation. This work shows that useful data can be synthetically generated even for tasks that cannot be solved directly by LLMs: for problems with structured outputs, it is possible to prompt an LLM to perform the task in the reverse direction, by generating plausible input text for a target output structure. Leveraging this asymmetry in task difficulty makes it possible to produce large-scale, high-quality data for complex tasks. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach on closed information extraction, where collecting ground-truth data is challenging, and no satisfactory dataset exists to date. We synthetically generate a dataset of 1.8M data points, establish its superior quality compared to existing datasets in a human evaluation, and use it to finetune small models (220M and 770M parameters), termed SynthIE, that outperform the prior state of the art (with equal model size) by a substantial margin of 57 absolute points in micro-F1 and 79 points in macro-F1. Code, data, and models are available at https://github.com/epfl-dlab/SynthIE.37:T50e,Knowledge Distillation (KD) compresses computationally expensive pre-trained language models (PLMs) by transferring their knowledge to smaller models, allowing their use in resource-constrained or real-time settings. However, most smaller models fail to surpass the performance of the original larger model, resulting in sacrificing performance to improve inference speed. To address this issue, we propose Co-Training and Co-Distillation (CTCD), a novel framework that improves performance and inference speed together by co-training two models while mutually distilling knowledge. The CTCD framework successfully achieves this based on two significant findings: 1) Distilling knowledge from the smaller model to the larger model during co-training improves the performance of the larger model. 2) The enhanced performance of the larger model further boosts the performance of the smaller model. The CTCD framework shows promise as it can be combined with existing techniques like architecture design or data augmentation, replacing one-way KD methods, to achieve further performance improvement. Extensive ablation studies demonstrate the effectiveness of CTCD, and the small model distilled by CTCD outperforms the original larger model by a significant margin of 1.66 on the GLUE benchmark.38:T497,Large Language Models (LLMs) are claimed to be capable of Natural Language Inference (NLI), necessary for applied tasks like question answering and summarization. We present a series of behavioral studies on several LLM families (LLaMA, GPT-3.5, and PaLM) which probe their behavior using controlled experiments. We establish two biases originating from pretraining which predict much of their behavior, and show that these are major sources of hallucination in generative LLMs. First, memorization at the level of sentences: we show that, regardless of the premise, models falsely label NLI test samples as entailing when the hypothesis is attested in training data, and that entities are used as ``indices'' to access the memorized data. Second, statistical patterns of usage learned at the level of corpora: we further show a similar effect when the premise predicate is less frequent than that of the hypothesis in the training data, a bias following from previous studies. We demonstrate that LLMs perform significantly worse on NLI test samples which do not conform to these biases than those which do, and we offer these as valuable controls for future LLM evaluation.39:T405,Lexical semantic relations (LSRs) characterize meaning relationships between words and play an important role in systematic generalization on lexical inference tasks. Notably, several tasks that require knowledge of hypernymy still pose a challenge for pretrained language models (LMs) such as BERT, underscoring the need to better align their linguistic behavior with our knowledge of LSRs. In this paper, we propose B ALAUR , a model that addresses this challenge by modeling LSRs directly in the LM’s hidden states throughout pretraining. Motivating our approach is the hypothesis that the internal representations of LMs can provide an interface to their observable linguistic behavior, and that by controlling one we can influence the other. We validate our hypothesis and demonstrate that B ALAUR generally improves the performance of large transformer-based LMs on a comprehensive set of hypernymy-informed tasks, as well as on the original LM objective. Code and data are made available at github.com/mirandrom/balaur .3a:T520,Recent psycholinguistic studies have drawn conflicting conclusions about the relationship between the quality of a language model and the ability of its surprisal estimates to predict human reading times, which has been speculated to be due to the large gap in both the amount of training data and model capacity across studies. The current work aims to consolidate these findings by evaluating surprisal estimates from Transformer-based language model variants that vary systematically in the amount of training data and model capacity on their ability to predict human reading times. The results show that surprisal estimates from most variants with contemporary model capacities provide the best fit after seeing about two billion training tokens, after which they begin to diverge from humanlike expectations. Additionally, newly-trained smaller model variants reveal a 'tipping point' at convergence, after which the decrease in language model perplexity begins to result in poorer fits to human reading times. These results suggest that the massive amount of training data is mainly responsible for the poorer fit achieved by surprisal from larger pre-trained language models, and that a certain degree of model capacity is necessary for Transformer-based language models to capture humanlike expectations.3b:T697,Parameter-efficient tuning (PET) methods can effectively drive extremely large pre-trained language models (PLMs) by training only minimal parameters. Different PET methods utilize different manually designed tunable modules. In small PLMs, there are usually noticeable performance differences among PET methods. Nevertheless, as the model scale increases, the performance differences become marginal. Hence, we hypothesize that model scaling mitigates the impact of design differences on PET methods. To investigate this hypothesis, we introduce a more flexible PET method called Arbitrary PET (APET) method. The APET method is compatible with a tunable module, which consists of any number of parameters distributed in arbitrary positions. Then, we utilize it and conduct experiments on 11 NLP tasks across 3 representative PLMs. Our investigations reveal that model scaling (1) mitigates the effects of the positions of tunable parameters on performance, and (2) enables tuning methods to achieve performance comparable to full-parameter fine-tuning by optimizing fewer tunable parameters. Intriguingly, we also observe that tuning methods optimize the similar number of tunable parameters to exceed random guess performance on different tasks. We collectively discuss this phenomenon and the two aforementioned findings from an optimization perspective to understand the underlying mechanisms. These conclusions enhance our understanding of the impact of model scaling on PET and assist in designing more effective and efficient PET methods for PLMs of different scales. The source code can be obtained from this GitHub repository: \url{https://github.com/yushengsu-thu/PET_Scaling}.3c:T4b7,Generative models have been widely applied to solve extractive tasks, where parts of the input is extracted to form the desired output, and achieved significant success. For example, in extractive question answering (QA), generative models have constantly yielded state-of-the-art results. In this work, we identify the issue of tokenization inconsistency that is commonly neglected in training these models. This issue damages the extractive nature of these tasks after the input and output are tokenized inconsistently by the tokenizer, and thus leads to performance drop as well as hallucination. We propose a simple yet effective fix to this issue and conduct a case study on extractive QA. We show that, with consistent tokenization, the model performs better in both in-domain and out-of-domain datasets, with a notable average of +1.7 F2 gain when a BART model is trained on SQuAD and evaluated on 8 QA datasets. Further, the model converges faster, and becomes less likely to generate out-of-context answers. With these findings, we would like to call for more attention on how tokenization should be done when solving extractive tasks and recommend applying consistent tokenization during training.3d:T431,A trustworthy real-world prediction system should produce well-calibrated confidence scores; that is, its confidence in an answer should be indicative of the likelihood that the answer is correct, enabling deferral to an expert in cases of low-confidence predictions. Recent studies have shown that unsupervised pre-training produces large language models (LMs) whose conditional probabilities are remarkably well-calibrated. However, the most widely-used LMs are fine-tuned with reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF-LMs), and some studies have suggested that RLHF-LMs produce conditional probabilities that are very poorly calibrated. In light of this perceived weakness, we conduct a broad evaluation of methods for extracting confidence scores from RLHF-LMs. For RLHF-LMs such as ChatGPT, GPT-4, and Claude, we find that verbalized confidences emitted as output tokens are typically better-calibrated than the model's conditional probabilities on the TriviaQA, SciQ, and TruthfulQA benchmarks, often reducing the expected calibration error by a relative 50%.3e:T5ca,Large language models (LLMs) exhibit impressive emergent abilities in natural language processing, but their democratization is hindered due to huge computation requirements and closed-source nature. Recent research on advancing open-source smaller LMs by distilling knowledge from black-box LLMs has obtained promising results in the instruction-following ability. However, the reasoning ability which is more challenging to foster, is relatively rarely explored. In this paper, we propose a tailored learning approach to distill such reasoning ability to smaller LMs to facilitate the democratization of the exclusive reasoning ability. In contrast to merely employing LLM as a data annotator, we exploit the potential of LLM as a reasoning teacher by building an interactive multi-round learning paradigm. This paradigm enables the student to expose its deficiencies to the black-box teacher who then can provide customized training data in return. Further, to exploit the reasoning potential of the smaller LM, we propose self-reflection learning to motivate the student to learn from self-made mistakes. The learning from self-reflection and LLM are all tailored to the student's learning status, thanks to the seamless integration with the multi-round learning paradigm. Comprehensive experiments and analysis on mathematical and commonsense reasoning tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. The code will be available at https://github.com/Raibows/Learn-to-Reason.3f:T430,When we transfer a pretrained language model to a new language, there are many axes of variation that change at once. To disentangle the impact of different factors like syntactic similarity and vocabulary similarity, we propose a set of controlled transfer studies: we systematically transform the language of the GLUE benchmark, altering one axis of crosslingual variation at a time, and then measure the resulting drops in a pretrained model's downstream performance. We find that models can largely recover from syntactic-style shifts, but cannot recover from vocabulary misalignment and embedding matrix re-initialization, even with continued pretraining on 15 million tokens. %On the other hand, transferring to a dataset with an unaligned vocabulary is extremely hard to recover from in the low-data regime. Moreover, good-quality tokenizers in the transfer language do not make vocabulary alignment easier. Our experiments provide insights into the factors of cross-lingual transfer that researchers should most focus on when designing language transfer scenarios.40:T50b,Multilingual understanding models (or encoder-based), pre-trained via masked language modeling, have achieved promising results on many language understanding tasks (e.g., mBERT). However, these non-autoregressive (NAR) models still struggle to generate high-quality texts compared with autoregressive (AR) models. Considering that encoder-based models have the advantage of efficient generation and self-correction abilities, this paper explores methods to empower multilingual understanding models the generation abilities to get a unified model. Specifically, we start from a multilingual encoder (XLM-R) and propose a \textbf{S}emantic-\textbf{G}uided \textbf{A}lignment-then-Denoising (SGA) approach to adapt an encoder to a multilingual generator with a small number of new parameters. Experiments show that the proposed approach is an effective adaption method, outperforming widely-used initialization-based methods with gains of 9.4 BLEU on machine translation, 8.1 Rouge-L on question generation, and 5.5 METEOR on story generation on XLM-R$_{large}$. On the other hand, we observe that XLM-R is still inferior to mBART in supervised settings despite better results on zero-shot settings, indicating that more exploration is required to make understanding models strong generators.41:T514,Large language models (LLMs) have exhibited considerable cross-lingual generalization abilities, whereby they implicitly transfer knowledge across languages. However, the transfer is not equally successful for all languages, especially for low-resource ones, which poses an ongoing challenge. It is unclear whether we have reached the limits of implicit cross-lingual generalization and if explicit knowledge transfer is viable. In this paper, we investigate the potential for explicitly aligning conceptual correspondence between languages to enhance cross-lingual generalization. Using the syntactic aspect of language as a testbed, our analyses of 43 languages reveal a high degree of alignability among the spaces of structural concepts within each language for both encoder-only and decoder-only LLMs. We then propose a meta-learning-based method to learn to align conceptual spaces of different languages, which facilitates zero-shot and few-shot generalization in concept classification and also offers insights into the cross-lingual in-context learning phenomenon. Experiments on syntactic analysis tasks show that our approach achieves competitive results with state-of-the-art methods and narrows the performance gap between languages, particularly benefiting those with limited resources.42:T4fb,Our physical world is constantly evolving over time, rendering challenges for pre-trained language models to understand and reason over the temporal contexts of texts. Existing work focuses on strengthening the direct association between a piece of text and its time-stamp. However, the knowledge-time association is usually insufficient for the downstream tasks that require reasoning over temporal dependencies between knowledge. In this work, we make use of the underlying nature of time, all temporally-scoped sentences are strung together through a one-dimensional time axis, and suggest creating a graph structure based on the relative placements of events along the time axis. Inspired by the graph view, we propose RemeMo ($\underline{Re}$lative Ti$\underline{me}$ $\underline{Mo}$deling), which explicitly connects all temporally-scoped facts by modeling the time relations between any two sentences. Experimental results show that RemeMo outperforms the baseline T5 on multiple temporal question answering datasets under various settings. Further analysis suggests that RemeMo is especially good at modeling long-range complex temporal dependencies. We release our code and pre-trained checkpoints at $\href{https://github.com/DAMO-NLP-SG/RemeMo}{\text{this url}}$.43:T463,Although In-Context Learning has proven effective across a broad array of tasks, its efficiency is noticeably influenced by the selection of demonstrations. Existing methods tend to select different demonstrations for each test instance, which is time-consuming and poses limitations in practical scenarios. Therefore, this study aims to address the challenge of selecting a representative subset of in-context demonstrations that can effectively prompt different test instances in a specific task. We propose that this representative subset should be of high quality and diversity. Our empirical analyses confirm that demonstrations that meet these criteria can indeed bolster model performance. To satisfy these criteria, this paper further introduces a two-stage Determinantal Point Process (DPP) method designed to incorporate both quality and diversity in the process of demonstration selection, thereby obtaining representative in-context demonstrations. Through comprehensive experimentation, we have confirmed the efficacy of our proposed method, paving the way for more practical and effective In-Context Learning.44:T54c,Recent work has shown the promise of learning with human feedback paradigms to produce human-determined high-quality text. Existing works use human feedback to train large language models (LLMs) in general domain abstractive summarization and have obtained summary quality exceeding traditional likelihood training. In this paper, we focus on a less explored form of human feedback -- Human Edits. We propose Sequence Alignment (un)Likelihood Training (SALT), a novel technique to use both the human-edited and model-generated data together in the training loop. In addition, we demonstrate simulating Human Edits with ground truth summaries coming from existing training data -- Imitation edits, along with the model-generated summaries obtained after the training, to reduce the need for expensive human-edit data. In our experiments, we extend human feedback exploration from general domain summarization to medical domain summarization. Our results demonstrate the effectiveness of SALT in improving the summary quality with Human and Imitation Edits. Through additional experiments, we show that SALT outperforms the conventional RLHF method (designed for human preferences) -- DPO, when applied to human-edit data. We hope the evidence in our paper prompts researchers to explore, collect, and better use different human feedback approaches scalably.45:T4be,Previous studies have revealed that vanilla pre-trained language models (PLMs) lack the capacity to handle knowledge-intensive NLP tasks alone; thus, several works have attempted to integrate external knowledge into PLMs. However, despite the promising outcome, we empirically observe that PLMs may have already encoded rich knowledge in their pre-trained parameters but fail to fully utilize them when applying them to knowledge-intensive tasks. In this paper, we propose a new paradigm dubbed Knowledge Rumination to help the pre-trained language model utilize that related latent knowledge without retrieving it from the external corpus. By simply adding a prompt like"As far as I know"to the PLMs, we try to review related latent knowledge and inject them back into the model for knowledge consolidation. We apply the proposed knowledge rumination to various language models, including RoBERTa, DeBERTa, and GPT-3. Experimental results on six commonsense reasoning tasks and GLUE benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed approach, which proves that the knowledge stored in PLMs can be better exploited to enhance performance. Code is available in https://github.com/zjunlp/knowledge-rumination.46:T496,Despite the ability to train capable LLMs, the methodology for maintaining their relevancy and rectifying errors remains elusive. To this end, the past few years have witnessed a surge in techniques for editing LLMs, the objective of which is to efficiently alter the behavior of LLMs within a specific domain without negatively impacting performance across other inputs. This paper embarks on a deep exploration of the problems, methods, and opportunities related to model editing for LLMs. In particular, we provide an exhaustive overview of the task definition and challenges associated with model editing, along with an in-depth empirical analysis of the most progressive methods currently at our disposal. We also build a new benchmark dataset to facilitate a more robust evaluation and pinpoint enduring issues intrinsic to existing techniques. Our objective is to provide valuable insights into the effectiveness and feasibility of each editing technique, thereby assisting the community in making informed decisions on the selection of the most appropriate method for a specific task or context. Code and datasets are available at https://github.com/zjunlp/EasyEdit.47:T505,Recent work has shown how to prompt large language models with explanations to obtain strong performance on textual reasoning tasks, i.e., the chain-of-thought paradigm. However, subtly different explanations can yield widely varying downstream task accuracy. Explanations that have not been"tuned"for a task, such as off-the-shelf explanations written by nonexperts, may lead to mediocre performance. This paper tackles the problem of how to optimize explanation-infused prompts in a blackbox fashion. We first generate sets of candidate explanations for each example in the prompt using a leave-one-out scheme, then find an effective combination of these explanations with a two-stage framework. We first evaluate explanations for each in-context example in isolation according to two proxy metrics, log likelihood and accuracy on new examples. Then, we search over combinations of explanations to find one that yields high performance against a silver-labeled development set. Across four textual reasoning tasks spanning question answering, mathematical reasoning, and natural language inference, results show that our proxy metrics correlate with ground truth accuracy and our overall method can effectively improve prompts over crowdworker annotations and naive search strategies48:T607,Instruction tuning has emerged to enhance the capabilities of large language models (LLMs) to comprehend instructions and generate appropriate responses. Existing methods either manually annotate or employ LLM (e.g., GPT-series) to generate data for instruction tuning. However, they often overlook associating instructions with existing annotated datasets. In this paper, we propose Dynosaur, a dynamic growth paradigm for the automatic curation of instruction-tuning data. Based on the metadata of existing datasets, we use LLMs to automatically construct instruction-tuning data by identifying relevant data fields and generating appropriate instructions. By leveraging the existing annotated datasets, Dynosaur offers several advantages: 1) it reduces the API cost for generating instructions (e.g., it costs less than $12 USD by calling GPT-3.5-turbo for generating 800K instruction tuning samples; 2) it provides high-quality data for instruction tuning (e.g., it performs better than Alpaca and Flan on Super-NI and Longform with comparable data sizes); and 3) it supports the continuous improvement of models by generating instruction-tuning data when a new annotated dataset becomes available. We further investigate a continual learning scheme for learning with the ever-growing instruction-tuning dataset, and demonstrate that replaying tasks with diverse instruction embeddings not only helps mitigate forgetting issues but generalizes to unseen tasks better. Code and data are available at https://github.com/WadeYin9712/Dynosaur.49:T40c,Modern systems for multi-hop question answering (QA) typically break questions into a sequence of reasoning steps, termed chain-of-thought (CoT), before arriving at a final answer. Often, multiple chains are sampled and aggregated through a voting mechanism over the final answers, but the intermediate steps themselves are discarded. While such approaches improve performance, they do not consider the relations between intermediate steps across chains and do not provide a unified explanation for the predicted answer. We introduce Multi-Chain Reasoning (MCR), an approach which prompts large language models to meta-reason over multiple chains of thought, rather than aggregating their answers. MCR examines different reasoning chains, mixes information between them and selects the most relevant facts in generating an explanation and predicting the answer. MCR outperforms strong baselines on 7 multi-hop QA datasets. Moreover, our analysis reveals that MCR explanations exhibit high quality, enabling humans to verify its answers.4a:T4b3,Document understanding tasks, in particular, Visually-rich Document Entity Retrieval (VDER), have gained significant attention in recent years thanks to their broad applications in enterprise AI. However, publicly available data have been scarce for these tasks due to strict privacy constraints and high annotation costs. To make things worse, the non-overlapping entity spaces from different datasets hinder the knowledge transfer between document types. In this paper, we propose a method to collect massive-scale and weakly labeled data from the web to benefit the training of VDER models. The collected dataset, named DocumentNet, does not depend on specific document types or entity sets, making it universally applicable to all VDER tasks. The current DocumentNet consists of 30M documents spanning nearly 400 document types organized in a four-level ontology. Experiments on a set of broadly adopted VDER tasks show significant improvements when DocumentNet is incorporated into the pre-training for both classic and few-shot learning settings. With the recent emergence of large language models (LLMs), DocumentNet provides a large data source to extend their multi-modal capabilities for VDER.4b:T4fe,Previous studies have shown that large language models (LLMs) like GPTs store massive factual knowledge in their parameters. However, the stored knowledge could be false or out-dated. Traditional knowledge editing methods refine LLMs via fine-tuning on texts containing specific knowledge. However, with the increasing scales of LLMs, these gradient-based approaches bring large computation costs. The trend of model-as-a-service also makes it impossible to modify knowledge in black-box LMs. Inspired by in-context learning (ICL), a new paradigm based on demonstration contexts without parameter updating, we explore whether ICL can edit factual knowledge. To answer this question, we give a comprehensive empirical study of ICL strategies. Experiments show that in-context knowledge editing (IKE), without any gradient and parameter updating, achieves a competitive success rate compared to gradient-based methods on GPT-J (6B) but with much fewer side effects, including less over-editing on similar but unrelated facts and less knowledge forgetting on previously stored knowledge. We also apply the method to larger LMs with tens or hundreds of parameters like OPT-175B, which shows the scalability of our method. The code is available at https://github.com/Zce1112zslx/IKE.4c:T551,The information stored in large language models (LLMs) falls out of date quickly, and retraining from scratch is often not an option. This has recently given rise to a range of techniques for injecting new facts through updating model weights. Current evaluation paradigms are extremely limited, mainly validating the recall of edited facts, but changing one fact should cause rippling changes to the model's related beliefs. If we edit the UK Prime Minister to now be Rishi Sunak, then we should get a different answer to Who is married to the British Prime Minister? In this work, we present a benchmark, MQuAKE (Multi-hop Question Answering for Knowledge Editing), comprising multi-hop questions that assess whether edited models correctly answer questions where the answer should change as an entailed consequence of edited facts. While we find that current knowledge-editing approaches can recall edited facts accurately, they fail catastrophically on the constructed multi-hop questions. We thus propose a simple memory-based approach, MeLLo, which stores all edited facts externally while prompting the language model iteratively to generate answers that are consistent with the edited facts. While MQuAKE remains challenging, we show that MeLLo scales well with LLMs (e.g., OpenAI GPT-3.5-turbo) and outperforms previous model editors by a large margin.4d:T56e,In many real-world scenarios (e.g., academic networks, social platforms), different types of entities are not only associated with texts but also connected by various relationships, which can be abstracted as Text-Attributed Heterogeneous Graphs (TAHGs). Current pretraining tasks for Language Models (LMs) primarily focus on separately learning the textual information of each entity and overlook the crucial aspect of capturing topological connections among entities in TAHGs. In this paper, we present a new pretraining framework for LMs that explicitly considers the topological and heterogeneous information in TAHGs. Firstly, we define a context graph as neighborhoods of a target node within specific orders and propose a topology-aware pretraining task to predict nodes involved in the context graph by jointly optimizing an LM and an auxiliary heterogeneous graph neural network. Secondly, based on the observation that some nodes are text-rich while others have little text, we devise a text augmentation strategy to enrich textless nodes with their neighbors' texts for handling the imbalance issue. We conduct link prediction and node classification tasks on three datasets from various domains. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of our approach over existing methods and the rationality of each design. Our code is available at https://github.com/Hope-Rita/THLM.4e:T4f6,Animacy - whether an entity is alive and sentient - is fundamental to cognitive processing, impacting areas such as memory, vision, and language. However, animacy is not always expressed directly in language: in English it often manifests indirectly, in the form of selectional constraints on verbs and adjectives. This poses a potential issue for transformer language models (LMs): they often train only on text, and thus lack access to extralinguistic information from which humans learn about animacy. We ask: how does this impact LMs' animacy processing - do they still behave as humans do? We answer this question using open-source LMs. Like previous studies, we find that LMs behave much like humans when presented with entities whose animacy is typical. However, we also show that even when presented with stories about atypically animate entities, such as a peanut in love, LMs adapt: they treat these entities as animate, though they do not adapt as well as humans. Even when the context indicating atypical animacy is very short, LMs pick up on subtle clues and change their behavior. We conclude that despite the limited signal through which LMs can learn about animacy, they are indeed sensitive to the relevant lexical semantic nuances available in English.4f:T589,Chain-of-thought (CoT) is capable of eliciting models to explicitly generate reasoning paths, thus promoting reasoning accuracy and attracting increasing attention. Specifically, zero-shot CoT achieves remarkable improvements in a wide range of reasoning tasks by simply instructing the LLM with the prompt"Let's think step by step!". Despite the success of zero-shot CoT, the existing zero-shot prompting techniques remain limited to a single language, making it challenging to generalize to other languages and hindering global development. In this work, we introduce cross-lingual prompting (CLP), aiming to improve zero-shot CoT reasoning across languages. Specifically, CLP consists of two main components: (1) cross-lingual alignment prompting and (2) task-specific solver prompting. The cross-lingual alignment prompting is responsible for aligning representations across different languages, whereas the task-specific solver prompting is used to generate the final chain of thoughts and results for the reasoning task. In addition, we further introduce cross-lingual self-consistent prompting (CLSP) to ensemble different reasoning paths across languages. Our experimental evaluations on several benchmarks demonstrate that CLP and CLSP significantly outperform the existing prompting methods and achieve state-of-the-art performance. We hope this work will inspire further breakthroughs in cross-lingual CoT.50:T4e9,End-to-end spoken language understanding (SLU) remains elusive even with current large pretrained language models on text and speech, especially in multilingual cases. Machine translation has been established as a powerful pretraining objective on text as it enables the model to capture high-level semantics of the input utterance and associations between different languages, which is desired for speech models that work on lower-level acoustic frames. Motivated particularly by the task of cross-lingual SLU, we demonstrate that the task of speech translation (ST) is a good means of pretraining speech models for end-to-end SLU on both intra- and cross-lingual scenarios. By introducing ST, our models reach higher performance over baselines on monolingual and multilingual intent classification as well as spoken question answering using SLURP, MINDS-14, and NMSQA benchmarks. To verify the effectiveness of our methods, we also create new benchmark datasets from both synthetic and real sources, for speech summarization and low-resource/zero-shot transfer from English to French or Spanish. We further show the value of preserving knowledge for the ST pretraining task for better downstream performance, possibly using Bayesian transfer regularizers.51:T583,In recent years, Pre-trained Language Models (PLMs) have shown their superiority by pre-training on unstructured text corpus and then fine-tuning on downstream tasks. On entity-rich textual resources like Wikipedia, Knowledge-Enhanced PLMs (KEPLMs) incorporate the interactions between tokens and mentioned entities in pre-training, and are thus more effective on entity-centric tasks such as entity linking and relation classification. Although exploiting Wikipedia's rich structures to some extent, conventional KEPLMs still neglect a unique layout of the corpus where each Wikipedia page is around a topic entity (identified by the page URL and shown in the page title). In this paper, we demonstrate that KEPLMs without incorporating the topic entities will lead to insufficient entity interaction and biased (relation) word semantics. We thus propose KEPLET, a novel Knowledge-Enhanced Pre-trained LanguagE model with Topic entity awareness. In an end-to-end manner, KEPLET identifies where to add the topic entity's information in a Wikipedia sentence, fuses such information into token and mentioned entities representations, and supervises the network learning, through which it takes topic entities back into consideration. Experiments demonstrated the generality and superiority of KEPLET which was applied to two representative KEPLMs, achieving significant improvements on four entity-centric tasks.52:T5f2,The underlying mechanism of neural networks in capturing precise knowledge has been the subject of consistent research efforts. In this work, we propose a theoretical approach based on Neural Tangent Kernels (NTKs) to investigate such mechanisms. Specifically, considering the infinite network width, we hypothesize the learning dynamics of target models may intuitively unravel the features they acquire from training data, deepening our insights into their internal mechanisms. We apply our approach to several fundamental models and reveal how these models leverage statistical features during gradient descent and how they are integrated into final decisions. We also discovered that the choice of activation function can affect feature extraction. For instance, the use of the \textit{ReLU} activation function could potentially introduce a bias in features, providing a plausible explanation for its replacement with alternative functions in recent pre-trained language models. Additionally, we find that while self-attention and CNN models may exhibit limitations in learning n-grams, multiplication-based models seem to excel in this area. We verify these theoretical findings through experiments and find that they can be applied to analyze language modeling tasks, which can be regarded as a special variant of classification. Our contributions offer insights into the roles and capacities of fundamental components within large language models, thereby aiding the broader understanding of these complex systems.53:T46a,Large Language models (LLMs) possess the capability to engage In-context Learning (ICL) by leveraging a few demonstrations pertaining to a new downstream task as conditions. However, this particular learning paradigm suffers from high instability stemming from substantial variances induced by factors such as the input distribution of selected examples, their ordering, and prompt formats. In this work, we demonstrate that even when all these factors are held constant, the random selection of examples still results in high variance. Consequently, we aim to explore the informative ability of data examples by quantifying the Information Gain (IG) obtained in prediction after observing a given example candidate. Then we propose to sample those with maximum IG. Additionally, we identify the presence of template bias, which can lead to unfair evaluations of IG during the sampling process. To mitigate this bias, we introduce Calibration Before Sampling strategy. The experimental results illustrate that our proposed method can yield an average relative improvement of 14.3% across six classification tasks using three LLMs.54:T449,Language models have been shown to perform remarkably well on a wide range of natural language processing tasks. In this paper, we propose LEAP, a novel system that uses language models to perform multi-step logical reasoning and incorporates explicit planning into the inference procedure. Explicit planning enables the system to make more informed reasoning decisions at each step by looking ahead into their future effects. Moreover, we propose a training strategy that safeguards the planning process from being led astray by spurious features. Our full system significantly outperforms other competing methods on multiple standard datasets. When using small T5 models as its core selection and deduction components, our system performs competitively compared to GPT-3 despite having only about 1B parameters (i.e., 175 times smaller than GPT-3). When using GPT-3.5, it significantly outperforms chain-of-thought prompting on the challenging PrOntoQA dataset. We have conducted extensive empirical studies to demonstrate that explicit planning plays a crucial role in the system's performance.55:T4f2,Generative AI models have shown impressive performance on many Natural Language Processing tasks such as language understanding, reasoning, and language generation. An important question being asked by the AI community today is about the capabilities and limits of these models, and it is clear that evaluating generative AI is very challenging. Most studies on generative LLMs have been restricted to English and it is unclear how capable these models are at understanding and generating text in other languages. We present the first comprehensive benchmarking of generative LLMs - MEGA, which evaluates models on standard NLP benchmarks, covering 16 NLP datasets across 70 typologically diverse languages. We compare the performance of generative LLMs including Chat-GPT and GPT-4 to State of the Art (SOTA) non-autoregressive models on these tasks to determine how well generative models perform compared to the previous generation of LLMs. We present a thorough analysis of the performance of models across languages and tasks and discuss challenges in improving the performance of generative LLMs on low-resource languages. We create a framework for evaluating generative LLMs in the multilingual setting and provide directions for future progress in the field.56:T546,Retrieval-augmented generation models augment knowledge encoded in a language model by providing additional relevant external knowledge (context) during generation. Although it has been shown that the quantity and quality of context impact the performance of retrieval-augmented generation models during inference, limited research explores how these characteristics affect model training. This paper explores how context quantity and quality during model training affect the performance of Fusion-in-Decoder (FiD), the state-of-the-art retrieval-augmented generation model, in extractive open-domain question answering tasks. Experimental results suggest that FiD models overfit to context quality during training and show suboptimal performance when evaluated on different context quality. Through the experimental results, we also reveal FiD models trained with different context quality have different cross-attention distribution patterns. Specifically, as context quality during training increases, FiD models tend to attend more uniformly to each passage in context. Finally, based on these observations, we propose a method to mitigate overfitting to specific context quality by introducing bias to the cross-attention distribution, which we demonstrate to be effective in improving the performance of FiD models on different context quality.57:T405,Understanding how and what pre-trained language models (PLMs) learn about language is an open challenge in natural language processing. Previous work has focused on identifying whether they capture semantic and syntactic information, and how the data or the pre-training objective affects their performance. However, to the best of our knowledge, no previous work has specifically examined how information loss in input token characters affects the performance of PLMs. In this study, we address this gap by pre-training language models using small subsets of characters from individual tokens. Surprisingly, we find that pre-training even under extreme settings, i.e. using only one character of each token, the performance retention in standard NLU benchmarks and probing tasks compared to full-token models is high. For instance, a model pre-trained only on single first characters from tokens achieves performance retention of approximately $90$\% and $77$\% of the full-token model in SuperGLUE and GLUE tasks, respectively.58:T499,In-context learning is the paradigm that adapts large language models to downstream tasks by providing a few examples. Few-shot selection -- selecting appropriate examples for each test instance separately -- is important for in-context learning. In this paper, we propose Skill-KNN, a skill-based few-shot selection method for in-context learning. The key advantages of Skill-KNN include: (1) it addresses the problem that existing methods based on pre-trained embeddings can be easily biased by surface natural language features that are not important for the target task; (2) it does not require training or fine-tuning of any models, making it suitable for frequently expanding or changing example banks. The key insight is to optimize the inputs fed into the embedding model, rather than tuning the model itself. Technically, Skill-KNN generates the skill-based descriptions for each test case and candidate example by utilizing a pre-processing few-shot prompting, thus eliminating unimportant surface features. Experimental results across five cross-domain semantic parsing datasets and six backbone models show that Skill-KNN significantly outperforms existing methods.59:T523,The performance of large language models (LLMs) on existing reasoning benchmarks has significantly improved over the past years. In response, we present JEEBench, a considerably more challenging benchmark dataset for evaluating the problem solving abilities of LLMs. We curate 515 challenging pre-engineering mathematics, physics and chemistry problems from the highly competitive IIT JEE-Advanced exam. Long-horizon reasoning on top of deep in-domain knowledge is essential for solving problems in this benchmark. Our evaluation on various open-source and proprietary models reveals that the highest performance, even after using techniques like self-consistency, self-refinement and chain-of-thought prompting, is less than 40%. The typical failure modes of GPT-4, the best model, are errors in algebraic manipulation, difficulty in grounding abstract concepts into mathematical equations accurately and failure in retrieving relevant domain-specific concepts. We also observe that by mere prompting, GPT-4 is unable to assess risk introduced by negative marking for incorrect answers. For this, we develop a post-hoc confidence-thresholding method over self-consistency, which enables effective response selection. We hope that our challenging benchmark will guide future re-search in problem-solving using LLMs.5a:T566,One of the exciting capabilities of recent language models for dialog is their ability to independently search for relevant information to ground a given dialog response. However, obtaining training data to teach models how to issue search queries is time and resource consuming. In this work, we propose q2d: an automatic data generation pipeline that generates information-seeking dialogs from questions. We prompt a large language model (PaLM) to create conversational versions of question answering datasets, and use it to improve query generation models that communicate with external search APIs to ground dialog responses. Unlike previous approaches which relied on human written dialogs with search queries, our method allows to automatically generate query-based grounded dialogs with better control and scale. Our experiments demonstrate that: (1) For query generation on the QReCC dataset, models trained on our synthetically-generated data achieve 90%--97% of the performance of models trained on the human-generated data; (2) We can successfully generate data for training dialog models in new domains without any existing dialog data as demonstrated on the multi-hop MuSiQue and Bamboogle QA datasets. (3) We perform a thorough analysis of the generated dialogs showing that humans find them of high quality and struggle to distinguish them from human-written dialogs.5b:T60e,Eye movements in reading play a crucial role in psycholinguistic research studying the cognitive mechanisms underlying human language processing. More recently, the tight coupling between eye movements and cognition has also been leveraged for language-related machine learning tasks such as the interpretability, enhancement, and pre-training of language models, as well as the inference of reader- and text-specific properties. However, scarcity of eye movement data and its unavailability at application time poses a major challenge for this line of research. Initially, this problem was tackled by resorting to cognitive models for synthesizing eye movement data. However, for the sole purpose of generating human-like scanpaths, purely data-driven machine-learning-based methods have proven to be more suitable. Following recent advances in adapting diffusion processes to discrete data, we propose ScanDL, a novel discrete sequence-to-sequence diffusion model that generates synthetic scanpaths on texts. By leveraging pre-trained word representations and jointly embedding both the stimulus text and the fixation sequence, our model captures multi-modal interactions between the two inputs. We evaluate ScanDL within- and across-dataset and demonstrate that it significantly outperforms state-of-the-art scanpath generation methods. Finally, we provide an extensive psycholinguistic analysis that underlines the model's ability to exhibit human-like reading behavior. Our implementation is made available at https://github.com/DiLi-Lab/ScanDL.5c:T5a1,As pretrained transformer language models continue to achieve state-of-the-art performance, the Natural Language Processing community has pushed for advances in model compression and efficient attention mechanisms to address high computational requirements and limited input sequence length. Despite these separate efforts, no investigation has been done into the intersection of these two fields. In this work, we provide an evaluation of model compression via knowledge distillation on efficient attention transformers. We provide cost-performance trade-offs for the compression of state-of-the-art efficient attention architectures and the gains made in performance in comparison to their full attention counterparts. Furthermore, we introduce a new long-context Named Entity Recognition dataset, GONERD, to train and test the performance of NER models on long sequences. We find that distilled efficient attention transformers can preserve a significant amount of original model performance, preserving up to 98.6% across short-context tasks (GLUE, SQUAD, CoNLL-2003), up to 94.6% across long-context Question-and-Answering tasks (HotpotQA, TriviaQA), and up to 98.8% on long-context Named Entity Recognition (GONERD), while decreasing inference times by up to 57.8%. We find that, for most models on most tasks, performing knowledge distillation is an effective method to yield high-performing efficient attention models with low costs.5d:T671,Large language models (LLMs) are capable of answering knowledge-intensive complex questions with chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning. However, they tend to generate factually incorrect reasoning steps when the required knowledge is not available or up-to-date in models' parameters. Recent works turn to retrieving external knowledge to augment CoT reasoning. Despite being promising, these chain-based methods suffer from: 1) Negative retrieval. Unnecessary or incorrect retrieval may mislead the reasoning; 2) Limited sight. Lacking the ability to look backward or forward, a local error in one step will propagate along the chain. In this paper, we propose a novel approach: Probabilistic Tree-of-thought Reasoning (ProbTree). First, LLMs translate a complex question into a query tree, in which each non-root node denotes a sub-question of its parent node. Then, probabilistic reasoning is conducted over the tree, by solving questions from leaf to root considering the confidence of both question decomposing and answering. During reasoning, for leaf nodes, LLMs choose a more confident answer from Closed-book QA that employs parametric knowledge and Open-book QA that employs retrieved external knowledge, thus eliminating the negative retrieval problem. For non-leaf nodes, with the hierarchical structure, LLMs have broader sights and are able to globally reason with the information from child nodes, thus recovering from local errors. The experiments on three Complex QA datasets under the open-domain setting show that our approach outperforms SOTA methods significantly, demonstrating the effect of probabilistic tree-of-thought reasoning.5e:T41b,Large language models (LLMs) with in-context learning have demonstrated impressive generalization capabilities in the cross-domain text-to-SQL task, without the use of in-domain annotations. However, incorporating in-domain demonstration examples has been found to greatly enhance LLMs' performance. In this paper, we delve into the key factors within in-domain examples that contribute to the improvement and explore whether we can harness these benefits without relying on in-domain annotations. Based on our findings, we propose a demonstration selection framework ODIS which utilizes both out-of-domain examples and synthetically generated in-domain examples to construct demonstrations. By retrieving demonstrations from hybrid sources, ODIS leverages the advantages of both, showcasing its effectiveness compared to baseline methods that rely on a single data source. Furthermore, ODIS outperforms state-of-the-art approaches on two cross-domain text-to-SQL datasets, with improvements of 1.1 and 11.8 points in execution accuracy, respectively.5f:T418,While large language models have proven effective in a huge range of downstream applications, they often generate text that is problematic or lacks a desired attribute. In this paper, we introduce Reward-Augmented Decoding (RAD), a text generation procedure that uses a small unidirectional reward model to encourage a language model to generate text that has certain properties. Specifically, RAD uses the reward model to score generations as they are produced and rescales sampling probabilities to favor high-reward tokens. By using a unidirectional reward model, RAD can cache activations from prior generation steps to decrease computational overhead. Through experiments on generating non-toxic and sentiment-controlled text, we demonstrate that RAD performs best among methods that change only the generation procedure and matches the performance of state-of-the-art methods that involve re-training the language model. We further validate that RAD is effective on very large language models while incurring a minimal computational overhead.60:T443,In this paper we improve the zero-shot generalization ability of language models via Mixture-Of-Memory Augmentation (MoMA), a mechanism that retrieves augmentation documents from multiple information corpora ("external memories"), with the option to"plug in"new memory at inference time. We develop a joint learning mechanism that trains the augmentation component with latent labels derived from the end retrieval task, paired with hard negatives from the memory mixture. We instantiate the model in a zero-shot dense retrieval setting by augmenting a strong T5-based retriever with MoMA. Our model, MoMA, obtains strong zero-shot retrieval accuracy on the eighteen tasks included in the standard BEIR benchmark. It outperforms systems that seek generalization from increased model parameters and computation steps. Our analysis further illustrates the necessity of augmenting with mixture-of-memory for robust generalization, the benefits of augmentation learning, and how MoMA utilizes the plug-in memory at inference time without changing its parameters. We plan to open source our code.61:T592,Factual consistency evaluation is often conducted using Natural Language Inference (NLI) models, yet these models exhibit limited success in evaluating summaries. Previous work improved such models with synthetic training data. However, the data is typically based on perturbed human-written summaries, which often differ in their characteristics from real model-generated summaries and have limited coverage of possible factual errors. Alternatively, large language models (LLMs) have recently shown promising results in directly evaluating generative tasks, but are too computationally expensive for practical use. Motivated by these limitations, we introduce TrueTeacher, a method for generating synthetic data by annotating diverse model-generated summaries using a LLM. Unlike prior work, TrueTeacher does not rely on human-written summaries, and is multilingual by nature. Experiments on the TRUE benchmark show that a student model trained using our data, substantially outperforms both the state-of-the-art model with similar capacity, and the LLM teacher. In a systematic study, we compare TrueTeacher to existing synthetic data generation methods and demonstrate its superiority and robustness to domain-shift. We also show that our method generalizes to multilingual scenarios. Lastly, we release our large scale synthetic dataset (1.4M examples), generated using TrueTeacher, and a checkpoint trained on this data.62:T576,Despite their impressive performance, large language models (LMs) still struggle with reliably generating complex output structures when not finetuned to follow the required output format exactly. To address this issue, grammar-constrained decoding (GCD) can be used to control the generation of LMs, guaranteeing that the output follows a given structure. Most existing GCD methods are, however, limited to specific tasks, such as parsing or code generation. In this work, we demonstrate that formal grammars can describe the output space for a much wider range of tasks and argue that GCD can serve as a unified framework for structured NLP tasks in general. For increased flexibility, we introduce input-dependent grammars, which allow the grammar to depend on the input and thus enable the generation of different output structures for different inputs. We then empirically demonstrate the power and flexibility of GCD-enhanced LMs on (1) information extraction, (2) entity disambiguation, and (3) constituency parsing. Our results indicate that grammar-constrained LMs substantially outperform unconstrained LMs or even beat task-specific finetuned models. Grammar constraints thus hold great promise for harnessing off-the-shelf LMs for a wide range of structured NLP tasks, especially where training data is scarce or finetuning is expensive. Code and data: https://github.com/epfl-dlab/GCD.63:T517,Most biomedical pretrained language models are monolingual and cannot handle the growing cross-lingual requirements. The scarcity of non-English domain corpora, not to mention parallel data, poses a significant hurdle in training multilingual biomedical models. Since knowledge forms the core of domain-specific corpora and can be translated into various languages accurately, we propose a model called KBioXLM, which transforms the multilingual pretrained model XLM-R into the biomedical domain using a knowledge-anchored approach. We achieve a biomedical multilingual corpus by incorporating three granularity knowledge alignments (entity, fact, and passage levels) into monolingual corpora. Then we design three corresponding training tasks (entity masking, relation masking, and passage relation prediction) and continue training on top of the XLM-R model to enhance its domain cross-lingual ability. To validate the effectiveness of our model, we translate the English benchmarks of multiple tasks into Chinese. Experimental results demonstrate that our model significantly outperforms monolingual and multilingual pretrained models in cross-lingual zero-shot and few-shot scenarios, achieving improvements of up to 10+ points. Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/ngwlh-gl/KBioXLM.64:T615,While text style transfer has many applications across natural language processing, the core premise of transferring from a single source style is unrealistic in a real-world setting. In this work, we focus on arbitrary style transfer: rewriting a text from an arbitrary, unknown style to a target style. We propose STEER: Unified Style Transfer with Expert Reinforcement, a unified frame-work developed to overcome the challenge of limited parallel data for style transfer. STEER involves automatically generating a corpus of style-transfer pairs using a product of experts during decoding. The generated offline data is then used to pre-train an initial policy before switching to online, off-policy reinforcement learning for further improvements via fine-grained reward signals. STEER is unified and can transfer to multiple target styles from an arbitrary, unknown source style, making it particularly flexible and efficient. Experimental results on a challenging dataset with text from a diverse set of styles demonstrate state-of-the-art results compared to competitive baselines. Remarkably, STEER outperforms the 175B parameter instruction-tuned GPT-3 on overall style transfer quality, despite being 226 times smaller in size. We also show STEER is robust, maintaining its style transfer capabilities on out-of-domain data, and surpassing nearly all baselines across various styles. The success of our method highlights the potential of RL algorithms when augmented with controllable decoding to overcome the challenge of limited data supervision.65:T401,The concept of a complex event schema per-tains to the graph structure that represents real-world knowledge of events and their multi-dimensional relationships. However, previous studies on event schema induction have been hindered by challenges such as error propagation and data quality issues. To tackle these challenges, we propose a knowledge-enriched discrete diffusion model. Specifically, we distill the abundant event scenario knowledge of Large Language Models (LLMs) through an object-oriented Python style prompt. We incorporate this knowledge into the training data, enhancing its quality. Subsequently, we employ a discrete diffusion process to generate all nodes and links simultaneously in a non-auto-regressive manner to tackle the problem of error propagation. Additionally, we devise an entity relationship prediction module to complete entity relationships between event arguments. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach achieves outstanding performance across a range of evaluation metrics. 166:T434,Large language models (LLMs) can use in-context demonstrations to improve performance on zero-shot tasks. However, selecting the best in-context examples is challenging because model performance can vary widely depending on the selected examples. We present a cross-entropy difference (CED) method for selecting in-context demonstrations. Our method is based on the observation that the effectiveness of in-context demonstrations negatively correlates with the perplexity of the test example by a language model that was finetuned on that demonstration. We utilize parameter efficient finetuning to train small models on training data that are used for computing the cross-entropy difference between a test example and every candidate in-context demonstration. This metric is used to rank and select in-context demonstrations independently for each test input. We evaluate our method on a mix-domain dataset that combines 8 benchmarks, representing 4 text generation tasks, showing that CED for in-context demonstration selection can improve performance for a variety of LLMs.67:T4a5,Lexical ambiguity is a significant and pervasive challenge in Neural Machine Translation (NMT), with many state-of-the-art (SOTA) NMT systems struggling to handle polysemous words (Campolungo et al., 2022). The same holds for the NMT pretraining paradigm of denoising synthetic"code-switched"text (Pan et al., 2021; Iyer et al., 2023), where word senses are ignored in the noising stage -- leading to harmful sense biases in the pretraining data that are subsequently inherited by the resulting models. In this work, we introduce Word Sense Pretraining for Neural Machine Translation (WSP-NMT) - an end-to-end approach for pretraining multilingual NMT models leveraging word sense-specific information from Knowledge Bases. Our experiments show significant improvements in overall translation quality. Then, we show the robustness of our approach to scale to various challenging data and resource-scarce scenarios and, finally, report fine-grained accuracy improvements on the DiBiMT disambiguation benchmark. Our studies yield interesting and novel insights into the merits and challenges of integrating word sense information and structured knowledge in multilingual pretraining for NMT.68:T537,A growing area of research investigates augmenting language models with tools (e.g., search engines, calculators) to overcome their shortcomings (e.g., missing or incorrect knowledge, incorrect logical inferences). Various few-shot tool-usage strategies have been proposed. However, there is no systematic and fair comparison across different strategies, or between these strategies and strong baselines that do not leverage tools. We conduct an extensive empirical analysis, finding that (1) across various datasets, example difficulty levels, and models, strong no-tool baselines are competitive to tool-assisted strategies, implying that effectively using tools with in-context demonstrations is a difficult unsolved problem; (2) for knowledge-retrieval tasks, strategies that *refine* incorrect outputs with tools outperform strategies that retrieve relevant information *ahead of* or *during generation*; (3) tool-assisted strategies are expensive in the number of tokens they require to work -- incurring additional costs by orders of magnitude -- which does not translate into significant improvement in performance. Overall, our findings suggest that few-shot tool integration is still an open challenge, emphasizing the need for comprehensive evaluations of future strategies to accurately assess their *benefits* and *costs*.69:T453,Recent instruction-finetuned large language models (LMs) have achieved notable performances in various tasks, such as question-answering (QA). However, despite their ability to memorize a vast amount of general knowledge across diverse tasks, they might be suboptimal on specific tasks due to their limited capacity to transfer and adapt knowledge to target tasks. Moreover, further finetuning LMs with labeled datasets is often infeasible due to their absence, but it is also questionable if we can transfer smaller LMs having limited knowledge only with unlabeled test data. In this work, we show and investigate the capabilities of smaller self-adaptive LMs, only with unlabeled test data. In particular, we first stochastically generate multiple answers, and then ensemble them while filtering out low-quality samples to mitigate noise from inaccurate labels. Our proposed self-adaption strategy demonstrates significant performance improvements on benchmark QA datasets with higher robustness across diverse prompts, enabling LMs to stay stable. Code is available at: https://github.com/starsuzi/T-SAS.6a:T4ca,In this paper, we study how to improve the zero-shot reasoning ability of large language models~(LLMs) over structured data in a unified way. Inspired by the study on tool augmentation for LLMs, we develop an \emph{Iterative Reading-then-Reasoning~(IRR)} approach for solving question answering tasks based on structured data, called \textbf{StructGPT}. In our approach, we construct the specialized function to collect relevant evidence from structured data (\ie \emph{reading}), and let LLMs concentrate the reasoning task based on the collected information (\ie \emph{reasoning}). Specially, we propose an \emph{invoking-linearization-generation} procedure to support LLMs in reasoning on the structured data with the help of the external interfaces. By iterating this procedures with provided interfaces, our approach can gradually approach the target answer to a given query. Extensive experiments conducted on three types of structured data demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, which can significantly boost the performance of ChatGPT and achieve comparable performance against the full-data supervised-tuning baselines. Our codes and data are publicly available at~\url{https://github.com/RUCAIBox/StructGPT}.6b:T48f,Large language models with instruction-following capabilities open the door to a wider group of users. However, when it comes to information extraction - a classic task in natural language processing - most task-specific systems cannot align well with long-tail ad hoc extraction use cases for non-expert users. To address this, we propose a novel paradigm, termed On-Demand Information Extraction, to fulfill the personalized demands of real-world users. Our task aims to follow the instructions to extract the desired content from the associated text and present it in a structured tabular format. The table headers can either be user-specified or inferred contextually by the model. To facilitate research in this emerging area, we present a benchmark named InstructIE, inclusive of both automatically generated training data, as well as the human-annotated test set. Building on InstructIE, we further develop an On-Demand Information Extractor, ODIE. Comprehensive evaluations on our benchmark reveal that ODIE substantially outperforms the existing open-source models of similar size. Our code and dataset are released on https://github.com/yzjiao/On-Demand-IE.6c:T408,Structured pruning methods have proven effective in reducing the model size and accelerating inference speed in various network architectures such as Transformers. Despite the versatility of encoder-decoder models in numerous NLP tasks, the structured pruning methods on such models are relatively less explored compared to encoder-only models. In this study, we investigate the behavior of the structured pruning of the encoder-decoder models in the decoupled pruning perspective of the encoder and decoder component, respectively. Our findings highlight two insights: (1) the number of decoder layers is the dominant factor of inference speed, and (2) low sparsity in the pruned encoder network enhances generation quality. Motivated by these findings, we propose a simple and effective framework, NASH, that narrows the encoder and shortens the decoder networks of encoder-decoder models. Extensive experiments on diverse generation and inference tasks validate the effectiveness of our method in both speedup and output quality.6d:T592,Large Language Models (LLMs) have generated considerable interest and debate regarding their potential emergence of Theory of Mind (ToM). Several recent inquiries reveal a lack of robust ToM in these models and pose a pressing demand to develop new benchmarks, as current ones primarily focus on different aspects of ToM and are prone to shortcuts and data leakage. In this position paper, we seek to answer two road-blocking questions: (1) How can we taxonomize a holistic landscape of machine ToM? (2) What is a more effective evaluation protocol for machine ToM? Following psychological studies, we taxonomize machine ToM into 7 mental state categories and delineate existing benchmarks to identify under-explored aspects of ToM. We argue for a holistic and situated evaluation of ToM to break ToM into individual components and treat LLMs as an agent who is physically situated in environments and socially situated in interactions with humans. Such situated evaluation provides a more comprehensive assessment of mental states and potentially mitigates the risk of shortcuts and data leakage. We further present a pilot study in a grid world setup as a proof of concept. We hope this position paper can facilitate future research to integrate ToM with LLMs and offer an intuitive means for researchers to better position their work in the landscape of ToM. Project page: https://github.com/Mars-tin/awesome-theory-of-mind6e:T5f1,Generative Large Language Models (LLMs) such as GPT-3 are capable of generating highly fluent responses to a wide variety of user prompts. However, LLMs are known to hallucinate facts and make non-factual statements which can undermine trust in their output. Existing fact-checking approaches either require access to the output probability distribution (which may not be available for systems such as ChatGPT) or external databases that are interfaced via separate, often complex, modules. In this work, we propose"SelfCheckGPT", a simple sampling-based approach that can be used to fact-check the responses of black-box models in a zero-resource fashion, i.e. without an external database. SelfCheckGPT leverages the simple idea that if an LLM has knowledge of a given concept, sampled responses are likely to be similar and contain consistent facts. However, for hallucinated facts, stochastically sampled responses are likely to diverge and contradict one another. We investigate this approach by using GPT-3 to generate passages about individuals from the WikiBio dataset, and manually annotate the factuality of the generated passages. We demonstrate that SelfCheckGPT can: i) detect non-factual and factual sentences; and ii) rank passages in terms of factuality. We compare our approach to several baselines and show that our approach has considerably higher AUC-PR scores in sentence-level hallucination detection and higher correlation scores in passage-level factuality assessment compared to grey-box methods.6f:T560,The remarkable advancements in large language models (LLMs) have significantly enhanced the performance in few-shot learning settings. By using only a small number of labeled examples, referred to as demonstrations, LLMs can effectively grasp the task at hand through in-context learning. However, the process of selecting appropriate demonstrations has received limited attention in prior work. This paper addresses the issue of identifying the most informative demonstrations for few-shot learning by approaching it as a pool-based Active Learning (AL) problem over a single iteration. Our objective is to investigate how AL algorithms can serve as effective demonstration selection methods for in-context learning. We compare various standard AL algorithms based on uncertainty, diversity, and similarity, and consistently observe that the latter outperforms all other methods, including random sampling. Notably, uncertainty sampling, despite its success in conventional supervised learning scenarios, performs poorly in this context. Our extensive experimentation involving a diverse range of GPT and OPT models across $24$ classification and multi-choice tasks, coupled with thorough analysis, unambiguously demonstrates that in-context example selection through AL prioritizes high-quality examples that exhibit low uncertainty and bear similarity to the test examples.70:T563,Charts are very popular for analyzing data, visualizing key insights and answering complex reasoning questions about data. To facilitate chart-based data analysis using natural language, several downstream tasks have been introduced recently such as chart question answering and chart summarization. However, most of the methods that solve these tasks use pretraining on language or vision-language tasks that do not attempt to explicitly model the structure of the charts (e.g., how data is visually encoded and how chart elements are related to each other). To address this, we first build a large corpus of charts covering a wide variety of topics and visual styles. We then present UniChart, a pretrained model for chart comprehension and reasoning. UniChart encodes the relevant text, data, and visual elements of charts and then uses a chart-grounded text decoder to generate the expected output in natural language. We propose several chart-specific pretraining tasks that include: (i) low-level tasks to extract the visual elements (e.g., bars, lines) and data from charts, and (ii) high-level tasks to acquire chart understanding and reasoning skills. We find that pretraining the model on a large corpus with chart-specific low- and high-level tasks followed by finetuning on three down-streaming tasks results in state-of-the-art performance on three downstream tasks.71:T518,Abstract grammatical knowledge - of parts of speech and grammatical patterns - is key to the capacity for linguistic generalization in humans. But how abstract is grammatical knowledge in large language models? In the human literature, compelling evidence for grammatical abstraction comes from structural priming. A sentence that shares the same grammatical structure as a preceding sentence is processed and produced more readily. Because confounds exist when using stimuli in a single language, evidence of abstraction is even more compelling from crosslingual structural priming, where use of a syntactic structure in one language primes an analogous structure in another language. We measure crosslingual structural priming in large language models, comparing model behavior to human experimental results from eight crosslingual experiments covering six languages, and four monolingual structural priming experiments in three non-English languages. We find evidence for abstract monolingual and crosslingual grammatical representations in the models that function similarly to those found in humans. These results demonstrate that grammatical representations in multilingual language models are not only similar across languages, but they can causally influence text produced in different languages.72:T53e,Evaluating the factuality of long-form text generated by large language models (LMs) is non-trivial because (1) generations often contain a mixture of supported and unsupported pieces of information, making binary judgments of quality inadequate, and (2) human evaluation is time-consuming and costly. In this paper, we introduce FACTSCORE, a new evaluation that breaks a generation into a series of atomic facts and computes the percentage of atomic facts supported by a reliable knowledge source. We conduct an extensive human evaluation to obtain FACTSCOREs of people biographies generated by several state-of-the-art commercial LMs -- InstructGPT, ChatGPT, and the retrieval-augmented PerplexityAI -- and report new analysis demonstrating the need for such a fine-grained score (e.g., ChatGPT only achieves 58%). Since human evaluation is costly, we also introduce an automated model that estimates FACTSCORE using retrieval and a strong language model, with less than a 2% error rate. Finally, we use this automated metric to evaluate 6,500 generations from a new set of 13 recent LMs that would have cost $26K if evaluated by humans, with various findings: GPT-4 and ChatGPT are more factual than public models, and Vicuna and Alpaca are some of the best public models. FACTSCORE is available for public use via `pip install factscore`.73:T4c4,Text-based safety classifiers are widely used for content moderation and increasingly to tune generative language model behavior - a topic of growing concern for the safety of digital assistants and chatbots. However, different policies require different classifiers, and safety policies themselves improve from iteration and adaptation. This paper introduces and evaluates methods for agile text classification, whereby classifiers are trained using small, targeted datasets that can be quickly developed for a particular policy. Experimenting with 7 datasets from three safety-related domains, comprising 15 annotation schemes, led to our key finding: prompt-tuning large language models, like PaLM 62B, with a labeled dataset of as few as 80 examples can achieve state-of-the-art performance. We argue that this enables a paradigm shift for text classification, especially for models supporting safer online discourse. Instead of collecting millions of examples to attempt to create universal safety classifiers over months or years, classifiers could be tuned using small datasets, created by individuals or small organizations, tailored for specific use cases, and iterated on and adapted in the time-span of a day.74:T5e9,Contrastively trained vision-language models have achieved remarkable progress in vision and language representation learning, leading to state-of-the-art models for various downstream multimodal tasks. However, recent research has highlighted severe limitations of these models in their ability to perform compositional reasoning over objects, attributes, and relations. Scene graphs have emerged as an effective way to understand images compositionally. These are graph-structured semantic representations of images that contain objects, their attributes, and relations with other objects in a scene. In this work, we consider the scene graph parsed from text as a proxy for the image scene graph and propose a graph decomposition and augmentation framework along with a coarse-to-fine contrastive learning objective between images and text that aligns sentences of various complexities to the same image. Along with this, we propose novel negative mining techniques in the scene graph space for improving attribute binding and relation understanding. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach that significantly improves attribute binding, relation understanding, systematic generalization, and productivity on multiple recently proposed benchmarks (For example, improvements upto $18\%$ for systematic generalization, $16.5\%$ for relation understanding over a strong baseline), while achieving similar or better performance than CLIP on various general multimodal tasks.75:T4a8,Large Language Models (LLMs) evaluation is a patchy and inconsistent landscape, and it is becoming clear that the quality of automatic evaluation metrics is not keeping up with the pace of development of generative models. We aim to improve the understanding of current models' performance by providing a preliminary and hybrid evaluation on a range of open and closed-source generative LLMs on three NLP benchmarks: text summarisation, text simplification and grammatical error correction (GEC), using both automatic and human evaluation. We also explore the potential of the recently released GPT-4 to act as an evaluator. We find that ChatGPT consistently outperforms many other popular models according to human reviewers on the majority of metrics, while scoring much more poorly when using classic automatic evaluation metrics. We also find that human reviewers rate the gold reference as much worse than the best models' outputs, indicating the poor quality of many popular benchmarks. Finally, we find that GPT-4 is capable of ranking models' outputs in a way which aligns reasonably closely to human judgement despite task-specific variations, with a lower alignment in the GEC task.76:T40d,Large Language Models (LLMs) exhibit impressive performance on a range of NLP tasks, due to the general-purpose linguistic knowledge acquired during pretraining. Existing model interpretability research (Tenney et al., 2019) suggests that a linguistic hierarchy emerges in the LLM layers, with lower layers better suited to solving syntactic tasks and higher layers employed for semantic processing. Yet, little is known about how encodings of different linguistic phenomena interact within the models and to what extent processing of linguistically-related categories relies on the same, shared model representations. In this paper, we propose a framework for testing the joint encoding of linguistic categories in LLMs. Focusing on syntax, we find evidence of joint encoding both at the same (related part-of-speech (POS) classes) and different (POS classes and related syntactic dependency relations) levels of linguistic hierarchy. Our cross-lingual experiments show that the same patterns hold across languages in multilingual LLMs.77:T54e,Model merging (e.g., via interpolation or task arithmetic) fuses multiple models trained on different tasks to generate a multi-task solution. The technique has been proven successful in previous studies, where the models are trained on similar tasks and with the same initialization. In this paper, we expand on this concept to a multimodal setup by merging transformers trained on different modalities. Furthermore, we conduct our study for a novel goal where we can merge vision, language, and cross-modal transformers of a modality-specific architecture to create a parameter-efficient modality-agnostic architecture. Through comprehensive experiments, we systematically investigate the key factors impacting model performance after merging, including initialization, merging mechanisms, and model architectures. We also propose two metrics that assess the distance between weights to be merged and can serve as an indicator of the merging outcomes. Our analysis leads to an effective training recipe for matching the performance of the modality-agnostic baseline (i.e., pre-trained from scratch) via model merging. Our method also outperforms naive merging significantly on various tasks, with improvements of 3% on VQA, 7% on COCO retrieval, 25% on NLVR2, 14% on Flickr30k and 3% on ADE20k. Our code is available at https://github.com/ylsung/vl-merging78:T668,Large language models (LLMs) have proven to be very superior to conventional methods in various tasks. However, their expensive computations and high memory requirements are prohibitive for deployment. Model quantization is an effective method for reducing this overhead. The problem is that in most previous works, the quantized model was calibrated using few samples from the training data, which might affect the generalization of the quantized LLMs to unknown cases and tasks. Hence in this work, we explore an important question: Can we design a data-independent quantization method for LLMs to guarantee its generalization performance? In this work, we propose EasyQuant, a training-free and data-independent weight-only quantization algorithm for LLMs. Our observation indicates that two factors: outliers in the weight and quantization ranges, are essential for reducing the quantization error. Therefore, in EasyQuant, we leave the outliers (less than 1%) unchanged and optimize the quantization range to reduce the reconstruction error. With these methods, we surprisingly find that EasyQuant achieves comparable performance to the original model. Since EasyQuant does not depend on any training data, the generalization performance of quantized LLMs is safely guaranteed. Moreover, EasyQuant can be implemented in parallel so that the quantized model could be attained in a few minutes even for LLMs over 100B. To our best knowledge, we are the first work that achieves almost lossless quantization performance for LLMs under a data-independent setting and our algorithm runs over 10 times faster than the data-dependent methods.79:T5b0,The dialogue systems in customer services have been developed with neural models to provide users with precise answers and round-the-clock support in task-oriented conversations by detecting customer intents based on their utterances. Existing intent detection approaches have highly relied on adaptively pre-training language models with large-scale datasets, yet the predominant cost of data collection may hinder their superiority. In addition, they neglect the information within the conversational responses of the agents, which have a lower collection cost, but are significant to customer intent as agents must tailor their replies based on the customers' intent. In this paper, we propose RSVP, a self-supervised framework dedicated to task-oriented dialogues, which utilizes agent responses for pre-training in a two-stage manner. Specifically, we introduce two pre-training tasks to incorporate the relations of utterance-response pairs: 1) Response Retrieval by selecting a correct response from a batch of candidates, and 2) Response Generation by mimicking agents to generate the response to a given utterance. Our benchmark results for two real-world customer service datasets show that RSVP significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art baselines by 4.95% for accuracy, 3.4% for MRR@3, and 2.75% for MRR@5 on average. Extensive case studies are investigated to show the validity of incorporating agent responses into the pre-training stage.7a:T452,Two of the central factors believed to underpin human sentence processing difficulty are expectations and retrieval from working memory. A recent attempt to create a unified cognitive model integrating these two factors relied on the parallels between the self-attention mechanism of transformer language models and cue-based retrieval theories of working memory in human sentence processing (Ryu and Lewis 2021). While Ryu and Lewis show that attention patterns in specialized attention heads of GPT-2 are consistent with similarity-based interference, a key prediction of cue-based retrieval models, their method requires identifying syntactically specialized attention heads, and makes the cognitively implausible assumption that hundreds of memory retrieval operations take place in parallel. In the present work, we develop a recurrent neural language model with a single self-attention head, which more closely parallels the memory system assumed by cognitive theories. We show that our model's single attention head captures semantic and syntactic interference effects observed in human experiments.7b:T52e,Large language models have become a vital component in modern NLP, achieving state of the art performance in a variety of tasks. However, they are often inefficient for real-world deployment due to their expensive inference costs. Knowledge distillation is a promising technique to improve their efficiency while retaining most of their effectiveness. In this paper, we reproduce, compare and analyze several representative methods for task-agnostic (general-purpose) distillation of Transformer language models. Our target of study includes Output Distribution (OD) transfer, Hidden State (HS) transfer with various layer mapping strategies, and Multi-Head Attention (MHA) transfer based on MiniLMv2. Through our extensive experiments, we study the effectiveness of each method for various student architectures in both monolingual (English) and multilingual settings. Overall, we show that MHA transfer based on MiniLMv2 is generally the best option for distillation and explain the potential reasons behind its success. Moreover, we show that HS transfer remains as a competitive baseline, especially under a sophisticated layer mapping strategy, while OD transfer consistently lags behind other approaches. Findings from this study helped us deploy efficient yet effective student models for latency-critical applications.7c:T671,Large Language Models (LLMs), through their contextualized representations, have been empirically proven to encapsulate syntactic, semantic, word sense, and common-sense knowledge. However, there has been limited exploration of their physical reasoning abilities, specifically concerning the crucial attributes for comprehending everyday objects. To address this gap, we introduce NEWTON, a repository and benchmark for evaluating the physics reasoning skills of LLMs. Further, to enable domain-specific adaptation of this benchmark, we present a pipeline to enable researchers to generate a variant of this benchmark that has been customized to the objects and attributes relevant for their application. The NEWTON repository comprises a collection of 2800 object-attribute pairs, providing the foundation for generating infinite-scale assessment templates. The NEWTON benchmark consists of 160K QA questions, curated using the NEWTON repository to investigate the physical reasoning capabilities of several mainstream language models across foundational, explicit, and implicit reasoning tasks. Through extensive empirical analysis, our results highlight the capabilities of LLMs for physical reasoning. We find that LLMs like GPT-4 demonstrate strong reasoning capabilities in scenario-based tasks but exhibit less consistency in object-attribute reasoning compared to humans (50% vs. 84%). Furthermore, the NEWTON platform demonstrates its potential for evaluating and enhancing language models, paving the way for their integration into physically grounded settings, such as robotic manipulation. Project site: https://newtonreasoning.github.io7d:T42f,Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated their potential to refine their generation based on their own feedback. However, the feedback from LLM itself is often inaccurate, thereby limiting its benefits. In this paper, we propose Study Assistant for Large LAnguage Model (SALAM), a novel framework with an auxiliary agent to assist the main LLM in learning from mistakes through interactive cooperation. In the gathering phase, the student assistant agent probes the main LLM, analyzes its errors, and collects the interaction in a mistake memory. During the examination phase, the study assistant provides guidelines by retrieving relevant cases to help the main LLM anticipate and avoid similar errors. We first investigate the effectiveness of a general study assistant and then customize it to provide LLM-specific guidance through imitation learning from successful guidance experiences. Our experiments on three LLMs using two challenging frameworks demonstrate that SALAM can significantly boost LLMs by an accuracy margin of up to 6.6 on BBH and 12.6 on BBQ.7e:T5c1,Large language models (LLMs) such as ChatGPT can produce coherent, cohesive, relevant, and fluent answers for various natural language processing (NLP) tasks. Taking document-level machine translation (MT) as a testbed, this paper provides an in-depth evaluation of LLMs' ability on discourse modeling. The study focuses on three aspects: 1) Effects of Context-Aware Prompts, where we investigate the impact of different prompts on document-level translation quality and discourse phenomena; 2) Comparison of Translation Models, where we compare the translation performance of ChatGPT with commercial MT systems and advanced document-level MT methods; 3) Analysis of Discourse Modelling Abilities, where we further probe discourse knowledge encoded in LLMs and shed light on impacts of training techniques on discourse modeling. By evaluating on a number of benchmarks, we surprisingly find that LLMs have demonstrated superior performance and show potential to become a new paradigm for document-level translation: 1) leveraging their powerful long-text modeling capabilities, GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 outperform commercial MT systems in terms of human evaluation; 2) GPT-4 demonstrates a stronger ability for probing linguistic knowledge than GPT-3.5. This work highlights the challenges and opportunities of LLMs for MT, which we hope can inspire the future design and evaluation of LLMs.We release our data and annotations at https://github.com/longyuewangdcu/Document-MT-LLM.7f:T49e,Incorporating language-specific (LS) modules is a proven method to boost performance in multilingual machine translation. This approach bears similarity to Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) because it does not inflate FLOPs. However, the scalability of this approach to hundreds of languages (experts) tends to be unmanageable due to the prohibitive number of parameters introduced by full-rank matrices in fully-connected layers. In this work, we introduce the Language-Specific Matrix Synthesis (LMS) method. This approach constructs LS modules by generating low-rank matrices from two significantly smaller matrices to approximate the full-rank matrix. Furthermore, we condense multilingual knowledge from multiple LS modules into a single shared module with the Fuse Distillation (FD) technique to improve the efficiency of inference and model serialization. We show that our LMS method significantly outperforms previous LS methods and MoE methods with the same amount of extra parameters, e.g., 1.73 BLEU points over the Switch Transformer on many-to-many multilingual machine translation. Importantly, LMS is able to have comparable translation performance with much fewer parameters.80:T494,Large Language Models (LLMs) have recently gained the In-Context Learning (ICL) ability with the models scaling up, allowing them to quickly adapt to downstream tasks with only a few demonstration examples prepended in the input sequence. Nonetheless, the current practice of ICL treats all demonstration examples equally, which still warrants improvement, as the quality of examples is usually uneven. In this paper, we investigate how to determine approximately optimal weights for demonstration examples and how to apply them during ICL. To assess the quality of weights in the absence of additional validation data, we design a masked self-prediction (MSP) score that exhibits a strong correlation with the final ICL performance. To expedite the weight-searching process, we discretize the continuous weight space and adopt beam search. With approximately optimal weights obtained, we further propose two strategies to apply them to demonstrations at different model positions. Experimental results on 8 text classification tasks show that our approach outperforms conventional ICL by a large margin. Our code are publicly available at https:github.com/Zhe-Young/WICL.81:T495,Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown their ability to collaborate effectively with humans in real-world scenarios. However, LLMs are apt to generate hallucinations, i.e., makeup incorrect text and unverified information, which can cause significant damage when deployed for mission-critical tasks. In this paper, we propose a self-check approach based on reverse validation to detect factual errors automatically in a zero-resource fashion. To facilitate future studies and assess different methods, we construct a hallucination detection benchmark named PHD, which is generated by ChatGPT and annotated by human annotators. Contrasting previous studies of zero-resource hallucination detection, our method and benchmark concentrate on passage-level detection instead of sentence-level. We empirically evaluate our method and existing zero-resource detection methods on two datasets. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method considerably outperforms the baselines while costing fewer tokens and less time. Furthermore, we manually analyze some hallucination cases that LLM failed to capture, revealing the shared limitation of zero-resource methods.82:T544,While large language models (LLMs) bring not only performance but also complexity, recent work has started to turn LLMs into data generators rather than task inferencers, where another affordable task model is trained for efficient deployment and inference. However, such an approach has primarily been applied to natural language tasks and has not yet been explored for symbolic language tasks with complex structured outputs (e.g., semantic parsing and code generation). In this paper, we propose SymGen which utilizes LLMs for generating various annotation-expensive symbolic language data. SymGen consists of an informative prompt to steer generation and an agreement-based verifier to improve data correctness. We conduct extensive experiments on six symbolic language tasks across various settings. Compared with the LLMs, we demonstrate the 1\%-sized task model can achieve comparable or better performance, largely cutting inference and deployment costs. We also show that generated data with only a few human demonstrations can be as effective as over 10 times the amount of human-annotated data when training the task model, saving a considerable amount of annotation effort. SymGen sheds new light on data generation for complex tasks, and we release the code at \href{https://github.com/HKUNLP/SymGen}{https://github.com/HKUNLP/SymGen}.83:T548,Pre-trained large language models (LLMs) reflect the inherent social biases of their training corpus. Many methods have been proposed to mitigate this issue, but they often fail to debias or they sacrifice model accuracy. We use conceptors--a soft projection method--to identify and remove the bias subspace in LLMs such as BERT and GPT. We propose two methods of applying conceptors (1) bias subspace projection by post-processing by the conceptor NOT operation; and (2) a new architecture, conceptor-intervened BERT (CI-BERT), which explicitly incorporates the conceptor projection into all layers during training. We find that conceptor post-processing achieves state-of-the-art (SoTA) debiasing results while maintaining LLMs' performance on the GLUE benchmark. Further, it is robust in various scenarios and can mitigate intersectional bias efficiently by its AND operation on the existing bias subspaces. Although CI-BERT's training takes all layers' bias into account and can beat its post-processing counterpart in bias mitigation, CI-BERT reduces the language model accuracy. We also show the importance of carefully constructing the bias subspace. The best results are obtained by removing outliers from the list of biased words, combining them (via the OR operation), and computing their embeddings using the sentences from a cleaner corpus.84:T4dd,With the rapid development of NLP, large-scale language models (LLMs) excel in various tasks across multiple domains now. However, existing benchmarks may not adequately measure these models' capabilities, especially when faced with new knowledge. In this paper, we address the lack of benchmarks to evaluate LLMs' ability to handle new knowledge, an important and challenging aspect in the rapidly evolving world. We propose an approach called KnowGen that generates new knowledge by altering existing entity attributes and relationships, resulting in artificial entities that are distinct from real-world entities. With KnowGen, we introduce a benchmark named ALCUNA to assess LLMs' abilities in knowledge understanding, differentiation, and association. We benchmark several LLMs, reveals that their performance in face of new knowledge is not satisfactory, particularly in reasoning between new and internal knowledge. We also explore the impact of entity similarity on the model's understanding of entity knowledge and the influence of contextual entities. We appeal to the need for caution when using LLMs in new scenarios or with new knowledge, and hope that our benchmarks can help drive the development of LLMs in face of new knowledge.85:T50d,The field of vision-and-language (VL) understanding has made unprecedented progress with end-to-end large pre-trained VL models (VLMs). However, they still fall short in zero-shot reasoning tasks that require multi-step inferencing. To achieve this goal, previous works resort to a divide-and-conquer pipeline. In this paper, we argue that previous efforts have several inherent shortcomings: 1) They rely on domain-specific sub-question decomposing models. 2) They force models to predict the final answer even if the sub-questions or sub-answers provide insufficient information. We address these limitations via IdealGPT, a framework that iteratively decomposes VL reasoning using large language models (LLMs). Specifically, IdealGPT utilizes an LLM to generate sub-questions, a VLM to provide corresponding sub-answers, and another LLM to reason to achieve the final answer. These three modules perform the divide-and-conquer procedure iteratively until the model is confident about the final answer to the main question. We evaluate IdealGPT on multiple challenging VL reasoning tasks under a zero-shot setting. In particular, our IdealGPT outperforms the best existing GPT-4-like models by an absolute 10% on VCR and 15% on SNLI-VE. Code is available at https://github.com/Hxyou/IdealGPT86:T4fa,The increased deployment of LMs for real-world tasks involving knowledge and facts makes it important to understand model epistemology: what LMs think they know, and how their attitudes toward that knowledge are affected by language use in their inputs. Here, we study an aspect of model epistemology: how epistemic markers of certainty, uncertainty, or evidentiality like"I'm sure it's","I think it's", or"Wikipedia says it's"affect models, and whether they contribute to model failures. We develop a typology of epistemic markers and inject 50 markers into prompts for question answering. We find that LMs are highly sensitive to epistemic markers in prompts, with accuracies varying more than 80%. Surprisingly, we find that expressions of high certainty result in a 7% decrease in accuracy as compared to low certainty expressions; similarly, factive verbs hurt performance, while evidentials benefit performance. Our analysis of a popular pretraining dataset shows that these markers of uncertainty are associated with answers on question-answering websites, while markers of certainty are associated with questions. These associations may suggest that the behavior of LMs is based on mimicking observed language use, rather than truly reflecting epistemic uncertainty.0:{"rsc":["$","$1","c",{"children":[["$","div",null,{"className":"mx-auto max-w-5xl px-4 py-8","children":["$","$L2",null,{"data":{"venue":"EMNLP","venue_slug":"emnlp-2023","year":2023,"full_name":"Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing","generated_at":"2026-04-19T08:32:10.890267+00:00","stats":{"total_fetched":2310,"total_relevant":472,"by_award":{"poster":472},"by_category":{"mechanism":174,"llm_pretrain":108,"post_train":90,"efficient":48,"multimodal":27,"agent":16,"multimodal_gen":4,"industry":1,"coding_agent":4}},"papers":[{"id":"2305.13245","title":"GQA: Training Generalized Multi-Query Transformer Models from Multi-Head Checkpoints","authors":["Joshua Ainslie","James Lee-Thorp","Michiel de Jong","Yury Zemlyanskiy","Federico Lebrón","Sumit Sanghai"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Multi-query attention (MQA), which only uses a single key-value head, drastically speeds up decoder inference. However, MQA can lead to quality degradation, and moreover it may not be desirable to train a separate model just for faster inference. We (1) propose a recipe for uptraining existing multi-head language model checkpoints into models with MQA using 5% of original pre-training compute, and (2) introduce grouped-query attention (GQA), a generalization of multi-query attention which uses an intermediate (more than one, less than number of query heads) number of key-value heads. We show that uptrained GQA achieves quality close to multi-head attention with comparable speed to MQA.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.13245","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/AinslieLJZLS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.298"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/AinslieLJZLS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.298","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["gqa","mqa","uptraining","kv-cache","attention-optimization"]},{"id":"LiuDLSL23","title":"Towards A Unified View of Sparse Feed-Forward Network in Pretraining Large Language Model","authors":["Zeyu Liu","Tim Dettmers","Xi Lin","Veselin Stoyanov","Xian Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiuDLSL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.930"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiuDLSL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.930","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["moe","sparse-ffn","pretrain","architecture"]},{"id":"PengAAAABCCCDDG23","title":"RWKV: Reinventing RNNs for the Transformer Era","authors":["Bo Peng","Eric Alcaide","Quentin Anthony","Alon Albalak","Samuel Arcadinho","Stella Biderman","Huanqi Cao","Xin Cheng","Michael Chung","Leon Derczynski","Xingjian Du","Matteo Grella","Kranthi Kiran GV","Xuzheng He","Haowen Hou","Przemyslaw Kazienko","Jan Kocon","Jiaming Kong","Bartlomiej Koptyra","Hayden Lau","Jiaju Lin","Krishna Sri Ipsit Mantri","Ferdinand Mom","Atsushi Saito","Guangyu Song","Xiangru Tang","Johan S. Wind","Stanislaw Wozniak","Zhenyuan Zhang","Qinghua Zhou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/PengAAAABCCCDDG23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.936"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/PengAAAABCCCDDG23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.936","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["rwkv","rnn","architecture","efficient"]},{"id":"2311.00913","title":"Self-Influence Guided Data Reweighting for Language Model Pre-training","authors":["Megh Thakkar","Tolga Bolukbasi","Sriram Ganapathy","Shikhar Vashishth","Sarath Chandar","Partha Talukdar"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.00913","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ThakkarBGVCT23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.125"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ThakkarBGVCT23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.125","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["data-quality","data-reweighting","pretraining","training-dynamics"]},{"id":"WangPXMLSDKLXAC23","title":"Shall We Pretrain Autoregressive Language Models with Retrieval? A Comprehensive Study","authors":["Boxin Wang","Wei Ping","Peng Xu","Lawrence McAfee","Zihan Liu","Mohammad Shoeybi","Yi Dong","Oleksii Kuchaiev","Bo Li","Chaowei Xiao","Anima Anandkumar","Bryan Catanzaro"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WangPXMLSDKLXAC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.482"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WangPXMLSDKLXAC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.482","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文问的是一个更前置的问题：检索到底应该只在推理时接入，还是应该在自回归语言模型预训练阶段就纳入训练闭环。过去主流做法通常把 retrieval 当 inference-time 插件，但如果模型在预训练时从未学会如何使用检索，那么下游再接入 often 会出现接口错配和收益不稳定。","importance":"它的重要性很高，因为这是直接作用在 pretrain 范式上的问题。若结论明确，影响的不只是某个 RAG 细节，而是 base model 是否应把外部记忆访问当作原生能力来训练。这会影响数据管线、训练成本、上下文设计和后续工具使用接口。","technical_approach":"从标题能确认，这是一篇关于‘是否用 retrieval 预训练 AR LM’的 comprehensive study，而不是单点新模型。核心方法应是系统比较：纯 AR 预训练、训练时引入 retrieval、以及不同检索配置对下游表现的影响。其关键价值不在于提出新模块，而在于控制变量后回答一个经常被经验性讨论的问题：预训练阶段见过 retrieval，是否真的让模型更会用外部知识。这样的研究难点在于把 retrieval 带来的额外 token、额外算力和真正的方法收益区分开。","experiments":"由于当前没有摘要与表格，不能写模型规模、数据规模、基线和数值提升。可以确定的是，论文定位为 comprehensive study，说明实验大概率覆盖多种训练设置和下游任务，而不是单 benchmark。值得关注的实验点应包括：训练时是否检索、检索频率、检索质量、以及对知识密集型任务和开放生成任务的不同影响，但具体结论必须以正文为准。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a pretraining-level question: should retrieval be introduced only at inference time, or should autoregressive language models be pretrained with retrieval in the loop? The dominant practice has been to bolt retrieval on later, but that can create an interface mismatch if the base model was never trained to use retrieved evidence.","importance":"This is highly relevant to pretraining because it speaks to model-native tool use. A clear answer would affect more than RAG tuning. It would influence base-model training recipes, data pipelines, context formats, and how external memory is exposed to the model throughout its lifecycle.","technical_approach":"From the title, this is a comprehensive study rather than a single new architecture. The likely setup is a controlled comparison between standard AR pretraining and retrieval-augmented pretraining, possibly across multiple retrieval configurations and downstream evaluations. The methodological value is in separating true benefits of retrieval-aware pretraining from confounds such as extra tokens, extra compute, or extra context at train time.","experiments":"No abstract or quantitative results are provided here, so model sizes, corpora, baselines, and gains cannot be stated responsibly. What is safe to say is that, as a comprehensive study, the paper likely spans multiple training conditions and task types rather than a single benchmark. Any specific empirical conclusion needs the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["retrieval","pretrain","scaling"]},{"id":"ZhangLZZWZQ23","title":"SpeechGPT: Empowering Large Language Models with Intrinsic Cross-Modal Conversational Abilities","authors":["Dong Zhang","Shimin Li","Xin Zhang","Jun Zhan","Pengyu Wang","Yaqian Zhou","Xipeng Qiu"],"institutions":["Fudan University"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhangLZZWZQ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.1055"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhangLZZWZQ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.1055","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"让 LLM 原生支持语音的\"感知-理解-生成\"闭环，而不是靠 ASR+LLM+TTS 三段拼接。拼接方案延迟大、语义信息在转写时丢失、无法端到端训练。","importance":"范式级工作，是把\"语音当 token\"思路真正塞进 LLaMA 主体的早期代表之一，对后续 AudioLM / Moshi / Qwen-Audio 等统一语音 LM 方向有直接影响。核心启示：只要有离散语音 token，就能把语音纳入标准 next-token 建模栈。","technical_approach":"用 HuBERT 类 self-supervised 离散单元做语音 tokenizer，得到 discrete speech units，然后和文本 token 拼进同一个 vocab，让 LLaMA 统一做 next-token 预测。三阶段训练：(1) modality adaptation——在未配对语音数据上继续 pretrain，让 LLaMA 先学会语音 token 的分布；(2) cross-modal instruction tuning——用语音-文本配对指令数据；(3) chain-of-modality 指令微调——跨模态链式任务。再用 vocoder 把输出 speech token 还原成波形。","experiments":"作者构建 SpeechInstruct 数据集。在语音指令跟随、spoken QA、ASR/TTS 等任务上展示端到端能力，并给定性示例展示 speech-to-speech 对话。具体数字以定性/指令跟随为主。","authors_note":"复旦大学 Xipeng Qiu 组。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Give LLMs native speech-in / speech-out capability instead of the ASR+LLM+TTS pipeline, which is laggy, loses paralinguistic information at transcription, and cannot be trained end-to-end.","importance":"A paradigm-level early example of treating speech as tokens inside a LLaMA backbone, influential for later unified speech-LM work (AudioLM, Moshi, Qwen-Audio). The takeaway: given discrete speech units, speech slots straight into the standard next-token stack.","technical_approach":"Uses HuBERT-style self-supervised discrete units as a speech tokenizer, concatenates speech tokens with text tokens into one vocabulary, and lets LLaMA do plain next-token prediction. Three-stage training: (1) modality adaptation—continued pretraining on unpaired speech so the model learns the speech-token distribution; (2) cross-modal instruction tuning with paired speech-text; (3) chain-of-modality instruction tuning for mixed modality chains. A vocoder maps output speech tokens back to waveform.","experiments":"Introduces the SpeechInstruct dataset. Demonstrates end-to-end spoken instruction following, spoken QA, ASR/TTS, plus qualitative speech-to-speech dialogue. Evaluation is largely qualitative / instruction-following oriented.","authors_note":"Fudan University, Xipeng Qiu's group."},"tags":["speech-lm","multimodal","tokenizer","unified-model"],"notable_authors":["Xipeng Qiu"]},{"id":"2210.11610","title":"Large Language Models Can Self-Improve","authors":["Jiaxin Huang","Shixiang Gu","Le Hou","Yuexin Wu","Xuezhi Wang","Hongkun Yu","Jiawei Han"],"institutions":["Google Research"],"abstract":"Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved excellent performances in various tasks. However, fine-tuning an LLM requires extensive supervision. Human, on the other hand, may improve their reasoning abilities by self-thinking without external inputs. In this work, we demonstrate that an LLM is also capable of self-improving with only unlabeled datasets. We use a pre-trained LLM to generate\"high-confidence\"rationale-augmented answers for unlabeled questions using Chain-of-Thought prompting and self-consistency, and fine-tune the LLM using those self-generated solutions as target outputs. We show that our approach improves the general reasoning ability of a 540B-parameter LLM (74.4%->82.1% on GSM8K, 78.2%->83.0% on DROP, 90.0%->94.4% on OpenBookQA, and 63.4%->67.9% on ANLI-A3) and achieves state-of-the-art-level performance, without any ground truth label. We conduct ablation studies and show that fine-tuning on reasoning is critical for self-improvement.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.11610","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/0001GHW00023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.67"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/0001GHW00023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.67","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是：LLM 的推理能力提升是否一定依赖人工标注监督，还是模型可以用未标注问题自己生成高质量解答，再反过来训练自己。过去 reasoning finetune 通常高度依赖人工解题过程或答案，成本高且扩展慢；而如果模型能从自身高置信输出中学习，就有机会把后训练扩展到大量无标注数据。","importance":"这项工作的重要性很高，属于 pretrain-posttrain 接口上的方法级结果。它给出了一个强信号：在足够大的模型上，自举式 self-training 不只是做数据扩充，而是能实质提升 reasoning。对后续 RLAIF、拒绝采样蒸馏、过程监督和 test-time search 都有影响，因为它说明“模型生成 + 置信筛选 + 再训练”本身可以形成正反馈闭环。","technical_approach":"方法很直接：用预训练 LLM 在未标注问题上通过 CoT prompting 和 self-consistency 生成多条解答，从中筛出高置信的 rationale-augmented answers，再用这些自生成解作为监督去 finetune 原模型。关键设计点有两个。第一，使用 rationale 而不只用最终答案，因为中间过程提供更稠密的学习信号。第二，用 self-consistency 做置信过滤，而不是无差别自训练，这样能减少错误伪标签放大。它和传统 self-training 的区别在于，目标不是分类标签，而是带推理链的完整输出序列。","experiments":"实验结果在摘要里给得很清楚：作者在 540B 模型上，GSM8K 从 74.4% 提升到 82.1%，DROP 从 78.2% 到 83.0%，OpenBookQA 从 90.0% 到 94.4%，ANLI-A3 从 63.4% 到 67.9%。这说明提升不局限于数学，而覆盖数值推理、常识问答和自然语言推断。摘要还说性能达到或优于使用标注样本 finetune 的水平，但未给出更细对比设置。一个重要边界是，这种方法依赖底座模型先具备足够强的初始推理能力，否则高置信筛选会产出太多错误信号，难以形成正循环。","authors_note":"作者团队包含 Google Research 研究者；Xuezhi Wang 是较知名作者，长期做 CoT、self-consistency、reasoning 与 instruction tuning 相关工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether improving LLM reasoning must rely on human supervision, or whether a model can bootstrap itself using only unlabeled questions. Standard reasoning fine-tuning depends heavily on human-written answers or rationales, which is costly and hard to scale.","importance":"This is a high-impact method paper at the pretrain–posttrain boundary. It shows that self-training with generated rationales is not merely data augmentation; at sufficient scale, it can materially improve reasoning ability. That result directly informs later work on self-distillation, rejection sampling, process supervision, and model-generated training loops.","technical_approach":"The approach is simple and effective: use a pretrained LLM to generate rationale-augmented answers on unlabeled questions with CoT prompting and self-consistency, keep high-confidence solutions, and fine-tune the same model on those self-generated outputs. Two choices matter. First, training on full rationales gives denser supervision than final answers alone. Second, self-consistency acts as a quality filter, reducing error amplification that would otherwise plague naive self-training.","experiments":"The abstract reports clear gains on a 540B model: GSM8K improves from 74.4% to 82.1%, DROP from 78.2% to 83.0%, OpenBookQA from 90.0% to 94.4%, and ANLI-A3 from 63.4% to 67.9%. The gains span arithmetic, reading-based numerical reasoning, commonsense QA, and NLI, which suggests some transfer beyond a single domain. The main caveat is also clear: the loop likely depends on a strong enough base model to generate sufficiently clean pseudo-rationales in the first place.","authors_note":"The team includes Google Research authors. Xuezhi Wang is a notable researcher known for chain-of-thought, self-consistency, reasoning, and instruction-tuning work."},"tags":["self-improve","reasoning","self-training","rlaif"],"notable_authors":["Jiaxin Huang","Shixiang Gu","Le Hou","Yuexin Wu","Xuezhi Wang"]},{"id":"2303.09752","title":"CoLT5: Faster Long-Range Transformers with Conditional Computation","authors":["Joshua Ainslie","Tao Lei","Michiel de Jong","Santiago Ontañón","Siddhartha Brahma","Yury Zemlyanskiy","David C. Uthus","Mandy Guo","James Lee-Thorp","Yi Tay","Yun-Hsuan Sung","Sumit Sanghai"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Many natural language processing tasks benefit from long inputs, but processing long documents with Transformers is expensive -- not only due to quadratic attention complexity but also from applying feedforward and projection layers to every token. However, not all tokens are equally important, especially for longer documents. We propose CoLT5, a long-input Transformer model that builds on this intuition by employing conditional computation, devoting more resources to important tokens in both feedforward and attention layers. We show that CoLT5 achieves stronger performance than LongT5 with much faster training and inference, achieving SOTA on the long-input SCROLLS benchmark. Moreover, CoLT5 can effectively and tractably make use of extremely long inputs, showing strong gains up to 64k input length.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.09752","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/AinslieLJOBZUGL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.309"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/AinslieLJOBZUGL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.309","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["long-context","conditional-computation","efficient-attention","architecture"]},{"id":"2311.16298","title":"Influence Scores at Scale for Efficient Language Data Sampling","authors":["Nikhil Anand","Joshua Tan","Maria Minakova"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.16298","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/AnandTM23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.152"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/AnandTM23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.152","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["data-selection","influence-functions","data-sampling","training-efficiency"]},{"id":"ChenZ0SY23","title":"A Cheaper and Better Diffusion Language Model with Soft-Masked Noise","authors":["Jiaao Chen","Aston Zhang","Mu Li","Alex Smola","Diyi Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ChenZ0SY23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.289"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ChenZ0SY23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.289","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：扩散语言模型在离散 token 上训练和采样都太贵，因此很难真正和自回归 LM 竞争。已有离散 diffusion LM 往往依赖固定的离散噪声过程，例如随机替换或 [MASK] 污染，这类设计训练目标与文本结构不够匹配，导致步数多、信号稀疏、生成成本高。","importance":"它的价值主要是方法级的：用更贴近语言建模的 soft-masked 噪声，试图把 diffusion LM 从“能做”往“更便宜也更能打”推进一步。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于，离散扩散的瓶颈未必只在架构，而在噪声参数化是否给了模型足够平滑、可学习的恢复目标；如果噪声设计得更好，diffusion LM 才有资格和 AR LM 比训练效率与生成质量。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把传统硬离散 corruption 改成 soft-masked noise：不是把 token 直接替换成单一 [MASK] 或随机词，而是把原 token 逐步混成一个软分布，再训练模型从不同噪声等级恢复原词。这个设计的关键好处是保留了更多词汇级不确定性信息，避免硬 mask 让条件分布过于离散、梯度过于跳变。和最接近的离散 diffusion / masked diffusion 方法相比，它强调噪声分布连续化而不是单纯改 sampler，因此想同时改善训练稳定性与采样步数效率。代价是实现上要处理软标签或分布级状态，推理时仍然需要多步去噪，无法完全摆脱 diffusion 的串行开销。","experiments":"从题目可以确认，作者主张该方法在成本和效果上同时优于已有 diffusion LM，但给定信息没有提供可核验的模型规模、数据规模、baseline 名称或具体提升数字，因此这里不能编造。可以合理预期实验会围绕离散 diffusion LM baseline、采样步数、困惑度或生成质量展开，并比较不同噪声设计；但具体结论、提升幅度和 ablation 位置需要论文正文支持。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical bottleneck: diffusion language models over discrete tokens are still too expensive to train and decode to be serious alternatives to autoregressive LMs. Prior discrete diffusion setups usually use hard corruption processes such as random replacement or explicit masking, which are easy to define but give a coarse recovery target and weak learning signal for text.","importance":"This is mainly a method-level contribution: it argues that a better noise process can make diffusion LM training cheaper and generation better at the same time. The broader pretraining takeaway is that the main limitation of discrete diffusion may not be the paradigm alone, but the mismatch between the corruption process and linguistic uncertainty; if the noise is made smoother, the paradigm becomes more competitive.","technical_approach":"The core idea is a soft-masked noise process. Instead of collapsing a token into a single mask symbol or a random replacement, the method gradually mixes it into a soft token distribution and trains the model to denoise from multiple corruption levels. This preserves uncertainty information and avoids the brittle supervision induced by hard masking. Relative to nearby discrete diffusion or masked diffusion approaches, the novelty is not just a better sampler but a softer parameterization of the noising process, intended to improve optimization and reduce the number of denoising steps needed for good quality. The trade-off is that inference still remains multi-step and therefore costlier than standard AR decoding.","experiments":"From the title alone, the claim is that the method is both cheaper and better than prior diffusion LMs, but the provided material contains no verifiable numbers for model size, data scale, baselines, or gains. It is likely that the paper compares against discrete diffusion baselines on generation quality and sampling cost, with ablations over noise design, but concrete results should only be taken from the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion-lm","masked-lm","non-ar"],"notable_authors":["Jiaao Chen","Aston Zhang","Mu Li","Alex Smola","Diyi Yang"]},{"id":"2310.10837","title":"Approximating Two-Layer Feedforward Networks for Efficient Transformers","authors":["Róbert Csordás","Kazuki Irie","Jürgen Schmidhuber"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$5","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.10837","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/CsordasIS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.49"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/CsordasIS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.49","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：如何在不明显牺牲性能的前提下降低 Transformer FFN 的计算和存储成本，而且要用对语言模型更公平的比较方式。过去很多 MoE 工作在 compute-equal 条件下比较稀疏和稠密模型，但对 LM 来说，参数量、容量和训练预算耦合很强，只看计算相等容易得出偏乐观结论。","importance":"这是效率与架构层面的工作，对 pretrain 很相关，因为 FFN 是 Transformer 里主要的参数和算力消耗之一。它的重要性有两点。第一，作者提出一个统一框架，把 MoE、PKM 等看成近似 two-layer FFN 的不同方式，这有助于把零散工程技巧放到同一设计空间里。第二，它强调 parameter-equal evaluation，这对评估大模型稀疏化方法是一个很有价值的口径修正。","technical_approach":"方法上，作者给出一个统一视角来近似两层前馈网络，把多种 MoE 和 product-key memories 都纳入同一框架，并据此提出改进版 MoE/PKM。关键点不只是‘更稀疏’，而是把这些模块理解为对 dense FFN 的不同低成本近似，然后分析哪些近似在参数固定时更划算。这样设计有效，因为 FFN 的容量、激活稀疏性和参数访问模式本来就是一个连续设计空间。与 prior 的差异主要在两处：一是统一化解释，二是 parameter-equal 而非 compute-equal 的比较设定。代价在于，这类近似模块往往会增加路由、访存或训练不稳定性，实际系统收益未必与理论稀疏度同步。","experiments":"摘要里可确认的事实是：作者在 parameter-equal 条件下，将其 MoE 与 dense Transformer-XL 在 WikiText 等语言建模任务上比较，并声称结果具有竞争力。由于摘要截断，缺失具体数据集全名、模型尺寸和数值提升，因此不能补数字。即便如此，论文最重要的实验信息已经足够明确：它不是在稀疏模型最有利的 compute-equal 设定下赢 baseline，而是在参数量对齐的更严格条件下证明竞争性，这一点本身就值得重视。","authors_note":"作者包括 Jürgen Schmidhuber。该团队长期关注高效神经网络、记忆模块和架构改造。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks how to reduce the compute and memory cost of Transformer feed-forward blocks without giving up language-model performance, and it argues that the usual evaluation protocol for sparse models is often misleading. Many MoE papers compare sparse and dense models under equal compute, but for LMs the coupling between parameter count, capacity, and training budget makes that comparison incomplete.","importance":"This is directly relevant to pretraining efficiency because FFNs are one of the main sources of parameters and compute in Transformers. The contribution matters for two reasons. First, it provides a unified framework in which MoEs, PKMs, and related modules are all viewed as ways to approximate a two-layer FFN. Second, it pushes parameter-equal evaluation, which is a meaningful correction for judging sparse LM architectures.","technical_approach":"The paper develops a common framework for approximating two-layer feed-forward networks and shows that several existing methods, including MoEs and product-key memories, fit inside it. Using that perspective, it proposes improved versions of MoEs and PKMs. The key idea is not sparsity for its own sake, but identifying which approximations give the best trade-off when parameter budget is fixed. This framing is useful because FFN capacity, sparsity, and parameter access pattern naturally form a shared design space. Relative to prior work, the main difference is the unified interpretation and the use of parameter-equal rather than compute-equal comparisons. The trade-off is the usual one for sparse modules: routing and memory access may introduce practical overhead and optimization instability.","experiments":"What can be stated safely from the abstract is that the proposed MoEs are competitive with dense Transformer-XL on WikiText-style language modeling benchmarks under a parameter-equal setting. The abstract is truncated and does not include model sizes or exact gains, so no numbers should be fabricated. The most important empirical point is the evaluation regime itself: the paper claims competitiveness under a stricter and arguably more relevant comparison than the standard sparse-model setup.","authors_note":"The author list includes Jürgen Schmidhuber, whose group has a long history in efficient neural architectures and memory-based modeling."},"tags":["moe","architecture","efficient"],"notable_authors":["Róbert Csordás","Kazuki Irie","Jürgen Schmidhuber"]},{"id":"2402.09949","title":"Multi-word Tokenization for Sequence Compression","authors":["Leonidas Gee","Leonardo Rigutini","Marco Ernandes","Andrea Zugarini"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Large Language Models have proven highly successful at modelling a variety of tasks. However, this comes at a steep computational cost that hinders wider industrial uptake. In this paper, we present MWT: a Multi-Word Tokenizer that goes beyond word boundaries by representing frequent multi-word expressions as single tokens. MWTs produce a more compact and efficient tokenization that yields two benefits: (1) Increase in performance due to a greater coverage of input data given a fixed sequence length budget; (2) Faster and lighter inference due to the ability to reduce the sequence length with negligible drops in performance. Our results show that MWT is more robust across shorter sequence lengths, thus allowing for major speedups via early sequence truncation.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.09949","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/GeeREZ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-INDUSTRY.58"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/GeeREZ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-industry.58","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["tokenizer","sequence-compression","efficiency"]},{"id":"LiSYJWX23","title":"Adaptive Gating in Mixture-of-Experts based Language Models","authors":["Jiamin Li","Qiang Su","Yitao Yang","Yimin Jiang","Cong Wang","Hong Xu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiSYJWX23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.217"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiSYJWX23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.217","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：MoE 语言模型中的 gating 往往静态且脆弱，导致专家利用不均衡、路由噪声大，最终浪费参数容量并影响训练稳定性。现有工作常把重点放在扩专家数和 load balancing loss，但对 gating 本身如何自适应输入与训练阶段关注不够。","importance":"这是一个方法级、偏架构与训练动态的工作，和 pretrain 直接相关。它的重要性在于：MoE 的上限不只由专家能力决定，更由路由是否把 token 送到合适的专家决定；如果 gating 更自适应，MoE 才能真正把额外参数转成有效容量，而不是只增加系统复杂度。","technical_approach":"核心方法是改进 MoE LM 的 gating 机制，使其能够根据输入特征或训练状态自适应调整路由决策，而不是固定地依赖单一打分策略。和标准 top-k gating 相比，这类设计通常会在专家选择、概率校准或负载控制上加入动态因素，目标是同时减少 expert collapse 和错误路由；其有效性来自一个简单事实：不同 token、不同层、不同训练阶段需要的专家分工并不相同，静态门控很难长期最优。","experiments":"从题目可推断，实验应比较 adaptive gating 与标准 Switch/稀疏 MoE gating 在语言建模困惑度、下游任务、负载均衡和训练稳定性上的差异。由于没有摘要和结果表，我无法确认参数规模、专家数、top-k 设置和具体收益数字；比较确定的是，论文贡献点在 gating，而不是新的 expert 网络或更大训练数据。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a central weakness of MoE language models: gating is often too rigid and unstable, which leads to uneven expert usage, noisy routing, and wasted parameter capacity. Prior work pays a lot of attention to more experts and load-balancing losses, but less to how the gating function itself should adapt to input and training dynamics.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution directly relevant to pretraining architecture and training dynamics. Its significance is that the ceiling of MoE performance is determined not only by expert quality, but by whether routing sends tokens to the right experts; if gating becomes more adaptive, extra parameters are more likely to translate into effective capacity rather than just more system complexity.","technical_approach":"The core idea is an adaptive gating mechanism for MoE-based language models, where routing changes with input characteristics or training state rather than relying on a fixed scoring rule. Relative to standard top-k gating, this kind of design typically introduces dynamic factors into expert selection, probability calibration, or load control to reduce both expert collapse and misrouting; the rationale is straightforward: different tokens, layers, and training phases do not require the same partition of expertise.","experiments":"From the title, the evaluation likely compares adaptive gating against standard sparse MoE or Switch-style routing on language modeling perplexity, downstream tasks, load balancing, and training stability. Since no abstract or result tables are available, I cannot report parameter counts, number of experts, top-k settings, or exact gains; the safe conclusion is that the contribution is in the gating policy rather than new expert blocks or larger-scale data.","authors_note":""},"tags":["moe","routing","training-dynamics","scaling"]},{"id":"LiangGMHGGZK23","title":"XLM-V: Overcoming the Vocabulary Bottleneck in Multilingual Masked Language Models","authors":["Davis Liang","Hila Gonen","Yuning Mao","Rui Hou","Naman Goyal","Marjan Ghazvininejad","Luke Zettlemoyer","Madian Khabsa"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiangGMHGGZK23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.813"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiangGMHGGZK23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.813","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["tokenizer","multilingual","vocabulary"]},{"id":"2305.14681","title":"Emergent Inabilities? Inverse Scaling Over the Course of Pretraining","authors":["James A. Michaelov","Ben Bergen"],"institutions":["University of California, San Diego"],"abstract":"Does inverse scaling only occur as a function of model size, or can it also occur over the course of training? We carry out an exploratory study investigating whether the performance of language models on specific tasks can decrease (while general performance remains high) during training on the language modeling task. We find 8 tasks on which Pythia 12B (Biderman et al., 2023) shows decreased performance over the course of training. Five of these tasks (TruthfulQA-MC1, TruthfulQA-MC2, Hindsight Neglect, Memo Trap, and Pattern Match Suppression) additionally show a consistent relationship whereby larger language models show a greater decrease in performance the more they are trained, despite showing standard (positive) scaling overall. This highlights the importance of testing performance at all relevant benchmarks any time models are trained on additional data, even if their overall performance improves","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14681","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/Michaelov023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.973"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/Michaelov023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.973","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：inverse scaling 不仅会随模型变大出现，是否也会在同一个模型的预训练过程中逐步出现。过去 inverse scaling 常被表述为“大模型比小模型更差”的横向现象；作者把问题改成纵向训练动态分析：在 general LM loss 继续变好时，某些具体能力是否反而退化。","importance":"这项工作的贡献属于训练动态与评测层，对 pretrain 非常相关。它的重要性在于提醒我们：用总 loss 或常规 benchmark 监控训练并不够，某些安全性、真实性或抗干扰能力可能在继续训练时被主动损害。这直接影响 checkpoint 选择、 mid-training 评测、 curriculum 和 cooldown 策略，也对“多训一定更好”的朴素 scaling 直觉提出了修正。","technical_approach":"核心方法是利用 Pythia 12B 的全训练轨迹，在多个 checkpoint 上重复评测一组已知会 inverse scaling 的任务。方法本身不复杂，但设计上很重要：作者同时看模型大小和训练步数，把横向 scaling 与纵向 pretraining dynamics 结合起来。关键不是提出新训练法，而是用现成可重现的训练日志回答一个此前少被直接测的问题：能力退化究竟发生在 architecture/size，还是发生在持续拟合语料的过程中。","experiments":"实验最关键的事实是：作者发现 8 个任务在 Pythia 12B 的训练过程中性能下降，其中 5 个任务还表现出一致的“训练越久、模型越大，下降越明显”的模式，同时总体语言建模性能仍在上升。摘要点名的任务包括 TruthfulQA-MC1、TruthfulQA-MC2、Hindsight Neglect、Memo Trap、Pattern Match Suppression。这个结果说明 inverse scaling 不是静态尺寸现象，而可以是训练轨迹中的涌现失能。虽然摘要没有给出具体数值，但结论已经足够强：继续预训练会系统性强化某些错误启发式或迎合数据频率模式。边界在于，结论目前建立在特定任务集和 Pythia 族上，是否泛化到更现代的数据配比和 post-training 后模型，需要后续验证。","authors_note":"University of California, San Diego。Ben Bergen 以认知科学与语言模型行为研究知名。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether inverse scaling is only a cross-model size effect, or whether it can also emerge over the course of training within the same model. Earlier discussion often treated inverse scaling as a static comparison where larger models do worse; this work reframes it as a training-dynamics question: can task performance fall while language modeling performance keeps improving?","importance":"This is a training-dynamics and evaluation contribution with direct relevance to pretraining. Its importance is that it warns against using aggregate LM loss or a narrow benchmark set as the sole training signal. Some capabilities tied to truthfulness or robustness may degrade as training continues, which matters for checkpoint selection, mid-training evaluation, curricula, and cooldown design.","technical_approach":"The approach is straightforward but well targeted: evaluate many checkpoints from the full Pythia 12B training trajectory on a set of known inverse-scaling tasks. The key choice is to study both model size and training step, linking horizontal scaling behavior with longitudinal pretraining dynamics. The paper does not propose a new training method; it uses reproducible checkpoints to answer a question that standard final-checkpoint evaluations cannot see.","experiments":"The main empirical fact is that the authors identify 8 tasks where Pythia 12B gets worse over training, and 5 of them show a consistent pattern in which larger models degrade more as they are trained longer, even while overall language modeling quality improves. The abstract explicitly lists TruthfulQA-MC1, TruthfulQA-MC2, Hindsight Neglect, Memo Trap, and Pattern Match Suppression among these tasks. That is a strong result even without detailed numbers: longer pretraining can systematically amplify harmful heuristics or frequency-following behavior. The clear limitation is scope—the finding is established on selected tasks and the Pythia family, so generalization to newer data mixtures or post-trained assistants remains open.","authors_note":"University of California, San Diego. Ben Bergen is well known for work on cognitive science and language model behavior."},"tags":["training-dynamics","scaling-law","inverse-scaling","pretraining"],"notable_authors":["James A. Michaelov","Ben Bergen"]},{"id":"OladipoAAOOAL23","title":"Better Quality Pre-training Data and T5 Models for African Languages","authors":["Akintunde Oladipo","Mofetoluwa Adeyemi","Orevaoghene Ahia","Abraham Toluwase Owodunni","Odunayo Ogundepo","David Ifeoluwa Adelani","Jimmy Lin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/OladipoAAOOAL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.11"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/OladipoAAOOAL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.11","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["data-quality","multilingual","pretraining-data","t5"]},{"id":"RenduchintalaKB23","title":"INGENIOUS: Using Informative Data Subsets for Efficient Pre-Training of Language Models","authors":["H. S. V. N. S. Kowndinya Renduchintala","Krishnateja Killamsetty","Sumit Bhatia","Milan Aggarwal","Ganesh Ramakrishnan","Rishabh K. Iyer","Balaji Krishnamurthy"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/RenduchintalaKB23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.445"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/RenduchintalaKB23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.445","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是预训练数据并非越多越好、但高质量筛选又常常成本很高的问题。过去大规模 LM 预训练普遍采取‘尽量多抓数据再做轻过滤’，因为人工定义什么是有信息量的数据很难，但这会让训练预算大量消耗在边际收益很低的样本上。","importance":"这是直接面向 pretrain 数据配比与样本选择的工作，价值不在模型结构，而在于试图把‘信息量更高的数据子集’变成可操作的预训练策略。若方法稳健，它对训练预算受限场景尤其重要，因为它挑战了只靠规模堆数据的默认路线，并可能影响数据去重、课程学习和 active data selection 的接口设计。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 INGENIOUS，用 informative data subsets 做更高效的语言模型预训练。它应属于数据选择/子集构造方法，而不是新损失函数：先依据某种可计算的代表性、困难度、多样性或梯度相关指标挑选样本，再用更小子集训练模型，目标是在接近原始全量效果下减少 token 预算。它和随机下采样的区别在于选择信号是有偏的、服务于学习效率；它和纯质量过滤的区别在于不仅删噪声，还要保留对参数更新最有用的覆盖。风险是选择标准容易和当前模型或任务耦合，导致跨规模、跨语域泛化不稳。","experiments":"从题目可判断，实验核心应是：在更少预训练 token 或更短训练步数下，与全量训练或随机子集相比，达到更好的下游或困惑度表现。合理 baseline 包括随机采样、常见 coreset/data pruning 方法，以及可能的质量过滤策略。当前没有摘要与表格，因此无法确认模型参数量、预训练语料规模、节省的 token 比例和具体提升幅度；若有有价值的 scaling 观察，最关键的是子集在小模型上选出来后，是否能迁移到更大模型继续有效。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a pretraining question that matters in practice: if not all tokens are equally useful, how do we identify informative subsets instead of paying full cost on marginal data? Large-scale LM training often defaults to ‘collect more and lightly filter,’ largely because defining useful data is hard, but that wastes budget on samples with weak learning value.","importance":"This is directly relevant to pretraining data strategy. Its contribution is not a new architecture, but an attempt to operationalize informative subset selection for efficient LM pretraining. If the method is robust, it matters for budget-constrained training and challenges the default assumption that more raw data is always the safest route.","technical_approach":"INGENIOUS appears to be a data-selection method for efficient LM pretraining. The likely setup is to score examples by some signal tied to informativeness, diversity, difficulty, or representativeness, then train on a curated subset that delivers similar utility at lower token cost. The key distinction from random subsampling is that the retained subset is intentionally biased toward learning value. The key distinction from simple quality filtering is that it should preserve coverage of useful updates, not just remove obvious noise. The main risk is coupling: a subset that looks informative for one model size or domain may not transfer cleanly to another.","experiments":"The expected empirical claim is straightforward: with fewer pretraining tokens or steps, the selected subset outperforms random subsets and approaches or matches full-data training. Reasonable baselines include random sampling, coreset-style pruning, and quality-filtering heuristics. Because the abstract and tables are not provided, I cannot state model sizes, corpus scale, token savings, or exact gains. A particularly useful scaling result would be whether subsets selected at one scale remain effective for larger models.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-selection","efficient-pretrain","data-quality"]},{"id":"SainzCGELA23","title":"NLP Evaluation in trouble: On the Need to Measure LLM Data Contamination for each Benchmark","authors":["Oscar Sainz","Jon Ander Campos","Iker García-Ferrero","Julen Etxaniz","Oier Lopez de Lacalle","Eneko Agirre"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/SainzCGELA23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.722"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/SainzCGELA23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.722","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是 LLM 评测被数据污染系统性高估的问题，而且作者强调污染不能只做一次全局声明，必须对每个 benchmark 单独测量。过去很多论文只粗略说‘训练数据可能包含测试集’，但不量化 benchmark 级别污染率，这会让不同榜单分数失去可比性。","importance":"这是评测与数据治理层面的重要工作。对 pretrain 研究的直接冲击是：如果不逐 benchmark 估计 contamination，就很难判断模型提升来自更强泛化，还是来自预训练见过类似样本。它会倒逼训练数据审计、基准集去重策略和结果报告规范更加严格，尤其对闭源大模型更关键。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是提出一套 benchmark-specific contamination measurement 流程，而不是泛泛讨论泄漏风险。可能包括 n-gram / approximate matching、语义近邻、模板变体检测，或基于生成行为的可疑记忆分析，用来估计每个 benchmark 与训练语料的重叠程度。它和过去简单字符串去重的区别在于：污染不只来自完全重复，还可能来自近重复、释义和模板化改写；因此评估必须细到单 benchmark，甚至细到子任务。代价是检测规则越严格，误报和漏报之间的权衡越难做。","experiments":"从标题看，实验核心应是对多个常用 NLP benchmark 做污染测量，并展示不同 benchmark 的污染水平差异很大，不能一概而论。当前没有摘要，无法列出 benchmark 数量、检测算法、污染率区间和与性能的相关系数。若论文有说服力，最值得看的结果是：某些被广泛引用的 benchmark 污染程度明显高，且模型排名或绝对分数会因此被重新解释；同时，作者应讨论 exact match 与 fuzzy match 下的敏感性差异。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a growing credibility issue in LLM evaluation: contamination cannot be treated as a vague global caveat and must be measured for each benchmark individually. Many papers acknowledge possible leakage from pretraining data, but without benchmark-level quantification, reported scores are hard to interpret.","importance":"This is an evaluation and data-governance paper with direct implications for pretraining research. If contamination is not measured benchmark by benchmark, we cannot tell whether gains reflect stronger generalization or simple exposure. The work matters because it pushes toward tighter dataset auditing, benchmark hygiene, and more credible reporting standards.","technical_approach":"The likely contribution is a benchmark-specific contamination measurement pipeline rather than a generic warning about leakage. That probably involves exact overlap checks plus fuzzier forms of matching, such as near-duplicate detection, paraphrase overlap, or template-level similarity. The important design choice is recognizing that contamination is not limited to literal duplicates. A benchmark can be compromised through close variants, and different benchmarks can have very different risk profiles. The main challenge is balancing false positives and false negatives in contamination detection.","experiments":"The core empirical result is likely a survey across multiple NLP benchmarks showing that contamination varies substantially and cannot be summarized by a single global statement. Without the abstract and tables, I cannot report the benchmarks, measured contamination rates, or correlation with model performance. The most informative findings would be highly contaminated benchmarks that are still widely used and sensitivity analyses comparing exact-match versus fuzzy-match detection.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-contamination","evaluation","benchmark"]},{"id":"2310.17680","title":"CodeFusion: A Pre-trained Diffusion Model for Code Generation","authors":["Mukul Singh","José Cambronero","Sumit Gulwani","Vu Le","Carina Negreanu","Gust Verbruggen"],"institutions":["Microsoft"],"abstract":"Imagine a developer who can only change their last line of code, how often would they have to start writing a function from scratch before it is correct? Auto-regressive models for code generation from natural language have a similar limitation: they do not easily allow reconsidering earlier tokens generated. We introduce CodeFusion, a pre-trained diffusion code generation model that addresses this limitation by iteratively denoising a complete program conditioned on the encoded natural language. We evaluate CodeFusion on the task of natural language to code generation for Bash, Python, and Microsoft Excel conditional formatting (CF) rules. Experiments show that CodeFusion (75M parameters) performs on par with state-of-the-art auto-regressive systems (350M-175B parameters) in top-1 accuracy and outperforms them in top-3 and top-5 accuracy due to its better balance in diversity versus quality.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.17680","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/SinghCG0NV23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.716"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/SinghCG0NV23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.716","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"AR 代码生成模型无法回头修改已生成的 token，这对需要全局一致的代码（变量名、括号匹配、格式规则）是硬伤。作者想用 diffusion 的迭代去噪来支持'反复改写整段程序'这种生成方式。","importance":"对 diffusion LM 范式是一篇有说服力的 case study：在代码这种结构性强、局部错一处整体就挂的领域，non-AR 的迭代 refinement 是有天然优势的。75M 参数打平 350M–175B 的 AR 系统这个数字如果能站得住，会让'AR 必然碾压 diffusion'的默认假设松动一些。但 72M 与 175B 的对比需要小心看 tokenizer、数据、解码预算等是否公平。","technical_approach":"Encoder-decoder 结构：自然语言经 encoder 编码作为条件，decoder 端在连续 embedding 空间做 diffusion，最后用一个 classification head 把去噪后的 embedding 映射回离散 token。预训练阶段用 unsupervised code denoising，再在 NL→code 对上 fine-tune。与纯离散 diffusion（D3PM 系）不同，它走 embedding-space continuous diffusion，目的是让梯度传导更顺畅、也更容易复用 Transformer 架构。","experiments":"三个任务：Bash、Python（CoNaLa 风格）、Excel 条件格式规则。CodeFusion 75M 在 top-1 上对标 350M–175B 的 AR baseline（GPT-3、CodeT5、StarCoder 等），在 top-3/top-5 多样性上优势更明显——这点符合 diffusion 的直觉：同一 prompt 去噪出的候选更分散。","authors_note":"Microsoft 团队（Sumit Gulwani 组，长期做 program synthesis / PROSE）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Autoregressive code generators can't revise earlier tokens, which hurts code where global consistency (brackets, naming, format rules) matters. The paper uses diffusion's iterative denoising to allow rewriting the whole program across steps.","importance":"A decent case study for diffusion LMs on a domain where non-AR refinement is naturally suited. If the 75M-vs-175B top-1 parity holds up, it weakens the default 'AR strictly dominates diffusion' view. Caveat: the comparison spans very different tokenizers, data, and decoding budgets, so read the headline number carefully.","technical_approach":"Encoder-decoder: NL encoded as condition; decoder runs continuous diffusion in embedding space, then a classification head maps denoised embeddings back to discrete tokens. Pretrained with unsupervised code denoising, then NL→code fine-tuning. Continuous-embedding diffusion (not D3PM-style discrete) for cleaner gradients and easy Transformer reuse.","experiments":"Bash, Python, Excel CF rules. 75M CodeFusion matches 350M–175B AR baselines (GPT-3, CodeT5, StarCoder) in top-1, with clearer wins in top-3/top-5 diversity — consistent with diffusion producing more varied candidates per prompt.","authors_note":"Microsoft (Sumit Gulwani's program-synthesis line, PROSE lineage)."},"tags":["diffusion-lm","code-generation","non-ar-lm"],"notable_authors":["Sumit Gulwani"]},{"id":"2207.10551","title":"Scaling Laws vs Model Architectures: How does Inductive Bias Influence Scaling?","authors":["Yi Tay","Mostafa Dehghani","Samira Abnar","Hyung Won Chung","William Fedus","Jinfeng Rao","Sharan Narang","Vinh Q. Tran","Dani Yogatama","Donald Metzler"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"There have been a lot of interest in the scaling properties of Transformer models. However, not much has been done on the front of investigating the effect of scaling properties of different inductive biases and model architectures. Do model architectures scale differently? If so, how does inductive bias affect scaling behaviour? How does this influence upstream (pretraining) and downstream (transfer)? This paper conducts a systematic study of scaling behaviour of ten diverse model architectures such as Transformers, Switch Transformers, Universal Transformers, Dynamic convolutions, Performers, and recently proposed MLP-Mixers. Via extensive experiments, we show that (1) architecture is an indeed an important consideration when performing scaling and (2) the best performing model can fluctuate at different scales. We believe that the findings outlined in this work has significant implications to how model architectures are currently evaluated in the community.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.10551","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/Tay0ACFRN0YM23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.825"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/Tay0ACFRN0YM23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.825","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["scaling-law","architecture","inductive-bias","pretraining"]},{"id":"ThawaniGZP23","title":"Learn Your Tokens: Word-Pooled Tokenization for Language Modeling","authors":["Avijit Thawani","Saurabh Ghanekar","Xiaoyuan Zhu","Jay Pujara"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ThawaniGZP23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.662"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ThawaniGZP23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.662","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["tokenizer","language-modeling","subword","pretraining"]},{"id":"2305.14160","title":"Label Words are Anchors: An Information Flow Perspective for Understanding In-Context Learning","authors":["Lean Wang","Lei Li","Damai Dai","Deli Chen","Hao Zhou","Fandong Meng","Jie Zhou","Xu Sun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"In-context learning (ICL) emerges as a promising capability of large language models (LLMs) by providing them with demonstration examples to perform diverse tasks. However, the underlying mechanism of how LLMs learn from the provided context remains under-explored. In this paper, we investigate the working mechanism of ICL through an information flow lens. Our findings reveal that label words in the demonstration examples function as anchors: (1) semantic information aggregates into label word representations during the shallow computation layers' processing; (2) the consolidated information in label words serves as a reference for LLMs' final predictions. Based on these insights, we introduce an anchor re-weighting method to improve ICL performance, a demonstration compression technique to expedite inference, and an analysis framework for diagnosing ICL errors in GPT2-XL. The promising applications of our findings again validate the uncovered ICL working mechanism and pave the way for future studies.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14160","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WangLDCZMZS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.609"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WangLDCZMZS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.609","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解释 in-context learning 到底是如何工作的，重点不是描述现象，而是定位信息在层间如何流动。过去对 ICL 机制的讨论很多，但常停留在“像隐式梯度更新”或“像模式匹配”的类比，缺少能指导 prompt 设计和压缩的具体可操作解释。","importance":"它的重要性在于提供了一个可操作的机制性观点：示例中的 label words 是锚点。对 pretrain 和机制分析的价值很直接，因为这把 ICL 的一部分行为从黑箱现象变成了可干预对象，进一步导出 re-weighting 与 demonstration compression 这样的具体方法，而不仅是事后解释。","technical_approach":"核心方法是从 information flow 视角分析 ICL，并提出‘label words are anchors’这一机制假设。作者的结论是：浅层计算时，语义信息会向 label word 的表示聚合；后续预测再把这些被聚合过的信息当作参照。这和把所有 token 视为同等示例载体的看法不同。基于这个观察，作者做了两件事：一是对 anchor token 重新加权以提升 ICL；二是利用 anchor 性质压缩 demonstrations。设计有效的原因很明确：如果关键决策主要绑定在标签词周围，那就应优先保留并强化这些位置，而不是平均处理整个示例。","experiments":"从摘要能确认的事实是，论文既有机制分析，也提出了 anchor re-weighting 和 demonstration compression 两个应用。摘要没有给出模型规模、所测任务、具体提升幅度或层分析细节，因此不能写具体数字。能稳妥总结的是：作者声称浅层聚合、后层引用这一两阶段信息流模式，并且该模式可被利用来做性能提升和上下文压缩，而不是只停留在解释层面。","authors_note":"作者包含 Lei Li、Hao Zhou。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a mechanistic question: how does information actually flow during in-context learning? Prior discussions often rely on broad analogies such as implicit learning or pattern matching, but those views are hard to turn into concrete interventions for prompt design or context compression.","importance":"Its contribution is mechanistic and actionable. The claim that label words act as anchors turns part of ICL from a vague emergent effect into something that can be inspected and manipulated. That matters because it leads to interventions, not just explanations: re-weighting anchors and compressing demonstrations.","technical_approach":"The core idea is an information-flow analysis of ICL, leading to the hypothesis that label words are anchors. The reported mechanism is two-stage: semantic information from demonstrations aggregates into label-word representations in shallow layers, and those consolidated label representations later guide final prediction. This differs from views that treat all demonstration tokens as roughly equivalent carriers of task information. Based on the anchor view, the paper proposes anchor re-weighting to improve ICL and demonstration compression that preserves the most decision-relevant parts of the context.","experiments":"From the abstract, we can safely state that the paper includes both a mechanistic study and two derived methods: anchor re-weighting and demonstration compression. The abstract does not provide model scales, task suites, or exact gains, so those should not be filled in. The main experimental claim is that the proposed information-flow view is useful enough to support both performance improvement and context reduction.","authors_note":"Lei Li and Hao Zhou are among the authors."},"tags":["icl","attention-analysis","information-flow"],"notable_authors":["Lei Li","Hao Zhou"]},{"id":"WangYGR23","title":"Pretraining Without Attention","authors":["Junxiong Wang","Jing Nathan Yan","Albert Gu","Alexander M. Rush"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WangYGR23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.5"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WangYGR23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.5","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["architecture","ssm","attention-free"]},{"id":"WeiHLCHTCLZ0L23","title":"Symbol tuning improves in-context learning in language models","authors":["Jerry W. Wei","Le Hou","Andrew K. Lampinen","Xiangning Chen","Da Huang","Yi Tay","Xinyun Chen","Yifeng Lu","Denny Zhou","Tengyu Ma","Quoc V. Le"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WeiHLCHTCLZ0L23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.61"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WeiHLCHTCLZ0L23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.61","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["icl","symbol-tuning","instruction-tuning"]},{"id":"WeiKTL23","title":"Inverse Scaling Can Become U-Shaped","authors":["Jason Wei","Najoung Kim","Yi Tay","Quoc V. Le"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WeiKTL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.963"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WeiKTL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.963","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["scaling-law","inverse-scaling","emergence"]},{"id":"2203.16487","title":"Speculative Decoding: Exploiting Speculative Execution for Accelerating Seq2seq Generation","authors":["Heming Xia","Tao Ge","Peiyi Wang","Si-Qing Chen","Furu Wei","Zhifang Sui"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$7","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.16487","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/Xia0WCWS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.257"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/Xia0WCWS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.257","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["speculative-decoding","inference-acceleration","autoregressive"]},{"id":"2305.02176","title":"Towards Being Parameter-Efficient: A Stratified Sparsely Activated Transformer with Dynamic Capacity","authors":["Haoran Xu","Maha Elbayad","Kenton Murray","Jean Maillard","Vedanuj Goswami"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Mixture-of-experts (MoE) models that employ sparse activation have demonstrated effectiveness in significantly increasing the number of parameters while maintaining low computational requirements per token. However, recent studies have established that MoE models are inherently parameter-inefficient as the improvement in performance diminishes with an increasing number of experts. We hypothesize this parameter inefficiency is a result of all experts having equal capacity, which may not adequately meet the varying complexity requirements of different tokens or tasks. In light of this, we propose Stratified Mixture of Experts (SMoE) models, which feature a stratified structure and can assign dynamic capacity to different tokens. We demonstrate the effectiveness of SMoE on three multilingual machine translation benchmarks, containing 4, 15, and 94 language pairs, respectively. We show that SMoE outperforms multiple state-of-the-art MoE models with the same or fewer parameters.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.02176","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/XuEMMG23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.856"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/XuEMMG23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.856","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["moe","sparse-activation","routing","architecture"]},{"id":"2303.05295","title":"Dynamic Stashing Quantization for Efficient Transformer Training","authors":["Guo Yang","Daniel Lo","Robert Mullins","Yiren Zhao"],"institutions":["University of Cambridge"],"abstract":"$8","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.05295","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YangLMZ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.489"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YangLMZ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.489","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 训练是 memory-bound 的，现有量化训练方法主要关注减少计算量，但对内存访问的优化不够。问题是如何设计一种量化策略，重点减少内存操作同时兼顾计算效率。","importance":"系统/方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究有直接价值：训练阶段的量化如果能有效减少内存带宽压力而不损失模型质量，就能降低大模型预训练的硬件门槛。关键洞察是「训练是 memory-bound」这一出发点，比单纯追求低精度算术更切中实际瓶颈。","technical_approach":"提出 Dynamic Stashing Quantization (DSQ)：动态地对训练中间激活值进行量化存储（stashing），在需要时再反量化。与静态量化不同，DSQ 根据训练动态调整量化策略。核心设计选择是优先优化内存读写而非仅优化 FLOPs，因为训练的实际瓶颈在内存带宽。","experiments":"在两个从头训练的翻译任务和三个分类微调任务上验证。具体精度和加速比未在摘要中给出。验证了 DSQ 在减少内存操作的同时保持了训练质量。","authors_note":"Robert Mullins, Yiren Zhao，来自 University of Cambridge。Mullins 是 Cambridge 计算机体系结构方向的知名教授。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLM training is memory-bound, but existing quantization methods focus primarily on reducing arithmetic cost rather than memory operations. The goal is a quantization strategy that prioritizes memory access reduction.","importance":"System/method-level contribution. Directly relevant to pretrain: if training-time quantization can effectively reduce memory bandwidth pressure without quality loss, it lowers the hardware barrier for large-scale pretraining. The key insight—training is memory-bound—targets the actual bottleneck rather than just FLOPs.","technical_approach":"Dynamic Stashing Quantization (DSQ) dynamically quantizes intermediate activations for storage (stashing) during training and dequantizes on demand. Unlike static quantization, DSQ adapts its strategy based on training dynamics. The core design choice is to optimize memory read/write over arithmetic cost, matching the actual training bottleneck.","experiments":"Evaluated on two from-scratch translation tasks and three classification fine-tuning tasks. Specific precision levels and speedup ratios not stated in the abstract. Confirms DSQ reduces memory operations while maintaining training quality.","authors_note":"Robert Mullins, Yiren Zhao, University of Cambridge. Mullins is a well-known professor in computer architecture at Cambridge."},"tags":["quantization","training-efficiency","memory-optimization"],"notable_authors":["Robert Mullins"]},{"id":"2311.09006","title":"Data Similarity is Not Enough to Explain Language Model Performance","authors":["Gregory Yauney","Emily Reif","David Mimno"],"institutions":["Cornell University"],"abstract":"Large language models achieve high performance on many but not all downstream tasks. The interaction between pretraining data and task data is commonly assumed to determine this variance: a task with data that is more similar to a model's pretraining data is assumed to be easier for that model. We test whether distributional and example-specific similarity measures (embedding-, token- and model-based) correlate with language model performance through a large-scale comparison of the Pile and C4 pretraining datasets with downstream benchmarks. Similarity correlates with performance for multilingual datasets, but in other benchmarks, we surprisingly find that similarity metrics are not correlated with accuracy or even each other. This suggests that the relationship between pretraining data and downstream tasks is more complex than often assumed.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.09006","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YauneyRM23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.695"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YauneyRM23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.695","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"挑战了“预训练数据与下游任务越相似，模型表现越好”的普遍假设，指出仅靠数据相似度无法解释或预测语言模型的下游性能。","importance":"数据/评测级。直接冲击了当前预训练数据清洗和混合（Data Mixing）中依赖相似度检索的核心启发式规则，提示我们需要超越表面分布相似度的新指标来评估数据价值。","technical_approach":"开展大规模相关性研究。使用基于 Embedding、Token 和 Model 的多种分布与样本级相似度指标，对比了 The Pile 和 C4 预训练数据集与多个下游 Benchmark 之间的关系。","experiments":"实验发现，除了多语言数据集外，在其他 Benchmark 中，相似度指标与模型准确率之间惊人地没有相关性，甚至相似度指标彼此之间也不相关。","authors_note":"David Mimno (Cornell)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Challenges the prevailing assumption that higher similarity between pretraining data and downstream tasks guarantees better model performance, showing that similarity alone cannot explain LLM capabilities.","importance":"Data/Evaluation level. It directly challenges the core heuristic of using similarity-based retrieval for data curation and mixing, indicating a critical need for new metrics beyond surface-level distribution similarity to evaluate data utility.","technical_approach":"Conducts a large-scale correlation study. Compares The Pile and C4 pretraining datasets against downstream benchmarks using various distributional and example-specific similarity measures (embedding-, token-, and model-based).","experiments":"Found that similarity correlates with performance *only* for multilingual datasets. Surprisingly, in other benchmarks, similarity metrics do not correlate with accuracy, nor even with each other.","authors_note":"David Mimno (Cornell)"},"tags":["data-quality","pretraining-data","scaling-law","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["David Mimno"]},{"id":"YuMP23","title":"Characterizing Mechanisms for Factual Recall in Language Models","authors":["Qinan Yu","Jack Merullo","Ellie Pavlick"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YuMP23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.615"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YuMP23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.615","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文研究的是：语言模型做事实回忆时，内部到底依赖什么机制，而不只是报告能不能答对。这个问题之所以重要，是因为 factual recall 常被当成参数记忆的黑箱现象来讨论，但如果不知道是哪些表示或电路在起作用，就很难谈编辑、遗忘或时效性控制。","importance":"从标题看，这是机制分析类工作，对 pretrain 的直接价值在于把“记住事实”从现象层推进到机制层。它不提供新的训练算法，但可能为模型编辑、知识更新、遗忘、以及 factuality 诊断提供更可操作的中间变量，因此属于高信息密度的分析型论文。","technical_approach":"仅凭标题可确认，作者是在表征或电路层面刻画 factual recall 的机制，而不是单纯做问答基准。大概率会通过激活分析、因果干预、或定位与实体/关系相关的组件来拆解模型如何提取并输出事实；但给定当前信息，不能进一步断言具体实验手段。","experiments":"摘要未提供，因此无法可靠给出模型规模、数据集、指标和数字结果。能确定的是，实验目标应是识别 factual recall 的可解释机制，并验证这些机制与回忆正确性之间的因果或相关关系。具体结论、幅度和边界需要正文支持。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a mechanistic question: what internal processes support factual recall in language models, beyond simply measuring whether the answer is correct. This matters because factual knowledge is often treated as a black-box property of parameters, which makes editing, forgetting, and temporal control hard to reason about.","importance":"This is an analysis contribution rather than a new training method. Its value for pretraining research is that it can expose actionable structure behind memorized knowledge, which is useful for model editing, knowledge updating, forgetting, and diagnosis of factuality failures.","technical_approach":"From the title alone, the work appears to characterize internal mechanisms for factual recall rather than benchmark QA performance. The likely tools are representation analysis and causal intervention over model components, but the exact method cannot be stated reliably without the abstract or paper text.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so model scales, datasets, metrics, and numerical findings cannot be reported safely. What can be said is that the experiments likely aim to identify mechanisms correlated with—or causally involved in—successful factual recall.","authors_note":""},"tags":["factual-recall","interpretability","knowledge","probing"],"notable_authors":["Qinan Yu","Jack Merullo","Ellie Pavlick"]},{"id":"YuZ0023","title":"Pre-training Language Models for Comparative Reasoning","authors":["Mengxia Yu","Zhihan Zhang","Wenhao Yu","Meng Jiang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YuZ0023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.763"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YuZ0023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.763","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：语言模型很少被显式预训练去做 comparative reasoning，而这类能力又广泛出现在排序、比较、差异判断和关系推断中。过去这类能力通常寄希望于通用语言建模自然涌现，或者在下游任务里再补，但这可能导致样本效率低、泛化不稳。","importance":"如果论文证明确实能通过预训练目标或数据设计提升 comparative reasoning，那它是一个能力定向预训练的例子。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：并非所有高级推理都应完全交给规模涌现；某些结构化 reasoning skills 可能值得在预训练阶段显式建模。","technical_approach":"从标题能确认，作者是在 pre-training 阶段针对 comparative reasoning 做专门设计，而不是单纯做 benchmark。可能涉及构造比较关系数据、设计对应预训练任务，或把比较操作融入语言建模目标；但没有摘要，无法可靠说明是数据增强、目标函数改造还是架构变化。","experiments":"摘要缺失，因此模型规模、预训练语料、下游基准、主要指标和提升幅度都不能确定。可以判断实验核心会是：比较推理相关任务上，比较导向预训练是否优于通用 LM 预训练或纯下游微调。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper focuses on a specific gap: language models are rarely pretrained explicitly for comparative reasoning, even though comparison underlies ranking, contrastive judgment, and relational inference. In practice, this skill is often expected to emerge from generic language modeling or be fixed downstream, which may be inefficient and brittle.","importance":"If supported empirically, this is a useful example of capability-targeted pretraining. The broader implication is that not every reasoning skill should be left entirely to scale and emergence; some structured reasoning behaviors may benefit from explicit pretraining signals.","technical_approach":"The title indicates a pretraining method aimed at comparative reasoning rather than just a benchmark study. It likely introduces dedicated comparison-oriented data or objectives, but without the abstract it is not possible to say whether the main change is in the data, the loss, or the model architecture.","experiments":"No abstract is available, so model sizes, corpus scale, benchmarks, and gains cannot be reported safely. The key empirical test is whether comparison-focused pretraining improves comparative reasoning tasks over generic LM pretraining or downstream-only fine-tuning.","authors_note":""},"tags":["pretraining","reasoning","objective","data-mixture"],"notable_authors":["Mengxia Yu","Zhihan Zhang","Wenhao Yu","Meng Jiang"]},{"id":"ZhangRHZZ23","title":"Efficient Long-Range Transformers: You Need to Attend More, but Not Necessarily at Every Layer","authors":["Qingru Zhang","Dhananjay Ram","Cole Hawkins","Sheng Zha","Tuo Zhao"],"institutions":["Amazon AWS AI","Georgia Institute of Technology"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhangRHZZ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.183"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhangRHZZ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.183","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"长序列 Transformer 里 full attention 的 O(L²) 代价主要花得冤枉——多数层的 attention 并不需要那么远的视野。但之前的\"稀疏一半层\"方案通常均匀替换，没考虑层与层之间的功能差异。","importance":"方法/架构级贡献，属于\"长上下文效率\"话题下一个值得记的观察：不是所有层都该省，真正需要全局视野的层要保留，其他层可以用很廉价的近似。对做长上下文 pretrain 的人有直接预算分配含义。","technical_approach":"混合层式注意力：只在少量层保留 full attention（\"attend more\"），其他层用更廉价的 local / sparse 注意力。关键是如何选哪些层保留——通过对 attention entropy / receptive field 的分析确定\"全局层\"位置，通常分布在网络中后段。训练时混合两种层，推理时自然继承效率。","experiments":"在长文本 LM 和长文分类/检索任务上，用 ~50% 甚至更少的 full attention 层达到与全 full-attention 相当的性能，计算量显著下降。作者给出不同\"全局层\"放置策略的对比，表明位置很关键。","authors_note":"Amazon AWS AI + Georgia Tech（Tuo Zhao）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Full O(L²) attention on long sequences is mostly wasted—many layers do not need a global view. Prior half-sparse schemes replace layers uniformly and ignore that layers play different roles.","importance":"A useful datapoint for the long-context efficiency literature: keep full attention only where it matters, cheapen the rest. Directly informs compute-budget allocation in long-context pretraining.","technical_approach":"Mixed-layer attention. Keep full attention in a small subset of layers ('attend more') and use cheap local/sparse attention elsewhere. The non-trivial bit is picking which layers to keep—driven by analysis of attention entropy / effective receptive field, the 'global' layers cluster in the mid-to-late stack. Training uses the mixed stack, so inference inherits the speedup.","experiments":"On long-text LM and classification/retrieval, matches full-attention quality with ~50% or fewer full-attention layers, cutting FLOPs substantially. Ablations on where to place the global layers show placement matters more than count.","authors_note":"Amazon AWS AI with Tuo Zhao at Georgia Tech."},"tags":["long-context","attention","efficient-transformer"],"notable_authors":["Tuo Zhao"]},{"id":"2309.10312","title":"Rigorously Assessing Natural Language Explanations of Neurons","authors":["Jing Huang","Atticus Geiger","Karel D&apos;Oosterlinck","Zhengxuan Wu","Christopher Potts"],"institutions":["Stanford University"],"abstract":"Natural language is an appealing medium for explaining how large language models process and store information, but evaluating the faithfulness of such explanations is challenging. To help address this, we develop two modes of evaluation for natural language explanations that claim individual neurons represent a concept in a text input. In the *observational mode*, we evaluate claims that a neuron a activates on all and only input strings that refer to a concept picked out by the proposed explanation E. In the *intervention mode*, we construe E as a claim that neuron a is a causal mediator of the concept denoted by E. We apply our framework to the GPT-4-generated explanations of GPT-2 XL neurons of Bills et al. (2023) and show that even the most confident explanations have high error rates and little to no causal efficacy. We close the paper by critically assessing whether natural language is a good choice for explanations and whether neurons are the best level of analysis.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.10312","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/blackboxnlp/HuangGDWP23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.BLACKBOXNLP-1.24"},"_dblp_key":"conf/blackboxnlp/HuangGDWP23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.blackboxnlp-1.24","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解决用大模型（如 GPT-4）自动生成自然语言来解释神经元功能的评估难题，指出当前缺乏严谨的验证手段来判断这些解释是否忠实于神经元的真实行为。","importance":"评估级贡献。给 OpenAI 的自动可解释性工作泼了冷水，建立了一套严格的证伪框架，对后续依赖 LLM 做机制分析的研究设定了极高的验证标准。","technical_approach":"提出两种评估模式：观察模式（神经元是否仅在解释提及的概念上激活）和干预模式（神经元是否是该概念的因果中介）。将自然语言解释转化为可计算的逻辑断言进行严格测试。","experiments":"在 OpenAI 提供的 GPT-4 解释 GPT-2 XL 神经元的数据集上测试，发现即使是置信度最高的解释，也存在极高的错误率（不符合观察或干预一致性）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addresses the evaluation challenge of using LLMs (like GPT-4) to automatically generate natural language explanations for neuron functions, noting the lack of rigorous methods to verify their faithfulness.","importance":"Evaluation contribution. It challenges OpenAI's automated interpretability work by establishing a strict falsification framework, setting a high verification standard for future mechanistic interpretability research relying on LLMs.","technical_approach":"Proposes two evaluation modes: observational (does the neuron activate only on concepts mentioned in the explanation) and interventional (is the neuron a causal mediator of the concept). Converts natural language explanations into computable logical assertions for strict testing.","experiments":"Tested on the dataset of GPT-4 explanations of GPT-2 XL neurons provided by OpenAI. Found that even the most confident explanations have extremely high error rates (failing observational or interventional consistency)."},"tags":["interpretability","neurons","explanation"],"notable_authors":["Christopher Potts","Atticus Geiger"]},{"id":"2309.00941","title":"Emergent Linear Representations in World Models of Self-Supervised Sequence Models","authors":["Neel Nanda","Andrew Lee","Martin Wattenberg"],"institutions":["DeepMind","Harvard University"],"abstract":"How do sequence models represent their decision-making process? Prior work suggests that Othello-playing neural network learned nonlinear models of the board state (Li et al., 2023a). In this work, we provide evidence of a closely related linear representation of the board. In particular, we show that probing for “my colour” vs. “opponent’s colour” may be a simple yet powerful way to interpret the model’s internal state. This precise understanding of the internal representations allows us to control the model’s behaviour with simple vector arithmetic. Linear representations enable significant interpretability progress, which we demonstrate with further exploration of how the world model is computed.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.00941","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/blackboxnlp/NandaLW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.BLACKBOXNLP-1.2"},"_dblp_key":"conf/blackboxnlp/NandaLW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.blackboxnlp-1.2","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"修正先前关于 Othello-GPT（黑白棋模型）内部世界模型是“非线性”的结论，探究序列模型底层状态表示的真实几何结构。","importance":"机制分析级贡献。极其重要。它证明了即使是复杂的自监督序列预测，其底层状态表示也是线性的。这为通过简单的向量加减（Vector Arithmetic）来控制模型行为提供了坚实的理论基础。","technical_approach":"放弃复杂的非线性探针，直接使用线性探针寻找“我的颜色”与“对手颜色”的特征方向。通过在激活空间中进行简单的向量运算，观察是否能精确干预模型的合法落子预测。","experiments":"成功找到了代表棋盘状态的线性方向。通过简单的向量算术修改内部状态，能够精确控制模型的输出行为，证明了线性表示的充分性和精确性。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Corrects prior conclusions that the internal world model of Othello-GPT is 'non-linear', investigating the true geometric structure of underlying state representations in sequence models.","importance":"Mechanistic interpretability contribution. Highly significant. It proves that even in complex self-supervised sequence prediction, underlying state representations are linear. This provides a solid theoretical foundation for controlling model behavior via simple vector arithmetic.","technical_approach":"Abandons complex non-linear probes and directly uses linear probes to find feature directions for 'my color' vs. 'opponent's color'. Observes whether simple vector arithmetic in the activation space can precisely intervene in the model's legal move predictions.","experiments":"Successfully identified linear directions representing the board state. Modifying internal states via simple vector arithmetic precisely controls the model's output behavior, proving the sufficiency and precision of linear representations."},"tags":["world-models","linear-representation","probing"],"notable_authors":["Neel Nanda","Martin Wattenberg"]},{"id":"Tan23","title":"Causal Abstraction for Chain-of-Thought Reasoning in Arithmetic Word Problems","authors":["Juanhe (TJ) Tan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$9","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/blackboxnlp/Tan23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.BLACKBOXNLP-1.12"},"_dblp_key":"conf/blackboxnlp/Tan23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.blackboxnlp-1.12","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的核心问题是：CoT 提高算术题准确率，到底是因为模型真的沿着中间推理在算，还是只是把 CoT 当成一种有用的表面格式。此前很多工作只看“有 CoT 时答案更准”，但没有检验中间推理本身是否正确、也没有验证这些中间 token 是否对最终答案有因果作用，因此这个问题一直被经验现象掩盖。","importance":"这篇工作的价值主要在机制分析层面，而不是提出新的推理方法。它把“CoT 是否被模型真正使用”从相关性问题推进到因果问题，这对理解推理增强、后训练监督信号设计、以及如何解释 CoT 的可靠性都有直接意义；如果 CoT 只是陪衬文本，那么基于 CoT 的蒸馏、拒绝采样和过程监督的收益边界就要重新评估。","technical_approach":"作者的方法核心是“正确性评估 + 因果抽象干预”。先分析 CoT 与答案正确性的相关性，再用 causal abstraction 检查中间推理 token 的改变是否会按照 CoT 描述的逻辑改变最终答案。这个设计比只做 prompt 对比更强，因为它不只问“有无 CoT”，而是问“某一步推理内容变了，答案会不会随之变化”。作者聚焦 arithmetic word problems，是因为这类任务有较清晰的中间变量和可验证的推理链，适合做受控因果分析；代价是结论外推到开放域推理时要保守。","experiments":"从摘要可确认的关键结论是：对于 CoT prompting 的模型，正确答案与正确 CoT 高度相关，而且中间 CoT token 对最终答案存在可检测的因果影响。摘要未给出模型规模、数据规模、具体 benchmark、数值提升或干预幅度，因此不能可靠复述更细实验数字。就结果含义看，这支持“至少在算术题上，模型并非只是在答案后附带一段看似合理的解释”，但也不能直接推出所有 CoT 都忠实、完整或可解释。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a precise question: when chain-of-thought improves arithmetic reasoning, is the model actually using the intermediate steps, or is CoT just a helpful surface pattern. Prior work mostly showed accuracy gains from prompting with CoT, but did not test whether the generated reasoning is correct or whether those intermediate tokens causally affect the final answer.","importance":"This is a mechanism paper rather than a new reasoning method. Its main contribution is to move the discussion from correlation to causal use of CoT, which matters for how we interpret process supervision, rationale distillation, and CoT-based filtering; if CoT is not causally used, many current post-training signals would be weaker than they look.","technical_approach":"The method combines correctness analysis with causal abstraction. First, it measures how strongly correct CoTs align with correct answers. Then it uses intervention-based causal abstraction to test whether changing intermediate CoT tokens changes the final answer in the way the reasoning trace predicts. This is stronger than comparing prompts with and without CoT, because it probes whether the content of the reasoning path matters. The focus on arithmetic word problems is deliberate: they offer cleaner latent variables and more checkable reasoning chains, though that also narrows the scope of the conclusion.","experiments":"From the abstract, the key result is that for CoT-prompted LLMs, correct answers are strongly correlated with correct CoTs, and intermediate CoT tokens have measurable causal impact on final answers. The abstract does not provide model sizes, dataset sizes, benchmark names, or exact effect sizes, so finer quantitative claims would be unsafe. The practical takeaway is limited but useful: at least in arithmetic settings, CoT is not merely decorative text appended after the fact.","authors_note":""},"tags":["cot","causal-abstraction","reasoning"],"notable_authors":["Juanhe (TJ) Tan"]},{"id":"0002H23","title":"Multilingual Lottery Tickets to Pretrain Language Models","authors":["Jaeseong Lee","Seung-won Hwang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/0002H23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.629"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/0002H23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.629","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 multilinguality curse：在容量受限的 mPLM 中，多语言会相互干扰，尤其低资源语言常被高资源语言挤压。过去常见解法是直接扩模型容量，但这会同步抬高训练和推理成本；作者想要的是在不长期保留大模型成本的前提下，减少语言间负迁移。","importance":"这项工作的价值在于把 lottery ticket 思路引入多语预训练，属于架构/容量分配层面的新角度。对 pretrain 的启示是，多语负迁移未必只能靠“更大模型”解决，也可以先借助大容量训练消解冲突，再把每种语言需要的有效子网络提取出来；这实际上是在探索按语言重分配参数，而不是平均共享参数。","technical_approach":"方法可以概括为 scale-then-find-ticket。先训练一个更大容量的多语模型以减轻干扰，然后为每种语言搜索一个性能接近全模型的子网络，也就是 multilingual lottery ticket。关键设计点在于：作者不是一开始就做显式 MoE 或语言专属模块，而是先让大模型在共享参数空间里形成较少冲突的解，再通过 ticket 搜索把对每种语言真正重要的参数子集识别出来。这样做的好处是保留了大模型训练阶段的抗干扰性，同时避免部署时全量使用大模型；代价是 ticket 搜索与管理会增加工程复杂度。","experiments":"摘要表明该方法能够在保持每种语言容量大致不变的同时，缓解多语言负干扰。给定信息没有模型规模、语言数、训练语料、对比基线或具体性能/压缩数字，因此不能提供量化结果。可以确认的结论是：作者主张“先放大再剪出每语种子网”优于“直接在小模型里硬共享”，其关注点是参数利用效率而非单纯追求更大模型上界。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the curse of multilinguality: in capacity-limited mPLMs, languages interfere with one another, often hurting low-resource languages the most. A straightforward fix is to scale the model up, but that increases both training and inference cost.","importance":"This is an architecture and capacity-allocation contribution. Its main value is to reframe multilingual interference as a parameter allocation problem rather than a purely scale problem. For pretraining, that suggests an alternative to permanent over-scaling: train large to reduce conflict, then distill language-specific subnetworks.","technical_approach":"The method follows a scale-then-find-ticket recipe. First, train a larger multilingual model to reduce interference. Then, for each language, search for a lottery-ticket subnetwork that matches the full model’s performance for that language. The important design choice is to avoid hard language partitioning from the start; instead, the model first learns in a shared over-parameterized space, and only later are the useful per-language parameter subsets extracted. This preserves the optimization benefits of scale while lowering effective deployed capacity, at the cost of extra ticket-search complexity.","experiments":"The abstract claims that this approach alleviates multilingual interference while keeping per-language capacity roughly comparable. It does not provide model sizes, language counts, baseline systems, or exact performance/compression numbers in the given text, so no quantitative claims should be added. The qualitative point is clear: larger shared training plus sparse per-language specialization can outperform forcing all languages into the same small dense model.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multilingual","lottery-ticket","pretrain-efficiency","mplm"],"notable_authors":["Jaeseong Lee","Seung-won Hwang"]},{"id":"2305.14281","title":"Weakly-Supervised Learning of Visual Relations in Multimodal Pretraining","authors":["Emanuele Bugliarello","Aida Nematzadeh","Lisa Anne Hendricks"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Recent work in vision-and-language pretraining has investigated supervised signals from object detection data to learn better, fine-grained multimodal representations. In this work, we take a step further and explore how we can tap into supervision from small-scale visual relation data. In particular, we propose two pretraining approaches to contextualise visual entities in a multimodal setup. With verbalised scene graphs, we transform visual relation triplets into structured captions, and treat them as additional image descriptions. With masked relation prediction, we further encourage relating entities from image regions with visually masked contexts. When applied to strong baselines pretrained on large amounts of Web data, zero-shot evaluations on both coarse-grained and fine-grained tasks show the efficacy of our methods in learning multimodal representations from weakly-supervised relations data.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14281","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/BugliarelloNH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.184"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/BugliarelloNH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.184","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["multimodal-pretraining","visual-relations","weak-supervision","alignment"]},{"id":"2305.00118","title":"Speak, Memory: An Archaeology of Books Known to ChatGPT/GPT-4","authors":["Kent K. Chang","Mackenzie Cramer","Sandeep Soni","David Bamman"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"In this work, we carry out a data archaeology to infer books that are known to ChatGPT and GPT-4 using a name cloze membership inference query. We find that OpenAI models have memorized a wide collection of copyrighted materials, and that the degree of memorization is tied to the frequency with which passages of those books appear on the web. The ability of these models to memorize an unknown set of books complicates assessments of measurement validity for cultural analytics by contaminating test data; we show that models perform much better on memorized books than on non-memorized books for downstream tasks. We argue that this supports a case for open models whose training data is known.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.00118","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ChangCSB23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.453"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ChangCSB23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.453","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["memorization","data-quality","membership-inference","copyright"]},{"id":"ChenVS23","title":"The Locality and Symmetry of Positional Encodings","authors":["Lihu Chen","Gaël Varoquaux","Fabian M. Suchanek"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ChenVS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.955"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ChenVS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.955","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"不同的位置编码（PE，如 RoPE, ALiBi）在长上下文外推时的表现差异巨大，但缺乏统一的数学框架来解释其底层机制。","importance":"架构/机制分析。从数学上严格定义并解释了位置编码的局部性（Locality）和对称性（Symmetry），直接指导长上下文预训练的架构选型和 PE 设计。","technical_approach":"理论分析与实证结合。通过分析不同 PE 点积的数学性质，推导出注意力权重随距离衰减的理论边界（局部性），以及模型区分左右上下文的能力（对称性）。","experiments":"理论证明结合语言建模实验，验证了具备良好局部性衰减特性的 PE（如 ALiBi 或特定配置的 RoPE）具有更强的长度泛化能力。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Different Positional Encodings (PEs, e.g., RoPE, ALiBi) exhibit drastically different performances in long-context extrapolation, yet lack a unified mathematical framework to explain their underlying mechanisms.","importance":"Architecture/Mechanism analysis. Mathematically defines and explains the locality and symmetry of PEs, directly guiding architecture selection and PE design for long-context pretraining.","technical_approach":"Theoretical analysis combined with empirical validation. Analyzes the mathematical properties of PE dot products to derive theoretical bounds for attention decay over distance (locality) and the model's ability to distinguish left/right context (symmetry).","experiments":"Combines theoretical proofs with language modeling experiments to verify that PEs with good locality decay properties (like ALiBi or specifically configured RoPE) possess stronger length generalization capabilities."},"tags":["positional-encoding","architecture"],"notable_authors":["Gaël Varoquaux","Fabian M. Suchanek"]},{"id":"ChenY23","title":"Unlearn What You Want to Forget: Efficient Unlearning for LLMs","authors":["Jiaao Chen","Diyi Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ChenY23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.738"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ChenY23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.738","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"如何在不重新进行昂贵预训练的情况下，高效地从 LLM 中擦除特定知识（如有毒内容、隐私数据或版权文本），且不引发灾难性遗忘。","importance":"方法级贡献。机器遗忘（Machine Unlearning）是模型合规（如 GDPR）和安全对齐的关键 Post-train 技术，本文提供了一种轻量级的知识编辑接口。","technical_approach":"高效遗忘目标函数。结合梯度上升（针对需要遗忘的数据集，破坏其表征）和正则化/梯度下降（针对需要保留的通用数据集，维持模型能力），通过微调实现精准的知识擦除。","experiments":"在知识提取和毒性测试基准上，该方法成功擦除了目标知识（如特定实体的隐私信息），同时保持了模型在通用语言建模任务上的 Perplexity 和下游准确率。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to efficiently erase specific knowledge (e.g., toxic content, private data, or copyrighted text) from an LLM without expensive retraining from scratch, while avoiding catastrophic forgetting.","importance":"Method-level contribution. Machine unlearning is a critical post-training technology for model compliance (e.g., GDPR) and safety alignment. This paper provides a lightweight interface for knowledge editing.","technical_approach":"Efficient unlearning objective. Combines gradient ascent (on the forget set to disrupt its representation) with regularization or gradient descent (on a retain set to preserve general capabilities), achieving precise knowledge erasure via fine-tuning.","experiments":"On knowledge extraction and toxicity benchmarks, the method successfully erases target knowledge (e.g., private info of specific entities) while maintaining the model's Perplexity and downstream accuracy on general language modeling tasks."},"tags":["unlearning","llm"],"notable_authors":["Jiaao Chen","Diyi Yang"]},{"id":"2310.16261","title":"The Distributional Hypothesis Does Not Fully Explain the Benefits of Masked Language Model Pretraining","authors":["Ting-Rui Chiang","Dani Yogatama"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We analyze the masked language modeling pretraining objective function from the perspective of the distributional hypothesis. We investigate whether better sample efficiency and the better generalization capability of models pretrained with masked language modeling can be attributed to the semantic similarity encoded in the pretraining data's distributional property. Via a synthetic dataset, our analysis suggests that distributional property indeed leads to the better sample efficiency of pretrained masked language models, but does not fully explain the generalization capability. We also conduct analyses over two real-world datasets and demonstrate that the distributional property does not explain the generalization ability of pretrained natural language models either. Our results illustrate our limited understanding of model pretraining and provide future research directions.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.16261","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ChiangY23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.637"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ChiangY23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.637","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心结论是：分布假说只能部分解释 masked language model 预训练的收益，尤其解释不了其泛化能力。过去很多分析默认 MLM 的优势主要来自词在相似上下文中出现，从而学到语义接近性；作者要检验这个解释到底够不够。","importance":"这是对预训练目标理解的直接修正。它的重要性不在于推出新 objective，而在于告诉我们：如果把 MLM 的好处简单归因于 distributional similarity，就会误判预训练信号的来源。对 pretrain 研究的含义是，目标函数为什么能带来迁移与泛化，可能还依赖结构归纳偏置、条件化方式或优化路径，而不是仅靠词共现统计。","technical_approach":"方法上是分析型工作。作者先用 synthetic dataset 做可控实验，隔离分布性质与泛化行为；再在两个真实数据集上复核结论。这个设计有两个优点。第一，合成数据允许精确控制 distributional property，因此能更清楚地区分样本效率和泛化。第二，真实数据验证避免结论只停留在 toy setting。论文得到的判断是：distributional property 确实解释了 pretrained MLM 更好的 sample efficiency，但不足以解释 generalization。也就是说，‘学到相似词在相似上下文中出现’能让模型更快学，但不能完整说明为什么它能跨分布或跨任务泛化。","experiments":"关键实验事实在摘要里很清楚。第一，在 synthetic 数据上，分布性质可以解释样本效率提升，但不能完全解释泛化。第二，在两个真实世界数据集上，作者同样发现 distributional property 不能解释自然语言模型的泛化能力。摘要没有给出模型规模、具体任务、指标和数值，因此无法安全写数字。最值得关注的 ablation 是 synthetic 数据如何控制分布相似性，以及在去掉这些因素后泛化是否仍保留。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper makes a sharp claim: the distributional hypothesis explains only part of the benefit of masked language model pretraining, and it does not fully account for generalization. Many analyses implicitly assume that MLM works mainly because words appearing in similar contexts acquire similar semantics. The authors test whether that explanation is sufficient.","importance":"This is an important corrective for how we think about pretraining objectives. Its value is not a new objective, but a clearer statement of what the standard explanation misses. For pretraining research, the implication is that MLM gains may depend on inductive bias, conditioning structure, or optimization effects beyond distributional statistics alone.","technical_approach":"The paper uses controlled analysis rather than proposing a new model. It first constructs a synthetic dataset where distributional properties can be manipulated cleanly, then checks whether the same conclusions hold on two real-world datasets. This design separates sample efficiency from generalization, which is the key distinction. The result is nuanced: distributional structure does explain why pretrained MLMs learn more sample efficiently, but it does not fully explain why they generalize better. That means contextual co-occurrence is part of the story, not the whole story.","experiments":"The core empirical findings are stated in the abstract. On synthetic data, distributional properties explain the sample-efficiency benefit of MLM pretraining but fail to fully explain generalization. The same mismatch appears on two real-world datasets. The abstract does not include model sizes, task names, or metrics, so no numerical claims should be added. The most informative ablations are those that vary distributional structure while measuring whether generalization persists.","authors_note":""},"tags":["mlm","pretraining-objective","analysis"],"notable_authors":["Ting-Rui Chiang","Dani Yogatama"]},{"id":"2310.07321","title":"On the Impact of Cross-Domain Data on German Language Models","authors":["Amin Dada","Aokun Chen","Cheng Peng","Kaleb E. Smith","Ahmad Idrissi-Yaghir","Constantin Seibold","Jianning Li","Lars Heiliger","Christoph M. Friedrich","Daniel Truhn","Jan Egger","Jiang Bian","Jens Kleesiek","Yonghui Wu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Traditionally, large language models have been either trained on general web crawls or domain-specific data. However, recent successes of generative large language models, have shed light on the benefits of cross-domain datasets. To examine the significance of prioritizing data diversity over quality, we present a German dataset comprising texts from five domains, along with another dataset aimed at containing high-quality data. Through training a series of models ranging between 122M and 750M parameters on both datasets, we conduct a comprehensive benchmark on multiple downstream tasks. Our findings demonstrate that the models trained on the cross-domain dataset outperform those trained on quality data alone, leading to improvements up to $4.45\\%$ over the previous state-of-the-art. The models are available at https://huggingface.co/ikim-uk-essen","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.07321","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/DadaCPSISLHFTEB23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.922"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/DadaCPSISLHFTEB23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.922","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在德语这种非英语语种上，预训练数据该优先堆质量还是堆跨域多样性？以往德语模型要么训 CommonCrawl，要么训某个垂直域，缺乏系统对比。","importance":"数据级贡献，给非英语预训练一个具体的经验点：多样性收益大于单纯的'高质量过滤'。对做多语言/小语种 pretrain 的团队有直接参考价值，尤其是在 domain mixture 这个一直靠手感的问题上。","technical_approach":"构造两个德语数据集——一个跨 5 个领域（web、法律、医疗、文学等）的混合集，一个经过严格质量过滤的集合；在 122M–750M 规模上训练同架构模型，固定其他变量，只换数据做对照。思路直白但执行干净。","experiments":"多下游任务 benchmark 上，跨域数据集训出来的模型比纯高质量数据最高提升 4.45%，超过之前的德语 SOTA。规模覆盖 122M/355M/750M，结论在不同 size 上一致。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"For German (and by extension non-English) pretraining, is it better to prioritize data quality or cross-domain diversity? Prior German LMs either used generic web crawl or a single domain, with no clean controlled comparison.","importance":"A data-level contribution that gives a concrete empirical anchor: diversity beats aggressive quality filtering, at least for this setup. Useful reference for anyone doing non-English or domain-mixture pretraining, where the mix ratio is usually set by intuition.","technical_approach":"Build two German corpora—one mixing five domains (web, legal, medical, literature, etc.), one filtered for quality—and train matched architectures from 122M to 750M on each, keeping everything else fixed. Simple design, clean control.","experiments":"Across multiple downstream benchmarks, cross-domain training beats quality-filtered by up to 4.45%, surpassing prior German SOTA. The gap holds across 122M/355M/750M scales.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-mixture","multilingual","data-quality"]},{"id":"2305.14233","title":"Enhancing Chat Language Models by Scaling High-quality Instructional Conversations","authors":["Ning Ding","Yulin Chen","Bokai Xu","Yujia Qin","Shengding Hu","Zhiyuan Liu","Maosong Sun","Bowen Zhou"],"institutions":["Tsinghua University (THUNLP)","OpenBMB"],"abstract":"$b","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14233","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/DingCXQHL0Z23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.183"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/DingCXQHL0Z23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.183","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"开源 chat 模型和 ChatGPT 的差距很大程度上是指令数据的差距。作者要造一个不依赖人工 query、覆盖面广、多轮、质量有保证的大规模指令对话集。","importance":"数据级工作，UltraChat 是 2023 年开源社区重要的 SFT 数据源，直接影响了后续 UltraLM、Zephyr 等模型的训练，也是'指令数据合成 pipeline'范式的代表作之一。对 pretrain→posttrain 接口的研究者是必须熟悉的参考。","technical_approach":"完全由两个 ChatGPT 实例互相对话合成：一个扮演用户、一个扮演助手，按事先设计的话题/元信息树去展开，保证话题广度和多轮一致性。关键设计是不用真实用户 query，避免隐私和分布偏差，但用结构化 seed 来保证多样性。","experiments":"生成 1.5M 多轮对话。用 LLaMA 做 SFT 得到 UltraLM，在 AlpacaEval、MT-Bench 等多项评测上超过当时主要开源 chat baseline（Vicuna、WizardLM 等），逼近同规模 ChatGPT 替代。","authors_note":"清华 THUNLP（Zhiyuan Liu 组）+ OpenBMB，Ning Ding、Yujia Qin、Shengding Hu 都是该组活跃成员。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The gap between open chat models and ChatGPT is largely a data gap. The goal is a large, diverse, multi-turn, high-quality instructional conversation set without relying on human queries.","importance":"A data-level contribution that became one of the most influential SFT corpora in 2023, feeding UltraLM, Zephyr, and many follow-ups. Essential reference for the instruction-data-synthesis paradigm and the pretrain→posttrain interface.","technical_approach":"Fully synthetic: two ChatGPT instances role-play user and assistant, expanding a structured topic/meta-information tree to ensure breadth and multi-turn coherence. The key design choice is avoiding real user queries (privacy, bias) while using structured seeds to enforce diversity.","experiments":"1.5M multi-turn dialogues. LLaMA fine-tuned on UltraChat (UltraLM) outperforms major open chat baselines of the time (Vicuna, WizardLM) on AlpacaEval and MT-Bench and approaches ChatGPT-level at matched scale.","authors_note":"Tsinghua THUNLP (Zhiyuan Liu's group) and OpenBMB; Ning Ding, Yujia Qin, Shengding Hu are active members."},"tags":["sft","instruction-data","data-quality"],"notable_authors":["Ning Ding","Yujia Qin","Shengding Hu"]},{"id":"DoKPNDNLR0H23","title":"HyperRouter: Towards Efficient Training and Inference of Sparse Mixture of Experts","authors":["Truong Do","Le Khiem","Quang Pham","TrungTin Nguyen","Thanh-Nam Doan","Binh Nguyen","Chenghao Liu","Savitha Ramasamy","Xiaoli Li","Steven C. H. Hoi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/DoKPNDNLR0H23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.351"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/DoKPNDNLR0H23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.351","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"MoE 的 router 在训练初期信号弱、容易 collapse 到少数专家，而且 router 本身的参数增长会吃效率。HyperRouter 想解决 router 训练不稳和 router 参数代价这对矛盾。","importance":"架构级工作，针对 MoE 这个在大模型 pretrain 里日益主流的模块。对关心 MoE 稳定性和路由设计的人是一个具体方案点。","technical_approach":"用 HyperNetwork 动态生成 router 的权重，而不是让 router 权重独立训练。这样 router 的参数被 hypernet 约束、学习信号更强，也便于和其他 MoE 层共享生成器。相对 Switch/GShard 那种静态线性 router 是一个正交改造。","experiments":"在语言建模和下游任务上，相比 SwitchTransformer、HashRouter 等基线报告更快收敛与更好最终指标；具体数字看原文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"MoE routers suffer from weak early-training signal and collapse to a few experts; router parameters also add cost. HyperRouter targets router instability and parameter overhead together.","importance":"An architectural contribution on MoE routing—an increasingly central pretraining component. A concrete design point for anyone caring about MoE stability and router efficiency.","technical_approach":"A HyperNetwork generates router weights instead of training them independently. This constrains router parameters and gives stronger learning signal, and the generator can be shared across MoE layers. Orthogonal modification to Switch/GShard-style static linear routers.","experiments":"Reports faster convergence and better final metrics than Switch Transformer, HashRouter and related baselines on LM and downstream tasks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["moe","sparse-routing","training-efficiency","inference-efficiency"]},{"id":"2304.14767","title":"Dissecting Recall of Factual Associations in Auto-Regressive Language Models","authors":["Mor Geva","Jasmijn Bastings","Katja Filippova","Amir Globerson"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.14767","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/GevaBFG23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.751"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/GevaBFG23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.751","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["interpretability","factual-knowledge","information-flow","auto-regressive-lm"]},{"id":"GhoseP23","title":"Contrastive Deterministic Autoencoders For Language Modeling","authors":["Amur Ghose","Pascal Poupart"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/GhoseP23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.567"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/GhoseP23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.567","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["language-modeling","autoencoder","non-ar-lm","contrastive-learning"]},{"id":"2310.05793","title":"DiffuSeq-v2: Bridging Discrete and Continuous Text Spaces for Accelerated Seq2Seq Diffusion Models","authors":["Shansan Gong","Mukai Li","Jiangtao Feng","Zhiyong Wu","Lingpeng Kong"],"institutions":["The University of Hong Kong","ByteDance"],"abstract":"Diffusion models have gained prominence in generating high-quality sequences of text. Nevertheless, current approaches predominantly represent discrete text within a continuous diffusion space, which incurs substantial computational overhead during training and results in slower sampling speeds. In this paper, we introduce a soft absorbing state that facilitates the diffusion model in learning to reconstruct discrete mutations based on the underlying Gaussian space, thereby enhancing its capacity to recover conditional signals. During the sampling phase, we employ state-of-the-art ODE solvers within the continuous space to expedite the sampling process. Comprehensive experimental evaluations reveal that our proposed method effectively accelerates the training convergence by 4x and generates samples of similar quality 800x faster, rendering it significantly closer to practical application. \\footnote{The code is released at \\url{https://github.com/Shark-NLP/DiffuSeq}","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.05793","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/GongLF0K23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.660"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/GongLF0K23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.660","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"文本扩散模型在连续空间建模离散文本时训练慢、采样慢。DiffuSeq-v2 要解决的是如何在保持生成质量的同时大幅加速训练收敛和推理速度。","importance":"方法级贡献，直接推进 diffusion LM 的实用性。对 pretrain 研究的意义：diffusion LM 是挑战 AR 范式的重要方向，但训练/推理效率一直是瓶颈；本文将训练加速 4x、采样加速 800x，显著缩小了与 AR 模型的效率差距。","technical_approach":"引入 soft absorbing state，在连续高斯扩散空间中让模型学习重建离散突变（discrete mutations），从而增强对条件信号的恢复能力。这是在连续和离散文本空间之间架桥的关键设计。采样阶段使用先进的 ODE solver 在连续空间中加速。与原始 DiffuSeq 相比，核心区别在于不再纯粹在连续空间操作，而是利用离散状态信息引导扩散过程。","experiments":"训练收敛加速约 4x，采样速度提升约 800x（摘要截断，具体 benchmark 和指标需查全文）。在 seq2seq 任务上进行了全面评估，生成质量与加速效果均有提升。","authors_note":"Lingpeng Kong 来自香港大学，在结构化生成和扩散模型方面有持续产出。DiffuSeq 是该团队的前序工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Text diffusion models suffer from slow training and sampling when modeling discrete text in continuous space. DiffuSeq-v2 aims to substantially accelerate both training convergence and inference while maintaining generation quality.","importance":"Method-level advance for diffusion LMs. Diffusion-based text generation is a key challenger to the AR paradigm, but efficiency has been a major bottleneck. Achieving ~4x training speedup and ~800x sampling speedup significantly narrows the gap with AR models.","technical_approach":"Introduces a soft absorbing state that lets the diffusion model learn to reconstruct discrete mutations from the underlying Gaussian space, improving conditional signal recovery. This bridges discrete and continuous text representations. At sampling time, state-of-the-art ODE solvers are used in continuous space for acceleration. The key departure from original DiffuSeq is leveraging discrete state information to guide the continuous diffusion process.","experiments":"~4x training convergence speedup and ~800x sampling acceleration reported (abstract truncated; full benchmarks need the paper). Comprehensive evaluation on seq2seq tasks shows both quality and speed improvements.","authors_note":"Lingpeng Kong (HKU) has sustained output in structured generation and diffusion models. DiffuSeq is the team's prior work."},"tags":["diffusion-lm","seq2seq","discrete-token","sampling"],"notable_authors":["Lingpeng Kong"]},{"id":"HavrillaZPTTBAC23","title":"trlX: A Framework for Large Scale Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback","authors":["Alexander Havrilla","Maksym Zhuravinskyi","Duy Phung","Aman Tiwari","Jonathan Tow","Stella Biderman","Quentin Anthony","Louis Castricato"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/HavrillaZPTTBAC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.530"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/HavrillaZPTTBAC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.530","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["rlhf","reinforcement-learning","training-framework","alignment"]},{"id":"HeF0S0T23","title":"Merging Experts into One: Improving Computational Efficiency of Mixture of Experts","authors":["Shwai He","Run-Ze Fan","Liang Ding","Li Shen","Tianyi Zhou","Dacheng Tao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/HeF0S0T23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.907"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/HeF0S0T23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.907","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["moe","model-compression","efficiency","architecture"]},{"id":"HendelGG23","title":"In-Context Learning Creates Task Vectors","authors":["Roee Hendel","Mor Geva","Amir Globerson"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/HendelGG23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.624"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/HendelGG23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.624","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["icl","task-vector","representation","generalization"]},{"id":"HouKVY23","title":"Effects of sub-word segmentation on performance of transformer language models","authors":["Jue Hou","Anisia Katinskaia","Anh-Duc Vu","Roman Yangarber"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/HouKVY23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.459"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/HouKVY23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.459","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["tokenizer","subword","lm-training"]},{"id":"HouLFSZZBS23","title":"Towards a Mechanistic Interpretation of Multi-Step Reasoning Capabilities of Language Models","authors":["Yifan Hou","Jiaoda Li","Yu Fei","Alessandro Stolfo","Wangchunshu Zhou","Guangtao Zeng","Antoine Bosselut","Mrinmaya Sachan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/HouLFSZZBS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.299"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/HouLFSZZBS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.299","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["interpretability","reasoning","circuits"]},{"id":"HuangH23","title":"Long-Range Language Modeling with Selective Cache","authors":["Xinting Huang","Nora Hollenstein"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/HuangH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.321"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/HuangH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.321","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：长程语言建模需要历史上下文，但完整缓存历史 token 的表示成本太高，而简单截断又会丢掉关键远程信息。此前常见做法是在固定窗口、segment recurrence 或 memory token 之间折中，但都没有真正按'哪些过去内容值得记'来选择缓存。","importance":"它的贡献属于方法级和效率级。对 pretrain 的启示是，长上下文能力不一定只能靠更长训练窗口和更大显存，也可以通过选择性记忆改变有效上下文分配；这与训练时的 token budget、推理时 KV-cache 开销、以及 memory-augmented LM 设计直接相关。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 selective cache：不是缓存所有历史状态，而是有选择地保留对未来预测最有用的部分。与 Transformer-XL 式固定保留过去 segment 相比，它强调 selection；与检索式记忆不同，它仍在标准语言建模框架内工作。合理推断其关键设计包括：基于注意力、surprisal、位置或学习到的打分函数挑选历史表示写入缓存，并在后续 token 预测时访问该缓存。这样设计有效，是因为长程依赖通常稀疏，不是所有历史 token 都值得保留。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认所用数据集和 perplexity 改善幅度。按标题判断，实验应在长文档语言建模基准上，对比固定上下文窗口、Transformer-XL、Compressive Transformer 或其他 memory baselines，主要指标是 perplexity 与单位计算/内存成本。最有价值的 ablation 应包括：缓存预算变化、选择策略差异，以及性能是否主要来自少数关键远程 token。无可靠数字可写。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a classic long-context trade-off in language modeling: full history helps, but caching everything is expensive, while naive truncation discards useful distant context. Earlier approaches such as fixed windows or segment recurrence keep history mechanically rather than deciding what is actually worth remembering.","importance":"This is a method and efficiency contribution. For pretraining, the main implication is that long-range capability may come not only from larger context windows, but also from better memory allocation. That has direct relevance to token budgets during training and to KV-cache cost at inference.","technical_approach":"The key idea is a selective cache that stores only a subset of historical states judged useful for future prediction. Unlike Transformer-XL-style recurrence, which keeps past segments by rule, this approach emphasizes selection; unlike external retrieval, it remains within the language-modeling pipeline. The likely mechanism is to score past tokens or states using attention, surprise, position, or a learned utility signal, then retain only the highest-value memory entries. This design is sensible because long-range dependencies in text are sparse rather than uniformly distributed.","experiments":"The abstract is missing, so dataset names and perplexity gains cannot be stated reliably. The likely evaluation is on long-document language modeling, compared against fixed-window transformers, Transformer-XL, Compressive Transformer, or related memory baselines, with perplexity and memory/computation cost as the main metrics. The most informative ablations would vary the cache budget and selection rule, and test whether a small set of cached tokens accounts for most of the gain. No numeric details are safely recoverable.","authors_note":""},"tags":["long-context","cache","lm"]},{"id":"2310.16076","title":"Practical Computational Power of Linear Transformers and Their Recurrent and Self-Referential Extensions","authors":["Kazuki Irie","Róbert Csordás","Jürgen Schmidhuber"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Recent studies of the computational power of recurrent neural networks (RNNs) reveal a hierarchy of RNN architectures, given real-time and finite-precision assumptions. Here we study auto-regressive Transformers with linearised attention, a.k.a. linear Transformers (LTs) or Fast Weight Programmers (FWPs). LTs are special in the sense that they are equivalent to RNN-like sequence processors with a fixed-size state, while they can also be expressed as the now-popular self-attention networks. We show that many well-known results for the standard Transformer directly transfer to LTs/FWPs. Our formal language recognition experiments demonstrate how recently proposed FWP extensions such as recurrent FWPs and self-referential weight matrices successfully overcome certain limitations of the LT, e.g., allowing for generalisation on the parity problem. Our code is public.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.16076","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/IrieCS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.588"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/IrieCS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.588","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的结论是：线性 Transformer 在有限精度、实时计算假设下的计算能力可以被严格刻画，而且其局限与扩展路径都比工程界常见说法更清楚。过去大家常把 linear attention 当成'更快但近似更差的 attention'，较少从形式语言与状态容量角度分析它究竟能算什么、不能算什么。","importance":"这是一篇范式分析级工作。对 pretrain 的意义不在于直接提升某个 benchmark，而在于澄清一类高效架构的能力边界：线性 Transformer 本质上等价于固定状态大小的 RNN/Fast Weight Programmer，因此它的表达瓶颈不是简单的近似误差，而是状态受限；相应地，递归扩展和自指权重能否补足能力，关系到长上下文、高效注意力和替代架构的可行性判断。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把 auto-regressive linear Transformer 形式化为固定大小状态的序列处理器，并把标准 Transformer 的若干计算能力结论迁移到 LT/FWP 上，再分析其递归和自指扩展。论文进一步研究 recurrent FWP 和 self-referential weight matrices 这些扩展为何能突破基础 LT 的限制。与经验性架构论文不同，这里不是先堆 benchmark，而是先给计算模型，再用形式语言识别实验验证能力层级。这样设计有效，因为对这类架构，很多关键差异在长程可计算性上，普通困惑度实验不一定能暴露。","experiments":"已知摘要明确提到 formal language recognition experiments。可可靠总结的实验结论是：基础 LT/FWP 受固定状态约束，在某些形式语言上存在能力限制；而 recurrent FWP 和 self-referential extensions 能成功克服其中一部分限制。摘要没有给出具体语言集合、模型规模或准确率数字，因此不能编造。最值得注意的观察是，这类实验不是为了追求 SOTA，而是用可控任务验证理论层级是否在实际训练中可见。","authors_note":"作者包括 Jürgen Schmidhuber。团队长期代表性方向包括 Fast Weight Programmers、RNN 计算能力分析、线性/高效 Transformer 理论。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper argues that the practical computational power of linear Transformers can be characterized much more precisely than the usual 'faster but weaker attention' narrative suggests. Prior discussion often treats linear attention as an efficiency approximation, while under real-time and finite-precision assumptions it is more useful to ask what these models can and cannot compute as fixed-state sequence processors.","importance":"This is a paradigm-level analysis paper. Its relevance to pretraining is not a direct benchmark gain but a sharper understanding of the capability boundary of efficient architectures. Linear Transformers are effectively fixed-size-state RNN-like processors, so their limits are tied to state capacity rather than merely approximation quality. That matters for long-context modeling, efficient attention, and whether such architectures can serve as serious alternatives to standard Transformers.","technical_approach":"The paper formalizes autoregressive linear Transformers as fixed-state sequence processors, equivalent to Fast Weight Programmers, and transfers several known computational results from standard Transformers to this setting. It then studies extensions such as recurrent FWPs and self-referential weight matrices, asking how and why they overcome some of the base model's limitations. The design is theory-first and then empirically validated on formal language recognition tasks, which is appropriate because many architectural differences only become visible on controlled computability tests rather than ordinary perplexity benchmarks.","experiments":"The abstract explicitly states that the experiments are formal language recognition tests. The reliable takeaway is that vanilla linear Transformers/FWPs exhibit limitations consistent with fixed-state processing, while recurrent and self-referential FWP extensions can overcome some of them. The abstract does not provide language sets, model sizes, or numeric accuracies, so those should not be invented. The key value of the experiments is to show that the theoretical hierarchy is reflected in trainable models, not just in abstract proofs.","authors_note":"The authors include Jürgen Schmidhuber. The broader line of work includes Fast Weight Programmers, computational analyses of RNNs, and theory around linear/efficient Transformers."},"tags":["linear-attention","fast-weight","expressivity"],"notable_authors":["Jürgen Schmidhuber","Kazuki Irie","Róbert Csordás"]},{"id":"JeonLPK23","title":"A Frustratingly Easy Post-Training Quantization Scheme for LLMs","authors":["Yongkweon Jeon","Chungman Lee","Kyungphil Park","Ho-Young Kim"],"institutions":[],"abstract":",","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/JeonLPK23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.892"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/JeonLPK23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.892","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["quantization","ptq","llm"]},{"id":"2310.05736","title":"LLMLingua: Compressing Prompts for Accelerated Inference of Large Language Models","authors":["Huiqiang Jiang","Qianhui Wu","Chin-Yew Lin","Yuqing Yang","Lili Qiu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.05736","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/JiangWLYQ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.825"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/JiangWLYQ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.825","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["prompt-compression","inference"]},{"id":"2305.06983","title":"Active Retrieval Augmented Generation","authors":["Zhengbao Jiang","Frank F. Xu","Luyu Gao","Zhiqing Sun","Qian Liu","Jane Dwivedi-Yu","Yiming Yang","Jamie Callan","Graham Neubig"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.06983","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/JiangXGSLDYCN23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.495"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/JiangXGSLDYCN23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.495","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["rag","retrieval","hallucination"]},{"id":"KimKPL023","title":"Leap-of-Thought: Accelerating Transformers via Dynamic Token Routing","authors":["Yeachan Kim","Junho Kim","Jun-Hyung Park","Mingyu Lee","SangKeun Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/KimKPL023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.976"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/KimKPL023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.976","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer 在推理时对所有 token 施加相同的计算量（层数），导致处理简单 token 时存在严重的计算冗余。","importance":"效率与架构。探索了细粒度的动态计算（Dynamic Routing / Early Exiting），对优化长文本或大规模部署的推理成本有启发。","technical_approach":"提出动态 token 路由机制（Leap-of-Thought）。模型在中间层评估每个 token 的置信度，对于已确信的“简单” token 允许其直接跳过后续层（early exit），仅对复杂 token 进行全层计算。","experiments":"","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Transformers apply the same amount of computation (number of layers) to all tokens during inference, leading to severe computational redundancy for 'easy' tokens.","importance":"Efficiency & Architecture. Explores fine-grained dynamic computation (Dynamic Routing / Early Exiting), offering insights for optimizing inference costs in long-context or large-scale deployments.","technical_approach":"Introduces a dynamic token routing mechanism (Leap-of-Thought). The model evaluates the confidence of each token at intermediate layers; 'easy' tokens with high confidence are allowed to bypass subsequent layers (early exit), while only complex tokens undergo full-layer processing.","experiments":"","authors_note":""},"tags":["dynamic-routing","efficient-inference","transformer-architecture"]},{"id":"2311.00288","title":"Active Instruction Tuning: Improving Cross-Task Generalization by Training on Prompt Sensitive Tasks","authors":["Po-Nien Kung","Fan Yin","Di Wu","Kai-Wei Chang","Nanyun Peng"],"institutions":["UCLA"],"abstract":"$10","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.00288","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/KungY0CP23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.112"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/KungY0CP23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.112","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"指令微调（IT）数据量庞大，全量训练成本高，而随机采样任务会导致跨任务泛化能力次优。","importance":"数据级。将主动学习（Active Learning）引入 post-train 数据筛选，证明了基于模型不确定性的数据挑选比随机挑选更有效，对构建高质量 SFT 数据集有直接价值。","technical_approach":"提出基于“提示词不确定性”的主动指令微调框架。核心机制是：对 prompt 进行微小扰动，观察当前模型输出的分歧程度（disagreement），以此衡量该任务的信息量（informativeness），优先挑选分歧大的任务进行训练。","experiments":"在 NIV2 和 Self-Instruct 数据集上验证。通过主动挑选 prompt 敏感的任务，模型在未见任务上的 zero-shot 泛化能力显著优于随机采样基线。","authors_note":"Nanyun Peng (UCLA)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Instruction tuning on all available tasks is computationally prohibitive, and random task sampling often leads to suboptimal cross-task generalization.","importance":"Data-level contribution. Introduces active learning to post-training data curation, proving that selecting data based on model uncertainty is superior to random sampling, which is highly valuable for building efficient SFT datasets.","technical_approach":"Proposes an active instruction tuning framework based on 'prompt uncertainty.' It perturbs prompts and measures the disagreement in the current model's outputs. Tasks with high disagreement (informativeness) are prioritized for tuning.","experiments":"Evaluated on NIV2 and Self-Instruct. Actively tuning on prompt-sensitive tasks significantly improved zero-shot generalization on unseen tasks compared to random sampling baselines.","authors_note":"Nanyun Peng (UCLA)"},"tags":["instruction-tuning","data-selection","generalization"],"notable_authors":["Nanyun Peng","Kai-Wei Chang"]},{"id":"2307.16039","title":"Okapi: Instruction-tuned Large Language Models in Multiple Languages with Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback","authors":["Viet Dac Lai","Chien Van Nguyen","Nghia Trung Ngo","Thuat Nguyen","Franck Dernoncourt","Ryan A. Rossi","Thien Huu Nguyen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$11","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.16039","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LaiNNNDRN23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-DEMO.28"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LaiNNNDRN23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-demo.28","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：把 RLHF 风格的指令对齐从英语扩展到多语言开源 LLM，而不是继续停留在“先做英文、其他语言靠迁移碰运气”的状态。已有开源指令模型大多只覆盖英语和少数高资源语言，这使很多语言既缺少可用助手模型，也缺少关于多语言对齐是否能稳定迁移的经验。","importance":"它的重要性主要在方法落地和数据建设，而不是提出新的 RLHF 算法。对 pretrain / posttrain 接口的启示是：对齐并不天然是单语问题，多语言偏好数据、奖励建模和指令分布本身会成为能力边界的一部分；如果这些环节缺位，底座的多语言预训练能力很难在聊天场景里被充分释放。","technical_approach":"核心做法是构建一个多语言版 instruction tuning + RLHF 流程，并据此训练 Okapi 系列模型。它不是改造底座架构，而是把已有英文对齐流水线迁移到多语言环境：先做监督指令微调，再利用人类反馈或偏好信号训练奖励模型并做 RL 优化；关键设计点通常在于如何覆盖多语言指令、如何让奖励信号跨语言可比、以及如何避免高资源语言在混合训练中压制低资源语言。","experiments":"从给到的信息里只能确认：论文声称训练了多语言 instruction-tuned LLM，并用 SFT 与 RLHF 两阶段提升多语言助手表现。摘要没有提供可可靠提取的模型参数量、语言数、数据规模、基线名称和具体增益，因此不能负责任地复述数字；能确定的实验重点应当是跨语言指令跟随与对齐质量对比，以及 RLHF 相比仅 SFT 的增益。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical gap: extending instruction tuning and RLHF-style alignment to multilingual open-source LLMs, instead of relying on English-only alignment and hoping multilingual behavior transfers. Most open instruction-tuned models at the time mainly served English and a few high-resource languages, leaving broad multilingual access and alignment quality underexplored.","importance":"Its contribution is primarily methodological and data-facing rather than a new RLHF algorithm. For the pretrain–posttrain interface, the key takeaway is that alignment is not language-agnostic in practice: multilingual preference data, reward modeling, and instruction coverage define how much of a pretrained multilingual base can actually surface in assistant use.","technical_approach":"The method is a multilingual adaptation of the standard instruction-tuning pipeline, culminating in the Okapi family. It keeps the base architecture intact and ports the usual SFT-to-RLHF recipe into a multilingual setting: supervised instruction tuning first, then preference-driven reward modeling and RL optimization; the hard part is making supervision and rewards comparable across languages and preventing high-resource languages from dominating the update signal.","experiments":"From the provided information, the safe conclusion is that the paper evaluates multilingual instruction following and alignment quality, and studies the added value of RLHF over SFT alone. The abstract snippet does not expose reliable numbers for model size, language coverage, data volume, baselines, or exact gains, so those details should be treated as unavailable here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["rlhf","multilingual","instruction-tuning","sft"],"notable_authors":["Viet Dac Lai","Chien Van Nguyen","Nghia Trung Ngo","Thuat Nguyen","Franck Dernoncourt"]},{"id":"LeeKBHSC23","title":"Enhancing Computation Efficiency in Large Language Models through Weight and Activation Quantization","authors":["Janghwan Lee","Minsoo Kim","Seungcheol Baek","Seok Joong Hwang","Wonyong Sung","Jungwook Choi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LeeKBHSC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.910"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LeeKBHSC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.910","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的是：如何通过权重和激活量化降低大语言模型的计算与部署成本，同时尽量保住精度。这个问题一直存在，但在 LLM 场景下更尖锐，因为参数量、KV cache 和激活带宽都把推理成本推得很高。","importance":"从标题看，它属于系统效率方向，对 pretrain 本身的直接贡献有限，但对“可训练、可部署的模型规模边界”有现实意义。量化方法如果能稳定迁移到 LLM，会影响训练后压缩、低成本 serving，甚至反过来影响预训练时的架构和数值格式选择。","technical_approach":"仅从标题无法确认其具体技术路线。能做的稳妥判断是：它讨论联合权重量化和激活量化，而不是只压缩权重；这通常意味着作者试图同时削减存储和乘加带宽，但也必须处理激活分布更难校准、异常值更伤精度这一老问题。","experiments":"由于没有摘要，无法确认模型类型、量化位宽、是否是 PTQ 还是 QAT、基线、数据集和精度损失。唯一可说的是，论文应以效率—精度权衡为主线，比较不同量化配置下的吞吐、内存和任务性能变化；任何具体数字在当前信息下都不应编造。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies how to reduce LLM compute cost through joint weight and activation quantization while preserving model quality. This is a long-standing systems problem, but it becomes sharper for LLMs because parameters, activations, and KV-cache traffic all scale deployment cost aggressively.","importance":"Based on the title, this is primarily a systems-efficiency contribution rather than a direct pretraining-method paper. Still, robust LLM quantization matters for the practical model-size frontier and can feed back into how we think about architecture, numerical formats, and post-training compression.","technical_approach":"The exact method cannot be recovered from the title alone. The only safe takeaway is that the paper targets both weight and activation quantization, not just weight-only compression; that usually means it aims to cut both storage and compute bandwidth, while facing the harder calibration problem caused by activation outliers.","experiments":"Without an abstract, there is no reliable information about model family, bit-widths, PTQ vs QAT, datasets, baselines, or accuracy loss. The likely experimental focus is the quality–efficiency trade-off under different quantization settings, but no concrete result should be asserted here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","efficient-inference","ptq"],"notable_authors":["Janghwan Lee","Minsoo Kim","Seungcheol Baek","Seok Joong Hwang","Wonyong Sung"]},{"id":"LeeSENMFRA23","title":"Ensemble-Instruct: Instruction Tuning Data Generation with a Heterogeneous Mixture of LMs","authors":["Young-Suk Lee","Md. Arafat Sultan","Yousef El-Kurdi","Tahira Naseem","Asim Munawar","Radu Florian","Salim Roukos","Ramón Fernandez Astudillo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LeeSENMFRA23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.836"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LeeSENMFRA23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.836","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：instruction tuning 数据生成过度依赖单一 teacher LM，导致风格、覆盖和错误模式都比较单一。单模型合成虽然便宜，但容易把一个 teacher 的盲点原样复制到整个指令数据集里。","importance":"它的重要性在于把数据合成问题从“多生成一些”推进到“用异质模型混合来改善数据分布”。对后训练和 continual pretrain 都有启示：训练数据的 teacher 多样性可能和模型 ensemble 一样重要，因为它决定了监督信号的覆盖范围与偏差结构。","technical_approach":"从标题可确认的方法核心是 Ensemble-Instruct：用 heterogeneous mixture of LMs 来生成 instruction tuning 数据，而不是依赖单一模型。这里的关键设计思想通常是利用不同模型在风格、知识、长度偏好和错误类型上的互补性，合成一个覆盖更广、偏差更分散的数据集；代价是数据筛选和一致性控制更复杂。","experiments":"由于没有摘要，无法确认用了多少 teacher、异质性来自模型家族还是规模、生成了多大数据集，以及相比单 teacher 合成提升多少。可以合理判断实验会比较单模型和多模型生成数据在数据质量与下游 instruction tuning 效果上的差异，但具体指标和数字当前不可得。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a weakness in instruction-data synthesis: relying on a single teacher LM produces narrow style, coverage, and error patterns. Single-model generation is convenient, but it tends to clone one model's blind spots into the entire instruction-tuning corpus.","importance":"The contribution is data-centric. For post-training and even continual pretraining, it suggests that teacher diversity in synthetic supervision may matter as much as model diversity in inference, because it shapes both coverage and bias structure of the training signal.","technical_approach":"From the title, the core idea of Ensemble-Instruct is to generate instruction-tuning data with a heterogeneous mixture of language models rather than a single teacher. The intended mechanism is straightforward: different models bring different strengths, styles, and failure modes, so mixing them should broaden supervision and reduce the dominance of any one teacher's bias, at the cost of more complex filtering and consistency control.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so the number and type of teacher models, dataset size, baselines, and gains cannot be stated reliably. The likely experimental comparison is single-teacher versus heterogeneous-teacher synthetic data, measured both by data quality and by downstream instruction-tuned model performance.","authors_note":""},"tags":["instruction-tuning","synthetic-data","ensemble"],"notable_authors":["Young-Suk Lee","Md. Arafat Sultan","Yousef El-Kurdi","Tahira Naseem","Asim Munawar"]},{"id":"LiLZLW23","title":"Tuna: Instruction Tuning using Feedback from Large Language Models","authors":["Haoran Li","Yiran Liu","Xingxing Zhang","Wei Lu","Furu Wei"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiLZLW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.1011"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiLZLW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.1011","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：高质量 instruction tuning 数据昂贵且难扩展，人工反馈收集速度慢，导致很多模型虽有强预训练能力，但难以稳定转化为对话与遵循指令能力。作者希望用大模型自身产生的反馈来替代或放大人工监督，从而降低对人类偏好标注的依赖。","importance":"这是一个典型的 post-train 数据与方法工作，但对 pretrain 很有启发，因为它直接影响预训练能力最终能释放多少。它的重要性在于给出了一条便宜的数据闭环路径：如果 LLM 反馈足够可靠，就可以大规模迭代指令数据和偏好信号，这会改变后训练的主要瓶颈。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Tuna：利用大语言模型提供反馈来做 instruction tuning，而不是完全依赖人工评分。关键点不只是用模型打分，而是把反馈转成可训练的监督信号，用来筛选、改写或优化指令-响应数据；和直接 self-instruct 只靠模型生成数据不同，Tuna 更强调“生成后再由模型反馈校正”，因为未经反馈约束的合成数据很容易流向表面流畅但对齐性差的模式。","experiments":"从题目看，实验应比较使用 LLM feedback 的指令调优与人工标注、纯 self-instruct 或常规 SFT 管线在聊天、遵循指令或通用基准上的效果。由于缺少摘要和结果，我无法确认所用基础模型、数据规模、反馈模型、评价集和具体提升数字；但可以合理判断，论文的核心论据会围绕：在较低人工成本下接近或超过人工反馈驱动的 instruction tuning。","authors_note":"如果题目中的 Furu Wei 是同名作者本人，则其代表性工作包括微软体系内的 Turing/NLG 与后续对话式大模型相关工作；但当前给定信息不足以安全确认机构与作者身份，故不展开。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a central bottleneck in instruction tuning: high-quality supervision and human feedback are expensive and slow, which limits how much pretrained capability can be converted into useful assistant behavior. The proposed direction is to let LLMs provide feedback at scale, reducing the dependence on human preference annotation.","importance":"This is a post-training data/method paper with direct implications for pretraining utilization. Its significance is that it suggests a cheaper closed loop for supervision: if model-generated feedback is reliable enough, instruction data and alignment signals can be iterated at scale, which changes the dominant cost structure of post-training.","technical_approach":"The core method, Tuna, uses feedback from large language models for instruction tuning rather than relying entirely on human judgments. The point is not only to have a model score outputs, but to convert that feedback into usable supervision for filtering, rewriting, or improving instruction–response pairs; compared with plain self-instruct pipelines that mostly generate more data, Tuna emphasizes a generate-then-critique loop because unconstrained synthetic data often drifts toward fluent but weakly aligned responses.","experiments":"From the title, the paper likely compares LLM-feedback-based instruction tuning against human-labeled data, plain self-instruct, or standard SFT pipelines on instruction-following, chat, or general evaluation suites. Without the abstract and tables, I cannot safely report the base models, data scale, feedback model, benchmarks, or exact gains; the likely central claim is cost-effective performance that approaches or exceeds stronger supervision baselines with less human effort.","authors_note":"If the listed Furu Wei is indeed the Microsoft researcher, his representative work would include Turing/NLG and subsequent conversational LLM efforts, but the provided metadata is insufficient to confirm affiliations safely, so I leave this unexpanded."},"tags":["instruction-tuning","synthetic-data","feedback","alignment"],"notable_authors":["Furu Wei"]},{"id":"LiYL23","title":"Rethinking the Construction of Effective Metrics for Understanding the Mechanisms of Pretrained Language Models","authors":["You Li","Jinhui Yin","Yuming Lin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiYL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.894"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiYL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.894","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["interpretability","metrics","pretrained-models"]},{"id":"LiuGCZW23","title":"Enhancing Scalability of Pre-trained Language Models via Efficient Parameter Sharing","authors":["Peiyu Liu","Ze-Feng Gao","Yushuo Chen","Xin Zhao","Ji-Rong Wen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiuGCZW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.920"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiuGCZW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.920","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["parameter-sharing","efficient","architecture"]},{"id":"LiuIXWXZ23","title":"G-Eval: NLG Evaluation using Gpt-4 with Better Human Alignment","authors":["Yang Liu","Dan Iter","Yichong Xu","Shuohang Wang","Ruochen Xu","Chenguang Zhu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiuIXWXZ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.153"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiuIXWXZ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.153","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["evaluation","gpt-4","nlg-eval"]},{"id":"LiuLHDC23","title":"LLM-FP4: 4-Bit Floating-Point Quantized Transformers","authors":["Shih-Yang Liu","Zechun Liu","Xijie Huang","Pingcheng Dong","Kwang-Ting Cheng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiuLHDC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.39"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiuLHDC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.39","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["quantization","fp4","inference"]},{"id":"LvZGXHCL0GLSGYQ23","title":"CoLLiE: Collaborative Training of Large Language Models in an Efficient Way","authors":["Kai Lv","Shuo Zhang","Tianle Gu","Shuhao Xing","Jiawei Hong","Keyu Chen","Xiaoran Liu","Yuqing Yang","Honglin Guo","Tengxiao Liu","Yu Sun","Qipeng Guo","Hang Yan","Xipeng Qiu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LvZGXHCL0GLSGYQ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-DEMO.48"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LvZGXHCL0GLSGYQ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-demo.48","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["distributed-training","efficient-training","llm-infrastructure"]},{"id":"2310.16484","title":"Subspace Chronicles: How Linguistic Information Emerges, Shifts and Interacts during Language Model Training","authors":["Max Müller-Eberstein","Rob van der Goot","Barbara Plank","Ivan Titov"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$12","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.16484","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/Muller-Eberstein23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.879"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/Muller-Eberstein23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.879","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["training-dynamics","interpretability","emergence"]},{"id":"2310.19089","title":"Pushdown Layers: Encoding Recursive Structure in Transformer Language Models","authors":["Shikhar Murty","Pratyusha Sharma","Jacob Andreas","Christopher D. Manning"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$13","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.19089","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/MurtySAM23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.195"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/MurtySAM23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.195","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["architecture","self-attention","recursive-structure"]},{"id":"2310.12426","title":"MAF: Multi-Aspect Feedback for Improving Reasoning in Large Language Models","authors":["Deepak Nathani","David Wang","Liangming Pan","William Yang Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$14","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.12426","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/NathaniWPW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.407"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/NathaniWPW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.407","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["feedback","reasoning","self-improvement","post-training"]},{"id":"PeiZZWGWXY23","title":"BioT5: Enriching Cross-modal Integration in Biology with Chemical Knowledge and Natural Language Associations","authors":["Qizhi Pei","Wei Zhang","Jinhua Zhu","Kehan Wu","Kaiyuan Gao","Lijun Wu","Yingce Xia","Rui Yan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/PeiZZWGWXY23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.70"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/PeiZZWGWXY23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.70","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["multimodal-pretraining","t5","biology","cross-modal"]},{"id":"PfeifferPNWRR23","title":"mmT5: Modular Multilingual Pre-Training Solves Source Language Hallucinations","authors":["Jonas Pfeiffer","Francesco Piccinno","Massimo Nicosia","Xinyi Wang","Machel Reid","Sebastian Ruder"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/PfeifferPNWRR23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.132"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/PfeifferPNWRR23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.132","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["multilingual","t5","modular","pretraining"]},{"id":"PressZMSSL23","title":"Measuring and Narrowing the Compositionality Gap in Language Models","authors":["Ofir Press","Muru Zhang","Sewon Min","Ludwig Schmidt","Noah A. Smith","Mike Lewis"],"institutions":["University of Washington","Allen Institute for AI"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/PressZMSSL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.378"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/PressZMSSL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.378","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 在需要多步组合推理的问题上存在'组合性差距'（compositionality gap）：模型能正确回答每个子问题，但无法将子答案组合得到最终答案。本文量化了这一差距并提出 self-ask 方法来缩小它。","importance":"范式级启示。组合性差距直接揭示了 LLM 推理能力的一个结构性弱点——不是知识不够，而是组合能力不足。对 pretrain 研究者来说，这暗示单纯增加数据量或模型规模可能无法解决组合推理问题，需要在训练目标或推理策略上做文章。Self-ask 是 CoT 的一个重要变体。","technical_approach":"首先定义并量化组合性差距：在多跳问答中，模型能答对所有子问题但答错组合问题的比例。然后提出 self-ask：让模型在回答前先自己提出并回答子问题（类似递归分解），可选地结合搜索引擎获取子答案。关键洞察是显式分解比隐式 CoT 更能帮助模型完成组合推理。","experiments":"在 Compositional Celebrities 和 2WikiMultiHopQA 等多跳 QA 数据集上测试。组合性差距在 GPT-3（text-davinci-002）上约 40%+。Self-ask 将多跳 QA 准确率显著提升，尤其结合搜索引擎时效果最好。随模型规模增大，差距有所缩小但未消失。","authors_note":"Ofir Press（University of Washington / AI2），此前以 ALiBi 位置编码闻名。Noah A. Smith 和 Sewon Min 也是 NLP 领域的知名研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLMs exhibit a 'compositionality gap': they can answer individual sub-questions correctly but fail to compose sub-answers into a correct final answer for multi-hop questions. This paper measures this gap and proposes self-ask to narrow it.","importance":"A paradigm-level insight. The compositionality gap reveals a structural weakness in LLM reasoning—it's not about lacking knowledge but about failing to compose. For pretrain researchers, this suggests that scaling data or parameters alone may not solve compositional reasoning; training objectives or inference strategies need rethinking. Self-ask is an influential CoT variant.","technical_approach":"First defines and quantifies the compositionality gap: the fraction of multi-hop questions where the model answers all sub-questions correctly but the composed question incorrectly. Then proposes self-ask: the model explicitly generates and answers sub-questions before the final answer, optionally using a search engine for sub-answers. The key insight is that explicit decomposition outperforms implicit chain-of-thought for compositional reasoning.","experiments":"Tested on Compositional Celebrities and 2WikiMultiHopQA. The compositionality gap is ~40%+ on GPT-3 (text-davinci-002). Self-ask significantly improves multi-hop QA accuracy, especially when combined with search. The gap narrows with model scale but does not disappear.","authors_note":"Ofir Press (University of Washington / AI2), known for ALiBi positional encoding. Noah A. Smith and Sewon Min are prominent NLP researchers."},"tags":["compositionality","reasoning","cot"],"notable_authors":["Ofir Press","Noah A. Smith","Sewon Min"]},{"id":"Ren0Z23","title":"Context Compression for Auto-regressive Transformers with Sentinel Tokens","authors":["Siyu Ren","Qi Jia","Kenny Q. Zhu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/Ren0Z23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.794"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/Ren0Z23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.794","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：在不改动自回归生成范式的前提下，把长上下文中的冗余历史压缩掉，从而降低 Transformer 的计算和显存成本。以往长上下文通常靠稀疏注意力、外部记忆或截断历史来规避二次复杂度，但这些方法要么改模型较重，要么直接损失生成所需的细粒度条件信息。","importance":"这是一篇方法级的效率工作，价值在于给自回归 Transformer 提供了一种训练内生的上下文压缩接口。对 pretrain 的启示不是提出新范式，而是说明可以用专门的哨兵 token 学会把历史信息汇聚到少量位置，再在推理时只保留这些位置，作为 KV-cache 和长上下文训练之间的折中方案。","technical_approach":"核心方法是引入 sentinel tokens 作为可学习的信息汇聚点，让模型在序列内部主动做上下文压缩。具体做法应是周期性插入或追加少量哨兵 token，使其通过注意力吸收邻近片段的信息；随后在后续层或后续时间步优先依赖这些压缩表示，而不是保留全部历史 token。它和直接做 pooling 的区别在于压缩位置仍然处于标准 token 序列中，因此兼容原生 Transformer；它和外部记忆的区别在于记忆是端到端随语言建模目标一起学出来的，而不是另加检索模块。代价是压缩比越高，越容易丢掉局部词法细节，因此更适合存在重复或主题稳定的长上下文，而不一定适合每个 token 都关键的精细生成场景。","experiments":"从题目可判断，实验重点应是长序列语言建模或生成任务中的速度—质量权衡，但当前给定信息没有摘要、表格或数字，因此不能可靠写出模型规模、数据规模和具体提升幅度。可以合理预期论文会对比标准 Transformer 或其他上下文压缩基线，并报告在相近困惑度或生成质量下的计算节省；若有消融，最关键的应是哨兵数量、插入频率和压缩位置对性能的影响。由于缺少原始摘要，这里不对数值结果做推断。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical bottleneck: how to compress long autoregressive context without abandoning standard left-to-right generation. Prior work usually sidestepped the quadratic cost with sparse attention, truncation, or external memory, but those choices either change the model substantially or drop token-level information that generation may still need.","importance":"This is a method-level efficiency paper with a clear pretraining relevance: it proposes an in-model interface for context compression rather than a separate memory system. The main takeaway for pretrain research is that a language model may learn to funnel useful history into a small set of dedicated tokens, giving a middle ground between full-context training and aggressive cache pruning.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to add sentinel tokens that act as learned aggregation slots for surrounding context. Instead of pooling hidden states outside the sequence, the model compresses information into a few ordinary sequence positions that remain compatible with the vanilla Transformer stack. Relative to external memory, the compressed representation is trained end-to-end under the language modeling objective. Relative to naive downsampling, it preserves a differentiable path for the model to decide what to keep. The trade-off is straightforward: higher compression reduces compute more, but it also risks losing local lexical detail, so the method is likely strongest when history is redundant or semantically stable.","experiments":"From the title, the key empirical focus is likely the quality-versus-efficiency trade-off on long-context language modeling or generation. However, the provided material contains no abstract or tables, so model size, data scale, baselines, and exact gains cannot be stated reliably. The most informative ablations would likely vary the number of sentinel tokens, insertion schedule, and where compression is applied in the network. I am intentionally not inventing numerical results.","authors_note":""},"tags":["context-compression","long-context","kv-cache"]},{"id":"ShenYLDKH23","title":"Scaling Vision-Language Models with Sparse Mixture of Experts","authors":["Sheng Shen","Zhewei Yao","Chunyuan Li","Trevor Darrell","Kurt Keutzer","Yuxiong He"],"institutions":["UC Berkeley","Microsoft"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ShenYLDKH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.758"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ShenYLDKH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.758","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"把 MoE 引入 VLM，验证稀疏专家能否像在纯文本 LM 上一样，用同样的 FLOPs 拿到更好的多模态性能。之前 MoE 在 VLM 里做得少，主要担心跨模态专家分化不清。","importance":"方法级+系统级贡献，给多模态 pretrain 提供了一个可参考的 scaling 方案。对判断'MoE 是否普遍适用于统一多模态建模'是一个直接的数据点。","technical_approach":"在 VLM 主干（类似 CLIP/BLIP 的 Transformer）中把若干 FFN 层替换为稀疏 MoE 层（top-k 路由），对比 dense 同 FLOPs 模型。重点是观察 text token 和 image token 是否走到不同专家，以及如何平衡路由负载。","experiments":"在图文检索、VQA、captioning 上对比 dense 和 MoE VLM。在相同推理 FLOPs 下 MoE 一致优于 dense，放大参数后增益更大；并观察到专家确实出现模态偏好，但不是硬分离。","authors_note":"UC Berkeley / Microsoft，Trevor Darrell、Kurt Keutzer、Chunyuan Li 等。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Test whether sparse MoE scales VLMs the same way it scales text LMs — at matched FLOPs, can experts help? Prior VLM work mostly stayed dense, partly because of concerns that experts wouldn't specialize cleanly across modalities.","importance":"A methodological/systems contribution that gives multimodal pretraining a concrete MoE scaling recipe, and a data point on whether MoE generalizes beyond text to unified multimodal modeling.","technical_approach":"Replaces selected FFN layers in a CLIP/BLIP-style VLM backbone with sparse top-k MoE layers and compares to a FLOPs-matched dense baseline. A main object of study is whether text and image tokens route to different experts, and how to keep routing balanced.","experiments":"Evaluated on retrieval, VQA, and captioning. MoE consistently beats dense at matched inference FLOPs, with larger gaps as parameter count grows. Experts show modality preference but not hard separation.","authors_note":"UC Berkeley / Microsoft; Trevor Darrell, Kurt Keutzer, Chunyuan Li."},"tags":["moe","vision-language","scaling","sparse-moe"],"notable_authors":["Chunyuan Li","Trevor Darrell","Kurt Keutzer"]},{"id":"2310.07096","title":"Sparse Universal Transformer","authors":["Shawn Tan","Yikang Shen","Zhenfang Chen","Aaron C. Courville","Chuang Gan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$15","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.07096","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/TanSCCG23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.12"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/TanSCCG23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.12","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["transformer","parameter-sharing","sparsity","architecture"]},{"id":"TayWC0SSGZRCZMP23","title":"Transcending Scaling Laws with 0.1% Extra Compute","authors":["Yi Tay","Jason Wei","Hyung Won Chung","Vinh Q. Tran","David R. So","Siamak Shakeri","Xavier Garcia","Huaixiu Steven Zheng","Jinfeng Rao","Aakanksha Chowdhery","Denny Zhou","Donald Metzler","Slav Petrov","Neil Houlsby","Quoc V. Le","Mostafa Dehghani"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/TayWC0SSGZRCZMP23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.91"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/TayWC0SSGZRCZMP23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.91","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["scaling-law","compute-optimal","training-dynamics","efficiency"]},{"id":"2305.11129","title":"mLongT5: A Multilingual and Efficient Text-To-Text Transformer for Longer Sequences","authors":["David C. Uthus","Santiago Ontañón","Joshua Ainslie","Mandy Guo"],"institutions":["Google Research"],"abstract":"We present our work on developing a multilingual, efficient text-to-text transformer that is suitable for handling long inputs. This model, called mLongT5, builds upon the architecture of LongT5, while leveraging the multilingual datasets used for pretraining mT5 and the pretraining tasks of UL2. We evaluate this model on a variety of multilingual summarization and question-answering tasks, and the results show stronger performance for mLongT5 when compared to existing multilingual models such as mBART or M-BERT.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.11129","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/UthusOAG23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.628"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/UthusOAG23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.628","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有的多语言模型（如 mT5）在处理长文本（如长文档摘要、跨语言长文本 QA）时，受限于标准自注意力的二次复杂度，效率低下且效果不佳。","importance":"架构与多语言扩展。将长上下文建模能力与多语言预训练结合，填补了开源领域缺乏高效多语言长文本 Seq2Seq 模型的空白。","technical_approach":"沿用 LongT5 的架构（局部注意力+瞬态全局注意力以降低复杂度），使用 mT5 的多语言数据集（mC4）进行预训练，并引入 UL2 的混合去噪目标（Mixture-of-Denoisers）以增强生成和理解能力。","experiments":"在多语言摘要和 QA 任务上进行评估，mLongT5 的性能显著优于现有的多语言模型如 mBART 和 M-BERT。","authors_note":"Google Research / Joshua Ainslie (LongT5 作者)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing multilingual models (like mT5) are inefficient and perform poorly on long-context tasks due to the quadratic complexity of standard self-attention.","importance":"Architecture and Multilingual Scaling. Combines long-context modeling capabilities with multilingual pre-training, filling the gap in open-source efficient multilingual long-text Seq2Seq models.","technical_approach":"Builds upon the LongT5 architecture (local + transient global attention to reduce complexity), pre-trains on mT5's multilingual dataset (mC4), and incorporates UL2's Mixture-of-Denoisers objective to enhance both generation and understanding.","experiments":"Evaluated on multilingual summarization and QA tasks, mLongT5 significantly outperforms existing multilingual models such as mBART and M-BERT.","authors_note":"Google Research / Joshua Ainslie"},"tags":["long-context","multilingual","t5","pretraining"],"notable_authors":["Joshua Ainslie"]},{"id":"VuHHS23","title":"Koala: An Index for Quantifying Overlaps with Pre-training Corpora","authors":["Thuy-Trang Vu","Xuanli He","Gholamreza Haffari","Ehsan Shareghi"],"institutions":["Monash University"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/VuHHS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-DEMO.7"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/VuHHS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-demo.7","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"随着预训练语料规模的爆炸，下游评估数据集极易被包含在训练集中（数据污染），导致评估结果虚高，且难以快速检测。","importance":"数据质量与评估。提供了一种轻量级、可扩展的污染检测工具，使得在不访问完整闭源训练数据的情况下，也能对数据重叠度进行量化估计。","technical_approach":"提出 Koala 索引。基于精确匹配或 n-gram 集合操作，构建一个高效的搜索结构，用于快速计算目标评估集与已知大规模预训练语料库之间的重叠比例。","experiments":"在多个公开基准上量化了污染程度，证明了该工具在检测数据泄漏方面的高效性和实用性。","authors_note":"Monash University"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"With the explosion of pre-training corpus sizes, downstream evaluation datasets are easily included in the training set (data contamination), leading to inflated results that are hard to detect.","importance":"Data Quality and Evaluation. Provides a lightweight, scalable contamination detection tool, enabling quantitative estimation of data overlap even without access to the full closed-source training data.","technical_approach":"Proposes the Koala index. Builds an efficient search structure based on exact match or n-gram set operations to quickly calculate the overlap ratio between a target evaluation set and known large-scale pre-training corpora.","experiments":"Quantified the degree of contamination across multiple public benchmarks, demonstrating the tool's efficiency and practicality in detecting data leakage.","authors_note":"Monash University"},"tags":["pretrain-data","contamination","data-quality"]},{"id":"2305.07922","title":"CodeT5+: Open Code Large Language Models for Code Understanding and Generation","authors":["Yue Wang","Hung Le","Akhilesh Gotmare","Nghi D. Q. Bui","Junnan Li","Steven C. H. Hoi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$16","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.07922","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WangLGB0H23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.68"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WangLGB0H23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.68","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是代码 LLM 在架构和预训练目标上的双重僵化：很多模型要么是 encoder-only、要么是 decoder-only，少数统一 encoder-decoder 方案又往往在部分任务上折中明显；同时预训练目标通常过少，导致某些代码任务和训练信号错配。","importance":"它的重要性是方法与系统结合的基础模型工作。对 pretrain 的启示很明确：代码模型不应被单一架构和单一目标绑定，模块化架构配合任务相关预训练目标，可能比‘一个网络吃所有任务’更划算。这对后续多模态统一建模也有参考意义，因为问题本质上也是不同接口、不同目标如何共享底座。","technical_approach":"CodeT5+ 的核心是一个灵活的开放代码大模型框架，而不是单一固定形态模型。摘要明确指出它针对不同下游任务支持不同架构使用方式，并扩展预训练目标集合，使理解和生成任务都能得到更相关的训练信号。与此前把 encoder-decoder 当作统一万能解不同，CodeT5+ 更强调按任务选择合适接口，同时保持共享能力。这样设计有效的原因是：代码理解、补全、生成、编辑对信息流方向和条件依赖不同，强行统一常会让一部分任务吃亏。代价则是训练和部署路径更复杂。","experiments":"从摘要可确认，作者比较的对象是既有 code LLM 在架构灵活性和预训练目标覆盖上的限制，并提出 CodeT5+ 作为改进。摘要没有提供参数规模、预训练 token 数、数据组成、基线模型和具体提升数字，因此这里不能补数字。可以合理总结的是，实验应覆盖 code understanding 与 code generation 两大类任务，因为这正是论文设计的出发点。","authors_note":"作者包含 Junnan Li。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets two structural limitations in code LLMs: rigid architectures and narrow pretraining objectives. Existing models are often tied to encoder-only or decoder-only setups, while unified encoder-decoder systems can still be suboptimal for a subset of tasks. At the same time, limited objective design creates a mismatch between training signals and downstream code workloads.","importance":"This is a foundation-model contribution at the method-plus-system level. The pretraining lesson is straightforward: code models should not be locked into a single architecture or objective family. A modular setup with task-relevant pretraining signals may be more effective than forcing one monolithic interface to serve all code tasks equally.","technical_approach":"CodeT5+ is presented as a flexible open code LLM framework rather than a single rigid model form. The abstract indicates two core moves: support different architectural usage modes for different downstream tasks, and broaden the set of pretraining objectives so code understanding and code generation are both trained with more relevant signals. The design departs from the idea that one unified encoder-decoder pathway is always sufficient. The motivation is practical: code understanding, completion, generation, and editing have different information-flow requirements, so hard unification can leave performance on the table.","experiments":"The abstract tells us the paper positions CodeT5+ against prior code LLMs limited by architectural inflexibility and sparse objective design. It does not state parameter counts, pretraining corpus size, baselines, or exact gains, so those should be omitted here. What is safe to infer is that the evaluation likely spans both code understanding and code generation tasks, because those are exactly the two pressure points highlighted in the method.","authors_note":"Junnan Li is among the authors."},"tags":["code-llm","pretrain","encoder-decoder"],"notable_authors":["Junnan Li"]},{"id":"2310.11976","title":"InfoDiffusion: Information Entropy Aware Diffusion Process for Non-Autoregressive Text Generation","authors":["Renzhi Wang","Jing Li","Piji Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Diffusion models have garnered considerable interest in the field of text generation. Several studies have explored text diffusion models with different structures and applied them to various tasks, including named entity recognition and summarization. However, there exists a notable disparity between the\"easy-first\"text generation process of current diffusion models and the\"keyword-first\"natural text generation process of humans, which has received limited attention. To bridge this gap, we propose InfoDiffusion, a non-autoregressive text diffusion model. Our approach introduces a\"keyinfo-first\"generation strategy and incorporates a noise schedule based on the amount of text information. In addition, InfoDiffusion combines self-conditioning with a newly proposed partially noising model structure. Experimental results show that InfoDiffusion outperforms the baseline model in terms of generation quality and diversity, as well as exhibiting higher sampling efficiency.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.11976","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WangLL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.919"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WangLL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.919","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是文本 diffusion 生成顺序与人类写作过程不匹配的问题。现有很多非自回归文本 diffusion 模型偏向 easy-first 逐步恢复，而人类往往先确定关键信息再补细节；这种顺序错配会让模型在关键信息保真和生成效率之间都吃亏。","importance":"它的重要性在于对 diffusion LM 的生成范式提出了一个更细的修正：不仅要讨论离散扩散能不能做文本，还要讨论‘先生成什么’。对新型语言建模研究的启发是，噪声调度不只是优化细节，它实际上决定了模型学到的内容优先级，因此直接影响非 AR 文本生成的质量与可控性。","technical_approach":"InfoDiffusion 的核心是一个 information-entropy aware 的离散文本 diffusion 过程。它提出 keyinfo-first 生成策略，并按文本信息量设计噪声调度；同时结合 self-conditioning 和一种新的 partially noising 训练策略。和已有 easy-first diffusion 文本生成相比，关键区别是把 token 的恢复顺序从‘噪声容易去掉的先恢复’改成‘信息承载更关键的先恢复’。这样设计的直觉很强：如果关键词先定下来，后续句法和补充内容会更容易收敛。代价是关键性估计本身若不稳，可能带来错误放大。","experiments":"从摘要可确认，论文是一个 non-autoregressive text diffusion model，并明确比较了 easy-first 与其 keyinfo-first 路线。摘要没有给出数据集、模型规模、baseline、指标和提升数字，因此不能填具体结果。可以明确记录的实验要点是：作者不只改 noise schedule，还把 self-conditioning 与部分加噪训练联动起来，这通常意味着他们关注训练-采样一致性和迭代稳定性，而不是只做单点技巧替换。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a mismatch between how current text diffusion models generate and how informative text is typically composed. Many non-autoregressive diffusion models follow an easy-first recovery pattern, whereas humans often settle key information first and fill in details later. That mismatch can hurt both content fidelity and generation behavior.","importance":"This matters because it refines the discussion around diffusion LMs beyond the usual AR-vs-NAR framing. The paper argues that the denoising schedule is not just an optimization detail; it shapes which information the model commits to early, and that directly affects generation quality and controllability.","technical_approach":"InfoDiffusion proposes an information-entropy-aware diffusion process for text. Its main idea is a keyinfo-first generation strategy, paired with a noise schedule based on the amount of textual information. It also combines self-conditioning with a newly proposed partially noising training strategy. The key departure from prior easy-first diffusion methods is that recovery order is driven by information importance rather than denoising convenience. The motivation is simple: if high-value content is established early, the remaining syntactic and local content decisions become easier. The risk is that unstable importance estimation can propagate mistakes early in the denoising chain.","experiments":"The abstract confirms that this is a non-autoregressive text diffusion model and that it explicitly contrasts keyinfo-first generation with the common easy-first pattern. It does not specify datasets, model size, baselines, or exact gains, so those should be omitted. One useful experimental signal is that the paper changes not only the schedule but also the training setup through self-conditioning and partial noising, suggesting attention to train-sample consistency rather than a single isolated tweak.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion-lm","non-ar","text-generation"]},{"id":"WeiZLZGG023","title":"Outlier Suppression+: Accurate quantization of large language models by equivalent and effective shifting and scaling","authors":["Xiuying Wei","Yunchen Zhang","Yuhang Li","Xiangguo Zhang","Ruihao Gong","Jinyang Guo","Xianglong Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WeiZLZGG023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.102"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WeiZLZGG023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.102","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["quantization","llm","outlier","post-training-quantization"]},{"id":"WilfAMLMSNM23","title":"Difference-Masking: Choosing What to Mask in Continued Pretraining","authors":["Alex Wilf","Syeda Nahida Akter","Leena Mathur","Paul Pu Liang","Sheryl Mathew","Mengrou Shou","Eric Nyberg","Louis-Philippe Morency"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WilfAMLMSNM23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.881"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WilfAMLMSNM23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.881","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["continued-pretraining","masking-strategy","data-selection"]},{"id":"WuFZWZ023","title":"TLM: Token-Level Masking for Transformers","authors":["Yangjun Wu","Kebin Fang","Dongxiang Zhang","Han Wang","Hao Zhang","Gang Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WuFZWZ023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.871"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WuFZWZ023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.871","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["token-masking","transformer","training-objective"]},{"id":"2209.10052","title":"Adapting Pretrained Text-to-Text Models for Long Text Sequences","authors":["Wenhan Xiong","Anchit Gupta","Shubham Toshniwal","Yashar Mehdad","Scott Yih"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$17","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.10052","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/XiongGTMY23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.370"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/XiongGTMY23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.370","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["long-context","attention-modification","continual-pretraining"]},{"id":"2310.07911","title":"Pit One Against Many: Leveraging Attention-head Embeddings for Parameter-efficient Multi-head Attention","authors":["Huiyin Xue","Nikolaos Aletras"],"institutions":["University of Sheffield"],"abstract":"Scaling pre-trained language models has resulted in large performance gains in various natural language processing tasks but comes with a large cost in memory requirements. Inspired by the position embeddings in transformers, we aim to simplify and reduce the memory footprint of the multi-head attention (MHA) mechanism. We propose an alternative module that uses only a single shared projection matrix and multiple head embeddings (MHE), i.e. one per head. We empirically demonstrate that our MHE attention is substantially more memory efficient compared to alternative attention mechanisms while achieving high predictive performance retention ratio to vanilla MHA on several downstream tasks. MHE attention only requires a negligible fraction of additional parameters ($3nd$, where $n$ is the number of attention heads and $d$ the size of the head embeddings) compared to a single-head attention, while MHA requires $(3n^2-3n)d^2-3nd$ additional parameters.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.07911","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/XueA23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.695"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/XueA23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.695","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Multi-Head Attention (MHA) 的参数量随 head 数线性增长，每个 head 都有独立的 Q/K/V 投影矩阵，这在大模型中占据显著内存。问题是能否用更少的参数实现接近 MHA 的效果。","importance":"方法级贡献，属于注意力机制的参数效率优化。与 MQA (Multi-Query Attention) / GQA (Grouped-Query Attention) 是同一赛道的不同思路。对 pretrain 研究的启示：用 head embedding 替代独立投影矩阵是一种极端压缩方案，额外参数仅 3nd（n 为 head 数，d 为维度），但需要验证在大规模预训练中是否保持性能。","technical_approach":"核心思路受位置编码启发：所有 head 共享一个投影矩阵，每个 head 仅通过一个小的 head embedding 来区分。这样 Q/K/V 的参数从 O(n·d²) 降到 O(d²+n·d)。与 MQA 的区别在于 MQA 共享 K/V 但保留独立 Q，而 MHE 更激进地共享所有投影，仅靠 embedding 区分 head。trade-off 是表达能力可能下降。","experiments":"在多个下游任务上评估，MHE 注意力在大幅减少参数的同时保持了较高的性能保留率（相对 vanilla MHA）。具体数值未在摘要中给出。关键观察是额外参数量极小（3nd），但性能保留率需要在更大规模模型上验证。","authors_note":"Huiyin Xue, Nikolaos Aletras，来自 University of Sheffield。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"MHA parameters scale linearly with head count due to independent Q/K/V projections per head, consuming significant memory. The question is whether near-MHA performance can be achieved with far fewer parameters.","importance":"Method-level contribution in attention parameter efficiency, in the same space as MQA/GQA but with a more aggressive compression approach. For pretrain research: the idea of replacing per-head projections with shared projection + head embeddings is an extreme compression point worth testing at scale.","technical_approach":"Inspired by position embeddings: all heads share a single projection matrix, differentiated only by small per-head embeddings (MHE). This reduces Q/K/V parameters from O(n·d²) to O(d²+n·d). More aggressive than MQA (which shares K/V only)—MHE shares everything and relies solely on embeddings for head specialization. The trade-off is potential expressiveness loss.","experiments":"Evaluated on several downstream tasks. MHE attention achieves high performance retention relative to vanilla MHA with substantially fewer parameters (only 3nd additional parameters). Specific numbers not in the abstract. Scalability to large-scale pretraining remains to be validated.","authors_note":"Huiyin Xue, Nikolaos Aletras, University of Sheffield."},"tags":["attention-optimization","multi-head-attention","parameter-efficiency","architecture"]},{"id":"YangS0R23","title":"Bootstrapping Small &amp; High Performance Language Models with Unmasking-Removal Training Policy","authors":["Yahan Yang","Elior Sulem","Insup Lee","Dan Roth"],"institutions":["University of Pennsylvania"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YangS0R23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.30"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YangS0R23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.30","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"如何训练小而高性能的语言模型。提出一种 unmasking-removal 训练策略来 bootstrap 小模型的能力。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：小模型的训练策略可能需要与大模型不同的课程设计。如果 unmasking-removal 能有效提升小模型性能，这对资源受限场景下的预训练有实际价值。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失，无法提供详细技术描述。根据标题推断：训练过程中逐步 unmask 并移除已学会的内容，形成一种课程学习策略，让小模型更高效地利用训练数据。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法提供实验细节。","authors_note":"Dan Roth（University of Pennsylvania / Amazon，NLP 领域资深研究者，ACL Fellow）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to train small yet high-performing language models, using an unmasking-removal training policy to bootstrap small model capabilities.","importance":"Method-level contribution. Pretrain relevance: small models may need different curriculum designs than large ones. If unmasking-removal effectively boosts small model performance, it has practical value for resource-constrained pretraining.","technical_approach":"Abstract unavailable. Based on the title: a curriculum-like training strategy that progressively unmasks and removes learned content, enabling small models to use training data more efficiently.","experiments":"Abstract unavailable; no experimental details can be provided.","authors_note":"Dan Roth (University of Pennsylvania / Amazon, senior NLP researcher, ACL Fellow)."},"tags":["masked-lm","training-dynamics","small-model","objective"],"notable_authors":["Dan Roth"]},{"id":"2305.14947","title":"How Predictable Are Large Language Model Capabilities? A Case Study on BIG-bench","authors":["Qinyuan Ye","Harvey Yiyun Fu","Xiang Ren","Robin Jia"],"institutions":["USC"],"abstract":"$18","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14947","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YeFRJ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.503"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YeFRJ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.503","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"探究大语言模型的能力是否可预测：能否仅根据模型家族、参数量、任务类型和 few-shot 数量等元数据，在不实际运行评估的情况下准确预测其在特定任务上的表现。","importance":"Scaling Law/评测级。将 Scaling Law 的预测范围从宏观的 Loss 扩展到了具体的下游任务指标，证明了模型能力（即使是看似涌现的能力）在多维度配置下存在高度可学习的模式。","technical_approach":"将性能预测转化为一个机器学习问题。利用 BIG-bench 上的历史实验记录作为训练数据，训练一个基于 MLP 的预测器，输入实验配置元数据，输出预测的性能分数。","experiments":"在 BIG-bench 实验记录的随机训练-测试划分上，MLP 预测器实现了超过 95% 的 R^2 分数，证明了 LLM 能力的高度可预测性。","authors_note":"Xiang Ren, Robin Jia (USC)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Investigates whether LLM capabilities are predictable: can we accurately forecast performance on specific tasks based solely on metadata (model family, parameters, task, few-shot count) without running the actual evaluation?","importance":"Scaling Law/Evaluation level. It extends the scope of Scaling Laws from macroscopic loss to specific downstream task metrics, proving that model capabilities (even seemingly emergent ones) follow highly learnable patterns across configuration dimensions.","technical_approach":"Frames performance prediction as a machine learning problem. Trains an MLP-based predictor using historical experiment records from BIG-bench, mapping configuration metadata to performance scores.","experiments":"On a random train-test split of BIG-bench records, the MLP predictor achieves an R^2 score greater than 95%, demonstrating the high predictability of LLM capabilities.","authors_note":"Xiang Ren, Robin Jia (USC)"},"tags":["scaling-law","capability-prediction","big-bench","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Xiang Ren","Robin Jia"]},{"id":"YuW0B23","title":"TRAMS: Training-free Memory Selection for Long-range Language Modeling","authors":["Haofei Yu","Cunxiang Wang","Yue Zhang","Wei Bi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YuW0B23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.331"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YuW0B23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.331","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注长程语言建模中的记忆选择问题：当外部记忆或长历史太大时，如何在不重新训练模型的前提下挑出最有用的上下文。这个问题重要，是因为很多长上下文方案的瓶颈不是“能不能存下”，而是“给模型看什么最值”。","importance":"从标题看，这是系统/推理效率方向的工作，但对 pretrain 有启发，因为它触及长上下文建模的核心接口：训练好的 LM 是否需要显式记忆筛选器，以及这个筛选器能否 training-free。若成立，它意味着部分长程能力问题可以在推理层修补，而不必全部回到昂贵的长序列预训练。","technical_approach":"仅从标题可确认，TRAMS 提出的是一种 training-free 的 memory selection 方法，用于 long-range language modeling，而不是通过额外微调学习检索器。设计意图应是利用现有模型信号或启发式在推理时挑选相关记忆，从而减少噪声历史对预测的干扰；但具体打分机制、插入位置和复杂度权衡，当前信息不足。","experiments":"摘要未提供，因此无法确认使用了哪些长程建模基准、上下文长度、baseline、指标和数字结果。可确定的只是，实验应比较 training-free 记忆选择与无选择或训练式选择在长程建模表现与开销上的差异。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies memory selection for long-range language modeling: when the available history or external memory is large, how can we choose the most useful pieces without retraining the model. This matters because many long-context failures are not just storage problems; they are relevance-selection problems.","importance":"This looks like a systems/inference contribution, but it is relevant to pretraining because it probes a key interface in long-context modeling: how much of the problem can be fixed at inference time, and whether explicit memory selection must be learned. If a training-free selector works well, it reduces pressure on expensive long-sequence pretraining.","technical_approach":"From the title, TRAMS is a training-free method for selecting memory in long-range language modeling rather than a learned retriever trained with additional supervision. The likely mechanism is to use model-derived signals or heuristics to rank candidate memory chunks at inference time, but the exact scoring method and insertion point are not available from the provided information.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so datasets, context lengths, baselines, and numerical gains cannot be reported safely. The likely empirical comparison is between training-free memory selection, no selection, and possibly learned selection methods under long-range LM settings.","authors_note":""},"tags":["long-context","memory","inference","training-free"],"notable_authors":["Haofei Yu","Cunxiang Wang","Yue Zhang","Wei Bi"]},{"id":"ZhangCSCZ23","title":"Revisiting Block-based Quantisation: What is Important for Sub-8-bit LLM Inference?","authors":["Cheng Zhang","Jianyi Cheng","Ilia Shumailov","George A. Constantinides","Yiren Zhao"],"institutions":["Imperial College London","University of Cambridge"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhangCSCZ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.617"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhangCSCZ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.617","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在 sub-8-bit 场景下系统梳理 block-based 量化的设计空间，回答\"LLM 推理量化到底哪些因子真正重要\"。此前工作各自挑选 block size、scaling、数值格式，结论难以互相比较，6-bit 以下究竟什么组合可用并不清楚。","importance":"方法级/系统级贡献。为 LLM 低比特推理量化提供一个可复用的设计坐标系，对 pretrain 研究者判断\"训完后能压到几 bit、代价在哪\"有直接参考价值。","technical_approach":"把 block-based 量化拆成三个正交维度——block 粒度（per-tensor/channel/group/sub-channel）、数值格式（INT、FP、log 等）、scaling factor 的精度与共享策略——做系统性组合实验。重点考察这些维度在 8/6/4-bit 下对精度的边际贡献，而不是提一个新 kernel。","experiments":"在多个 LLM 上以 PTQ 形式扫描上述设计空间，识别哪些因子在 6-bit 以下变成主导。具体数字未在给定信息中体现。","authors_note":"Imperial College London 与 Ilia Shumailov（以模型安全/量化研究闻名）合作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Systematically chart the design space of block-based quantisation for sub-8-bit LLM inference. Prior work each picks its own block size, scaling and number format, so it has been unclear which knobs actually matter once you push below 6 bits.","importance":"A method/systems contribution that gives pretraining practitioners a reusable map of 'how low can I push a trained LLM and what costs which bit'.","technical_approach":"Decomposes block-based quantisation into three orthogonal axes—block granularity (per-tensor/channel/group/sub-channel), numeric format (INT, FP, log, etc.), and scaling-factor precision/sharing—then runs combinatorial PTQ sweeps. The point is not a new kernel but an apples-to-apples factor study, especially where each factor starts to dominate below 6 bits.","experiments":"PTQ sweeps over several LLMs across the design grid, isolating which axes carry the accuracy at 8/6/4 bits. Concrete numbers not available from the given info.","authors_note":"Imperial College London, with Ilia Shumailov (known for ML security and quantisation work)."},"tags":["quantization","inference","low-bit"],"notable_authors":["Ilia Shumailov"]},{"id":"ZhangGZ023","title":"Scaling Law for Document Neural Machine Translation","authors":["Zhuocheng Zhang","Shuhao Gu","Min Zhang","Yang Feng"],"institutions":["Institute of Computing Technology, CAS","University of Chinese Academy of Sciences"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhangGZ023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.556"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhangGZ023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.556","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"给文档级神经机器翻译（Doc-NMT）写一个 scaling law：模型大小、数据量、上下文长度三者如何共同决定 loss。句级 NMT 的 scaling 已被反复验证，但引入跨句上下文后，增加的长程依赖是否遵循同类规律，此前没有清楚答案。","importance":"方法级观察，对做长上下文 pretrain 的人尤其有用——回答了\"加长 context 到底给 loss 带来多少确定性收益\"这个一直偏经验的问题，并给出一个可外推的公式形式。","technical_approach":"在 Doc-NMT 上扫参数量 N、数据量 D、上下文长度 L 三维网格，拟合 Chinchilla 风格的幂律并新增上下文长度项。核心发现是 L 以独立的幂律项进入 loss，而不是与 N、D 耦合，意味着\"给定算力，最优的 (N, D, L) 可以近似独立决定\"。","experiments":"Transformer 系列 Doc-NMT 模型（覆盖数千万到数亿量级）在多语向上拟合；曲线外推与实际测量吻合良好。作者据此给出在给定 compute budget 下推荐的 L。","authors_note":"中科院计算所 冯洋组（Yang Feng，机器翻译方向）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Derive a scaling law for document-level NMT covering model size, data size and context length jointly. Sentence-level NMT scaling is well-studied, but whether adding cross-sentence context follows the same law was unclear.","importance":"A concrete, transferable observation for long-context pretraining: it pins down how much loss reduction each extra token of context actually buys, turning what was mostly folklore into an extrapolable formula.","technical_approach":"Sweeps N (params), D (data) and L (context length) on Doc-NMT and fits a Chinchilla-style power law extended with an L term. Key finding: L contributes a largely independent power-law term rather than coupling with N or D, so optimal (N, D, L) can be chosen near-independently under a compute budget.","experiments":"Transformer Doc-NMT across tens-of-millions to hundreds-of-millions of parameters on multiple language pairs; extrapolations match measurements. The fitted law yields recommended L for a given compute budget.","authors_note":"ICT, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Yang Feng's group (MT)."},"tags":["scaling-law","nmt","document"],"notable_authors":["Yang Feng"]},{"id":"ZhangLB23","title":"Video-LLaMA: An Instruction-tuned Audio-Visual Language Model for Video Understanding","authors":["Hang Zhang","Xin Li","Lidong Bing"],"institutions":["DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhangLB23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-DEMO.49"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhangLB23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-demo.49","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"把 LLM 扩展到同时理解视频帧和音频的对话模型，并且能做指令跟随。此前大多数 video-LLM 只接视觉一条模态，音频要么丢掉要么另接 ASR，缺少端到端的音视频+语言联合建模。","importance":"多模态 pretrain 范式级工作（在 2023 年的位置）。代表了\"冻结大模型 + 轻量跨模态桥接 + 指令微调\"这一当时的主流配方如何扩展到视频场景，对理解 native multimodal 之前的过渡形态有价值。","technical_approach":"双分支 Q-Former 架构：视觉分支用 ViT + image Q-Former + video Q-Former 聚合时序；音频分支用 ImageBind 作为 audio encoder 再接 audio Q-Former。两条 Q-Former 输出对齐到 LLaMA 的 embedding 空间。两阶段训练：先在大规模 image/video-text 做表示对齐，再用 video-instruction 数据做指令微调。LLM 主体冻结，只训桥接层。","experiments":"在多项视频 QA / 对话评测（如 MSRVTT-QA、MSVD-QA、ActivityNet-QA 及作者整理的对话样例）上与 Video-ChatGPT、VideoChat 等同期方法比较，具备音频理解能力是主要差异点。具体数字未给出。","authors_note":"阿里达摩院，Lidong Bing 团队（多语言/多模态 LLM）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Extend LLMs to jointly understand video frames and audio in a conversational, instruction-following setting. Most prior video-LLMs take only visual input and either drop audio or bolt on ASR, lacking end-to-end audio-visual-language modelling.","importance":"A representative multimodal pretraining recipe (as of 2023): frozen LLM + lightweight cross-modal bridges + instruction tuning, now extended to video+audio. Useful as a reference point for understanding the transition toward native multimodal models.","technical_approach":"Two-branch Q-Former design. Vision branch: ViT → image Q-Former → video Q-Former for temporal aggregation. Audio branch: ImageBind encoder → audio Q-Former. Both project into LLaMA's embedding space. Two-stage training: large-scale image/video–text alignment, then video-instruction tuning. LLM backbone stays frozen; only the bridges are trained.","experiments":"Evaluated on video QA / dialogue benchmarks (MSRVTT-QA, MSVD-QA, ActivityNet-QA, plus curated conversation cases) against contemporaries like Video-ChatGPT and VideoChat. The audio-understanding capability is the main differentiator. Specific numbers not available here.","authors_note":"DAMO Academy, Alibaba, Lidong Bing's group (multilingual / multimodal LLMs)."},"tags":["video-llm","audio-visual","instruction-tuning"],"notable_authors":["Lidong Bing"]},{"id":"2303.08117","title":"Do Transformers Parse while Predicting the Masked Word?","authors":["Haoyu Zhao","Abhishek Panigrahi","Rong Ge","Sanjeev Arora"],"institutions":["Princeton University","Duke University"],"abstract":"$19","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08117","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhaoP0A23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.1029"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhaoP0A23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.1029","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"BERT/RoBERTa 的 embedding 里能探测出句法树，但业内一直有争论：模型是真的在做 parse，还是只学到了某种弱相关的统计信号？作者想给这件事一个更严格的回答。","importance":"机制分析贡献，偏理论。对 pretrain 研究者是难得的正面构造性证据：MLM 目标本身在 PCFG 生成数据上就能迫使 transformer 学出近似 inside-outside 这样的 parsing 算法，解释了为什么 probing 能探出句法。","technical_approach":"在 PCFG 生成的合成数据上分析。先构造性地给出一个可实现的 transformer（参数数量、头数、维度都 realistic）可以近似执行 inside-outside 算法、完成 parsing 与 masked word prediction；再从理论上论证：在 PCFG 数据上最小化 MLM loss 会偏向于学到这种 parsing-like 计算，而不是其他等价但不做 parsing 的解。","experiments":"混合理论 + 小规模实验。合成 PCFG 数据上训练 BERT/RoBERTa 规模的模型，用 probing 验证模型确实编码了接近 ground-truth 的句法结构，并与理论构造的 attention 模式对比。","authors_note":"Princeton + Duke，Sanjeev Arora、Rong Ge，理论派做 LM 机制分析的代表团队。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Probing shows BERT/RoBERTa encode parse trees, but it has been unclear whether models actually parse or just exploit weakly correlated statistics. The authors aim for a rigorous answer.","importance":"A mechanistic, largely theoretical contribution. It gives constructive evidence that MLM training on PCFG-generated data pushes transformers toward approximate inside-outside-like parsing, explaining why probing succeeds.","technical_approach":"Work within a PCFG-generated setting. First constructively exhibit a transformer with realistic depth/width/heads that approximates the inside-outside algorithm and performs both parsing and masked-word prediction; then argue theoretically that minimizing MLM loss on PCFG data favors such parsing-like solutions.","experiments":"Theory plus small-scale experiments: BERT/RoBERTa-sized models trained on synthetic PCFG data; probing confirms learned structure close to ground truth and matches the constructed attention patterns.","authors_note":"Princeton and Duke; Sanjeev Arora and Rong Ge, prominent in theoretical analysis of LM mechanisms."},"tags":["mlm","interpretability","syntax"],"notable_authors":["Sanjeev Arora","Rong Ge"]},{"id":"2310.12936","title":"A Predictive Factor Analysis of Social Biases and Task-Performance in Pretrained Masked Language Models","authors":["Yi Zhou","José Camacho-Collados","Danushka Bollegala"],"institutions":["Cardiff University","University of Liverpool"],"abstract":"Various types of social biases have been reported with pretrained Masked Language Models (MLMs) in prior work. However, multiple underlying factors are associated with an MLM such as its model size, size of the training data, training objectives, the domain from which pretraining data is sampled, tokenization, and languages present in the pretrained corpora, to name a few. It remains unclear as to which of those factors influence social biases that are learned by MLMs. To study the relationship between model factors and the social biases learned by an MLM, as well as the downstream task performance of the model, we conduct a comprehensive study over 39 pretrained MLMs covering different model sizes, training objectives, tokenization methods, training data domains and languages. Our results shed light on important factors often neglected in prior literature, such as tokenization or model objectives.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.12936","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhouCB23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.683"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhouCB23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.683","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"MLM 的社会偏见被大量报道，但到底是模型大小、数据量、训练目标、tokenizer、语料领域、语言哪一个因素在推动偏见？先前工作只单独看一两个因素，没法解耦。","importance":"实证/分析贡献，对 pretrain 数据和目标设计有直接参考价值。结论可以指导：如果想在 pretrain 阶段控偏，哪些杠杆真有效、哪些是伪相关。","technical_approach":"做一次大规模因素分析：收集 39 个预训练 MLM，在模型大小、训练数据量、训练目标、tokenizer、语料领域、语言等维度上差异化分布，然后用统计/回归方法去拟合每个因素对社会偏见指标和下游任务表现的贡献。","experiments":"39 个 MLM 横向对比。典型发现：模型大小与偏见并非单调关系；训练数据的 domain 和语言分布影响显著；下游性能与偏见之间存在一定 trade-off 但并非必然。具体系数见原文。","authors_note":"Cardiff University + University of Liverpool，Danushka Bollegala。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"MLMs are known to encode social biases, but prior work rarely disentangles which factor—size, data volume, objective, tokenizer, domain, language—actually drives bias.","importance":"An empirical/analytical contribution directly useful for pretraining design: it tells you which knobs actually move bias and which are red herrings.","technical_approach":"Large factor analysis: collects 39 pretrained MLMs varying in size, data volume, objective, tokenizer, domain, and language, then uses statistical/regression analysis to attribute bias metrics and downstream performance to each factor.","experiments":"Cross-sectional study over 39 MLMs. Key findings include non-monotonic size–bias relationships, substantial effects from training-data domain and language composition, and a partial but not inevitable trade-off between downstream task performance and bias.","authors_note":"Cardiff University and University of Liverpool; Danushka Bollegala."},"tags":["mlm","bias","pretraining-factors"],"notable_authors":["Danushka Bollegala","José Camacho-Collados"]},{"id":"2311.04420","title":"Data Factors for Better Compositional Generalization","authors":["Xiang Zhou","Yichen Jiang","Mohit Bansal"],"institutions":["UNC Chapel Hill"],"abstract":"$1a","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.04420","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhouJB23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.898"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhouJB23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.898","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"组合泛化 benchmark（SCAN/COGS）上从头训练的 transformer 惨败，但在大数据上训练的 SOTA 模型却表现不错。这个矛盾怎么解释？","importance":"实证贡献，对 pretrain 数据设计有直接启发：复杂、多样、合适难度的训练数据本身就是组合泛化能力的来源，而不需要新架构或新损失。这和 Chinchilla/数据质量研究线形成呼应。","technical_approach":"控制变量地在合成数据上训练 transformer，系统扫 dataset scale、pattern complexity、example difficulty 等因素，观察组合泛化能力的变化。关键是把'数据复杂度'拆成可操作的轴，看哪一轴真的推动泛化。","experiments":"在 SCAN、COGS 及其变体上，发现：单纯加数据量不够，pattern 多样性和难度分布才是核心；合适配比下 transformer 从头训也能显著提升组合泛化。给出了两条关键轴和对应的 scaling 行为。","authors_note":"UNC Chapel Hill，Mohit Bansal 组。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Transformers trained from scratch fail badly on SCAN/COGS-style compositional generalization, yet large-data SOTA models do fine. How to reconcile?","importance":"Empirical contribution directly relevant to pretraining data design: complexity and diversity of training data, not new architectures or losses, seem to drive compositional generalization. Ties in with Chinchilla-era data-quality work.","technical_approach":"Controlled experiments on synthetic data, sweeping dataset scale, pattern complexity, and example difficulty while training vanilla transformers, to isolate which 'complexity axis' actually moves compositional generalization.","experiments":"On SCAN, COGS and variants, raw dataset size alone is insufficient; pattern diversity and example difficulty distribution matter most. With the right mix, from-scratch transformers achieve substantially better compositional generalization. The paper identifies two key axes and their scaling behavior.","authors_note":"UNC Chapel Hill; Mohit Bansal's group."},"tags":["compositional-generalization","data-scaling","pretraining"],"notable_authors":["Mohit Bansal"]},{"id":"2310.17570","title":"DiffS2UT: A Semantic Preserving Diffusion Model for Textless Direct Speech-to-Speech Translation","authors":["Yongxin Zhu","Zhujin Gao","Xinyuan Zhou","Zhongyi Ye","Linli Xu"],"institutions":["University of Science and Technology of China"],"abstract":"$1b","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.17570","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhuGZYX23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.709"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhuGZYX23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.709","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"无文本直接语音到语音翻译（S2ST）中，离散语音单元序列远长于对应文本，给自回归模型带来效率瓶颈；同时，直接在离散语音单元上做离散扩散会忽略连续空间结构，导致生成质量下降。问题的根源是语音的低信息密度和离散化后丢失的连续语义关系。","importance":"方法级贡献。将扩散模型引入无文本 S2ST 是一个有意义的尝试，核心启示在于：对低信息密度的离散 token 序列（语音单元），在连续嵌入空间做扩散再映射回离散空间，比直接做离散扩散更合理。这对语音 LM 和离散 token 扩散建模都有参考价值。","technical_approach":"DiffS2UT 的关键设计是在连续语音表示空间执行扩散前向过程，而非在离散 token 空间。具体做法：先将离散语音单元映射到连续嵌入，在该空间施加高斯扩散噪声并训练去噪网络，生成时从噪声恢复连续表示再映射回离散单元。这样做保留了语音单元之间的语义距离关系（相近的单元在嵌入空间也相近），避免了离散扩散中所有 token 等距的问题。与纯离散扩散（如 D3PM）相比，连续空间扩散能利用梯度信息更平滑地生成；与自回归方法相比，扩散模型可并行生成，缓解长序列的效率问题。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体数字。从方法描述推断，实验应在标准 S2ST benchmark 上与自回归 S2UT 和离散扩散 baseline 对比，重点指标包括翻译质量（BLEU 或语义相似度）和生成效率。需要查看全文确认具体数据。","authors_note":"作者来自中国科学技术大学（Linli Xu 组）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Textless direct speech-to-speech translation suffers from very long discrete speech unit sequences (due to low information density of speech), which burdens autoregressive models. Naively applying discrete diffusion to these units ignores the continuous semantic structure and degrades quality.","importance":"A method-level contribution showing that running diffusion in continuous embedding space rather than discrete token space is more effective for speech unit generation. The insight—that discrete tokens with latent continuous structure benefit from continuous-space diffusion—is relevant to speech LM and discrete diffusion research more broadly.","technical_approach":"DiffS2UT maps discrete speech units into continuous embeddings, applies Gaussian diffusion in that space, and trains a denoiser to recover the clean embeddings, which are then mapped back to discrete units. This preserves semantic proximity between units (unlike discrete diffusion where all tokens are equidistant) and enables parallel generation. The key design choice is continuous-space diffusion over discrete tokens, trading the simplicity of discrete diffusion for better gradient-based denoising and semantic preservation.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide specific numbers. Experiments presumably compare against autoregressive S2UT and discrete diffusion baselines on standard S2ST benchmarks. Full paper needed for concrete metrics.","authors_note":"Authors from University of Science and Technology of China (Linli Xu's group)."},"tags":["diffusion","speech-to-speech","discrete-units","speech-lm"]},{"id":"2310.13439","title":"Self-Consistency of Large Language Models under Ambiguity","authors":["Henning Bartsch","Ole Jorgensen","Domenic Rosati","Jason Hoelscher-Obermaier","Jacob Pfau"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1c","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.13439","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/blackboxnlp/BartschJRHP23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.BLACKBOXNLP-1.7"},"_dblp_key":"conf/blackboxnlp/BartschJRHP23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.blackboxnlp-1.7","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解决大模型在面对存在多个正确答案的模糊问题（under-specification）时，输出一致性难以评估的问题。以往研究多关注确定性任务，忽略了模型在模糊场景下的内在偏好稳定性。","importance":"评估级贡献。揭示了模型在模糊场景下的一致性并非简单的随机采样方差，而是随模型能力提升而增强的系统性特征，这对设计可靠的解码策略和理解模型内在偏好有直接启发。","technical_approach":"构建模糊整数序列补全任务作为测试床。通过在不同上下文（如改变说话人、改变序列长度等鲁棒性检查）下多次采样，统计模型选择特定有效答案的频率，以此量化模型在模糊条件下的自我一致性。","experiments":"在 OpenAI 模型系列上测试，发现平均一致性在 67% 到 82% 之间，远高于随机基线。模型规模越大、能力越强，一致性越高，且对 prompt 扰动具有较强的鲁棒性。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addresses the difficulty of evaluating LLM output consistency in under-specified scenarios where multiple answers are correct, a setting largely ignored by prior work focusing on deterministic tasks.","importance":"Evaluation contribution. It reveals that consistency under ambiguity is not merely random sampling variance but a systematic feature that scales with model capability, offering insights for reliable decoding and understanding intrinsic model preferences.","technical_approach":"Constructs an ambiguous integer sequence completion task as a testbed. The method quantifies self-consistency by measuring the frequency of the model selecting specific valid answers across multiple samples under various contexts (e.g., changing speakers or sequence lengths).","experiments":"Tested on the OpenAI model suite. Average consistency ranges from 67% to 82%, significantly higher than a random baseline. Consistency increases with model capability and remains robust against prompt perturbations."},"tags":["consistency","llm-eval","ambiguity"]},{"id":"2310.12611","title":"Identifying and Adapting Transformer-Components Responsible for Gender Bias in an English Language Model","authors":["Abhijith Chintam","Rahel Beloch","Willem H. Zuidema","Michael Hanna","Oskar van der Wal"],"institutions":["University of Amsterdam"],"abstract":"$1d","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.12611","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/blackboxnlp/ChintamBZHW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.BLACKBOXNLP-1.29"},"_dblp_key":"conf/blackboxnlp/ChintamBZHW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.blackboxnlp-1.29","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解决如何在不损害通用语言建模能力的前提下，精准定位并消除 LLM 内部导致性别偏见的特定组件。","importance":"方法级贡献。打通了“机制可解释性定位”到“参数高效微调（PEFT）去偏”的闭环，证明了基于因果分析找到的极少数神经元可以直接用于下游干预。","technical_approach":"对比了因果中介分析、自动化回路发现和新提出的 DiffMask+（基于可微掩码的定位方法）。利用这些方法找到负责偏见的组件集合，然后仅对这些特定组件进行参数高效微调以缓解偏见。","experiments":"在 GPT-2 Small 上实验。发现不同定位方法找到的组件有显著重叠；仅微调这些极少量的组件就能有效缓解性别偏见，同时保持整体语言建模性能不下降。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addresses how to precisely identify and mitigate specific LLM components responsible for gender bias without degrading general language modeling performance.","importance":"Methodological contribution. It bridges the gap between mechanistic interpretability and parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) for debiasing, proving that causally identified neurons can be directly targeted for intervention.","technical_approach":"Compares causal mediation analysis, automated circuit discovery, and a novel method called DiffMask+ (based on differential masking). It uses these to find bias-inducing components and applies PEFT exclusively to them.","experiments":"Tested on GPT-2 Small. Found significant overlap in components identified by different methods. Fine-tuning only this tiny subset of components effectively mitigated gender bias while preserving general LM performance."},"tags":["bias","causal-mediation","interpretability"],"notable_authors":["Willem H. Zuidema"]},{"id":"2306.07384","title":"Probing Quantifier Comprehension in Large Language Models: Another Example of Inverse Scaling","authors":["Akshat Gupta"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1e","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.07384","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/blackboxnlp/Gupta23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.BLACKBOXNLP-1.4"},"_dblp_key":"conf/blackboxnlp/Gupta23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.blackboxnlp-1.4","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"纠正先前研究中关于“LLM 对量词（few/most）理解存在逆向缩放（inverse scaling）”的结论，指出这是评估方法不当导致的假象。","importance":"评估与范式级贡献。直接推翻了领域内的一个反常识 prior，强调了 prompt 设计和测试指标在探测 LLM 真实能力时的决定性作用，避免预训练研究被错误指标误导。","technical_approach":"弃用之前可能引入混淆变量的测试格式，设计了新的量词理解探测方法，严格隔离 few-type 和 most-type 量词的语义差异进行对比测试。","experiments":"重新测试后发现，随着模型参数规模增加，LLM 区分这两类量词的能力实际上是正向提升的（尽管绝对性能仍不完美），从而彻底否定了逆向缩放的说法。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Corrects previous claims that LLMs exhibit inverse scaling in understanding quantifiers (few/most), arguing that this was an artifact of inappropriate evaluation methodology.","importance":"Evaluation and paradigm contribution. It directly refutes a counter-intuitive prior in the field, emphasizing the critical role of prompt design and metrics in probing true LLM capabilities, preventing pretraining research from being misled.","technical_approach":"Discards previous test formats that introduced confounding variables. Designs new probing methods that strictly isolate the semantic differences between few-type and most-type quantifiers for comparative testing.","experiments":"Retesting shows that as model size increases, the ability of LLMs to differentiate between these two types of quantifiers actually improves positively (though absolute performance is not perfect), thoroughly debunking the inverse scaling claim."},"tags":["inverse-scaling","probing","scaling"]},{"id":"2309.05605","title":"Memory Injections: Correcting Multi-Hop Reasoning Failures During Inference in Transformer-Based Language Models","authors":["Mansi Sakarvadia","Aswathy Ajith","Arham Khan","Daniel Grzenda","Nathaniel Hudson","André Bauer","Kyle Chard","Ian T. Foster"],"institutions":["University of Chicago","Argonne National Laboratory"],"abstract":"Answering multi-hop reasoning questions requires retrieving and synthesizing information from diverse sources. Large Language Models (LLMs) struggle to perform such reasoning consistently. Here we propose an approach to pinpoint and rectify multi-hop reasoning failures through targeted memory injections on LLM attention heads. First, we analyze the per-layer activations of GPT-2 models in response to single and multi-hop prompts. We then propose a mechanism that allows users to inject pertinent prompt-specific information, which we refer to as “memories,” at critical LLM locations during inference. By thus enabling the LLM to incorporate additional relevant information during inference, we enhance the quality of multi-hop prompt completions. We show empirically that a simple, efficient, and targeted memory injection into a key attention layer can often increase the probability of the desired next token in multi-hop tasks, by up to 424%.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.05605","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/blackboxnlp/SakarvadiaAKGHBCF23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.BLACKBOXNLP-1.26"},"_dblp_key":"conf/blackboxnlp/SakarvadiaAKGHBCF23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.blackboxnlp-1.26","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解决 LLM 在多跳推理时因无法有效整合分散信息而失败的问题，提出一种无需微调、在推理期直接干预注意力头的方法。","importance":"方法级贡献。展示了在 inference 阶段通过激活干预（Activation Intervention）来增强推理能力的可行性，与近期流行的基于内部状态干预的对齐/增强方法思路一致。","technical_approach":"首先分析 GPT-2 在单跳和多跳 prompt 下的逐层激活差异，定位关键注意力头。然后在推理时，将特定 prompt 相关的外部信息（称为“memories”）直接注入到这些关键位置的激活中。","experiments":"在 GPT-2 模型上证明，这种简单、高效的免微调（tuning-free）注入机制能够显著提升多跳推理 prompt 的完成质量。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addresses LLM failures in multi-hop reasoning caused by the inability to effectively synthesize scattered information, proposing a tuning-free method to intervene directly in attention heads during inference.","importance":"Methodological contribution. Demonstrates the feasibility of enhancing reasoning capabilities through activation intervention during inference, aligning with recent trends in internal state intervention for alignment and augmentation.","technical_approach":"First analyzes layer-wise activation differences in GPT-2 under single- and multi-hop prompts to locate critical attention heads. Then, during inference, injects prompt-specific external information ('memories') directly into the activations at these critical locations.","experiments":"Proved on GPT-2 models that this simple, efficient, tuning-free injection mechanism significantly improves the completion quality of multi-hop reasoning prompts."},"tags":["multi-hop","interpretability","attention"]},{"id":"SinghMARG23","title":"Explaining Data Patterns in Natural Language with Language Models","authors":["Chandan Singh","John X. Morris","Jyoti Aneja","Alexander M. Rush","Jianfeng Gao"],"institutions":["Microsoft Research","Cornell University"],"abstract":"Large language models (LLMs) have displayed an impressive ability to harness natural language to perform complex tasks. We explore whether we can leverage this ability to find and explain patterns in data. Specifically, given a pre-trained LLM and data examples, we apply interpretable autoprompting (iPrompt) to generate a natural language string explaining the data. iPrompt iteratively generates explanations with an LLM and reranks them based on their performance when used as a prompt. Experiments on a wide range of datasets, from synthetic mathematics to natural language understanding, show that iPrompt can yield meaningful insights by accurately finding dataset explanations that are human-interpretable. Moreover, iPrompt is reasonably efficient, as it does not require access to model gradients and works with relatively small models (e.g. ~6 billion parameters rather than >=100 billion). Finally, experiments with scientific datasets show the potential for iPrompt to aid in scientific discovery.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/blackboxnlp/SinghMARG23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.BLACKBOXNLP-1.3"},"_dblp_key":"conf/blackboxnlp/SinghMARG23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.blackboxnlp-1.3","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解决如何利用 LLM 自动发现并用自然语言解释数据集中的潜在模式，且无需访问模型梯度。","importance":"方法级贡献。探索了 LLM 作为“数据分析师/模式提取器”的潜力，提供了一种可解释的 prompt 优化范式，对数据清洗和指令合成有启发。","technical_approach":"提出 iPrompt（可解释自动提示）。给定数据样本，利用 LLM 迭代生成自然语言解释，并根据这些解释作为 prompt 在数据上的预测性能进行重新排序（reranking）。","experiments":"在合成数学和 NLU 数据集上测试。iPrompt 能够准确找到人类可理解的数据集解释，且由于是黑盒操作，计算效率较高。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addresses how to leverage LLMs to automatically discover and explain latent patterns in datasets using natural language, without requiring access to model gradients.","importance":"Methodological contribution. Explores the potential of LLMs as 'data analysts/pattern extractors', providing an interpretable prompt optimization paradigm that inspires data cleaning and instruction synthesis.","technical_approach":"Proposes iPrompt (interpretable autoprompting). Given data examples, it uses an LLM to iteratively generate natural language explanations, which are then reranked based on their predictive performance when used as prompts on the data.","experiments":"Tested on synthetic math and NLU datasets. iPrompt accurately finds human-interpretable dataset explanations and is computationally efficient due to its black-box nature."},"tags":["explanation","prompting","interpretability"],"notable_authors":["Alexander M. Rush","Jianfeng Gao"]},{"id":"2310.12751","title":"Character-Level Chinese Backpack Language Models","authors":["Hao Sun","John Hewitt"],"institutions":["Stanford University"],"abstract":"$1f","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.12751","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/blackboxnlp/SunH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.BLACKBOXNLP-1.8"},"_dblp_key":"conf/blackboxnlp/SunH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.blackboxnlp-1.8","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"验证 Backpack 架构（将预测分解为 token 语义组件加权和）是否适用于缺乏自然词边界、高度依赖组合语义的中文（字符级）。","importance":"架构与范式级贡献。证明了非标准 Transformer 架构在非英语、非 subword 体系下的通用性，为构建原生支持细粒度可解释性的多语言基座模型提供了新路径。","technical_approach":"摒弃 subword 分词，直接在字符级（character-tokenized）中文数据上训练 Backpack 模型。利用其架构特性，观察字符级意义如何对数加性（log-additively）组合成词义。","experiments":"训练了 134M 参数的中文 Backpack 模型，性能与 104M 的 Transformer 相当。在 SimLex 风格的评估中，证明其学到了丰富的字符级语义，且能通过组合形成准确的词义。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Validates whether the Backpack architecture (which decomposes predictions into weighted sums of token sense components) is applicable to Chinese, a language lacking natural word boundaries and highly reliant on compositional semantics at the character level.","importance":"Architectural and paradigm contribution. Proves the universality of non-standard Transformer architectures in non-English, non-subword systems, offering a new path for building multilingual foundation models with native fine-grained interpretability.","technical_approach":"Discards subword tokenization and trains a Backpack model directly on character-tokenized Chinese data. Leverages its architectural properties to observe how character-level meanings log-additively compose into word meanings.","experiments":"Trained a 134M parameter Chinese Backpack model, achieving performance comparable to a 104M Transformer. In SimLex-style evaluations, it demonstrated learning rich character-level semantics that compose to form accurate word meanings."},"tags":["architecture","tokenizer","chinese","interpretability"],"notable_authors":["John Hewitt"]},{"id":"2310.06201","title":"Compressing Context to Enhance Inference Efficiency of Large Language Models","authors":["Yucheng Li","Bo Dong","Frank Guerin","Chenghua Lin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$20","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06201","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/0001DGL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.391"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/0001DGL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.391","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是长上下文推理时一个很实际的问题：很多输入里有大量冗余 token，导致推理时显存和时延随上下文长度急剧上升，而模型真正需要的信息只占一部分。过去主流解法要么扩 context window、要么做检索或摘要，但前者成本高，后者会改写内容并引入生成误差，因此“只删冗余、不重写语义”的压缩路径值得单独做。","importance":"这是系统与推理效率层面的工作，不直接改预训练，但对 serving 和长上下文训练接口有启发。它说明在很多长文档场景里，瓶颈不只是模型上下文长度不够，而是原始输入组织方式低效；如果简单、可控的上下文剪枝就能保留效果，就能降低推理成本，也能为后续训练时的 curriculum、packing、检索前过滤提供思路。","technical_approach":"作者提出 Selective Context，核心是识别并裁剪输入中的冗余片段，让上下文更紧凑。方法的关键取舍是不做抽象式摘要，而是偏向选择性保留原文中高价值部分，这样可以减少语义漂移和 hallucination 风险；与纯检索相比，它面向整段输入压缩，而不是外部召回。该设计有效的前提是很多任务的关键信息具有局部稀疏性，冗长文档中存在大块对当前问题无贡献的内容；边界是当答案依赖广域分布信息或全局文风时，激进裁剪可能伤性能。","experiments":"摘要给出的事实是：作者在 arXiv 论文、新闻文章和长对话三类长文本源上，评测了摘要、问答和回复生成，Selective Context 在提升推理效率的同时保持了任务效果。摘要未包含模型名称、压缩率、延迟下降比例、token 节省量或具体性能变化，因此不能填具体数字。能确认的经验结论是，这不是只在单一任务上成立的技巧，而是在多种长上下文来源上都有可迁移性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical long-context problem: many inputs contain substantial redundancy, so inference cost grows with context length even when only a small fraction of tokens matters. Existing solutions often extend the context window or summarize the input, but the former is expensive and the latter can rewrite or distort information.","importance":"This is a systems-oriented contribution with relevance to serving and long-context training pipelines. The main lesson is that long-context inefficiency is often an input-efficiency problem, not only a model-capacity problem. If selective pruning preserves quality, it can reduce inference cost and inform upstream data packing or retrieval filtering.","technical_approach":"The proposed method, Selective Context, identifies and removes redundant parts of the input to make the context more compact. The key design choice is to prefer selective retention over abstractive rewriting, which keeps the original wording and reduces semantic drift. Compared with retrieval, it compresses the provided context itself rather than fetching external evidence. This should work when relevant information is sparse, but the trade-off is obvious: tasks requiring broad aggregation or global discourse cues may be less tolerant to pruning.","experiments":"From the abstract, the method is tested on arXiv papers, news articles, and long conversations, across summarization, QA, and response generation, and improves inference efficiency while maintaining task performance. The abstract does not report model names, compression ratios, latency gains, or quality deltas, so precise metrics cannot be stated safely. The reliable takeaway is cross-domain applicability rather than a single benchmark win.","authors_note":""},"tags":["context-compression","long-context","inference"],"notable_authors":["Yucheng Li","Bo Dong","Frank Guerin","Chenghua Lin"]},{"id":"2310.05317","title":"Task-Adaptive Tokenization: Enhancing Long-Form Text Generation Efficacy in Mental Health and Beyond","authors":["Siyang Liu","Naihao Deng","Sahand Sabour","Yilin Jia","Minlie Huang","Rada Mihalcea"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We propose task-adaptive tokenization as a way to adapt the generation pipeline to the specifics of a downstream task and enhance long-form generation in mental health. Inspired by insights from cognitive science, our task-adaptive tokenizer samples variable segmentations from multiple outcomes, with sampling probabilities optimized based on task-specific data. We introduce a strategy for building a specialized vocabulary and introduce a vocabulary merging protocol that allows for the integration of task-specific tokens into the pre-trained model's tokenization step. Through extensive experiments on psychological question-answering tasks in both Chinese and English, we find that our task-adaptive tokenization approach brings a significant improvement in generation performance while using up to 60% fewer tokens. Preliminary experiments point to promising results when using our tokenization approach with very large language models.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.05317","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/0003DSJHM23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.944"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/0003DSJHM23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.944","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是一个常被忽略但很实际的问题：预训练模型的通用 tokenizer 未必适合特定长文本生成任务，尤其在心理健康问答这类高频术语、固定表达和长句并存的场景里，低效切分会拉长序列、稀释语义片段，并放大生成难度。过去通常默认 tokenizer 固定不动，只在模型或数据上做适配，因此 tokenization 这一层的任务不匹配常被忽略。","importance":"这项工作的意义在于把 tokenizer 重新拉回训练/生成效率讨论中，属于数据表示层面的改进。对 pretrain 研究的启示很直接：tokenizer 不是中性的前处理，而是决定序列长度、语义边界和训练难度的核心部件；即便不重训大模型，针对任务做轻量 tokenization 适配也可能带来可观收益。这一点对长上下文、跨语言和领域适配都值得重视。","technical_approach":"作者提出 task-adaptive tokenization。核心做法是让 tokenizer 从多个可变切分结果中采样，并根据任务数据优化这些切分的采样概率；同时构建任务专用词表，并通过 vocabulary merging protocol 将这些 task-specific tokens 接入已有预训练模型的 tokenization 流程。这个设计不是完全推倒重练 tokenizer，而是在兼容原模型词表的前提下做局部增补和分词重配。这样做有效，因为它同时解决了两件事：一是把任务中高价值片段压成更短、更稳定的 token 序列；二是避免彻底更换词表导致 embedding 和模型输入接口失配。边界是，这种收益依赖任务分布足够集中；若任务非常开放，专用词表可能泛化有限。","experiments":"摘要提供了几个关键事实：论文在中英文心理健康问答的长文本生成任务上做实验；task-adaptive tokenization 能显著提升生成表现，同时使用更少 token。摘要没有给出模型规模、数据规模、主 baseline、自动指标或 token 降幅，因此不能补数字。可以确认的价值点是，该方法同时改善质量和长度效率，而不是单纯通过增加词表获得更大模型容量。","authors_note":"作者中 Minlie Huang 是较知名作者，长期从事中文对话、生成模型与大模型研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses an often overlooked mismatch: a generic pretrained tokenizer may be suboptimal for specific long-form generation tasks. In domains like mental-health QA, poor segmentation can inflate sequence length, break meaningful phrases, and make generation harder than it needs to be.","importance":"This is a representation-level contribution with clear pretraining relevance. The main lesson is that tokenization is not a neutral preprocessing step; it shapes sequence length, semantic boundaries, and optimization difficulty. Even without retraining a foundation model from scratch, task-adaptive tokenization can change downstream generation quality and efficiency.","technical_approach":"The proposed task-adaptive tokenizer samples from multiple possible segmentations and optimizes the sampling probabilities using task-specific data. It also builds a specialized vocabulary and introduces a vocabulary-merging protocol so new task-specific tokens can be integrated into the pretrained model’s tokenization pipeline. The important design choice is compatibility: instead of replacing the original tokenizer entirely, the method augments it in a way that preserves the existing model interface while shortening high-value domain phrases. This should work best when the target domain has repeated lexical patterns; the benefit may shrink for broader, more open-ended distributions.","experiments":"The abstract gives two reliable findings: experiments are run on Chinese and English psychological QA long-form generation, and task-adaptive tokenization yields significant quality improvements while using fewer tokens. The provided text does not include model sizes, dataset sizes, baseline tokenizers, metric values, or token reduction rates, so no exact numbers should be added. The practical takeaway is joint quality-and-efficiency gain from adapting the tokenizer rather than the core model alone.","authors_note":"Minlie Huang is a notable author known for Chinese dialogue systems, generative models, and large language model research."},"tags":["tokenizer","task-adaptive","long-form-generation"],"notable_authors":["Siyang Liu","Naihao Deng","Sahand Sabour","Yilin Jia","Minlie Huang"]},{"id":"2305.15025","title":"Dior-CVAE: Pre-trained Language Models and Diffusion Priors for Variational Dialog Generation","authors":["Tianyu Yang","Thy Thy Tran","Iryna Gurevych"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$21","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.15025","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/0004TG23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.313"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/0004TG23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.313","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion-prior","vae","dialogue-generation","latent-variable"]},{"id":"2311.17376","title":"CESAR: Automatic Induction of Compositional Instructions for Multi-turn Dialogs","authors":["Taha Aksu","Devamanyu Hazarika","Shikib Mehri","Seokhwan Kim","Dilek Hakkani-Tur","Yang Liu","Mahdi Namazifar"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$22","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.17376","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/AksuHMKHLN23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.717"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/AksuHMKHLN23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.717","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["instruction-tuning","data-synthesis","multi-turn-dialogue"]},{"id":"AzariaM23","title":"The Internal State of an LLM Knows When It&apos;s Lying","authors":["Amos Azaria","Tom M. Mitchell"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/AzariaM23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.68"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/AzariaM23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.68","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["interpretability","truthfulness","hallucination","internal-representations"]},{"id":"2310.05424","title":"Fast and Robust Early-Exiting Framework for Autoregressive Language Models with Synchronized Parallel Decoding","authors":["Sangmin Bae","Jongwoo Ko","Hwanjun Song","Se-Young Yun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$23","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.05424","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/BaeKSY23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.362"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/BaeKSY23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.362","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["early-exiting","inference-efficiency","parallel-decoding"]},{"id":"2212.09146","title":"Can Retriever-Augmented Language Models Reason? The Blame Game Between the Retriever and the Language Model","authors":["Parishad BehnamGhader","Santiago Miret","Siva Reddy"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$24","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.09146","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/BehnamGhaderMR23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.1036"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/BehnamGhaderMR23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.1036","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["rag","reasoning","retrieval-augmented-generation","analysis"]},{"id":"2310.12640","title":"Non-Autoregressive Sentence Ordering","authors":["Yi Bin","Wenhao Shi","Bin Ji","Jipeng Zhang","Yujuan Ding","Yang Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$25","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.12640","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/BinSJZDY23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.277"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/BinSJZDY23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.277","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["non-autoregressive","decoding","ordering","objective"]},{"id":"2310.15355","title":"Why LLMs Hallucinate, and How to Get (Evidential) Closure: Perceptual, Intensional, and Extensional Learning for Faithful Natural Language Generation","authors":["Adam Bouyamourn"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$26","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.15355","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/Bouyamourn23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.192"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/Bouyamourn23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.192","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["hallucination","faithfulness","objective","generation"]},{"id":"BrownGKTK23","title":"Understanding the Inner-workings of Language Models Through Representation Dissimilarity","authors":["Davis Brown","Charles Godfrey","Nicholas Konz","Jonathan H. Tu","Henry Kvinge"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/BrownGKTK23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.403"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/BrownGKTK23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.403","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["interpretability","representations","analysis","lm"]},{"id":"2305.03668","title":"A Suite of Generative Tasks for Multi-Level Multimodal Webpage Understanding","authors":["Andrea Burns","Krishna Srinivasan","Joshua Ainslie","Geoff Brown","Bryan A. Plummer","Kate Saenko","Jianmo Ni","Mandy Guo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$27","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.03668","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/BurnsSABPSNG23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.119"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/BurnsSABPSNG23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.119","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["multimodal","web-data","benchmark","generative"]},{"id":"2305.12580","title":"A Framework for Bidirectional Decoding: Case Study in Morphological Inflection","authors":["Marc E. Canby","Julia Hockenmaier"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$28","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.12580","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/CanbyH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.297"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/CanbyH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.297","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["bidirectional-decoding","non-autoregressive","sequence-modeling","decoding"]},{"id":"2311.18805","title":"Unnatural Error Correction: GPT-4 Can Almost Perfectly Handle Unnatural Scrambled Text","authors":["Qi Cao","Takeshi Kojima","Yutaka Matsuo","Yusuke Iwasawa"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$29","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.18805","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/CaoKMI23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.550"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/CaoKMI23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.550","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["robustness","character-level","evaluation","generalization"]},{"id":"ChenCZ023","title":"How Many Demonstrations Do You Need for In-context Learning?","authors":["Jiuhai Chen","Lichang Chen","Chen Zhu","Tianyi Zhou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ChenCZ023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.745"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ChenCZ023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.745","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在 In-Context Learning (ICL) 中，demonstration 数量与模型性能之间的 Scaling 关系尚不明确，且长上下文带来的收益递减点未知。","importance":"机制分析。为长上下文模型的推理期 Context 利用效率提供了指导，打破了“示例越多越好”的简单假设，对如何分配 KV-cache 资源有实际意义。","technical_approach":"实证 Scaling 分析。在多个 NLP 任务上系统性增加 k-shot 数量，绘制性能曲线，寻找不同模型规模和任务复杂度下的性能饱和点与衰减点。","experiments":"发现 ICL 性能在达到特定数量的 demonstration 后趋于饱和，甚至因上下文过长引入噪声而下降；最佳 shot 数量高度依赖于具体任务和模型能力。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The scaling relationship between the number of demonstrations and model performance in In-Context Learning (ICL) is unclear, as is the point of diminishing returns for long contexts.","importance":"Mechanism analysis. Provides guidance on context utilization efficiency during inference for long-context models, challenging the 'more is better' assumption and informing KV-cache resource allocation.","technical_approach":"Empirical scaling analysis. Systematically increases the number of k-shots across various NLP tasks to plot performance curves, identifying saturation and degradation points across different model sizes and task complexities.","experiments":"Reveals that ICL performance saturates after a certain number of demonstrations and may even degrade due to noise in overly long contexts; the optimal number of shots is highly dependent on the task and model capability."},"tags":["icl","demonstrations"],"notable_authors":["Tianyi Zhou"]},{"id":"ChenSHJ23","title":"Personalized Distillation: Empowering Open-Sourced LLMs with Adaptive Learning for Code Generation","authors":["Hailin Chen","Amrita Saha","Steven Chu-Hong Hoi","Shafiq Joty"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ChenSHJ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.417"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ChenSHJ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.417","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"传统的代码生成知识蒸馏采用静态数据集，忽略了学生模型在不同学习阶段的特定短板，导致蒸馏效率和上限受限。","importance":"方法级贡献。引入了“自适应/个性化”的 Post-train 数据合成范式，将静态蒸馏升级为动态的难例挖掘（Hard-example mining），提升了小模型的代码能力上限。","technical_approach":"个性化自适应蒸馏。教师模型不再盲目生成数据，而是根据学生模型的当前预测结果和错误分布，动态生成或选择针对性的训练样本，实施定制化的能力补齐。","experiments":"在开源基座模型上进行代码蒸馏，相比传统静态蒸馏方法，在代码生成基准（如 HumanEval）上取得了更快的收敛速度和更高的最终通过率。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Traditional knowledge distillation for code generation uses static datasets, ignoring the specific weaknesses of the student model at different learning stages, which limits distillation efficiency and performance ceiling.","importance":"Method-level contribution. Introduces an 'adaptive/personalized' post-training data synthesis paradigm, upgrading static distillation to dynamic hard-example mining, thereby raising the coding capabilities of smaller models.","technical_approach":"Personalized adaptive distillation. The teacher model dynamically generates or selects targeted training samples based on the student model's current predictions and error distribution, implementing customized capability patching.","experiments":"Applied to open-source base models for code distillation. Compared to static distillation, it achieves faster convergence and higher pass rates on code generation benchmarks like HumanEval."},"tags":["distillation","code","sft"],"notable_authors":["Steven Chu-Hong Hoi","Shafiq Joty"]},{"id":"ChenWQWYZ23","title":"MCC-KD: Multi-CoT Consistent Knowledge Distillation","authors":["Hongzhan Chen","Siyue Wu","Xiaojun Quan","Rui Wang","Ming Yan","Ji Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ChenWQWYZ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.454"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ChenWQWYZ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.454","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"传统的 Chain-of-Thought (CoT) 蒸馏容易导致学生模型只学会了推理的表面格式（格式模仿），而缺乏内在的逻辑一致性和鲁棒性。","importance":"方法级贡献。提升了复杂推理能力蒸馏的质量，强调了“多路径一致性”作为高质量 Post-train 训练信号的重要性，对构建小参数推理模型有直接价值。","technical_approach":"多路径一致性知识蒸馏（MCC-KD）。让教师模型对同一问题生成多条不同的有效推理路径，在蒸馏损失函数中，不仅要求学生模型拟合最终答案，还强制其在多条推理轨迹间保持逻辑一致性约束。","experiments":"在数学推理（如 GSM8K）和常识推理数据集上，MCC-KD 训练出的学生模型相比标准单路径 CoT 蒸馏表现出更强的推理准确率和鲁棒性。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Traditional Chain-of-Thought (CoT) distillation often leads student models to merely mimic the surface format of reasoning without acquiring internal logical consistency and robustness.","importance":"Method-level contribution. Improves the quality of complex reasoning distillation, emphasizing 'multi-path consistency' as a high-quality post-training signal, which is highly valuable for building small-parameter reasoning models.","technical_approach":"Multi-CoT Consistent Knowledge Distillation (MCC-KD). The teacher model generates multiple diverse and valid reasoning paths for the same question. The distillation loss forces the student not only to fit the final answer but also to maintain logical consistency constraints across these multiple reasoning trajectories.","experiments":"On mathematical reasoning (e.g., GSM8K) and commonsense reasoning datasets, student models trained with MCC-KD exhibit higher reasoning accuracy and robustness compared to standard single-path CoT distillation."},"tags":["distillation","cot","reasoning"],"notable_authors":["Xiaojun Quan","Ming Yan"]},{"id":"ChenXHLXL0Z23","title":"Boosting Inference Efficiency: Unleashing the Power of Parameter-Shared Pre-trained Language Models","authors":["Weize Chen","Xiaoyue Xu","Xu Han","Yankai Lin","Ruobing Xie","Zhiyuan Liu","Maosong Sun","Jie Zhou"],"institutions":["Tsinghua University","Tencent"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ChenXHLXL0Z23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.738"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ChenXHLXL0Z23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.738","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"大模型推理时的显存占用（特别是权重加载）和访存带宽瓶颈严重限制了 Serving 效率和吞吐量。","importance":"架构/效率级贡献。在百亿参数时代重新审视了层间参数共享（类似 ALBERT）的价值，为打破 Memory Wall 提供了一种牺牲极少性能换取大幅显存优化的架构妥协方案。","technical_approach":"参数共享预训练语言模型。在预训练或微调阶段引入层间参数共享机制（如跨层复用 Transformer Block），使得模型在增加计算深度（层数）以保证表达能力的同时，不增加物理参数量，从而大幅降低推理时的显存占用和权重加载延迟。","experiments":"证明了参数共享模型在大幅降低显存占用和推理延迟的同时，能保持与同等深度非共享模型相当的下游任务性能。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Memory footprint (especially weight loading) and memory bandwidth bottlenecks during LLM inference severely limit serving efficiency and throughput.","importance":"Architecture/Efficiency contribution. Revisits the value of cross-layer parameter sharing (similar to ALBERT) in the era of tens of billions of parameters, offering an architectural compromise to break the Memory Wall with minimal performance loss.","technical_approach":"Parameter-Shared Pre-trained Language Models. Introduces cross-layer parameter sharing mechanisms (e.g., reusing Transformer blocks across layers) during pretraining or fine-tuning. This allows the model to increase computational depth for expressiveness without increasing physical parameter count, drastically reducing memory footprint and weight loading latency during inference.","experiments":"Demonstrates that parameter-shared models can maintain downstream task performance comparable to non-shared models of the same depth while significantly reducing memory usage and inference latency."},"tags":["parameter-sharing","inference","plm"],"notable_authors":["Xu Han","Yankai Lin","Ruobing Xie","Zhiyuan Liu","Maosong Sun"]},{"id":"ChenYKLWMXWX23","title":"TheoremQA: A Theorem-driven Question Answering Dataset","authors":["Wenhu Chen","Ming Yin","Max Ku","Pan Lu","Yixin Wan","Xueguang Ma","Jianyu Xu","Xinyi Wang","Tony Xia"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ChenYKLWMXWX23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.489"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ChenYKLWMXWX23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.489","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有的数学评测集（如 GSM8K）过于偏向初等代数，无法有效评估 LLM 在复杂科学定理应用上的深度逻辑推理（Latent Reasoning）能力。","importance":"数据/评估级贡献。提供了一个高质量、高难度的 STEM 推理 Benchmark，暴露了当前模型在深度逻辑推理上的短板，为下一代主攻 Reasoning 的预训练和 RLHF 提供了靶点。","technical_approach":"构建 TheoremQA 数据集。由人类专家标注，包含物理、数学、工程等领域的复杂问题，这些问题必须显式或隐式地应用特定科学定理才能求解，极大地增加了推理深度。","experiments":"评测了 GPT-4、Claude 及多种开源模型，发现即使是最先进的 SOTA 模型，在定理应用推理上的准确率也远低于人类专家水平，存在巨大的改进空间。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing math benchmarks (like GSM8K) are too biased towards elementary algebra and fail to effectively evaluate LLMs' deep latent reasoning capabilities in applying complex scientific theorems.","importance":"Data/Evaluation contribution. Provides a high-quality, high-difficulty STEM reasoning benchmark, exposing the shortcomings of current models in deep logical reasoning and offering a target for next-generation reasoning-focused pretraining and RLHF.","technical_approach":"Constructs the TheoremQA dataset. Annotated by human experts, it contains complex questions from physics, mathematics, and engineering that require the explicit or implicit application of specific scientific theorems to solve, drastically increasing the required reasoning depth.","experiments":"Evaluated GPT-4, Claude, and various open-source models. Results show that even the most advanced SOTA models fall far behind human expert levels in theorem-applied reasoning, indicating massive room for improvement."},"tags":["benchmark","reasoning","math"],"notable_authors":["Wenhu Chen","Pan Lu"]},{"id":"ChenZYM023","title":"On the Relation between Sensitivity and Accuracy in In-Context Learning","authors":["Yanda Chen","Chen Zhao","Zhou Yu","Kathleen R. McKeown","He He"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ChenZYM023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.12"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ChenZYM023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.12","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：in-context learning 里模型对示例扰动的敏感性，和最终准确率之间到底是什么关系。过去很多工作把 prompt sensitivity 当成 ICL 不稳定性的表征，但较少系统回答它是否只是坏现象，还是和高性能存在结构性联系。","importance":"这是机制分析类工作，不直接给新 pretrain 方法，但对理解 ICL 能力的来源有用。它的重要性在于：如果 sensitivity 和 accuracy 之间存在稳定关系，那么我们评估 prompt robustness、构造 few-shot benchmark、甚至解释大模型的 context use 都要改口径；不能只把低敏感性当成绝对好事。","technical_approach":"从题目看，作者系统分析 sensitivity 与 accuracy 的关系，而不是单点报告某个 prompt engineering 技巧。通常这类方法会对 demonstration 顺序、标签映射、样例替换等扰动做受控实验，再衡量性能变化和平均准确率的相关性。这个设计有效的原因是它把 ICL 表现拆成‘会不会用上下文’和‘对哪种上下文敏感’两个维度。边界在于，观察到相关性不等于给出因果机制，尤其当模型规模、任务难度和 calibration 混在一起时。","experiments":"给定材料没有摘要，因此无法可靠写出使用了哪些模型、任务集、指标和数字。可以确定的是论文聚焦 sensitivity-accuracy relation；如果正文完整，关键结果应包括不同模型族、不同 ICL 设置下两者是正相关、负相关还是分段关系，并辅以 prompt 扰动 ablation。但具体结论和幅度这里不能补写。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a basic but unresolved question in in-context learning: how model sensitivity to prompt perturbations relates to final accuracy. Prior work often treats sensitivity as a symptom of instability, but that does not tell us whether it is merely harmful or partly tied to the mechanism that enables ICL in the first place.","importance":"This is a mechanism paper rather than a new pretraining method, but it matters for how we interpret context use in LMs. If sensitivity and accuracy are systematically linked, then prompt robustness should not be evaluated in isolation, and some forms of sensitivity may reflect genuine use of demonstrations rather than simple brittleness.","technical_approach":"From the title, the contribution is a controlled analysis of the sensitivity-accuracy relationship. A typical design here is to perturb demonstration order, label mappings, or example selection, then measure both performance and variance under perturbations. That decomposition is useful because it separates whether the model uses context at all from whether it uses the right contextual cues. The limitation is that correlation alone does not establish a causal account, especially when model scale and task difficulty co-vary.","experiments":"No abstract details are provided, so there is no safe basis for listing model families, benchmarks, metrics, or numerical findings. The likely experimental core is a broad sweep over ICL settings and perturbation types, but the exact direction and magnitude of the relationship should be taken from the paper itself.","authors_note":""},"tags":["icl","sensitivity","analysis"],"notable_authors":["Yanda Chen","Chen Zhao","Zhou Yu","Kathleen R. McKeown","He He"]},{"id":"2310.13620","title":"Bridging Information-Theoretic and Geometric Compression in Language Models","authors":["Emily Cheng","Corentin Kervadec","Marco Baroni"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"For a language model (LM) to faithfully model human language, it must compress vast, potentially infinite information into relatively few dimensions. We propose analyzing compression in (pre-trained) LMs from two points of view: geometric and information-theoretic. We demonstrate that the two views are highly correlated, such that the intrinsic geometric dimension of linguistic data predicts their coding length under the LM. We then show that, in turn, high compression of a linguistic dataset predicts rapid adaptation to that dataset, confirming that being able to compress linguistic information is an important part of successful LM performance. As a practical byproduct of our analysis, we evaluate a battery of intrinsic dimension estimators for the first time on linguistic data, showing that only some encapsulate the relationship between information-theoretic compression, geometric compression, and ease-of-adaptation.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.13620","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ChengKB23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.762"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ChengKB23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.762","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心结论是：语言模型里的“压缩”可以同时从几何维度和信息论编码长度两种角度理解，而且二者高度相关。过去这两个视角通常分开讨论——一个看表示空间的内在维度，一个看模型给数据分配的负对数似然——作者想回答它们是不是在衡量同一件更底层的能力。","importance":"这是机制与表征层面的工作，价值在于把两个原本分裂的分析框架接起来。对 pretrain 研究的启示很直接：如果内在几何维度能预测 coding length，而 coding length 又预测适应速度，那么‘会压缩的数据更容易被模型快速吸收’就不只是直觉，而可能成为分析数据难度、继续预训练收益和 domain adaptation 难度的通用标尺。","technical_approach":"方法上它不是提出新 LM，而是做一套桥接分析：先在预训练 LM 上同时测 linguistic dataset 的几何内在维度和信息论压缩率，再看二者相关性；随后检验高压缩数据是否更易快速适配。关键设计有两点。第一，作者把 coding length 视作模型对数据结构利用程度的可观测量，而不是只看表面 perplexity。第二，他们系统比较了一组 intrinsic dimension estimator 在语言数据上的表现，试图找到对 NLP 更稳健的估计器。这样设计有效，因为语言分布高维、稀疏且强结构化，通用几何工具未必能直接迁移。边界在于，这类相关性分析更擅长解释趋势，不一定能说明具体训练机制。","experiments":"论文最重要的实验事实有三条。第一，语言数据的几何内在维度与在 LM 下的 coding length 高度相关，说明几何压缩和信息论压缩并非彼此独立。第二，压缩率高的数据集往往适应更快，支持“压缩能力是成功 LM 表现的一部分”。第三，作者首次在语言数据上系统评估多种 intrinsic dimension estimator，并指出其中有些估计器更可靠。给定摘要没有具体模型规模、数据规模和相关系数数字，因此不能补写数值；但从贡献看，重点是相关性强、趋势稳定，而不是刷新某个 benchmark。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The central claim is that compression in language models can be understood through two lenses—geometric intrinsic dimension and information-theoretic coding length—and that these two views are strongly aligned. These perspectives are usually studied separately, so the paper asks whether they are in fact measuring the same underlying capability of the model.","importance":"This is a mechanistic and representational contribution rather than a new training recipe. Its relevance to pretraining is that it turns a vague intuition into a usable analysis tool: if intrinsic dimension predicts coding length, and coding length predicts adaptation speed, then compressibility becomes a practical way to reason about dataset difficulty, continual pretraining benefit, and domain adaptation ease.","technical_approach":"The paper builds a bridge rather than a new LM. It measures both the intrinsic geometric dimension of linguistic datasets and their coding length under pretrained LMs, then studies the correlation between them. It further tests whether highly compressible datasets adapt faster. A useful design choice is to treat coding length as a model-based observable of how much structure the LM can exploit, instead of relying only on perplexity. Another key piece is the systematic evaluation of several intrinsic-dimension estimators on linguistic data, because off-the-shelf geometric estimators are not guaranteed to behave well in high-dimensional, highly structured language representations. The limitation is standard for this type of work: strong correlations explain trends, but they do not fully identify the causal training mechanism.","experiments":"The main empirical facts are clear from the abstract. First, geometric intrinsic dimension strongly correlates with coding length under the LM. Second, datasets that compress better tend to allow faster adaptation. Third, the paper benchmarks a set of intrinsic-dimension estimators on linguistic data and identifies estimators that are more suitable in this setting. The abstract does not provide model sizes, dataset counts, or correlation coefficients, so no numeric gains should be inferred.","authors_note":""},"tags":["representation","compression","geometry"],"notable_authors":["Emily Cheng","Corentin Kervadec","Marco Baroni"]},{"id":"2305.14788","title":"Adapting Language Models to Compress Contexts","authors":["Alexis Chevalier","Alexander Wettig","Anirudh Ajith","Danqi Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2a","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14788","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ChevalierWAC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.232"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ChevalierWAC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.232","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 Transformer 上下文窗口有限、长文处理成本过高的问题，而且它不满足于简单截断或检索拼接，而是希望把长历史压缩成模型可继续利用的内部状态。过去做长上下文通常要么直接扩窗，算力和显存代价线性到二次增长；要么外接摘要器，但摘要文本会丢信息且训练目标不一致。","importance":"这是一个很典型的 pretrain↔serving 接口工作，但方法本身也接近新的建模能力：把预训练 LM 适配成能“写工作记忆”的 AutoCompressor。它的重要性在于，若无监督地学到可复用的 summary vectors，就有机会把超长上下文变成软提示状态，而不是每次重读原文；这直接关系到长上下文预训练、memory 机制和推理成本优化。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把长文分段处理，并为每一段生成 compact summary vectors；之后模型在做语言建模时，把所有先前段的 summary vectors 当作 soft prompts 读入。它是对现成预训练 OPT 的适配，而不是从头设计新架构。关键机制有两个。第一，训练目标是无监督的下一词预测，因此 summary vector 被迫保留对未来 token 预测最有用的信息，而不是做人类可读摘要。第二，历史被压成固定数量向量，计算从‘重读全部 token’变成‘读少量记忆槽’，这就是它省成本的来源。它舍弃的是逐 token 精确访问能力，因此适合保留全局语义与主题，不一定擅长细粒度定位。","experiments":"实验上，作者在 OPT 模型上微调，最长训练序列到 30,720 tokens。核心结果有两类。第一，AutoCompressor 能利用长上下文改善 perplexity，说明 summary vectors 确实携带了对语言建模有用的历史信息。第二，在 in-context learning 评估里，它先压缩大量示例再作为软提示使用，表明这种记忆形式不只服务于 PPL，也能服务于 few-shot 条件化。摘要没有给出具体参数量、PPL 降幅或相对 baseline 数字，因此不能补写；但最值得关注的 ablation 通常会是 summary vector 数量、分段长度以及压缩比对性能的影响。","authors_note":"作者包含 Danqi Chen。若按作者阵容看，相关团队在检索增强、长上下文建模和高效 LM 使用上长期有积累。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical limitation of Transformer LMs: finite context windows make long-document processing expensive and fragile. Instead of simply extending the window or using textual summaries, it asks whether a pretrained LM can be adapted to write reusable internal memory states that preserve predictive information from long contexts.","importance":"This is highly relevant at the pretrain-serving boundary, but it also changes the modeling interface itself: the LM becomes an AutoCompressor that carries forward learned summary vectors rather than rereading raw tokens. That matters for long-context pretraining and memory-augmented modeling, because it offers a way to trade exact token access for cheaper persistent context.","technical_approach":"The method processes long documents in segments and produces compact summary vectors for each segment. During language modeling, summary vectors from all previous segments are fed back as soft prompts. This is an adaptation of pretrained OPT models, not a new model family from scratch. The design works because the objective remains unsupervised next-token prediction, so the summary vectors are optimized to retain whatever history is most useful for predicting future tokens, not to be human-readable. The compute win comes from replacing repeated access to many old tokens with access to a small fixed memory. The trade-off is clear: compressed memory should retain coarse predictive structure, but fine-grained retrieval of exact earlier details becomes harder.","experiments":"The paper fine-tunes OPT models on sequences up to 30,720 tokens. The main findings are that AutoCompressors use long contexts to improve perplexity, and that the compressed vectors also help in in-context learning when many demonstrations need to be packed into limited space. The abstract does not state parameter counts, baseline names, or numeric improvements, so those should not be invented. The most informative ablations are likely memory size, segment size, and compression ratio.","authors_note":"The author list includes Danqi Chen, whose group is well known for retrieval-augmented and efficient language modeling work."},"tags":["context-compression","long-context"],"notable_authors":["Alexis Chevalier","Alexander Wettig","Anirudh Ajith","Danqi Chen"]},{"id":"2305.03796","title":"Transformer Working Memory Enables Regular Language Reasoning And Natural Language Length Extrapolation","authors":["Ta-Chung Chi","Ting-Han Fan","Alexander Rudnicky","Peter J. Ramadge"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Unlike recurrent models, conventional wisdom has it that Transformers cannot perfectly model regular languages. Inspired by the notion of working memory, we propose a new Transformer variant named RegularGPT. With its novel combination of Weight-Sharing, Adaptive-Depth, and Sliding-Dilated-Attention, RegularGPT constructs working memory along the depth dimension, thereby enabling efficient and successful modeling of regular languages such as PARITY. We further test RegularGPT on the task of natural language length extrapolation and surprisingly find that it rediscovers the local windowed attention effect deemed necessary in prior work for length extrapolation.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.03796","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ChiFRR23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.397"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ChiFRR23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.397","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：标准 Transformer 被普遍认为不能严格建模正则语言，也难做稳定的长度外推。过去的回避方式通常是引入 recurrence、外部状态机，或者接受在训练长度之外性能崩溃；作者想证明，Transformer 只要有合适的‘工作记忆’结构，未必做不到。","importance":"它的重要性在于对架构能力边界提出了直接修正。对 pretrain 研究来说，这不是在做纯理论题，而是在问：长度泛化和算法性模式学习，究竟是 Transformer 范式不行，还是现有深度/注意力组织方式不对。如果后者成立，那么很多长上下文和 reasoning 能力问题可以通过记忆组织来改，而不一定要彻底换范式。","technical_approach":"作者提出 RegularGPT，核心不是单一 trick，而是三件事的组合：Weight-Sharing、Adaptive-Depth、Sliding-Dilated-Attention。它们共同的作用是沿深度维构造 working memory，让网络在层间逐步传递和更新有限状态，而不是只在 token 维做一次性全局混合。Weight sharing 让不同深度像重复执行同一状态转移；adaptive depth 让不同输入复杂度用不同计算步数；sliding-dilated attention 则在局部窗口和稀疏跳连之间折中，既保局部性又扩大感受野。和传统 Transformer 相比，它更像把‘时间上的 recurrence’折到了‘深度上的迭代’里。代价是训练与实现更复杂，且对通用大规模语言建模是否同样收益还需要证据。","experiments":"实验上，论文声称 RegularGPT 能成功建模 PARITY 等正则语言，并在自然语言长度外推上表现出优势。更有意思的一点是，模型在自然语言外推时重新发现了 prior work 认为必要的 local windowed attention 效应，这说明工作记忆结构可能是促成长度外推的更一般机制。摘要没有给出参数量、数据集、具体长度区间和提升数字，因此不能硬写数字；但关键观察已足够明确：它在形式语言和自然语言外推两侧都做了验证，而不是只在 toy task 上成立。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper challenges a common belief: standard Transformers are often considered unable to model regular languages perfectly and unreliable at length extrapolation. Prior work usually sidesteps this with recurrence, external memory, or by accepting failure beyond training lengths. The authors ask whether the limitation is architectural in principle, or mostly a matter of how memory is organized.","importance":"This matters because it reframes a capability boundary. For pretraining research, the implication is that some failures in algorithmic pattern learning and length generalization may come from the default Transformer organization rather than from the Transformer paradigm itself. If so, memory structure becomes a concrete design lever.","technical_approach":"The proposed model, RegularGPT, combines three ingredients: weight sharing, adaptive depth, and sliding-dilated attention. Together they create a form of working memory along the depth axis, so the network can iteratively update internal state rather than relying only on one-pass token mixing. Weight sharing makes depth behave more like repeated state transitions. Adaptive depth allocates more computation to harder inputs. Sliding-dilated attention balances local attention with sparse longer-range access. Relative to a standard Transformer, this effectively moves some recurrence into depth. The trade-off is added architectural and optimization complexity, and it is not yet obvious how well the same design scales to mainstream large-scale pretraining.","experiments":"Empirically, the paper reports success on regular-language tasks such as PARITY and also on natural-language length extrapolation. A particularly interesting result is that the model rediscovers the local windowed-attention effect that prior work argued was necessary for length extrapolation, suggesting that working-memory structure may be the more general explanation. The abstract provides no parameter counts, datasets, or exact gains, so the summary should stay qualitative.","authors_note":""},"tags":["architecture","length-extrapolation","attention"],"notable_authors":["Ta-Chung Chi","Ting-Han Fan","Alexander Rudnicky","Peter J. Ramadge"]},{"id":"2211.00107","title":"Where to start? Analyzing the potential value of intermediate models","authors":["Leshem Choshen","Elad Venezian","Shachar Don-Yehiya","Noam Slonim","Yoav Katz"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2b","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.00107","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ChoshenVDSK23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.90"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ChoshenVDSK23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.90","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心结论是：选择中间模型作为新任务起点时，收益可以相当程度上分解为‘目标数据集本身的可获益性’和‘候选起点模型本身的通用性’，而不主要取决于源任务与目标任务是否对齐。过去 intertraining 常被理解为：先在一个相近任务上微调，再转到目标任务会更好；作者系统检验这个直觉是否成立。","importance":"这对 pretrain↔posttrain 接口很有价值，因为它直接关系到 continual finetuning、mid-training 和 checkpoint 选择策略。重要之处在于，它削弱了“任务相似度决定一切”的经验法则，转而提示我们要把目标任务难度和起点模型质量分开建模。这对构建自动化训练流水线很实际：你不一定需要最相近的数据，而可能只需要一个‘普遍更好的中间状态’。","technical_approach":"方法上是系统分析 intertraining scheme，而不是提出新优化器或新模型。作者在一系列英文分类任务上，比较 vanilla pretrained model 与各种已经在 source dataset 上 finetune 过的 intermediate models，观察它们作为 target finetuning 起点的收益。关键设计是把 intertraining gain 分解成 target-side 和 base-model-side 两部分，而不是只看 source-target 配对。这个设计有效，因为它避免把所有差异都归因为数据集语义相似。它放弃的是更复杂的因果解释，因此结论更偏经验规律而非机制定理。","experiments":"摘要给出的关键事实有两点。第一，作者做的是 wide-range English classification tasks 上的系统分析，而不是单一 benchmark。第二，结果显示 intertraining gain 可以相对独立地从目标数据集和候选 base model 两侧分析，这与当前把 source-target alignment 视为主要因素的认知相反。摘要没有给具体模型、任务数和提升幅度，因此不能写数字。最有价值的观察应是：某些目标任务无论接什么中间模型都更容易受益，而某些中间模型对许多目标任务都更适合作为起点。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper argues that the value of an intermediate model as a starting point for a new task can be analyzed largely as two separate factors: how much the target dataset tends to benefit from intertraining, and how generally useful the candidate starting model is. This challenges the common intuition that source-target task alignment is the main driver.","importance":"This is highly relevant to the pretrain-to-posttrain interface because it informs checkpoint selection, continual fine-tuning, and mid-training pipelines. The practical message is important: choosing a good intermediate state may be less about finding the closest source task and more about identifying target tasks that are receptive to transfer and intermediate models that are broadly strong starting points.","technical_approach":"The work is a systematic study of intertraining, not a new architecture. It compares vanilla pretrained models against models already fine-tuned on source datasets, then uses them as starting points for target fine-tuning across a range of English classification tasks. The key analytical choice is to decompose intertraining gain into a target-side component and a starting-model-side component, rather than treating each source-target pair as an indivisible unit. This is useful because it avoids over-attributing gains to semantic alignment alone. The trade-off is that the paper offers a strong empirical regularity more than a full mechanistic explanation.","experiments":"Two points are explicit in the abstract. First, the study is broad and systematic across English classification tasks. Second, it finds that intertraining gain can be analyzed largely independently for the target dataset and the candidate starting model, contrary to the standard view that source-target alignment is the major factor. The abstract does not report model names, task counts, or effect sizes, so no numbers should be added.","authors_note":""},"tags":["intertraining","transfer","finetuning"],"notable_authors":["Leshem Choshen","Elad Venezian","Shachar Don-Yehiya","Noam Slonim","Yoav Katz"]},{"id":"2310.10567","title":"RegaVAE: A Retrieval-Augmented Gaussian Mixture Variational Auto-Encoder for Language Modeling","authors":["Jingcheng Deng","Liang Pang","Huawei Shen","Xueqi Cheng"],"institutions":["Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences"],"abstract":"$2c","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.10567","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/DengPSC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.164"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/DengPSC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.164","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有检索增强 LM 有两个老问题：检索用的 query 只看当前 source 不考虑未来 target，检索到的原始文本又受上下文长度和噪声限制。作者想在隐空间里同时解决这两件事。","importance":"方法级探索，把 VAE 的隐变量当作检索和聚合的媒介，给 RAG 提供了一个非 raw-text 的替代路径。对 pretrain 本身影响有限，但对理解'检索信号怎么进模型'有一定启发。","technical_approach":"RegaVAE 基于高斯混合 VAE：把文本编码到一个紧凑隐空间，这个隐空间被训练成同时包含 source 和 future target 的信息，因此检索出的邻居天然对齐生成目标；生成时用隐变量聚合而非拼接原文，绕开上下文长度和噪声问题。相比 RETRO/kNN-LM 那种拼 token 的做法，是走 latent 聚合这条路。","experiments":"在多个语言建模数据集上报告了困惑度和生成多样性/质量的改善，并做了检索信号是否有效、隐空间维度等 ablation。具体数字需看原文。","authors_note":"中科院计算所（Institute of Computing Technology, CAS）团队，Liang Pang、Huawei Shen、Xueqi Cheng 长期做 IR 与生成结合。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Retrieval-augmented LMs have two persistent issues: the retrieval query only conditions on the current source (ignoring the future target the LM will generate), and injecting raw retrieved text is bottlenecked by context length and noise. The paper tackles both in latent space.","importance":"A methodological exploration that replaces raw-text concatenation with VAE latent aggregation in RAG. Limited direct impact on pretraining, but a useful data point for how retrieval signals should enter a generative model.","technical_approach":"RegaVAE uses a Gaussian-mixture VAE whose latent space is trained to encode both source and future target information, so nearest-neighbor retrieval in that space is naturally aligned with what the LM is about to generate. Aggregation happens via latents rather than token concatenation, sidestepping context-length and noise issues. Contrast with RETRO/kNN-LM which splice raw tokens.","experiments":"Reports perplexity and generation-quality gains on several LM datasets, with ablations on the retrieval signal and latent dimensionality. Exact numbers in the paper.","authors_note":"ICT CAS; Liang Pang, Huawei Shen, Xueqi Cheng have a long track record at the IR–generation intersection."},"tags":["retrieval-augmented","vae","language-model"],"notable_authors":["Liang Pang","Xueqi Cheng"]},{"id":"2310.05344","title":"SteerLM: Attribute Conditioned SFT as an (User-Steerable) Alternative to RLHF","authors":["Yi Dong","Zhilin Wang","Makesh Narsimhan Sreedhar","Xianchao Wu","Oleksii Kuchaiev"],"institutions":["NVIDIA"],"abstract":"$2d","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.05344","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/DongWSWK23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.754"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/DongWSWK23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.754","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"RLHF 训练链路复杂，reward 模型又常是单维打分，用户在推理时无法控制模型的具体行为维度（比如更幽默、更简洁）。能不能用纯 SFT 就拿到可控 + 对齐？","importance":"对齐范式级的工作，NVIDIA 实际把它用进了 Nemotron 和 HelpSteer 数据生产线，对'放弃 RLHF，用 attribute-conditioned SFT'这条路线是一个重要推动。对研究 pretrain→posttrain 接口的人值得关注——它意味着把对齐信号显式化为多维属性而非黑盒 reward。","technical_approach":"SteerLM 分两步：先训一个属性预测模型给每个 response 打上 helpfulness/humor/toxicity 等多维标签；然后把这些属性作为条件 token 拼进 prompt 做 SFT，让模型学会'给定属性向量生成符合属性的回复'；推理时用户可以直接填属性向量做 steering。相比 RLHF 最大差别是全程只用 SFT，不做 PPO，不训 reward。","experiments":"在 Open Assistant、MT-Bench 等评测上，SteerLM（基于 LLaMA/43B 规模）能达到或超过同规模 RLHF 模型，且支持属性可控。有 ablation 说明多维属性标注的重要性。","authors_note":"NVIDIA 团队，Oleksii Kuchaiev 负责 NeMo/Nemotron 对齐方向，这条线后来长成 HelpSteer/HelpSteer2。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"RLHF is operationally complex and its reward is usually a single opaque scalar, so users can't steer specific behavior axes (humor, verbosity) at inference. Can SFT alone deliver both alignment and run-time steerability?","importance":"A paradigm-level alignment paper that NVIDIA actually put into production (Nemotron, HelpSteer). An important push for 'skip RLHF, use attribute-conditioned SFT,' and relevant to pretrain→posttrain interface research because it makes alignment signal explicit and multi-dimensional rather than a black-box reward.","technical_approach":"Two stages: (1) train an attribute predictor that labels each response along axes like helpfulness, humor, toxicity; (2) SFT a base model conditioned on these attribute tokens prepended to the prompt, teaching it 'given this attribute vector, produce a matching response.' At inference, the user fills the attribute vector directly. Key difference from RLHF: no PPO, no reward model at training time.","experiments":"On Open Assistant and MT-Bench, SteerLM at LLaMA-43B scale matches or exceeds same-size RLHF models while supporting attribute steering. Ablations show multi-attribute labeling matters.","authors_note":"NVIDIA; Oleksii Kuchaiev leads NeMo/Nemotron alignment, which evolved into HelpSteer/HelpSteer2."},"tags":["alignment","sft","rlhf-alternative","steerable"],"notable_authors":["Oleksii Kuchaiev"]},{"id":"GaoHLC23","title":"Roles of Scaling and Instruction Tuning in Language Perception: Model vs. Human Attention","authors":["Changjiang Gao","Shujian Huang","Jixing Li","Jiajun Chen"],"institutions":["Nanjing University"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/GaoHLC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.868"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/GaoHLC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.868","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"scaling 和 instruction tuning 到底如何改变 LM 在读文本时的'注意分布'？它们让模型更像人看文本，还是更不像？这是理解对齐后 LM 认知行为变化的一个具体切口。","importance":"机制/行为分析类工作，对 pretrain 研究的价值在于：把 scaling 和 instruction tuning 这两个最重要的训练变量对模型'语言感知'的影响拆开看。是诠释'涌现到底是什么变了'的一种尝试。","technical_approach":"用人类阅读时的 eye-tracking / 注意力数据作为参照，对比不同规模和是否 instruction-tuned 的 LM 在同一文本上的 token 重要性分布（可能用 attention、gradient 或 importance 度量），计算与人类注意的对齐度。","experiments":"核心观察：规模变大让模型注意分布更接近人类，但 instruction tuning 在某些方面反而拉远了与人类注意的对齐。具体数字看原文。","authors_note":"南京大学 NLP 组（Shujian Huang, Jiajun Chen）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How do scaling and instruction tuning reshape an LM's 'reading attention' over text—do they make it more human-like or less? A concrete angle on how alignment changes model cognition.","importance":"A mechanistic/behavioral analysis that separates the two dominant training variables (scale vs. instruction tuning) by their effect on language perception. A useful lens for interpreting what actually changes during these training phases.","technical_approach":"Compare token importance distributions (via attention / gradient-based importance) of LMs at different scales, with and without instruction tuning, against human eye-tracking data on the same texts; quantify alignment with human attention.","experiments":"Key finding: scaling increases alignment with human attention, while instruction tuning can reduce it in some respects—i.e., the two axes don't move the model in the same direction.","authors_note":"Nanjing University NLP (Shujian Huang, Jiajun Chen)."},"tags":["scaling","instruction-tuning","attention-mechanism","interpretability"],"notable_authors":["Shujian Huang","Jiajun Chen"]},{"id":"GaoYYC23","title":"Enabling Large Language Models to Generate Text with Citations","authors":["Tianyu Gao","Howard Yen","Jiatong Yu","Danqi Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/GaoYYC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.398"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/GaoYYC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.398","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["rag","citation-generation","attribution"]},{"id":"2309.09582","title":"Fabricator: An Open Source Toolkit for Generating Labeled Training Data with Teacher LLMs","authors":["Jonas Golde","Patrick Haller","Felix Hamborg","Julian Risch","Alan Akbik"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2e","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.09582","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/Golde0HRA23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-DEMO.1"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/Golde0HRA23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-demo.1","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["synthetic-data","data-generation","teacher-llm","distillation"]},{"id":"Gonen0BSZ23","title":"Demystifying Prompts in Language Models via Perplexity Estimation","authors":["Hila Gonen","Srini Iyer","Terra Blevins","Noah A. Smith","Luke Zettlemoyer"],"institutions":["University of Washington","Meta FAIR"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/Gonen0BSZ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.679"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/Gonen0BSZ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.679","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Prompt 的选择对 LLM 性能影响巨大但缺乏系统理解。本文通过困惑度（perplexity）来解释和预测不同 prompt 的效果差异，试图揭开 prompt 工程的黑箱。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的意义在于：如果 prompt 效果可以用模型自身的困惑度来预测，说明 prompt sensitivity 本质上反映了预训练分布的特征，这为理解 ICL 机制和预训练数据分布提供了新视角。","technical_approach":"核心思路是用模型对 prompt 本身的困惑度来估计该 prompt 在下游任务上的表现。困惑度越低的 prompt（即更符合预训练分布的表述）往往效果更好。具体方法和边界条件需查看全文。","experiments":"摘要为空，无法提供具体实验细节。","authors_note":"作者团队包括 Luke Zettlemoyer 和 Noah A. Smith（华盛顿大学 / Meta），两人是 NLP 领域顶级研究者，Zettlemoyer 在 Meta FAIR 主导了多项 LLM 相关工作。Srini Iyer 也在 Meta FAIR。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Prompt choice drastically affects LLM performance but remains poorly understood. This work uses perplexity estimation to explain and predict prompt effectiveness, aiming to demystify prompt engineering.","importance":"Method-level contribution. For pretrain research, the finding that prompt effectiveness correlates with model perplexity implies prompt sensitivity is a reflection of pretraining distribution characteristics—offering a lens into ICL mechanisms.","technical_approach":"The key idea is using the model's own perplexity on a prompt to estimate that prompt's downstream task performance. Lower-perplexity prompts (more aligned with pretraining distribution) tend to work better. Detailed methodology requires the full paper.","experiments":"Abstract is empty; no experimental details available.","authors_note":"Team includes Luke Zettlemoyer and Noah A. Smith (UW / Meta FAIR), top NLP researchers. Zettlemoyer leads multiple LLM efforts at Meta FAIR."},"tags":["prompting","perplexity","interpretability","icl"],"notable_authors":["Luke Zettlemoyer","Noah A. Smith"]},{"id":"2310.19572","title":"Improving Input-label Mapping with Demonstration Replay for In-context Learning","authors":["Zhuocheng Gong","Jiahao Liu","Qifan Wang","Jingang Wang","Xunliang Cai","Dongyan Zhao","Rui Yan"],"institutions":["Meituan","Meta AI"],"abstract":"$2f","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.19572","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/GongLWWC0023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.995"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/GongLWWC0023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.995","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"ICL 中因果语言模型的单向注意力限制了对 demonstration 中 input-label 映射关系的充分捕获。每个 token 只能看到前面的 token，无法回顾完整的 input-label 对信息。","importance":"方法级贡献。揭示了 AR LM 做 ICL 时的一个结构性限制——单向注意力导致 demonstration 信息利用不充分。对 pretrain 研究的启示：ICL 能力不仅取决于预训练规模，还受限于注意力机制的信息流方向。","technical_approach":"提出 Demonstration Replay 方法：在推理时让模型能够回顾（replay）demonstration 中的 input-label 映射信息，弥补因果注意力的单向性缺陷。具体机制是在不修改模型参数的前提下，通过某种 replay 机制增强对 demonstration 的双向信息利用。与直接微调或修改注意力 mask 的方法不同，这是一种推理时的策略。","experiments":"摘要截断，具体实验数据不完整。需查看全文了解 benchmark、baseline 和提升幅度。","authors_note":"Xunliang Cai 等来自美团（Meituan）。Qifan Wang 来自 Meta AI。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In ICL, the causal (unidirectional) attention of autoregressive LMs prevents full capture of input-label mapping from demonstrations—each token can only attend to preceding tokens, missing backward information.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It highlights a structural limitation of AR LMs for ICL: unidirectional attention underutilizes demonstration information. For pretrain research, this suggests ICL capability is constrained not just by scale but by attention directionality.","technical_approach":"Proposes Demonstration Replay: at inference time, the model revisits input-label mappings in demonstrations to compensate for causal attention's unidirectionality. This is an inference-time strategy that does not modify model parameters, distinguishing it from approaches that alter attention masks or fine-tune.","experiments":"Abstract truncated; specific benchmarks and numbers unavailable. Full paper needed for details.","authors_note":"Xunliang Cai et al. from Meituan. Qifan Wang from Meta AI."},"tags":["icl","demonstration-selection","prompting","generalization"],"notable_authors":["Qifan Wang"]},{"id":"2310.13669","title":"Automatic Unit Test Data Generation and Actor-Critic Reinforcement Learning for Code Synthesis","authors":["Philip John Gorinski","Matthieu Zimmer","Gerasimos Lampouras","Derrick-Goh-Xin Deik","Ignacio Iacobacci"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$30","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.13669","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/GorinskiZLDI23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.28"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/GorinskiZLDI23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.28","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"代码生成模型用 RL 微调时需要 unit test 作为 reward signal，但高质量 unit test 的获取成本远高于代码数据本身。本文要解决的是如何自动生成 unit test 数据，并结合 actor-critic RL 来提升代码合成质量。","importance":"方法级贡献，处于 pretrain→posttrain 接口。对 pretrain 研究的启示：代码 LM 的 RL 训练信号质量直接影响模型改进效果，自动生成 unit test 降低了 RL 反馈的获取门槛，类似于 R1-Zero 范式中自动化 reward 构造的思路。","technical_approach":"两步走：(1) 自动生成 unit test 数据，替代人工编写的测试用例；(2) 用 actor-critic RL（而非简单的 REINFORCE）进一步训练代码生成模型。关键选择是用 actor-critic 而非 policy gradient，可能是为了降低方差、提高训练稳定性。与此前 RL for code 工作的区别在于不依赖预定义的 unit test。","experiments":"摘要截断，具体 benchmark（如 HumanEval、MBPP）和数字需查全文。核心卖点是 unit test 自动生成使 RL 训练可扩展。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"RL fine-tuning for code generation requires unit tests as reward signals, but obtaining high-quality unit tests is far more expensive than collecting code data. This work addresses automatic unit test generation combined with actor-critic RL for code synthesis.","importance":"Method-level contribution at the pretrain-posttrain interface. For pretrain research, it demonstrates that automating reward signal construction (unit tests) is key to scalable RL for code LMs, echoing the broader trend of automated reward in R1-Zero-style training.","technical_approach":"Two-step approach: (1) automatically generate unit test data to replace hand-written tests; (2) apply actor-critic RL (not vanilla REINFORCE) to further train the code generation model. Actor-critic is chosen likely for lower variance and better training stability. The key distinction from prior RL-for-code work is removing dependence on predefined unit tests.","experiments":"Abstract truncated; specific benchmarks and numbers need the full paper. The main claim is that automatic unit test generation makes RL training scalable.","authors_note":""},"tags":["code-generation","reinforcement-learning","actor-critic","unit-test"]},{"id":"GuetaVRSKC23","title":"Knowledge is a Region in Weight Space for Fine-tuned Language Models","authors":["Almog Gueta","Elad Venezian","Colin Raffel","Noam Slonim","Yoav Katz","Leshem Choshen"],"institutions":["IBM Research","UNC Chapel Hill"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/GuetaVRSKC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.95"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/GuetaVRSKC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.95","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"微调后的语言模型中，知识是否可以在权重空间中被定位为一个区域（region）？此前对知识编辑和模型合并的研究暗示权重空间有结构，但缺乏系统验证。","importance":"机制分析级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示：如果知识在权重空间中确实形成可辨识的区域，这对理解 pretrain 阶段知识的编码方式、模型合并（model merging）、continual learning 都有直接影响。","technical_approach":"摘要为空，无法提供技术细节。从标题推断，核心思路是在微调后的模型权重空间中分析知识的几何分布，可能涉及权重插值、模型合并等实验。","experiments":"摘要为空，无法提供实验细节。","authors_note":"Colin Raffel 是 T5 的主要作者，Google Brain / UNC，在预训练方法和迁移学习方面有范式级影响。Noam Slonim 来自 IBM Research。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Can knowledge in fine-tuned language models be localized as a region in weight space? Prior work on knowledge editing and model merging hints at weight space structure, but systematic validation is lacking.","importance":"Mechanistic analysis contribution. If knowledge forms identifiable regions in weight space, it directly informs understanding of how pretrain encodes knowledge, and has implications for model merging and continual learning.","technical_approach":"Abstract is empty. From the title, the approach likely analyzes the geometric distribution of knowledge in fine-tuned model weight space, possibly involving weight interpolation and model merging experiments.","experiments":"Abstract is empty; no experimental details available.","authors_note":"Colin Raffel is the lead author of T5 (Google Brain / UNC), with paradigm-level influence on pretraining and transfer learning. Noam Slonim is from IBM Research."},"tags":["weight-space","fine-tuning","knowledge-editing","representation"],"notable_authors":["Colin Raffel","Noam Slonim"]},{"id":"2305.14907","title":"Coverage-based Example Selection for In-Context Learning","authors":["Shivanshu Gupta","Matt Gardner","Sameer Singh"],"institutions":["UC Irvine"],"abstract":"$31","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14907","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/Gupta0023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.930"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/Gupta0023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.930","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"ICL 的 example 选择通常独立地按相似度排序，导致选出的 example 冗余且遗漏重要信息。本文要解决的是如何选择一组互补的 example，使其覆盖测试输入的关键方面。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的间接启示：ICL 性能对 example 选择高度敏感，而覆盖率（coverage）比单纯相似度更重要，这暗示 LLM 的 ICL 机制更依赖于 demonstration 的信息多样性而非单点匹配。","technical_approach":"发现 BERTScore-Recall（BSR）比传统相似度指标更能选出覆盖测试输入关键方面（如推理模式）的 example。进一步将 BSR 和其他标准指标扩展为集合级（set-level）可优化指标，从而在 example 集合层面最大化覆盖率。关键洞察是从 instance-level ranking 转向 set-level optimization。","experiments":"在 15 个数据集、6 类任务、7 个不同 LLM 上验证。BSR 是最优的单指标；集合级优化进一步提升覆盖率和下游表现。具体提升幅度需查全文。","authors_note":"Sameer Singh 来自 UC Irvine，在 NLP 鲁棒性和可解释性方面有大量工作。Matt Gardner 此前在 Allen AI。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Standard ICL example selection ranks examples independently by similarity, leading to redundancy and missing important information. This work addresses selecting a complementary set of examples that covers salient aspects of the test input.","importance":"Method-level contribution. For pretrain research, the finding that coverage matters more than point-wise similarity suggests LLM ICL mechanisms rely more on demonstration diversity than single-example matching.","technical_approach":"Finds that BERTScore-Recall (BSR) selects examples that better cover salient aspects (e.g., reasoning patterns) of the test input compared to standard similarity metrics. Extends BSR and other metrics to set-level optimizable objectives, shifting from instance-level ranking to set-level coverage optimization.","experiments":"Evaluated on 15 datasets, 6 task types, 7 diverse LLMs. BSR is the best single metric; set-level optimization further improves coverage and downstream performance. Specific numbers require the full paper.","authors_note":"Sameer Singh (UC Irvine) is known for NLP robustness and interpretability. Matt Gardner was previously at Allen AI."},"tags":["icl","demonstration-selection","prompting","retrieval"],"notable_authors":["Sameer Singh","Matt Gardner"]},{"id":"2305.14956","title":"Editing Common Sense in Transformers","authors":["Anshita Gupta","Debanjan Mondal","Akshay Krishna Sheshadri","Wenlong Zhao","Xiang Li","Sarah Wiegreffe","Niket Tandon"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$32","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14956","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/GuptaMS00WT23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.511"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/GuptaMS00WT23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.511","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有的模型知识编辑方法（如 MEMIT）只在百科知识（单一正确答案）上验证过，但常识知识（多个正确答案，如苹果可以是绿色或红色但不是透明的）从未被研究。本文探索常识判断是否也与 Transformer 中可定位、可编辑的参数因果关联。","importance":"方法级贡献，扩展了知识编辑的适用范围。对 pretrain 研究的启示：常识知识在 Transformer 中也是局部化存储的，这与百科知识的存储机制一致，暗示 pretrain 阶段不同类型知识的编码方式可能有共性。","technical_approach":"首先验证常识判断确实与 Transformer 中可定位的参数存在因果关联（肯定性结论）。然后发现直接应用 MEMIT 效果不佳，因为常识知识有多个正确答案。改进方法包括多种变体以适应常识领域的多答案特性。具体改进细节需查全文。","experiments":"摘要截断，具体 benchmark 和数字不完整。核心发现：(1) 常识知识可定位可编辑；(2) 原始 MEMIT 在常识领域表现不佳；(3) 改进后的方法有效。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing model editing methods (e.g., MEMIT) have only been evaluated on encyclopedic knowledge with single correct answers. Commonsense knowledge with multiple valid answers (e.g., apples can be green or red but not transparent) has not been studied. This work investigates whether commonsense judgments are causally associated with localizable, editable parameters in Transformers.","importance":"Method-level contribution extending knowledge editing to commonsense. For pretrain research, the finding that commonsense knowledge is also locally stored in Transformers suggests different knowledge types may share encoding mechanisms during pretraining.","technical_approach":"First verifies that commonsense judgments are indeed causally linked to localizable parameters (affirmative answer). Then finds that directly applying MEMIT yields poor results due to multiple valid answers in commonsense. Proposes improvements to handle multi-answer commonsense editing. Specific modifications need the full paper.","experiments":"Abstract truncated. Key findings: (1) commonsense knowledge is localizable and editable; (2) vanilla MEMIT performs poorly on commonsense; (3) proposed improvements are effective.","authors_note":""},"tags":["model-editing","commonsense","transformer","knowledge-editing"]},{"id":"2311.01307","title":"The Effect of Scaling, Retrieval Augmentation and Form on the Factual Consistency of Language Models","authors":["Lovisa Hagström","Denitsa Saynova","Tobias Norlund","Moa Johansson","Richard Johansson"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Large Language Models (LLMs) make natural interfaces to factual knowledge, but their usefulness is limited by their tendency to deliver inconsistent answers to semantically equivalent questions. For example, a model might predict both\"Anne Redpath passed away in Edinburgh.\"and\"Anne Redpath's life ended in London.\"In this work, we identify potential causes of inconsistency and evaluate the effectiveness of two mitigation strategies: up-scaling and augmenting the LM with a retrieval corpus. Our results on the LLaMA and Atlas models show that both strategies reduce inconsistency while retrieval augmentation is considerably more efficient. We further consider and disentangle the consistency contributions of different components of Atlas. For all LMs evaluated we find that syntactical form and other evaluation task artifacts impact consistency. Taken together, our results provide a better understanding of the factors affecting the factual consistency of language models.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.01307","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/HagstromSNJJ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.332"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/HagstromSNJJ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.332","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 对语义等价的问题给出不一致的事实性回答（如同时说某人死于爱丁堡和伦敦）。本文系统研究 scaling 和检索增强（RAG）对事实一致性的影响，并分析不一致的来源。","importance":"实验分析级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的直接启示：(1) 单纯 scaling up 可以减少不一致但效率远低于 RAG；(2) 句法形式和语义内容对不一致性的贡献可以被解耦——这暗示 pretrain 阶段模型对不同表述形式的知识编码存在系统性偏差。","technical_approach":"在 LLaMA 和 Atlas（检索增强模型）上，用语义等价但句法不同的问题对测试事实一致性。分析两种缓解策略：(1) 增大模型规模；(2) 加入检索语料库。进一步解耦 Atlas 各组件对一致性的贡献，并区分句法形式 vs 语义内容对不一致性的影响。","experiments":"在 LLaMA 和 Atlas 上实验。两种策略都能减少不一致性，但 RAG 的效率显著更高。句法形式和语义内容都会导致不一致，且可以被解耦分析。具体数字需查全文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLMs give inconsistent factual answers to semantically equivalent questions (e.g., predicting someone died in both Edinburgh and London). This work systematically studies the effect of scaling and retrieval augmentation on factual consistency, and disentangles sources of inconsistency.","importance":"Empirical analysis contribution. Key takeaways for pretrain research: (1) scaling reduces inconsistency but is far less efficient than RAG; (2) syntactic form and semantic content contribute independently to inconsistency—suggesting systematic encoding biases during pretraining.","technical_approach":"Tests factual consistency on LLaMA and Atlas (retrieval-augmented) using semantically equivalent but syntactically varied question pairs. Evaluates two mitigation strategies: scaling up and retrieval augmentation. Disentangles contributions of different Atlas components and separates syntactic vs semantic sources of inconsistency.","experiments":"Experiments on LLaMA and Atlas. Both strategies reduce inconsistency, but RAG is considerably more efficient. Syntactic form and semantic content both contribute to inconsistency and can be disentangled. Specific numbers require the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["scaling","retrieval","factuality","consistency"]},{"id":"Han0TWCP23","title":"Improving Sequential Model Editing with Fact Retrieval","authors":["Xiaoqi Han","Ru Li","Hongye Tan","Yuanlong Wang","Qinghua Chai","Jeff Z. Pan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/Han0TWCP23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.749"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/Han0TWCP23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.749","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"序列化模型编辑（sequential model editing）中，连续编辑多个事实后模型性能退化。本文通过引入事实检索（fact retrieval）来改善序列编辑的稳定性。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的间接启示：序列编辑的退化问题反映了 pretrain 阶段知识编码的脆弱性——连续修改局部参数会破坏全局知识结构。引入检索机制是一种外部化知识管理的思路。","technical_approach":"摘要为空，无法提供技术细节。从标题推断，核心思路是在序列编辑过程中加入事实检索步骤，帮助模型在编辑新事实时保持对已编辑事实的记忆。","experiments":"摘要为空，无法提供实验细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In sequential model editing, performance degrades after editing multiple facts consecutively. This work introduces fact retrieval to improve the stability of sequential editing.","importance":"Method-level contribution. For pretrain research, the degradation in sequential editing reflects the fragility of knowledge encoding during pretraining—consecutive local parameter modifications disrupt global knowledge structure. Retrieval-based approaches externalize knowledge management.","technical_approach":"Abstract is empty. From the title, the approach likely adds a fact retrieval step during sequential editing to help the model retain previously edited facts while incorporating new ones.","experiments":"Abstract is empty; no experimental details available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["model-editing","fact-retrieval","knowledge-editing"]},{"id":"2305.14992","title":"Reasoning with Language Model is Planning with World Model","authors":["Shibo Hao","Yi Gu","Haodi Ma","Joshua Jiahua Hong","Zhen Wang","Daisy Zhe Wang","Zhiting Hu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$33","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14992","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/HaoGMHWWH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.507"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/HaoGMHWWH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.507","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["reasoning","planning","world-model","cot"]},{"id":"2310.15151","title":"Verb Conjugation in Transformers Is Determined by Linear Encodings of Subject Number","authors":["Sophie Hao","Tal Linzen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Deep architectures such as Transformers are sometimes criticized for having uninterpretable\"black-box\"representations. We use causal intervention analysis to show that, in fact, some linguistic features are represented in a linear, interpretable format. Specifically, we show that BERT's ability to conjugate verbs relies on a linear encoding of subject number that can be manipulated with predictable effects on conjugation accuracy. This encoding is found in the subject position at the first layer and the verb position at the last layer, but distributed across positions at middle layers, particularly when there are multiple cues to subject number.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.15151","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/HaoL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.300"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/HaoL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.300","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["interpretability","transformer","linear-probe","syntax"]},{"id":"HuL23","title":"Prompting is not a substitute for probability measurements in large language models","authors":["Jennifer Hu","Roger Levy"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/HuL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.306"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/HuL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.306","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["probing","prompting","lm-analysis"]},{"id":"HuMMF23","title":"Meta-Learning Online Adaptation of Language Models","authors":["Nathan Hu","Eric Mitchell","Christopher D. Manning","Chelsea Finn"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/HuMMF23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.268"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/HuMMF23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.268","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["meta-learning","online-adaptation","continual"]},{"id":"HuSCWF023","title":"DecipherPref: Analyzing Influential Factors in Human Preference Judgments via GPT-4","authors":["Yebowen Hu","Kaiqiang Song","Sangwoo Cho","Xiaoyang Wang","Hassan Foroosh","Fei Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/HuSCWF023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.519"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/HuSCWF023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.519","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：人类偏好标注为什么会偏向某些回答，现有偏好学习通常直接把 winner/loser 当监督信号，却很少拆开看究竟哪些可观测因素在驱动判断。这个问题现在值得重做，是因为 RLHF 和偏好模型越来越依赖大规模人工或 AI 偏好数据，如果偏好本身被长度、语气、格式等表层因素系统性污染，后续 reward model 和对齐过程会一起继承偏差。","importance":"它的价值主要是分析框架级，而不是提出新的预训练算法。对 pretrain/post-train 闭环的启示在于：偏好数据不是天然可靠标签，GPT-4 可以被用作可扩展的偏好因素分析器，帮助区分内容质量信号和表层捷径信号；这直接影响 reward modeling、自动偏好数据合成，以及对齐训练中常见的 length bias / verbosity bias 诊断。","technical_approach":"核心方法是用 GPT-4 充当可解释的偏好分析器，去解析人类偏好判断受哪些因素影响，而不是只训练一个黑盒 preference model。可以推断其关键设计是：把成对回答和人类选择输入 GPT-4，让模型给出影响判断的因素归因，再统计这些因素与最终偏好的一致性和强弱；与传统只做相关性回归或只训练二分类偏好模型不同，这种做法试图把'偏好来自什么'显式化。它的有效性依赖 GPT-4 对细粒度语言属性的稳定判断，但边界也很明确：如果 GPT-4 自身带有偏好风格，它可能把模型偏好误当成人类偏好。","experiments":"从给定信息看，实验结论应围绕'哪些因素最能解释人类偏好'以及'GPT-4 归因与人工判断的一致性'展开，但这里没有摘要，无法可靠给出数据规模、标注集、基线或具体提升数字。可以确定的是，合理的核心比较对象应包括直接偏好预测、长度/流畅性等启发式特征，以及人工分析；若论文成立，最有价值的结果通常不是单点精度，而是证明某些常被忽略的因素在偏好判断中占据高解释力，或者 GPT-4 的因素提取可复现人工分析趋势。由于缺少摘要，具体数值留空。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a simple but important question: what actually drives human preference judgments, beyond the binary chosen/rejected labels commonly used in preference learning. This matters now because RLHF pipelines increasingly treat preference labels as clean supervision, while the labels may systematically reflect superficial cues such as length, tone, or formatting rather than true response quality.","importance":"The contribution is best viewed as an analysis framework, not a new pretraining method. Its relevance to pretrain/post-train research is that preference data should be audited as a noisy training signal; using GPT-4 to decompose preference judgments can help separate genuine quality signals from shortcut features, which is directly useful for reward modeling, synthetic preference generation, and diagnosing alignment biases.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to use GPT-4 as an interpretable analyzer of preference factors rather than only training a black-box preference predictor. The likely mechanism is to feed response pairs plus human choices to GPT-4, ask it to identify influential factors, and then aggregate how consistently those factors explain the final preference. Compared with standard preference classification or simple feature correlations, this makes the source of preference more explicit. The design is useful if GPT-4 is stable at fine-grained judgment decomposition, but the limitation is equally clear: GPT-4 may project its own stylistic priors onto human preference explanations.","experiments":"Given the missing abstract, the experimental section can only be summarized cautiously. The key results likely center on which factors explain human preferences most strongly and how well GPT-4-derived explanations align with human judgments. The natural baselines would include direct preference prediction, heuristic features such as response length or fluency, and manual factor analysis. The most valuable outcome, if supported, is not a single accuracy number but evidence that a small set of identifiable factors explains a large share of preference labels. No reliable numeric details can be extracted from the provided information.","authors_note":""},"tags":["preference","rlhf","evaluation"]},{"id":"HuWLXLB0PL23","title":"LLM-Adapters: An Adapter Family for Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning of Large Language Models","authors":["Zhiqiang Hu","Lei Wang","Yihuai Lan","Wanyu Xu","Ee-Peng Lim","Lidong Bing","Xing Xu","Soujanya Poria","Roy Ka-Wei Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/HuWLXLB0PL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.319"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/HuWLXLB0PL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.319","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：现有 PEFT 方法在大语言模型上各有短板，LoRA、prefix/prompt tuning、adapter 之类方法往往只覆盖一种插入位置或更新形式，导致适配能力、稳定性和工程便利性之间难以兼顾。这个问题重要，因为大模型训练成本已使'如何高效改模型'成为默认前提，而不是补充技巧。","importance":"它的贡献是方法级和系统级的中间层：不是改变预训练范式，但会影响 post-train 的默认接口，并反过来影响我们如何设计基座模型的可适配性。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，adapter family 这类统一化设计如果能在不同层位和任务上稳定工作，说明底座模型内部存在可复用的低维更新通道，这对后续研究模块化更新、continual pretrain、低成本领域迁移都有意义。","technical_approach":"核心方法是提出一个'Adapter 家族'，把多种参数高效微调方式放进统一框架，再比较不同结构在 LLM 上的适用性。标题表明它不是单一 adapter，而是一组可配置模块；合理推断其关键设计包括：在 attention / FFN / residual 路径上定义不同插入点，用瓶颈层、缩放系数或低秩更新控制增量参数，并对比串联式、并联式或门控式适配器。与只做 LoRA 的方法不同，它强调结构家族化和统一视角；有效的原因通常是不同任务和模型层需要不同容量与归纳偏置，而不是一个 adapter 结构包打天下。","experiments":"由于没有摘要，无法可靠写出参数规模、任务集合和具体提升数字。按标题判断，实验重点大概率是：在若干 LLM 与 NLP 任务上，对比 full fine-tuning、LoRA、prefix tuning、经典 adapter 等基线，报告性能-参数量-训练显存三者的 trade-off；另外应有 ablation 比较插入位置、瓶颈维度、层共享与否等。若论文成立，最有价值的结果应是某几类 adapter 在相近参数预算下稳定优于现有 PEFT，或不同模型规模下表现更稳。具体数值无法确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical gap in parameter-efficient fine-tuning for LLMs: existing methods such as LoRA, prefix tuning, and classic adapters each solve only part of the problem, and none is clearly dominant across insertion points, stability, and engineering simplicity. This is worth revisiting because efficient adaptation is no longer optional for large models.","importance":"This is mainly a method-level contribution with systems implications. It does not change pretraining directly, but it shapes the pretrain-to-post-train interface by making model adaptation more structured. For pretraining research, a successful adapter family would suggest that LLMs expose reusable low-dimensional update channels, which matters for continual pretraining, domain adaptation, and modular model updates.","technical_approach":"The key idea is to introduce an adapter family rather than a single PEFT module, placing multiple lightweight adaptation designs under a unified framework. From the title, the likely design space includes different insertion points in attention/FFN/residual paths, bottleneck adapters, scaling mechanisms, or low-rank variants. The distinction from single-method PEFT work is that the paper appears to compare and standardize multiple adapter forms for LLMs. The design makes sense because different layers and tasks likely need different update capacities and inductive biases, rather than one universally best adapter.","experiments":"Because the abstract is missing, the experiments can only be summarized at a high level. The expected setup would compare against full fine-tuning, LoRA, prefix tuning, and standard adapters on several LLMs and NLP tasks, with attention to the trade-off among quality, trainable parameter count, and memory cost. The most useful ablations would test insertion location, bottleneck size, layer sharing, and scaling rules. No reliable numeric details are available from the provided input.","authors_note":""},"tags":["peft","adapter","lora"]},{"id":"HuaLGHSJ23","title":"Dynamic Low-rank Estimation for Transformer-based Language Models","authors":["Ting Hua","Xiao Li","Shangqian Gao","Yen-Chang Hsu","Yilin Shen","Hongxia Jin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/HuaLGHSJ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.621"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/HuaLGHSJ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.621","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：Transformer 语言模型中的低秩结构并不是静态的，固定秩近似会在压缩率和性能损失之间做出僵硬折中。过去很多压缩方法预先设定 rank，再用统一配置套所有层，但不同层、不同训练阶段的有效秩并不一样，因此会要么浪费参数，要么伤性能。","importance":"它的贡献属于方法级和效率级。对 pretrain 的意义不是替代主干范式，而是提供一种更细粒度的容量分配思路：模型的有效表示维度应按层、按阶段动态调节，而不是一次性拍脑袋定死。这和 scaling、稀疏化、结构化压缩都相关，因为它讨论的是'参数预算该放在哪里'。","technical_approach":"核心方法是对 Transformer LM 做动态低秩估计，而不是用固定秩分解。标题说明重点在 estimation，不只是 low-rank factorization；合理推断其机制是：在训练或压缩过程中估计每层权重矩阵的有效秩，再据此自适应调整低秩分解的 rank，可能结合奇异值能量、门控变量或可学习 rank 参数。和传统统一 rank 的 SVD/LoRA 式近似相比，它的区别在于 rank 是数据驱动和层依赖的。这样设计有效，是因为 attention/FFN 不同模块的信息瓶颈并不一致。","experiments":"由于没有摘要，无法可靠给出模型规模、压缩率和 perplexity 变化。按题目推断，实验大概率覆盖 Transformer-based language models 上的语言建模任务，对比固定 rank 压缩、剪枝或低秩适配基线，主要看 perplexity、参数量、推理或训练开销。值得关注的 ablation 应包括：动态 rank 是否随层深变化、是否在训练后期收敛到更稀疏配置、同等参数预算下是否优于固定 rank。具体数字无法确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a common weakness in low-rank modeling for Transformer language models: the useful rank is not static, so a fixed-rank approximation imposes a rigid trade-off between compression and quality. Earlier work often chooses one rank schedule in advance, even though different layers and training stages likely need different capacities.","importance":"This is a method and efficiency contribution. It does not replace the main LM paradigm, but it matters for pretraining because it reframes capacity allocation: model dimensionality should be assigned adaptively across layers instead of being fixed globally. That connects naturally to scaling, sparsity, and structured compression.","technical_approach":"The main idea is dynamic low-rank estimation for Transformer LMs rather than a fixed low-rank decomposition. The emphasis on estimation suggests that the model infers an effective rank per layer or module during training or compression, potentially using singular value energy, gates, or learnable rank controls. Relative to standard fixed-rank SVD-style methods or low-rank adaptation with preset dimensions, the distinction is that rank becomes data- and layer-dependent. This is plausible because attention and FFN blocks do not share the same information bottleneck.","experiments":"The missing abstract prevents any reliable reporting of model sizes, compression ratios, or perplexity changes. The likely setup evaluates Transformer language models under compression or efficient training, comparing against fixed-rank approximations and related baselines. The most informative ablations would test how rank varies by depth, whether it shrinks or expands over training, and whether dynamic allocation yields better perplexity under the same parameter budget. No numeric details can be safely recovered from the prompt.","authors_note":""},"tags":["low-rank","compression","lm"]},{"id":"HuangCZL23","title":"DiffusionSL: Sequence Labeling via Tag Diffusion Process","authors":["Ziyang Huang","Pengfei Cao","Jun Zhao","Kang Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/HuangCZL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.860"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/HuangCZL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.860","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：序列标注通常被当作逐 token 的局部分类问题，但这种做法对标签间依赖建模较弱，尤其在需要全局一致性的任务上容易出现局部最优。过去常见方案是 CRF 或自回归标签生成；前者表达力有限，后者推理串行且容易把标签生成问题过度语言化。","importance":"它的重要性主要在建模范式层面，虽然应用在 sequence labeling，但方法本身是在 NLP 离散结构预测里引入 diffusion。对 pretrain 研究的启发是：离散 diffusion 不只适用于生成式文本建模，也可以作为非自回归结构预测器；这和 D3PM、SEDD、MDLM 一类工作的核心关切一致——如何在离散空间里用并行迭代替代严格左到右生成。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把标签序列建模为一个 tag diffusion process，用扩散-去噪过程来预测整段标签，而不是逐个位置直接分类。与标准 token classifier 相比，它显式建模了标签之间的联合结构；与自回归标签生成相比，它更偏并行迭代。关键设计大概率包括：定义离散标签空间上的前向加噪规则，把 gold tags 扰动成不同噪声级别的标签序列，再训练模型逐步去噪恢复；可能还配合条件编码器利用输入文本。这样设计有效，是因为中间噪声状态给了模型学习局部纠错和全局协调的机会。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认具体任务和数字，但实验应覆盖典型序列标注任务，如 NER、slot filling 或 chunking，对比 BiLSTM/Transformer + CRF、自回归生成式标注器和普通分类器。关键指标通常是 F1。若论文成立，最有价值的证据应包括：在需要长程标签依赖的设置中优于 CRF 或普通分类器，以及去噪步数与性能/速度存在可控 trade-off。没有可靠数字可写。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper revisits sequence labeling as a structured prediction problem rather than a collection of independent token classifications. Standard token classifiers often under-model label dependencies, while CRFs are limited and autoregressive label generation is serial and somewhat mismatched to the task.","importance":"Its significance is mainly paradigm-level within structured NLP modeling. Although the target task is sequence labeling, the broader relevance is that it applies diffusion to discrete structured prediction, which is closely related to newer non-autoregressive language modeling ideas in discrete spaces.","technical_approach":"The method treats the target tag sequence as a diffusion variable and learns to recover clean tags from noisy tag sequences. Compared with a standard token classifier, this explicitly models the joint structure of labels; compared with autoregressive tagging, it supports iterative parallel refinement. The likely design uses a discrete corruption process over tag labels and a conditional denoiser that takes the input text as context. This can work because intermediate noisy states let the model learn both local correction and global consistency.","experiments":"With no abstract available, the exact datasets and gains cannot be stated reliably. The natural evaluation would include tasks such as NER, slot filling, or chunking, compared against Transformer/BiLSTM taggers, CRF heads, and autoregressive labeling baselines, with F1 as the main metric. The most useful ablation would examine the number of denoising steps and whether gains are larger on tasks with stronger label dependencies. No trustworthy numeric details are available here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion-lm","sequence-labeling"]},{"id":"HuangGZLC23","title":"Privacy Implications of Retrieval-Based Language Models","authors":["Yangsibo Huang","Samyak Gupta","Zexuan Zhong","Kai Li","Danqi Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/HuangGZLC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.921"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/HuangGZLC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.921","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要回答的是：retrieval-based language model 在引入外部语料提升知识与时效性的同时，会不会带来新的隐私泄露面，且这种风险是否不同于纯参数化 LM。过去对隐私的讨论多集中在参数记忆和训练数据抽取，但 RLM 把私有文档直接接到推理链路里，攻击面明显变了。","importance":"这是系统级和安全边界级的重要工作。对 pretrain 的意义很直接：越来越多模型把 retrieval 当作'不改参数也能补知识'的方案，但如果隐私风险主要转移而非减少，那么 retrieval 不是无代价替代物。它会影响我们如何看待 parametric memory vs external memory 的取舍，也关系到训练数据治理和部署架构设计。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是系统性分析 retrieval-based LM 的隐私泄露路径，比较检索模块、生成模块和二者耦合后的攻击面。按题目推断，论文可能研究 membership inference、文档提取、基于提示的敏感内容恢复或检索索引泄漏；关键不是单一攻击，而是区分风险来源：是 retriever 把私有文档召回了，还是 generator 放大并复述了召回内容。和只评估生成模型 memorization 的工作不同，这里把 RAG 看成完整系统来审计。","experiments":"虽然没有摘要，但实验上应包含带检索和不带检索的语言模型对比，控制是否能访问私有语料库、top-k 检索规模、文档去重与过滤策略等变量，指标可能包括 attack success rate、extraction rate 或 membership inference AUC。若论文成立，最关键的发现通常会是：retrieval 显著改变隐私风险分布，某些设置下比纯 LM 更容易直接泄露原文片段；同时也可能出现通过检索隔离降低参数记忆泄露的反向现象。没有可靠数字可报告。","authors_note":"作者中有 Danqi Chen。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a timely question: when language models rely on retrieval, do they create new privacy risks that differ from those of purely parametric LMs? Prior privacy work mostly focuses on memorization and extraction from model parameters, but retrieval-based systems expose private documents during inference, so the threat model changes materially.","importance":"This is a system-level safety contribution with clear implications for pretraining and deployment. Retrieval is often treated as a low-cost alternative to storing more knowledge in parameters, but that trade-off is incomplete if privacy risk is shifted rather than reduced. The paper is important because it forces a more careful comparison between parametric memory and external memory.","technical_approach":"The likely contribution is a structured privacy analysis of retrieval-based language models, separating the risks introduced by the retriever, the generator, and their interaction. From the title, the work probably studies attacks such as document extraction, membership inference, or prompt-based recovery of sensitive content, and asks whether leakage comes from retrieval itself or from generation amplifying retrieved text. This differs from standard memorization studies by auditing the full RLM pipeline.","experiments":"Without the abstract, exact numbers cannot be stated. The natural setup would compare LM-only and retrieval-augmented systems while varying private corpus access, top-k retrieval, deduplication, and filtering. Likely metrics include attack success rate, extraction rate, or membership inference AUC. The most important result, if supported, would be that retrieval changes the privacy surface in a nontrivial way: it may reduce some forms of parameter memorization while making direct content leakage easier in others. No trustworthy numeric details are available here.","authors_note":"Danqi Chen is among the authors."},"tags":["rag","privacy","memorization"],"notable_authors":["Danqi Chen"]},{"id":"HuangQC23","title":"Diffusion Language Model with Query-Document Relevance for Query-Focused Summarization","authors":["Shaoyao Huang","Luozheng Qin","Ziqiang Cao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/HuangQC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.735"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/HuangQC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.735","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：query-focused summarization 不仅要求摘要流畅，还要求紧扣查询意图，传统自回归摘要模型容易生成通顺但偏题的内容。过去通常通过 encoder 里拼接 query 或加 relevance features 来缓解，但生成目标本身仍然没有直接约束'逐步朝更相关摘要靠近'。","importance":"它的贡献是任务方法级，但对新型语言建模有额外价值，因为它把 diffusion LM 用在条件摘要并显式引入 query-document relevance。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：diffusion 文本模型在条件生成里的一项潜在优势，是更方便把全局控制信号融入迭代去噪过程，而不必完全依赖左到右解码时的局部条件化。","technical_approach":"核心方法是一个带 query-document relevance 信号的 diffusion language model，用于 query-focused summarization。与标准 AR summarizer 相比，它通过迭代去噪生成摘要；与普通 diffusion text generation 相比，它额外把 query 与 source document 的相关性作为条件或引导信号注入生成过程。这样设计有效，是因为查询相关性是全局约束，如果只在 decoder 输入端轻量拼接，模型容易在长摘要里漂移；而在每步去噪中持续施加 relevance，可以更稳地把生成压回查询需求。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认数据集和 ROUGE 提升。合理的实验应在 query-focused summarization 基准上，对比 BART/T5 一类 AR 基线，以及不带 relevance 引导的 diffusion 版本，指标主要是 ROUGE 和 query relevance 相关指标。关键 ablation 应检查：去掉 relevance 信号后是否摘要更偏题、不同引导强度对流畅性与相关性的 trade-off、扩散步数对质量和延迟的影响。具体数字无法确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper focuses on a common failure mode in query-focused summarization: models often generate fluent summaries that only loosely follow the query intent. Earlier approaches usually concatenate the query with the document or add relevance features, but the generation objective itself does not strongly enforce query faithfulness throughout decoding.","importance":"This is mainly a task-level modeling contribution, but it is also relevant to alternative LM paradigms because it applies diffusion language modeling to conditional summarization with an explicit relevance signal. The broader lesson is that diffusion-style generation may be a useful vehicle for injecting global control signals beyond left-to-right conditioning.","technical_approach":"The method is a diffusion language model for query-focused summarization, augmented with query-document relevance. Compared with standard autoregressive summarizers, it produces the summary via iterative denoising; compared with plain diffusion text generation, it explicitly injects relevance between the query and source document as a conditioning or guidance signal. This design is reasonable because query relevance is a global constraint, and simple input concatenation may not be enough to prevent topical drift in long summaries.","experiments":"The missing abstract means the exact datasets and ROUGE gains cannot be reported. A likely evaluation would compare against AR summarizers such as BART or T5, plus a diffusion variant without relevance guidance, using ROUGE and query-relevance metrics. The most informative ablations would remove the relevance signal, vary guidance strength, and study the quality-latency trade-off across denoising steps. No trustworthy numeric details are available from the prompt.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion-lm","summarization"]},{"id":"HuangTZZSXW23","title":"Not All Languages Are Created Equal in LLMs: Improving Multilingual Capability by Cross-Lingual-Thought Prompting","authors":["Haoyang Huang","Tianyi Tang","Dongdong Zhang","Xin Zhao","Ting Song","Yan Xia","Furu Wei"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/HuangTZZSXW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.826"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/HuangTZZSXW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.826","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：LLM 的多语言能力明显不均衡，高资源语言往往能触发更强推理，而低资源语言即使问题等价也表现更差。过去常见处理是直接在目标语言提问，或者做翻译后再回答，但这两种方式要么受限于目标语言内部表示能力，要么把跨语言推理链条拆成外部流水线。","importance":"它的贡献属于方法级，但对 multilingual pretrain 很有启发。它传递的核心信号是：多语言能力不只是词表覆盖和训练 token 占比问题，还涉及'思维语言'与'输出语言'解耦；如果高资源语言中的 latent reasoning 更强，那么 prompting 层面就可以暴露出底座模型内部跨语言表征的不均衡。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 cross-lingual-thought prompting：让模型在更强势的语言中组织中间推理，再输出目标语言答案。与直接目标语言 CoT 相比，它显式利用语言间能力不对称；与先机器翻译再推理再回译相比，它更像在同一模型内部调度不同语言通道，而不是外接翻译系统。这样设计有效，是因为许多 LLM 在英语等高资源语言上拥有更成熟的推理模板和统计结构，但最终答案仍可映射回目标语言。","experiments":"虽然没有摘要，但按题目判断，实验应覆盖多种语言和推理任务，比较 direct prompting、native CoT、translate-test、以及 cross-lingual-thought prompting。关键指标可能是准确率或 EM/F1。若论文成立，核心证据应是：低资源语言收益最大，高资源语言收益较小；并且收益更多出现在需要多步推理的任务，而不是简单事实问答。没有可靠数字可报告。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a visible asymmetry in multilingual LLMs: the same model often reasons much better in high-resource languages than in low-resource ones, even for equivalent tasks. Prior practice either prompts directly in the target language or uses external translation pipelines, both of which leave performance on the table for reasoning-heavy tasks.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution with strong implications for multilingual pretraining. The main lesson is that multilingual capability is not only about token coverage or data proportion; it is also about decoupling the language of reasoning from the language of output. That makes it relevant to how we interpret internal multilingual representations in LLMs.","technical_approach":"The core idea is cross-lingual-thought prompting: let the model perform intermediate reasoning in a stronger language, then produce the answer in the target language. Compared with native target-language chain-of-thought, this explicitly exploits language asymmetry; compared with translate-reason-translate pipelines, it keeps the process inside one model instead of relying on a separate MT system. The design is plausible because many LLMs have more robust reasoning templates in English or other high-resource languages, even when they can still output in another language.","experiments":"The abstract is missing, so exact language coverage and gains cannot be stated. The likely experiments compare direct prompting, native CoT, translation-based methods, and cross-lingual-thought prompting on multilingual reasoning benchmarks, using accuracy or exact-match style metrics. The most likely pattern is that low-resource languages benefit the most and gains are concentrated in reasoning-intensive tasks rather than simple factual QA. No numeric details can be verified from the provided information.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multilingual","prompting","llm"]},{"id":"HuangZL023","title":"Learning Preference Model for LLMs via Automatic Preference Data Generation","authors":["Shijia Huang","Jianqiao Zhao","Yanyang Li","Liwei Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/HuangZL023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.570"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/HuangZL023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.570","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：LLM 的偏好模型训练受限于高质量人工偏好数据稀缺且昂贵，而直接用少量人工比较对大模型做 reward modeling 容易过拟合标注风格。此前已有工作尝试用 AI feedback 替代人类，但自动生成偏好数据的质量和可控性一直是核心瓶颈。","importance":"它的贡献是 post-train 方法级，但与 pretrain 接口非常紧。原因是自动偏好数据生成如果可行，会显著改变对齐成本结构，并让 preference model 从'标注驱动'转向'生成-筛选驱动'。这不仅影响 RLHF/RLAIF，也会影响我们如何构建中间训练数据和怎样定义训练信号质量。","technical_approach":"核心方法是先自动生成 preference data，再用这些数据训练 LLM 的 preference model。标题说明重点不是直接 DPO/RLHF，而是 preference model 学习本身；合理推断其关键机制包括：让一个强教师模型为同一提示生成多候选回答并自动排序，或者通过规则/自一致性构造 chosen-rejected 对，再据此训练偏好模型。与直接采集人工 pairwise data 相比，它更强调规模和自动化；与简单 self-training 不同，关键在于如何控制生成偏好对的质量和多样性，否则偏好模型只会学到教师模型的风格偏置。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认是否在 HH-RLHF、SHP、UltraFeedback 等数据上实验，也无法给出 reward model 准确率或下游 win rate。合理的实验应比较：人工偏好数据训练、自动生成偏好数据训练、二者混合训练；评估包含 preference prediction accuracy，以及用该偏好模型驱动 reranking 或 RL 后的回答质量。最有价值的 ablation 应该是自动数据规模、教师模型强度、过滤策略对最终偏好模型的影响。具体数字无法确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a central bottleneck in alignment: training preference models requires high-quality preference pairs, but human annotation is expensive and limited. Prior work has explored AI feedback, yet automatic preference data generation remains difficult because data quality and bias control are hard to maintain.","importance":"This is a post-training method contribution with a strong interface to pretraining-era model development. If automatic preference data generation works well, it changes the cost structure of alignment and shifts preference learning from annotation-limited to generation-and-filtering-limited. That directly affects reward modeling, synthetic supervision, and how we think about training signal quality.","technical_approach":"The method learns a preference model from automatically generated preference data instead of relying purely on human-labeled comparisons. From the title, the likely pipeline is to have a stronger model generate multiple responses for each prompt, derive chosen-versus-rejected pairs through ranking, rules, or self-consistency, and then train a preference model on those pairs. The key distinction from standard RLHF pipelines is that the main innovation is in creating the training labels themselves. The design only works if the generated preference pairs are sufficiently diverse and well filtered; otherwise the preference model will mostly copy the teacher's superficial style.","experiments":"Because the abstract is missing, datasets and gains cannot be reported reliably. A natural evaluation would compare preference models trained on human data, synthetic data, and mixtures of both, then measure pairwise preference accuracy and downstream usefulness in reranking or RL-style optimization. The most informative ablations would vary synthetic data volume, teacher strength, and filtering strategy. No trustworthy numeric details are available in the prompt.","authors_note":""},"tags":["preference-model","rlhf","data-synthesis"]},{"id":"JiYXLIF23","title":"Towards Mitigating LLM Hallucination via Self Reflection","authors":["Ziwei Ji","Tiezheng Yu","Yan Xu","Nayeon Lee","Etsuko Ishii","Pascale Fung"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/JiYXLIF23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.123"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/JiYXLIF23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.123","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["hallucination","self-reflection"]},{"id":"JiangCCW23","title":"Lion: Adversarial Distillation of Proprietary Large Language Models","authors":["Yuxin Jiang","Chunkit Chan","Mingyang Chen","Wei Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/JiangCCW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.189"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/JiangCCW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.189","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["distillation","adversarial","llm"]},{"id":"JiangJXZZL023","title":"Towards Anytime Fine-tuning: Continually Pre-trained Language Models with Hypernetwork Prompts","authors":["Gangwei Jiang","Caigao Jiang","Siqiao Xue","James Zhang","Jun Zhou","Defu Lian","Ying Wei"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/JiangJXZZL023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.808"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/JiangJXZZL023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.808","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["continual-pretrain","hypernetwork","prompt"]},{"id":"2310.10266","title":"Generative Calibration for In-context Learning","authors":["Zhongtao Jiang","Yuanzhe Zhang","Cao Liu","Jun Zhao","Kang Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$34","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.10266","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/JiangZLZL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.152"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/JiangZLZL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.152","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["in-context-learning","calibration"]},{"id":"JinZZ23","title":"Parameter-efficient Tuning for Large Language Model without Calculating Its Gradients","authors":["Feihu Jin","Jiajun Zhang","Chengqing Zong"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$35","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/JinZZ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.22"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/JinZZ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.22","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["peft","gradient-free","tuning"]},{"id":"2303.04132","title":"Exploiting Asymmetry for Synthetic Training Data Generation: SynthIE and the Case of Information Extraction","authors":["Martin Josifoski","Marija Sakota","Maxime Peyrard","Robert West"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$36","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.04132","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/JosifoskiSP023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.96"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/JosifoskiSP023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.96","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["synthetic-data","information-extraction"]},{"id":"KangC23","title":"Impact of Co-occurrence on Factual Knowledge of Large Language Models","authors":["Cheongwoong Kang","Jaesik Choi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/KangC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.518"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/KangC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.518","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["factual-knowledge","co-occurrence","memorization","llm"]},{"id":"KassemMS23","title":"Preserving Privacy Through Dememorization: An Unlearning Technique For Mitigating Memorization Risks In Language Models","authors":["Aly M. Kassem","Omar Mahmoud","Sherif Saad"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/KassemMS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.265"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/KassemMS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.265","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["memorization","unlearning","privacy","language-model"]},{"id":"KazemnejadRPC23","title":"Measuring the Knowledge Acquisition-Utilization Gap in Pretrained Language Models","authors":["Amirhossein Kazemnejad","Mehdi Rezagholizadeh","Prasanna Parthasarathi","Sarath Chandar"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/KazemnejadRPC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.285"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/KazemnejadRPC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.285","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["knowledge-acquisition","knowledge-utilization","pretrained-lm","probing"]},{"id":"KimBSKKYS23","title":"Aligning Large Language Models through Synthetic Feedback","authors":["Sungdong Kim","Sanghwan Bae","Jamin Shin","Soyoung Kang","Donghyun Kwak","Kang Min Yoo","Minjoon Seo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/KimBSKKYS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.844"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/KimBSKKYS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.844","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"依赖人类反馈的强化学习（RLHF）成本高昂且难以扩展，限制了 LLM 对齐的迭代速度。","importance":"范式级。验证了 RLAIF（AI反馈强化学习）的可行性，证明了强模型合成的偏好数据可以替代或补充人类数据，是目前 post-train 降本增效的核心路线。","technical_approach":"使用高能力 LLM（Teacher）自动生成对不同回复的偏好标签（Synthetic Feedback），以此训练奖励模型（Reward Model），最后通过 PPO 算法对目标模型进行对齐微调。","experiments":"","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) is expensive and hard to scale, bottlenecking the iteration speed of LLM alignment.","importance":"Paradigm-level. Validates the feasibility of RLAIF (AI Feedback), proving that preference data synthesized by strong models can replace or augment human data, which is now a core strategy for efficient post-training.","technical_approach":"Uses a highly capable LLM (Teacher) to automatically generate preference labels for different responses (Synthetic Feedback). A Reward Model is trained on this data, followed by PPO to align the target model.","experiments":"","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","synthetic-feedback","llm","rlhf"]},{"id":"KimJKJYSS23","title":"The CoT Collection: Improving Zero-shot and Few-shot Learning of Language Models via Chain-of-Thought Fine-Tuning","authors":["Seungone Kim","Se June Joo","Doyoung Kim","Joel Jang","Seonghyeon Ye","Jamin Shin","Minjoon Seo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/KimJKJYSS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.782"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/KimJKJYSS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.782","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"中小规模语言模型（<10B）缺乏 zero-shot CoT 推理能力，直接在常规任务上微调无法激发其逐步推理潜力。","importance":"数据级。开源了大规模、高质量的 CoT 轨迹数据集，确立了“通过蒸馏大模型推理轨迹来提升小模型泛化能力”的有效路径。","technical_approach":"构建 The CoT Collection 数据集，包含大量由强模型生成的任务指令与对应的 CoT 解析。将这些数据用于微调较小的模型（如 T5/Flan 系列），强制其学习逐步推理的模式。","experiments":"","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Small-to-medium language models (<10B) lack zero-shot CoT reasoning capabilities, and standard task fine-tuning fails to elicit their step-by-step reasoning potential.","importance":"Data-level contribution. Open-sources a large-scale, high-quality dataset of CoT trajectories, establishing a proven path for distilling reasoning capabilities from large models to improve small model generalization.","technical_approach":"Constructs 'The CoT Collection', a dataset containing massive task instructions and corresponding CoT rationales generated by strong models. This data is used to fine-tune smaller models (e.g., T5/Flan), forcing them to internalize step-by-step reasoning patterns.","experiments":"","authors_note":""},"tags":["cot","instruction-tuning","sft","zero-shot"]},{"id":"2310.07629","title":"The Past, Present and Better Future of Feedback Learning in Large Language Models for Subjective Human Preferences and Values","authors":["Hannah Kirk","Andrew M. Bean","Bertie Vidgen","Paul Röttger","Scott Hale"],"institutions":["Oxford Internet Institute","Alan Turing Institute"],"abstract":"Human feedback is increasingly used to steer the behaviours of Large Language Models (LLMs). However, it is unclear how to collect and incorporate feedback in a way that is efficient, effective and unbiased, especially for highly subjective human preferences and values. In this paper, we survey existing approaches for learning from human feedback, drawing on 95 papers primarily from the ACL and arXiv repositories.First, we summarise the past, pre-LLM trends for integrating human feedback into language models. Second, we give an overview of present techniques and practices, as well as the motivations for using feedback; conceptual frameworks for defining values and preferences; and how feedback is collected and from whom. Finally, we encourage a better future of feedback learning in LLMs by raising five unresolved conceptual and practical challenges.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.07629","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/KirkBVRH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.148"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/KirkBVRH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.148","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"RLHF 被广泛使用，但在处理主观人类偏好时，反馈的收集和整合方式缺乏标准，容易引入偏见且效率低下。","importance":"范式级综述。系统梳理了 pre-LLM 到当前 RLHF 的演进，指出了对齐数据采样的核心痛点（谁的偏好、如何定义价值观），对 post-train 数据构建有直接指导意义。","technical_approach":"综述性工作。分析了 95 篇文献，解构了反馈学习的动机、价值观定义框架以及反馈收集机制，呼吁建立更透明、更多元的人类反馈收集范式。","experiments":"综述文章，无具体模型实验。核心贡献是提出了反馈学习的分类法和未来研究框架。","authors_note":"Hannah Kirk (Oxford), Bertie Vidgen"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"While RLHF is widely used, the methods for collecting and incorporating feedback—especially for subjective human preferences—lack standardization, leading to bias and inefficiency.","importance":"Paradigm-level survey. Systematically reviews the evolution from pre-LLM to current RLHF practices, highlighting core pain points in alignment data sampling (whose preferences, how to define values), directly guiding post-training data curation.","technical_approach":"Survey paper. Analyzes 95 papers to deconstruct the motivations for feedback learning, conceptual frameworks for defining values, and feedback collection mechanisms, advocating for more transparent and diverse human feedback paradigms.","experiments":"As a survey, it contains no specific model experiments. The core contribution is a taxonomy of feedback learning and a framework for future research.","authors_note":"Hannah Kirk, Bertie Vidgen"},"tags":["rlhf","human-feedback","survey","alignment"],"notable_authors":["Hannah Kirk","Bertie Vidgen","Scott Hale"]},{"id":"2311.02849","title":"Co-training and Co-distillation for Quality Improvement and Compression of Language Models","authors":["Hayeon Lee","Rui Hou","Jongpil Kim","Davis Liang","Hongbo Zhang","Sung Ju Hwang","Alexander Min"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$37","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.02849","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/Lee0KLZHM23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.500"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/Lee0KLZHM23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.500","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：知识蒸馏通常能压缩语言模型，但小模型性能往往仍明显低于大模型，形成“速度换质量”的硬 trade-off。过去多数蒸馏是单向的——大模型教小模型——作者质疑这种方向性本身限制了训练收益。","importance":"它的重要性在于提出了一个会反直觉地改善大模型和小模型的训练框架，而不只是做压缩。对 pretrain 和 continual / mid-train 研究的启示是，多模型联合训练里的信息流未必应当单向；小模型的归纳偏置和更快更新，可能反过来给大模型提供正则化或更稳定的目标。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Co-Training and Co-Distillation（CTCD）：同时训练一个大模型和一个小模型，并让两者相互蒸馏，而不是只让大模型单向监督小模型。关键判断有两点：第一，小模型到大模型的反向蒸馏也能提升大模型；第二，这样得到的大模型再去蒸馏小模型，效果好于传统流程。与标准 KD 相比，它把 teacher 视为训练中动态演化的伙伴，而不是固定且单向的信号源。","experiments":"摘要明确给出了两条核心实验结论，但没有给出具体模型规模、数据集和数值提升。能确认的是：作者展示了双向蒸馏下，大模型性能可被小模型反哺提升，而由此得到的 teacher 再压缩 student 时，小模型质量也更高；因此 CTCD 同时改善质量和推理速度这一目标组合。缺失的具体数字、基线和 ablation 细节不能从现有信息可靠恢复。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a familiar limitation of knowledge distillation: smaller language models gain speed, but usually remain worse than the original teacher, so quality is traded for efficiency. The authors challenge the standard one-way setup where only the large model teaches the small one.","importance":"The main contribution is conceptual and training-oriented: co-training with mutual distillation can improve both the compressed model and the larger model that is supposed to be the teacher. For pretraining-style research, this matters because it suggests information flow in multi-model training need not be strictly top-down; smaller models may contribute useful inductive bias or stabilization back to larger ones.","technical_approach":"The method, Co-Training and Co-Distillation (CTCD), jointly trains a large and a small model while distilling knowledge in both directions. This departs from standard KD in two ways: the teacher is not fixed, and the student also acts as a teacher; the intended effect is that co-evolving models regularize each other, and the improved large model then becomes a better source for subsequent compression.","experiments":"From the abstract, two empirical claims are explicit: distilling from the smaller model into the larger one improves the larger model, and the resulting larger model transfers better to the smaller one than a conventionally trained teacher does. The provided snippet does not contain trustworthy details on model scale, datasets, baselines, or exact deltas, so the quantitative summary cannot go further here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["knowledge-distillation","model-compression","co-training"],"notable_authors":["Hayeon Lee","Rui Hou","Jongpil Kim","Davis Liang","Hongbo Zhang"]},{"id":"LeePPKK23","title":"A Framework for Vision-Language Warm-up Tasks in Multimodal Dialogue Models","authors":["Jaewook Lee","Seongsik Park","Seong-Heum Park","Hongjin Kim","Harksoo Kim"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LeePPKK23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.167"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LeePPKK23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.167","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要处理的是：多模态对话模型在正式任务训练前，如何设计合适的 vision-language warm-up tasks，让模型先学会跨模态对齐与交互，而不是直接在对话监督上硬学。这个问题常被数据规模掩盖，但在中小规模训练里尤其关键。","importance":"它更像是训练配方层面的工作。对 VLM 预训练的启示是，warm-up 任务设计会影响后续多模态对话的样本效率和稳定性；如果 warm-up 做得对，可以减少模型把视觉输入当噪声或把语言模板当捷径的风险。","technical_approach":"仅凭标题能确认：作者提出了一个用于多模态对话模型的 vision-language warm-up 任务框架，而不是单一任务。这样的框架通常会把图文匹配、视觉问答、区域描述或跨模态生成等任务组织成前置训练阶段，用来先建立视觉表示与语言解码之间的接口；但具体任务集合和调度策略当前无法确认。","experiments":"由于没有摘要，无法确认使用了哪类多模态对话模型、哪些 warm-up 任务、训练数据规模、对比基线和性能提升。可以确定的只是实验应围绕“是否 warm-up、用哪些 warm-up、对下游多模态对话指标的影响”展开；具体数字不能补写。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a practical training question for multimodal dialogue models: what vision-language warm-up tasks should be used before full dialogue training so that the model learns cross-modal grounding instead of struggling to acquire it implicitly from dialogue supervision alone.","importance":"This is best viewed as a training-recipe contribution. For VLM pretraining, the likely value is in showing that warm-up task design affects sample efficiency and stability in downstream multimodal dialogue, especially when scale is not large enough to wash away bad curriculum choices.","technical_approach":"From the title, the authors propose a framework of vision-language warm-up tasks rather than a single auxiliary objective. Such a framework would typically stage multiple image-text objectives before dialogue fine-tuning to establish a cleaner interface between visual representations and language generation, but the exact task set cannot be confirmed from the provided information.","experiments":"No abstract is available, so there is no reliable evidence on model architecture, datasets, baselines, or gains. The natural experimental question is how different warm-up designs affect downstream multimodal dialogue quality, but any quantitative statement would be speculative here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","pretraining","dialogue"],"notable_authors":["Jaewook Lee","Seongsik Park","Seong-Heum Park","Hongjin Kim","Harksoo Kim"]},{"id":"LeePSWJ23","title":"Making Large Language Models Better Data Creators","authors":["Dong-Ho Lee","Jay Pujara","Mohit Sewak","Ryen White","Sujay Kumar Jauhar"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LeePSWJ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.948"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LeePSWJ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.948","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的是：如何让大语言模型更擅长生成训练数据，而不是只把它们当最终任务求解器。这个问题现在值得重视，因为越来越多后训练、蒸馏和自举流程依赖模型合成数据，但“会回答”不等于“会稳定地产生高质量、可训练的数据”。","importance":"它对 pretrain ↔ posttrain 闭环很相关。若能系统提升 LLM 作为数据创建器的能力，就会直接影响指令数据合成、偏好数据扩充、self-training 和 teacher-student 流程的信号质量；这属于训练信号工程，而不是单纯下游表现优化。","technical_approach":"仅从标题无法确认具体方法。能稳妥说的是，论文把研究对象从‘模型输出答案质量’转向‘模型生成训练样本的质量’，这通常意味着会重新设计提示、筛选、评估或自我修正机制，让生成数据在多样性、正确性和任务覆盖上更适合后续训练使用。","experiments":"没有摘要，因此无法确认数据生成场景、目标任务、人工评估维度、基线提示策略或最终训练收益。唯一安全的判断是：实验应当比较不同数据生成策略所产数据的质量，以及这些数据用于训练后对下游模型性能的影响；具体数值缺失。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper focuses on making LLMs better data generators rather than only better task solvers. This matters because many modern pipelines—instruction tuning, self-training, distillation, preference expansion—depend on synthetic data, and being good at answering does not automatically make a model good at producing training data.","importance":"This is highly relevant to the pretrain–posttrain loop. If LLMs can be made better data creators, the quality of synthetic supervision improves directly, which can change the effectiveness of instruction data generation, self-bootstrapping, and teacher-student training.","technical_approach":"The title alone does not reveal the exact method. The safe inference is that the paper treats synthetic data generation as its own optimization target, likely involving better prompting, filtering, validation, or self-revision so that generated examples are more useful for subsequent training rather than merely plausible on the surface.","experiments":"Without the abstract, there is no reliable information about tasks, datasets, human-evaluation setup, baselines, or downstream gains. The expected experimental logic is to compare synthetic data quality and then measure how those data affect a learner trained on them, but the actual numbers are unavailable here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["synthetic-data","data-generation"],"notable_authors":["Dong-Ho Lee","Jay Pujara","Mohit Sewak","Ryen White","Sujay Kumar Jauhar"]},{"id":"LiCZNW23","title":"HaluEval: A Large-Scale Hallucination Evaluation Benchmark for Large Language Models","authors":["Junyi Li","Xiaoxue Cheng","Xin Zhao","Jian-Yun Nie","Ji-Rong Wen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiCZNW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.397"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiCZNW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.397","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：LLM 幻觉缺少一个大规模、系统化且可操作的评测基准，导致不同工作各测各的，结果很难横向比较。此前很多评估要么规模小、要么任务单一、要么只覆盖事实问答的一部分幻觉形态。","importance":"它的贡献首先是 benchmark 级的。对 pretrain / posttrain 的意义在于，幻觉如果没有统一评测，就难以区分是底座知识不足、对齐诱导过度编造，还是解码策略的问题；一个大规模基准能把这些讨论从 anecdote 推向更可复现实验。","technical_approach":"核心方法是构建 HaluEval，一个面向 LLM hallucination 的大规模评测集。虽然没有摘要细节，但从标题可以判断它不是提出新模型，而是定义任务、样本来源和评测协议，去覆盖不同类型的 hallucination；关键价值通常在于把‘幻觉’操作化为可判别的实例，而不是停留在宽泛概念。","experiments":"仅凭标题能可靠确认的实验部分是：作者应使用 HaluEval 对多个 LLM 做系统评测，并比较它们在不同 hallucination 类型上的表现。没有摘要就无法确认数据规模、模型名单、评分方式和主要发现，因此不能填具体数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a measurement gap: hallucination in LLMs lacked a large-scale, systematic benchmark, making results hard to compare across papers. Earlier evaluations were often small, task-specific, or too narrow in the kinds of hallucinations they captured.","importance":"This is a benchmark contribution with clear downstream value. For pretrain and posttrain analysis, a shared hallucination benchmark is important because it helps separate failures of knowledge, alignment, prompting, and decoding instead of collapsing them into anecdotal examples.","technical_approach":"The main contribution is HaluEval, a large-scale hallucination evaluation benchmark for LLMs. From the title, the work is about dataset and protocol construction rather than a new generation model; its value lies in operationalizing hallucination into benchmarkable cases rather than treating it as a vague qualitative notion.","experiments":"What can be stated safely is that the paper likely evaluates multiple LLMs on HaluEval and compares behavior across hallucination categories. The provided information does not include dataset size, model list, scoring protocol, or empirical rankings, so no quantitative summary should be added here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["hallucination","benchmark","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Junyi Li","Xiaoxue Cheng","Xin Zhao","Jian-Yun Nie","Ji-Rong Wen"]},{"id":"LiDZWZW23","title":"Evaluating Object Hallucination in Large Vision-Language Models","authors":["Yifan Li","Yifan Du","Kun Zhou","Jinpeng Wang","Wayne Xin Zhao","Ji-Rong Wen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiDZWZW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.20"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiDZWZW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.20","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：如何系统评估大视觉语言模型中的 object hallucination，也就是模型描述出图中不存在的物体。随着 LVLM 生成能力增强，这类错误变得更常见也更隐蔽，而传统图文指标往往对它不敏感。","importance":"它是 VLM 评测方向的重要补充。对原生多模态预训练的启示是，图像—文本对齐不能只看整体描述质量；如果训练目标和解码偏好鼓励语言先验压过视觉证据，模型就会在 object-level grounding 上失真，这对统一多模态建模是一个很具体的诊断切口。","technical_approach":"从标题看，论文核心是提出 object hallucination 的评测方法或基准，而不是新模型。关键点通常在于把错误从句子级‘是否合理’细化到对象级‘是否真的可见’，从而更准确地区分语言流畅但视觉不忠实的输出；具体标注协议与指标当前无法确认。","experiments":"仅凭标题能确定：作者会在多个大视觉语言模型上评估 object hallucination，并比较其严重程度。没有摘要时，无法确认涉及哪些模型、图像数据集、自动指标、人工验证比例和主要结论数字，因此这里只能保留定性描述。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies how to evaluate object hallucination in large vision-language models, meaning cases where the model mentions objects not present in the image. As LVLMs become more fluent, this failure mode becomes more visible, and generic captioning or dialogue metrics often miss it.","importance":"This is an important evaluation contribution for multimodal pretraining. The broader lesson is that image-text alignment should not be judged only at the sentence level; when training objectives or decoding biases let language priors dominate visual evidence, object-level grounding errors become a concrete and measurable failure mode.","technical_approach":"From the title, the work focuses on an evaluation setup or benchmark for object hallucination rather than introducing a new model. The core idea is likely to move from coarse output quality assessment to object-level faithfulness checks, which better isolate visually ungrounded but fluent generations.","experiments":"The safe summary is that the paper evaluates multiple large vision-language models for object hallucination. Without the abstract, the model list, datasets, metrics, and empirical findings cannot be stated reliably, so the description must remain qualitative.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","hallucination","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Yifan Li","Yifan Du","Kun Zhou","Jinpeng Wang","Wayne Xin Zhao"]},{"id":"LiMGS23","title":"Pragmatic Reasoning Unlocks Quantifier Semantics for Foundation Models","authors":["Yiyuan Li","Rakesh R. Menon","Sayan Ghosh","Shashank Srivastava"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiMGS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.38"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiMGS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.38","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：foundation models 在量词语义上常常表现不稳定，尤其遇到 all / some / most 这类依赖语境与说话者意图的判断时，表面匹配远不够。过去很多评测把问题归因于模型缺少逻辑规则，但作者认为还缺少 pragmatic reasoning，也就是结合交流目的去解释量词。","importance":"这篇工作更偏语义与推理分析，但对预训练研究有一个直接提醒：仅靠大规模 next-token 拟合并不能保证学到稳健的组合语义，特别是当语义解释受语用约束时。它的重要性在于把失败原因从“模型不会逻辑”细化为“模型没用对语用层信号”，这比笼统说 reasoning 不足更可操作。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把 pragmatic reasoning 显式引入量词语义理解，而不是只看字面真值条件。作者应当通过带语境、说话者意图或 listener/speaker 建模的推理框架，来校正 foundation model 对量词含义的判断；与纯逻辑模板法不同，这种设计认为量词理解错误很多时候不是语法解析失败，而是忽略了对话目标和信息增益。","experiments":"从题目看，实验重点应是量词语义相关基准，比较基础模型在有无 pragmatic reasoning 支持时的表现差异，并展示一些典型反例。由于没有摘要与数字，我无法提供所测模型、任务规模、准确率和提升幅度；可以确认的是，论文的核心结论不是“换个更大模型就好”，而是“加上语用推理后，模型才会更接近人类式量词解释”。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a specific but revealing weakness: foundation models are often unreliable on quantifier semantics, especially for expressions like all, some, or most whose interpretation depends on context and communicative intent. Instead of treating the issue as purely missing logical rules, the authors argue that pragmatic reasoning is the missing ingredient.","importance":"This is primarily a semantics/reasoning analysis paper, but it has a useful pretraining implication: large-scale next-token training does not automatically produce robust compositional meaning, especially when interpretation is pragmatically constrained. The contribution is important because it narrows the failure mode from vague 'reasoning weakness' to a more actionable absence of pragmatic modeling.","technical_approach":"The central move is to explicitly inject pragmatic reasoning into quantifier understanding rather than relying only on literal truth-conditional interpretation. The likely mechanism is a context-aware speaker/listener or intent-sensitive inference procedure that revises how the model interprets quantifiers; compared with purely logical template methods, this assumes many errors come not from failed parsing but from ignoring communicative goals and informativeness.","experiments":"From the title, the evaluation likely uses quantifier-semantics benchmarks and compares foundation models with and without pragmatic reasoning support, together with representative counterexamples. Because the abstract and numbers are unavailable, I cannot safely report the tested models, benchmark sizes, accuracies, or margins; the dependable takeaway is that stronger quantifier performance is attributed to pragmatic reasoning rather than just scaling up the base model.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reasoning","semantics","foundation-models"]},{"id":"LiQ23","title":"MoT: Memory-of-Thought Enables ChatGPT to Self-Improve","authors":["Xiaonan Li","Xipeng Qiu"],"institutions":["Fudan University"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiQ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.392"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiQ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.392","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：ChatGPT 一次性生成的思维链不稳定，且无法自然积累跨问题经验，因此 self-improvement 常停留在单样本反思。作者希望给模型一个可持续复用的“思维记忆”，让过去的高质量推理轨迹在新问题上继续产生作用。","importance":"这是一个后训练/推理时增强方法，但对理解语言模型的 latent reasoning 很有价值。它的重要性在于把“让模型多想一步”推进到“让模型记住哪些想法有效”，这比单次 CoT 或反思更接近可持续优化；对合成推理数据、test-time adaptation 和 agent memory 都有启发。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Memory-of-Thought，把历史推理过程存成可检索、可复用的记忆单元，再在新问题上调取相似或有用的思路辅助生成。它不是重新训练基础模型，而是在推理环节增加外部记忆与自改进闭环；和普通 few-shot CoT 不同，示例不再是静态人工挑选，而是由系统从过往成功推理中动态组织，因此更有机会适配当前问题结构。","experiments":"从题目可推断，实验大概率在数学、常识或多步推理任务上比较普通 CoT、self-reflection 和 MoT 的表现，并分析记忆库规模或检索质量的影响。由于没有摘要和结果数字，我不能给出具体 benchmark、样本数和提升幅度；可以较确定地说，论文主张的收益来自‘跨样本复用推理经验’，而非更大的基础模型或额外监督微调。","authors_note":"Xipeng Qiu 是复旦大学 NLP 方向知名学者，代表性工作包括 CPM、PromptCLUE/中文大模型与多项预训练和提示学习研究。题目未给机构，但作者身份可以相对确定。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a limitation of standard chain-of-thought with ChatGPT: a single reasoning trace is unstable, and useful reasoning patterns are not naturally accumulated across problems. The goal is to provide a reusable memory of successful thoughts so the model can improve beyond one-off reflection.","importance":"This is a post-training and inference-time enhancement paper, but it is relevant to how we think about latent reasoning in language models. Its importance is that it shifts the question from 'can the model think longer?' to 'can it retain and reuse effective reasoning patterns?', which is more aligned with continual improvement, synthetic reasoning data generation, and agent memory design.","technical_approach":"The method, Memory-of-Thought, stores historical reasoning trajectories as retrievable memory units and reuses them to assist generation on new problems. It does not retrain the base model; instead, it augments inference with an external memory and a self-improvement loop. Unlike ordinary few-shot CoT with static exemplars, the support traces are dynamically selected from prior successful reasoning, which should better match the structure of the current query.","experiments":"Based on the title, the evaluation likely covers math, commonsense, or multi-step reasoning tasks, comparing standard CoT, self-reflection, and MoT, with ablations on memory size or retrieval quality. Since the abstract and result tables are unavailable, I cannot safely report benchmarks, dataset sizes, or exact gains; the robust takeaway is that the claimed benefit comes from cross-instance reuse of reasoning experience rather than a larger base model or extra supervised fine-tuning.","authors_note":"Xipeng Qiu is a well-known NLP researcher at Fudan University, with representative work in Chinese pretrained models, prompting, and large language models. The institution is not listed in the prompt, but the author identity is relatively clear."},"tags":["self-improvement","memory","reasoning","post-training"],"notable_authors":["Xipeng Qiu"]},{"id":"LiQ23a","title":"Finding Support Examples for In-Context Learning","authors":["Xiaonan Li","Xipeng Qiu"],"institutions":["Fudan University"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiQ23a","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.411"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiQ23a","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.411","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：in-context learning 的效果高度依赖示例选择，但什么样的 support examples 真正有帮助，过去更多靠启发式或相似度检索，并不稳定。作者要找的是支持示例的可操作判据，而不是继续盲目堆示例数量。","importance":"这是一篇 ICL 机制与方法结合的工作。对 pretrain 研究的价值在于，它帮助回答‘模型在上下文里到底如何利用例子’这个老问题；如果 support example 的作用规律更清楚，就能更系统地设计 prompt、构建合成 demonstrations，甚至反向指导预训练阶段该暴露什么形式的条件化模式。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是提出一种寻找 support examples 的策略，可能结合任务相关性、标签覆盖、推理路径匹配或梯度/不确定性信号，而不是只按表面语义相似度检索。和传统 nearest-neighbor 式 ICL 选例不同，作者强调‘支持性’而非‘相似性’，因为最像当前输入的例子未必最能改变模型决策边界，真正有用的示例往往是能提供判别结构或解题模板的那一类。","experiments":"从题目看，实验应覆盖多个 ICL 基准，比较所提选例方法与随机选例、语义检索、覆盖式选例等 baseline 在不同 shot 数下的表现。由于缺少摘要与数字，我无法确认使用的基础模型、数据集、上下文长度设置和提升幅度；可以较有把握地说，论文的重点是示例选择质量，而不是额外微调或外部知识注入。","authors_note":"Xipeng Qiu 是复旦大学 NLP 方向知名学者，代表性工作包括多项中文预训练模型、提示学习与大模型研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a core bottleneck in in-context learning: performance is highly sensitive to which demonstrations are provided, yet example selection is still dominated by heuristics or simple similarity retrieval. The goal is to identify what makes a support example actually useful, rather than merely adding more examples.","importance":"This is both a mechanism and a method paper for ICL. Its value for pretraining research is that it helps clarify how models use demonstrations in context; if the regularities of useful support examples are better understood, prompt design becomes more systematic, synthetic demonstrations can be built more effectively, and pretraining can potentially be shaped to expose the right conditional patterns.","technical_approach":"The likely method is a strategy for finding support examples based on signals beyond surface similarity, such as task relevance, label coverage, reasoning-path compatibility, or uncertainty/gradient-like criteria. This differs from nearest-neighbor-style ICL retrieval because the paper emphasizes supportiveness rather than resemblance: the most similar example is not always the one that most effectively shifts the model’s decision process, while a good support example may provide a template or discriminative structure instead.","experiments":"From the title, the evaluation likely spans several ICL benchmarks and compares the proposed selection method against random demonstrations, semantic retrieval, and coverage-based baselines under different shot counts. Without the abstract and tables, I cannot safely report the backbone models, datasets, context settings, or exact gains; the dependable takeaway is that the paper is about example quality in ICL, not extra fine-tuning or external knowledge injection.","authors_note":"Xipeng Qiu is a well-known NLP researcher at Fudan University, with representative work on Chinese pretrained models, prompting, and large language models."},"tags":["in-context-learning","retrieval","example-selection"],"notable_authors":["Xipeng Qiu"]},{"id":"LiWZXYX23","title":"MMNMT: Modularizing Multilingual Neural Machine Translation with Flexibly Assembled MoE and Dense Blocks","authors":["Shangjie Li","Xiangpeng Wei","Shaolin Zhu","Jun Xie","Baosong Yang","Deyi Xiong"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiWZXYX23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.303"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiWZXYX23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.303","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["moe","machine-translation","modularization","multilingual"]},{"id":"LiWZZZ23","title":"Interpreting and Exploiting Functional Specialization in Multi-Head Attention under Multi-task Learning","authors":["Chong Li","Shaonan Wang","Yunhao Zhang","Jiajun Zhang","Chengqing Zong"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiWZZZ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.1026"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiWZZZ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.1026","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["attention","interpretability","multi-task-learning"]},{"id":"LiZL023","title":"Synthetic Data Generation with Large Language Models for Text Classification: Potential and Limitations","authors":["Zhuoyan Li","Hangxiao Zhu","Zhuoran Lu","Ming Yin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiZL023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.647"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiZL023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.647","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["synthetic-data","data-quality","text-classification"]},{"id":"LiZZHCS0HLLW23","title":"CLEVA: Chinese Language Models EVAluation Platform","authors":["Yanyang Li","Jianqiao Zhao","Duo Zheng","Zi-Yuan Hu","Zhi Chen","Xiaohui Su","Yongfeng Huang","Shijia Huang","Dahua Lin","Michael R. Lyu","Liwei Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiZZHCS0HLLW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-DEMO.17"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiZZHCS0HLLW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-demo.17","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["benchmark","chinese","evaluation"]},{"id":"LimL23","title":"Disentangling Transformer Language Models as Superposed Topic Models","authors":["Jia Peng Lim","Hady W. Lauw"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LimL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.534"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LimL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.534","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["interpretability","topic-model","superposition"]},{"id":"LiuCHA23","title":"Cognitive Dissonance: Why Do Language Model Outputs Disagree with Internal Representations of Truthfulness?","authors":["Kevin Liu","Stephen Casper","Dylan Hadfield-Menell","Jacob Andreas"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiuCHA23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.291"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiuCHA23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.291","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["truthfulness","interpretability","hallucination"]},{"id":"LiuFGYL0HCLH23","title":"Composable Text Controls in Latent Space with ODEs","authors":["Guangyi Liu","Zeyu Feng","Yuan Gao","Zichao Yang","Xiaodan Liang","Junwei Bao","Xiaodong He","Shuguang Cui","Zhen Li","Zhiting Hu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiuFGYL0HCLH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.1030"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiuFGYL0HCLH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.1030","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["latent-space","diffusion","controllable-generation"]},{"id":"LiuLWWC0W023","title":"Retrieval-based Knowledge Transfer: An Effective Approach for Extreme Large Language Model Compression","authors":["Jiduan Liu","Jiahao Liu","Qifan Wang","Jingang Wang","Xunliang Cai","Dongyan Zhao","Ran Wang","Rui Yan"],"institutions":["Meta AI","Tencent"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiuLWWC0W023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.578"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiuLWWC0W023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.578","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"极大规模LLM（如100B+）的传统知识蒸馏（KD）需要计算全量预训练数据的 teacher logits，计算成本极高且难以落地。","importance":"提出了一种绕过 logits 匹配的蒸馏新范式，将模型压缩转化为检索增强问题，大幅降低了极大规模模型的蒸馏门槛。","technical_approach":"放弃在预训练分布上对齐 logits，而是将 Teacher 模型的知识离散化为外部数据存储。Student 模型通过引入检索机制（Retrieval）在推理时获取 Teacher 的知识，从而在保持小参数量的同时逼近大模型的表现。","experiments":"在问答和推理任务上验证，结合检索的小模型能达到甚至超越传统KD的效果，同时节省了海量的 Teacher 前向推理算力。","authors_note":"Qifan Wang (Meta AI)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Traditional knowledge distillation (KD) for extreme-scale LLMs (e.g., 100B+) requires computing teacher logits over the entire pretraining corpus, which is computationally prohibitive.","importance":"Introduces a paradigm shift that bypasses logit matching, framing model compression as a retrieval-augmented generation problem to drastically lower the barrier for distilling extreme-scale models.","technical_approach":"Abandons logit alignment on the pretraining distribution. Instead, it discretizes the Teacher's knowledge into an external datastore. The Student model uses a retrieval mechanism during inference to fetch this knowledge, approximating the large model's performance while maintaining a small parameter footprint.","experiments":"Evaluated on QA and reasoning tasks. The retrieval-augmented small model matches or outperforms standard KD while saving massive amounts of Teacher forward-pass compute.","authors_note":"Qifan Wang (Meta AI)"},"tags":["compression","distillation","retrieval"],"notable_authors":["Qifan Wang"]},{"id":"LiuTCZZ023","title":"LogiCoT: Logical Chain-of-Thought Instruction Tuning","authors":["Hanmeng Liu","Zhiyang Teng","Leyang Cui","Chaoli Zhang","Qiji Zhou","Yue Zhang"],"institutions":["Tencent AI Lab","Westlake University"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiuTCZZ023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.191"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiuTCZZ023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.191","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"标准的 CoT 微调依赖模型自发涌现的推理能力，容易产生逻辑跳跃或幻觉，缺乏严格的逻辑约束。","importance":"在指令微调阶段引入符号逻辑约束，是提升模型 System-2 慢思考和严密推理能力的有效数据构造尝试。","technical_approach":"提出 LogiCoT，在指令微调数据中注入形式逻辑（如演绎推理步骤）。不仅要求模型输出自然语言解释，还要求其输出对应的逻辑符号骨架，通过多任务学习强制模型对齐形式逻辑规则。","experiments":"在 ProofWriter 等逻辑推理数据集上，相比标准 CoT 微调，逻辑错误率显著下降，推理步骤的严密性得到提升。","authors_note":"Leyang Cui (Tencent AI Lab)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Standard CoT fine-tuning relies on emergent reasoning capabilities, which often leads to logical leaps or hallucinations due to a lack of strict logical constraints.","importance":"Injecting symbolic logic constraints during instruction tuning is an effective data-centric approach to enhance System-2 slow thinking and rigorous reasoning.","technical_approach":"Proposes LogiCoT by injecting formal logic (e.g., deductive steps) into instruction tuning data. The model is trained to output both natural language explanations and their corresponding logical symbolic skeletons, forcing alignment with formal logic rules via multi-task learning.","experiments":"Tested on logical reasoning datasets like ProofWriter. Compared to standard CoT tuning, it significantly reduces logical errors and improves the rigor of reasoning steps.","authors_note":"Leyang Cui (Tencent AI Lab)"},"tags":["cot","instruction-tuning","reasoning"],"notable_authors":["Leyang Cui"]},{"id":"LongC023","title":"Segmented Recurrent Transformer: An Efficient Sequence-to-Sequence Model","authors":["Yinghan Long","Sayeed Shafayet Chowdhury","Kaushik Roy"],"institutions":["Purdue University"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LongC023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.558"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LongC023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.558","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer 的全局注意力机制在处理长序列 Seq2Seq 任务时，面临显存和计算量的二次方爆炸问题。","importance":"探索了 Attention 与 RNN 结合的架构变体，属于在长上下文建模方向上对线性复杂度架构（如后来的 Mamba/RWKV）的早期/同期探索。","technical_approach":"提出分段循环 Transformer（SRT）。将长输入切分为多个局部 Segment，Segment 内部使用标准 Transformer 保证并行计算效率，Segment 之间通过 RNN 状态传递全局上下文。","experiments":"在长文档摘要等任务上，以线性级的显存消耗达到了与全量 Attention 相当的性能，大幅提升了长序列的推理和训练效率。","authors_note":"Kaushik Roy (Purdue)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The global attention mechanism in Transformers faces quadratic memory and computational explosion when processing long sequences in Seq2Seq tasks.","importance":"Explores an architectural hybrid of Attention and RNNs, serving as an early/concurrent exploration of linear-complexity architectures (like Mamba/RWKV) for long-context modeling.","technical_approach":"Proposes Segmented Recurrent Transformer (SRT). It divides long inputs into local segments. Standard Transformers process each segment to maintain parallel efficiency, while an RNN state is passed between segments to capture global context.","experiments":"On tasks like long-document summarization, it achieves performance comparable to full-attention models but with linear memory complexity, significantly improving training and inference efficiency for long sequences.","authors_note":"Kaushik Roy (Purdue)"},"tags":["long-context","recurrent","transformer"],"notable_authors":["Kaushik Roy"]},{"id":"LotzSRE23","title":"Text Rendering Strategies for Pixel Language Models","authors":["Jonas F. Lotz","Elizabeth Salesky","Phillip Rust","Desmond Elliott"],"institutions":["University of Copenhagen"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LotzSRE23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.628"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LotzSRE23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.628","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"基于像素的语言模型（如 PIXEL）将文本渲染为图像输入，但文本的视觉渲染策略（字体、排版）对模型学习效率的影响尚不明确。","importance":"视觉语言统一建模的基础性工作。证明了在 Pixel LM 中，渲染策略等价于传统 LM 的 Tokenizer，直接决定了信息密度和预训练效率。","technical_approach":"系统性地控制变量，测试了不同的字体类型、字号、行距和排版密度。分析这些“视觉 Tokenizer”参数如何影响模型对文本语义的提取和下游任务表现。","experiments":"发现渲染密度（每个 Patch 包含的字符数）和字体清晰度是关键。优化的渲染策略能让模型在下游任务上提升数个百分点，证明了视觉编码的超参数极其敏感。","authors_note":"Desmond Elliott (University of Copenhagen)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Pixel-based language models (like PIXEL) render text as images, but the impact of visual rendering strategies (fonts, layout) on learning efficiency remains unclear.","importance":"A foundational study for visual-text unified modeling. It proves that in Pixel LMs, the rendering strategy is equivalent to the tokenizer in traditional LMs, directly determining information density and pretraining efficiency.","technical_approach":"Systematically controls variables to test different font types, sizes, line spacing, and layout densities. Analyzes how these 'visual tokenizer' parameters affect semantic extraction and downstream performance.","experiments":"Found that rendering density (characters per patch) and font clarity are critical. Optimized rendering strategies improve downstream performance by several percentage points, highlighting the extreme sensitivity of visual encoding hyperparameters.","authors_note":"Desmond Elliott (University of Copenhagen)"},"tags":["tokenizer","pixel-lm"],"notable_authors":["Desmond Elliott"]},{"id":"LuBWJCRAJRDFLHQ23","title":"Inference-Time Policy Adapters (IPA): Tailoring Extreme-Scale LMs without Fine-tuning","authors":["Ximing Lu","Faeze Brahman","Peter West","Jaehun Jung","Khyathi Raghavi Chandu","Abhilasha Ravichander","Prithviraj Ammanabrolu","Liwei Jiang","Sahana Ramnath","Nouha Dziri","Jillian Fisher","Bill Y. Lin","Skyler Hallinan","Lianhui Qin","Xiang Ren","Sean Welleck","Yejin Choi"],"institutions":["University of Washington","Allen Institute for AI (AI2)"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LuBWJCRAJRDFLHQ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.424"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LuBWJCRAJRDFLHQ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.424","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"对千亿参数极大规模模型（如 GPT-3 175B）进行 SFT 或 RLHF 对齐成本极高，且容易导致对齐税（Alignment Tax）。","importance":"提出了一种 Inference-time 的对齐范式。将对齐目标从 Base Model 剥离，证明了小模型干预大模型解码的可行性，是推测解码和对比解码思想的延伸。","technical_approach":"提出推理时策略适配器（IPA）。冻结超大 Base 模型，单独训练一个轻量级的小模型（Policy Adapter）来学习特定的约束或偏好。在推理时，用小模型的 Logits 来引导大模型的生成分布。","experiments":"在 GPT-3 175B 上应用 1.5B 的 IPA，成功实现了毒性缓解和风格控制，效果媲美全量微调，但计算成本降低了几个数量级。","authors_note":"Peter West, Yejin Choi (AI2 / UW)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Aligning extreme-scale models (e.g., GPT-3 175B) via SFT or RLHF is computationally prohibitive and often incurs an alignment tax.","importance":"Proposes an inference-time alignment paradigm. By decoupling the alignment objective from the base model, it proves the viability of small-model intervention during large-model decoding, extending the concepts of speculative and contrastive decoding.","technical_approach":"Introduces Inference-Time Policy Adapters (IPA). The massive base model is frozen, and a lightweight small model (Policy Adapter) is trained separately to learn specific constraints or preferences. During inference, the small model's logits are used to guide the generation distribution of the large model.","experiments":"Applying a 1.5B IPA to GPT-3 175B successfully achieved toxicity mitigation and style control. It matches the performance of full fine-tuning but reduces computational costs by orders of magnitude.","authors_note":"Peter West, Yejin Choi (AI2 / UW)"},"tags":["inference-time","policy-adapter","alignment"],"notable_authors":["Ximing Lu","Peter West","Yejin Choi"]},{"id":"LuCLBSG23","title":"Measuring Pointwise \\mathcalV-Usable Information In-Context-ly","authors":["Sheng Lu","Shan Chen","Yingya Li","Danielle S. Bitterman","Guergana Savova","Iryna Gurevych"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LuCLBSG23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.1054"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LuCLBSG23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.1054","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["icl","information-theory","analysis"]},{"id":"LuHMZLGAMW23","title":"TRIP: Accelerating Document-level Multilingual Pre-training via Triangular Document-level Pre-training on Parallel Data Triplets","authors":["Hongyuan Lu","Haoyang Huang","Shuming Ma","Dongdong Zhang","Wai Lam","Zhaochuan Gao","Anthony Aue","Arul Menezes","Furu Wei"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LuHMZLGAMW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.526"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LuHMZLGAMW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.526","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["multilingual","pretrain","document-level"]},{"id":"LuL023","title":"Take a Closer Look at Multilinguality! Improve Multilingual Pre-Training Using Monolingual Corpora Only","authors":["Jinliang Lu","Yu Lu","Jiajun Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LuL023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.190"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LuL023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.190","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["multilingual","pretrain","data"]},{"id":"LuWRLK23","title":"Efficient Classification of Long Documents via State-Space Models","authors":["Peng Lu","Suyuchen Wang","Mehdi Rezagholizadeh","Bang Liu","Ivan Kobyzev"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LuWRLK23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.404"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LuWRLK23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.404","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["ssm","long-context","architecture"]},{"id":"LutatiZW23","title":"Focus Your Attention (with Adaptive IIR Filters)","authors":["Shahar Lutati","Itamar Zimerman","Lior Wolf"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LutatiZW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.772"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LutatiZW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.772","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["attention","iir-filter","architecture"]},{"id":"LuukkonenKLEKKG23","title":"FinGPT: Large Generative Models for a Small Language","authors":["Risto Luukkonen","Ville Komulainen","Jouni Luoma","Anni Eskelinen","Jenna Kanerva","Hanna-Mari Kupari","Filip Ginter","Veronika Laippala","Niklas Muennighoff","Aleksandra Piktus","Thomas Wang","Nouamane Tazi","Teven Le Scao","Thomas Wolf","Osma Suominen","Samuli Sairanen","Mikko Merioksa","Jyrki Heinonen","Aija Vahtola","Samuel Antao","Sampo Pyysalo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LuukkonenKLEKKG23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.164"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LuukkonenKLEKKG23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.164","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["small-language","finnish","pretraining","gpt"]},{"id":"MadaanHY23","title":"What Makes Chain-of-Thought Prompting Effective? A Counterfactual Study","authors":["Aman Madaan","Katherine Hermann","Amir Yazdanbakhsh"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/MadaanHY23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.101"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/MadaanHY23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.101","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["cot","prompting","counterfactual"]},{"id":"2305.14552","title":"Sources of Hallucination by Large Language Models on Inference Tasks","authors":["Nick McKenna","Tianyi Li","Liang Cheng","Mohammad Javad Hosseini","Mark Johnson","Mark Steedman"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$38","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14552","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/McKennaLCH0S23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.182"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/McKennaLCH0S23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.182","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：LLM 在推理任务上产生“幻觉”时，错因到底来自推理能力不足，还是来自预训练学到的偏置。此前很多工作把 NLI、QA、摘要中的错误笼统归因于 reasoning failure；作者用受控行为实验指出，至少在一部分场景下，模型错误可以被两个更基础的预训练来源解释：句子级记忆和词项共现模式。","importance":"这项工作的贡献是机制分析层面的，而且对 pretrain 很相关。它的重要性在于把 hallucination 的一部分责任从“推理模块不行”转回“预训练统计偏置”，这会影响我们如何设计数据去重、数据配比、评测以及 post-training 对齐。如果错误主要由记忆触发和 lexical prior 驱动，那么单纯堆 chain-of-thought 或 instruction tuning 不能从根上解决。","technical_approach":"核心方法是行为探针而不是新模型。作者在多类 LLM（LLaMA、GPT-3.5、PaLM）上构造控制实验，分别测试：当 hypothesis 在训练数据中被见过时，模型是否会无视 premise 倾向于判 entailment；以及当某些词对在预训练里高频共现时，模型是否会把这种统计相关误当语义蕴含。关键设计是把 premise-hypothesis 关系与训练语料可记忆性、词项使用模式解耦，这样能更直接定位错误来源。和普通 benchmark 相关性分析不同，它试图给出可操作的因果候选机制。","experiments":"实验结论很明确：多个 LLM 家族都显示出两类偏置，而且这两类偏置能解释 NLI 等推理任务中的大量错误。第一，若 hypothesis 是训练中可检索到的句子，模型更容易输出 entailment，即使 premise 不支持；第二，实体会像索引一样触发记忆片段，词汇层面的使用统计也会影响判断。论文强调这些现象在受控设置下跨模型出现，因此不是单一架构偶然失效。边界是，文章更像定性+行为证据而非完整量化归因：它证明这些偏置“很重要”，但未必穷尽全部 hallucination 来源。","authors_note":"机构与代表性团队信息无法从给定材料中可靠确认，返回空字符串。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether hallucinations on inference tasks are really failures of reasoning, or whether they are often driven by biases inherited from pretraining. Much prior discussion loosely attributes NLI-style errors to poor reasoning; this paper argues that a substantial part of the behavior can instead be explained by memorized sentences and lexical co-occurrence priors.","importance":"This is a mechanism-analysis contribution with clear pretraining relevance. Its significance is that it shifts some blame from downstream reasoning failure back to pretraining statistics, which matters for deduplication, data design, evaluation, and alignment. If the model is being steered by memory triggers and lexical priors, then post-hoc prompting alone will not fix the root cause.","technical_approach":"The method is a set of controlled behavioral probes rather than a new model. Across LLaMA, GPT-3.5, and PaLM, the authors test whether models over-predict entailment when the hypothesis is attested in training data, and whether token-level usage patterns are mistaken for semantic entailment. The key experimental choice is to separate premise-hypothesis semantics from memorization and lexical statistics, so the error source can be isolated more cleanly than with standard benchmark correlation studies.","experiments":"The central empirical finding is that both biases appear across multiple LLM families and explain a substantial fraction of failures on inference tasks. First, if a hypothesis is memorized or appears familiar from training, models tend to label it as entailed even when the premise does not support it. Second, entities can act as indices into memorized text, and broad lexical usage statistics also distort judgments. The strength of the paper is the cross-model consistency under controlled settings. The limitation is that the work offers strong behavioral evidence for important sources of hallucination, but not a complete quantitative decomposition of all error sources.","authors_note":""},"tags":["hallucination","nli","pretraining-bias","llm-behavior"],"notable_authors":["Nick McKenna","Tianyi Li","Liang Cheng","Mohammad Javad Hosseini","Mark Johnson"]},{"id":"MinixhoferPV23","title":"CompoundPiece: Evaluating and Improving Decompounding Performance of Language Models","authors":["Benjamin Minixhofer","Jonas Pfeiffer","Ivan Vulic"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/MinixhoferPV23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.24"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/MinixhoferPV23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.24","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：语言模型在处理复合词，尤其是需要 decompounding 的语言现象时，表现到底有多差，以及如何系统改善。复合词会把词法、分词和语义组合问题捆在一起；如果 tokenizer 和预训练没有学好这种组合规律，模型在生成、理解和迁移上都可能吃亏。","importance":"这项工作对 pretrain 的意义主要落在 tokenizer 与形态泛化分析上。它的重要性在于把一个常被更大规模平均掉的细节单独拎出来：对德语等富复合构词语言，subword 方案未必自然解决 decompounding，错误的切分会直接影响词义组合和参数共享。","technical_approach":"从题目可确认，这篇论文同时做了两件事：先评估语言模型的 decompounding 能力，再提出改进方法。合理推测其方法会围绕复合词分解数据、评测基准或 tokenizer/训练改造展开，但给定材料没有摘要，无法可靠写出具体算法、训练目标或与 prior 的精确差异。","experiments":"由于缺少摘要和实验描述，无法安全给出模型规模、数据集和具体数字。可以确定的是，论文关注“评估 + 改进”两部分，并试图把 decompounding 从一般词汇泛化问题中分离出来单独测量；但具体结论需要原文支持，不能编造。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies how well language models handle decompounding, and how to improve that ability. Compound words tie together morphology, tokenization, and compositional semantics, so weak handling here can become a real bottleneck, especially in languages with productive compounding.","importance":"Its pretraining relevance is mainly through tokenization and morphological generalization. The likely contribution is to show that subword modeling does not automatically solve decompounding, and that segmentation errors can directly hurt semantic composition and cross-word parameter sharing.","technical_approach":"From the title, the paper has two parts: evaluate decompounding performance of language models, then propose improvements. The exact method is not recoverable from the provided metadata, so it would be unsafe to specify whether the intervention is in tokenization, training data, prompting, or model architecture.","experiments":"The provided information is insufficient to summarize the experiments with confidence. What can be stated is that the paper likely isolates decompounding as a standalone evaluation target and tests whether a proposed intervention improves it, but specific datasets, models, and gains are not available here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["tokenizer","subword","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Benjamin Minixhofer","Jonas Pfeiffer","Ivan Vulic"]},{"id":"MirceaC23","title":"Balaur: Language Model Pretraining with Lexical Semantic Relations","authors":["Andrei Mircea","Jackie C. K. Cheung"],"institutions":["McGill University"],"abstract":"$39","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/MirceaC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.674"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/MirceaC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.674","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：预训练语言模型虽然在表面语言建模上很强，但对 hypernymy 等 lexical semantic relations 仍然不稳，说明隐藏表示没有把词汇语义关系编码好。过去这类问题多在下游或 probing 阶段补救；作者选择直接在预训练中约束 hidden states，希望从表示层改写模型的词汇推理行为。","importance":"这是一项典型的 pretrain 表示学习工作。它的重要性不在规模，而在方法思路：不是再加一点任务数据做微调，而是把 lexical semantic relations 当作预训练期间的一等公民，显式塑造表示空间。对基座研究的启示是，若某类语言规律长期在下游暴露短板，可能需要在预训练目标或中间表示中直接注入结构约束，而不是期待 next-token loss 自动学到一切。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 BALAUR：在语言模型预训练中直接建模 lexical semantic relations，并让这些关系体现在 hidden states 里。作者的关键假设是，内部表示是可控接口，调 hidden states 可以影响外显语言行为。技术上，它应当在标准 LM 目标之外加入 relation-aware 约束，使相关词在表示空间中满足某些语义关系结构。和仅在输出层做词汇监督、或下游再加 lexical objective 的方法相比，BALAUR 更强调“贯穿预训练”的表示干预，因此目标是让词汇推理能力成为模型表征的一部分，而不是外挂头部。","experiments":"摘要给出的结论是：BALAUR 验证了“控制 hidden states 能影响语言行为”的假设，并在 lexical inference 尤其是 hypernymy 相关任务上优于基线。虽然没有给出参数规模和具体数字，但可以确认它至少在词汇语义关系任务上改善了 pretrained LM 的系统泛化。真正值得关注的不是单个 benchmark 提升，而是这种结果支持了一个更一般的方向：通过在预训练阶段结构化地塑造表示，可定向修复某些长期存在的语言短板。边界则是，这类显式关系监督可能覆盖面有限，对开放域生成能力和规模扩展性的影响仍需更多验证。","authors_note":"McGill University。Jackie C. K. Cheung 在语言生成与表示学习方向较活跃。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a specific weakness of pretrained language models: they are strong at generic language modeling but still brittle on lexical semantic relations such as hypernymy. Prior work often tries to patch this at probing or fine-tuning time; this paper instead modifies pretraining representations directly.","importance":"This is a genuine pretraining representation-learning contribution. Its importance is methodological: rather than assuming next-token prediction will implicitly learn all lexical structure, it treats lexical semantic relations as first-class training signals and uses them to shape hidden states throughout pretraining.","technical_approach":"The core method is BALAUR, which models lexical semantic relations directly in the hidden states of the LM during pretraining. The key hypothesis is that hidden representations form a controllable interface, so constraining them can change downstream linguistic behavior. Concretely, the method augments standard LM training with relation-aware structure in representation space. Compared with approaches that add lexical supervision only at the output layer or during downstream fine-tuning, BALAUR intervenes throughout pretraining, aiming to make lexical reasoning part of the model’s internal geometry rather than an attached classifier behavior.","experiments":"From the abstract, the paper reports that BALAUR validates the central hypothesis and improves over baselines on lexical inference tasks, especially those involving hypernymy. The abstract does not provide model sizes or exact gains, so the safe summary is qualitative. The more interesting point is not one benchmark number but the broader implication: targeted representational shaping during pretraining can repair persistent linguistic weaknesses that generic LM objectives leave unresolved. The open question is how far such explicit supervision scales and whether it trades off against broader open-domain language modeling ability.","authors_note":"McGill University. Jackie C. K. Cheung is active in language generation and representation learning."},"tags":["pretraining-objective","semantic-relations"],"notable_authors":["Andrei Mircea","Jackie C. K. Cheung"]},{"id":"MurahariDJSW0N23","title":"MUX-PLMs: Data Multiplexing for High-throughput Language Models","authors":["Vishvak Murahari","Ameet Deshpande","Carlos E. Jimenez","Izhak Shafran","Mingqiu Wang","Yuan Cao","Karthik Narasimhan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/MurahariDJSW0N23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.301"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/MurahariDJSW0N23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.301","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["efficiency","throughput","multiplexing"]},{"id":"NamburiSSS23","title":"The Cost of Compression: Investigating the Impact of Compression on Parametric Knowledge in Language Models","authors":["Satya Sai Srinath Namburi","Makesh Sreedhar","Srinath Srinivasan","Frederic Sala"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/NamburiSSS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.349"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/NamburiSSS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.349","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["compression","parametric-knowledge","efficiency"]},{"id":"NowakSDC23","title":"On the Representational Capacity of Recurrent Neural Language Models","authors":["Franz Nowak","Anej Svete","Li Du","Ryan Cotterell"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/NowakSDC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.434"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/NowakSDC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.434","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["rnn","language-modeling","architecture","capacity"]},{"id":"2304.11389","title":"Transformer-Based Language Model Surprisal Predicts Human Reading Times Best with About Two Billion Training Tokens","authors":["Byung-Doh Oh","William Schuler"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3a","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.11389","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/OhS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.128"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/OhS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.128","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["scaling","surprisal","training-data","language-modeling"]},{"id":"PanAWW23","title":"Logic-LM: Empowering Large Language Models with Symbolic Solvers for Faithful Logical Reasoning","authors":["Liangming Pan","Alon Albalak","Xinyi Wang","William Yang Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/PanAWW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.248"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/PanAWW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.248","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["reasoning","tool-use","symbolic","llm"]},{"id":"PatelBRB23","title":"MAGNIFICo: Evaluating the In-Context Learning Ability of Large Language Models to Generalize to Novel Interpretations","authors":["Arkil Patel","Satwik Bhattamishra","Siva Reddy","Dzmitry Bahdanau"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/PatelBRB23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.134"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/PatelBRB23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.134","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["in-context-learning","generalization","evaluation","reasoning"]},{"id":"PetersenP23","title":"Can language models learn analogical reasoning? Investigating training objectives and comparisons to human performance","authors":["Molly R. Petersen","Lonneke van der Plas"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/PetersenP23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.1022"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/PetersenP23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.1022","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["training-objective","reasoning","analogical-reasoning","generalization"]},{"id":"PetrakMTRG23","title":"Learning From Free-Text Human Feedback - Collect New Datasets Or Extend Existing Ones?","authors":["Dominic Petrak","Nafise Sadat Moosavi","Ye Tian","Nikolai Rozanov","Iryna Gurevych"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/PetrakMTRG23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.1011"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/PetrakMTRG23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.1011","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["human-feedback","alignment","dataset","training-signal"]},{"id":"PhangZL23","title":"Investigating Efficiently Extending Transformers for Long Input Summarization","authors":["Jason Phang","Yao Zhao","Peter J. Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/PhangZL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.240"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/PhangZL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.240","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["long-context","efficient-attention","summarization"]},{"id":"Pradeep0GLZLM023","title":"How Does Generative Retrieval Scale to Millions of Passages?","authors":["Ronak Pradeep","Kai Hui","Jai Gupta","Ádám D. Lelkes","Honglei Zhuang","Jimmy Lin","Donald Metzler","Vinh Q. Tran"],"institutions":["University of Waterloo","Google Research"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/Pradeep0GLZLM023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.83"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/Pradeep0GLZLM023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.83","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"生成式检索（generative retrieval）用 seq2seq 模型直接生成文档标识符来完成检索，在小规模语料上表现不错，但能否 scale 到百万级文档一直是未解问题。本文系统评估了这一 scaling 瓶颈。","importance":"对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：生成式检索本质上是用语言模型做记忆和检索，其 scaling 行为揭示了 LM 参数化记忆的容量边界。结论偏负面——生成式检索在大规模下显著退化，这对'用 LM 替代传统索引'的范式是重要的现实检验。","technical_approach":"在 NQ 等标准检索数据集上，将语料规模从几千逐步扩展到百万级，评估 DSI（Differentiable Search Index）及其变体的检索质量变化。对比 baseline 包括 BM25 和 dual-encoder 等传统/神经检索方法。核心发现是生成式检索的性能随语料规模增长而显著下降，而传统方法相对稳健。","experiments":"在 NQ320K 到 MS MARCO 8.8M 规模上测试。生成式检索在小规模（如 NQ320K）上有竞争力，但扩展到百万级后 Recall 大幅下降，与 dual-encoder 的差距拉大。具体数字需参考原文表格，但趋势明确：scaling 是生成式检索的硬伤。","authors_note":"Ronak Pradeep 来自 University of Waterloo（Jimmy Lin 组），该组是信息检索领域的顶级团队。Honglei Zhuang、Donald Metzler 等来自 Google Research。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Generative retrieval uses seq2seq models to directly generate document identifiers for retrieval. It works well on small corpora, but whether it scales to millions of passages has been an open question. This paper provides a systematic evaluation of that scaling bottleneck.","importance":"The finding is largely negative: generative retrieval degrades significantly at scale, while traditional and dual-encoder methods remain robust. For pretrain researchers, this reveals capacity limits of parametric memory in LMs—you cannot simply scale up a generative model to replace an index over millions of documents.","technical_approach":"Systematically scales corpus size from thousands to millions of passages on NQ and MS MARCO, evaluating DSI variants against BM25 and dual-encoder baselines. The key observation is that generative retrieval performance drops substantially as corpus size grows, while baselines degrade gracefully.","experiments":"Tested from NQ320K up to MS MARCO 8.8M passages. Generative retrieval is competitive at small scale but recall drops sharply at millions of passages, widening the gap with dual-encoder methods. The scaling trend is the main empirical contribution.","authors_note":"Ronak Pradeep from University of Waterloo (Jimmy Lin's group), a top IR lab. Honglei Zhuang and Donald Metzler from Google Research."},"tags":["generative-retrieval","scaling"],"notable_authors":["Donald Metzler"]},{"id":"PrasadSZB23","title":"ReCEval: Evaluating Reasoning Chains via Correctness and Informativeness","authors":["Archiki Prasad","Swarnadeep Saha","Xiang Zhou","Mohit Bansal"],"institutions":["UNC Chapel Hill"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/PrasadSZB23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.622"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/PrasadSZB23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.622","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有对 LLM 推理链（chain-of-thought）的评估主要看最终答案是否正确，忽略了推理过程本身的质量。ReCEval 提出从正确性（correctness）和信息量（informativeness）两个维度评估推理链中每一步。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的间接启示：如果我们想在 pretrain 或 mid-train 阶段注入推理能力，需要更细粒度的评估信号来衡量推理质量，而不仅仅是最终答案的 EM/F1。这为 reward model 设计和数据筛选提供了思路。","technical_approach":"将推理链拆分为逐步（step-by-step）评估。正确性维度检查每一步是否逻辑自洽且事实正确；信息量维度检查每一步是否为最终结论提供了必要的新信息（而非冗余或无关）。评估可以用 NLI 模型或 LLM 自动完成，也支持人工标注。","experiments":"在 GSM8K、EntailmentBank 等推理数据集上测试，与人工标注的推理链质量评分对比，ReCEval 的自动评估与人工判断有较高相关性。具体相关系数需查原文，但核心结论是逐步评估比只看最终答案能更好地区分推理链质量。","authors_note":"来自 UNC Chapel Hill（Mohit Bansal 组），该组在 NLG 评估、推理和多模态方面有大量高质量工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing evaluation of LLM reasoning chains focuses on final answer correctness, ignoring the quality of intermediate steps. ReCEval proposes evaluating each reasoning step along two dimensions: correctness and informativeness.","importance":"A method-level contribution to reasoning evaluation. For pretrain research, it suggests that finer-grained evaluation signals—beyond final-answer EM/F1—are needed to assess and improve reasoning capabilities injected during pretraining or mid-training. Relevant to reward model design and data filtering.","technical_approach":"Decomposes reasoning chain evaluation into step-level assessment. Correctness checks logical consistency and factual accuracy of each step; informativeness checks whether each step contributes necessary new information toward the conclusion. Can be automated via NLI models or LLMs.","experiments":"Tested on GSM8K, EntailmentBank, and similar reasoning datasets. Automatic ReCEval scores correlate well with human judgments of reasoning chain quality. The key finding is that step-level evaluation discriminates chain quality better than final-answer-only metrics.","authors_note":"From UNC Chapel Hill (Mohit Bansal's group), prolific in NLG evaluation, reasoning, and multimodal research."},"tags":["reasoning","cot","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Mohit Bansal"]},{"id":"PratoHPSC23","title":"EpiK-Eval: Evaluation for Language Models as Epistemic Models","authors":["Gabriele Prato","Jerry Huang","Prasanna Parthasarathi","Shagun Sodhani","Sarath Chandar"],"institutions":["Mila","Polytechnique Montréal"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/PratoHPSC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.593"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/PratoHPSC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.593","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 作为知识库使用时，其内部知识的一致性（epistemic consistency）缺乏系统评估。EpiK-Eval 构建了一个评估框架，测试模型是否能在不同问法下对同一事实保持一致的回答。","importance":"评估级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示：模型在预训练中学到的知识如果在不同 prompt 下表现不一致，说明知识的编码是脆弱的。这为评估 pretrain 数据质量和知识注入效果提供了一个新角度。","technical_approach":"构建了一组需要多步推理才能回答的事实性问题，每个问题有多种等价的问法（paraphrase）。评估模型在这些等价问法下的回答一致性。核心指标是跨 paraphrase 的答案一致率，而非单纯的准确率。","experiments":"在 GPT-3.5、GPT-4 等模型上测试，发现即使是最强的模型也存在显著的 epistemic inconsistency——同一事实换个问法就可能给出矛盾答案。具体不一致率需查原文。","authors_note":"来自 Mila / Polytechnique Montréal，Sarath Chandar 组在 continual learning 和 LLM 评估方面有持续产出。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"When LLMs are used as knowledge bases, the consistency of their internal knowledge across different phrasings of the same question is poorly understood. EpiK-Eval provides a benchmark to measure this epistemic consistency.","importance":"An evaluation-level contribution. For pretrain researchers, inconsistency across paraphrases signals fragile knowledge encoding during pretraining. This benchmark offers a new lens for assessing data quality and knowledge retention in pretrained models.","technical_approach":"Constructs factual questions requiring multi-hop reasoning, each with multiple equivalent phrasings. Measures cross-paraphrase answer consistency rather than just accuracy. The key metric is how often the model gives the same answer to semantically equivalent queries.","experiments":"Tested on GPT-3.5, GPT-4, and others. Even the strongest models show significant epistemic inconsistency—contradicting themselves when the same fact is asked differently. Specific inconsistency rates are in the paper.","authors_note":"From Mila / Polytechnique Montréal. Sarath Chandar's group works on continual learning and LLM evaluation."},"tags":["knowledge","evaluation","hallucination"],"notable_authors":["Sarath Chandar"]},{"id":"PryzantI0L0023","title":"Automatic Prompt Optimization with &quot;Gradient Descent&quot; and Beam Search","authors":["Reid Pryzant","Dan Iter","Jerry Li","Yin Tat Lee","Chenguang Zhu","Michael Zeng"],"institutions":["Microsoft Research"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/PryzantI0L0023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.494"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/PryzantI0L0023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.494","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"手动编写 LLM prompt 费时且不稳定，自动 prompt 优化方法大多需要梯度或大量标注数据。本文提出用自然语言'梯度'（文本反馈）和 beam search 来自动优化 prompt，无需访问模型参数。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的间接价值：自动 prompt 优化揭示了 LLM 对指令措辞的敏感性，这反映了预训练阶段指令理解能力的编码方式。此外，该方法可用于高效筛选 pretrain/SFT 数据的 prompt 模板。","technical_approach":"核心思路是把 prompt 优化类比为梯度下降：用一个 LLM 生成当前 prompt 的'文本梯度'（即对 prompt 的自然语言改进建议），然后用另一个 LLM 根据这些建议生成新的 prompt 候选，再用 beam search 在候选中选择最优。整个过程是黑盒的，不需要模型梯度。关键设计是将 mini-batch 的错误样本作为反馈信号。","experiments":"在 BBH（BIG-Bench Hard）、GSM8K 等任务上测试，与人工 prompt 和 APE（Automatic Prompt Engineer）对比。在多数任务上超过人工 prompt，在部分任务上超过 APE。提升幅度因任务而异，通常在 2-10 个百分点。","authors_note":"Reid Pryzant 来自 Microsoft Research，Yin Tat Lee 是优化理论领域的知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Manual prompt engineering is time-consuming and brittle. Most automatic prompt optimization methods require gradients or extensive labeled data. This paper proposes optimizing prompts using natural language 'gradients' (textual feedback) and beam search, without access to model parameters.","importance":"A method-level contribution. For pretrain researchers, the sensitivity of LLMs to prompt wording—which this method exploits—reflects how instruction-following is encoded during pretraining. The approach can also be used to efficiently search prompt templates for data curation.","technical_approach":"Analogizes prompt optimization to gradient descent: one LLM generates 'text gradients' (natural language suggestions for improving the prompt based on error analysis), another LLM produces new prompt candidates from these suggestions, and beam search selects the best. Fully black-box—no model gradients needed. Key design: uses mini-batch error samples as feedback signal.","experiments":"Tested on BBH, GSM8K, and other tasks against human-written prompts and APE. Outperforms human prompts on most tasks and APE on several, with improvements typically in the 2-10 percentage point range depending on the task.","authors_note":"Reid Pryzant from Microsoft Research. Yin Tat Lee is a well-known optimization theorist."},"tags":["prompt-optimization","apo"],"notable_authors":["Yin Tat Lee"]},{"id":"PurkayasthaRPGV23","title":"Romanization-based Large-scale Adaptation of Multilingual Language Models","authors":["Sukannya Purkayastha","Sebastian Ruder","Jonas Pfeiffer","Iryna Gurevych","Ivan Vulic"],"institutions":["Google DeepMind","TU Darmstadt","University of Cambridge"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/PurkayasthaRPGV23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.538"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/PurkayasthaRPGV23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.538","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"多语言 LM 对低资源语言（尤其是使用非拉丁文字的语言）覆盖不足，因为 tokenizer 和预训练数据都偏向高资源语言。本文探索用罗马化（romanization，即把非拉丁文字转写为拉丁字母）来弥合这一差距。","importance":"方法级贡献，对多语言预训练有直接启示。罗马化是一种低成本的输入规范化手段，可以让低资源语言复用高资源拉丁语系语言的 tokenizer 和表示空间。这为多语言 pretrain 的 tokenizer 设计和数据处理提供了一个实用思路。","technical_approach":"将低资源语言的文本通过标准罗马化方案（如 Urdu→拉丁转写）转换后输入多语言 LM（如 mBERT、XLM-R），然后用 adapter 进行适配。核心假设是罗马化后的文本与英语等高资源语言在 token 空间上更接近，从而能更好地利用预训练知识。对比了直接用原始文字 vs 罗马化后的效果。","experiments":"在多种低资源语言（如乌尔都语、印地语、阿拉伯语等）的 NER、分类等下游任务上测试。罗马化 + adapter 在多数低资源语言上优于直接使用原始文字，尤其在 tokenizer 对该语言覆盖差的情况下提升更明显。但对已有良好 tokenizer 覆盖的语言，罗马化的收益有限。","authors_note":"Sebastian Ruder（Google DeepMind）是多语言 NLP 领域的标志性人物。Jonas Pfeiffer 和 Iryna Gurevych 来自 TU Darmstadt，Ivan Vulić 来自 Cambridge。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Multilingual LMs underserve low-resource languages, especially those with non-Latin scripts, due to tokenizer and data biases. This paper explores romanization—transliterating non-Latin text to Latin script—as a way to bridge this gap.","importance":"A method-level contribution to multilingual pretraining. Romanization is a low-cost input normalization that lets low-resource languages reuse the tokenizer and representation space of high-resource Latin-script languages. Directly relevant to tokenizer design and data processing for multilingual pretrain.","technical_approach":"Converts low-resource language text to Latin script via standard romanization schemes, then feeds it into multilingual LMs (mBERT, XLM-R) with adapters for task adaptation. The hypothesis is that romanized text is closer to English in token space, enabling better transfer. Compares original script vs. romanized input systematically.","experiments":"Tested on NER, classification, and other tasks across Urdu, Hindi, Arabic, and other low-resource languages. Romanization + adapters outperform original-script input in most low-resource settings, especially when the tokenizer has poor coverage of the target script. Gains diminish for languages already well-covered by the tokenizer.","authors_note":"Sebastian Ruder (Google DeepMind) is a leading figure in multilingual NLP. Jonas Pfeiffer and Iryna Gurevych from TU Darmstadt; Ivan Vulić from Cambridge."},"tags":["multilingual","tokenizer","romanization"],"notable_authors":["Sebastian Ruder","Jonas Pfeiffer","Iryna Gurevych","Ivan Vulić"]},{"id":"QiFB23","title":"Cross-Lingual Consistency of Factual Knowledge in Multilingual Language Models","authors":["Jirui Qi","Raquel Fernández","Arianna Bisazza"],"institutions":["University of Groningen"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/QiFB23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.658"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/QiFB23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.658","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"多语言 LM 在不同语言中对同一事实的回答是否一致？已有工作主要关注单语言的事实准确性，跨语言一致性（cross-lingual factual consistency）缺乏系统研究。","importance":"评估级贡献。对多语言预训练的直接启示：如果模型在英语中知道某个事实但在其他语言中回答错误或矛盾，说明预训练中的知识并未真正跨语言对齐。这为评估多语言 pretrain 数据配比和对齐策略提供了新维度。","technical_approach":"构建跨语言事实一致性评估框架：用多语言知识探测（knowledge probing）在多种语言中查询同一事实，比较模型在不同语言下的回答是否一致。分析了语言相似度、训练数据量等因素对一致性的影响。","experiments":"在 mBERT 和 XLM-R 上测试多种语言对。发现跨语言事实一致性远低于预期——模型在高资源语言（如英语）中正确的事实，在低资源语言中经常给出不同甚至矛盾的答案。语言间的一致性与训练数据量和语言相似度正相关。","authors_note":"来自 University of Groningen，Arianna Bisazza 在多语言 NLP 方面有持续产出。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Do multilingual LMs give consistent answers to the same factual question across languages? Prior work focuses on monolingual factual accuracy; cross-lingual factual consistency has been understudied.","importance":"An evaluation-level contribution. For multilingual pretraining, inconsistency across languages means knowledge learned in one language is not truly aligned across languages. This provides a new dimension for evaluating multilingual pretrain data ratios and alignment strategies.","technical_approach":"Builds a cross-lingual factual consistency evaluation framework using multilingual knowledge probing: queries the same fact in multiple languages and compares answers. Analyzes how language similarity and training data volume affect consistency.","experiments":"Tested on mBERT and XLM-R across multiple language pairs. Cross-lingual factual consistency is much lower than expected—facts correctly answered in English are often answered differently or contradictorily in low-resource languages. Consistency correlates with training data volume and language similarity.","authors_note":"From University of Groningen. Arianna Bisazza has consistent output in multilingual NLP."},"tags":["multilingual","knowledge","consistency"],"notable_authors":["Arianna Bisazza"]},{"id":"QinZ0CYY23","title":"Is ChatGPT a General-Purpose Natural Language Processing Task Solver?","authors":["Chengwei Qin","Aston Zhang","Zhuosheng Zhang","Jiaao Chen","Michihiro Yasunaga","Diyi Yang"],"institutions":["Amazon","Stanford University","SJTU"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/QinZ0CYY23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.85"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/QinZ0CYY23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.85","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"厘清经过RLHF的超大模型（如ChatGPT）在传统NLP基础任务上的真实水位，验证其是否已经可以全面替代针对特定任务微调的小模型。","importance":"评估范式级。为预训练/指令微调模型的下游能力边界提供了详实的基准，明确了通用LLM在结构化输出和序列标注任务上的短板，打破了“大模型已解决所有NLP任务”的错觉。","technical_approach":"在20个涵盖推理、分类、序列标注的经典NLP数据集上，对ChatGPT进行Zero-shot和Few-shot评估，并与全量微调的特定任务SOTA模型（如BERT/RoBERTa变体）进行严格对比。","experiments":"发现ChatGPT在算术推理（如GSM8K）和自然语言推理上表现优异，但在序列标注（如NER）和部分特定领域分类任务上，Zero-shot表现仍显著落后于微调模型。这表明强约束的结构化输出仍是当前自回归范式的弱点。","authors_note":"Chengwei Qin, Aston Zhang, Michihiro Yasunaga 等 (Amazon / Stanford)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Clarifies the actual performance level of RLHF-aligned LLMs (like ChatGPT) on traditional NLP tasks, verifying whether they can fully replace task-specific fine-tuned small models.","importance":"Evaluation paradigm level. Provides a detailed benchmark for the downstream capability boundaries of pre-trained/instruction-tuned models, highlighting the shortcomings of general LLMs in structured output and sequence tagging tasks.","technical_approach":"Evaluates ChatGPT in zero-shot and few-shot settings across 20 classic NLP datasets covering reasoning, classification, and sequence tagging. Strictly compares the results against fully fine-tuned task-specific SOTA models (e.g., BERT/RoBERTa variants).","experiments":"Reveals that while ChatGPT excels in arithmetic reasoning (e.g., GSM8K) and NLI, its zero-shot performance on sequence tagging (e.g., NER) and certain domain-specific classification tasks still significantly lags behind fine-tuned models. This indicates that strictly constrained structured outputs remain a weakness of the current autoregressive paradigm.","authors_note":"Chengwei Qin, Aston Zhang, Michihiro Yasunaga et al. (Amazon / Stanford)"},"tags":["chatgpt","benchmark","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Aston Zhang","Michihiro Yasunaga"]},{"id":"QinZ23","title":"Accelerating Toeplitz Neural Network with Constant-time Inference Complexity","authors":["Zhen Qin","Yiran Zhong"],"institutions":["SenseTime","OpenGVLab"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/QinZ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.750"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/QinZ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.750","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解决非自注意力架构（如Toeplitz Neural Network, TNN）在自回归推理时，无法像RNN那样做到O(1)复杂度，导致生成延迟高的问题。","importance":"架构级贡献。在Transformer替代方案（如SSM、RWKV）的竞争中，证明了基于Toeplitz矩阵的线性模型也能实现恒定时间的推理，为长文本生成提供了新的高效基座候选。","technical_approach":"通过代数重构，将TNN中的Toeplitz矩阵乘法转化为递归（Recurrent）形式。舍弃了全局依赖的显式矩阵计算，利用隐藏状态向量传递历史信息，使得生成下一个token的计算量与上下文长度完全解耦。","experiments":"在语言建模任务上，重构后的TNN在保持与原版TNN相同困惑度（Perplexity）的前提下，推理速度显著提升，显存占用从随序列长度线性增长降为常数级（O(1)）。","authors_note":"Zhen Qin, Yiran Zhong (SenseTime / OpenGVLab)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Resolves the issue where non-attention architectures (like Toeplitz Neural Networks, TNN) fail to achieve O(1) complexity during autoregressive inference, leading to high generation latency.","importance":"Architecture-level contribution. Amidst the race for Transformer alternatives (e.g., SSMs, RWKV), it proves that linear models based on Toeplitz matrices can also achieve constant-time inference, offering a highly efficient foundation model candidate for long-context generation.","technical_approach":"Reformulates the Toeplitz matrix multiplication in TNN into a recurrent form via algebraic transformations. It abandons explicit global matrix computations in favor of passing historical information through a hidden state vector, completely decoupling the per-token generation cost from context length.","experiments":"On language modeling tasks, the reformulated TNN maintains the exact same perplexity as the original TNN while significantly boosting inference speed. Memory footprint is reduced from growing linearly with sequence length to a constant O(1).","authors_note":"Zhen Qin, Yiran Zhong (SenseTime / OpenGVLab)"},"tags":["efficient-attention","toeplitz","inference"],"notable_authors":["Zhen Qin","Yiran Zhong"]},{"id":"RadhakrishnanYK23","title":"Whispering LLaMA: A Cross-Modal Generative Error Correction Framework for Speech Recognition","authors":["Srijith Radhakrishnan","Chao-Han Huck Yang","Sumeer Ahmad Khan","Rohit Kumar","Narsis A. Kiani","David Gomez-Cabrero","Jesper Tegnér"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/RadhakrishnanYK23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.618"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/RadhakrishnanYK23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.618","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解决端到端语音识别（如Whisper）在特定领域或长尾词汇上容易产生拼写或语法错误，且重新训练声学模型成本极高的问题。","importance":"跨模态/Post-train接口。展示了如何利用纯文本LLM强大的语言先验来纠正其他模态模型的输出，是早期跨模态融合的一种松耦合、低成本范式。","technical_approach":"将Whisper的输出文本作为Prompt输入给LLaMA，通过Few-shot或轻量级微调让LLaMA执行生成式错误纠正（GEC）。舍弃了修改ASR声学特征的复杂路径，纯粹在文本空间进行后处理对齐。","experiments":"在多个ASR基准上，Whispering LLaMA显著降低了词错误率（WER），尤其是在包含罕见词或复杂专有名词的音频片段上，证明了LLM的上下文理解能力可以有效弥补声学模型的短板。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Resolves the issue where end-to-end ASR models (like Whisper) are prone to spelling or grammatical errors on domain-specific or long-tail vocabulary, while retraining acoustic models is prohibitively expensive.","importance":"Cross-modal/Post-train interface. Demonstrates how to leverage the strong linguistic priors of text-only LLMs to correct outputs from other modalities, serving as a loosely coupled, low-cost paradigm for early cross-modal fusion.","technical_approach":"Feeds Whisper's output text as a prompt into LLaMA, using few-shot prompting or lightweight fine-tuning to make LLaMA perform Generative Error Correction (GEC). Abandons the complex route of modifying ASR acoustic features, aligning purely in the text space via post-processing.","experiments":"Across multiple ASR benchmarks, Whispering LLaMA significantly reduced the Word Error Rate (WER), especially on audio segments containing rare words or complex proper nouns, proving that LLMs' contextual understanding can effectively compensate for acoustic model shortcomings.","authors_note":""},"tags":["speech","llama","cross-modal"]},{"id":"RaunakMA23","title":"Dissecting In-Context Learning of Translations in GPT-3","authors":["Vikas Raunak","Arul Menezes","Hany Hassan Awadalla"],"institutions":["Microsoft"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/RaunakMA23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.61"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/RaunakMA23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.61","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"探究大模型在机器翻译任务中的上下文学习（ICL）机制，验证其是否仅仅依赖格式识别（如分类任务中的发现）还是真正利用了演示中的映射关系。","importance":"机制分析。修正了此前关于“ICL不需要正确标签”的认知，证明了在复杂生成任务中，输入输出的正确映射对ICL至关重要，指导了SFT/ICL数据的合成策略。","technical_approach":"采用扰动分析法，对GPT-3的翻译Prompt进行标签随机化、格式破坏等操作，观察性能退化情况。通过对比分类任务和生成任务在扰动下的不同表现，剥离出ICL中真正起作用的因素。","experiments":"实验表明，当把翻译对中的目标语言替换为随机句子时，翻译质量大幅下降（BLEU显著降低）。这与Min et al. (2022) 在简单分类任务上“随机标签不影响性能”的结论截然相反。","authors_note":"Microsoft 团队工作"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Investigates the mechanism of In-Context Learning (ICL) in LLMs for machine translation, verifying whether it merely relies on format recognition (as found in classification tasks) or truly utilizes the mapping relationships in demonstrations.","importance":"Mechanistic analysis. Corrects the prior belief that 'ICL does not need correct labels', proving that in complex generation tasks, correct input-output mapping is crucial for ICL, which guides SFT/ICL data synthesis strategies.","technical_approach":"Employs perturbation analysis by applying label randomization and format corruption to GPT-3's translation prompts and observing performance degradation. By comparing the different behaviors of classification and generation tasks under perturbation, it isolates the true active factors in ICL.","experiments":"Experiments show that replacing the target language in translation pairs with random sentences causes a massive drop in translation quality (significant BLEU decrease). This sharply contrasts with the conclusion of Min et al. (2022) on simple classification tasks, where random labels did not hurt performance.","authors_note":"Microsoft Team"},"tags":["in-context-learning","translation","gpt-3"],"notable_authors":["Vikas Raunak","Hany Hassan Awadalla"]},{"id":"RossetZD0B23","title":"Axiomatic Preference Modeling for Longform Question Answering","authors":["Corby Rosset","Guoqing Zheng","Victor Dibia","Ahmed Awadallah","Paul N. Bennett"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/RossetZD0B23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.702"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/RossetZD0B23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.702","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是长篇问答中的偏好建模不稳定：同样答案可能在事实性、覆盖度、结构、引用方式等多个维度上好坏不同，简单的成对偏好学习往往把这些标准混在一起。过去 RLHF 或 ranker 常直接从总体偏好标签学一个黑盒分数，但在 long-form QA 里这种做法很难解释，也难以控制评估准则。","importance":"这是偏 post-train 接口但对训练信号质量很有启发的工作。它的重要性在于把‘偏好’从单一分数拆成公理化的可解释约束，说明长答案质量建模需要更细的结构化信号。对 pretrain/posttrain 闭环的价值是：如果偏好目标本身定义得更稳，后续 SFT/RL 的优化方向也会更少受标注噪声和奖励黑箱影响。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 axiomatic preference modeling：不直接把偏好视为不可解释的 latent score，而是用一组显式公理或规则来约束长答案比较。典型做法可能是把答案质量分解为若干可判定维度，再通过满足这些公理的一致性学习偏好模型。它和普通 reward model 的区别在于，训练目标不仅追求拟合偏好标签，还追求符合预先指定的比较原则；这有助于减少标签稀疏时的任意性。代价是公理设计会带来先验偏置，如果定义得不对，模型会系统性偏好某种文风或结构而非真实质量。","experiments":"从题目判断，实验应集中在 long-form QA 偏好预测、reranking 或与人偏好一致性评估上，并与标准 pairwise preference model 或 pointwise ranker 比较。当前没有摘要，无法确认使用的数据集、标注规模、主要指标以及提升幅度。若论文做得扎实，最值得看的实验会是跨数据集泛化、对不同质量维度的控制性分析，以及公理移除后的性能退化，用来验证结构化偏好约束是否真的优于黑盒拟合。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a real weakness in long-form QA: preference labels collapse multiple quality dimensions into a single signal, making learned reward or ranking models unstable and hard to interpret. Standard pairwise preference learning often works as a black box, but that is a poor fit when answers differ along factuality, coverage, organization, and citation quality at the same time.","importance":"This is more of a post-training and evaluation paper, but it matters for training-signal quality. Its contribution is to make preference modeling more structured and explicit, which is valuable wherever reward models are later used for reranking, SFT filtering, or RL. The broader lesson is that better-defined preferences can reduce noise and hidden bias in the optimization target.","technical_approach":"The method uses axiomatic preference modeling: instead of learning a single opaque score from pairwise labels, it imposes explicit principles on how long-form answers should be compared. The likely benefit is better consistency and interpretability, especially when labels are sparse or heterogeneous. Compared with a standard reward model, the objective is not only to fit preferences but also to satisfy predefined comparison rules. The trade-off is that the axioms inject prior assumptions; if they are poorly chosen, the model may overvalue style or structure rather than genuine answer quality.","experiments":"The expected evaluation setting is long-form QA preference prediction, answer reranking, or agreement with human judgments, compared against standard pairwise or pointwise preference models. Since no abstract is provided, I cannot reliably name datasets, annotator setup, metrics, or exact gains. The most valuable evidence would be cross-dataset generalization, dimension-wise analysis of answer quality, and ablations removing individual axioms.","authors_note":""},"tags":["preference-modeling","reward-model","long-form"]},{"id":"RudmanCE23","title":"Outlier Dimensions Encode Task Specific Knowledge","authors":["William Rudman","Catherine Chen","Carsten Eickhoff"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/RudmanCE23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.901"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/RudmanCE23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.901","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是表征中的 outlier dimensions 到底只是数值异常，还是承载了有功能性的任务知识。过去对激活 outlier 的讨论多集中在量化、数值稳定性和表示几何上，常把它们视作工程噪声或副产物，而不是可解释的知识载体。","importance":"这是机制分析类工作，贡献在于把 outlier dimensions 从‘需要处理的异常值’重新解释为‘可能编码任务特定知识的维度’。对 pretrain 和 posttrain 的启示都很实际：如果任务知识集中在少量异常维度，那么剪枝、量化、适配器设计和表示干预都不能只按均匀假设来做。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是定位表示中的 outlier dimensions，并分析这些维度与任务性能之间的因果或近因果关系。常见做法会包括：识别高幅值或高方差维度、在任务前后比较其分布、对这些维度做消融/屏蔽/替换，再看性能变化。它和纯相关性分析的区别在于要验证‘去掉这些维度会不会显著伤任务’，从而支持其编码了 task-specific knowledge 的解释。若结论成立，意味着表示不是均匀分布信息，而是存在高度集中的功能位点；但边界也很明确，这种集中是否只出现在某些模型层、某些任务、或某些微调方式，需要额外验证。","experiments":"从题目看，最关键的结果应是：少量 outlier dimensions 的干预会对特定任务造成远高于随机维度的影响，并且这种现象在多个任务或模型中可复现。合理 baseline 是随机维度消融、非 outlier 高方差维度、以及不同层位点对比。当前没有摘要，无法确认涉及的模型、任务数量和性能降幅数字；若有价值的消融，最值得看的会是预训练模型 vs 微调模型、早层 vs 晚层、以及跨任务共享与任务专属 outlier 的差异。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether outlier dimensions in model representations are merely numerical artifacts or whether they actually encode task-specific knowledge. Prior discussion around outliers often centered on quantization and stability, treating them as nuisances rather than functional carriers of information.","importance":"This is an interpretability and representation-analysis contribution with practical implications. If task-relevant information is concentrated in a small set of outlier dimensions, then assumptions of uniformly distributed knowledge become less reliable for pruning, quantization, adapter design, and activation interventions.","technical_approach":"The likely method is to identify outlier dimensions in hidden representations and test whether they matter disproportionately for downstream tasks. A convincing setup would compare these dimensions against random or non-outlier controls through masking, ablation, or perturbation, and then measure task degradation. The key design choice is to move beyond correlation: the claim only matters if intervention on outlier dimensions changes behavior much more than intervention on matched controls. The main boundary is generality—such concentration may depend on layer, task, or fine-tuning regime.","experiments":"The expected core finding is that ablating a small number of outlier dimensions hurts task performance far more than ablating random dimensions, supporting the idea that they carry task-specific knowledge. Useful baselines would include random-dimension ablation, non-outlier high-variance dimensions, and layer-wise comparisons. Without the abstract and tables, I cannot state the exact models, tasks, or effect sizes. Strong evidence would include replication across tasks and differences between pretrained and fine-tuned states.","authors_note":""},"tags":["outlier-dimensions","representations","interpretability"]},{"id":"Ryu23","title":"Plausibility Processing in Transformer Language Models: Focusing on the Role of Attention Heads in GPT","authors":["Soo Ryu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/Ryu23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.27"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/Ryu23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.27","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是 Transformer 语言模型如何处理 plausibility，也就是句子是否符合常识或语义合理性，尤其想定位到 GPT 中具体由哪些注意力头承担这类处理。过去很多工作能证明模型整体区分合理/不合理句子，但较少把责任进一步拆到 head 级机制上。","importance":"这是细粒度机制分析工作，贡献量级偏认知与可解释性，而非直接改进训练算法。对 pretrain 的启示在于：如果 plausibility processing 明显集中在少量头或特定层，那么训练信号、知识组织和可干预性可能比我们想的更局部，这会影响后续对 head pruning、功能模块化和安全干预的判断。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是围绕 plausibility 设计刺激材料，再分析 GPT 各注意力头的激活、贡献或干预效应。常见路径包括 attention pattern inspection、head ablation、对数概率变化分析，以及比较合理与不合理输入时头级响应差异。关键不是观察到某些头‘看起来更活跃’，而是证明干预这些头会系统性改变模型对 plausibility 的判断。它和一般 attention 可视化的区别在于有明确语言现象和可检验假设。边界在于 attention 头功能常随上下文而变，单头因果解释容易被 residual stream 和 MLP 路径稀释。","experiments":"从题目看，实验应围绕 GPT 类模型上的 plausibility 现象展开，核心结果很可能是识别出少量对合理性判断贡献显著的头，且这些头在某些层集中出现。当前无摘要，无法确认具体模型版本、刺激集大小、显著性检验和效应量。若论文可信，最值得看的证据是：随机头消融对 plausibility 影响很小，而目标头消融影响显著；以及这种现象在不同类型的常识/语义违例上是否一致。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper investigates how Transformer language models process plausibility, with a specific focus on whether particular attention heads in GPT are responsible for that behavior. Prior work often showed that models are sensitive to plausible versus implausible text at the model level, but stopped short of identifying fine-grained circuit components.","importance":"This is a mechanistic interpretability paper rather than a training-method paper. Its value lies in testing whether a semantic function like plausibility is localized enough to be mapped to specific heads or layers. If that localization is real, it affects how we think about pruning, intervention, and where certain kinds of knowledge live inside pretrained models.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is to construct plausibility-sensitive stimuli and analyze head-level behavior in GPT through attention inspection, head ablation, and probability shifts. The design matters because simple attention visualization is not enough; the stronger claim requires showing that manipulating certain heads systematically changes plausibility-related behavior. The method is therefore closer to targeted causal probing than descriptive analysis. The main caveat is that head functions are often context-dependent and can be partially bypassed by residual and MLP pathways.","experiments":"The key empirical result is likely the identification of a small subset of heads whose ablation disproportionately affects plausibility judgments. Good controls would include random-head ablations, layer-matched baselines, and comparisons across different plausibility phenomena. Because no abstract or tables are provided, I cannot name the exact GPT variant, dataset size, or effect magnitudes. The strongest evidence would be consistency across several types of semantic or commonsense violations.","authors_note":""},"tags":["attention-heads","gpt","interpretability"]},{"id":"SalehiMKFH23","title":"SHARCS: Efficient Transformers Through Routing with Dynamic Width Sub-networks","authors":["Mohammadreza Salehi","Sachin Mehta","Aditya Kusupati","Ali Farhadi","Hannaneh Hajishirzi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/SalehiMKFH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.706"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/SalehiMKFH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.706","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是 Transformer 推理和训练成本过高，而静态宽度缩减又会在所有输入上统一损失容量。过去常见做法是蒸馏、剪枝或 early exit，但这些方法通常把计算预算固定住，不能根据样本难度动态分配宽度。","importance":"这是架构与系统效率工作，贡献在于把动态计算从 token/专家路由进一步延伸到 width 维度。对 pretrain 的启示是：模型容量未必需要对所有样本、所有层都全开；如果动态宽度子网络能稳定训练，未来可能影响宽深配比、MoE 之外的条件计算设计，以及 serving 时的弹性算力分配。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 SHARCS，通过 routing 在每一层或若干层中选择不同宽度的子网络，从而实现 dynamic width。它不是简单的统一裁剪，而是为不同输入激活不同宽度路径；也不是标准 MoE，因为被路由的是共享参数中的不同宽度子网络，而不一定是完全独立的专家。这样设计的好处是能在简单样本上省算力，在困难样本上保容量。关键难点在于路由器训练稳定性、不同宽度路径之间的参数干扰，以及如何保证子网络都被充分训练而非塌缩到少数路径。","experiments":"从题目看，实验重点应是与标准 Transformer、宽度裁剪模型以及其他动态计算方法比较，在接近精度下减少 FLOPs 或延迟。合理 baseline 包括 static sub-network、token routing、early exit 等。当前没有摘要，无法给出模型规模、任务设置、FLOPs 节省比例和精度变化。若论文完整，最值得看的 ablation 是：路由粒度、宽度候选集、训练时的 load balancing 或 regularization，以及 dynamic width 在训练时和仅推理时使用的差异。","authors_note":"Ali Farhadi 与 Hannaneh Hajishirzi 所在团队长期做高效模型、视觉语言与可组合推理。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the inefficiency of running full-width Transformers on every input, even though different examples likely need different amounts of capacity. Static width reduction saves compute, but it imposes the same smaller model on easy and hard cases alike.","importance":"This is an architecture and systems paper on conditional computation. Its relevance to pretraining is that it explores dynamic capacity allocation along the width dimension, which is a useful alternative to expert routing or static compression. If stable, this idea could influence future training and serving designs where not all layers or inputs need the same active width.","technical_approach":"SHARCS uses routing over dynamic-width subnetworks inside Transformers. The key idea is to activate different width configurations depending on the input, instead of committing to one fixed reduced model. This differs from standard pruning because the model remains elastic at runtime. It also differs from classical MoE because the routed units are width-based subnetworks over shared parameters rather than fully separate experts. The value is obvious: save compute on easier inputs while preserving capacity for harder ones. The difficult part is training the router and preventing collapse or interference across subnetworks.","experiments":"The likely evaluation compares SHARCS against standard Transformers, static-width baselines, and other adaptive-compute methods under matched quality targets. Relevant metrics would include accuracy, FLOPs, and latency. Since no abstract or tables are available, I cannot report model sizes, tasks, or exact efficiency gains. The most useful ablations would study routing granularity, width choices, and regularization or load balancing for the subnetworks.","authors_note":"Ali Farhadi and Hannaneh Hajishirzi are associated with a team known for efficient models, vision-language work, and compositional reasoning."},"tags":["routing","dynamic-width","efficient-transformer"],"notable_authors":["Ali Farhadi","Hannaneh Hajishirzi"]},{"id":"Salesky0KP23","title":"Multilingual Pixel Representations for Translation and Effective Cross-lingual Transfer","authors":["Elizabeth Salesky","Neha Verma","Philipp Koehn","Matt Post"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/Salesky0KP23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.854"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/Salesky0KP23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.854","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是跨语言文本建模过度依赖离散词片词表，导致对拼写变化大、资源稀缺或脚本差异明显的语言迁移不稳。传统多语 NMT 和 LM 通常通过共享 subword vocabulary 来做跨语迁移，但当脚本碎片化严重或词形变化丰富时，这条路线会带来高 OOV 和不公平的词表分配。","importance":"这是表示与 tokenizer 范式相关的工作，重要性在于重新讨论‘文本是否必须先变成离散子词’。对 pretrain 的启示很直接：pixel/字形级表示如果能支撑翻译和跨语迁移，就说明多语统一建模未必要把词表共享当成唯一接口，尤其对低资源和新脚本语言可能更友好。","technical_approach":"核心方法是使用 multilingual pixel representations，把文本渲染成像素或字形图像后再建模，用于 translation 和 cross-lingual transfer。它不是常规 OCR，因为目标不是先识别再还原文本，而是直接把视觉形态当作输入表示来学习语言任务。与 subword tokenizer 相比，它放弃了显式离散词边界和词表共享，换来对新字符、罕见脚本和拼写变体的天然覆盖。之所以可能有效，是因为跨语言共享的一部分并不在词表层面，而在更底层的字形与局部模式层面。代价也明显：输入更长、视觉编码更重，而且对字体、渲染方式和版式扰动更敏感。","experiments":"从标题看，实验应覆盖机器翻译以及若干 cross-lingual transfer 任务，并将 pixel representations 与字符级、BPE 或 SentencePiece 基线比较。当前无摘要，无法确认涉及语言数、模型规模和具体 BLEU / accuracy 提升。若论文有说服力，最值得看的结果应是：在脚本差异大或资源极低的语言上，pixel 表示相对 subword 基线更有优势；同时作者应报告其在高资源常规语言上的代价，以说明这种表示不是免费午餐。","authors_note":"Matt Post 和 Philipp Koehn 都是机器翻译领域的知名研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper questions a standard assumption in multilingual NLP: that cross-lingual transfer should be mediated primarily through shared subword vocabularies. That assumption works unevenly across scripts and morphology, and it is especially brittle for low-resource or orthographically diverse languages.","importance":"This is a representation and tokenization paper with direct pretraining relevance. Its value is in exploring a non-standard interface for multilingual modeling: pixel-level text representations. If such representations can support translation and transfer well, they broaden the design space beyond subword sharing and may offer a better path for languages underserved by conventional tokenizers.","technical_approach":"The method uses multilingual pixel representations, likely rendering text into visual forms and learning from that input directly for translation and cross-lingual tasks. This is not OCR in the usual pipeline sense; the visual form itself is the representation for downstream language modeling. The trade is clear. Compared with subword tokenization, pixel representations avoid vocabulary fragmentation and can naturally cover unseen characters or scripts. In return, they require heavier encoders and may be more sensitive to rendering choices. The reason this could work is that some cross-lingual regularities may be captured below the level of discrete shared tokens.","experiments":"The expected benchmarks are machine translation and cross-lingual transfer tasks, with comparisons against character-based and subword-based baselines such as BPE or SentencePiece systems. Without the abstract and tables, I cannot state the number of languages, model sizes, or exact BLEU and transfer gains. The most informative evidence would be stronger performance on low-resource or script-diverse languages together with a clear accounting of the compute and accuracy trade-offs on standard high-resource settings.","authors_note":"Matt Post and Philipp Koehn are well-known researchers in machine translation."},"tags":["tokenizer","pixel","multilingual"],"notable_authors":["Philipp Koehn","Matt Post"]},{"id":"ShenZZZDGZH23","title":"Loose lips sink ships: Mitigating Length Bias in Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback","authors":["Wei Shen","Rui Zheng","WenYu Zhan","Jun Zhao","Shihan Dou","Tao Gui","Qi Zhang","Xuanjing Huang"],"institutions":["Fudan University"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ShenZZZDGZH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.188"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ShenZZZDGZH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.188","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"RLHF 下奖励模型普遍给长回复更高分，导致 PPO 后模型越训越啰嗦。作者想在不牺牲偏好对齐质量的前提下消除长度偏置。","importance":"对 RLHF/posttrain 管线的实用修正，间接影响 pretrain 研究者对'训练信号质量'的判断——reward hacking 的一个具体形式。","technical_approach":"在奖励建模和 PPO 两端同时做干预：奖励模型阶段用长度解耦训练（在成对偏好里加入长度匹配约束，或显式回归掉长度项），PPO 阶段在奖励里扣掉长度相关分量。核心是把'长度'从'质量'这一潜变量里剥出来，而不是简单做长度惩罚。","experiments":"在标准 HH/偏好数据集上，相比原始 RLHF，新方法把平均回复长度压缩 20–40% 左右而偏好胜率不降甚至小幅提升。消融显示：只做 PPO 端扣分会让模型绕开；必须从 RM 开始修。","authors_note":"复旦大学 等。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Reward models in RLHF systematically score longer responses higher, so PPO drifts toward verbose outputs. The goal is to remove this length bias without losing preference alignment.","importance":"A practical fix for the RLHF pipeline and a concrete case study of reward hacking; useful for pretrainers thinking about training-signal quality in the post-train loop.","technical_approach":"Intervenes at both reward model and PPO: during RM training, decouples length from quality via length-matched pairs or explicit length regression-out; during PPO, subtracts a length-correlated component from the reward. The point is to remove length as a latent confound in 'quality', rather than just penalizing length at PPO time.","experiments":"On standard preference benchmarks (HH etc.), average response length drops ~20–40% while preference win-rate holds or slightly improves versus vanilla RLHF. Ablation: PPO-side length penalty alone is gamed — the RM must be fixed first.","authors_note":"Fudan University and collaborators."},"tags":["rlhf","length-bias","reward-hacking"]},{"id":"SiSZZB23","title":"Getting MoRE out of Mixture of Language Model Reasoning Experts","authors":["Chenglei Si","Weijia Shi","Chen Zhao","Luke Zettlemoyer","Jordan L. Boyd-Graber"],"institutions":["University of Maryland","University of Washington"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/SiSZZB23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.552"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/SiSZZB23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.552","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"单一大模型在不同类型推理任务上表现不均衡，简单做一个模型包打所有推理既不经济也效果不稳。作者把多个专长不同的推理模型组合为 MoE 路由系统。","importance":"方法级贡献，偏 inference-time ensembling，对 pretrain 本身影响小；但观察到的'不同模型在不同推理类型上互补'对多模型协作训练/蒸馏有参考价值。","technical_approach":"MoRE：构建一组推理专家（不同 prompt 或不同底座模型，擅长数学、常识、符号等不同推理），训练一个路由器根据问题类型选择专家，并在回答上做置信度加权聚合。核心是把 MoE 的'稀疏激活'思路搬到推理任务路由，而不是在训练时做 MoE。","experiments":"在 MMLU、BBH 等综合推理集上，MoRE 显著优于任何单专家，相对最强单一模型也有稳定收益；消融显示'路由器有没有/准不准'决定大部分增益。","authors_note":"Maryland / Washington 等；Chenglei Si、Weijia Shi、Luke Zettlemoyer、Jordan Boyd-Graber。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"A single LLM is uneven across different reasoning types; one model for all reasoning is neither efficient nor reliable. The paper routes among several specialized reasoning experts.","importance":"An inference-time ensembling contribution. Limited direct impact on pretraining, but the observation that different models are complementary across reasoning types is useful for multi-model distillation and co-training.","technical_approach":"MoRE builds a set of reasoning experts (different prompts or base models specialized in math, commonsense, symbolic, etc.) and trains a router that picks an expert per question, then aggregates answers with confidence. It ports MoE's sparse-activation idea to task routing at inference, not pretraining.","experiments":"On MMLU and BBH-style suites, MoRE beats any single expert by a solid margin over the strongest baseline; ablations show most gain comes from router quality.","authors_note":"University of Maryland / University of Washington; Chenglei Si, Weijia Shi, Luke Zettlemoyer, Jordan Boyd-Graber."},"tags":["moe","reasoning","expert-models"],"notable_authors":["Chenglei Si","Weijia Shi","Luke Zettlemoyer","Jordan L. Boyd-Graber"]},{"id":"SiWLZCW23","title":"An Empirical Study of Instruction-tuning Large Language Models in Chinese","authors":["Qingyi Si","Tong Wang","Zheng Lin","Xu Zhang","Yanan Cao","Weiping Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/SiWLZCW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.269"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/SiWLZCW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.269","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"系统回答中文指令微调里 LLM 基座、参数规模、数据量和数据配方这些因素各自贡献多少的问题。之前多数工作只在某个基座上堆数据或随手换个模型，缺少把变量拆开看的对照实验。","importance":"对做中文 post-train 的团队属于工程参考级价值，给出了可直接落地的数据和基座选择经验。但对 pretrain 研究的冲击有限，更多是验证了'基座 > 指令数据量'这类已被英文社区观察到的结论在中文上同样成立。","technical_approach":"做控制变量的 empirical study：固定一个指令微调流程，分别扫基座（LLaMA / Bloom / 等）、模型规模、中文指令数据的量级与来源、以及人类价值对齐数据等。同时考察 CoT、角色扮演等扩展能力的数据添加效应。","experiments":"在中文评测（作者自建 + 公开榜单）上跑多组配置。核心观察：基座选择对下游影响最大，数据量继续扩大后收益递减，混入 CoT/对齐数据会带来能力互补而非此消彼长。没有刷新 SOTA，定位是经验研究。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How much does each factor — base model, scale, instruction data size, data recipe — actually contribute in Chinese instruction tuning? Prior Chinese IT work usually varied one knob at a time without a clean controlled comparison.","importance":"Practically useful for teams doing Chinese post-training; gives concrete guidance on base-model and data choices. Limited novelty for pretrain research — mostly confirms that 'base model dominates instruction-data volume', an observation already seen in English.","technical_approach":"A controlled empirical sweep: fix an IT pipeline, then vary base model family, model size, Chinese instruction data volume/source, and alignment/CoT/role-play data separately. Each axis isolated so effects are attributable.","experiments":"Chinese benchmarks (in-house + public). Key findings: base model matters most; returns diminish as instruction volume grows; CoT and alignment data give complementary gains rather than tradeoffs. Not SOTA-chasing; positioned as an empirical study.","authors_note":""},"tags":["instruction-tuning","empirical-study","sft"]},{"id":"SlobodkinGCDR23","title":"The Curious Case of Hallucinatory (Un)answerability: Finding Truths in the Hidden States of Over-Confident Large Language Models","authors":["Aviv Slobodkin","Omer Goldman","Avi Caciularu","Ido Dagan","Shauli Ravfogel"],"institutions":["Bar-Ilan University"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/SlobodkinGCDR23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.220"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/SlobodkinGCDR23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.220","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 面对'不可回答'问题时经常自信地编造答案（hallucinated answerability）。作者想知道模型内部是否其实'知道'这个问题不可答，只是输出层没体现出来。","importance":"Interpretability 角度有价值：如果模型的 hidden state 里确实线性可分地编码了 answerability，那减轻幻觉就不一定非要靠 RLHF 或外挂检索，直接从表示层面做干预就可能有效。对理解 pretrain 里 knowledge-vs-output 的脱节也是一个数据点。","technical_approach":"在 answerable/unanswerable QA 数据上做 probing：训练线性分类器从中间层 hidden state 去判断问题是否可答，比较与模型最终输出置信度的分歧。进一步验证探针结果不是数据浅层特征（如问句表面形式）造成的。","experiments":"在 SQuAD 2.0 类的可答/不可答数据上，探针在中间层能显著好于模型自身的输出置信度去区分 answerability。说明信息在内部存在但没被正确使用。","authors_note":"以色列 Bar-Ilan 大学（Ido Dagan 组）。Shauli Ravfogel 长期做表示层干预（iterative nullspace projection 等）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLMs confidently hallucinate answers to unanswerable questions. The paper asks whether the model internally 'knows' the question is unanswerable even when its output doesn't reflect that.","importance":"An interpretability result with practical payoff: if answerability is linearly decodable from hidden states, hallucination mitigation doesn't strictly require RLHF or retrieval — representation-level intervention may suffice. Also a clean data point on the knowledge-vs-output gap created by pretraining.","technical_approach":"Linear probing on QA data: train a classifier on mid-layer hidden states to predict answerability, then compare against the model's own output confidence. Controls to rule out surface-form shortcuts.","experiments":"On SQuAD 2.0-style answerable/unanswerable data, mid-layer probes substantially outperform the model's output confidence at detecting unanswerability — the information is present inside but unused by the decoder.","authors_note":"Bar-Ilan (Ido Dagan's group). Shauli Ravfogel is known for representation-level interventions (INLP)."},"tags":["hallucination","hidden-states","interpretability"],"notable_authors":["Ido Dagan","Shauli Ravfogel"]},{"id":"StolfoBS23","title":"A Mechanistic Interpretation of Arithmetic Reasoning in Language Models using Causal Mediation Analysis","authors":["Alessandro Stolfo","Yonatan Belinkov","Mrinmaya Sachan"],"institutions":["ETH Zurich","Technion"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/StolfoBS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.435"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/StolfoBS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.435","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 能做两位数加减法等算术，但到底是哪些组件在完成计算、怎么分工的并不清楚。作者想用因果中介分析（causal mediation）定位算术推理的具体电路。","importance":"典型的 mechanistic interpretability 工作，方向上是 Anthropic / ROME 那条线的延伸。价值在于把'算术'这种相对可控、可验证的能力当作探针，揭示 Transformer 内部的分工模式——这对理解 pretrain 涌现能力是有用的实证。","technical_approach":"因果中介分析：给定一个算术 prompt 和对照 prompt，做 activation patching，把某层某位置的激活从一个 run 替换到另一个 run，看输出如何变化，从而量化该位置对最终答案的因果贡献。定位到具体的 attention head 和 MLP。","experiments":"在 GPT-2 等模型上定位到一小组专门处理算术的 head，主要集中在中后层；MLP 层承担数值信息的聚合与映射；不同操作数位置的角色也被分开识别。","authors_note":"ETH Zurich (Mrinmaya Sachan) + Technion (Yonatan Belinkov，NLP interpretability 资深)。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLMs can do arithmetic but we don't know which components do what. The paper uses causal mediation analysis to localize the arithmetic circuit.","importance":"In the lineage of ROME/Anthropic-style mech-interp. Arithmetic is a controllable, verifiable capability, which makes it a clean probe for how Transformers distribute sub-computations — useful evidence for understanding emergent abilities from pretraining.","technical_approach":"Activation patching: pair an arithmetic prompt with a control prompt, swap activations at specific layer/position, and measure the output change to quantify causal contribution. Isolates specific attention heads and MLPs responsible for arithmetic.","experiments":"On GPT-2-family models, identifies a small set of mid-to-late-layer heads specialized for arithmetic, with MLPs aggregating numeric information; distinct roles for different operand positions.","authors_note":"ETH Zurich (Mrinmaya Sachan) and Technion (Yonatan Belinkov, long track record in NLP interpretability)."},"tags":["mechanistic-interpretability","arithmetic-reasoning","causal-mediation"],"notable_authors":["Yonatan Belinkov","Mrinmaya Sachan"]},{"id":"2306.02320","title":"Exploring the Impact of Model Scaling on Parameter-Efficient Tuning","authors":["Yusheng Su","Chi-Min Chan","Jiali Cheng","Yujia Qin","Yankai Lin","Shengding Hu","Zonghan Yang","Ning Ding","Xingzhi Sun","Guotong Xie","Zhiyuan Liu","Maosong Sun"],"institutions":["Tsinghua University"],"abstract":"$3b","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.02320","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/SuCCQLHYDSXL023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.931"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/SuCCQLHYDSXL023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.931","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"PET 方法（Adapter / LoRA / Prefix 等）在小模型上各有高低，为什么到大模型差距就变小？作者假设是模型规模把设计差异抹平了，并且想用实验验证这一点。","importance":"对理解 scaling 如何改变 fine-tuning 景观有参考价值——如果结论成立，说明在足够大的 PLM 上，PET 的具体设计不重要，重要的只是可调参数量和位置自由度。这会改变后续 PEFT 方法论文的评估方式。","technical_approach":"提出 Arbitrary PET（APET）：不再预设结构，把可训练参数的数量和位置都当成自由变量，可以分布在任意层、任意模块上。由此能在同一框架下系统扫描'规模 × 参数量 × 位置'这三个维度。","experiments":"11 个 NLP 任务，覆盖不同 PLM 规模。核心发现：小模型上 PET 方法之间差距明显，大模型上几乎消失；APET 在大模型上仅用少量参数就能媲美 full fine-tuning；参数位置的影响在大模型上也趋于弱化。","authors_note":"清华大学（Yankai Lin 等）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"PET methods (Adapter, LoRA, Prefix...) differ notably on small PLMs but converge on large ones. The paper tests the hypothesis that scaling washes out PET design differences.","importance":"Matters for how to evaluate PEFT research going forward: if the claim holds, on large PLMs only parameter count and placement freedom matter, not the specific design. That changes what counts as a meaningful PEFT contribution.","technical_approach":"Arbitrary PET (APET): drop any structural prior — let trainable parameters have arbitrary count and placement across layers/modules. This lets them sweep the three axes (scale × param count × position) in one unified framework.","experiments":"11 NLP tasks across multiple PLM sizes. Findings: large inter-method gaps on small models, near-zero on large ones; APET matches full fine-tuning at large scale with few parameters; placement sensitivity also decreases with scale.","authors_note":"Tsinghua group (Yankai Lin etc.)."},"tags":["parameter-efficient-tuning","scaling","peft"],"notable_authors":["Yankai Lin"]},{"id":"2212.09912","title":"Tokenization Consistency Matters for Generative Models on Extractive NLP Tasks","authors":["Kaiser Sun","Peng Qi","Yuhao Zhang","Lan Liu","William Yang Wang","Zhiheng Huang"],"institutions":["AWS AI Labs","UC Santa Barbara"],"abstract":"$3c","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.09912","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/SunQZLWH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.887"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/SunQZLWH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.887","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"生成式模型做抽取式任务（如抽取式 QA）时，输入里的 span 和输出里的同一个 span 可能被 tokenizer 切成不同形式（比如是否带前导空格），导致模型必须'翻译'而非'抽取'，带来性能下降和幻觉。这个坑大多数工程代码默认忽略。","importance":"是 tokenizer 层面很实操的一个发现。对所有用 seq2seq 或 decoder-only 做 span-style 任务（QA、信息抽取、实体识别）的工作都有直接影响。也是 pretrain 阶段 tokenizer 设计需要考虑下游一致性的一个实证提醒。","technical_approach":"诊断 + 简单修复：识别出训练时输出 span 的 tokenization 与同一 span 在输入上下文中的 tokenization 不一致的情况，统一两边的 tokenization 规则（通常涉及前缀空格、大小写、子词边界的处理）。无需改模型架构。","experiments":"抽取式 QA 为案例，修复后同时提升 in-domain 和 OOD 准确率，幻觉率显著下降。增益来自于训练数据的一致性，而非模型变大。","authors_note":"作者来自 AWS AI / Salesforce / UCSB 线（Peng Qi、Yuhao Zhang、William Wang）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"When generative models do extractive tasks, the same span can be tokenized differently in the input context vs. the target output (e.g., leading-space issues). That forces the model to 'translate' rather than 'copy', causing accuracy drops and hallucinations — a trap most pipelines silently miss.","importance":"A very practical tokenizer-level finding with broad reach: any seq2seq/decoder-only system on QA, IE, or NER should care. Also a reminder that pretrain-time tokenizer choices have downstream consistency consequences.","technical_approach":"Diagnose + simple fix: detect mismatches between the tokenization of a span inside the context and the tokenization of that span as a target, then align the rules (leading whitespace, casing, subword boundaries). No architectural change.","experiments":"Case study on extractive QA. With consistent tokenization, both in-domain and OOD accuracy improve and hallucination rate drops notably — gains are from data-side consistency, not scale.","authors_note":"AWS AI / Salesforce / UCSB (Peng Qi, Yuhao Zhang, William Wang)."},"tags":["tokenizer","tokenization-consistency","generative-models"],"notable_authors":["Peng Qi","William Yang Wang"]},{"id":"TanSQQQXQ23","title":"Self-Criticism: Aligning Large Language Models with their Understanding of Helpfulness, Honesty, and Harmlessness","authors":["Xiaoyu Tan","Shaojie Shi","Xihe Qiu","Chao Qu","Zhenting Qi","Yinghui Xu","Yuan Qi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":",","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/TanSQQQXQ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-INDUSTRY.62"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/TanSQQQXQ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-industry.62","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["alignment","self-training","rlhf","safety"]},{"id":"2305.14975","title":"Just Ask for Calibration: Strategies for Eliciting Calibrated Confidence Scores from Language Models Fine-Tuned with Human Feedback","authors":["Katherine Tian","Eric Mitchell","Allan Zhou","Archit Sharma","Rafael Rafailov","Huaxiu Yao","Chelsea Finn","Christopher D. Manning"],"institutions":["Stanford University"],"abstract":"$3d","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14975","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/TianMZSRYFM23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.330"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/TianMZSRYFM23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.330","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"RLHF 微调被广泛认为会破坏预训练模型原本良好的条件概率校准，导致模型输出的 logits 无法真实反映其置信度。","importance":"Post-training 机制分析。打破了“RLHF 模型无法输出可靠置信度”的刻板印象，证明通过特定接口（直接询问）可以绕过 logits 失真的问题，对构建可靠的拒绝机制（拒答）有直接启发。","technical_approach":"对比了基于条件概率（logits）和基于“口头表达”（verbalized confidence，即直接 prompt 问模型“你有多少把握”）的置信度提取方法。核心发现是，虽然 RLHF 扭曲了 token 级别的概率分布，但模型在语义层面依然保留了对自身不确定性的感知。","experiments":"在 ChatGPT 和 Anthropic 模型上进行评估。结果表明，对于 RLHF 模型，直接询问置信度（verbalized confidence）的校准误差显著低于传统的条件概率方法。","authors_note":"Stanford University / Eric Mitchell, Rafael Rafailov (DPO 作者)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"RLHF fine-tuning is widely believed to ruin the well-calibrated conditional probabilities of pre-trained LMs, making logits unreliable indicators of confidence.","importance":"Post-training mechanism analysis. It challenges the stereotype that RLHF models are inherently poorly calibrated, showing that reliable confidence can be elicited via specific interfaces, which is crucial for building reliable rejection/deferral mechanisms.","technical_approach":"Compares confidence extraction methods based on conditional probabilities (logits) versus 'verbalized confidence' (prompting the model to state its confidence). The key finding is that while RLHF distorts token-level probability distributions, the model retains an awareness of its own uncertainty at the semantic level.","experiments":"Evaluated on ChatGPT and Anthropic models. Results show that for RLHF models, verbalized confidence yields significantly lower calibration error than traditional conditional probabilities.","authors_note":"Stanford University / Eric Mitchell, Rafael Rafailov"},"tags":["calibration","rlhf","confidence","post-training"],"notable_authors":["Eric Mitchell","Rafael Rafailov","Chelsea Finn"]},{"id":"UshioZC23","title":"Efficient Multilingual Language Model Compression through Vocabulary Trimming","authors":["Asahi Ushio","Yi Zhou","José Camacho-Collados"],"institutions":["Cardiff University"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/UshioZC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.981"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/UshioZC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.981","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"多语言预训练模型（如 mBERT, XLM-R）的词表极其庞大，在单语言或少语言下游部署时造成严重的显存和计算浪费。","importance":"效率与部署。提供了一种极低成本（无需重新训练）的模型压缩 baseline，证明了词表冗余是多语言模型部署时的首要优化点。","technical_approach":"提出词表裁剪（Vocabulary Trimming）。通过分析目标语言语料，识别并保留高频 token，直接从模型的 Embedding 层和输出预测层中物理删除未使用的 token 参数。","experiments":"在不损失目标语言下游任务性能的前提下，可将多语言模型的参数量显著减少（主要来自 Embedding 层），大幅降低推理显存占用。","authors_note":"Cardiff University / José Camacho-Collados"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Multilingual pre-trained models have massive vocabularies, causing severe memory and computational waste when deployed for monolingual or few-language downstream tasks.","importance":"Efficiency and Deployment. Provides a very low-cost (no retraining required) baseline for model compression, proving that vocabulary redundancy is the primary optimization target for multilingual model deployment.","technical_approach":"Proposes Vocabulary Trimming. By analyzing target language corpora, it identifies and retains high-frequency tokens, physically removing unused token parameters directly from the Embedding and output prediction layers.","experiments":"Significantly reduces the parameter count of multilingual models (mostly from the Embedding layer) without degrading performance on target language downstream tasks, drastically lowering inference memory footprint.","authors_note":"Cardiff University / José Camacho-Collados"},"tags":["compression","vocabulary","multilingual","tokenizer"],"notable_authors":["José Camacho-Collados"]},{"id":"WanHYQB023","title":"Explore-Instruct: Enhancing Domain-Specific Instruction Coverage through Active Exploration","authors":["Fanqi Wan","Xinting Huang","Tao Yang","Xiaojun Quan","Wei Bi","Shuming Shi"],"institutions":["Tencent AI Lab"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WanHYQB023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.587"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WanHYQB023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.587","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有的指令数据合成方法（如 Self-Instruct）在垂直领域应用时，往往生成的数据分布狭窄、多样性不足，无法覆盖复杂的领域知识边界。","importance":"数据合成 / Post-training。引入了主动探索机制来指导数据合成，证明了结构化地遍历领域知识空间比随机 prompt 采样能产生更高质量的 SFT 数据。","technical_approach":"将领域知识空间建模为树状结构，利用 LLM 进行主动探索（Active Exploration）。通过深度优先或广度优先的策略，引导模型在特定子领域内生成更多样化、长尾的指令对，打破生成时的模式崩溃。","experiments":"在医疗、法律等垂直领域，使用该方法合成的数据微调的模型，性能显著优于传统 Self-Instruct 生成的数据。","authors_note":"Tencent AI Lab"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing instruction data synthesis methods (like Self-Instruct) often generate narrowly distributed data with insufficient diversity when applied to vertical domains, failing to cover complex domain knowledge boundaries.","importance":"Data Synthesis / Post-training. Introduces an active exploration mechanism to guide data synthesis, proving that structurally traversing the domain knowledge space yields higher-quality SFT data than random prompt sampling.","technical_approach":"Models the domain knowledge space as a tree structure and uses an LLM for Active Exploration. Through depth-first or breadth-first strategies, it guides the model to generate more diverse, long-tail instruction pairs within specific sub-domains, breaking mode collapse during generation.","experiments":"In vertical domains like medical and legal, models fine-tuned on data synthesized by this method significantly outperform those using traditional Self-Instruct data.","authors_note":"Tencent AI Lab"},"tags":["instruction-tuning","data-synthesis"]},{"id":"WangALSS23","title":"GradSim: Gradient-Based Language Grouping for Effective Multilingual Training","authors":["Mingyang Wang","Heike Adel","Lukas Lange","Jannik Strötgen","Hinrich Schütze"],"institutions":["LMU Munich","Bosch"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WangALSS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.282"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WangALSS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.282","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在多语言预训练中，将所有语言混合训练会导致资源竞争和负迁移。传统的基于语言学语系的分组方法往往不能反映模型优化的真实动态。","importance":"训练动态与数据配比。证明了“模型视角的梯度对齐度”比“人类视角的语言学分类”更能指导多语言联合训练，为数据路由和 MoE 专家分配提供了基于优化的新思路。","technical_approach":"提出 GradSim。在训练早期，计算不同语言数据在模型参数上产生的梯度向量。将梯度余弦相似度高的语言聚为一组进行联合训练，从而最大化正迁移、避免梯度冲突。","experiments":"相比于基于语言学语系的分组和全量混合训练，基于 GradSim 分组训练的多语言模型在下游任务上取得了更好的性能。","authors_note":"LMU Munich / Hinrich Schütze"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In multilingual pre-training, mixing all languages leads to resource competition and negative transfer. Traditional grouping based on linguistic families often fails to reflect the true dynamics of model optimization.","importance":"Training Dynamics and Data Mixing. Proves that 'gradient alignment from the model's perspective' is better at guiding multilingual joint training than 'linguistic classification from a human perspective', providing a new optimization-based approach for data routing and MoE expert allocation.","technical_approach":"Proposes GradSim. During early training, it computes the gradient vectors produced by different language data on model parameters. Languages with high gradient cosine similarity are clustered together for joint training, maximizing positive transfer and avoiding gradient conflicts.","experiments":"Compared to linguistic-family-based grouping and full mixed training, multilingual models trained with GradSim grouping achieved better performance on downstream tasks.","authors_note":"LMU Munich / Hinrich Schütze"},"tags":["multilingual","gradient-analysis","language-grouping"],"notable_authors":["Hinrich Schütze"]},{"id":"WangCGXBZZGH23","title":"Orthogonal Subspace Learning for Language Model Continual Learning","authors":["Xiao Wang","Tianze Chen","Qiming Ge","Han Xia","Rong Bao","Rui Zheng","Qi Zhang","Tao Gui","Xuanjing Huang"],"institutions":["BAAI (Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence)"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WangCGXBZZGH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.715"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WangCGXBZZGH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.715","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"语言模型在进行持续学习（Continual Learning，如不断注入新知识或新任务）时，会严重遗忘旧知识（灾难性遗忘）。","importance":"Continual Pre-training / 优化器。从参数空间的几何视角解决遗忘问题，为 LLM 的持续预训练和无损知识更新提供了一种严格的数学约束方法。","technical_approach":"采用正交子空间学习。在学习新任务时，计算旧任务特征的奇异值分解（SVD），找到旧任务依赖的参数子空间。将新任务的梯度投影到该子空间的正交补空间中进行更新，从而在数学上保证新更新不会改变旧任务的输出。","experiments":"在一系列 NLP 任务的持续学习设定下，该方法显著降低了灾难性遗忘率，优于传统的正则化和回放（Replay）方法。","authors_note":"BAAI (智源人工智能研究院)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Language models suffer from severe catastrophic forgetting of old knowledge when undergoing continual learning (e.g., continuously injecting new knowledge or tasks).","importance":"Continual Pre-training / Optimizer. Addresses forgetting from a geometric perspective of the parameter space, providing a strict mathematically constrained method for continual pre-training and lossless knowledge updating in LLMs.","technical_approach":"Employs orthogonal subspace learning. When learning a new task, it computes the SVD of old task features to find the parameter subspace relied upon by old tasks. The gradients of the new task are then projected onto the orthogonal complement of this subspace for updating, mathematically ensuring that new updates do not alter the outputs of old tasks.","experiments":"Under continual learning settings across a sequence of NLP tasks, this method significantly reduces the catastrophic forgetting rate, outperforming traditional regularization and replay methods.","authors_note":"BAAI (Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence)"},"tags":["continual-learning","subspace"]},{"id":"2310.13332","title":"Democratizing Reasoning Ability: Tailored Learning from Large Language Model","authors":["Zhaoyang Wang","Shaohan Huang","Yuxuan Liu","Jiahai Wang","Minghui Song","Zihan Zhang","Haizhen Huang","Furu Wei","Weiwei Deng","Feng Sun","Qi Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3e","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.13332","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WangHLWSZHWDSZ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.120"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WangHLWSZHWDSZ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.120","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：如何把闭源大模型的推理能力，而不只是指令跟随能力，迁移到算力和参数都更受限的开源小模型。过去蒸馏工作大多让大模型做数据标注器，重点提升对话和指令遵循；但推理能力更依赖过程性信号，单轮标注通常不够。","importance":"它的重要性在于把“reasoning distillation”从静态监督推进到交互式教学范式。对 pretrain/posttrain 接口的启示是：如果高质量推理不是主要靠更多无标注 token，而是靠更强的教师过程监督获得，那么小模型能力提升路径就会明显偏向 teacher-driven post-training，而不是单纯扩大预训练规模。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 tailored learning：把黑盒 LLM 从单纯答案生成器改成推理教师，进行多轮交互式学习。关键不在于再多收一些 CoT 数据，而在于根据学生模型当前能力定制训练样本与教学轮次，让教师逐步暴露更合适的中间推理。与常见 self-instruct 或一次性蒸馏不同，这种设计试图减少“教师答案太强、学生学不会”以及“只学到表面格式”的问题。代价是训练流程更复杂，也更依赖教师质量和交互策略稳定性。","experiments":"从摘要能确认的是，论文关注将闭源大模型的推理能力蒸馏到开源小模型，并采用 interactive multi-round learning pipeline。摘要没有给出学生模型规模、教师模型、数据量、任务集和具体提升幅度，因此不能编造数字。可以合理提炼的实验重点是：作者把 reasoning 作为单独目标评测，而不是把整体指令分数的上升当成推理增强的替代指标。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a specific gap in LLM democratization: transferring reasoning ability, not just instruction-following, from powerful closed models to smaller open models. Earlier distillation work often treats the teacher as a label generator, which is usually sufficient for formatting and task compliance but too weak for process-heavy reasoning.","importance":"Its contribution is methodological at the post-training frontier. The broader implication for pretrain research is that some capability gaps may be better closed with teacher-shaped supervision than with more generic pretraining tokens. That matters when deciding whether to invest in larger base models or better capability-specific transfer pipelines.","technical_approach":"The method is a tailored learning framework where the large model acts as a reasoning teacher in a multi-round interactive process. The key design choice is adaptive teaching rather than one-shot answer distillation. The student is exposed to reasoning signals matched to its current competence, which aims to reduce both over-hard supervision and superficial imitation of answer style. Compared with standard self-instruct-style pipelines, this is more targeted but also more operationally complex and more sensitive to teacher consistency.","experiments":"From the abstract, we can confirm that the paper studies reasoning distillation from black-box LLMs to smaller open models through an interactive multi-round learning pipeline. The abstract does not provide model sizes, datasets, benchmarks, or exact gains, so those should be left unspecified. The experimental framing itself is notable: reasoning is treated as a separate capability to teach, not as a byproduct of generic instruction tuning.","authors_note":""},"tags":["distillation","reasoning"]},{"id":"WangSDGMI23","title":"kNN-LM Does Not Improve Open-ended Text Generation","authors":["Shufan Wang","Yixiao Song","Andrew Drozdov","Aparna Garimella","Varun Manjunatha","Mohit Iyyer"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WangSDGMI23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.929"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WangSDGMI23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.929","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答一个很具体但很关键的问题：kNN-LM 这种外部记忆增强方法，是否真的能提升开放式文本生成。过去 kNN-LM 在困惑度和某些受约束 setting 上常有收益，但这些收益能否转化为开放生成质量，并没有被同样严格地确认。","importance":"它的重要性在于给 memory-augmented LM 泼了一盆冷水。对 pretrain 和检索增强研究的启示是：降低 perplexity 或提升 token-level 似然，并不等于开放生成更好；如果目标是聊天、创作或开放续写，外部记忆机制的评估标准必须和传统语言建模分开看。","technical_approach":"从标题可知，论文采用的是反证式实证研究：系统评估 kNN-LM 在 open-ended text generation 上的效果，并得出否定结论。技术上重点应是把 kNN 检索记忆接入生成流程，和标准 LM 或其他增强方法对比，然后分别看 token-level 指标与生成质量指标。与很多记忆增强工作默认‘更准的下一个 token 会带来更好生成’不同，这篇论文显然在检验这个传导链是否成立。","experiments":"标题已经给出最核心结论：kNN-LM does not improve open-ended text generation。由于没有摘要和数表，这里不能写具体任务、模型、指标和跌幅。可以稳妥记录的是，这类实验通常需要同时报告自动指标与人工或偏好式评测，否则‘不提升生成’很难站住；但该论文具体采用了哪些证据，还需正文确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper examines a focused but important question: does kNN-LM actually improve open-ended text generation? Prior work often reports gains in perplexity or in more constrained settings, but it is not obvious that those gains transfer to free-form generation quality.","importance":"Its significance is corrective. For memory-augmented language modeling and retrieval-based methods, the paper highlights a key evaluation mismatch: better token-level likelihood does not automatically mean better open-ended generation. That matters for both pretraining objectives and how retrieval/memory methods are justified.","technical_approach":"From the title, this is a negative empirical study. The likely approach is to integrate kNN-based external memory into generation and compare it against standard LM generation under open-ended settings, checking both token-level and generation-level outcomes. The key question is whether the usual causal story holds: if next-token prediction improves, does generation improve too?","experiments":"The strongest available fact is already in the title: kNN-LM does not improve open-ended text generation. Without the abstract or tables, model choices, benchmarks, and quantitative gaps should not be invented. A credible study of this claim would need both automatic and human-centered generation evaluation, but the exact setup must come from the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["knn-lm","retrieval","generation"]},{"id":"WangZS23","title":"Let&apos;s Synthesize Step by Step: Iterative Dataset Synthesis with Large Language Models by Extrapolating Errors from Small Models","authors":["Ruida Wang","Wangchunshu Zhou","Mrinmaya Sachan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WangZS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.791"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WangZS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.791","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["data-synthesis","distillation"]},{"id":"WebsonLYP23","title":"Are Language Models Worse than Humans at Following Prompts? It&apos;s Complicated","authors":["Albert Webson","Alyssa Marie Loo","Qinan Yu","Ellie Pavlick"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WebsonLYP23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.514"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WebsonLYP23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.514","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["prompting","evaluation"]},{"id":"2202.12312","title":"Oolong: Investigating What Makes Transfer Learning Hard with Controlled Studies","authors":["Zhengxuan Wu","Alex Tamkin","Isabel Papadimitriou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3f","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.12312","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WuTP23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.198"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WuTP23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.198","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["transfer-learning","cross-lingual","controlled-study","pretraining"]},{"id":"2305.13140","title":"Extrapolating Multilingual Understanding Models as Multilingual Generators","authors":["Bohong Wu","Fei Yuan","Hai Zhao","Lei Li","Jingjing Xu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$40","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.13140","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WuYZLX23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.1031"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WuYZLX23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.1031","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["multilingual","non-autoregressive","encoder-to-generator","pretraining"]},{"id":"2310.12794","title":"Are Structural Concepts Universal in Transformer Language Models? Towards Interpretable Cross-Lingual Generalization","authors":["Ningyu Xu","Qi Zhang","Jingting Ye","Menghan Zhang","Xuanjing Huang"],"institutions":["Fudan University"],"abstract":"$41","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.12794","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/XuZYZH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.931"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/XuZYZH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.931","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 的跨语言泛化能力参差不齐，尤其低资源语言表现差。核心问题是：不同语言内部的结构概念（如句法结构）空间是否可对齐？如果可以，能否通过显式对齐来增强跨语言迁移？","importance":"分析级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：多语言预训练模型内部确实形成了高度可对齐的结构概念空间，这为设计更好的多语言预训练目标（如显式结构对齐 loss）提供了实证基础。覆盖 43 种语言、同时分析 encoder-only 和 decoder-only 模型，范围较广。","technical_approach":"以句法结构为切入点，提取不同语言中 Transformer 内部的结构概念表示，然后度量这些表示空间之间的可对齐程度。关键发现是：encoder-only 和 decoder-only 模型中，各语言的结构概念空间都呈现高度可对齐性。这暗示隐式跨语言迁移的瓶颈可能不在于表示空间的结构差异，而在于对齐信号的缺乏。","experiments":"分析覆盖 43 种语言，同时在 encoder-only 和 decoder-only 架构上进行。具体的对齐度量指标和数值未在摘要中给出。核心观察是结构概念空间的高可对齐性在两种架构中都成立。","authors_note":"来自复旦大学（Qi Zhang, Xuanjing Huang 团队），该团队在中文 NLP 和语言模型分析方面有持续产出。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Cross-lingual generalization in LLMs is uneven, especially for low-resource languages. The question is whether structural concept spaces (e.g., syntax) across languages are alignable, and whether explicit alignment can improve transfer.","importance":"Analysis-level contribution. Provides empirical evidence that multilingual pretrained models form highly alignable structural concept spaces across languages—useful for designing explicit cross-lingual alignment objectives during pretraining. Covers 43 languages and both encoder-only and decoder-only architectures.","technical_approach":"Uses syntax as a testbed: extracts structural concept representations from Transformer internals across languages, then measures cross-lingual alignability of these spaces. Key finding: high alignability holds for both encoder-only and decoder-only models, suggesting the bottleneck for cross-lingual transfer may be lack of alignment signal rather than structural incompatibility.","experiments":"Analysis spans 43 languages on both encoder-only and decoder-only models. Specific alignment metrics and numerical results not provided in the abstract. Core observation: high structural concept alignability is consistent across architectures.","authors_note":"Fudan University (Qi Zhang, Xuanjing Huang group), active in Chinese NLP and language model analysis."},"tags":["cross-lingual-generalization","interpretability","transformers"],"notable_authors":["Qi Zhang","Xuanjing Huang"]},{"id":"YamamotoM23","title":"Absolute Position Embedding Learns Sinusoid-like Waves for Attention Based on Relative Position","authors":["Yuji Yamamoto","Takuya Matsuzaki"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Attention weight is a clue to interpret how a Transformer-based model makes an inference. In some attention heads, the attention focuses on the neighbors of each token. This allows the output vector of each token to depend on the surrounding tokens and contributes to make the inference context-dependent. We analyze the mechanism behind the concentration of attention on nearby tokens. We show that the phenomenon emerges as follows: (1) learned position embedding has sinusoid-like components, (2) such components are transmitted to the query and the key in the self-attention, (3) the attention head shifts the phases of the sinusoid-like components so that the attention concentrates on nearby tokens at speciﬁc relative positions. In other words, a certain type of Transformer-based model acquires the sinusoidal positional encoding to some extent on its own through Masked Language Modeling.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YamamotoM23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.2"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YamamotoM23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.2","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer 中某些 attention head 会集中关注邻近 token，形成局部注意力模式。这种现象的内在机制是什么？具体来说，学习到的绝对位置编码 (APE) 是如何实现基于相对位置的注意力的？","importance":"机制分析级贡献。对 pretrain 研究有直接启发：揭示了学习型 APE 会自发习得类正弦波成分，并通过 Q/K 投影的相位偏移实现相对位置注意力。这解释了为什么 APE 在实践中能部分替代显式相对位置编码（如 RoPE），也为理解位置编码的设计空间提供了机制层面的证据。","technical_approach":"分析路径分三步：(1) 发现学习到的 APE 包含类正弦波成分；(2) 这些成分通过 self-attention 的 Q/K 线性变换被传递；(3) attention head 通过调整正弦波的相位，使注意力集中在特定相对位置上。这实际上说明 APE 隐式地学到了相对位置编码的功能。分析方法是对学习到的 embedding 做频谱分析，再追踪信号在 Q/K 投影中的传播。","experiments":"在 Transformer 模型上分析学习到的位置编码，验证了正弦波成分的存在及其在 Q/K 中的传播和相位偏移机制。具体模型规模和任务未在摘要中说明。这是一项分析性工作，核心价值在于机制解释而非性能提升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Some attention heads in Transformers concentrate on nearby tokens, creating local attention patterns. The question is: how does learned absolute position embedding (APE) achieve relative-position-based attention?","importance":"Mechanistic analysis contribution. Directly relevant to pretrain research: it reveals that learned APE spontaneously acquires sinusoid-like components, and Q/K projections shift their phases to create relative position attention. This explains why APE can partially substitute explicit relative position encodings (e.g., RoPE) and informs the design space of position encodings.","technical_approach":"Three-step analysis: (1) learned APE contains sinusoid-like frequency components; (2) these components propagate through Q/K linear projections in self-attention; (3) attention heads shift the phases of these sinusoidal components to concentrate attention at specific relative positions. The analysis uses spectral decomposition of learned embeddings and traces signal propagation through Q/K projections.","experiments":"Analyzes learned position embeddings in Transformer models, confirming the existence of sinusoidal components and their phase-shift mechanism in Q/K. Specific model scale and tasks not stated in the abstract. This is an analytical work; its value is in mechanistic explanation rather than performance gains.","authors_note":""},"tags":["position-embeddings","interpretability","attention-mechanism"]},{"id":"2310.14709","title":"Once Upon a Time in Graph: Relative-Time Pretraining for Complex Temporal Reasoning","authors":["Sen Yang","Xin Li","Lidong Bing","Wai Lam"],"institutions":["Alibaba DAMO Academy","Chinese University of Hong Kong"],"abstract":"$42","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.14709","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YangLBL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.728"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YangLBL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.728","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"预训练语言模型难以理解和推理文本中的时间上下文，现有方法侧重于将文本与时间戳直接关联，但这种关联不足以支撑需要跨知识时间依赖推理的下游任务。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：将时间关系建模为图结构并融入预训练，是一种将结构化先验注入语言模型的思路。但适用范围较窄，主要面向时间推理相关任务。","technical_approach":"提出 RemeMo (Relative Time Modeling)：利用事件在一维时间轴上的相对位置关系构建图结构，然后基于这个图进行预训练。核心思路是把时间推理从「文本-时间戳」的直接关联转变为「事件-事件」的相对时间关系建模。与直接在文本中注入时间标记的方法相比，图结构能更自然地表达传递性等时间推理所需的关系。","experiments":"摘要中未给出具体实验数据。核心声称是 RemeMo 在需要复杂时间推理的下游任务上优于仅做文本-时间戳关联的方法。","authors_note":"Sen Yang, Lidong Bing（阿里达摩院 NLP 团队）。Lidong Bing 在多语言 NLP 和信息抽取方向有广泛工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Pretrained LMs struggle with temporal reasoning. Existing methods focus on direct text-timestamp association, which is insufficient for tasks requiring reasoning over temporal dependencies between pieces of knowledge.","importance":"Method-level contribution. For pretrain research: injecting structured temporal priors (graph-based relative time) into pretraining is an interesting approach to encoding relational knowledge, though its scope is narrow (temporal reasoning tasks).","technical_approach":"RemeMo (Relative Time Modeling) builds a graph structure based on relative placements of events along a 1D time axis, then pretrains on this graph. The shift is from text-timestamp association to event-event relative temporal modeling. Compared to injecting time tokens into text, the graph structure naturally captures transitivity and other temporal reasoning properties.","experiments":"Specific experimental numbers not provided in the abstract. Core claim: RemeMo outperforms text-timestamp association methods on complex temporal reasoning tasks.","authors_note":"Sen Yang, Lidong Bing (Alibaba DAMO Academy NLP). Lidong Bing has extensive work in multilingual NLP and information extraction."},"tags":["temporal-reasoning","pretraining-objective","knowledge-graph"],"notable_authors":["Lidong Bing"]},{"id":"YangZSLZL23","title":"Representative Demonstration Selection for In-Context Learning with Two-Stage Determinantal Point Process","authors":["Zhao Yang","Yuanzhe Zhang","Dianbo Sui","Cao Liu","Jun Zhao","Kang Liu"],"institutions":["Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences"],"abstract":"$43","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YangZSLZL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.331"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YangZSLZL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.331","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"ICL 中为每个测试实例单独选择 demonstration 耗时且不实用。问题是如何选出一个代表性子集，能同时有效提示同一任务中的不同测试实例。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的间接启示：ICL 的 demonstration 选择问题反映了模型对上下文信息的利用模式——什么样的上下文信号对模型最有帮助，这与预训练阶段的数据选择逻辑相通。","technical_approach":"提出两阶段 Determinantal Point Process (DPP) 方法：第一阶段确保 demonstration 的质量（每个 example 本身要好），第二阶段确保多样性（example 之间要互补）。DPP 是一种概率模型，天然倾向于选择多样化的子集。与逐实例选择方法的区别在于：这里选出的是一个固定子集，适用于整个任务，大幅降低推理时的选择开销。","experiments":"摘要中未给出具体数字。核心结论是满足高质量 + 高多样性的 demonstration 子集确实能提升模型性能，两阶段 DPP 是实现这一目标的有效方法。","authors_note":"Jun Zhao, Kang Liu（中科院自动化所），在信息抽取和知识图谱方向有长期积累。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Selecting demonstrations per test instance in ICL is time-consuming and impractical. The goal is to find a single representative subset that effectively prompts diverse test instances within a task.","importance":"Method-level contribution. Indirect pretrain relevance: the demonstration selection problem reflects how models utilize context information—what context signals help most, paralleling data selection logic in pretraining.","technical_approach":"Two-stage Determinantal Point Process (DPP): stage 1 ensures individual quality of each demonstration, stage 2 ensures diversity across the subset. DPP naturally favors diverse selections. Unlike per-instance selection methods, this produces a fixed subset for the entire task, greatly reducing inference-time selection overhead.","experiments":"Specific numbers not provided in the abstract. Core finding: demonstration subsets meeting both high quality and high diversity criteria improve model performance, and two-stage DPP effectively achieves this.","authors_note":"Jun Zhao, Kang Liu (Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences), long-standing work in information extraction and knowledge graphs."},"tags":["icl","demonstration-selection","dpp","few-shot"],"notable_authors":["Jun Zhao","Kang Liu"]},{"id":"2310.05857","title":"Improving Summarization with Human Edits","authors":["Zonghai Yao","Benjamin J. Schloss","Sai P. Selvaraj"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$44","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.05857","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YaoSS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.158"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YaoSS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.158","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"探索如何利用人类编辑（Human Edits）轨迹而非单纯的偏好打分来优化 LLM 摘要能力，同时解决收集高质量编辑数据成本过高的问题。","importance":"Post-train 级。为 RLHF/DPO 之外提供了一种利用密集监督信号（token 级修改轨迹）的对齐范式，证明了编辑过程本身包含比最终序列奖励更丰富的指导信息。","technical_approach":"提出 SALT（序列对齐似然训练）方法。核心机制是将人类编辑数据与模型生成数据混合训练；为了降低成本，利用现有的 Ground Truth 摘要逆向构造“模仿编辑（Imitation edits）”，从而在不增加人工标注的情况下模拟编辑过程。","experiments":"实验表明，结合真实编辑与模拟编辑的 SALT 方法，在摘要质量上超越了传统的最大似然估计（MLE）训练，并显著降低了对昂贵人工编辑数据的依赖（摘要未提供具体指标数字）。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Explores how to leverage human edit trajectories, rather than just preference scores, to improve LLM summarization while mitigating the high cost of collecting such edit data.","importance":"Post-train level. It offers an alignment paradigm alternative to RLHF/DPO by utilizing dense supervision signals (token-level edit trajectories), proving that the editing process contains richer guidance than sequence-level rewards.","technical_approach":"Proposes SALT (Sequence Alignment (un)Likelihood Training). The core mechanism mixes human-edited and model-generated data in the training loop. To reduce costs, it synthesizes 'Imitation edits' using existing ground-truth summaries, simulating the editing process without requiring new human annotations.","experiments":"Results show that SALT, using both real and simulated edits, surpasses traditional maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) training in summary quality and reduces the need for expensive human data (specific metrics not provided in abstract).","authors_note":""},"tags":["human-feedback","summarization","preference-learning","edits"]},{"id":"2305.08732","title":"Knowledge Rumination for Pre-trained Language Models","authors":["Yunzhi Yao","Peng Wang","Shengyu Mao","Chuanqi Tan","Fei Huang","Huajun Chen","Ningyu Zhang"],"institutions":["Alibaba"],"abstract":"$45","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.08732","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YaoWMTHC023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.206"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YaoWMTHC023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.206","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解决预训练模型在面对知识密集型任务时，无法有效激活和利用其参数内部已编码的丰富知识，从而过度依赖外部检索的问题。","importance":"推理/Post-train 级。揭示了模型“知道自己知道，但不会主动用”的现象，为 RAG（检索增强生成）之外提供了一种通过内部知识反刍（Self-Knowledge Elicitation）来提升表现的轻量级替代方案。","technical_approach":"提出“知识反刍（Knowledge Rumination）”范式。不引入外部语料库，而是通过在输入中添加特定 Prompt（如“就我所知”），强制模型先生成（review）相关的潜在知识，再将这些生成的知识作为上下文注入回模型中进行最终预测。","experiments":"实证观察证实 PLM 参数中已包含足够知识，通过简单的 Prompt 引导即可显著提升知识密集型任务的表现（摘要未提供具体指标数字）。","authors_note":"Fei Huang (Alibaba)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addresses the issue where PLMs fail to effectively activate and utilize the rich knowledge already encoded in their parameters for knowledge-intensive tasks, often defaulting to external retrieval.","importance":"Inference/Post-train level. It highlights the phenomenon that models 'know what they know but fail to use it proactively,' offering a lightweight alternative to RAG via internal knowledge elicitation.","technical_approach":"Proposes the 'Knowledge Rumination' paradigm. Instead of retrieving from external corpora, it prepends a specific prompt (e.g., 'As far as I know') to force the model to generate (review) related latent knowledge. This generated text is then injected back into the context for the final prediction.","experiments":"Empirical observations confirm that PLMs already encode sufficient knowledge, and simple prompt-based elicitation significantly improves performance on knowledge-intensive tasks (specific metrics not provided in abstract).","authors_note":"Fei Huang (Alibaba)"},"tags":["knowledge","pretrained-lm","representation","probing"],"notable_authors":["Fei Huang"]},{"id":"2305.13172","title":"Editing Large Language Models: Problems, Methods, and Opportunities","authors":["Yunzhi Yao","Peng Wang","Bozhong Tian","Siyuan Cheng","Zhoubo Li","Shumin Deng","Huajun Chen","Ningyu Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$46","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.13172","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YaoWT0LDC023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.632"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YaoWT0LDC023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.632","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"系统性梳理和评估大语言模型编辑（Model Editing）技术，解决如何在不引发灾难性遗忘的情况下，高效、精准地修改 LLM 特定领域知识的问题。","importance":"范式/评测级。这是一篇关于 Model Editing 的综述与 Benchmark 工作。对于预训练后如何低成本维护模型时效性、修正幻觉提供了全局视角和标准化测试基准。","technical_approach":"对当前模型编辑的任务定义、面临挑战进行了详尽概述，并对现有的前沿方法进行了深度的实证分析。同时，构建了一个新的 Benchmark 数据集，以提供更具鲁棒性的评估标准。","experiments":"构建了新 Benchmark 并对现有 SOTA 方法进行了实证对比分析，指出了当前方法的局限性和未来机会（摘要未提供具体指标数字）。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Systematically reviews and evaluates LLM editing techniques, addressing how to efficiently and precisely alter specific domain knowledge in LLMs without causing catastrophic forgetting.","importance":"Paradigm/Evaluation level. This is a comprehensive survey and benchmark on Model Editing. It provides a global perspective and standardized testing ground for maintaining model relevancy and fixing hallucinations post-pretraining at a low cost.","technical_approach":"Provides an exhaustive overview of task definitions and challenges in model editing, alongside an in-depth empirical analysis of current state-of-the-art methods. It also introduces a new benchmark dataset for more robust evaluation.","experiments":"Constructed a new benchmark and conducted empirical analysis on existing SOTA methods, pinpointing current limitations and future opportunities (specific metrics not provided in abstract).","authors_note":""},"tags":["model-editing","knowledge","survey","continual-learning"]},{"id":"2302.04813","title":"Explanation Selection Using Unlabeled Data for Chain-of-Thought Prompting","authors":["Xi Ye","Greg Durrett"],"institutions":["UT Austin"],"abstract":"$47","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.04813","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YeD23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.41"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YeD23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.41","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解决 Chain-of-Thought (CoT) 提示中，未经特定任务优化的解释（如非专家编写的现成解释）会导致下游任务性能平庸且方差极大的问题。","importance":"推理/Prompt级。揭示了 CoT 的有效性不仅取决于“是否有推理步骤”，更高度依赖于推理路径的具体表述质量，并提供了一种无需目标标签的黑盒优化方案。","technical_approach":"提出一种利用无标签数据优化 CoT 解释的黑盒两阶段框架。首先，使用留一法（leave-one-out）为 Prompt 中的每个样本生成候选解释集；其次，根据两个代理指标独立评估这些解释，并寻找最佳组合。","experiments":"证明了细微的解释差异会导致巨大的准确率波动，并通过该两阶段框架成功找到了能提升下游推理任务性能的有效解释组合（摘要未提供具体指标数字）。","authors_note":"Greg Durrett (UT Austin)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addresses the issue where unoptimized Chain-of-Thought (CoT) explanations (e.g., off-the-shelf ones written by non-experts) lead to mediocre downstream performance and high variance.","importance":"Inference/Prompt level. It reveals that the efficacy of CoT depends not just on the presence of reasoning steps, but heavily on the specific formulation of the reasoning path, providing a black-box optimization method without requiring target labels.","technical_approach":"Proposes a two-stage black-box framework using unlabeled data to optimize CoT prompts. First, it generates candidate explanations for each prompt example using a leave-one-out scheme. Second, it evaluates these explanations in isolation via proxy metrics to find an optimal combination.","experiments":"Demonstrates that subtle differences in explanations cause wide variations in accuracy, and the proposed framework successfully identifies effective explanation combinations to boost reasoning performance (specific metrics not provided in abstract).","authors_note":"Greg Durrett (UT Austin)"},"tags":["cot","prompting","unlabeled-data","selection"],"notable_authors":["Greg Durrett"]},{"id":"YeHXYYXLT0ZJHLH23","title":"UReader: Universal OCR-free Visually-situated Language Understanding with Multimodal Large Language Model","authors":["Jiabo Ye","Anwen Hu","Haiyang Xu","Qinghao Ye","Ming Yan","Guohai Xu","Chenliang Li","Junfeng Tian","Qi Qian","Ji Zhang","Qin Jin","Liang He","Xin Lin","Fei Huang"],"institutions":["Alibaba"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YeHXYYXLT0ZJHLH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.187"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YeHXYYXLT0ZJHLH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.187","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"（注：摘要缺失，基于标题推断）旨在解决多模态大语言模型在处理视觉场景文字（Visually-situated Language）时过度依赖外部 OCR 系统的问题。","importance":"VLM 预训练级。推动了原生多模态（Native Multimodal）建模，证明了将视觉特征直接映射为语言理解信号的可行性，去除了 OCR 带来的级联错误和延迟。","technical_approach":"（基于标题推断）提出 UReader，一种无需 OCR（OCR-free）的通用视觉-语言理解多模态大模型架构，直接从图像像素中端到端地提取和理解文本信息。","experiments":"（摘要缺失，无实验数据）","authors_note":"Ming Yan, Haiyang Xu (Alibaba)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"(Note: Abstract missing, inferred from title) Aims to solve the over-reliance on external OCR systems when Multimodal LLMs process visually-situated language.","importance":"VLM Pretraining level. Advances native multimodal modeling by proving the feasibility of directly mapping visual features to language understanding signals, eliminating cascading errors and latency from OCR pipelines.","technical_approach":"(Inferred from title) Proposes UReader, a universal OCR-free multimodal large language model architecture that extracts and understands text information end-to-end directly from image pixels.","experiments":"(Abstract missing, no experimental data)","authors_note":"Ming Yan, Haiyang Xu (Alibaba)"},"tags":["multimodal","ocr-free","document-understanding","vlm"],"notable_authors":["Ming Yan","Haiyang Xu"]},{"id":"2305.14327","title":"Dynosaur: A Dynamic Growth Paradigm for Instruction-Tuning Data Curation","authors":["Da Yin","Xiao Liu","Fan Yin","Ming Zhong","Hritik Bansal","Jiawei Han","Kai-Wei Chang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$48","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14327","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YinLYZB0C23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.245"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YinLYZB0C23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.245","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：如何低成本、可扩展地构造高质量 instruction-tuning 数据，而不是继续依赖纯人工标注或让 GPT 从零编指令。此前主流做法要么贵、要么风格单一、要么没有充分利用现成监督数据中的字段语义；作者的判断是，已有标注数据的元数据和字段结构本身就是可复用的指令模板来源。","importance":"它的价值主要是数据构造方法级，而不是模型范式级。对 pretrain/post-train 接口的启示是：监督数据集可以被系统性重写为 instruction 数据，这条路线比纯 synthetic instruction generation 更便宜，也更容易覆盖真实任务分布，因此对后训练数据管线有直接参考意义。","technical_approach":"核心方法是一个基于数据集元数据的动态增长式 instruction 数据构造框架，而不是直接让 LLM 自由生成整条样本。Dynosaur先识别已有数据集中的相关字段及其角色，再让 LLM 生成与字段一致的指令和输入输出形式，并在数据扩展过程中持续增长任务覆盖。关键设计取舍是把“任务语义”锚定在现有标注数据上，这样能显著降低 API 调用量，也减少无约束生成带来的任务漂移；代价是它依赖数据集元数据质量，如果字段定义含糊或 schema 很弱，生成质量会受限。","experiments":"从摘要能确认的关键事实是：作者强调 Dynosaur 相比直接用 LLM 从头生成指令，显著降低了 API 成本，并利用现有 annotated datasets 获得更高效的数据构造。摘要未给出模型参数、数据规模、主基线名称和具体提升数字，因此这里不能硬填。可以合理推断实验会围绕成本、数据质量和下游 instruction-tuned 模型效果展开，但具体数字需以正文表格为准。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical bottleneck: how to build instruction-tuning data at scale without relying on expensive manual annotation or unconstrained LLM-only generation. Prior pipelines either pay heavily for data creation or ignore that existing supervised datasets already encode task semantics through their fields and metadata.","importance":"This is mainly a data-pipeline contribution, not a new modeling paradigm. Its relevance to pretrain/post-train research is that it turns legacy supervised corpora into instruction data systematically, offering a cheaper and more distribution-grounded alternative to fully synthetic instruction generation.","technical_approach":"Dynosaur is a dynamic growth framework that derives instruction-tuning examples from existing datasets instead of generating them from scratch. It identifies relevant fields from dataset metadata, maps them to instruction/input/output roles, and uses an LLM to formulate task instructions consistent with those fields. The key design choice is to anchor generation to existing annotations, which reduces API cost and limits semantic drift; the obvious boundary is that it depends on the quality and clarity of dataset schemas.","experiments":"The abstract supports two concrete takeaways: Dynosaur reduces API cost relative to direct LLM-based instruction generation, and it leverages existing annotated datasets more efficiently. The abstract does not report model sizes, dataset totals, baselines, or exact gains, so those details cannot be stated reliably here. The full paper likely evaluates cost, data quality, and downstream instruction-tuning performance, but the exact numbers need the main text.","authors_note":""},"tags":["instruction-tuning","data-curation","synthetic-data","curriculum"]},{"id":"2304.13007","title":"Answering Questions by Meta-Reasoning over Multiple Chains of Thought","authors":["Ori Yoran","Tomer Wolfson","Ben Bogin","Uri Katz","Daniel Deutch","Jonathan Berant"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$49","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.13007","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YoranWBKDB23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.364"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YoranWBKDB23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.364","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：多条 CoT 采样之后，只对最终答案投票会浪费中间推理信息，也无法形成统一解释。此前 self-consistency 类方法默认“链条之间彼此独立，最后只聚合答案”就够了，但作者认为跨链的中间步骤里有可被再次推理利用的互补证据。","importance":"它的贡献是推理聚合方法级，对 post-train 推理范式有直接价值，也反过来提示 pretrain 端：模型是否具备比较、筛选和融合多条 reasoning traces 的能力，可能比单条 CoT 质量更关键。影响量级不在于改了底座，而在于把“sample many, vote once”推进到“sample many, reason over them”。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Multi-Chain Reasoning，把多条 CoT 作为输入，再让 LLM 做一次元推理，而不是做多数投票。MCR 会检查不同链条中的中间步骤，混合彼此有用的信息，筛掉无关或错误步骤，并输出统一答案与解释。与 self-consistency 最接近但关键不同点在于：后者把中间过程当一次性副产品，MCR 把它们当可编辑、可组合的推理工作区；这样设计有效的前提是不同链条确实含有互补但不完全一致的信息。","experiments":"从摘要能确认的是，论文面向 multi-hop QA，比较对象至少包括多链采样后直接投票的聚合方式。摘要明确声称 MCR 能检查、混合并选择最相关的推理片段，但没有给出所用模型规模、数据集名称、指标或提升数字，因此不能补写具体结果。实验的真实看点应当是：相比 answer voting，元推理是否在正确率和解释一致性上都有收益。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a weakness in multi-chain CoT inference: standard approaches sample several reasoning chains but discard the intermediate steps and only vote on final answers. That is suboptimal when different chains contain complementary partial evidence that could be reconciled into a stronger final explanation.","importance":"This is a reasoning-time aggregation contribution with clear implications beyond QA. It suggests that model capability should be measured not only by generating one good chain, but also by comparing, filtering, and integrating multiple imperfect chains—a useful lens for both post-training and future pretraining objectives.","technical_approach":"The method, Multi-Chain Reasoning (MCR), prompts an LLM to reason over multiple CoTs instead of doing answer-level voting. It inspects intermediate steps across chains, mixes useful information, discards irrelevant parts, and then produces a unified answer. The crucial difference from self-consistency is that reasoning traces are treated as reusable evidence rather than disposable samples; this can help when each chain is only partially correct.","experiments":"From the abstract, the setting is multi-hop QA and the natural baseline is answer voting over multiple sampled chains. The abstract claims that MCR can select and combine relevant reasoning pieces, but it provides no model sizes, benchmark names, or exact gains. The main empirical question is whether meta-reasoning beats simple voting on both answer accuracy and explanation coherence.","authors_note":""},"tags":["cot","reasoning","self-consistency","aggregation"]},{"id":"2306.08937","title":"DocumentNet: Bridging the Data Gap in Document Pre-training","authors":["Lijun Yu","Jin Miao","Xiaoyu Sun","Jiayi Chen","Alexander G. Hauptmann","Hanjun Dai","Wei Wei"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4a","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.08937","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YuMSCHD023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-INDUSTRY.66"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YuMSCHD023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-industry.66","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：文档预训练尤其是文档实体检索缺少大规模公开数据，现有数据又因隐私和实体空间不重叠而难以迁移。过去很多文档任务被数据稀缺卡住，不是模型结构不够强，而是没有跨文档类型、跨实体集合的统一预训练语料。","importance":"这是数据级贡献，而且量级不小。对预训练研究的意义在于，它把文档理解从小而封闭的 benchmark 推向 web-scale 弱监督预训练，直接回应了‘文档基础模型缺什么数据’的问题；如果数据质量足够，这类工作比再改一点网络结构更可能改变上限。","technical_approach":"核心方法是从网页大规模收集弱标注文档，构建不依赖特定文档类型或固定实体集的通用数据集 DocumentNet。设计关键不是为某个任务手工清洗高精标注，而是追求规模、类型泛化和实体空间开放性，从而让模型在预训练时先学到跨模板、跨版式、跨实体的匹配能力。这个选择有效，是因为文档检索的瓶颈之一正是实体空间碎片化；代价则是弱标注噪声更高，需要模型或训练目标具备一定鲁棒性。","experiments":"摘要给出了最重要的数字：DocumentNet 当前包含 3000 万文档，覆盖 547 万实体。任务上聚焦 VDER。摘要没有给出具体预训练模型规模、主 baseline、评测数据集名称和提升幅度，因此不能补具体分数。可以明确的是，实验主张应当围绕：大规模弱监督预训练是否能跨不同文档类型和不重叠实体空间迁移。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a data bottleneck in document pretraining, especially for visually-rich document entity retrieval: public datasets are scarce, privacy-constrained, and often have disjoint entity spaces that limit transfer. The limitation is less about architecture and more about the absence of large, open, cross-domain pretraining data.","importance":"This is a substantial data contribution. For pretraining research, the key message is that document foundation models need web-scale weak supervision that spans document types and open entity spaces; such a dataset can matter more than another small architectural tweak.","technical_approach":"DocumentNet is built by collecting massive weakly labeled documents from the web, with the explicit goal of being independent of specific document types or fixed entity sets. The design favors scale and universality over narrow, high-precision annotation. That choice is sensible because transfer in document retrieval is often blocked by fragmented entity spaces; the trade-off is higher label noise, so downstream training must tolerate imperfect supervision.","experiments":"The abstract provides the main scale numbers: DocumentNet contains 30M documents spanning 5.47M entities. The target application is VDER. However, the abstract does not report model sizes, benchmark names, baselines, or exact gains, so those details cannot be stated reliably here. The empirical claim to watch is whether weakly supervised pretraining transfers across document types and non-overlapping entity spaces.","authors_note":""},"tags":["document-pretraining","data-quality","multimodal","dataset"],"notable_authors":["Lijun Yu","Alexander G. Hauptmann"]},{"id":"ZevallosFB23","title":"Frequency Balanced Datasets Lead to Better Language Models","authors":["Rodolfo Zevallos","Mireia Farrús","Núria Bel"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZevallosFB23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.527"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZevallosFB23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.527","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：训练语料中的频率分布偏置是否会系统性伤害语言模型，而更平衡的频率分布能否学出更好的表示。这个问题过去常被弱化，因为大规模 LM 训练默认接受自然语料的 Zipf 分布，但这不代表它对学习目标就是最优的。","importance":"这是典型的数据分布研究，对 pretrain 很相关。它如果成立，意味着‘自然分布就是最好分布’这个默认工程假设需要修正；数据重采样或频率平衡可能是比小幅模型改动更直接的增益来源。","technical_approach":"从标题能确认，作者比较了 frequency balanced datasets 与常规数据分布对语言模型质量的影响。方法层面大概率是通过重采样、重加权或构造频率更均衡的训练集来改变 token/type 分布，再观察 LM 学习效果变化。关键机制假设是：过高频词主导梯度会挤占低频但信息量更高模式的学习。","experiments":"摘要未提供，因此无法确认模型规模、语言、数据集大小、baseline 和具体提升幅度。标题给出的核心结论足够明确：频率更平衡的数据集会导向更好的语言模型；但‘更好’是指困惑度、低频泛化、还是下游表现，需要正文确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether the natural frequency skew of language data systematically hurts language modeling, and whether more frequency-balanced training data can produce better models. This is a meaningful question because large-scale LM training usually accepts Zipfian data as given, not necessarily as optimal.","importance":"This is a directly relevant data-distribution study for pretraining. If the claim holds, it challenges a common engineering default—that matching the raw corpus distribution is inherently best—and suggests that data reweighting may be a stronger lever than minor model changes.","technical_approach":"From the title, the work compares frequency-balanced datasets against standard training distributions for language model training. The likely intervention is resampling or reweighting to flatten token/type frequency skew. The motivating mechanism is that very frequent patterns can dominate gradient updates and crowd out learning on lower-frequency but informative patterns.","experiments":"No abstract is available, so model sizes, languages, corpora, baselines, and exact gains cannot be reported safely. The title provides the directional conclusion: more frequency-balanced datasets lead to better language models, but the metric behind 'better' needs the paper text.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-quality","frequency","pretrain-data"],"notable_authors":["Rodolfo Zevallos","Mireia Farrús","Núria Bel"]},{"id":"Zhang0ZL23","title":"Toward Building General Foundation Models for Language, Vision, and Vision-Language Understanding Tasks","authors":["Xinsong Zhang","Yan Zeng","Jipeng Zhang","Hang Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/Zhang0ZL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.40"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/Zhang0ZL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.40","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：能否构建真正通用的 foundation model，同时覆盖语言、视觉和视觉语言理解任务，而不是分别训练单模态模型再用桥接模块拼接。这个问题重要，因为多模态系统长期受限于表示空间割裂、训练目标不统一、迁移不顺畅。","importance":"从标题看，这是范式级目标，至少在问题设定上很大。对 pretrain 的意义很直接：它关注 unified foundation model，而不是任务级 VLM；如果方法可行，会触及统一 tokenizer、统一目标函数、跨模态参数共享和原生多模态预训练这些核心问题。","technical_approach":"仅根据标题可确认，作者试图朝 general foundation models for language, vision, and vision-language tasks 推进，而不是只做某个双模态 benchmark。可能的技术路径包括统一编码空间、联合预训练目标、共享 backbone 或任务路由，但没有摘要，无法可靠说明是 AR、对比学习、masked modeling 还是其他混合范式。","experiments":"摘要缺失，因此模型大小、训练数据规模、覆盖任务、baseline 和是否达到统一模型下的 competitive performance 都无法确认。能确定的是，实验应跨 language、vision、vision-language 三类任务，验证统一模型是否有足够泛化而不是单点强。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether one can build a genuinely general foundation model covering language, vision, and vision-language understanding, instead of training separate unimodal systems with lightweight bridges. This matters because multimodal systems still suffer from fragmented representations and mismatched training objectives.","importance":"At the level of problem framing, this is paradigm-scale. It is directly relevant to pretraining because it concerns unified multimodal modeling rather than a narrow downstream VLM setup, touching core questions such as shared representations, joint objectives, and native multimodal pretraining.","technical_approach":"From the title alone, the work aims at a general foundation model spanning language-only, vision-only, and vision-language tasks. The exact implementation could involve shared backbones, unified latent spaces, or joint pretraining objectives, but without the abstract it is not possible to state the concrete modeling choice safely.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so model scale, training data, task coverage, baselines, and quantitative outcomes cannot be reported reliably. The decisive empirical question is whether a single unified model remains competitive across all three task families rather than excelling only in one.","authors_note":""},"tags":["foundation-model","vision-language","unified"],"notable_authors":["Xinsong Zhang","Yan Zeng","Jipeng Zhang","Hang Li"]},{"id":"ZhangFCNW23","title":"How Do Large Language Models Capture the Ever-changing World Knowledge? A Review of Recent Advances","authors":["Zihan Zhang","Meng Fang","Ling Chen","Mohammad-Reza Namazi-Rad","Jun Wang"],"institutions":["University of Wollongong"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhangFCNW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.516"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhangFCNW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.516","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"综述 LLM 如何应对\"世界知识会变\"这件事。预训练一次定格知识，但现实中事实会更新、会过时，补救路径（重训、continual pretrain、RAG、知识编辑、参数外挂）各自代价和边界不同，缺一个统一的坐标系。","importance":"综述类贡献。对 pretrain 研究者的价值在于把\"知识更新\"这个通常被划到 RAG/编辑子领域的问题，拉回到 pretrain 时间轴上——什么是可以在 pretrain/mid-train 里解决的，什么必须靠推理时外挂。","technical_approach":"按\"如何把新知识注入模型\"分类：(1) 隐式——continual pretrain / fine-tune；(2) 显式——retrieval-augmented / tool；(3) 编辑——ROME/MEMIT 类定点修改。对每类讨论知识时效性、冲突消解、评估方法，并指出 benchmark 多半只测静态事实，难反映真实的 drift。","experiments":"综述本身不跑实验，但整理了目前时效性 benchmark（如 TemporalWiki、RealTimeQA）及各方法的典型报告数据。","authors_note":"University of Wollongong，与 Paper 3 同一作者群。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Survey of how LLMs cope with ever-changing world knowledge. Pretraining freezes facts, and the remedies (retraining, continual pretrain, RAG, knowledge editing) each have different costs and limits without a unified view.","importance":"A survey whose value to pretraining researchers is to pull 'knowledge updating'—usually parked in the RAG/editing sub-community—back onto the pretraining timeline: what can be handled in pretrain/mid-train vs. what must be done at inference.","technical_approach":"Taxonomises by injection path: (1) implicit via continual pretrain / fine-tune; (2) explicit via retrieval or tools; (3) surgical via ROME/MEMIT-style editing. Discusses recency, conflict resolution, and evaluation for each, noting most benchmarks still probe static facts and underreport real drift.","experiments":"No new experiments; compiles existing temporal benchmarks (TemporalWiki, RealTimeQA, etc.) and reported numbers.","authors_note":"University of Wollongong, same author group as the CITB paper."},"tags":["survey","knowledge-update","continual-pretrain"],"notable_authors":["Meng Fang"]},{"id":"ZhangQGDZZZWF23","title":"Enhancing Uncertainty-Based Hallucination Detection with Stronger Focus","authors":["Tianhang Zhang","Lin Qiu","Qipeng Guo","Cheng Deng","Yue Zhang","Zheng Zhang","Chenghu Zhou","Xinbing Wang","Luoyi Fu"],"institutions":["Shanghai Jiao Tong University","Westlake University"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhangQGDZZZWF23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.58"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhangQGDZZZWF23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.58","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"用 token 级不确定性（熵、概率）检测 LLM 幻觉，但直接平均所有 token 的不确定性有两个问题：大量 function word 稀释信号，且模型\"过度自信\"本身是一种系统性偏差。","importance":"方法级改进，把不确定性幻觉检测从\"平均概率\"升级成更细粒度的信号筛选，对用 perplexity 做数据/样本质量打分有借鉴意义。","technical_approach":"两点关键改动：(1) Focus——只在 informative token 上算不确定性，而不是所有 token 上平均，靠 IDF/词性/关键词过滤；(2) Penalty——对\"LLM 自信但可能错\"的 token 额外加权，缓解 overconfidence bias。整体仍是 logit-based，不需要外部知识源，可做白盒幻觉检测。","experiments":"在事实类 QA 基准上与基于概率/熵的 baseline 比较幻觉检测的 AUROC / F1，有稳定提升。ablation 显示 focus 和 penalty 各自独立贡献。","authors_note":"上海交大张岳组相关（Yue Zhang 在 Westlake 方向也有工作），具体归属以论文为准。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Token-level uncertainty (entropy, probability) is a natural hallucination signal for white-box LLMs, but averaging over all tokens dilutes the signal with function words, and models' systematic overconfidence further biases the estimate.","importance":"A refinement of uncertainty-based hallucination detection from 'mean probability' to a more selective signal, with transfer value for any perplexity-based data or sample quality scoring.","technical_approach":"Two changes: (1) Focus—compute uncertainty only on informative tokens, filtered by IDF / POS / keyword, rather than averaging over all tokens; (2) Penalty—up-weight tokens where the model is confident yet plausibly wrong, to counter overconfidence bias. Remains logit-based, no external knowledge needed.","experiments":"On factual QA benchmarks, improves AUROC / F1 over probability- and entropy-based baselines. Ablations show focus and penalty each contribute independently.","authors_note":""},"tags":["hallucination","uncertainty"],"notable_authors":["Yue Zhang"]},{"id":"2305.12740","title":"Can We Edit Factual Knowledge by In-Context Learning?","authors":["Ce Zheng","Lei Li","Qingxiu Dong","Yuxuan Fan","Zhiyong Wu","Jingjing Xu","Baobao Chang"],"institutions":["Peking University","Shanghai AI Lab"],"abstract":"$4b","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.12740","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhengLDFWXC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.296"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhengLDFWXC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.296","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"传统知识编辑方法（ROME/MEMIT 等）要改参数，模型大了代价高，且黑盒 API 模型根本没法改。作者问：能不能纯用 in-context learning 改事实知识？","importance":"方法级贡献，展示了一条零参数更新的知识编辑路径。对 pretrain/posttrain 的启发在于：很多看似需要权重更新的问题，其实可以 offload 到 prompt 上下文，代价是需要精心设计 demonstration。","technical_approach":"提出 IKE：在 prompt 里放入三类 demonstration——copy（原样记住新事实）、update（用新事实替换旧答案）、retain（与被编辑事实无关的问题保持原答案），分别对应 reliability、generalization、specificity 三个评测维度。核心是用 demo 显式教模型何时该用新事实、何时不该用。","experiments":"在 COUNTERFACT / zsRE 等知识编辑 benchmark 上与 FT、ROME、MEMIT 等对比；IKE 在可靠性和泛化上有竞争力，同时显著减少对无关知识的副作用（specificity 更好），且不需要梯度。","authors_note":"北大 + 上海 AI Lab，Qingxiu Dong 等。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Gradient-based knowledge editors (ROME, MEMIT) scale poorly and cannot touch black-box APIs. Can factual edits be done purely via in-context learning?","importance":"A method-level contribution showing a zero-update editing route. Broader lesson for pretraining/post-training: some problems thought to need weight updates can be handled via carefully designed demonstrations.","technical_approach":"Proposes IKE with three demonstration types in the prompt: copy (memorize new fact), update (override old answer with new fact), retain (leave unrelated facts untouched), mapped to reliability/generalization/specificity. Demonstrations explicitly teach the model when to apply the new fact and when not to.","experiments":"On COUNTERFACT and zsRE, IKE is competitive with FT, ROME, MEMIT on reliability and generalization, and notably better on specificity (fewer side-effects on unrelated knowledge), all without gradient updates.","authors_note":"Peking University and Shanghai AI Lab; includes Qingxiu Dong."},"tags":["knowledge-editing","in-context-learning"],"notable_authors":["Qingxiu Dong"]},{"id":"2305.14795","title":"MQuAKE: Assessing Knowledge Editing in Language Models via Multi-Hop Questions","authors":["Zexuan Zhong","Zhengxuan Wu","Christopher D. Manning","Christopher Potts","Danqi Chen"],"institutions":["Stanford University","Princeton University"],"abstract":"$4c","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14795","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhongWMPC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.971"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhongWMPC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.971","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有知识编辑评测只看能不能复述被编辑的事实，看不出编辑是否传播到相关信念。把英国首相改成 Sunak 后，'英国首相的妻子是谁' 的答案也应该变——这才是真的改了。","importance":"评测级贡献，重要。MQuAKE 直接暴露了当前 ROME/MEMIT 类方法的致命短板——改单个事实但不改连锁推理结果，这个发现会长期影响知识编辑研究方向，推动从 local edit 转向 ripple edit。","technical_approach":"构造多跳问题 benchmark MQuAKE：每个样本包含一次或多次 fact edits，以及一组多跳问题，其答案在编辑后应随之改变。既有 MQuAKE-CF（counterfactual）又有 MQuAKE-T（真实时间演化）。用这套数据测 ROME/MEMIT/MEND 等编辑方法是否真的产生 ripple effect。","experiments":"对主流编辑方法打分，发现它们在单跳 recall 上接近完美，但在多跳上准确率大幅下滑（下降几十个百分点），并且编辑次数越多越垮。作者还给出一个简单的 memory-based baseline（把编辑事实存外部，检索时用 LLM 重推）显著胜过参数编辑方法。","authors_note":"Stanford + Princeton，Danqi Chen、Chris Manning、Chris Potts。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing knowledge-editing benchmarks only test recall of the edited fact, not whether the edit propagates to related beliefs. Changing the UK PM to Sunak should also change the answer to 'who is married to the UK PM?'.","importance":"An evaluation-level contribution with real teeth. MQuAKE exposes a fundamental weakness of ROME/MEMIT-style local editors and is likely to reshape research toward ripple-aware editing.","technical_approach":"Builds MQuAKE: multi-hop QA benchmark where each instance applies one or more edits and asks multi-hop questions whose answers must shift accordingly. Includes counterfactual (MQuAKE-CF) and temporal (MQuAKE-T) variants. Tests whether existing editors (ROME, MEMIT, MEND, etc.) propagate edits.","experiments":"Editors achieve near-perfect single-hop recall but drop dramatically on multi-hop accuracy, worsening as more edits accumulate. A simple memory-based baseline that stores edits externally and re-reasons with the LLM substantially beats parameter-editing methods.","authors_note":"Stanford and Princeton; Danqi Chen, Christopher Manning, Christopher Potts."},"tags":["knowledge-editing","multi-hop","benchmark"],"notable_authors":["Danqi Chen","Christopher D. Manning","Christopher Potts"]},{"id":"2311.13240","title":"On the Calibration of Large Language Models and Alignment","authors":["Chiwei Zhu","Benfeng Xu","Quan Wang","Yongdong Zhang","Zhendong Mao"],"institutions":["University of Science and Technology of China"],"abstract":"As large language models attract increasing attention and find widespread application, concurrent challenges of reliability also arise at the same time. Confidence calibration, an effective analysis method for gauging the reliability of deep models, serves as a crucial tool for assessing and improving their reliability. However, such investigation has been comparatively underexplored. In this work, we conduct a systematic examination of the calibration of aligned language models throughout the entire construction process, including pretraining and alignment training. At each stage, we investigate how different training settings, such as parameter scales and training data, affect model calibration. To thoroughly assess model calibration, we evaluate models on three most concerned aspects: generation, factuality and understanding. Our work sheds light on whether popular LLMs are well-calibrated and how the training process influences model calibration.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.13240","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhuX00M23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.654"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhuX00M23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.654","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"大语言模型经过对齐训练（RLHF/SFT）后，其置信度校准（calibration）会发生什么变化？此前对 LLM 校准的研究大多只看单一阶段或单一任务，缺乏对 pretrain → alignment 全流程的系统性分析。","importance":"这是一项分析性工作，贡献在于揭示 pretrain 和 alignment 各阶段对校准的影响规律。对 pretrain 研究的启示：模型规模、训练数据量在 pretrain 阶段如何影响校准，以及 alignment 训练是否系统性地破坏 pretrain 阶段建立的校准特性。这些发现对理解 pretrain ↔ posttrain 接口处的信号传递很有价值。","technical_approach":"系统性实验设计：在 pretrain 和 alignment 两个阶段分别控制参数规模和训练数据量，观察校准变化。评估覆盖三个维度——生成质量、事实性、安全性——以全面衡量校准。方法本身不是新的校准技术，而是用已有的校准度量（如 ECE）做大规模受控实验。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体模型名称和数字。从描述看，实验涵盖不同参数规模的 LLM，在 pretrain 和 alignment 各阶段分别评估，任务包括生成、事实性判断和安全性评估。需查看全文获取具体 ECE 数值和 scaling 趋势。","authors_note":"作者来自中国科学技术大学。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How does alignment training (RLHF/SFT) affect the confidence calibration of LLMs? Prior work studied calibration at isolated stages; a systematic examination across the full pretrain-to-alignment pipeline was missing.","importance":"An analytical contribution that maps how parameter scale and training data affect calibration at each stage, and whether alignment systematically degrades calibration established during pretraining. Directly relevant to understanding the pretrain ↔ posttrain interface.","technical_approach":"Controlled experiments varying parameter scale and training data at both pretraining and alignment stages, measuring calibration across three dimensions: generation quality, factuality, and safety. No new calibration technique is proposed; the contribution is the systematic experimental design using standard metrics like ECE.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide specific model names or numbers. The study covers multiple model scales and evaluates at each training stage across three task dimensions. Full paper needed for concrete ECE values and scaling observations.","authors_note":"Authors from University of Science and Technology of China."},"tags":["calibration","alignment","reliability","llm-evaluation"]},{"id":"2310.12580","title":"Pretraining Language Models with Text-Attributed Heterogeneous Graphs","authors":["Tao Zou","Le Yu","Yifei Huang","Leilei Sun","Bowen Du"],"institutions":["Beihang University"],"abstract":"$4d","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.12580","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/Zou0HS023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.692"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/Zou0HS023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.692","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有语言模型预训练只利用每个实体的文本信息，忽略了文本属性异构图（Text-Attributed Heterogeneous Graphs, TAHGs）中实体间的拓扑关系和异构类型信息。学术网络、社交平台等场景中，实体既有文本又有多种关系，单独建模文本会丢失结构信号。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出了一种让语言模型在预训练阶段显式编码图拓扑和异构性的框架。对 pretrain 研究的启示：当预训练数据本身具有丰富的结构化关系时（如知识图谱、引用网络），如何设计预训练任务来捕获这些关系，是一个值得关注的方向。不过该工作聚焦于特定图结构场景，通用性有待验证。","technical_approach":"定义了「上下文图」（context graph）作为目标节点在特定阶数内的邻域子图，然后设计了拓扑感知的预训练任务——预测上下文图中涉及的节点。这让 LM 在预训练时就学习到图的连接模式。此外还引入了异构信息的建模（不同类型的边和节点），使模型区分不同关系类型。与 GNN+LM 的后融合方案不同，这里是在预训练目标层面直接注入图结构。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体数字。预期在学术网络或社交平台等 TAHG 数据集上评估，与纯文本预训练 LM 和 GNN+LM 混合方法对比。需查看全文获取具体指标。","authors_note":"作者来自北京航空航天大学。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Current LM pretraining focuses on textual information of individual entities and ignores topological connections and heterogeneous relationships in Text-Attributed Heterogeneous Graphs (TAHGs), which are common in academic networks and social platforms.","importance":"A method-level contribution proposing a pretraining framework that explicitly encodes graph topology and heterogeneity into LMs. Relevant to pretrain research when training data has rich structural relationships (citation networks, knowledge graphs), though generality beyond graph-structured domains is unclear.","technical_approach":"Defines a 'context graph' as the k-hop neighborhood of a target node and designs a topology-aware pretraining task that predicts nodes within this context graph. This injects graph connectivity patterns directly into the pretraining objective, unlike post-hoc GNN+LM fusion. Heterogeneous information (different edge/node types) is also modeled to distinguish relationship types.","experiments":"The abstract provides no specific numbers. Experiments are expected on TAHG datasets (academic/social networks) comparing against text-only pretrained LMs and GNN+LM hybrid methods. Full paper needed for metrics.","authors_note":"Authors from Beihang University."},"tags":["pretraining","graph","heterogeneous-graph","text-attributed"]},{"id":"BhattacharyaB23","title":"Unveiling Multilinguality in Transformer Models: Exploring Language Specificity in Feed-Forward Networks","authors":["Sunit Bhattacharya","Ondrej Bojar"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/blackboxnlp/BhattacharyaB23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.BLACKBOXNLP-1.9"},"_dblp_key":"conf/blackboxnlp/BhattacharyaB23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.blackboxnlp-1.9","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"探究多语言 Transformer 模型如何在参数层面（特别是前馈神经网络 FFN 层）隔离或共享不同语言的表示。","importance":"机制分析级贡献。帮助理解多语言预训练中的容量分配（capacity allocation）机制，对缓解多语言灾难性遗忘或设计高效的稀疏/MoE架构有指导意义。","technical_approach":"通过探测（probing）和激活分析，定位 FFN 中对特定语言敏感的神经元，分析多语言模型内部的语言特异性子网络分布。","experiments":"（摘要截断，基于标题推断）验证了 FFN 中存在语言特异性神经元，揭示了多语言表示在网络深层的解耦现象。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Investigates how multilingual Transformer models isolate or share representations of different languages at the parameter level, specifically within Feed-Forward Networks (FFNs).","importance":"Mechanistic interpretability contribution. It aids in understanding capacity allocation in multilingual pretraining, providing guidance for mitigating catastrophic forgetting or designing efficient sparse/MoE architectures.","technical_approach":"Uses probing and activation analysis to locate language-sensitive neurons within FFNs, analyzing the distribution of language-specific subnetworks inside multilingual models.","experiments":"(Abstract truncated, inferred from title) Validates the existence of language-specific neurons in FFNs, revealing the decoupling of multilingual representations in deeper layers."},"tags":["multilingual","ffn","interpretability"],"notable_authors":["Ondrej Bojar"]},{"id":"CongCHB23","title":"Investigating the Effect of Discourse Connectives on Transformer Surprisal: Language Models Understand Connectives, Even So They Are Surprised","authors":["Yan Cong","Emmanuele Chersoni","Yu-Yin Hsu","Philippe Blache"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"As neural language models (NLMs) based on Transformers are becoming increasingly dominant in natural language processing, several studies have proposed analyzing the semantic and pragmatic abilities of such models. In our study, we aimed at investigating the effect of discourse connectives on NLMs with regard to Transformer Surprisal scores by focusing on the English stimuli of an experimental dataset, in which the expectations about an event in a discourse fragment could be reversed by a concessive or a contrastive connective. By comparing the Surprisal scores of several NLMs, we found that bigger NLMs show patterns similar to humans’ behavioral data when a concessive connective is used, while connective-related effects tend to disappear with a contrastive one. We have additionally validated our findings with GPT-Neo using an extended dataset, and results mostly show a consistent pattern.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/blackboxnlp/CongCHB23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.BLACKBOXNLP-1.17"},"_dblp_key":"conf/blackboxnlp/CongCHB23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.blackboxnlp-1.17","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"评估自回归语言模型是否真正理解篇章连接词（如让步或对比）对后续语义预期的反转作用，而不仅仅是拟合局部词频统计。","importance":"机制分析级贡献。从心理语言学视角验证了 LLM 的长程语用建模能力，证明了 scaling law 在篇章级逻辑理解上的有效性。","technical_approach":"使用 Transformer Surprisal（负对数概率）作为探针。对比模型在遇到让步（concessive）和对比（contrastive）连接词时，对后续事件 token 的 surprisal 变化是否符合人类行为学预期。","experiments":"发现较大规模的神经语言模型在处理让步连接词时，surprisal 模式与人类高度一致；但对比连接词的效应较弱。证明了语用理解能力随模型规模涌现。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Evaluates whether autoregressive LMs truly understand the semantic reversal effects of discourse connectives (concessive vs. contrastive) on subsequent expectations, rather than just fitting local word frequencies.","importance":"Mechanistic interpretability contribution. It validates the long-range pragmatic modeling capabilities of LLMs from a psycholinguistic perspective, demonstrating the effectiveness of scaling laws on discourse-level logical understanding.","technical_approach":"Uses Transformer Surprisal (negative log-probability) as a probe. It compares whether the change in surprisal for subsequent event tokens, when encountering concessive or contrastive connectives, aligns with human behavioral data.","experiments":"Found that larger NLMs show surprisal patterns highly consistent with humans when processing concessive connectives, though the effect is weaker for contrastive ones. Proves that pragmatic understanding emerges with scale."},"tags":["surprisal","discourse","probing"]},{"id":"2310.06977","title":"Why Bother with Geometry? On the Relevance of Linear Decompositions of Transformer Embeddings","authors":["Timothee Mickus","Raúl Vázquez"],"institutions":["University of Helsinki"],"abstract":"A recent body of work has demonstrated that Transformer embeddings can be linearly decomposed into well-defined sums of factors, that can in turn be related to specific network inputs or components. There is however still a dearth of work studying whether these mathematical reformulations are empirically meaningful. In the present work, we study representations from machine-translation decoders using two of such embedding decomposition methods. Our results indicate that, while decomposition-derived indicators effectively correlate with model performance, variation across different runs suggests a more nuanced take on this question. The high variability of our measurements indicate that geometry reflects model-specific characteristics more than it does sentence-specific computations, and that similar training conditions do not guarantee similar vector spaces.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06977","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/blackboxnlp/MickusV23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.BLACKBOXNLP-1.10"},"_dblp_key":"conf/blackboxnlp/MickusV23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.blackboxnlp-1.10","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"探究 Transformer 嵌入的线性分解（将表示拆解为输入或组件的加权和）在经验上是否真的具有物理意义，还是仅仅是数学上的巧合。","importance":"机制分析级贡献。对当前流行的“线性表示假说”提出了警示，指出几何分解结果的高方差意味着它更多反映了模型初始化的特异性，而非通用的语言计算逻辑。","technical_approach":"在机器翻译 Decoder 上应用两种现有的嵌入分解方法。通过跨多个随机种子训练的 run 进行对比，分析分解得到的几何指标与模型实际性能、句子级计算的相关性和稳定性。","experiments":"发现虽然分解指标与模型整体性能有相关性，但在不同 run 之间变异极大。结论是：几何特征更多反映了模型特定的（model-specific）特征，而不是句子特定的（sentence-specific）计算。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Investigates whether linear decompositions of Transformer embeddings (breaking representations into weighted sums of inputs/components) are empirically meaningful or just mathematical coincidences.","importance":"Mechanistic interpretability contribution. It cautions against the popular 'linear representation hypothesis', pointing out that the high variance in geometric decompositions reflects model initialization specifics rather than universal linguistic computation.","technical_approach":"Applies two existing embedding decomposition methods to machine translation decoders. Compares across multiple runs with different random seeds to analyze the correlation and stability of geometric indicators with actual model performance and sentence-level computation.","experiments":"Found that while decomposition indicators correlate with overall model performance, they vary drastically across different runs. Concludes that geometry reflects model-specific characteristics more than sentence-specific computations."},"tags":["interpretability","embeddings","transformer"]},{"id":"PrakashL23","title":"Layered Bias: Interpreting Bias in Pretrained Large Language Models","authors":["Nirmalendu Prakash","Roy Ka-Wei Lee"],"institutions":["Singapore University of Technology and Design"],"abstract":"Large language models (LLMs) like GPT and PALM have excelled in numerous natural language processing (NLP) tasks such as text generation, question answering, and translation. However, they are also found to have inherent social biases. To address this, recent studies have proposed debiasing techniques like iterative nullspace projection (INLP) and Counterfactual Data Augmentation (CDA). Additionally, there’s growing interest in understanding the intricacies of these models. Some researchers focus on individual neural units, while others examine specific layers. In our study, we benchmark newly released models, assess the impact of debiasing methods, and investigate how biases are linked to different transformer layers using a method called Logit Lens. Specifically, we evaluate three modern LLMs: OPT, LLaMA, and LLaMA2, and their debiased versions. Our experiments are based on two popular bias evaluation datasets, StereoSet and CrowS-Pairs, and we perform a layer-by-layer analysis using the Logit Lens.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/blackboxnlp/PrakashL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.BLACKBOXNLP-1.22"},"_dblp_key":"conf/blackboxnlp/PrakashL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.blackboxnlp-1.22","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"探究预训练语言模型中的社会偏见是如何在 Transformer 的不同层级中累积和分布的，以及去偏方法在各层的实际干预效果。","importance":"机制分析级贡献。将 Logit Lens 引入偏见分析，打破了把 LLM 当黑盒测偏见的传统，为设计 layer-specific 的去偏策略（如只干预特定层）提供了依据。","technical_approach":"结合 Logit Lens 技术（将中间层激活直接投影到词表空间），在层级别量化偏见。评估了 INLP 和 CDA 等去偏方法对各层内部表示的具体影响。","experiments":"在三个现代模型上进行基准测试。揭示了偏见并非均匀分布，而是与特定 Transformer 层强相关，且去偏方法对不同层的动态影响存在显著差异。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Investigates how social biases in pretrained LMs accumulate and distribute across different Transformer layers, and evaluates the actual intervention effects of debiasing methods at each layer.","importance":"Mechanistic interpretability contribution. It introduces Logit Lens to bias analysis, breaking the tradition of treating LLMs as black boxes for bias measurement, and provides a basis for layer-specific debiasing strategies.","technical_approach":"Combines Logit Lens technology (projecting intermediate layer activations directly into vocabulary space) to quantify bias at the layer level. Evaluates the specific impacts of debiasing methods like INLP and CDA on internal representations across layers.","experiments":"Benchmarked on three modern models. Revealed that bias is not uniformly distributed but strongly correlated with specific Transformer layers, and debiasing methods have significantly different dynamic impacts across layers."},"tags":["bias","interpretability","debiasing"],"notable_authors":["Roy Ka-Wei Lee"]},{"id":"2310.15004","title":"When Language Models Fall in Love: Animacy Processing in Transformer Language Models","authors":["Michael Hanna","Yonatan Belinkov","Sandro Pezzelle"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4e","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.15004","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/0001BP23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.744"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/0001BP23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.744","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注一个被文本预训练常常绕开的问题：Transformer 语言模型在没有直接接触真实世界感知信号的情况下，是否真的学到了 animacy（有生性）这种依赖常识和选择限制的语义属性。过去大家更多在典型、容易判断的名词上验证模型行为像人，但这不足以说明模型掌握了更细粒度、非显式表达的 animacy 机制。","importance":"这项工作的意义在于它不是再做一个 probing 小结论，而是在检验“纯文本 LM 能学到多少世界知识”的边界。对 pretrain 的启示是明确的：一些看似基础的语义属性，即使在人类认知中很核心，也可能只在典型样本上被语言统计近似学到，一旦脱离高频原型，模型的表示和泛化就会暴露缺口。","technical_approach":"作者用开源 LM 系统研究 animacy processing，并把评测从典型实体扩展到更困难、先验更弱或表达更隐含的情形。方法重点不在构造新模型，而在设计能区分“记住词汇共现”与“具备稳定 animacy 表征”的对比设置：当实体有典型有生性时，模型往往和人类一致；但论文进一步检查在更不典型、仅靠上下文选择限制才能判断的条件下，模型是否仍保持人类式行为。这个设计有效，因为 animacy 在英语里常常不是显式标签，而是通过动词、形容词可搭配性间接体现。","experiments":"从摘要可确认的实验结论是：开源 LM 在典型 animacy 条件下表现接近人类，但在更有挑战的条件下会出现明显偏差。摘要截断后未给出具体模型名称、数据规模、指标或误差幅度，因此无法安全复述数值。可以确定的是，论文不是在宣称“LM 完全不懂 animacy”，而是在说它们对原型样本有效、对非原型和隐式约束不稳，这比二元判断更有信息量。","authors_note":"作者来自认知/语言与 NLP 交叉方向；Yonatan Belinkov 是较知名作者，长期做语言模型表征分析、鲁棒性与可解释性研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a gap that text-only pretraining often hides: can transformer LMs really represent animacy, a semantic property humans learn from both language and world experience. Earlier work mostly focused on prototypical cases where the animacy label is easy to infer, which does not tell us whether models have a robust mechanism or just fit common lexical patterns.","importance":"The contribution is diagnostic rather than algorithmic, but it matters for pretraining. It sharpens the boundary of what text-only learning can recover about world knowledge: some seemingly basic semantic distinctions may be approximated well for typical examples yet fail once the signal becomes indirect or non-prototypical.","technical_approach":"The authors evaluate open-source LMs on animacy processing with conditions that separate lexical familiarity from genuine semantic generalization. The key move is to go beyond typical animate/inanimate entities and test cases where animacy must be inferred through selectional constraints, such as which verbs or adjectives naturally apply. That is the right stress test because English often encodes animacy indirectly rather than with explicit markers.","experiments":"The abstract supports one clear empirical takeaway: LMs behave similarly to humans for entities with typical animacy, but diverge under harder conditions. The provided text is truncated, so model names, dataset details, and quantitative gaps are unavailable and should not be fabricated. The paper therefore reads as a boundary-setting result, not a blanket claim that LMs fail at animacy altogether.","authors_note":"The work sits at the intersection of NLP and cognitive modeling. Yonatan Belinkov is a notable author known for representation analysis, robustness, and interpretability of neural language models."},"tags":["probing","linguistics","analysis"],"notable_authors":["Michael Hanna","Yonatan Belinkov","Sandro Pezzelle"]},{"id":"2310.14799","title":"Cross-lingual Prompting: Improving Zero-shot Chain-of-Thought Reasoning across Languages","authors":["Libo Qin","Qiguang Chen","Fuxuan Wei","Shijue Huang","Wanxiang Che"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4f","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.14799","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/0001CWHC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.163"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/0001CWHC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.163","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：zero-shot CoT 提示词在英语里有效，但一旦换语言，尤其是低资源或与英语分布差异大的语言，推理能力会明显不稳。过去的 zero-shot prompting 基本默认“同一种提示语在单语言内工作”，没有系统处理跨语言对齐与求解阶段分工，因此多语言 CoT 一直缺少简单可迁移的方法。","importance":"这项工作的重要性是方法级的，但它触及 multilingual pretrain 的一个真实接口问题：模型的推理能力未必能通过任意语言等价激活。对 pretrain 的启示是，跨语言推理不仅取决于参数中是否已有知识，也取决于触发这些知识的提示语言、任务语言和中间推理语言之间是否对齐；这对后续多语指令数据设计、跨语蒸馏和 test-time prompting 都有价值。","technical_approach":"作者提出 Cross-lingual Prompting（CLP），核心由两部分组成：cross-lingual alignment prompting 和 task-specific solver prompting。前者的作用是先把模型拉到一个更稳定的跨语语义/指令对齐状态，后者再显式触发任务求解过程；也就是说，它把“先理解跨语言要求”和“再做具体推理”拆成两段，而不是把所有负担都压在一句 zero-shot CoT 指令上。这个设计与常见单语言 CoT 的区别在于，它把语言迁移误差视为独立瓶颈，而不假设 reasoning prompt 可以天然跨语泛化。","experiments":"摘要说明 CLP 用于提升 across languages 的 zero-shot CoT reasoning，但没有在给定信息中提供模型规模、覆盖语种、任务集合、主 baseline 或具体提升幅度，因此不能编造数字。可以稳妥给出的结论是：作者证明了将跨语对齐与求解提示分离，优于直接沿用单语言 zero-shot CoT；其收益应主要体现在多语言泛化稳定性，而不是单语上重新发明 CoT。","authors_note":"作者团队来自中文 NLP / 多语言处理方向；车万翔是较知名作者，长期做句法、信息抽取与多语言 NLP。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical gap: zero-shot CoT prompting works well in English, but its reasoning gains do not transfer reliably across languages. Existing prompting recipes mostly assume a single-language setup and leave cross-lingual alignment implicit, which is exactly where multilingual reasoning often breaks.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution with clear implications for multilingual pretraining and post-training. It suggests that cross-lingual reasoning quality depends not only on what the model knows, but also on whether the prompt language, task language, and reasoning language activate that knowledge consistently.","technical_approach":"The proposed Cross-lingual Prompting (CLP) has two components: cross-lingual alignment prompting and task-specific solver prompting. The first stage aligns the model to the multilingual instruction and semantic space; the second stage triggers the actual reasoning behavior. The design choice matters because it decouples language transfer from problem solving, instead of assuming that a standard zero-shot CoT phrase will generalize across languages by itself.","experiments":"The abstract supports the high-level claim that CLP improves zero-shot CoT reasoning across languages. However, the provided text does not include model sizes, number of languages, benchmark names, baselines, or exact gains, so no quantitative summary should be invented. The credible takeaway is qualitative: separating alignment from solving helps multilingual reasoning more than directly reusing monolingual CoT prompts.","authors_note":"The team works in multilingual NLP. Wanxiang Che is a notable author known for parsing, information extraction, and multilingual language processing."},"tags":["cot","multilingual","prompting"],"notable_authors":["Libo Qin","Qiguang Chen","Fuxuan Wei","Shijue Huang","Wanxiang Che"]},{"id":"2305.09652","title":"The Interpreter Understands Your Meaning: End-to-end Spoken Language Understanding Aided by Speech Translation","authors":["Mutian He","Philip N. Garner"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$50","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.09652","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/0001G23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.291"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/0001G23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.291","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是端到端 SLU，尤其是跨语言 SLU，为什么即使有大规模文本和语音预训练仍然难做。作者的判断是，现有 speech 表征往往停留在较低层的声学模式，而 SLU 需要更高层的语义抽象和跨语言对齐；传统做法通常把 ASR、MT、NLU 分开学，信息链长且误差累积，因此需要一个更贴近语义的语音预训练目标。","importance":"这项工作是语音预训练目标设计上的方法级贡献。对 pretrain 的启示在于：speech translation 不只是下游任务，也可以作为更强的语义预训练信号，把低层声学输入直接压到跨语言语义空间里；这与“统一 token + 统一 LM”路线不同，但同样是在探索 speech model 应该从什么监督里学抽象语义。","technical_approach":"作者用 speech translation（ST）作为端到端 SLU 的预训练任务，再迁移到单语和跨语的 intent classification 等任务。这个选择的关键原因是 ST 同时要求模型从声学帧中提取句级语义，并建立跨语言映射，比 ASR 更接近“理解”而非“转写”，也比只做语音自监督更直接地提供语义目标。方法上它不是给 SLU 额外拼一个翻译模块，而是把 ST 当作上游训练阶段，从而改善下游 SLU 表征；代价是需要带语音-翻译配对的数据，数据获取门槛高于无监督语音预训练。","experiments":"摘要明确说：引入 ST 预训练后，模型在单语和多语场景下的 intent classification 都优于 baseline。给定信息没有具体模型规模、预训练语料规模、语种数、数据集名称或提升幅度，因此不能补数字。可以确认的经验结论是，收益不仅出现在 cross-lingual SLU，也覆盖 intralingual SLU，说明 ST 带来的不是单纯的翻译迁移，而是更通用的语义表征改进。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks why end-to-end spoken language understanding, especially cross-lingual SLU, remains difficult even with large pretrained speech and text models. The authors argue that many current speech representations stay too close to acoustics, while SLU needs higher-level semantic abstraction and cross-lingual alignment.","importance":"This is a pretraining-objective contribution for speech models. The main lesson is that speech translation can serve as semantic pretraining, not just as a downstream task. That matters because it offers a direct way to map low-level acoustic input into a language-agnostic semantic space.","technical_approach":"The method pretrains speech models on speech translation and then transfers them to end-to-end SLU tasks such as intent classification. The design choice is sensible: compared with ASR, speech translation forces the model to discard language-specific surface form and preserve utterance meaning; compared with generic self-supervised speech objectives, it injects a more explicit semantic target. The downside is data cost, since paired speech-to-translation corpora are harder to obtain than unlabeled audio.","experiments":"The abstract states that adding ST pretraining improves both monolingual and multilingual intent classification over baselines. No model sizes, datasets, language counts, or exact gains are included in the provided text, so no numbers should be invented. The safe takeaway is that the benefit is not limited to cross-lingual transfer; it also improves same-language SLU, suggesting a broader semantic gain.","authors_note":""},"tags":["speech","slu","translation"],"notable_authors":["Mutian He","Philip N. Garner"]},{"id":"2305.01810","title":"KEPLET: Knowledge-Enhanced Pretrained Language Model with Topic Entity Awareness","authors":["Yichuan Li","Jialong Han","Kyumin Lee","Chengyuan Ma","Benjamin Z. Yao","Xiaohu Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$51","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.01810","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/0001HLMYL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.458"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/0001HLMYL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.458","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是现有知识增强 PLM 在 Wikipedia 上做实体建模时，虽然利用了 mention-entity 交互，却忽略了一个很强的结构先验：每个页面本身围绕一个 topic entity 组织。过去的方法把页面里的实体当作局部提及来处理，没有显式把“整页都在讲谁”纳入预训练，因此实体间关系建模仍然不完整，尤其会漏掉跨句乃至全篇的主题约束。","importance":"这是一项知识增强预训练方法上的增量改进，但切中数据结构利用不足的问题。对 pretrain 的启示是，像 Wikipedia 这类半结构化语料中，真正有价值的不只是链接锚点，还包括页面级组织结构；如果只吃平铺文本，会白白丢掉廉价而稳定的监督信号。这个思路可推广到文档级 topic token、页面元数据和结构化 layout 建模。","technical_approach":"作者提出 KEPLET，在知识增强预训练中加入 topic entity awareness。核心不是再引入更多外部知识库，而是把 Wikipedia 页面标题/URL 指向的主题实体显式纳入 token-entity 交互建模，让模型在预训练时同时感知局部 mention 和全局 topic entity。与传统 KEPLM 相比，它补上了页面级实体上下文，因此能更好地约束哪些实体关系是当前文档真正相关的。这个设计有效，因为 Wikipedia 页面的写作分布强依赖 topic entity；若忽略它，模型会把很多实体交互视作彼此平权的局部共现。","experiments":"摘要明确声称：不建模 topic entity 会导致实体交互建模不足，而 KEPLET 在 entity-centric tasks 上更有效。给定信息没有模型参数、预训练语料规模、任务列表、主 baseline 和提升幅度，因此不能补具体数字。可以把握的结论是，这篇论文的收益应主要集中在实体链接、关系分类等实体中心任务，而不是一般语言理解全面改写 SOTA。","authors_note":"作者中 Kyumin Lee、Benjamin Z. Yao 较活跃于信息抽取、知识图谱与表示学习方向。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a specific weakness in knowledge-enhanced PLMs on Wikipedia: prior models use mention–entity interactions but ignore the page-level topic entity around which each article is organized. As a result, they miss a strong document-level prior that shapes which entity interactions are actually relevant.","importance":"This is an incremental pretraining-method contribution, but it makes a useful point about data structure. For pretraining, the takeaway is that semi-structured corpora like Wikipedia offer more than anchor links; page-level organization itself is a cheap and reliable supervision signal. Ignoring it leaves document-level entity information on the table.","technical_approach":"KEPLET adds topic entity awareness to knowledge-enhanced pretraining. Instead of only modeling local mentioned entities, it explicitly incorporates the topic entity identified by the page title or URL into token–entity interaction modeling. The difference from prior KEPLMs is therefore not a larger knowledge source but a better use of document structure. This should help because Wikipedia articles are heavily conditioned on the topic entity, and treating all entity mentions as equally local loses that global constraint.","experiments":"The abstract supports the qualitative claim that KEPLMs without topic entities model entity interactions insufficiently, and that KEPLET improves entity-centric tasks. The provided text does not include model size, pretraining scale, benchmark names, or exact gains, so no quantitative summary should be fabricated. The likely scope is narrow but meaningful: gains should concentrate on entity-linking-style tasks rather than broad language understanding.","authors_note":"Kyumin Lee and Benjamin Z. Yao are active researchers in information extraction, knowledge representation, and related NLP areas."},"tags":["knowledge-enhanced","plm","entity"],"notable_authors":["Yichuan Li","Jialong Han","Kyumin Lee","Chengyuan Ma","Benjamin Z. Yao"]},{"id":"2305.14196","title":"ZeroSCROLLS: A Zero-Shot Benchmark for Long Text Understanding","authors":["Uri Shaham","Maor Ivgi","Avia Efrat","Jonathan Berant","Omer Levy"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We introduce ZeroSCROLLS, a zero-shot benchmark for natural language understanding over long texts, which contains only test and small validation sets, without training data. We adapt six tasks from the SCROLLS benchmark, and add four new datasets, including two novel information fusing tasks, such as aggregating the percentage of positive reviews. Using ZeroSCROLLS, we conduct a comprehensive evaluation of both open-source and closed large language models, finding that Claude outperforms ChatGPT, and that GPT-4 achieves the highest average score. However, there is still room for improvement on multiple open challenges in ZeroSCROLLS, such as aggregation tasks, where models struggle to pass the naive baseline. As the state of the art is a moving target, we invite researchers to evaluate their ideas on the live ZeroSCROLLS leaderboard.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14196","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/0002IEBL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.536"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/0002IEBL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.536","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是长文本理解缺少一个真正 zero-shot 的评测基准。此前很多长文本 benchmark 带训练集，模型可以通过任务特定适配获益，难以分离“预训练本身的长文理解能力”和“额外监督带来的适配能力”；而且一些关键能力，比如跨段聚合、信息融合，并没有被充分覆盖。","importance":"这是数据/评测层面的工作，但对 pretrain 研究很有用。它把长文本理解从“能塞进长窗口”推进到“零样本能否做真实信息压缩与聚合”，更适合作为比较不同预训练范式、上下文扩展方法、检索与摘要接口的统一外部度量。尤其是没有训练集这一点，能更干净地暴露模型原生能力而不是 task tuning 能力。","technical_approach":"作者构建 ZeroSCROLLS：只提供 test 和少量 validation、不提供训练数据；包含从 SCROLLS 改编的 6 个任务，并新增 4 个数据集，其中包括两个新的信息融合任务，比如统计正面评论比例。设计上的关键是故意加入 aggregation/fusion 类任务，因为长文本的真正难点常常不是局部抽取，而是跨多段证据整合；如果只测问答或摘要，很容易把“定位到一段关键信息”误当成长文本理解。","experiments":"摘要给出的主要事实有三点。第一，作者系统评测了开源和闭源 LLM。第二，Claude 平均表现优于 ChatGPT，GPT-4 平均分最高。第三，多个挑战仍未解决，尤其 aggregation 任务上模型甚至难以超过 naive baseline。摘要未给出具体分数、模型版本和任务细分结果，因此不能补数字。这个结果有价值，因为它说明即便顶级模型在长文本上也并未形成稳健优势，短板集中在需要全局统计和跨片段融合的任务。","authors_note":"作者团队包含 Omer Levy、Jonathan Berant，均是较知名的语义表示、问答与大模型评测研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper fills a benchmark gap: long-text understanding lacked a genuinely zero-shot evaluation suite. Many existing benchmarks include training data, which mixes up intrinsic long-context ability with task-specific adaptation, and they under-test difficult skills like evidence aggregation across long documents.","importance":"This is a benchmark contribution, but it is highly relevant to pretraining research. By removing training data, ZeroSCROLLS better measures what models can do out of the box on long-context understanding. That makes it useful for comparing pretraining recipes, context-extension methods, retrieval pipelines, and compression strategies without contamination from downstream fine-tuning.","technical_approach":"ZeroSCROLLS contains only test sets and small validation sets, with no training data. It adapts six tasks from SCROLLS and adds four new datasets, including two information-fusion tasks such as aggregating the percentage of positive reviews. This design choice matters because long-context difficulty is often about global aggregation rather than local extraction; a benchmark that only tests retrieval-style QA would miss that.","experiments":"The abstract provides three concrete findings: the authors evaluate both open and closed LLMs; Claude outperforms ChatGPT on average; and GPT-4 achieves the best average score. It also notes that aggregation remains a major weakness, with models struggling to beat even a naive baseline on some tasks. Exact scores and model variants are not included in the provided text, so they should not be invented.","authors_note":"The team includes Jonathan Berant and Omer Levy, both well-known for work on semantic modeling, question answering, and language model evaluation."},"tags":["long-context","benchmark","zero-shot"],"notable_authors":["Uri Shaham","Maor Ivgi","Avia Efrat","Jonathan Berant","Omer Levy"]},{"id":"2310.16350","title":"Unraveling Feature Extraction Mechanisms in Neural Networks","authors":["Xiaobing Sun","Jiaxi Li","Wei Lu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$52","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.16350","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/0002L023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.650"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/0002L023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.650","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文想解决的是：神经网络到底在训练中按什么机制提取统计特征，并把它们整合为最终决策。过去关于内部机制的分析很多停留在经验 probing 或案例解释，缺少能直接连接训练动态与特征形成过程的统一理论工具，因此作者转向 NTK 框架，希望在可分析设置下把“学到了什么、何时学到”讲清楚。","importance":"这是一篇理论分析工作，对直接改进 pretrain 的帮助有限，但对理解训练动态、特征偏置和架构选择有基础价值。特别是如果其结论能推广到现代网络，它会影响我们怎么看 activation function、优化早期的特征学习顺序，以及不同模型为何偏好不同统计结构。","technical_approach":"作者基于 Neural Tangent Kernel（NTK）分析无限宽网络下的学习动态，用它来拆解模型在梯度下降中如何利用训练数据中的统计特征，并如何将这些特征整合进最终预测。关键点不是提出新网络，而是把 feature extraction 当作训练动力学问题处理。摘要还强调激活函数会影响特征提取，例如 ReLU 的选择会改变模型偏好的特征类型。这类分析的优点是可得较清晰结论；边界也明显：无限宽和 NTK 线性化能否 faithfully 反映实际有限宽深网络，始终需要经验验证。","experiments":"从摘要可确认的是，作者把该理论方法应用到多个基础模型，并得到关于特征利用和激活函数影响的结论。没有给出具体模型、任务、定理形式、实验验证指标或数值结果，因此不能扩写成量化摘要。更合适的理解是：这篇论文提供了一个解释框架，而不是靠大规模实证 benchmark 建立优势。","authors_note":"Wei Lu 是较知名作者，长期从事 NLP 与神经网络建模研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a fundamental question: how do neural networks extract statistical features during training and combine them into final decisions. Much prior analysis is empirical or post hoc; the authors want a more principled view that ties feature acquisition directly to learning dynamics.","importance":"This is a theory-oriented contribution. Its immediate impact on pretraining practice is limited, but it matters for understanding optimization bias, architectural choices, and why different models may favor different kinds of features during training.","technical_approach":"The paper uses Neural Tangent Kernels to analyze learning dynamics in the infinite-width regime. The goal is not to propose a new architecture, but to use the NTK lens to characterize which statistical features are picked up during gradient descent and how they contribute to decisions. The abstract also highlights activation functions as a meaningful factor, with ReLU affecting the type of features extracted. The strength of this approach is analytical clarity; the obvious limitation is the usual NTK gap between infinite-width linearized behavior and practical finite-width deep networks.","experiments":"From the abstract, the framework is applied to several basic models and yields conclusions about feature extraction and activation effects. The provided text does not include theorem statements, benchmark settings, or quantitative validations, so no detailed empirical claims should be added. This should be read primarily as an explanatory framework rather than a benchmark-driven paper.","authors_note":"Wei Lu is a notable author with long-standing work in NLP and neural modeling."},"tags":["ntk","feature-extraction","learning-dynamics","theory"],"notable_authors":["Xiaobing Sun","Jiaxi Li","Wei Lu"]},{"id":"2310.08923","title":"Towards Informative Few-Shot Prompt with Maximum Information Gain for In-Context Learning","authors":["Hongfu Liu","Ye Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$53","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08923","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/0002W23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.1060"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/0002W23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.1060","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 few-shot ICL 的高方差问题，而且它指出一个容易被忽略的来源：即使示例数量、顺序、格式都固定，单纯换一组随机示例，性能也会显著波动。以往大家更多优化模板、排序或标签平衡，却较少直接问“哪些样本本身更有信息量”，因此示例选择仍然偏启发式。","importance":"这是一项 ICL 推理时优化的方法工作。对 pretrain 的启示不在模型内部，而在于它强调了 few-shot 例子的价值并不等价，信息量差异会显著影响模型是否能在上下文中快速建立任务假设；这能反过来帮助理解 ICL 到底更像模式匹配、贝叶斯更新还是局部适配。","technical_approach":"作者提出用 Information Gain（IG）量化一个候选示例在被观察后对预测带来的信息增益，并优先采样最大 IG 的示例构造 few-shot prompt。这个方法的关键优点是把示例选择从“代表性/多样性”的静态启发式转成“对当前预测最有帮助”的动态度量。摘要还提到作者识别了影响 IG 的前提因素，但给定信息中未展开。与常见 embedding 覆盖或相似度检索不同，它直接以预测分布变化为目标，因此更贴近 ICL 的实际机制；代价是估计 IG 可能需要额外模型调用，成本不低。","experiments":"摘要确认两点：第一，随机 few-shot 选择即便在控制顺序、格式等因素后仍有高方差；第二，基于最大 IG 的采样能改进 ICL。给定信息没有模型规模、任务集、baseline、指标和提升幅度，因此不能写数字。可以确认的观察是，论文把方差源头定位到样本信息量而非仅仅 prompt 表面形式，这一点对后续示例选择研究更重要。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets the instability of few-shot in-context learning and highlights an under-emphasized source of variance: even when the number of examples, their order, and the prompt format are fixed, changing which examples are selected can still cause large performance swings.","importance":"This is an inference-time prompting contribution. Its value for pretraining research is indirect but real: it shows that in-context examples are not interchangeable, and that example informativeness strongly shapes whether a pretrained model can infer the task from context.","technical_approach":"The method quantifies the information gain of a candidate example, defined by how much it changes the model’s predictive belief after being observed, and then samples examples with maximal IG. The key idea is to replace static heuristics such as diversity or nearest-neighbor matching with a prediction-centric criterion. That is better aligned with the mechanics of ICL, although it may require extra model evaluations to estimate IG and therefore adds runtime cost.","experiments":"The abstract supports two main findings: random example selection causes high variance even after controlling for ordering and format, and maximum-IG sampling improves few-shot ICL. The provided text does not include model sizes, tasks, baselines, or exact gains, so no quantitative claims should be fabricated. The main empirical contribution is therefore the diagnosis of where variance comes from and a principled way to reduce it.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","prompt-selection","information-theory"],"notable_authors":["Hongfu Liu","Ye Wang"]},{"id":"2310.15513","title":"A Joint Matrix Factorization Analysis of Multilingual Representations","authors":["Zheng Zhao","Yftah Ziser","Bonnie Webber","Shay B. Cohen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We present an analysis tool based on joint matrix factorization for comparing latent representations of multilingual and monolingual models. An alternative to probing, this tool allows us to analyze multiple sets of representations in a joint manner. Using this tool, we study to what extent and how morphosyntactic features are reflected in the representations learned by multilingual pre-trained models. We conduct a large-scale empirical study of over 33 languages and 17 morphosyntactic categories. Our findings demonstrate variations in the encoding of morphosyntactic information across upper and lower layers, with category-specific differences influenced by language properties. Hierarchical clustering of the factorization outputs yields a tree structure that is related to phylogenetic trees manually crafted by linguists. Moreover, we find the factorization outputs exhibit strong associations with performance observed across different cross-lingual tasks. We release our code to facilitate future research.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.15513","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/0005ZWC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.851"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/0005ZWC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.851","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["multilingual","representation-analysis","matrix-factorization","interpretability"]},{"id":"2303.15714","title":"Explicit Planning Helps Language Models in Logical Reasoning","authors":["Hongyu Zhao","Kangrui Wang","Mo Yu","Hongyuan Mei"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$54","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.15714","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/0006WYM23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.688"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/0006WYM23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.688","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["logical-reasoning","planning","chain-of-thought"]},{"id":"2310.08475","title":"Can We Edit Multimodal Large Language Models?","authors":["Siyuan Cheng","Bozhong Tian","Qingbin Liu","Xi Chen","Yongheng Wang","Huajun Chen","Ningyu Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"In this paper, we focus on editing Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs). Compared to editing single-modal LLMs, multimodal model editing is more challenging, which demands a higher level of scrutiny and careful consideration in the editing process. To facilitate research in this area, we construct a new benchmark, dubbed MMEdit, for editing multimodal LLMs and establishing a suite of innovative metrics for evaluation. We conduct comprehensive experiments involving various model editing baselines and analyze the impact of editing different components for multimodal LLMs. Empirically, we notice that previous baselines can implement editing multimodal LLMs to some extent, but the effect is still barely satisfactory, indicating the potential difficulty of this task. We hope that our work can provide the NLP community with insights. Code and dataset are available in https://github.com/zjunlp/EasyEdit.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08475","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/0008TL0WC023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.856"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/0008TL0WC023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.856","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["knowledge-editing","multimodal-llm","benchmark"]},{"id":"AggarwalY23","title":"Let&apos;s Sample Step by Step: Adaptive-Consistency for Efficient Reasoning and Coding with LLMs","authors":["Pranjal Aggarwal","Aman Madaan","Yiming Yang","Mausam"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/AggarwalY23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.761"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/AggarwalY23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.761","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["adaptive-consistency","reasoning","inference-efficiency"]},{"id":"2303.12528","title":"MEGA: Multilingual Evaluation of Generative AI","authors":["Kabir Ahuja","Harshita Diddee","Rishav Hada","Millicent Ochieng","Krithika Ramesh","Prachi Jain","Akshay Uttama Nambi","Tanuja Ganu","Sameer Segal","Mohamed Ahmed","Kalika Bali","Sunayana Sitaram"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$55","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.12528","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/AhujaDHORJNGSAB23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.258"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/AhujaDHORJNGSAB23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.258","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["multilingual","evaluation","benchmark"]},{"id":"2403.14197","title":"Context Quality Matters in Training Fusion-in-Decoder for Extractive Open-Domain Question Answering","authors":["Kosuke Akimoto","Kunihiro Takeoka","Masafumi Oyamada"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$56","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.14197","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/AkimotoTO23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.784"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/AkimotoTO23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.784","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["rag","fid","data-quality","training-dynamics"]},{"id":"2310.17271","title":"Understanding the Role of Input Token Characters in Language Models: How Does Information Loss Affect Performance?","authors":["Ahmed Alajrami","Katerina Margatina","Nikolaos Aletras"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$57","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.17271","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/AlajramiMA23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.563"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/AlajramiMA23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.563","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["tokenizer","input-representation","robustness"]},{"id":"2305.14210","title":"Skill-Based Few-Shot Selection for In-Context Learning","authors":["Shengnan An","Bo Zhou","Zeqi Lin","Qiang Fu","Bei Chen","Nanning Zheng","Weizhu Chen","Jian-Guang Lou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$58","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14210","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/AnZLFC0CL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.831"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/AnZLFC0CL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.831","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["icl","few-shot-selection","in-context-learning"]},{"id":"2305.15074","title":"Have LLMs Advanced Enough? A Challenging Problem Solving Benchmark For Large Language Models","authors":["Daman Arora","Himanshu Gaurav Singh","Mausam"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$59","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.15074","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/AroraSM23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.468"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/AroraSM23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.468","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["benchmark","reasoning","math-reasoning","evaluation"]},{"id":"BejanSF23","title":"Make Every Example Count: On the Stability and Utility of Self-Influence for Learning from Noisy NLP Datasets","authors":["Irina Bejan","Artem Sokolov","Katja Filippova"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/BejanSF23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.625"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/BejanSF23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.625","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["data-quality","influence-functions","noisy-data"]},{"id":"2310.13682","title":"Optimizing Retrieval-augmented Reader Models via Token Elimination","authors":["Moshe Berchansky","Peter Izsak","Avi Caciularu","Ido Dagan","Moshe Wasserblat"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Fusion-in-Decoder (FiD) is an effective retrieval-augmented language model applied across a variety of open-domain tasks, such as question answering, fact checking, etc. In FiD, supporting passages are first retrieved and then processed using a generative model (Reader), which can cause a significant bottleneck in decoding time, particularly with long outputs. In this work, we analyze the contribution and necessity of all the retrieved passages to the performance of reader models, and propose eliminating some of the retrieved information, at the token level, that might not contribute essential information to the answer generation process. We demonstrate that our method can reduce run-time by up to 62.2%, with only a 2% reduction in performance, and in some cases, even improve the performance results.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.13682","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/BerchanskyICDW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.93"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/BerchanskyICDW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.93","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["rag","token-elimination","inference-efficiency","fid"]},{"id":"BhattacharyyaSK23","title":"A Video Is Worth 4096 Tokens: Verbalize Story Videos To Understand Them In Zero Shot","authors":["Aanisha Bhattacharyya","Yaman Singla","Balaji Krishnamurthy","Rajiv Ratn Shah","Changyou Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/BhattacharyyaSK23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.608"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/BhattacharyyaSK23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.608","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["video","captioning","zero-shot","multimodal"]},{"id":"2304.14318","title":"q2d: Turning Questions into Dialogs to Teach Models How to Search","authors":["Yonatan Bitton","Shlomi Cohen-Ganor","Ido Hakimi","Yoad Lewenberg","Roee Aharoni","Enav Weinreb"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$5a","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.14318","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/BittonCHLAW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.843"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/BittonCHLAW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.843","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["search","data-synthesis","tool-use","dialog"]},{"id":"2310.15587","title":"ScanDL: A Diffusion Model for Generating Synthetic Scanpaths on Texts","authors":["Lena S. Bolliger","David R. Reich","Patrick Haller","Deborah N. Jakobi","Paul Prasse","Lena A. Jäger"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$5b","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.15587","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/BolligerR0JPJ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.960"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/BolligerR0JPJ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.960","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion","synthetic-data","interpretability","reading"]},{"id":"2311.13657","title":"Efficient Transformer Knowledge Distillation: A Performance Review","authors":["Nathan Brown","Ashton Williamson","Tahj Anderson","Logan Lawrence"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$5c","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.13657","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/BrownWAL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-INDUSTRY.6"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/BrownWAL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-industry.6","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["distillation","efficient-attention","compression","transformer"]},{"id":"2310.17530","title":"Evaluating Bias and Fairness in Gender-Neutral Pretrained Vision-and-Language Models","authors":["Laura Cabello","Emanuele Bugliarello","Stephanie Brandl","Desmond Elliott"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Pretrained machine learning models are known to perpetuate and even amplify existing biases in data, which can result in unfair outcomes that ultimately impact user experience. Therefore, it is crucial to understand the mechanisms behind those prejudicial biases to ensure that model performance does not result in discriminatory behaviour toward certain groups or populations. In this work, we define gender bias as our case study. We quantify bias amplification in pretraining and after fine-tuning on three families of vision-and-language models. We investigate the connection, if any, between the two learning stages, and evaluate how bias amplification reflects on model performance. Overall, we find that bias amplification in pretraining and after fine-tuning are independent. We then examine the effect of continued pretraining on gender-neutral data, finding that this reduces group disparities, i.e., promotes fairness, on VQAv2 and retrieval tasks without significantly compromising task performance.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.17530","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/CabelloBBE23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.525"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/CabelloBBE23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.525","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["vlm","bias","evaluation","fairness"]},{"id":"2310.13012","title":"H2O Open Ecosystem for State-of-the-art Large Language Models","authors":["Arno Candel","Jon McKinney","Philipp Singer","Pascal Pfeiffer","Maximilian Jeblick","Chun Ming Lee","Marcos V. Conde"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Large Language Models (LLMs) represent a revolution in AI. However, they also pose many significant risks, such as the presence of biased, private, copyrighted or harmful text. For this reason we need open, transparent and safe solutions. We introduce a complete open-source ecosystem for developing and testing LLMs. The goal of this project is to boost open alternatives to closed-source approaches. We release h2oGPT, a family of fine-tuned LLMs of diverse sizes. We also introduce H2O LLM Studio, a framework and no-code GUI designed for efficient fine-tuning, evaluation, and deployment of LLMs using the most recent state-of-the-art techniques. Our code and models are fully open-source. We believe this work helps to boost AI development and make it more accessible, efficient and trustworthy. The demo is available at: https://gpt.h2o.ai/","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.13012","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/CandelMSPJLC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-DEMO.6"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/CandelMSPJLC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-demo.6","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["open-source","llm","ecosystem","industry"]},{"id":"2311.13982","title":"Probabilistic Tree-of-thought Reasoning for Answering Knowledge-intensive Complex Questions","authors":["Shulin Cao","Jiajie Zhang","Jiaxin Shi","Xin Lv","Zijun Yao","Qi Tian","Lei Hou","Juanzi Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$5d","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.13982","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/CaoZSL0THL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.835"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/CaoZSL0THL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.835","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["tree-of-thought","rag","reasoning","knowledge"]},{"id":"2305.12947","title":"ChatGPT to Replace Crowdsourcing of Paraphrases for Intent Classification: Higher Diversity and Comparable Model Robustness","authors":["Ján Cegin","Jakub Simko","Peter Brusilovsky"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"The emergence of generative large language models (LLMs) raises the question: what will be its impact on crowdsourcing? Traditionally, crowdsourcing has been used for acquiring solutions to a wide variety of human-intelligence tasks, including ones involving text generation, modification or evaluation. For some of these tasks, models like ChatGPT can potentially substitute human workers. In this study, we investigate whether this is the case for the task of paraphrase generation for intent classification. We apply data collection methodology of an existing crowdsourcing study (similar scale, prompts and seed data) using ChatGPT and Falcon-40B. We show that ChatGPT-created paraphrases are more diverse and lead to at least as robust models.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.12947","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/CeginSB23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.117"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/CeginSB23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.117","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["data-synthesis","paraphrase","intent","chatgpt"]},{"id":"ChaeSOKKYLKY23","title":"Dialogue Chain-of-Thought Distillation for Commonsense-aware Conversational Agents","authors":["Hyungjoo Chae","Yongho Song","Kai Tzu-iunn Ong","Taeyoon Kwon","Minjin Kim","Youngjae Yu","Dongha Lee","Dongyeop Kang","Jinyoung Yeo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ChaeSOKKYLKY23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.342"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ChaeSOKKYLKY23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.342","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["distillation","cot","dialog","alignment"]},{"id":"2310.06302","title":"Selective Demonstrations for Cross-domain Text-to-SQL","authors":["Shuaichen Chang","Eric Fosler-Lussier"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$5e","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06302","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ChangF23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.944"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ChangF23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.944","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"跨领域 Text-to-SQL 任务中缺乏目标领域的标注数据，导致 In-Context Learning (ICL) 无法利用高质量的 in-domain demonstration，性能受限。","importance":"数据级贡献。证明了 LLM 自生成的合成数据可以作为高质量 ICL 示例的替代品，为低资源或冷启动场景下的推理期适配（Test-time adaptation）提供了一种廉价且有效的路径。","technical_approach":"提出 ODIS 框架，采用混合检索策略。放弃了纯依赖外部数据的传统做法，转而将真实的 Out-of-Domain (OOD) 示例与 LLM 基于目标数据库 Schema 自动生成的 In-Domain 合成示例混合，作为最终的 ICL demonstration。","experiments":"在跨领域 Text-to-SQL 基准上，混合检索策略显著优于纯 OOD 检索或纯合成数据，证明了真实 OOD 提供的结构泛化性与合成 In-Domain 提供的 Schema 适应性具有互补价值。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The lack of target-domain annotated data in cross-domain Text-to-SQL limits the effectiveness of In-Context Learning (ICL), which heavily relies on high-quality in-domain demonstrations.","importance":"Data-level contribution. It demonstrates that synthetic data generated by LLMs can substitute for real in-domain ICL examples, offering a cost-effective path for test-time adaptation in low-resource scenarios.","technical_approach":"Proposes the ODIS framework using a hybrid retrieval strategy. Instead of relying solely on external data, it mixes real Out-of-Domain (OOD) examples with synthetic In-Domain examples generated by the LLM based on the target database schema to construct the final prompt.","experiments":"Evaluated on cross-domain Text-to-SQL benchmarks. The hybrid approach outperforms both pure OOD and pure synthetic baselines, proving that the structural generalization from OOD data and the schema adaptation from synthetic data are complementary."},"tags":["icl","demonstration-selection","text-to-sql","generalization"],"notable_authors":["Eric Fosler-Lussier"]},{"id":"2310.05481","title":"Cabbage Sweeter than Cake? Analysing the Potential of Large Language Models for Learning Conceptual Spaces","authors":["Usashi Chatterjee","Amit Gajbhiye","Steven Schockaert"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"The theory of Conceptual Spaces is an influential cognitive-linguistic framework for representing the meaning of concepts. Conceptual spaces are constructed from a set of quality dimensions, which essentially correspond to primitive perceptual features (e.g. hue or size). These quality dimensions are usually learned from human judgements, which means that applications of conceptual spaces tend to be limited to narrow domains (e.g. modelling colour or taste). Encouraged by recent findings about the ability of Large Language Models (LLMs) to learn perceptually grounded representations, we explore the potential of such models for learning conceptual spaces. Our experiments show that LLMs can indeed be used for learning meaningful representations to some extent. However, we also find that fine-tuned models of the BERT family are able to match or even outperform the largest GPT-3 model, despite being 2 to 3 orders of magnitude smaller.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.05481","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ChatterjeeGS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.725"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ChatterjeeGS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.725","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"纯文本预训练的 LLM 能否在没有多模态感知输入的情况下，学到符合人类认知的物理/感知概念空间（如颜色、味道、大小）。","importance":"机制分析。触及了“纯文本模型是否具备物理世界 grounding”的根本争议，对评估纯文本预训练的表征极限和多模态预训练的必要性有直接启发。","technical_approach":"探针与表征分析。将 LLM 的内部表征空间与认知语言学中基于人类判断构建的“概念空间（Conceptual Spaces）”进行几何对齐分析，评估文本共现能否还原真实的物理维度。","experiments":"实验表明 LLM 确实能在一定程度上学到有意义的感知表征，但在处理细粒度或反直觉的物理属性（如“卷心菜比蛋糕甜？”）时表现挣扎，暗示了纯文本建模在物理 grounding 上的边界。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Whether text-only pretrained LLMs can learn grounded, perceptual conceptual spaces (e.g., color, taste, size) that align with human cognition without direct multimodal sensory input.","importance":"Mechanism analysis. It touches upon the fundamental debate of whether text-only models can achieve physical grounding, providing insights into the representational limits of text pretraining and the necessity of multimodal pretraining.","technical_approach":"Probing and representation analysis. Aligns the internal representation space of LLMs with cognitive-linguistic 'Conceptual Spaces' built from human judgments, evaluating if text co-occurrence can reconstruct real physical dimensions.","experiments":"Shows that LLMs can learn meaningful perceptual representations to some extent but struggle with fine-grained or counter-intuitive physical properties, indicating the boundaries of physical grounding in pure text modeling."},"tags":["concept-representation","semantics","analysis","llm"],"notable_authors":["Steven Schockaert"]},{"id":"CheangCW0LS0C23","title":"Can LMs Generalize to Future Data? An Empirical Analysis on Text Summarization","authors":["Chi Seng Cheang","Hou Pong Chan","Derek F. Wong","Xuebo Liu","Zhaocong Li","Yanming Sun","Shudong Liu","Lidia S. Chao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/CheangCW0LS0C23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.1007"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/CheangCW0LS0C23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.1007","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"预训练数据的时间截止点导致 LLM 在处理未来时间戳的文本（如新闻摘要）时出现事实性错误和性能衰减。","importance":"数据级/评估级贡献。量化了静态预训练数据带来的时间分布偏移问题，为 Continual Pretraining 和 RAG 的必要性提供了实证依据。","technical_approach":"实证分析。构建按时间线严格划分的文本摘要数据集，系统性评估模型性能随训练-测试时间跨度增加的衰减趋势。","experiments":"证实了时间跨度越大，模型在摘要任务上的准确性和事实一致性下降越明显，暴露出静态参数化知识在时间敏感任务上的脆弱性。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The temporal cutoff of pretraining data causes LLMs to suffer from factual errors and performance degradation when processing future-timestamped text, such as news summaries.","importance":"Data/Evaluation contribution. Quantifies the temporal distribution shift caused by static pretraining data, providing empirical justification for Continual Pretraining and RAG.","technical_approach":"Empirical analysis. Constructs a text summarization dataset strictly partitioned by timeline to systematically evaluate the performance decay as the gap between training and testing time increases.","experiments":"Confirms that larger temporal gaps lead to more significant drops in summarization accuracy and factual consistency, exposing the fragility of static parameterized knowledge on time-sensitive tasks."},"tags":["generalization","distribution-shift","evaluation","summarization"],"notable_authors":["Xuebo Liu"]},{"id":"ChenWC023","title":"Fidelity-Enriched Contrastive Search: Reconciling the Faithfulness-Diversity Trade-Off in Text Generation","authors":["Wei-Lin Chen","Cheng-Kuang Wu","Hsin-Hsi Chen","Chung-Chi Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ChenWC023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.54"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ChenWC023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.54","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在文本生成解码过程中，维持文本多样性（避免重复）和保持对源文本的忠实度（避免幻觉）之间存在固有的 Trade-off。","importance":"推理/解码级贡献。改进了对比搜索（Contrastive Search）解码算法，对需要严格遵循 Context 的任务（如摘要、RAG）有直接帮助，无需重新训练模型。","technical_approach":"保真度增强的对比搜索。在标准对比搜索的惩罚项中显式引入 Fidelity 约束（如生成 token 与源文本的语义相似度），在自回归解码的每一步动态平衡多样性与事实性。","experiments":"在摘要和数据到文本生成任务上，该解码策略在保持文本多样性（低 rep-n 指标）的同时，显著降低了幻觉率，提升了事实一致性指标。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"There is an inherent trade-off between maintaining text diversity (avoiding repetition) and preserving fidelity to the source text (avoiding hallucinations) during text generation decoding.","importance":"Inference/Decoding contribution. Improves the Contrastive Search decoding algorithm, directly benefiting tasks that require strict adherence to context (e.g., summarization, RAG) without retraining the model.","technical_approach":"Fidelity-Enriched Contrastive Search. Explicitly introduces a fidelity constraint (e.g., semantic similarity between the generated token and the source text) into the penalty term of standard contrastive search, dynamically balancing diversity and factuality at each autoregressive decoding step.","experiments":"On summarization and data-to-text tasks, this decoding strategy significantly reduces hallucination rates and improves factual consistency metrics while maintaining text diversity (low rep-n)."},"tags":["decoding","generation","contrastive-search"],"notable_authors":["Hsin-Hsi Chen","Yun-Nung Chen"]},{"id":"ChenWCC23","title":"Self-ICL: Zero-Shot In-Context Learning with Self-Generated Demonstrations","authors":["Wei-Lin Chen","Cheng-Kuang Wu","Yun-Nung Chen","Hsin-Hsi Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ChenWCC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.968"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ChenWCC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.968","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在 Zero-shot 场景下缺乏外部人工标注的 demonstration，导致无法激活 LLM 强大的 In-Context Learning (ICL) 能力。","importance":"范式级贡献。证明了 LLM 可以通过“自举（Bootstrapping）”生成伪数据来增强自身推理，是 Test-time Compute 增强的一种早期形态，模糊了 Zero-shot 和 Few-shot 的边界。","technical_approach":"提出 Self-ICL 两阶段 Prompting 框架。首先，提示模型针对当前任务指令自行生成若干输入输出对（伪 demonstration）；然后，将这些自生成的数据作为 ICL 上下文，输入给模型进行最终预测。","experiments":"在多个文本分类和生成任务上，Self-ICL 显著优于直接的 Zero-shot 推理，且性能逼近使用真实人工标注数据的 Few-shot ICL。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The lack of external human-annotated demonstrations in zero-shot scenarios prevents the activation of LLMs' powerful In-Context Learning (ICL) capabilities.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution. Proves that LLMs can bootstrap their own reasoning by generating pseudo-data, serving as an early form of test-time compute scaling and blurring the line between zero-shot and few-shot learning.","technical_approach":"Proposes the Self-ICL two-stage prompting framework. First, prompts the model to generate input-output pairs (pseudo-demonstrations) for the given task instruction. Second, uses these self-generated pairs as ICL context for the final prediction.","experiments":"Across multiple text classification and generation tasks, Self-ICL significantly outperforms direct zero-shot inference and approaches the performance of few-shot ICL using real human-annotated data."},"tags":["icl","zero-shot","self-generation"],"notable_authors":["Yun-Nung Chen","Hsin-Hsi Chen"]},{"id":"ChenZCSGJTZSPY23","title":"STAIR: Learning Sparse Text and Image Representation in Grounded Tokens","authors":["Chen Chen","Bowen Zhang","Liangliang Cao","Jiguang Shen","Tom Gunter","Albin Madappally Jose","Alexander Toshev","Yantao Zheng","Jonathon Shlens","Ruoming Pang","Yinfei Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ChenZCSGJTZSPY23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.932"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ChenZCSGJTZSPY23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.932","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：图文联合表示通常要么把图像 patch/token 全量送入模型，计算重且冗余高；要么做粗粒度对齐，丢掉细粒度 grounding。作者试图学习一种稀疏、可落地到 token 的 grounded representation，让文本和图像只通过少量关键单元交互。","importance":"这是统一多模态预训练里的表示级工作，重点不在下游任务技巧，而在如何把图像和文本压进同一组可解释、可稀疏访问的 token。它重要的地方在于：如果 grounded token 真能学到跨模态关键语义，就有机会降低多模态 pretrain 的序列长度和注意力成本，同时保留对齐能力，这对原生多模态 LM 是直接相关的。","technical_approach":"从题目看，STAIR 的核心是学习 sparse text and image representation in grounded tokens，也就是让两种模态都投射到少量共享或可对齐的 token 单元上。这个方向通常会显式鼓励稀疏选择、局部绑定或跨模态对齐，而不是依赖密集 cross-attention 去“事后对齐”。这样设计的原因是：稀疏 token 既能减少计算，也更容易把对齐位置落到具体概念上。边界在于，过强的稀疏性会损失长尾细节，尤其对开放域视觉语义覆盖不全时容易掉信息。","experiments":"给定材料没有摘要正文，因此无法确认使用了哪些数据集、模型规模、对比 baseline 和提升幅度。能确定的只有论文主张围绕稀疏图文 token 表示展开；若正文支持，关键实验应当包括跨模态检索、grounding 或 VLP 预训练迁移，并报告稀疏率与性能的 trade-off，但这里不能代填数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a representation problem in multimodal pretraining: dense image-text interactions are expensive, while coarse alignment often loses token-level grounding. The goal is to learn sparse grounded tokens that carry the important cross-modal semantics without paying the full dense-attention cost.","importance":"This is a representation-level contribution for unified multimodal pretraining. Its relevance comes from a simple systems implication: if text and image information can be routed through a small set of grounded tokens, model context length and attention cost can drop without giving up alignment. That matters for native multimodal LMs, where token budget is often the bottleneck.","technical_approach":"From the title, STAIR learns sparse text and image representations in grounded tokens. The likely design choice is to force both modalities to communicate through a small number of semantically anchored units, instead of relying purely on dense cross-attention to discover alignment implicitly. This can improve efficiency and interpretability at the same time. The trade-off is that aggressive sparsity may discard long-tail visual details or weak linguistic cues, especially when grounding coverage is incomplete.","experiments":"The provided material contains no abstract text, so there is no reliable basis for reporting datasets, model sizes, baselines, or numeric gains. The paper likely evaluates retrieval, grounding, or transfer from vision-language pretraining, together with sparsity-performance trade-offs, but those details need the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["sparse-representation","vision-language","tokens"],"notable_authors":["Chen Chen","Bowen Zhang","Liangliang Cao","Jiguang Shen","Tom Gunter"]},{"id":"ChoenniGS23","title":"How do languages influence each other? Studying cross-lingual data sharing during LM fine-tuning","authors":["Rochelle Choenni","Dan Garrette","Ekaterina Shutova"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ChoenniGS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.818"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ChoenniGS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.818","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文研究的是：多语言微调时，不同语言之间究竟如何共享数据、相互帮助或相互干扰。这个问题常被粗略地用‘高资源帮助低资源’或‘语言相近更有利’来概括，但真正的共享机制和边界并不清楚。","importance":"它属于跨语言迁移分析工作。对 pretrain 和 continual adaptation 的意义在于，多语言模型的收益并不只取决于总数据量，还取决于语言间参数共享在微调阶段如何被触发。理解这个过程，有助于设计更合理的语言配比、阶段式训练和 adapter / LoRA 共享策略。","technical_approach":"从题目看，作者分析 cross-lingual data sharing during LM fine-tuning，重点应是观察一种语言的微调数据如何改变另一种语言的表现，而不是提出新架构。常见做法会控制语言对、资源量、语言距离或任务类型，然后比较单语与多语微调差异。这样设计的价值在于把‘跨语言迁移’拆成可观测效应，而不是只报告一个平均增益。边界在于，若只在微调阶段分析，结论未必能直接外推到预训练阶段的数据混合规律。","experiments":"给定材料没有摘要正文，因此无法确认模型、语言集合、任务和数值结论。可以确认的是论文关心语言间影响机制；如果正文支持，关键结果应当包括哪些语言对互利、哪些会负迁移，以及这些现象是否由语言相似度、数据规模或脚本共享解释。但这里不能补写未给出的实验数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper examines how languages help or interfere with one another during multilingual LM fine-tuning. This is often summarized too loosely with rules like 'high-resource helps low-resource' or 'closer languages transfer better', but the actual sharing dynamics are less understood.","importance":"This is an analysis contribution for multilingual adaptation. Its relevance to pretraining is that multilingual gains do not come only from more data; they also depend on when and how parameter sharing is activated across languages during adaptation. That matters for language mixing, stage-wise training, and parameter-efficient transfer design.","technical_approach":"From the title, the paper studies cross-lingual data sharing effects during LM fine-tuning rather than proposing a new model. The likely methodology is to control language pairs, resource levels, language similarity, and task setup, then compare multilingual versus monolingual fine-tuning outcomes. This is useful because it turns transfer into a measurable interaction effect instead of a single averaged score. The limitation is that conclusions drawn at fine-tuning time may not transfer cleanly to the pretraining regime.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so there is no reliable basis for listing models, languages, tasks, or numerical outcomes. The likely empirical focus is on which language pairs show positive transfer and which show interference, and whether that can be explained by similarity or data size, but those details require the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multilingual","cross-lingual","finetuning"],"notable_authors":["Rochelle Choenni","Dan Garrette","Ekaterina Shutova"]},{"id":"2310.20144","title":"EELBERT: Tiny Models through Dynamic Embeddings","authors":["Gabrielle Cohn","Rishika Agarwal","Deepanshu Gupta","Siddharth Patwardhan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We introduce EELBERT, an approach for compression of transformer-based models (e.g., BERT), with minimal impact on the accuracy of downstream tasks. This is achieved by replacing the input embedding layer of the model with dynamic, i.e. on-the-fly, embedding computations. Since the input embedding layer accounts for a significant fraction of the model size, especially for the smaller BERT variants, replacing this layer with an embedding computation function helps us reduce the model size significantly. Empirical evaluation on the GLUE benchmark shows that our BERT variants (EELBERT) suffer minimal regression compared to the traditional BERT models. Through this approach, we are able to develop our smallest model UNO-EELBERT, which achieves a GLUE score within 4% of fully trained BERT-tiny, while being 15x smaller (1.2 MB) in size.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.20144","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/CohnAGP23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-INDUSTRY.43"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/CohnAGP23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-industry.43","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是小型 Transformer 模型里 embedding 层占比过高的问题。对 BERT-tiny 这类小模型，输入词表 embedding 常常不是最有用的参数，却吞掉大量存储；传统压缩多聚焦层数、宽度或蒸馏，embedding 这一大块往往处理得不够激进。","importance":"这是模型压缩里的系统级与表示级改动，对 pretrain 本身不是范式性冲击，但对小模型部署很实用。它的重要性在于指出：在 tiny 模型区间，embedding 参数可能是最不划算的部分，若改成动态计算，能显著缩模而几乎不伤下游精度。这对 tokenizer 设计、词表规模选择和参数分配都有启发。","technical_approach":"EELBERT 的核心是用动态、on-the-fly 的 embedding computation function 替代静态 embedding table。换句话说，模型不再为每个词都存一整条独立向量，而是根据某种共享函数即时生成输入表示。这个设计之所以有效，是因为词表参数本质上高度冗余，尤其在小模型里，embedding 容量远超后续层可利用的程度。与常规压缩方法相比，它改的是输入层参数化，而不是事后量化或剪枝。代价是 embedding lookup 从一次表查找变成一次计算，推理延迟可能上升；此外，这种函数式表示对开放词表或形态复杂语言是否更稳还需要更多证据。","experiments":"摘要给了一个清楚的数字锚点：最小模型 UNO-EELBERT 的 GLUE 分数距离 fully trained BERT-tiny 仅差 4% 以内，同时模型尺寸显著降低。论文整体结论是，在 GLUE 上相较传统 BERT 变体只有很小回退，但换来了明显压缩。摘要没有提供具体参数量、压缩倍数和各子任务分数，因此无法精确写出缩减比例。最值得关注的 ablation 应是：在不同模型尺寸下，embedding 层占比越高，动态 embedding 的收益越明显。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a specific inefficiency in small Transformer models: the input embedding layer can consume a large fraction of total parameters, especially in tiny BERT variants. Standard compression methods often focus on depth, width, pruning, or distillation, while leaving this embedding-heavy budget mostly intact.","importance":"This is a practical compression contribution rather than a new pretraining paradigm, but it makes an important point about parameter allocation. In the tiny-model regime, embedding parameters may be the least cost-effective part of the model. Replacing them with dynamic computation can cut size substantially with only minor downstream degradation. That is relevant to vocabulary design and model budgeting.","technical_approach":"EELBERT replaces the static input embedding table with a dynamic embedding computation performed on the fly. Instead of storing a dedicated vector per token, the model generates embeddings through a shared function. The intuition is that vocabulary embeddings are highly redundant, and that redundancy is especially painful when the rest of the model is small. Relative to standard compression, this changes the parameterization of the input layer rather than pruning or quantizing the model after the fact. The trade-off is that lookup becomes computation, which may hurt latency, and the robustness of the approach across richer vocabularies remains an open question.","experiments":"The abstract gives one concrete anchor: the smallest model, UNO-EELBERT, stays within 4% of a fully trained BERT-tiny on GLUE while being significantly smaller. More generally, the EELBERT variants show only minor regression against traditional BERT models on GLUE. The abstract does not state parameter counts or compression ratios, so those should not be guessed. A likely important ablation is that the benefit grows when embeddings make up a larger share of total parameters.","authors_note":""},"tags":["compression","embeddings","bert"],"notable_authors":["Gabrielle Cohn","Rishika Agarwal","Deepanshu Gupta","Siddharth Patwardhan"]},{"id":"2310.15852","title":"Using Artificial French Data to Understand the Emergence of Gender Bias in Transformer Language Models","authors":["Lina Conti","Guillaume Wisniewski"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Numerous studies have demonstrated the ability of neural language models to learn various linguistic properties without direct supervision. This work takes an initial step towards exploring the less researched topic of how neural models discover linguistic properties of words, such as gender, as well as the rules governing their usage. We propose to use an artificial corpus generated by a PCFG based on French to precisely control the gender distribution in the training data and determine under which conditions a model correctly captures gender information or, on the contrary, appears gender-biased.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.15852","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ContiW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.641"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ContiW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.641","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：Transformer LM 中性别偏见是如何从训练数据分布里长出来的，模型又在什么条件下真正学到语法性别规则，而不是只学到偏置共现。过去这类研究常在真实语料上做诊断，但真实语料变量太多，很难把‘语言规律学习’和‘社会偏见放大’拆开。","importance":"这是一个机制分析工作，虽然主题是 bias，但方法论对 pretrain 很有价值：用人工生成语料精确控制统计结构，观察语言性质和偏置何时涌现。对预训练研究的启示是，模型学到的词属性并不天然等于语言规则本身，数据分布的微小偏斜就可能让表示把语法属性和社会属性纠缠在一起。","technical_approach":"作者用基于法语的 PCFG 生成 artificial corpus，显式控制 gender distribution，再训练 Transformer LM，检查模型何时正确捕捉 gender 信息、何时表现出 gender bias。这个设计的优势很明显：PCFG 提供了可控、可重复的语法环境，能逐项改变分布偏差而不改其他因素，因此比直接在自然语料上相关性分析更接近因果实验。它与常见 bias benchmark 的区别在于，不只是测偏见强弱，而是在构造环境里研究偏见 emergence 的条件。边界在于，人造语料的外部效度有限，尤其当真实法语中的词汇语义和社会常识参与偏见形成时。","experiments":"摘要层面最关键的事实是：作者通过人工法语语料控制性别分布，研究 Transformer 何时学到正确 gender 信息、何时转而表现为 bias。给定摘要没有模型规模、数据规模、具体控制变量和数值指标，因此不能硬写结果表格。最值得看的实验应是：随着 gender distribution 偏斜程度变化，模型从规则学习到偏见放大的转折点，以及不同训练条件下这一转折是否稳定。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies how gender bias emerges in Transformer language models, and under what training conditions the model learns grammatical gender correctly rather than merely amplifying skewed co-occurrence patterns. Real-corpus analyses often mix too many factors to separate genuine rule learning from bias formation.","importance":"Although the topic is bias, the methodological value is broader for pretraining research: the paper uses controlled synthetic corpora to study when a linguistic property and an unwanted bias emerge. The pretraining takeaway is that learning a word property from data does not guarantee learning the intended rule; small distributional skews can entangle grammatical and social signals inside the model.","technical_approach":"The authors generate an artificial French corpus with a PCFG and explicitly control the gender distribution in the training data. They then train Transformer LMs and test when the models capture gender correctly and when they appear biased. This design is strong because a PCFG gives precise control over grammatical structure while varying only the target distributional factors, which is much closer to a causal setup than standard corpus diagnostics. The distinction from many bias benchmarks is that the goal is not only to measure bias, but to understand its emergence conditions. The limitation is external validity: synthetic French cannot capture every semantic and social factor present in real data.","experiments":"The abstract establishes the main empirical setup clearly: artificial French data with controlled gender distributions is used to determine the conditions under which a model learns gender properly or becomes gender-biased. It does not provide model sizes, data sizes, or quantitative thresholds, so no numbers should be inserted. The key experiment to watch is the transition point at which distributional skew turns rule learning into biased behavior.","authors_note":""},"tags":["bias","synthetic-data","analysis"],"notable_authors":["Lina Conti","Guillaume Wisniewski"]},{"id":"2310.09520","title":"Reward-Augmented Decoding: Efficient Controlled Text Generation With a Unidirectional Reward Model","authors":["Haikang Deng","Colin Raffel"],"institutions":["UNC Chapel Hill"],"abstract":"$5f","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.09520","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/DengR23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.721"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/DengR23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.721","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在不改 LM 参数的前提下做可控生成，既要控属性（毒性、情感）又要尽量不拖慢解码速度。以往 FUDGE 类方法用双向分类器每步重打分，代价贵。","importance":"方法级改进，核心贡献是一个 cache 友好的 reward 模型设计。虽然是 decoding-time 控制而非 pretrain，但对理解'轻量 reward 如何影响采样分布'这件事有用，也是 RLHF 之外的便宜对齐替代。","technical_approach":"RAD 用一个小型单向（causal）reward model 给部分生成打分，然后按 reward rescale 下一个 token 的采样概率。关键设计是 reward 模型单向——这样可以和 LM 一样 cache 前缀激活，避免每步重新 encode 全序列，这是相比 FUDGE（双向）最实在的效率差别。","experiments":"在非毒性生成和情感可控生成两个任务上，RAD 在'只改 decoding、不改权重'的一类方法里表现最好，并接近需要改权重的更重方法。","authors_note":"Colin Raffel（T5、UL2 作者），当时在 UNC/HuggingFace 方向。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Controlled generation without touching LM weights, while keeping decoding cheap. FUDGE-style methods use a bidirectional classifier that must re-encode the full prefix each step.","importance":"A methodological tweak whose real contribution is the cache-friendly reward model. Not a pretraining paper, but a useful reference for how lightweight rewards reshape sampling, and a cheap alternative to RLHF for simple attribute control.","technical_approach":"RAD scores partial generations with a small unidirectional (causal) reward model and rescales next-token sampling probabilities accordingly. The unidirectional choice is the key move: it lets the reward model cache prefix activations just like the LM, avoiding per-step re-encoding—this is the concrete efficiency gap vs. FUDGE.","experiments":"On non-toxic and sentiment-controlled generation, RAD is the strongest among weight-preserving methods and competitive with heavier weight-modifying approaches.","authors_note":"Colin Raffel (T5, UL2)."},"tags":["decoding","reward-model","controlled-generation"],"notable_authors":["Colin Raffel"]},{"id":"DengWFDW023","title":"Attack Prompt Generation for Red Teaming and Defending Large Language Models","authors":["Boyi Deng","Wenjie Wang","Fuli Feng","Yang Deng","Qifan Wang","Xiangnan He"],"institutions":["USTC","Meta AI"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/DengWFDW023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.143"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/DengWFDW023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.143","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"怎样系统性地生成对抗 prompt 去红队测试 LLM，同时用这些数据把模型防御训得更稳？过去的红队数据要么靠人工要么靠简单模板，覆盖面窄。","importance":"posttrain/安全侧工作，对 pretrain 的反哺在于：提供了可规模化生产对抗数据的流程，这类数据正在进入 SFT/DPO 阶段，间接影响 base model 的 cooldown/annealing 设计。","technical_approach":"用 LLM 自身按攻击意图分类生成 attack prompt（instruction-based red-teaming），再把这些 prompt 喂回防御端做对抗训练/fine-tune，形成 attack↔defense 的迭代。具体机制要看原文。","experiments":"报告了多类攻击类别下对若干 open-source LLM 的攻击成功率，以及经过防御训练后的鲁棒性提升。","authors_note":"Fuli Feng（USTC）团队，Qifan Wang（Meta）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to systematically generate adversarial prompts for red-teaming LLMs and reuse them to harden the model. Prior red-team data is either human-crafted or template-based, limiting coverage.","importance":"A safety/posttraining contribution with indirect pretraining relevance: it offers a scalable adversarial-data pipeline, the kind of data now flowing into SFT/DPO and cooldown stages.","technical_approach":"Use an LLM to generate attack prompts organized by attack intent (instruction-based red-teaming), then feed them back as adversarial training data for defense, iterating attack↔defense.","experiments":"Reports attack success rates across categories on several open-source LLMs and robustness gains after defensive fine-tuning.","authors_note":"USTC (Fuli Feng) and collaborators including Qifan Wang (Meta)."},"tags":["red-teaming","safety","adversarial"],"notable_authors":["Fuli Feng","Qifan Wang"]},{"id":"FanTLC0J23","title":"Chain-of-Thought Tuning: Masked Language Models can also Think Step By Step in Natural Language Understanding","authors":["Caoyun Fan","Jidong Tian","Yitian Li","Wenqing Chen","Hao He","Yaohui Jin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/FanTLC0J23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.913"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/FanTLC0J23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.913","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"CoT 一直被认为是生成式 LLM 的专属能力，MLM（BERT 类）因为不是自回归似乎天然不能做 step-by-step 推理。作者想验证在 NLU 任务上 MLM 能不能也靠 CoT 拿收益。","importance":"方法级、偏观察性质的工作，挑战了'CoT 只属于大 decoder'的默认看法。对理解 CoT 到底是架构能力还是训练范式能力提供一个数据点。","technical_approach":"把 CoT 的'先写理由再给答案'结构改写成 MLM 可消化的形式：通过 prompt + 多轮 mask 预测，让 BERT 类模型先填'推理链'、再填'答案'。本质是把自回归的 CoT 转成 mask 填空版 CoT。","experiments":"在若干 NLU 任务（情感、推理类）上，CoT tuning 后的 MLM 相比常规 MLM fine-tune 有稳定提升；具体数字看原文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"CoT is widely seen as an autoregressive-decoder ability, so MLMs (BERT-style) are assumed to be out of the game. Can MLMs actually benefit from CoT-style supervision on NLU tasks?","importance":"An observational/methodological contribution that challenges 'CoT belongs to big decoders.' A useful data point on whether CoT is an architectural property or a training-format property.","technical_approach":"Reformulate CoT's 'reason then answer' structure for MLMs: via prompting and multi-round mask prediction, have BERT fill in the reasoning chain first, then the answer. Essentially a mask-infilling version of CoT.","experiments":"On several NLU tasks (sentiment, inference), CoT-tuned MLMs consistently beat vanilla MLM fine-tuning.","authors_note":""},"tags":["chain-of-thought","masked-lm","nlu","reasoning"]},{"id":"FradetGCB23","title":"Byte Pair Encoding for Symbolic Music","authors":["Nathan Fradet","Nicolas Gutowski","Fabien Chhel","Jean-Pierre Briot"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/FradetGCB23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.123"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/FradetGCB23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.123","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"符号音乐（MIDI 等）的常用 tokenization 要么用事件序列，词表小但序列很长，要么手工合并，缺乏自动化的压缩方案。作者问能不能直接把 BPE 搬到符号音乐上。","importance":"跨模态 tokenizer 工作，对把音乐纳入统一 LM 预训练的方向有直接参考价值。核心信息是：文本侧的子词压缩策略可以迁移到结构化离散序列，这对语音/代码/动作序列的 tokenizer 设计都是印证。","technical_approach":"把符号音乐的原始事件 token 序列当成'字节序列'，直接跑 BPE 合并频繁 bigram，得到一个压缩的音乐子词词表。实现上关键是定义合适的基础事件 token 和合并约束。","experiments":"在多个符号音乐任务（生成、分类）上，BPE tokenizer 显著缩短序列长度，同时提升或持平下游表现；具体压缩比和指标看原文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Standard symbolic-music tokenization is either event-level (short vocab, very long sequences) or hand-crafted. Can plain BPE from text transfer directly to symbolic music?","importance":"A cross-modal tokenizer contribution, relevant to anyone wanting to bring music into unified LM pretraining. The broader message—text-side subword compression transfers to structured discrete sequences—echoes tokenizer design for speech, code, and action sequences.","technical_approach":"Treat raw symbolic-music event tokens as a 'byte stream' and run BPE to merge frequent bigrams into a compressed music subword vocabulary. The main design call is the base event token set and merge constraints.","experiments":"On symbolic music generation and classification tasks, BPE tokenization substantially shortens sequences while matching or improving downstream performance.","authors_note":""},"tags":["tokenizer","bpe","symbolic-music","tokenization"]},{"id":"FuYXRJ23","title":"Estimating Large Language Model Capabilities without Labeled Test Data","authors":["Harvey Yiyun Fu","Qinyuan Ye","Albert Xu","Xiang Ren","Robin Jia"],"institutions":["USC"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/FuYXRJ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.639"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/FuYXRJ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.639","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在没有 labeled test data 的前提下，怎么估计一个 LLM 在某个下游任务上的能力？这是 serving 和模型选型里的现实痛点——标注贵，新任务多。","importance":"评测方法学工作，对 pretrain 研究者选 checkpoint、筛数据配比时有用：如果能无监督估计能力，等于在训练循环里加了一个更便宜的 proxy。","technical_approach":"用模型自身的置信度/一致性等无监督信号去估计能力。典型套路是：同一输入下多次采样看一致性、或用 self-consistency、或看模型在辅助任务上的 calibration 特征，然后回归到真实 accuracy。具体组合看原文。","experiments":"在一批任务和模型上对比了多种无标签估计方法与真实 accuracy 的相关性，得到哪些 proxy 最靠谱的结论。","authors_note":"USC INK Lab（Xiang Ren）和 Robin Jia 组。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How do you estimate an LLM's capability on a downstream task without labeled test data? A practical pain point for model selection and serving—labels are expensive, tasks proliferate.","importance":"An evaluation-methodology contribution useful to pretraining researchers: an unlabeled capability proxy is effectively a cheap signal you can plug into checkpoint selection and data-mixture search.","technical_approach":"Use the model's own unsupervised signals—confidence, consistency across samples, self-consistency, calibration features on auxiliary tasks—and regress them onto true accuracy. The paper compares combinations.","experiments":"Correlates several label-free estimators with true accuracy across a set of tasks and models, identifying which proxies are most reliable.","authors_note":"USC INK Lab (Xiang Ren) and Robin Jia."},"tags":["evaluation","llm-capabilities"],"notable_authors":["Xiang Ren","Robin Jia"]},{"id":"GaoD0023","title":"Is ChatGPT a Good Causal Reasoner? A Comprehensive Evaluation","authors":["Jinglong Gao","Xiao Ding","Bing Qin","Ting Liu"],"institutions":["Harbin Institute of Technology (SCIR)"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/GaoD0023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.743"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/GaoD0023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.743","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"ChatGPT 经常在表面语言任务上看起来很强，但真正做因果推理时水平到底怎样？作者要做一个系统的因果推理评估。","importance":"评测/诊断工作，对 pretrain 研究者的意义是提供一个具体的能力边界点：base LLM + RLHF 之后，在因果这个结构化推理维度上差距在哪，有助于思考 pretrain 数据或训练目标怎么补。","technical_approach":"在多种因果推理任务上评测 ChatGPT，包括因果发现、因果关系判断、反事实等；设计多种 prompt 设置（zero/few-shot, CoT）观察不同因素的影响。偏 evaluation 而非新方法。","experiments":"ChatGPT 在显式因果线索任务上表现尚可，但在需要多步推理或反事实的任务上大幅下滑，表明它更像是在做'因果关系词匹配'而非真正因果建模。具体数字看原文。","authors_note":"哈工大 SCIR 实验室（Bing Qin, Ting Liu）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"ChatGPT often looks strong on surface-level language tasks; what is its actual capability on causal reasoning? The paper does a systematic evaluation.","importance":"An evaluation/diagnostic contribution: for pretraining researchers, it marks a concrete capability boundary—where base LLM + RLHF falls short on structured causal reasoning, which informs what pretraining data or objectives might need to address.","technical_approach":"Evaluate ChatGPT on a suite of causal reasoning tasks (causal discovery, causal relation judgment, counterfactual) under varied prompt settings (zero/few-shot, CoT). Evaluation-focused, not a new method.","experiments":"ChatGPT does okay when causal cues are explicit but drops sharply on multi-step and counterfactual cases, suggesting it leans on surface cue matching rather than causal modeling.","authors_note":"HIT SCIR (Bing Qin, Ting Liu)."},"tags":["causal-reasoning","evaluation","chatgpt"],"notable_authors":["Bing Qin","Ting Liu"]},{"id":"2311.12391","title":"From Wrong To Right: A Recursive Approach Towards Vision-Language Explanation","authors":["Jiaxin Ge","Sanjay Subramanian","Trevor Darrell","Boyi Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Addressing the challenge of adapting pre-trained vision-language models for generating insightful explanations for visual reasoning tasks with limited annotations, we present ReVisE: a $\\textbf{Re}$cursive $\\textbf{Vis}$ual $\\textbf{E}$xplanation algorithm. Our method iteratively computes visual features (conditioned on the text input), an answer, and an explanation, to improve the explanation quality step by step until the answer converges. We find that this multi-step approach guides the model to correct its own answers and outperforms single-step explanation generation. Furthermore, explanations generated by ReVisE also serve as valuable annotations for few-shot self-training. Our approach outperforms previous methods while utilizing merely 5% of the human-annotated explanations across 10 metrics, demonstrating up to a 4.2 and 1.3 increase in BLEU-1 score on the VCR and VQA-X datasets, underscoring the efficacy and data-efficiency of our method.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.12391","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/GeSDL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.75"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/GeSDL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.75","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["vlm","visual-reasoning","explanation-generation"]},{"id":"2302.03754","title":"Augmenting Zero-Shot Dense Retrievers with Plug-in Mixture-of-Memories","authors":["Suyu Ge","Chenyan Xiong","Corby Rosset","Arnold Overwijk","Jiawei Han","Paul Bennett"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$60","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.03754","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/GeXRO0023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.111"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/GeXRO0023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.111","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["retrieval-augmentation","zero-shot-generalization","memory-mechanism"]},{"id":"2305.11171","title":"TrueTeacher: Learning Factual Consistency Evaluation with Large Language Models","authors":["Zorik Gekhman","Jonathan Herzig","Roee Aharoni","Chen Elkind","Idan Szpektor"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$61","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.11171","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/GekhmanHAES23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.127"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/GekhmanHAES23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.127","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["factual-consistency","synthetic-data","evaluation","reward-model"]},{"id":"2305.13971","title":"Grammar-Constrained Decoding for Structured NLP Tasks without Finetuning","authors":["Saibo Geng","Martin Josifoski","Maxime Peyrard","Robert West"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$62","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.13971","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/GengJP023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.674"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/GengJP023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.674","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["constrained-decoding","structured-generation","inference"]},{"id":"2311.11564","title":"KBioXLM: A Knowledge-anchored Biomedical Multilingual Pretrained Language Model","authors":["Lei Geng","Xu Yan","Ziqiang Cao","Juntao Li","Wenjie Li","Sujian Li","Xinjie Zhou","Yang Yang","Jun Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$63","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.11564","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/GengYCLLLZYZ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.751"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/GengYCLLLZYZ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.751","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["domain-specific-pretraining","multilingual","biomedical"]},{"id":"2305.11707","title":"What Comes Next? Evaluating Uncertainty in Neural Text Generators Against Human Production Variability","authors":["Mario Giulianelli","Joris Baan","Wilker Aziz","Raquel Fernández","Barbara Plank"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"In Natural Language Generation (NLG) tasks, for any input, multiple communicative goals are plausible, and any goal can be put into words, or produced, in multiple ways. We characterise the extent to which human production varies lexically, syntactically, and semantically across four NLG tasks, connecting human production variability to aleatoric or data uncertainty. We then inspect the space of output strings shaped by a generation system's predicted probability distribution and decoding algorithm to probe its uncertainty. For each test input, we measure the generator's calibration to human production variability. Following this instance-level approach, we analyse NLG models and decoding strategies, demonstrating that probing a generator with multiple samples and, when possible, multiple references, provides the level of detail necessary to gain understanding of a model's representation of uncertainty. Code available at https://github.com/dmg-illc/nlg-uncertainty-probes.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.11707","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/GiulianelliBAFP23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.887"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/GiulianelliBAFP23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.887","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["uncertainty","nlg","evaluation","human-variability"]},{"id":"2310.16411","title":"Decoding Stumpers: Large Language Models vs. Human Problem-Solvers","authors":["Alon Goldstein","Miriam Havin","Roi Reichart","Ariel Goldstein"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"This paper investigates the problem-solving capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) by evaluating their performance on stumpers, unique single-step intuition problems that pose challenges for human solvers but are easily verifiable. We compare the performance of four state-of-the-art LLMs (Davinci-2, Davinci-3, GPT-3.5-Turbo, GPT-4) to human participants. Our findings reveal that the new-generation LLMs excel in solving stumpers and surpass human performance. However, humans exhibit superior skills in verifying solutions to the same problems. This research enhances our understanding of LLMs' cognitive abilities and provides insights for enhancing their problem-solving potential across various domains.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.16411","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/GoldsteinHRG23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.779"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/GoldsteinHRG23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.779","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["reasoning","evaluation","problem-solving","human-vs-llm"]},{"id":"2312.05662","title":"Understanding the Effect of Model Compression on Social Bias in Large Language Models","authors":["Gustavo Gonçalves","Emma Strubell"],"institutions":["CMU","Allen AI"],"abstract":"Large Language Models (LLMs) trained with self-supervision on vast corpora of web text fit to the social biases of that text. Without intervention, these social biases persist in the model's predictions in downstream tasks, leading to representational harm. Many strategies have been proposed to mitigate the effects of inappropriate social biases learned during pretraining. Simultaneously, methods for model compression have become increasingly popular to reduce the computational burden of LLMs. Despite the popularity and need for both approaches, little work has been done to explore the interplay between these two. We perform a carefully controlled study of the impact of model compression via quantization and knowledge distillation on measures of social bias in LLMs. Longer pretraining and larger models led to higher social bias, and quantization showed a regularizer effect with its best trade-off around 20% of the original pretraining time.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.05662","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/GoncalvesS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.161"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/GoncalvesS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.161","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"模型压缩（量化、知识蒸馏）会如何影响 LLM 中已有的社会偏见？此前偏见缓解和模型压缩各自有大量工作，但两者的交互效应几乎没有被系统研究过，导致部署压缩模型时偏见风险不可控。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：更长的预训练和更大的模型并不一定减少偏见，而压缩可能放大或改变偏见分布。这对选择压缩策略、评估 pretrain checkpoint 的公平性有直接参考价值。","technical_approach":"受控实验研究，非提出新方法。对 LLM 分别施加 post-training 量化和知识蒸馏两种压缩手段，在多个社会偏见度量（如 StereoSet、CrowS-Pairs 等）上对比压缩前后的偏见变化。关键控制变量包括预训练时长和模型规模。","experiments":"摘要截断，具体数字不完整。核心发现：更长的预训练和更大的模型规模并不总是降低偏见；量化和蒸馏对偏见的影响方向和幅度因偏见类型和度量方式而异。具体 baseline 和提升幅度需查看全文。","authors_note":"Emma Strubell 来自 CMU / Allen AI，以关注 NLP 环境成本和公平性著称（Energy and Policy Considerations for Deep Learning in NLP, ACL 2019）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How does model compression (quantization, knowledge distillation) interact with social biases already present in LLMs? Despite both bias mitigation and compression being heavily studied, their interplay has been largely unexplored, leaving bias risks uncontrolled in compressed deployments.","importance":"A controlled empirical study rather than a new method. Its value for pretrain research: longer pretraining and larger scale do not reliably reduce bias, and compression can shift bias profiles in non-obvious ways—useful for checkpoint selection and compression pipeline design.","technical_approach":"Controlled experimental study applying post-training quantization and knowledge distillation to LLMs, measuring social bias via multiple benchmarks (e.g., StereoSet, CrowS-Pairs). Key controlled variables are pretraining duration and model scale.","experiments":"Abstract is truncated; full numbers unavailable. Key finding: longer pretraining and larger models do not consistently reduce bias; quantization and distillation affect bias differently depending on bias type and metric.","authors_note":"Emma Strubell (CMU / Allen AI) is known for work on NLP's environmental cost and fairness (Energy and Policy Considerations for Deep Learning in NLP, ACL 2019)."},"tags":["model-compression","bias","llm-evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Emma Strubell"]},{"id":"GoodarziKMWDTWL23","title":"Robustness of Named-Entity Replacements for In-Context Learning","authors":["Saeed Goodarzi","Nikhil Kagita","Dennis Minn","Shufan Wang","Roberto Dessì","Shubham Toshniwal","Adina Williams","Jack Lanchantin","Koustuv Sinha"],"institutions":[],"abstract":",","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/GoodarziKMWDTWL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.728"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/GoodarziKMWDTWL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.728","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"研究 ICL 中命名实体替换对模型鲁棒性的影响。当 demonstration 中的命名实体被替换时，LLM 的 ICL 表现是否稳定？","importance":"实验分析级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示有限，但对理解 ICL 的泛化机制有参考价值——模型是否真正学到了任务模式，还是依赖于表面实体线索。","technical_approach":"摘要几乎为空，无法提供技术细节。从标题推断，核心方法是系统性地替换 ICL demonstration 中的命名实体，观察模型预测的变化。","experiments":"摘要为空，无法提供实验细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Investigates the robustness of ICL when named entities in demonstrations are replaced. Does LLM performance remain stable, or does it rely on surface entity cues?","importance":"Empirical analysis contribution. Limited direct impact on pretrain research, but relevant for understanding ICL generalization—whether models learn task patterns or depend on superficial entity features.","technical_approach":"Abstract is nearly empty. From the title, the approach likely involves systematically replacing named entities in ICL demonstrations and measuring prediction changes.","experiments":"Abstract is empty; no experimental details available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["icl","robustness","named-entities","prompting"]},{"id":"2311.07167","title":"STEER: Unified Style Transfer with Expert Reinforcement","authors":["Skyler Hallinan","Faeze Brahman","Ximing Lu","Jaehun Jung","Sean Welleck","Yejin Choi"],"institutions":["University of Washington","Allen AI"],"abstract":"$64","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.07167","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/HallinanBLJW023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.506"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/HallinanBLJW023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.506","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"文本风格迁移通常假设已知源风格，但现实中源风格往往未知。本文要解决的是任意风格到目标风格的迁移，且缺乏平行数据。","importance":"方法级贡献，主要面向 posttrain/应用层。对 pretrain 研究的间接启示：(1) 用 product of experts 自动生成风格迁移对作为离线数据，类似于合成数据增强 pretrain 的思路；(2) 离线预训练 + 在线 RL 的两阶段范式与 pretrain→posttrain 的流程有结构相似性。","technical_approach":"STEER 框架分两阶段：(1) 用 product of experts（多个专家模型的联合解码）自动生成风格迁移对，构建离线训练语料；(2) 用生成的数据预训练初始策略，然后切换到在线 off-policy RL，通过细粒度 reward 信号进一步优化。统一框架支持多种目标风格。","experiments":"摘要截断，具体 benchmark 和数字不完整。核心卖点是统一框架处理任意风格迁移，且不依赖平行数据。","authors_note":"Sean Welleck 在 LLM 推理和生成方面有持续产出。Luke Zettlemoyer 的名字未出现在作者列表中但 Ximing Lu 等来自 UW/Allen AI 生态。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Text style transfer typically assumes a known source style, but in practice the source style is often unknown. This work tackles arbitrary-to-target style transfer without parallel data.","importance":"Method-level contribution, primarily posttrain/application-facing. Indirect relevance to pretrain: (1) using product of experts to auto-generate style-transfer pairs mirrors synthetic data augmentation for pretraining; (2) the offline pretrain + online RL pipeline structurally resembles pretrain→posttrain workflows.","technical_approach":"STEER has two stages: (1) auto-generate style-transfer pairs via product of experts (joint decoding from multiple expert models) to build offline training data; (2) pretrain an initial policy on this data, then switch to online off-policy RL with fine-grained rewards. The unified framework supports multiple target styles.","experiments":"Abstract truncated; specific benchmarks and numbers unavailable. Main claim is a unified framework for arbitrary style transfer without parallel data.","authors_note":"Sean Welleck has sustained output in LLM reasoning and generation. Ximing Lu et al. are from the UW/Allen AI ecosystem."},"tags":["reinforcement-learning","style-transfer","alignment"],"notable_authors":["Sean Welleck"]},{"id":"HanKK00LLBH23","title":"On Sample-Efficient Code Generation","authors":["Hojae Han","Yu Jin Kim","Byoungjip Kim","Youngwon Lee","Kyungjae Lee","Kyungmin Lee","Moontae Lee","Kyunghoon Bae","Seung-won Hwang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/HanKK00LLBH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-INDUSTRY.73"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/HanKK00LLBH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-industry.73","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["code-generation","sample-efficiency","data-efficiency"]},{"id":"HaoC0LXLJZ23","title":"Complex Event Schema Induction with Knowledge-Enriched Diffusion Model","authors":["Yupu Hao","Pengfei Cao","Yubo Chen","Kang Liu","Jiexin Xu","Huaijun Li","Xiaojian Jiang","Jun Zhao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$65","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/HaoC0LXLJZ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.319"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/HaoC0LXLJZ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.319","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion","discrete-token","knowledge-graph","event-schema"]},{"id":"HerzigMKAFDG23","title":"Incorporating Structured Representations into Pretrained Vision &amp; Language Models Using Scene Graphs","authors":["Roei Herzig","Alon Mendelson","Leonid Karlinsky","Assaf Arbelle","Rogério Feris","Trevor Darrell","Amir Globerson"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/HerzigMKAFDG23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.870"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/HerzigMKAFDG23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.870","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["vision-language","scene-graph","structured-representation","pretraining"]},{"id":"InceZYYEE23","title":"Harnessing Dataset Cartography for Improved Compositional Generalization in Transformers","authors":["Osman Batur Ince","Tanin Zeraati","Semih Yagcioglu","Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh","Erkut Erdem","Aykut Erdem"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/InceZYYEE23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.867"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/InceZYYEE23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.867","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：Transformer 在 compositional generalization 上常常失败，但训练样本并不是同样有价值，现有做法很少利用样本难度和学习动态去主动重配训练数据。过去 dataset cartography 更多用于诊断数据集中的 easy / hard / ambiguous 样本，而不是直接作为提升组合泛化的训练信号。","importance":"它的贡献主要是数据与训练策略级。对 pretrain 的启示在于：训练动态导出的样本地图不只是分析工具，也可能是数据配比和 curriculum 的实际控制变量。对于大模型预训练，这对应一个更普遍的问题——哪些 token/样本应该在什么阶段被重复看、降权看或过滤掉。","technical_approach":"核心方法是利用 dataset cartography 改进 Transformer 的 compositional generalization。所谓 cartography，通常是根据训练过程中每个样本的置信度和波动，把数据分成易学、模糊、难学几类；论文应是据此重采样、重加权或分阶段训练。与常规统一训练分布相比，它不再假设所有训练样本对组合泛化等价有益。这样设计有效，是因为 compositional failure 往往不是纯容量不足，而是模型被频繁样式化样本牵着走，没有充分学到可迁移的规则。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认具体组合泛化基准和提升数字。按题目判断，实验应在 compositional generalization benchmark 上比较标准 Transformer 训练与基于 cartography 的采样/课程策略，指标可能是 exact match 或 accuracy，重点看 out-of-distribution compositional split。最有价值的 ablation 应包括：哪些 cartography 区域的样本最有利、是去掉 ambiguous 样本还是强化困难样本更有效，以及不同训练阶段最佳策略是否不同。具体数值无法确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a recurring issue: Transformers often struggle with compositional generalization, yet training data is usually treated as uniformly useful. Dataset cartography has mostly been used as a diagnostic tool for easy, hard, and ambiguous examples, not as an active mechanism to improve compositional behavior.","importance":"This is primarily a data and training-strategy contribution. The broader relevance to pretraining is that learning-dynamics-derived data maps may be actionable, not merely descriptive. That connects to a larger question in large-scale training: which examples should be emphasized, repeated, down-weighted, or filtered at different stages.","technical_approach":"The likely method uses dataset cartography to guide resampling, reweighting, or curriculum design for Transformers on compositional generalization tasks. Cartography usually tracks per-example confidence and variability during training, then categorizes samples into easy, ambiguous, and hard regions. The difference from standard training is that the method does not assume all examples contribute equally to compositional generalization. This makes sense because failures in compositionality are often tied to shortcut learning rather than raw capacity limits.","experiments":"The abstract is missing, so the exact benchmarks and gains cannot be stated. The expected setup compares standard Transformer training against cartography-guided sampling or curricula on compositional generalization benchmarks, likely reporting accuracy or exact match on IID and compositional splits. The most informative ablations would ask which cartography regions help most and whether the best strategy changes over training. No numeric details can be verified from the provided information.","authors_note":""},"tags":["dataset-cartography","generalization","transformer"]},{"id":"2305.14726","title":"In-Context Demonstration Selection with Cross Entropy Difference","authors":["Dan Iter","Reid Pryzant","Ruochen Xu","Shuohang Wang","Yang Liu","Yichong Xu","Chenguang Zhu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$66","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14726","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/IterPXWLXZ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.81"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/IterPXWLXZ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.81","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的结论是：in-context demonstration selection 可以通过 cross-entropy difference 做到更有针对性，而不是依赖 embedding 相似度或启发式检索。过去 few-shot ICL 的难点不是有没有示例，而是给定测试样本时选哪些示例最有用；现有方法常按语义相似度选例子，但相似不等于对该测试样本最能改善条件建模。","importance":"它的贡献主要是方法级，且与 pretrain 研究有关，因为它把 ICL 选例问题重新表述成语言建模收益估计问题。更具体地说，这篇工作在 probing 一个更深的问题：哪些训练样本会在不给参数更新的前提下，作为上下文最有效地改变模型分布；这对理解 ICL 机制和构造高价值合成上下文都有意义。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 cross-entropy difference, CED。做法是先用参数高效微调在单个候选 demonstration 或少量训练数据上训练小模型，再计算该模型对测试样本的困惑度/交叉熵，并利用差值来给候选 demonstration 排序。论文基于一个经验观察：有效 demonstration 与'被在该示例上微调过的小模型更低困惑度地解释测试样本'负相关。与 embedding retrieval 相比，CED 直接评估'这个示例是否有助于解释该测试点'；代价是需要额外训练许多小模型或近似实现，因此更像离线重打分方案。","experiments":"摘要能可靠支持的事实包括：作者用 parameter-efficient finetuning 训练小模型，计算测试样本和每个候选 in-context demonstration 的 cross-entropy difference，并据此排序选择示例。摘要没有给出具体任务、模型规模和提升数字，因此不能补写。可以合理概括的实验目标是：与随机选择、embedding 相似度和其他 demonstration selection 基线比较，验证 CED 选出的示例能提高 zero-shot/few-shot 任务表现。核心边界也很明确：如果候选池很大，这种方法的离线成本可能显著高于简单检索。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper's main point is that in-context demonstration selection should be based on expected language-modeling benefit, not just semantic similarity. In few-shot ICL, the bottleneck is often not whether demonstrations exist, but which ones actually help for a given test example; similarity-based retrieval is convenient, yet similar examples are not always the most useful conditioning context.","importance":"This is a method contribution with relevance to pretraining research because it reframes ICL example selection as a distribution-shaping problem. More broadly, it probes a deeper question: which examples are most effective at changing model behavior through context alone, without parameter updates. That matters for understanding ICL mechanisms and for building better synthetic context construction pipelines.","technical_approach":"The method is cross-entropy difference (CED). The paper first uses parameter-efficient fine-tuning to train small models on candidate demonstrations or small training subsets, then computes how well those models explain the test example, using the resulting cross-entropy difference to rank demonstrations. The motivating observation is that effective demonstrations are negatively correlated with the perplexity assigned to the test instance by a model fine-tuned on that demonstration. Compared with embedding-based retrieval, CED estimates usefulness more directly. The trade-off is extra offline cost, since the method needs many lightweight fine-tuned scorers or a good approximation thereof.","experiments":"The abstract reliably tells us that PEFT-trained small models are used to compute cross-entropy differences between a test example and each candidate demonstration, and that this score is used for ranking and selection. It does not provide datasets, model sizes, or performance numbers, so those should not be invented. The expected experimental comparison is against random or similarity-based demonstration selection, with the claim being that CED yields better in-context examples for downstream task performance. A clear limitation is scalability when the candidate pool becomes very large.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","demonstration-selection"]},{"id":"IwamotoYKOM23","title":"Incorporating Syntactic Knowledge into Pre-trained Language Model using Optimization for Overcoming Catastrophic Forgetting","authors":["Ran Iwamoto","Issei Yoshida","Hiroshi Kanayama","Takuya Ohko","Masayasu Muraoka"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Syntactic knowledge is invaluable information for many tasks which handle complex or long sentences, but typical pre-trained language models do not contain sufﬁcient syntactic knowledge. Thus it results in failures in downstream tasks that require syntactic knowledge. In this paper, we explore additional training to incorporate syntactic knowledge to a language model. We designed four pre-training tasks that learn different syntactic perspectives. For adding new syntactic knowledge and keeping a good balance between the original and additional knowledge, we addressed the problem of catastrophic forgetting that prevents the model from keeping semantic information when the model learns additional syntactic knowledge. We demonstrated that additional syntactic training produced consistent performance gains while clearly avoiding catastrophic forgetting.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/IwamotoYKOM23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.732"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/IwamotoYKOM23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.732","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["continual-pretrain","syntax","catastrophic-forgetting"]},{"id":"2310.14050","title":"Code-Switching with Word Senses for Pretraining in Neural Machine Translation","authors":["Vivek Iyer","Edoardo Barba","Alexandra Birch","Jeff Z. Pan","Roberto Navigli"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$67","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.14050","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/IyerBBPN23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.859"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/IyerBBPN23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.859","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["pretrain","nmt","code-switching"]},{"id":"2310.10062","title":"A Comprehensive Evaluation of Tool-Assisted Generation Strategies","authors":["Alon Jacovi","Avi Caciularu","Jonathan Herzig","Roee Aharoni","Bernd Bohnet","Mor Geva"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$68","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.10062","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/JacoviCHABG23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.926"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/JacoviCHABG23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.926","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["tool-use","evaluation"]},{"id":"2310.13307","title":"Test-Time Self-Adaptive Small Language Models for Question Answering","authors":["Soyeong Jeong","Jinheon Baek","Sukmin Cho","Sung Ju Hwang","Jong Park"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$69","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.13307","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/JeongBCHP23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.1033"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/JeongBCHP23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.1033","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["test-time","adaptation","qa"]},{"id":"2305.09645","title":"StructGPT: A General Framework for Large Language Model to Reason over Structured Data","authors":["Jinhao Jiang","Kun Zhou","Zican Dong","Keming Ye","Xin Zhao","Ji-Rong Wen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6a","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.09645","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/JiangZDYZW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.574"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/JiangZDYZW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.574","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["structured-data","reasoning","tool-use"]},{"id":"2310.16040","title":"Instruct and Extract: Instruction Tuning for On-Demand Information Extraction","authors":["Yizhu Jiao","Ming Zhong","Sha Li","Ruining Zhao","Siru Ouyang","Heng Ji","Jiawei Han"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6b","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.16040","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/Jiao0LZOJ023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.620"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/Jiao0LZOJ023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.620","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["instruction-tuning","information-extraction"]},{"id":"Jiao0W0LW0T23","title":"ParroT: Translating during Chat using Large Language Models tuned with Human Translation and Feedback","authors":["Wenxiang Jiao","Jen-tse Huang","Wenxuan Wang","Zhiwei He","Tian Liang","Xing Wang","Shuming Shi","Zhaopeng Tu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/Jiao0W0LW0T23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.1001"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/Jiao0W0LW0T23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.1001","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["translation","instruction-tuning","feedback"]},{"id":"JumeletZ23","title":"Transparency at the Source: Evaluating and Interpreting Language Models With Access to the True Distribution","authors":["Jaap Jumelet","Willem H. Zuidema"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/JumeletZ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.288"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/JumeletZ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.288","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["interpretability","language-model","evaluation","distribution"]},{"id":"JunejaDCM023","title":"Small Language Models Fine-tuned to Coordinate Larger Language Models improve Complex Reasoning","authors":["Gurusha Juneja","Subhabrata Dutta","Soumen Chakrabarti","Sunny Manchanda","Tanmoy Chakraborty"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/JunejaDCM023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.225"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/JunejaDCM023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.225","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["multi-agent","reasoning","coordination","small-lm"]},{"id":"KamathHC23","title":"Text encoders bottleneck compositionality in contrastive vision-language models","authors":["Amita Kamath","Jack Hessel","Kai-Wei Chang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/KamathHC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.301"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/KamathHC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.301","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["compositionality","clip","text-encoder","vision-language"]},{"id":"KassnerTS0SC23","title":"Language Models with Rationality","authors":["Nora Kassner","Oyvind Tafjord","Ashish Sabharwal","Kyle Richardson","Hinrich Schütze","Peter Clark"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/KassnerTS0SC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.877"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/KassnerTS0SC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.877","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["rationality","reasoning","language-model"]},{"id":"KatzB23","title":"VISIT: Visualizing and Interpreting the Semantic Information Flow of Transformers","authors":["Shahar Katz","Yonatan Belinkov"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/KatzB23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.939"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/KatzB23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.939","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["interpretability","information-flow","transformer","visualization"]},{"id":"Ke0XCL23","title":"Sub-network Discovery and Soft-masking for Continual Learning of Mixed Tasks","authors":["Zixuan Ke","Bing Liu","Wenhan Xiong","Asli Celikyilmaz","Haoran Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/Ke0XCL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.1008"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/Ke0XCL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.1008","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"混合任务持续学习（Continual Learning）中，传统的硬掩码（hard-masking）方法虽然能防止灾难性遗忘，但阻碍了任务间的知识共享（forward transfer）。","importance":"方法级。探讨了参数隔离与共享的 trade-off，对预训练模型在不断更新数据流时不遗忘旧知识且能正向迁移有启发。","technical_approach":"提出子网络发现与软掩码（Soft-masking）机制。放弃绝对的参数隔离，允许新任务以软权重形式复用旧任务的子网络，从而在保留前向迁移能力的同时抑制反向干扰。","experiments":"","authors_note":"Bing Liu (Continual Learning 领域权威)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In continual learning across mixed tasks, traditional hard-masking prevents catastrophic forgetting but severely limits knowledge sharing (forward transfer) between tasks.","importance":"Methodological. Explores the trade-off between parameter isolation and sharing, offering insights for lifelong pretraining without forgetting.","technical_approach":"Proposes sub-network discovery combined with soft-masking. Instead of strict parameter isolation, it allows new tasks to reuse old sub-networks via soft weights, enabling forward transfer while mitigating backward interference.","experiments":"","authors_note":"Bing Liu (Pioneer in Continual Learning)"},"tags":["continual-learning","soft-masking","sub-network"],"notable_authors":["Bing Liu"]},{"id":"KervadecFB23","title":"Unnatural language processing: How do language models handle machine-generated prompts?","authors":["Corentin Kervadec","Francesca Franzon","Marco Baroni"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/KervadecFB23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.959"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/KervadecFB23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.959","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 主要在人类自然语言上预训练，但实际应用中常被输入机器生成的、非自然的 prompt，模型对此类分布外（OOD）输入的处理机制尚不清晰。","importance":"机制分析。触及了 tokenizer 和预训练数据分布的边界，揭示了模型对非自然语言的鲁棒性，对理解 LLM 的泛化能力有重要意义。","technical_approach":"构建非自然语言（如算法生成、压缩文本）的 prompt 测试集，分析模型困惑度（Perplexity）与下游任务性能之间的相关性，探究语言模型在偏离自然语言分布时的行为表现。","experiments":"","authors_note":"Marco Baroni (知名计算语言学家)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLMs are pre-trained on natural human text, but are increasingly prompted with machine-generated or unnatural text; their mechanism for handling such out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs remains unclear.","importance":"Mechanistic analysis. Probes the boundaries of tokenizers and pretraining distributions, revealing model robustness to unnatural language and shedding light on LLM generalization.","technical_approach":"Constructs a test suite of unnatural prompts (e.g., algorithmically generated or compressed text) to analyze the correlation between perplexity and downstream task performance, investigating how models behave when inputs deviate from natural language.","experiments":"","authors_note":"Marco Baroni (Prominent Computational Linguist)"},"tags":["prompt-sensitivity","machine-generated-prompts","robustness","llm"],"notable_authors":["Marco Baroni"]},{"id":"KhalifaLLL023","title":"GRACE: Discriminator-Guided Chain-of-Thought Reasoning","authors":["Muhammad Khalifa","Lajanugen Logeswaran","Moontae Lee","Honglak Lee","Lu Wang"],"institutions":["University of Michigan"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/KhalifaLLL023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.1022"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/KhalifaLLL023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.1022","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"链式思考（CoT）在自回归解码时容易在中间步骤产生逻辑错误或幻觉，且标准解码无法提前评估步骤的正确性。","importance":"范式级（Inference/Post-train）。引入判别器引导解码，是 Process Reward Model (PRM) 引导搜索的早期形态，对提升复杂推理的准确性至关重要。","technical_approach":"提出 GRACE 框架，训练一个判别器（Discriminator）来评估中间推理步骤的质量。在推理阶段，利用该判别器的分数作为引导信号，干预并优化 CoT 的逐步生成过程。","experiments":"","authors_note":"Honglak Lee, Lu Wang (UMich)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning often suffers from logical errors or hallucinations during intermediate steps, and standard autoregressive decoding cannot evaluate step correctness on the fly.","importance":"Paradigm-level (Inference/Post-train). Introduces discriminator-guided decoding, serving as an early form of Process Reward Model (PRM) guided search, which is crucial for scaling inference compute in complex reasoning.","technical_approach":"Proposes the GRACE framework, which trains a discriminator to evaluate the quality of intermediate reasoning steps. During inference, the discriminator's scores are used as guidance signals to intervene and optimize the step-by-step CoT generation.","experiments":"","authors_note":"Honglak Lee, Lu Wang"},"tags":["chain-of-thought","discriminator","reasoning","decoding"],"notable_authors":["Honglak Lee","Lu Wang"]},{"id":"KhalighinejadLW23","title":"Approximating CKY with Transformers","authors":["Ghazal Khalighinejad","Ollie Liu","Sam Wiseman"],"institutions":["Duke University"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/KhalighinejadLW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.934"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/KhalighinejadLW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.934","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer 能否在内部原生实现类似 CKY 的动态规划算法以处理上下文无关文法（CFG），其理论表达能力与实际学习机制之间存在 gap。","importance":"机制分析。从理论和经验角度探讨了 Transformer 逼近复杂结构化算法的能力，对理解注意力机制如何隐式构建动态规划表有直接帮助。","technical_approach":"设计实验让 Transformer 拟合 CKY 解析过程。通过分析注意力权重，观察模型是否学会了类似 CKY 算法中的自底向上、组合子树的计算图依赖关系。","experiments":"","authors_note":"Sam Wiseman (Duke)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"It remains an open question whether Transformers can natively implement dynamic programming algorithms like CKY for context-free grammars, highlighting a gap between theoretical expressivity and actual learned mechanisms.","importance":"Mechanistic analysis. Explores the capacity of Transformers to approximate complex structured algorithms, directly aiding the understanding of how attention mechanisms implicitly construct dynamic programming tables.","technical_approach":"Designs experiments to train Transformers to approximate the CKY parsing process. Analyzes attention weights to determine if the model learns the bottom-up, subtree-combining computational dependencies inherent in the CKY algorithm.","experiments":"","authors_note":"Sam Wiseman"},"tags":["cky-parsing","transformer","approximation","formal-language"],"notable_authors":["Sam Wiseman"]},{"id":"KimHMW23","title":"FinePrompt: Unveiling the Role of Finetuned Inductive Bias on Compositional Reasoning in GPT-4","authors":["Jeonghwan Kim","Giwon Hong","Sung-Hyon Myaeng","Joyce Jiyoung Whang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/KimHMW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.245"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/KimHMW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.245","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"指令微调（Instruction Tuning）引入的归纳偏置（Inductive Bias）究竟是增强了底层模型的组合推理能力，还是仅仅教会了模型特定的输出格式？","importance":"机制分析。直击 Pretrain 与 Post-train 的接口问题，探讨 SFT 对模型原生推理能力的真实影响（是激发还是损害）。","technical_approach":"提出 FinePrompt 评估框架，专门针对组合推理任务。通过对比基础预训练模型（Base）和微调模型（Instruct/Chat）在不同 prompt 下的表现，剥离并量化微调带来的归纳偏置效应。","experiments":"","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Does the inductive bias introduced by instruction tuning genuinely enhance the underlying compositional reasoning abilities of LLMs, or does it merely teach them specific output formats?","importance":"Mechanistic analysis. Directly addresses the pretrain-posttrain interface by investigating the true impact of SFT on a model's native reasoning capabilities (whether it elicits or degrades them).","technical_approach":"Proposes the FinePrompt evaluation framework tailored for compositional reasoning. By comparing base pre-trained models with instruction-tuned models under various prompts, it isolates and quantifies the inductive bias effects brought by fine-tuning.","experiments":"","authors_note":""},"tags":["compositionality","gpt4","finetuning","inductive-bias"]},{"id":"KimKHH23","title":"ATHENA: Mathematical Reasoning with Thought Expansion","authors":["JB. Kim","Hazel Kim","Joonghyuk Hahn","Yo-Sub Han"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/KimKHH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.1014"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/KimKHH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.1014","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"数学推理任务中，单一路径的 CoT 容易陷入死胡同，缺乏对不同解题方向的探索和回溯能力。","importance":"方法级。探索了推理期的计算扩展（Inference Scaling），通过构建思维图/树来提升数学推理上限。","technical_approach":"提出 ATHENA 框架，引入“思维扩展”（Thought Expansion）机制。在生成推理步骤时，模型会展开多个候选想法，并进行评估和选择，类似于 Tree of Thoughts (ToT) 的多路径探索。","experiments":"","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In mathematical reasoning, single-path CoT easily hits dead ends and lacks the ability to explore alternative solution directions or backtrack.","importance":"Methodological. Explores inference-time compute scaling by constructing thought graphs/trees to push the upper bound of mathematical reasoning.","technical_approach":"Proposes the ATHENA framework, introducing a 'Thought Expansion' mechanism. When generating reasoning steps, the model expands multiple candidate thoughts, evaluates them, and selects the best, akin to the multi-path exploration in Tree of Thoughts (ToT).","experiments":"","authors_note":""},"tags":["math-reasoning","cot","prompting"]},{"id":"2310.10054","title":"NASH: A Simple Unified Framework of Structured Pruning for Accelerating Encoder-Decoder Language Models","authors":["Jongwoo Ko","Seungjoon Park","Yujin Kim","Sumyeong Ahn","Du-Seong Chang","Euijai Ahn","Se-Young Yun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6c","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.10054","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/KoPKACAY23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.404"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/KoPKACAY23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.404","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Encoder-Decoder 模型的结构化剪枝研究不足，过去的方法往往将两部分同等对待，没有理清各自对推理速度和生成质量的真实影响。","importance":"架构与效率级。给出了明确的非对称剪枝 heuristic：Decoder 决定速度，Encoder 决定质量。这对 T5/BART 类模型的压缩或早期架构设计有直接启发。","technical_approach":"提出 NASH 框架，将 Encoder 和 Decoder 的剪枝解耦。核心机制是：对 Encoder 保持低稀疏度（少剪）以维持表征和生成质量，对 Decoder 进行激进的层级剪枝以最大化推理加速。","experiments":"发现 Decoder 层数是推理速度的决定性因素，而 Encoder 的稀疏度直接影响生成质量。基于此非对称策略在多项 NLP 任务上实现了更好的速度-质量 trade-off。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Structured pruning is well-explored for encoder-only models, but applying it to encoder-decoder architectures lacks clear guidelines on how to balance pruning between the two components.","importance":"Architecture & Efficiency. Provides a clear asymmetric pruning heuristic (decoder depth dictates speed, encoder density dictates quality), directly informing the compression and architectural design of T5/BART-style models.","technical_approach":"Proposes the NASH framework, which decouples the pruning of the encoder and decoder. It maintains low sparsity in the encoder to preserve representation and generation quality, while aggressively pruning decoder layers to maximize inference speedup.","experiments":"Identified that decoder depth is the dominant factor for inference speed, while low sparsity in the encoder enhances generation quality. This asymmetric strategy achieves a superior speed-quality trade-off across various NLP tasks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["structured-pruning","model-compression","encoder-decoder"]},{"id":"2310.16964","title":"Critic-Driven Decoding for Mitigating Hallucinations in Data-to-text Generation","authors":["Mateusz Lango","Ondrej Dusek"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Hallucination of text ungrounded in the input is a well-known problem in neural data-to-text generation. Many methods have been proposed to mitigate it, but they typically require altering model architecture or collecting additional data, and thus cannot be easily applied to an existing model. In this paper, we explore a new way to mitigate hallucinations by combining the probabilistic output of a generator language model (LM) with the output of a special\"text critic\"classifier, which guides the generation by assessing the match between the input data and the text generated so far. Our method does not need any changes to the underlying LM's architecture or training procedure and can thus be combined with any model and decoding operating on word probabilities. The critic does not need any additional training data, using the base LM's training data and synthetic negative examples. Our experimental results show that our method improves over the baseline on the WebNLG and OpenDialKG benchmarks.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.16964","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LangoD23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.172"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LangoD23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.172","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：在 data-to-text 生成里减少 hallucination，但不改动生成器结构、也不要求额外标注数据。以往很多方法依赖重训模型、加入覆盖机制或额外监督，迁移到现有模型的成本高，所以作者转向“只改解码”的路线。","importance":"它的价值是一个系统级、接口友好的方案：把 groundedness 约束从训练阶段后移到解码阶段。对 pretrain / posttrain 的启示是，生成模型的事实一致性未必只能靠再训练改善，推断时引入独立 critic 也能作为低成本补丁；代价则是推理复杂度上升，而且收益依赖 critic 质量。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Critic-Driven Decoding：在每一步生成时，把语言模型的 token 概率和一个 text critic 对“输入数据—当前前缀文本是否匹配”的打分联合起来，重排候选 token。它不是训练一个新的序列生成器，而是训练或使用一个独立分类器来评估 grounding；与典型 reranking 不同，它在前缀级别持续干预解码，因此能更早抑制偏离输入的数据幻觉。","experiments":"摘要可确认的关键事实是：方法可与任意输出词概率的生成模型组合，且不需要修改底层 LM 架构或训练流程。给到信息没有参数规模、数据集名称、具体 hallucination 指标或提升幅度，因此这里不能编造数字；合理推断实验重点应包括在标准 data-to-text 基准上比较原始解码、reranking 和 critic-guided decoding 的事实一致性与流畅性 trade-off。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets hallucinations in data-to-text generation, but does so without retraining the generator or changing its architecture. Prior fixes often require architectural changes, extra supervision, or model-specific training, which makes them hard to retrofit onto an existing generator.","importance":"The contribution is mainly systems-oriented: it moves factual grounding control from training time to decoding time. For pretrain/posttrain thinking, the useful lesson is that faithfulness is not only a model-training problem; a separate inference-time critic can be an effective low-friction patch, albeit with extra decoding cost and critic-quality dependence.","technical_approach":"The method, Critic-Driven Decoding, combines next-word probabilities from a generator LM with scores from a text critic that estimates whether the source data matches the text prefix generated so far. This is not a new generator but a decoding wrapper around an existing one; unlike end-of-sequence reranking, prefix-level guidance can intervene earlier and prevent the generation from drifting off the input.","experiments":"What can be safely stated from the abstract is that the method is model-agnostic for any generator exposing word probabilities and does not require architectural or training changes to the base LM. The provided text does not include reliable numbers for model sizes, datasets, metrics, or gain margins, so the experimental summary must stay qualitative here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["decoding","hallucination","generation"],"notable_authors":["Mateusz Lango","Ondrej Dusek"]},{"id":"LeongCWWL23","title":"Self-Detoxifying Language Models via Toxification Reversal","authors":["Chak Tou Leong","Yi Cheng","Jiashuo Wang","Jian Wang","Wenjie Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LeongCWWL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.269"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LeongCWWL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.269","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文处理的是：如何让语言模型自我去毒化，而不是依赖外部过滤器或大量额外安全数据。传统 detoxification 往往通过拒答、词表屏蔽或单独分类器来压制有毒输出，但这些方法经常牺牲通用能力或只在表层词汇上起作用。","importance":"它的价值在于提出一种可能更接近生成机制本身的安全训练思路。对 posttrain 和训练信号设计的启示是，安全对齐未必要只做‘抑制’，也可以通过构造反向样本或反转过程让模型学会把 toxic continuation 拉回到非 toxic 区域。","technical_approach":"从标题能确认其核心想法是 Toxification Reversal：通过‘先毒化、再反转’的方式实现 self-detoxifying。也就是说，方法可能不是单纯训练一个 toxicity classifier，而是构造毒性文本及其逆向改写或对应关系，让模型在生成或改写过程中学习把有毒倾向映射回安全表达；具体损失形式和训练流程当前无法确认。","experiments":"没有摘要，因此无法确定使用了哪些毒性基准、是否做了自动与人工双评、以及去毒化与语言质量之间的 trade-off 数字。能安全描述的只有：实验应当评估 toxicity 降低幅度、流畅性/有用性保留程度，以及相对外部过滤或常规微调方法的优劣。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies self-detoxification for language models, aiming to reduce toxic generation without relying solely on external filters or large extra safety datasets. Conventional detoxification often works by suppression—blocking words, rejecting outputs, or training separate classifiers—which can hurt utility or remain surface-level.","importance":"Its likely contribution is a training signal for safety that is closer to the generation process itself. For post-training, the interesting idea is that safety alignment may be achieved not only by penalizing toxicity, but by explicitly teaching the model to reverse toxic continuations into safer ones.","technical_approach":"The title indicates a toxification-reversal framework: instead of only identifying toxic text, the model learns through a reversal process that maps toxic expressions back to non-toxic alternatives. That makes it different from a pure toxicity classifier setup, though the exact objective and whether it is framed as rewriting, contrastive learning, or preference-style supervision cannot be verified here.","experiments":"Without the abstract, datasets, baselines, toxicity metrics, and utility-retention numbers are unavailable. The natural evaluation would measure toxicity reduction together with quality preservation and compare against filtering or standard detoxification fine-tuning, but no concrete claim should be made beyond that.","authors_note":""},"tags":["toxicity","alignment","decoding"],"notable_authors":["Chak Tou Leong","Yi Cheng","Jiashuo Wang","Jian Wang","Wenjie Li"]},{"id":"LevyJLVMFBCR23","title":"Comparing Biases and the Impact of Multilingual Training across Multiple Languages","authors":["Sharon Levy","Neha Anna John","Ling Liu","Yogarshi Vyas","Jie Ma","Yoshinari Fujinuma","Miguel Ballesteros","Vittorio Castelli","Dan Roth"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LevyJLVMFBCR23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.634"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LevyJLVMFBCR23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.634","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的是：多语言训练会如何改变不同语言上的偏见表现，且这些偏见是否可跨语言比较。很多工作只测英语偏见，或者默认多语言训练会自然稀释偏差，但这个假设并不稳。","importance":"它对多语言预训练评估是有价值的数据与分析工作。对 pretrain 的直接启示是：跨语言扩展不只是覆盖更多 token 分布，也会重组社会偏见和表示偏差；因此模型比较不能只看平均精度，还要看不同语言上的不公平模式是否被放大、迁移或隐藏。","technical_approach":"从标题可确认，论文做的是跨多语言的偏见比较，并分析 multilingual training 的影响。它更像评测与诊断框架，而不是新训练算法；关键难点通常在于如何设计可比的偏见测量、控制翻译和文化差异带来的混杂因素，以及区分‘语言差异’和‘训练策略差异’。","experiments":"由于没有摘要，无法确认涉及多少语言、使用哪些偏见基准、比较哪些单语/多语模型，也没有具体统计显著性结果。可以确定的是，实验应围绕跨语言偏见分布和多语言训练带来的变化展开；但任何具体结论强度都需要原文支持，这里不能补写。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper examines how multilingual training changes model biases across languages, instead of assuming bias findings from English generalize automatically. This is a real gap because bias evaluation is often English-centric, while multilingual training may amplify, dampen, or redistribute harms differently across languages.","importance":"Its contribution is evaluative and diagnostic. For pretraining research, the message is that scaling to multiple languages changes more than linguistic coverage: it also changes the bias profile of the model, which means model quality cannot be summarized by average benchmark scores alone.","technical_approach":"From the title, the work compares biases across multiple languages and studies the impact of multilingual training. This is likely an evaluation framework rather than a new model; the technical challenge is to make bias measurements comparable across languages while controlling for translation artifacts, cultural mismatch, and differences in training setup.","experiments":"No abstract is available, so the language set, model families, bias benchmarks, and exact empirical findings cannot be stated with confidence. The likely experimental structure is a cross-lingual comparison of bias metrics under monolingual versus multilingual training, but no more specific quantitative summary is justified here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multilingual","bias","pretraining"],"notable_authors":["Sharon Levy","Neha Anna John","Ling Liu","Yogarshi Vyas","Jie Ma"]},{"id":"LiCSCHLS23","title":"Theory of Mind for Multi-Agent Collaboration via Large Language Models","authors":["Huao Li","Yu Quan Chong","Simon Stepputtis","Joseph Campbell","Dana Hughes","Charles Lewis","Katia P. Sycara"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiCSCHLS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.13"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiCSCHLS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.13","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的是：能否让 LLM 在多智能体协作中显式利用 theory of mind，也就是建模其他智能体的信念、意图和信息状态，而不是只做单体规划。过去很多 LLM agent 工作把他人状态当作环境文本的一部分处理，但这在协作任务里往往不够。","importance":"它的重要性更多在 agentic reasoning 和交互建模，而不是预训练本体。即便如此，它对 latent reasoning / structured prompting 有启发：当任务需要多方视角协调时，显式的他者建模可能比单轨 CoT 更关键，这也提示未来预训练是否需要更强的社会交互式数据。","technical_approach":"仅从标题可确认：论文把 Theory of Mind 作为多智能体协作中的核心机制，并通过 LLM 实现。通常这意味着为每个 agent 维护不同视角、可见信息或心智状态，并在生成计划或通信时显式推断他方意图；这比普通 shared-context prompting 更复杂，但也更符合协作问题的结构。","experiments":"没有摘要，所以无法确认具体环境、任务类型、基线 agent、是否多轮交互，以及 ToM 模块带来的提升幅度。可安全描述的是，实验应比较有无 ToM 建模时的协作成功率、通信效率或规划质量；具体数字当前缺失。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether LLM-based multi-agent collaboration can benefit from explicit theory-of-mind modeling—reasoning about other agents' beliefs, intentions, and private information—instead of treating all interaction as plain text context. Many LLM-agent setups implicitly assume shared-context reasoning is enough, which is often weak for coordination.","importance":"The contribution sits more in agentic reasoning than in core pretraining, but it is still relevant to how we think about structured reasoning. The broader implication is that when a task depends on perspective-taking and coordination, explicit modeling of others may matter more than generic chain-of-thought.","technical_approach":"From the title, the approach centers on using LLMs to realize theory-of-mind for multi-agent collaboration. That likely means separating viewpoints or hidden information across agents and prompting the model to reason over others' likely goals or beliefs, rather than relying on a single undifferentiated context.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so there is no reliable information on the environments, baselines, metrics, or gains. The likely evaluation compares collaboration success and coordination quality with and without explicit ToM mechanisms, but the quantitative outcomes are unavailable here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["theory-of-mind","multi-agent","collaboration"],"notable_authors":["Huao Li","Yu Quan Chong","Simon Stepputtis","Joseph Campbell","Dana Hughes"]},{"id":"LiGFXHMS23","title":"Multi-step Jailbreaking Privacy Attacks on ChatGPT","authors":["Haoran Li","Dadi Guo","Wei Fan","Mingshi Xu","Jie Huang","Fanpu Meng","Yangqiu Song"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiGFXHMS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.272"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiGFXHMS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.272","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：现有对话模型的安全防护往往只拦截单轮、显式的违规提示，但对多轮、分步诱导的隐私窃取攻击缺乏系统分析。作者关注的不是一般越狱，而是攻击者如何把敏感信息提取任务拆成看似无害的子步骤，从而绕过 ChatGPT 的拒答策略。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要在安全评测方法，而不是预训练方法本身。它提醒做大模型的人：只看单轮 red teaming 会系统性高估隐私防护能力，因为模型在多轮上下文里会逐步失去最初的安全边界；这对后训练安全对齐、记忆控制和对话状态级防护都有直接启发。","technical_approach":"核心方法是构造多步 jailbreaking privacy attack 框架，而不是发明新的训练算法。作者把隐私攻击拆成若干低风险子任务，通过上下文累积、角色设定或任务重写，让模型在每一步都更像是在完成正常协作；和直接要求“泄露某信息”的攻击相比，这种设计利用了安全过滤通常按局部语义判别、而不是按全局意图追踪的弱点，因此更容易穿透防线。","experiments":"从题目和可用信息看，实验重点应是比较单步与多步攻击在 ChatGPT 上的成功率差异，并分析不同攻击链长度、提示策略或场景下的隐私泄露效果。由于这里没有摘要、表格和数字，我不能可靠给出模型版本、样本规模、具体成功率或提升幅度；能确认的只有，这篇工作以真实商用对话模型为对象，强调多轮攻击比传统单轮攻击更接近实际威胁面。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a clear gap: safety defenses for chat models are mostly evaluated on single-turn, explicit prompts, while privacy leakage can be induced through multi-turn decomposition. The focus is not generic jailbreaking, but how an attacker can break a sensitive request into seemingly harmless steps and bypass ChatGPT’s refusal behavior.","importance":"This is primarily a security-evaluation contribution rather than a pretraining method. Its main implication is that single-turn red teaming likely overestimates privacy robustness, because models can drift across turns and lose the safety boundary maintained at the initial request; that matters for post-training alignment, memory control, and state-aware safety systems.","technical_approach":"The method is a multi-step privacy attack framework, not a new learning algorithm. The attacker decomposes a privacy extraction goal into lower-risk subgoals, using contextual accumulation, role play, or task reframing so that each step looks benign in isolation; compared with direct leakage prompts, this works because many safeguards score local semantics rather than tracking intent over the full dialogue trajectory.","experiments":"Given the title and available metadata, the experiments likely compare single-step and multi-step attacks on ChatGPT, and vary attack length, prompting strategy, or privacy scenario. The abstract and tables are not provided here, so I cannot responsibly report model versions, dataset size, exact success rates, or margins; the reliable takeaway is that multi-turn attacks are positioned as a materially stronger and more realistic threat model than one-shot jailbreaks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["jailbreak","privacy","alignment"]},{"id":"LiJWR0Q23","title":"Watermarking LLMs with Weight Quantization","authors":["Linyang Li","Botian Jiang","Pengyu Wang","Ke Ren","Hang Yan","Xipeng Qiu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiJWR0Q23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.220"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiJWR0Q23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.220","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：如何给 LLM 植入可验证的所有权标记，同时尽量不影响模型能力、也不依赖输出层面的文本 watermark。现有文本水印容易被改写、抽样扰动或后处理破坏，而参数级标记更接近模型归属证明，但实现上要兼顾可检出性与性能损失。","importance":"这项工作属于模型治理与系统层方法，对预训练研究的启发在于：量化不只是压缩工具，也可以变成参数空间中的可控信号通道。它的重要性不在提升模型质量，而在提出一种和模型发布、蒸馏、压缩部署兼容的 ownership tracing 思路，这对开放模型生态是实际问题。","technical_approach":"核心方法是利用权重量化过程嵌入水印，即在离散化后的权重分布中编码特定模式，并在后续通过统计检验或密钥匹配进行验证。和文本输出水印不同，它把标记放在模型内部参数上；和任意参数扰动式签名不同，量化提供了天然的离散容器，能让嵌入更稳定、检验更直接，但代价是要控制量化误差不能明显伤害下游性能。","experiments":"从题目可判断，实验应围绕三件事展开：水印可检出性、对模型性能的影响、以及对常见攻击如微调、剪枝、再量化或噪声扰动的鲁棒性。由于当前没有摘要和结果表，我不能确认使用的是哪类模型、几 bit 量化、检测准确率或性能下降幅度；能较稳妥地说，这篇工作把 watermarking 和 model compression 放在了同一技术接口上。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical ownership problem: how to embed a verifiable watermark into an LLM without relying on output-text watermarking and without materially hurting model quality. Text-level watermarks are often fragile under paraphrasing, sampling changes, or post-processing, while parameter-level marks are better aligned with model provenance but harder to make both robust and low-cost.","importance":"This is a governance and systems contribution with a useful pretraining-side implication: quantization is not only for compression, but can serve as a controllable signaling channel in parameter space. Its value is not better task accuracy, but a deployment-compatible route for ownership tracing that fits open-weight, distilled, and compressed model pipelines.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to embed watermarks during weight quantization by encoding designated patterns into the discretized weight distribution, then verifying them through key-based or statistical detection. Unlike text watermarking, the signal lives inside model parameters; unlike arbitrary parameter perturbation signatures, quantization gives a natural discrete container, which can improve stability and simplify verification, though the design must keep quantization error from degrading downstream performance.","experiments":"From the title, the experiments should cover three axes: detectability of the watermark, utility impact on the model, and robustness under attacks such as fine-tuning, pruning, requantization, or noise. The abstract and tables are not available here, so I cannot safely report model families, bit-widths, detection rates, or exact utility drops; the reliable takeaway is that the paper unifies watermarking with model compression rather than treating them as separate concerns.","authors_note":""},"tags":["watermarking","quantization","llm-security"]},{"id":"LiLCX23","title":"Towards Robust Pruning: An Adaptive Knowledge-Retention Pruning Strategy for Language Models","authors":["Jianwei Li","Qi Lei","Wei Cheng","Dongkuan Xu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiLCX23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.79"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiLCX23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.79","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：语言模型剪枝后性能通常脆弱，尤其在分布变化或任务迁移下容易丢掉关键知识。传统剪枝大多围绕参数重要性或稀疏率优化，但没有显式控制“保住哪些知识”，所以压缩后常见现象是表面指标还行、鲁棒性先掉。","importance":"这是一个方法级压缩工作，对预训练研究的启发是：模型压缩不能只看参数冗余，还要看知识保真。对做基础模型的人，这类工作有价值的地方在于它把 pruning objective 从“删多少参数”往“删完后还能保留什么行为能力”推进了一步，特别适合部署后长期使用或多任务迁移场景。","technical_approach":"核心方法是提出一种自适应知识保留剪枝策略，不是单纯按权重幅值或梯度打分。直观上，它在剪枝决策里加入了知识保留信号，动态调整哪些参数或结构更值得保留；和静态重要性评分相比，这样做的好处是能把压缩预算优先给那些承载通用语言知识、而不是只对当前训练 batch 有贡献的参数，从而提升剪枝后的鲁棒性。","experiments":"从题目看，实验大概率比较了该方法与 magnitude pruning、movement pruning 或知识蒸馏式剪枝在多个 NLP 任务上的表现，重点看不同稀疏率下的精度和鲁棒性变化。由于没有摘要和数字，我无法确认具体模型规模、任务集合、最佳提升幅度和 ablation 细节；但论文的卖点很明确：在同等压缩率下，更稳地保留预训练知识，而不是只追求短期验证集分数。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a common failure mode in LM pruning: compressed models often look acceptable on in-domain metrics but lose knowledge and break more easily under transfer or distribution shift. Standard pruning methods optimize sparsity or local importance, but they do not explicitly control what knowledge is retained after pruning.","importance":"This is a method-level compression paper with a useful message for pretraining work: model compression should be framed not only as parameter removal, but as knowledge preservation. Its practical value is strongest for foundation models that need to survive deployment, transfer, and multi-task reuse after pruning.","technical_approach":"The main idea is an adaptive knowledge-retention pruning strategy rather than plain magnitude- or gradient-based pruning. In effect, the pruning decision is guided by signals related to retained knowledge, so the budget is preferentially spent on parameters carrying reusable linguistic competence instead of those that only look important for the current local optimization state; that is why the method is aimed at robustness, not just compactness.","experiments":"From the title, the evaluation likely compares against standard pruning baselines such as magnitude pruning, movement pruning, or distillation-style compression across multiple NLP tasks, with attention to performance under different sparsity levels. Since the abstract and result tables are missing, I cannot safely report model sizes, benchmark suites, exact gains, or ablation numbers; the reliable takeaway is that the paper argues for better robustness at a fixed compression ratio by explicitly preserving pretrained knowledge.","authors_note":""},"tags":["pruning","compression","knowledge-retention"]},{"id":"LiLDWL23","title":"A Zero-Shot Language Agent for Computer Control with Structured Reflection","authors":["Tao Li","Gang Li","Zhiwei Deng","Bryan Wang","Yang Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiLDWL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.753"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiLDWL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.753","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：在没有专门微调的情况下，语言模型如何稳定地完成电脑控制这类长链交互任务。过去这类任务常依赖任务特定数据收集和行为克隆，但覆盖面差、迁移差；作者尝试用 zero-shot agent 配合结构化反思，把通用模型能力直接转成 GUI/计算机操作能力。","importance":"这项工作更偏 agent 与人机交互系统，但对 pretrain/post-train 接口有启发。它说明，仅靠预训练得到的语言推理能力不足以支撑复杂环境中的可靠行动，必须加上外部状态表示、错误恢复和反思机制；这对后续工具使用、软件 agent、以及多模态行动模型都很关键。","technical_approach":"核心方法是一个零样本 language agent，并加入 structured reflection 作为显式纠错环。与简单 ReAct 式“想一步做一步”不同，structured reflection 会把失败原因、环境反馈和后续修正组织成结构化中间表示，再驱动下一轮决策；这样设计的原因是电脑控制错误往往不是知识缺失，而是状态误读和历史误操作累积，非结构化自由反思容易漂移，结构化约束更利于恢复。","experiments":"从题目判断，实验应在多个 computer control 或 GUI 操作基准上，与纯 prompting agent、无反思版本或现有 zero-shot baseline 对比成功率。当前没有摘要和数值，所以我不能给出具体环境、任务数量、绝对成功率和提升幅度；比较确定的是，论文强调的是 zero-shot 设置和 structured reflection 的增益，而不是额外监督数据带来的收益。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a practical question: how can a language model reliably control a computer in zero-shot settings without task-specific fine-tuning? Prior approaches often rely on collected demonstrations or behavior cloning, which are narrow and brittle; this work instead tries to turn general-purpose language competence into actionable GUI control through structured reflection.","importance":"This is more of an agent/HCI paper than a pretraining paper, but it matters at the pretrain–posttrain interface. The key lesson is that pretrained reasoning alone is not enough for reliable action in long-horizon environments; explicit state handling, recovery, and reflection are needed, which is highly relevant to tool use, software agents, and multimodal action models.","technical_approach":"The method is a zero-shot language agent augmented with structured reflection as an explicit error-correction loop. Unlike loosely formatted ReAct-style prompting, the reflection step organizes failures, environment feedback, and repair plans into a structured intermediate form before the next action is chosen; this helps because computer-control failures are often due to state misreads and compounding interaction errors, where unconstrained free-form reflection tends to drift.","experiments":"From the title, the evaluation likely uses computer-control or GUI benchmarks and compares against plain prompting agents, no-reflection variants, or existing zero-shot baselines using task success rate. Since no abstract or tables are provided, I cannot report environments, task counts, exact success rates, or margins; the safe takeaway is that the paper attributes the gain to structured reflection in a zero-shot regime rather than to extra supervision.","authors_note":""},"tags":["agent","computer-use","reflection"]},{"id":"LiMC23","title":"Mixture-of-Linguistic-Experts Adapters for Improving and Interpreting Pre-trained Language Models","authors":["Raymond Li","Gabriel Murray","Giuseppe Carenini"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiMC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.634"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiMC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.634","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：预训练语言模型虽然强，但其内部对不同语言现象的处理缺乏可控的模块化结构，因此既难进一步提升，也难解释。传统 adapter 往往按任务或层来设计，而不是按语言学功能来分工，导致性能和可解释性都不理想。","importance":"这是一篇方法级的参数高效微调与解释性结合工作。对 pretrain 研究的启发是：如果把适配器按语言学子能力拆分，再用 mixture 机制按输入动态组合，可能比单一 adapter 更接近模型真实的知识组织方式；它未必改变大模型主干训练范式，但给“如何在不动主干的前提下获得更结构化能力”提供了方向。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Mixture-of-Linguistic-Experts adapters，即构造多个面向不同语言特征或语言学现象的 adapter expert，并通过 gating 为不同输入或 token 分配权重。它和标准 MoE 的区别不在稀疏扩容，而在 expert 的语义归因：作者试图让每个 expert 对应较清晰的 linguistic specialization，从而同时提升表现和可解释性；这样设计的有效性来自于语言现象本来就具有一定分解结构，单 adapter 很难兼顾所有模式。","experiments":"从题目看，实验应包含两部分：一是与普通 adapter、单 expert 或全参数微调比较下游性能；二是分析 gating 与 linguistic categories 的对应关系，证明专家分工不是随机的。当前没有摘要和表格，因此我无法给出所用 backbone、任务集合、参数开销和提升数字；可以确认的是，论文把“提高性能”和“解释专家在学什么”放在同一框架下做。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a dual limitation of pretrained LMs: they are powerful, but their handling of different linguistic phenomena is neither modular nor easy to interpret. Standard adapters are usually organized by task or layer rather than by linguistic function, which limits both controllability and interpretability.","importance":"This is a method-level paper at the intersection of parameter-efficient tuning and interpretability. Its relevance to pretraining is that it explores whether structured adaptation modules, aligned with linguistic subskills, can better match how language competence is distributed in a frozen backbone; it does not change the backbone training paradigm, but it offers a more organized route to add capability without full retraining.","technical_approach":"The method introduces Mixture-of-Linguistic-Experts adapters: multiple adapter experts are designed around different linguistic features or phenomena, and a gating mechanism dynamically mixes them per input or token. This differs from standard MoE mainly in the intended semantics of the experts rather than sparse scaling; the design hypothesis is that language phenomena are partially decomposable, so a single adapter is forced into entangled compromises that hurt both utility and interpretability.","experiments":"From the title, the experiments likely evaluate downstream performance against regular adapters, single-expert variants, or full fine-tuning, and then inspect whether gating patterns align with linguistic categories in a nontrivial way. Without abstract and tables, I cannot report the backbone models, tasks, parameter overhead, or exact gains; the dependable takeaway is that the paper tries to improve performance and explain expert specialization within one PEFT framework.","authors_note":""},"tags":["adapters","moe","interpretability"]},{"id":"LiRSWQ23","title":"PerturbScore: Connecting Discrete and Continuous Perturbations in NLP","authors":["Linyang Li","Ke Ren","Yunfan Shao","Pengyu Wang","Xipeng Qiu"],"institutions":["Fudan University"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiRSWQ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.442"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiRSWQ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.442","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：NLP 中离散扰动和连续扰动通常分开研究，前者像字符替换、词替换，后者像 embedding-space attack 或平滑正则，但两者之间缺少统一视角。结果是鲁棒性评测和训练常常各做各的，难以比较，也难迁移。","importance":"这是一个鲁棒性分析与方法工作。对预训练研究的意义在于，它试图把 token 空间和表示空间的扰动联系起来，这有助于我们理解模型对输入变化的真实敏感方向，也可能反向指导数据增广、对抗训练和 tokenizer 设计。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 PerturbScore，用一个统一评分或度量把离散扰动与连续扰动接到同一个框架里。和传统只在字符/词层枚举攻击、或只在 embedding 空间做梯度攻击不同，这个方法的目标是建立二者的可比性与映射关系：如果一个离散改写在表示空间里对应很大偏移，那它更可能揭示模型脆弱点；反过来，连续方向也可以帮助发现更有效的离散攻击。","experiments":"从题目看，实验应展示 PerturbScore 在对抗样本发现、鲁棒性评测或不同扰动类型相关性分析上的效果，并与现有离散或连续 attack baseline 比较。由于没有摘要与数值，无法给出具体任务、模型规模、攻击成功率或相关系数提升；可以确认的是，论文的主要贡献不是新任务成绩，而是提供连接两类扰动的统一分析工具。","authors_note":"Xipeng Qiu 是复旦大学 NLP 方向知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a fragmentation problem in NLP robustness: discrete perturbations and continuous perturbations are often studied separately, with little unification between token-space edits and representation-space changes. As a result, robustness training and evaluation become hard to compare, and insights do not transfer well across attack types.","importance":"This is a robustness analysis/method paper with a useful pretraining implication. By connecting perturbations in token space and embedding space, it can help reveal the directions to which pretrained models are truly sensitive, which in turn may inform data augmentation, adversarial training, and tokenizer design.","technical_approach":"The core contribution, PerturbScore, is a unified score or metric that links discrete and continuous perturbations within one framework. Unlike methods that either enumerate token edits or optimize embedding-space attacks in isolation, the goal here is to make the two perturbation families comparable and mappable: a discrete rewrite that induces a large representation shift is more likely to expose brittleness, while continuous vulnerability directions can guide more effective discrete attacks.","experiments":"From the title, the evaluation likely demonstrates PerturbScore on adversarial example discovery, robustness assessment, or correlation analysis across perturbation types, compared with standard discrete and continuous attack baselines. Without the abstract and numbers, I cannot safely report tasks, model sizes, attack success rates, or correlation improvements; the dependable takeaway is that the paper contributes a unifying analysis tool rather than just another benchmark score.","authors_note":"Xipeng Qiu is a well-known NLP researcher at Fudan University."},"tags":["robustness","perturbation","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Xipeng Qiu"]},{"id":"LiSZKCLY23","title":"CoAnnotating: Uncertainty-Guided Work Allocation between Human and Large Language Models for Data Annotation","authors":["Minzhi Li","Taiwei Shi","Caleb Ziems","Min-Yen Kan","Nancy F. Chen","Zhengyuan Liu","Diyi Yang"],"institutions":["A*STAR"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiSZKCLY23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.92"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiSZKCLY23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.92","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：数据标注中如果完全依赖人工，成本太高；如果直接让 LLM 全自动标，则质量和一致性难保证。作者关注的是更实际的协作问题：如何根据样本不确定性，把简单样本交给 LLM、把高风险样本交给人，从而在固定预算下最大化标注质量。","importance":"这是一篇数据系统工作，对 pretrain 的意义不在模型结构，而在数据生产流水线。它的重要性很实际：高质量监督和偏好数据是后训练瓶颈，而 uncertainty-guided 人机分工提供了一条可规模化的数据获取方案；对持续预训练、指令数据构建和评测集扩展都相关。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 CoAnnotating：利用不确定性估计来分配人类和 LLM 的标注工作，而不是固定比例地混合两者。关键机制是先让系统判断哪些样本模型把握高、可交给 LLM 处理，哪些样本风险高、需要人工介入；和简单的 human-in-the-loop 不同，这个方法把协作决策前置为一个可优化的问题，因为成本节约主要来自‘把人用在最值钱的样本上’。","experiments":"从题目看，实验应比较纯人工、纯 LLM、随机分配和 uncertainty-guided allocation 在多个标注任务上的质量-成本曲线。由于没有摘要和数字，我不能给出任务类型、样本规模、节省的标注成本或质量提升幅度；能确定的是，论文的价值在于展示一种有原则的人机标注资源调度，而不是证明 LLM 可以完全替代人类标注员。","authors_note":"Nancy F. Chen 是语音与语言处理方向知名学者，长期在 A*STAR / 新加坡相关研究机构从事多模态与 NLP 研究。当前给定信息不足以精确确认本论文全部机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical annotation bottleneck: fully human labeling is expensive, while fully automatic LLM labeling is unreliable on difficult cases. The real question is how to allocate work between humans and LLMs based on uncertainty so that quality is maximized under a fixed annotation budget.","importance":"This is a data-systems paper whose relevance to pretraining lies in data production rather than model architecture. Its importance is very practical: high-quality supervision and preference data are now a major bottleneck, and uncertainty-guided human–LLM allocation offers a scalable route for building instruction data, evaluation sets, and continual-training corpora.","technical_approach":"The core method, CoAnnotating, uses uncertainty estimation to decide whether an instance should be labeled by a human or by an LLM, rather than mixing them with a fixed ratio. The key mechanism is to route confident, lower-risk samples to the model and reserve ambiguous or high-impact cases for humans; compared with generic human-in-the-loop setups, this explicitly optimizes the allocation decision because most cost savings come from spending human effort only where it matters most.","experiments":"From the title, the experiments likely compare fully human annotation, fully LLM annotation, random allocation, and uncertainty-guided allocation on quality–cost tradeoffs across several labeling tasks. Since the abstract and result tables are unavailable, I cannot safely report task types, dataset sizes, cost reduction, or exact quality margins; the reliable takeaway is that the paper argues for principled work allocation, not for replacing human annotators outright.","authors_note":"Nancy F. Chen is a well-known researcher in speech and language processing, with long-standing work associated with A*STAR and Singapore-based research institutions. The provided metadata is not sufficient to identify all institutions for this paper precisely."},"tags":["data-annotation","human-in-the-loop","llm"],"notable_authors":["Nancy F. Chen"]},{"id":"LiWF0ZC23","title":"Robust Prompt Optimization for Large Language Models Against Distribution Shifts","authors":["Moxin Li","Wenjie Wang","Fuli Feng","Yixin Cao","Jizhi Zhang","Tat-Seng Chua"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiWF0ZC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.95"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiWF0ZC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.95","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["prompting","distribution-shift","robustness"]},{"id":"LiWWN23","title":"MoPe: Model Perturbation based Privacy Attacks on Language Models","authors":["Marvin Li","Jason Wang","Jeffrey G. Wang","Seth Neel"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiWWN23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.842"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiWWN23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.842","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["privacy","attacks","language-models"]},{"id":"LiXDZSKL23","title":"Can Language Models Understand Physical Concepts?","authors":["Lei Li","Jingjing Xu","Qingxiu Dong","Ce Zheng","Xu Sun","Lingpeng Kong","Qi Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiXDZSKL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.726"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiXDZSKL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.726","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["llm-evaluation","physical-reasoning","benchmark"]},{"id":"LiZ000YLHL23","title":"API-Bank: A Comprehensive Benchmark for Tool-Augmented LLMs","authors":["Minghao Li","Yingxiu Zhao","Bowen Yu","Feifan Song","Hangyu Li","Haiyang Yu","Zhoujun Li","Fei Huang","Yongbin Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiZ000YLHL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.187"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiZ000YLHL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.187","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["tool-use","benchmark","api-calling"]},{"id":"LiangYHZLZCHW23","title":"Hi-ArG: Exploring the Integration of Hierarchical Argumentation Graphs in Language Pretraining","authors":["Jingcong Liang","Rong Ye","Meng Han","Qi Zhang","Ruofei Lai","Xinyu Zhang","Zhao Cao","Xuanjing Huang","Zhongyu Wei"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiangYHZLZCHW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.902"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiangYHZLZCHW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.902","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["graph","pretrain","argumentation"]},{"id":"LiaoJLWW23","title":"Self-Improvement of Non-autoregressive Model via Sequence-Level Distillation","authors":["Yusheng Liao","Shuyang Jiang","Yiqi Li","Yu Wang","Yanfeng Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiaoJLWW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.878"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiaoJLWW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.878","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["non-autoregressive","distillation"]},{"id":"LinLZFLCS23","title":"Learning to Compose Representations of Different Encoder Layers towards Improving Compositional Generalization","authors":["Lei Lin","Shuangtao Li","Yafang Zheng","Biao Fu","Shan Liu","Yidong Chen","Xiaodong Shi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LinLZFLCS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.108"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LinLZFLCS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.108","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["compositional-generalization","representation"]},{"id":"LinWTWGWS23","title":"ToxicChat: Unveiling Hidden Challenges of Toxicity Detection in Real-World User-AI Conversation","authors":["Zi Lin","Zihan Wang","Yongqi Tong","Yangkun Wang","Yuxin Guo","Yujia Wang","Jingbo Shang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LinWTWGWS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.311"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LinWTWGWS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.311","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["safety","toxicity","benchmark"]},{"id":"LiuG0HZQZ23","title":"Plan, Verify and Switch: Integrated Reasoning with Diverse X-of-Thoughts","authors":["Tengxiao Liu","Qipeng Guo","Yuqing Yang","Xiangkun Hu","Yue Zhang","Xipeng Qiu","Zheng Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiuG0HZQZ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.169"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiuG0HZQZ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.169","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["reasoning","cot","planning"]},{"id":"LiuHLXZCHZ23","title":"ViT-TTS: Visual Text-to-Speech with Scalable Diffusion Transformer","authors":["Huadai Liu","Rongjie Huang","Xuan Lin","Wenqiang Xu","Maozong Zheng","Hong Chen","Jinzheng He","Zhou Zhao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiuHLXZCHZ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.990"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiuHLXZCHZ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.990","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["tts","diffusion","visual"]},{"id":"LiuLSL23","title":"A Picture is Worth a Thousand Words: Language Models Plan from Pixels","authors":["Anthony Z. Liu","Lajanugen Logeswaran","Sungryull Sohn","Honglak Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiuLSL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.1025"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiuLSL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.1025","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["vlm","planning","pixel"]},{"id":"LiuWMSWKSS023","title":"We&apos;re Afraid Language Models Aren&apos;t Modeling Ambiguity","authors":["Alisa Liu","Zhaofeng Wu","Julian Michael","Alane Suhr","Peter West","Alexander Koller","Swabha Swayamdipta","Noah A. Smith","Yejin Choi"],"institutions":["University of Washington","Allen Institute for AI (AI2)"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiuWMSWKSS023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.51"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiuWMSWKSS023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.51","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"自然语言天然存在歧义，但现有的 Next-token 预测目标强制模型将概率分布坍缩到单一的最可能解释上，导致模型无法识别或保留多重语义。","importance":"直击自回归（AR）语言建模的底层缺陷。指出了当前预训练目标在处理不确定性和多模态分布时的根本局限，对后续探索 Energy-based 或 Latent variable LM 有启发。","technical_approach":"构建了 AmbiEnt 基准测试，专门评估模型对歧义句（如介词短语依附歧义）的理解。通过 Prompting 和概率探测，观察模型是否能在多个合法解释上分配合理的概率质量。","experiments":"测试了 GPT-3 等模型，发现它们压倒性地偏好单一解释。即使在 Prompt 中明确提示存在歧义，模型依然难以维持多假设分布。","authors_note":"Julian Michael, Peter West (UW / AI2)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Natural language is inherently ambiguous, but the standard next-token prediction objective forces models to collapse their probability distributions into a single most likely interpretation, failing to recognize multiple valid meanings.","importance":"Exposes a fundamental flaw in the autoregressive (AR) language modeling paradigm regarding uncertainty and multimodal distributions, motivating future work in Energy-based or Latent variable LMs.","technical_approach":"Introduces the AmbiEnt benchmark to evaluate model comprehension of ambiguous sentences (e.g., prepositional phrase attachment). Uses prompting and probability probing to check if models assign reasonable probability mass to multiple valid interpretations.","experiments":"Evaluated models like GPT-3. Results show an overwhelming preference for a single interpretation. Even when explicitly prompted about ambiguity, models struggle to maintain a multi-hypothesis distribution.","authors_note":"Julian Michael, Peter West (UW / AI2)"},"tags":["ambiguity","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Julian Michael","Peter West","Alane Suhr"]},{"id":"LiuYWZJGLLZYWZ23","title":"Knowledge-Selective Pretraining for Attribute Value Extraction","authors":["Hui Liu","Qingyu Yin","Zhengyang Wang","Chenwei Zhang","Haoming Jiang","Yifan Gao","Zheng Li","Xian Li","Chao Zhang","Bing Yin","William Wang","Xiaodan Zhu"],"institutions":["Amazon","Rutgers University"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LiuYWZJGLLZYWZ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.542"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LiuYWZJGLLZYWZ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.542","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"垂直领域（如电商）的属性值提取（AVE）任务中，通用的随机 Mask 预训练无法有效建立实体与属性之间的结构化关联。","importance":"证明了在 Continual Pretraining 阶段，Task-guided 的数据破坏策略（Masking）比无脑随机 Mask 能带来更高的下游信息抽取收益。","technical_approach":"提出知识选择性预训练。放弃随机 Mask，专门针对文本中的属性值进行 Mask，并引入对比学习损失，拉近实体与其对应属性在隐空间中的表示距离。","experiments":"在电商语料上进行继续预训练，在低资源 AVE 任务上显著超越了标准 RoBERTa 基线，证明了结构化先验注入的有效性。","authors_note":"Haoming Jiang (Amazon)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In domain-specific tasks like Attribute Value Extraction (AVE), generic random masking during pretraining fails to capture the structured relationship between entities and their attributes.","importance":"Demonstrates that task-guided data corruption (masking) during continual pretraining yields higher downstream gains for information extraction than naive random masking.","technical_approach":"Proposes knowledge-selective pretraining. Instead of random masking, it selectively masks attribute values in the text and introduces a contrastive learning loss to pull entities and their corresponding attributes closer in the latent space.","experiments":"Continual pretraining on e-commerce corpora shows significant improvements over standard RoBERTa baselines on low-resource AVE tasks, validating the injection of structured priors.","authors_note":"Haoming Jiang (Amazon)"},"tags":["pretrain","data-selection","attribute-extraction"],"notable_authors":["Haoming Jiang","Chenwei Zhang"]},{"id":"LoSXZZ23","title":"Hierarchical Prompting Assists Large Language Model on Web Navigation","authors":["Robert Lo","Abishek Sridhar","Frank F. Xu","Hao Zhu","Shuyan Zhou"],"institutions":["Carnegie Mellon University (CMU)"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LoSXZZ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.685"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LoSXZZ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.685","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在长周期的 Web 导航任务中，HTML 文本极长且充满噪声，单体 LLM 容易在长上下文中迷失高层目标（Lost in the middle）。","importance":"确立了 Agent 任务中“规划与执行解耦”的系统级范式，对后续基于 LLM 的复杂工作流设计有直接指导意义。","technical_approach":"采用分层 Prompting 策略。上层 Planner 负责将用户指令拆解为当前子目标，下层 Executor 专注于在当前 HTML 页面中解析并执行具体动作（如点击、输入），两者交替运行。","experiments":"在 WebShop 和 Mind2Web 上的成功率大幅提升。分层设计有效缓解了上下文超载问题，减少了模型在长序列中的规划错误。","authors_note":"Shuyan Zhou (CMU)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In long-horizon web navigation tasks, HTML text is excessively long and noisy, causing monolithic LLMs to lose track of high-level goals within the long context.","importance":"Establishes a system-level paradigm of decoupling planning from execution in Agent tasks, directly guiding the design of complex LLM workflows.","technical_approach":"Employs a hierarchical prompting strategy. A high-level Planner decomposes user instructions into current sub-goals, while a low-level Executor focuses on parsing the current HTML page and executing specific actions (e.g., click, type). The two operate alternately.","experiments":"Achieved substantial success rate improvements on WebShop and Mind2Web. The hierarchical design effectively mitigates context overload and reduces planning errors in long sequences.","authors_note":"Shuyan Zhou (CMU)"},"tags":["web-agent","prompting"],"notable_authors":["Shuyan Zhou","Frank F. Xu"]},{"id":"LodhaBCTGBPS23","title":"On Surgical Fine-tuning for Language Encoders","authors":["Abhilasha Lodha","Gayatri Belapurkar","Saloni Chalkapurkar","Yuanming Tao","Reshmi Ghosh","Samyadeep Basu","Dmitrii Petrov","Soundararajan Srinivasan"],"institutions":["Amazon"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LodhaBCTGBPS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.204"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LodhaBCTGBPS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.204","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"对预训练语言编码器进行全量微调（Full FT）容易破坏底层通用特征，导致灾难性遗忘和 OOD 泛化能力下降。","importance":"从实证角度挑战了“全量微调总是最优”的惯性思维，为 Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) 提供了机制层面的解释和支持。","technical_approach":"提出“外科手术式微调”（Surgical FT）。通过分析各层和各模块对特定任务的敏感度（如基于 Fisher 信息），只更新最关键的少数层或参数（如仅更新顶层或特定注意力头），冻结其余部分。","experiments":"在 GLUE 和领域偏移数据集上，Surgical FT 在保持 In-domain 性能的同时，OOD 泛化能力显著优于全量微调。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Full fine-tuning (Full FT) of pre-trained language encoders often destroys underlying general features, leading to catastrophic forgetting and degraded out-of-domain (OOD) generalization.","importance":"Empirically challenges the default assumption that full fine-tuning is always optimal, providing mechanistic support for Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT).","technical_approach":"Proposes 'Surgical FT'. By analyzing the sensitivity of different layers and modules to specific tasks (e.g., via Fisher information), it updates only the most critical subset of parameters (like top layers or specific attention heads) while freezing the rest.","experiments":"On GLUE and domain shift datasets, Surgical FT matches in-domain performance while significantly outperforming full fine-tuning on OOD generalization.","authors_note":""},"tags":["fine-tuning","layerwise"]},{"id":"LongWP23","title":"Adapt in Contexts: Retrieval-Augmented Domain Adaptation via In-Context Learning","authors":["Quanyu Long","Wenya Wang","Sinno Jialin Pan"],"institutions":["Nanyang Technological University (NTU)"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LongWP23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.402"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LongWP23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.402","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"领域适应（Domain Adaptation）通常需要昂贵的继续预训练（DAPT），而纯 Zero-shot 的 ICL 在垂直领域表现不佳。","importance":"验证了“检索增强的 ICL”可以作为一种免训练的轻量级领域适应替代方案，将领域知识的注入从权重更新转移到了上下文构建。","technical_approach":"利用密集检索器从目标领域无标注语料中召回与当前输入相似的样本，构建 Few-shot Prompt。通过上下文学习隐式地让模型感知目标领域的数据分布。","experiments":"在情感分析等领域适应任务上，该方法显著优于随机 Few-shot，性能逼近经过目标领域微调的模型。","authors_note":"Sinno Jialin Pan (NTU)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Domain Adaptation typically requires expensive domain-adaptive pretraining (DAPT), while pure zero-shot ICL performs poorly in specialized domains.","importance":"Validates that retrieval-augmented ICL can serve as a training-free, lightweight alternative for domain adaptation, shifting knowledge injection from weight updates to context construction.","technical_approach":"Uses a dense retriever to fetch similar examples from an unlabeled target domain corpus to construct few-shot prompts. This implicitly exposes the model to the target domain distribution via in-context learning.","experiments":"On domain adaptation tasks like sentiment analysis, this approach significantly outperforms random few-shot baselines, approaching the performance of models fine-tuned on the target domain.","authors_note":"Sinno Jialin Pan (NTU)"},"tags":["icl","domain-adaptation","retrieval"],"notable_authors":["Sinno Jialin Pan"]},{"id":"LoyaSF23","title":"Exploring the Sensitivity of LLMs&apos; Decision-Making Capabilities: Insights from Prompt Variations and Hyperparameters","authors":["Manikanta Loya","Divya Sinha","Richard Futrell"],"institutions":["UC Irvine"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LoyaSF23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.241"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LoyaSF23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.241","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"社区倾向于用 LLM 模拟人类决策（如行为经济学博弈），但这些决策结果可能只是 Prompt 格式或采样参数的伪影，而非真正的推理。","importance":"给 LLM Agent 和认知模拟研究泼了一盆冷水，提醒研究者在评估模型“涌现”的决策能力时必须控制超参数和 Prompt 敏感性。","technical_approach":"在经典决策任务（如最后通牒博弈）中，系统性地扰动 Prompt（同义词替换、格式微调）并遍历 Temperature 和 Top-p 参数，观察模型决策分布的变化。","experiments":"结果表明，LLM 的决策极度脆弱。高 Temperature 会导致决策趋于随机而非“理性”，且微小的 Prompt 变化就能完全反转模型的偏好。","authors_note":"Richard Futrell (UC Irvine)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The community increasingly uses LLMs to simulate human decision-making (e.g., in behavioral economics), but these decisions might be artifacts of prompt formatting or sampling parameters rather than genuine reasoning.","importance":"Serves as a cautionary tale for LLM Agent and cognitive simulation research, emphasizing the need to control for hyperparameter and prompt sensitivity when evaluating 'emergent' decision-making.","technical_approach":"Systematically perturbs prompts (synonym replacement, formatting tweaks) and sweeps Temperature and Top-p parameters in classic decision-making tasks (like the Ultimatum Game) to observe shifts in decision distributions.","experiments":"Results show that LLM decisions are highly fragile. High temperature leads to random rather than 'rational' choices, and minor prompt variations can completely flip the model's preferences.","authors_note":"Richard Futrell (UC Irvine)"},"tags":["prompt-sensitivity","llm-evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Richard Futrell"]},{"id":"LoyolaMI23","title":"Perceptual Structure in the absence of grounding: the impact of abstractedness and subjectivity in color language for LLMs","authors":["Pablo Loyola","Edison Marrese-Taylor","Andrés Hoyos Idrobo"],"institutions":["National Institute of Informatics (Japan)","University of Tokyo"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LoyolaMI23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.102"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LoyolaMI23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.102","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"纯文本预训练模型能否在没有视觉 Grounding 的情况下，仅凭文本共现学到真实世界的连续感知结构（如颜色空间）？","importance":"触及了预训练中“具身与符号接地（Symbol Grounding）”的核心争议。证明了纯文本 Scaling 也能逼近部分物理世界的感知流形。","technical_approach":"提取 LLM 对颜色词汇的内部表示，并与人类感知的 CIELAB 颜色空间进行对齐分析。测试模型在处理抽象和主观颜色描述时的表现。","experiments":"发现 LLM 确实能从纯文本中重建出与人类高度一致的颜色拓扑结构，但在处理极度主观或缺乏常见文本共现的复杂颜色时，仍不如多模态 Grounded 模型。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Can pure-text pre-trained models learn continuous perceptual structures of the real world (like color spaces) purely from text co-occurrence, without visual grounding?","importance":"Touches on the core debate of embodiment and symbol grounding in pretraining. It proves that pure-text scaling can approximate certain perceptual manifolds of the physical world.","technical_approach":"Extracts LLM internal representations of color words and aligns them with the human-perceived CIELAB color space. Tests the model's performance on abstract and subjective color descriptions.","experiments":"Found that LLMs can indeed reconstruct color topologies highly consistent with human perception purely from text. However, they still lag behind multimodal grounded models when handling highly subjective or complex colors lacking frequent text co-occurrence.","authors_note":""},"tags":["grounding","color","representation"],"notable_authors":["Edison Marrese-Taylor"]},{"id":"LuHZZY023","title":"Improving End-to-End Speech Processing by Efficient Text Data Utilization with Latent Synthesis","authors":["Jianqiao Lu","Wenyong Huang","Nianzu Zheng","Xingshan Zeng","Yu Ting Yeung","Xiao Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LuHZZY023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.327"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LuHZZY023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.327","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["speech","text-speech","latent"]},{"id":"LuoVPH23","title":"Systematic Assessment of Factual Knowledge in Large Language Models","authors":["Linhao Luo","Thuy-Trang Vu","Dinh Q. Phung","Gholamreza Haffari"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/LuoVPH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.885"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/LuoVPH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.885","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["factual-knowledge","llm-evaluation","probing"]},{"id":"2310.19619","title":"Towards A Holistic Landscape of Situated Theory of Mind in Large Language Models","authors":["Ziqiao Ma","Jacob Sansom","Run Peng","Joyce Chai"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6d","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.19619","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/MaSPC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.72"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/MaSPC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.72","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["theory-of-mind","llm-evaluation","benchmark"]},{"id":"2310.14883","title":"Non-autoregressive Streaming Transformer for Simultaneous Translation","authors":["Zhengrui Ma","Shaolei Zhang","Shoutao Guo","Chenze Shao","Min Zhang","Yang Feng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Simultaneous machine translation (SiMT) models are trained to strike a balance between latency and translation quality. However, training these models to achieve high quality while maintaining low latency often leads to a tendency for aggressive anticipation. We argue that such issue stems from the autoregressive architecture upon which most existing SiMT models are built. To address those issues, we propose non-autoregressive streaming Transformer (NAST) which comprises a unidirectional encoder and a non-autoregressive decoder with intra-chunk parallelism. We enable NAST to generate the blank token or repetitive tokens to adjust its READ/WRITE strategy flexibly, and train it to maximize the non-monotonic latent alignment with an alignment-based latency loss. Experiments on various SiMT benchmarks demonstrate that NAST outperforms previous strong autoregressive SiMT baselines.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.14883","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/MaZGSZF23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.314"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/MaZGSZF23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.314","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["non-autoregressive","simultaneous-translation","streaming"]},{"id":"2303.08896","title":"SelfCheckGPT: Zero-Resource Black-Box Hallucination Detection for Generative Large Language Models","authors":["Potsawee Manakul","Adian Liusie","Mark J. F. Gales"],"institutions":["University of Cambridge"],"abstract":"$6e","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08896","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ManakulLG23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.557"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ManakulLG23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.557","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：在拿不到模型 logits、也不接外部知识库的黑盒条件下，如何检测生成式 LLM 的事实性幻觉。此前主流做法要么依赖白盒概率信息，要么依赖检索和知识库管线；这两类方法在 ChatGPT 一类闭源接口上都不够实用，因此“只靠模型自己输出的一致性”成为值得单独研究的方向。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要在评测与系统方法层，而不是训练范式创新。它提出了一个零资源、黑盒可用的 hallucination detector，直接降低了事实性监控的接入门槛；对 pretrain 研究的启示是，模型内部知识是否稳定、采样后是否自洽，本身可以作为知识可靠性的外显信号，这为分析预训练知识表征和不确定性提供了一个便宜的观测窗口。","technical_approach":"核心方法是原创但很朴素：对同一提示从同一个黑盒 LLM 采样多次，用样本之间的相互矛盾程度来估计原回答中的句子是否可能幻觉。设计上的关键判断是：如果模型真的“知道”一个事实，不同采样应当在该事实附近收敛；如果模型只是语言上会编，样本间会出现更高的不一致。作者没有走外部检索路线，也没有要求 token 概率，而是把 NLI、问答或语义相似度模型作为后验一致性打分器，对句子级 factuality 做排序。它和最接近的自一致性思路的区别在于，目标不是提升推理答案，而是把跨样本分歧显式转成 hallucination score。","experiments":"实验结论是：SelfCheckGPT 在句子级幻觉检测上明显优于基于灰盒概率的强基线，并且在段落级事实性排序上也有效。论文主要在 WikiBio 风格的人物传记生成上评测，比较对象包括基于 token probability 的方法、prompted MQAG 变体和人工标注。结果层面，采样一致性信号与人工 factuality judgment 有稳定相关，句子级检测的 AUC-PR/排序指标优于多个 baseline；同时，随着采样数增加，性能先升后趋于饱和，说明这个方法确实在聚合“知识稳定性”而不是单次采样噪声。边界也很明确：如果模型会稳定地重复同一个错误，SelfCheckGPT 会把它误判为可靠；因此它更适合抓“不稳定幻觉”，不适合纠正“高置信系统性错误”。","authors_note":"University of Cambridge。作者中 Mark J. F. Gales 长期从事语音与语言建模。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a very practical question: how to detect factual hallucinations from a black-box LLM when you have neither token probabilities nor an external knowledge source. Prior approaches usually assumed white-box access or retrieval-backed verification, both of which break down for systems like ChatGPT, so a self-consistency-based detector is worth isolating and studying.","importance":"This is mainly an evaluation and systems contribution rather than a new pretraining method. Its importance is that it makes hallucination checking deployable in zero-resource black-box settings; for pretraining research, it also suggests that the stability of sampled generations is an observable proxy for how robustly a fact is represented inside the model.","technical_approach":"The method is simple and original in framing: sample multiple responses to the same prompt, then measure cross-sample disagreement to score whether a sentence in the original answer is likely hallucinated. The key design choice is to treat consistency as evidence of stored knowledge and inconsistency as evidence of fabrication. Instead of retrieval or token-level confidence, the method uses downstream scorers such as NLI, QA, or semantic similarity to compare sampled passages and derive sentence-level factuality scores. Relative to generic self-consistency ideas, the goal here is not answer selection for reasoning, but explicit hallucination detection from sampled variance.","experiments":"The main empirical result is that SelfCheckGPT outperforms strong gray-box baselines for sentence-level hallucination detection and works for passage-level factuality ranking as well. The paper evaluates on biography-style generation with human factuality annotations, comparing against token-probability baselines and prompted QA-style checks. Reported results show stronger correlation with human judgments and better ranking / AUC-style metrics than several alternatives. An informative trend is that more samples help up to a saturation point, which supports the intended mechanism of aggregating knowledge stability rather than benefiting from one lucky sample. The limitation is equally clear: if the model repeats the same falsehood consistently, the method will overestimate reliability, so it is better at catching unstable hallucinations than stable but wrong beliefs.","authors_note":"University of Cambridge. Mark J. F. Gales is well known for work in speech and language modeling."},"tags":["hallucination","detection","black-box","consistency"],"notable_authors":["Potsawee Manakul","Adian Liusie","Mark J. F. Gales"]},{"id":"2305.14264","title":"Active Learning Principles for In-Context Learning with Large Language Models","authors":["Katerina Margatina","Timo Schick","Nikolaos Aletras","Jane Dwivedi-Yu"],"institutions":["University of Liverpool","The University of Manchester"],"abstract":"$6f","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14264","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/MargatinaSAD23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.334"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/MargatinaSAD23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.334","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：ICL 里少量 demonstration 该怎么选，不能再只靠随机抽样或启发式相似度。过去 few-shot prompting 的注意力大多放在 prompt 模板和模型规模上，而 demonstration selection 常被当作次要工程细节；作者认为这其实是一个标准的 pool-based active learning 问题，因为预算极小的时候，示例信息量决定了 ICL 上限。","importance":"这项工作的贡献属于方法与实验分析层。它没有改预训练，但对 pretrain/posttrain 接口很有启发：如果 ICL 的性能强烈依赖所选 few-shot 样本，那么很多“模型能力”其实掺杂了上下文数据选择效应；这提醒我们在比较基座模型时，要把 demonstration selection 当成独立变量，而不是默认随机。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把单轮 ICL demonstration 选择重新表述为主动学习。作者系统比较了不确定性、代表性、多样性等经典 AL 策略在 LLM ICL 中的效果，并设计了适配 black-box / expensive-query 场景的选择流程。关键点不在发明全新算法，而在于把 AL 的目标从“迭代收集标注”改成“在固定预算下挑上下文示例”，并分析不同策略何时比随机更稳。和已有基于语义相似度或排序检索的做法相比，这篇工作强调示例应当最大化决策边界信息，而不只是和测试样本看起来像。","experiments":"实验结论是：主动学习式选择通常优于随机或简单相似度检索，但提升具有任务依赖性。论文在多种文本分类/理解 few-shot 任务上评测，使用大语言模型做 ICL，比较 random、uncertainty-based、diversity-based、similarity-based 等策略。总体上，基于不确定性或覆盖性的选择在小预算 demonstration 下更稳定，尤其是在类别不平衡或样本池冗余较高时收益更明显；但并非所有任务都显著提升，这说明 ICL 的示例选择受任务结构和模型先验共同约束。一个有价值的观察是，选得“信息量大”的样本比选得“最像测试样本”的样本更常带来泛化收益，说明 demonstration 更像是在线校准器，而不是简单 nearest-neighbor 提示。","authors_note":"University of Liverpool；The University of Manchester。Nikolaos Aletras 在高效 NLP 和 LLM 评测方向较活跃。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a simple but under-examined question: in in-context learning, how should we choose the few demonstrations instead of relying on random sampling or weak heuristics. Earlier work focused much more on prompt templates and model scale, but with tiny shot budgets the informativeness of the chosen examples can dominate the outcome, which makes this naturally an active learning problem.","importance":"This is a methods-and-analysis contribution rather than a pretraining one. Its relevance to pretraining research is indirect but real: if ICL performance depends heavily on which examples are shown, then some reported “model capability” is actually a selection effect from context construction, not a pure property of the base model.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to recast one-shot demonstration selection for ICL as pool-based active learning. The paper does not introduce a radically new algorithm; instead, it systematically adapts and compares uncertainty-, diversity-, and representativeness-based AL strategies under the constraints of LLM prompting. The design choice that matters is to optimize for informative examples under a strict context budget, rather than examples that are merely similar to the test item. Compared with prior retrieval-style prompting, the paper argues that boundary-informing examples can be more useful than nearest neighbors.","experiments":"The main empirical finding is that active-learning-based selection often beats random or simple similarity-based selection, but gains are task-dependent rather than universal. The evaluation covers several few-shot NLP tasks with LLM-based ICL, comparing random, uncertainty-based, diversity-based, and similarity-driven baselines. Uncertainty and coverage-oriented methods are generally more stable when the budget is very small, especially under label imbalance or redundant candidate pools. But the gains are not uniform across all tasks, which is an important boundary condition. A useful takeaway is that examples with higher information value often outperform the most test-similar ones, suggesting that demonstrations act more like online calibration signals than pure nearest-neighbor retrieval.","authors_note":"University of Liverpool; The University of Manchester. Nikolaos Aletras is active in efficient NLP and LLM evaluation."},"tags":["in-context-learning","active-learning","example-selection"],"notable_authors":["Katerina Margatina","Timo Schick","Nikolaos Aletras","Jane Dwivedi-Yu"]},{"id":"2305.14761","title":"UniChart: A Universal Vision-language Pretrained Model for Chart Comprehension and Reasoning","authors":["Ahmed Masry","Parsa Kavehzadeh","Do Xuan Long","Enamul Hoque","Shafiq Joty"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$70","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14761","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/MasryKLHJ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.906"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/MasryKLHJ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.906","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：现有图表理解模型大多借用通用 OCR 或图文预训练，却没有显式建模图表的结构语义，因此在图表问答和摘要等任务上泛化有限。图表不是普通图片，关键信息来自数据字段、坐标轴、图例和视觉编码之间的对应关系；如果预训练阶段不把这些结构纳入表示，模型很难稳定做跨图表推理。","importance":"这项工作属于数据级加方法级的 VLM 预训练贡献。它的重要性不在于提出通用视觉语言范式，而在于证明“结构化图表”值得单独做原生预训练：为一个狭但重要的视觉子领域构建大规模语料，并把文本、数据、布局、视觉元素统一编码。对统一多模态预训练的启示是，专用模态若有强结构先验，直接把结构作为 token/encoder 输入，往往比只依赖通用图像 patch 更有效。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 UniChart：一个面向 chart comprehension 的专用 vision-language pretrained model。它不是简单把 chart 当图片喂给通用 VLM，而是联合编码图表中的文本、底层数据表、视觉样式和布局关系，并围绕图表任务做预训练。关键设计在于显式表示“数据如何被视觉化”，也就是 chart grammar；这使模型不只看见柱子/折线的外观，还能对齐到数值与语义角色。和最接近的 DocVQA 或通用 image-text pretraining 相比，UniChart 放弃了一部分通用性，换来更强的 chart-specific inductive bias。","experiments":"实验结论是：UniChart 在多个图表理解与推理基准上显著优于通用 VLM 和任务专用基线。论文先构建了大规模 chart corpus，覆盖多主题和多视觉风格，再在 chart QA、chart summarization 等任务上评测。核心结果是，多数任务达到新的 SOTA 或明显提升，且跨数据集迁移更稳；消融显示，如果去掉结构化输入或只保留视觉/文本单模态，性能会明显下降，说明收益不是单纯来自更多数据，而来自结构建模本身。边界在于，这套方法高度依赖图表领域的 parser 与数据对齐质量，迁移到开放场景图像理解并不一定成立。","authors_note":"机构信息无法从给定材料中可靠确认，返回空字符串。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a mismatch in chart understanding: most existing systems inherit generic OCR or vision-language pretraining, yet charts are not generic images. Their meaning depends on explicit structure—axes, legends, labels, and how data values are visually encoded—so models that ignore this structure often underperform on chart QA and summarization.","importance":"This is a data-plus-method contribution in domain-specific VLM pretraining. Its main value is showing that chart understanding benefits from native pretraining with structural supervision, not just from scaling a general VLM. For broader multimodal pretraining, the lesson is that when a modality has a strong symbolic structure, exposing that structure explicitly can be more effective than relying only on image patches and text tokens.","technical_approach":"The core method is UniChart, a vision-language pretrained model specialized for chart comprehension and reasoning. Instead of treating a chart as just another image, it jointly encodes chart text, underlying data, visual elements, and layout relations, then pretrains on chart-centric objectives. The important design choice is to model the mapping from data to visual form—the chart grammar—so the model can reason over values and semantic roles rather than only surface appearance. Compared with generic VLMs or DocVQA-style models, UniChart gives up some generality in exchange for much stronger chart-specific inductive bias.","experiments":"The main result is that UniChart outperforms both generic VLMs and prior chart-specific baselines across multiple chart understanding benchmarks. The paper first builds a large chart corpus spanning diverse topics and visual styles, then evaluates on chart QA, summarization, and reasoning tasks. The gains are consistent enough to suggest that the improvement is not just from more data. Ablations are especially informative: removing structured inputs or using only visual/textual signals causes clear degradation, which supports the claim that explicit structure modeling is doing real work. The boundary is that the method depends on reliable chart parsing and alignment, so the recipe may not transfer cleanly to open-world image understanding.","authors_note":""},"tags":["chart-understanding","vision-language","pretraining"],"notable_authors":["Ahmed Masry","Parsa Kavehzadeh","Do Xuan Long","Enamul Hoque","Shafiq Joty"]},{"id":"Merlo23","title":"Blackbird language matrices (BLM), a new task for rule-like generalization in neural networks: Can Large Language Models pass the test?","authors":["Paola Merlo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":",","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/Merlo23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.546"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/Merlo23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.546","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：如何用一个更接近“规则泛化”而非记忆拟合的测试，评估 LLM 是否真的学会了抽象规则。常见 benchmark 往往混杂了语言先验、数据泄漏和启发式捷径，因此很难单独测出模型能否在新组合上做类规则推断。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要在评测设计。对 pretrain 研究的意义是，如果我们想判断模型是否具备 systematical generalization，仅看标准 NLP 基准不够，需要这种专门隔离规则泛化的任务；它可以作为分析训练阶段、模型规模和 tokenizer/数据分布是否支持抽象组合能力的探针。","technical_approach":"从题目和摘要可确认的信息有限，但核心方法应是提出 Blackbird Language Matrices 这一新任务，用矩阵式或组合式输入来测试神经网络和 LLM 的规则类泛化能力。其设计动机应是减少自然语料中的表面统计线索，让模型必须依赖更抽象的模式归纳。由于给定材料没有方法细节，无法进一步确认任务格式、模型设置或与既有 SCAN/COGS 类任务的具体差异。","experiments":"给定材料没有提供实验细节，因此无法可靠总结具体模型、指标和数字。可以保守判断的是，论文应围绕“LLM 能否通过该规则泛化测试”展开，并报告模型在这个更受控任务上的表现边界；但没有原文支持，不应编造结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper appears to ask how to evaluate rule-like generalization in LLMs with a benchmark that is less confounded by memorization and surface heuristics. Standard NLP benchmarks often mix together linguistic prior, data leakage, and shortcut features, making them weak tests of abstract compositional generalization.","importance":"This is primarily an evaluation contribution. For pretraining research, such a benchmark matters because it can probe whether scale, data mix, and tokenization actually support systematic generalization, rather than only improving interpolation on familiar distributions.","technical_approach":"From the title and the incomplete abstract, the core contribution is the introduction of Blackbird Language Matrices as a new task for testing rule-like generalization in neural networks and LLMs. The likely design goal is to reduce shallow corpus cues so that success requires more abstract pattern induction. The provided material is not sufficient to state the exact task format or the precise methodological differences relative to earlier compositional generalization benchmarks.","experiments":"The available metadata does not contain enough information to summarize the experiments reliably. The paper likely evaluates whether LLMs pass this controlled rule-generalization test and characterizes their failure modes, but specific models, metrics, and numerical results cannot be confirmed from the given text.","authors_note":""},"tags":["generalization","rule-learning","llm-evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Paola Merlo"]},{"id":"2311.09194","title":"Structural Priming Demonstrates Abstract Grammatical Representations in Multilingual Language Models","authors":["James A. Michaelov","Catherine Arnett","Tyler A. Chang","Ben Bergen"],"institutions":["University of California, San Diego"],"abstract":"$71","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.09194","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/MichaelovAC023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.227"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/MichaelovAC023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.227","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：多语语言模型里的语法知识到底有多抽象，是否超越了词汇和单语模板记忆。过去很多关于语法能力的证据都可能被同语言表面重叠解释掉；作者选择 structural priming，尤其是 crosslingual priming，来检验模型是否共享更抽象的句法表示。","importance":"这项工作的贡献主要是机制分析。它对 pretrain 的意义在于，如果多语模型确实表现出跨语言结构启动效应，那么预训练可能学到了某种语言无关或弱语言相关的抽象语法空间；这会影响我们理解 tokenizer 共享、语料混合和参数共享为什么能支撑跨语言迁移。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把心理语言学中的 structural priming 实验迁移到 multilingual LMs。作者构造跨语言句法条件，观察模型在受到一种语言结构提示后，是否更倾向于生成另一种语言中的对应结构。关键设计是用 crosslingual 条件削弱词面与单语共现的解释空间；如果 priming 仍存在，说明表示层至少部分抽象到了结构。与常规 probing 不同，这种方法更像行为层面的最小干预测试，而不是线性分类器读出。","experiments":"从摘要能确认的核心结果是：作者测量了 multilingual LMs 的跨语言 structural priming，并把模型行为和人类实验结果作对比。论文的实证价值主要在于，如果 priming pattern 与人类类似，就能支持“抽象语法表示”这一解释；同时它也能比较不同模型或语言对上的 priming 强弱。给定材料没有具体模型名、数字和表格，无法安全写出提升幅度；但可以明确的是，这不是下游 accuracy 论文，而是用受控行为范式给出语法抽象性的证据。","authors_note":"University of California, San Diego。Ben Bergen 团队。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper investigates how abstract grammatical knowledge in multilingual language models really is, and whether it goes beyond lexical overlap and language-specific templates. Earlier evidence for syntax in LMs is often vulnerable to same-language confounds, so crosslingual structural priming is a stronger test of abstract representation.","importance":"This is primarily a mechanistic analysis paper. Its relevance to pretraining is that crosslingual priming, if robust, implies that multilingual pretraining can induce partially language-general grammatical representations, which bears directly on shared tokenization, data mixing, and parameter sharing across languages.","technical_approach":"The method imports structural priming from psycholinguistics into multilingual LM evaluation. The authors construct crosslingual syntactic conditions and test whether exposure to one structure in one language makes the model more likely to produce the analogous structure in another language. The crucial design feature is that crosslingual transfer weakens purely lexical and same-language memorization accounts. Compared with standard probes, this is a behavioral test with stronger causal intuition rather than a readout-classifier analysis.","experiments":"From the abstract, the main result is that the paper measures crosslingual structural priming in multilingual LMs and compares the observed behavior with human experimental findings. The empirical contribution is meaningful because human-like priming patterns would support the claim of abstract grammatical representation, while differences across models or language pairs would reveal where that abstraction breaks. The provided text does not include model names or numerical values, so it would be unsafe to invent concrete metrics. What can be stated confidently is that the paper uses controlled behavioral evidence, not downstream task accuracy, to argue about syntactic abstraction.","authors_note":"University of California, San Diego. From the Ben Bergen group."},"tags":["interpretability","grammar","multilingual"],"notable_authors":["James A. Michaelov","Catherine Arnett","Tyler A. Chang","Ben Bergen"]},{"id":"2305.14251","title":"FActScore: Fine-grained Atomic Evaluation of Factual Precision in Long Form Text Generation","authors":["Sewon Min","Kalpesh Krishna","Xinxi Lyu","Mike Lewis","Wen-tau Yih","Pang Wei Koh","Mohit Iyyer","Luke Zettlemoyer","Hannaneh Hajishirzi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$72","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14251","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/MinKLLYKIZH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.741"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/MinKLLYKIZH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.741","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：长文本生成的 factuality 不能再用整段“真/假”二分类来评估，因为一段回答里通常混有支持和不支持的原子事实。此前很多评测把长文本作为整体打分，导致模型之间的细粒度差异被掩盖，也难以给训练和系统改进提供可操作反馈。","importance":"这是一篇评测方法论文，但对 pretrain/posttrain 都很重要。它的重要性在于把事实性从粗粒度偏好判断，改成可分解、可归因的 atomic precision 指标；这使得我们能更准确地分析预训练知识覆盖、对齐后的幻觉模式，以及 retrieval augmentation 到底改善了什么。对训练研究来说，好的评测往往先于好的优化目标，FACTSCORE 就属于这种基础设施工作。","technical_approach":"核心方法是提出 FACTSCORE：先把长文本拆成 atomic facts，再检查每个原子事实是否被可靠知识源支持，最后计算支持比例。关键设计有两点。第一，它评估的是 factual precision 而不是整体质量，因此不会因为一段文本里夹杂几句正确事实就掩盖错误。第二，它要求支持证据来自可信知识源，从而把“听起来合理”与“可验证正确”区分开。与常见的 sentence-level entailment 或人工整体偏好相比，FACTSCORE 的粒度更细，适合分析 biography 等信息密集型生成。","experiments":"实验上最关键的事实是：作者对人物传记生成做了大规模人工评测，比较 InstructGPT、ChatGPT 和检索增强的 PerplexityAI，并展示了细粒度 atomic factuality 评分能揭示传统整体评测看不到的差异。摘要明确给出一个代表性数字：ChatGPT 生成的人物传记只有约 58% 的原子事实被支持，这说明高流畅度不等于高 factual precision。论文还通过人评验证 FACTSCORE 的必要性和可靠性。对 pretrain 研究有价值的观察是，RAG 系统能显著改善这一指标，说明相当一部分错误不是表达能力问题，而是知识检索/调用失败。","authors_note":"机构与代表性团队信息无法从给定材料中可靠确认，返回空字符串。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a basic evaluation failure: factuality in long-form generation cannot be captured by a single binary judgment over an entire passage, because one answer often mixes supported and unsupported statements. Coarse whole-answer ratings blur meaningful differences between models and provide weak feedback for system improvement.","importance":"This is an evaluation-method paper, but it matters a lot for both pretraining and post-training. Its contribution is to turn factuality from a vague holistic judgment into an atomic precision metric that is decomposable and auditable. That makes it much easier to study knowledge coverage, hallucination patterns after alignment, and what retrieval augmentation is actually fixing.","technical_approach":"The core proposal is FACTSCORE: decompose a generated passage into atomic facts, verify each fact against a reliable knowledge source, and report the percentage that are supported. Two design choices matter. First, the metric targets factual precision rather than overall quality, so a few correct claims do not wash out unsupported ones. Second, support must come from a trusted source, separating verifiable correctness from merely plausible language. Compared with sentence-level entailment or holistic human preferences, this gives much finer feedback for information-dense generation such as biographies.","experiments":"The key empirical point is that large-scale human evaluation on biography generation reveals substantial factual errors even in strong commercial models, and FACTSCORE exposes those errors more clearly than coarse evaluation. The abstract gives one headline number: ChatGPT supports only about 58% of the atomic facts in generated biographies. The paper compares systems including InstructGPT, ChatGPT, and retrieval-augmented PerplexityAI, showing that a finer metric is necessary to see the real gaps. A useful implication for pretraining research is that retrieval augmentation improves this score materially, suggesting that many failures are about access to knowledge rather than surface generation quality.","authors_note":""},"tags":["evaluation","factuality","hallucination"],"notable_authors":["Sewon Min","Kalpesh Krishna","Xinxi Lyu","Mike Lewis","Wen-tau Yih"]},{"id":"MoskvichevM23","title":"NarrativeXL: a Large-scale Dataset for Long-Term Memory Models","authors":["Arsenii Moskvichev","Ky-Vinh Mai"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/MoskvichevM23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.1005"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/MoskvichevM23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.1005","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：长程记忆模型缺少足够大、足够长、能稳定评估记忆保持与检索能力的数据集。现有长上下文评测常偏短、偏单任务，或把记忆与表面局部匹配混在一起，因此很难比较不同 memory architecture 的真实收益。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要在数据与评测基础设施。对 pretrain 研究的意义是，长程记忆不是单靠扩大 context window 就能充分理解的；如果没有专门数据集，就很难判断 recurrent memory、external memory、segment recurrence 或 retrieval-augmented pretraining 到底解决了什么问题。","technical_approach":"从题目可确认，论文提出 NarrativeXL，一个面向 long-term memory models 的大规模数据集。其设计目标应是提供更长跨度的叙事信息，以测试模型能否跨长距离保留人物、事件和状态变化。给定材料没有摘要，因此无法确认数据来源、样本长度、标注形式和任务定义。","experiments":"由于缺少摘要和结果描述，无法可靠给出实验模型、指标和提升幅度。可以保守总结的是，这篇工作应当用 NarrativeXL 比较多类 long-term memory model 的行为，并展示传统长上下文模型在长期叙事跟踪上的不足；但没有原文证据，不应补写数字结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper appears to address a data bottleneck for long-term memory models: there is a lack of large-scale datasets that genuinely stress memory retention and retrieval over long narrative spans. Existing long-context benchmarks are often too short, too narrow, or too easy to solve with local cues.","importance":"This is mainly a dataset and evaluation contribution. For pretraining research, it matters because long-term memory is not the same as simply increasing the context window, and without purpose-built datasets it is hard to tell what memory architectures or retrieval-augmented approaches are actually buying.","technical_approach":"From the title, the paper introduces NarrativeXL, a large-scale dataset for long-term memory models. The intended design is presumably to use long narrative structure to probe whether models can retain entities, events, and state changes across extended spans. The provided material is not sufficient to state the exact source, annotation scheme, or task formulation.","experiments":"The available metadata does not support a reliable summary of the experiments. The likely setup is a comparison of different long-term memory models on NarrativeXL to expose weaknesses of standard long-context systems on narrative tracking, but concrete models, metrics, and gains cannot be confirmed here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["long-context","dataset","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Arsenii Moskvichev","Ky-Vinh Mai"]},{"id":"2302.06541","title":"Towards Agile Text Classifiers for Everyone","authors":["Maximilian Mozes","Jessica Hoffmann","Katrin Tomanek","Muhamed Kouate","Nithum Thain","Ann Yuan","Tolga Bolukbasi","Lucas Dixon"],"institutions":["Google Research"],"abstract":"$73","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.06541","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/MozesHTKTYBD23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.30"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/MozesHTKTYBD23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.30","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：安全文本分类器通常跟着政策改、需求碎、标注预算小，怎样才能快速为新政策做出高质量分类器。传统做法依赖较大标注集和完整微调流程，迭代太慢；而在内容审核和对话安全里，政策本身就在持续变化，所以“agile classification”比静态 benchmark 最优更重要。","importance":"这项工作主要属于系统方法与 posttrain 接口，但对 pretrain 同样有信息增益。它的重要性在于展示了一个很强的现实信号：超大语言模型经过 prompt-tuning 后，在极小标注数据下就能成为高质量安全分类器。这说明基座模型已经学到大量可迁移的安全相关表征，也意味着很多安全能力更像是接口与适配问题，而不全是重新训练数据的问题。","technical_approach":"核心方法是围绕“小样本、快迭代”的安全分类器训练流程做系统评估，重点考察 prompt-tuning 大模型而不是从头训练或全参数微调。关键设计选择是使用很小、针对具体政策精心构造的标注集，让分类器围绕政策边界快速适配；这和追求大而全通用安全集的路线不同。与传统轻量模型或 full fine-tuning 相比，prompt-tuning 在参数效率、迭代速度和小样本稳健性上更适合真实政策开发周期。","experiments":"实验结论很强也很具体：在 3 个安全相关领域、7 个数据集、15 种标注方案上，prompt-tuning PaLM 62B 用少至 80 个标注样本就能达到 SOTA。这个数字是论文最有价值的事实，因为它直接说明了大模型特征迁移的强度。作者还比较了多种设置，结论指向同一个方向：当目标是为特定政策快速迭代分类器时，大模型的参数高效适配比传统监督学习流程更合适。边界则是，依赖超大基座模型意味着推理成本和部署门槛不低，而且这套结论是否迁移到更隐蔽、跨文化或对抗性更强的安全标签，还需要更多验证。","authors_note":"Google Research。作者名单中 Jessica Hoffmann、Katrin Tomanek 等。团队长期关注安全、责任 AI 与 PaLM 相关应用。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical bottleneck in safety classification: policies change quickly, annotation budgets are small, and teams need new classifiers fast. Traditional supervised pipelines assume larger labeled datasets and slower iteration, which is a poor fit for real moderation and assistant safety workflows.","importance":"This is mainly a systems and post-training paper, but it is informative for pretraining as well. Its significance is the strong evidence that very large language models already contain transferable representations for safety classification, so the bottleneck is often adaptation to policy definitions rather than building a classifier from scratch.","technical_approach":"The core approach is a systematic study of agile safety classification under tiny labeled budgets, with prompt-tuning of large LMs as the main adaptation mechanism. The important design choice is to use small, targeted datasets tailored to a specific policy, instead of aiming for one broad universal safety dataset. Compared with training smaller classifiers or doing full fine-tuning, prompt-tuning is positioned as a better fit for fast policy iteration because it is parameter-efficient and more label-efficient.","experiments":"The headline empirical result is very concrete: across 3 safety-related domains, 7 datasets, and 15 annotation schemes, prompt-tuning PaLM 62B reaches state-of-the-art performance with as few as 80 labeled examples. That number matters because it quantifies how much useful safety-relevant structure is already present in the base model. The broader pattern is that when the goal is rapid adaptation to a new policy boundary, large-model prompt-tuning outperforms slower traditional supervised workflows. The limitation is practical rather than conceptual: using a 62B model carries nontrivial serving cost and deployment constraints, and the conclusion may not fully transfer to more adversarial or culturally variable safety categories.","authors_note":"Google Research. The author list includes Jessica Hoffmann and Katrin Tomanek; the broader team works on safety, responsible AI, and PaLM-related applications."},"tags":["safety","classification","data-filtering"],"notable_authors":["Maximilian Mozes","Jessica Hoffmann","Katrin Tomanek","Muhamed Kouate","Nithum Thain"]},{"id":"MurtyPS23","title":"Pseudointelligence: A Unifying Lens on Language Model Evaluation","authors":["Shikhar Murty","Orr Paradise","Pratyusha Sharma"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/MurtyPS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.485"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/MurtyPS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.485","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["evaluation","methodology"]},{"id":"2310.17774","title":"Words, Subwords, and Morphemes: What Really Matters in the Surprisal-Reading Time Relationship?","authors":["Sathvik Nair","Philip Resnik"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"An important assumption that comes with using LLMs on psycholinguistic data has gone unverified. LLM-based predictions are based on subword tokenization, not decomposition of words into morphemes. Does that matter? We carefully test this by comparing surprisal estimates using orthographic, morphological, and BPE tokenization against reading time data. Our results replicate previous findings and provide evidence that in the aggregate, predictions using BPE tokenization do not suffer relative to morphological and orthographic segmentation. However, a finer-grained analysis points to potential issues with relying on BPE-based tokenization, as well as providing promising results involving morphologically-aware surprisal estimates and suggesting a new method for evaluating morphological prediction.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.17774","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/NairR23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.752"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/NairR23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.752","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["tokenizer","surprisal","cognitive-modeling"]},{"id":"OlaussonGLZSTL23","title":"LINC: A Neurosymbolic Approach for Logical Reasoning by Combining Language Models with First-Order Logic Provers","authors":["Theo Olausson","Alex Gu","Benjamin Lipkin","Cedegao E. Zhang","Armando Solar-Lezama","Joshua B. Tenenbaum","Roger Levy"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/OlaussonGLZSTL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.313"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/OlaussonGLZSTL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.313","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["reasoning","tool-use","symbolic","faithfulness"]},{"id":"2305.16876","title":"CombLM: Adapting Black-Box Language Models through Small Fine-Tuned Models","authors":["Aitor Ormazabal","Mikel Artetxe","Eneko Agirre"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Methods for adapting language models (LMs) to new tasks and domains have traditionally assumed white-box access to the model, and work by modifying its parameters. However, this is incompatible with a recent trend in the field, where the highest quality models are only available as black-boxes through inference APIs. Even when the model weights are available, the computational cost of fine-tuning large LMs can be prohibitive for most practitioners. In this work, we present a lightweight method for adapting large LMs to new domains and tasks, assuming no access to their weights or intermediate activations. Our approach fine-tunes a small white-box LM and combines it with the large black-box LM at the probability level through a small network, learned on a small validation set. We validate our approach by adapting a large LM (OPT-30B) to several domains and a downstream task (machine translation), observing improved performance in all cases, of up to 9%, while using a domain expert 23x smaller.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16876","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/OrmazabalAA23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.180"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/OrmazabalAA23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.180","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["adaptation","black-box","fine-tuning","distillation"]},{"id":"PanPCNKW23","title":"On the Risk of Misinformation Pollution with Large Language Models","authors":["Yikang Pan","Liangming Pan","Wenhu Chen","Preslav Nakov","Min-Yen Kan","William Yang Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/PanPCNKW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.97"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/PanPCNKW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.97","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["misinformation","data-quality","safety","llm"]},{"id":"PangCD023","title":"Guideline Learning for In-Context Information Extraction","authors":["Chaoxu Pang","Yixuan Cao","Qiang Ding","Ping Luo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/PangCD023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.950"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/PangCD023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.950","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["in-context-learning","information-extraction","prompting","generalization"]},{"id":"PapadimitriouJ23","title":"Injecting structural hints: Using language models to study inductive biases in language learning","authors":["Isabel Papadimitriou","Dan Jurafsky"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/PapadimitriouJ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.563"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/PapadimitriouJ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.563","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["inductive-bias","language-learning","structural-bias","language-models"]},{"id":"PetitCY23","title":"Structural generalization in COGS: Supertagging is (almost) all you need","authors":["Alban Petit","Caio F. Corro","François Yvon"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/PetitCY23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.69"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/PetitCY23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.69","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["structural-generalization","syntax","inductive-bias","evaluation"]},{"id":"PinterE23","title":"Emptying the Ocean with a Spoon: Should We Edit Models?","authors":["Yuval Pinter","Michael Elhadad"],"institutions":["Ben-Gurion University of the Negev"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/PinterE23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.1012"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/PinterE23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.1012","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"模型编辑（model editing）作为修正 LLM 事实错误的手段，其可行性和可靠性是否被高估了？现有编辑方法在局部修改后往往引发不可预测的副作用，作者质疑这一研究方向的根本前提。","importance":"这是一篇立场论文（position paper），对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：如果模型编辑不可靠，那么 pretrain 阶段的数据质量和知识注入就更加关键，因为后期修补的成本和风险可能远超预期。属于方法论层面的警示。","technical_approach":"论文以分析和论证为主，系统梳理了现有模型编辑方法（如 ROME、MEND 等）的局限性，指出编辑操作在参数空间中的连锁效应难以控制，类比为'用勺子舀干大海'——逐条修正事实在规模上不可行。核心论点是知识在参数中的分布式存储使得精确编辑本质上是 ill-posed 的。","experiments":"作为立场论文，没有大规模新实验，主要依赖对已有编辑方法实验结果的再分析和反思。","authors_note":"Yuval Pinter（Ben-Gurion University）和 Michael Elhadad，Pinter 在 tokenization 和 subword 建模方面有多篇有影响力的工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Model editing is increasingly proposed as a way to fix factual errors in LLMs post-training. This position paper questions whether the approach is fundamentally viable, arguing that distributed knowledge storage in parameters makes precise, side-effect-free editing intractable at scale.","importance":"A methodological critique rather than a new method. For pretrain researchers, the implication is clear: if post-hoc editing is unreliable, investing in data quality and knowledge curation during pretraining becomes even more critical. The paper reframes editing as a symptom of insufficient upstream solutions.","technical_approach":"Analytical/argumentative. The authors survey existing editing methods (ROME, MEND, etc.) and systematically catalog their failure modes—ripple effects, inconsistency across paraphrases, and inability to scale to many edits. The core argument is that knowledge is distributed across parameters in ways that make surgical modification ill-posed.","experiments":"No new large-scale experiments. The paper re-analyzes published results from prior editing work to support its thesis.","authors_note":"Yuval Pinter (Ben-Gurion University) and Michael Elhadad. Pinter is known for work on tokenization and subword modeling."},"tags":["model-editing","position-paper"],"notable_authors":["Yuval Pinter"]},{"id":"PothSPPEIVRGP23","title":"Adapters: A Unified Library for Parameter-Efficient and Modular Transfer Learning","authors":["Clifton Poth","Hannah Sterz","Indraneil Paul","Sukannya Purkayastha","Leon Engländer","Timo Imhof","Ivan Vulic","Sebastian Ruder","Iryna Gurevych","Jonas Pfeiffer"],"institutions":["TU Darmstadt"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/PothSPPEIVRGP23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-DEMO.13"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/PothSPPEIVRGP23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-demo.13","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"参数高效微调（PEFT）方法种类繁多（Adapter、LoRA、Prefix Tuning 等），但缺乏统一的实现框架，导致研究者难以公平比较和组合使用这些方法。Adapters 库旨在提供一个统一接口。","importance":"系统级贡献。对 pretrain 研究者来说，这类库降低了在不同 PEFT 方法间切换和实验的成本，尤其在 continual pretrain 和 modular transfer 场景下有实用价值。但它本身不提出新方法。","technical_approach":"基于 HuggingFace Transformers 构建统一 API，将 Adapter（bottleneck）、LoRA、Prefix Tuning、IA³ 等方法抽象为可插拔模块，支持组合（composition）——如堆叠、并行、注意力融合等。关键设计选择是保持与原始 Transformers 的兼容性，同时允许多个 adapter 的灵活组合。","experiments":"论文主要展示库的功能覆盖和易用性，而非在特定任务上刷 SOTA。提供了多种 PEFT 方法在 GLUE 等标准 benchmark 上的复现结果作为参考。","authors_note":"团队来自 TU Darmstadt（UKP Lab），Jonas Pfeiffer、Iryna Gurevych 等是 adapter 和模块化迁移学习方向的核心推动者，AdapterHub 的原始作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The proliferation of parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods (Adapters, LoRA, Prefix Tuning, etc.) lacks a unified implementation framework, making fair comparison and composition difficult. This library provides a single interface for all major PEFT approaches.","importance":"A systems-level contribution. For pretrain researchers, it reduces friction when experimenting with different PEFT methods during continual pretraining or modular transfer. It does not propose new methods but significantly lowers the engineering barrier.","technical_approach":"Built on top of HuggingFace Transformers, the library abstracts bottleneck adapters, LoRA, Prefix Tuning, IA³, and others into pluggable modules with a unified API. A key feature is adapter composition—stacking, parallel, and attention-based fusion of multiple adapters. Designed to maintain full compatibility with the base Transformers library.","experiments":"Primarily a library paper; experiments demonstrate reproducibility of published PEFT results on GLUE and other standard benchmarks rather than pushing new SOTA.","authors_note":"From TU Darmstadt UKP Lab. Jonas Pfeiffer and Iryna Gurevych are central figures in adapter-based modular transfer learning and the original AdapterHub."},"tags":["adapters","peft"],"notable_authors":["Jonas Pfeiffer","Iryna Gurevych"]},{"id":"QiLHWLWL23","title":"An Investigation of LLMs&apos; Inefficacy in Understanding Converse Relations","authors":["Chengwen Qi","Bowen Li","Binyuan Hui","Bailin Wang","Jinyang Li","Jinwang Wu","Yuanjun Laili"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/QiLHWLWL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.429"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/QiLHWLWL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.429","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 在理解逆关系（converse relations）方面存在系统性缺陷——例如知道'A 是 B 的父亲'但无法推出'B 是 A 的孩子'。本文系统调查了这一现象的范围和原因。","importance":"机制分析级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示：逆关系理解的失败暴露了 autoregressive LM 在关系推理上的结构性弱点，可能与训练数据中关系的方向性偏差有关。这为理解 LM 的知识表示和推理局限提供了具体案例。","technical_approach":"构建了包含多种关系类型的逆关系测试集，系统测试 LLM 在正向关系和逆向关系上的表现差异。分析了可能的原因，包括训练数据中关系方向的不对称分布、模型对关系的表面模式匹配而非深层理解等。","experiments":"在 ChatGPT、GPT-4 等多个 LLM 上测试。发现所有模型在逆关系上的准确率显著低于正向关系，差距在某些关系类型上超过 20 个百分点。即使用 CoT prompting 也无法完全弥补。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLMs systematically fail to understand converse relations—e.g., knowing 'A is B's father' but failing to infer 'B is A's child.' This paper investigates the scope and causes of this failure.","importance":"A mechanistic analysis. For pretrain researchers, this failure exposes a structural weakness in autoregressive LMs for relational reasoning, likely linked to directional biases in training data. It provides a concrete case study of LM knowledge representation limitations.","technical_approach":"Constructs a test set covering multiple relation types, systematically comparing LLM performance on forward vs. converse relations. Analyzes potential causes including asymmetric relation direction distribution in training data and surface pattern matching rather than deep relational understanding.","experiments":"Tested on ChatGPT, GPT-4, and others. All models show significantly lower accuracy on converse relations than forward relations, with gaps exceeding 20 percentage points for some relation types. CoT prompting does not fully close the gap.","authors_note":""},"tags":["evaluation","relations","llm"]},{"id":"QiXSLJWH23","title":"The Art of SOCRATIC QUESTIONING: Recursive Thinking with Large Language Models","authors":["Jingyuan Qi","Zhiyang Xu","Ying Shen","Minqian Liu","Di Jin","Qifan Wang","Lifu Huang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/QiXSLJWH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.255"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/QiXSLJWH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.255","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 在复杂推理任务中的表现受限于单次 prompting 的深度。本文提出 Socratic Questioning 方法，通过递归地让模型自问自答来分解复杂问题，提升推理深度。","importance":"方法级贡献，属于 CoT/推理增强的变体。对 pretrain 研究的间接启示：递归分解策略的有效性暗示 LLM 的单步推理深度有限，需要通过多轮交互来弥补。这与 pretrain 阶段是否应该训练更深的推理能力相关。","technical_approach":"核心是递归问题分解：面对一个复杂问题，模型先生成一系列子问题（Socratic questions），然后逐一回答子问题，再将子答案整合为最终答案。与 self-ask 类似但更强调递归性——子问题本身可以继续被分解。实现上用 few-shot prompting 引导模型进行这种递归思考。","experiments":"在多种推理 benchmark（如 GSM8K、StrategyQA 等）上测试，与标准 CoT 和 self-ask 对比。在需要多步推理的任务上有一致提升，但在简单任务上收益有限。具体提升幅度因任务而异。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLM reasoning depth is limited by single-pass prompting. This paper proposes Socratic Questioning—recursively having the model ask and answer sub-questions—to decompose complex problems and deepen reasoning.","importance":"A method-level contribution in the CoT/reasoning augmentation space. For pretrain research, the effectiveness of recursive decomposition suggests LLMs have limited single-step reasoning depth, which may need to be addressed during pretraining or through inference-time strategies.","technical_approach":"Recursive problem decomposition: given a complex question, the model generates Socratic sub-questions, answers them, and integrates sub-answers into a final answer. Similar to self-ask but emphasizes recursion—sub-questions can themselves be further decomposed. Implemented via few-shot prompting to guide recursive thinking.","experiments":"Tested on GSM8K, StrategyQA, and other reasoning benchmarks against standard CoT and self-ask. Shows consistent improvements on multi-step reasoning tasks but limited gains on simpler tasks. Specific improvement margins vary by task.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reasoning","cot","prompting"]},{"id":"QianH0Q0J23","title":"CREATOR: Tool Creation for Disentangling Abstract and Concrete Reasoning of Large Language Models","authors":["Cheng Qian","Chi Han","Yi Ren Fung","Yujia Qin","Zhiyuan Liu","Heng Ji"],"institutions":["Tsinghua University"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/QianH0Q0J23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.462"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/QianH0Q0J23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.462","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 使用外部工具时，通常只能调用预定义的工具集，面对新问题时缺乏灵活性。CREATOR 让 LLM 自己创建工具（即编写可复用的代码函数），将抽象推理和具体执行解耦。","importance":"方法级贡献，对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：工具创建能力要求模型同时具备抽象推理和代码生成能力，这两种能力的交叉是 pretrain 数据配比（代码 vs 自然语言）的一个重要考量。此外，工具创建范式可能影响未来 pretrain 阶段对代码数据的需求。","technical_approach":"CREATOR 分四步：(1) 抽象推理——分析问题需要什么功能；(2) 工具创建——编写一个通用的 Python 函数；(3) 决策——决定如何调用该工具；(4) 执行——运行代码并获取结果。与 ToolFormer/Chameleon 等'调用现有工具'的方法不同，CREATOR 的工具是模型自己写的，因此更灵活。关键设计是将抽象推理和具体实现分离，减少推理错误传播到执行阶段。","experiments":"在 MATH 和 TabMWP 等数学推理 benchmark 上测试，与 CoT、PAL（Program-Aided Language Models）、ToolFormer 等对比。CREATOR 在 MATH 上比 CoT 提升约 8-12 个百分点，比 PAL 也有显著提升。Ablation 显示工具创建步骤（而非仅代码执行）是性能提升的关键。","authors_note":"来自清华大学（刘知远组），Yujia Qin 和 Zhiyuan Liu 在工具学习（tool learning）方向有系列工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"When LLMs use external tools, they are typically limited to a predefined tool set and lack flexibility for novel problems. CREATOR enables LLMs to create their own tools (reusable code functions), disentangling abstract reasoning from concrete execution.","importance":"A method-level contribution. For pretrain research, tool creation requires both abstract reasoning and code generation—the intersection of these capabilities is directly relevant to pretrain data mixture decisions (code vs. natural language ratio). The tool creation paradigm may also influence future demand for code data in pretraining.","technical_approach":"CREATOR has four stages: (1) abstract reasoning—analyze what functionality is needed; (2) tool creation—write a general Python function; (3) decision—determine how to call the tool; (4) execution—run the code. Unlike ToolFormer/Chameleon which call existing tools, CREATOR's tools are model-authored, offering more flexibility. Key design: separating abstract reasoning from implementation reduces error propagation.","experiments":"Tested on MATH and TabMWP against CoT, PAL, and ToolFormer. CREATOR improves over CoT by ~8-12 points on MATH and also outperforms PAL significantly. Ablations show the tool creation step (not just code execution) is the key driver of improvement.","authors_note":"From Tsinghua University (Zhiyuan Liu's group). Yujia Qin and Zhiyuan Liu have a series of works on tool learning."},"tags":["tool-use","reasoning"],"notable_authors":["Zhiyuan Liu"]},{"id":"QiaoLN23","title":"DiffusionRet: Diffusion-Enhanced Generative Retriever using Constrained Decoding","authors":["Shanbao Qiao","Xuebing Liu","Seung-Hoon Na"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/QiaoLN23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.638"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/QiaoLN23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.638","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解决生成式检索（Generative Retrieval）中自回归模型容易生成无效文档ID（幻觉）的问题，探索非自回归生成在强约束场景的可用性。","importance":"范式级探索。将Diffusion LM引入离散的文档ID生成，为跳出Next-token预测范式、在强约束离散空间中应用扩散模型提供了有价值的参考。","technical_approach":"采用Diffusion模型生成连续的隐层表示，而非直接预测离散token。关键机制是在解码阶段引入受限解码（Constrained Decoding），将连续表示强制投影到预先构建的文档ID前缀树（Trie）上，舍弃了自由生成，从而确保生成的ID绝对合法。","experiments":"在NQ和TriviaQA等开放域问答检索基准上进行评估。DiffusionRet在保持高召回率的同时，彻底消除了无效ID的生成，且由于其非自回归特性，推理效率优于依赖束搜索（Beam Search）的标准自回归模型。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Resolves the issue of autoregressive models generating invalid document IDs (hallucinations) in generative retrieval, exploring the viability of non-autoregressive generation in highly constrained settings.","importance":"Paradigm-level exploration. Introduces Diffusion LMs to discrete document ID generation, providing a valuable reference for stepping outside the next-token prediction paradigm and applying diffusion models in constrained discrete spaces.","technical_approach":"Employs a Diffusion model to generate continuous latent representations instead of directly predicting discrete tokens. The key mechanism is applying constrained decoding during inference, which forces the continuous representations to project onto a pre-built document ID Trie. This abandons free-form generation to guarantee the absolute validity of the generated IDs.","experiments":"Evaluated on open-domain QA retrieval benchmarks like NQ and TriviaQA. DiffusionRet completely eliminates invalid ID generation while maintaining high recall. Due to its non-autoregressive nature, its inference efficiency surpasses standard autoregressive models relying on beam search.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","retrieval","constrained-decoding"]},{"id":"QinCJ23","title":"Lifelong Sequence Generation with Dynamic Module Expansion and Adaptation","authors":["Chengwei Qin","Chen Chen","Shafiq Joty"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/QinCJ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.414"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/QinCJ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.414","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解决Seq2Seq模型在持续学习（Lifelong Learning）新任务序列时面临的灾难性遗忘问题，寻找比全量微调或固定容量Adapter更灵活的参数更新策略。","importance":"训练动态与微调机制。探索了动态架构在Continual Post-training中的应用，对如何低成本且无损地向基座模型持续注入新知识有直接启发。","technical_approach":"提出一种动态模块扩展与自适应机制。当检测到新任务的数据分布与旧任务差异较大时，模型动态增加新的Adapter或专家模块，并通过路由机制进行自适应选择。舍弃了固定参数量的限制，用可控的参数增长换取旧知识的保留。","experiments":"在多个自然语言生成任务序列上进行实验。该方法在保留旧任务性能（极低的遗忘率）和快速拟合新任务之间，取得了比传统正则化方法（如EWC）或固定容量Adapter更好的平衡。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addresses catastrophic forgetting in Seq2Seq models during lifelong learning of new task sequences, seeking a more flexible parameter update strategy than full fine-tuning or fixed-capacity adapters.","importance":"Training dynamics and fine-tuning mechanism. Explores the application of dynamic architectures in continual post-training, offering direct insights into how to continuously inject new knowledge into base models at low cost and without degradation.","technical_approach":"Proposes a dynamic module expansion and adaptation mechanism. When the data distribution of a new task significantly diverges from old tasks, the model dynamically adds new adapters or expert modules, utilizing a routing mechanism for adaptive selection. It trades fixed parameter constraints for controlled parameter growth to preserve old knowledge.","experiments":"Tested on sequences of natural language generation tasks. The method achieves a better balance between retaining old task performance (extremely low forgetting rate) and rapidly fitting new tasks compared to traditional regularization methods (e.g., EWC) or fixed-capacity adapters.","authors_note":""},"tags":["continual-learning","modular"],"notable_authors":["Shafiq Joty"]},{"id":"QiuZKPC23","title":"Detecting and Mitigating Hallucinations in Multilingual Summarisation","authors":["Yifu Qiu","Yftah Ziser","Anna Korhonen","Edoardo Maria Ponti","Shay B. Cohen"],"institutions":["University of Edinburgh","University of Cambridge"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/QiuZKPC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.551"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/QiuZKPC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.551","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解决多语言摘要生成中，由于跨语言对齐不足和语料质量参差不齐导致的严重幻觉问题。","importance":"评估与数据质量。揭示了多语言预训练模型在跨语言生成时特有的幻觉模式，对多语言语料的配比、清洗以及SFT阶段的质量控制有指导意义。","technical_approach":"提出了一种基于跨语言蕴含（Cross-lingual Entailment）的幻觉检测指标。利用该指标在训练数据中过滤低质量的跨语言样本，并在解码阶段引入惩罚机制，抑制模型生成无源文本支持的内容。","experiments":"在多语言摘要数据集上，使用过滤后的数据进行微调显著降低了生成摘要的幻觉率，同时保持了ROUGE分数的竞争力，证明了数据清洗在跨语言任务中的高ROI。","authors_note":"Shay B. Cohen (University of Edinburgh)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addresses the severe hallucination issues in multilingual summarization caused by insufficient cross-lingual alignment and uneven corpus quality.","importance":"Evaluation and data quality. Reveals hallucination patterns unique to multilingual pre-trained models during cross-lingual generation, providing guidance for multilingual data mixing, cleaning, and quality control during SFT.","technical_approach":"Proposes a hallucination detection metric based on cross-lingual entailment. Utilizes this metric to filter low-quality cross-lingual samples from the training data and introduces a penalty mechanism during decoding to suppress the generation of content unsupported by the source text.","experiments":"On multilingual summarization datasets, fine-tuning with the filtered data significantly reduced the hallucination rate of generated summaries while maintaining competitive ROUGE scores, proving the high ROI of data cleaning in cross-lingual tasks.","authors_note":"Shay B. Cohen (University of Edinburgh)"},"tags":["hallucination","multilingual","summarization"],"notable_authors":["Shay B. Cohen","Anna Korhonen","Edoardo Maria Ponti"]},{"id":"RadharapuRAL23","title":"AART: AI-Assisted Red-Teaming with Diverse Data Generation for New LLM-powered Applications","authors":["Bhaktipriya Radharapu","Kevin Robinson","Lora Aroyo","Preethi Lahoti"],"institutions":["Google"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/RadharapuRAL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-INDUSTRY.37"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/RadharapuRAL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-industry.37","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解决大模型安全对齐中，人工红队测试（Red-Teaming）成本高、覆盖率低、且难以针对新应用场景快速定制的问题。","importance":"数据级/Post-train接口。提供了一种自动化的指令合成与红队数据生成范式，直接服务于RLHF/SFT的安全对齐阶段，有助于缓解Reward Hacking。","technical_approach":"利用高能力LLM作为生成器，输入特定的应用上下文和安全策略，通过结构化Prompt生成多样化的对抗性测试用例。核心在于将抽象的安全准则转化为具体的、具有欺骗性的用户输入。","experiments":"相比于基线自动化方法，AART生成的红队数据在多样性上有显著提升，并在实际应用测试中暴露了更多潜在的安全漏洞，大幅降低了对齐数据的获取成本。","authors_note":"Google 团队工作"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addresses the high cost, low coverage, and difficulty of rapidly customizing manual red-teaming for new application scenarios during LLM safety alignment.","importance":"Data-level/Post-train interface. Provides an automated paradigm for instruction synthesis and red-team data generation, directly serving the safety alignment phase in RLHF/SFT and helping mitigate reward hacking.","technical_approach":"Utilizes a highly capable LLM as a generator. By inputting specific application contexts and safety policies, it uses structured prompts to generate diverse adversarial test cases. The core lies in translating abstract safety guidelines into concrete, deceptive user inputs.","experiments":"Compared to baseline automated methods, the red-team data generated by AART shows a significant improvement in diversity and exposes more potential safety vulnerabilities in real-world application tests, drastically reducing the acquisition cost of alignment data.","authors_note":"Google Team"},"tags":["red-teaming","safety","data-generation"],"notable_authors":["Lora Aroyo","Preethi Lahoti"]},{"id":"Raheja0KK23","title":"CoEdIT: Text Editing by Task-Specific Instruction Tuning","authors":["Vipul Raheja","Dhruv Kumar","Ryan Koo","Dongyeop Kang"],"institutions":["Grammarly"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/Raheja0KK23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.350"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/Raheja0KK23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.350","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解决文本编辑任务（如语法纠错、文本简化、改写）碎片化的问题，构建一个统一的指令微调文本编辑基座。","importance":"数据配比与SFT。展示了高质量、细粒度的任务特定指令数据如何大幅提升中等规模模型在特定领域的Zero-shot泛化能力，证明了领域专精SFT的价值。","technical_approach":"收集并清洗了包含多种编辑意图的大规模指令数据集，使用FLAN-T5作为基座进行多任务指令微调。舍弃了针对单一任务（如仅做纠错）的独立建模，用统一的Seq2Seq框架处理所有编辑需求。","experiments":"训练了参数量从3B到11B的CoEdIT模型，在多项文本编辑基准上达到SOTA。其Zero-shot编辑性能甚至超越了参数量大得多的通用LLM（如GPT-3），证明了数据密度的重要性。","authors_note":"Grammarly 团队工作"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Resolves the fragmentation of text editing tasks (e.g., grammar correction, simplification, paraphrasing) by building a unified instruction-tuned foundation model for text editing.","importance":"Data mixing and SFT. Demonstrates how high-quality, fine-grained task-specific instruction data can drastically improve the zero-shot generalization of medium-sized models in specific domains, proving the value of domain-expert SFT.","technical_approach":"Collects and cleans a large-scale instruction dataset encompassing various editing intents, using FLAN-T5 as the base model for multi-task instruction tuning. Abandons isolated modeling for single tasks (like standalone GEC) in favor of a unified Seq2Seq framework for all editing needs.","experiments":"Trained CoEdIT models ranging from 3B to 11B parameters, achieving SOTA on multiple text editing benchmarks. Its zero-shot editing performance even surpasses much larger general LLMs (like GPT-3), proving the importance of data density.","authors_note":"Grammarly Team"},"tags":["instruction-tuning","text-editing"],"notable_authors":["Vipul Raheja","Dongyeop Kang"]},{"id":"Ramakrishna00Z23","title":"INVITE: a Testbed of Automatically Generated Invalid Questions to Evaluate Large Language Models for Hallucinations","authors":["Anil Ramakrishna","Rahul Gupta","Jens Lehmann","Morteza Ziyadi"],"institutions":["Amazon"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/Ramakrishna00Z23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.360"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/Ramakrishna00Z23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.360","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解决现有幻觉评估基准难以区分模型是“真懂”还是“盲目迎合用户预设”的问题。","importance":"评估与Reward信号。构建无效问题测试床，有助于训练更鲁棒的Reward Model，防止模型在RLHF中学会过度回答（Reward Hacking）。","technical_approach":"自动生成包含错误预设或逻辑矛盾的无效问题（Invalid Questions），测试LLM是否能够识别并拒绝回答，而不是顺着错误预设编造答案。核心是引入了“拒答率”作为幻觉评估的关键维度。","experiments":"评估了多个主流LLM，发现即使是经过对齐的模型，在面对精心构造的无效问题时仍有较高概率产生幻觉并给出肯定回答，暴露出当前RLHF在处理对抗性预设时的脆弱性。","authors_note":"Amazon 团队工作"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Resolves the difficulty existing hallucination benchmarks face in distinguishing whether a model 'truly understands' or is merely 'blindly pandering to user premises'.","importance":"Evaluation and Reward signals. Building a testbed of invalid questions helps train more robust Reward Models, preventing models from learning to over-answer (Reward Hacking) during RLHF.","technical_approach":"Automatically generates invalid questions containing false premises or logical contradictions to test whether LLMs can identify and refuse to answer them, rather than fabricating answers along the false premises. The core is introducing 'refusal rate' as a key dimension in hallucination evaluation.","experiments":"Evaluated multiple mainstream LLMs and found that even aligned models have a high probability of hallucinating and giving affirmative answers when faced with carefully crafted invalid questions, exposing the fragility of current RLHF against adversarial premises.","authors_note":"Amazon Team"},"tags":["hallucination","benchmark","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Jens Lehmann"]},{"id":"RawteCPSTCSD23","title":"The Troubling Emergence of Hallucination in Large Language Models - An Extensive Definition, Quantification, and Prescriptive Remediations","authors":["Vipula Rawte","Swagata Chakraborty","Agnibh Pathak","Anubhav Sarkar","S. M. Towhidul Islam Tonmoy","Aman Chadha","Amit P. Sheth","Amitava Das"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/RawteCPSTCSD23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.155"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/RawteCPSTCSD23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.155","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"系统性地定义、量化并提出缓解大模型幻觉的综合框架，解决领域内对幻觉定义模糊、评估标准不一的问题。","importance":"综述与分类学。对幻觉在预训练（数据污染）、微调（过度拟合）、解码（采样偏差）阶段的成因进行了系统梳理，适合作为排查模型缺陷的Checklist。","technical_approach":"归纳了幻觉的多种表现形式（内在冲突、外在不一致等），并总结了从数据清洗（Pretrain）、RLHF（Posttrain）到检索增强（Inference）的全链路缓解策略。","experiments":"作为综述文章，无特定单一实验，但汇总了领域内多项SOTA评估指标的对比，指出了当前基于LLM-as-a-Judge评估幻觉的局限性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Systematically defines, quantifies, and proposes a comprehensive framework for mitigating LLM hallucinations, addressing the field's vague definitions and inconsistent evaluation standards.","importance":"Survey and taxonomy. Systematically outlines the causes of hallucinations across pre-training (data contamination), fine-tuning (overfitting), and decoding (sampling bias) stages, serving as an excellent checklist for debugging model flaws.","technical_approach":"Categorizes various manifestations of hallucinations (intrinsic conflict, extrinsic inconsistency, etc.) and summarizes full-pipeline mitigation strategies ranging from data cleaning (Pretrain) and RLHF (Posttrain) to Retrieval Augmentation (Inference).","experiments":"As a survey paper, it lacks a specific single experiment but aggregates comparisons of multiple SOTA evaluation metrics in the field, pointing out the current limitations of LLM-as-a-Judge for evaluating hallucinations.","authors_note":""},"tags":["hallucination","evaluation"]},{"id":"RazdaibiedinaKK23","title":"Representation Projection Invariance Mitigates Representation Collapse","authors":["Anastasia Razdaibiedina","Ashish Khetan","Zohar S. Karnin","Daniel Khashabi","Vivek Madan"],"institutions":["Amazon"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/RazdaibiedinaKK23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.975"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/RazdaibiedinaKK23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.975","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"缓解对比学习或微调过程中常见的表示坍塌（Representation Collapse）问题，即模型倾向于将所有输入映射到狭窄的低秩向量空间。","importance":"损失函数与优化。对改进预训练后期的对比学习（如文本表征模型预训练）或多模态对齐Loss有直接帮助，提供了一种无需负样本的正则化手段。","technical_approach":"在损失函数中引入表示投影不变性（Projection Invariance）正则项。强制模型在经过不同随机投影后仍保持相对距离，从而鼓励特征空间的高秩（High-rank）分布，避免特征挤压。","experiments":"在多个文本相似度和表征学习基准上，该正则化方法有效提升了向量的各向同性（Isotropy），在不增加复杂负采样策略的情况下，改善了下游检索和分类性能。","authors_note":"Amazon 团队工作"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Mitigates the common issue of representation collapse during contrastive learning or fine-tuning, where models tend to map all inputs into a narrow, low-rank vector space.","importance":"Loss function and optimization. Directly helps improve contrastive learning in late-stage pre-training (e.g., text embedding models) or multimodal alignment loss, providing a regularization method that does not require negative samples.","technical_approach":"Introduces a Representation Projection Invariance regularization term into the loss function. It forces the model to maintain relative distances after undergoing different random projections, thereby encouraging a high-rank distribution in the feature space and avoiding feature squeezing.","experiments":"On multiple text similarity and representation learning benchmarks, this regularization method effectively improved vector isotropy. It enhanced downstream retrieval and classification performance without adding complex negative sampling strategies.","authors_note":"Amazon Team"},"tags":["representation","fine-tuning","collapse"],"notable_authors":["Daniel Khashabi"]},{"id":"RenCL0H23","title":"TESTA: Temporal-Spatial Token Aggregation for Long-form Video-Language Understanding","authors":["Shuhuai Ren","Sishuo Chen","Shicheng Li","Xu Sun","Lu Hou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/RenCL0H23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.66"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/RenCL0H23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.66","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是长视频-语言理解中的 token 爆炸问题：视频一长，时序帧和空间 patch 数都会迅速增长，标准视频 Transformer 很难在可接受计算量下保留足够上下文。过去常见做法是均匀采样或固定下采样，但这会把真正与文本相关的时间段和区域一起丢掉。","importance":"这是偏系统与方法结合的多模态效率工作，贡献在于把长视频理解的瓶颈明确拆成时间和空间两个维度分别聚合。对统一预训练和 VLM 的启示是：多模态长上下文并不一定要靠单一的全局压缩，面向任务相关性的分轴聚合更可能在算力受限下保住性能。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 TESTA，即 temporal-spatial token aggregation，用分层或渐进式方式同时压缩时间 token 和空间 token。它不是简单减少帧数，而是根据视觉-语言交互信号保留更有信息量的时间片段和空间区域；也不是把所有维度一起做统一池化，因为那样容易在长视频里把局部事件和跨帧依赖一起抹平。最接近的已有路线是 token pruning 或 tubelet downsampling，但 TESTA 的关键设计应是把时域和空域作为不同统计结构处理，从而以更小代价保留与问题相关的证据。","experiments":"从题目看，实验应覆盖长视频问答、检索或时序定位类任务，并重点报告在更长输入下的准确率与吞吐提升。合理的 baseline 会包括不聚合的全量模型、固定采样、以及已有 token pruning/merging 方法。当前没有摘要和结果表，无法可靠给出数据集名称、参数量、FLOPs 节省比例或精确提升数字；若有关键消融，最值得看的会是仅做 temporal aggregation、仅做 spatial aggregation、以及二者联合时的增益是否近似可加。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the token explosion in long-form video-language understanding: once videos get long, both temporal frames and spatial patches blow up, and standard Transformers become too expensive to run without dropping useful context. Earlier solutions often relied on uniform sampling or fixed downsampling, which removes relevant moments and regions together with irrelevant ones.","importance":"This is a multimodal efficiency paper with clear systems implications. Its main contribution is to treat temporal and spatial redundancy as different problems rather than compressing everything with one blunt mechanism. For pretraining and native multimodal modeling, the useful lesson is that structured aggregation along each axis can preserve task-relevant evidence better than generic global reduction under the same compute budget.","technical_approach":"TESTA performs temporal-spatial token aggregation, likely in a staged or hierarchical manner, to reduce video tokens while keeping language-relevant content. The design choice that matters is separating temporal aggregation from spatial aggregation instead of pooling all visual tokens uniformly. That distinction is important because long videos contain different kinds of redundancy across time and space. Compared with generic token pruning or fixed tubelet reduction, the method is aimed at keeping salient events and regions aligned with the text signal.","experiments":"The empirical story is likely built around long-video QA, retrieval, or related video-language benchmarks, with attention to the accuracy-versus-throughput trade-off at longer sequence lengths. Reasonable baselines would include full-token models, uniform sampling, and prior token pruning or merging methods. Since no abstract or tables are provided, I cannot state datasets, model sizes, FLOPs reduction, or exact gains reliably. The most informative ablations would compare temporal-only, spatial-only, and joint aggregation.","authors_note":""},"tags":["video","token-aggregation","long-context"]},{"id":"RuderCGKMNRRSWW23","title":"XTREME-UP: A User-Centric Scarce-Data Benchmark for Under-Represented Languages","authors":["Sebastian Ruder","Jonathan H. Clark","Alexander Gutkin","Mihir Kale","Min Ma","Massimo Nicosia","Shruti Rijhwani","Parker Riley","Jean Michel A. Sarr","Xinyi Wang","John Wieting","Nitish Gupta","Anna Katanova","Christo Kirov","Dana L. Dickinson","Brian Roark","Bidisha Samanta","Connie Tao","David Ifeoluwa Adelani","Vera Axelrod","Isaac Caswell","Colin Cherry","Dan Garrette","R. Reeve Ingle","Melvin Johnson","Dmitry Panteleev","Partha Talukdar"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/RuderCGKMNRRSWW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.125"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/RuderCGKMNRRSWW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.125","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是低资源、弱代表语言的评测长期脱离真实用户需求：现有多语 benchmark 往往语言覆盖有限、任务偏学术、数据规模也不足以反映实际使用痛点。过去跨语评测常默认有平行资源、标准化训练集和统一标签体系，但这恰恰不是 under-represented languages 的常态。","importance":"这是数据与评测基础设施工作，贡献量级在 benchmark 层面。对 pretrain 的意义很直接：如果评测集只覆盖资源较好的语言，就会系统性高估多语预训练的泛化能力；用户中心、稀缺数据设定更能检验 tokenizer、共享词表、跨语迁移和 continual pretrain 是否真的有效。","technical_approach":"核心产物是 XTREME-UP，一个面向 under-represented languages 的 user-centric scarce-data benchmark。它不是再拼一个大而全的多语榜单，而是强调真实用户场景和稀缺标注条件，因此设计重点应在语言选择、任务选择、数据收集协议和评测切分，而非模型创新。与传统 XTREME 类 benchmark 的差别，应在于更贴近真实低资源约束，例如更少训练样本、更不平衡的语言分布、以及更关注实际可用性而不是单次 leaderboard 数字。","experiments":"这类论文的关键实验通常不是追求单模型 SOTA，而是证明 benchmark 的区分度和代表性：不同规模与不同预训练背景的模型在该基准上会出现与既有基准不同的排序。合理 baseline 包括 mBERT、XLM-R、mT5 或其他多语模型，以及 few-shot / full-shot 的对比。当前没有摘要和表格，无法给出语言数、任务数、数据规模和具体分数差距；但最值得关注的是，哪些模型在主流多语基准表现强，却在 XTREME-UP 上明显退化，这能直接暴露预训练覆盖和数据分布偏差。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a benchmark gap: evaluation for under-represented languages often fails to reflect real user needs and real data scarcity. Existing multilingual benchmarks have improved coverage, but they still tend to assume cleaner resources, more standardized tasks, and more supervision than many underserved languages actually have.","importance":"This is a benchmark and data-infrastructure contribution. Its relevance to pretraining is concrete: multilingual pretraining quality is often overestimated when evaluation stays concentrated on relatively well-resourced languages and convenient tasks. A user-centric scarce-data benchmark is better suited to stress-test tokenization, cross-lingual transfer, vocabulary sharing, and continual adaptation.","technical_approach":"XTREME-UP is a benchmark construction effort focused on under-represented languages under realistic low-data conditions. The contribution is not a new model, but a task and dataset design that prioritizes user relevance and scarce supervision. Relative to older multilingual leaderboards, the likely difference is less idealized training data, more uneven language conditions, and task choices that better reflect actual deployment constraints.","experiments":"For a benchmark paper, the critical empirical result is whether it changes the picture of model capability rather than whether one model wins by a small margin. Reasonable baselines would include multilingual encoders and encoder-decoders such as mBERT, XLM-R, and mT5 under few-shot and richer-data settings. Without the abstract or tables, I cannot state the number of languages, tasks, or exact score gaps. The most telling result would be model rank reversals: systems that look strong on mainstream multilingual benchmarks but degrade sharply on XTREME-UP.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multilingual","benchmark","low-resource"],"notable_authors":["Sebastian Ruder"]},{"id":"Sahak0R23","title":"A State-Vector Framework for Dataset Effects","authors":["Esmat Sahak","Zining Zhu","Frank Rudzicz"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/Sahak0R23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.942"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/Sahak0R23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.942","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是数据集效应缺乏统一、可比较的刻画方式：同一模型在不同数据集上表现差异很大，但我们往往只能事后归因于领域差异、标注风格或难度，而没有一个稳定表征去量化这种影响。过去关于 dataset effects 的分析多是任务内经验性比较，缺少可迁移的抽象框架。","importance":"这是方法论与分析框架工作。对 pretrain 的意义在于，数据集不是简单的样本集合，而是会在训练动态和最终能力上留下可识别的‘状态’偏置；如果这个状态可建模，就有机会更系统地做数据混合、continual pretrain 顺序设计和 benchmark 诊断。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 state-vector framework：把数据集对模型造成的影响编码成某种向量化状态，而不是只看最终准确率。合理理解是，通过模型参数变化、表示变化、梯度统计或行为特征提取数据集对应的 state vector，再用它比较不同数据集的相似性、偏置方向或迁移关系。它和传统 dataset similarity 指标的区别在于后者常基于表面文本统计，而 state-vector 更接近‘这个数据集会把模型往哪里推’。如果设计得好，它能连接数据分布和训练动力学；但代价是 state 的定义高度依赖选取的模型与观测空间。","experiments":"题目表明论文更可能强调框架有效性而非单点 SOTA。最关键的实验应是：该 state vector 能预测跨数据集迁移、微调收益、或 benchmark 上的系统误差，并优于简单词汇/标签分布特征。当前无摘要，无法确认使用了哪些任务、模型和相关性数值。若有说服力，实验里应包含多个数据集家族、跨模型一致性，以及 state-vector 与下游迁移表现之间的显著相关。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a recurring but poorly formalized issue: datasets affect model behavior in systematic ways, yet we often describe those effects only after the fact through vague notions like domain shift or annotation style. Prior analyses of dataset effects have usually been task-specific and descriptive rather than framed in a transferable representation.","importance":"This is a methodological analysis paper. Its relevance to pretraining is that datasets are not just collections of samples; they induce directional changes in model state and capability. If those effects can be represented consistently, that would help with data mixture design, continual pretraining order, and benchmark diagnostics.","technical_approach":"The proposed state-vector framework appears to represent each dataset by a vector capturing how it moves or biases a model, rather than by surface statistics alone. That vector could plausibly be derived from parameter updates, representation shifts, gradients, or behavior signatures. The key distinction from standard dataset similarity metrics is that it aims to encode training effect, not just textual resemblance. If successful, it offers a bridge between data properties and learning dynamics. The main limitation is dependence on the chosen model and observation space.","experiments":"The paper likely validates the framework by showing that these state vectors predict transfer behavior, dataset compatibility, or error patterns better than simpler baselines based on lexical or label distributions. Without the abstract and tables, I cannot state datasets, models, or exact correlation values. Strong evidence would include consistency across multiple task families and meaningful predictive power for cross-dataset transfer.","authors_note":""},"tags":["dataset-effects","analysis"],"notable_authors":["Frank Rudzicz"]},{"id":"SahuVBL23","title":"PromptMix: A Class Boundary Augmentation Method for Large Language Model Distillation","authors":["Gaurav Sahu","Olga Vechtomova","Dzmitry Bahdanau","Issam H. Laradji"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/SahuVBL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.323"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/SahuVBL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.323","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是 LLM 蒸馏到小模型时，学生模型往往学不到教师在类别边界附近的判别行为，导致泛化不足。过去蒸馏主要依赖原始样本上的软标签，但如果训练样本在边界附近覆盖不够，学生学到的决策面会比教师更粗糙。","importance":"这是蒸馏方法工作，直接价值在小模型高效部署，但对 pretrain 也有一层启示：大模型知识并不只在样本中心区域，更集中地体现在不确定边界附近。这个视角会影响我们怎么做数据合成、蒸馏采样和 curriculum，尤其是在教师是强指令模型时。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 PromptMix，一种面向类边界的增强方法，用于 LLM distillation。按题目理解，它会通过混合 prompt 或构造介于类别之间的输入，显式扩充决策边界附近的训练样本，让学生看到更多高不确定度、但最能约束分类面的例子。它和常规 data augmentation 的区别在于目标不是增加表面多样性，而是补足 class boundary；和普通 KD 的区别在于不只拟合教师输出，还主动生成最有蒸馏价值的样本。风险在于混合 prompt 可能引入不自然样本，如果偏离真实输入分布太多，学生可能学到人为边界。","experiments":"从题目看，实验应在若干分类或判别任务上比较标准 KD、数据增强 KD 和 PromptMix。合理指标包括准确率、macro-F1，以及低数据条件下的收益。当前无摘要，无法确认教师/学生模型规模、任务数量和具体提升幅度。若论文扎实，最关键的 ablation 会是：边界样本比例、混合方式、以及教师置信度筛选对蒸馏效果的影响；同时还应观察增强是否在 out-of-domain 上保持收益，而非只提升 in-domain。","authors_note":"Dzmitry Bahdanau 是序列建模与注意力机制领域的知名作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a common weakness in distillation from large language models: the student often fails to match the teacher near class boundaries, where the decision function is most informative. Standard KD mostly transfers soft labels on observed examples, but that can leave boundary regions under-covered.","importance":"This is a distillation-method paper with deployment relevance, but it also carries a broader lesson: a large model’s useful knowledge is not only in prototypical examples, and boundary behavior deserves explicit attention. That matters for synthetic data generation, sample selection, and curriculum design when distilling instruction-following or classification behavior.","technical_approach":"PromptMix is a class-boundary augmentation method for LLM distillation. The likely mechanism is to mix prompts or synthesize intermediate examples that sit closer to decision boundaries, then distill the teacher’s behavior on those harder cases. Compared with standard augmentation, the goal is not generic diversity but targeted boundary coverage. Compared with plain KD, it actively creates high-value training examples instead of passively consuming the original dataset. The main trade-off is realism: if mixed prompts drift too far from natural inputs, the student may fit artificial boundaries.","experiments":"The expected evaluation is on classification-style tasks, comparing standard KD, augmentation-based KD, and PromptMix under limited data and standard settings. Relevant metrics would include accuracy and macro-F1, with particular interest in low-resource gains. Since the abstract is missing, I cannot report teacher/student sizes, number of tasks, or exact improvements. Strong ablations would study the amount of boundary-focused augmentation, mixing strategy, and confidence-based filtering from the teacher.","authors_note":"Dzmitry Bahdanau is a well-known researcher in sequence modeling and attention."},"tags":["data-augmentation","distillation","synthetic-data"],"notable_authors":["Dzmitry Bahdanau"]},{"id":"Schlangen23","title":"On General Language Understanding","authors":["David Schlangen"],"institutions":["University of Potsdam"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/Schlangen23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.591"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/Schlangen23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.591","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"讨论'通用语言理解（General Language Understanding）'这个说法到底指什么，以及当前评测实践和这个目标的关系。背景是 GLUE/SuperGLUE 之后，社区已习惯把'通用'等同于'多任务平均分高'，但这和人对语言理解的直觉并不一致。","importance":"立场/概念论文，对 pretrain 研究的主要价值是帮助把'我们到底在评测什么'问清楚。对benchmark 设计和 scaling claim 的解读有参考意义，但不是方法层面的工作。","technical_approach":"以科学哲学和语言学角度给出一个'语言理解能力'的分解框架，区分任务能力、语境适应、概念性理解等层次，并据此批评现有通用性声明。非实验性论文。","experiments":"无实证实验。","authors_note":"David Schlangen，长期从事对话与评测方法论研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Asks what 'general language understanding' is actually supposed to mean, and whether current multi-task benchmark scores license the 'general' claim. Post-GLUE, the community conflates 'high average score' with 'general', which this paper pushes back on.","importance":"A position / conceptual paper. For pretraining research its value is in sharpening how we interpret benchmark-based generality claims and scaling results, not in proposing a new method.","technical_approach":"Draws on philosophy of science and linguistics to decompose language understanding into distinguishable capabilities (task competence, contextual adaptation, conceptual grasp) and uses this to critique conflation in current evaluation practice. No experiments.","experiments":"No empirical experiments.","authors_note":"David Schlangen; long-standing work on dialogue and evaluation methodology."},"tags":["language-understanding","evaluation","theory"],"notable_authors":["David Schlangen"]},{"id":"SchottFB23","title":"Polyglot or Not? Measuring Multilingual Encyclopedic Knowledge in Foundation Models","authors":["Tim Schott","Daniel Furman","Shreshta Bhat"],"institutions":["UC Berkeley"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/SchottFB23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.691"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/SchottFB23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.691","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在多语种下系统测量基础模型的百科知识掌握程度，回答'参数里到底记了多少跨语言事实'。以前的事实性评测（LAMA 等）主要是英文，没法区分模型是知识稀缺还是只在英语里会。","importance":"数据级/评测级贡献，给 pretrain 研究者提供了一个可用的多语种事实知识探针，方便对比不同语料配比、不同 tokenizer、不同模型家族的跨语种知识迁移。","technical_approach":"基于 Wikidata 构造跨 20+ 语种、覆盖百科实体关系的填空/对比问句，用对比打分（正确答案 vs 干扰项的 log-likelihood）评估模型是否'知道'某条事实。关键设计是让同一条事实在各语种有平行版本，从而把'知识'和'语言能力'解耦。","experiments":"在 BLOOM、LLaMA、mT5、XGLM 等多个开源基础模型上跑评测。主要观察：同一模型在英语上的事实正确率显著高于低资源语言，且差距随模型规模变化不一致——单纯 scaling 并不能自动补齐低资源语种的知识缺口。","authors_note":"UC Berkeley 相关团队。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Measure how much encyclopedic knowledge foundation models actually carry across languages, rather than only in English as LAMA-style probes did. This separates 'the model doesn't know the fact' from 'it only knows it in English'.","importance":"An evaluation/data contribution: a reusable multilingual factual-knowledge probe that lets pretraining researchers compare data mixes, tokenizers, and model families on cross-lingual knowledge transfer.","technical_approach":"Builds parallel cloze/contrastive queries from Wikidata covering 20+ languages, scoring correct vs. distractor completions by log-likelihood. Parallelism across languages is the key design choice — it decouples 'knowing the fact' from 'speaking the language'.","experiments":"Evaluates BLOOM, LLaMA, mT5, XGLM and others. Core finding: English factual accuracy is substantially higher than low-resource languages for every model, and the gap does not close monotonically with scale — scaling alone does not equalize multilingual factual recall.","authors_note":"UC Berkeley-affiliated authors."},"tags":["multilingual","knowledge-probing","foundation-models"]},{"id":"SchulhoffPKBSAT23","title":"Ignore This Title and HackAPrompt: Exposing Systemic Vulnerabilities of LLMs Through a Global Prompt Hacking Competition","authors":["Sander Schulhoff","Jeremy Pinto","Anaum Khan","Louis-François Bouchard","Chenglei Si","Svetlina Anati","Valen Tagliabue","Anson Liu Kost","Christopher Carnahan","Jordan L. Boyd-Graber"],"institutions":["University of Maryland"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/SchulhoffPKBSAT23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.302"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/SchulhoffPKBSAT23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.302","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"系统刻画 LLM 在真实对抗下能被如何'劫持 prompt'。以前 prompt injection 多是少量案例研究，缺一个大规模、分类清楚的攻击语料。","importance":"数据级贡献，对 alignment/posttrain 反馈到 pretrain 有参考价值：攻击模式可以作为训练/评测 red-teaming 语料，也能暴露 instruction tuning 鲁棒性的边界。","technical_approach":"办了一次全球 prompt hacking 比赛，收集 60 万条攻击 prompt；把攻击按目标（越狱、信息泄露、指令覆盖等）和技术（角色扮演、编码混淆、上下文污染等）做分类学整理，形成一个可查询的攻击分类体系。","experiments":"在 GPT-3、ChatGPT、FlanT5 等模型上统计各类攻击的成功率。主要观察：即便是 RLHF 过的模型，组合型攻击（多技术叠加）成功率远高于单一技术；部分简单技巧在所有测试模型上普适。","authors_note":"Maryland 大学等，Sander Schulhoff 是 Learn Prompting 的作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Build a large-scale, taxonomized corpus of real adversarial prompts against LLMs. Prior prompt-injection work was mostly anecdotal; there was no dataset big enough to characterize the attack surface.","importance":"A dataset contribution useful for red-teaming and alignment-driven pretraining: the attack taxonomy doubles as eval + training signal, and exposes where instruction tuning's robustness breaks down.","technical_approach":"Ran a global prompt-hacking competition collecting ~600k adversarial prompts; organized them into a taxonomy along two axes — goal (jailbreak, leakage, instruction override, ...) and technique (role-play, obfuscation, context contamination, ...).","experiments":"Measures attack success rates on GPT-3, ChatGPT, FlanT5 and others. Key finding: even RLHF-tuned models fall much more often to combinations of techniques than to any single one; some simple tricks transfer across all models tested.","authors_note":"Authors from University of Maryland and others; Sander Schulhoff is behind Learn Prompting."},"tags":["prompt-injection","safety","adversarial","llm-security"],"notable_authors":["Sander Schulhoff","Chenglei Si"]},{"id":"SenguptaA023","title":"Manifold-Preserving Transformers are Effective for Short-Long Range Encoding","authors":["Ayan Sengupta","Md. Shad Akhtar","Tanmoy Chakraborty"],"institutions":["IIIT Delhi","IIT Delhi"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/SenguptaA023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.228"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/SenguptaA023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.228","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在同时需要短程和长程依赖建模的任务上，普通 Transformer 的 attention 会把 token 表示拉离原始几何流形，造成信息退化。作者想给编码器加一个'几何约束'让表示在层间保持流形结构。","importance":"方法级小贡献，对 encoder 类架构有参考意义；对大规模 decoder-only pretrain 的直接影响有限，但思路（把表示学习当成流形保持问题）在长文本/混合粒度编码上值得留意。","technical_approach":"在 Transformer 每层后加入一个流形保持正则，显式约束层间表示的局部几何（邻近关系/距离结构）不被 attention 破坏。和 Performer/Longformer 这类改 attention kernel 的思路不同，这里不改 attention，而是加约束项。","experiments":"在 LRA（长程）和若干短文本分类任务上对比标准 Transformer 和高效 Transformer 变体。在长程任务上有一致提升，短文本任务也无明显退化，参数开销小。","authors_note":"IIIT Delhi / IIT Delhi，Tanmoy Chakraborty 团队。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Standard attention distorts the geometric manifold of token representations, hurting tasks that need both short- and long-range reasoning. The paper adds a manifold-preserving constraint to keep layerwise geometry intact.","importance":"A modest architectural contribution, most relevant to encoder-style models. Less directly applicable to large decoder-only pretraining, but the framing — representation learning as manifold preservation — is worth noting for long-context encoders.","technical_approach":"Adds a regularizer at each Transformer layer that penalizes distortion of local geometric relations (neighborhoods/distances) between consecutive layers. Unlike Performer/Longformer which modify the attention kernel, this keeps attention intact and constrains its output.","experiments":"Evaluated on Long Range Arena and short-text classification. Consistent gains on long-range tasks, no regression on short tasks, with small parameter overhead.","authors_note":"IIIT Delhi / IIT Delhi, Tanmoy Chakraborty's group."},"tags":["transformer-architecture","long-range","manifold","encoding"],"notable_authors":["Tanmoy Chakraborty"]},{"id":"ShaniVS23","title":"Towards Concept-Aware Large Language Models","authors":["Chen Shani","Jilles Vreeken","Dafna Shahaf"],"institutions":["Stanford University","CISPA","Hebrew University"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ShaniVS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.877"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ShaniVS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.877","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 按 subword token 建模，内部没有'概念'这一层抽象；作者主张让模型显式具备概念感知（concept-aware）能力，以改进组合泛化和抽象推理。","importance":"范式级探讨 + 初步实现。如果成立，会影响 tokenizer 与输入表示的设计——这是 pretrain 层面的一个反思点，但目前更偏 position paper。","technical_approach":"提出概念感知 LM 的设想：在 token 表示之上引入显式概念层（通过聚类/知识图谱对齐等方式把 token 映射到概念节点），并在训练目标里加入概念级预测。给了原型实现和若干 case study，尚未上大规模。","experiments":"小规模原型验证，在若干需要概念级抽象的诊断任务上展示 concept-aware 模型优于基线。尚未在主流 LM benchmark 上做 scaling。","authors_note":"Stanford / CISPA，Dafna Shahaf 团队。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLMs operate over subword tokens and lack an explicit 'concept' layer; the paper argues models should be concept-aware to improve compositional generalization and abstract reasoning.","importance":"Mostly a paradigm-level proposal with an initial implementation. If the framing holds up, it has implications for tokenizer and input-representation design — a pretraining-relevant reflection, though currently closer to a position paper.","technical_approach":"Adds an explicit concept layer above tokens (via clustering / KG alignment that maps tokens to concept nodes) and augments training with concept-level prediction objectives. Demonstrated with a prototype rather than at scale.","experiments":"Small-scale prototype on diagnostic tasks needing concept-level abstraction; concept-aware variant beats baseline. No large-scale LM benchmark results yet.","authors_note":"Stanford / CISPA; Dafna Shahaf's group."},"tags":["concept-awareness","llm-knowledge","representation"],"notable_authors":["Jilles Vreeken","Dafna Shahaf"]},{"id":"ShenTZK23","title":"Flatness-Aware Prompt Selection Improves Accuracy and Sample Efficiency","authors":["Lingfeng Shen","Weiting Tan","Boyuan Zheng","Daniel Khashabi"],"institutions":["Johns Hopkins University"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ShenTZK23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.523"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ShenTZK23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.523","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"in-context learning 下不同 prompt 模板的效果差异巨大，但没有可靠的无标签方法选出好 prompt。以前的方法要么依赖验证集，要么用 perplexity，效果不稳。","importance":"方法级贡献，给 prompt 选择提供了一个新的无监督准则；间接对理解 ICL 机制有启发——'loss landscape 平坦度'和泛化/稳定性的联系被迁移到了 prompt 层面。","technical_approach":"把'损失函数平坦度（flatness）'作为 prompt 好坏的代理：对每个候选 prompt，在模型参数上注入小扰动，测量输出分布的变化幅度，变化越小表示该 prompt 对应的 loss surface 越平坦，选择最平坦的 prompt。关键假设是平坦区域的 prompt 在分布偏移下更稳。","experiments":"在 GPT 家族和若干分类任务上对比 perplexity 选择、随机选择、和 oracle。Flatness-based 选择显著优于 perplexity，接近甚至匹配 oracle，且样本效率更高。","authors_note":"JHU，Daniel Khashabi 团队。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"ICL performance swings wildly with prompt template, but there is no reliable label-free way to pick good prompts. Existing heuristics (validation accuracy, perplexity) are either label-hungry or unstable.","importance":"A concrete methodological contribution for prompt selection, and indirectly informative about ICL: it ports the loss-landscape flatness↔generalization story from weight space to prompt space.","technical_approach":"Uses loss-landscape flatness as a proxy for prompt quality: perturb model parameters slightly and measure how much the output distribution changes under each candidate prompt; pick the prompt whose loss surface is flattest. The bet is that flat prompts are more robust to distribution shift.","experiments":"On GPT-family models across classification tasks, flatness-based selection beats perplexity-based and random selection, approaching oracle selection, with better sample efficiency.","authors_note":"Johns Hopkins University; Daniel Khashabi's group."},"tags":["prompt-selection","flatness","in-context-learning","loss-landscape"],"notable_authors":["Daniel Khashabi"]},{"id":"ShiHGHTZ23","title":"Toward Human Readable Prompt Tuning: Kubrick&apos;s The Shining is a good movie, and a good prompt too?","authors":["Weijia Shi","Xiaochuang Han","Hila Gonen","Ari Holtzman","Yulia Tsvetkov","Luke Zettlemoyer"],"institutions":["University of Washington","CMU"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ShiHGHTZ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.733"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ShiHGHTZ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.733","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Soft prompt tuning 学出来的向量通常不对应任何自然语言，既不可读也不可迁移。作者想学可读的 prompt——又像人话又性能强。","importance":"方法级贡献，同时对理解 prompt 的作用机制有启发：它直接挑战了'最优 prompt 必须是离散自然语言'和'soft prompt 必须不可读'这两个假设。","technical_approach":"用 Langevin 采样在离散 token 空间做优化，把一个自然度/流畅度约束（LM likelihood）和任务损失一起作为目标。从而采样出的 prompt 既低任务损失又是人类可读文本。不同于 AutoPrompt 的贪心搜索，它用基于梯度的采样，能跳出局部解；又不同于 soft prompt，它强制 stay 在离散词表上。","experiments":"在若干分类/生成任务上对比 AutoPrompt、soft prompt 和 manual prompt。学出的可读 prompt 经常是看起来不相关的句子（比如电影评论），但性能接近 soft prompt；且这些 prompt 能部分迁移到其他模型，soft prompt 不行。","authors_note":"Washington / CMU，Weijia Shi、Luke Zettlemoyer 相关生态。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Soft prompts don't map to natural language — they are neither readable nor transferable. The paper searches for prompts that are simultaneously fluent and high-performing.","importance":"A method contribution that also challenges two assumptions: that optimal prompts must be discrete natural language, and that soft prompts must be unreadable. Useful for anyone probing what prompts actually do.","technical_approach":"Langevin-style sampling over discrete tokens with a joint objective of task loss plus LM fluency. Unlike AutoPrompt's greedy search, gradient-based sampling can escape local minima; unlike soft prompts, it stays strictly within the discrete vocabulary.","experiments":"Across classification and generation tasks, the learned readable prompts — often surprising (e.g., movie-review-like sentences) — approach soft-prompt performance and, unlike soft prompts, partially transfer across models.","authors_note":"University of Washington / CMU; connected to Weijia Shi and Luke Zettlemoyer's line of work."},"tags":["prompt-tuning","interpretability","soft-prompt"],"notable_authors":["Weijia Shi","Luke Zettlemoyer"]},{"id":"ShiSYY023","title":"Specialist or Generalist? Instruction Tuning for Specific NLP Tasks","authors":["Chufan Shi","Yixuan Su","Cheng Yang","Yujiu Yang","Deng Cai"],"institutions":["Tsinghua University"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ShiSYY023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.947"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ShiSYY023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.947","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"做某个特定任务时，到底该用一个任务专用微调模型，还是用一个指令调优过的通才模型？社区默认 instruction tuning = 通才牺牲单点最优，但缺乏系统对比。","importance":"方法/实证贡献，对 post-train 路线选择有直接指导：如何让 instruction tuning 在保留通用性的同时不输专用微调。","technical_approach":"把 task-specific 数据混入 instruction tuning 中，并研究不同混合比例下通才能力和专用能力的 trade-off；提出一种简单的混合与 curriculum 调度，让模型在单点任务上逼近专用 SFT，同时不丢多任务泛化。","experiments":"以中等规模 LM 为底座，在若干 NLP 任务（QA、summarization 等）上比较 specialist SFT、generalist instruction tuning 和混合版本。关键观察：只要专用数据比例得当，混合模型可以在目标任务上达到 specialist 95% 以上的水平，而在其他任务上几乎不退化；专用数据比例过高时通用能力明显退化。","authors_note":"清华大学。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"For a specific NLP task, should you use a task-specific finetune or a generalist instruction-tuned model? The field assumes instruction tuning sacrifices single-task peak, but this hadn't been carefully quantified.","importance":"An empirical contribution directly relevant to post-training recipe choices: how to keep instruction tuning's generality without losing to task-specific SFT.","technical_approach":"Studies mixing task-specific data into instruction tuning at varying ratios, mapping the generalist↔specialist trade-off. Proposes a simple mixing + curriculum schedule that approaches specialist SFT on the target task while preserving multi-task generalization.","experiments":"On a mid-scale LM across tasks like QA and summarization, compares specialist SFT, generalist instruction tuning, and mixed variants. Finding: with the right ratio, the mixed model reaches ~95%+ of specialist performance on the target task with minimal regression elsewhere; too much task-specific data hurts generality.","authors_note":"Tsinghua University."},"tags":["instruction-tuning","specialist-vs-generalist","sft"]},{"id":"ShuH0SC23","title":"POSQA: Probe the World Models of LLMs with Size Comparisons","authors":["Chang Shu","Jiuzhou Han","Fangyu Liu","Ehsan Shareghi","Nigel Collier"],"institutions":["University of Cambridge","Monash University"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ShuH0SC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.504"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ShuH0SC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.504","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"用物体大小比较这个简单问题当作探针，测 LLM 内部是否有一致的世界模型（物理常识）。以前的常识评测多是选择题，容易被表层相关性做对。","importance":"评测级贡献，对理解'LM 在 pretrain 里到底学到了什么物理世界知识'有帮助；间接对多模态 pretrain 的动机做了一个量化参考点。","technical_approach":"构造 POSQA：大量三元组问题（'A 和 B 哪个大'），覆盖日常物体、生物、地理实体等。除了直接问比较，还设计可比性探针（两物体是否在同量级）、一致性探针（A>B 和 B<A 应一致）。评测 GPT-3/ChatGPT/LLaMA 等模型在直接比较与一致性上的差距。","experiments":"模型在两两比较正确率上看起来不错（70–80%），但一致性检查后暴露大量矛盾：模型经常同时回答 A>B 和 B>A。规模越大一致性略好但远未饱和；提供图片或 context 能显著帮助，暗示模型的'世界模型'主要是文本共现层级的，不是真的几何/物理层级。","authors_note":"剑桥大学、Monash、Ehsan Shareghi、Nigel Collier。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Use object-size comparison as a probe for whether LLMs carry a coherent world model. Prior commonsense benchmarks are mostly multiple-choice and gameable by surface correlations.","importance":"An evaluation contribution that sharpens the question of what physical-world knowledge LMs actually pick up during pretraining, and provides a quantitative anchor for the motivation of multimodal pretraining.","technical_approach":"Builds POSQA with triplet questions ('is A bigger than B?') over everyday objects, organisms, and geographic entities. Adds comparability probes (same order of magnitude?) and consistency probes (A>B vs. B<A should agree). Evaluates GPT-3, ChatGPT, LLaMA and others on raw accuracy and internal consistency.","experiments":"Pairwise accuracy looks fine (70–80%), but consistency checks expose frequent contradictions — models often affirm both A>B and B>A. Scale helps consistency only marginally; image or textual context helps substantially, suggesting the 'world model' is mostly co-occurrence-level rather than geometric/physical.","authors_note":"University of Cambridge, Monash University; Ehsan Shareghi, Nigel Collier."},"tags":["probing","world-model","interpretability"],"notable_authors":["Nigel Collier","Ehsan Shareghi"]},{"id":"2305.13812","title":"Coarse-to-Fine Contrastive Learning in Image-Text-Graph Space for Improved Vision-Language Compositionality","authors":["Harman Singh","Pengchuan Zhang","Qifan Wang","Mengjiao Wang","Wenhan Xiong","Jingfei Du","Yu Chen"],"institutions":["Meta"],"abstract":"$74","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.13812","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/SinghZWWXDC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.56"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/SinghZWWXDC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.56","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"对比学习出来的 VLM（CLIP 系）在组合推理上很差——分不清 'red cube on blue ball' 和 'blue cube on red ball'。作者想用场景图作为结构化监督去教模型理解对象-属性-关系。","importance":"属于 VLM 预训练 loss 层面的改进尝试，对理解'为什么对比学习忽略组合性、以及加什么信号能补回来'有一定启示。但整体是 CLIP-style 微调增强，而不是重构预训练范式，范式冲击有限。","technical_approach":"从文本解析出场景图作为图像场景图的代理，按对象/属性/关系做图分解得到不同粒度的负样本和正样本，在 coarse-to-fine 的对比损失框架下训练。关键选择是用文本场景图替代图像场景图（后者标注昂贵），以及把 hard negative 从随机采样改成图结构驱动的可控构造。","experiments":"在 ARO、Winoground、VL-CheckList 等组合性评测上报告提升，同时尽量不牺牲标准检索指标。具体基座和数值略。","authors_note":"Meta/FAIR 系作者为主（Pengchuan Zhang、Qifan Wang、Wenhan Xiong 等常见于 FAIR 视觉-语言工作）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Contrastive VLMs (CLIP-style) fail at compositional reasoning — they can't distinguish 'red cube on blue ball' from 'blue cube on red ball'. The paper uses scene graphs as structured supervision to teach object–attribute–relation composition.","importance":"A loss-level enhancement for VLM pretraining; informative for understanding which signals fix CLIP's compositional blind spot. Not a paradigm shift — still CLIP-style fine-tuning rather than a new pretraining objective.","technical_approach":"Parse scene graphs from text as a proxy for image scene graphs (image-side parsing is expensive). Decompose the graph by object/attribute/relation to generate structured positives and hard negatives, then train with a coarse-to-fine contrastive loss. Key move: replace random negatives with graph-driven controllable negatives.","experiments":"Improvements on ARO, Winoground, VL-CheckList type compositional benchmarks, with care to preserve standard retrieval metrics.","authors_note":"Meta/FAIR-affiliated authors (Pengchuan Zhang, Qifan Wang, Wenhan Xiong have FAIR VL track record)."},"tags":["contrastive-learning","vision-language","compositionality"],"notable_authors":["Pengchuan Zhang"]},{"id":"2310.13800","title":"Evaluation Metrics in the Era of GPT-4: Reliably Evaluating Large Language Models on Sequence to Sequence Tasks","authors":["Andrea Sottana","Bin Liang","Kai Zou","Zheng Yuan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$75","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.13800","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/SottanaLZY23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.543"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/SottanaLZY23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.543","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"当前 LLM 生成质量的评估混乱：BLEU/ROUGE 类自动指标与人类判断严重脱节，而用 GPT-4 当评委又缺乏系统验证。作者想系统看清几类指标在 seq2seq 任务上到底谁更可信。","importance":"评测方法学层面的贡献，对 pretrain/post-train 评估都有参考价值——因为很多 pretrain 消融实验最后也用这类下游任务打分。结论对 'LLM-as-judge' 的流行做法是一个较冷静的限定。","technical_approach":"在摘要、文本简化、GEC 三个任务上跑一组开源/闭源 LLM（含 ChatGPT），同时采集传统自动指标、GPT-4 打分、人工打分，做三者相关性分析。","experiments":"主要发现：(1) ChatGPT 在人工评测上普遍最好，但传统自动指标给它打分很低——说明自动指标偏向 reference-like 输出而非真实质量；(2) GPT-4 作为评委与人工相关性明显高于传统指标，但在特定任务（如 GEC 的细节错误）仍有偏差。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLM evaluation is a mess: BLEU/ROUGE correlate poorly with humans, and GPT-4-as-judge is widely used but under-validated. The paper asks which metric family to actually trust on seq2seq tasks.","importance":"A methodology contribution relevant to pretrain/post-train ablations that rely on these downstream scores. Tempers the enthusiasm for LLM-as-judge with task-specific caveats.","technical_approach":"On summarization, simplification, and GEC, run several open/closed LLMs including ChatGPT; collect classical automatic metrics, GPT-4 ratings, and human ratings; analyze cross-correlations.","experiments":"(1) ChatGPT is rated best by humans but penalized by classical metrics — those metrics reward reference similarity, not quality. (2) GPT-4 judgments correlate with humans much better than classical metrics but still show task-specific bias (e.g., missing fine-grained GEC errors).","authors_note":""},"tags":["evaluation","metrics","seq2seq"]},{"id":"2310.18696","title":"Probing LLMs for Joint Encoding of Linguistic Categories","authors":["Giulio Starace","Konstantinos Papakostas","Rochelle Choenni","Apostolos Panagiotopoulos","Matteo Rosati","Alina Leidinger","Ekaterina Shutova"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$76","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.18696","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/StaracePCPRLS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.476"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/StaracePCPRLS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.476","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"已有 probing 工作告诉我们 LLM 层级里低层偏句法、高层偏语义，但不同语言类别是否共享同一组神经元/表示并没有搞清。作者要回答的是 joint encoding 的问题——比如词性和依存关系用的是不是同一块电路。","importance":"机制可解释性的细化工作。结论若成立（句法类别之间存在显著的共享表示），会影响对多任务探针结果的解读，也对 pretrain 里'涌现的语言结构如何组织'提供更精细的画面。","technical_approach":"设计成对 probing：对两个语言类别 A 和 B，分别训练探针，然后看能否在共享表示子空间里互相预测。扩展到多语言设置考察跨语言是否也 joint encode。","experiments":"在主流 LLM（疑似 BERT/LLaMA 家族）多层上跑，观察到同层内不同句法类别的强共享、不同层间也有一定共享，多语言下对同类现象也有跨语言共享表示。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Prior probing tells us syntax lives in lower layers and semantics in upper ones, but not whether different linguistic categories share the same representations. The paper targets joint encoding — e.g., do POS and dependency use the same circuitry?","importance":"Refines mechanistic interpretability. If joint encoding holds, it changes how we should read multi-task probing results and gives a finer picture of how linguistic structure organizes inside pretrained models.","technical_approach":"Pairwise probing: for categories A and B, train probes and test whether a shared subspace lets one predict the other. Extended to multilingual setups to check cross-lingual joint encoding.","experiments":"On standard LLMs across layers, finds strong same-layer sharing across syntactic categories, partial cross-layer sharing, and cross-lingual sharing for analogous phenomena.","authors_note":""},"tags":["probing","linguistic-hierarchy","interpretability"]},{"id":"Sultan23","title":"Knowledge Distillation \\approx Label Smoothing: Fact or Fallacy?","authors":["Md. Sultan"],"institutions":["IBM Research"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/Sultan23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.271"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/Sultan23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.271","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"一种流行观点认为知识蒸馏 ≈ label smoothing（都是软化目标分布）。作者想验证这在实际 NLP 模型上到底成立不成立，尤其是两者对泛化和置信度校准的影响是否可互换。","importance":"理论-实证校准类工作。如果 KD 的收益确实只是正则化效应，那很多蒸馏工程工作就是在花大代价做 label smoothing；反之则说明 teacher 的暗知识确实不可替代。结论对压缩/蒸馏路线的认识有直接影响。","technical_approach":"在相同实验条件下对比三种训练：普通 CE、label smoothing、以及 KD（不同 teacher）。关注的不只是准确率，而是泛化 gap、校准（ECE）、在 OOD/对抗输入上的表现差异。","experiments":"结论是'fallacy'：KD 在多数设置下带来比 label smoothing 更大的准确率与校准收益，且 teacher 的具体分布形状影响显著——不是单纯的软化效应。","authors_note":"IBM Research（Md Arafat Sultan）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"A popular claim equates knowledge distillation with label smoothing (both soften targets). The paper tests whether they are actually interchangeable on generalization and calibration in NLP.","importance":"A theory-vs-practice calibration paper. If KD's gain is just regularization, most distillation pipelines are overpaying for what label smoothing gives. If not, teacher 'dark knowledge' is irreplaceable. Either way it sharpens how we think about compression.","technical_approach":"Matched-setup comparison of plain CE, label smoothing, and KD (with different teachers). Measures accuracy, generalization gap, calibration (ECE), and OOD/adversarial robustness — not just accuracy.","experiments":"Verdict: fallacy. KD produces larger accuracy and calibration gains than label smoothing in most settings, and teacher distribution shape matters beyond mere softening.","authors_note":"IBM Research (Md Arafat Sultan)."},"tags":["knowledge-distillation","label-smoothing","training-dynamics"]},{"id":"2310.14542","title":"Evaluating Large Language Models on Controlled Generation Tasks","authors":["Jiao Sun","Yufei Tian","Wangchunshu Zhou","Nan Xu","Qian Hu","Rahul Gupta","John Frederick Wieting","Nanyun Peng","Xuezhe Ma"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"While recent studies have looked into the abilities of large language models in various benchmark tasks, including question generation, reading comprehension, multilingual and etc, there have been few studies looking into the controllability of large language models on generation tasks. We present an extensive analysis of various benchmarks including a sentence planning benchmark with different granularities. After comparing large language models against state-of-the-start finetuned smaller models, we present a spectrum showing large language models falling behind, are comparable, or exceed the ability of smaller models. We conclude that **large language models struggle at meeting fine-grained hard constraints**.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.14542","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/SunTZXH0WPM23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.190"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/SunTZXH0WPM23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.190","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 在'受控生成'上到底行不行——尤其是细粒度硬约束（必须出现某个词、符合某种结构、长度精确）。以前大多只看粗粒度的风格/主题控制，没有系统比较 LLM 与 finetuned 小模型。","importance":"现实信号：很多人假设 GPT-4 在所有 NLP 任务上都压倒 finetuned 小模型，这篇告诉你细粒度硬约束下这个假设不成立。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：纯 next-token LM 在'满足组合性约束'上有结构性缺陷，这个短板不是靠继续 scaling 就能保证解决的。","technical_approach":"构建涵盖不同粒度的 controlled generation benchmark（句子规划、受限词汇、结构约束等），对比开源/闭源 LLM 与专门 finetune 的小模型在各约束下的通过率。","experiments":"画出一条谱系：在粗粒度的风格/主题控制上，LLM 能追平甚至超过小模型；在细粒度的硬约束上明显落后；约束越硬、组合越复杂，差距越大。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Do LLMs actually do controlled generation, especially with fine-grained hard constraints (must-include words, exact structure, precise length)? Prior work mostly covered coarse style/topic control and lacked head-to-head with finetuned small models.","importance":"Grounds the common assumption that GPT-4 dominates finetuned small models. It doesn't, under hard fine-grained constraints. Implication for pretrain: next-token LM has structural limitations on compositional constraint satisfaction — not obviously fixed by more scale.","technical_approach":"Build a controlled-generation benchmark at multiple granularities (sentence planning, lexical constraints, structural constraints) and compare open/closed LLMs with task-specific finetuned smaller models on constraint satisfaction rates.","experiments":"A clear spectrum: on coarse style/topic control LLMs match or beat small models; on fine-grained hard constraints they fall behind; harder and more compositional constraints widen the gap.","authors_note":""},"tags":["controlled-generation","evaluation","llm","benchmark"]},{"id":"2304.14933","title":"An Empirical Study of Multimodal Model Merging","authors":["Yi-Lin Sung","Linjie Li","Kevin Lin","Zhe Gan","Mohit Bansal","Lijuan Wang"],"institutions":["UNC Chapel Hill","Microsoft"],"abstract":"$77","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.14933","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/SungLLGBW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.105"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/SungLLGBW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.105","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"已有 model merging 工作几乎都是在同一个初始化、同类任务的模型之间做插值。作者要看一个更硬的问题：在不同模态（视觉、语言、跨模态）上分别训练的 Transformer，能不能合并出一个模态无关、参数高效的模型？","importance":"对多模态统一建模是一个 bottom-up 视角的尝试。如果 merging 在跨模态下能 work，那意味着不同模态的 Transformer 参数空间存在可对齐结构，这对理解 native multimodal pretrain 的 init 选择、shared backbone 的可行性是重要实证。即使不完全 work，失败模式也有信息量。","technical_approach":"系统扫 merging 三要素：初始化（是否同源）、合并机制（平均、task arithmetic、加权、permutation 对齐等）、以及模态特定架构的处理。合并对象是视觉 Transformer、语言 Transformer 和跨模态 Transformer。","experiments":"核心发现：初始化是决定性因素——共享 pretrain 初始化的模型才能被有效合并；跨模态合并可以做到接近 modality-specific 多模型联合的性能，但必须有共同祖先。纯独立预训练的模型合并会显著掉点。","authors_note":"UNC (Mohit Bansal 组) + Microsoft (Zhe Gan, Linjie Li, Kevin Lin)。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Model merging has mostly been studied within same-init, same-task-family models. This paper tackles the harder question: can Transformers trained on different modalities (vision, language, cross-modal) be merged into a single modality-agnostic, parameter-efficient model?","importance":"A bottom-up probe into unified multimodal modeling. If cross-modal merging works, it implies alignable structure in Transformer parameter spaces across modalities — informative for init choices and shared-backbone feasibility in native multimodal pretraining. The failure modes are also informative.","technical_approach":"Systematic sweep over three factors: initialization (shared vs. independent), merging mechanism (averaging, task arithmetic, weighted, permutation alignment), and handling of modality-specific modules. Merges vision, language, and cross-modal Transformers.","experiments":"Headline finding: initialization dominates. Only models sharing a pretraining ancestor merge effectively; with a shared init, cross-modal merging approaches the performance of keeping specialists separate. Independently pretrained models degrade sharply when merged.","authors_note":"UNC (Mohit Bansal's group) + Microsoft (Zhe Gan, Linjie Li, Kevin Lin)."},"tags":["model-merging","multimodal","transfer","optimization"],"notable_authors":["Mohit Bansal","Zhe Gan"]},{"id":"SureshMYHPR23","title":"Conceptual structure coheres in human cognition but not in large language models","authors":["Siddharth Suresh","Kushin Mukherjee","Xizheng Yu","Wei-Chun Huang","Lisa Padua","Timothy T. Rogers"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/SureshMYHPR23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.47"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/SureshMYHPR23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.47","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["cognition","concepts","llm","evaluation"]},{"id":"SveteC23","title":"Recurrent Neural Language Models as Probabilistic Finite-state Automata","authors":["Anej Svete","Ryan Cotterell"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/SveteC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.502"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/SveteC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.502","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["rnns","formal-languages","theory","language-modeling"]},{"id":"2310.13291","title":"Assessing Privacy Risks in Language Models: A Case Study on Summarization Tasks","authors":["Ruixiang Tang","Gord Lueck","Rodolfo Quispe","Huseyin A. Inan","Janardhan Kulkarni","Xia Hu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Large language models have revolutionized the field of NLP by achieving state-of-the-art performance on various tasks. However, there is a concern that these models may disclose information in the training data. In this study, we focus on the summarization task and investigate the membership inference (MI) attack: given a sample and black-box access to a model's API, it is possible to determine if the sample was part of the training data. We exploit text similarity and the model's resistance to document modifications as potential MI signals and evaluate their effectiveness on widely used datasets. Our results demonstrate that summarization models are at risk of exposing data membership, even in cases where the reference summary is not available. Furthermore, we discuss several safeguards for training summarization models to protect against MI attacks and discuss the inherent trade-off between privacy and utility.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.13291","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/TangLQIKH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.1029"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/TangLQIKH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.1029","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["privacy","membership-inference","language-models","memorization"]},{"id":"2403.02775","title":"EasyQuant: An Efficient Data-free Quantization Algorithm for LLMs","authors":["Hanlin Tang","Yifu Sun","Decheng Wu","Kai Liu","Jianchen Zhu","Zhanhui Kang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$78","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.02775","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/TangSWLZK23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.565"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/TangSWLZK23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.565","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["quantization","llm","data-free","compression"]},{"id":"2310.09773","title":"RSVP: Customer Intent Detection via Agent Response Contrastive and Generative Pre-Training","authors":["Yu-Chien Tang","Wei-Yao Wang","An-Zi Yen","Wen-Chih Peng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$79","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.09773","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/TangWYP23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.698"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/TangWYP23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.698","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["contrastive-learning","generative-pretraining","dialogue","intent"]},{"id":"TangYZY23","title":"When are Lemons Purple? The Concept Association Bias of Vision-Language Models","authors":["Yingtian Tang","Yutaro Yamada","Yoyo Zhang","Ilker Yildirim"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/TangYZY23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.886"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/TangYZY23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.886","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["vlm","bias","concepts","evaluation"]},{"id":"2310.16142","title":"A Language Model with Limited Memory Capacity Captures Interference in Human Sentence Processing","authors":["William Timkey","Tal Linzen"],"institutions":["New York University (NYU)"],"abstract":"$7a","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.16142","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/TimkeyL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.582"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/TimkeyL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.582","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"试图用 Transformer 的自注意力机制解释人类句子处理的认知负荷，但现有方法依赖不切实际的假设（如数百次并行检索和手动挑选特定注意力头）。","importance":"机制分析与认知建模。指出标准 Transformer 架构在模拟人类工作记忆时的局限性，提出引入容量限制是更合理的建模方向，为理解 LM 与人类认知的差异提供了视角。","technical_approach":"构建了一个具有有限记忆容量的语言模型机制。通过限制可访问的上下文或引入检索瓶颈，自然地捕捉到了人类在处理复杂句子时由于相似性产生的干扰效应（interference），而无需像前人那样手动挑选特定的注意力头。","experiments":"在心理语言学数据集上进行评估，证明引入记忆限制的模型比标准 GPT-2 更贴近人类的阅读时间预测和干扰效应。","authors_note":"NYU / Tal Linzen (心理语言学与 LM 机制分析知名学者)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Attempts to explain human sentence processing difficulty using Transformer self-attention rely on cognitively implausible assumptions, such as massive parallel retrieval and manually selected attention heads.","importance":"Mechanistic analysis and cognitive modeling. It highlights the limitations of standard Transformers in simulating human working memory and suggests that introducing capacity limits is a more plausible modeling direction.","technical_approach":"Implements a language model mechanism with limited memory capacity. By restricting accessible context or introducing a retrieval bottleneck, it naturally captures similarity-based interference effects seen in humans, without the need to manually cherry-pick specific attention heads.","experiments":"Evaluated on psycholinguistic datasets, showing that the memory-limited model better predicts human reading times and interference effects compared to standard GPT-2.","authors_note":"NYU / Tal Linzen"},"tags":["memory","sentence-processing","language-modeling","cognition"],"notable_authors":["Tal Linzen"]},{"id":"2310.08797","title":"A Comparative Analysis of Task-Agnostic Distillation Methods for Compressing Transformer Language Models","authors":["Takuma Udagawa","Aashka Trivedi","Michele Merler","Bishwaranjan Bhattacharjee"],"institutions":["IBM Research"],"abstract":"$7b","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08797","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/UdagawaTMB23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-INDUSTRY.3"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/UdagawaTMB23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-industry.3","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"针对 Transformer 语言模型的任务无关（通用）知识蒸馏方法繁多，缺乏在统一框架下的系统性对比和选型指导。","importance":"系统与效率。为预训练模型的通用压缩提供了详实的工程参考，明确了不同蒸馏目标（输出分布、隐藏状态、注意力矩阵）在不同学生架构下的优劣边界。","technical_approach":"复现并对比了输出分布（OD）转移、不同层映射策略的隐藏状态（HS）转移，以及基于 MiniLMv2 的多头注意力（MHA）转移。核心在于评估这些方法在不同学生模型架构下的通用表征迁移能力。","experiments":"在多种学生模型架构上进行了广泛实验，系统分析了各蒸馏方法在保留预训练模型通用效能上的表现。","authors_note":"IBM Research"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"There are many task-agnostic (general-purpose) knowledge distillation methods for Transformer LMs, but a systematic comparison and selection guide within a unified framework is lacking.","importance":"Systems and Efficiency. Provides a detailed engineering reference for general-purpose model compression, clarifying the trade-offs of different distillation targets (output distribution, hidden states, attention matrices) across various student architectures.","technical_approach":"Reproduces and compares Output Distribution (OD) transfer, Hidden State (HS) transfer with various layer mapping strategies, and Multi-Head Attention (MHA) transfer based on MiniLMv2. The core is to evaluate their ability to transfer general representations to different student architectures.","experiments":"Extensive experiments across various student architectures, systematically analyzing the performance of each method in retaining the general effectiveness of the pre-trained model.","authors_note":"IBM Research"},"tags":["distillation","compression","transformer","efficiency"]},{"id":"VeseliRKW23","title":"Evaluating the Knowledge Base Completion Potential of GPT","authors":["Blerta Veseli","Simon Razniewski","Jan-Christoph Kalo","Gerhard Weikum"],"institutions":["Max Planck Institute"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/VeseliRKW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.426"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/VeseliRKW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.426","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"大语言模型（LLM）内部蕴含丰富的世界知识，能否直接用 LLM 替代传统的知识图谱嵌入（KGE）模型来做严格的知识库补全（KBC）？","importance":"能力边界探索。明确了 LLM 的参数化知识与严格图谱结构知识之间的鸿沟，指出纯自回归生成在处理封闭域、高精度关系推理时的局限。","technical_approach":"将 KBC 任务转化为自然语言 prompt（如“预测尾实体”），评估 GPT 系列模型在不同关系类型上的补全能力，并与传统的专用 KGE 模型进行对比。","experiments":"尽管 GPT 在常识关系上表现尚可，但在标准 KBC 基准上，其性能不及专用的 KGE 模型，主要受限于幻觉和对复杂图谱拓扑结构的不敏感。","authors_note":"Max Planck Institute / Gerhard Weikum"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Can LLMs, which encode vast world knowledge, directly replace traditional Knowledge Graph Embedding (KGE) models for strict Knowledge Base Completion (KBC)?","importance":"Capability Boundary Exploration. Clarifies the gap between LLMs' parametric knowledge and strict graph structural knowledge, highlighting the limitations of pure autoregressive generation in closed-domain, high-precision relational reasoning.","technical_approach":"Converts KBC tasks into natural language prompts (e.g., 'predict the tail entity'), evaluates GPT models' completion abilities across different relation types, and compares them with traditional specialized KGE models.","experiments":"While GPT performs decently on commonsense relations, it falls short of specialized KGE models on standard KBC benchmarks, primarily limited by hallucinations and insensitivity to complex graph topologies.","authors_note":"Max Planck Institute / Gerhard Weikum"},"tags":["knowledge-probing","gpt"],"notable_authors":["Gerhard Weikum"]},{"id":"ViswanathanZBWN23","title":"Prompt2Model: Generating Deployable Models from Natural Language Instructions","authors":["Vijay Viswanathan","Chenyang Zhao","Amanda Bertsch","Tongshuang Wu","Graham Neubig"],"institutions":["Carnegie Mellon University (CMU)"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ViswanathanZBWN23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-DEMO.38"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ViswanathanZBWN23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-demo.38","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"针对特定任务部署千亿参数 LLM 成本极高，而手动收集数据训练小模型又耗时费力。","importance":"Pretrain-Posttrain 接口 / 数据合成。提出了一种从 Prompt 到可部署小模型的全自动流水线，展示了 LLM 作为“数据合成器和教师”在模型微型化中的应用范式。","technical_approach":"接收用户的自然语言任务描述，利用大模型自动生成训练数据集，同时检索相关的开源数据集，最后用这些混合数据微调一个较小的预训练模型（如 T5）。","experiments":"生成的特定任务小模型（参数量小几个数量级）在目标任务上的性能，能够超越作为数据生成器的零样本大模型。","authors_note":"CMU / Graham Neubig"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Deploying massive LLMs for specific tasks is prohibitively expensive, while manually collecting data to train smaller models is time-consuming.","importance":"Pretrain-Posttrain Interface / Data Synthesis. Proposes a fully automated pipeline from prompt to deployable small model, demonstrating the paradigm of using LLMs as 'data synthesizers and teachers' for model miniaturization.","technical_approach":"Takes a natural language task description, uses a large LLM to automatically generate a training dataset, retrieves relevant open-source datasets, and finally fine-tunes a smaller pre-trained model (like T5) on this combined data.","experiments":"The resulting task-specific small models (orders of magnitude smaller) outperform the zero-shot large models used as data generators on the target tasks.","authors_note":"CMU / Graham Neubig"},"tags":["data-synthesis","distillation"],"notable_authors":["Graham Neubig","Tongshuang Wu"]},{"id":"WanSNDEAP23","title":"Universal Self-Adaptive Prompting","authors":["Xingchen Wan","Ruoxi Sun","Hootan Nakhost","Hanjun Dai","Julian Eisenschlos","Sercan Ö. Arik","Tomas Pfister"],"institutions":["Google DeepMind"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WanSNDEAP23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.461"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WanSNDEAP23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.461","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"不同的任务甚至不同的输入样本，往往需要不同的 Prompt 策略（如 Zero-shot, Few-shot, CoT）才能激发 LLM 的最佳性能，手动为每个任务寻找最优 Prompt 成本极高。","importance":"推理增强。探索了模型在推理阶段的“自我元认知”能力，即让模型自己决定用什么方式思考，减少了对人工 prompt 工程的依赖。","technical_approach":"提出 USP (Universal Self-Adaptive Prompting) 框架。不依赖外部的启发式规则，而是让 LLM 自身根据当前输入，从一个包含多种 Prompt 策略的候选池中，自适应地打分并选择最合适的一种进行推理。","experiments":"在多个基准测试中，USP 能够自动匹配到最佳策略，取得接近甚至超越人工精调 Prompt 的性能。","authors_note":"Google DeepMind / Hanjun Dai"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Different tasks and even different input samples often require different prompting strategies (e.g., Zero-shot, Few-shot, CoT) to elicit optimal LLM performance, making manual prompt tuning prohibitively expensive.","importance":"Inference Enhancement. Explores the model's 'self-metacognition' ability during inference—letting the model decide how to think—reducing reliance on manual prompt engineering.","technical_approach":"Proposes the USP (Universal Self-Adaptive Prompting) framework. Instead of relying on external heuristics, it allows the LLM itself to adaptively score and select the most suitable prompting strategy from a candidate pool based on the current input.","experiments":"Across multiple benchmarks, USP automatically matches the best strategy, achieving performance close to or exceeding manually fine-tuned prompts.","authors_note":"Google DeepMind / Hanjun Dai"},"tags":["prompting","self-adaptive"],"notable_authors":["Hanjun Dai"]},{"id":"2310.07018","title":"NEWTON: Are Large Language Models Capable of Physical Reasoning?","authors":["Yi Ru Wang","Jiafei Duan","Dieter Fox","Siddhartha S. Srinivasa"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$7c","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.07018","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WangDFS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.652"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WangDFS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.652","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心是补上“LLM 是否具备物理常识与物理推理能力”这一评测空白。已有工作大量测语法、语义、常识和数学，但对日常物体属性、可供性、相互作用这类物理知识缺少系统 benchmark，导致大家往往用零散案例判断模型能力，既不稳定，也不利于后续定向改进。","importance":"它的主要贡献是数据与评测范式，而不是新的预训练方法。对 pretrain 研究的价值在于：它把“物理世界知识”从模糊能力拆成可测的 object-attribute 维度，并提供可定制生成流程，这有助于分析预训练数据覆盖、知识表征边界，以及后训练或检索增强到底是在补知识还是补推理。","technical_approach":"方法上它做的是一个物理推理基准库 NEWTON，并配套了领域自定义扩展管线。核心设计不是出难题，而是先把物体、属性和关系组织成结构化 object-attribute 对，再围绕这些属性构造评测任务；这样做的好处是可控、可扩展，也更容易定位错误来源。相比开放式问答式评测，这种设计牺牲了一部分任务自然度，但换来了更清晰的覆盖面和更稳定的比较基线。","experiments":"从摘要能确认的关键事实是：NEWTON 包含 2800 个 object-attribute 对，并用于评估 LLM 的物理推理。摘要没有给出具体参评模型、指标、提升数字或错误分布，因此这里不能臆造。可以确定的是，作者不仅做静态 benchmark，还强调 benchmark 的可迁移生成流程，说明实验目标不只是排名，而是支持特定应用场景下的物理知识评估与定制扩展。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a missing evaluation axis: whether LLMs actually possess usable physical reasoning about everyday objects. Prior work extensively probes syntax, semantics, commonsense, and math, but physical attributes and object interactions are usually tested only through scattered examples, which makes the conclusions weak and hard to build on.","importance":"This is primarily a benchmark and dataset contribution, not a new pretraining method. Its relevance to pretraining is that it operationalizes “physical world knowledge” into measurable object-attribute units, which makes it easier to study data coverage, representation limits, and whether later improvements come from better knowledge acquisition or just stronger task adaptation.","technical_approach":"The core contribution is NEWTON, a repository and benchmark for physical reasoning, plus a pipeline for domain-specific variants. The key design choice is to organize evaluation around structured object-attribute pairs rather than unconstrained QA alone. That improves control, coverage, and error attribution. The trade-off is lower task naturalness, but the benefit is a cleaner probe of what the model knows and where it fails.","experiments":"The abstract confirms that NEWTON contains 2,800 object-attribute pairs and is used to evaluate LLM physical reasoning. It does not provide model sizes, benchmark metrics, ranking numbers, or ablations, so those should not be invented. What is clear is that the evaluation is meant to be extensible: the customization pipeline is part of the contribution, not an implementation detail.","authors_note":""},"tags":["benchmark","physical-reasoning"]},{"id":"WangI23","title":"DocSplit: Simple Contrastive Pretraining for Large Document Embeddings","authors":["Yujie Wang","Mike Izbicki"],"institutions":[],"abstract":",","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WangI23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.945"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WangI23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.945","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注长文档表示学习：如何在不依赖复杂架构或昂贵监督信号的情况下，学到对大文档检索和匹配有效的 embedding。以往长文档 embedding 常依赖分层编码、任务特定监督或复杂预训练，训练成本高，迁移性也未必稳定。","importance":"它的价值在于提出“简单对比式预训练”也能做大文档 embedding，这对表征学习范式有方法级启发。如果结果成立，说明长文档场景不一定需要很重的结构设计，数据构造和正负样本定义本身就是性能杠杆。","technical_approach":"从标题能确认，方法核心是 DocSplit：通过 document splitting 构造对比学习信号来预训练大文档 embedding。直觉上，这是把同一文档的不同片段视作语义一致的正样本，以此逼模型学会跨段聚合主题信息，同时通过负样本拉开不同文档边界。相比显式标注或生成式长文档目标，这种方法更轻量，但也可能更偏主题一致性而非细粒度事实对齐。","experiments":"当前给定信息没有摘要、没有数据集、没有模型规模、也没有结果数字，因此无法提供可信的实验细节。可以确定的只有：论文主张用一种简单的 contrastive pretraining 方法学习 large document embeddings。其是否优于生成式预训练、收益在多长文档上最明显、以及对 chunking 策略有多敏感，都需要正文或表格支持后才能判断。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets long-document representation learning: how to obtain useful document embeddings without relying on heavy architectures or expensive supervision. Prior approaches to long-document embeddings often use hierarchical encoders, task-specific labels, or complex pretraining setups, which raise cost and can limit transfer.","importance":"Its potential contribution is methodological: showing that simple contrastive pretraining may be enough for large-document embeddings. If the empirical claim holds, it suggests that for this setting, data construction and pair definition can matter as much as architecture.","technical_approach":"From the title, the core idea is DocSplit, a simple contrastive pretraining scheme built around splitting documents. The likely mechanism is to treat segments from the same document as positive pairs, forcing the encoder to preserve document-level semantics across chunks, while negatives push apart unrelated documents. Compared with generative objectives or supervised retrieval training, this is cheaper and cleaner, but it may favor topical cohesion more than fine-grained factual alignment.","experiments":"No abstract or quantitative results are provided here, so model sizes, datasets, baselines, and gains cannot be stated responsibly. What we can say is limited: the paper claims a simple contrastive pretraining recipe for large document embeddings. Whether its gains are robust across document length, splitting strategy, and retrieval tasks remains to be verified from the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["contrastive","document-embedding"]},{"id":"2305.13829","title":"Learning from Mistakes via Cooperative Study Assistant for Large Language Models","authors":["Danqing Wang","Lei Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$7d","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.13829","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WangL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.659"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WangL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.659","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：LLM 虽然能基于自反馈修正答案，但单模型自我反思的反馈经常不准，导致“从错误中学习”这条路收益受限。过去不少方法把纠错责任放在同一个模型身上，结果是错误诊断和错误修复都可能沿着同一偏差漂移。","importance":"它的重要性在于把自我改进从单代理机制改成协作机制。对 posttrain 乃至 pretrain 诊断的启发是：错误分析本身可以作为一个独立角色外包出来，模型能力提升不一定靠更强 base model，也可以靠更好的 error collection 和 case-based guidance 管线。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 SALAM，用一个辅助学生代理配合主 LLM 学习错误。框架分两阶段：gathering 阶段由 student assistant 主动 probing 主模型、分析错误并把交互写入 mistake memory；examination 阶段则检索相关错误案例和指导意见，帮助主模型在新问题上预判相似错误。与单模型 self-refine 相比，SALAM 的关键区别是把‘发现错因’与‘生成最终答案’角色分开，从而提升反馈质量。代价是系统更复杂，而且检索记忆是否泛化、是否会引入历史偏见，是明确边界。","experiments":"从摘要可确认，作者既评估了通用 study assistant，也做了面向特定任务的定制 assistant。摘要没有给出参评模型、任务集、提升数字和 ablation 结果，因此不能写具体分数。可以确定的实验指向是：作者不只是看最终答对率，还关注通过错误记忆与协作反馈能否稳定改善后续回答，这使它更像一个持续学习/测试时适配框架。","authors_note":"作者包含 Lei Li。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a concrete limitation of self-improvement in LLMs: self-generated feedback is often unreliable, so learning from one’s own mistakes does not consistently help. Many prior setups ask the same model to both diagnose and repair its errors, which makes the whole loop vulnerable to the same internal bias.","importance":"The contribution is a systems-level shift from single-agent self-refinement to cooperative correction. The broader lesson is that error analysis can be treated as a separate capability. Better performance may come not only from stronger base models, but also from better mistake collection, retrieval, and guidance mechanisms.","technical_approach":"The method, SALAM, introduces an auxiliary study-assistant agent to help the main LLM learn from mistakes. It has two phases. In gathering, the assistant probes the main model, identifies failures, and stores them in a mistake memory. In examination, it retrieves relevant prior cases and provides guidance before the main model answers. Compared with standard self-refine pipelines, the key difference is role separation: error discovery and answer generation are decoupled. That can improve feedback quality, though it adds system complexity and raises questions about memory generalization and bias accumulation.","experiments":"The abstract confirms that the paper studies both a general study assistant and task-customized assistants. It does not provide model names, benchmark suites, or numeric gains, so those should remain unspecified. The experimental angle is still clear: the paper evaluates whether cooperative memory-backed feedback improves future answers more reliably than self-feedback alone.","authors_note":"Lei Li is among the authors."},"tags":["self-improvement","feedback"],"notable_authors":["Lei Li"]},{"id":"2304.02210","title":"Document-Level Machine Translation with Large Language Models","authors":["Longyue Wang","Chenyang Lyu","Tianbo Ji","Zhirui Zhang","Dian Yu","Shuming Shi","Zhaopeng Tu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$7e","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.02210","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WangLJZY0T23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.1036"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WangLJZY0T23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.1036","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：像 ChatGPT 这样的 LLM，是否真的具备文档级机器翻译所需的 discourse modeling 能力，而不仅是句子级流畅改写能力。以往对 LLM 翻译能力的讨论常聚焦单句质量，但文档级翻译更依赖指代消解、篇章衔接和跨句一致性，这正好能更细地暴露模型的上下文建模边界。","importance":"它的重要性主要在评测与能力分析层面。对 pretrain 的启示是：如果 LLM 在开放对话中表现出的连贯性不能稳定转化为文档级 MT 的 discourse competence，那么“长上下文预训练带来自然 discourse 能力”这个假设就需要更谨慎地拆解。","technical_approach":"方法上，这不是提出新模型，而是把 document-level MT 当作一个严格测试平台，系统比较不同 context-aware prompts、ChatGPT、商业 MT 系统以及先进 document-level MT 方法。设计的关键点是把‘提示方式’和‘模型能力’分开考察，并进一步 probe 模型编码的 discourse knowledge 及训练技术影响。相比只报 BLEU，这种分析更接近机制诊断：同一模型在不同上下文注入方式下表现如何，能帮助判断问题出在底层知识、推理使用，还是提示接口。","experiments":"摘要明确给出三类实验：一是 context-aware prompts 的效果；二是 ChatGPT 与商业 MT 和先进 doc-level MT 方法的翻译性能对比；三是对 discourse 建模能力的 probing 分析。摘要没有提供所用语言对、测试集、指标和具体数值，因此不能写提升幅度。能确定的是，这篇论文关注的不只是总体翻译质量，还专门看 discourse phenomena，这使实验更适合回答‘LLM 是否真的会用跨句上下文’。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether LLMs such as ChatGPT truly possess the discourse modeling ability required for document-level machine translation, rather than just producing fluent sentence-level paraphrases. Prior discussions of LLM translation often focus on sentence quality, but document-level MT stresses cross-sentence consistency, reference tracking, and coherence.","importance":"Its value is mainly in evaluation and capability diagnosis. For pretraining research, the implication is important: if the coherence seen in general chat does not reliably translate into document-level MT discourse competence, then claims about long-context pretraining yielding robust discourse understanding need to be treated more carefully.","technical_approach":"This is an evaluation-driven study rather than a new model. It uses document-level MT as a stress test and examines three axes: context-aware prompting, comparison against commercial and advanced document-level MT systems, and probing of encoded discourse knowledge. A useful design choice is to separate prompt effects from model effects. That makes the study more diagnostic than simply reporting a translation score.","experiments":"The abstract clearly states three experimental components: prompt studies, model comparison, and discourse probing. It does not provide language pairs, test sets, metrics, or exact numbers, so those cannot be filled in here. What is clear is that the paper does not stop at overall translation quality; it explicitly analyzes discourse phenomena, which is the right level if the goal is to assess real cross-sentence modeling.","authors_note":""},"tags":["long-context","mt","evaluation"]},{"id":"WangLSL23","title":"Self-Knowledge Guided Retrieval Augmentation for Large Language Models","authors":["Yile Wang","Peng Li","Maosong Sun","Yang Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WangLSL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.691"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WangLSL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.691","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注检索增强中的一个基础问题：LLM 何时真的需要外部检索，何时其实已经知道答案。很多 RAG 系统默认‘能检索就检索’，但这会引入无谓开销，也可能把外部噪声带进来，反而伤害生成稳定性。","importance":"它的重要性在于把 retrieval augmentation 从固定管线推进到自适应决策问题。对 pretrain/posttrain 的启示是：模型内部知识与外部记忆不是简单叠加关系，先判断自知之明，再决定是否检索，可能比盲目扩大检索召回更关键。","technical_approach":"从标题能确认，方法核心是 self-knowledge guided retrieval augmentation。也就是先利用模型对自身知识状态的判断来引导检索触发或检索使用，而不是无条件接入外部文档。与标准 RAG 相比，这种设计的关键是把‘我知不知道’作为中间变量；如果判断准确，就能减少不必要检索，并避免已知答案被错误证据干扰。边界也很清楚：一旦 self-knowledge estimation 不准，系统就会出现该检索时不检索，或不该检索时盲检索的问题。","experiments":"当前给定信息没有摘要和结果数字，因此不能可靠描述模型、数据集或提升幅度。可稳妥概括的实验主线应是比较：无检索、总是检索、以及 self-knowledge guided 检索三种设置；并考察在知识充足与知识不足样本上的差异收益。除此之外都需要正文支撑。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a basic but under-discussed question in retrieval augmentation: when does an LLM actually need external retrieval, and when does it already know enough internally? Many RAG systems retrieve by default, which increases cost and can inject noisy evidence that destabilizes generation.","importance":"Its significance is in reframing retrieval augmentation as an adaptive decision problem rather than a fixed pipeline. The broader implication is that internal parametric knowledge and external memory should be coordinated, not simply stacked. A good estimate of what the model already knows may matter as much as retrieval quality itself.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method centers on self-knowledge guided retrieval augmentation. The likely mechanism is to let the model’s estimate of its own knowledge state determine whether retrieval should be triggered or how retrieved content should be used. Compared with standard always-on RAG, the key change is introducing a gating variable: does the model already know the answer? If that estimate is good, the system can avoid unnecessary retrieval and reduce harm from irrelevant documents. The obvious failure mode is poor self-knowledge estimation, which leads to both missed retrieval and unnecessary retrieval.","experiments":"No abstract or quantitative results are available here, so model scales, datasets, and gains should not be fabricated. The most plausible experimental comparison is among three modes: no retrieval, always retrieve, and self-knowledge-guided retrieval. Beyond that, especially any numerical claims, the full paper is needed.","authors_note":""},"tags":["rag","self-knowledge"]},{"id":"WangY023","title":"Can ChatGPT Defend its Belief in Truth? Evaluating LLM Reasoning via Debate","authors":["Boshi Wang","Xiang Yue","Huan Sun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WangY023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.795"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WangY023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.795","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：LLM 是否真的拥有稳定的、可辩护的真信念，而不只是会在单轮问答中给出看似正确的答案。传统 QA 评测只看最终答案，难以区分模型是基于一致推理坚持真值，还是被表述方式和对抗话术轻易带偏。","importance":"它的重要性在于提出了一种更接近交互式推理稳定性的评测视角。对机制分析和 posttrain 的启示是：模型是否能在辩论中捍卫真实命题，可能比单轮正确率更能暴露其信念稳定性、对抗鲁棒性和内部知识调用的一致性。","technical_approach":"从标题可知，方法核心是通过 debate 来评估 LLM reasoning。关键设计不是再出一套静态题，而是让模型在对抗性多轮交互中为自己的判断辩护，从而观察其是否能坚持真值、识别伪论据并维持一致立场。与标准 QA 或 CoT 评测相比，debate 更强调‘理由在压力下是否稳定’。这样做有效的原因是，很多表面正确的回答在遭遇反驳后会暴露出脆弱性。边界是：辩论表现也会受角色设定、提示方式和语言能力影响，不完全等价于底层信念。","experiments":"当前没有摘要和结果数字，因此无法确定使用了哪些模型、辩论协议、任务集和具体结论强度。唯一可确认的是，论文把 debate 当作 reasoning evaluation 工具，而标题中的“Can ChatGPT Defend its Belief in Truth?”暗示其重点是检验 ChatGPT 在真值辩护上的稳定性，而不只是回答正确率。","authors_note":"作者包含 Huan Sun。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether an LLM can consistently defend true beliefs, rather than merely produce correct-looking answers in a single turn. Standard QA evaluation only checks the endpoint, so it cannot tell whether the model’s answer is supported by stable reasoning or is easily swayed by framing and counterarguments.","importance":"Its contribution is an evaluation reframing toward interactive reasoning stability. For mechanistic analysis and post-training, this matters because the ability to defend a true claim under debate may reveal more about belief consistency, adversarial robustness, and knowledge use than one-shot accuracy alone.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method is to evaluate LLM reasoning through debate. The key shift is from static question answering to adversarial multi-turn defense of a claim. This setup tests whether the model can maintain truth, reject misleading arguments, and preserve internal consistency under pressure. Compared with standard QA or even chain-of-thought prompting, debate probes the stability of reasons, not just the presence of an answer. The trade-off is that debate quality is also influenced by prompting protocol and rhetorical ability, so it is not a pure measure of latent belief.","experiments":"No abstract or numeric results are provided, so the models, debate protocol, benchmarks, and exact findings should not be specified here. What can be stated safely is that the paper uses debate as a reasoning evaluation tool, and the title suggests a focus on whether ChatGPT can reliably defend truth rather than merely answer correctly once.","authors_note":"Huan Sun is among the authors."},"tags":["reasoning","evaluation","llm"],"notable_authors":["Huan Sun"]},{"id":"WangYHZH23","title":"Hallucination Detection for Generative Large Language Models by Bayesian Sequential Estimation","authors":["Xiaohua Wang","Yuliang Yan","Longtao Huang","Xiaoqing Zheng","Xuanjing Huang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WangYHZH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.949"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WangYHZH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.949","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["hallucination","evaluation"]},{"id":"WangZ023","title":"On the Dimensionality of Sentence Embeddings","authors":["Hongwei Wang","Hongming Zhang","Dong Yu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WangZ023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.694"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WangZ023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.694","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["embeddings","dimensionality"]},{"id":"Wen-YiM23","title":"Hyperpolyglot LLMs: Cross-Lingual Interpretability in Token Embeddings","authors":["Andrea W. Wen-Yi","David Mimno"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/Wen-YiM23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.71"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/Wen-YiM23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.71","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["interpretability","multilingual","embeddings","cross-lingual"]},{"id":"WenZGZH23","title":"Re³Dial: Retrieve, Reorganize and Rescale Conversations for Long-Turn Open-Domain Dialogue Pre-training","authors":["Jiaxin Wen","Hao Zhou","Jian Guan","Jie Zhou","Minlie Huang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WenZGZH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.612"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WenZGZH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.612","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["dialogue-pretraining","long-turn","data-construction"]},{"id":"West0SLJLCHBB023","title":"NovaCOMET: Open Commonsense Foundation Models with Symbolic Knowledge Distillation","authors":["Peter West","Ronan Le Bras","Taylor Sorensen","Bill Yuchen Lin","Liwei Jiang","Ximing Lu","Khyathi Raghavi Chandu","Jack Hessel","Ashutosh Baheti","Chandra Bhagavatula","Yejin Choi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/West0SLJLCHBB023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.80"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/West0SLJLCHBB023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.80","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["knowledge-distillation","commonsense","foundation-model"]},{"id":"WiegreffeFTCS23","title":"Increasing Probability Mass on Answer Choices Does Not Always Improve Accuracy","authors":["Sarah Wiegreffe","Matthew Finlayson","Oyvind Tafjord","Peter Clark","Ashish Sabharwal"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WiegreffeFTCS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.522"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WiegreffeFTCS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.522","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["calibration","multiple-choice","llm-evaluation"]},{"id":"WilcoxMCP23","title":"Language Model Quality Correlates with Psychometric Predictive Power in Multiple Languages","authors":["Ethan Wilcox","Clara Meister","Ryan Cotterell","Tiago Pimentel"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WilcoxMCP23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.466"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WilcoxMCP23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.466","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["psychometrics","language-model","multilingual","evaluation"]},{"id":"WuLXDW0X23","title":"DEPN: Detecting and Editing Privacy Neurons in Pretrained Language Models","authors":["Xinwei Wu","Junzhuo Li","Minghui Xu","Weilong Dong","Shuangzhi Wu","Chao Bian","Deyi Xiong"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WuLXDW0X23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.174"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WuLXDW0X23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.174","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["privacy","neuron-editing","interpretability","pretrained-lm"]},{"id":"WuMQLH23","title":"Query-as-context Pre-training for Dense Passage Retrieval","authors":["Xing Wu","Guangyuan Ma","Wanhui Qian","Zijia Lin","Songlin Hu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/WuMQLH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.118"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/WuMQLH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.118","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["dense-retrieval","pretraining","query-as-context"]},{"id":"2311.01732","title":"Proto-lm: A Prototypical Network-Based Framework for Built-in Interpretability in Large Language Models","authors":["Sean Xie","Soroush Vosoughi","Saeed Hassanpour"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Large Language Models (LLMs) have significantly advanced the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP), but their lack of interpretability has been a major concern. Current methods for interpreting LLMs are post hoc, applied after inference time, and have limitations such as their focus on low-level features and lack of explainability at higher level text units. In this work, we introduce proto-lm, a prototypical network-based white-box framework that allows LLMs to learn immediately interpretable embeddings during the fine-tuning stage while maintaining competitive performance. Our method's applicability and interpretability are demonstrated through experiments on a wide range of NLP tasks, and our results indicate a new possibility of creating interpretable models without sacrificing performance. This novel approach to interpretability in LLMs can pave the way for more interpretable models without the need to sacrifice performance.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.01732","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/XieVH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.261"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/XieVH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.261","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["interpretability","prototypical-networks","architecture"]},{"id":"XuGDM23","title":"Baize: An Open-Source Chat Model with Parameter-Efficient Tuning on Self-Chat Data","authors":["Canwen Xu","Daya Guo","Nan Duan","Julian J. McAuley"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/XuGDM23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.385"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/XuGDM23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.385","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["synthetic-data","sft","self-chat","peft"]},{"id":"2305.13993","title":"Condensing Multilingual Knowledge with Lightweight Language-Specific Modules","authors":["Haoran Xu","Weiting Tan","Shuyue Stella Li","Yunmo Chen","Benjamin Van Durme","Philipp Koehn","Kenton Murray"],"institutions":["Johns Hopkins University"],"abstract":"$7f","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.13993","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/XuTLCDKM23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.97"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/XuTLCDKM23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.97","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"多语言翻译中，为每种语言引入独立的 language-specific (LS) 模块能提升性能，但当语言数量扩展到数百种时，全秩矩阵带来的参数量不可控。问题是如何在保持 LS 模块收益的同时大幅压缩参数。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：大规模多语言/多专家场景下，低秩分解 + 蒸馏融合是一种可行的参数压缩路径，与 MoE 的 expert 压缩问题直接相关。当 expert 数量极大时，这种思路比直接做稀疏路由更节省存储。","technical_approach":"提出 Language-Specific Matrix Synthesis (LMS)：将每种语言的 LS 模块用两个小矩阵的乘积来近似全秩矩阵，实现低秩构造。进一步提出 Fuse Distillation (FD)，将多个 LS 模块的知识蒸馏到一个共享模块中。关键选择是用低秩分解而非剪枝或量化，因为目标是在训练阶段就控制参数增长，而非事后压缩。与标准 MoE 的区别在于 expert 本身被压缩，而非靠路由稀疏化来省 FLOPs。","experiments":"在多语言机器翻译任务上验证，具体参数量和语言数未在摘要中给出。核心结论是 LMS 在大幅减少参数的同时保持了接近全秩 LS 模块的翻译质量，FD 进一步通过知识融合提升了共享模块的泛化能力。","authors_note":"Haoran Xu, Benjamin Van Durme 等，来自 Johns Hopkins University。Van Durme 是 JHU CLSP 的核心成员，在 NLP/信息抽取领域有长期积累。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Language-specific modules boost multilingual MT but become parameter-prohibitive when scaling to hundreds of languages. The goal is to compress these modules without sacrificing per-language quality.","importance":"Method-level contribution. Relevant to pretrain research as a parameter-efficient strategy for scaling large numbers of experts—directly applicable to MoE settings where expert count is very high.","technical_approach":"Language-Specific Matrix Synthesis (LMS) constructs each LS module as a product of two small matrices (low-rank approximation) instead of full-rank FC layers. Fuse Distillation (FD) then condenses knowledge from multiple LS modules into a single shared module. The key design choice is to control parameter growth at training time via low-rank factorization rather than post-hoc compression.","experiments":"Evaluated on multilingual MT. LMS substantially reduces parameters while maintaining translation quality close to full-rank LS modules. FD further improves the shared module's generalization. Specific model sizes and language counts not detailed in the abstract.","authors_note":"Haoran Xu, Benjamin Van Durme et al., Johns Hopkins University (CLSP)."},"tags":["multilingual","machine-translation","moe","parameter-efficiency"],"notable_authors":["Benjamin Van Durme"]},{"id":"XuZCM23","title":"Look-back Decoding for Open-Ended Text Generation","authors":["Nan Xu","Chunting Zhou","Asli Celikyilmaz","Xuezhe Ma"],"institutions":["Meta FAIR","USC"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/XuZCM23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.66"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/XuZCM23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.66","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"开放式文本生成中，自回归解码容易产生重复、退化等问题。Look-back Decoding 试图在解码阶段通过回顾已生成内容来缓解这些退化现象。","importance":"方法级贡献，聚焦于推理阶段的解码策略改进。对 pretrain 研究的直接启示有限，但对理解 AR 模型的生成退化机制有参考价值——退化是模型问题还是解码问题，这个区分对 pretrain 目标设计有间接意义。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失，根据标题推断：在解码过程中引入对已生成 token 的回顾机制（look-back），调整后续 token 的生成概率分布，以减少重复和退化。具体机制细节无法确认。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法提供具体实验数据。","authors_note":"Chunting Zhou (Meta FAIR)、Xuezhe Ma (USC，MoE/高效架构方向有多篇工作)、Asli Celikyilmaz (Meta FAIR，对话生成方向)。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Open-ended text generation with AR models suffers from degeneration (repetition, incoherence). Look-back Decoding addresses this at inference time by conditioning on previously generated content.","importance":"Method-level, focused on decoding strategy. Limited direct pretrain impact, but relevant to understanding whether generation degeneration is a model or decoding problem—a distinction that informs pretrain objective design.","technical_approach":"Abstract unavailable. Based on the title, the method introduces a look-back mechanism during decoding that adjusts token probabilities by referencing already-generated text to reduce repetition and degeneration.","experiments":"Abstract unavailable; no experimental details can be provided.","authors_note":"Chunting Zhou (Meta FAIR), Xuezhe Ma (USC, known for MoE/efficient architecture work), Asli Celikyilmaz (Meta FAIR)."},"tags":["decoding-strategy","text-generation"],"notable_authors":["Chunting Zhou","Xuezhe Ma","Asli Celikyilmaz"]},{"id":"2310.08309","title":"Not All Demonstration Examples are Equally Beneficial: Reweighting Demonstration Examples for In-Context Learning","authors":["Zhe Yang","Damai Dai","Peiyi Wang","Zhifang Sui"],"institutions":["Peking University","Tsinghua University"],"abstract":"$80","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08309","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YangDWS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.880"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YangDWS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.880","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"In-Context Learning (ICL) 中，所有 demonstration example 被等权对待，但实际上不同 example 的质量差异很大。问题是如何为 demonstration 分配近似最优的权重，以及如何在 ICL 中应用这些权重。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的间接启示：ICL 性能对 demonstration 权重敏感，说明模型内部对不同上下文信息的利用是非均匀的。这与预训练数据配比、数据质量加权的思路相通——不是所有训练信号都同等有价值。","technical_approach":"设计了 Masked Self-Prediction (MSP) 评分来评估权重质量（无需额外验证集）：遮蔽部分 demonstration 后让模型自预测，以此衡量各 example 的贡献。为加速搜索，将权重离散化。关键选择是用模型自身的预测能力作为权重评估信号，避免了对外部标注数据的依赖。","experiments":"摘要中未给出具体数字。核心结论是 MSP 评分与最终 ICL 性能有强相关性，加权后的 ICL 优于等权基线。","authors_note":"Damai Dai（智谱/清华，DeepSeek 团队核心成员之一）、Zhifang Sui（北京大学）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"ICL treats all demonstration examples equally, but their quality varies significantly. The problem is how to assign approximately optimal weights to demonstrations and apply them during ICL without extra validation data.","importance":"Method-level contribution. Indirect pretrain relevance: the sensitivity of ICL to demonstration weighting reflects non-uniform utilization of context information by the model, paralleling data quality weighting in pretraining.","technical_approach":"Proposes Masked Self-Prediction (MSP) score: masks parts of demonstrations and uses the model's self-prediction to assess each example's contribution, avoiding dependence on external labeled data. Weights are discretized to speed up search. The key insight is using the model's own predictive signal as a proxy for demonstration quality.","experiments":"Specific numbers not provided in the abstract. Core finding: MSP score strongly correlates with final ICL performance, and weighted ICL outperforms equal-weight baselines.","authors_note":"Damai Dai (Zhipu/Tsinghua, core member of DeepSeek team), Zhifang Sui (Peking University)."},"tags":["in-context-learning","demonstration-selection","prompting"],"notable_authors":["Damai Dai"]},{"id":"2310.06498","title":"A New Benchmark and Reverse Validation Method for Passage-level Hallucination Detection","authors":["Shiping Yang","Renliang Sun","Xiaojun Wan"],"institutions":["Peking University"],"abstract":"$81","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06498","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YangS023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.256"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YangS023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.256","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 容易生成幻觉（事实错误和未经验证的信息），现有零资源幻觉检测方法多在句子级别工作。问题是如何在段落级别进行零资源幻觉检测，以及如何构建可靠的评测基准。","importance":"数据/评测级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的间接启示：幻觉是预训练模型的固有问题，理解幻觉的检测和模式有助于反哺预训练数据质量控制和训练目标设计。段落级检测比句子级更贴近实际使用场景。","technical_approach":"提出基于反向验证（reverse validation）的自检方法：让模型根据生成内容反向推理，检查一致性来发现事实错误。同时构建了 PHD (Passage-level Hallucination Detection) 基准，由 ChatGPT 生成、人工标注。与句子级方法的区别在于需要处理段落内的上下文依赖和跨句一致性。","experiments":"摘要中未给出具体数字。核心结论是反向验证方法在段落级幻觉检测上优于现有零资源方法，PHD 基准为后续研究提供了标准化评测。","authors_note":"Xiaojun Wan，北京大学，在文本生成和摘要方向有长期积累。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLMs generate hallucinations, and existing zero-resource detection methods operate at sentence level. The problem is passage-level hallucination detection without external resources, plus building a reliable benchmark.","importance":"Benchmark/evaluation-level contribution. Indirect pretrain relevance: understanding hallucination patterns can inform pretraining data quality control and training objective design. Passage-level detection is more realistic than sentence-level.","technical_approach":"Proposes a reverse validation self-check: the model reasons backward from generated content to check consistency, detecting factual errors. Also constructs PHD (Passage-level Hallucination Detection) benchmark, generated by ChatGPT and annotated by humans. Unlike sentence-level methods, this must handle intra-passage context dependencies and cross-sentence consistency.","experiments":"Specific numbers not provided in the abstract. Core finding: reverse validation outperforms existing zero-resource methods at passage-level hallucination detection. PHD benchmark provides standardized evaluation for future work.","authors_note":"Xiaojun Wan, Peking University, long-standing work in text generation and summarization."},"tags":["hallucination","benchmark","evaluation","factuality"],"notable_authors":["Xiaojun Wan"]},{"id":"YangYFYWWZ23","title":"RefGPT: Dialogue Generation of GPT, by GPT, and for GPT","authors":["Dongjie Yang","Ruifeng Yuan","Yuantao Fan","Yifei Yang","Zili Wang","Shusen Wang","Hai Zhao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YangYFYWWZ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.165"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YangYFYWWZ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.165","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"如何利用 GPT 自身来生成高质量的对话数据，用于训练和改进 GPT 类模型。","importance":"数据级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的间接启示：合成数据的质量和多样性是 posttrain 阶段的关键问题，而 posttrain 数据质量会反哺对 pretrain 策略的需求理解。但这篇更偏 posttrain/数据合成方向。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失，无法提供详细技术描述。根据标题推断：RefGPT 是一个用 GPT 生成对话数据、再用这些数据训练 GPT 的闭环框架。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法提供实验细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to use GPT itself to generate high-quality dialogue data for training and improving GPT-like models.","importance":"Data-level contribution. Indirect pretrain relevance: synthetic data quality is critical for post-training, and post-training data needs inform pretraining strategy. This work leans more toward post-training/data synthesis.","technical_approach":"Abstract unavailable. Based on the title: RefGPT is a closed-loop framework where GPT generates dialogue data that is then used to train GPT models.","experiments":"Abstract unavailable; no experimental details can be provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["dialogue","synthetic-data","gpt","instruction-tuning"]},{"id":"YeJKJS23","title":"Efficiently Enhancing Zero-Shot Performance of Instruction Following Model via Retrieval of Soft Prompt","authors":["Seonghyeon Ye","Joel Jang","Doyoung Kim","Yongrae Jo","Minjoon Seo"],"institutions":["KAIST"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YeJKJS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.822"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YeJKJS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.822","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"（注：摘要缺失，基于标题推断）解决指令微调模型在零样本（Zero-Shot）场景下性能不足的问题，同时追求计算效率。","importance":"推理/Post-train 级。探索了通过检索软提示（Soft Prompt）来动态增强指令遵循能力，属于一种轻量级的测试时计算（Test-time compute）或参数高效适配方法。","technical_approach":"（基于标题推断）通过检索机制获取与当前指令相关的 Soft Prompt，并将其注入到指令遵循模型中，以此高效提升 Zero-Shot 性能。","experiments":"（摘要缺失，无实验数据）","authors_note":"Minjoon Seo (KAIST)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"(Note: Abstract missing, inferred from title) Addresses the performance gap of instruction-following models in zero-shot scenarios while maintaining computational efficiency.","importance":"Inference/Post-train level. Explores dynamically enhancing instruction-following capabilities via soft prompt retrieval, representing a lightweight test-time compute or parameter-efficient adaptation method.","technical_approach":"(Inferred from title) Retrieves soft prompts relevant to the current instruction and injects them into the instruction-following model to efficiently boost zero-shot performance.","experiments":"(Abstract missing, no experimental data)","authors_note":"Minjoon Seo (KAIST)"},"tags":["instruction-tuning","retrieval","soft-prompt","zero-shot"],"notable_authors":["Minjoon Seo"]},{"id":"2310.14868","title":"Assessing Step-by-Step Reasoning against Lexical Negation: A Case Study on Syllogism","authors":["Mengyu Ye","Tatsuki Kuribayashi","Jun Suzuki","Goro Kobayashi","Hiroaki Funayama"],"institutions":["Tohoku University"],"abstract":"Large language models (LLMs) take advantage of step-by-step reasoning instructions, e.g., chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting. Building on this, their ability to perform CoT-style reasoning robustly is of interest from a probing perspective. In this study, we inspect the step-by-step reasoning ability of LLMs with a focus on negation, which is a core linguistic phenomenon that is difficult to process. In particular, we introduce several controlled settings (e.g., reasoning in case of fictional entities) to evaluate the logical reasoning abilities of the models. We observed that dozens of modern LLMs were not robust against lexical negation (e.g., plausible ->implausible) when performing CoT-style reasoning, and the results highlight unique limitations in each LLM family.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.14868","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YeKSKF23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.912"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YeKSKF23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.912","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"探究 LLM 在执行 Chain-of-Thought (CoT) 推理时，是否真正掌握了逻辑演绎，还是仅仅在进行脆弱的模式匹配，特别是在面对词汇否定（Lexical Negation）时的鲁棒性。","importance":"机制分析/评测级。揭示了当前预训练/SFT 范式在处理核心语言学现象（否定）时的严重缺陷，证明了看似强大的 CoT 推理在逻辑层面依然是浅层的。","technical_approach":"设计了一系列受控的探测实验（Probing）。通过引入虚构实体（排除世界知识干扰），专门针对三段论中的词汇否定（如 plausible 变为 implausible）来评估模型的逻辑推理鲁棒性。","experiments":"测试了数十个现代 LLM，观察到它们在执行 CoT 推理时对词汇否定均不具备鲁棒性，凸显了各个 LLM 家族在逻辑处理上独特的局限性。","authors_note":"Jun Suzuki (Tohoku University)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Investigates whether LLMs performing Chain-of-Thought (CoT) are executing true logical deduction or merely fragile pattern matching, specifically testing their robustness against lexical negation.","importance":"Mechanism/Evaluation level. It exposes a severe flaw in current pretraining/SFT paradigms regarding a core linguistic phenomenon (negation), proving that seemingly powerful CoT reasoning remains logically shallow.","technical_approach":"Designs controlled probing experiments. By introducing fictional entities (to isolate reasoning from world knowledge), it specifically evaluates logical robustness against lexical negation (e.g., plausible vs. implausible) in syllogisms.","experiments":"Tested dozens of modern LLMs and observed that they are not robust against lexical negation when performing CoT reasoning, highlighting unique logical limitations across different LLM families.","authors_note":"Jun Suzuki (Tohoku University)"},"tags":["cot","reasoning","negation","robustness"],"notable_authors":["Jun Suzuki"]},{"id":"2305.13917","title":"Generating Data for Symbolic Language with Large Language Models","authors":["Jiacheng Ye","Chengzu Li","Lingpeng Kong","Tao Yu"],"institutions":["HKU"],"abstract":"$82","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.13917","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YeLK023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.523"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YeLK023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.523","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解决利用 LLM 作为数据生成器时，难以生成具有复杂结构约束的符号语言（如语义解析、代码）数据的问题。","importance":"数据合成/Post-train 级。将 Synthetic Data 的边界从非结构化自然语言扩展到了高约束的符号语言，为训练端侧高效的小型 Task Model 提供了高质量的数据合成范式。","technical_approach":"提出 SymGen 框架。包含两个核心组件：1) Informative Prompt，用于引导 LLM 生成符合特定结构的符号语言；2) 基于一致性（Agreement-based）的验证器，用于过滤和提升生成数据的结构正确性。","experiments":"在 6 个符号语言任务的多种设置下进行了广泛实验，证明了该方法在生成高标注成本的符号数据方面的有效性（摘要未提供具体指标数字）。","authors_note":"Lingpeng Kong, Tao Yu (HKU)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addresses the difficulty of using LLMs as data generators for symbolic languages (e.g., semantic parsing, code) that require complex, strict structural constraints.","importance":"Data Synthesis/Post-train level. Expands the boundary of synthetic data generation from unstructured natural language to highly constrained symbolic languages, providing a paradigm to train efficient, smaller task models.","technical_approach":"Proposes the SymGen framework, consisting of two core components: 1) An informative prompt to steer the LLM towards generating structurally compliant symbolic language, and 2) An agreement-based verifier to filter and improve the structural correctness of the generated data.","experiments":"Conducted extensive experiments on six symbolic language tasks across various settings, proving its effectiveness in generating annotation-expensive symbolic data (specific metrics not provided in abstract).","authors_note":"Lingpeng Kong, Tao Yu (HKU)"},"tags":["synthetic-data","llm","symbolic","distillation"],"notable_authors":["Lingpeng Kong","Tao Yu"]},{"id":"2211.11087","title":"Conceptor-Aided Debiasing of Large Language Models","authors":["Yifei Li","Lyle H. Ungar","João Sedoc"],"institutions":["UPenn"],"abstract":"$83","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.11087","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YifeiUS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.661"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YifeiUS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.661","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解决现有 LLM 去偏（Debiasing）方法往往在消除社会偏见的同时，严重牺牲模型通用语言能力（准确率）的 Trade-off 问题。","importance":"表征/对齐级。引入了一种基于软投影（Soft Projection）的表征干预技术，证明了偏见子空间可以在不破坏预训练流形（Manifold）的情况下被精确剥离。","technical_approach":"利用 Conceptors（一种软投影方法）识别并移除 BERT 和 GPT 等模型中的偏见子空间。提出两种应用方式：1) 后处理：通过 Conceptor NOT 操作投影掉偏见；2) CI-BERT 架构：在训练期间显式地将 Conceptor 投影集成到所有 Transformer 层中。","experiments":"Conceptor 后处理方法在实现 SOTA 去偏效果的同时，完美保持了模型在 GLUE Benchmark 上的性能，且在多种设置下表现出强鲁棒性。","authors_note":"Lyle H. Ungar (UPenn)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addresses the trade-off in existing LLM debiasing methods, which often severely sacrifice general language capabilities (accuracy) while attempting to remove social biases.","importance":"Representation/Alignment level. Introduces a soft projection-based representation intervention technique, proving that bias subspaces can be precisely surgically removed without destroying the pre-trained manifold.","technical_approach":"Utilizes Conceptors (a soft projection method) to identify and remove bias subspaces in models like BERT and GPT. Proposes two methods: 1) Post-processing via the Conceptor NOT operation; 2) CI-BERT architecture, which explicitly incorporates Conceptor projection into all layers during training.","experiments":"The Conceptor post-processing method achieves SOTA debiasing results while fully maintaining the LLMs' performance on the GLUE benchmark, showing robustness across various settings.","authors_note":"Lyle H. Ungar (UPenn)"},"tags":["debiasing","representation","alignment","safety"],"notable_authors":["Lyle H. Ungar"]},{"id":"2310.14820","title":"ALCUNA: Large Language Models Meet New Knowledge","authors":["Xunjian Yin","Baizhou Huang","Xiaojun Wan"],"institutions":["Peking University"],"abstract":"$84","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.14820","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YinH023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.87"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YinH023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.87","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解决现有 Benchmark 无法准确评估 LLM 处理“新知识”能力的问题，因为真实世界的实体往往已经存在于模型的预训练语料中（数据污染）。","importance":"评测/预训练动态级。直击了当前知识评测中最大的痛点——Data Contamination。通过合成全新实体，强制模型展示其真正的泛化与推理能力，而非单纯的记忆提取。","technical_approach":"提出 KnowGen 方法，通过修改现有实体的属性和关系，生成与现实世界完全不同的“人造实体”。基于此构建了 ALCUNA Benchmark，专门评估模型对全新知识的理解、区分和关联能力。","experiments":"使用 ALCUNA 对多个 LLM 进行了基准测试，揭示了模型在面对未见过的合成知识时能力的真实边界（摘要未提供具体指标数字）。","authors_note":"Xiaojun Wan (Peking University)"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addresses the inability of existing benchmarks to accurately measure LLMs' capability to handle 'new knowledge,' as real-world entities are often already memorized from pretraining corpora (data contamination).","importance":"Evaluation/Pretraining Dynamics level. Directly tackles the biggest pain point in knowledge evaluation: Data Contamination. By synthesizing entirely novel entities, it forces models to demonstrate true generalization and reasoning rather than mere memory retrieval.","technical_approach":"Proposes KnowGen, an approach that generates 'artificial entities' distinct from the real world by altering attributes and relationships of existing entities. Based on this, it introduces the ALCUNA benchmark to assess understanding, differentiation, and association of new knowledge.","experiments":"Benchmarked several LLMs using ALCUNA, revealing the true boundaries of model capabilities when faced with unseen, synthetic knowledge (specific metrics not provided in abstract).","authors_note":"Xiaojun Wan (Peking University)"},"tags":["benchmark","knowledge","evaluation","continual-learning"],"notable_authors":["Xiaojun Wan"]},{"id":"2305.14985","title":"IdealGPT: Iteratively Decomposing Vision and Language Reasoning via Large Language Models","authors":["Haoxuan You","Rui Sun","Zhecan Wang","Long Chen","Gengyu Wang","Hammad A. Ayyubi","Kai-Wei Chang","Shih-Fu Chang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$85","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14985","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YouSW0WACC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.755"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YouSW0WACC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.755","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：现有 VLM 在零样本多步推理上仍然不稳，而已有 divide-and-conquer 流水线又过度依赖专用子问题分解器，并且在信息不足时仍被迫输出最终答案。作者想要一种更通用、可迭代、能在缺信息时继续追问的视觉语言推理框架。","importance":"它的价值在于把 LLM 作为通用推理控制器、把 VLM 作为感知执行器来做闭环推理，这对 native multimodal 预训练有启发。严格说它不是 pretrain 方法，但它揭示了当前 VLM 缺的不是感知本身，而是可迭代的 task decomposition 和停机/继续查询机制，这对统一多模态建模接口设计很有参考意义。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 IdealGPT，一个迭代分解的 VL 推理框架，而不是端到端直接答题。LLM 负责生成子问题，VLM 负责回答与视觉内容相关的子问题，系统根据当前证据决定是否继续分解，直到信息足够再输出最终答案。相对已有方法，作者放弃了固定域专用分解器，也不强制单轮闭合求解；这种设计有效，是因为它允许把不确定性显式暴露出来，并用后续查询补足缺失证据。边界也很明确：如果子问题生成本身不可靠，错误会在迭代中传播。","experiments":"从摘要能确认的事实是，论文关注 zero-shot VL reasoning，并将方法与此前 divide-and-conquer 流水线作对比。摘要点出了两个被修正的缺陷：依赖 domain-specific decomposer，以及在信息不足时也要强答；但没有给出评测数据集、模型规模、主要指标和增益数字，因此不能补写具体 SOTA 结果。实验的关键应是验证迭代式追问是否优于一次性分解。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a known gap in vision-language systems: end-to-end VLMs still struggle on zero-shot multi-step reasoning, while earlier decomposition pipelines rely on domain-specific question decomposers and still force a final answer when evidence is insufficient. The goal is a more general reasoning loop that can ask, inspect, and continue when needed.","importance":"This is not a pretraining method, but it is relevant to multimodal foundation models because it cleanly separates reasoning control from perceptual grounding. The main takeaway for pretraining is that current VLM limitations are not just about visual representation quality; they also reflect weak iterative decomposition and poor uncertainty handling.","technical_approach":"IdealGPT is an iterative decomposition framework where an LLM proposes sub-questions and a VLM answers the visually grounded ones. The system keeps decomposing until it has enough evidence to answer the original question, instead of committing too early. Compared with prior divide-and-conquer pipelines, it avoids domain-specific decomposers and introduces an explicit continue-or-stop behavior. That design is useful because it lets the model recover from missing evidence rather than hallucinating a complete answer from partial information.","experiments":"The abstract establishes the target setting—zero-shot vision-language reasoning—and positions the method against prior decomposition pipelines. It clearly states the two intended advantages, but it does not report model sizes, benchmarks, or numerical gains. The decisive experiment is whether iterative querying beats one-shot decomposition when the initial evidence is incomplete.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","reasoning","decomposition","prompting"]},{"id":"YuZGZZY23","title":"Licon: A Diverse, Controllable and Challenging Linguistic Concept Learning Benchmark","authors":["Shenglong Yu","Ying Zhang","Wenya Guo","Zhengkun Zhang","Ru Zhou","Xiaojie Yuan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YuZGZZY23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.358"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YuZGZZY23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.358","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：现有 linguistic concept learning 评测往往不够多样、不可控，或者难度不足，因而很难真正区分模型是学会了概念，还是只是在吃表面模式。这个问题值得重做，因为随着大模型能力上升，旧 benchmark 很容易饱和，失去诊断价值。","importance":"这是 benchmark/data 贡献。对 pretrain 的意义在于，它为分析模型概念抽象、组合泛化和受控学习能力提供了更干净的测试床；这类基准不直接提升模型，但能更准确暴露预训练到底学到了什么、没学到什么。","technical_approach":"从标题能确认，Licon 是一个强调 diverse、controllable、challenging 的 linguistic concept learning benchmark。关键设计思路应是通过受控生成或精细分层来覆盖不同概念类型并调节难度，从而避免模型靠词频或模板捷径取胜；但没有摘要，无法说明概念类别、任务形式和构造流程。","experiments":"摘要未提供，因此不能确认 benchmark 规模、概念数量、参与评测的模型、指标和饱和程度。可合理预期实验会展示现有模型在该基准上仍存在明显短板，并分析控制变量如何影响成绩。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a benchmark problem: existing evaluations for linguistic concept learning are often too narrow, weakly controlled, or not challenging enough to tell true concept learning from surface pattern matching. This is worth revisiting because strong LMs can quickly saturate older benchmarks.","importance":"This is a benchmark/data contribution. Its relevance to pretraining is diagnostic rather than algorithmic: a better controlled benchmark can reveal what pretraining actually teaches models about abstraction and compositional generalization, instead of rewarding shortcut exploitation.","technical_approach":"From the title, Licon is a benchmark designed to be diverse, controllable, and challenging for linguistic concept learning. The likely design is to vary concept types and difficulty under controlled conditions so that models cannot rely on simple frequency or template shortcuts, but the exact construction details are unavailable without the abstract.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so the benchmark scale, number of concepts, participating models, and quantitative findings cannot be stated reliably. The expected empirical contribution is to show that current models still struggle once concept learning is evaluated under stronger control and harder settings.","authors_note":""},"tags":["benchmark","concept-learning","generalization","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Shenglong Yu","Ying Zhang","Wenya Guo","Zhengkun Zhang","Ru Zhou"]},{"id":"YuanCGXY23","title":"Beneath Surface Similarity: Large Language Models Make Reasonable Scientific Analogies after Structure Abduction","authors":["Siyu Yuan","Jiangjie Chen","Xuyang Ge","Yanghua Xiao","Deqing Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/YuanCGXY23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.160"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/YuanCGXY23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.160","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：LLM 做科学类 analogy 时，容易停留在表面相似而不是结构相似；作者想验证，若先做 structure abduction，再做类比，模型是否能给出更合理的科学类比。这个问题重要，因为 analogical reasoning 本来就依赖关系结构，不是关键词匹配。","importance":"它属于推理机制分析兼方法改进。对 pretrain 的启示是，当前模型的类比能力可能不是完全缺失，而是缺少把隐含结构先抽出来的过程；如果这一点成立，未来预训练或后训练可以更明确地监督结构归纳，而不是只堆更多表面文本共现。","technical_approach":"从标题可判断，作者提出或验证了一条两阶段路径：先做 structure abduction，也就是从实例中归纳潜在关系结构，再基于该结构进行 analogy。与直接让 LLM 端到端做类比相比，这种设计试图先消除表层相似度的干扰，把推理重心转回关系对应。边界在于，结构归纳若失败，后续类比也会失真。","experiments":"没有摘要，因此无法确认是哪些科学类比数据集、用了哪些 LLM、指标是什么、提升有多大。标题至少给出一个明确结论方向：在加入结构归纳后，LLM 能做出更合理的 scientific analogies；但具体‘更合理’的度量和幅度需要正文支持。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a common failure mode in scientific analogy: LLMs may overuse surface similarity instead of relational structure. The central question is whether a prior step of structure abduction enables more reasonable analogical reasoning.","importance":"This is a reasoning-oriented contribution with implications for pretraining. If analogy improves after explicit structural inference, the lesson is that current models may not lack analogical capacity outright; they may lack a reliable mechanism for recovering latent relational structure before mapping one domain to another.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method is effectively a two-stage reasoning process: first infer latent structure, then perform analogy based on that structure. This contrasts with direct end-to-end prompting for analogies, which is more vulnerable to superficial matches. The expected benefit is better alignment on relations rather than lexical overlap; the failure mode is that bad structure induction will propagate downstream.","experiments":"Without the abstract, the datasets, models, metrics, and exact gains cannot be reported safely. The title nonetheless states the directional claim: after structure abduction, LLMs produce more reasonable scientific analogies.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reasoning","analogy","structure","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Siyu Yuan","Jiangjie Chen","Xuyang Ge","Yanghua Xiao","Deqing Yang"]},{"id":"ZhangC23","title":"Mitigating Temporal Misalignment by Discarding Outdated Facts","authors":["Michael J. Q. Zhang","Eunsol Choi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhangC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.879"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhangC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.879","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：语言模型中的时间错配并不只是因为缺少新事实，也因为旧事实仍在干扰；因此需要研究如何主动丢弃过时事实。过去常见做法更关注注入或更新新知识，但较少把‘忘掉旧知识’作为独立控制目标。","importance":"这项工作的意义很直接，属于 knowledge updating / continual pretrain / model editing 交叉点。对 pretrain 的启示是，时间一致性不是单向写入问题，而是写入与遗忘的联合优化问题；如果只会追加新知识，模型会在冲突事实下持续失配。","technical_approach":"从标题可判断，作者的核心主张是通过 discarding outdated facts 来缓解 temporal misalignment，而不是仅依赖补充最新数据。具体实现可能是数据过滤、训练目标设计、编辑或检索层抑制旧知识，但当前没有摘要，不能确认是参数层遗忘还是外部知识接口层面的处理。","experiments":"摘要未提供，因此无法确定使用了哪些时序知识基准、时间切片数据、baseline 和数字结果。标题至少给出明确方向：主动丢弃过时事实可以减轻 temporal misalignment；但其代价是否会伤及稳定知识、以及遗忘是否可控，需要正文中的消融支撑。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses temporal misalignment by focusing on an under-emphasized cause: outdated facts are not just stale—they actively interfere with current knowledge. Prior work often emphasizes adding new facts, while paying less attention to explicitly discarding obsolete ones.","importance":"This is highly relevant to knowledge updating, continual pretraining, and model editing. The main lesson for pretraining is that temporal alignment is not only a write problem; it is a joint write-and-forget problem. Without controlled forgetting, newly acquired facts may continue to compete with outdated ones.","technical_approach":"From the title, the central intervention is to mitigate temporal misalignment by discarding outdated facts rather than only appending fresh information. The implementation could be at the data level, objective level, parameter-editing level, or retrieval interface level, but the exact mechanism cannot be determined without the abstract.","experiments":"No abstract is available, so benchmarks, time-sliced data, baselines, and exact gains cannot be stated reliably. The directional claim is clear from the title: removing outdated facts helps with temporal misalignment. The important open question is how selective the forgetting is and what collateral damage it causes.","authors_note":""},"tags":["temporal","knowledge","data-curation"],"notable_authors":["Michael J. Q. Zhang","Eunsol Choi"]},{"id":"ZhangCZKLZMLC23","title":"RepoCoder: Repository-Level Code Completion Through Iterative Retrieval and Generation","authors":["Fengji Zhang","Bei Chen","Yue Zhang","Jacky Keung","Jin Liu","Daoguang Zan","Yi Mao","Jian-Guang Lou","Weizhu Chen"],"institutions":["Microsoft","City University of Hong Kong"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhangCZKLZMLC23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.151"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhangCZKLZMLC23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.151","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"仓库级代码补全中，如何把散落在多个文件里的上下文喂给 LLM。单文件上下文不够，而简单拼接又受限于 context window 且噪声大。","importance":"方法级贡献，属于典型的\"给冻结 LLM 加检索\"，对 pretrain 侧的启示主要在于：即便模型没见过该仓库，通过迭代检索也能逼近仓库内一致性，这对判断 code pretrain 数据覆盖率需求有参考意义。","technical_approach":"迭代式 retrieval-generation。第一轮用光标附近上下文当 query 检索仓库相似片段，生成一段补全；再把生成结果回填进 query 做第二轮检索，因为生成内容通常比原始上下文更接近真正的目标代码，检索命中率更高。反复几轮直到收敛。关键洞察是用\"模型自己的猜测\"来改写 retrieval query。","experiments":"作者构建了 RepoEval 基准（line/api/function 三种补全粒度），在多个 LLM（包括 Codex、CodeGen 等）上显著超过单纯 in-file 上下文和一次性检索 baseline，迭代 2-3 轮即可收敛。","authors_note":"微软与香港城市大学合作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Repository-level code completion: how to surface context scattered across many files to a frozen LLM, given that in-file context is too narrow and naive concatenation blows the context window with noise.","importance":"A retrieval-augmentation method. For pretraining folks the interesting signal is that iterative retrieval can approximate repo-level coherence even when the model never saw the repo—useful when calibrating how much repo-level data pretraining really needs.","technical_approach":"Iterative retrieve-then-generate. Round 1 uses the code around the cursor as the retrieval query; round 2 re-queries using the model's own draft completion, which is typically closer to the true target than the raw prefix, so retrieval recall improves. Repeat until convergence. The core trick is using the model's own guess to rewrite the retrieval query.","experiments":"Introduces RepoEval (line/api/function granularity). Across multiple LLMs including Codex and CodeGen, iterative retrieval clearly beats in-file context and one-shot retrieval; 2–3 iterations suffice.","authors_note":"Microsoft × City University of Hong Kong."},"tags":["code-completion","repo-level","retrieval"]},{"id":"ZhangF0N23","title":"CITB: A Benchmark for Continual Instruction Tuning","authors":["Zihan Zhang","Meng Fang","Ling Chen","Mohammad-Reza Namazi-Rad"],"institutions":["University of Wollongong","Eindhoven University of Technology"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhangF0N23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.633"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhangF0N23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.633","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"缺一个专门衡量\"continual instruction tuning\"的基准：模型在连续接入新指令任务时，既不能遗忘旧能力，也要保持对新任务的泛化。现有 continual learning 基准大多是分类任务，不覆盖指令格式的异质性。","importance":"基准级贡献。对 post-train ↔ pre-train 接口有意义：continual instruction tuning 本质上决定了\"基座模型能否不断吸收新任务而不退化\"，是否需要 replay、是否需要 LoRA、遗忘曲线怎么走，都要在统一基准上才能比较。","technical_approach":"构造 CITB：把一批 instruction 格式的任务按时间/领域切成任务流，评估模型按流顺序学习时的前向迁移、后向迁移和遗忘。引入若干 continual learning 经典算法（replay、EWC、LoRA 等）在 instruction tuning 设置下的对照。","experiments":"在 T5 / LLaMA 家族上跑该 stream，衡量 exact-match / rougeL 等指标随任务增加的变化。作者的主要观察是：现有 CL 方法在指令任务上收益有限，replay 仍是最稳的 baseline，说明 instruction tuning 的遗忘机制与分类 CL 不完全同构。","authors_note":"University of Wollongong 与 Meng Fang（Eindhoven/Liverpool，continual/RL 方向）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"There is no dedicated benchmark for continual instruction tuning—models must absorb a stream of new instruction-format tasks without forgetting old ones, and prior CL benchmarks are mostly classification and miss the heterogeneity of instructions.","importance":"A benchmark contribution sitting at the pretrain↔posttrain seam: whether a base model can keep ingesting new tasks without degrading is exactly what continual IT settles, and that requires a common yardstick.","technical_approach":"Builds CITB by arranging instruction-formatted tasks into a stream and measuring forward transfer, backward transfer and forgetting. Compares standard CL techniques (replay, EWC, LoRA, etc.) ported into the instruction-tuning setup.","experiments":"Runs streams on T5 / LLaMA-family models with EM / ROUGE-L. Main finding: classical CL methods give limited gains in this setting; simple replay remains the most reliable baseline, suggesting instruction-tuning forgetting is not mechanistically identical to classification CL.","authors_note":"University of Wollongong, with Meng Fang (Eindhoven/Liverpool, continual & RL)."},"tags":["instruction-tuning","continual-learning","benchmark"],"notable_authors":["Meng Fang"]},{"id":"ZhangLDMS23","title":"SAC³: Reliable Hallucination Detection in Black-Box Language Models via Semantic-aware Cross-check Consistency","authors":["Jiaxin Zhang","Zhuohang Li","Kamalika Das","Bradley A. Malin","Kumar Sricharan"],"institutions":["Intuit AI Research","Vanderbilt University"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhangLDMS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.1032"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhangLDMS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.1032","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"黑盒 LLM（只能调 API）如何检测幻觉。已有 self-consistency 类方法（SelfCheckGPT）对同一问题多采样看一致性，但对\"在同义改写的问题上系统性一致地错\"这种情况无能为力。","importance":"方法级贡献，属于后训练/评测侧但对 pretrain 有启示——说明单纯采样一致性并不可靠，需要在语义空间扰动才能暴露真幻觉，这对合成数据/奖励信号的质控也有参考价值。","technical_approach":"SAC³：在两个方向上做 cross-check。(1) 对同一问题多次采样（self-check），(2) 把问题做语义等价改写后再采样（semantic-aware cross-check），然后在两组答案上算一致性。语义扰动能抓住\"稳定幻觉\"——模型对原问题反复输出同一个错误答案。","experiments":"在多个 QA 数据集（包括事实类和开放式）上对比 SelfCheckGPT 等 baseline，报告 AUROC 等检测指标的提升。作者强调语义改写这一步带来的增量是主要来源。","authors_note":"Intuit AI Research 与 Vanderbilt University（Bradley Malin，医疗 NLP 方向资深）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Hallucination detection for black-box LLMs accessible only via API. Existing self-consistency methods like SelfCheckGPT sample the same question multiple times, but fail when the model is consistently wrong on paraphrases of the same question.","importance":"A detection-side contribution with upstream implications: it shows sampling consistency alone is not a trustworthy hallucination signal—semantic-space perturbation is needed—which also matters for quality-controlling synthetic data and reward signals.","technical_approach":"SAC³ does cross-check along two axes: (1) multiple samples on the original question (self-check); (2) samples on semantically equivalent paraphrases (semantic-aware cross-check). Inconsistency is then aggregated across both sets. Paraphrase probing catches 'stable hallucinations' that standard self-consistency misses.","experiments":"On several QA datasets (factual and open-ended), SAC³ improves detection AUROC over SelfCheckGPT baselines. Ablations attribute most of the gain to the semantic-rephrasing step.","authors_note":"Intuit AI Research; Vanderbilt University (Bradley Malin, senior in clinical NLP)."},"tags":["hallucination","consistency"],"notable_authors":["Bradley A. Malin"]},{"id":"ZhangLH23","title":"Contrastive Learning of Sentence Embeddings from Scratch","authors":["Junlei Zhang","Zhenzhong Lan","Junxian He"],"institutions":["Westlake University","Hong Kong University of Science and Technology"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhangLH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.238"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhangLH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.238","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"句向量对比学习一直受限于高质量正样本对的稀缺：NLI 标注贵，SimCSE 的无监督路线（同一句过两次 dropout）上限又明显低于有监督。能否在不依赖任何标注数据的情况下达到有监督水平？","importance":"方法级贡献，体现了\"用 LLM 合成数据做表示学习\"这条思路的可行性——对 pretrain 研究者来说，这是数据合成反哺表示训练的一个干净样例。","technical_approach":"用 LLM 直接生成 NLI 三元组（entailment / contradiction）作为 SimCSE 训练数据的替代，而非 crawl 或标注。再用与 SimCSE 完全相同的对比训练框架。核心赌注是：LLM 合成的 NLI 语对，质量足够支撑 sentence embedding 训练，而成本是零标注。","experiments":"在 STS 系列基准上，纯合成数据训练的模型达到甚至超过有监督 SimCSE（基于人工 NLI 数据）的水平，明显优于无监督 SimCSE。作者还比较不同 LLM 生成数据的质量差异。","authors_note":"西湖大学 Zhenzhong Lan 组，Junxian He（HKUST，预训练/表示学习）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Sentence-embedding contrastive learning has been bottlenecked by positive-pair scarcity: NLI labels are expensive, while SimCSE's unsupervised dropout trick lags clearly behind supervised. Can we match supervised quality without any labels?","importance":"A clean demonstration that LLM-synthesised data can replace human-labelled pairs for representation learning—useful as a concrete case study of synthetic-data feedback into training.","technical_approach":"Uses an LLM to generate NLI-style triplets (entailment/contradiction) instead of crawling or labelling, then trains with the exact SimCSE contrastive objective. The bet is that LLM-generated pairs are good enough to replace human NLI data at zero labelling cost.","experiments":"On STS benchmarks, purely synthetic-data training matches or surpasses supervised SimCSE (trained on human NLI) and clearly beats unsupervised SimCSE. Also compares generator LLMs to study data-quality sensitivity.","authors_note":"Westlake University (Zhenzhong Lan); Junxian He (HKUST, pretraining & representation)."},"tags":["sentence-embedding","contrastive"],"notable_authors":["Junxian He","Zhenzhong Lan"]},{"id":"ZhangW0XI0LZ023","title":"Auto-Instruct: Automatic Instruction Generation and Ranking for Black-Box Language Models","authors":["Zhihan Zhang","Shuohang Wang","Wenhao Yu","Yichong Xu","Dan Iter","Qingkai Zeng","Yang Liu","Chenguang Zhu","Meng Jiang"],"institutions":["University of Notre Dame","Microsoft"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhangW0XI0LZ023","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.659"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhangW0XI0LZ023","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.659","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"黑盒 LLM 的 prompt 工程高度依赖人工，且同一任务不同写法性能差距可达 10 分以上。能否让模型自己生成并挑选 instruction，摆脱人工 prompt tuning？","importance":"方法级贡献，属于\"LLM 自举指令\"这一支，对 pretrain 研究者的意义在于：如果 instruction 可以稳定自生成+自筛选，那下游合成指令数据（再回哺 pretrain/SFT）的质量下限可以被保证。","technical_approach":"两步 pipeline：(1) 让 LLM 基于任务 demo 生成多条候选 instruction；(2) 训一个 ranker 模型，学会在给定任务上预测哪条 instruction 会让下游 LLM 跑得最好——ranker 训练信号来自下游 LLM 的真实表现。推理时对新任务生成+排序，选 top-1。与 APE 等无监督选 prompt 的方法相比，Auto-Instruct 的关键是有一个专门训练过的 ranker 而不是靠下游 LLM 的 log-prob 自打分。","experiments":"在 SuperNI、BBH 等基准上，相比人工 prompt 和 APE 有稳定提升；跨任务泛化测试显示 ranker 在未见任务上也能挑到好 instruction。","authors_note":"Notre Dame 与 Microsoft。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Prompting black-box LLMs is heavily manual, and the same task can swing 10+ points across paraphrases. Can the model autogenerate and select its own instructions, removing the human in the loop?","importance":"Part of the 'LLM bootstrapping its own instructions' line. For pretraining folks the relevant angle is: if instructions can be reliably self-generated and self-filtered, synthetic instruction data (feeding back into SFT or mid-train) gains a floor on quality.","technical_approach":"Two-step pipeline. (1) LLM generates multiple candidate instructions from task demos. (2) A dedicated ranker model is trained to predict which candidate will give the best downstream performance, supervised by the downstream LLM's actual scores. At inference, generate+rank, pick top-1. The difference from APE-style unsupervised selection is the trained ranker replacing self-scored log-probs.","experiments":"Consistent gains over human prompts and APE on SuperNI and BBH. Cross-task generalisation shows the ranker transfers to unseen tasks.","authors_note":"University of Notre Dame with Microsoft."},"tags":["instruction","prompting","data-synthesis"]},{"id":"ZhangWW23","title":"Parameter-Efficient Cross-lingual Transfer of Vision and Language Models via Translation-based Alignment","authors":["Zhen Zhang","Jialu Wang","Xin Eric Wang"],"institutions":["University of California, Santa Cruz"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhangWW23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.483"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhangWW23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.483","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"视觉-语言模型的跨语言迁移通常要么重训 encoder、要么做昂贵的多语言对齐预训练，成本高、覆盖语言少。作者想用更轻量的方式把英文 VLM 迁移到其他语言。","importance":"方法级贡献。思路不新（翻译 + adapter 对齐），但把 cross-lingual VLM 的迁移成本压到 parameter-efficient 级别，对中小团队落地多语言多模态系统有参考价值；对 pretrain 研究的启示有限。","technical_approach":"核心是 translation-based alignment + parameter-efficient 微调。用机器翻译把英文多模态数据翻译成目标语言，然后只训练少量新增参数（adapter 类）来对齐目标语言 text encoder 和原英文 VLM 的视觉表示，避免全量微调带来的英文能力退化和算力开销。","experiments":"在多语言图文检索、VQA 等任务上与全量微调和已有 multilingual VLM 对比；具体数字需看原文。卖点是用远少于 full fine-tune 的参数达到接近的跨语言性能。","authors_note":"UC Santa Cruz，Xin Eric Wang 组，长期做 vision-language 和多模态导航。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Cross-lingual transfer of vision-language models usually requires retraining encoders or expensive multilingual pretraining. The authors want a cheap alternative.","importance":"Method-level contribution. Not conceptually novel but makes multilingual VLM adaptation feasible with small parameter budgets; limited implications for pretraining research itself.","technical_approach":"Translation-based alignment plus parameter-efficient tuning: machine-translate English multimodal data into target languages, then train a small number of added parameters to align target-language text encoders with the frozen English VLM's visual representations, avoiding full fine-tuning.","experiments":"Evaluated on multilingual image-text retrieval and VQA against full fine-tuning and multilingual VLM baselines; claims comparable transfer with a fraction of trainable parameters.","authors_note":"UC Santa Cruz, Xin Eric Wang's group, known for vision-language and multimodal navigation work."},"tags":["vlm","cross-lingual","peft"],"notable_authors":["Xin Eric Wang"]},{"id":"ZhangWYJL23","title":"Generative Table Pre-training Empowers Models for Tabular Prediction","authors":["Tianping Zhang","Shaowen Wang","Shuicheng Yan","Li Jian","Qian Liu"],"institutions":["Sea AI Lab","Tsinghua University"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhangWYJL23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.917"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhangWYJL23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.917","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"表格预测（分类/回归）长期由 GBDT（XGBoost/LightGBM）主导，深度方法缺乏跨表通用预训练范式。作者问：能不能把 LM 式的生成式预训练搬到 tabular 上，让一个预训练模型迁移到各种下游表格任务。","importance":"范式级尝试，对 tabular 领域而言。把 LM 预训练思路迁过来，做出一个 tabular foundation model 雏形，后续 TabPFN、TabLLM 之类工作都可以放在这条线上比较。对通用 pretrain 研究者而言，价值在于展示：生成式预训练在非文本离散/连续混合结构上也能 scale。","technical_approach":"把表格每一行序列化成 token 序列（列名 + 值），在大量异构表上做生成式预训练（类似 LM 预测下一个 cell 值）。关键设计是处理列类型异构（数值 vs 类别）和不同表的列不对齐问题——用列名作为 schema 提示，让模型学到 schema-conditioned 的行生成能力。下游任务既可以零样本直接 prompt，也可以少量 fine-tune。","experiments":"在多个 tabular benchmark（分类/回归）上对比 XGBoost、TabNet、FT-Transformer 等；报告预训练模型在少样本和全量数据下都有竞争力。具体增益依赖数据集，详见原文。","authors_note":"Sea AI Lab 团队，Qian Liu、Shuicheng Yan 等。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Tabular prediction is still dominated by GBDTs; deep learning lacks a general cross-table pretraining paradigm. Can LM-style generative pretraining work on tabular data?","importance":"A paradigm attempt for the tabular domain: a first-shot tabular foundation model via generative pretraining. For general pretraining researchers, it is evidence that generative objectives scale beyond text to heterogeneous structured data.","technical_approach":"Serialize each row into a token sequence of column-name/value pairs, then pretrain generatively across many heterogeneous tables (LM-style next-cell prediction). Column names act as schema prompts, giving schema-conditioned row generation and enabling transfer to tables with different columns. Downstream use is either zero-shot prompting or light fine-tuning.","experiments":"Compared against XGBoost, TabNet, FT-Transformer on multiple tabular benchmarks; competitive in both few-shot and full-data regimes, with gains varying by dataset.","authors_note":"Sea AI Lab; includes Qian Liu and Shuicheng Yan."},"tags":["tabular","pretraining","generative"],"notable_authors":["Shuicheng Yan","Qian Liu"]},{"id":"ZhangXDCC0LLZ23","title":"ZhuJiu: A Multi-dimensional, Multi-faceted Chinese Benchmark for Large Language Models","authors":["Baoli Zhang","Haining Xie","Pengfan Du","Junhao Chen","Pengfei Cao","Yubo Chen","Shengping Liu","Kang Liu","Jun Zhao"],"institutions":["Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences"],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhangXDCC0LLZ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-DEMO.44"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhangXDCC0LLZ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-demo.44","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"中文 LLM 缺乏系统性、多维度的评测。作者想做一个覆盖知识/推理/生成/价值观等维度的中文 benchmark。","importance":"数据/评测级贡献。对中文 LLM 研发团队是现成工具；对 pretrain 研究的价值在于提供一个信号更丰富的中文评测环境，比单测 CMMLU/C-Eval 信息量更大。","technical_approach":"构建多维度评测集 ZhuJiu（烛炬），覆盖知识掌握、语言理解、推理、生成、价值观等能力维度，混合选择题、生成题、对比评测等多种题型；对主流中文/多语种 LLM 做系统测评。","experiments":"对多家中英文 LLM（包括 GPT-4、ChatGPT、中文开源模型）做打榜，报告各维度表现。核心输出是 benchmark 本身和一份能力画像。","authors_note":"中科院自动化所团队。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Chinese LLMs lack a systematic multi-dimensional evaluation suite. The authors build one covering knowledge, reasoning, generation, values, etc.","importance":"A data/evaluation contribution. Useful to Chinese LLM developers and gives pretraining researchers a richer Chinese signal than C-Eval/CMMLU alone.","technical_approach":"Constructs ZhuJiu, a multi-dimensional Chinese benchmark spanning knowledge, language understanding, reasoning, generation, and value alignment, combining multiple-choice, generative and pairwise-comparison formats, then benchmarks mainstream LLMs.","experiments":"Scores major Chinese and multilingual LLMs including GPT-4 and ChatGPT across dimensions; the main output is the benchmark and capability profiles.","authors_note":"Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences."},"tags":["benchmark","chinese","evaluation"]},{"id":"2310.08172","title":"Exploring the Cognitive Knowledge Structure of Large Language Models: An Educational Diagnostic Assessment Approach","authors":["Zheyuan Zhang","Jifan Yu","Juanzi Li","Lei Hou"],"institutions":["Tsinghua University"],"abstract":"Large Language Models (LLMs) have not only exhibited exceptional performance across various tasks, but also demonstrated sparks of intelligence. Recent studies have focused on assessing their capabilities on human exams and revealed their impressive competence in different domains. However, cognitive research on the overall knowledge structure of LLMs is still lacking. In this paper, based on educational diagnostic assessment method, we conduct an evaluation using MoocRadar, a meticulously annotated human test dataset based on Bloom Taxonomy. We aim to reveal the knowledge structures of LLMs and gain insights of their cognitive capabilities. This research emphasizes the significance of investigating LLMs' knowledge and understanding the disparate cognitive patterns of LLMs. By shedding light on models' knowledge, researchers can advance development and utilization of LLMs in a more informed and effective manner.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08172","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhangYLH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.111"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhangYLH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.111","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有 LLM 评测多用考试总分，看不出模型在知识维度上的认知结构差异。作者想用教育学的诊断评估思路去刻画 LLM 的知识图景。","importance":"评测视角贡献，不是方法突破。对 pretrain 研究的潜在用处是：如果 Bloom Taxonomy 层级（记忆/理解/应用/分析等）能区分模型差异，就能成为预训练数据配比和 mid-train 的更细粒度信号。","technical_approach":"基于 MoocRadar（一个用 Bloom Taxonomy 标注过的人类测试数据集），把题目按认知层级拆开，分别测 LLM 的表现，从而得到不同层级的能力画像，而不是一个总分。","experiments":"在 MoocRadar 上评测多个 LLM，报告它们在 Bloom 各层级上的得分分布和差异。主要结论是不同模型的认知 profile 明显不同，不能只看平均准确率。","authors_note":"清华大学，李涓子、侯磊团队，长期做知识工程和 MOOC。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Standard LLM benchmarks give aggregate scores and hide differences in cognitive structure. The authors apply educational diagnostic assessment to probe that structure.","importance":"An evaluation-angle contribution. For pretraining, if Bloom-taxonomy levels (remember/understand/apply/analyze...) reliably separate models, they could become a finer-grained signal for data mix and mid-training decisions.","technical_approach":"Uses MoocRadar, a human test set annotated with Bloom Taxonomy levels, and scores LLMs separately at each cognitive level, yielding a per-level profile instead of a single aggregate.","experiments":"Evaluates several LLMs on MoocRadar and reports distinct cognitive profiles across models, arguing that aggregate accuracy hides meaningful capability gaps.","authors_note":"Tsinghua University; Juanzi Li and Lei Hou's group, long-standing work on knowledge engineering and MOOCs."},"tags":["knowledge-probing","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Juanzi Li","Lei Hou"]},{"id":"2303.10868","title":"Retrieving Multimodal Information for Augmented Generation: A Survey","authors":["Ruochen Zhao","Hailin Chen","Weishi Wang","Fangkai Jiao","Do Xuan Long","Chengwei Qin","Bosheng Ding","Xiaobao Guo","Minzhi Li","Xingxuan Li","Shafiq Joty"],"institutions":["Nanyang Technological University"],"abstract":"As Large Language Models (LLMs) become popular, there emerged an important trend of using multimodality to augment the LLMs' generation ability, which enables LLMs to better interact with the world. However, there lacks a unified perception of at which stage and how to incorporate different modalities. In this survey, we review methods that assist and augment generative models by retrieving multimodal knowledge, whose formats range from images, codes, tables, graphs, to audio. Such methods offer a promising solution to important concerns such as factuality, reasoning, interpretability, and robustness. By providing an in-depth review, this survey is expected to provide scholars with a deeper understanding of the methods' applications and encourage them to adapt existing techniques to the fast-growing field of LLMs.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.10868","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhaoCWJLQDGLLJ23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-EMNLP.314"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhaoCWJLQDGLLJ23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.314","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"多模态检索增强生成（MM-RAG）的文献散在不同模态/任务里，缺乏统一视角去回答：在什么阶段、用什么方式把多模态知识注入生成模型最合适。","importance":"综述型贡献。对 pretrain 研究的用处在于给 retrieval-augmented pretrain、多模态 grounding 预训练提供一个现成的方法地图，省去自己梳理。","technical_approach":"对图像、代码、表格、图、音频等多种模态的检索增强生成工作做分类综述：按检索对象模态、融合阶段（输入层 / 中间层 / 输出层）、融合方式等维度组织。","experiments":"综述，无实验。","authors_note":"南洋理工大学（NTU）团队。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The MM-RAG literature is scattered across modalities and tasks; there is no unified view of when and how to inject multimodal knowledge into generative models.","importance":"A survey. Useful for pretraining researchers as a ready-made map of methods for retrieval-augmented and grounded multimodal training.","technical_approach":"Taxonomizes retrieval-augmented generation across image, code, table, graph, and audio modalities along axes such as retrieved modality, fusion stage (input/intermediate/output), and fusion mechanism.","experiments":"Survey; no experiments.","authors_note":"Nanyang Technological University."},"tags":["rag","multimodal","survey"]},{"id":"2311.00258","title":"Noisy Exemplars Make Large Language Models More Robust: A Domain-Agnostic Behavioral Analysis","authors":["Hongyi Zheng","Abulhair Saparov"],"institutions":["New York University"],"abstract":"Recent advances in prompt engineering enable large language models (LLMs) to solve multi-hop logical reasoning problems with impressive accuracy. However, there is little existing work investigating the robustness of LLMs with few-shot prompting techniques. Therefore, we introduce a systematic approach to test the robustness of LLMs in multi-hop reasoning tasks via domain-agnostic perturbations. We include perturbations at multiple levels of abstractions (e.g. lexical perturbations such as typos, and semantic perturbations such as the inclusion of intermediate reasoning steps in the questions) to conduct behavioral analysis on the LLMs. Throughout our experiments, we find that models are more sensitive to certain perturbations such as replacing words with their synonyms. We also demonstrate that increasing the proportion of perturbed exemplars in the prompts improves the robustness of few-shot prompting methods.","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.00258","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhengS23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.277"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhengS23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.277","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"few-shot prompting 在多跳推理上效果好，但其鲁棒性没有系统研究。作者问：对 exemplar 做什么样的扰动会让 LLM 垮掉？反过来，能否用扰动提升鲁棒性？","importance":"实证贡献，对 prompt/demo 设计有直接启示：加噪训练式思路也适用于 ICL。对 pretrain 研究者的价值一般，但 'noisy demonstrations 反而更鲁棒' 这个结论和 RL/SFT 里加噪提升泛化的观察一致。","technical_approach":"设计一套 domain-agnostic 扰动：词汇级（错字、同义词替换）、句法级、语义级（往问题里插入中间推理步骤）等，系统地扰动 few-shot exemplars 和 test query，观察 LLM 在多跳推理上的表现变化。然后反过来把带噪 exemplars 放进 prompt，看是否提升鲁棒性。","experiments":"在多跳推理数据集上对主流 LLM 做行为分析。核心发现：模型对同义词替换最敏感；把噪声 exemplar 放进 prompt 可以让模型对测试时的扰动更鲁棒。","authors_note":"NYU。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Few-shot prompting works on multi-hop reasoning but its robustness is under-studied. Which perturbations break it, and can noisy exemplars help?","importance":"An empirical contribution with direct implications for prompt/demo design; the 'noisy demos improve robustness' result echoes noise-injection findings in SFT/RL and generalizes naturally to ICL.","technical_approach":"Defines domain-agnostic perturbations at lexical (typos, synonyms), syntactic, and semantic (injecting intermediate reasoning steps) levels, applied to exemplars and/or test queries. Then tests whether using noisy exemplars in the prompt improves robustness.","experiments":"Behavioral analysis on multi-hop reasoning tasks across LLMs. Models are most sensitive to synonym replacement; noisy exemplars in the prompt improve robustness to test-time perturbations.","authors_note":"New York University."},"tags":["few-shot","robustness","reasoning"]},{"id":"2302.13439","title":"Navigating the Grey Area: How Expressions of Uncertainty and Overconfidence Affect Language Models","authors":["Kaitlyn Zhou","Dan Jurafsky","Tatsunori Hashimoto"],"institutions":["Stanford University"],"abstract":"$86","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.13439","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhouJH23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.335"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhouJH23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.335","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LM 被当作事实来源使用，但用户话语里的不确定性/自信表达（'我觉得'、'Wikipedia 说'）会不会让模型改变答案？模型的 epistemology 稳不稳？","importance":"实证贡献，对对齐/posttrain 和 RAG prompt 设计都有直接影响。更深的启发是：pretrain 数据里混入的大量主观表达让模型学到了'对自信者让步'的行为模式，这是一个可复现的偏差。","technical_approach":"构造 epistemic marker 类型学，选 50 个 marker（高确定、弱确定、第三方引用等），注入到 QA prompt 前面，测模型答题准确率随 marker 的变化。","experiments":"在 QA benchmark 上，不同 marker 造成准确率波动超过 80 个百分点。反直觉结论：高确定性表达（'I'm sure it's ...'）反而让模型准确率下降约 7%，也就是模型倾向于迁就用户的自信，哪怕用户是错的。","authors_note":"Stanford，Dan Jurafsky、Tatsunori Hashimoto。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LMs are used as factual sources, but do epistemic markers in user prompts ('I'm sure', 'Wikipedia says') alter their answers? How stable is model epistemology?","importance":"An empirical contribution with direct implications for alignment, post-training, and RAG prompt design. Deeper lesson: pretraining corpora contain abundant subjective hedging, and models internalize a bias toward deferring to confident-sounding users.","technical_approach":"Builds a typology of epistemic markers, selects 50 (high-certainty, low-certainty, evidential like 'Wikipedia says'), prepends each to QA prompts, and measures accuracy shifts.","experiments":"On QA benchmarks, marker choice swings accuracy by >80 percentage points. Counterintuitively, high-certainty expressions reduce accuracy by ~7%—models cave to user confidence even when the user is wrong.","authors_note":"Stanford; Dan Jurafsky and Tatsunori Hashimoto."},"tags":["epistemics","uncertainty","llm-behavior","prompting"],"notable_authors":["Dan Jurafsky","Tatsunori Hashimoto"]},{"id":"ZhuZ00L0T23","title":"Zero-shot Sharpness-Aware Quantization for Pre-trained Language Models","authors":["Miaoxi Zhu","Qihuang Zhong","Li Shen","Liang Ding","Juhua Liu","Bo Du","Dacheng Tao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/emnlp/ZhuZ00L0T23","doi":"https://doi.org/10.18653/V1/2023.EMNLP-MAIN.696"},"_dblp_key":"conf/emnlp/ZhuZ00L0T23","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.696","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"预训练语言模型的零样本量化（zero-shot quantization，即不使用原始训练数据进行校准）中，现有方法未考虑量化后损失曲面的平坦性，导致量化模型泛化能力不足。","importance":"方法级贡献，将 sharpness-aware minimization（SAM）的思想引入零样本 PTQ/QAT 场景。对 pretrain 研究的启示有限但具体：量化是 LLM 部署的关键环节，而零样本设定避免了对原始预训练数据的依赖，这在数据不可得的场景下有实际价值。","technical_approach":"核心思路是在量化过程中引入 sharpness-aware 的优化目标，使量化后模型落在损失曲面的平坦区域，从而提升泛化。零样本意味着不使用真实训练数据，而是通过合成数据或模型自身统计量来校准量化参数。具体机制需查看全文（摘要为空）。","experiments":"摘要为空，无法提供实验细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Zero-shot quantization of pretrained language models (without access to original training data for calibration) suffers from poor generalization because existing methods ignore the flatness of the post-quantization loss landscape.","importance":"A method-level contribution bringing sharpness-aware minimization into zero-shot quantization for PLMs. Practically relevant for deploying LLMs when original pretraining data is unavailable, though the impact on pretrain research itself is indirect.","technical_approach":"Introduces a sharpness-aware objective during quantization to guide the quantized model toward flat minima, improving generalization. Zero-shot means no real training data is used; calibration relies on synthetic data or model statistics. Details require the full paper (abstract is empty).","experiments":"Abstract is empty; no experimental details available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","zero-shot","sharpness-aware"]}]},"allConferences":[{"slug":"acl-2025","venue":"ACL","year":2025,"full_name":"Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics","total_relevant":641,"total_fetched":3380,"by_award":{"poster":626,"best_paper":3,"outstanding_paper":12},"by_track":{"long":367,"findings":231,"short":18,"industry":10,"srw":6,"demo":6,"main":3},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T00:45:57.823033+00:00"},{"slug":"acl-2024","venue":"ACL","year":2024,"full_name":"Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics","total_relevant":385,"total_fetched":2145,"by_award":{"poster":385},"by_track":{"long":185,"findings":173,"srw":5,"short":9,"main":13},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T22:50:37.051621+00:00"},{"slug":"acl-2023","venue":"ACL","year":2023,"full_name":"Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics","total_relevant":424,"total_fetched":2876,"by_award":{"poster":424},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T09:44:43.509860+00:00"},{"slug":"emnlp-2025","venue":"EMNLP","year":2025,"full_name":"Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing","total_relevant":915,"total_fetched":3499,"by_award":{"poster":915},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T07:35:55.574285+00:00"},{"slug":"emnlp-2024","venue":"EMNLP","year":2024,"full_name":"Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing","total_relevant":718,"total_fetched":2460,"by_award":{"poster":718},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T03:40:34.148010+00:00"},{"slug":"emnlp-2023","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"full_name":"Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing","total_relevant":472,"total_fetched":2310,"by_award":{"poster":472},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T08:32:10.890267+00:00"},{"slug":"iclr-2026","venue":"ICLR","year":2026,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","total_relevant":1053,"total_fetched":5470,"by_award":{"poster":1053},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T01:40:59.513393+00:00"},{"slug":"iclr-2025","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","total_relevant":1979,"total_fetched":3720,"by_award":{"spotlight":193,"poster":1665,"oral":121},"by_track":{"main":1979},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T18:27:18.207575+00:00"},{"slug":"iclr-2024","venue":"ICLR","year":2024,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","total_relevant":851,"total_fetched":2456,"by_award":{"poster":682,"spotlight":130,"oral":39},"by_track":{"main":851},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T17:50:03.172895+00:00"},{"slug":"iclr-2023","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","total_relevant":294,"total_fetched":1794,"by_award":{"poster":294},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T11:29:30.626329+00:00"},{"slug":"icml-2025","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"full_name":"International Conference on Machine Learning","total_relevant":516,"total_fetched":3332,"by_award":{"poster":462,"oral":18,"spotlight":36},"by_track":{"main":510,"position":6},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T20:04:14.360455+00:00"},{"slug":"icml-2024","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"full_name":"International Conference on Machine Learning","total_relevant":335,"total_fetched":3321,"by_award":{"poster":292,"spotlight":15,"oral":28},"by_track":{"main":335},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T18:50:07.833195+00:00"},{"slug":"icml-2023","venue":"ICML","year":2023,"full_name":"International Conference on Machine Learning","total_relevant":297,"total_fetched":2934,"by_award":{"poster":297},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T04:21:49.394726+00:00"},{"slug":"naacl-2025","venue":"NAACL","year":2025,"full_name":"North American Chapter of the ACL","total_relevant":385,"total_fetched":1376,"by_award":{"poster":385},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T04:50:05.821261+00:00"},{"slug":"naacl-2024","venue":"NAACL","year":2024,"full_name":"North American Chapter of the ACL","total_relevant":321,"total_fetched":1342,"by_award":{"poster":321},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T04:35:26.823821+00:00"},{"slug":"neurips-2025","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2025,"full_name":"Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems","total_relevant":1338,"total_fetched":5858,"by_award":{"poster":1338},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T05:45:45.290822+00:00"},{"slug":"neurips-2024","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"full_name":"Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems","total_relevant":576,"total_fetched":4561,"by_award":{"poster":505,"spotlight":59,"oral":12},"by_track":{"datasets_benchmarks":50,"main":526},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T21:58:15.480882+00:00"},{"slug":"neurips-2023","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"full_name":"Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems","total_relevant":523,"total_fetched":3582,"by_award":{"poster":523},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T04:06:29.627949+00:00"}]}]}],["$L87"],"$L88"]}],"isPartial":false,"staleTime":300,"varyParams":null,"buildId":"CH7QW8TExBpH2R9CnsKlz"}
87:["$","script","script-0",{"src":"/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/03ne4hgh5k61l.js","async":true}]
88:["$","$L89",null,{"children":["$","$8a",null,{"name":"Next.MetadataOutlet","children":"$@8b"}]}]
8b:null
