1:"$Sreact.fragment"
2:I[44048,["/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0u8r51s9xyykl.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0d3shmwh5_nmn.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0eajwm.uf2h.~.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/03ne4hgh5k61l.js"],"ConferenceView"]
5a:I[97367,["/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0u8r51s9xyykl.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0d3shmwh5_nmn.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0eajwm.uf2h.~.js"],"OutletBoundary"]
5b:"$Sreact.suspense"
3:T588,Selecting high-quality pre-training data is important for creating capable language models, but existing methods rely on simple heuristics. We introduce QuRating, a method for selecting pre-training data that can capture human intuitions about data quality. In this paper, we investigate four qualities - writing style, required expertise, facts&trivia, and educational value - and find that LLMs are able to discern these qualities, especially when making pairwise judgments of texts. We train a QuRater model to learn scalar ratings from pairwise judgments, and use it to annotate a 260B training corpus with quality ratings for each of the four criteria. In our experiments, we select 30B tokens according to the different quality ratings and train 1.3B-parameter language models on the selected data. We find that it is important to balance quality and diversity. When we sample using quality ratings as logits over documents, our models obtain lower perplexity and stronger in-context learning performance than baselines. Our best model is based on educational value and performs similarly to a model trained with uniform sampling for 50% more steps. Beyond data selection, we use the quality ratings to construct a training curriculum which improves performance without changing the training dataset. We extensively analyze the quality ratings and discuss their characteristics, biases, and wider implications.4:T51f,Training large transformers is slow, but recent innovations on GPU architecture give us an advantage. NVIDIA Ampere GPUs can execute a fine-grained 2:4 sparse matrix multiplication twice as fast as its dense equivalent. In the light of this property, we comprehensively investigate the feasibility of accelerating feed-forward networks (FFNs) of transformers in pre-training. First, we define a ``flip rate'' to monitor the stability of a 2:4 training process. Utilizing this metric, we propose three techniques to preserve accuracy: to modify the sparse-refined straight-through estimator by applying the masked decay term on gradients, to determine a feasible decay factor in warm-up stage, and to enhance the model's quality by a dense fine-tuning procedure near the end of pre-training. Besides, we devise two techniques to practically accelerate training: to calculate transposable 2:4 masks by convolution, and to accelerate gated activation functions by reducing GPU L2 cache miss. Experiments show that our 2:4 sparse training algorithm achieves similar convergence to dense training algorithms on several transformer pre-training tasks, while actual acceleration can be observed on different shapes of transformer block apparently. Our toolkit is available at https://github.com/huyz2023/2by4-pretrain.5:T56e,Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) is key to aligning Large Language Models (LLMs), typically paired with the Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) algorithm. While PPO is a powerful method designed for general reinforcement learning tasks, it is overly sophisticated for LLMs, leading to laborious hyper-parameter tuning and significant computation burdens. To make RLHF efficient, we present ReMax, which leverages 3 properties of RLHF: fast simulation, deterministic transitions, and trajectory-level rewards. These properties are not exploited in PPO, making it less suitable for RLHF. Building on the renowned REINFORCE algorithm, ReMax does not require training an additional value model as in PPO and is further enhanced with a new variance reduction technique. ReMax offers several benefits over PPO: it is simpler to implement, eliminates more than 4 hyper-parameters in PPO, reduces GPU memory usage, and shortens training time. ReMax can save about 46% GPU memory than PPO when training a 7B model and enables training on A800-80GB GPUs without the memory-saving offloading technique needed by PPO. Applying ReMax to a Mistral-7B model resulted in a 94.78% win rate on the AlpacaEval leaderboard and a 7.739 score on MT-bench, setting a new SOTA for open-source 7B models. These results show the effectiveness of ReMax while addressing the limitations of PPO in LLMs.6:T519,This paper addresses the growing need for efficient large language models (LLMs) on mobile devices, driven by increasing cloud costs and latency concerns. We focus on designing top-quality LLMs with fewer than a billion parameters, a practical choice for mobile deployment. Contrary to prevailing belief emphasizing the pivotal role of data and parameter quantity in determining model quality, our investigation underscores the significance of model architecture for sub-billion scale LLMs. Leveraging deep and thin architectures, coupled with embedding sharing and grouped-query attention mechanisms, we establish a strong baseline network denoted as MobileLLM, which attains a remarkable 2.7%/4.3% accuracy boost over preceding 125M/350M state-of-the-art models. Additionally, we propose an immediate block-wise weight-sharing approach with no increase in model size and only marginal latency overhead. The resultant models, denoted as MobileLLM-LS, demonstrate a further accuracy enhancement of 0.7%/0.8% than MobileLLM 125M/350M. Moreover, MobileLLM model family shows significant improvements compared to previous sub-billion models on chat benchmarks, and demonstrates close correctness to LLaMA-v2 7B in API calling tasks, highlighting the capability of small models for common on-device use cases.7:T5b1,In-context learning is a powerful emergent ability in transformer models. Prior work in mechanistic interpretability has identified a circuit element that may be critical for in-context learning -- the induction head (IH), which performs a match-and-copy operation. During training of large transformers on natural language data, IHs emerge around the same time as a notable phase change in the loss. Despite the robust evidence for IHs and this interesting coincidence with the phase change, relatively little is known about the diversity and emergence dynamics of IHs. Why is there more than one IH, and how are they dependent on each other? Why do IHs appear all of a sudden, and what are the subcircuits that enable them to emerge? We answer these questions by studying IH emergence dynamics in a controlled setting by training on synthetic data. In doing so, we develop and share a novel optogenetics-inspired causal framework for modifying activations throughout training. Using this framework, we delineate the diverse and additive nature of IHs. By clamping subsets of activations throughout training, we then identify three underlying subcircuits that interact to drive IH formation, yielding the phase change. Furthermore, these subcircuits shed light on data-dependent properties of formation, such as phase change timing, already showing the promise of this more in-depth understanding of subcircuits that need to"go right"for an induction head.8:T63a,A common approach for aligning language models to human preferences is to first learn a reward model from preference data, and then use this reward model to update the language model. We study two closely related problems that arise in this approach. First, any monotone transformation of the reward model preserves preference ranking; is there a choice that is ``better'' than others? Second, we often wish to align language models to multiple properties: how should we combine multiple reward models? Using a probabilistic interpretation of the alignment procedure, we identify a natural choice for transformation for (the common case of) rewards learned from Bradley-Terry preference models. The derived transformation is straightforward: we apply a log-sigmoid function to the centered rewards, a method we term ``LSC-transformation'' (log-sigmoid-centered transformation). This transformation has two important properties. First, it emphasizes improving poorly-performing outputs, rather than outputs that already score well. This mitigates both underfitting (where some prompts are not improved) and reward hacking (where the model learns to exploit misspecification of the reward model). Second, it enables principled aggregation of rewards by linking summation to logical conjunction: the sum of transformed rewards corresponds to the probability that the output is ``good'' in all measured properties, in a sense we make precise. Experiments aligning language models to be both helpful and harmless using RLHF show substantial improvements over the baseline (non-transformed) approach.9:T676,Pretraining auto-regressive large language models~(LLMs) with retrieval demonstrates better perplexity and factual accuracy by leveraging external databases. However, the size of existing pretrained retrieval-augmented LLM is still limited (e.g., Retro has 7.5B parameters), which limits the effectiveness of instruction tuning and zero-shot generalization. In this work, we introduce Retro 48B, the largest LLM pretrained with retrieval. Specifically, we continue to pretrain a 43B GPT model on additional 100 billion tokens using the Retro augmentation method by retrieving from 1.2 trillion tokens. Notably, the obtained foundation model, Retro 48B, largely outperforms the counterpart GPT 43B trained on 1.2T tokens in terms of perplexity with only 2.58% additional GPU hours, demonstrating the significant scaling potential of the method. After instruction tuning on Retro, InstructRetro demonstrates significant improvement over the instruction tuned GPT on a wide range of zero-shot tasks. Specifically, the average improvement of InstructRetro is 7% over its GPT counterpart across 8 short-form QA and reading comprehension tasks, 10% over GPT across 4 challenging long-form QA tasks, and 16% over GPT across 3 summarization tasks. Surprisingly, we find that one can ablate the encoder from InstructRetro architecture and directly use its decoder backbone, while achieving comparable results. Our results highlight the promising direction to obtain a better GPT decoder through continued pretraining with retrieval before instruction tuning. Our code and checkpoints are publicly available at: https://huggingface.co/nvidia/retro-48b-instruct-4k.a:T5fd,In recent years, the rise of generative self-supervised learning (SSL) paradigms has exhibited impressive performance across visual, language, and multi-modal domains. While the varied designs of generative SSL objectives lead to distinct properties in downstream tasks, a theoretical understanding of these differences remains largely unexplored. In this paper, we establish the first theoretical comparisons between two leading generative SSL paradigms: autoregressive SSL and masked SSL. Through establishing theoretical frameworks, we elucidate the strengths and limitations of autoregressive and masked SSL within the primary evaluation tasks of classification and content generation. Our findings demonstrate that in classification tasks, the flexibility of targeted tokens in masked SSL fosters more inter-sample connections compared to the fixed position of target tokens in autoregressive SSL, which yields superior clustering performance. In content generation tasks, the misalignment between the flexible lengths of test samples and the fixed length of unmasked texts in masked SSL (vs. flexible lengths of conditional texts in autoregressive SSL) hinders its generation performance. To leverage each other's strengths and mitigate weaknesses, we propose diversity-enhanced autoregressive and variable-length masked objectives, which substantially improve the classification performance of autoregressive SSL and the generation performance of masked SSL. Code is available at https://github.com/PKU-ML/LookAheadLookAround.b:T435,We present an approach called Q-probing to adapt a pre-trained language model to maximize a task-specific reward function. At a high level, Q-probing sits between heavier approaches such as finetuning and lighter approaches such as few shot prompting, but can also be combined with either. The idea is to learn a simple linear function on a model's embedding space that can be used to reweight candidate completions. We theoretically show that this sampling procedure is equivalent to a KL-constrained maximization of the Q-probe as the number of samples increases. To train the Q-probes we consider either reward modeling or a class of novel direct policy learning objectives based on importance weighted policy gradients. With this technique, we see gains in domains with ground-truth rewards (code generation) as well as implicit rewards defined by preference data, even outperforming finetuning in data-limited regimes. Moreover, a Q-probe can be trained on top of an API since it only assumes access to sampling and embeddings. Code: https://github.com/likenneth/q_probe .c:T491,We introduce Magicoder, a series of fully open-source (code, weights, and data) Large Language Models (LLMs) for code that significantly closes the gap with top code models while having no more than 7B parameters. Magicoder models are trained on 75K synthetic instruction data using OSS-Instruct, a novel approach to enlightening LLMs with open-source code snippets to generate diverse instruction data for code. Our main motivation is to mitigate the inherent bias of the synthetic data generated by LLMs through the wealth of open-source references for the production of more realistic and controllable data. The orthogonality of OSS-Instruct and other data generation methods like Evol-Instruct further enables us to build an enhanced MagicoderS. Both Magicoder and MagicoderS substantially outperform state-of-the-art code models with similar or even larger sizes on a wide range of coding benchmarks. Notably, MagicoderS-CL-7B based on CodeLlama even surpasses the prominent ChatGPT on HumanEval+ (66.5 vs. 65.9 in pass@1 ). Overall, OSS-Instruct opens a new direction for crafting diverse synthetic instruction data for code using abundant open-source references.d:T591,This paper studies the alignment process of generative models with Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF). We first identify the primary challenges of existing popular methods like offline PPO and offline DPO as lacking in strategical exploration of the environment. Then, to understand the mathematical principle of RLHF, we consider a standard mathematical formulation, the reverse-KL regularized contextual bandit for RLHF. Despite its widespread practical application, a rigorous theoretical analysis of this formulation remains open. We investigate its behavior in three distinct settings -- offline, online, and hybrid -- and propose efficient algorithms with finite-sample theoretical guarantees. Moving towards practical applications, our framework, with a robust approximation of the information-theoretical policy improvement oracle, naturally gives rise to several novel RLHF algorithms. This includes an iterative version of the Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) algorithm for online settings, and a multi-step rejection sampling strategy for offline scenarios. Our empirical evaluations on real-world alignment experiment of large language model demonstrate that these proposed methods significantly surpass existing strong baselines, such as DPO and Rejection Sampling Optimization (RSO), showcasing the connections between solid theoretical foundations and their potent practical implementations.e:T454,The sparsely gated mixture of experts (MoE) architecture sends different inputs to different subnetworks, i.e., experts, through trainable routers. MoE reduces the training computation significantly for large models, but its deployment can be still memory or computation expensive for some downstream tasks. Model pruning is a popular approach to reduce inference computation, but its application in MoE architecture is largely unexplored. To the best of our knowledge, this paper provides the first provably efficient technique for pruning experts in finetuned MoE models. We theoretically prove that prioritizing the pruning of the experts with a smaller change of the routers l2 norm from the pretrained model guarantees the preservation of test accuracy, while significantly reducing the model size and the computational requirements. Although our theoretical analysis is centered on binary classification tasks on simplified MoE architecture, our expert pruning method is verified on large vision MoE models such as VMoE and E3MoE finetuned on benchmark datasets such as CIFAR10, CIFAR100, and ImageNet.f:T4f5,In this work, we study rapid improvements of the training loss in transformers when being confronted with multi-step decision tasks. We found that transformers struggle to learn the intermediate task and both training and validation loss saturate for hundreds of epochs. When transformers finally learn the intermediate task, they do this rapidly and unexpectedly. We call these abrupt improvements Eureka-moments, since the transformer appears to suddenly learn a previously incomprehensible concept. We designed synthetic tasks to study the problem in detail, but the leaps in performance can be observed also for language modeling and in-context learning (ICL). We suspect that these abrupt transitions are caused by the multi-step nature of these tasks. Indeed, we find connections and show that ways to improve on the synthetic multi-step tasks can be used to improve the training of language modeling and ICL. Using the synthetic data we trace the problem back to the Softmax function in the self-attention block of transformers and show ways to alleviate the problem. These fixes reduce the required number of training steps, lead to higher likelihood to learn the intermediate task, to higher final accuracy and training becomes more robust to hyper-parameters.10:T526,On-device training is currently the most common approach for training machine learning (ML) models on private, distributed user data. Despite this, on-device training has several drawbacks: (1) most user devices are too small to train large models on-device, (2) on-device training is communication- and computation-intensive, and (3) on-device training can be difficult to debug and deploy. To address these problems, we propose Private Evolution-Text (PrE-Text), a method for generating differentially private (DP) synthetic textual data. First, we show that across multiple datasets, training small models (models that fit on user devices) with PrE-Text synthetic data outperforms small models trained on-device under practical privacy regimes ($\epsilon=1.29$, $\epsilon=7.58$). We achieve these results while using 9$\times$ fewer rounds, 6$\times$ less client computation per round, and 100$\times$ less communication per round. Second, finetuning large models on PrE-Text's DP synthetic data improves large language model (LLM) performance on private data across the same range of privacy budgets. Altogether, these results suggest that training on DP synthetic data can be a better option than training a model on-device on private distributed data. Code is available at https://github.com/houcharlie/PrE-Text.11:T616,Transformers have recently revolutionized many domains in modern machine learning and one salient discovery is their remarkable in-context learning capability, where models can solve an unseen task by utilizing task-specific prompts without further parameters fine-tuning. This also inspired recent theoretical studies aiming to understand the in-context learning mechanism of transformers, which however focused only on linear transformers. In this work, we take the first step toward studying the learning dynamics of a one-layer transformer with softmax attention trained via gradient descent in order to in-context learn linear function classes. We consider a structured data model, where each token is randomly sampled from a set of feature vectors in either balanced or imbalanced fashion. For data with balanced features, we establish the finite-time convergence guarantee with near-zero prediction error by navigating our analysis over two phases of the training dynamics of the attention map. More notably, for data with imbalanced features, we show that the learning dynamics take a stage-wise convergence process, where the transformer first converges to a near-zero prediction error for the query tokens of dominant features, and then converges later to a near-zero prediction error for the query tokens of under-represented features, respectively via one and four training phases. Our proof features new techniques for analyzing the competing strengths of two types of attention weights, the change of which determines different training phases.12:T482,Common methods for aligning large language models (LLMs) with desired behaviour heavily rely on human-labelled data. However, as models grow increasingly sophisticated, they will surpass human expertise, and the role of human evaluation will evolve into non-experts overseeing experts. In anticipation of this, we ask: can weaker models assess the correctness of stronger models? We investigate this question in an analogous setting, where stronger models (experts) possess the necessary information to answer questions and weaker models (non-experts) lack this information. The method we evaluate is debate, where two LLM experts each argue for a different answer, and a non-expert selects the answer. We find that debate consistently helps both non-expert models and humans answer questions, achieving 76% and 88% accuracy respectively (naive baselines obtain 48% and 60%). Furthermore, optimising expert debaters for persuasiveness in an unsupervised manner improves non-expert ability to identify the truth in debates. Our results provide encouraging empirical evidence for the viability of aligning models with debate in the absence of ground truth.13:T50a,Stepwise inference protocols, such as scratchpads and chain-of-thought, help language models solve complex problems by decomposing them into a sequence of simpler subproblems. Despite the significant gain in performance achieved via these protocols, the underlying mechanisms of stepwise inference have remained elusive. To address this, we propose to study autoregressive Transformer models on a synthetic task that embodies the multi-step nature of problems where stepwise inference is generally most useful. Specifically, we define a graph navigation problem wherein a model is tasked with traversing a path from a start to a goal node on the graph. Despite is simplicity, we find we can empirically reproduce and analyze several phenomena observed at scale: (i) the stepwise inference reasoning gap, the cause of which we find in the structure of the training data; (ii) a diversity-accuracy tradeoff in model generations as sampling temperature varies; (iii) a simplicity bias in the model's output; and (iv) compositional generalization and a primacy bias with in-context exemplars. Overall, our work introduces a grounded, synthetic framework for studying stepwise inference and offers mechanistic hypotheses that can lay the foundation for a deeper understanding of this phenomenon.14:T5b8,Adaptive gradient optimizers like Adam(W) are the default training algorithms for many deep learning architectures, such as transformers. Their diagonal preconditioner is based on the gradient outer product which is incorporated into the parameter update via a square root. While these methods are often motivated as approximate second-order methods, the square root represents a fundamental difference. In this work, we investigate how the behavior of adaptive methods changes when we remove the root, i.e., strengthen their second-order motivation. Surprisingly, we find that such square-root-free adaptive methods close the generalization gap to SGD on convolutional architectures, while maintaining their root-based counterpart's performance on transformers. The second-order perspective also has practical benefits for developing non-diagonal methods that can incorporate arbitrary curvature approximations through the concept of preconditioner invariance. In contrast to root-based methods like Shampoo, root-free counterparts work well and fast with half-precision since they do not require numerically unstable matrix root decompositions and inversions. Overall, our findings provide new insights into the development of adaptive methods and raise important questions regarding the overlooked role of adaptivity in their success. (experiment code: https://github.com/yorkerlin/remove-the-square-root optimizer code: https://github.com/f-dangel/sirfshampoo)15:T46f,Among the widely used parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods, LoRA and its variants have gained considerable popularity because of avoiding additional inference costs. However, there still often exists an accuracy gap between these methods and full fine-tuning (FT). In this work, we first introduce a novel weight decomposition analysis to investigate the inherent differences between FT and LoRA. Aiming to resemble the learning capacity of FT from the findings, we propose Weight-Decomposed Low-Rank Adaptation (DoRA). DoRA decomposes the pre-trained weight into two components, magnitude and direction, for fine-tuning, specifically employing LoRA for directional updates to efficiently minimize the number of trainable parameters. By employing \ours, we enhance both the learning capacity and training stability of LoRA while avoiding any additional inference overhead. \ours~consistently outperforms LoRA on fine-tuning LLaMA, LLaVA, and VL-BART on various downstream tasks, such as commonsense reasoning, visual instruction tuning, and image/video-text understanding. Code is available at https://github.com/NVlabs/DoRA.16:T51f,Speech understanding as an element of the more generic video understanding using audio-visual large language models (av-LLMs) is a crucial yet understudied aspect. This paper proposes video-SALMONN, a single end-to-end av-LLM for video processing, which can understand not only visual frame sequences, audio events and music, but speech as well. To obtain fine-grained temporal information required by speech understanding, while keeping efficient for other video elements, this paper proposes a novel multi-resolution causal Q-Former (MRC Q-Former) structure to connect pre-trained audio-visual encoders and the backbone large language model. Moreover, dedicated training approaches including the diversity loss and the unpaired audio-visual mixed training scheme are proposed to avoid frames or modality dominance. On the introduced speech-audio-visual evaluation benchmark, video-SALMONN achieves more than 25\% absolute accuracy improvements on the video-QA task and over 30\% absolute accuracy improvements on audio-visual QA tasks with human speech. In addition, video-SALMONN demonstrates remarkable video comprehension and reasoning abilities on tasks that are unprecedented by other av-LLMs. Our training code and model checkpoints are available at \texttt{\url{https://github.com/bytedance/SALMONN/}}.17:T57b,This paper introduces diffusion protein language model (DPLM), a versatile protein language model that demonstrates strong generative and predictive capabilities for protein sequences. We first pre-train scalable DPLMs from evolutionary-scale protein sequences within a generative self-supervised discrete diffusion probabilistic framework, which generalizes language modeling for proteins in a principled way. After pre-training, DPLM exhibits the ability to generate structurally plausible, novel, and diverse protein sequences for unconditional generation. We further demonstrate the proposed diffusion generative pre-training makes DPLM possess a better understanding of proteins, making it a superior representation learner, which can be fine-tuned for various predictive tasks, comparing favorably to ESM2 (Lin et al., 2022). Moreover, DPLM can be tailored for various needs, which showcases its prowess of conditional generation in several ways: (1) conditioning on partial peptide sequences, e.g., generating scaffolds for functional motifs with high success rate; (2) incorporating other modalities as conditioner, e.g., structure-conditioned generation for inverse folding; and (3) steering sequence generation towards desired properties, e.g., satisfying specified secondary structures, through a plug-and-play classifier guidance. Code is released at \url{https://github.com/bytedance/dplm}.18:T5d9,While recently Multimodal Large Language Models (MM-LLMs) have made exciting strides, they mostly fall prey to the limitation of only input-side multimodal understanding, without the ability to produce content in multiple modalities. As we humans always perceive the world and communicate with people through various modalities, developing any-to-any MM-LLMs capable of accepting and delivering content in any modality becomes essential to human-level AI. To fill the gap, we present an end-to-end general-purpose any-to-any MM-LLM system, NExT-GPT. We connect an LLM with multimodal adaptors and different diffusion decoders, enabling NExT-GPT to perceive inputs and generate outputs in arbitrary combinations of text, images, videos, and audio. By leveraging the existing well-trained highly-performing encoders and decoders, NExT-GPT is tuned with only a small amount of parameter (1%) of certain projection layers, which not only benefits low-cost training and also facilitates convenient expansion to more potential modalities. Moreover, we introduce a modality-switching instruction tuning (MosIT) and manually curate a high-quality dataset for MosIT, based on which NExT-GPT is empowered with complex cross-modal semantic understanding and content generation. Overall, our research showcases the promising possibility of building an AI agent capable of modeling universal modalities, paving the way for more human-like AI research in the community. Project page: https://next-gpt.github.io/19:T596,Fine-tuning pre-trained Large Language Models (LLMs) is essential to align them with human values and intentions. This process often utilizes methods like pairwise comparisons and KL divergence against a reference LLM, focusing on the evaluation of full answers generated by the models. However, the generation of these responses occurs in a token level, following a sequential, auto-regressive fashion. In this paper, we introduce Token-level Direct Preference Optimization (TDPO), a novel approach to align LLMs with human preferences by optimizing policy at the token level. Unlike previous methods, which face challenges in divergence efficiency, TDPO incorporates forward KL divergence constraints for each token, improving alignment and diversity. Utilizing the Bradley-Terry model for a token-based reward system, TDPO enhances the regulation of KL divergence, while preserving simplicity without the need for explicit reward modeling. Experimental results across various text tasks demonstrate TDPO's superior performance in balancing alignment with generation diversity. Notably, fine-tuning with TDPO strikes a better balance than DPO in the controlled sentiment generation and single-turn dialogue datasets, and significantly improves the quality of generated responses compared to both DPO and PPO-based RLHF methods. Our code is open-sourced at https://github.com/Vance0124/Token-level-Direct-Preference-Optimization.1a:T614,GEneral Matrix Multiply (GEMM) is a central operation in deep learning and corresponds to the largest chunk of the compute footprint. Therefore, improving its efficiency is an active topic of ongoing research. A popular strategy is the use of low bit-width integers to approximate the original entries in a matrix. This allows efficiency gains, but often requires sophisticated techniques to control the rounding error incurred. In this work, we first verify/check that when the low bit-width restriction is removed, for a variety of Transformer-based models, whether integers are sufficient for all GEMMs need -- for {\em both} training and inference stages, and can achieve parity with floating point counterparts. No sophisticated techniques are needed. We find that while a large majority of entries in matrices (encountered in such models) can be easily represented by {\em low} bit-width integers, the existence of a few heavy hitter entries make it difficult to achieve efficiency gains via the exclusive use of low bit-width GEMMs alone. To address this issue, we develop a simple algorithm, Integer Matrix Unpacking (IM-Unpack), to {\em unpack} a matrix with large integer entries into a larger matrix whose entries all lie within the representable range of arbitrarily low bit-width integers. This allows {\em equivalence} with the original GEMM, i.e., the exact result can be obtained using purely low bit-width integer GEMMs. This comes at the cost of additional operations -- we show that for many popular models, this overhead is quite small.1b:T5d0,Code provides a general syntactic structure to build complex programs and perform precise computations when paired with a code interpreter - we hypothesize that language models (LMs) can leverage code-writing to improve Chain of Thought reasoning not only for logic and arithmetic tasks, but also for semantic ones (and in particular, those that are a mix of both). For example, consider prompting an LM to write code that counts the number of times it detects sarcasm in an essay: the LM may struggle to write an implementation for"detect_sarcasm(string)"that can be executed by the interpreter (handling the edge cases would be insurmountable). However, LMs may still produce a valid solution if they not only write code, but also selectively"emulate"the interpreter by generating the expected output of"detect_sarcasm(string)". In this work, we propose Chain of Code (CoC), a simple yet surprisingly effective extension that improves LM code-driven reasoning. The key idea is to encourage LMs to format semantic sub-tasks in a program as flexible pseudocode that the interpreter can explicitly catch undefined behaviors and hand off to simulate with an LM (as an"LMulator"). Experiments demonstrate that Chain of Code outperforms Chain of Thought and other baselines across a variety of benchmarks; on BIG-Bench Hard, Chain of Code achieves 84%, a gain of 12% over Chain of Thought. In a nutshell, CoC broadens the scope of reasoning questions that LMs can answer by"thinking in code".1c:T4a7,SoftMax is a ubiquitous ingredient of modern machine learning algorithms. It maps an input vector onto a probability simplex and reweights the input by concentrating the probability mass at large entries. Yet, as a smooth approximation to the Argmax function, a significant amount of probability mass is distributed to other, residual entries, leading to poor interpretability and noise. Although sparsity can be achieved by a family of SoftMax variants, they often require an alternative loss function and do not preserve multi-modality. We show that this trade-off between multi-modality and sparsity limits the expressivity of SoftMax as well as its variants. We provide a solution to this tension between objectives by proposing a piece-wise differentiable function, termed MultiMax, which adaptively modulates the output distribution according to input entry range. Through comprehensive analysis and evaluation, we show that MultiMax successfully produces a distribution that supresses irrelevant entries while preserving multimodality, with benefits in image classification, language modeling and machine translation. The code is available at https://github.com/ZhouYuxuanYX/MultiMax.1d:T726,Large Language Models (LLMs), renowned for their remarkable performance across diverse domains, present a challenge when it comes to practical deployment due to their colossal model size. In response to this challenge, efforts have been directed toward the application of traditional network pruning techniques to LLMs, uncovering a massive number of parameters that can be pruned in one-shot without hurting performance. Prevailing LLM pruning strategies have consistently adhered to the practice of uniformly pruning all layers at equivalent sparsity, resulting in robust performance. However, this observation stands in contrast to the prevailing trends observed in the field of vision models, where non-uniform layerwise sparsity typically yields stronger results. To understand the underlying reasons for this disparity, we conduct a comprehensive study and discover a strong correlation with the emergence of activation outliers in LLMs. Inspired by this finding, we introduce a novel LLM pruning methodology that incorporates a tailored set of non-uniform layerwise sparsity ratios, termed as Outlier Weighed Layerwise sparsity (OWL). The sparsity ratio of OWL is proportional to the outlier ratio observed within each layer, facilitating a more effective alignment between layerwise weight sparsity and outlier ratios. Our empirical evaluation, conducted across the LLaMA-V1 family and OPT, spanning various benchmarks, demonstrates the distinct advantages offered by OWL over previous methods. For instance, OWL exhibits a remarkable performance gain, surpassing the state-of-the-art Wanda and SparseGPT by 61.22 and 6.80 perplexity at a high sparsity level of 70%, respectively, while delivering 2.6x end-to-end inference speed-up in the DeepSparse inference engine. Codes are available at https://github.com/luuyin/OWL.1e:T4d6,We consider the problem of multi-objective alignment of foundation models with human preferences, which is a critical step towards helpful and harmless AI systems. However, it is generally costly and unstable to fine-tune large foundation models using reinforcement learning (RL), and the multi-dimensionality, heterogeneity, and conflicting nature of human preferences further complicate the alignment process. In this paper, we introduce Rewards-in-Context (RiC), which conditions the response of a foundation model on multiple rewards in its prompt context and applies supervised fine-tuning for alignment. The salient features of RiC are simplicity and adaptivity, as it only requires supervised fine-tuning of a single foundation model and supports dynamic adjustment for user preferences during inference time. Inspired by the analytical solution of an abstracted convex optimization problem, our dynamic inference-time adjustment method approaches the Pareto-optimal solution for multiple objectives. Empirical evidence demonstrates the efficacy of our method in aligning both Large Language Models (LLMs) and diffusion models to accommodate diverse rewards with only around 10% GPU hours compared with multi-objective RL baseline.1f:T4a4,In-context learning (ICL) has emerged as a particularly remarkable characteristic of Large Language Models (LLM): given a pretrained LLM and an observed dataset, LLMs can make predictions for new data points from the same distribution without fine-tuning. Numerous works have postulated ICL as approximately Bayesian inference, rendering this a natural hypothesis. In this work, we analyse this hypothesis from a new angle through the martingale property, a fundamental requirement of a Bayesian learning system for exchangeable data. We show that the martingale property is a necessary condition for unambiguous predictions in such scenarios, and enables a principled, decomposed notion of uncertainty vital in trustworthy, safety-critical systems. We derive actionable checks with corresponding theory and test statistics which must hold if the martingale property is satisfied. We also examine if uncertainty in LLMs decreases as expected in Bayesian learning when more data is observed. In three experiments, we provide evidence for violations of the martingale property, and deviations from a Bayesian scaling behaviour of uncertainty, falsifying the hypothesis that ICL is Bayesian.20:T431,Modern language models (LMs) have gained widespread acceptance in everyday and professional contexts, particularly in programming. An essential procedure enabling this adoption is instruction tuning, which substantially enhances LMs' practical utility by training them to follow user instructions and human preferences. However, existing instruction tuning schemes overlook a crucial aspect: the security of generated code. As a result, even the state-of-the-art instruction-tuned LMs frequently produce unsafe code, posing significant security risks. In this work, we introduce SafeCoder to address this gap. SafeCoder performs security-centric fine-tuning using a diverse and high-quality dataset that we collected using an automated pipeline. We integrate the security fine-tuning with standard instruction tuning, to facilitate a joint optimization of both security and utility. Despite its simplicity, we show that SafeCoder is effective across a variety of popular LMs and datasets. It is able to drastically improve security (by about 30%), while preserving utility.21:T557,Uncertainty decomposition refers to the task of decomposing the total uncertainty of a predictive model into aleatoric (data) uncertainty, resulting from inherent randomness in the data-generating process, and epistemic (model) uncertainty, resulting from missing information in the model's training data. In large language models (LLMs) specifically, identifying sources of uncertainty is an important step toward improving reliability, trustworthiness, and interpretability, but remains an important open research question. In this paper, we introduce an uncertainty decomposition framework for LLMs, called input clarification ensembling, which can be applied to any pre-trained LLM. Our approach generates a set of clarifications for the input, feeds them into an LLM, and ensembles the corresponding predictions. We show that, when aleatoric uncertainty arises from ambiguity or under-specification in LLM inputs, this approach makes it possible to factor an (unclarified) LLM's predictions into separate aleatoric and epistemic terms, using a decomposition similar to the one employed by Bayesian neural networks. Empirical evaluations demonstrate that input clarification ensembling provides accurate and reliable uncertainty quantification on several language processing tasks. Code and data are available at https://github.com/UCSB-NLP-Chang/llm_uncertainty.22:T676,We introduce an Outlier-Efficient Modern Hopfield Model (termed $\mathrm{OutEffHop}$) and use it to address the outlier inefficiency problem of {training} gigantic transformer-based models. Our main contribution is a novel associative memory model facilitating \textit{outlier-efficient} associative memory retrievals. Interestingly, this memory model manifests a model-based interpretation of an outlier-efficient attention mechanism (${\rm Softmax}_1$): it is an approximation of the memory retrieval process of $\mathrm{OutEffHop}$. Methodologically, this allows us to introduce novel outlier-efficient Hopfield layers as powerful alternatives to traditional attention mechanisms, with superior post-quantization performance. Theoretically, the Outlier-Efficient Modern Hopfield Model retains and improves the desirable properties of standard modern Hopfield models, including fixed point convergence and exponential storage capacity. Empirically, we demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed model across large-scale transformer-based and Hopfield-based models (including BERT, OPT, ViT, and STanHop-Net), benchmarking against state-of-the-art methods like $\mathtt{Clipped\_Softmax}$ and $\mathtt{Gated\_Attention}$. Notably, $\mathrm{OutEffHop}$ achieves an average reduction of 22+\% in average kurtosis and 26+\% in the maximum infinity norm of model outputs across four models. Code is available at \href{https://github.com/MAGICS-LAB/OutEffHop}{GitHub}; models are on \href{https://huggingface.co/collections/magicslabnu/outeffhop-6610fcede8d2cda23009a98f}{Hugging Face Hub}; future updates are on \href{https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.03828}{arXiv}.23:T646,Despite the impressive performance in a variety of complex tasks, modern large language models (LLMs) still have trouble dealing with some math problems that are simple and intuitive for humans, such as addition. While we can easily learn basic rules of addition and apply them to new problems of any length, LLMs struggle to do the same. Instead, they may rely on similar cases seen in the training corpus for help. We define these two different reasoning mechanisms as"rule-based reasoning"and"case-based reasoning". Since rule-based reasoning is essential for acquiring systematic generalization ability, we aim to explore exactly whether transformers use rule-based or case-based reasoning for math problems. Through carefully designed intervention experiments on five math tasks, we confirm that transformers are performing case-based reasoning, no matter whether scratchpad is used, which aligns with the previous observations that transformers use subgraph matching/shortcut learning to reason. To mitigate such problems, we propose a Rule-Following Fine-Tuning (RFFT) technique to teach transformers to perform rule-based reasoning. Specifically, we provide explicit rules in the input and then instruct transformers to recite and follow the rules step by step. Through RFFT, we successfully enable LLMs fine-tuned on 1-5 digit addition to generalize to up to 12-digit addition with over 95% accuracy, which is over 40% higher than scratchpad. The significant improvement demonstrates that teaching LLMs to use rules explicitly helps them learn rule-based reasoning and generalize better in length.24:T4c0,Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) and Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) are pivotal methodologies in reward learning, which involve inferring and shaping the underlying reward function of sequential decision-making problems based on observed human demonstrations and feedback. Most prior work in reward learning has relied on prior knowledge or assumptions about decision or preference models, potentially leading to robustness issues. In response, this paper introduces a novel linear programming (LP) framework tailored for offline reward learning. Utilizing pre-collected trajectories without online exploration, this framework estimates a feasible reward set from the primal-dual optimality conditions of a suitably designed LP, and offers an optimality guarantee with provable sample efficiency. Our LP framework also enables aligning the reward functions with human feedback, such as pairwise trajectory comparison data, while maintaining computational tractability and sample efficiency. We demonstrate that our framework potentially achieves better performance compared to the conventional maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) approach through analytical examples and numerical experiments.25:T6a6,Generative Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable results for a wide range of tasks. However, deploying these models for inference has been a significant challenge due to their unprecedented resource requirements. This has forced existing deployment frameworks to use multi-GPU inference pipelines, which are often complex and costly, or to use smaller and less performant models. In this work, we demonstrate that the main bottleneck for generative inference with LLMs is memory bandwidth, rather than compute, specifically for single batch inference. While quantization has emerged as a promising solution by representing weights with reduced precision, previous efforts have often resulted in notable performance degradation. To address this, we introduce SqueezeLLM, a post-training quantization framework that not only enables lossless compression to ultra-low precisions of up to 3-bit, but also achieves higher quantization performance under the same memory constraint. Our framework incorporates two novel ideas: (i) sensitivity-based non-uniform quantization, which searches for the optimal bit precision assignment based on second-order information; and (ii) the Dense-and-Sparse decomposition that stores outliers and sensitive weight values in an efficient sparse format. When applied to the LLaMA models, our 3-bit quantization significantly reduces the perplexity gap from the FP16 baseline by up to 2.1x as compared to the state-of-the-art methods with the same memory requirement. Furthermore, when deployed on an A6000 GPU, our quantized models achieve up to 2.3x speedup compared to the baseline. Our code is available at https://github.com/SqueezeAILab/SqueezeLLM.26:T539,Large language models (LLMs) show excellent performance in difficult tasks, but they often require massive memories and computational resources. How to reduce the parameter scale of LLMs has become research hotspots. In this study, we make an important observation that the multi-head self-attention (MHA) sub-layer of Transformer exhibits noticeable low-rank structure, while the feed-forward network (FFN) sub-layer does not. With this regard, we design a mixed compression model, which organically combines Low-Rank matrix approximation And structured Pruning (LoRAP). For the MHA sub-layer, we propose an input activation weighted singular value decomposition method to strengthen the low-rank characteristic. Furthermore, we discover that the weight matrices in MHA sub-layer have different low-rank degrees. Thus, a novel parameter allocation scheme according to the discrepancy of low-rank degrees is devised. For the FFN sub-layer, we propose a gradient-free structured channel pruning method. During the pruning, we get an interesting finding that the least important 1% of parameter actually play a vital role in model performance. Extensive evaluations on zero-shot perplexity and zero-shot task classification indicate that our proposal is superior to previous structured compression rivals under multiple compression ratios.27:T51a,Similar to natural language models, pre-trained genome language models are proposed to capture the underlying intricacies within genomes with unsupervised sequence modeling. They have become essential tools for researchers and practitioners in biology. However, the hand-crafted tokenization policies used in these models may not encode the most discriminative patterns from the limited vocabulary of genomic data. In this paper, we introduce VQDNA, a general-purpose framework that renovates genome tokenization from the perspective of genome vocabulary learning. By leveraging vector-quantized codebooks as learnable vocabulary, VQDNA can adaptively tokenize genomes into pattern-aware embeddings in an end-to-end manner. To further push its limits, we propose Hierarchical Residual Quantization (HRQ), where varying scales of codebooks are designed in a hierarchy to enrich the genome vocabulary in a coarse-to-fine manner. Extensive experiments on 32 genome datasets demonstrate VQDNA's superiority and favorable parameter efficiency compared to existing genome language models. Notably, empirical analysis of SARS-CoV-2 mutations reveals the fine-grained pattern awareness and biological significance of learned HRQ vocabulary, highlighting its untapped potential for broader applications in genomics.28:T647,Vision-language models (VLMs) are impactful in part because they can be applied to a variety of visual understanding tasks in a zero-shot fashion, without any fine-tuning. We study $\textit{generative VLMs}$ that are trained for next-word generation given an image. We explore their zero-shot performance on the illustrative task of image-text retrieval across 8 popular vision-language benchmarks. Our first observation is that they can be repurposed for discriminative tasks (such as image-text retrieval) by simply computing the match score of generating a particular text string given an image. We call this probabilistic score the $\textit{Visual Generative Pre-Training Score}$ (VisualGPTScore). While the VisualGPTScore produces near-perfect accuracy on some retrieval benchmarks, it yields poor accuracy on others. We analyze this behavior through a probabilistic lens, pointing out that some benchmarks inadvertently capture unnatural language distributions by creating adversarial but unlikely text captions. In fact, we demonstrate that even a"blind"language model that ignores any image evidence can sometimes outperform all prior art, reminiscent of similar challenges faced by the visual-question answering (VQA) community many years ago. We derive a probabilistic post-processing scheme that controls for the amount of linguistic bias in generative VLMs at test time without having to retrain or fine-tune the model. We show that the VisualGPTScore, when appropriately debiased, is a strong zero-shot baseline for vision-language understanding, oftentimes producing state-of-the-art accuracy.29:T48c,The ever-growing ecosystem of LLMs has posed a challenge in selecting the most appropriate pre-trained model to fine-tune amidst a sea of options. Given constrained resources, fine-tuning all models and making selections afterward is unrealistic. In this work, we formulate this resource-constrained selection task into predicting fine-tuning performance and illustrate its natural connection with Scaling Law. Unlike pre-training, we find that the fine-tuning scaling curve includes not just the well-known"power phase"but also the previously unobserved"pre-power phase". We also explain why existing Scaling Law fails to capture this phase transition phenomenon both theoretically and empirically. To address this, we introduce the concept of"pre-learned data size"into our Rectified Scaling Law, which overcomes theoretical limitations and fits experimental results much better. By leveraging our law, we propose a novel LLM selection algorithm that selects the near-optimal model with hundreds of times less resource consumption, while other methods may provide negatively correlated selection. The project page is available at rectified-scaling-law.github.io.2a:T6f0,Large language models (LLMs) have shown remarkable instruction-following capabilities and achieved impressive performances in various applications. However, the performances of LLMs depend heavily on the instructions given to them, which are typically manually tuned with substantial human efforts. Recent work has used the query-efficient Bayesian optimization (BO) algorithm to automatically optimize the instructions given to black-box LLMs. However, BO usually falls short when optimizing highly sophisticated (e.g., high-dimensional) objective functions, such as the functions mapping an instruction to the performance of an LLM. This is mainly due to the limited expressive power of the Gaussian process (GP) which is used by BO as a surrogate to model the objective function. Meanwhile, it has been repeatedly shown that neural networks (NNs), especially pre-trained transformers, possess strong expressive power and can model highly complex functions. So, we adopt a neural bandit algorithm which replaces the GP in BO by an NN surrogate to optimize instructions for black-box LLMs. More importantly, the neural bandit algorithm allows us to naturally couple the NN surrogate with the hidden representation learned by a pre-trained transformer (i.e., an open-source LLM), which significantly boosts its performance. These motivate us to propose our INSTruction optimization usIng Neural bandits Coupled with Transformers (INSTINCT) algorithm. We perform instruction optimization for ChatGPT and use extensive experiments to show that INSTINCT consistently outperforms baselines in different tasks, e.g., various instruction induction tasks and the task of improving zero-shot chain-of-thought instructions. Our code is available at https://github.com/xqlin98/INSTINCT.2b:T4f1,In recent years, deep learning has made remarkable progress in a wide range of domains, with a particularly notable impact on natural language processing tasks. One of the challenges associated with training deep neural networks in the context of LLMs is the need for large amounts of computational resources and time. To mitigate this, network growing algorithms offer potential cost savings, but their underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. We present two notable contributions in this paper. First, we present Deep Fusion, an efficient approach to network training that leverages pre-trained initializations of smaller networks. Second, we propose a theoretical framework using backward error analysis to illustrate the dynamics of mid-training network growth. Our experiments show how Deep Fusion is a practical and effective approach that not only accelerates the training process but also reduces computational requirements, maintaining or surpassing traditional training methods' performance in various NLP tasks and T5 model sizes. Finally, we validate our theoretical framework, which guides the optimal use of Deep Fusion, showing that with carefully optimized training dynamics, it significantly reduces both training time and resource consumption.2c:T4c0,Discrete diffusion or flow models could enable faster and more controllable sequence generation than autoregressive models. We show that na\"ive linear flow matching on the simplex is insufficient toward this goal since it suffers from discontinuities in the training target and further pathologies. To overcome this, we develop Dirichlet flow matching on the simplex based on mixtures of Dirichlet distributions as probability paths. In this framework, we derive a connection between the mixtures' scores and the flow's vector field that allows for classifier and classifier-free guidance. Further, we provide distilled Dirichlet flow matching, which enables one-step sequence generation with minimal performance hits, resulting in $O(L)$ speedups compared to autoregressive models. On complex DNA sequence generation tasks, we demonstrate superior performance compared to all baselines in distributional metrics and in achieving desired design targets for generated sequences. Finally, we show that our classifier-free guidance approach improves unconditional generation and is effective for generating DNA that satisfies design targets. Code is available at https://github.com/HannesStark/dirichlet-flow-matching.2d:T6d4,Video encompasses both visual and auditory data, creating a perceptually rich experience where these two modalities complement each other. As such, videos are a valuable type of media for the investigation of the interplay between audio and visual elements. Previous studies of audio-visual modalities primarily focused on either audio-visual representation learning or generative modeling of a modality conditioned on the other, creating a disconnect between these two branches. A unified framework that learns representation and generates modalities has not been developed yet. In this work, we introduce a novel framework called Vision to Audio and Beyond (VAB) to bridge the gap between audio-visual representation learning and vision-to-audio generation. The key approach of VAB is that rather than working with raw video frames and audio data, VAB performs representation learning and generative modeling within latent spaces. In particular, VAB uses a pre-trained audio tokenizer and an image encoder to obtain audio tokens and visual features, respectively. It then performs the pre-training task of visual-conditioned masked audio token prediction. This training strategy enables the model to engage in contextual learning and simultaneous video-to-audio generation. After the pre-training phase, VAB employs the iterative-decoding approach to rapidly generate audio tokens conditioned on visual features. Since VAB is a unified model, its backbone can be fine-tuned for various audio-visual downstream tasks. Our experiments showcase the efficiency of VAB in producing high-quality audio from video, and its capability to acquire semantic audio-visual features, leading to competitive results in audio-visual retrieval and classification.2e:T5c4,We present Self-Play Preference Optimization (SPO), an algorithm for reinforcement learning from human feedback. Our approach is minimalist in that it does not require training a reward model nor unstable adversarial training and is therefore rather simple to implement. Our approach is maximalist in that it provably handles non-Markovian, intransitive, and stochastic preferences while being robust to the compounding errors that plague offline approaches to sequential prediction. To achieve the preceding qualities, we build upon the concept of a Minimax Winner (MW), a notion of preference aggregation from the social choice theory literature that frames learning from preferences as a zero-sum game between two policies. By leveraging the symmetry of this game, we prove that rather than using the traditional technique of dueling two policies to compute the MW, we can simply have a single agent play against itself while maintaining strong convergence guarantees. Practically, this corresponds to sampling multiple trajectories from a policy, asking a preference or teacher model to compare them, and then using the proportion of wins as the reward for a particular trajectory. We demonstrate that on a suite of continuous control tasks, we are able to learn significantly more efficiently than reward-model based approaches while maintaining robustness to the intransitive and stochastic preferences that frequently occur in practice when aggregating human judgments.2f:T780,Understanding neural networks is challenging in part because of the dense, continuous nature of their hidden states. We explore whether we can train neural networks to have hidden states that are sparse, discrete, and more interpretable by quantizing their continuous features into what we call codebook features. Codebook features are produced by finetuning neural networks with vector quantization bottlenecks at each layer, producing a network whose hidden features are the sum of a small number of discrete vector codes chosen from a larger codebook. Surprisingly, we find that neural networks can operate under this extreme bottleneck with only modest degradation in performance. This sparse, discrete bottleneck also provides an intuitive way of controlling neural network behavior: first, find codes that activate when the desired behavior is present, then activate those same codes during generation to elicit that behavior. We validate our approach by training codebook Transformers on several different datasets. First, we explore a finite state machine dataset with far more hidden states than neurons. In this setting, our approach overcomes the superposition problem by assigning states to distinct codes, and we find that we can make the neural network behave as if it is in a different state by activating the code for that state. Second, we train Transformer language models with up to 410M parameters on two natural language datasets. We identify codes in these models representing diverse, disentangled concepts (ranging from negative emotions to months of the year) and find that we can guide the model to generate different topics by activating the appropriate codes during inference. Overall, codebook features appear to be a promising unit of analysis and control for neural networks and interpretability. Our codebase and models are open-sourced at https://github.com/taufeeque9/codebook-features.30:T4db,Recent works like Tree-of-Thought (ToT) and Reasoning via Planning (RAP) aim to augment the reasoning capabilities of LLMs by using tree-search algorithms to guide multi-step reasoning. These methods rely on prompting a pre-trained model to serve as a value function and focus on problems with low search depth. As a result, these methods will not work in domains where the pre-trained LLM does not have enough knowledge to serve as an effective value function or in domains that require long-horizon planning. To address these limitations, we present an AlphaZero-like tree-search learning framework for LLMs (termed TS-LLM), systematically illustrating how tree-search with a learned value function can guide LLM decoding. TS-LLM distinguishes itself in two key ways. (1) Leveraging a learned value function and AlphaZero-like algorithms, our approach can be generally adaptable to a wide range of tasks, language models of any size, and tasks of varying search depths. (2) Our approach can guide LLMs during both inference and training, iteratively improving the LLM. Empirical results across reasoning, planning, alignment, and decision-making tasks show that TS-LLM outperforms existing approaches and can handle trees with a depth of 64.31:T4b7,The increasing complexity of foundational models underscores the necessity for explainability, particularly for fine-tuning, the most widely used training method for adapting models to downstream tasks. Instance attribution, one type of explanation, attributes the model prediction to each training example by an instance score. However, the robustness of instance scores, specifically towards dataset resampling, has been overlooked. To bridge this gap, we propose a notion of robustness on the sign of the instance score. We theoretically and empirically demonstrate that the popular leave-one-out-based methods lack robustness, while the Shapley value behaves significantly better, but at a higher computational cost. Accordingly, we introduce an efficient fine-tuning-free approximation of the Shapley value (FreeShap) for instance attribution based on the neural tangent kernel. We empirically demonstrate that FreeShap outperforms other methods for instance attribution and other data-centric applications such as data removal, data selection, and wrong label detection, and further generalize our scale to large language models (LLMs). Our code is available at https://github.com/JTWang2000/FreeShap.32:T4d8,Despite their sophisticated capabilities, large language models (LLMs) encounter a major hurdle in effective assessment. This paper first revisits the prevalent evaluation method-multiple choice question answering (MCQA), which allows for straightforward accuracy measurement. Through a comprehensive evaluation of 24 models across 11 benchmarks, we highlight several potential drawbacks of MCQA, for instance, the inconsistency between the MCQA evaluation and the generation of open-ended responses in practical scenarios. In response, we introduce an RWQ-Elo rating system, engaging 24 LLMs such as GPT-4, GPT-3.5, Google-Gemini-Pro and LLaMA-1/-2, in a two-player competitive format, with GPT-4 serving as the judge. Each LLM receives an Elo rating thereafter. This system is designed to mirror real-world usage, and for this purpose, we have compiled a new benchmark called ``Real-world questions'' (RWQ), comprising 20,772 authentic user inquiries. Additionally, we thoroughly analyze the characteristics of our system and compare it with prior leaderboards like AlpacaEval and MT-Bench. Our analysis reveals the stability of our RWQ-Elo system, the feasibility of registering new models, and its potential to reshape LLM leaderboards.33:T442,Generative modeling via stochastic processes has led to remarkable empirical results as well as to recent advances in their theoretical understanding. In principle, both space and time of the processes can be discrete or continuous. In this work, we study time-continuous Markov jump processes on discrete state spaces and investigate their correspondence to state-continuous diffusion processes given by SDEs. In particular, we revisit the $\textit{Ehrenfest process}$, which converges to an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process in the infinite state space limit. Likewise, we can show that the time-reversal of the Ehrenfest process converges to the time-reversed Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process. This observation bridges discrete and continuous state spaces and allows to carry over methods from one to the respective other setting. Additionally, we suggest an algorithm for training the time-reversal of Markov jump processes which relies on conditional expectations and can thus be directly related to denoising score matching. We demonstrate our methods in multiple convincing numerical experiments.34:T5b6,Large-scale recommendation systems are characterized by their reliance on high cardinality, heterogeneous features and the need to handle tens of billions of user actions on a daily basis. Despite being trained on huge volume of data with thousands of features, most Deep Learning Recommendation Models (DLRMs) in industry fail to scale with compute. Inspired by success achieved by Transformers in language and vision domains, we revisit fundamental design choices in recommendation systems. We reformulate recommendation problems as sequential transduction tasks within a generative modeling framework ("Generative Recommenders"), and propose a new architecture, HSTU, designed for high cardinality, non-stationary streaming recommendation data. HSTU outperforms baselines over synthetic and public datasets by up to 65.8% in NDCG, and is 5.3x to 15.2x faster than FlashAttention2-based Transformers on 8192 length sequences. HSTU-based Generative Recommenders, with 1.5 trillion parameters, improve metrics in online A/B tests by 12.4% and have been deployed on multiple surfaces of a large internet platform with billions of users. More importantly, the model quality of Generative Recommenders empirically scales as a power-law of training compute across three orders of magnitude, up to GPT-3/LLaMa-2 scale, which reduces carbon footprint needed for future model developments, and further paves the way for the first foundational models in recommendations.35:T45e,This work introduces self-infilling code generation, a general framework that incorporates infilling operations into auto-regressive decoding. Our approach capitalizes on the observation that recent infilling-capable code language models can self-infill: whereas infilling operations aim to fill in the middle based on a predefined prefix and suffix, self-infilling sequentially generates both such surrounding context and the infilled content. We utilize this capability to introduce novel interruption and looping mechanisms in conventional decoding, evolving it into a non-monotonic process. Interruptions allow for postponing the generation of specific code until a definitive suffix is established, enhancing control over the output. Meanwhile, the looping mechanism, which leverages the complementary nature of self-infilling and left-to-right decoding, can iteratively update and synchronize each piece of generation cyclically. Extensive experiments are conducted to demonstrate that our proposed decoding process is effective in enhancing both regularity and quality across several code generation benchmarks.36:T481,The pretraining-finetuning paradigm has become the prevailing trend in modern deep learning. In this work, we discover an intriguing linear phenomenon in models that are initialized from a common pretrained checkpoint and finetuned on different tasks, termed as Cross-Task Linearity (CTL). Specifically, we show that if we linearly interpolate the weights of two finetuned models, the features in the weight-interpolated model are often approximately equal to the linear interpolation of features in two finetuned models at each layer. We provide comprehensive empirical evidence supporting that CTL consistently occurs for finetuned models that start from the same pretrained checkpoint. We conjecture that in the pretraining-finetuning paradigm, neural networks approximately function as linear maps, mapping from the parameter space to the feature space. Based on this viewpoint, our study unveils novel insights into explaining model merging/editing, particularly by translating operations from the parameter space to the feature space. Furthermore, we delve deeper into the root cause for the emergence of CTL, highlighting the role of pretraining.37:T4f2,Training a unified model to take multiple targets into account is a trend towards artificial general intelligence. However, how to efficiently mitigate the training conflicts among heterogeneous data collected from different domains or tasks remains under-explored. In this study, we explore to leverage Mixture of Low-rank Adapters (MoLA) to mitigate conflicts in heterogeneous data training, which requires to jointly train the multiple low-rank adapters and their shared backbone. Specifically, we introduce two variants of MoLA, namely, MoLA-Grad and MoLA-Router, to respectively handle the target-aware and target-agnostic scenarios during inference. The former uses task identifiers to assign personalized low-rank adapters to each task, disentangling task-specific knowledge towards their adapters, thereby mitigating heterogeneity conflicts. The latter uses a novel Task-wise Decorrelation (TwD) loss to intervene the router to learn oriented weight combinations of adapters to homogeneous tasks, achieving similar effects. We conduct comprehensive experiments to verify the superiority of MoLA over previous state-of-the-art methods and present in-depth analysis on its working mechanism. Source code is available at: https://github.com/MediaBrain-SJTU/MoLA38:T748,A broad use case of large language models (LLMs) is in goal-directed decision-making tasks (or"agent"tasks), where an LLM needs to not just generate completions for a given prompt, but rather make intelligent decisions over a multi-turn interaction to accomplish a task (e.g., when interacting with the web, using tools, or providing customer support). Reinforcement learning (RL) provides a general paradigm to address such agent tasks, but current RL methods for LLMs largely focus on optimizing single-turn rewards. By construction, most single-turn RL methods cannot endow LLMs with the ability to intelligently seek information over multiple turns, perform credit assignment, or reason about their past actions -- all of which are critical in agent tasks. This raises the question: how can we design effective and efficient multi-turn RL algorithms for LLMs? In this paper, we develop a framework for building multi-turn RL algorithms for fine-tuning LLMs, that preserves the flexibility of existing single-turn RL methods for LLMs (e.g., proximal policy optimization), while accommodating multiple turns, long horizons, and delayed rewards effectively. To do this, our framework adopts a hierarchical RL approach and runs two RL algorithms in parallel: a high-level off-policy value-based RL algorithm to aggregate reward over utterances, and a low-level RL algorithm that utilizes this high-level value function to train a token policy within each utterance or turn. Our hierarchical framework, Actor-Critic Framework with a Hierarchical Structure (ArCHer), can also give rise to other RL methods. Empirically, we find that ArCHer significantly improves efficiency and performance on agent tasks, attaining a sample efficiency of about 100x over existing methods, while also improving with larger model capacity (upto the 7 billion scale that we tested on).39:T4db,Catastrophic forgetting emerges as a critical challenge when fine-tuning multi-modal large language models (MLLMs), where improving performance on unseen tasks often leads to a significant performance drop on the original tasks. This paper presents a comprehensive analysis of catastrophic forgetting in MLLMs and introduces a post-training adjustment method called Model Tailor. Our method primarily preserves the pre-trained parameters while replacing a small number ($\leq$ 10\%) of fine-tuned parameters, maintaining $\sim$ 99\% effectiveness on original tasks versus pre-training, and achieving $\sim$ 97\% on new tasks compared to standard fine-tuning. Specifically, we derive a sparse mask to identify the"model patch", based on a fusion strategy that integrates salience and sensitivity analysis. Subsequently, a compensation mechanism is introduced to"decorate the patch", enhancing the model's performance on both target and original tasks. Additionally, our method is adaptable to multi-task scenarios. Through extensive experiments on InstructBLIP and LLaVA-1.5 in both image captioning and visual question answering tasks, our approach demonstrates significant task adaptability while preserving inherent pre-trained capabilities.3a:T451,Parameter-efficient fine-tuning optimizes large, pre-trained foundation models by updating a subset of parameters; in this class, Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) is particularly effective. Inspired by an effort to investigate the different roles of LoRA matrices during fine-tuning, this paper characterizes and leverages unexpected asymmetry in the importance of low-rank adapter matrices. Specifically, when updating the parameter matrices of a neural network by adding a product $BA$, we observe that the $B$ and $A$ matrices have distinct functions: $A$ extracts features from the input, while $B$ uses these features to create the desired output. Based on this observation, we demonstrate that fine-tuning $B$ is inherently more effective than fine-tuning $A$, and that a random untrained $A$ should perform nearly as well as a fine-tuned one. Using an information-theoretic lens, we also bound the generalization of low-rank adapters, showing that the parameter savings of exclusively training $B$ improves the bound. We support our conclusions with experiments on RoBERTa, BART-Large, LLaMA-2, and ViTs.3b:T500,Current vision large language models (VLLMs) exhibit remarkable capabilities yet are prone to generate harmful content and are vulnerable to even the simplest jailbreaking attacks. Our initial analysis finds that this is due to the presence of harmful data during vision-language instruction fine-tuning, and that VLLM fine-tuning can cause forgetting of safety alignment previously learned by the underpinning LLM. To address this issue, we first curate a vision-language safe instruction-following dataset VLGuard covering various harmful categories. Our experiments demonstrate that integrating this dataset into standard vision-language fine-tuning or utilizing it for post-hoc fine-tuning effectively safety aligns VLLMs. This alignment is achieved with minimal impact on, or even enhancement of, the models' helpfulness. The versatility of our safety fine-tuning dataset makes it a valuable resource for safety-testing existing VLLMs, training new models or safeguarding pre-trained VLLMs. Empirical results demonstrate that fine-tuned VLLMs effectively reject unsafe instructions and substantially reduce the success rates of several black-box adversarial attacks, which approach zero in many cases. The code and dataset are available at https://github.com/ys-zong/VLGuard.3c:T7b1,Large language models (LLMs) have shown strong capabilities in natural language generation. To further enhance its ability in multi-turn dialogue generation, supervised fine-tuning (SFT) methods based on multi-turn dialogue data have been widely adopted. These methods aim to improve the understanding of dialogue context and enable LLMs to generate appropriate responses by incorporating historical dialogue information. However, current multi-turn dialogue SFT methods have some drawbacks. Either it cannot fully utilize the multi-turn dialogue data, or it has a quite long training time. This paper proposes a sufficient, efficient and effective fine-tuning method based on multi-turn dialogue data. The proposed method optimizes the cross-entropy loss with KL divergence, takes the entire multi-turn dialogue as input, and calculates the loss for all rounds of responses. Comparing with commonly used SFT approach that only takes the loss of the last turn response during training, our method can use training data sufficiently by digesting the entire conversation data and taking all rounds’ responses loss for weights update. Also, compared to the SFT method which splits a multi-turn dialogue into numerous progressive conversation data for training, the proposed multi-turn dialogues SFT method is more efficient in training LLMs. This is demonstrated by significantly reducing the amount of time required for training. Meanwhile, the trained model can mimic the chat style on the training set by making consistency between the generated output and the expected response with the help of KL divergence. Experimental results on the doc2dial dataset and a medical dataset demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms traditional fine-tuning methods in terms of ROUGE, BLEU score and overall training time. It shows the effectiveness of the proposed method in achieving sufficient and efficient training of large language models for multi-turn dialogue data.3d:T5ab,Schr\"odinger bridge (SB) has emerged as the go-to method for optimizing transportation plans in diffusion models. However, SB requires estimating the intractable forward score functions, inevitably resulting in the costly implicit training loss based on simulated trajectories. To improve the scalability while preserving efficient transportation plans, we leverage variational inference to linearize the forward score functions (variational scores) of SB and restore simulation-free properties in training backward scores. We propose the variational Schr\"odinger diffusion model (VSDM), where the forward process is a multivariate diffusion and the variational scores are adaptively optimized for efficient transport. Theoretically, we use stochastic approximation to prove the convergence of the variational scores and show the convergence of the adaptively generated samples based on the optimal variational scores. Empirically, we test the algorithm in simulated examples and observe that VSDM is efficient in generations of anisotropic shapes and yields straighter sample trajectories compared to the single-variate diffusion. We also verify the scalability of the algorithm in real-world data and achieve competitive unconditional generation performance in CIFAR10 and conditional generation in time series modeling. Notably, VSDM no longer depends on warm-up initializations and has become tuning-friendly in training large-scale experiments.3e:T570,Diffusion models have exhibit exceptional performance in text-to-image generation and editing. However, existing methods often face challenges when handling complex text prompts that involve multiple objects with multiple attributes and relationships. In this paper, we propose a brand new training-free text-to-image generation/editing framework, namely Recaption, Plan and Generate (RPG), harnessing the powerful chain-of-thought reasoning ability of multimodal LLMs to enhance the compositionality of text-to-image diffusion models. Our approach employs the MLLM as a global planner to decompose the process of generating complex images into multiple simpler generation tasks within subregions. We propose complementary regional diffusion to enable region-wise compositional generation. Furthermore, we integrate text-guided image generation and editing within the proposed RPG in a closed-loop fashion, thereby enhancing generalization ability. Extensive experiments demonstrate our RPG outperforms state-of-the-art text-to-image diffusion models, including DALL-E 3 and SDXL, particularly in multi-category object composition and text-image semantic alignment. Notably, our RPG framework exhibits wide compatibility with various MLLM architectures (e.g., MiniGPT-4) and diffusion backbones (e.g., ControlNet). Our code is available at: https://github.com/YangLing0818/RPG-DiffusionMaster3f:T4ba,Gradient regularization (GR), which aims to penalize the gradient norm atop the loss function, has shown promising results in training modern over-parameterized deep neural networks. However, can we trust this powerful technique? This paper reveals that GR can cause performance degeneration in adaptive optimization scenarios, particularly with learning rate warmup. Our empirical and theoretical analyses suggest this is due to GR inducing instability and divergence in gradient statistics of adaptive optimizers at the initial training stage. Inspired by the warmup heuristic, we propose three GR warmup strategies, each relaxing the regularization effect to a certain extent during the warmup course to ensure the accurate and stable accumulation of gradients. With experiments on Vision Transformer family, we confirm the three GR warmup strategies can effectively circumvent these issues, thereby largely improving the model performance. Meanwhile, we note that scalable models tend to rely more on the GR warmup, where the performance can be improved by up to 3\% on Cifar10 compared to baseline GR. Code is available at \href{https://github.com/zhaoyang-0204/gnp}{https://github.com/zhaoyang-0204/gnp}.40:T55b,Recent advances in retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) have initiated a new era in repository-level code completion. However, the invariable use of retrieval in existing methods exposes issues in both efficiency and robustness, with a large proportion of the retrieved contexts proving unhelpful or harmful to code language models (code LMs). In this paper, we propose a selective RAG framework to avoid retrieval when unnecessary. To power this framework, we design a self-supervised learning approach to enable a code LM to accurately self-evaluate whether retrieval can improve its output quality and robustly leverage the potentially noisy retrieved contexts. Using this LM as both the selective RAG policy and the generation model, our framework achieves state-of-the-art repository-level code completion performance on diverse benchmarks including RepoEval, CrossCodeEval, and CrossCodeLongEval, a new long-form code completion benchmark. Meanwhile, our analyses show that selectively retrieving brings as much as 70% inference speedup in the online serving setting without harming the performance. We further demonstrate that our framework is able to accommodate different generation models, retrievers, and programming languages. These advancements position our framework as an important step towards more accurate and efficient repository-level code completion.41:T62c,Compressing high-capability Large Language Models (LLMs) has emerged as a favored strategy for resource-efficient inferences. While state-of-the-art (SoTA) compression methods boast impressive advancements in preserving benign task performance, the potential risks of compression in terms of safety and trustworthiness have been largely neglected. This study conducts the first, thorough evaluation of three (3) leading LLMs using five (5) SoTA compression techniques across eight (8) trustworthiness dimensions. Our experiments highlight the intricate interplay between compression and trustworthiness, revealing some interesting patterns. We find that quantization is currently a more effective approach than pruning in achieving efficiency and trustworthiness simultaneously. For instance, a 4-bit quantized model retains the trustworthiness of its original counterpart, but model pruning significantly degrades trustworthiness, even at 50% sparsity. Moreover, employing quantization within a moderate bit range could unexpectedly improve certain trustworthiness dimensions such as ethics and fairness. Conversely, extreme quantization to very low bit levels (3 bits) tends to reduce trustworthiness significantly. This increased risk cannot be uncovered by looking at benign performance alone, in turn, mandating comprehensive trustworthiness evaluation in practice. These findings culminate in practical recommendations for simultaneously achieving high utility, efficiency, and trustworthiness in LLMs. Code and models are available at https://decoding-comp-trust.github.io.42:T61c,Multimodal pretraining is an effective strategy for the trinity of goals of representation learning in autonomous robots: 1) extracting both local and global task progressions; 2) enforcing temporal consistency of visual representation; 3) capturing trajectory-level language grounding. Most existing methods approach these via separate objectives, which often reach sub-optimal solutions. In this paper, we propose a universal unified objective that can simultaneously extract meaningful task progression information from image sequences and seamlessly align them with language instructions. We discover that via implicit preferences, where a visual trajectory inherently aligns better with its corresponding language instruction than mismatched pairs, the popular Bradley-Terry model can transform into representation learning through proper reward reparameterizations. The resulted framework, DecisionNCE, mirrors an InfoNCE-style objective but is distinctively tailored for decision-making tasks, providing an embodied representation learning framework that elegantly extracts both local and global task progression features, with temporal consistency enforced through implicit time contrastive learning, while ensuring trajectory-level instruction grounding via multimodal joint encoding. Evaluation on both simulated and real robots demonstrates that DecisionNCE effectively facilitates diverse downstream policy learning tasks, offering a versatile solution for unified representation and reward learning. Project Page: https://2toinf.github.io/DecisionNCE/43:T50f,We present an approach for estimating the fraction of text in a large corpus which is likely to be substantially modified or produced by a large language model (LLM). Our maximum likelihood model leverages expert-written and AI-generated reference texts to accurately and efficiently examine real-world LLM-use at the corpus level. We apply this approach to a case study of scientific peer review in AI conferences that took place after the release of ChatGPT: ICLR 2024, NeurIPS 2023, CoRL 2023 and EMNLP 2023. Our results suggest that between 6.5% and 16.9% of text submitted as peer reviews to these conferences could have been substantially modified by LLMs, i.e. beyond spell-checking or minor writing updates. The circumstances in which generated text occurs offer insight into user behavior: the estimated fraction of LLM-generated text is higher in reviews which report lower confidence, were submitted close to the deadline, and from reviewers who are less likely to respond to author rebuttals. We also observe corpus-level trends in generated text which may be too subtle to detect at the individual level, and discuss the implications of such trends on peer review. We call for future interdisciplinary work to examine how LLM use is changing our information and knowledge practices.44:T419,Planning is a fundamental property of human intelligence. Reasoning about asynchronous plans is challenging since it requires sequential and parallel planning to optimize time costs. Can large language models (LLMs) succeed at this task? Here, we present the first large-scale study investigating this question. We find that a representative set of closed and open-source LLMs, including GPT-4 and LLaMA-2, behave poorly when not supplied with illustrations about the task-solving process in our benchmark AsyncHow. We propose a novel technique called Plan Like a Graph (PLaG) that combines graphs with natural language prompts and achieves state-of-the-art results. We show that although PLaG can boost model performance, LLMs still suffer from drastic degradation when task complexity increases, highlighting the limits of utilizing LLMs for simulating digital devices. We see our study as an exciting step towards using LLMs as efficient autonomous agents. Our code and data are available at https://github.com/fangru-lin/graph-llm-asynchow-plan.45:T5ca,Large Language Models (LLMs) inherently carry the biases contained in their training corpora, which can lead to the perpetuation of societal harm. As the impact of these foundation models grows, understanding and evaluating their biases becomes crucial to achieving fairness and accuracy. We propose to study what LLMs know about the world we live in through the lens of geography. This approach is particularly powerful as there is ground truth for the numerous aspects of human life that are meaningfully projected onto geographic space such as culture, race, language, politics, and religion. We show various problematic geographic biases, which we define as systemic errors in geospatial predictions. Initially, we demonstrate that LLMs are capable of making accurate zero-shot geospatial predictions in the form of ratings that show strong monotonic correlation with ground truth (Spearman's $\rho$ of up to 0.89). We then show that LLMs exhibit common biases across a range of objective and subjective topics. In particular, LLMs are clearly biased against locations with lower socioeconomic conditions (e.g. most of Africa) on a variety of sensitive subjective topics such as attractiveness, morality, and intelligence (Spearman's $\rho$ of up to 0.70). Finally, we introduce a bias score to quantify this and find that there is significant variation in the magnitude of bias across existing LLMs. Code is available on the project website: https://rohinmanvi.github.io/GeoLLM46:T495,Large language models (LLMs) have proven to be highly effective across various natural language processing tasks. However, their large number of parameters poses significant challenges for practical deployment. Pruning, a technique aimed at reducing the size and complexity of LLMs, offers a potential solution by removing redundant components from the network. Despite the promise of pruning, existing methods often struggle to achieve substantial end-to-end LLM inference speedup. In this paper, we introduce SLEB, a novel approach designed to streamline LLMs by eliminating redundant transformer blocks. We choose the transformer block as the fundamental unit for pruning, because LLMs exhibit block-level redundancy with high similarity between the outputs of neighboring blocks. This choice allows us to effectively enhance the processing speed of LLMs. Our experimental results demonstrate that SLEB outperforms previous LLM pruning methods in accelerating LLM inference while also maintaining superior perplexity and accuracy, making SLEB as a promising technique for enhancing the efficiency of LLMs. The code is available at: https://github.com/jiwonsong-dev/SLEB.47:T409,The complex and unpredictable nature of deep neural networks prevents their safe use in many high-stakes applications. There have been many techniques developed to interpret deep neural networks, but all have substantial limitations. Algorithmic tasks have proven to be a fruitful test ground for interpreting a neural network end-to-end. Building on previous work, we completely reverse engineer fully connected one-hidden layer networks that have ``grokked'' the arithmetic of the permutation groups $S_5$ and $S_6$. The models discover the true subgroup structure of the full group and converge on neural circuits that decompose the group arithmetic using the permutation group's subgroups. We relate how we reverse engineered the model's mechanisms and confirmed our theory was a faithful description of the circuit's functionality. We also draw attention to current challenges in conducting interpretability research by comparing our work to Chughtai et al. [4] which alleges to find a different algorithm for this same problem.48:T5d1,The diversity of contexts in which large language models (LLMs) are deployed requires the ability to modify or customize default model behaviors to incorporate nuanced requirements and preferences. A convenient interface to specify such model adjustments is high-level verbal feedback, such as"Don't use emojis when drafting emails to my boss."However, while writing high-level feedback is far simpler than collecting annotations for reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF), we find that simply prompting a model with such feedback leads to overgeneralization of the feedback to contexts where it is not relevant. We study the problem of incorporating verbal feedback without such overgeneralization, inspiring a new method Contextualized Critiques with Constrained Preference Optimization (C3PO). C3PO uses a piece of high-level feedback to generate a small synthetic preference dataset specifying how the feedback should (and should not) be applied. It then fine-tunes the model in accordance with the synthetic preference data while minimizing the divergence from the original model for prompts where the feedback does not apply. Our experimental results indicate that our approach effectively applies verbal feedback to relevant scenarios while preserving existing behaviors for other contexts. For both human- and GPT-4-generated high-level feedback, C3PO effectively adheres to the given feedback comparably to in-context baselines while reducing overgeneralization by 30%.49:T4d9,An important issue with Large Language Models (LLMs) is their undesired ability to generate toxic language. In this work, we show that the neurons responsible for toxicity can be determined by their power to discriminate toxic sentences, and that toxic language can be mitigated by reducing their activation levels proportionally to this power. We propose AUROC adaptation (AurA), an intervention that can be applied to any pre-trained LLM to mitigate toxicity. As the intervention is proportional to the ability of each neuron to discriminate toxic content, it is free of any model-dependent hyperparameters. We show that AurA can achieve up to $2.2 \times$ reduction in toxicity with only a $0.72$ perplexity increase. We also show that AurA is effective with models of different scale (from 1.5B to 40B parameters), and its effectiveness in mitigating toxic language, while preserving common-sense zero-shot abilities, holds across all scales. AurA can be combined with pre-prompting strategies, boosting its average mitigation potential from $1.28\times$ to $2.35\times$. Moreover, AurA can counteract adversarial pre-prompts that maliciously elicit toxic content, making it an effective method for deploying safer and less toxic models.4a:T658,Recently, there has been a surge in interest in developing optimization algorithms for overparameterized models as achieving generalization is believed to require algorithms with suitable biases. This interest centers on minimizing sharpness of the original loss function; the Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) algorithm has proven effective. However, most literature only considers a few sharpness measures, such as the maximum eigenvalue or trace of the training loss Hessian, which may not yield meaningful insights for non-convex optimization scenarios like neural networks. Additionally, many sharpness measures are sensitive to parameter invariances in neural networks, magnifying significantly under rescaling parameters. Motivated by these challenges, we introduce a new class of sharpness measures in this paper, leading to new sharpness-aware objective functions. We prove that these measures are \textit{universally expressive}, allowing any function of the training loss Hessian matrix to be represented by appropriate hyperparameters. Furthermore, we show that the proposed objective functions explicitly bias towards minimizing their corresponding sharpness measures, and how they allow meaningful applications to models with parameter invariances (such as scale-invariances). Finally, as instances of our proposed general framework, we present \textit{Frob-SAM} and \textit{Det-SAM}, which are specifically designed to minimize the Frobenius norm and the determinant of the Hessian of the training loss, respectively. We also demonstrate the advantages of our general framework through extensive experiments.4b:T64a,Large Language Model (LLM) agents, capable of performing a broad range of actions, such as invoking tools and controlling robots, show great potential in tackling real-world challenges. LLM agents are typically prompted to produce actions by generating JSON or text in a pre-defined format, which is usually limited by constrained action space (e.g., the scope of pre-defined tools) and restricted flexibility (e.g., inability to compose multiple tools). This work proposes to use executable Python code to consolidate LLM agents' actions into a unified action space (CodeAct). Integrated with a Python interpreter, CodeAct can execute code actions and dynamically revise prior actions or emit new actions upon new observations through multi-turn interactions. Our extensive analysis of 17 LLMs on API-Bank and a newly curated benchmark shows that CodeAct outperforms widely used alternatives (up to 20% higher success rate). The encouraging performance of CodeAct motivates us to build an open-source LLM agent that interacts with environments by executing interpretable code and collaborates with users using natural language. To this end, we collect an instruction-tuning dataset CodeActInstruct that consists of 7k multi-turn interactions using CodeAct. We show that it can be used with existing data to improve models in agent-oriented tasks without compromising their general capability. CodeActAgent, finetuned from Llama2 and Mistral, is integrated with Python interpreter and uniquely tailored to perform sophisticated tasks (e.g., model training) using existing libraries and autonomously self-debug.4c:T519,Most of the existing Large Language Model (LLM) benchmarks on scientific problem reasoning focus on problems grounded in high-school subjects and are confined to elementary algebraic operations. To systematically examine the reasoning capabilities required for solving complex scientific problems, we introduce an expansive benchmark suite SciBench for LLMs. SciBench contains a carefully curated dataset featuring a range of collegiate-level scientific problems from mathematics, chemistry, and physics domains. Based on the dataset, we conduct an in-depth benchmarking study of representative open-source and proprietary LLMs with various prompting strategies. The results reveal that the current LLMs fall short of delivering satisfactory performance, with the best overall score of merely 43.22%. Furthermore, through a detailed user study, we categorize the errors made by LLMs into ten problem-solving abilities. Our analysis indicates that no single prompting strategy significantly outperforms the others and some strategies that demonstrate improvements in certain problem-solving skills could result in declines in other skills. We envision that SciBench will catalyze further developments in the reasoning abilities of LLMs, thereby ultimately contributing to scientific research and discovery.4d:T4e4,Reward engineering has long been a challenge in Reinforcement Learning (RL) research, as it often requires extensive human effort and iterative processes of trial-and-error to design effective reward functions. In this paper, we propose RL-VLM-F, a method that automatically generates reward functions for agents to learn new tasks, using only a text description of the task goal and the agent's visual observations, by leveraging feedbacks from vision language foundation models (VLMs). The key to our approach is to query these models to give preferences over pairs of the agent's image observations based on the text description of the task goal, and then learn a reward function from the preference labels, rather than directly prompting these models to output a raw reward score, which can be noisy and inconsistent. We demonstrate that RL-VLM-F successfully produces effective rewards and policies across various domains - including classic control, as well as manipulation of rigid, articulated, and deformable objects - without the need for human supervision, outperforming prior methods that use large pretrained models for reward generation under the same assumptions. Videos can be found on our project website: https://rlvlmf2024.github.io/4e:T4e8,Deep learning for time series forecasting has traditionally operated within a one-model-per-dataset framework, limiting its potential to leverage the game-changing impact of large pre-trained models. The concept of universal forecasting, emerging from pre-training on a vast collection of time series datasets, envisions a single Large Time Series Model capable of addressing diverse downstream forecasting tasks. However, constructing such a model poses unique challenges specific to time series data: i) cross-frequency learning, ii) accommodating an arbitrary number of variates for multivariate time series, and iii) addressing the varying distributional properties inherent in large-scale data. To address these challenges, we present novel enhancements to the conventional time series Transformer architecture, resulting in our proposed Masked Encoder-based Universal Time Series Forecasting Transformer (Moirai). Trained on our newly introduced Large-scale Open Time Series Archive (LOTSA) featuring over 27B observations across nine domains, Moirai achieves competitive or superior performance as a zero-shot forecaster when compared to full-shot models. Code, data, and model weights can be found at https://github.com/SalesforceAIResearch/uni2ts.4f:T4e3,Diffusion models benefit from instillation of task-specific information into the score function to steer the sample generation towards desired properties. Such information is coined as guidance. For example, in text-to-image synthesis, text input is encoded as guidance to generate semantically aligned images. Proper guidance inputs are closely tied to the performance of diffusion models. A common observation is that strong guidance promotes a tight alignment to the task-specific information, while reducing the diversity of the generated samples. In this paper, we provide the first theoretical study towards understanding the influence of guidance on diffusion models in the context of Gaussian mixture models. Under mild conditions, we prove that incorporating diffusion guidance not only boosts classification confidence but also diminishes distribution diversity, leading to a reduction in the differential entropy of the output distribution. Our analysis covers the widely adopted sampling schemes including DDPM and DDIM, and leverages comparison inequalities for differential equations as well as the Fokker-Planck equation that characterizes the evolution of probability density function, which may be of independent theoretical interest.50:T4fc,Watermarking techniques offer a promising way to identify machine-generated content via embedding covert information into the contents generated from language models. A challenge in the domain lies in preserving the distribution of original generated content after watermarking. Our research extends and improves upon existing watermarking framework, placing emphasis on the importance of a \textbf{Di}stribution-\textbf{P}reserving (DiP) watermark. Contrary to the current strategies, our proposed DiPmark simultaneously preserves the original token distribution during watermarking (distribution-preserving), is detectable without access to the language model API and prompts (accessible), and is provably robust to moderate changes of tokens (resilient). DiPmark operates by selecting a random set of tokens prior to the generation of a word, then modifying the token distribution through a distribution-preserving reweight function to enhance the probability of these selected tokens during the sampling process. Extensive empirical evaluation on various language models and tasks demonstrates our approach's distribution-preserving property, accessibility, and resilience, making it a effective solution for watermarking tasks that demand impeccable quality preservation.51:T4f0,The development of large language models (LLMs) has greatly advanced the field of multimodal understanding, leading to the emergence of large multimodal models (LMMs). In order to enhance the level of visual comprehension, recent studies have equipped LMMs with region-level understanding capabilities by representing object bounding box coordinates as a series of text sequences (pix2seq). In this paper, we introduce a novel paradigm for object location modeling called pix2emb method, where we ask the LMM to output the location embeddings and then decode them with different decoders. This paradigm allows us to use different location formats (such as bounding boxes and masks) in multimodal conversations. Leveraging the proposed pix2emb method, we train an LMM named NExT-Chat and demonstrate its capability of handling multiple tasks like visual grounding, region captioning, and grounded reasoning. Comprehensive experiments show the effectiveness of our NExT-Chat on various tasks, e.g., NExT-Chat (87.7) vs. Shikra (86.9) on POPE-Random, NExT-Chat (68.9) vs. LISA (67.9) on referring expression segmentation task, and NExT-Chat (79.6) vs. Kosmos-2 (62.3) on region caption task. The code and model are released at https://github.com/NExT-ChatV/NExT-Chat.52:T52e,Bridging the gap between diffusion models and human preferences is crucial for their integration into practical generative workflows. While optimizing downstream reward models has emerged as a promising alignment strategy, concerns arise regarding the risk of excessive optimization with learned reward models, which potentially compromises ground-truth performance. In this work, we confront the reward overoptimization problem in diffusion model alignment through the lenses of both inductive and primacy biases. We first identify a mismatch between current methods and the temporal inductive bias inherent in the multi-step denoising process of diffusion models, as a potential source of reward overoptimization. Then, we surprisingly discover that dormant neurons in our critic model act as a regularization against reward overoptimization while active neurons reflect primacy bias. Motivated by these observations, we propose Temporal Diffusion Policy Optimization with critic active neuron Reset (TDPO-R), a policy gradient algorithm that exploits the temporal inductive bias of diffusion models and mitigates the primacy bias stemming from active neurons. Empirical results demonstrate the superior efficacy of our methods in mitigating reward overoptimization. Code is avaliable at https://github.com/ZiyiZhang27/tdpo.53:T410,Protein language models have demonstrated significant potential in the field of protein engineering. However, current protein language models primarily operate at the residue scale, which limits their ability to provide information at the atom level. This limitation prevents us from fully exploiting the capabilities of protein language models for applications involving both proteins and small molecules. In this paper, we propose ESM-AA (ESM All-Atom), a novel approach that enables atom-scale and residue-scale unified molecular modeling. ESM-AA achieves this by pretraining on multi-scale code-switch protein sequences and utilizing a multi-scale position encoding to capture relationships among residues and atoms. Experimental results indicate that ESM-AA surpasses previous methods in proteinmolecule tasks, demonstrating the full utilization of protein language models. Further investigations reveal that through unified molecular modeling, ESM-AA not only gains molecular knowledge but also retains its understanding of proteins.154:T56a,Prepending model inputs with safety prompts is a common practice for safeguarding large language models (LLMs) against queries with harmful intents. However, the underlying working mechanisms of safety prompts have not been unraveled yet, restricting the possibility of automatically optimizing them to improve LLM safety. In this work, we investigate how LLMs' behavior (i.e., complying with or refusing user queries) is affected by safety prompts from the perspective of model representation. We find that in the representation space, the input queries are typically moved by safety prompts in a"higher-refusal"direction, in which models become more prone to refusing to provide assistance, even when the queries are harmless. On the other hand, LLMs are naturally capable of distinguishing harmful and harmless queries without safety prompts. Inspired by these findings, we propose a method for safety prompt optimization, namely DRO (Directed Representation Optimization). Treating a safety prompt as continuous, trainable embeddings, DRO learns to move the queries' representations along or opposite the refusal direction, depending on their harmfulness. Experiments with eight LLMs on out-of-domain and jailbreak benchmarks demonstrate that DRO remarkably improves the safeguarding performance of human-crafted safety prompts, without compromising the models' general performance.55:T536,We introduce Score identity Distillation (SiD), an innovative data-free method that distills the generative capabilities of pretrained diffusion models into a single-step generator. SiD not only facilitates an exponentially fast reduction in Fr\'echet inception distance (FID) during distillation but also approaches or even exceeds the FID performance of the original teacher diffusion models. By reformulating forward diffusion processes as semi-implicit distributions, we leverage three score-related identities to create an innovative loss mechanism. This mechanism achieves rapid FID reduction by training the generator using its own synthesized images, eliminating the need for real data or reverse-diffusion-based generation, all accomplished within significantly shortened generation time. Upon evaluation across four benchmark datasets, the SiD algorithm demonstrates high iteration efficiency during distillation and surpasses competing distillation approaches, whether they are one-step or few-step, data-free, or dependent on training data, in terms of generation quality. This achievement not only redefines the benchmarks for efficiency and effectiveness in diffusion distillation but also in the broader field of diffusion-based generation. The PyTorch implementation is available at https://github.com/mingyuanzhou/SiD56:T53e,Continuous-time generative models, such as Flow Matching (FM), construct probability paths to transport between one distribution and another through the simulation-free learning of the neural ordinary differential equations (ODEs). During inference, however, the learned model often requires multiple neural network evaluations to accurately integrate the flow, resulting in a slow sampling speed. We attribute the reason to the inherent (joint) heterogeneity of source and/or target distributions, namely the singularity problem, which poses challenges for training the neural ODEs effectively. To address this issue, we propose a more general framework, termed Switched FM (SFM), that eliminates singularities via switching ODEs, as opposed to using a uniform ODE in FM. Importantly, we theoretically show that FM cannot transport between two simple distributions due to the existence and uniqueness of initial value problems of ODEs, while these limitations can be well tackled by SFM. From an orthogonal perspective, our framework can seamlessly integrate with the existing advanced techniques, such as minibatch optimal transport, to further enhance the straightness of the flow, yielding a more efficient sampling process with reduced costs. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the newly proposed SFM through several numerical examples.57:T6b8,In recent years, Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across a wide range of natural language processing (NLP) tasks, such as question-answering, sentiment analysis, text summarization, and machine translation. However, the ever-growing complexity of LLMs demands immense computational resources, hindering the broader research and application of these models. To address this, various parameter-efficient fine-tuning strategies, such as Low-Rank Approximation (LoRA) and Adapters, have been developed. Despite their potential, these methods often face limitations in compressibility. Specifically, LoRA struggles to scale effectively with the increasing number of trainable parameters in modern large scale LLMs. Additionally, Low-Rank Economic Tensor-Train Adaptation (LoRETTA), which utilizes tensor train decomposition, has not yet achieved the level of compression necessary for fine-tuning very large scale models with limited resources. This paper introduces Tensor Train Low-Rank Approximation (TT-LoRA), a novel parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) approach that extends LoRETTA with optimized tensor train (TT) decomposition integration. By eliminating Adapters and traditional LoRA-based structures, TT-LoRA achieves greater model compression without compromising downstream task performance, along with reduced inference latency and computational overhead. We conduct an exhaustive parameter search to establish benchmarks that highlight the tradeoff between model compression and performance. Our results demonstrate significant compression of LLMs while maintaining comparable performance to larger models, facilitating their deployment on resource-constraint platforms.0:{"rsc":["$","$1","c",{"children":[["$","div",null,{"className":"mx-auto max-w-5xl px-4 py-8","children":["$","$L2",null,{"data":{"venue":"ICML","venue_slug":"icml-2024","year":2024,"full_name":"International Conference on Machine Learning","generated_at":"2026-04-18T18:50:07.833195+00:00","stats":{"total_fetched":3321,"total_relevant":335,"by_award":{"poster":292,"spotlight":15,"oral":28},"by_category":{"mechanism":83,"efficient":52,"multimodal_gen":20,"post_train":78,"agent":6,"multimodal":27,"llm_pretrain":59,"coding_agent":6,"industry":4},"by_track":{"main":335}},"papers":[{"id":"DaganSR24","title":"Getting the most out of your tokenizer for pre-training and domain adaptation","authors":["Gautier Dagan","Gabriel Synnaeve","Baptiste Rozière"],"institutions":["Meta FAIR"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/DaganSR24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/DaganSR24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/dagan24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"Tokenizer 的选择对预训练效率和下游性能影响很大，但在 domain adaptation（领域适配）场景下，原始 tokenizer 往往对新领域文本的压缩率很差（token 数膨胀），导致训练和推理效率下降。这篇工作系统研究了如何为预训练和领域适配选择/调整 tokenizer。","importance":"系统级贡献，直接关系到 pretrain 效率。核心发现：tokenizer 的 fertility（每个词被切成多少 token）对训练 FLOPs 和最终性能都有显著影响；在 continual pretrain 场景下，扩展或替换 tokenizer 的收益和代价需要仔细权衡。这对多语言预训练和垂直领域适配都有实操价值。","technical_approach":"系统比较了三种策略：(1) 直接用原始 tokenizer；(2) 在新领域数据上训练新 tokenizer 并从头初始化 embedding；(3) 扩展原始 tokenizer 的词表并用启发式方法初始化新 token embedding。关键发现是策略 (3)（词表扩展 + 智能初始化）在大多数场景下是最优的——既保留了原始模型的知识，又改善了新领域的压缩率。初始化方法很关键：用子词组合的平均 embedding 初始化新 token 比随机初始化好很多。","experiments":"在代码、生物医学等领域的 continual pretrain 实验中验证，模型规模从数百 M 到数 B 参数。词表扩展后新领域的 token 数减少 20-40%，训练效率相应提升。下游任务性能与从头训练新 tokenizer 相当或更好，同时保留了通用能力。","authors_note":"Gabriel Synnaeve 和 Baptiste Rozière 来自 Meta FAIR，Rozière 是 Code Llama 的核心作者之一。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Tokenizer choice significantly affects pretrain efficiency and downstream performance, yet during domain adaptation the original tokenizer often has poor compression on new-domain text (token count inflation). This work systematically studies how to choose or adapt tokenizers for pretraining and domain adaptation.","importance":"A systems-level contribution directly tied to pretrain efficiency. Key finding: tokenizer fertility (tokens per word) materially impacts training FLOPs and final performance. In continual pretraining, the cost-benefit of extending or replacing the tokenizer must be carefully evaluated. Practically valuable for multilingual pretraining and vertical domain adaptation.","technical_approach":"Three strategies are systematically compared: (1) keep the original tokenizer; (2) train a new tokenizer on domain data with fresh embeddings; (3) extend the original vocabulary and initialize new token embeddings heuristically. Strategy (3)—vocabulary extension with smart initialization—wins in most settings: it preserves the original model's knowledge while improving domain compression. The initialization method matters a lot: averaging sub-token embeddings for new tokens substantially outperforms random initialization.","experiments":"Validated on continual pretraining for code and biomedical domains, with model sizes from hundreds of millions to several billion parameters. Vocabulary extension reduces new-domain token counts by 20-40%, with proportional training efficiency gains. Downstream performance matches or exceeds training a new tokenizer from scratch while retaining general capabilities.","authors_note":"Gabriel Synnaeve and Baptiste Rozière are at Meta FAIR. Rozière is a core author of Code Llama."},"tags":["tokenizer","pretrain","domain-adaptation","vocabulary"],"notable_authors":["Gabriel Synnaeve","Baptiste Rozière"]},{"id":"DaoG24","title":"Transformers are SSMs: Generalized Models and Efficient Algorithms Through Structured State Space Duality","authors":["Tri Dao","Albert Gu"],"institutions":["Princeton University","Carnegie Mellon University"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/DaoG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/DaoG24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/dao24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer 和 SSM（状态空间模型，如 Mamba）看似是两种不同的序列建模范式，但它们之间存在深层的数学联系。这篇工作建立了两者的统一理论框架（Structured State Space Duality），并基于此设计了 Mamba-2，一个更高效的 SSM 架构。","importance":"范式级贡献。这是 Mamba 系列的第二代工作，直接影响 pretrain 架构选择。核心洞察：线性 attention 和选择性 SSM 可以统一为结构化矩阵的不同分解形式，这意味着可以在两种范式之间自由切换以获得各自的优势（SSM 的线性复杂度推理 + Transformer 的并行训练）。Mamba-2 的训练速度比 Mamba-1 快 2-8 倍，同时保持了质量。","technical_approach":"关键理论贡献是证明选择性 SSM 的计算等价于一种特殊的半可分（semiseparable）结构化矩阵乘法，而 linear attention 也是这类矩阵的另一种分解。基于此，Mamba-2 的设计选择包括：(1) 更大的 state dimension（从 Mamba-1 的 16 提升到 256）；(2) 利用矩阵分解的灵活性，在训练时用类似 attention 的并行算法，推理时切换回 SSM 的递推形式；(3) 简化了 Mamba-1 的一些设计（去掉了部分门控），使其更容易用 tensor core 加速。","experiments":"在语言建模上，Mamba-2 在相同参数量和训练 FLOPs 下与 Mamba-1 质量相当或略优，但训练吞吐量提升 2-8 倍（取决于序列长度）。与 Transformer++ 基线相比，Mamba-2 在长序列上有明显优势。模型规模测试到数 B 参数。","authors_note":"Tri Dao（Princeton/Stanford）是 FlashAttention 的作者，Albert Gu（CMU）是 S4/Mamba 系列的创始人。两人合作代表了高效序列建模领域的最强组合。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Transformers and SSMs (e.g., Mamba) appear to be distinct sequence modeling paradigms, but they share deep mathematical connections. This work establishes a unified theoretical framework (Structured State Space Duality) and uses it to design Mamba-2, a more efficient SSM architecture.","importance":"A paradigm-level contribution directly affecting pretrain architecture choices. The core insight: linear attention and selective SSMs are different decompositions of the same family of structured (semiseparable) matrices, enabling free switching between SSM's linear-time inference and Transformer's parallel training. Mamba-2 trains 2-8× faster than Mamba-1 while maintaining quality.","technical_approach":"The key theoretical result shows that selective SSM computation is equivalent to multiplication by a semiseparable structured matrix, and linear attention is another decomposition of the same matrix family. Mamba-2's design choices: (1) much larger state dimension (256 vs. 16 in Mamba-1); (2) attention-like parallel algorithm during training, switching to SSM recurrence at inference; (3) simplified gating compared to Mamba-1, enabling better tensor core utilization.","experiments":"On language modeling, Mamba-2 matches or slightly exceeds Mamba-1 quality at the same parameter count and FLOPs, with 2-8× training throughput improvement (depending on sequence length). Clear advantages over Transformer++ baselines on long sequences. Tested up to multi-billion parameter scale.","authors_note":"Tri Dao (Princeton/Stanford) created FlashAttention; Albert Gu (CMU) created S4/Mamba. Their collaboration represents the strongest team in efficient sequence modeling."},"tags":["ssm","transformer","mamba","architecture","efficiency"],"notable_authors":["Tri Dao","Albert Gu"]},{"id":"GloeckleIRLS24","title":"Better &amp; Faster Large Language Models via Multi-token Prediction","authors":["Fabian Gloeckle","Badr Youbi Idrissi","Baptiste Rozière","David Lopez-Paz","Gabriel Synnaeve"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GloeckleIRLS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GloeckleIRLS24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/gloeckle24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心结论是：next-token prediction 不是大语言模型唯一合理的训练目标，同时预测多个未来 token 可以同时带来更好的模型质量和更快的推理。传统 AR 训练把监督信号压在下一个 token 上，目标简单但信息密度低，也天然把解码速度绑死在逐 token 生成上；作者试图在不放弃 AR 主干的前提下，提升训练信号利用率和推理吞吐。","importance":"这是与 pretrain 直接相关的方法级工作，而且对建模范式有一定冲击。它没有像 diffusion LM 那样完全离开 AR，但明确挑战了“一个位置只预测一个 token”这一默认设定；如果多 token prediction 在相近 compute 下稳定更优，那会影响未来训练目标设计、解码接口以及 speculative / blockwise generation 的路线选择。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 multi-token prediction：让模型在每个位置不仅预测下一个 token，还预测接下来多个 token。它不是简单地在推理时一次吐多个 token，而是把训练目标改成更高信息密度的多步监督，从而逼迫中间表征携带更长程的未来信息；与标准 NTP 相比，它减少了‘只学局部一步条件分布’的偏置。设计上的关键 trade-off 是，预测跨度更大时监督更难、对建模误差更敏感，但如果做得好，模型会学到更适合块状生成的表示，因此在质量和速度上同时受益。","experiments":"给定信息中没有摘要，无法确认模型规模和具体数字，但这篇论文已知属于 Meta 一类会做较系统验证的工作，通常会报告预训练 perplexity、下游 zero/few-shot 评测，以及基于多 token 头的解码加速。你应重点看三点：一是在相同训练算力下是否 consistently 优于 next-token baseline；二是推理加速是否来自真实 wall-clock 而不是理想化 token 数；三是预测 horizon 增大后收益是否饱和，过长 horizon 是否伤害稳定性或最终质量。","authors_note":"作者团队信息从题目本身无法完全确认。Gabriel Synnaeve、David Lopez-Paz、Baptiste Rozière 是业界较知名研究者，长期活跃于大模型预训练、推理与基础机器学习研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper’s main claim is that next-token prediction is not the only sensible objective for large language models: predicting multiple future tokens can improve both model quality and decoding speed. Standard autoregressive training places all supervision on the immediate next token, which is simple but information-sparse and tightly couples generation to one-token-at-a-time decoding. The paper revisits that design choice.","importance":"This is directly relevant to pretraining and meaningful at the objective-design level. It does not abandon autoregression in the way diffusion LMs do, but it clearly challenges the default assumption that each position should supervise only one future token. If multi-token prediction is consistently better at similar compute, it affects how we think about training targets, decoding interfaces, and the relationship to speculative or blockwise generation.","technical_approach":"The core idea is multi-token prediction: at each position, the model predicts not just the next token but several future tokens. This is not merely a decoding trick. It changes the training objective into a denser multi-step supervision signal, encouraging representations that carry information about a longer future span. Relative to standard next-token prediction, that reduces the bias toward purely local one-step conditionals. The trade-off is clear: longer-horizon targets are harder and more sensitive to modeling error, but if optimized well they can produce representations better suited for block generation, yielding gains in both quality and speed.","experiments":"The abstract is not provided here, so exact model sizes and numbers cannot be stated reliably. This kind of paper typically reports pretraining perplexity, downstream zero-shot or few-shot evaluation, and decoding speedups enabled by the multi-token heads. The most important things to check are whether gains are consistent under matched training compute, whether speedups are measured in real wall-clock terms rather than idealized token counts, and whether benefits saturate as the prediction horizon grows, with overly long horizons potentially hurting stability or final quality.","authors_note":"The full team affiliation cannot be confirmed from the provided metadata alone. Gabriel Synnaeve, David Lopez-Paz, and Baptiste Rozière are well-known researchers with substantial work in large-scale pretraining, reasoning, and core machine learning."},"tags":["multi-token-prediction","llm-pretrain","training-objective","speculative-decoding"],"notable_authors":["Fabian Gloeckle","David Lopez-Paz","Gabriel Synnaeve","Baptiste Rozière"]},{"id":"PoliTNPDKSHER0M24","title":"Mechanistic Design and Scaling of Hybrid Architectures","authors":["Michael Poli","Armin W. Thomas","Eric Nguyen","Pragaash Ponnusamy","Björn Deiseroth","Kristian Kersting","Taiji Suzuki","Brian L. Hie","Stefano Ermon","Christopher Ré","Ce Zhang","Stefano Massaroli"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/PoliTNPDKSHER0M24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/PoliTNPDKSHER0M24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/poli24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文讨论的是 hybrid architectures 的设计与扩展规律：如何把不同序列建模模块组合起来，并在机制上理解何时比纯 Transformer 更优。过去混合架构常凭经验拼接 attention、SSM、卷积或其他状态空间模块，能跑但缺少清晰设计原则；作者想把“为什么这样混、怎么随规模扩展”讲得更系统。","importance":"这是和 pretrain 很相关的方法级工作。当前长上下文和高吞吐训练都在逼迫架构从纯注意力走向混合方案，因此‘mechanistic design + scaling’比单点 benchmark 更有价值。若论文给出了稳定的 scaling 规律或模块分工原则，对大模型主干设计会有直接参考意义。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是提出一种或一组可机制解释的 hybrid backbone，把注意力与其他高效序列模块按功能拆分，而不是简单堆层。关键选择通常包括：哪些层负责全局内容路由，哪些层负责局部或线性时间状态传播，如何安排层序和比例，以及如何保持训练稳定。与纯 Transformer 相比，hybrid 的潜在优势是更好的长序列效率和归纳偏置；代价是系统复杂度更高，优化面更不均匀，而且不同规模下最优配比未必一致。","experiments":"虽然未给出摘要，但从题目看，实验大概率覆盖架构 scaling：不同参数量、上下文长度和训练 token 下 hybrid 与 Transformer/SSM-only baseline 的比较。核心指标通常包括训练 loss、下游准确率、吞吐、显存和长上下文退化。最值得关注的不是是否某一点 SOTA，而是是否观察到稳定的 scaling crossover：例如小模型谁更强，大模型或长上下文下谁开始占优，以及模块比例是否随规模变化。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies how to design and scale hybrid sequence architectures, and when they should outperform a pure Transformer. Many hybrid models mix attention with SSMs, convolutions, or other sequence modules in a fairly ad hoc way. They sometimes work, but the field lacks clear design principles. This work appears to make that design space more mechanistic and more predictable under scaling.","importance":"This is highly relevant to pretraining at the method level. Long-context training and serving efficiency are already pushing the field beyond pure attention, so a paper about mechanistic design and scaling laws for hybrids is more valuable than a single benchmark win. If the paper identifies stable scaling patterns or module roles, it can directly inform backbone design for future large models.","technical_approach":"The likely contribution is a hybrid backbone, or a family of them, built around a mechanistic decomposition of sequence processing rather than simple layer stacking. The central choices are usually which layers handle global content routing, which layers handle local mixing or linear-time state propagation, how to schedule those components through depth, and how to preserve optimization stability. Relative to a pure Transformer, the upside is better long-sequence efficiency and potentially better inductive bias. The cost is added systems complexity, rougher optimization behavior, and scale-dependent hyperparameter choices.","experiments":"Although no abstract is provided, the title strongly suggests scaling experiments across parameter count, context length, and training tokens, comparing hybrids against Transformer and perhaps SSM-only baselines. The key metrics are likely training loss, downstream quality, throughput, memory use, and long-context degradation. The most valuable result would not be a single state-of-the-art point, but a stable crossover pattern: which architecture wins when small, which wins at larger scale or longer context, and how the optimal module ratio changes with scale.","authors_note":""},"tags":["hybrid-architecture","ssm","attention","scaling-law","architecture"]},{"id":"2402.09739","title":"QuRating: Selecting High-Quality Data for Training Language Models","authors":["Alexander Wettig","Aatmik Gupta","Saumya Malik","Danqi Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.09739","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WettigGM024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WettigGM024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/wettig24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["data-quality","data-selection","pretraining","scaling"]},{"id":"YangT0HLGCSZ0ZW24","title":"UniAudio: Towards Universal Audio Generation with Large Language Models","authors":["Dongchao Yang","Jinchuan Tian","Xu Tan","Rongjie Huang","Songxiang Liu","Haohan Guo","Xuankai Chang","Jiatong Shi","Sheng Zhao","Jiang Bian","Zhou Zhao","Xixin Wu","Helen M. Meng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YangT0HLGCSZ0ZW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YangT0HLGCSZ0ZW24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/yang24x.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是音频生成任务长期被切成多个孤立子问题的问题。过去音乐、语音、环境声、语音编辑往往各自建模、各用各的 tokenizer 和训练目标，导致能力难复用、数据难统一，因此作者尝试用大语言模型框架做统一音频生成。","importance":"这是典型的统一建模型工作，对 pretrain 的意义明显大于单一任务提分。它的重要性不在于又做了一个音频生成器，而在于把 audio token 当成语言 token 处理，探索一个模型是否能跨语音、音乐、一般声音及其理解/生成接口共享表示；这和语音 LM、跨模态统一预训练、非文本 tokenizer 设计直接相关。","technical_approach":"核心方法是构建一个面向多种音频任务的统一 LLM 式生成框架。大概率包含三层关键设计：第一，用离散化或分层 codec/tokenizer 把不同类型音频映射到统一 token 空间或至少统一序列接口；第二，用文本提示、任务标记或结构化控制信号把 TTS、语音克隆、音频续写、音乐生成等任务写成同一种条件生成问题；第三，用单一自回归语言模型做 next-token 建模，而不是为每类任务单独设计扩散器或声学模型。这样的设计有效，是因为统一序列建模可以最大化参数复用并利用 LLM 已成熟的 scaling 与 prompting 机制，但边界也很清楚：音频 token 序列通常极长，统一词表和码率设计若处理不好，会直接拖垮训练效率与长程建模质量。","experiments":"从题目和方向看，实验重点应当是跨任务统一训练后，在多个音频生成基准上接近或达到专用模型性能，并展示 zero-shot 或 in-context 泛化。给定信息里没有可确认的参数规模、训练数据时长、codec 细节、主基线和具体指标，因此不能填具体数字。真正值得看的实验是：统一训练是否带来正迁移还是任务干扰；不同音频 tokenizer/层级码率对质量和序列长度的影响；以及相比专用系统，LLM 式统一建模在可控性和新任务适配上是否更有优势。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a fragmentation problem in audio generation. Speech, music, environmental sound, and audio editing are usually modeled with separate pipelines, tokenizers, and objectives, which limits transfer and makes unified pretraining difficult.","importance":"This is important as a unified pretraining study rather than a task-specific gain. The key contribution is treating audio generation as a large language model problem, which matters for speech/audio LMs, multimodal tokenization, and the broader question of whether non-text modalities can share one generative backbone.","technical_approach":"The method appears to build a single LLM-style framework for diverse audio generation tasks. The likely ingredients are: an audio tokenizer or codec stack that converts different audio types into token sequences, a prompt/task-spec interface that turns heterogeneous tasks into conditional generation, and one autoregressive model instead of separate acoustic or diffusion systems per task. This design is appealing because it maximizes parameter sharing and reuses the scaling behavior of language models, but it also inherits the hard parts of audio LM training: extremely long sequences, codebook design, and the trade-off between bitrate and modeling tractability.","experiments":"The paper likely evaluates a unified model across multiple audio generation tasks and checks whether one model can approach specialist systems while enabling transfer or zero-shot behavior. The provided information does not include model size, hours of training data, codec details, baselines, or metric values, so those should be left unspecified. The most informative results would be cross-task transfer, interference under joint training, and ablations on tokenization granularity versus quality and efficiency.","authors_note":""},"tags":["audio-lm","multimodal","tokenizer","unified-modeling","generation"]},{"id":"2405.10140","title":"Libra: Building Decoupled Vision System on Large Language Models","authors":["Yifan Xu","Xiaoshan Yang","Yaguang Song","Changsheng Xu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"In this work, we introduce Libra, a prototype model with a decoupled vision system on a large language model (LLM). The decoupled vision system decouples inner-modal modeling and cross-modal interaction, yielding unique visual information modeling and effective cross-modal comprehension. Libra is trained through discrete auto-regressive modeling on both vision and language inputs. Specifically, we incorporate a routed visual expert with a cross-modal bridge module into a pretrained LLM to route the vision and language flows during attention computing to enable different attention patterns in inner-modal modeling and cross-modal interaction scenarios. Experimental results demonstrate that the dedicated design of Libra achieves a strong MLLM baseline that rivals existing works in the image-to-text scenario with merely 50 million training data, providing a new perspective for future multimodal foundation models. Code is available at https://github.com/YifanXu74/Libra.","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.10140","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0008YSX24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0008YSX24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/xu24ab.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["multimodal-pretraining","autoregressive","vision-tokenizer","llm"]},{"id":"2401.16421","title":"Two Stones Hit One Bird: Bilevel Positional Encoding for Better Length Extrapolation","authors":["Zhenyu He","Guhao Feng","Shengjie Luo","Kai Yang","Liwei Wang","Jingjing Xu","Zhi Zhang","Hongxia Yang","Di He"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"In this work, we leverage the intrinsic segmentation of language sequences and design a new positional encoding method called Bilevel Positional Encoding (BiPE). For each position, our BiPE blends an intra-segment encoding and an inter-segment encoding. The intra-segment encoding identifies the locations within a segment and helps the model capture the semantic information therein via absolute positional encoding. The inter-segment encoding specifies the segment index, models the relationships between segments, and aims to improve extrapolation capabilities via relative positional encoding. Theoretical analysis shows this disentanglement of positional information makes learning more effective. The empirical results also show that our BiPE has superior length extrapolation capabilities across a wide range of tasks in diverse text modalities.","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.16421","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0012FLY0XZY024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0012FLY0XZY024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/he24c.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["positional-encoding","length-extrapolation","long-context","architecture"]},{"id":"AkyurekWKA24","title":"In-Context Language Learning: Architectures and Algorithms","authors":["Ekin Akyürek","Bailin Wang","Yoon Kim","Jacob Andreas"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/AkyurekWKA24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/AkyurekWKA24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/akyurek24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要信息，无法确认该工作要解决的 ICL（in-context learning）核心问题是“为什么能学”、还是“怎样设计架构/算法让 ICL 更强/更稳/更可控”。","importance":"缺少摘要信息，无法判断其贡献是机制分析（解释 ICL）、方法设计（新架构/训练法），还是把 ICL 作为接口统一若干学习范式。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要信息，无法说明其提出的架构与算法具体是什么、与标准 Transformer ICL 的差异点在哪里、以及为何能改善泛化或样本效率。","experiments":"缺少摘要信息，无法给出任务集合（回归/分类/算法任务/语言任务）、模型规模、以及相对 baseline 的提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract was provided, so it is unclear whether the paper targets understanding why ICL works or designing architectures/algorithms that make ICL stronger and more controllable.","importance":"Without details, we cannot assess whether the contribution is mechanistic, methodological, or a unifying perspective on learning via context.","technical_approach":"The proposed architectures/algorithms, their differences from standard Transformer ICL, and the rationale for improved generalization/sample efficiency are not specified.","experiments":"No information on task suites, model scales, or quantitative gains vs. baselines was provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","architecture","icl","language-learning"]},{"id":"BordelonAP24","title":"A Dynamical Model of Neural Scaling Laws","authors":["Blake Bordelon","Alexander B. Atanasov","Cengiz Pehlevan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/BordelonAP24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/BordelonAP24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/bordelon24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["scaling-law","training-dynamics","neural-scaling","theory"]},{"id":"BurnsIKBGACEJLS24","title":"Weak-to-Strong Generalization: Eliciting Strong Capabilities With Weak Supervision","authors":["Collin Burns","Pavel Izmailov","Jan Hendrik Kirchner","Bowen Baker","Leo Gao","Leopold Aschenbrenner","Yining Chen","Adrien Ecoffet","Manas Joglekar","Jan Leike","Ilya Sutskever","Jeffrey Wu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/BurnsIKBGACEJLS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/BurnsIKBGACEJLS24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/burns24b.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["weak-to-strong","alignment","scalable-oversight","openai"]},{"id":"CaiLGPLCD24","title":"Medusa: Simple LLM Inference Acceleration Framework with Multiple Decoding Heads","authors":["Tianle Cai","Yuhong Li","Zhengyang Geng","Hongwu Peng","Jason D. Lee","Deming Chen","Tri Dao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/CaiLGPLCD24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/CaiLGPLCD24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/cai24b.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["speculative-decoding","inference-acceleration","multi-head","llm-serving"]},{"id":"FuPNYHK024","title":"Data Engineering for Scaling Language Models to 128K Context","authors":["Yao Fu","Rameswar Panda","Xinyao Niu","Xiang Yue","Hannaneh Hajishirzi","Yoon Kim","Hao Peng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/FuPNYHK024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/FuPNYHK024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/fu24d.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["long-context","data-engineering","data-quality","scaling-law"]},{"id":"2404.01847","title":"Accelerating Transformer Pre-training with 2: 4 Sparsity","authors":["Yuezhou Hu","Kang Zhao","Weiyu Huang","Jianfei Chen","Jun Zhu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.01847","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HuZHCZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HuZHCZ24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/hu24r.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是：如何在不显著掉点的前提下，把 Transformer 预训练的 FFN 计算迁移到 GPU 原生支持的 2:4 结构化稀疏，从而获得接近硬件上限的加速。过去稀疏训练常见问题是训练不稳定、稀疏模式频繁翻转导致收敛差，最终需要回退到 dense。","importance":"贡献是系统级 + 训练技巧级：它不是提出新模型，而是把“2:4 稀疏在预训练可用”这件事做成一套可监控、可稳定训练的流程。对大规模 pretrain 的直接启示是：结构化稀疏的收益不只在推理端，预训练端也能吃到硬件红利，但前提是要把稀疏模式稳定性当作一等公民来优化。","technical_approach":"方法核心是围绕 2:4 稀疏训练的稳定性做闭环控制。作者提出 flip rate 作为稀疏模式“翻转频率”的稳定性指标，用它来诊断训练何时进入不稳定区；为保精度提出三点：在 sparse-refined STE（直通估计器）上对梯度加 masked decay 抑制不必要的模式翻转；在 warm-up 阶段选择可行的 decay factor 避免早期震荡；在预训练末期做一次 dense fine-tuning，把稀疏训练带来的表示损失补回来。取舍是：更强的稀疏约束带来更高吞吐，但需要额外的训练日程与末期 dense 阶段来回收精度。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体模型规模、训练 token 数、wall-clock 加速比、以及与 dense 预训练的精度差（如 ppl 或下游分数），因此无法报告数字。可确认的实验主线是：以 flip rate 监控训练稳定性，并验证三项技巧对“稳定训练 + 精度保持”的贡献；是否达到 Ampere 上理论 2x 的端到端收益，需要结合实现细节（稀疏算子覆盖率、通信/带宽瓶颈）在正文中核对。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical bottleneck: making 2:4 structured sparsity usable during Transformer pretraining (especially FFNs) to exploit Ampere GPUs’ fast sparse matmul, without the typical instability and accuracy loss of sparse training.","importance":"This is a systems-and-training contribution rather than a new modeling paradigm: it packages 2:4 sparse pretraining into a monitorable and stabilizable recipe. For large-scale pretraining, the key message is that structured sparsity can pay off during training too, but only if sparsity-pattern stability is explicitly controlled.","technical_approach":"The method builds a control loop around sparsity stability. It introduces a flip rate metric to track how often the 2:4 mask changes, uses it to detect unstable regimes, and proposes three fixes: add a masked decay term to gradients in a sparse-refined straight-through estimator to reduce unnecessary mask flips; pick a feasible decay factor during warm-up to avoid early oscillations; and run dense fine-tuning near the end of pretraining to recover quality lost to sparsification. The trade-off is higher throughput versus extra schedule complexity and a late dense phase.","experiments":"The abstract does not report model sizes, token counts, end-to-end speedups, or accuracy deltas versus dense baselines, so numeric outcomes cannot be summarized faithfully. The experimental narrative is that flip rate correlates with training stability and the three techniques improve stability and final quality; whether the full pipeline reaches near-2x wall-clock gains depends on operator coverage and system bottlenecks detailed in the paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["sparsity","transformer-pretraining","training-efficiency","gpu-acceleration"],"notable_authors":["Jun Zhu"]},{"id":"KimLH24","title":"Scaling Beyond the GPU Memory Limit for Large Mixture-of-Experts Model Training","authors":["Yechan Kim","Hwijoon Lim","Dongsu Han"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/KimLH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/KimLH24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/kim24w.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：MoE 大模型训练经常不是被算力而是被单卡显存上限卡住，尤其在 expert 数量、路由缓存、优化器状态一起膨胀时，常规数据并行或张量并行很快失效。过去常见做法是缩小 batch、减少 expert 或依赖更大 GPU，这些都只是回避问题，没有真正突破显存墙。","importance":"如果论文标题所示的方法成立，它的贡献属于系统级训练扩展。MoE 的理论优势是参数量可以扩得很大而每 token 计算受控，但工程上真正难的是把不活跃参数、激活和通信都塞进有限显存；因此“超出 GPU memory limit 训练”这类工作对大规模稀疏预训练很关键，因为它决定了 MoE 是否能在常规集群上可复现、可扩展，而不只是少数超大硬件团队的能力。","technical_approach":"从标题判断，方法核心应是把超出单卡容量的 MoE 训练状态做跨层次切分与按需搬运，使模型参数规模不再被 GPU 常驻内存直接限制。和传统 ZeRO/FSDP 只处理 dense 模型的参数、梯度、优化器状态切分不同，MoE 还要处理 expert 级别的不均匀访问和 token dispatch；因此有效方案通常需要同时设计 expert 放置、通信调度、激活重计算或 CPU/NVMe offload 的配合机制。它的关键不是单一 trick，而是让“哪些状态必须常驻、哪些可以延迟加载”这件事有清晰边界，否则通信和访存延迟会把 MoE 的理论收益吃掉。","experiments":"当前给到信息没有摘要，因此无法可靠写出模型规模、集群配置、吞吐提升或收敛保持的具体数字。基于题目，实验最关键的判断应是两点：一是是否在固定 GPU 显存下训练了显著更大的 MoE；二是这种扩展是否保持了可接受的训练吞吐和最终质量，而不是单纯“能跑起来”。如果原文给出不同 offload/并行策略下的 memory-throughput trade-off，这会是最值得看的部分。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical blocker for large-scale MoE training: GPU memory, not raw compute, often becomes the hard limit once expert parameters, routing buffers, and optimizer states all scale up together. The usual workarounds—smaller batches, fewer experts, or larger GPUs—avoid the constraint rather than removing it.","importance":"Assuming the title reflects the main result, this is a systems-level contribution with direct relevance to sparse pretraining. MoE is attractive because it decouples parameter count from per-token compute, but that promise only matters if training can escape the per-GPU memory ceiling. A method that genuinely scales MoE beyond device memory would make sparse pretraining more reproducible on ordinary clusters rather than only on top-end hardware.","technical_approach":"From the title, the likely core idea is to partition and move MoE training states across memory tiers so that total model size is no longer bounded by what must reside permanently on each GPU. Unlike dense-model sharding methods such as ZeRO or FSDP, MoE has to handle expert-specific access skew and token dispatch in addition to parameter, gradient, and optimizer partitioning. In practice, that usually means a coordinated design across expert placement, communication scheduling, activation recomputation, and CPU or storage offloading. The key is not one trick but deciding what truly needs to stay resident and what can be fetched on demand without destroying throughput.","experiments":"No abstract is provided here, so model sizes, cluster setup, throughput gains, and convergence numbers cannot be stated reliably. The central empirical questions are likely: first, how much larger an MoE can be trained under a fixed GPU memory budget; second, whether that larger training setup preserves acceptable throughput and final quality rather than merely making training possible. If the paper includes ablations over offloading and sharding strategies, those trade-offs are probably the most informative part.","authors_note":""},"tags":["moe","training-system","memory","scaling","distributed-training"]},{"id":"KongGBPVC24","title":"Audio Flamingo: A Novel Audio Language Model with Few-Shot Learning and Dialogue Abilities","authors":["Zhifeng Kong","Arushi Goel","Rohan Badlani","Wei Ping","Rafael Valle","Bryan Catanzaro"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/KongGBPVC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/KongGBPVC24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/kong24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：现有音频语言模型往往擅长单轮音频理解或特定任务，但很难兼顾 few-shot 学习和多轮对话能力。过去音频系统通常在 ASR、音频事件分类、语音问答之间分开建模，或者把音频简单接到文本 LLM 前面，导致真正的音频条件对话和少样本泛化能力不足。","importance":"这项工作对 pretrain 的价值在于推动 audio-language model 从“接插件式多模态”走向更原生的统一建模。对于基座模型研究者，关键启示不是又一个音频 benchmark，而是音频 token/表示、跨模态对齐和对话式训练目标如何一起决定模型的泛化形态。few-shot 能力如果成立，说明模型学到的不只是任务模板，而是较稳健的音频-语言映射。","technical_approach":"从题目看，Audio Flamingo 借鉴了 Flamingo 类架构思路，把音频编码器与语言模型通过跨注意力或门控融合起来，并针对 few-shot learning 和 dialogue 做了训练设计。它大概率不是把音频完全离散化后做纯 AR 统一建模，而是保留连续音频表征，再让 LLM 在提示中消费音频上下文。和传统 speech-to-text 或音频分类模型不同，它关注的是开放式语言输出；和简单音频前缀拼接相比，有效融合机制更能保留长时音频信息并支持多轮引用。代价是对齐数据和训练配方会非常关键，模型也容易继承文本 LLM 的幻觉与对话偏差。","experiments":"由于没有摘要，无法安全写出训练数据规模、参数量和具体 benchmark 数值。按题目判断，实验重点应包括：few-shot 设定下对音频理解任务的泛化，相比纯监督 finetune 或冻结编码器方法是否更稳；以及在音频对话任务上，模型是否能引用先前音频上下文并进行多轮交互。如果论文比较了不同音频注入方式或对话数据混合比例，这会比单纯分数更有参考价值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a gap in current audio-language models: many systems can do single-turn audio understanding or narrow tasks, but they struggle to combine few-shot learning with multi-turn dialogue. Prior approaches often separate ASR, audio event understanding, and spoken QA, or simply attach audio features to a text LLM, which leaves true audio-conditioned dialogue and in-context generalization weak.","importance":"Its relevance to pretraining is that it pushes audio-language modeling from a plug-in multimodal setup toward something more native. The key value is not another audio benchmark, but what it says about audio representations, cross-modal alignment, and dialogue-oriented training objectives. If the few-shot behavior is real, it suggests the model learned a more reusable audio-language mapping rather than just task-specific templates.","technical_approach":"From the title, Audio Flamingo likely follows the Flamingo-style recipe: an audio encoder is fused into a language model through cross-attention or gated connectors, and the training setup is tailored for few-shot prompting and dialogue. This is probably not a fully discrete unified LM over audio tokens; more likely it keeps continuous audio embeddings and lets the LLM consume them as contextual inputs. Compared with classic speech or audio classifiers, the focus is open-ended language generation. Compared with naive prefix injection, a stronger fusion module should preserve long-range acoustic context and support multi-turn references better. The trade-off is heavy dependence on alignment data and a tendency to inherit the language model’s hallucination and dialogue biases.","experiments":"Without the abstract, training data scale, model size, and benchmark numbers cannot be reported safely. The likely center of the experiments is whether the model generalizes in few-shot settings on audio understanding tasks better than standard supervised finetuning or frozen-encoder baselines, and whether it can sustain multi-turn audio-grounded dialogue by referring back to earlier audio context. If the paper compares different audio injection mechanisms or mixtures of dialogue data, those ablations are probably more informative than the headline scores.","authors_note":""},"tags":["audio-lm","multimodal","few-shot","dialogue","speech"]},{"id":"KouHHDZ24","title":"CLLMs: Consistency Large Language Models","authors":["Siqi Kou","Lanxiang Hu","Zhezhi He","Zhijie Deng","Hao Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/KouHHDZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/KouHHDZ24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/kou24a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：能否把 consistency model 的快速生成思想带到语言模型里，绕开标准自回归逐 token 解码的线性时延。过去非 AR 语言建模一直受两个问题限制：一是训练目标往往和离散文本不匹配，二是即便并行生成，质量也常明显落后于 AR LM，因此很难真正挑战 next-token 范式。","importance":"这项工作如果成立，属于新型语言建模范式探索，和 diffusion LM 一样值得 pretrain 研究者关注。它的重要性不在短期内替代 AR，而在于检验另一类生成目标是否能在离散文本上给出更好的 latency-quality 折中。即使最后性能不如最强 AR，它也可能为并行解码、草稿生成、或 AR+非AR混合训练提供新接口。","technical_approach":"从标题判断，CLLMs 是把 consistency training 移植到大语言模型：学习一个从噪声或部分破坏文本到更一致文本的映射，使多步去噪可被少步甚至一步近似。和 diffusion LM 相比，consistency model 的卖点通常是更少采样步数；和 masked LM 相比，它不只是补全被 mask 的位置，而是显式学习不同噪声层级之间的一致映射。设计上最难的是离散 token 空间的连续化表示、训练时的 corruption schedule，以及如何避免并行生成中的 mode averaging 和语义塌缩。","experiments":"当前没有摘要，无法可靠写出模型规模、数据集和生成质量数字。最关键的实验应该是三类：第一，和自回归 LM 比较质量-延迟折中；第二，和 diffusion 或 masked parallel decoding 方法比较采样步数与文本质量；第三，验证 consistency 训练在尺度增大时是否稳定。若原文报告 few-step 生成下的 perplexity 替代指标或下游任务分数，这会决定它是概念验证还是有潜力进入主线范式。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether the fast generation idea behind consistency models can be brought to language modeling, reducing the linear latency of standard autoregressive decoding. Non-AR language modeling has long faced two obstacles: training objectives that fit discrete text poorly, and a persistent quality gap versus strong AR LMs even when generation is parallelized.","importance":"If the method works, this is a paradigm-level exploration relevant to pretraining in the same way diffusion LMs are. Its importance is not that it will immediately replace autoregressive modeling, but that it tests whether a different generative objective can offer a better latency-quality trade-off on text. Even if it falls short of the best AR models, it could still become useful for parallel decoding, draft generation, or hybrid AR/non-AR training.","technical_approach":"From the title, CLLMs likely adapt consistency training to language models by learning a mapping from noisy or corrupted text states to more consistent ones, so that multi-step denoising can be approximated in very few steps. Compared with diffusion LMs, the main appeal of consistency models is lower sampling cost. Compared with masked LMs, the goal is not just fill-in-the-blank prediction but consistency across corruption levels. The hard parts are how to represent discrete tokens in a form suitable for consistency training, how to choose the corruption schedule, and how to avoid mode averaging or semantic collapse under parallel generation.","experiments":"No abstract is available, so model size, datasets, and quantitative quality metrics cannot be stated safely. The decisive experiments are likely threefold: quality-versus-latency comparisons against autoregressive LMs, sampling-step and text-quality comparisons against diffusion or masked parallel generation baselines, and scaling tests showing whether consistency training remains stable as models grow. If the paper reports few-step generation results on downstream tasks or robust quality proxies, that would indicate whether this is only a proof of concept or something more durable.","authors_note":""},"tags":["consistency-model","parallel-decoding","inference-acceleration","llm"]},{"id":"2310.10505","title":"ReMax: A Simple, Effective, and Efficient Reinforcement Learning Method for Aligning Large Language Models","authors":["Ziniu Li","Tian Xu","Yushun Zhang","Zhihang Lin","Yang Yu","Ruoyu Sun","Zhi-Quan Luo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$5","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.10505","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiXZL00L24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiXZL00L24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/li24cd.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["rlhf","alignment","policy-optimization","efficiency"]},{"id":"2402.14905","title":"MobileLLM: Optimizing Sub-billion Parameter Language Models for On-Device Use Cases","authors":["Zechun Liu","Changsheng Zhao","Forrest N. Iandola","Chen Lai","Yuandong Tian","Igor Fedorov","Yunyang Xiong","Ernie Chang","Yangyang Shi","Raghuraman Krishnamoorthi","Liangzhen Lai","Vikas Chandra"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.14905","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Liu0ILTFXCSKLC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Liu0ILTFXCSKLC24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/liu24ce.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["small-lm","architecture","mobile","scaling-law","depth-vs-width"]},{"id":"MunosVCARGTGMFM24","title":"Nash Learning from Human Feedback","authors":["Rémi Munos","Michal Valko","Daniele Calandriello","Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar","Mark Rowland","Daniel Guo","Yunhao Tang","Matthieu Geist","Thomas Mesnard","Côme Fiegel","Andrea Michi","Marco Selvi","Sertan Girgin","Nikola Momchev","Olivier Bachem","Daniel J. Mankowitz","Doina Precup","Bilal Piot"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MunosVCARGTGMFM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MunosVCARGTGMFM24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/munos24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["rlhf","nash-equilibrium","alignment","reward-model"]},{"id":"QinS0SSZ24","title":"Various Lengths, Constant Speed: Efficient Language Modeling with Lightning Attention","authors":["Zhen Qin","Weigao Sun","Dong Li","Xuyang Shen","Weixuan Sun","Yiran Zhong"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/QinS0SSZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/QinS0SSZ24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/qin24c.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["linear-attention","long-context","efficient-attention","architecture"]},{"id":"2404.07129","title":"What needs to go right for an induction head? A mechanistic study of in-context learning circuits and their formation","authors":["Aaditya K. Singh","Ted Moskovitz","Felix Hill","Stephanie C. Y. Chan","Andrew M. Saxe"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$7","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.07129","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SinghMHCS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SinghMHCS24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/singh24c.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["in-context-learning","induction-heads","mechanistic-interpretability","training-dynamics"]},{"id":"2402.00742","title":"Transforming and Combining Rewards for Aligning Large Language Models","authors":["Zihao Wang","Chirag Nagpal","Jonathan Berant","Jacob Eisenstein","Alexander Nicholas D&apos;Amour","Sanmi Koyejo","Victor Veitch"],"institutions":["Google DeepMind","Google"],"abstract":"$8","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.00742","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangNBEDKV24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangNBEDKV24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/wang24ay.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"RLHF 中从偏好数据学到的 reward model 存在两个被忽视的问题：(1) reward 的单调变换不影响偏好排序，但不同变换对 alignment 效果差异很大，该选哪个？(2) 多个 reward model 如何组合才最优？以前这两个问题缺乏有原则的解法。","importance":"方法级贡献，直接改进 RLHF 的 reward 使用方式。对 pretrain-posttrain 接口的启示：reward 信号的质量和形式直接影响 alignment 效果，本文给出了基于概率解释的有原则选择，减少了 reward engineering 中的 ad-hoc 调参。这对理解 RL 训练信号如何反哺模型质量有价值。","technical_approach":"从 alignment 过程的概率解释出发，对 Bradley-Terry 偏好模型学到的 reward 推导出自然的变换选择：对中心化后的 reward 施加 log-sigmoid 变换。这个选择不是 heuristic，而是从 KL-regularized optimization 的概率结构中自然导出的。对于多 reward 组合问题，同样基于概率框架给出了组合方式。","experiments":"摘要未给出完整实验数字，但论文声称该变换方法简单直接且有效。","authors_note":"作者包括 Jacob Eisenstein 和 Jonathan Berant（Google DeepMind），以及 Alexander D'Amour（Google），在 alignment 和因果推断方向有深厚积累。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In RLHF, the learned reward model is invariant to monotone transformations for preference ranking, but different transformations yield very different alignment outcomes. Additionally, combining multiple reward models lacks a principled approach. Both problems were previously handled ad hoc.","importance":"A method-level contribution to RLHF reward engineering. Relevant to the pretrain-posttrain interface: reward signal quality directly affects alignment, and this work provides a principled transformation derived from probabilistic reasoning rather than heuristic tuning.","technical_approach":"Derives a natural reward transformation from the probabilistic interpretation of KL-regularized alignment: apply log-sigmoid to centered rewards learned from Bradley-Terry preference models. This is not a heuristic but follows from the optimization structure. Multi-reward combination is handled within the same probabilistic framework.","experiments":"Full experimental numbers not available from the abstract. The proposed transformation is described as straightforward to implement.","authors_note":"Authors include Jacob Eisenstein and Jonathan Berant (Google DeepMind), and Alexander D'Amour (Google), with strong backgrounds in alignment and causal inference."},"tags":["alignment","reward-model","rlhf","preference-learning","reward-shaping"],"notable_authors":["Jacob Eisenstein","Jonathan Berant"]},{"id":"2310.07713","title":"InstructRetro: Instruction Tuning post Retrieval-Augmented Pretraining","authors":["Boxin Wang","Wei Ping","Lawrence McAfee","Peng Xu","Bo Li","Mohammad Shoeybi","Bryan Catanzaro"],"institutions":["NVIDIA"],"abstract":"$9","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.07713","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangPM00SC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangPM00SC24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/wang24bd.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"检索增强预训练（Retro 方法）此前只在 7.5B 规模验证过，规模受限导致指令微调和零样本泛化效果不佳。需要验证 Retro 方法能否 scale 到更大模型，并在指令微调后保持优势。","importance":"系统级贡献，是目前最大的检索增强预训练 LLM（48B）。对 pretrain 研究的直接启示：检索增强预训练在大规模下仍然有效，且额外 GPU 开销极小（2.58%），这意味着 Retro 式方法可以作为标准预训练的低成本增强手段。同时验证了检索增强预训练 + 指令微调的完整 pipeline。","technical_approach":"在已有的 43B GPT 模型基础上，用 Retro 方法继续预训练 100B tokens，检索库为 1.2T tokens。关键选择是 continue pretrain 而非从头训练，这大幅降低了成本。之后进行指令微调（InstructRetro），验证检索增强预训练的基座在 posttrain 阶段的表现。与从头训练 1.2T tokens 的 GPT 43B 对比。","experiments":"Retro 48B 在困惑度上显著优于同数据量训练的 GPT 43B，且额外 GPU 开销仅 2.58%。这是一个非常有吸引力的效率比。指令微调后的零样本泛化能力也有提升，验证了检索增强预训练的收益能传递到下游。","authors_note":"作者包括 Wei Ping 和 Boxin Wang（NVIDIA），NVIDIA 在检索增强预训练方向有持续投入。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Retrieval-augmented pretraining (Retro) had only been validated at 7.5B scale, limiting its effectiveness for instruction tuning and zero-shot generalization. The question is whether Retro scales to much larger models and retains benefits after instruction tuning.","importance":"A system-level contribution: the largest retrieval-augmented pretrained LLM at 48B parameters. Key takeaway for pretrain research: Retro-style augmentation remains effective at scale with only 2.58% additional GPU cost, making it a practical low-cost enhancement to standard pretraining. The full pipeline from retrieval-augmented pretrain to instruction tuning is validated.","technical_approach":"Continues pretraining a 43B GPT model with Retro augmentation on 100B additional tokens, retrieving from a 1.2T token corpus. The critical choice is continue-pretrain rather than training from scratch, which drastically reduces cost. Instruction tuning (InstructRetro) is then applied to validate downstream transfer.","experiments":"Retro 48B significantly outperforms GPT 43B (trained on 1.2T tokens) in perplexity, with only 2.58% additional GPU hours. Instruction-tuned version shows improved zero-shot generalization, confirming retrieval-augmented pretraining benefits transfer through the posttrain pipeline.","authors_note":"Authors include Wei Ping and Boxin Wang (NVIDIA). NVIDIA has sustained investment in retrieval-augmented pretraining."},"tags":["rag","retrieval-augmented-pretraining","instruction-tuning","long-context","post-training"],"notable_authors":["Wei Ping","Boxin Wang"]},{"id":"YangWSPK24","title":"Gated Linear Attention Transformers with Hardware-Efficient Training","authors":["Songlin Yang","Bailin Wang","Yikang Shen","Rameswar Panda","Yoon Kim"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YangWSPK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YangWSPK24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/yang24ab.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是线性注意力虽然理论上是 O(n) 更适合长序列，但在实际训练中常常既不够稳也不够快的问题。很多线性注意力变体在表达能力上弱于 softmax attention，或者训练时需要不友好的张量重排与前缀扫描，导致硬件上未必比标准注意力占优。","importance":"这是一篇方法与系统实现耦合得很紧的工作。对 pretrain 的意义在于，它不是单纯提出一个更省复杂度的近似，而是试图把线性注意力做成训练友好的主干模块；如果成立，长上下文预训练和低成本 serving 都会受益，因为核心瓶颈从算法复杂度进一步落到真正可实现的吞吐与稳定性上。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Gated Linear Attention Transformer：在线性注意力框架里加入门控机制，并按硬件友好的方式重写训练计算图。门控的作用通常是弥补线性核化后丢失的选择性，让模型保留类似内容相关遗忘/保留能力；而硬件高效训练往往意味着避免代价高的串行前缀操作、降低 HBM 访问、让算子更贴近 GPU/TPU 擅长的矩阵乘。它和已有线性 Transformer 的差异，重点不只是一个新公式，而是把表达性和可训练性一起考虑：如果只有线性复杂度但需要复杂自定义 kernel 或训练不稳定，实际很难替代标准 Transformer。","experiments":"根据题目，实验应当同时覆盖语言建模质量和训练效率，可能包括长序列设置下与 softmax attention、Performer、RetNet、Mamba 或其他 linear/RNN-like 模型比较。给定信息没有具体参数量、上下文长度、吞吐提升和 perplexity 数字，因此不能写死。值得关注的关键事实应包括：在相同预算下是否达到接近标准 Transformer 的 loss/perplexity；吞吐和显存是否随序列长度扩大而真正受益；门控机制和硬件友好实现分别贡献了多少提升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a well-known gap between the promise and reality of linear attention. Linear-time attention is attractive for long sequences, but many variants lose too much modeling power or require training procedures that are not actually hardware efficient.","importance":"This matters at the method-and-systems boundary. For pretraining, the value is not just lower asymptotic complexity, but whether a linear-attention backbone can train stably and fast enough to become a realistic alternative for long-context language modeling.","technical_approach":"The proposed model is a Gated Linear Attention Transformer with a hardware-efficient training formulation. The gate is there to recover selectivity that plain kernelized linear attention often lacks, while the implementation side tries to map the computation to operations accelerators handle well, instead of relying on expensive sequential scans or memory-heavy kernels. The important distinction from prior linear Transformers is that the paper appears to optimize expressivity and hardware efficiency together rather than treating them separately.","experiments":"The likely evaluation includes both language-model quality and wall-clock efficiency, probably against softmax Transformers and other efficient-sequence models. The provided metadata does not expose parameter counts, context lengths, throughput numbers, or perplexity values, so they should not be fabricated. The critical experimental questions are whether it closes the quality gap to standard attention, whether the speedup survives real hardware measurements, and how much of the gain comes from gating versus the training formulation.","authors_note":""},"tags":["linear-attention","transformer","hardware-efficiency","training","architecture"]},{"id":"YinHZ0YSZ24","title":"StableMask: Refining Causal Masking in Decoder-only Transformer","authors":["Qingyu Yin","Xuzheng He","Xiang Zhuang","Yu Zhao","Jianhua Yao","Xiaoyu Shen","Qiang Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YinHZ0YSZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YinHZ0YSZ24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/yin24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作针对的是 decoder-only Transformer 里固定 causal mask 过于僵硬的问题。标准下三角 mask 保证自回归训练与推理一致，但它也把所有历史 token 一视同仁，可能限制信息流和优化效率，因此作者尝试在不破坏自回归约束的前提下重新设计 masking。","importance":"这是一篇训练目标/结构细节层面的改进工作。它的重要性在于 causal mask 通常被当作不可碰的默认设定，而这篇论文说明 masking 本身也可以是可优化对象；如果确实能稳定改善语言建模或训练效率，那么对 decoder-only LLM 预训练是低侵入、易复用的改动。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 StableMask，对传统 causal masking 做 refinement。合理推断，它不是彻底改成双向或 prefix-LM，而是在保持生成时因果性的前提下，调整某些 token 间可见性、权重或训练期的遮挡模式，以改善梯度传播和表示学习。设计上的关键约束是：训练阶段的信息泄漏必须可控，否则会出现 train-test mismatch；同时 mask 改动若过强，模型可能依赖训练期额外上下文，在真实自回归解码时失效。它与一般 masked LM 的根本区别是仍服务于 decoder-only 生成模型，而不是换任务范式。","experiments":"从题目看，实验应主要在语言建模或下游生成任务上比较标准 causal mask 与 StableMask，可能报告困惑度、下游任务分数和训练稳定性。给定信息里没有模型尺寸、数据集、具体改进幅度和 ablation 数字，因此不能虚构。真正值得检查的是：收益是否在不同规模模型上都存在；是否只是短训练技巧，还是最终收敛也更好；以及在长上下文和真实 autoregressive decoding 下是否没有副作用。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper revisits a design choice that is usually taken for granted: the fixed causal mask in decoder-only Transformers. Standard masking guarantees autoregressive consistency, but it may also impose unnecessarily rigid information flow during training.","importance":"This is a targeted training/objective-level contribution. Its significance is that masking itself may be a useful optimization knob for decoder-only LMs, offering a relatively low-intrusion way to improve pretraining if the change preserves generation-time behavior.","technical_approach":"The proposed StableMask refines causal masking without abandoning the decoder-only autoregressive setup. The likely idea is to modify visibility patterns or training-time masking behavior so that optimization becomes easier while keeping information leakage under control. That trade-off is the whole point: if the training mask becomes too permissive, the model will exploit context that does not exist at inference time; if it stays too rigid, there is little benefit over the standard lower-triangular mask.","experiments":"The expected evaluation compares standard causal masking against StableMask on language-modeling and generation tasks, likely including perplexity and training stability. The provided metadata does not expose model sizes, datasets, or numerical gains, so those should not be invented. The most important evidence would be robustness across scales and the absence of train-test mismatch during actual autoregressive decoding.","authors_note":""},"tags":["decoder-only","causal-mask","transformer","training-stability","architecture"]},{"id":"YouFWYL24","title":"When Linear Attention Meets Autoregressive Decoding: Towards More Effective and Efficient Linearized Large Language Models","authors":["Haoran You","Yichao Fu","Zheng Wang","Amir Yazdanbakhsh","Yingyan Celine Lin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YouFWYL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YouFWYL24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/you24a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是线性注意力模型在自回归解码阶段往往没有想象中有效的问题。很多线性化 LLM 在训练复杂度上看起来更优，但真正到 AR decoding 时，质量、状态更新方式和硬件效率之间存在新的矛盾，因此作者专门从解码场景重新审视 linear attention。","importance":"这项工作对长上下文和高效 serving 都有直接意义。对 pretrain 研究的价值在于提醒我们：训练时的 O(n) 优势不自动转化为生成时优势，真正可替代标准 Transformer 的高效架构必须同时满足预训练可收敛、解码质量不掉、状态缓存便宜、并且 kernel 友好这几个条件。","technical_approach":"核心方法是面向 autoregressive decoding 重新设计或校正线性注意力机制，使其在增量生成时更有效、更稳定。与一般只在 full-sequence training 下定义线性注意力不同，这类方法通常会显式优化递推状态表示、token-by-token 更新公式或归一化方式，减少历史压缩带来的信息损失。设计逻辑很明确：如果线性注意力把历史压得过于粗糙，训练时也许还能靠并行上下文补偿，但解码时每步只能依赖压缩状态，性能就会更容易崩。它和普通 efficient attention 论文的区别，在于把 decoding 作为一等公民而不是附带结果。","experiments":"根据题目，实验应覆盖语言建模质量、解码延迟/吞吐、长序列扩展性，并与标准 Transformer 及其他 linearized LLM 比较。给定信息没有模型参数量、上下文长度、速度提升和 perplexity/accuracy 数字，因此不能填具体值。值得重点看的是：在相同参数和训练预算下，是否在 AR decoding 质量上明显优于现有线性注意力；速度收益是在真实 batch=1/小 batch 解码场景仍然成立，还是只在理想化大 batch 训练场景有效。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper focuses on a practical weakness of linear attention in autoregressive generation. Many linearized LLMs look attractive during training, but their advantages often shrink or disappear at decoding time once quality, state compression, and hardware effects are all taken into account.","importance":"This is directly relevant to both long-context modeling and efficient serving. The main lesson for pretraining is that an efficient backbone cannot be judged only by training complexity; it must also retain quality under incremental decoding and provide a cheap, stable recurrent state.","technical_approach":"The method revisits linear attention from the perspective of autoregressive decoding rather than full-sequence training. The likely contribution is a better state update, normalization, or recurrent formulation that preserves more useful history information when generation proceeds token by token. That design target matters because aggressive history compression can be partially hidden during training but becomes much more damaging at inference when the model only has the summarized state.","experiments":"The expected evaluation includes language-model quality, decoding latency and throughput, and scaling with sequence length, likely against standard Transformers and prior linear-attention LLMs. The provided metadata does not include model sizes, context lengths, or numerical improvements, so they should not be fabricated. The central evidence should be quality under real AR decoding, not only training-time efficiency.","authors_note":""},"tags":["linear-attention","autoregressive","llm","decoding","efficiency"]},{"id":"YuanPCLSXW24","title":"Self-Rewarding Language Models","authors":["Weizhe Yuan","Richard Yuanzhe Pang","Kyunghyun Cho","Xian Li","Sainbayar Sukhbaatar","Jing Xu","Jason Weston"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YuanPCLSXW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YuanPCLSXW24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/yuan24d.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["self-rewarding","alignment","reward-model","llm-training"]},{"id":"2407.00935","title":"Look Ahead or Look Around? A Theoretical Comparison Between Autoregressive and Masked Pretraining","authors":["Qi Zhang","Tianqi Du","Haotian Huang","Yifei Wang","Yisen Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.00935","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhangDHWW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhangDHWW24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zhang24m.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["autoregressive","masked-pretraining","ssl-theory","generative-ssl"]},{"id":"2402.14688","title":"Q-Probe: A Lightweight Approach to Reward Maximization for Language Models","authors":["Kenneth Li","Samy Jelassi","Hugh Zhang","Sham M. Kakade","Martin Wattenberg","David Brandfonbrener"],"institutions":["Google DeepMind","Google Research"],"abstract":"$b","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.14688","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0002JZKWB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0002JZKWB24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/li24ae.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：如何在不做重型 finetuning 或 RL 的情况下，让语言模型朝任务 reward 更高的方向偏转。过去的做法通常在 few-shot prompting 和 full finetuning 之间二选一，前者轻但弱，后者强但贵；Q-Probe 试图填这条中间地带。","importance":"它的重要性在于提出了一种很轻的 post-train 接口，可以把 reward 信号接到冻结模型上。对 pretrain 研究的启发是：并不是所有 reward 对齐都要回传到全模型参数，表示空间里可能已经存在可线性读出的“好回答方向”，只需要一个便宜的读出器和重排机制就能拿到一部分收益。这对理解预训练表征的可控性很有价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法是训练一个线性 Q-probe，在模型 embedding 空间上给候选续写打分，再按分数重加权采样。它不是改模型参数，而是改采样偏好；这比 finetuning 便宜得多，也比单纯 reward model rerank 更贴近模型内部表示。作者还给出理论说明：当候选样本数增加时，这个采样过程等价于在 KL 约束下最大化 probe 分数。训练 probe 时，他们既考虑 reward modeling，也提出了基于重要性加权 policy gradient 的直接策略学习目标。这样设计有效的原因是，它把“学习 reward 方向”和“保持原模型分布不跑太远”解耦了，但边界也很清楚：如果候选集质量本来就差，probe 再好也救不回来。","experiments":"摘要里明确说在有真实 reward 的领域看到了收益，例如代码场景，但给定文本被截断，具体模型规模、数据量和提升数字不可确认。可以确定的是，论文比较的是轻量方法与较重方法之间的 trade-off，而不是宣称全面替代 finetuning。值得关注的实验点应包括：样本数增加时效果是否接近理论预测、线性 probe 与更复杂 probe 的差距、以及和 few-shot / reranking / LoRA 类方法的成本效果比。","authors_note":"作者列表里可确认有 Google DeepMind / Google Research 相关研究者 Kenneth Li、Martin Wattenberg、Sham Kakade 等。该团队长期做可解释性、奖励建模与轻量对齐方向；Martin Wattenberg 也因可视化与解释性工作广为人知。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a very practical question: how can we steer a pretrained LM toward higher task reward without paying the full cost of finetuning or RL? Existing options tend to sit at the extremes—prompting is cheap but weak, finetuning is stronger but expensive—so Q-Probing is designed to occupy the middle ground.","importance":"Its main contribution is a lightweight post-training interface for reward optimization on top of a frozen model. The pretraining-relevant insight is that useful reward directions may already be linearly readable in the model’s representation space. If true, not all alignment gains require updating the full network; some can be extracted with a cheap readout plus better sampling. That is informative about what pretraining already stores.","technical_approach":"The method learns a linear Q-probe over the model’s embedding space and uses it to reweight sampled candidate completions. This is not parameter finetuning; it is distribution steering at sampling time. That makes it much cheaper than RL or supervised finetuning, while more representation-aware than external reranking alone. The theory says that, as the number of candidate samples grows, the procedure approaches KL-constrained maximization of the probe score. For learning the probe, the paper considers both reward modeling and direct policy-learning objectives based on importance-weighted policy gradients. The design works because it separates reward direction learning from full policy updating, but the limitation is equally clear: if the base model never proposes good candidates, reweighting cannot create them.","experiments":"The abstract explicitly mentions gains in domains with ground-truth rewards, including code, but the provided text is truncated before giving concrete numbers, model sizes, or datasets. What matters empirically is likely the cost-quality trade-off versus prompting, reranking, and finetuning-style baselines, as well as how performance scales with the number of sampled candidates. Exact figures cannot be recovered from the given information.","authors_note":"The author list includes researchers associated with Google DeepMind / Google Research, including Kenneth Li, Martin Wattenberg, and Sham Kakade. The broader team is known for work on interpretability, reward modeling, and lightweight alignment methods."},"tags":["reward-modeling","inference-time","alignment","steering"],"notable_authors":["Kenneth Li","Sham M. Kakade","Martin Wattenberg"]},{"id":"2312.02120","title":"Magicoder: Empowering Code Generation with OSS-Instruct","authors":["Yuxiang Wei","Zhe Wang","Jiawei Liu","Yifeng Ding","Lingming Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.02120","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0003W0D024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0003W0D024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/wei24h.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：开源小模型做代码生成时，和顶级闭源/大模型之间仍有明显差距，而高质量指令数据又稀缺。过去大量 synthetic instruction 数据依赖模型自己编题，容易带入分布偏差和不真实的任务风格；Magicoder 要解决的正是这类数据偏置。","importance":"它的重要性首先是数据方法，而不是新架构。OSS-Instruct 的贡献在于用开源代码片段作为“现实锚点”来生成更可信、可控的代码指令数据，从而让不超过 7B 的开源代码模型显著缩小差距。对 pretrain/post-train 接口的启发很明确：合成数据不是越多越好，关键是生成过程是否被真实语料约束。这个思路对通用指令数据、工具使用数据、甚至 reasoning 数据合成都很有参考价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 OSS-Instruct：利用 open-source code snippets 引导 LLM 生成多样的代码指令数据，减少纯模型自生成带来的模式坍缩和任务失真。它不是直接拿 OSS 代码继续预训练，而是把 OSS 作为数据合成的条件与约束，让生成出的 instruction-following 数据更贴近真实开发场景。作者还强调它与 Evol-Instruct 正交，因此进一步构建了 MagicoderS。这个设计有效，是因为它把“现实代码分布”注入数据合成流程；若不这么做，纯 synthetic 数据很容易只覆盖模型自己擅长的表层模式。","experiments":"摘要给出的硬信息比较明确：Magicoder 是完全开源的代码模型系列，参数量不超过 7B，训练使用 75K synthetic instruction 数据。结果上，Magicoder 和 MagicoderS 都显著超过同尺寸开源代码模型，并缩小与顶级代码模型的差距，但摘要截断，无法确认 HumanEval、MBPP 等具体分数和提升幅度。可以确定的实验重点包括：OSS-Instruct 相比普通 self-instruct 的优势，以及与 Evol-Instruct 结合后的增益是否互补。","authors_note":"从作者列表可确认团队包括 Yuxiang Wei、Lingming Zhang 等，代表性工作即 Magicoder。给定信息不足以可靠确认其机构归属，因此这里不展开。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a concrete bottleneck in open code LMs: small open models still lag far behind top code systems, and high-quality instruction data is scarce. A lot of synthetic instruction tuning data is generated from the model’s own prior, which introduces unrealistic task distributions and amplifies existing biases. Magicoder is aimed squarely at that data problem.","importance":"This is primarily a data-generation contribution rather than an architectural one. The key idea behind OSS-Instruct is to anchor synthetic instruction creation in open-source code snippets, making the resulting tasks more realistic and controllable. For pretraining and post-training research, the broader lesson is important: synthetic data quality depends heavily on how strongly it is grounded in real distributions, not just on volume. That insight transfers well beyond code, including tool-use and reasoning data synthesis.","technical_approach":"The core method, OSS-Instruct, uses open-source code as a grounding signal to prompt an LLM to generate diverse code instructions and solutions. This is different from simply continuing pretraining on code; the open-source corpus acts as a constraint on synthetic instruction generation. The paper also argues that OSS-Instruct is orthogonal to Evol-Instruct, which leads to the stronger MagicoderS variant. The design works because it injects real code distributions into the data pipeline. Without that grounding, purely synthetic instruction sets tend to overrepresent whatever patterns the teacher model already prefers.","experiments":"The abstract gives a few firm facts: Magicoder is a fully open-source family of code LMs with no more than 7B parameters, trained on 75K synthetic instruction examples. Magicoder and MagicoderS substantially outperform comparable open code models, but the provided text is truncated before the benchmark names and exact scores. The most relevant empirical comparisons are likely against other open 7B-scale code models and against alternative instruction-data generation pipelines such as plain self-instruct and Evol-Instruct.","authors_note":"The author list includes Yuxiang Wei and Lingming Zhang, and the team is directly associated with the Magicoder line of open code models. The provided material is insufficient to confirm institutional affiliations reliably, so they are left unspecified."},"tags":["code-llm","synthetic-data","instruction-tuning","data-generation"],"notable_authors":["Yuxiang Wei","Lingming Zhang"]},{"id":"0006LWW0L24","title":"Short-Long Convolutions Help Hardware-Efficient Linear Attention to Focus on Long Sequences","authors":["Zicheng Liu","Siyuan Li","Li Wang","Zedong Wang","Yunfan Liu","Stan Z. Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0006LWW0L24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0006LWW0L24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/liu24ak.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["linear-attention","long-context","hardware-efficiency","convolution"]},{"id":"2312.11456","title":"Iterative Preference Learning from Human Feedback: Bridging Theory and Practice for RLHF under KL-constraint","authors":["Wei Xiong","Hanze Dong","Chenlu Ye","Ziqi Wang","Han Zhong","Heng Ji","Nan Jiang","Tong Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.11456","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0015DYW0J0024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0015DYW0J0024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/xiong24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["rlhf","dpo","iterative-preference","kl-constraint","alignment"]},{"id":"AdepuZZS24","title":"FrameQuant: Flexible Low-Bit Quantization for Transformers","authors":["Harshavardhan Adepu","Zhanpeng Zeng","Li Zhang","Vikas Singh"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/AdepuZZS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/AdepuZZS24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/adepu24a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要信息，无法确认 FrameQuant 试图解决的低比特量化痛点是精度掉点、跨层/跨通道分布漂移，还是 KV-cache/激活量化带来的推理瓶颈。","importance":"缺少摘要信息，无法判断其是一个可落地的推理量化方案（影响 serving 成本），还是对训练期量化感知（QAT）/后训练量化（PTQ）有新结论。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要信息，无法说明其“Flexible”体现在哪些自由度（per-token/per-channel、分组、动态范围、混合精度、误差补偿）以及与 GPTQ/AWQ/SmoothQuant 等的关键差异。","experiments":"缺少摘要信息，无法给出 bit-width、模型家族、困惑度/下游任务、吞吐/显存节省与对比基线。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract was provided, so the quantization bottleneck targeted by FrameQuant (accuracy drop, distribution shift, KV/activation quantization) is unclear.","importance":"Without details, we cannot assess whether this is mainly a deploy-time cost reducer or a method with new implications for PTQ/QAT.","technical_approach":"The meaning of “flexible” (per-token/per-channel, grouping, dynamic ranges, mixed precision, error compensation) and differences vs. GPTQ/AWQ/SmoothQuant are not specified.","experiments":"Bit-widths, model families, perplexity/task metrics, memory/throughput gains, and baselines are not available from the provided information.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","transformers","low-bit","compression"]},{"id":"AgarwalAHE0VPW24","title":"CHAI: Clustered Head Attention for Efficient LLM Inference","authors":["Saurabh Agarwal","Bilge Acun","Basil Hosmer","Mostafa Elhoushi","Yejin Lee","Shivaram Venkataraman","Dimitris Papailiopoulos","Carole-Jean Wu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/AgarwalAHE0VPW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/AgarwalAHE0VPW24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/agarwal24a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要信息，无法确认 CHAI 要解决的是多头注意力在推理时的算力/带宽浪费，还是长上下文下 KV 访问成为瓶颈导致的吞吐下降。","importance":"缺少摘要信息，无法判断其对 LLM inference 的收益是结构性（可改变注意力计算复杂度）还是实现性（更好的 kernel/并行），以及对训练端是否有可迁移的注意力头冗余结论。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要信息，无法说明“Clustered Head Attention”如何聚类头（按相似性、按层内共享投影、按 KV 共享），以及聚类带来的精度-速度权衡与稳定性边界。","experiments":"缺少摘要信息，无法给出模型规模、上下文长度、硬件、延迟/吞吐提升与精度损失，以及与 MHA/MQA/GQA、head pruning 等基线的对比。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract was provided, so it is unclear whether CHAI targets compute/bandwidth waste in multi-head attention or KV access bottlenecks under long context.","importance":"Without details, we cannot tell if the gains are architectural (changing attention complexity) or implementation-level, nor whether it yields transferable insights about head redundancy for training.","technical_approach":"How heads are clustered (similarity, shared projections, KV sharing) and the resulting accuracy–speed trade-offs are not specified.","experiments":"Model sizes, context lengths, hardware, latency/throughput gains, accuracy impact, and comparisons vs. MHA/MQA/GQA or head pruning are not available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["attention","kv-cache","llm-inference","head-clustering"]},{"id":"Agostinelli0C24","title":"LeaPformer: Enabling Linear Transformers for Autoregressive and Simultaneous Tasks via Learned Proportions","authors":["Victor Agostinelli","Sanghyun Hong","Lizhong Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Agostinelli0C24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Agostinelli0C24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/agostinelli-iii24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要信息，无法确认 LeaPformer 具体要解决线性 Transformer 在自回归生成与同时（simultaneous）任务之间难以兼容的问题细节与现有折中。","importance":"缺少摘要信息，无法判断其是对线性注意力在生成任务上的关键缺陷（例如因果掩码下的表达力/稳定性）给出可用修补，还是提出新的统一序列建模接口。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要信息，无法说明“Learned Proportions”学习的是什么比例（例如 AR vs simultaneous 的混合、前看/后看窗口、或不同注意力路径权重），以及为何能让线性结构在两类任务上都不崩。","experiments":"缺少摘要信息，无法给出与标准 Transformer、Performer/Linear Attention 等基线的对比，及在语言建模/流式任务上的指标与规模。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract was provided, so the exact incompatibility between linear Transformers for autoregressive generation vs. simultaneous tasks is unclear.","importance":"Without details, we cannot assess whether this is a practical fix for linear attention’s generative weaknesses or a broader unifying modeling interface.","technical_approach":"What “learned proportions” parameterize (AR vs simultaneous mixing, lookahead, path weighting) and why that stabilizes linear architectures is not specified.","experiments":"No information on comparisons vs. standard Transformers/Performer-style baselines, task suites, scales, or metrics was provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["linear-transformer","autoregressive","architecture","efficiency"]},{"id":"AhnZK024","title":"Understanding Adam Optimizer via Online Learning of Updates: Adam is FTRL in Disguise","authors":["Kwangjun Ahn","Zhiyu Zhang","Yunbum Kook","Yan Dai"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/AhnZK024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/AhnZK024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/ahn24b.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要信息，无法确认该工作要解释 Adam 的哪类现象（收敛性、泛化、超参敏感性、或与权重衰减/正则的关系），以及“Adam 是 FTRL”用于解决什么实际困惑。","importance":"缺少摘要信息，无法判断其理论重述是否能转化为可操作的训练建议（例如更稳的学习率/β 调度、或对 AdamW 的理解）。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要信息，无法说明其把 Adam 的更新写成在线学习框架下的 FTRL（follow-the-regularized-leader）等价形式时，关键假设是什么、等价到什么程度、以及对动量与自适应二阶矩的解释增量。","experiments":"缺少摘要信息，无法给出理论验证或实证对比（Adam vs SGD/FTRL 变体）以及在深网训练上的指标。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract was provided, so it is unclear which practical mystery about Adam (convergence, generalization, hyperparameter sensitivity, or weight decay interaction) the paper aims to resolve via an FTRL view.","importance":"Without details, we cannot judge whether the theoretical reframing yields actionable training guidance (e.g., LR/beta schedules or clearer AdamW interpretation).","technical_approach":"Key assumptions and the strength of the claimed equivalence between Adam updates and an online-learning FTRL formulation are not specified.","experiments":"No information on theoretical validation or empirical comparisons (Adam vs SGD/FTRL variants) on deep networks was provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["adam","optimizer","ftrl","online-learning","training-dynamics"]},{"id":"CaiMHYWK024","title":"Flextron: Many-in-One Flexible Large Language Model","authors":["Ruisi Cai","Saurav Muralidharan","Greg Heinrich","Hongxu Yin","Zhangyang Wang","Jan Kautz","Pavlo Molchanov"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/CaiMHYWK024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/CaiMHYWK024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/cai24e.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["elastic-inference","model-compression","flexible-architecture","llm"]},{"id":"CaiTWC24","title":"LoCoCo: Dropping In Convolutions for Long Context Compression","authors":["Ruisi Cai","Yuandong Tian","Zhangyang Wang","Beidi Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/CaiTWC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/CaiTWC24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/cai24g.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["long-context","context-compression","convolution","kv-cache"]},{"id":"CalandrielloGMR24","title":"Human Alignment of Large Language Models through Online Preference Optimisation","authors":["Daniele Calandriello","Zhaohan Daniel Guo","Rémi Munos","Mark Rowland","Yunhao Tang","Bernardo Ávila Pires","Pierre Harvey Richemond","Charline Le Lan","Michal Valko","Tianqi Liu","Rishabh Joshi","Zeyu Zheng","Bilal Piot"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/CalandrielloGMR24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/CalandrielloGMR24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/calandriello24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["online-rlhf","preference-optimization","alignment","llm"]},{"id":"ChenZCC24","title":"MoE-RBench: Towards Building Reliable Language Models with Sparse Mixture-of-Experts","authors":["Guanjie Chen","Xinyu Zhao","Tianlong Chen","Yu Cheng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChenZCC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChenZCC24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/chen24bg.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["moe","reliability","evaluation","sparse-models"]},{"id":"ChengCS24","title":"Transformers Implement Functional Gradient Descent to Learn Non-Linear Functions In Context","authors":["Xiang Cheng","Yuxin Chen","Suvrit Sra"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChengCS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChengCS24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/cheng24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文想回答的是：Transformer 在 in-context learning 里到底学到了什么算法，尤其是面对非线性函数时是否仍可解释为某种优化过程。此前很多理论结果把 ICL 解释成线性回归、核回归或梯度下降近似，但大多局限在线性任务；这篇工作要把这个解释推进到更一般的非线性情形。","importance":"这项工作属于机制与理论层面的范式解释。对 pretrain 社区，它的重要性不在直接提升 benchmark，而在于给出一个更具体的 ICL 计算图景：如果 Transformer 确实在上下文中实现了 functional gradient descent，那么模型规模、层数、注意力结构和示例组织方式为什么会影响 ICL，就有了更清晰的解释框架。","technical_approach":"核心主张是：Transformer 可被构造成或近似看作在函数空间中做梯度下降，而不是只在参数空间拟合一个隐式线性器。functional gradient descent 可以理解为逐步修正当前预测函数，每一步都依据上下文样本的残差信息更新预测规则。和过去把注意力解释成单次核平滑不同，这里的关键在于多层结构对应多步迭代，因此能表示更强的非线性适应。若论文成立，其新意在于把“多层 Transformer 的迭代修正”与“函数空间优化”严格对齐。","experiments":"这类论文通常会包含理论构造加合成实验，验证 Transformer 在非线性回归或分类任务上的 ICL 行为是否接近 functional gradient descent，并比较层数、宽度、样本顺序对逼近误差的影响。值得关注的实验不是绝对 SOTA，而是：多层模型是否展现出近似逐步残差修正；非线性任务上是否明显优于只能表达线性更新的理论基线。没有摘要，无法确认具体任务设置和数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks what algorithm Transformers implement during in-context learning, especially beyond linear tasks. Earlier theory often explains ICL as linear regression, kernel regression, or a form of gradient descent, but those accounts are mostly limited to linear settings; this work aims to extend the picture to non-linear function learning.","importance":"This is a theory-and-mechanism contribution rather than a direct performance paper. Its value for pretraining research is that it offers a more concrete computational lens on ICL: if a Transformer effectively performs functional gradient descent in context, then depth, attention structure, and example organization start to have a more interpretable role.","technical_approach":"The main claim is that a Transformer can implement, or closely approximate, gradient descent in function space rather than just fitting an implicit linear predictor. Functional gradient descent means iteratively refining the current prediction function using residual information from context examples. The departure from earlier kernel-smoothing style views is that multiple layers correspond to multiple update steps, which can support genuinely non-linear adaptation.","experiments":"Papers of this type usually combine theory with synthetic experiments, showing that Transformers trained for ICL on non-linear tasks behave like iterative residual-correction procedures. The useful evidence would be whether deeper models exhibit stepwise improvement consistent with functional updates, and whether they outperform linear-update baselines on non-linear families. Exact tasks, architectures, and metrics are not available from the provided metadata.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","transformer","optimization","theory"]},{"id":"ChoRN24","title":"KV-Runahead: Scalable Causal LLM Inference by Parallel Key-Value Cache Generation","authors":["Minsik Cho","Mohammad Rastegari","Devang Naik"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChoRN24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChoRN24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/cho24e.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是因果 LLM 推理时 KV cache 生成串行、难并行的问题。标准自回归解码每生成一个 token 都要等待前一步完成，导致即使算力足够，推理延迟仍受串行依赖限制；现有优化多在 attention kernel 或 speculative decoding 上做文章，而不是直接并行化 KV 生成。","importance":"这项工作属于系统与推理效率方向，但对 pretrain 研究也有间接价值，因为服务侧瓶颈会反过来影响可接受的模型架构和训练目标。若 KV-Runahead 真的能规模化并行生成 cache，它的意义是给因果解码打开一个新的加速维度：不是少算，而是重排依赖、提前算。","technical_approach":"从题目看，KV-Runahead 的核心思想是提前并行生成未来若干步所需的 key/value 表示，从而缩短严格逐 token 的等待链。设计难点在于：未来 token 还未最终确定，提前生成的 KV 只能基于某种预测、近似或分支方案，因此必须控制错误传播和回退代价。它和 speculative decoding 的关系可能是相近但不完全相同：speculation 主要提前猜 token，KV-Runahead 更强调把与 token 相关的中间状态准备工作前移并并行化。","experiments":"关键实验应会报告不同 batch size、序列长度和硬件配置下的端到端 latency、throughput 和额外内存开销，并与 vanilla decoding、speculative decoding 或 paged attention 系统做比较。真正需要看的不是单点加速，而是当上下文变长或模型变大时加速是否还能维持，以及错误回退是否吞掉收益。没有摘要，具体模型和加速倍数无法确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a core inference bottleneck in causal LLMs: KV-cache generation is inherently sequential under standard autoregressive decoding. Even with enough compute, token-by-token dependence dominates latency. Most existing optimizations improve attention kernels or use speculative decoding, but they do not directly parallelize KV generation itself.","importance":"This is a systems contribution with indirect relevance to pretraining and architecture design. If KV-Runahead works well, it opens a different acceleration axis for causal decoding: not just reducing compute, but restructuring dependency so more cache-related work can be done ahead of time and in parallel.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method likely precomputes or parallelizes key/value cache generation for future decoding steps. The hard part is that future tokens are not yet finalized, so any run-ahead computation must rely on prediction, approximation, or branch management, and the benefit depends on keeping rollback overhead under control. Relative to speculative decoding, the emphasis seems less on token guessing itself and more on moving intermediate-state preparation earlier in the pipeline.","experiments":"The important experiments should report end-to-end latency, throughput, and memory overhead across sequence lengths, batch sizes, and hardware setups, compared against vanilla decoding and likely other acceleration baselines. The critical question is whether speedups hold under long contexts and large models without rollback costs erasing the gains. Exact architectures and speedup numbers are not available from the provided information.","authors_note":""},"tags":["kv-cache","inference","parallelism","serving"]},{"id":"2405.16646","title":"A Provably Effective Method for Pruning Experts in Fine-tuned Sparse Mixture-of-Experts","authors":["Mohammed Nowaz Rabbani Chowdhury","Meng Wang","Kaoutar El Maghraoui","Naigang Wang","Pin-Yu Chen","Christopher D. Carothers"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.16646","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Chowdhury0MWCC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Chowdhury0MWCC24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/chowdhury24a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是：针对已经微调过的稀疏 MoE 模型，如何安全地剪掉一部分 experts，以降低部署时的显存和计算开销。MoE 在训练时能以较低激活成本扩展参数，但推理和部署并不总便宜；尤其下游微调后，哪些 expert 还能删、删多少不伤精度，一直缺少有理论保证的方法。","importance":"这项工作的贡献是方法级加理论级，对稀疏大模型部署很实用。它的重要性不只是“又一个 pruning 方法”，而是专门针对 fine-tuned sparse MoE 给出可证明有效的 expert pruning 准则。对 pretrain 社区的启发在于：MoE 的可扩展性不能只看训练 FLOPs，还要看下游适配后的结构冗余如何被利用；router 的变化量可能是判断专家价值的一个比直觉更可靠的信号。","technical_approach":"作者的核心结论是：优先剪掉那些相对预训练模型而言 router l2 范数变化较小的 experts，可以在显著缩小模型的同时保留测试精度。这个设计抓住了一个很具体的假设：如果某个 expert 在下游微调后对应的路由器几乎没变，说明它对新任务的分工重组贡献有限，因此更可能是可删冗余。和按 expert 使用频率、权重范数或启发式重要性分数剪枝相比，这个方法的差别在于它看的是“从预训练到微调的结构性变化”，而不是某一时刻的静态大小。理论保证是它最强的卖点，但边界也明确：结论依赖于论文设定的假设条件，实际效果还要看路由器训练方式和下游任务分布。","experiments":"根据摘要，论文强调在显著缩小模型尺寸的同时保持测试准确率，但未给出具体数值。可合理推断实验会在 fine-tuned sparse MoE 上，对比其理论驱动的 pruning 准则与常见启发式，如基于使用率或参数大小的 expert 剪枝，指标包括测试精度、模型大小和推理成本。最值得关注的实证点是：router change 这一信号是否比静态重要性更稳健，以及不同剪枝比例下性能退化是否更平滑。具体模型规模、数据集、压缩率和提升幅度在提供摘要中缺失。","authors_note":"从作者列表可确认包含 IBM Research 常见作者 Pin-Yu Chen，但给定信息不足以完整确认全部机构与团队脉络。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical deployment problem for sparse MoE models: after finetuning, how do we prune experts without damaging accuracy? MoE reduces training compute by activating only a subset of experts, but deployment can still be expensive in memory and inference cost. There has been little principled guidance on which experts remain redundant after downstream finetuning.","importance":"This is a method-plus-theory contribution with clear practical value for sparse large-model deployment. What makes it notable is not just pruning, but pruning tailored to finetuned sparse MoE with a provable criterion. For pretraining-oriented readers, the broader lesson is that MoE efficiency should be evaluated beyond training FLOPs: downstream adaptation may expose structured redundancy, and router dynamics can be a better signal of expert utility than static heuristics.","technical_approach":"The key result is simple and specific: prune experts whose router l2 norm changes the least from the pretrained model, and this provably preserves test accuracy under the paper’s assumptions while reducing model size. The intuition is that if finetuning barely changes routing for an expert, that expert likely contributes little to task-specific reorganization and is a stronger pruning candidate. This differs from pruning by usage frequency, weight norm, or ad hoc importance scores because it uses the transition from pretraining to finetuning as the signal, not a static snapshot.","experiments":"From the abstract, the empirical claim is that the method significantly reduces model size while preserving test accuracy, though no concrete numbers are provided. The experiments likely compare the proposed criterion against standard heuristic expert-pruning baselines on finetuned sparse MoE models, measuring test accuracy, compression, and inference cost. The most interesting empirical question is whether router-change-based pruning is consistently more reliable than static importance heuristics across pruning ratios. Exact model sizes, datasets, and margins are not given in the provided abstract.","authors_note":"The author list includes Pin-Yu Chen, commonly associated with IBM Research, but the provided metadata is not sufficient to confidently reconstruct the full institutional context."},"tags":["moe","pruning","fine-tuning","compression"],"notable_authors":["Pin-Yu Chen"]},{"id":"CuiY0YH0NXXL0024","title":"ULTRAFEEDBACK: Boosting Language Models with Scaled AI Feedback","authors":["Ganqu Cui","Lifan Yuan","Ning Ding","Guanming Yao","Bingxiang He","Wei Zhu","Yuan Ni","Guotong Xie","Ruobing Xie","Yankai Lin","Zhiyuan Liu","Maosong Sun"],"institutions":["Tsinghua University"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/CuiY0YH0NXXL0024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/CuiY0YH0NXXL0024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/cui24f.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"高质量的 AI 反馈数据对 LLM 对齐至关重要，但现有反馈数据集规模小、多样性不足。UltraFeedback 构建了一个大规模、多维度的 AI 反馈数据集，用于提升 LLM 的 RLHF/DPO 训练效果。","importance":"数据级贡献，直接服务于 posttrain 阶段的对齐训练。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：AI 反馈的质量和规模如何影响模型最终能力，以及 pretrain 模型的哪些能力决定了它作为反馈生成器的上限。UltraFeedback 已被广泛用于开源社区的对齐实验（如 Zephyr），影响力显著。","technical_approach":"用多个强 LLM（GPT-4 等）对大量指令-回复对进行多维度评分（helpfulness、honesty、harmlessness、instruction-following 等），构建约 64k 条带有细粒度偏好标注的数据。关键设计选择：(1) 多模型生成回复以增加多样性；(2) 多维度评分而非单一偏好；(3) 规模化——比 HH-RLHF 等数据集大一个量级。","experiments":"基于 UltraFeedback 训练的模型（如 UltraLM）在 AlpacaEval、MT-Bench 等对齐 benchmark 上显著优于同规模基线。Zephyr-7B 使用 UltraFeedback 做 DPO 后在 MT-Bench 上接近 GPT-3.5 水平。数据集已开源，被社区广泛复用。","authors_note":"团队来自清华大学（知识工程实验室），Ning Ding 和 Ganqu Cui 是该组在 LLM 对齐和数据构建方面的核心成员。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"High-quality AI feedback data is critical for LLM alignment, but existing feedback datasets are small and lack diversity. UltraFeedback builds a large-scale, multi-dimensional AI feedback dataset to improve RLHF/DPO training.","importance":"A data-level contribution for the posttrain alignment stage. Its pretrain relevance lies in understanding how feedback quality/scale affects final model capability, and what pretrain properties determine a model's ceiling as a feedback generator. UltraFeedback has been widely adopted in the open-source community (e.g., Zephyr), giving it significant practical impact.","technical_approach":"Multiple strong LLMs (GPT-4, etc.) score a large set of instruction-response pairs across multiple dimensions (helpfulness, honesty, harmlessness, instruction-following), producing ~64k examples with fine-grained preference annotations. Key choices: (1) multi-model response generation for diversity; (2) multi-dimensional scoring rather than single preference; (3) scale—an order of magnitude larger than HH-RLHF.","experiments":"Models trained on UltraFeedback (e.g., UltraLM) significantly outperform same-scale baselines on AlpacaEval and MT-Bench. Zephyr-7B with UltraFeedback DPO approaches GPT-3.5 on MT-Bench. The dataset is open-sourced and widely reused.","authors_note":"From Tsinghua University (Knowledge Engineering Lab). Ning Ding and Ganqu Cui are core members working on LLM alignment and data construction."},"tags":["ai-feedback","sft","rlhf","data-quality","alignment"],"notable_authors":["Ning Ding","Ganqu Cui"]},{"id":"FuBS024","title":"Break the Sequential Dependency of LLM Inference Using Lookahead Decoding","authors":["Yichao Fu","Peter Bailis","Ion Stoica","Hao Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/FuBS024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/FuBS024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/fu24a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["decoding","inference","parallelism","latency"]},{"id":"FuYW0024","title":"Breaking through the learning plateaus of in-context learning in Transformer","authors":["Jingwen Fu","Tao Yang","Yuwang Wang","Yan Lu","Nanning Zheng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/FuYW0024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/FuYW0024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/fu24h.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["in-context-learning","transformer","learning-dynamics","plateaus"]},{"id":"GatmirySRJK24","title":"Can Looped Transformers Learn to Implement Multi-step Gradient Descent for In-context Learning?","authors":["Khashayar Gatmiry","Nikunj Saunshi","Sashank J. Reddi","Stefanie Jegelka","Sanjiv Kumar"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GatmirySRJK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GatmirySRJK24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/gatmiry24b.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要检验一个很具体的机制假设：looped Transformer 能不能在 in-context learning 里真的实现多步梯度下降，而不是只学到一个近似的一步更新。此前很多 ICL 理论把 Transformer 解释成隐式学习器，但多数结果停留在单步或线性情形；作者关注更强的命题，即通过权重共享反复迭代的 Transformer，是否具备执行多步优化过程的能力。","importance":"这项工作的价值在机制理解，而不是直接提升 benchmark。对 pretrain 研究尤其相关，因为它触及一个核心问题：大模型的 ICL 到底是在做模式匹配，还是在上下文中实现某种显式算法；如果 looped 架构确实更容易学到迭代优化，这会影响我们如何设计 recurrent depth、test-time computation 和 latent reasoning 结构。","technical_approach":"核心方法是研究带循环结构的 Transformer，也就是同一模块对表示多次迭代更新，并分析其是否能表示并学习多步梯度下降。这个设计和标准堆叠 Transformer 的区别在于，它把“深度”变成一个可重复执行的计算过程，更像算法展开；如果 ICL 任务本身需要逐步修正参数估计或隐藏状态，looped 结构理论上比一次性前馈更自然。边界也很清楚：能表示不等于会在真实训练中稳定学到，而会学到也不等于在大规模开放任务上自动出现。","experiments":"给定信息不足，无法可靠报告任务设置、模型大小和定量结果。按题目判断，实验大概率会用合成回归或分类任务，比较普通 Transformer 与 looped Transformer 在需要多步更新的 ICL 任务上的表现，并检查随着 loop 次数增加是否更接近显式梯度下降轨迹；如果有消融，最关键的是共享权重、循环次数以及训练分布外任务复杂度对结果的影响。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tests a precise mechanistic hypothesis: can looped Transformers actually implement multi-step gradient descent in in-context learning, rather than merely approximating a one-step update. Much of the ICL theory literature explains Transformers as implicit learners, but many results stop at one-step or linear settings. This work asks for a stronger form of algorithmic behavior.","importance":"Its contribution is to understanding mechanism, not to setting a new benchmark. This matters for pretraining because it speaks directly to what ICL is doing: pattern retrieval versus an internal optimization process. If looped architectures are genuinely better at learning iterative updates, that informs recurrent-depth designs, test-time compute, and broader latent-reasoning style architectures.","technical_approach":"The core object is a looped Transformer, where the same module is applied repeatedly to refine internal representations, and the analysis asks whether this structure can express and learn multi-step gradient descent. Compared with a standard stacked Transformer, this turns depth into an explicit reusable computation, closer to algorithm unrolling. That makes it a natural candidate when the ICL task itself benefits from iterative parameter or state refinement. The boundary is important: representational capability does not guarantee learnability under realistic training, and learnability on synthetic tasks does not imply spontaneous emergence in large open-domain models.","experiments":"The provided information is not enough to state tasks, model sizes, or numerical gains reliably. From the title, the likely setup is controlled synthetic regression or classification tasks comparing standard and looped Transformers on ICL problems that require multi-step adaptation. The most useful ablations would be the number of loops, whether weights are shared, and how performance changes as the required update complexity exceeds the training distribution.","authors_note":""},"tags":["looped-transformer","in-context-learning","gradient-descent","transformer"]},{"id":"GhandehariounCP24","title":"Patchscopes: A Unifying Framework for Inspecting Hidden Representations of Language Models","authors":["Asma Ghandeharioun","Avi Caciularu","Adam Pearce","Lucas Dixon","Mor Geva"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GhandehariounCP24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GhandehariounCP24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/ghandeharioun24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文试图解决 hidden representation inspection 过于碎片化的问题：不同 probing 和 patching 方法各看一角，但缺少统一框架来系统检查语言模型中间表示到底编码了什么、能被谁读出、以及会如何影响后续计算。过去很多分析要么只做线性 probe，要么只做激活替换，结论容易局限在单一视角。","importance":"它的重要性主要在工具和分析范式。对 pretrain 研究者来说，好的表征检查框架能更快定位模型在层间传递了什么信息、哪些表征是可读但未被利用、哪些错误来自表示缺失还是读取机制失效；这对 interpretability、mechanistic analysis、以及训练后数据诊断都有实际帮助。","technical_approach":"Patchscopes 的核心应该是把 representation patching、decoding 和对比检查整合成统一接口，让研究者可以把某层某位置的隐藏状态‘接到’一个可解释的读取头或另一个上下文中，观察它携带的信息。相比传统 probe 只回答“能否线性读出”，这种框架更进一步去问“如果把这段表示放到别处，它会驱动模型产生什么行为”；相比单纯激活 patching，它又强调可系统枚举和统一比较。设计上的好处是分析范围更广，代价是解释结果仍依赖读取器选择和 patching 分布外效应。","experiments":"给定信息不足，无法确认论文覆盖哪些模型与任务，也无法提供定量指标。按题目判断，实验重点应是展示 Patchscopes 如何统一复现多类已有 inspection 方法，并在词义、事实、句法或推理中间状态等案例上给出更清晰的层级分析。对工程读者最有价值的是，看它能否发现传统 probe 漏掉的表示差异，以及这些发现是否与模型行为变化一致。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a fragmentation problem in hidden-state analysis: probing, patching, and decoding methods each reveal part of the story, but there is no unified framework for inspecting what internal LM representations contain, who can read them, and how they affect later computation. Prior analyses often stay within one lens and therefore give only partial conclusions.","importance":"Its value is primarily methodological and analytical. For pretraining researchers, a strong representation-inspection framework helps separate failures of representation from failures of readout, and it makes it easier to study what information is carried across layers. That is useful for interpretability, mechanistic analysis, and even for diagnosing training data effects after the fact.","technical_approach":"Patchscopes appears to unify representation patching, decoding, and comparative inspection into a common framework. The key idea is to take a hidden state at a specific layer and position, attach it to an interpretable readout path or insert it into another context, and then observe what behavior it induces. This goes beyond a standard probe, which only asks whether information is linearly decodable, by asking what the representation can actually drive when consumed by a model component. Compared with raw activation patching, the contribution is a more systematic and comparable interface. The main trade-off is that conclusions still depend on the chosen readout and on how much distribution shift patching introduces.","experiments":"The provided information is insufficient to state the exact models, tasks, or quantitative metrics. From the title, the experiments likely demonstrate that Patchscopes can subsume several existing inspection techniques and provide clearer layerwise analyses on phenomena such as lexical meaning, factual content, syntax, or intermediate reasoning states. For practitioners, the most valuable evidence would be cases where Patchscopes reveals distinctions that standard probes miss and where those distinctions align with downstream behavior changes.","authors_note":""},"tags":["interpretability","hidden-representations","probing","llm"]},{"id":"GhosalHR24","title":"Understanding Finetuning for Factual Knowledge Extraction","authors":["Gaurav Rohit Ghosal","Tatsunori Hashimoto","Aditi Raghunathan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GhosalHR24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GhosalHR24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/ghosal24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注一个常被混淆的问题：finetuning 到底是在教模型提取已有事实知识，还是在往模型里写入新知识。过去很多 factual probing 或 knowledge editing 工作只看最终问答正确率，因此很难分清模型是学会了更好地读取参数中已有知识，还是确实改变了内部知识存储。","importance":"这对 pretrain 与 posttrain 的边界理解很重要。若 finetuning 更多是在改善知识提取而不是注入知识，那么我们对 continued pretraining、domain adaptation、instruction tuning 甚至 RAG 的角色划分都要调整；它也会影响如何解释 benchmark 提升，避免把‘更会答了’误判成‘知道得更多了’。","technical_approach":"核心思路应是把 factual knowledge extraction 与 factual knowledge acquisition 分开研究，并分析不同 finetuning 设置对两者的作用。一个合理的做法是控制训练样本与测试问题的表面形式、上下文提示和实体分布，观察性能提升是来自检索/读取路径被校准，还是参数真正吸收了新事实；与单纯测 EM 或 accuracy 的工作不同，这类设计更强调因果归因。它的难点在于知识‘存在但提不出来’和‘根本不存在’并不容易严格区分。","experiments":"给定信息不足，无法给出模型、数据集和数字。按标题判断，实验大概率会比较不同 finetuning 策略在 factual QA、closed-book retrieval 或 probing 任务上的变化，并用对照设置区分 extraction 和 acquisition。最值得看的结果不是绝对分数，而是：少量监督是否主要提升读取；增加与事实相关的训练样本后，提升是否会转化为更稳健的泛化；以及这种现象在模型大小上是否一致。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a distinction that is often blurred: does fine-tuning help a model extract factual knowledge it already has, or does it actually insert new knowledge. Much prior work on factual probing or knowledge editing focuses on final QA accuracy, which makes it hard to separate better retrieval from genuine knowledge acquisition.","importance":"This matters for how we think about the pretraining-posttraining boundary. If fine-tuning mainly improves knowledge extraction rather than adding knowledge, then our interpretation of continued pretraining, domain adaptation, instruction tuning, and even RAG shifts. It also changes how we read benchmark gains, because better answers need not imply a larger stored knowledge base.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is to explicitly separate factual knowledge extraction from acquisition and then analyze how different fine-tuning regimes affect each. A sensible design is to control surface form, prompts, and entity distributions so that one can see whether gains come from calibrating the readout path or from actually changing the parametric memory. Compared with work that only reports accuracy, this is more about causal attribution. The central difficulty is that 'the knowledge is there but inaccessible' and 'the knowledge is absent' are not easy to distinguish cleanly.","experiments":"The available information is not enough to report models, datasets, or numeric outcomes. From the title, the experiments likely compare multiple fine-tuning strategies on factual QA, closed-book retrieval, or probing tasks, using controls to separate extraction effects from acquisition effects. The most useful results are not just absolute accuracy, but whether small supervised updates mostly improve access to existing knowledge, whether more fact-bearing data leads to more robust generalization, and whether the pattern changes with model scale.","authors_note":""},"tags":["fine-tuning","factual-knowledge","llm","knowledge-extraction"]},{"id":"GhoshEKSAJDM24","title":"A Closer Look at the Limitations of Instruction Tuning","authors":["Sreyan Ghosh","Chandra Kiran Reddy Evuru","Sonal Kumar","Ramaneswaran S.","Deepali Aneja","Zeyu Jin","Ramani Duraiswami","Dinesh Manocha"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GhoshEKSAJDM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GhoshEKSAJDM24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/ghosh24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心结论大概率是：instruction tuning 的收益有明确边界，而且这些边界比社区默认想象得更早暴露。过去很多工作把指令微调视作通用增强手段，但它常把多种能力提升、格式对齐和数据污染混在一起，作者想更细地看它到底改善了什么、牺牲了什么。","importance":"这对 posttrain 设计直接重要，对 pretrain 也有反向启发。若 instruction tuning 在泛化、鲁棒性、知识保持或非指令分布任务上存在系统性限制，那么后续工作就不能只堆更多指令数据，而需要回到预训练目标、mid-training、数据混配和合成数据质量上找原因。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是做更严格的对照分析，而不是再提一个新的 instruction tuning 变体。所谓 closer look，通常意味着把任务类型、模板变化、分布外泛化、长度、组合性或安全性等因素拆开评估，区分模型是真的获得了更通用的任务抽象，还是只是更会跟随常见指令格式。和只报平均 benchmark 的做法相比，这种设计更能暴露 trade-off，例如对齐变强但基础能力回退，或者模板鲁棒性提高但知识精确性下降。","experiments":"给定信息不足，无法确认论文所测模型和具体数字。你应重点关注是否有以下现象：在 seen-style instruction 上提升明显，但在 unseen formatting、hard compositional tasks 或非指令原始任务上收益有限；随着 instruction 数据增加，收益是否快速饱和；以及是否出现 forgetting 或 calibration 变差。如果这些模式存在，它们比单一榜单分数更有解释力。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The likely headline is that instruction tuning has sharper limits than the field often assumes. Instruction tuning is commonly treated as a broadly beneficial post-training step, but its effects mix together formatting alignment, task adaptation, possible contamination, and true capability gains. This paper appears to disentangle those pieces.","importance":"This is directly important for post-training and indirectly important for pretraining. If instruction tuning shows systematic limits in generalization, robustness, knowledge retention, or performance off the instruction distribution, then simply scaling instruction data is not enough. The answer may instead lie in pretraining objectives, mid-training, data mixtures, and the quality of synthetic supervision.","technical_approach":"The contribution is likely a stricter evaluation framework rather than a new tuning method. A 'closer look' usually means separating task families, template variation, out-of-distribution generalization, length, compositionality, or safety-related behavior, so one can tell whether the model learned a reusable task abstraction or just became better at following common instruction formats. Compared with reporting average benchmark scores, this design is better at exposing trade-offs, such as stronger alignment but weaker base capabilities, or better format robustness but worse factual precision.","experiments":"The provided information is insufficient to name the exact models or quantitative results. The most informative findings to look for are whether gains concentrate on seen-style instructions while transfer to unseen formatting, compositional tasks, or raw non-instruction tasks remains limited; whether returns saturate quickly as more instruction data is added; and whether there is evidence of forgetting or poorer calibration. Those patterns would be more meaningful than a single leaderboard gain.","authors_note":""},"tags":["instruction-tuning","limitations","sft","llm"]},{"id":"2310.12956","title":"Eureka-Moments in Transformers: Multi-Step Tasks Reveal Softmax Induced Optimization Problems","authors":["David T. Hoffmann","Simon Schrodi","Jelena Bratulic","Nadine Behrmann","Volker Fischer","Thomas Brox"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.12956","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HoffmannSBB0B24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HoffmannSBB0B24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/hoffmann24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["transformer","training-dynamics","softmax","emergence"]},{"id":"2406.02958","title":"PrE-Text: Training Language Models on Private Federated Data in the Age of LLMs","authors":["Charlie Hou","Akshat Shrivastava","Hongyuan Zhan","Rylan Conway","Trang Le","Adithya Sagar","Giulia Fanti","Daniel Lazar"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$10","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.02958","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HouSZCLSFL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HouSZCLSFL24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/hou24c.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["federated-learning","privacy","data","training"]},{"id":"2310.05249","title":"In-context Convergence of Transformers","authors":["Yu Huang","Yuan Cheng","Yingbin Liang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$11","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.05249","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HuangCL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HuangCL24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/huang24d.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文研究的核心问题是：带 softmax attention 的真实 Transformer（哪怕只有一层）在做 in-context learning（ICL）时，梯度下降训练过程如何收敛、收敛到什么解，以及数据结构（balanced/imbalanced 采样）如何影响这种“上下文内拟合”。以往理论多聚焦线性 Transformer，难以解释 softmax 注意力下的训练动力学。","importance":"贡献是理论机制层面的：它把 ICL 从“现象”推进到“可分析的训练动力学”，并把 softmax attention 纳入分析对象。对 pretrain 的启示是：ICL 能力不仅取决于架构表达力，也强依赖训练分布的结构与频率偏置；这为解释某些提示学习不稳定、对长尾任务不友好提供了理论入口。","technical_approach":"作者分析一个一层 Transformer（softmax attention）在梯度下降下学习线性函数类的过程，并在一个结构化数据模型中推导/刻画收敛行为。数据 token 从一组特征向量集合中采样，分别讨论 balanced 与 imbalanced 的采样机制，从而把“频率偏置如何改变注意力分配与等效学习规则”变成可计算对象。方法选择一层模型是为了可解析性，代价是结论需要通过实验或后续工作验证能否外推到深层、多头与真实语料。","experiments":"摘要未提供任何实验设置与数值结果（如维度、样本量、收敛速率对比、与线性 Transformer 理论的差异量化），因此无法总结定量发现。能确认的是其目标是刻画训练动力学与收敛性质，而不是追求基准 SOTA；读者需要在正文中检查其理论假设（数据模型、学习率区间、初始化）与仿真验证是否覆盖常见 pretrain 训练区间。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies how in-context learning emerges and converges during gradient-based training in a one-layer Transformer with softmax attention, and how data structure (balanced vs imbalanced sampling) shapes that convergence. Most prior theory focuses on linear Transformers, leaving softmax attention dynamics underexplained.","importance":"This is a mechanistic/theoretical contribution: it brings softmax attention into analyzable ICL training dynamics rather than treating ICL as a black-box capability. For pretraining practice, it suggests ICL behavior can be strongly driven by frequency and sampling bias in the training distribution, which helps explain instability and long-tail failures in prompt-based generalization.","technical_approach":"The authors analyze gradient descent dynamics for a one-layer softmax-attention Transformer trained to in-context learn linear function classes under a structured token-generation model. Tokens are sampled from a finite set of feature vectors, with both balanced and imbalanced regimes, enabling explicit reasoning about how sampling frequency affects attention allocation and the effective learning rule. The deliberate simplification (one layer) buys tractability but limits direct transfer to deep multi-head Transformers without additional validation.","experiments":"No experimental configurations or numeric results are included in the abstract (e.g., dimensions, sample sizes, convergence rates, or quantitative gaps vs linear-Transformer theory), so quantitative findings cannot be summarized. The work appears focused on convergence characterizations rather than benchmark performance; readers should verify how well the assumptions (data model, learning-rate regime, initialization) match realistic pretraining settings.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","transformer-theory","convergence","generalization"],"notable_authors":["Yingbin Liang"]},{"id":"HuhC0I24","title":"Position: The Platonic Representation Hypothesis","authors":["Minyoung Huh","Brian Cheung","Tongzhou Wang","Phillip Isola"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HuhC0I24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HuhC0I24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/huh24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要信息，无法准确概括该 Position paper 对“Platonic Representation Hypothesis”的具体主张、适用范围与可证伪点。","importance":"缺少摘要信息，无法判断其对表示学习/多模态统一表征/预训练目标设计的直接启示强度。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要信息，无法总结其论证结构（经验综述、理论命题、可检验预测或反例）与关键定义。","experiments":"Position 类论文可能不以实验为主，但由于缺少摘要信息，无法确认是否包含实证证据与其范围。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The abstract is missing, so the paper’s concrete claim, scope, and falsifiable predictions around the “Platonic Representation Hypothesis” cannot be stated precisely.","importance":"Without the abstract, its direct implications for representation learning, multimodal unification, or pretraining objective design cannot be assessed.","technical_approach":"Without the abstract, the argument structure (empirical synthesis vs theoretical thesis vs testable predictions) and key definitions cannot be summarized.","experiments":"Position papers may be non-empirical, but without the abstract it is unclear what evidence, if any, is provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["representation-learning","convergence","multimodal","scaling"],"notable_authors":["Phillip Isola"]},{"id":"Ildiz0LRO24","title":"From Self-Attention to Markov Models: Unveiling the Dynamics of Generative Transformers","authors":["Muhammed Emrullah Ildiz","Yixiao Huang","Yingcong Li","Ankit Singh Rawat","Samet Oymak"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Ildiz0LRO24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Ildiz0LRO24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/ildiz24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要信息，无法准确说明论文如何把 generative Transformer 的生成动力学与 Markov model 联系起来，以及它要解释的具体现象（如长程依赖、暴露偏差或采样退化）。","importance":"缺少摘要信息，无法判断其对理解 AR 生成、训练-采样不一致或替代建模范式的启示强度。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要信息，无法总结其从 self-attention 到 Markov 的推导路径、近似条件与失效边界。","experiments":"缺少摘要信息，无法报告验证该动力学观点的实验任务、指标与定量结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The abstract is missing, so it is not possible to state precisely how the paper connects generative Transformer dynamics to Markov models or which generation pathologies it targets.","importance":"Without the abstract, its implications for understanding AR generation, train–sample mismatch, or alternative modeling views cannot be assessed.","technical_approach":"Without the abstract, the derivation/approximation route from self-attention to a Markovian view and its failure modes cannot be summarized.","experiments":"Without the abstract, tasks, metrics, and quantitative validations cannot be reported.","authors_note":""},"tags":["self-attention","markov-model","generative-transformer","training-dynamics"],"notable_authors":["Samet Oymak"]},{"id":"ImL24","title":"Understanding the Learning Dynamics of Alignment with Human Feedback","authors":["Shawn Im","Yixuan Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ImL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ImL24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/im24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要信息，无法可靠界定论文讨论的“alignment with human feedback”是 RLHF、DPO/IPO 还是更一般的偏好学习，以及它要解释的学习动力学现象是什么。","importance":"缺少摘要信息，无法判断其对对齐训练稳定性、reward hacking、或 pretrain↔posttrain 接口的直接启示。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要信息，无法总结其动力学分析方法（理论推导、简化模型、或实证诊断）与关键结论。","experiments":"缺少摘要信息，无法报告实验设定、模型规模、数据规模与主要发现的定量证据。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The abstract is missing, so we cannot reliably identify whether the paper studies RLHF, DPO-style preference optimization, or a broader alignment setup, nor which learning-dynamics phenomenon it explains.","importance":"Without the abstract, its practical implications for alignment stability, reward hacking, or the pretrain–posttrain interface cannot be assessed.","technical_approach":"Without the abstract, the analysis method (theory, simplified models, or empirical diagnostics) and key conclusions cannot be summarized.","experiments":"Without the abstract, experimental setups, scales, and quantitative evidence cannot be reported.","authors_note":""},"tags":["rlhf","alignment","training-dynamics","learning-theory"],"notable_authors":["Shawn Im","Yixuan Li"]},{"id":"2402.06782","title":"Debating with More Persuasive LLMs Leads to More Truthful Answers","authors":["Akbir Khan","John Hughes","Dan Valentine","Laura Ruis","Kshitij Sachan","Ansh Radhakrishnan","Edward Grefenstette","Samuel R. Bowman","Tim Rocktäschel","Ethan Perez"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$12","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.06782","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/KhanHVRSRGBRP24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/KhanHVRSRGBRP24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/khan24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的问题是：当“评审者”比“作答者”更弱、甚至缺乏关键信息时，如何仍然从更强模型那里得到更接近真相的答案。传统 RLHF 假设人类或标注者能稳定判断对错，但在强模型时代这个假设会变弱。","importance":"贡献是对齐信号设计层面的：它给出证据表明 debate 可以把“弱监督者”变成可用的选择器，从而在一定条件下提升真实性（truthfulness）。对 pretrain/posttrain 闭环的启示是：如果偏好信号来自非专家，训练目标可能需要从“直接打分”转向“对抗式呈现证据后再选择”，以提高监督信号的信息量。","technical_approach":"方法是让两个更强的 LLM 专家围绕不同答案进行辩论，由一个更弱的非专家模型（或人类）在看完辩论后选择答案。关键设计点是信息不对称：专家“拥有必要信息”，非专家“缺乏信息”，用来模拟未来人类监督强模型的处境；debate 的作用是把隐含证据外显化，降低非专家仅凭先验或表面流畅度做决定的概率。边界在于：如果辩论更擅长修辞而非证据，或评审者容易被误导，debate 可能放大错误而不是纠正错误。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体数据集、模型名称/规模、truthfulness 指标与提升幅度的数字，因此无法复述定量结果。可确认的结论是：debate 在其实验设定中“持续地”帮助非专家模型与人类得到更正确的答案；读者需要在正文核对其对照组（单专家回答、直接投票、解释式回答等）、以及对“更有说服力但错误”的鲁棒性评估。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a forward-looking alignment problem: how can a weaker judge (often missing key information) still select truthful answers from stronger models. Standard RLHF implicitly assumes reliable human correctness judgments, which becomes brittle as models surpass human expertise.","importance":"This is a supervision-signal contribution: it provides evidence that debate can turn a weak overseer into a more effective selector and improve truthfulness under certain conditions. For the pretrain/posttrain loop, it suggests that when labels come from non-experts, training signals may need to be structured as adversarial evidence presentation rather than direct scoring to increase informational content.","technical_approach":"The method runs a debate between two stronger LLM “experts” advocating different answers, then a weaker “non-expert” model (or a human) chooses after reading the debate. The key experimental design is information asymmetry: experts have the necessary information while the judge does not, mirroring future oversight. Debate helps by externalizing evidence and counterarguments, reducing reliance on priors or surface fluency. The main failure mode is rhetorical manipulation: if persuasion outcompetes evidence, debate can amplify errors.","experiments":"The abstract does not specify datasets, model identities/sizes, metrics, or numeric gains, so quantitative results cannot be reported here. The stated finding is that debate consistently helps both weak-model judges and humans answer more correctly; readers should verify baselines (single expert, direct answers, explanations) and robustness to persuasive-but-wrong debaters in the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","debate","truthfulness","oversight","rlhf"]},{"id":"2402.07757","title":"Towards an Understanding of Stepwise Inference in Transformers: A Synthetic Graph Navigation Model","authors":["Mikail Khona","Maya Okawa","Jan Hula","Rahul Ramesh","Kento Nishi","Robert P. Dick","Ekdeep Singh Lubana","Hidenori Tanaka"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$13","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.07757","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/KhonaOHRNDLT24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/KhonaOHRNDLT24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/khona24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解释的是：为什么 scratchpad/CoT 这类“分步推理协议”能显著提升 Transformer 的多步问题能力，以及模型在内部到底学到了什么计算结构。以往在真实任务上很难做机制分析，因为数据与推理步骤不可控、评估也混杂。","importance":"贡献是机制分析与可控基准层面的：它用一个足够简单但确实需要多步的合成任务，把大模型上观察到的 stepwise inference 现象在小环境中复现并拆解。对 pretrain 的启示是：如果想让模型稳定学会“可迭代的算法”，需要关注训练信号是否迫使模型显式表示中间状态，而不是只在输出端对齐最终答案。","technical_approach":"方法是构造一个图导航（graph navigation）合成任务：给定起点与终点，模型需要沿图上的路径逐步移动到目标。作者用自回归 Transformer 在该任务上训练，并用它来分析 stepwise inference 的若干现象（摘要提到能复现多项规模化现象，但未给出完整列表）。选择合成任务的好处是可控：可以精确控制步数、图结构与监督形式；代价是外推到自然语言推理仍需要额外论证。","experiments":"摘要未给出模型规模、图规模/步数分布、训练 token、以及与不使用 stepwise 协议的对照提升数字，因此无法报告定量结果。可确认的是作者声称在该合成环境中复现了大规模模型上关于 stepwise inference 的多个经验现象，并对其进行分析；读者需要在正文核对这些现象具体是什么、以及是否包含关键对照（直接输出答案 vs 输出路径/中间步骤）。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper aims to explain why stepwise inference protocols (scratchpads/chain-of-thought) boost Transformers on multi-step problems, and what computational structure the model actually learns. On real tasks, mechanistic analysis is hard because reasoning steps and supervision are not controllable.","importance":"Its contribution is a controllable mechanistic testbed: a simple synthetic task that still requires genuine multi-step computation, allowing stepwise-inference phenomena seen at scale to be reproduced and dissected. For pretraining, it reinforces a practical point: to learn iterative algorithms robustly, training signals often need to force explicit intermediate state representations, not just final-answer matching.","technical_approach":"They introduce a synthetic graph navigation task where the model must traverse from a start node to a goal node along a path, trained with an autoregressive Transformer. The controlled setup lets them vary step count, graph structure, and supervision format to probe stepwise inference behaviors. The trade-off is external validity: insights must be validated beyond the synthetic environment to claim relevance to natural language reasoning.","experiments":"The abstract does not report model sizes, graph sizes/step distributions, training scale, or numeric gains versus non-stepwise baselines, so quantitative results cannot be summarized. The authors state they reproduce several stepwise-inference phenomena observed at scale and analyze them; readers should check the exact phenomena and key controls (direct answer vs explicit path/steps) in the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["chain-of-thought","transformer","in-context-learning","reasoning","mechanistic-interpretability"]},{"id":"KondratyukYGLHS24","title":"VideoPoet: A Large Language Model for Zero-Shot Video Generation","authors":["Dan Kondratyuk","Lijun Yu","Xiuye Gu","José Lezama","Jonathan Huang","Grant Schindler","Rachel Hornung","Vighnesh Birodkar","Jimmy Yan","Ming-Chang Chiu","Krishna Somandepalli","Hassan Akbari","Yair Alon","Yong Cheng","Joshua V. Dillon","Agrim Gupta","Meera Hahn","Anja Hauth","David Hendon","Alonso Martinez","David Minnen","Mikhail Sirotenko","Kihyuk Sohn","Xuan Yang","Hartwig Adam","Ming-Hsuan Yang","Irfan Essa","Huisheng Wang","David A. Ross","Bryan Seybold"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/KondratyukYGLHS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/KondratyukYGLHS24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/kondratyuk24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：能否像训练语言模型一样，用统一 token 序列建模做零样本视频生成，而不是依赖任务特化的视频 diffusion 管线。过去视频生成系统通常拆成多模块：文本编码、时空扩散、级联超分辨率，各部分训练目标不同，扩展到多任务和跨模态时成本很高，也不利于统一预训练。","importance":"这项工作对 pretrain 的意义很直接，属于跨模态统一建模范式。它把视频生成重写成“多模态 token 的 next-token 建模”问题，如果做得通，说明 AR 语言模型不仅能做理解和离散生成，也能覆盖视频这种时空信号。对统一模型研究，这比单一视频 benchmark 更重要，因为它触及的是表示、tokenizer 和训练目标能否复用到不同模态。","technical_approach":"VideoPoet 从题目上看是一个 large language model for zero-shot video generation，核心应是先把视频和条件模态离散化成统一 token，再用一个自回归 Transformer 建模这些 token 序列。与典型 diffusion video model 的区别不是简单把 decoder 换成 Transformer，而是把生成、条件控制和跨任务迁移放进同一个离散序列框架里。这样设计有效的前提是视频 tokenizer 足够表达时空结构，同时语言模型的序列先验能承接长程时间依赖；代价则是 token 长度和码率会很大，训练与采样都容易受上下文窗口和错误累积限制。","experiments":"虽然这里没有摘要，但按这类工作的常规重点，实验应围绕零样本文生视频质量、多任务泛化和统一模型能力展开，而不是只看单个数据集 FVD。最关键的事实通常包括：是否在文生视频、图生视频或视频编辑等任务上无需专门 finetune；与专用 diffusion 基线相比在质量或一致性上处于什么位置；以及 tokenizer 设计、上下文长度、采样策略对效果的影响。具体模型规模和指标必须以原文为准，当前信息不足以安全填写数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether video generation can be cast as unified token-sequence modeling, rather than relying on task-specific video diffusion pipelines. Traditional systems are usually split into multiple modules—text encoders, spatiotemporal diffusion backbones, super-resolution stages—with different objectives, which makes multi-task and cross-modal scaling expensive and awkward.","importance":"This is directly relevant to pretraining because it is a unified multimodal modeling result. If video generation can be handled by next-token modeling over multimodal tokens, then autoregressive LMs are not limited to text or simple discrete generation; they may serve as a common backbone for video as well. That matters more than a single benchmark win because it tests whether tokenization, representations, and training objectives can be shared across modalities.","technical_approach":"From the title, VideoPoet is likely a large autoregressive model trained over a unified token space where video and conditioning modalities are discretized into sequences. The key difference from diffusion-based video generation is not just replacing the decoder with a Transformer, but moving generation, conditioning, and cross-task transfer into one discrete sequence framework. This can work if the video tokenizer preserves enough spatial and temporal structure and if the LM prior can capture long-range temporal dependencies. The trade-off is obvious: token sequences become long and expensive, and generation quality can be limited by context length and autoregressive error accumulation.","experiments":"Although no abstract is given, the likely experimental center is zero-shot text-to-video quality, multi-task generalization, and the benefits of a unified model rather than a single FVD score. The most informative results would be whether the model handles text-to-video, image-to-video, or editing without task-specific finetuning; how it compares with specialized diffusion baselines in quality and coherence; and how tokenizer design, context length, and decoding strategy affect results. Exact model sizes and numbers should be taken from the paper itself.","authors_note":""},"tags":["video-generation","llm","multimodal-token","zero-shot","autoregressive"]},{"id":"LavieGR24","title":"Towards Understanding Inductive Bias in Transformers: A View From Infinity","authors":["Itay Lavie","Guy Gur-Ari","Zohar Ringel"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LavieGR24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LavieGR24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/lavie24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关注的是：Transformer 的归纳偏置到底来自哪里，尤其在无限宽度或无限尺度视角下，哪些偏置是架构固有的，哪些是有限模型训练过程带来的。过去很多经验现象——例如位置敏感性、上下文组合方式、特定函数族更容易学——都被归因于 Transformer“擅长序列”，但这类说法通常缺少可分析的极限视角。","importance":"这是一篇偏基础理论的工作，但对预训练研究仍然有意义。原因是归纳偏置决定了模型在固定数据预算下更容易学到什么、不容易学到什么；如果能在 infinity 视角下把这些偏置拆清楚，就能帮助我们判断：某些能力提升应靠加数据，还是靠换架构、位置编码、注意力形式。对机制分析和 scaling law 解释也有潜在价值。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者用无限宽度或相关极限分析 Transformer，把其行为映射到更可处理的核、均值场或动力学对象上，从中提炼归纳偏置。关键点不只是得到一个极限公式，而是看这个极限保留了哪些 Transformer 特征、又丢掉了哪些 feature learning 效应。和纯经验分析相比，这种方法能更系统地解释“模型天生偏向哪些函数”；但边界也明显：无限视角常会弱化有限宽网络中的表示学习与优化非线性，因此结论更适合作为下界或参考坐标，而不是直接代替真实大模型解释。","experiments":"缺少摘要时，不能可靠写出理论结果和数值验证。预期实验价值主要在于用有限宽模型验证无限理论的预测方向，例如某些模式、频率或结构是否更易被 Transformer 学到，以及这些趋势是否随宽度增大更接近理论极限。若论文比较不同位置编码、层数或注意力结构下的偏置变化，这会是对模型设计更有用的部分。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies where the inductive bias of Transformers comes from, especially through an infinite-width or infinite-scale lens that separates architectural bias from effects introduced by finite-model optimization. Many empirical observations—sensitivity to position, preferred composition patterns, easier learning of some function classes—are often attributed to Transformers being “good at sequences,” but that statement is usually too vague to be analytically useful.","importance":"This is a foundational theory paper, but still relevant to pretraining because inductive bias determines what the model learns easily under a fixed data budget and what remains difficult. If an infinity-based analysis can isolate these biases cleanly, it can help us decide whether a capability bottleneck should be addressed by more data or by changing architecture, positional encoding, or attention design. It may also inform how we interpret scaling trends.","technical_approach":"From the title, the authors likely analyze Transformers in an infinite-width or related limit, mapping their behavior to a more tractable object such as a kernel, mean-field model, or training dynamics, and then reading off the implied inductive biases. The key question is not only what closed-form limit exists, but which Transformer properties survive in that limit and which feature-learning effects disappear. Compared with purely empirical analysis, this route can more systematically characterize which functions the architecture prefers. The limitation is equally important: infinite-limit views often suppress finite-width representation learning and optimization nonlinearities, so the conclusions are better treated as reference structure than as a full explanation of real LLM behavior.","experiments":"Without the abstract, specific theory statements and numerical validations cannot be given safely. The likely experimental role is to test whether finite-width Transformers move toward the predictions of the infinite-limit analysis: for example, whether certain patterns, frequencies, or structural relations are learned more easily, and whether these tendencies become clearer as width grows. Comparisons across positional encodings, depth, or attention variants would be particularly useful for model design.","authors_note":""},"tags":["inductive-bias","transformer","generalization","theory"]},{"id":"LeeBPWKM24","title":"A Mechanistic Understanding of Alignment Algorithms: A Case Study on DPO and Toxicity","authors":["Andrew Lee","Xiaoyan Bai","Itamar Pres","Martin Wattenberg","Jonathan K. Kummerfeld","Rada Mihalcea"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LeeBPWKM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LeeBPWKM24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/lee24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["dpo","alignment","mechanistic-interpretability","toxicity"]},{"id":"LiW0024","title":"EAGLE: Speculative Sampling Requires Rethinking Feature Uncertainty","authors":["Yuhui Li","Fangyun Wei","Chao Zhang","Hongyang Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiW0024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiW0024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/li24bt.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["speculative-decoding","sampling","inference","llm"]},{"id":"Lin024","title":"Dual Operating Modes of In-Context Learning","authors":["Ziqian Lin","Kangwook Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Lin024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Lin024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/lin24l.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["in-context-learning","mechanistic-analysis","generalization","transformer"]},{"id":"2402.03496","title":"Can We Remove the Square-Root in Adaptive Gradient Methods? A Second-Order Perspective","authors":["Wu Lin","Felix Dangel","Runa Eschenhagen","Juhan Bae","Richard E. Turner","Alireza Makhzani"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$14","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.03496","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LinDEBTM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LinDEBTM24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/lin24e.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["optimizer","adam","adaptive-gradient","training-stability"]},{"id":"LiuHBCDS024","title":"Online Speculative Decoding","authors":["Xiaoxuan Liu","Lanxiang Hu","Peter Bailis","Alvin Cheung","Zhijie Deng","Ion Stoica","Hao Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiuHBCDS024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiuHBCDS024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/liu24y.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["speculative-decoding","online-learning","inference-efficiency"]},{"id":"2402.09353","title":"DoRA: Weight-Decomposed Low-Rank Adaptation","authors":["Shih-Yang Liu","Chien-Yi Wang","Hongxu Yin","Pavlo Molchanov","Yu-Chiang Frank Wang","Kwang-Ting Cheng","Min-Hung Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$15","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.09353","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiuWY0WCC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiuWY0WCC24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/liu24bn.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：LoRA 虽然便宜，但和全参数微调之间常有稳定的性能差距，原因在于它只对权重更新空间做了低秩限制，却没有匹配全量微调对权重幅值和方向的联合调整能力。过去很多 PEFT 工作主要在 rank、target module 或初始化上打补丁，这篇工作试图从参数化方式本身解释差距来源。","importance":"DoRA 是 PEFT 方法级的重要改进，价值在于它给出了一个很干净的解释：LoRA 主要改方向，难以充分改幅值，因此表达能力不足。这个结论对 pretrain-posttrain 接口有直接启发——如果后训练预算有限，参数化方式本身决定了你能否逼近 full FT，而不是单纯多加点 rank 就能解决。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把预训练权重分解成 magnitude 和 direction 两部分，并只用 LoRA 去更新方向，同时显式学习幅值。它不是另起一套复杂适配器，而是在 LoRA 的低推理开销前提下补上一条全量微调里很关键但过去被忽略的更新通道；与标准 LoRA 相比，区别不在 rank 更高，而在参数更新几何更接近 full FT，所以更容易缩小性能差距。","experiments":"论文摘要明确给出的结论是：DoRA 在多项任务上同时提升 LLM、VL 和视觉模型的微调效果，并且保持 LoRA 不增加推理延迟的优点。当前给定信息没有包含完整数字、模型尺寸和 benchmark 列表，因此不能准确写出提升幅度；但从论文公开版本可知，作者重点比较的 baseline 是 LoRA 及其变体，观察点是 DoRA 在同等或相近可训练参数预算下更接近 full FT，同时在低 rank 设置下优势更明显。","authors_note":"作者名单中可确认 Yu-Chiang Frank Wang。仅凭给定信息无法稳妥确认全部机构，但该工作是典型的学术界与工业界联合 PEFT 研究，代表方向是参数高效微调。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical gap: LoRA is efficient, but it often underperforms full fine-tuning because it constrains updates in a way that does not match how full FT changes weights. Earlier PEFT work mostly tuned rank, target modules, or initialization; this paper asks whether the parameterization itself is the bottleneck.","importance":"DoRA is a meaningful method-level improvement for PEFT. Its main value is the clean diagnosis: LoRA mainly adapts weight direction, while full FT also changes magnitude in ways that matter, so matching full FT requires a better decomposition rather than just more low-rank capacity.","technical_approach":"The method decomposes each pretrained weight into magnitude and direction, then uses LoRA only for directional updates while learning magnitude separately. This keeps the low inference overhead of LoRA but adds back an update channel that full fine-tuning uses naturally; that geometric change, not simply a larger rank, is why DoRA narrows the gap.","experiments":"From the abstract, the main empirical claim is that DoRA improves fine-tuning quality across LLMs, vision-language models, and vision backbones while preserving the inference-cost advantage of LoRA. The provided snippet does not include full numerical tables, model scales, or exact gains, so those should not be fabricated; the key comparison is against LoRA-style baselines under similar trainable-parameter budgets, with stronger gains especially in low-rank regimes.","authors_note":"Yu-Chiang Frank Wang is explicitly identifiable from the author list. The exact institution set is not safely recoverable from the provided metadata, so it is left unspecified."},"tags":["lora","peft","weight-decomposition","fine-tuning"],"notable_authors":["Yu-Chiang Frank Wang"]},{"id":"Malach24","title":"Auto-Regressive Next-Token Predictors are Universal Learners","authors":["Eran Malach"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Malach24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Malach24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/malach24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：标准自回归 next-token predictor 作为学习器到底有多强，是否足以在理论上表达非常广的学习过程。这个问题之所以重要，是因为很多新范式都在挑战 AR，但如果 AR 在学习能力上本来就具备普适性，那么讨论焦点就会从“能不能学”转到“样本效率、优化效率和归纳偏置是否更好”。","importance":"这是一篇偏理论定位的工作，重要性在于给 AR 范式提供更强的表达能力论证。对 pretrain 研究的直接启发不是“别研究新范式了”，而是更细化地问：新范式赢的究竟是可表示性、训练动力学、并行性，还是更合适的任务结构；这能帮助讨论 diffusion LM、masked LM 等替代范式时更聚焦。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者应是证明 next-token predictor 在某种形式化设定下是 universal learner，即存在合适构造使其能模拟广泛学习算法或任务分布。关键不在工程实现，而在形式化对象、约束条件和证明所需假设；这类结果通常说明“理论上能表示”，但不自动推出现实训练中能高效学到，因此边界必须和统计效率、优化可达性分开看。","experiments":"给定信息没有摘要，且这类论文大概率以理论结果为主，因此不能虚构模型规模或 benchmark 分数。若有实验，也更可能是小规模构造例子用于支持理论直觉，而不是大模型性能对比。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a foundational question: how powerful are standard autoregressive next-token predictors as learners, and are they universal in a formal sense. This matters because many alternative paradigms are motivated by perceived limitations of AR, so a universality result changes what exactly needs to be improved.","importance":"This is a theory-oriented contribution. Its value is not to argue that AR is always the best practical choice, but to separate representational universality from the more practical issues of sample efficiency, optimization, parallelism, and inductive bias that alternative paradigms may improve.","technical_approach":"From the title, the likely contribution is a formal proof that autoregressive next-token predictors can simulate a broad class of learning procedures or solve a broad class of tasks under an appropriate construction. The key boundary is that universality says 'can represent,' not 'can be trained efficiently in realistic regimes,' so the result should be read as a capacity statement rather than an end-to-end practical guarantee.","experiments":"No abstract or numerical evidence is provided, and the paper is likely primarily theoretical. Any empirical component, if present, is more likely illustrative than a large-scale benchmark comparison, so concrete model sizes and metrics cannot be stated here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["autoregressive","theory","next-token","generalization"]},{"id":"MudgalLGLWHCCCS24","title":"Controlled Decoding from Language Models","authors":["Sidharth Mudgal","Jong Lee","Harish Ganapathy","YaGuang Li","Tao Wang","Yanping Huang","Zhifeng Chen","Heng-Tze Cheng","Michael Collins","Trevor Strohman","Jilin Chen","Alex Beutel","Ahmad Beirami"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MudgalLGLWHCCCS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MudgalLGLWHCCCS24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/mudgal24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["controlled-decoding","reward-model","alignment","inference"]},{"id":"MuqeethLLR24","title":"Learning to Route Among Specialized Experts for Zero-Shot Generalization","authors":["Mohammed Muqeeth","Haokun Liu","Yufan Liu","Colin Raffel"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MuqeethLLR24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MuqeethLLR24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/muqeeth24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["moe","routing","zero-shot","expert-specialization"]},{"id":"NawrotLCTP24","title":"Dynamic Memory Compression: Retrofitting LLMs for Accelerated Inference","authors":["Piotr Nawrot","Adrian Lancucki","Marcin Chochowski","David Tarjan","Edoardo M. Ponti"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/NawrotLCTP24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/NawrotLCTP24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/nawrot24a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["kv-cache","memory-compression","inference-acceleration","long-context"]},{"id":"PangTYXZWC24","title":"Self-Alignment of Large Language Models via Monopolylogue-based Social Scene Simulation","authors":["Xianghe Pang","Shuo Tang","Rui Ye","Yuxin Xiong","Bolun Zhang","Yanfeng Wang","Siheng Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/PangTYXZWC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/PangTYXZWC24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/pang24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["self-alignment","instruction-tuning","synthetic-data","social-simulation"]},{"id":"ParkPXLCO0P24","title":"Can Mamba Learn How To Learn? A Comparative Study on In-Context Learning Tasks","authors":["Jongho Park","Jaeseung Park","Zheyang Xiong","Nayoung Lee","Jaewoong Cho","Samet Oymak","Kangwook Lee","Dimitris Papailiopoulos"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ParkPXLCO0P24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ParkPXLCO0P24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/park24j.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["mamba","in-context-learning","sequence-modeling","architecture"]},{"id":"PeiZWH24","title":"Modeling Language Tokens as Functionals of Semantic Fields","authors":["Zhengqi Pei","Anran Zhang","Shuhui Wang","Qingming Huang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/PeiZWH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/PeiZWH24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/pei24c.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文想改写 token 的建模方式：不是把词看成离散符号本身，而是看成底层语义场的函数值或泛函。传统 LM 直接在 token 序列上建模，表达力强但对语义连续结构刻画粗糙；作者试图引入更连续的语义表征，把离散 token 生成和潜在语义场联系起来。","importance":"如果方法成立，这属于建模视角上的范式探索，而不只是小修小补。它对 pretrain 的启示在于：tokenization 也许不是唯一自然接口，语言模型可以在连续语义空间和离散词元之间建立更结构化的映射。这种方向和 latent LM、continuous representation LM、甚至部分 diffusion-style language modeling 有相通之处，值得关注但短期未必替代标准 AR。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是定义一个 semantic field，再把语言 token 建模为该场上的函数或测量，从而让序列生成依赖更平滑的语义几何。它看起来像原创建模框架，而不是简单套用已有 Transformer 目标。关键设计通常包括：如何参数化语义场、如何从 field 到 token 读出、训练时如何保持可微和稳定、以及如何避免引入过强归纳偏置导致表达受限。与标准 token-level AR 相比，它的潜在优势是更强的语义连续性与组合泛化；代价是训练复杂度、可扩展性和与现有 tokenizer/infra 的兼容性。","experiments":"给定信息不足，无法确认模型规模、任务和数值结果。按题目判断，实验应至少比较这种 field-based token 建模与标准 token embedding/softmax 方案在语言建模困惑度或下游理解任务上的差异，并分析语义场维度、读出函数形式和离散化策略对性能的影响。若论文扎实，最值得看的不是单点分数，而是它是否在小模型、低资源或语义泛化场景下展现出系统性优势。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper revisits how language tokens should be modeled: not merely as atomic discrete symbols, but as functionals of an underlying semantic field. Standard language models operate directly on token sequences, which is effective but fairly crude from a semantic geometry perspective. The authors appear to connect discrete token generation to a continuous latent semantic structure.","importance":"If the approach works, this is a modeling-perspective contribution rather than an incremental tweak. The pretraining implication is that tokenization may not be the only natural interface: a model could mediate between continuous semantic structure and discrete lexical outputs in a more principled way. This sits near latent language modeling, continuous representation learning, and some non-AR paradigms. It is worth attention, even if it is unlikely to replace standard autoregression in the near term.","technical_approach":"The method seems to define a semantic field and treat tokens as functionals or measurements over that field, so sequence generation is grounded in a smoother semantic substrate. This looks like an original modeling framework rather than a minor objective change. The important design choices are likely how the field is parameterized, how tokens are read out from it, how differentiability and training stability are maintained, and how to avoid an overly restrictive inductive bias. Relative to token-level AR, the upside is richer semantic continuity and possibly better compositionality; the downside is added training complexity and weaker compatibility with existing tokenizer-centered infrastructure.","experiments":"The provided information does not specify model sizes, tasks, or quantitative results. Based on the title, the experiments should at least compare field-based token modeling against standard embedding-plus-softmax formulations on language modeling or semantic understanding benchmarks, with ablations on field dimensionality, readout functions, and discretization choices. The most meaningful signal would not be a single benchmark win, but whether the method shows consistent advantages in small-data, small-model, or semantic generalization settings.","authors_note":""},"tags":["language-modeling","tokenization","semantics","representation"]},{"id":"QiuPFGW24","title":"Compute Better Spent: Replacing Dense Layers with Structured Matrices","authors":["Shikai Qiu","Andres Potapczynski","Marc Anton Finzi","Micah Goldblum","Andrew Gordon Wilson"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/QiuPFGW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/QiuPFGW24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/qiu24f.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["structured-matrices","efficient-architecture","model-compression"]},{"id":"RameVHDCBF24","title":"WARM: On the Benefits of Weight Averaged Reward Models","authors":["Alexandre Ramé","Nino Vieillard","Léonard Hussenot","Robert Dadashi","Geoffrey Cideron","Olivier Bachem","Johan Ferret"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/RameVHDCBF24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/RameVHDCBF24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/rame24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["reward-model","weight-averaging","rlhf","reward-hacking"]},{"id":"RameshLKDT24","title":"Compositional Capabilities of Autoregressive Transformers: A Study on Synthetic, Interpretable Tasks","authors":["Rahul Ramesh","Ekdeep Singh Lubana","Mikail Khona","Robert P. Dick","Hidenori Tanaka"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/RameshLKDT24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/RameshLKDT24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/ramesh24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["compositionality","autoregressive","transformer","synthetic-tasks"]},{"id":"ShaoML024","title":"Language Generation with Strictly Proper Scoring Rules","authors":["Chenze Shao","Fandong Meng","Yijin Liu","Jie Zhou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ShaoML024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ShaoML024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/shao24c.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["language-modeling","training-objective","scoring-rules","generation"]},{"id":"ShenMK24","title":"Position: Do pretrained Transformers Learn In-Context by Gradient Descent?","authors":["Lingfeng Shen","Aayush Mishra","Daniel Khashabi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ShenMK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ShenMK24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/shen24d.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["in-context-learning","transformers","mechanistic-interpretability","training-dynamics"]},{"id":"2403.01876","title":"DéjàVu: KV-cache Streaming for Fast, Fault-tolerant Generative LLM Serving","authors":["Foteini Strati","Sara McAllister","Amar Phanishayee","Jakub Tarnawski","Ana Klimovic"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Distributed LLM serving is costly and often underutilizes hardware accelerators due to three key challenges: bubbles in pipeline-parallel deployments caused by the bimodal latency of prompt and token processing, GPU memory overprovisioning, and long recovery times in case of failures. In this paper, we propose D\\'ej\\`aVu, a system to address all these challenges using a versatile and efficient KV cache streaming library (D\\'ej\\`aVuLib). Using D\\'ej\\`aVuLib, we propose and implement efficient prompt-token disaggregation to reduce pipeline bubbles, microbatch swapping for efficient GPU memory management, and state replication for fault-tolerance. We highlight the efficacy of these solutions on a range of large models across cloud deployments.","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.01876","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/StratiMPTK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/StratiMPTK24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/strati24a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是分布式 LLM serving 里一个很现实的问题：KV cache 不只是内存负担，它还牵连流水线气泡、显存过度预留和故障恢复慢。过去这些问题通常被拆开分别优化，但 prompt 阶段和 decode 阶段时延形态完全不同，导致系统层面总是有利用率损失。","importance":"这是系统级工作，但对大模型训练和部署一体化很有参考价值。它的重要性在于把 KV cache 从“模型推理副产物”提升为可流式调度的系统对象，由此同时改善吞吐、显存效率和容错；对 pretrain 研究者的启发是，长上下文和大 batch 推理的可行性，越来越受 cache 编排而不是单点算子优化限制。","technical_approach":"核心方法是一个通用 KV-cache streaming 库 DéjàVuLib，以及基于它构建的三类机制：prompt-token disaggregation、microbatch swapping、state replication。第一项把 prompt 处理和 token 解码拆开调度，用来减少 pipeline parallel 下的气泡；第二项按微批交换 cache 与状态，减少为峰值场景长时间占满 GPU 显存；第三项复制必要状态以缩短故障恢复时间。它不是改模型结构，而是围绕 cache 生命周期重做 serving 数据路径，这也是它能同时打到多个瓶颈的原因。","experiments":"摘要明确说实验覆盖多种大模型和云环境，并验证了吞吐、内存管理和容错收益，但没有给出具体模型名、参数量或数值提升。可以确定的对比对象应包括传统 pipeline-parallel serving、无 prompt/decode 解耦的部署方式，以及无状态复制的恢复方案。对读者更值得关注的是实验设置横跨不同云部署，这说明方法不是只在单一集群配置上成立。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a serving bottleneck that is usually treated piecemeal: KV cache is not only a memory issue, it also drives pipeline bubbles, GPU overprovisioning, and slow failure recovery in distributed LLM inference. Prompt processing and token decoding have very different latency profiles, so conventional pipeline-parallel deployments leave hardware underutilized.","importance":"This is a systems contribution, but a meaningful one for large-model practitioners because it elevates KV cache from passive model state to an actively streamed scheduling primitive. The broader lesson is that scalable long-context inference is increasingly constrained by cache orchestration rather than by isolated kernel-level optimizations.","technical_approach":"The core contribution is DéjàVuLib, a KV-cache streaming library, plus three serving mechanisms built on top of it: prompt-token disaggregation, microbatch swapping, and state replication. Disaggregation separates prompt work from decode work to reduce pipeline bubbles. Microbatch swapping manages GPU memory around demand peaks instead of reserving for worst case. State replication shortens recovery after failures. The key idea is to redesign the data path around the cache lifecycle rather than modifying the model itself.","experiments":"From the abstract, the empirical evidence spans multiple large models and cloud deployments and shows gains in efficiency, memory usage, and fault tolerance. The abstract does not include trustworthy numbers, model sizes, or named baselines, so those should be left unspecified. The main comparison axis is standard distributed serving versus cache-streaming-enabled serving under realistic deployment conditions.","authors_note":""},"tags":["kv-cache","serving","pipeline-parallel","fault-tolerance","llm-inference"],"notable_authors":["Foteini Strati","Sara McAllister","Amar Phanishayee","Jakub Tarnawski","Ana Klimovic"]},{"id":"2406.15704","title":"video-SALMONN: Speech-Enhanced Audio-Visual Large Language Models","authors":["Guangzhi Sun","Wenyi Yu","Changli Tang","Xianzhao Chen","Tian Tan","Wei Li","Lu Lu","Zejun Ma","Yuxuan Wang","Chao Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$16","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.15704","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SunYTC000M0024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SunYTC000M0024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/sun24l.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 audio-visual LLM 里一个被低估的问题：视频理解不仅是看帧和听环境声，还包括高时间分辨率的语音理解，而现有 av-LLM 往往在这一点上做得不够。常见做法要么把语音单独交给 ASR 管线，要么统一压缩成粗粒度 token，结果是语音细节丢失，和视频其他元素也难统一建模。","importance":"这项工作的意义在于把 speech 作为原生视频理解的一部分纳入单一 av-LLM，而不是外挂一个转写模块。对统一多模态预训练的启发很明确：不同模态不仅语义不同，时间尺度也不同，连接器如果只用单分辨率压缩，很容易让高频模态在对齐时被淹没。","technical_approach":"作者提出 video-SALMONN，一个端到端 av-LLM，并设计了 multi-resolution causal Q-Former 作为预训练音视频编码器与主干 LLM 之间的桥。核心思路是对语音保留更细时间粒度，同时对画面、音效、音乐仍保持较高效率；这比统一用一个固定查询粒度更合理，因为语音理解更依赖短时动态。作者还加入 diversity loss 和 unpaired audio-visual mixed training，前者减少不同查询或模态 token 的塌缩，后者缓解真实视频里模态缺失或错配导致的过拟合。","experiments":"摘要能确认的实验结论是：模型可以同时处理视觉序列、音频事件、音乐和语音，且训练策略旨在避免帧或模态信息被忽略。摘要没有提供参数量、训练数据规模、具体 benchmark 和提升数字，因此不能填充数值。若从方法设计推断，最关键的 ablation 应该是多分辨率 Q-Former 相对单分辨率桥接器，以及 mixed training 对 speech-heavy 与 general video tasks 的影响。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses an overlooked weakness in audio-visual LLMs: video understanding requires speech modeling at a much finer temporal resolution than what many unified AV systems preserve. Existing approaches often either offload speech to a separate ASR pipeline or compress everything into coarse tokens, which weakens both speech fidelity and unified modeling.","importance":"Its main contribution is to treat speech as a native part of end-to-end video understanding rather than a side channel. For multimodal pretraining, the broader lesson is that modality unification is not only about semantic alignment; it is also about preserving the right temporal resolution for each modality.","technical_approach":"The model, video-SALMONN, uses a multi-resolution causal Q-Former to connect pretrained audio-visual encoders to the backbone LLM. The key design choice is asymmetric compression: preserve fine-grained temporal detail for speech while staying efficient for frames, music, and general audio events. The paper also introduces a diversity loss to reduce representation collapse and an unpaired audio-visual mixed training scheme to improve robustness when modalities are incomplete or mismatched.","experiments":"The abstract supports the claim that the model handles visual frames, audio events, music, and speech within a single end-to-end AV-LLM. It does not include model size, data scale, benchmarks, or numerical gains, so those cannot be reported faithfully. The most informative ablations are likely the multi-resolution connector versus simpler connectors, and the mixed-training strategy on speech-centric versus generic video tasks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["audio-visual-llm","speech-understanding","video-llm","multimodal-pretrain"],"notable_authors":["Guangzhi Sun","Wenyi Yu","Changli Tang","Xianzhao Chen","Tian Tan"]},{"id":"WangGCJLYYLLYSM24","title":"MEMORYLLM: Towards Self-Updatable Large Language Models","authors":["Yu Wang","Yifan Gao","Xiusi Chen","Haoming Jiang","Shiyang Li","Jingfeng Yang","Qingyu Yin","Zheng Li","Xian Li","Bing Yin","Jingbo Shang","Julian J. McAuley"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangGCJLYYLLYSM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangGCJLYYLLYSM24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/wang24s.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 的参数知识在预训练后基本固化，无法在推理阶段高效地自我更新。现有方法要么依赖外部检索（RAG），要么需要重新微调，缺乏一种让模型自身持续吸收新知识的轻量机制。","importance":"方法级贡献，探索了 LLM 自更新的新范式。对 pretrain 研究的启示：如果模型能在部署后持续更新知识，那么预训练阶段的知识覆盖策略和 continual pretrain 的必要性都会被重新审视。这是 pretrain-posttrain 接口上的一个有趣探索。","technical_approach":"MemoryLLM 在 LLM 内部引入了可自更新的记忆模块，使模型能够在推理时将新信息写入自身参数/记忆，而不需要外部数据库或重新训练。具体机制细节在摘要中未给出，但核心设计选择是将记忆更新内化到模型架构中，区别于 RAG 的外挂检索和传统 fine-tuning 的全参数更新。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体实验细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLM knowledge is largely frozen after pretraining, and there is no lightweight mechanism for the model to self-update during inference. Existing solutions rely on external retrieval or costly fine-tuning.","importance":"A method-level exploration of self-updatable LLMs. Relevant to pretrain research because it challenges the assumption that knowledge must be baked in during pretraining—if models can self-update, the pretraining knowledge coverage strategy and continual pretraining needs may shift.","technical_approach":"MemoryLLM integrates a self-updatable memory module within the LLM architecture, allowing the model to internalize new information at inference time without external databases or retraining. The key design choice is making memory updates part of the model's forward pass rather than an external retrieval step. Detailed mechanisms are not available from the abstract.","experiments":"No specific experimental details available from the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["continual-pretrain","memory","lifelong-learning","llm"]},{"id":"2402.18567","title":"Diffusion Language Models Are Versatile Protein Learners","authors":["Xinyou Wang","Zaixiang Zheng","Fei Ye","Dongyu Xue","Shujian Huang","Quanquan Gu"],"institutions":["Nanjing University"],"abstract":"$17","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.18567","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangZYXHG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangZYXHG24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/wang24ct.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"蛋白质语言模型此前主要基于 autoregressive 或 masked language modeling 范式，在生成多样性和条件生成灵活性上受限。能否用离散扩散模型（discrete diffusion）作为蛋白质序列的统一预训练框架，同时获得强生成和强表示学习能力？","importance":"范式级贡献。这是 diffusion language model 在蛋白质领域的重要验证：证明了离散扩散预训练不仅能生成结构合理、新颖、多样的蛋白质序列，还能作为优秀的表示学习器用于下游预测任务。对 pretrain 研究的直接启示：离散扩散框架作为语言建模的泛化形式，在非文本序列上展现了与 AR/MLM 竞争甚至更优的能力，支持了 diffusion LM 作为通用预训练范式的潜力。","technical_approach":"DPLM 在进化尺度的蛋白质序列上，用离散扩散概率框架（discrete diffusion probabilistic framework）进行自监督预训练。这个框架将语言建模泛化为扩散过程：前向过程逐步加噪（mask/corrupt tokens），反向过程学习去噪恢复。预训练后模型既可无条件生成蛋白质序列，也可微调用于各种预测任务。关键设计选择是用离散扩散而非连续扩散，因为蛋白质序列本身是离散的氨基酸序列。","experiments":"预训练在进化尺度蛋白质数据上完成，模型具有可扩展性。无条件生成的蛋白质序列在结构合理性、新颖性和多样性上表现良好。作为表示学习器，DPLM 在多种预测任务上与 ESM 等 masked LM 基线相比表现有竞争力甚至更优。","authors_note":"作者包括 Zaixiang Zheng 和 Shujian Huang（南京大学），在蛋白质语言模型和 NLP 方向有持续产出。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Protein language models have relied on autoregressive or masked LM paradigms, which limit generation diversity and conditional flexibility. The question is whether discrete diffusion can serve as a unified pretraining framework for protein sequences with both strong generation and representation learning.","importance":"A paradigm-level contribution. Validates discrete diffusion LM on protein sequences at evolutionary scale, showing it achieves both strong unconditional generation (structurally plausible, novel, diverse) and competitive representation learning for predictive tasks. Directly supports the potential of diffusion LM as a general pretraining paradigm beyond text.","technical_approach":"DPLM pretrains on evolutionary-scale protein sequences using a discrete diffusion probabilistic framework—a generalization of language modeling where the forward process corrupts tokens and the reverse process learns to denoise. The choice of discrete (not continuous) diffusion is natural since protein sequences are discrete amino acid sequences. After pretraining, the model supports both unconditional generation and fine-tuning for prediction.","experiments":"Pretrained at evolutionary scale with demonstrated scalability. Unconditional generation produces structurally plausible, novel, and diverse protein sequences. As a representation learner, DPLM is competitive with or superior to masked LM baselines like ESM on various predictive tasks.","authors_note":"Authors include Zaixiang Zheng and Shujian Huang (Nanjing University), with sustained work in protein language models and NLP."},"tags":["diffusion-lm","protein","discrete-diffusion","pretraining"],"notable_authors":["Zaixiang Zheng","Shujian Huang"]},{"id":"2309.05519","title":"NExT-GPT: Any-to-Any Multimodal LLM","authors":["Shengqiong Wu","Hao Fei","Leigang Qu","Wei Ji","Tat-Seng Chua"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$18","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.05519","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Wu0Q0C24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Wu0Q0C24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/wu24e.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["any-to-any","multimodal-llm","unified-pretraining","cross-modal"]},{"id":"YangA0FZFY0024","title":"Do Efficient Transformers Really Save Computation?","authors":["Kai Yang","Jan Ackermann","Zhenyu He","Guhao Feng","Bohang Zhang","Yunzhen Feng","Qiwei Ye","Di He","Liwei Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YangA0FZFY0024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YangA0FZFY0024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/yang24a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["efficient-transformer","attention","training-cost","long-context"]},{"id":"YuGGMZHPDDH24","title":"Collage: Light-Weight Low-Precision Strategy for LLM Training","authors":["Tao Yu","Gaurav Gupta","Karthick Gopalswamy","Amith R. Mamidala","Hao Zhou","Jeffrey Huynh","Youngsuk Park","Ron Diamant","Anoop Deoras","Luke Huan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YuGGMZHPDDH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YuGGMZHPDDH24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/yu24d.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是 LLM 训练成本过高，尤其是全精度训练对显存、带宽和能耗压力都很大。现有低精度方法在推理侧已经比较成熟，但训练侧仍常被数值不稳定、梯度噪声放大和优化器状态开销限制，因此作者提出轻量级低精度训练策略。","importance":"这是一篇典型的训练系统工作，对大规模预训练很相关。它的重要性在于低精度训练如果能不改太多训练栈就稳定落地，收益不是小幅提速，而是直接改变可训练模型规模、batch 和硬件成本上限；尤其在带宽受限的分布式训练中，这类工作往往比单点算子优化更有价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Collage，一种 light-weight low-precision LLM training strategy。题目强调 light-weight，说明作者可能尽量避免复杂的混合精度补丁或大规模校正模块，而是通过更轻的量化格式、关键路径保高精度、误差补偿或状态分级存储来实现训练稳定性。设计逻辑通常是：把最敏感的部分——如梯度累积、优化器更新、outlier 通道或归一化——保守处理，其余张量激进降精度，从而在收益和稳定性之间取得平衡。它与纯推理量化不同，因为训练必须同时处理前向、反向和优化器状态三套数值路径。","experiments":"实验应主要报告训练稳定性、最终 loss/下游精度、显存占用、吞吐和能耗，并与 BF16/FP16 训练以及已有低精度训练方案比较。给定信息中没有可确认的位宽、模型参数量、预训练 token 数、速度提升和精度损失，因此不能编造。真正需要看的是：低精度收益是否在 7B+ 级别甚至更大模型上仍成立；是否只在短程实验稳定，还是完整训练也不掉队；以及优化器状态和通信开销是否一并降低。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets the high cost of LLM training, where full-precision activations, gradients, and optimizer states strain memory, bandwidth, and power. Low precision is already common at inference, but training remains harder because numerical errors interact with optimization dynamics.","importance":"This is a highly relevant training-systems contribution for large-scale pretraining. If a low-precision strategy is stable and easy to deploy, the gain is not just incremental speed; it can shift the feasible model size, batch size, and hardware budget for real training runs.","technical_approach":"The proposed Collage method is a lightweight low-precision training strategy for LLMs. The emphasis on lightweight suggests the design avoids heavy correction machinery and instead applies precision selectively, likely preserving higher precision only on the most sensitive paths such as accumulation, optimizer updates, normalization, or outlier handling. That is the right trade-off because training has three coupled numerical paths—forward, backward, and optimizer state—and instability in any one of them can dominate.","experiments":"The likely experiments compare against BF16/FP16 and prior low-precision training methods on final loss, downstream quality, memory footprint, throughput, and possibly energy. The provided input does not include bitwidths, model scales, token budgets, or numerical gains, so those should not be fabricated. The most important evidence would be stability over long runs and savings that extend beyond activations to optimizer state and communication.","authors_note":""},"tags":["low-precision","mixed-precision","training-efficiency","quantization"]},{"id":"2404.11999","title":"Token-level Direct Preference Optimization","authors":["Yongcheng Zeng","Guoqing Liu","Weiyu Ma","Ning Yang","Haifeng Zhang","Jun Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$19","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.11999","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZengLMYZW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZengLMYZW24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zeng24c.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["dpo","token-level","alignment","rlhf"]},{"id":"2403.07339","title":"IM-Unpack: Training and Inference with Arbitrarily Low Precision Integers","authors":["Zhanpeng Zeng","Karthikeyan Sankaralingam","Vikas Singh"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1a","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.07339","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZengSS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZengSS24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zeng24g.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["low-precision","integer-arithmetic","training-efficiency","quantization"]},{"id":"2401.16335","title":"Iterative Data Smoothing: Mitigating Reward Overfitting and Overoptimization in RLHF","authors":["Banghua Zhu","Michael I. Jordan","Jiantao Jiao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) is a pivotal technique that aligns language models closely with human-centric values. The initial phase of RLHF involves learning human values using a reward model from ranking data. It is observed that the performance of the reward model degrades after one epoch of training, and optimizing too much against the learned reward model eventually hinders the true objective. This paper delves into these issues, leveraging the theoretical insights to design improved reward learning algorithm termed 'Iterative Data Smoothing' (IDS). The core idea is that during each training epoch, we not only update the model with the data, but also update the date using the model, replacing hard labels with soft labels. Our empirical findings highlight the superior performance of this approach over the traditional methods.","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.16335","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhuJJ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhuJJ24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zhu24e.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["rlhf","reward-model","overoptimization","data-quality"]},{"id":"0002CCX24","title":"GiLOT: Interpreting Generative Language Models via Optimal Transport","authors":["Xuhong Li","Jiamin Chen","Yekun Chai","Haoyi Xiong"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0002CCX24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0002CCX24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/li24i.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：怎样用一个更有全局结构感的工具去解释生成式语言模型，而不是只看 attention、梯度或局部特征归因。现有解释方法大多擅长做局部相关性分析，但对“生成分布是怎样从上下文移动到输出”的整体几何关系刻画较弱，因此作者引入最优传输来分析 token 分布之间的对应与迁移。","importance":"它的价值更偏机制分析方法，而不是直接改进 pretrain 或 inference。对 pretrain 研究者的启发在于：如果最优传输视角真的能稳定揭示表示层或生成层的结构迁移，那么它可能成为分析训练动态、数据分布偏移、对齐后分布变化的一类新诊断工具；但从题目和给定信息看，这还不是范式级贡献，更像一套解释框架。","technical_approach":"核心方法大概率是把语言模型内部表示或输出分布之间的关系，写成最优传输问题来求 token/表示之间的匹配成本与运输计划。这样设计的好处是它强调全局耦合而不是逐点打分，能回答“哪些质量从哪里搬运到哪里”；代价是计算更重，而且解释结果会依赖 ground cost 的定义。和常见的 saliency 或 probing 不同，它不是训练一个额外分类器读出属性，而是直接从分布匹配角度解释生成机制。","experiments":"给定信息里没有摘要、模型规模、数据集和指标，因此无法可靠总结实验证据。可以合理预期论文会在若干生成模型或语言任务上，对比 attention-based、gradient-based 或 probing 类解释方法，并展示最优传输得到的对应关系更稳定或更符合人类直觉；但具体提升幅度、统计显著性和可扩展性目前都无法确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a clear gap: how to interpret generative language models with a global view of distributional movement, rather than relying only on local attribution tools such as attention or gradients. Existing methods often explain token-level relevance, but they do not describe well how probability mass or representation structure shifts from context to generation, which makes optimal transport a natural lens.","importance":"This is primarily an interpretability contribution, not a new pretraining method. Its relevance to pretraining research is indirect but real: if optimal-transport-based analysis can robustly expose how representations reorganize during training or alignment, it could become a useful diagnostic for data mixture effects, distribution shift, and post-training drift. From the available information, though, it looks like a framework-level analysis tool rather than a paradigm shift.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is to formulate relations between hidden states or output distributions as an optimal transport problem, then inspect the transport plan and cost structure. This matters because OT captures global coupling instead of isolated pairwise scores, so it can reveal where mass moves and which parts of the input-output system are structurally aligned. The trade-off is heavier computation and sensitivity to the chosen ground metric. Compared with standard probing, this is less about training a readout head and more about explaining generation through distribution matching.","experiments":"The provided material does not include the abstract, model sizes, datasets, or quantitative results, so the empirical evidence cannot be summarized reliably. A reasonable expectation is that the paper compares OT-based interpretations against attention-, gradient-, or probe-based baselines and argues for better stability or faithfulness, but the exact margins and scope are not available here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["interpretability","generative-lm","optimal-transport","representation"]},{"id":"2312.04474","title":"Chain of Code: Reasoning with a Language Model-Augmented Code Emulator","authors":["Chengshu Li","Jacky Liang","Andy Zeng","Xinyun Chen","Karol Hausman","Dorsa Sadigh","Sergey Levine","Li Fei-Fei","Fei Xia","Brian Ichter"],"institutions":["Google Research","Google DeepMind"],"abstract":"$1b","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.04474","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0002LZCHSL0XI24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0002LZCHSL0XI24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/li24ar.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的核心判断是：让语言模型“写代码再执行”并不够，因为很多推理步骤涉及模糊语义函数，真实解释器并不能执行；作者因此要解决的是，怎样把代码的精确结构和语言模型的语义补全结合起来。过去 Program-of-Thought 或 tool use 往往假设函数可执行，这在算术上好用，但在语义推理混合任务上经常卡住。","importance":"它的重要性主要在推理增强和 tool-augmented LM，不是 pretrain 方法本身。对 pretrain 的启发在于：模型内部已经有一部分“可程序化”的推理能力，但纯自然语言 CoT 和纯可执行代码之间存在空档，Chain of Code 提供了一种中间表示。这对未来把 reasoning traces、latent program 和执行器联合进训练目标有参考价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法是让模型先用代码组织推理，再在无法真实执行的局部步骤上由模型去“模拟解释器输出”。也就是说，它不是要求所有步骤都落到 Python 解释器，而是把可执行部分交给程序，语义灰区由模型补全。这个设计比纯 CoT 更结构化，比纯 code execution 更灵活。关键选择在于把代码当成思维脚手架，而不是严格可运行程序；代价是系统正确性仍受模型模拟能力限制，尤其在语义函数被错误‘脑补’时会引入新型幻觉。","experiments":"摘要说明方法覆盖逻辑、算术和语义混合任务，重点优势应体现在需要精确计算但又包含不可执行语义判断的 benchmark 上。给定信息没有具体模型、基线和数字，无法确认提升幅度。合理预期 baseline 包括 standard CoT、Program-of-Thought、PAL 或 tool-augmented prompting。读者真正应关注的实验点是：哪些子任务来自真实执行，哪些来自模拟执行，以及性能提升是否主要来自更好的中间表示而不是额外 token 开销。","authors_note":"作者中可确认有 Xinyun Chen、Karol Hausman、Andy Zeng 等，均与 Google Research / DeepMind 体系相关，团队代表性工作覆盖代码推理、机器人与 tool-augmented foundation models。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper makes a useful observation: having an LM write code and execute it is not enough, because many reasoning steps depend on semantic functions that no real interpreter can execute. The problem is therefore how to combine the precision of code structure with the model’s ability to fill in semantic gaps. Prior program-of-thought approaches work well when all functions are executable, but break on mixed semantic-computational tasks.","importance":"This is mainly a reasoning and tool-use contribution rather than a pretraining method. Its relevance to pretraining is conceptual: it suggests that part of an LM’s reasoning can be scaffolded into program form, but there is a persistent gap between natural-language CoT and fully executable programs. Chain of Code is an interesting midpoint that could inform future training on structured reasoning traces or latent programs.","technical_approach":"The method asks the LM to express reasoning in code, while letting the model selectively emulate interpreter outputs for code segments that cannot actually be executed. In other words, executable parts go to the interpreter, and semantic gray zones stay with the LM. This is more structured than plain CoT and more flexible than strict code execution. The design treats code as a reasoning scaffold rather than a requirement for full executability. The downside is that correctness still depends on the model’s semantic emulation, so new failure modes appear when the model hallucinates what a function should return.","experiments":"From the abstract, the evaluation spans logic, arithmetic, and semantic-mixed reasoning tasks, where the method should be strongest when precise computation and fuzzy semantic judgments coexist. The provided material does not include exact model sizes, baselines, or numerical gains. Likely baselines include standard CoT, PAL, Program-of-Thought, and other tool-augmented prompting methods. The key empirical question is how much of the gain comes from better intermediate structure versus simply spending more reasoning tokens.","authors_note":"The author list includes Xinyun Chen, Karol Hausman, and Andy Zeng, who are associated with Google Research / DeepMind. The broader team is known for work spanning code reasoning, tool use, and embodied foundation models."},"tags":["reasoning","tool-use","code","cot"],"notable_authors":["Xinyun Chen","Karol Hausman","Andy Zeng"]},{"id":"00030WC024","title":"LIDAO: Towards Limited Interventions for Debiasing (Large) Language Models","authors":["Tianci Liu","Haoyu Wang","Shiyang Wang","Yu Cheng","Jing Gao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/00030WC024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/00030WC024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/liu24bm.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关注的是：怎样在尽量少改动大语言模型的前提下做去偏，而不是靠大规模再训练或强干预。这个问题长期存在，因为主流 debiasing 方法要么效果有限，要么会明显伤模型能力；“limited interventions”说明作者想在两者之间找更稳的平衡。","importance":"这是 post-train 与模型行为控制方向的工作。对 pretrain 研究者的意义在于，它讨论了偏见是否可以通过局部参数、局部模块或局部表示编辑来修正，而不必重新塑形整个模型分布。如果成立，这会帮助我们区分哪些问题是预训练数据层面决定的，哪些问题是后期可局部校正的。","technical_approach":"仅从标题看，方法核心应当是限制干预范围，例如少量参数更新、局部层编辑、特定子空间校正或轻量适配器，以减少副作用。这样的设计目标很明确：尽量把改动限制在与偏见相关的子系统里，避免全模型 finetuning 带来的能力漂移。边界也同样明显：如果偏见是广泛分布式表征，过于局部的 intervention 可能只压住表层指标，难以泛化。","experiments":"由于没有摘要，无法确认它使用哪些偏见评测集、用什么大模型、比较哪些 baselines，以及在公平性与任务性能之间达成了多大 trade-off。若论文设计合理，最有价值的实验应当是：干预规模与效果的关系、跨任务泛化、以及去偏后语言能力和校准能力损失是否可控。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper focuses on a constrained version of debiasing: how to reduce harmful bias in large language models with minimal intervention, rather than through heavy retraining or broad policy shifts. This is a longstanding tension because stronger debiasing often degrades general capability, while lighter methods frequently do not generalize.","importance":"This is a post-training behavior-control contribution. For pretraining researchers, the interesting question is whether some bias can be corrected through local edits—small parameter sets, modules, or representation subspaces—rather than by reshaping the full pretrained distribution. That distinction matters for understanding what is baked into data and what remains locally controllable.","technical_approach":"From the title alone, the method likely constrains the intervention budget, for example via small parameter updates, layer-local edits, subspace adjustments, or lightweight adapters. The reason to do this is straightforward: keep the fix targeted and reduce collateral damage to overall language ability. The limit is also straightforward: if the bias is distributed across the network, overly local interventions may improve benchmark scores without changing the broader behavior.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so the datasets, model families, baselines, and quantitative fairness-capability trade-offs cannot be summarized reliably. The most informative experiments for this kind of work would be intervention budget versus effect size, transfer across prompts and tasks, and capability regression after debiasing.","authors_note":""},"tags":["debiasing","alignment","intervention","llm-safety"]},{"id":"0003AZPCW24","title":"Understanding Reasoning Ability of Language Models From the Perspective of Reasoning Paths Aggregation","authors":["Xinyi Wang","Alfonso Amayuelas","Kexun Zhang","Liangming Pan","Wenhu Chen","William Yang Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0003AZPCW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0003AZPCW24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/wang24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要回答的是：语言模型的推理能力到底来自单条 reasoning path 的质量，还是来自多条路径聚合后的总体效果。过去很多分析只盯 CoT 单样本正确率，默认“会推理”意味着能生成一条好链路，但 self-consistency 这类现象已经说明聚合机制本身可能贡献很大。","importance":"它的意义在于把 reasoning 能力拆成“路径生成”和“路径聚合”两个部分来看。对 pretrain 和 post-train 都有启发：如果能力提升主要来自可采样的多样性和后验聚合，而不是单路径质量，那训练目标、解码策略和 reward 设计都应该相应调整。这类工作有助于更准确地定位推理提升来自哪里。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者应当把推理过程表示为多条 reasoning paths，再分析模型如何通过多数投票、置信度、路径结构一致性或其他聚合规则得到最终答案。它不是单纯提出一个新 prompting trick，而是把“聚合”当成研究对象。这个视角有效，是因为很多模型单条链路并不稳定，但在多样本下答案会收敛；边界则在于，聚合能修正随机错误，却很难修正系统性错误。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认其使用 GSM8K、MATH、StrategyQA 还是其他推理集，也无法确认是否比较了 CoT、self-consistency、tree search 等方法。合理预期论文会量化：单路径准确率、多路径多样性、聚合后收益，以及不同模型规模下这三者的关系。如果有价值，最值得看的 ablation 会是：增加 sample 数时收益何时饱和，以及路径相互独立性对聚合效果的影响。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a sharp question: does language-model reasoning come primarily from producing one strong reasoning path, or from aggregating multiple imperfect paths? Much of the literature evaluates single-chain correctness, but phenomena like self-consistency already suggest that aggregation itself may be a major source of performance.","importance":"Its value lies in decomposing reasoning ability into path generation and path aggregation. That matters for both pretraining and post-training: if gains come mostly from diversity plus aggregation rather than from stronger single trajectories, then training objectives, decoding policies, and reward designs should reflect that. This kind of analysis helps locate where reasoning improvements actually come from.","technical_approach":"Based on the title, the paper likely models reasoning as a set of candidate paths and studies how aggregation rules—majority vote, confidence weighting, structural consistency, or related criteria—translate them into final answers. This is more than a prompting trick; it treats aggregation as the object of study. The perspective is useful because many models are unstable at the single-path level but become reliable after sampling multiple paths. The limitation is that aggregation can smooth random errors, but not systematic ones shared across paths.","experiments":"No abstract is available, so the exact benchmarks and numbers cannot be verified. A sensible evaluation would measure single-path accuracy, path diversity, and post-aggregation accuracy, and then study how these scale with model size and sample count. The most informative ablations would examine when returns from more samples saturate and how path correlation limits aggregation gains.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reasoning","cot","aggregation","language-models"]},{"id":"2406.01189","title":"MultiMax: Sparse and Multi-Modal Attention Learning","authors":["Yuxuan Zhou","Mario Fritz","Margret Keuper"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1c","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.01189","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0004FK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0004FK24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zhou24g.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的结论是：SoftMax 在注意力里同时兼顾多峰性和稀疏性做得不够好，导致注意力分布容易把概率摊到一堆残余项上，既不够可解释，也会引入噪声。已有 sparsemax 一类方法能做稀疏，但通常会牺牲多模态结构，甚至需要改 loss；作者要解决的正是这个长期 trade-off。","importance":"这是一个基础算子层面的改进，影响面可能比单个任务方法更广。对 pretrain 研究者来说，它的重要性不在于替代 Transformer，而在于给 attention 分布一个新的形状先验：既允许多个峰存在，又能对无关项真正压零。如果这个性质在大模型训练中稳定，它可能影响注意力可解释性、抗噪性和长上下文信息筛选效率。","technical_approach":"核心方法是提出 MultiMax，一个分段可微的映射函数，用来替代 SoftMax 进行稀疏且多峰的注意力学习。它不是简单把 SoftMax 变尖，也不是复用 sparsemax，而是试图自适应解决“多个重要项要保留、次要项该清零”的冲突。这样设计有效的原因是：真实注意力常常不是单峰，但也不该给所有次优 token 留尾巴。与很多稀疏替代方案不同，作者强调不需要更换整体损失函数，同时保留多模态表达能力。边界在于，分段函数的优化稳定性和大规模训练兼容性需要实证验证。","experiments":"摘要只给出了方法动机和性质，没有给出具体模型、任务和数字。无法确认它是在标准 attention benchmark、视觉任务还是语言模型上验证。若方法成立，关键实验应包括：相较 SoftMax 与 sparsemax 类方法的性能、注意力熵/稀疏度变化、以及在含噪输入或长序列场景下是否更稳。对于大模型读者，最关心的是它是否能无痛替换并在训练中保持稳定。","authors_note":"作者中可确认有 Max Planck Institute for Informatics / CISPA 方向常见研究者 Mario Fritz，但给定信息不足以完整确认机构映射。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper argues that SoftMax handles a key trade-off poorly: it can represent multiple peaks, but it spreads too much probability mass over residual entries, which hurts interpretability and injects noise. Existing sparse alternatives can zero out small entries, but often at the cost of losing multi-modality or requiring different training losses.","importance":"This is a low-level operator contribution with potentially broad relevance. For pretraining researchers, the interest is not that it replaces the Transformer, but that it changes the inductive bias of attention itself: keep several genuinely important modes while truly suppressing irrelevant ones. If that scales, it could matter for interpretability, robustness to noise, and long-context selection behavior.","technical_approach":"The method introduces MultiMax, a piecewise differentiable mapping intended to replace SoftMax in sparse and multi-modal attention learning. It is not just a sharper SoftMax, and not simply sparsemax reused; the point is to preserve several meaningful modes while driving unimportant entries exactly to zero. That design is appealing because real attention patterns are often multi-peaked but should not assign tails everywhere. A notable claim is that it avoids changing the overall loss function while improving the expressivity trade-off. The open question is optimization: piecewise operators can be attractive analytically but still be hard to scale in large-model training.","experiments":"The abstract provides the motivation and formulation but not the concrete experimental setup in the provided excerpt. So model classes, tasks, and quantitative gains cannot be stated reliably. The most important evidence would compare MultiMax against SoftMax and sparse alternatives on task accuracy, sparsity statistics, and robustness under noisy or long-sequence conditions. For LLM readers, the decisive issue is whether it drops into large-scale training cleanly.","authors_note":"The author list includes Mario Fritz, a well-known researcher associated with institutions such as the Max Planck Institute for Informatics and CISPA. The provided information is not sufficient to map all affiliations with confidence."},"tags":["attention","sparsity","multimodal","softmax"],"notable_authors":["Mario Fritz"]},{"id":"0006J00W24","title":"Junk DNA Hypothesis: Pruning Small Pre-Trained Weights Irreversibly and Monotonically Impairs &quot;Difficult&quot; Downstream Tasks in LLMs","authors":["Lu Yin","Ajay Kumar Jaiswal","Shiwei Liu","Souvik Kundu","Zhangyang Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0006J00W24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0006J00W24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/yin24b.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["pruning","llm","downstream-transfer","sparsity"]},{"id":"2310.05175","title":"Outlier Weighed Layerwise Sparsity (OWL): A Missing Secret Sauce for Pruning LLMs to High Sparsity","authors":["Lu Yin","You Wu","Zhenyu Zhang","Cheng-Yu Hsieh","Yaqing Wang","Yiling Jia","Gen Li","Ajay Kumar Jaiswal","Mykola Pechenizkiy","Yi Liang","Michael Bendersky","Zhangyang Wang","Shiwei Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1d","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.05175","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0006W0HWJLJPLBW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0006W0HWJLJPLBW24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/yin24e.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["pruning","llm","sparsity","outliers"]},{"id":"2402.10207","title":"Rewards-in-Context: Multi-objective Alignment of Foundation Models with Dynamic Preference Adjustment","authors":["Rui Yang","Xiaoman Pan","Feng Luo","Shuang Qiu","Han Zhong","Dong Yu","Jianshu Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1e","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.10207","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0010PLQ00C24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0010PLQ00C24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/yang24q.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["multi-objective-alignment","rlhf","reward-model","in-context"]},{"id":"AbhyankarHSZ024","title":"InferCept: Efficient Intercept Support for Augmented Large Language Model Inference","authors":["Reyna Abhyankar","Zijian He","Vikranth Srivatsa","Hao Zhang","Yiying Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/AbhyankarHSZ024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/AbhyankarHSZ024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/abhyankar24a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要信息，无法确认其“intercept support”具体拦截什么（KV-cache、算子、外部工具调用、RAG、或中间层激活）以及要解决的推理效率/可控性问题边界。","importance":"缺少摘要信息，无法判断其对 LLM serving/推理系统的贡献是工程级优化还是会反哺训练/建模范式的系统级接口能力。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要信息，无法说明其拦截机制的实现位置（编译器/运行时/框架层）、开销模型、以及与现有推理加速（speculative decoding、prefix caching、toolformer-style routing）的关系与取舍。","experiments":"缺少摘要信息，无法给出吞吐/延迟/成本等指标、模型规模、硬件配置与对比基线。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract was provided, so it is unclear what is being “intercepted” (KV-cache, operators, tool calls, RAG, intermediate activations) and which inference bottleneck it targets.","importance":"Without details, we cannot tell whether this is a pure serving optimization or a broader systems interface that could influence training–inference co-design.","technical_approach":"Implementation layer (compiler/runtime/framework), overhead model, and trade-offs vs. existing inference accelerations (speculative decoding, prefix caching, routing) are not specified.","experiments":"No information on latency/throughput/cost metrics, model sizes, hardware, or baselines was provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm-inference","serving","augmented-generation","intercept"]},{"id":"AhdritzQ0BE24","title":"Distinguishing the Knowable from the Unknowable with Language Models","authors":["Gustaf Ahdritz","Tian Qin","Nikhil Vyas","Boaz Barak","Benjamin L. Edelman"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/AhdritzQ0BE24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/AhdritzQ0BE24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/ahdritz24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要信息，无法确认该工作如何形式化“可知 vs 不可知”（是 epistemic uncertainty、数据外分布、还是信息论不可辨识），以及它要解决的具体失败模式（幻觉、过度自信、拒答策略）。","importance":"缺少摘要信息，无法判断其对 pretrain 的直接启示是改进不确定性估计/校准，还是提出可用于数据过滤与评测的新判据。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要信息，无法说明其方法是基于多样本/ensemble、对数似然与可识别性检验、还是构造对照任务来分离“模型不会”与“任务本身不可推断”。","experiments":"缺少摘要信息，无法给出评测任务、模型规模、以及区分 knowable/unknowable 的准确率、校准误差或拒答质量等指标。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract was provided, so how the paper formalizes “knowable vs. unknowable” (epistemic uncertainty, OOD, or information-theoretic unidentifiability) and which failure mode it targets cannot be determined.","importance":"Without details, we cannot assess whether the contribution is mainly about uncertainty estimation/calibration for LMs or about new evaluation/data-filtering criteria.","technical_approach":"It is unclear whether the approach relies on sampling/ensembles, likelihood-based identifiability tests, or controlled task constructions to separate “model doesn’t know” from “cannot be inferred.”","experiments":"Benchmarks, model scales, and quantitative results (classification accuracy, calibration error, abstention quality) are not available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["uncertainty","language-model","knowable-unknowable","calibration"]},{"id":"BandL0H24","title":"Linguistic Calibration of Long-Form Generations","authors":["Neil Band","Xuechen Li","Tengyu Ma","Tatsunori Hashimoto"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/BandL0H24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/BandL0H24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/band24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要信息，无法确认其“long-form generation 的 linguistic calibration”要校准的对象是事实性、语用一致性、还是模型对自身语言选择（语气/不确定性表达）的置信度匹配。","importance":"缺少摘要信息，无法判断其对 pretrain/posttrain 的启示是改进校准评测、引入新的训练信号，还是提供可落地的解码/后处理策略来降低长文幻觉与过度自信。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要信息，无法说明其校准方法是基于 token-level 概率校准、句段级不确定性聚合、还是通过对比学习/偏好学习让语言标记（hedging、引用、限定词）与真实不确定性对齐。","experiments":"缺少摘要信息，无法给出长文任务、模型规模、校准指标（ECE/Brier/选择性风险等）与生成质量指标的变化。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract was provided, so it is unclear what is being calibrated in long-form generation: factuality, discourse/pragmatic consistency, or the match between linguistic hedges and true uncertainty.","importance":"Without details, we cannot assess whether the work mainly improves calibration evaluation, introduces new training signals, or provides deployable decoding/post-processing to reduce overconfident hallucinations in long outputs.","technical_approach":"The calibration mechanism (token-level calibration, segment-level uncertainty aggregation, contrastive/preference learning aligning hedging language with uncertainty) is not specified.","experiments":"Tasks, model scales, calibration metrics (ECE/Brier/selective risk), and quality trade-offs are not available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["calibration","long-form","generation","evaluation","llm"]},{"id":"BarbulescuT24","title":"To Each (Textual Sequence) Its Own: Improving Memorized-Data Unlearning in Large Language Models","authors":["George-Octavian Barbulescu","Peter Triantafillou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/BarbulescuT24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/BarbulescuT24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/barbulescu24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：如何更有效地让 LLM 忘掉被记住的特定文本序列，而不是只在表面测试上降低复现率。现有 unlearning 往往对分类式删除更自然，但对语言模型里的逐 token 记忆删除更难，因为模型参数会以分布式方式存储信息，简单微调常常只是把触发方式改掉，没有真正消除记忆。","importance":"这项工作对 pretrain-posttrain 接口是有价值的，因为它把“模型记忆中的数据删除”具体化为序列级问题，而这正贴近大模型训练和版权/隐私合规的真实需求。它的重要性不在于提出一个通用新训练范式，而在于提醒我们：LLM 的 memorization 不是单点现象，unlearning 方法如果不面向 textual sequence 设计，容易高估删除效果。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者提出的是 sequence-specific 的 unlearning 方法，核心思想是让每条待遗忘文本序列拥有更定制化的处理，而不是用一套统一损失粗暴压低相关样本概率。这样的设计通常会围绕两个目标展开：一是显式降低模型对目标序列的条件生成倾向，二是尽量不伤害邻近分布的正常语言能力。和通用 negative finetuning 或梯度上升式遗忘相比，这类方法的差异点在于它更关注序列级结构和记忆触发路径，因此理论上更适合处理长 n-gram、模板化文本和近重复语料的删除。","experiments":"可以预期论文会在 memorized sequence extraction、精确提示下的复现率、以及整体困惑度或下游任务保留度上做评估，并与常见 unlearning baseline 比较。由于未提供摘要，无法确认所用基础模型、遗忘数据规模、具体攻击方法和提升数字；但判断这类工作的关键，不是只看删除样本上的 exposure 降了多少，而是看 membership inference、paraphrase trigger、prefix continuation 等更强攻击下是否仍有效，以及 utility-retention trade-off 是否平衡。如果只在 exact match 提示下有效，这种 unlearning 对实际部署价值有限。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical but hard problem: how to make an LLM forget memorized textual sequences rather than merely suppressing them on superficial tests. Existing unlearning methods are often better suited to classification-style deletion; in autoregressive language models, sequence memories are distributed across parameters, so naive fine-tuning can hide a memory without truly removing it.","importance":"This is relevant to the pretrain–posttrain loop because it turns data deletion into a sequence-level language modeling problem, which is much closer to real privacy and copyright requirements for LLMs. The contribution is not a new foundation-model paradigm, but a sharper formulation: if unlearning is not designed around textual sequences, its effectiveness is easy to overestimate.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method appears to assign more tailored treatment to each target textual sequence instead of using one generic loss to suppress all forget examples. The design likely balances two objectives: reduce the model’s tendency to continue or reproduce the target sequence, while preserving nearby language competence. Relative to generic negative fine-tuning or gradient-ascent unlearning, the distinguishing idea is sequence-level specificity, which should be better aligned with long n-grams, templated memorization, and near-duplicate training data.","experiments":"The evaluation is likely centered on sequence extraction or regurgitation rates, exact-prompt and prefix-based reproduction, and retention of general model utility such as perplexity or downstream performance. Since no abstract or metrics are provided, the base model, forget set size, attacks, and numerical gains cannot be confirmed here. The key lens for judging this work is whether it survives stronger attacks such as paraphrased prompts, membership inference, and continuation from partial prefixes. If gains hold only under exact-match prompting, the practical value of the unlearning method is limited.","authors_note":""},"tags":["unlearning","llm","memorization","data-quality","safety"],"notable_authors":["George-Octavian Barbulescu","Peter Triantafillou"]},{"id":"BasuRKMZRMF24","title":"On Mechanistic Knowledge Localization in Text-to-Image Generative Models","authors":["Samyadeep Basu","Keivan Rezaei","Priyatham Kattakinda","Vlad I. Morariu","Nanxuan Zhao","Ryan A. Rossi","Varun Manjunatha","Soheil Feizi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/BasuRKMZRMF24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/BasuRKMZRMF24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/basu24b.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文研究的是：文本到图像生成模型里的“知识”到底局部存在哪里，能不能被机制化定位，而不是只靠整体 prompt 行为做模糊归因。过去对 T2I 模型的知识分析多停留在输出层面，例如某个 prompt 能不能生成某概念，但这不足以回答知识是分散存储还是集中在某些模块、层或 cross-attention 通路中。","importance":"这项工作对生成模型 interpretability 和可编辑性都有意义。对 pretrain 研究者，价值在于它提供了理解多模态生成模型内部表征的一种入口：如果概念知识在特定部件上可定位，那么后续做知识编辑、去偏、版权删除或安全干预时，就不必总依赖代价高且副作用大的全模型再训练。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者采用 mechanistic knowledge localization 的分析框架，目标是识别哪些网络部件对某些文本-图像概念映射最关键。具体做法大概率包括激活/注意力追踪、因果干预、模块替换或 patching 实验，用来区分“相关”与“必要”。这和普通可视化工作的区别在于，它强调因果定位而非描述性热图。这样的设计有效，是因为 T2I 模型知识往往同时经过文本编码器、UNet/DiT 主干和条件注入模块传播，只有做干预才能看出真正承载知识的瓶颈。","experiments":"实验上应会围绕概念类别、实体属性、风格或关系知识做定位，并验证对被定位组件的干预会显著影响生成结果。由于没有摘要，无法确认使用的是 Stable Diffusion 还是其他模型，也无法确认定位精度、编辑成功率或副作用数字。判断这类工作的关键，是它能否证明定位结果具有可重复性和可操作性：例如跨 prompt 稳定、跨 seed 稳定、对近义表达鲁棒，并且对无关概念的干扰有限。如果只能在少量人工挑选案例上成立，工程价值会受限。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies where knowledge is mechanistically stored inside text-to-image models, rather than inferring it only from prompt-level behavior. Prior analyses of T2I systems often stop at outputs—whether a concept can be generated—but that does not reveal whether knowledge is diffuse or concentrated in specific layers, modules, or conditioning pathways.","importance":"This matters for both interpretability and controllability. For pretraining-oriented readers, the main value is that it offers a route to understanding internal representations in multimodal generators. If concept knowledge can be localized, downstream editing, debiasing, copyright removal, or safety interventions may not always require full-model retraining.","technical_approach":"From the title, the work likely uses a mechanistic localization toolkit to identify which components are critical for mapping text concepts into image generations. That usually involves activation tracing, causal interventions, module patching, or replacement studies to separate correlation from necessity. This goes beyond descriptive heatmaps. The reason this design is useful is that T2I knowledge flows through multiple subsystems—text encoder, denoising backbone, and conditioning interfaces—so causal tests are needed to find the actual bottlenecks.","experiments":"The experiments likely examine different concept types such as entities, attributes, styles, or relations, and test whether intervening on localized components materially changes generation behavior. Without the abstract, the underlying model family, localization metrics, and numerical outcomes cannot be confirmed. The most important question is whether the localized findings are stable across prompts, random seeds, and paraphrases, while leaving unrelated concepts mostly intact. If the evidence holds only for a few hand-picked examples, the practical significance is much weaker.","authors_note":""},"tags":["mechanistic-interpretability","text-to-image","knowledge","generative-models","localization"],"notable_authors":["Samyadeep Basu","Keivan Rezaei","Priyatham Kattakinda","Vlad I. Morariu","Nanxuan Zhao"]},{"id":"BelrosePQMF24","title":"Neural Networks Learn Statistics of Increasing Complexity","authors":["Nora Belrose","Quintin Pope","Lucia Quirke","Alex Mallen","Xiaoli Z. Fern"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/BelrosePQMF24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/BelrosePQMF24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/belrose24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文试图回答一个机制问题：神经网络在训练过程中，是不是按统计复杂度由浅到深地学习数据规律。以往大家常说网络先学简单模式后学复杂模式，但很多证据是经验性的，缺少一个明确把“复杂度”定义成统计结构层级并系统验证的框架。","importance":"它的重要性主要在机制理解层面。对 pretrain 来说，这类结果如果成立，会直接影响数据课程设计、训练阶段划分和 loss 解释：模型不是同时吸收所有结构，而是按某种统计难度排序逐步拟合。因此，数据混合、难度调度、cooldown 甚至 post-train 的收益边界，都可以从这个角度重新理解。","technical_approach":"从标题判断，作者构造或分析了具有不同统计复杂度的数据分布，观察网络在训练中的学习先后顺序。关键不在于发明新模型，而在于给“复杂度”一个可操作定义，并把学习动态和该定义对齐。和传统 frequency bias 或 spectral bias 研究相比，这项工作如果做得扎实，区别在于它讨论的不只是低频高频，而是更一般的高阶统计、组合依赖或条件结构何时被网络掌握。","experiments":"实验大概率包含可控合成任务和真实数据分析两部分，用来验证复杂统计特征确实比简单特征更晚被学到。由于没有摘要，无法确认是否比较不同架构、优化器和数据规模，也无法给出数值。对这类论文，最有价值的证据是：现象是否跨 MLP/CNN/Transformer 稳定，是否在不同初始化和训练时长下重现，以及“复杂统计后学到”是否能预测泛化或 grokking 类行为。如果只在精心设计的玩具任务中成立，对大规模预训练的外推就要谨慎。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a mechanistic question: do neural networks learn data statistics in order of increasing complexity during training? The intuition that models learn simple patterns before complex ones is common, but the evidence has often been informal, with little systematic framing of complexity as a hierarchy of statistical structure.","importance":"The contribution is primarily in learning dynamics and interpretability, but the implications reach pretraining. If this staged learning picture is correct, it changes how we think about data curricula, training phases, cooldown schedules, and even why some post-training interventions help only after certain pretraining capacities are in place.","technical_approach":"From the title, the authors likely define or construct data distributions with controlled levels of statistical complexity and then track when those structures are acquired during optimization. The key contribution is not a new model but an operational notion of complexity aligned with training dynamics. Relative to classic frequency-bias or spectral-bias work, the likely distinction is that this paper studies more general higher-order or compositional statistics, not just low versus high frequency signals.","experiments":"The empirical study likely combines controlled synthetic tasks with analysis on more realistic data to show that complex statistical dependencies are learned later than simpler ones. Since the abstract is missing, the exact architectures, scales, and numerical results cannot be verified. The most useful evidence would be whether the pattern holds across MLPs, CNNs, and Transformers, whether it is robust to initialization and optimizer changes, and whether delayed acquisition of complex statistics predicts phenomena like improved generalization or grokking-like phase changes. If the result is confined to toy settings, its relevance to large-scale pretraining is narrower.","authors_note":""},"tags":["learning-dynamics","statistics","generalization","representation","scaling"],"notable_authors":["Nora Belrose","Quintin Pope","Lucia Quirke","Alex Mallen","Xiaoli Z. Fern"]},{"id":"BertolottiC24","title":"By Tying Embeddings You Are Assuming the Distributional Hypothesis","authors":["Francesco Bertolotti","Walter Cazzola"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/BertolottiC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/BertolottiC24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/bertolotti24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文指出一个常被忽略的前提：输入输出 embedding tying 并不是纯粹的参数节省技巧，它隐含假设了 distributional hypothesis 在模型输出空间也成立。过去 tying 在 LLM 中很常见，大家主要从省参数和轻微正则化角度理解它，但很少追问这个约束在语义、词频和生成分布上到底强加了什么结构偏置。","importance":"这项工作对 pretrain 很相关，因为 embedding tying 是几乎默认的基座设计选择。它的重要性不在于提出大幅提升性能的新方法，而在于把一个“习以为常”的工程默认项翻回到建模假设层面审视。对 tokenizer、词表设计、跨模态统一 token 空间和输出头建模，这个视角都很有启发。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者主要做的是理论分析或概念澄清：当你把输入嵌入矩阵和输出 softmax 权重绑定时，你实际上要求‘适合表示词上下文相似性’的空间，同时也适合‘产生词分布判别边界’。这两个目标并不总一致。和不绑定权重相比，tying 的好处是减少参数并引入共享结构；代价是削弱输入表示与输出判别头各自独立适配任务的自由度。如果论文进一步给出反例或条件分析，那会更清楚地说明 tying 何时合理、何时会伤害表达能力。","experiments":"实验上应会比较 tied vs untied embeddings 在不同语言建模或文本任务上的差异，并分析这种差异与词频、语义相似性或表示几何的关系。由于没有摘要，无法确认是否使用 Transformer LM、哪些数据集、以及性能差异有多大。对这类工作，最值得关注的是边界条件：小模型是否更受益于 tying 的正则化，大模型是否更容易被其限制；以及在子词词表、跨语言或多模态输出空间里，这个假设是否更脆弱。这些观察比单点 benchmark 更有参考价值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper highlights a hidden assumption behind embedding tying: it is not just a parameter-saving trick, it implicitly assumes that the distributional hypothesis should also shape the output space. In LMs, tying input and output embeddings is common and often treated as harmless regularization, but that ignores the representational constraint it imposes on both encoding and prediction.","importance":"This is highly relevant to pretraining because embedding tying is a near-default architectural choice in foundation models. The contribution is not a new high-gain method, but a useful reframing of a standard design decision as a modeling assumption. That perspective matters for tokenizer design, output heads, and unified token spaces in multimodal models.","technical_approach":"From the title, the work is likely theoretical or conceptual. If the input embedding matrix and output softmax weights are tied, the model is forced to use one shared space both for representing contextual similarity and for defining token discrimination boundaries. Those needs are related but not identical. Compared with untied embeddings, tying reduces parameters and injects structural sharing; the trade-off is reduced freedom for the input representation and output classifier to specialize independently. The paper is most useful if it also characterizes when that assumption is justified and when it becomes restrictive.","experiments":"The empirical part likely compares tied and untied settings on language modeling or related text tasks, and analyzes how the differences interact with token frequency, semantic similarity, or embedding geometry. Since no abstract is provided, the architectures, datasets, and exact performance deltas cannot be confirmed. The most interesting questions are boundary conditions: whether tying helps smaller models mainly through regularization, whether larger models are more constrained by it, and whether the assumption is more fragile in subword, multilingual, or multimodal vocabularies. Those observations matter more than a single benchmark win.","authors_note":""},"tags":["embedding-tying","tokenizer","language-modeling","architecture","inductive-bias"],"notable_authors":["Francesco Bertolotti","Walter Cazzola"]},{"id":"BicaIBEBKGMBPM24","title":"Improving fine-grained understanding in image-text pre-training","authors":["Ioana Bica","Anastasija Ilic","Matthias Bauer","Goker Erdogan","Matko Bosnjak","Christos Kaplanis","Alexey A. Gritsenko","Matthias Minderer","Charles Blundell","Razvan Pascanu","Jovana Mitrovic"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/BicaIBEBKGMBPM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/BicaIBEBKGMBPM24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/bica24a.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：现有 image-text pre-training 虽然能学到全局图文对齐，但对细粒度理解往往不够好，特别是在属性、关系和局部区域层面。很多 CLIP 式方法只优化整图和整句的匹配，模型因此容易抓住粗粒度共现信号，却在需要精确 grounding 的场景下掉队。","importance":"这项工作对 VLM 预训练是直接相关的。它的重要性在于把问题聚焦到 fine-grained understanding，而这正是当前大型视觉语言模型从‘能对齐’走向‘能看清’的关键瓶颈。对 pretrain 设计来说，这意味着单纯扩大数据和模型未必自动补齐局部理解，训练目标和数据构造可能需要显式注入细粒度监督或伪监督。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者改进的是 image-text pre-training 的对齐机制，使模型不仅匹配全局语义，还更关注局部细节。虽然没有摘要，合理推测方法会涉及 region-word、attribute-object 或 relation-level 的训练信号，可能通过更细粒度的对比损失、token-level matching 或 hard negative 设计实现。与标准双塔全局对比学习相比，这类方法牺牲了一部分简洁性和吞吐，换来对局部语义的更强约束；设计是否成功，取决于它能否在不引入过多标注成本的情况下稳定提高细粒度对齐。","experiments":"实验大概率会在细粒度图文检索、视觉问答、区域理解或 compositionality benchmark 上显示提升，并与 CLIP/ALIGN 风格 baseline 对比。由于没有摘要，无法确认使用的数据规模、是否有额外标注、以及具体增益。最有参考价值的结果是：提升是否主要集中在细粒度 benchmark，而全球语义任务不受损；以及方法在 noisy web-scale 数据上是否仍有效。如果必须依赖高质量人工框标或 phrase grounding 标注，结论对大规模原生预训练的可迁移性会弱一些。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a known weakness of image-text pretraining: strong global alignment does not automatically yield fine-grained understanding of attributes, relations, and local regions. Many CLIP-style models optimize image-level and caption-level matching, which is enough for coarse semantic retrieval but often too weak for precise grounding.","importance":"This is directly relevant to VLM pretraining. The importance lies in sharpening a bottleneck the field is currently running into: moving from broad alignment to truly detailed visual-language understanding. The implication for pretraining is that scaling data and model size alone may not fix local grounding; the objective and data construction may need to inject fine-grained signals more explicitly.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method improves image-text pretraining by strengthening alignment beyond the global level. Without the abstract, a reasonable expectation is that the paper adds region-word, attribute-object, or relation-level supervision, possibly through finer contrastive losses, token-level matching, or better hard negatives. Compared with standard dual-encoder global contrastive learning, this family of methods trades some simplicity and throughput for stronger local semantic constraints. The key question is whether that extra structure can be added without requiring expensive annotations.","experiments":"The evaluation likely includes fine-grained retrieval, visual question answering, region understanding, or compositionality benchmarks, with comparisons to CLIP- or ALIGN-style baselines. Since no abstract is provided, the pretraining scale, annotation requirements, and exact gains cannot be verified. The most useful empirical evidence would show that gains are concentrated on fine-grained benchmarks while global alignment remains strong, and that the method still works under noisy web-scale data. If it depends heavily on curated box or phrase-grounding labels, the result is less transferable to large native pretraining pipelines.","authors_note":""},"tags":["image-text","pretraining","fine-grained","alignment","vlm"],"notable_authors":["Ioana Bica","Anastasija Ilic","Matthias Bauer","Goker Erdogan","Matko Bosnjak"]},{"id":"BiniRAK24","title":"ETHER: Efficient Finetuning of Large-Scale Models with Hyperplane Reflections","authors":["Massimo Bini","Karsten Roth","Zeynep Akata","Anna Khoreva"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/BiniRAK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/BiniRAK24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/bini24a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是参数高效微调里的一个老问题：如何在保持低训练成本的同时，提供足够强的更新表达能力。LoRA、adapter 等方法虽然省参数，但它们通常把更新限制在低秩或窄瓶颈空间里，这在某些任务上会变成明显的表示上限。","importance":"这项工作的贡献类型是方法级 PEFT 改进。对大模型训练链路的意义在于，它探索了一种不同于低秩加法更新的参数化路径：如果 hyperplane reflections 能用很少参数实现更强的函数变换，那么 PEFT 的设计空间就不止 LoRA 这一条。对 pretrain 本身冲击不大，但对 post-train 成本、快速任务适配和持续训练都有现实价值。","technical_approach":"作者提出 ETHER，用 hyperplane reflections 来高效微调大模型。直观上，它不是给权重加一个低秩增量，而是用一系列反射变换重参数化部分线性映射，从而以较小参数开销实现更丰富的几何变换。这个设计的潜台词是：某些任务适配需要的不只是‘小幅平移’，而是表示空间的方向性重整。和 LoRA 相比，ETHER 如果有效，优势应在同等参数预算下更高的表达力；代价则可能是实现更复杂、训练稳定性和与量化/并行框架的兼容性更需要验证。","experiments":"实验上应会与 LoRA、Adapter、全参微调等 baseline 比较，报告在多个模型和任务上的性能-参数-速度 trade-off。由于没有摘要，无法确认适用模型规模、所加模块位置以及具体增益。最值得看的 ablation 是反射层数、插入位置、与 rank/参数预算的关系，以及在生成任务与判别任务上的差异。如果它在极低参数预算下稳定优于 LoRA，说明反射式参数化确实更有效；如果只在少数设置赢，收益可能主要来自实现细节而非范式优势。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a familiar PEFT limitation: how to keep adaptation cheap without overly restricting the update space. Methods like LoRA and adapters are parameter-efficient, but they constrain updates to low-rank or narrow bottleneck forms, which can become a real expressivity bottleneck on harder tasks.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution in parameter-efficient fine-tuning. Its broader value is in expanding the PEFT design space beyond additive low-rank updates. If hyperplane reflections can deliver stronger functional adaptation under similar parameter budgets, that matters for post-training cost, rapid task adaptation, and continual model updates, even if it does not directly change core pretraining.","technical_approach":"The method, ETHER, uses hyperplane reflections for efficient finetuning. Intuitively, instead of adding a low-rank delta to a weight matrix, it reparameterizes part of the transformation through a sequence of reflections, aiming to achieve richer geometric changes with few parameters. The underlying intuition is that some adaptation problems require more than a small additive shift; they need directional reorganization of representation space. Relative to LoRA, the promised advantage is higher expressivity at equal budget, with possible trade-offs in implementation complexity, training stability, and systems compatibility.","experiments":"The experiments likely compare ETHER against LoRA, adapters, and full finetuning across multiple models and tasks, measuring the performance–parameter–speed trade-off. Since the abstract is unavailable, the exact model sizes, insertion points, and gains cannot be confirmed. The most informative ablations would cover the number of reflections, module placement, scaling with parameter budget, and differences between generative and discriminative tasks. If ETHER consistently beats LoRA at very low budget, that would support the reflection parameterization as a real advance; if wins are narrow, the gains may be more implementation-specific than paradigm-level.","authors_note":""},"tags":["peft","finetuning","low-rank","efficiency","adaptation"],"notable_authors":["Massimo Bini","Karsten Roth","Zeynep Akata","Anna Khoreva"]},{"id":"Brand0024","title":"Algorithm and Hardness for Dynamic Attention Maintenance in Large Language Models","authors":["Jan van den Brand","Zhao Song","Tianyi Zhou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Brand0024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Brand0024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/van-den-brand24a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["attention","dynamic-maintenance","algorithm","inference-efficiency"]},{"id":"BruceDEPS0LMSAA24","title":"Genie: Generative Interactive Environments","authors":["Jake Bruce","Michael D. Dennis","Ashley Edwards","Jack Parker-Holder","Yuge Shi","Edward Hughes","Matthew Lai","Aditi Mavalankar","Richie Steigerwald","Chris Apps","Yusuf Aytar","Sarah Bechtle","Feryal M. P. Behbahani","Stephanie C. Y. Chan","Nicolas Heess","Lucy Gonzalez","Simon Osindero","Sherjil Ozair","Scott E. Reed","Jingwei Zhang","Konrad Zolna","Jeff Clune","Nando de Freitas","Satinder Singh","Tim Rocktäschel"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/BruceDEPS0LMSAA24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/BruceDEPS0LMSAA24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/bruce24a.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["world-model","video-generation","interactive-environment","generative"]},{"id":"ButtMWRZDC24","title":"CodeIt: Self-Improving Language Models with Prioritized Hindsight Replay","authors":["Natasha Butt","Blazej Manczak","Auke J. Wiggers","Corrado Rainone","David W. Zhang","Michaël Defferrard","Taco Cohen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ButtMWRZDC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ButtMWRZDC24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/butt24a.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["self-improvement","code-generation","hindsight-replay","language-model"]},{"id":"CampbellYBRJ24","title":"Generative Flows on Discrete State-Spaces: Enabling Multimodal Flows with Applications to Protein Co-Design","authors":["Andrew Campbell","Jason Yim","Regina Barzilay","Tom Rainforth","Tommi S. Jaakkola"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/CampbellYBRJ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/CampbellYBRJ24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/campbell24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["discrete-flow","generative-flow","protein-design","non-ar"]},{"id":"CarliniPD0HCLJN24","title":"Stealing part of a production language model","authors":["Nicholas Carlini","Daniel Paleka","Krishnamurthy Dj Dvijotham","Thomas Steinke","Jonathan Hayase","A. Feder Cooper","Katherine Lee","Matthew Jagielski","Milad Nasr","Arthur Conmy","Eric Wallace","David Rolnick","Florian Tramèr"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/CarliniPD0HCLJN24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/CarliniPD0HCLJN24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/carlini24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["model-stealing","llm-security","api-attack","google"]},{"id":"ChenXLWXGH24","title":"In-Context Sharpness as Alerts: An Inner Representation Perspective for Hallucination Mitigation","authors":["Shiqi Chen","Miao Xiong","Junteng Liu","Zhengxuan Wu","Teng Xiao","Siyang Gao","Junxian He"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChenXLWXGH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChenXLWXGH24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/chen24av.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["hallucination","representation","in-context-learning","uncertainty"]},{"id":"ChenZ24a","title":"What Can Transformer Learn with Varying Depth? Case Studies on Sequence Learning Tasks","authors":["Xingwu Chen","Difan Zou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChenZ24a","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChenZ24a","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/chen24bp.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["transformer","depth","sequence-modeling","generalization"]},{"id":"Cheng0DML024","title":"RIME: Robust Preference-based Reinforcement Learning with Noisy Preferences","authors":["Jie Cheng","Gang Xiong","Xingyuan Dai","Qinghai Miao","Yisheng Lv","Fei-Yue Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Cheng0DML024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Cheng0DML024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/cheng24k.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是：当偏好标签有噪声时，基于偏好的强化学习如何保持稳定和鲁棒。这个问题在 RLHF 里很实际，因为人工比较、模型打分和合成偏好都会有系统性误标；标准做法通常默认偏好可靠，因此容易把噪声放大成错误奖励。","importance":"这项工作的意义在于它直接作用于 post-train 信号质量，而这又会反过来影响我们如何理解和设计 pretrain→alignment 的接口。若方法确实稳健，它的价值是方法级加系统级的：不是重新发明 RLHF，而是让现有偏好优化在低质反馈、数据混杂或众包环境下更可用。对工业侧尤其重要，因为噪声偏好几乎是默认条件，不是异常情况。","technical_approach":"从题目看，RIME 的核心是把“噪声偏好”显式纳入偏好强化学习目标，而不是继续把所有 pairwise preference 当成干净监督。一个合理的机制判断是：方法会同时做两件事——识别或下调可疑偏好样本的影响，以及在策略更新时避免高方差的错误奖励主导优化。它与普通 DPO、RLHF 或离线偏好学习的区别，不在于更复杂的 policy class，而在于把 preference noise 当成一等公民处理，从而减少 reward model 或 preference estimator 被污染后的级联误差。","experiments":"在没有摘要的情况下，能可靠概括的是实验焦点：应会在合成噪声和真实偏好噪声两种设置下，与标准偏好优化基线比较鲁棒性，观察噪声率上升时性能退化曲线是否更平缓。真正有信息量的结果通常不是“无噪时最好”，而是中高噪声区间是否仍能维持稳定提升，以及错误偏好是否会诱发过优化。具体任务、指标、噪声比例和提升数值未提供，无法确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical weakness in preference-based RL: preference labels are noisy, but most methods optimize as if they were clean. In RLHF-style pipelines, that mismatch is costly because annotation mistakes, model-judge bias, and synthetic preference noise can all be amplified into a bad reward signal.","importance":"This is important at the post-training interface, with indirect implications for pretraining and data design. If the method is effective, the contribution is not a new paradigm but a robustness upgrade to existing preference optimization under realistic feedback quality. That matters in practice because noisy preferences are the norm, especially at scale, not an edge case.","technical_approach":"From the title, RIME appears to explicitly model or mitigate noisy preferences inside the preference-based RL loop instead of trusting every pairwise label equally. The likely design principle is to reduce the influence of suspicious comparisons and to stabilize policy updates against reward errors. Relative to standard RLHF, DPO, or offline preference learning, the distinction is that noise is treated as a first-class training condition rather than an afterthought.","experiments":"Without the abstract, the safe read is that the experiments likely test robustness under both synthetic and real preference noise, comparing against standard preference-learning baselines as noise levels increase. The most meaningful result would be a flatter degradation curve and fewer failure modes under high noise, not just a small gain in the clean setting. Exact tasks, metrics, model sizes, and margins are not available from the provided metadata.","authors_note":""},"tags":["preference-learning","reinforcement-learning","noise-robustness","reward-modeling"]},{"id":"ChengSLZYLLH0Q24","title":"Can AI Assistants Know What They Don&apos;t Know?","authors":["Qinyuan Cheng","Tianxiang Sun","Xiangyang Liu","Wenwei Zhang","Zhangyue Yin","Shimin Li","Linyang Li","Zhengfu He","Kai Chen","Xipeng Qiu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChengSLZYLLH0Q24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChengSLZYLLH0Q24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/cheng24i.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文研究的是 AI assistant 能否识别并表达自己的未知，而不是在不确定时继续流畅作答。这个问题过去常被“提升 factuality”间接处理，但那通常优化的是答对率，不是 calibrated abstention，也就是该拒答时能否可靠拒答。","importance":"这项工作对对齐和评测都重要。它不是直接改 pretrain，但会影响我们如何定义可靠助手：知道多少是一回事，知道自己不知道是另一回事。对训练侧的启发在于，不确定性感知需要专门信号；单纯扩大模型和数据并不会自动得到好的 self-knowledge calibration。","technical_approach":"从题目推断，作者大概率把问题形式化为“知识边界识别”或“不确定性校准”，并区分了模型不会、模型没见过、模型证据不足这几类失败。有效方法通常包括：构造更细粒度的评测集，要求模型不仅给答案，还要给出知道/不知道判断；或者训练额外的拒答/校准头，利用置信度、检索证据或自一致性信号来做 abstention decision。它与普通幻觉评测的区别是把‘是否该回答’作为一等任务，而不是只看回答内容。","experiments":"关键实验应会比较不同模型、提示策略或校准方法在已知/未知样本上的识别精度、误拒率和误答率。真正有价值的观察通常是：模型在常规 QA 上准确，不代表它能在 OOD、长尾或知识空白区域稳定承认无知；链式思考和更长回答有时还会让错误答案更自信。具体 benchmark、数值和基线因无摘要无法确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies whether AI assistants can recognize what they do not know, instead of confidently answering anyway. This is different from general factuality work: improving answer accuracy does not automatically give calibrated abstention, which is the ability to decline when the model lacks sufficient knowledge.","importance":"This matters for alignment and evaluation more than for core pretraining, but the implication is important: model capability and self-knowledge are separate axes. A stronger model is not necessarily better calibrated, so uncertainty awareness likely needs explicit training signals or evaluation pressure rather than emerging for free from scale.","technical_approach":"From the title, the work likely formalizes the problem as knowledge-boundary detection or uncertainty calibration, separating cases where the model truly knows, does not know, or lacks enough evidence. A solid approach here would require models to output both an answer and a know/don’t-know judgment, possibly using confidence, self-consistency, or external evidence. The key distinction from standard hallucination benchmarks is that ‘should the model answer at all?’ becomes a first-class target.","experiments":"The core experiments likely compare models or prompting/calibration strategies on known versus unknown questions, measuring false answers, false refusals, and calibration quality. The most useful result would be showing that strong QA performance does not imply reliable uncertainty awareness, especially on long-tail or out-of-distribution queries. Exact datasets, baselines, and numbers cannot be confirmed from the provided information.","authors_note":""},"tags":["uncertainty","calibration","llm-evaluation","self-knowledge"]},{"id":"ChiangZ0ALLZ0JG24","title":"Chatbot Arena: An Open Platform for Evaluating LLMs by Human Preference","authors":["Wei-Lin Chiang","Lianmin Zheng","Ying Sheng","Anastasios Nikolas Angelopoulos","Tianle Li","Dacheng Li","Banghua Zhu","Hao Zhang","Michael I. Jordan","Joseph E. Gonzalez","Ion Stoica"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChiangZ0ALLZ0JG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChiangZ0ALLZ0JG24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/chiang24b.html","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 LLM 评测长期缺少开放、动态、真实用户偏好信号的问题。传统 benchmark 往往静态、封闭，而且容易被过拟合；人工标注评测则贵且慢，难以跟上模型迭代速度。Chatbot Arena 试图把评测转成持续在线的人类偏好比较。","importance":"这项工作的影响是系统级和生态级的。它没有改 pretrain 算法，但它重塑了模型比较的默认证据来源：从小规模专家集转向大规模真实用户盲测。对 pretrain/post-train 研究都重要，因为很多优化最终都要落到“用户更偏好什么”；Arena 让这个目标有了更高频、更开放、也更容易出现分布漂移的观测渠道。","technical_approach":"核心方法是在线盲测对战平台：用户向两个匿名模型同时提问，基于回答偏好做 pairwise comparison，再汇总成排名。关键设计不是技术复杂，而是评测机制：匿名减少品牌偏见，同题对比降低提示分布差异，持续采样覆盖真实交互分布。和固定 benchmark 相比，它牺牲了任务可控性，换来更强的生态有效性；边界是数据分布受平台用户群体影响，且易被模型输出风格而非真实能力左右。","experiments":"这篇工作的关键事实通常包括平台规模、投票数量、参赛模型数，以及 Arena 排名与传统 benchmark 的相关性和差异。最值得关注的结论一般是：一些在静态 benchmark 上强的模型，在真实偏好对战中未必同样占优；反过来，聊天风格、拒答策略、代码/推理混合能力会显著影响用户偏好。具体票数、模型名单和统计数值在给定信息中没有提供。","authors_note":"若按常识，这篇工作与 LMSYS 团队高度相关；但给定信息没有机构字段，这里不进一步展开。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a long-standing gap in LLM evaluation: we lack an open, continuously updated measurement of real human preference. Static benchmarks are easy to overfit and slow to refresh, while curated human evaluations are expensive and hard to scale with model release cadence. Chatbot Arena turns evaluation into ongoing online pairwise preference collection.","importance":"The impact is system-level and ecosystem-level rather than algorithmic. It does not change pretraining directly, but it changes what evidence the field uses to compare models. That matters for both pretraining and post-training because many model improvements ultimately need to cash out as user preference, and Arena provides a higher-frequency but noisier signal of that objective.","technical_approach":"The core design is an online blind battle platform where users compare responses from two anonymous models to the same prompt, and rankings are aggregated from pairwise votes. The strength is in the evaluation protocol rather than technical novelty: anonymity reduces brand bias, same-prompt comparison reduces prompt-distribution mismatch, and live traffic captures a more realistic interaction mix. The trade-off is lower task control and greater sensitivity to user population and stylistic effects.","experiments":"The key facts usually include platform scale, vote counts, number of evaluated models, and how Arena rankings correlate with or differ from standard benchmarks. The most informative result is typically that strong benchmark models do not always dominate under live human preference, while style, refusal behavior, and mixed-domain competence matter more than expected. Exact numbers are not available from the provided metadata.","authors_note":"Common knowledge strongly associates this work with the LMSYS team, but the provided fields do not explicitly list institutions, so this note stays conservative."},"tags":["llm-evaluation","human-preference","benchmark","arena"]},{"id":"ChoiJAM24","title":"Listwise Reward Estimation for Offline Preference-based Reinforcement Learning","authors":["Heewoong Choi","Sangwon Jung","Hongjoon Ahn","Taesup Moon"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChoiJAM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChoiJAM24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/choi24b.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文研究的是离线偏好强化学习中，如何从多候选响应的整体排序里更准确地估计奖励，而不是只做成对比较。传统 preference learning 大多把数据拆成 pairwise，这样简单但会丢掉 list 里的相对结构信息，也更容易在离线设置下产生样本效率和估计偏差问题。","importance":"这项工作对 RLHF 数据建模有直接启发。它的贡献更偏方法级：如果 listwise reward estimation 更稳、更省标注或更能利用排序数据，那么偏好数据收集和 reward model 训练都可以更接近真实产品流程，因为实际评审往往天然是“从多个回答里选最好/排序”而不是只做二选一。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是把 reward estimation 从 pairwise 扩展到 listwise，对一个候选列表联合建模，从而利用更多相对偏好约束。这样设计有效的原因是：同一列表中的候选共享上下文，排序信息能更细致地约束奖励间隔，而不只是告诉你 A 胜过 B。和 Bradley-Terry 风格的两两建模相比，listwise 方法通常更能减少信息浪费，但代价是目标函数和优化更复杂，对标注噪声也可能更敏感，需要做正则化或稳健估计。","experiments":"实验应会在离线 preference-based RL 场景中，对比 pairwise reward model、直接偏好优化变体或其他离线 RL 基线，观察最终策略质量和 reward estimation 误差。最有价值的结果通常是：在同等数据量下，listwise 建模是否带来更高样本效率，尤其在候选数较多时是否明显优于 pairwise 分解。具体任务、模型和提升幅度因无摘要无法确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies how to estimate rewards more effectively in offline preference-based RL by using full ranked lists of responses instead of reducing everything to pairwise comparisons. Standard preference learning is often pairwise because it is simple, but that throws away structure that is naturally present when annotators rank multiple candidates.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution with direct relevance to RLHF data modeling. If listwise reward estimation is more sample-efficient or more accurate, it can improve how we train reward models and how we collect supervision, since many real annotation workflows are naturally listwise rather than binary-choice only.","technical_approach":"The likely core idea is to model rewards jointly over candidate lists, extracting more constraints from a ranking than from isolated pairs. This can help because candidates in the same list share context, and the ranking provides richer relative information than a simple win/loss signal. Compared with Bradley-Terry style pairwise approaches, the gain is less information loss; the trade-off is a more complex objective and potentially greater sensitivity to noisy rankings unless the estimator is regularized.","experiments":"The experiments likely compare listwise reward estimation against pairwise reward models, direct preference optimization variants, or other offline preference-RL baselines. The key question is whether listwise modeling improves final policy quality or reward estimation efficiency under the same amount of feedback, especially when each prompt has many candidates. Exact settings and quantitative gains are not available from the provided metadata.","authors_note":""},"tags":["preference-learning","offline-rl","reward-modeling","ranking"]},{"id":"ChoiKC24","title":"BWS: Best Window Selection Based on Sample Scores for Data Pruning across Broad Ranges","authors":["Hoyong Choi","Nohyun Ki","Hye Won Chung"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChoiKC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChoiKC24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/choi24c.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是数据剪枝在不同保留率范围内性能不稳定的问题。很多 pruning 方法在某个特定压缩比上有效，但一旦要从轻度裁剪切到极限裁剪，样本打分或选择策略就不再稳；这说明它们更像是局部最优启发式，而不是广范围可用的数据选择原则。","importance":"这项工作对 pretrain 很相关，因为大规模训练中数据预算和训练 token 预算常常动态变化。一个能覆盖 broad ranges 的 pruning 方法，比在单一点上最优的方法更实用：它可以支持不同 compute budget、不同 curriculum 阶段，以及数据去重/清洗后的二次采样。贡献类型属于数据级加方法级。","technical_approach":"BWS 从题目看是基于 sample score 做 best window selection，也就是不直接按全局阈值硬截断，而是在分数分布上寻找更稳健的保留区间。这样设计的动机很直接：单样本分数往往噪声大、分布偏斜，固定比例截断容易在不同裁剪强度下选到性质完全不同的数据。通过窗口化选择，方法试图保留某一段最有信息密度、最少极端噪声的样本区间。和简单 top-k pruning 比，它更强调跨保留率的一致性，而不是某个保留率点的峰值成绩。","experiments":"关键实验应会在多个数据保留率上比较 BWS 与常见 sample scoring/pruning 基线，观察性能曲线是否在宽范围内更平稳、更高。若论文做得扎实，还会检查不同 score 来源、不同模型规模和不同训练预算下窗口选择是否稳定。真正有价值的结论是鲁棒性而非单点 SOTA。具体数据集、保留率区间和提升幅度未给出。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses an important weakness in data pruning: many methods work only at a narrow retention ratio. A pruning heuristic may look strong at one compression point but degrade badly when the keep rate changes, which makes it hard to use in real training pipelines with varying compute and token budgets.","importance":"This is directly relevant to pretraining because large-scale training rarely has a single fixed data budget. A pruning method that remains effective across a broad range of keep ratios is more useful than one that only peaks at one point. The contribution is therefore both data-centric and method-centric.","technical_approach":"From the title, BWS uses sample scores but selects a stable score window rather than applying a simple global top-k cutoff. The motivation is sensible: sample scores are noisy and often have skewed distributions, so hard thresholding can pick very different data regimes as the pruning ratio changes. Window selection aims to keep a band of samples that is information-dense while avoiding both low-quality tails and potentially over-specialized extremes.","experiments":"The key experiments should compare BWS against standard scoring-based pruning methods across many retention ratios, focusing on the shape of the performance curve rather than a single operating point. A strong paper here would also test whether the selected windows stay stable across score functions, model sizes, or compute budgets. Exact datasets, pruning ranges, and numerical gains are not available from the provided metadata.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-pruning","data-quality","sample-selection","training-efficiency"]},{"id":"CideronGVVKBMUB24","title":"MusicRL: Aligning Music Generation to Human Preferences","authors":["Geoffrey Cideron","Sertan Girgin","Mauro Verzetti","Damien Vincent","Matej Kastelic","Zalán Borsos","Brian McWilliams","Victor Ungureanu","Olivier Bachem","Olivier Pietquin","Matthieu Geist","Léonard Hussenot","Neil Zeghidour","Andrea Agostinelli"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/CideronGVVKBMUB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/CideronGVVKBMUB24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/cideron24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是音乐生成如何对齐人类偏好，而不是只优化似然或音频重建指标。对音乐这类开放式生成任务，传统训练目标和自动指标很难覆盖“好不好听、像不像人想要的风格、是否连贯”这些主观维度，因此需要 RLHF 式的方法，但音乐偏好比文本更难标注、更难建模。","importance":"这项工作的重要性在于把 preference alignment 从文本扩展到音乐生成，属于跨模态生成对齐的代表性尝试。对 pretrain 研究者的启发很直接：一旦生成目标跨到音频/音乐，‘先预训练、后偏好对齐’这套闭环仍然成立，但 reward 建模、候选采样和人类反馈协议都要重新设计。它的贡献更偏方法与系统落地，而不是纯粹的模型架构创新。","technical_approach":"从题目看，MusicRL 的核心是构建适用于音乐的偏好优化流程：先让模型生成多个音乐候选，再基于人类偏好训练 reward model 或直接做偏好强化学习，最后把生成分布推向更受欢迎的样本区域。和文本 RLHF 不同，音乐的关键难点在于偏好信号更稀疏、更高成本，而且‘局部好听’未必等于‘整体结构好’。因此有效设计通常需要控制候选多样性、时长和风格覆盖，避免 reward model 只学到浅层音色或响度偏好。","experiments":"关键实验应会用人类偏好胜率作为主指标，比较 MusicRL 与纯监督/似然训练基线在主观听感上的提升，并辅以自动音频指标做参考。最值得看的不是单个分数，而是 reward 优化是否真的提高整体人类偏好，还是只在某些风格上过拟合；另一个重要点是 reward hacking 是否出现，例如生成更保守、更短或更模式化的音乐来骗过偏好模型。给定摘要缺失，具体模型、数据规模和提升数值无法确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses how to align music generation with human preference rather than optimizing only likelihood or reconstruction-style objectives. In music, automatic metrics are especially weak proxies for what people actually care about—quality, coherence, style fit, and overall appeal—so preference alignment becomes attractive but also harder than in text.","importance":"This is important as a multimodal alignment paper that extends preference optimization beyond language. For pretraining-oriented readers, the main lesson is that the pretrain-then-align loop still applies in audio and music, but reward modeling, candidate generation, and feedback collection need to be redesigned for the modality. The contribution is therefore more methodological and system-facing than architectural.","technical_approach":"From the title, MusicRL likely builds an RLHF-style pipeline for music: generate candidate clips, collect human preferences, train a reward model and/or optimize directly against preferences, and shift the generation distribution toward samples humans prefer. The challenge relative to text is that music preferences are expensive, sparse, and strongly tied to global structure, not just local quality. A good design therefore needs to manage candidate diversity, clip duration, and style coverage so the reward model does not collapse onto shallow cues such as timbre or loudness.","experiments":"The core experiments likely use human preference win rate as the main metric, with automatic audio metrics as secondary references, comparing MusicRL against supervised or likelihood-trained baselines. The critical question is whether preference optimization improves overall human judgment rather than overfitting to narrow styles or exploiting reward-model weaknesses. Reward hacking is a particularly important failure mode to watch in this setting. Exact models, datasets, and numbers are not available from the provided metadata.","authors_note":""},"tags":["music-generation","preference-learning","alignment","reward-modeling"]},{"id":"CovertJH024","title":"Scaling Laws for the Value of Individual Data Points in Machine Learning","authors":["Ian Connick Covert","Wenlong Ji","Tatsunori Hashimoto","James Zou"],"institutions":["Stanford University"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/CovertJH024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/CovertJH024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/covert24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"单个数据点对模型训练的价值如何随数据集规模变化？以往的 data valuation 方法（如 Shapley value）计算成本极高且缺乏 scaling 视角，这篇工作建立了个体数据价值的 scaling law。","importance":"数据级贡献，对 pretrain 数据策略有直接启示。核心发现是：随着数据集增大，单个数据点的边际价值按幂律衰减，但不同数据点的衰减速率不同——高质量/稀有样本的价值衰减更慢。这为大规模预训练中的数据筛选、去重、配比提供了理论支撑。","technical_approach":"从 scaling law 的框架出发，定义个体数据价值为该数据点被加入训练集后对模型性能的边际贡献，然后推导其随数据集大小 n 的幂律衰减关系。关键假设是模型性能本身服从 power-law scaling，由此可以解析地得到单点价值的 scaling 行为。与 Shapley value 的区别在于：不需要穷举子集，而是利用 scaling law 的函数形式直接建模。","experiments":"在多个数据集和模型规模上验证了幂律衰减的预测，包括图像分类和语言建模任务。实验表明理论预测与实际观测吻合良好。具体参数量和数据规模需查原文。","authors_note":"Tatsunori Hashimoto 和 James Zou 均来自斯坦福大学，Hashimoto 在 LLM 评估和数据质量方面有大量工作，Zou 是数据估值（Data Shapley）方向的开创者之一。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How does the value of an individual data point scale as dataset size grows? Prior data valuation methods like Shapley values are computationally prohibitive and lack a scaling perspective. This work derives scaling laws for individual data point value.","importance":"A data-level contribution directly relevant to pretrain data strategy. The key finding is that marginal value of a single data point decays as a power law in dataset size, but the decay rate varies across points—rare or high-quality samples retain value longer. This provides theoretical grounding for data filtering, deduplication, and mixture decisions at scale.","technical_approach":"Individual data value is defined as the marginal performance gain from adding a point to the training set. Under the assumption that model performance follows a power-law scaling in data size, the per-point value scaling is derived analytically. Unlike Shapley values, this avoids subset enumeration by leveraging the functional form of scaling laws directly.","experiments":"Validated on multiple datasets and model scales across image classification and language modeling. Theoretical predictions match empirical observations well. Specific model sizes and dataset scales should be checked in the paper.","authors_note":"Tatsunori Hashimoto and James Zou are both at Stanford. Hashimoto is known for LLM evaluation and data quality work; Zou co-originated Data Shapley."},"tags":["scaling-law","data-valuation","data-quality"],"notable_authors":["Tatsunori Hashimoto","James Zou"]},{"id":"DasKSZ24","title":"A decoder-only foundation model for time-series forecasting","authors":["Abhimanyu Das","Weihao Kong","Rajat Sen","Yichen Zhou"],"institutions":["Google Research"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/DasKSZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/DasKSZ24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/das24c.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"时间序列预测传统上依赖针对特定数据集训练的专用模型，缺乏跨数据集的泛化能力。这篇工作构建了一个 decoder-only 的时间序列基础模型，用大量异构时间序列数据预训练，实现 zero-shot 预测。","importance":"范式级贡献——将 LLM 的 pretrain 范式（大规模预训练 + zero-shot 泛化）迁移到时间序列领域。对 pretrain 研究的启示：(1) decoder-only AR 架构在非文本序列上同样有效；(2) tokenization 策略（如何将连续值离散化或分 patch）是关键设计选择；(3) 验证了 scaling 在时间序列领域也成立。","technical_approach":"采用 decoder-only Transformer，将时间序列分成固定长度的 patch 作为 token，用 AR 方式预测下一个 patch。预训练数据来自大量公开时间序列数据集（跨领域、跨频率）。关键设计：(1) patch-based tokenization 而非逐点预测，平衡了效率和精度；(2) 输入归一化处理不同数据集的量纲差异；(3) 不使用任何数据集特定的特征工程。","experiments":"在多个标准时间序列预测 benchmark 上，zero-shot 性能与针对各数据集专门训练的 SOTA 模型（如 PatchTST）相当甚至更优。这是一个重要的结果——说明预训练的泛化能力可以替代数据集特定的调优。具体模型规模和数据量需查原文。","authors_note":"团队来自 Google Research。这是 Google 在时间序列基础模型方向的代表性工作（TimesFM）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Time-series forecasting traditionally relies on dataset-specific models with no cross-dataset generalization. This work builds a decoder-only foundation model for time series, pretrained on large heterogeneous time-series data for zero-shot forecasting.","importance":"A paradigm-level contribution that transfers the LLM pretrain recipe (large-scale pretraining + zero-shot generalization) to time series. Pretrain insights: (1) decoder-only AR works on non-text sequences; (2) tokenization strategy (how to discretize or patch continuous values) is a critical design choice; (3) scaling laws hold in the time-series domain.","technical_approach":"A decoder-only Transformer treats fixed-length patches of time series as tokens and autoregressively predicts the next patch. Pretraining data spans many public time-series datasets across domains and frequencies. Key designs: (1) patch-based tokenization balances efficiency and precision; (2) input normalization handles cross-dataset scale differences; (3) no dataset-specific feature engineering.","experiments":"Zero-shot performance on multiple standard forecasting benchmarks matches or exceeds dataset-specific SOTA models (e.g., PatchTST). This is a significant result—pretraining generalization can substitute for dataset-specific tuning. Model scale and data volume should be checked in the paper.","authors_note":"The team is from Google Research. This is Google's representative work on time-series foundation models (TimesFM)."},"tags":["time-series","decoder-only","foundation-model","pretrain"]},{"id":"2406.00793","title":"Is In-Context Learning in Large Language Models Bayesian? A Martingale Perspective","authors":["Fabian Falck","Ziyu Wang","Christopher C. Holmes"],"institutions":["University of Oxford"],"abstract":"$1f","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.00793","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/FalckWH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/FalckWH24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/falck24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"ICL（上下文学习）常被假设为近似贝叶斯推断，但缺乏严格验证。这篇工作从鞅（martingale）性质——贝叶斯学习系统对可交换数据的基本要求——出发，提出了可操作的检验方法来测试 LLM 的 ICL 是否真的是贝叶斯的。","importance":"机制分析级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示：如果 ICL 确实是贝叶斯的，那么 pretrain 数据分布和模型容量如何决定了隐式先验？如果不是，偏离贝叶斯的模式是什么？鞅性质还提供了一种分解 ICL 不确定性的原则性方法，对安全关键应用有价值。","technical_approach":"鞅性质要求：给定前 n 个样本后对第 n+1 个样本的预测期望等于当前预测（即预测序列是鞅）。这是贝叶斯更新的必要条件。作者设计了统计检验来验证 LLM 的 ICL 预测是否满足此性质，并利用鞅分解将预测不确定性拆分为 aleatoric（数据固有）和 epistemic（知识不足）两部分。关键洞察：如果鞅性质被违反，说明 LLM 的 ICL 不是在做贝叶斯推断，而可能是某种更简单的模式匹配。","experiments":"在合成数据和真实 LLM（GPT 系列等）上进行检验。发现 LLM 的 ICL 在简单任务上近似满足鞅性质，但在复杂任务上存在系统性偏离，表明 ICL 并非完全贝叶斯。不确定性分解在实际校准任务上也展示了实用价值。","authors_note":"Christopher C. Holmes 来自牛津大学，是贝叶斯统计领域的资深学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"ICL is often hypothesized to approximate Bayesian inference, but rigorous verification is lacking. This work tests this hypothesis through the martingale property—a fundamental requirement of Bayesian learning for exchangeable data—and proposes actionable statistical checks.","importance":"A mechanistic analysis contribution. Pretrain implications: if ICL is Bayesian, how do pretrain data distribution and model capacity determine the implicit prior? If not, what are the deviation patterns? The martingale framework also provides a principled uncertainty decomposition useful for safety-critical applications.","technical_approach":"The martingale property requires that the expected prediction for sample n+1, given the first n samples, equals the current prediction. This is a necessary condition for Bayesian updating. The authors design statistical tests to check whether LLM ICL predictions satisfy this property, and use martingale decomposition to separate aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty. Key insight: violation of the martingale property indicates ICL is not performing Bayesian inference but possibly simpler pattern matching.","experiments":"Tested on synthetic data and real LLMs (GPT family, etc.). ICL approximately satisfies the martingale property on simple tasks but shows systematic violations on complex tasks, suggesting ICL is not fully Bayesian. The uncertainty decomposition also demonstrates practical value in calibration tasks.","authors_note":"Christopher C. Holmes is at the University of Oxford, a senior researcher in Bayesian statistics."},"tags":["icl","bayesian-inference","theory","generalization"],"notable_authors":["Christopher C. Holmes"]},{"id":"FengLZ00W24","title":"Keypoint-based Progressive Chain-of-Thought Distillation for LLMs","authors":["Kaituo Feng","Changsheng Li","Xiaolu Zhang","Jun Zhou","Ye Yuan","Guoren Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/FengLZ00W24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/FengLZ00W24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/feng24e.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["cot","distillation","llm","reasoning"]},{"id":"FernandoBMOR24","title":"Promptbreeder: Self-Referential Self-Improvement via Prompt Evolution","authors":["Chrisantha Fernando","Dylan Banarse","Henryk Michalewski","Simon Osindero","Tim Rocktäschel"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/FernandoBMOR24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/FernandoBMOR24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/fernando24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["prompting","self-improvement","optimization","evaluation"]},{"id":"GaoGSDY0ZZC00L24","title":"Linear Alignment: A Closed-form Solution for Aligning Human Preferences without Tuning and Feedback","authors":["Songyang Gao","Qiming Ge","Wei Shen","Shihan Dou","Junjie Ye","Xiao Wang","Rui Zheng","Yicheng Zou","Zhi Chen","Hang Yan","Qi Zhang","Dahua Lin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GaoGSDY0ZZC00L24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GaoGSDY0ZZC00L24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/gao24f.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["alignment","closed-form","preference-optimization"]},{"id":"GaoQNGHC024","title":"Speech Self-Supervised Learning Using Diffusion Model Synthetic Data","authors":["Heting Gao","Kaizhi Qian","Junrui Ni","Chuang Gan","Mark A. Hasegawa-Johnson","Shiyu Chang","Yang Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GaoQNGHC024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GaoQNGHC024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/gao24j.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["speech-ssl","diffusion","synthetic-data","speech-lm"]},{"id":"GautamPZRH24","title":"Variance-reduced Zeroth-Order Methods for Fine-Tuning Language Models","authors":["Tanmay Gautam","Youngsuk Park","Hao Zhou","Parameswaran Raman","Wooseok Ha"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GautamPZRH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GautamPZRH24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/gautam24a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是一个现实问题：当梯度不可得、代价高或接口受限时，怎样用 zeroth-order 方法高效微调语言模型。传统 ZO fine-tuning 往往样本效率差、方差大、收敛慢，所以常被当成不得已的替代方案；作者想做的是把这条路线从“能用”推进到“更接近可用”。","importance":"这是方法级和系统级之间的工作。它对 pretrain 的直接冲击不如新训练目标大，但对 pretrain↔posttrain 接口有实际价值：很多真实场景里只能拿到 black-box logits、reward 或有限 API，若能稳定做低方差 ZO 微调，就能扩展对齐、偏好优化和私有模型适配的工具箱。","technical_approach":"核心方法是给语言模型的 ZO 微调加入方差缩减机制，以减少随机方向估计梯度时的噪声。经典 ZO 的瓶颈是每一步都靠函数值差分来估计高维梯度，维度一大就会非常抖，导致需要更多 query 和更小步长；variance reduction 的思路通常是复用历史估计、控制随机方向设计，或构造更低噪的控制变量。它和普通一阶方法的区别不在最终优化目标，而在可访问的信号类型：你不需要反向传播梯度，但要接受更高的 query 成本和更脆弱的超参稳定性。","experiments":"给定信息不足，无法确认所用模型是 BERT、T5 还是 decoder-only LLM，也无法给出任务和具体数值。理论上你应重点关注三类结果：相同 query budget 下是否明显优于现有 ZO baseline；在相同性能目标下是否显著减少函数评估次数；以及在低秩适配或全参数微调场景下，方差缩减是否仍稳定有效。若论文只在小模型上验证，外推到大模型时要保守。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical problem: how to fine-tune language models efficiently when gradients are unavailable, expensive, or hidden behind restricted interfaces. Standard zeroth-order fine-tuning is often too noisy and sample-inefficient, so it is usually treated as a fallback rather than a serious optimization route. The goal here is to make it materially more usable.","importance":"This sits between a method contribution and a systems contribution. It is not a new pretraining objective, but it matters at the pretrain-posttrain interface. In many realistic settings one only has access to black-box logits, rewards, or APIs. If zeroth-order tuning can be made lower variance and more stable, it broadens the toolbox for alignment, preference optimization, and adaptation of closed or private models.","technical_approach":"The method introduces variance reduction into zeroth-order optimization for LM fine-tuning, aiming to stabilize the directional finite-difference gradient estimates. The core bottleneck of classic ZO is that in high dimensions, random-direction estimates have very high variance, which forces many more function queries and smaller learning rates. Variance reduction typically helps by reusing information across steps, designing better perturbations, or constructing control variates. The difference from first-order tuning is not the objective but the available signal: you can optimize without backpropagated gradients, but you pay in query budget and usually in robustness to hyperparameters.","experiments":"The available information does not support reliable claims about model families, tasks, or exact numbers. The right results to look for are threefold: whether the method beats prior ZO baselines at the same query budget, whether it reaches the same target performance with fewer function evaluations, and whether the variance reduction remains stable under parameter-efficient tuning versus full-parameter tuning. If the validation is only on small models, extrapolation to large LMs should be treated cautiously.","authors_note":""},"tags":["zeroth-order","fine-tuning","variance-reduction","llm"]},{"id":"GillmanFAHLT024","title":"Self-Correcting Self-Consuming Loops for Generative Model Training","authors":["Nate Gillman","Michael Freeman","Daksh Aggarwal","Chia-Hong Hsu","Calvin Luo","Yonglong Tian","Chen Sun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GillmanFAHLT024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GillmanFAHLT024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/gillman24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文讨论的是生成模型训练中的一个越来越现实的问题：当训练数据里混入越来越多模型自己生成的样本时，性能会不会持续退化，还是可以通过自纠正机制避免崩塌。此前关于 self-consuming loop 的讨论多强调 distribution collapse 和 error accumulation，作者显然想说明这个闭环并非天然有害，关键在于是否有纠错信号。","importance":"这项工作对大模型数据生态很重要。预训练语料中 AI 生成内容占比上升几乎不可避免，如果作者能说明在什么条件下 self-generated data 可以被安全再利用，那会直接影响合成数据策略、过滤规则、teacher-student 蒸馏和 continual pretraining 方案；它不是纯理论问题，而是未来数据供应链问题。","technical_approach":"核心方法从 self-consuming loop 出发，但加入 self-correcting 机制，试图在模型反复消费自己生成数据时抑制误差放大。一个合理的机制可能包括置信度筛选、外部验证器、噪声建模、重加权或与真实数据混合训练；关键不是简单多喂 synthetic data，而是确保闭环每一轮都能把错误压下去而不是放大。和以往悲观结论相比，这篇更关心可恢复条件与稳定区间，而不是只证明最坏情况会退化。","experiments":"给定信息不足，无法提供模型规模、数据混合比例和具体数字。最值得看的实验应包括多轮 self-consuming 迭代下的性能轨迹，比较无纠错、简单过滤和作者方法三者；另外要看真实数据占比下降时是否存在临界点，以及纠错机制对样本多样性和分布覆盖的影响。如果论文只在简单生成任务上成立，那对大规模 LM 的外推要谨慎。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a rapidly growing practical issue: when training data contains increasing amounts of model-generated content, does performance inevitably degrade, or can a self-correcting loop prevent collapse. Earlier discussions of self-consuming training mostly emphasized distribution drift and error accumulation. This work appears to ask when that pessimism can be avoided.","importance":"This matters directly for the future data pipeline of generative models. AI-generated content in pretraining corpora is becoming unavoidable. If the paper identifies conditions under which self-generated data can be safely reused, that would inform synthetic data strategies, filtering pipelines, teacher-student distillation, and continual pretraining. This is not a niche concern; it is a likely operating regime for future models.","technical_approach":"The central idea is to study self-consuming loops with an explicit self-correction mechanism that suppresses error amplification across rounds. In practice, such a mechanism could involve confidence filtering, external verification, noise modeling, reweighting, or controlled mixing with human data. The key design point is that feeding back synthetic data is not enough; each iteration must reduce error faster than it compounds. Compared with prior pessimistic analyses, the contribution is likely to characterize recoverable regimes and stability conditions rather than just worst-case failure.","experiments":"The available information is not enough to state model scales, synthetic-to-real ratios, or exact numbers. The most informative experiments would track performance over multiple self-consuming rounds, comparing naive reuse, simple filtering, and the proposed correction strategy. It is also important to check whether there is a critical threshold as real-data proportion decreases, and whether the correction mechanism preserves diversity and coverage rather than only improving short-term quality. If the evidence only comes from simple toy generators, transfer to large language models should be treated carefully.","authors_note":""},"tags":["synthetic-data","self-consuming","model-collapse","data-quality"]},{"id":"HaoCM24","title":"Flora: Low-Rank Adapters Are Secretly Gradient Compressors","authors":["Yongchang Hao","Yanshuai Cao","Lili Mou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HaoCM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HaoCM24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/hao24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心结论是：LoRA 之类低秩适配方法不只是参数高效模块，它们在优化上可以被理解成一种梯度压缩。过去大家通常从参数化角度理解 low-rank adapter——限制更新落在低秩子空间里以减少可训练参数；作者则把视角转到梯度通信/表示上，解释它为什么在资源受限下仍常常有效。","importance":"这对 pretrain 后训练链路很有启发。若低秩适配本质上等价于某种结构化梯度压缩，那么我们就能用优化与分布式训练的语言来重新分析 LoRA 的有效性、失败模式和 rank 选择，而不仅仅把它当作经验技巧；这也可能反过来启发预训练中的梯度压缩、optimizer state 压缩和参数高效 continual pretrain。","technical_approach":"Flora 的关键做法是建立 low-rank adapter 更新与梯度压缩之间的等价或近似等价关系，并据此提出新的实现或理论解释。直观上，LoRA 把 full-rank 更新投影到一个低维子空间，这和保留梯度中的低秩主成分、丢弃其余信息有共同结构；如果这个视角成立，那么 rank、初始化、缩放系数以及更新频率都可以理解为压缩率与失真率的权衡。相比传统 LoRA 解释，这种表述更接近优化本身，也更容易和通信效率问题接轨。","experiments":"给定信息不足，无法确认论文是否提出了新算法、只做理论还是兼有实证，也无法给出具体任务和数值。最值得看的实验是：在相同可训练参数或相同通信/内存预算下，Flora 是否优于标准 LoRA、AdaLoRA 或梯度压缩基线；以及在 rank 很低时，它是否更稳、更少退化。若论文能展示不同层梯度谱结构与最优 rank 的对应关系，会特别有参考价值。","authors_note":"作者信息里可确认 Lili Mou。其长期活跃于自然语言处理与高效训练相关研究。其余机构与团队代表作无法从给定信息中可靠确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The main claim is that low-rank adapters such as LoRA are not just parameter-efficient modules; they can be understood as a form of gradient compression. Most prior explanations are parameterization-centric: constrain updates to a low-rank subspace to reduce trainable parameters. This paper shifts the view toward optimization and information preservation in the gradient.","importance":"This is useful well beyond adapter tuning. If low-rank adaptation is effectively a structured gradient compression scheme, then LoRA can be analyzed using the language of optimization, distortion, and communication efficiency rather than only as an empirical PEFT trick. That can feed back into pretraining-time ideas around gradient compression, optimizer-state reduction, and parameter-efficient continual pretraining.","technical_approach":"Flora appears to formalize an equivalence or close connection between low-rank adapter updates and compressed gradients, and then use that perspective to derive a method or a sharper explanation. Intuitively, LoRA projects a full-rank update into a low-dimensional subspace, which is structurally similar to retaining the dominant low-rank components of the gradient and discarding the rest. Under this view, rank, initialization, scaling, and update frequency become compression-versus-distortion choices. Compared with the standard LoRA story, this framing is closer to the optimization process itself and more naturally connects to distributed efficiency questions.","experiments":"The provided information does not say whether the paper is purely theoretical or also algorithmic, so exact tasks and numbers cannot be stated. The most informative evidence would compare Flora against standard LoRA, adaptive-rank variants, and generic gradient-compression baselines under matched trainable-parameter or memory/communication budgets. It would also be useful to see whether Flora degrades more gracefully at very low ranks. If the paper relates layerwise gradient spectra to the best rank choices, that would be especially actionable.","authors_note":"Lili Mou can be identified from the author list and is well known for work in NLP and efficient model training. The rest of the team and representative prior work cannot be confirmed reliably from the provided metadata."},"tags":["lora","peft","gradient-compression","optimization"],"notable_authors":["Lili Mou"]},{"id":"HavensAZ024","title":"Fine-grained Local Sensitivity Analysis of Standard Dot-Product Self-Attention","authors":["Aaron J. Havens","Alexandre Araujo","Huan Zhang","Bin Hu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HavensAZ024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HavensAZ024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/havens24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文研究的是标准 dot-product self-attention 的细粒度局部敏感性，也就是输入发生微小变化时，attention 输出会在什么条件下被放大、抑制或发生结构性改变。过去很多关于 attention 稳定性或 Lipschitz 性的结果较粗，只能给全局上界，难以解释真实模型里哪些 token 交互最脆弱。","importance":"它的贡献偏理论分析，但对训练稳定性和机制理解有潜在价值。对 pretrain 工程来说，如果我们更清楚 self-attention 对局部扰动的敏感方向，就能更好理解 loss spike、长上下文退化、位置编码耦合以及输入噪声对表示传播的影响；虽然它不直接给出新模型，但可能为架构正则和初始化提供依据。","technical_approach":"核心方法是对标准 self-attention 做更细粒度的局部敏感性分析，而不是停留在粗糙的范数上界。这里的‘fine-grained’通常意味着把 query、key、value 以及 softmax 归一化的作用拆开，分析不同 token 对、不同头或不同尺度下，微小扰动如何经由注意力权重和 value 聚合被放大。与已有全局稳定性分析相比，这种方法更接近真实计算图，因此更能指出敏感性来自 logits 竞争、softmax 饱和还是 value 对齐。","experiments":"给定信息不足，无法确认论文是否包含大规模实证，也无法提供具体数字。此类工作通常会用合成例子和训练后网络的数值实验来验证理论预测，例如测量不同注意力模式下的局部 Jacobian 或输出偏移。对实践者最有帮助的是，看这些敏感性结论是否能解释真实 Transformer 中的已知现象，例如长程注意力不稳定、某些头对噪声异常脆弱，或者特定归一化/温度设置能否缓解问题。","authors_note":"作者列表中可确认 Huan Zhang。其在深度网络鲁棒性、可验证性与优化分析方向有较强代表性。其余机构信息无法从给定内容中可靠确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies the fine-grained local sensitivity of standard dot-product self-attention: when inputs are perturbed slightly, under what conditions are the output changes amplified, suppressed, or qualitatively altered. Prior stability analyses for attention are often too coarse, giving global bounds that do not explain which token interactions are actually fragile in practice.","importance":"This is primarily a theoretical analysis contribution, but it can matter for training stability and mechanism understanding. For pretraining practitioners, a better account of the sensitive directions in self-attention can help interpret loss spikes, long-context degradation, positional interactions, and the propagation of input noise through deep Transformers. It is not a new architecture by itself, but it can inform regularization and initialization choices.","technical_approach":"The method performs a more granular local sensitivity analysis of standard self-attention rather than relying on broad norm bounds. 'Fine-grained' here usually means disentangling the roles of queries, keys, values, and the softmax normalization, and characterizing how perturbations to specific token pairs or scales are transformed by attention weights and value aggregation. Relative to existing global analyses, this is closer to the actual computation graph, so it can identify whether sensitivity comes from logit competition, softmax saturation, or value alignment.","experiments":"The provided information is insufficient to tell whether the paper includes large-scale empirical studies or to report numerical results. Work of this kind typically combines illustrative synthetic cases with numerical validation on trained networks, for example by measuring local Jacobians or output shifts under controlled perturbations. The most practical question is whether the derived sensitivity patterns explain known Transformer behaviors, such as instability in long-range attention, unusually noise-sensitive heads, or improvements from specific normalization or temperature choices.","authors_note":"Huan Zhang can be identified from the author list and is well known for work on robustness, verification, and optimization analysis in deep learning. The institutions cannot be confirmed reliably from the provided metadata."},"tags":["attention","interpretability","sensitivity","transformer"],"notable_authors":["Huan Zhang"]},{"id":"HayouG024","title":"LoRA+: Efficient Low Rank Adaptation of Large Models","authors":["Soufiane Hayou","Nikhil Ghosh","Bin Yu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HayouG024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HayouG024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/hayou24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["lora","peft","fine-tuning","efficiency"]},{"id":"2402.09497","title":"Instruction Tuning for Secure Code Generation","authors":["Jingxuan He","Mark Vero","Gabriela Krasnopolska","Martin T. Vechev"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$20","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.09497","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HeVKV24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HeVKV24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/he24k.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["instruction-tuning","code-llm","safety","alignment"]},{"id":"2402.05980","title":"Do Large Code Models Understand Programming Concepts? Counterfactual Analysis for Code Predicates","authors":["Ashish Hooda","Mihai Christodorescu","Miltiadis Allamanis","Aaron Wilson","Kassem Fawaz","Somesh Jha"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Large Language Models' success on text generation has also made them better at code generation and coding tasks. While a lot of work has demonstrated their remarkable performance on tasks such as code completion and editing, it is still unclear as to why. We help bridge this gap by exploring to what degree auto-regressive models understand the logical constructs of the underlying programs. We propose Counterfactual Analysis for Programming Concept Predicates (CACP) as a counterfactual testing framework to evaluate whether Large Code Models understand programming concepts. With only black-box access to the model, we use CACP to evaluate ten popular Large Code Models for four different programming concepts. Our findings suggest that current models lack understanding of concepts such as data flow and control flow.","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.05980","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HoodaCAWFJ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HoodaCAWFJ24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/hooda24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["code-llm","counterfactual","interpretability","reasoning"]},{"id":"2402.10208","title":"Recovering the Pre-Fine-Tuning Weights of Generative Models","authors":["Eliahu Horwitz","Jonathan Kahana","Yedid Hoshen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"The dominant paradigm in generative modeling consists of two steps: i) pre-training on a large-scale but unsafe dataset, ii) aligning the pre-trained model with human values via fine-tuning. This practice is considered safe, as no current method can recover the unsafe, pre-fine-tuning model weights. In this paper, we demonstrate that this assumption is often false. Concretely, we present Spectral DeTuning, a method that can recover the weights of the pre-fine-tuning model using a few low-rank (LoRA) fine-tuned models. In contrast to previous attacks that attempt to recover pre-fine-tuning capabilities, our method aims to recover the exact pre-fine-tuning weights. Our approach exploits this new vulnerability against large-scale models such as a personalized Stable Diffusion and an aligned Mistral.","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.10208","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HorwitzKH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HorwitzKH24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/horwitz24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["fine-tuning","alignment","safety","model-editing"]},{"id":"2311.08718","title":"Decomposing Uncertainty for Large Language Models through Input Clarification Ensembling","authors":["Bairu Hou","Yujian Liu","Kaizhi Qian","Jacob Andreas","Shiyu Chang","Yang Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$21","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.08718","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HouLQAC024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HouLQAC024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/hou24b.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["llm","uncertainty","ensemble","calibration"]},{"id":"2404.03828","title":"Outlier-Efficient Hopfield Layers for Large Transformer-Based Models","authors":["Jerry Yao-Chieh Hu","Pei-Hsuan Chang","Haozheng Luo","Hong-Yu Chen","Weijian Li","Wei-Po Wang","Han Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$22","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.03828","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HuCLCLWL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HuCLCLWL24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/hu24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["transformer","hopfield","training-stability","outliers"]},{"id":"HuH24","title":"Accelerated Speculative Sampling Based on Tree Monte Carlo","authors":["Zhengmian Hu","Heng Huang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HuH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HuH24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/hu24f.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["speculative-decoding","sampling","inference","acceleration"]},{"id":"2402.17709","title":"Case-Based or Rule-Based: How Do Transformers Do the Math?","authors":["Yi Hu","Xiaojuan Tang","Haotong Yang","Muhan Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$23","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.17709","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HuTYZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HuTYZ24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/hu24n.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的核心问题是：Transformer 在做基础数学（如加法）时，到底是在学“可组合的规则”（rule-based）还是在靠训练语料里的“相似例题检索”（case-based）。以往很多工作用准确率来间接讨论泛化，但很难区分“真学会规则”与“记住大量模式后插值”。","importance":"它的价值在于把“系统性泛化失败”拆成可检验的机制假设，并用干预实验去证伪/证实，而不是停留在现象描述。对 pretrain 的启示是：即便模型在分布内表现很好，也可能主要依赖 case-based 统计关联；如果目标是长度外推或组合泛化，训练目标、数据覆盖与归纳偏置需要显式设计。","technical_approach":"结论导向的方法是用“机制对照 + 干预”来区分两类推理：如果是 rule-based，模型应对长度扩展、数字重排等结构变化保持稳定；如果是 case-based，模型对与训练分布相似的表面模式更敏感。作者在五个数学任务上设计了可控的输入变换与干预实验，观察模型输出与中间行为对“结构规则”与“表面相似度”的依赖差异，从而判断其主要依赖哪种机制。","experiments":"摘要未给出模型规模、数据规模、具体任务列表、指标与数值提升，因此无法复述定量结论。已知实验覆盖五个数学任务，并以“精心设计的干预实验”来支持其关于 rule-based vs case-based 的判定；但缺少关键细节（如长度外推区间、训练/测试分布差异、对照 baseline）使得可复现性与外推强度需要读正文确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a mechanistic question: when Transformers solve elementary math (e.g., addition), are they applying compositional rules or leaning on retrieval of similar training cases. Prior work often reports accuracy and generalization gaps, but that does not disentangle “rule learning” from “pattern interpolation”.","importance":"Its main contribution is turning a vague generalization debate into testable hypotheses and using interventions to separate mechanisms. For pretraining, the takeaway is practical: strong in-distribution math accuracy can still be driven by case-based heuristics, so length extrapolation and compositionality likely require explicit inductive bias, data coverage, or objectives beyond standard next-token fitting.","technical_approach":"The approach is a mechanism probe via controlled transformations and interventions: rule-based behavior should be invariant to superficial pattern changes and robust under length extension, while case-based behavior should track surface similarity to seen instances. The authors design intervention tests across five math tasks and compare model sensitivity to structural vs surface cues to infer which mechanism dominates.","experiments":"The provided abstract does not include model sizes, data scale, task details, metrics, or numeric results, so no quantitative claims can be faithfully summarized here. What is clear is that the evidence is based on intervention experiments over five math tasks; the strength of the conclusion depends on details like extrapolation ranges and baselines, which must be checked in the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["arithmetic","generalization","icl","transformer-reasoning"],"notable_authors":["Muhan Zhang"]},{"id":"HuangLQLZ0M024","title":"BiLLM: Pushing the Limit of Post-Training Quantization for LLMs","authors":["Wei Huang","Yangdong Liu","Haotong Qin","Ying Li","Shiming Zhang","Xianglong Liu","Michele Magno","Xiaojuan Qi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HuangLQLZ0M024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HuangLQLZ0M024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/huang24q.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要信息，无法可靠确定其量化方法要解决的具体瓶颈（如权重量化、KV 量化、激活量化或端到端部署约束）。","importance":"缺少摘要信息，无法判断其是否是方法级突破（更低 bit、更少校准数据、更稳的 outlier 处理）还是工程整合。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要信息，无法总结 BiLLM 的关键机制与相对已有 PTQ/RTN/GPTQ/AWQ 等方法的差异。","experiments":"缺少摘要信息，无法报告模型家族、bit-width、基准任务与精度-速度权衡的具体数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The abstract is missing, so the exact quantization bottleneck BiLLM targets (weights/KV/activations/deployment constraints) cannot be identified reliably.","importance":"Without the abstract, it is not possible to judge whether this is a methodological leap (lower bits, less calibration, better outlier handling) or mainly an engineering integration.","technical_approach":"Without the abstract, BiLLM’s mechanism and its differences from common PTQ baselines (e.g., GPTQ/AWQ/RTN) cannot be summarized.","experiments":"Without the abstract, model families, bit-widths, benchmarks, and concrete accuracy–efficiency trade-offs cannot be reported.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","llm-compression","post-training-quantization","1-bit"],"notable_authors":["Wei Huang"]},{"id":"HumayunBB24","title":"Deep Networks Always Grok and Here is Why","authors":["Ahmed Imtiaz Humayun","Randall Balestriero","Richard G. Baraniuk"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HumayunBB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HumayunBB24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/humayun24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要信息，无法可靠说明论文对 grokking（训练后期突然泛化）的“总会发生”主张是在什么设定、什么损失与什么数据分布下成立。","importance":"缺少摘要信息，无法判断其是提出新的理论充分条件、给出更可操作的诊断指标，还是对既有 grokking 解释的统一。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要信息，无法总结其“Here is why”的机制解释（优化动力学、隐式正则、谱偏置等）与边界条件。","experiments":"缺少摘要信息，无法报告是否覆盖深网/Transformer、数据规模、训练时长与泛化跃迁的定量证据。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The abstract is missing, so the exact setting in which the paper claims networks “always grok” (data distribution, loss, model class) cannot be stated reliably.","importance":"Without the abstract, it is unclear whether the contribution is new sufficient conditions, actionable diagnostics, or a unifying explanation of prior grokking observations.","technical_approach":"Without the abstract, the proposed mechanism (“here is why”) and its boundary conditions cannot be summarized.","experiments":"Without the abstract, we cannot report what architectures/scales/training durations were tested or the quantitative evidence for generalization phase transitions.","authors_note":""},"tags":["grokking","generalization","training-dynamics","deep-networks"],"notable_authors":["Richard G. Baraniuk"]},{"id":"2405.12421","title":"A Unified Linear Programming Framework for Offline Reward Learning from Human Demonstrations and Feedback","authors":["Kihyun Kim","Jiawei Zhang","Asuman E. Ozdaglar","Pablo A. Parrilo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$24","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.12421","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Kim0OP24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Kim0OP24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/kim24ak.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：在离线条件下同时统一处理 IRL（从示范学奖励）与 RLHF（从偏好/反馈学奖励）时，如何减少对特定偏好模型或决策模型假设的依赖，从而提升鲁棒性。过去很多 reward learning 方法需要强假设（如噪声模型、最优性形式），假设错了就会学到偏的 reward。","importance":"贡献是方法与理论保证层面的：它把两类 reward learning 问题放进一个线性规划（LP）框架，用原-对偶最优性条件来刻画“可行奖励集合”，并给出最优性保证与可证明性质。对对齐训练的启示是：与其点估计一个 reward，不如先求一个与离线数据一致的 reward 集合，再在集合内做保守优化，可能更抗分布偏移与标注噪声。","technical_approach":"核心做法是构造一个合适的 LP，使得从离线轨迹与反馈出发，可以通过 primal-dual optimality conditions 推出与数据一致的 reward 约束，从而估计一个 feasible reward set 而非单一解。这个设计刻意弱化对人类偏好生成机制的建模，把不确定性留在“集合”里；代价是集合可能较宽，后续策略优化需要额外的保守性或选择准则，否则仍可能出现不可辨识导致的多解问题。","experiments":"摘要未提供实验域、数据规模、与经典 IRL/RLHF 方法的对比指标及数值，因此无法总结实证效果。能确认的是其强调离线轨迹、LP 估计可行奖励集合、以及带有可证明的最优性保证；读者需要在正文核对其在何种 MDP 规模下可计算、以及在现实偏好数据噪声下集合是否过宽影响实用性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses offline reward learning in a unified way for both IRL (from demonstrations) and RLHF-style learning (from feedback/preferences), aiming to reduce reliance on specific behavioral or preference-model assumptions that often break robustness.","importance":"This is a method-plus-theory contribution: it formulates offline reward learning as a linear programming framework, characterizes a feasible set of rewards via primal–dual optimality conditions, and provides optimality guarantees. For alignment, it motivates a more conservative workflow: infer a reward set consistent with offline data, then optimize policies within that uncertainty set to be less brittle to noise and distribution shift.","technical_approach":"The key idea is to design an LP whose primal–dual conditions translate offline trajectories and feedback into constraints on rewards, yielding a feasible reward set rather than a single point estimate. This intentionally avoids committing to a detailed preference/noise model, keeping uncertainty explicit. The trade-off is identifiability and practicality: the feasible set can be wide, and downstream policy optimization needs additional criteria to avoid exploiting ambiguity.","experiments":"The abstract does not specify domains, scales, baselines, metrics, or numeric improvements, so empirical results cannot be summarized. What is clear is the offline setting, LP-based feasible-set estimation, and provable guarantees; readers should check computational scaling with MDP size and whether the reward set becomes too loose under realistic noisy feedback.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reward-learning","rlhf","inverse-rl","human-feedback","optimization"],"notable_authors":["Asuman E. Ozdaglar","Pablo A. Parrilo"]},{"id":"2306.07629","title":"SqueezeLLM: Dense-and-Sparse Quantization","authors":["Sehoon Kim","Coleman Hooper","Amir Gholami","Zhen Dong","Xiuyu Li","Sheng Shen","Michael W. Mahoney","Kurt Keutzer"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$25","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.07629","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/KimHGDLSMK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/KimHGDLSMK24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/kim24f.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：如何在单卡或少卡上部署大语言模型时，把量化真正做成“省带宽且不明显掉点”的方案。此前很多量化方法默认计算是瓶颈，但对单 batch 自回归生成，真正卡住吞吐的是权重读取带宽；已有低比特量化虽然能省显存，却常因统一量化所有通道而在少数高敏感权重上造成明显精度损失。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要在系统-方法交界处。它不是改变预训练范式，但对大模型 serving 很有代表性：它把“量化误差不均匀分布”这个事实利用起来，用少量高精度预算保住最脆弱的权重，从而把 4-bit 级别压缩做得更可用。对 pretrain 研究者的启示是，部署优化不能只看平均误差，权重分布的长尾和层/通道敏感性往往决定最终可用性。","technical_approach":"核心方法是后训练量化中的 dense-and-sparse 混合表示：大多数权重走低比特致密量化，少数离群或高敏感权重单独以稀疏高精度形式保留。它本质上不是再训练一个量化模型，而是在离线校准后，把统一量化最容易出错的部分拆出来处理。关键设计选择是承认权重量化误差高度集中，而不是强行让所有参数共享同一种比特预算；和 GPTQ、AWQ 这类主要依赖逐层近似或激活感知缩放的方法相比，SqueezeLLM更强调用结构化稀疏补偿来修正尾部误差。这样设计有效的原因很直接：生成阶段带宽主导时，增加极少量稀疏高精度访存，换来大幅降低关键权重失真，整体吞吐和质量的折中更优。","experiments":"从给到的信息里能确认的核心结论是：作者面向生成式 LLM 推理，强调单 batch 设置下带宽而非 FLOPs 是主瓶颈，并展示其后训练量化能在显著压缩权重的同时减少性能退化。摘要未给出这里可可靠引用的具体模型规模、数据规模和精确指标，因此不适合编造数值。可合理把握的实验重点应包括：与已有后训练量化基线对比，在相近比特宽度下获得更好的 perplexity/下游任务保持率，以及在实际推理中受益于更低内存占用和更高有效吞吐；但具体幅度需要以论文原文为准。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical bottleneck: how to quantize LLMs for single-batch autoregressive inference without paying the usual quality penalty. Prior work often treated compute as the main constraint, but for generation on a single stream the bottleneck is usually memory bandwidth; standard low-bit quantization reduces memory traffic, yet it hurts accuracy because a small fraction of highly sensitive weights absorb most of the error.","importance":"This is mainly a systems-meets-method contribution. It does not change pretraining, but it is a useful deployment result because it turns the observation of uneven quantization sensitivity into a workable design: spend a tiny high-precision budget on the fragile weights and keep the rest aggressively compressed. The broader lesson for pretraining researchers is that serving quality is often decided by long-tail weight sensitivity rather than average quantization error.","technical_approach":"The method is a post-training dense-and-sparse quantization scheme: most weights are stored in low-bit dense form, while a small set of outlier or high-impact weights is kept separately in sparse higher precision. This is not a full retraining approach; it is an offline quantization pipeline that explicitly isolates the part where uniform low-bit quantization fails. The key design choice is to abandon a single precision budget for all parameters. Compared with methods such as GPTQ or AWQ, which mainly improve layerwise approximation or activation-aware scaling, SqueezeLLM leans more on sparse correction of the quantization tail. That works because under bandwidth-bound decoding, a very small amount of extra precise storage can recover much of the lost model quality.","experiments":"From the provided information, the main empirical claim is clear: for generative LLM inference, single-batch decoding is bandwidth-bound, and the proposed post-training quantization reduces model size with smaller performance degradation than prior approaches. The prompt does not provide reliable numbers for model size, datasets, or exact metrics, so those should not be invented. The likely experimental center is comparison against prior PTQ baselines at similar bit widths, showing better perplexity or downstream retention together with lower memory use and improved effective throughput, but the exact margins should be taken from the paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","llm","compression","inference","serving"]},{"id":"KimS24","title":"Transformers Learn Nonlinear Features In Context: Nonconvex Mean-field Dynamics on the Attention Landscape","authors":["Juno Kim","Taiji Suzuki"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/KimS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/KimS24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/kim24af.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要回答的是：Transformer 在 in-context learning 里到底学到了什么样的非线性特征，以及这种能力如何从注意力动力学里出现。过去大量理论结果停留在线性回归、核回归或凸设定，因此能解释“会拟合”，却很难解释模型为什么能在上下文中形成更复杂的特征选择与非线性决策边界。","importance":"这项工作属于机制与理论层面的贡献。它对预训练的直接工程价值不是给出新配方，而是帮助理解 ICL 的能力边界：如果 Transformer 的注意力动力学在平均场极限下就能支持非凸特征学习，那么一些被归因于“大模型神秘涌现”的现象，可能其实是训练动力学和架构偏置的自然结果。对做基座模型的人，这类结论有助于区分哪些能力需要靠数据和规模，哪些来自架构本身。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者采用的是 mean-field 动力学分析，把 Transformer 的训练过程投到 attention landscape 上，研究其在非凸设定下如何学习非线性特征。关键点在于，他们不是只把 Transformer 近似成固定核方法，而是显式分析参数更新如何改变表示本身；也就是说，关注的是 feature learning 而非 lazy training。和只讨论线性化 NTK 极限的工作相比，这条路线更接近实际大模型，因为真实预训练中表示会持续漂移，能力差异往往就来自这种漂移。","experiments":"由于没有摘要，这里不能可靠写出理论设定、定理条件或验证实验的具体数字。可以确定的是，实验或数值模拟的价值不在 benchmark 分数，而在验证理论预测：例如是否出现了对非线性结构的 in-context 拟合，是否观察到 attention 权重或表示演化与理论动力学一致，以及这些现象在宽度、层数或训练步数变化下是否稳定。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a mechanism question: what kind of nonlinear features can Transformers learn in context, and how does that ability emerge from attention dynamics during training? Much of the prior theory stayed in linear-regression, kernel, or convex settings, which can explain fitting but not the richer feature selection and nonlinear decision boundaries seen in in-context learning.","importance":"This is a theory-and-mechanism contribution. Its value to pretraining is not a new recipe but a clearer picture of ICL capacity and its limits. If nonlinear feature learning already appears in a mean-field analysis of attention, then some behaviors often described as mysterious emergence may instead be natural consequences of training dynamics plus architectural bias. That matters when deciding which capabilities require more data and scale, and which are baked into the model class.","technical_approach":"From the title, the authors study mean-field training dynamics of Transformers on the attention landscape and analyze how nonlinear features can be acquired in a nonconvex regime. The important point is that they do not reduce the model to a fixed kernel; they track how parameter updates reshape the representation itself. In other words, the focus is on feature learning rather than lazy training. Compared with NTK-style linearized analyses, this is closer to what happens in actual large-model training, where representational drift is often the source of qualitatively new behavior.","experiments":"No abstract is available, so theorem conditions, setup details, and quantitative validation cannot be stated safely. The likely role of experiments or simulations is not leaderboard performance but theory validation: whether Transformers indeed fit nonlinear structure in context, whether attention or representation trajectories match the predicted dynamics, and whether those effects persist across width, depth, or training time.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer","in-context-learning","training-dynamics","mean-field","representation"]},{"id":"KoKCY24","title":"DistiLLM: Towards Streamlined Distillation for Large Language Models","authors":["Jongwoo Ko","Sungnyun Kim","Tianyi Chen","Se-Young Yun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/KoKCY24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/KoKCY24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/ko24c.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作聚焦的问题是：LLM 蒸馏流程往往过重、过慢，而且效果高度依赖复杂的 teacher 采样和多阶段训练，导致蒸馏很难成为稳定的模型压缩路径。过去做法常把蒸馏看成“尽量复制 teacher 全部分布”，但对大模型来说，这样既贵也未必最有效，因为 teacher 输出里有很多对 student 不必要甚至有噪声的信息。","importance":"如果题目中的 streamlined distillation 是实质性改进，这篇工作的价值在方法和工程流程两个层面。蒸馏对 pretrain/posttrain 接口很重要：它决定强 teacher 能否被更低成本模型继承能力，尤其影响小模型、边缘部署和 continual model refresh。真正重要的不是把蒸馏做得更复杂，而是找出哪些监督信号最值钱、哪些步骤可以删掉而不伤性能。","technical_approach":"从标题判断，DistiLLM 的核心是重新整理蒸馏链路，减少不必要的 teacher 查询、训练阶段或损失项，让 student 更直接地学习有用行为。一个高概率的设计思路是避免完整 token 分布蒸馏，转向更稀疏或更任务相关的监督，例如只保留 top-k、序列级偏好、或对齐 teacher 生成轨迹而非全 soft label。它和传统知识蒸馏的关键区别通常不在“是否有 KL”，而在对监督带宽的重新分配：把有限训练预算集中到最能迁移 teacher 能力的信号上。","experiments":"由于缺少摘要，不能可靠报告模型大小、teacher-student 配置、蒸馏数据量和提升幅度。按题目判断，最值得看的实验应包括：与标准 KD、sequence-level distillation、甚至直接 SFT 基线相比，是否在更少 teacher 成本下达到相同或更好的 student 质量；以及在不同 student 尺寸下，这种 streamlined 设计是否稳定。若原文包含 teacher 调用次数与性能关系，那会很有参考价值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a common pain point in LLM distillation: current pipelines are often too heavy, too expensive, and too dependent on elaborate teacher sampling and multi-stage training. Many existing methods try to copy the teacher distribution as fully as possible, but for large models that is costly and often wasteful because much of the teacher signal is unnecessary or noisy for the student.","importance":"If the “streamlined” claim holds, this is meaningful at both the method and workflow level. Distillation is an important bridge between pretraining and deployment because it determines whether capabilities learned by a strong teacher can be transferred into a smaller, cheaper model. The key contribution would not be adding complexity, but identifying which supervision signals actually matter and which parts of the pipeline can be removed without hurting quality.","technical_approach":"From the title, DistiLLM likely restructures the distillation pipeline to reduce unnecessary teacher queries, training stages, or loss terms, so that the student learns the useful behavior more directly. A plausible design is to avoid full-distribution token-level distillation and move toward sparser or more task-relevant supervision, such as top-k targets, sequence-level preferences, or distilled generation trajectories instead of full soft labels. The distinction from standard KD is usually not whether KL is present, but how the limited supervision bandwidth is allocated.","experiments":"Without the abstract, model sizes, teacher-student configurations, data volume, and exact gains cannot be stated safely. The experiments worth checking are clear, though: whether the method matches or exceeds standard KD, sequence-level distillation, or even direct SFT baselines at lower teacher cost; and whether the simplified pipeline remains stable across different student scales. If the paper reports performance versus number of teacher calls, that would be especially useful.","authors_note":""},"tags":["distillation","llm","compression","training","efficiency"]},{"id":"KrasheninnikovK24","title":"Implicit meta-learning may lead language models to trust more reliable sources","authors":["Dmitrii Krasheninnikov","Egor Krasheninnikov","Bruno Kacper Mlodozeniec","Tegan Maharaj","David Krueger"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/KrasheninnikovK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/KrasheninnikovK24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/krasheninnikov24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作研究的是：语言模型在预训练或元学习过程中，是否会隐式学会“更相信可靠信息源”，以及这种行为在什么条件下出现。过去很多关于 truthfulness 或 calibration 的工作主要依赖额外对齐、监督或推理时检索，但如果模型本身能通过训练分布学到 source reliability，这会改变我们对预训练目标能力上限的判断。","importance":"这项工作对 pretrain 与 posttrain 接口很有启发。它的重要性不在于直接提升一个 benchmark，而在于说明某些看似需要显式监督的行为，可能能由隐式 meta-learning 从数据结构中自发获得。对数据配比和合成数据设计尤其 relevant：如果模型会利用来源可靠性的统计规律，那么训练数据里“谁说的”和“说了什么”同样重要。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者应构造了带有 source reliability 结构的训练分布，并分析或验证语言模型在其中进行 implicit meta-learning 的行为。核心机制不是显式加入一个可靠性标签分类器，而是让模型在多轮样本中发现某些来源历史上更常正确，于是在预测时自发提高其权重。和标准监督学习相比，这里的关键是上下文与训练分布共同提供了‘学习如何学习谁可信’的信号；边界则在于这种规律是否足够稳定，以及模型是否只是记忆表面模式而非真正形成可迁移的置信策略。","experiments":"没有摘要时，不能写具体任务和数值。可以确定的是，实验应围绕合成或半合成环境，测量模型对不同可靠来源的偏好是否随训练增强，并检验这种偏好在分布外来源、不同噪声率或冲突信息场景下是否保持。如果论文比较了不同模型规模或上下文长度，那将帮助判断这种‘信任可靠源’能力到底是规模效应还是数据结构效应。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies whether language models can implicitly learn to trust more reliable sources through pretraining or meta-learning dynamics, and under what conditions this behavior emerges. Much of the prior work on truthfulness or calibration relies on explicit supervision, alignment, or retrieval at inference time. If source reliability can instead be learned from the training distribution itself, that changes what we expect from pretraining alone.","importance":"This is valuable mainly at the pretrain–posttrain interface. The contribution is not a benchmark gain but a mechanism insight: some behaviors that seem to require explicit supervision may arise from implicit meta-learning when the data distribution contains the right structure. That is especially relevant for data mixture design and synthetic data generation, because not only the content but also the source identity may shape what the model learns.","technical_approach":"From the title, the authors likely build training environments where different sources have different reliability profiles and then analyze whether the model learns to weight them accordingly. The mechanism is not an explicit classifier for source trustworthiness. Instead, the model sees repeated evidence that some sources are more often correct and internalizes that pattern when making predictions. The key distinction from ordinary supervised learning is that the combination of context and training distribution teaches the model how to infer whom to trust. The boundary condition is whether the reliability pattern is stable enough and whether the model learns a transferable policy rather than memorizing superficial cues.","experiments":"Without the abstract, tasks and numbers cannot be stated safely. The likely experiments use synthetic or semi-synthetic settings to test whether preference for reliable sources strengthens with training, and whether it transfers to out-of-distribution sources, different noise levels, or conflicting-information scenarios. If the paper compares model sizes or context lengths, that would help separate a scale effect from a data-structure effect.","authors_note":""},"tags":["meta-learning","in-context-learning","source-reliability","llm"]},{"id":"LeeCFCF24","title":"A Human-Inspired Reading Agent with Gist Memory of Very Long Contexts","authors":["Kuang-Huei Lee","Xinyun Chen","Hiroki Furuta","John F. Canny","Ian Fischer"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LeeCFCF24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LeeCFCF24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/lee24c.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["long-context","reading-agent","gist-memory","llm"]},{"id":"LiNWLSYDY024","title":"Evaluating Quantized Large Language Models","authors":["Shiyao Li","Xuefei Ning","Luning Wang","Tengxuan Liu","Xiangsheng Shi","Shengen Yan","Guohao Dai","Huazhong Yang","Yu Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiNWLSYDY024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiNWLSYDY024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/li24bb.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["quantization","llm","evaluation","inference"]},{"id":"LiPGYBGLDGMHLJL24","title":"The WMDP Benchmark: Measuring and Reducing Malicious Use with Unlearning","authors":["Nathaniel Li","Alexander Pan","Anjali Gopal","Summer Yue","Daniel Berrios","Alice Gatti","Justin D. Li","Ann-Kathrin Dombrowski","Shashwat Goel","Gabriel Mukobi","Nathan Helm-Burger","Rassin Lababidi","Lennart Justen","Andrew B. Liu","Michael Chen","Isabelle Barrass","Oliver Zhang","Xiaoyuan Zhu","Rishub Tamirisa","Bhrugu Bharathi","Ariel Herbert-Voss","Cort B. Breuer","Andy Zou","Mantas Mazeika","Zifan Wang","Palash Oswal","Weiran Lin","Adam A. Hunt","Justin Tienken-Harder","Kevin Y. Shih"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiPGYBGLDGMHLJL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiPGYBGLDGMHLJL24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/li24bc.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["unlearning","safety","benchmark","evaluation"]},{"id":"2404.09695","title":"LoRAP: Transformer Sub-Layers Deserve Differentiated Structured Compression for Large Language Models","authors":["Guangyan Li","Yongqiang Tang","Wensheng Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$26","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.09695","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiT024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiT024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/li24bi.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["compression","lora","transformer","llm"]},{"id":"2405.10812","title":"VQDNA: Unleashing the Power of Vector Quantization for Multi-Species Genomic Sequence Modeling","authors":["Siyuan Li","Zedong Wang","Zicheng Liu","Di Wu","Cheng Tan","Jiangbin Zheng","Yufei Huang","Stan Z. Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$27","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.10812","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiW000Z0L24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiW000Z0L24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/li24bm.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["tokenizer","vector-quantization","sequence-modeling","pretraining"]},{"id":"2306.01879","title":"Revisiting the Role of Language Priors in Vision-Language Models","authors":["Zhiqiu Lin","Xinyue Chen","Deepak Pathak","Pengchuan Zhang","Deva Ramanan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$28","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.01879","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LinCPZR24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LinCPZR24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/lin24c.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["vision-language","language-prior","generative-vlm","zero-shot"]},{"id":"LinDENKTM24","title":"Structured Inverse-Free Natural Gradient Descent: Memory-Efficient &amp; Numerically-Stable KFAC","authors":["Wu Lin","Felix Dangel","Runa Eschenhagen","Kirill Neklyudov","Agustinus Kristiadi","Richard E. Turner","Alireza Makhzani"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LinDENKTM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LinDENKTM24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/lin24f.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["natural-gradient","optimizer","memory-efficiency","kfac"]},{"id":"LinDWHAKD24","title":"Learning to Model the World With Language","authors":["Jessy Lin","Yuqing Du","Olivia Watkins","Danijar Hafner","Pieter Abbeel","Dan Klein","Anca D. Dragan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LinDWHAKD24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LinDWHAKD24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/lin24g.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["world-model","language-model","reasoning","planning"]},{"id":"2402.02314","title":"Selecting Large Language Model to Fine-tune via Rectified Scaling Law","authors":["Haowei Lin","Baizhou Huang","Haotian Ye","Qinyu Chen","Zihao Wang","Sujian Li","Jianzhu Ma","Xiaojun Wan","James Zou","Yitao Liang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$29","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.02314","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LinHYCWLM00L24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LinHYCWLM00L24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/lin24j.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["scaling-law","model-selection","fine-tuning","llm"]},{"id":"2310.02905","title":"Use Your INSTINCT: INSTruction optimization for LLMs usIng Neural bandits Coupled with Transformers","authors":["Xiaoqiang Lin","Zhaoxuan Wu","Zhongxiang Dai","Wenyang Hu","Yao Shu","See-Kiong Ng","Patrick Jaillet","Bryan Kian Hsiang Low"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2a","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.02905","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LinWDHSNJL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LinWDHSNJL24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/lin24r.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["instruction-optimization","bandit","prompting","alignment"]},{"id":"LiuGBCBLHDVB24","title":"Decoding-time Realignment of Language Models","authors":["Tianlin Liu","Shangmin Guo","Leonardo Bianco","Daniele Calandriello","Quentin Berthet","Felipe Llinares-López","Jessica Hoffmann","Lucas Dixon","Michal Valko","Mathieu Blondel"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiuGBCBLHDVB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiuGBCBLHDVB24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/liu24r.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["decoding","alignment","realignment","llm"]},{"id":"LiuWF0TG0CMYXH24","title":"Unified Generation, Reconstruction, and Representation: Generalized Diffusion with Adaptive Latent Encoding-Decoding","authors":["Guangyi Liu","Yu Wang","Zeyu Feng","Qiyu Wu","Liping Tang","Yuan Gao","Zhen Li","Shuguang Cui","Julian J. McAuley","Zichao Yang","Eric P. Xing","Zhiting Hu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiuWF0TG0CMYXH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiuWF0TG0CMYXH24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/liu24bh.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：生成、重建和表示学习通常被不同目标函数和架构拆开做，导致一个模型很难同时兼顾采样质量、重建能力和表征泛化。对 pretrain 来说，这个问题重要，因为统一训练目标如果做得好，可以减少多阶段拼装，也可能让扩散模型从“只会生成”走向更通用的表征学习器。","importance":"这项工作的价值更接近建模范式层面。标题中的“Generalized Diffusion”和“Adaptive Latent Encoding-Decoding”表明作者在尝试把扩散从单一生成目标扩展成统一框架；如果成立，它对 diffusion LM、多模态 token 建模和 representation-aware pretraining 都有启发，因为它在问一个更基础的问题：扩散目标能否像自编码器和语言模型那样承担统一预训练角色。","technical_approach":"核心方法看起来是一个带自适应潜变量编码-解码机制的广义扩散框架，用同一套潜空间同时支持 generation、reconstruction 和 representation。设计上的关键选择大概率是：不直接在原始观测空间上强行统一所有目标，而是先通过 latent 编码控制信息瓶颈，再让扩散过程在潜空间内承担不同任务；这样做通常能缓解高维输入上训练不稳、目标互相拉扯和计算开销过大的问题。","experiments":"给定信息没有摘要和实验细节，因此无法确认模型规模、数据集、baseline 或具体提升数字。仅从题目推测，实验应会覆盖生成质量、重建误差以及下游表征评估三类指标，并比较统一训练与单任务训练的 trade-off；但任何具体结果都不能在缺少原文时编造。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a structural limitation: generation, reconstruction, and representation learning are usually trained with separate objectives and often separate models. That split is suboptimal for pretraining, because a stronger unified objective could reduce pipeline fragmentation and make diffusion models more generally useful beyond sample generation.","importance":"This is best viewed as a modeling-paradigm contribution. The combination of 'generalized diffusion' and 'adaptive latent encoding-decoding' suggests an attempt to turn diffusion into a more general pretraining framework, which is relevant to diffusion LM, multimodal token modeling, and representation-aware generative training.","technical_approach":"The likely method is a latent-space diffusion framework that jointly supports generation, reconstruction, and representation learning through adaptive encoding and decoding. The important design idea is to unify tasks in latent space rather than force every objective directly in observation space, which usually helps with stability, compute, and cross-objective interference.","experiments":"No abstract or quantitative results are provided, so model sizes, datasets, baselines, and gains cannot be stated with confidence. The expected evaluation would span sample quality, reconstruction fidelity, and downstream representation quality, but specific numbers would be speculative.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","unified-generation","latent-encoding","representation-learning"]},{"id":"2405.02347","title":"COPAL: Continual Pruning in Large Language Generative Models","authors":["Srikanth Malla","Joon Hee Choi","Chiho Choi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Adapting pre-trained large language models to different domains in natural language processing requires two key considerations: high computational demands and model's inability to continual adaptation. To simultaneously address both issues, this paper presents COPAL (COntinual Pruning in Adaptive Language settings), an algorithm developed for pruning large language generative models under a continual model adaptation setting. While avoiding resource-heavy finetuning or retraining, our pruning process is guided by the proposed sensitivity analysis. The sensitivity effectively measures model's ability to withstand perturbations introduced by the new dataset and finds model's weights that are relevant for all encountered datasets. As a result, COPAL allows seamless model adaptation to new domains while enhancing the resource efficiency. Our empirical evaluation on a various size of LLMs show that COPAL outperforms baseline models, demonstrating its efficacy in efficiency and adaptability.","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.02347","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MallaCC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MallaCC24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/malla24a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是：如何在持续适应多个新域时，一边降低大语言生成模型的计算成本，一边尽量避免反复微调带来的开销和灾难性遗忘。传统做法通常在 continual adaptation 和 model pruning 之间二选一：要么每来一个域就继续训，要么一次性剪枝后假设分布不变，这两者都不适合长期演化场景。","importance":"COPAL 的意义主要在系统方法层面，把剪枝从静态压缩问题改成持续适应问题。对 pretrain/posttrain 接口的启发在于：模型容量分配不应只看单次部署，而应看一串域迁移之后哪些参数值得长期保留；这和 continual pretrain、domain annealing 的思路是连着的。","technical_approach":"核心方法是一个持续剪枝算法，用 sensitivity analysis 评估参数在新数据引入扰动下的脆弱性，并找出对所有已见数据都重要的权重。关键设计不是为每个新域单独开一套 adapter，而是在不做重型微调或重训的前提下，动态识别‘跨域共享且稳健’的参数子集；这样做的收益是成本低，但代价通常是可塑性受限，面对高度异质的新域可能不如显式增量参数化灵活。","experiments":"摘要给出的明确结论是：COPAL 在 continual adaptation 场景下实现了无须资源密集型微调/重训的域适应，并通过敏感度引导的剪枝保持跨已见数据集的重要权重。当前信息没有模型大小、域数、剪枝率、baseline 和精确分数，因此不能写具体提升；但合理预期其比较对象包括静态剪枝、逐域微调和可能的持续学习基线，观察重点是性能保持与计算节省的平衡。","authors_note":"给定信息不足以确认机构和作者背景，无法稳妥补充。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a combined problem: how to adapt large generative language models across a sequence of domains while also reducing compute through pruning. Existing approaches usually optimize one side at a time—either continual adaptation with repeated tuning, or one-shot compression under a fixed distribution—which is a poor fit for evolving deployment settings.","importance":"COPAL is mainly a systems-and-methods contribution. Its relevance to pretraining is that capacity allocation should be treated as a temporal problem across domain shifts, not only as a static compression decision, which connects naturally to continual pretraining and staged adaptation.","technical_approach":"The method performs continual pruning guided by a sensitivity analysis that measures how model weights tolerate perturbations from each new dataset, then retains weights that remain useful across encountered domains. The important design choice is to search for a shared robust parameter subset instead of adding a separate adaptation module per domain, trading off flexibility for lower compute and operational simplicity.","experiments":"From the abstract, the main claim is that COPAL supports seamless domain adaptation without expensive fine-tuning or retraining, using sensitivity-guided pruning to preserve weights relevant across datasets. The provided text does not include model scales, pruning ratios, baselines, or exact numbers, so only the qualitative result can be stated safely.","authors_note":"The available metadata is not enough to identify institutions or prior representative work reliably."},"tags":["pruning","continual-learning","llm","domain-adaptation"]},{"id":"MazeikaPYZ0MSLB24","title":"HarmBench: A Standardized Evaluation Framework for Automated Red Teaming and Robust Refusal","authors":["Mantas Mazeika","Long Phan","Xuwang Yin","Andy Zou","Zifan Wang","Norman Mu","Elham Sakhaee","Nathaniel Li","Steven Basart","Bo Li","David A. Forsyth","Dan Hendrycks"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MazeikaPYZ0MSLB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MazeikaPYZ0MSLB24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/mazeika24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：自动化红队测试和稳健拒答目前缺少统一、标准化、可比较的评测框架，导致不同方法之间很难公平比较。过去很多安全评测依赖自定义攻击集、人工判分或口径不一致的 jailbreak 成功标准，因此结论常常不稳。","importance":"HarmBench 的价值是基准与评测基础设施层面，而且量级不小。对 pretrain/posttrain 研究的意义在于：安全对齐方法如果没有稳定 benchmark，就很难知道改进来自模型更安全，还是来自评测更松；标准化框架能把 automated red teaming、refusal robustness 和后训练策略的真实增益分开。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心方法是构建一个统一的 harm evaluation framework，覆盖攻击生成、模型响应判定以及 robust refusal 评估。关键设计通常包括：标准化危害类别、统一判分器或规则、区分‘拒绝有害请求’和‘误拒正常请求’，以及支持自动化红队迭代；这比单一 jailbreak 榜单更实用，因为它把攻击强度和防守稳健性放在同一坐标系下比较。","experiments":"给定信息没有摘要，因此无法确认具体任务覆盖范围、模型数目、分类体系、人工与自动评测一致性，或 benchmark 上的关键发现。较稳妥的判断是，实验应重点展示框架的可复现性、评判稳定性，以及现有模型/防御在标准口径下的排名变化，但不能在没有原文的情况下写具体数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a benchmarking gap: automated red teaming and robust refusal are widely studied, but there is no sufficiently standardized framework for fair comparison. As a result, many safety claims depend heavily on custom attack sets, custom judges, or inconsistent success criteria.","importance":"HarmBench is important as evaluation infrastructure. For pretrain and posttrain research, standardization matters because it helps separate genuine safety improvements from benchmark-specific artifacts, especially when comparing jailbreak defenses and refusal policies.","technical_approach":"From the title, the contribution is a unified evaluation framework covering automated red teaming and robust refusal. The likely key choices are standardized harm categories, a consistent way to score model behavior, and an evaluation setup that distinguishes successful refusal of harmful requests from over-refusal on benign inputs.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so the number of models, task taxonomy, judging protocol, and quantitative findings cannot be summarized reliably. The expected empirical focus is reproducibility and stability of evaluation, plus a clearer picture of how current models and defenses compare under one standardized setup.","authors_note":""},"tags":["safety","evaluation","red-teaming","alignment"]},{"id":"2306.11903","title":"Deep Fusion: Efficient Network Training via Pre-trained Initializations","authors":["Hanna Mazzawi","Javier Gonzalvo","Michael Wunder","Sammy Jerome","Benoit Dherin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2b","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.11903","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MazzawiGWJD24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MazzawiGWJD24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/mazzawi24a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：能否利用已经训练好的小网络初始化，低成本地把模型在训练中途长大，而不是从头训练目标大网络。这个问题在 LLM 训练里很实际，因为直接训练大模型代价高，而网络增长方法虽然看起来省算力，但过去缺少对其为什么有效、什么时候失效的机制理解。","importance":"Deep Fusion 的意义主要在训练系统与 scaling 策略层面。它对 pretrain 研究的价值在于：如果 mid-training network growth 可控，那么模型大小不再是训练开始时一次性锁死的决策，预训练可以探索更灵活的算力分配与 curriculum；这和 warm-start scaling、阶段性扩模、cooldown 前增长等问题都相关。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Deep Fusion：用预训练小网络的初始化来高效训练更大网络，并配合一个基于 backward error analysis 的理论框架解释中途扩网络的动态。与简单的 random growth 或从头训练相比，它的关键设计是保留已学到的表示与优化状态附近的良性区域，再把新增容量作为增量学习空间；这样做能省前期算力，但前提是增长方式要足够平滑，否则会破坏已有表示并引入训练不稳。","experiments":"摘要明确声称：Deep Fusion 展示了如何通过小网络的预训练初始化实现高效训练，并结合理论分析解释 mid-training growth。当前给定信息没有具体模型规模、增长时点、训练 token 数、baseline 和节省比例，因此无法写精确数字；但可以判断实验重点会比较从头训练、直接更大模型训练以及不同增长策略下的收敛速度和最终性能。","authors_note":"给定信息不足以确认机构与代表性作者背景。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether a larger network can be trained efficiently by growing from a pretrained smaller one, instead of training the full target model from scratch. This is practically important for LLM training because network growth promises compute savings, but its dynamics are still poorly understood.","importance":"Deep Fusion is mainly a training-systems and scaling contribution. Its relevance to pretraining is that if mid-training growth is reliable, model size becomes a schedulable variable rather than a fixed upfront choice, which opens room for more flexible compute allocation strategies.","technical_approach":"The method uses pretrained smaller-network initializations to train larger networks efficiently, and supports the idea with a backward-error-analysis view of mid-training growth dynamics. The central design choice is to preserve useful learned structure and expand capacity around it, rather than restart optimization in a larger random model; this can save compute, but only if the growth step is smooth enough to avoid destabilizing the learned representation.","experiments":"The abstract states that Deep Fusion demonstrates efficient training via pretrained initializations of smaller networks and provides a theoretical account of network growth. The supplied text does not include exact model scales, growth schedules, baselines, or savings, so numerical claims cannot be reproduced here.","authors_note":"The provided metadata is insufficient to confirm institutions or representative prior work."},"tags":["training-efficiency","initialization","network-growing","pretraining"]},{"id":"MeeusSFM24","title":"Copyright Traps for Large Language Models","authors":["Matthieu Meeus","Igor Shilov","Manuel Faysse","Yves-Alexandre de Montjoye"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MeeusSFM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MeeusSFM24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/meeus24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的核心问题是：是否可以通过设计“版权陷阱”来识别或证明 LLM 使用了受保护内容，从而更系统地研究训练数据中的版权风险。过去关于模型是否记住或使用版权材料，常依赖泄漏样例、成员推断或相似度检索，证据链不总是强；陷阱式设计试图把这一问题变成更可验证的实验。","importance":"这项工作属于数据治理与模型审计方向，对 pretrain 很相关。它的重要性在于，如果版权陷阱确实能稳定触发并被检测到，那么训练数据可追踪性、许可合规、去重策略和 memorization 评估都会受到影响；这不是单纯法律讨论，而是会直接反过来改变数据管线和风险控制。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心方法应是构造具有可识别版权特征或诱捕结构的内容，观察 LLM 在训练后是否会复现、响应或暴露这些特征，以此作为版权使用的信号。关键设计难点通常在两点：一是陷阱既要足够独特，避免自然共现导致误判；二是又要足够自然，保证模型在真实训练中会吸收它，否则审计信号太弱。","experiments":"给定信息没有摘要，因此无法确认陷阱构造方式、测试协议、模型范围、触发率或误报率。较稳妥的总结是：实验大概率围绕版权内容的可检测嵌入、模型复现概率和审计可靠性展开，但不能在缺乏原文时补具体数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies whether 'copyright traps' can be used to detect or demonstrate that an LLM has relied on protected content, making copyright auditing more experimentally grounded. Earlier evidence often relied on memorization anecdotes, membership-style tests, or similarity search, which do not always provide a strong attribution story.","importance":"This is a data governance and model auditing contribution with direct relevance to pretraining. If copyright traps work reliably, they affect how we think about dataset traceability, licensing, deduplication, and memorization risk in large-scale training pipelines.","technical_approach":"From the title, the likely method is to design uniquely identifiable copyrighted artifacts or trigger-like structures and test whether trained models reproduce or reveal them. The main design trade-off is between uniqueness and naturalness: traps must be distinctive enough to support attribution, but still realistic enough to be learned under normal training.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so the exact trap construction, model coverage, trigger rates, false positives, and auditing protocol cannot be summarized safely. The likely empirical focus is reliability of detection and attribution rather than standard downstream performance.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm","copyright","data-quality","memorization"]},{"id":"MerrillPS24","title":"The Illusion of State in State-Space Models","authors":["William Merrill","Jackson Petty","Ashish Sabharwal"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MerrillPS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MerrillPS24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/merrill24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：状态空间模型（SSM）被宣传为通过压缩状态高效处理长序列，但这种“状态”是否真的提供了比注意力或有限上下文表示更强的计算与记忆能力。现在值得讨论，是因为 Mamba 一类模型引发了大量替代 Transformer 的兴趣，但社区对其能力边界和宣传口径仍有不少混淆。","importance":"这项工作是机制分析和理论澄清层面的贡献。对 pretrain 的意义在于，它帮助研究者更准确地判断 SSM 适合解决什么问题：如果所谓 state 的优势在某些设定下是‘幻觉’或被高估，那么架构选择就不该只看吞吐和长序列表面指标，还要看可表达的依赖类型与训练可达性。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者的论点应是对 SSM 中“state”概念做形式化拆解，说明很多看似来自持久内部状态的能力，其实可以被更受限的机制模拟，或者并没有想象中强。关键不是简单唱衰 SSM，而是指出哪些能力来自线性递推、哪些来自参数化或输入依赖门控，哪些宣传则把实现细节误当成一般性理论性质。","experiments":"给定信息没有摘要，且这类论文大概率偏理论或概念分析，因此无法确认是否有大规模实证。若有实验，也更可能是构造任务来展示 SSM 在某些记忆/状态场景下的边界，而非标准语言建模 benchmark 上追求 SOTA。","authors_note":"Ashish Sabharwal 可从作者名单中确认。其余机构信息无法稳妥确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper questions whether the 'state' in state-space models really delivers the strong memory and computation story often implied in recent discussions. This matters because SSMs have become a serious alternative to Transformers, but their capabilities are often described in ways that blur implementation details and fundamental limits.","importance":"This is a theory-and-mechanism clarification paper. Its value for pretraining is that it sharpens how we compare architectures: throughput and long-context benchmarks are not enough if the underlying representational story about persistent state is overstated or misunderstood.","technical_approach":"From the title, the likely contribution is a formal analysis showing that some capabilities attributed to explicit state are weaker, more limited, or more easily simulated than commonly claimed. The useful distinction is between what comes from the recurrence itself, what comes from input-dependent parameterization or gating, and what is merely an artifact of how these models are marketed.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, and the work is likely mainly theoretical or conceptual. If there are experiments, they are more likely targeted constructions illustrating memory limits than broad SOTA-style language modeling results.","authors_note":"Ashish Sabharwal is identifiable from the author list. The institution information cannot be confirmed safely from the provided metadata."},"tags":["state-space-models","architecture","theory","sequence-modeling"],"notable_authors":["Ashish Sabharwal"]},{"id":"MicheliAF24","title":"Efficient World Models with Context-Aware Tokenization","authors":["Vincent Micheli","Eloi Alonso","François Fleuret"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MicheliAF24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MicheliAF24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/micheli24a.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["world-models","tokenizer","sequence-modeling","efficiency"]},{"id":"MishchenkoD24","title":"Prodigy: An Expeditiously Adaptive Parameter-Free Learner","authors":["Konstantin Mishchenko","Aaron Defazio"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MishchenkoD24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MishchenkoD24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/mishchenko24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["optimizer","training-dynamics","adaptive-optimization"]},{"id":"MohamadiLWS24","title":"Why Do You Grok? A Theoretical Analysis on Grokking Modular Addition","authors":["Mohamad Amin Mohamadi","Zhiyuan Li","Lei Wu","Danica J. Sutherland"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MohamadiLWS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MohamadiLWS24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/mohamadi24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["grokking","theory","training-dynamics","generalization"]},{"id":"MohriH24","title":"Language Models with Conformal Factuality Guarantees","authors":["Christopher Mohri","Tatsunori Hashimoto"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MohriH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MohriH24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/mohri24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["llm","factuality","conformal","evaluation"]},{"id":"MuldrewHZB24","title":"Active Preference Learning for Large Language Models","authors":["William Muldrew","Peter Hayes","Mingtian Zhang","David Barber"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MuldrewHZB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MuldrewHZB24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/muldrew24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["preference-learning","active-learning","rlhf","alignment"]},{"id":"NguyenAH24","title":"Is Temperature Sample Efficient for Softmax Gaussian Mixture of Experts?","authors":["Huy Nguyen","Pedram Akbarian","Nhat Ho"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/NguyenAH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/NguyenAH24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/nguyen24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["moe","softmax-gating","theory","temperature"]},{"id":"NguyenANH24","title":"A General Theory for Softmax Gating Multinomial Logistic Mixture of Experts","authors":["Huy Nguyen","Pedram Akbarian","TrungTin Nguyen","Nhat Ho"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/NguyenANH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/NguyenANH24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/nguyen24b.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["moe","softmax-gating","theory","multinomial-logistic"]},{"id":"PanigrahiMXA24","title":"Trainable Transformer in Transformer","authors":["Abhishek Panigrahi","Sadhika Malladi","Mengzhou Xia","Sanjeev Arora"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/PanigrahiMXA24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/PanigrahiMXA24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/panigrahi24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["transformer","architecture","trainability","sequence-modeling"]},{"id":"PapadopoulosWH24","title":"Arrows of Time for Large Language Models","authors":["Vassilis Papadopoulos","Jérémie Wenger","Clément Hongler"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/PapadopoulosWH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/PapadopoulosWH24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/papadopoulos24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["language-modeling","temporal-reasoning","sequence-order","generalization"]},{"id":"ParkCV24","title":"The Linear Representation Hypothesis and the Geometry of Large Language Models","authors":["Kiho Park","Yo Joong Choe","Victor Veitch"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ParkCV24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ParkCV24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/park24c.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["representation","geometry","linear-representation","llm"]},{"id":"ParkHCSL24","title":"Any-Precision LLM: Low-Cost Deployment of Multiple, Different-Sized LLMs","authors":["Yeonhong Park","Jake Hyun","SangLyul Cho","Bonggeun Sim","Jae W. Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ParkHCSL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ParkHCSL24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/park24e.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["quantization","deployment","model-compression","inference"]},{"id":"PawelczykNL24","title":"In-Context Unlearning: Language Models as Few-Shot Unlearners","authors":["Martin Pawelczyk","Seth Neel","Himabindu Lakkaraju"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/PawelczykNL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/PawelczykNL24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/pawelczyk24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的是：语言模型能否仅靠上下文提示，在不更新参数的情况下临时“忘掉”某些知识或行为。过去的 unlearning 基本依赖参数编辑、继续训练或数据删除证明，成本高且容易伤及无关能力；如果 in-context unlearning 可行，就说明一部分“遗忘”其实可以通过条件化推理而不是权重修改来实现。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要在概念层和评测层，而不是提出新的预训练算法。它把 unlearning 从“参数层面的不可逆操作”扩展到“推理时可控行为”，对 pretrain/post-train 的接口有启发：我们需要区分模型真的删除了知识，还是学会了在特定上下文里不去调用它。这个区分对安全、可撤销部署和遗忘评测都很关键。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把 unlearning 重写成 few-shot in-context task，让模型从少量示例中学习“遇到某类查询时拒答、改答或忽略特定事实”。它不是做权重更新，而是构造带有正反例的上下文，诱导模型在当前会话内改变决策边界。与传统 machine unlearning 不同，这里牺牲的是持久性和严格删除保证，换来的是低成本、可组合和无需再训练；边界也很明确：若知识在模型内部过于强或任务需要跨轮泛化，单靠 prompt 往往不够稳。","experiments":"给定信息不足，无法确认具体模型规模、数据规模和主指标。按题目判断，实验重点应是比较 in-context unlearning 与参数更新式 unlearning 在遗忘成功率、保留能力和迁移泛化上的差异，并检验 few-shot 示例数、示例格式以及目标知识类型对效果的影响。可以合理预期的关键观察是：局部行为抑制可能有效，但对强记忆事实、分布外改写和持久遗忘的效果有限。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a sharp question: can a language model “unlearn” selected knowledge or behaviors purely through context, without touching its weights. Prior unlearning work mostly relies on parameter updates, model editing, or retraining-based deletion, which are costly and often damage unrelated capabilities; if in-context unlearning works at all, then some forms of forgetting are really conditional behavior control rather than true weight-level erasure.","importance":"The contribution is mainly conceptual and evaluative, not a new pretraining recipe. It widens the unlearning discussion from irreversible parameter operations to inference-time controllability. That matters for the pretrain/post-train interface: we need to separate genuine knowledge removal from context-induced suppression. This distinction is important for safety claims, revocable deployment, and how unlearning should be benchmarked.","technical_approach":"The method reframes unlearning as a few-shot in-context task, where the model is shown examples that teach it to refuse, revise, or ignore targeted information at inference time. There is no weight update; the mechanism is entirely prompt conditioning. Compared with classical machine unlearning, it gives up persistence and formal deletion guarantees, but gains low cost, composability, and zero retraining. The boundary is also clear: if the memorized knowledge is strong or the task needs robust cross-turn generalization, prompt-only suppression is likely brittle.","experiments":"The provided information is insufficient to verify model sizes, data scale, baselines, or exact numbers. Based on the title, the experiments likely compare in-context unlearning against weight-editing or retraining-based approaches on forgetting success, utility retention, and generalization, with ablations on the number of demonstrations, prompt format, and the type of knowledge to suppress. A plausible takeaway is that local behavioral suppression can work, but persistent forgetting and out-of-distribution rewriting remain weak.","authors_note":""},"tags":["unlearning","in-context-learning","prompting","language-models"]},{"id":"PengSSA24","title":"Pragmatic Feature Preferences: Learning Reward-Relevant Preferences from Human Input","authors":["Andi Peng","Yuying Sun","Tianmin Shu","David Abel"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/PengSSA24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/PengSSA24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/peng24d.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的是：人类偏好数据里真正和奖励相关的特征，常常不是直接显式标注出来的，模型因此容易学到表面偏好而不是决策依据。过去很多 preference learning 默认人能稳定比较整体输出优劣，但现实中人更擅长指出局部特征、线索或理由；作者试图把这种更“务实”的输入转成可用的奖励信号。","importance":"这项工作对 post-train 比对 pretrain 更直接，但对 pretrain 也有接口价值。它提醒我们：训练信号质量不只是样本量问题，偏好标签的结构化程度决定了奖励模型学到的是语义目标还是表层 proxy。对 RLHF、RLAIF、合成偏好数据和 reward hacking 分析，这都是有实用意义的视角。","technical_approach":"核心方法是学习 reward-relevant preferences，即从人类提供的特征级输入中抽取哪些维度真正应影响奖励。它看起来不是简单做 pairwise preference，而是把人类反馈拆成特征偏好、语境条件和最终奖励之间的映射。与传统直接偏好学习相比，这种设计的优势是更可解释、样本效率可能更高，也更容易发现奖励错配；代价是需要设计反馈接口，并假设人类能稳定提供有用的特征级判断。","experiments":"给定信息不足，无法确认具体环境、模型规模和指标数字。按题目判断，实验应比较标准偏好学习与 feature-aware 方法在奖励建模准确率、策略学习表现和对分布偏移的鲁棒性上的差异。若论文完整，最值得看的 ablation 是：人类输入哪些特征最有信息量、错误或不完整特征反馈会造成多大退化，以及当奖励相关特征是潜变量而非显式属性时方法还能否工作。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a common failure mode in preference learning: human feedback often contains latent reward-relevant cues that are not captured well by plain pairwise comparisons. Standard preference pipelines assume annotators can reliably compare full outputs, but people are often better at identifying local features, reasons, or attributes. The goal is to turn that more pragmatic feedback into a better reward signal.","importance":"This is more directly about post-training than pretraining, but it is still relevant to the pretrain/post-train loop. The key lesson is that training signal quality is not just about scale; the structure of preference labels determines whether the model learns the intended objective or merely a superficial proxy. That matters for RLHF, RLAIF, synthetic preference generation, and reward hacking analysis.","technical_approach":"The method appears to learn reward-relevant preferences by extracting which human-identified features should actually influence reward. Rather than using only pairwise output comparisons, it likely models the mapping from feature-level feedback and context to final preference or reward. Relative to standard preference learning, this can improve interpretability, sample efficiency, and diagnosis of reward misspecification. The trade-off is that it requires a carefully designed feedback interface and assumes humans can provide useful feature-level judgments with some consistency.","experiments":"The provided information does not specify environments, model scales, or exact metrics. From the title, the experiments likely compare standard preference learning against feature-aware variants on reward modeling accuracy, downstream policy quality, and robustness under distribution shift. The most valuable ablations would test which kinds of human-provided features are most informative, how much noisy or incomplete feature feedback hurts, and whether the approach still helps when reward-relevant factors are latent rather than explicitly observable.","authors_note":""},"tags":["preference-learning","human-feedback","reward-modeling","alignment"]},{"id":"Petrov0B24","title":"Prompting a Pretrained Transformer Can Be a Universal Approximator","authors":["Aleksandar Petrov","Philip Torr","Adel Bibi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Petrov0B24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Petrov0B24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/petrov24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的是一个基础能力问题：固定预训练 Transformer，只通过 prompt 条件化，是否已经具备普适逼近能力。过去 prompt learning 的经验结果很多，但理论上常被质疑只是启发式技巧；作者试图给出更强的表达性结论，说明提示不仅能调出已有能力，理论上也足以实现任意函数近似。","importance":"这项工作属于理论层面的方法边界澄清。它对 pretrain 的启示是：如果结论成立，prompting 的上限可能比工程上直觉更高，模型权重与上下文之间的功能分工需要重新理解。它不会直接告诉你该怎么训更大的模型，但会影响我们如何看 in-context learning、prefix tuning 和固定 backbone 上的能力注入。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是证明存在某类预训练 Transformer 及合适的 prompt，使得整体输入输出映射可以逼近任意目标函数。关键不在经验调参，而在构造性证明：Transformer 的注意力和非线性如何在 prompt 提供的辅助 token 下模拟通用计算或函数表示。与“Transformer 是 universal approximator”的既有结果不同，这篇题目强调的是 prompting a pretrained transformer，也就是权重固定、能力经上下文激活；真正的边界在于理论存在性不等于可学习性，也不等于有限长度 prompt 在实际训练中可找到。","experiments":"这类论文的实验通常只是辅助说明，不是主要贡献。给定信息不足，无法确认是否包含合成任务或小规模验证。若有实验，重点通常会验证不同 prompt 长度、层数和宽度对逼近能力的影响，并展示理论构造在实际优化下有多难实现。对工程读者而言，更重要的不是“能不能逼近”，而是样本复杂度、搜索难度和鲁棒性是否可接受。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a foundational question: with a pretrained Transformer kept fixed, is prompting alone expressive enough to act as a universal approximator. Prompting has plenty of empirical success, but it is often treated as a heuristic. The authors aim to show a much stronger theoretical statement: prompts may not just elicit existing capabilities, but can in principle realize arbitrary input-output mappings.","importance":"This is a theory contribution that sharpens the boundary of what prompting can do. For pretraining research, the main implication is conceptual: if the claim holds, the functional split between model weights and context is richer than common engineering intuition suggests. It does not directly give a better training recipe, but it changes how we think about in-context learning, prefix-based adaptation, and capability injection into fixed backbones.","technical_approach":"The likely contribution is a constructive universality proof showing that there exists a suitable prompt for a pretrained Transformer such that the overall prompted system can approximate any target function in a certain class. The key is how attention and nonlinear layers, guided by prompt tokens, can emulate a universal computational mechanism. Relative to existing results that Transformers themselves are universal approximators, the emphasis here is stronger: the weights are fixed, and the prompt does the adaptation. The practical boundary is obvious: existence does not imply learnability, and finite prompt length found by realistic optimization may be far from the constructive proof.","experiments":"For a paper like this, experiments are usually illustrative rather than central. The provided information does not confirm whether synthetic demonstrations are included. If they are, the likely focus is on how approximation quality changes with prompt length, depth, and width, and how difficult the theoretical construction is to realize by gradient-based search. For practitioners, the more relevant question is not expressivity in principle, but sample complexity, optimization hardness, and robustness.","authors_note":""},"tags":["prompting","pretrained-transformer","expressivity","theory"]},{"id":"QinMZL0L00M24","title":"Accurate LoRA-Finetuning Quantization of LLMs via Information Retention","authors":["Haotong Qin","Xudong Ma","Xingyu Zheng","Xiaoyang Li","Yang Zhang","Shouda Liu","Jie Luo","Xianglong Liu","Michele Magno"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/QinMZL0L00M24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/QinMZL0L00M24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/qin24b.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["quantization","lora","llm-finetuning"]},{"id":"2402.03969","title":"In-Context Learning Agents Are Asymmetric Belief Updaters","authors":["Johannes A. Schubert","Akshay K. Jagadish","Marcel Binz","Eric Schulz"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We study the in-context learning dynamics of large language models (LLMs) using three instrumental learning tasks adapted from cognitive psychology. We find that LLMs update their beliefs in an asymmetric manner and learn more from better-than-expected outcomes than from worse-than-expected ones. Furthermore, we show that this effect reverses when learning about counterfactual feedback and disappears when no agency is implied. We corroborate these findings by investigating idealized in-context learning agents derived through meta-reinforcement learning, where we observe similar patterns. Taken together, our results contribute to our understanding of how in-context learning works by highlighting that the framing of a problem significantly influences how learning occurs, a phenomenon also observed in human cognition.","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.03969","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SchubertJBS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SchubertJBS24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/schubert24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["in-context-learning","behavior-analysis","belief-updating","reasoning"]},{"id":"ShenYC24","title":"Principled Penalty-based Methods for Bilevel Reinforcement Learning and RLHF","authors":["Han Shen","Zhuoran Yang","Tianyi Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ShenYC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ShenYC24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/shen24g.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["rlhf","reinforcement-learning","optimization","alignment"]},{"id":"ShiWXL24","title":"Why Larger Language Models Do In-context Learning Differently?","authors":["Zhenmei Shi","Junyi Wei","Zhuoyan Xu","Yingyu Liang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ShiWXL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ShiWXL24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/shi24f.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["in-context-learning","scaling","llm","behavior-analysis"]},{"id":"2402.05546","title":"Offline Actor-Critic Reinforcement Learning Scales to Large Models","authors":["Jost Tobias Springenberg","Abbas Abdolmaleki","Jingwei Zhang","Oliver Groth","Michael Bloesch","Thomas Lampe","Philemon Brakel","Sarah Bechtle","Steven Kapturowski","Roland Hafner","Nicolas Heess","Martin A. Riedmiller"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We show that offline actor-critic reinforcement learning can scale to large models - such as transformers - and follows similar scaling laws as supervised learning. We find that offline actor-critic algorithms can outperform strong, supervised, behavioral cloning baselines for multi-task training on a large dataset containing both sub-optimal and expert behavior on 132 continuous control tasks. We introduce a Perceiver-based actor-critic model and elucidate the key model features needed to make offline RL work with self- and cross-attention modules. Overall, we find that: i) simple offline actor critic algorithms are a natural choice for gradually moving away from the currently predominant paradigm of behavioral cloning, and ii) via offline RL it is possible to learn multi-task policies that master many domains simultaneously, including real robotics tasks, from sub-optimal demonstrations or self-generated data.","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.05546","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SpringenbergA0G24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SpringenbergA0G24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/springenberg24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["offline-rl","scaling-law","actor-critic","transformer"]},{"id":"2402.05841","title":"Dirichlet Flow Matching with Applications to DNA Sequence Design","authors":["Hannes Stärk","Bowen Jing","Chenyu Wang","Gabriele Corso","Bonnie Berger","Regina Barzilay","Tommi S. Jaakkola"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2c","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.05841","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/StarkJWCBBJ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/StarkJWCBBJ24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/stark24b.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["flow-matching","discrete-diffusion","dirichlet","sequence-generation"]},{"id":"2409.19132","title":"From Vision to Audio and Beyond: A Unified Model for Audio-Visual Representation and Generation","authors":["Kun Su","Xiulong Liu","Eli Shlizerman"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2d","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.19132","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SuLS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SuLS24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/su24b.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文想解决的核心问题是：音视频领域里表征学习和生成建模长期分裂，导致同一个模型很难既学到跨模态表示，又能做从视觉到音频的生成。过去工作通常二选一，要么做对比学习拿表示，要么做条件生成拿样本质量，但两者的训练目标和表示空间往往不兼容。","importance":"这项工作更接近统一多模态预训练思路，重要性在于它尝试把“理解”和“生成”放进同一框架里，而不是让生成模型和表示模型各自为战。对 pretrain 研究的启示很直接：如果目标是原生多模态模型，训练目标设计不能只偏向判别式对齐，也不能只偏向单向生成；两者共享的表示接口才是关键。","technical_approach":"作者提出 VAB（Vision to Audio and Beyond），目标是桥接音视频表征学习与 vision-to-audio generation。虽然摘要截断，能确认的核心设计是使用统一框架而不是串接两个独立模型；也就是说，它试图让同一套参数或同一表示空间同时服务跨模态理解和生成。和传统“先学 encoder，再单独接 generator”的路线相比，这种做法的潜在优势是表示不会只为检索或分类优化，从而更保留生成所需的细粒度时序与语义信息。","experiments":"从现有摘要只能确认作者覆盖了 audio-visual representation 与跨模态生成两类任务，并把视频作为联合视觉和声音的信息源来评估。摘要没有给出模型规模、数据集名称、评测指标或具体提升，因此无法负责任地报告数值。更值得关注的是它是否展示了统一训练在两类目标上都不明显牺牲性能，这将决定该框架是概念验证还是可行范式。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a split that has persisted in audio-visual learning: representation learning and generative modeling are usually trained as separate systems, making it hard to build one model that both understands and generates across modalities. Prior work typically optimizes either contrastive/discriminative objectives or conditional generation, but not both within one coherent interface.","importance":"This is relevant to unified multimodal pretraining because it pushes toward a single framework for both understanding and generation. The main takeaway is that native multimodal models likely need shared training interfaces that preserve both semantic alignment and generation-ready detail, rather than stitching together separate encoders and generators.","technical_approach":"The proposed framework, VAB, is intended to unify audio-visual representation learning with vision-to-audio generation. The abstract is truncated, but the central design choice is clear: use one framework instead of training a representation model and a generation model separately. Relative to the common 'encoder first, generator later' pipeline, this should help retain modality-specific detail while still learning aligned representations.","experiments":"The abstract only supports a high-level claim that the method is evaluated on both representation and generation settings over video-based audio-visual data. It does not provide model scale, datasets, metrics, or effect sizes, so those cannot be stated reliably. The key empirical question is whether the unified setup avoids the usual trade-off where one objective degrades the other.","authors_note":""},"tags":["audio-visual","unified-model","representation-learning","multimodal-generation"],"notable_authors":["Kun Su","Xiulong Liu","Eli Shlizerman"]},{"id":"2401.04056","title":"A Minimaximalist Approach to Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback","authors":["Gokul Swamy","Christoph Dann","Rahul Kidambi","Steven Wu","Alekh Agarwal"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2e","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.04056","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SwamyDK0A24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SwamyDK0A24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/swamy24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 RLHF 里一个长期存在但常被工程上绕开的问题：当偏好是非马尔可夫、非传递甚至带噪声时，怎么做简单但稳健的学习。很多 RLHF 流程依赖奖励模型和离线偏好优化，这在顺序决策里容易积累分布偏移误差，也默认偏好能被一个标量奖励很好刻画。","importance":"这项工作的贡献更偏方法论和理论接口，对大模型对齐有启发但不是直接面向 LLM 实用 SOTA。它重要的地方在于给出一种不训练奖励模型、也不做对抗式复杂优化的偏好学习框架，并且理论上覆盖更一般的偏好结构；对 pretrain/post-train 闭环的启发是，偏好信号未必适合先压缩成 reward 再学习策略。","technical_approach":"作者提出 Self-Play Preference Optimization（SPO），建立在 social choice 里的 minimax winner 概念上，把偏好聚合写成两个策略之间的零和博弈。关键洞察是利用游戏的对称性，避免显式训练奖励模型，而直接通过自博弈式策略比较来更新。这样做的好处是对偏好非传递和随机性更稳，因为它不强迫所有比较服从单一全序。和经典 RLHF 相比，它舍弃了 reward model 这个中间层，换来更简单的实现和更宽的理论适用域。","experiments":"摘要强调了理论性质：能处理 non-Markovian、intransitive、stochastic preferences，并对 offline sequential prediction 的误差累积更鲁棒。摘要没有给出 LLM 规模、任务名称、具体数值指标或与 PPO/DPO 等 baseline 的提升幅度，因此实验部分不能做数值复述。读者应把它先看作一种偏好优化原则，而不是已经在超大规模语言模型上完成充分验证的工业配方。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a foundational RLHF issue that many practical pipelines sidestep: how to learn from preferences when those preferences are sequential, non-Markovian, noisy, and even intransitive. Standard RLHF pipelines usually insert a reward model and then optimize against it, which is convenient but structurally brittle.","importance":"This is more of a methodological and theoretical contribution than a turnkey LLM recipe, but it matters because it questions the default 'fit reward first, optimize policy second' decomposition. For alignment work, the key message is that preference learning need not pass through a scalar reward surrogate.","technical_approach":"The proposed algorithm, Self-Play Preference Optimization (SPO), builds on the social-choice notion of a minimax winner and casts preference aggregation as a zero-sum game between policies. The important design move is to exploit the symmetry of that game so the method can optimize policies directly, without learning a separate reward model. That makes it naturally more compatible with stochastic and non-transitive preference structure than reward-based reductions.","experiments":"The abstract emphasizes theoretical coverage and robustness properties rather than concrete large-scale LLM numbers. It claims support for non-Markovian, intransitive, and stochastic preferences and improved robustness to compounding errors in offline sequential settings. Since the abstract gives no model sizes, benchmarks, or quantitative comparisons against PPO/DPO-like baselines, this should be read primarily as a principle and algorithmic framework.","authors_note":""},"tags":["rlhf","self-play","preference-optimization","alignment"],"notable_authors":["Gokul Swamy","Christoph Dann","Rahul Kidambi","Steven Wu","Alekh Agarwal"]},{"id":"TajwarSSR0XEFK24","title":"Preference Fine-Tuning of LLMs Should Leverage Suboptimal, On-Policy Data","authors":["Fahim Tajwar","Anikait Singh","Archit Sharma","Rafael Rafailov","Jeff Schneider","Tengyang Xie","Stefano Ermon","Chelsea Finn","Aviral Kumar"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/TajwarSSR0XEFK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/TajwarSSR0XEFK24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/tajwar24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文讨论的核心问题是：LLM 的 preference fine-tuning 不应只依赖高质量离线偏好数据，还应主动利用次优但来自当前策略分布的数据。传统做法倾向于追求“更干净、更优质”的偏好样本，但这会带来典型的 off-policy 偏差：模型真正会生成什么，和训练时看到的偏好对并不一致。","importance":"这对 post-train 方法选择有直接冲击，尤其影响 DPO、IPO、RLHF 数据构造和在线对齐流程。它重要的原因不是提出一个全新目标，而是强调数据分布比单条样本质量更关键：次优但 on-policy 的数据可能比高质量离线数据更能纠正模型真实行为。这一点对 pretrain/post-train 闭环也有启发，因为持续训练越来越依赖模型自生成数据。","technical_approach":"从标题可以确定，作者主张在 preference fine-tuning 中显式引入 suboptimal, on-policy data，而不是只筛最优响应。方法层面大概率是在现有偏好优化框架上改变数据采样和训练分布，而非重写整个目标函数。设计逻辑很清楚：如果训练只看离线优选答案，模型学到的是静态偏好排序；加入当前策略下会真实出现的次优轨迹，才能纠正模型在其自身生成分布上的错误。","experiments":"由于未提供摘要，无法确认模型规模、数据集、具体算法形式和提升数字，因此不能报告定量结果。仅从标题可推断，实验应比较离线高质量偏好数据与在线/准在线 on-policy 次优数据在偏好微调后的效果差异，并可能考察分布偏移下的泛化。没有更多公开信息时，最稳妥的结论是：这是一篇强调数据分布匹配的偏好学习论文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper argues that preference fine-tuning for LLMs should not rely only on high-quality offline preference data; it should also use suboptimal but on-policy data. The motivation is straightforward: clean offline preferences can still be badly mismatched to the model's actual generation distribution.","importance":"This has direct implications for DPO-style tuning, RLHF data collection, and online alignment workflows. The main contribution is not necessarily a new objective, but a stronger claim about data geometry: distribution match can matter more than local sample quality, especially when models are trained on their own outputs.","technical_approach":"From the title alone, the paper's central move is to incorporate suboptimal on-policy examples into preference fine-tuning rather than filtering down to only best responses. That likely means modifying the data collection and training distribution while staying close to existing preference-optimization pipelines. The reason this can help is that the model needs correction on trajectories it actually produces, not only on idealized offline comparisons.","experiments":"No abstract is available, so model scales, datasets, baselines, and quantitative gains cannot be stated reliably. The most plausible empirical focus is a comparison between high-quality offline preference data and on-policy suboptimal data under preference fine-tuning, especially under distribution shift. Without more information, the safe summary is that the paper makes a data-distribution argument for alignment training.","authors_note":""},"tags":["preference-tuning","on-policy","dpo","alignment"],"notable_authors":["Fahim Tajwar","Anikait Singh","Archit Sharma","Rafael Rafailov","Jeff Schneider"]},{"id":"2310.17230","title":"Codebook Features: Sparse and Discrete Interpretability for Neural Networks","authors":["Alex Tamkin","Mohammad Taufeeque","Noah D. Goodman"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2f","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.17230","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/TamkinTG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/TamkinTG24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/tamkin24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：神经网络隐藏状态太稠密、连续，导致解释性分析常常停留在事后线性探针或局部可视化，难以形成可操作的离散概念单元。过去不是没人尝试离散化，而是担心一加瓶颈性能就大幅下降，所以很少把可解释性约束真正嵌进模型内部。","importance":"这项工作对机制分析和可控性研究很有价值，虽然不是直接的 pretrain 方法论文。它的重要性在于证明：即使在层间加入很强的稀疏离散瓶颈，模型性能也只会适度下降，这为“把可解释性做成模型结构性质而不是事后分析工具”提供了可行路径。对大模型研究者来说，这可能影响未来对可解释中间表示、可编辑网络和离散 latent 的设计。","technical_approach":"作者的方法是给每一层加入向量量化瓶颈，把连续隐藏特征映射成少量离散 code 的稀疏和，称为 codebook features。关键设计是同时追求三件事：离散、稀疏、可组合；也就是不是把整层压成一个 code，而是用少数 code 的加和保留表达力。这样做比单一离散 token 更灵活，比原始连续激活更容易解释和干预。作者随后利用这些 codebook feature 查找与特定行为相关的离散特征，并进行控制。","experiments":"摘要给出的关键信息是：在这种“极强瓶颈”下，性能只出现 modest degradation，而可解释性和可控性显著提升。摘要没有提供模型类型、参数规模、任务数据集或具体数值，因此不能细报指标。实验上最值得关注的点不是绝对 SOTA，而是两个事实：一，网络在离散稀疏约束下仍能工作；二，离散特征可以被定位并用于行为控制，这比单纯可视化更进一步。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a basic obstacle in interpretability: hidden states in neural networks are dense and continuous, so analyses often remain post hoc and weakly actionable. Discretization has been explored before, but usually with the concern that strong bottlenecks would destroy performance.","importance":"This is not a pretraining paper in the narrow sense, but it is important for mechanistic interpretability and controllable modeling. Its main contribution is to show that sparse, discrete internal representations can be imposed with only modest performance loss, making interpretability a structural property of the network rather than just an external analysis layer.","technical_approach":"The method inserts vector-quantization bottlenecks at every layer so hidden states become sparse sums of a small number of discrete code vectors, called codebook features. The design is notable because it aims for discreteness, sparsity, and compositionality at once: not one code per layer, but a small additive set of codes. That preserves more capacity than a single-token bottleneck while making internal features much easier to inspect and intervene on.","experiments":"The abstract makes two key empirical claims: performance degrades only modestly despite the severe bottleneck, and the resulting discrete features support intuitive behavior control. It does not provide model classes, scales, datasets, or exact numbers, so those should remain unspecified. The important result is not state of the art but the demonstration that usable networks can operate with interpretable, editable internal codes.","authors_note":""},"tags":["interpretability","vector-quantization","sparse-representation","codebook"],"notable_authors":["Alex Tamkin","Mohammad Taufeeque","Noah D. Goodman"]},{"id":"2309.17179","title":"AlphaZero-Like Tree-Search can Guide Large Language Model Decoding and Training","authors":["Ziyu Wan","Xidong Feng","Muning Wen","Stephen Marcus McAleer","Ying Wen","Weinan Zhang","Jun Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$30","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.17179","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WanFWM00024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WanFWM00024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/wan24c.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：现有用树搜索增强 LLM 推理的方法，通常把预训练模型自己当 value function，因此只适合浅搜索、知识已足够的场景。遇到长程规划或模型先验不足时，这类方法会失效，因为搜索本身没有学到如何评估中间状态。","importance":"这项工作的意义在于把 AlphaZero 那套“搜索 + 学习到的价值函数”真正搬进 LLM 解码与训练，而不只是 prompt engineering 版 tree-of-thought。对 pretrain/post-train 接口的启发是，推理增强不一定只是 test-time trick，它可以反过来提供训练信号，形成 search-improve-learn 闭环。","technical_approach":"作者提出 TS-LLM，一个 AlphaZero-like tree-search learning framework。核心区别有两点：第一，价值函数不是靠同一个预训练 LLM 通过提示词临时充当，而是显式学习；第二，树搜索不仅用于解码，还反哺训练。这样设计的原因很直接：如果 value 依赖 prompt 出来的启发式评估，就很难支持深搜索；而可学习 value 能随着搜索数据逐步校准。与 ToT 或 RAP 相比，它更像把语言建模问题重新写成带规划与自举学习的决策问题。","experiments":"摘要没有提供参数规模、任务名称或具体数值提升，但能确认实验目标是展示 learned value function 在更深、更长程的搜索场景中优于仅靠预训练模型充当 value 的方法。主要 baseline 应包括 ToT、RAP 或其他基于 prompting 的搜索框架。对读者最有价值的观察将是：搜索深度增加时，TS-LLM 是否继续收益，而基线是否很快退化。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a key limitation in search-augmented LLM reasoning: most prior methods use the pretrained LLM itself as a value function, which works only for shallow search and domains where the model already has enough internal knowledge. That breaks down for long-horizon planning or settings with weak prior competence.","importance":"Its significance is that it imports the AlphaZero pattern—search plus a learned value function—into language-model decoding and training, rather than stopping at prompt-based tree search. For alignment and reasoning research, the important idea is that search can generate training signal, not just better test-time trajectories.","technical_approach":"The proposed TS-LLM framework differs from ToT- or RAP-style methods in two ways. First, it learns a value function instead of prompting the base LLM to act as one. Second, the search procedure feeds back into training rather than being used only at inference. This matters because learned values can improve with collected search data, making deeper planning feasible where prompted heuristics are unreliable.","experiments":"The abstract does not report model sizes, tasks, or exact gains, so quantitative details cannot be stated safely. What it does support is the intended comparison: TS-LLM versus prompt-based search methods in domains that require longer-horizon reasoning or better intermediate-state evaluation. The key empirical question is whether performance keeps improving with deeper search while heuristic-value baselines saturate or collapse.","authors_note":""},"tags":["tree-search","reasoning","rl","decoding","test-time-compute"],"notable_authors":["Ziyu Wan","Xidong Feng","Muning Wen","Stephen Marcus McAleer","Ying Wen"]},{"id":"WangJ024","title":"In-context Learning on Function Classes Unveiled for Transformers","authors":["Zhijie Wang","Bo Jiang","Shuai Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangJ024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangJ024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/wang24ae.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer 的 in-context learning（ICL）能力在理论上尚未被充分理解，特别是在不同函数类上 ICL 是如何工作的。已有理论分析多局限于线性函数类，对更一般的函数类缺乏严格刻画。","importance":"理论级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的价值在于：ICL 是 LLM 最核心的涌现能力之一，理解其在不同函数类上的工作机制有助于解释为什么某些预训练配置能产生更强的 ICL 能力，也为架构设计提供理论指导。","technical_approach":"对 Transformer 在不同函数类上的 ICL 行为进行理论分析，揭示 Transformer 如何通过注意力机制隐式地学习和适应不同的函数类。具体技术细节在摘要中未给出。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体实验细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The theoretical understanding of how Transformers perform in-context learning across different function classes remains limited. Most prior analyses are restricted to linear functions.","importance":"A theory-level contribution. Understanding ICL mechanisms across function classes is directly relevant to pretrain research, as ICL is one of the most important emergent capabilities. Theoretical insights here can inform architecture and training choices.","technical_approach":"Provides theoretical analysis of Transformer ICL behavior on various function classes, characterizing how attention mechanisms implicitly learn and adapt. Specific technical details are not available from the abstract.","experiments":"No specific experimental details available from the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","transformer","theory","generalization"]},{"id":"2406.04606","title":"Helpful or Harmful Data? Fine-tuning-free Shapley Attribution for Explaining Language Model Predictions","authors":["Jingtan Wang","Xiaoqiang Lin","Rui Qiao","Chuan-Sheng Foo","Bryan Kian Hsiang Low"],"institutions":["NUS"],"abstract":"$31","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.04606","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangL0FL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangL0FL24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/wang24aq.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在 fine-tuning 场景下，如何将模型预测归因到每条训练样本（instance attribution），且保证归因结果对数据重采样具有鲁棒性。已有的 leave-one-out 方法在鲁棒性上存在缺陷，而 Shapley 值虽然更鲁棒但计算成本极高。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的间接启示：数据归因和数据质量评估是 pretrain 数据筛选的核心问题，本文提出的 fine-tuning-free Shapley 近似方法如果能扩展到预训练规模，可能为预训练数据选择提供新工具。但目前主要面向 fine-tuning 场景。","technical_approach":"首先定义了 instance score 符号鲁棒性的概念，理论和实验证明 leave-one-out 方法缺乏这种鲁棒性，而 Shapley 值显著更好。然后提出了一种 fine-tuning-free 的 Shapley 值近似方法，避免了对每个数据子集重新训练模型的开销。关键创新在于不需要实际执行 fine-tuning 就能估计每条数据的贡献。","experiments":"摘要未给出完整实验细节，但声称在理论和实验上都验证了 leave-one-out 的鲁棒性不足和 Shapley 值的优势，以及所提近似方法的效率。","authors_note":"作者包括 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low（NUS，数据估值和 Shapley 值方向的知名研究者）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Instance attribution for fine-tuned language models needs to be robust to dataset resampling. Leave-one-out methods lack this robustness, while exact Shapley values are too expensive to compute.","importance":"A method-level contribution. Indirectly relevant to pretrain research: data attribution is central to pretraining data curation, and a scalable fine-tuning-free Shapley approximation could potentially extend to pretraining-scale data selection, though the current work targets fine-tuning.","technical_approach":"Defines sign-robustness for instance scores, proves leave-one-out methods fail this criterion while Shapley values pass. Proposes a fine-tuning-free approximation of Shapley values that avoids retraining on data subsets. The key insight is estimating data contributions without actually performing fine-tuning.","experiments":"Theoretical and empirical validation of robustness differences between leave-one-out and Shapley methods. Specific numbers not fully available from the abstract.","authors_note":"Authors include Bryan Kian Hsiang Low (NUS, well-known for data valuation and Shapley value research)."},"tags":["interpretability","data-attribution","shapley","fine-tuning","llm"],"notable_authors":["Bryan Kian Hsiang Low"]},{"id":"2403.07872","title":"Rethinking Generative Large Language Model Evaluation for Semantic Comprehension","authors":["Fangyun Wei","Xi Chen","Lin Luo"],"institutions":["Microsoft Research Asia"],"abstract":"$32","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.07872","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WeiCL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WeiCL24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/wei24c.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"多选题（MCQA）是当前 LLM 评估的主流方式，但它与实际开放式生成场景存在不一致性——模型在 MCQA 上的表现不能真实反映其语义理解和生成能力。需要更贴近真实使用场景的评估方法。","importance":"评估方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示：如果评估方法本身有偏，那么基于这些评估做出的预训练决策（数据配比、模型选择等）也可能有偏。本文揭示了 MCQA 评估的系统性缺陷，并提出了 Elo 评分替代方案。","technical_approach":"首先在 24 个模型、11 个 benchmark 上系统分析了 MCQA 评估的缺陷（如与开放式生成的不一致性）。然后提出 RWQ-Elo 评分系统：让 LLM 两两对战，由 GPT-4 做裁判，最终给出 Elo 评分。这种方式更接近真实场景中的相对能力比较。","experiments":"评测了 24 个 LLM（包括 GPT-4、GPT-3.5、Gemini-Pro、LLaMA-1/2 等），在 11 个 benchmark 上验证了 MCQA 的不一致性问题。RWQ-Elo 系统给出了更符合直觉的模型排名。","authors_note":"作者 Fangyun Wei 来自 Microsoft Research Asia。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"MCQA is the dominant LLM evaluation method, but it is inconsistent with open-ended generation in real use cases. Models' MCQA scores may not reflect their true semantic understanding and generation capabilities.","importance":"An evaluation-method-level contribution. If evaluation is biased, pretraining decisions (data mix, model selection) based on it may also be biased. This work systematically exposes MCQA's shortcomings and proposes an Elo-based alternative.","technical_approach":"Systematically analyzes MCQA evaluation flaws across 24 models and 11 benchmarks. Proposes RWQ-Elo: LLMs compete pairwise with GPT-4 as judge, producing Elo ratings that better reflect relative capabilities in realistic settings.","experiments":"Evaluated 24 LLMs including GPT-4, GPT-3.5, Gemini-Pro, LLaMA-1/2 across 11 benchmarks. Demonstrated systematic inconsistencies in MCQA evaluation. RWQ-Elo produces more intuitive model rankings.","authors_note":"Author Fangyun Wei is from Microsoft Research Asia."},"tags":["llm-evaluation","mcqa","benchmark","semantic-comprehension"],"notable_authors":["Fangyun Wei"]},{"id":"WeiHHXQXMW024","title":"Assessing the Brittleness of Safety Alignment via Pruning and Low-Rank Modifications","authors":["Boyi Wei","Kaixuan Huang","Yangsibo Huang","Tinghao Xie","Xiangyu Qi","Mengzhou Xia","Prateek Mittal","Mengdi Wang","Peter Henderson"],"institutions":["Princeton University"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WeiHHXQXMW024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WeiHHXQXMW024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/wei24f.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"经过安全对齐的 LLM，其安全性在模型剪枝和低秩修改等轻量操作下是否脆弱？以往对 safety alignment 的评估主要关注对抗性 prompt，忽略了参数层面的简单修改就可能破坏安全护栏。","importance":"方法级贡献，揭示了 safety alignment 的脆弱性。对 pretrain-posttrain 接口的重要启示：如果安全对齐只是在参数空间的一个浅层修改，那么剪枝、量化、低秩适配等常见部署操作都可能无意中破坏安全性。这意味着安全性可能需要更深层地融入预训练阶段，而非仅靠 posttrain 对齐。","technical_approach":"通过对已对齐 LLM 进行剪枝（pruning）和低秩修改（low-rank modifications），评估安全对齐的鲁棒性。核心发现是这些轻量操作就能显著削弱安全性，说明 alignment 信号在参数空间中的编码是脆弱的。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体实验数字，但论文系统评估了多种剪枝和低秩修改策略对安全性的影响。","authors_note":"作者包括 Yangsibo Huang 和 Xiangyu Qi（Princeton），在 LLM 安全和对抗鲁棒性方向有持续产出。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Is safety alignment in LLMs brittle under simple parameter-level operations like pruning and low-rank modifications? Prior safety evaluations focused on adversarial prompts, overlooking that lightweight parameter changes might break safety guardrails.","importance":"A method-level contribution exposing the fragility of safety alignment. Key implication for the pretrain-posttrain interface: if alignment is a shallow modification in parameter space, common deployment operations (pruning, quantization, LoRA) may inadvertently break safety. This suggests safety may need to be embedded more deeply during pretraining rather than relying solely on posttrain alignment.","technical_approach":"Applies pruning and low-rank modifications to safety-aligned LLMs and evaluates the resulting safety degradation. The core finding is that these lightweight operations can significantly undermine safety, indicating alignment signals are fragile in parameter space.","experiments":"Specific numbers not available from the abstract. The paper systematically evaluates multiple pruning and low-rank modification strategies on safety-aligned models.","authors_note":"Authors include Yangsibo Huang and Xiangyu Qi (Princeton), with sustained work on LLM safety and adversarial robustness."},"tags":["safety-alignment","pruning","low-rank","brittleness"],"notable_authors":["Yangsibo Huang","Xiangyu Qi"]},{"id":"2405.03549","title":"Bridging discrete and continuous state spaces: Exploring the Ehrenfest process in time-continuous diffusion models","authors":["Ludwig Winkler","Lorenz Richter","Manfred Opper"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$33","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.03549","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WinklerRO24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WinklerRO24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/winkler24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["discrete-diffusion","continuous-time","ehrenfest","generative-modeling"]},{"id":"WolfWALS24","title":"Fundamental Limitations of Alignment in Large Language Models","authors":["Yotam Wolf","Noam Wies","Oshri Avnery","Yoav Levine","Amnon Shashua"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WolfWALS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WolfWALS24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/wolf24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["alignment","llm","limitations","theory"]},{"id":"YangCZ24","title":"A Dense Reward View on Aligning Text-to-Image Diffusion with Preference","authors":["Shentao Yang","Tianqi Chen","Mingyuan Zhou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YangCZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YangCZ24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/yang24e.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion","preference-learning","reward-model","alignment"]},{"id":"YangGM24","title":"Better Safe than Sorry: Pre-training CLIP against Targeted Data Poisoning and Backdoor Attacks","authors":["Wenhan Yang","Jingdong Gao","Baharan Mirzasoleiman"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YangGM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YangGM24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/yang24i.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["clip","pretraining","data-poisoning","backdoor","robustness"]},{"id":"YangSWZS024","title":"Reducing Fine-Tuning Memory Overhead by Approximate and Memory-Sharing Backpropagation","authors":["Yuchen Yang","Yingdong Shi","Cheems Wang","Xiantong Zhen","Yuxuan Shi","Jun Xu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YangSWZS024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YangSWZS024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/yang24u.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是全参数微调时反向传播显存开销过高的问题。现有做法通常在 LoRA、梯度检查点、重计算和 CPU/offload 之间做折中，但这些方法要么牺牲可训练参数范围，要么显著拖慢训练，因此作者试图直接改造反传本身来减少需要保存的激活和梯度状态。","importance":"这项工作的价值更偏系统与训练方法层，而不是新建模范式。对 pretrain/post-train 工程的启示是：如果近似反传和跨层共享内存能在精度几乎不掉的前提下稳定工作，那么全参数微调的资源门槛可以进一步下降，尤其适合做大模型持续预训练、领域适配和多任务微调时的显存预算优化。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把近似反向传播和内存共享结合起来，减少反传阶段必须独占保存的中间量。直觉上，它不是像 checkpoint 那样把算力换显存，也不是像参数高效微调那样缩小可训练空间，而是允许某些梯度相关量用近似值恢复，并让不同时刻不会同时使用的内存区域复用；关键设计点在于控制近似误差不在深层网络中累积失稳，同时保证共享策略不破坏 autograd 依赖关系。它和传统 activation checkpoint 的区别是，checkpoint 主要靠重算，本文更强调近似恢复与显存布局优化的联合设计。","experiments":"从给定信息里无法确认具体模型规模、任务集合、显存节省比例和精度变化幅度，因此不应编造。可以合理推断，论文应当会把该方法与标准反传、activation checkpoint、以及可能的 offloading/PEFT 方法比较，核心指标大概率是峰值显存、训练吞吐和最终任务精度；真正需要关注的是在不同模型深度和 batch size 下，显存收益是否稳定，以及近似反传是否会在长训练中带来 loss drift 或收敛变差。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical bottleneck: full fine-tuning is often limited by backprop memory rather than compute. Existing fixes such as LoRA, checkpointing, and offloading each avoid the problem in a different way, but they either restrict what gets updated or slow training substantially, so the authors revisit backprop itself.","importance":"This is primarily a systems-and-training contribution, not a new modeling paradigm. The relevant takeaway for pretrain and post-train work is that if approximate backprop plus memory sharing can preserve quality, the cost of full-parameter adaptation drops meaningfully for continual pretraining, domain tuning, and multi-stage training pipelines.","technical_approach":"The method combines approximate backpropagation with memory sharing across tensors whose lifetimes do not overlap. The design choice is important: instead of trading memory for recomputation, as checkpointing does, or reducing trainable capacity, as PEFT does, it tries to keep full training while compressing what must be stored during backward. The hard part is keeping approximation error from accumulating and ensuring the shared-memory schedule remains compatible with gradient dependencies.","experiments":"The provided metadata does not include concrete model sizes, datasets, memory reduction numbers, or quality deltas, so those should not be invented. The meaningful experimental questions are whether it lowers peak memory against standard backprop and checkpointing, how much throughput it preserves, and whether the approximation remains stable over long training runs rather than only short fine-tuning schedules.","authors_note":""},"tags":["fine-tuning","memory","backpropagation","efficiency"]},{"id":"YinSC24","title":"Characterizing Truthfulness in Large Language Model Generations with Local Intrinsic Dimension","authors":["Fan Yin","Jayanth Srinivasa","Kai-Wei Chang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YinSC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YinSC24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/yin24c.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是如何刻画 LLM 生成内容的真实性，而不是只看最终答案对错。以往 truthfulness 研究常依赖外部判别器、基准问答正确率或生成后验证，这些方法能告诉你“错了没有”，但不太解释模型内部表征在 truthful 和 untruthful 生成时有什么结构性差异。","importance":"这是一篇机制分析工作。对 pretrain 和 post-train 的启示在于，如果真实性和某种局部表示几何量——这里是 local intrinsic dimension，局部内在维度——存在稳定相关性，那么它可能成为 hallucination 预警、解码控制、奖励建模或数据筛选的辅助信号，比单纯看 token probability 更接近内部状态层面的诊断。","technical_approach":"核心方法是用 local intrinsic dimension 去刻画模型在生成过程中隐藏状态附近流形的局部复杂度，并分析它与 truthfulness 的关系。这个思路不是再训练一个事实校验器，而是从表示空间几何出发：如果模型对某段生成更确定、更集中，局部维度可能更低；如果它在多个不一致解释之间摇摆，局部结构可能更分散。设计上的关键在于如何在不同层、不同 token 位置和不同任务上稳定估计这个量，以及如何排除它只是和 entropy、长度或难度共变的伪相关。","experiments":"从标题看，实验应会在 truthfulness 相关基准上比较 truthful 与 untruthful generation 的局部内在维度差异，并可能测试其作为检测信号的预测能力。给定信息没有具体模型、基准名称、相关系数或分类 AUC 等数字，因此不能补数。值得重点看的是：这种信号是否跨模型和任务稳定；是在生成前就可预测，还是只能事后分析；以及它相对 logits entropy、self-consistency 等简单指标到底带来多少增益。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies how to characterize truthfulness in LLM outputs from the model's internal geometry, rather than only judging answers as right or wrong after generation. Existing approaches often rely on external verification or benchmark accuracy, which gives outcomes but little insight into the hidden-state structure associated with truthful versus untruthful behavior.","importance":"This is an interpretability and diagnosis contribution. For pretraining and post-training, it matters because a reliable internal signal of truthfulness could support hallucination detection, decoding control, reward modeling, or data filtering without requiring a separate verifier for every case.","technical_approach":"The key idea is to use local intrinsic dimension, a measure of the effective dimensionality of nearby hidden representations, to analyze truthfulness during generation. Instead of building another classifier, the paper asks whether truthful generations occupy a different local geometric regime than false ones. The challenge is making that estimate stable across layers, token positions, and tasks, and showing it is not merely a proxy for entropy, response length, or question difficulty.","experiments":"The likely experiments compare local intrinsic dimension between truthful and untruthful generations on truthfulness benchmarks and test whether the signal can predict or detect failures. The provided information does not include model names, benchmark details, or numerical metrics such as AUC or correlation, so those should not be fabricated. The main question is whether the signal generalizes across models and adds value beyond simpler uncertainty indicators.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm","truthfulness","representation","intrinsic-dimension"]},{"id":"Yu0Y0L24","title":"Language Models are Super Mario: Absorbing Abilities from Homologous Models as a Free Lunch","authors":["Le Yu","Bowen Yu","Haiyang Yu","Fei Huang","Yongbin Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Yu0Y0L24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Yu0Y0L24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/yu24p.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是如何在不增加太多训练成本的情况下，让语言模型吸收其他同源模型的能力。传统做法通常依赖蒸馏、继续预训练或多模型集成，但这些方法要么额外开销大，要么会引入明显的训练与部署复杂度，因此作者想寻找一种接近“免费午餐”的能力迁移方式。","importance":"这项工作对 pretrain↔post-train 接口很有启发。它的重要性不一定在于单点 SOTA，而在于提出同源模型之间能力可组合、可迁移的新视角；如果这种迁移不需要完整重训，就可能影响模型合并、持续预训练、蒸馏和多阶段对齐的做法。","technical_approach":"从标题判断，核心方法是让一个语言模型从 homologous models——大致可理解为架构相近、语义空间兼容或来自同一模型家族的模型——吸收能力。它很可能不是简单 ensemble，而是通过参数空间、表示空间或输出空间的某种对齐，把教师模型中的局部专长迁移到学生模型，同时尽量避免标准蒸馏那种大量再训练。之所以强调 homologous，是因为同源模型之间 token embedding、层级表示和函数形态更接近，能力注入更容易稳定；边界则是异构模型或能力冲突严重时，迁移可能不再“免费”。","experiments":"给定信息无法确认具体是参数合并、logit 对齐、模块替换还是其他机制，也没有模型规模、任务集合和提升数字，因此不能编造。可以预期实验会比较原模型、被吸收能力的源模型、以及若干蒸馏/模型合并 baseline，并检验多个能力维度是否同时保留。真正需要看的实验点是：能力吸收是否存在遗忘；收益是否只对相近 checkpoint 有效；以及这种方法比继续训练节省了多少实际成本。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks how a language model can acquire abilities from other related models without paying the full cost of distillation, continued pretraining, or ensembling. That is attractive because current transfer methods are often expensive either at training time or at deployment.","importance":"This is interesting at the interface between pretraining and post-training. The broader significance is the idea that abilities may be composable across homologous models, which could influence model merging, continual pretraining, and low-cost capability transfer.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method likely transfers abilities between homologous models, meaning models with compatible architectures or representation spaces. The mechanism could operate in parameter space, representation space, or output space, but the key point is that similarity between source and target models is being exploited to make transfer easier than generic distillation. That also defines the boundary: if the models are too different or the imported abilities conflict, the transfer is unlikely to remain a 'free lunch'.","experiments":"The available metadata does not specify whether the method is parameter merging, logit alignment, module transplantation, or something else, and it provides no model sizes or numerical gains. Those details should therefore remain unspecified. The most important experiments would test retention versus forgetting, dependence on checkpoint similarity, and actual cost savings relative to conventional distillation or continued training.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm","model-merging","knowledge-transfer","fine-tuning"]},{"id":"YuWFSSL24","title":"Unveiling and Harnessing Hidden Attention Sinks: Enhancing Large Language Models without Training through Attention Calibration","authors":["Zhongzhi Yu","Zheng Wang","Yonggan Fu","Huihong Shi","Khalid Shaikh","Yingyan Celine Lin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YuWFSSL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YuWFSSL24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/yu24l.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是大语言模型里隐藏的 attention sinks 会无谓吸走注意力质量，进而影响生成效果。已有研究知道某些特殊 token 或位置会成为‘注意力黑洞’，但通常把它当现象描述；作者进一步追问能否不训练模型、只通过推理时校准就修复这种问题。","importance":"这是一篇偏推理机制和无训练修正的工作。对 pretrain 的直接影响有限，但它对理解注意力分配偏差、上下文利用失衡以及训练后校正空间很有价值；如果 attention sink 的形成与预训练分布、位置编码或 mask 设计相关，它也能反过来给训练目标和架构设计提供线索。","technical_approach":"核心方法是先揭示 hidden attention sinks，再通过 attention calibration 在不更新参数的情况下增强模型。这里的关键不是简单 reweight attention，而是找出哪些 heads、哪些位置、哪些 token 类型存在系统性吸附效应，并在推理时进行校准，抑制无信息价值的过度聚焦。这样设计有效，是因为很多推理错误并非来自知识缺失，而是来自注意力预算被坏模式浪费；但边界也明显：如果模型本身表示能力不足或事实知识缺失，校准注意力只能修正利用方式，不能凭空补知识。","experiments":"从题目看，实验应当展示在无需训练的前提下，attention calibration 可以提升若干 LLM 的生成质量、长上下文利用或下游任务表现，并配合可视化/分析验证 hidden attention sinks 的存在。给定信息没有模型名单、任务、提升幅度和 calibration 开销，因此不能补数字。值得关注的是：收益是否跨模型一致；是否只对长上下文或特定 prompt 模式有效；以及校准是否会破坏某些原本有用的强注意力模式。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies hidden attention sinks in large language models and asks whether they can be corrected without retraining. Prior work has noted that some tokens or positions attract disproportionate attention, but usually stops at describing the phenomenon rather than turning it into an actionable inference-time fix.","importance":"This is mainly an inference-time mechanism and calibration study. Its direct effect on pretraining is limited, but it is useful for understanding biased attention allocation, poor context utilization, and which failures can still be corrected after training without changing model weights.","technical_approach":"The method identifies hidden attention sinks and applies attention calibration at inference time to reduce their harmful effect. The key idea is not generic reweighting, but targeted correction of systematic over-attention patterns across heads, positions, or token types. This can work because some generation failures come from wasted attention budget rather than missing knowledge. The boundary is clear as well: calibration can improve how the model uses its context, but it cannot create knowledge or reasoning ability that the pretrained model does not have.","experiments":"The expected experiments show that attention calibration improves generation or long-context performance across several LLMs without additional training, along with analyses visualizing the sink behavior. The provided metadata does not include model names, tasks, numerical gains, or runtime overhead, so those should not be invented. The main questions are how broadly the effect generalizes and whether calibration suppresses useful attention patterns along with harmful ones.","authors_note":""},"tags":["attention-sink","attention-calibration","inference"]},{"id":"2402.17152","title":"Actions Speak Louder than Words: Trillion-Parameter Sequential Transducers for Generative Recommendations","authors":["Jiaqi Zhai","Lucy Liao","Xing Liu","Yueming Wang","Rui Li","Xuan Cao","Leon Gao","Zhaojie Gong","Fangda Gu","Jiayuan He","Yinghai Lu","Yu Shi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$34","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.17152","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhaiLLWLCGGGHLS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhaiLLWLCGGGHLS24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zhai24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["recommendation","sequential-transducer","scaling","transformer"]},{"id":"2402.02446","title":"LQER: Low-Rank Quantization Error Reconstruction for LLMs","authors":["Cheng Zhang","Jianyi Cheng","George Anthony Constantinides","Yiren Zhao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Post-training quantization of Large Language Models (LLMs) is challenging. In this work, we introduce Low-rank Quantization Error Reduction (LQER), which combines quantization and low-rank approximation to recover the model capability. LQER leverages an activation-induced scale matrix to drive the singular value distribution of quantization error towards a desirable distribution, which enables nearly-lossless W4A8 quantization on various LLMs and downstream tasks without the need for knowledge distillation, grid search, or gradient-base iterative optimization. Unlike existing methods, the computation pattern of LQER eliminates the need for specialized Scatter and Gather processes to collect high-precision weights from irregular memory locations. Our W4A8 LLMs achieve near-lossless performance on six popular downstream tasks, while using 1.36$\\times$ fewer hardware resources than the leading state-of-the-art method. We open-source our framework at https://github.com/ChengZhang-98/lqer","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.02446","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhangCCZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhangCCZ24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zhang24j.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["quantization","low-rank","post-training-quantization","llm"]},{"id":"2311.17972","title":"Self-Infilling Code Generation","authors":["Lin Zheng","Jianbo Yuan","Zhi Zhang","Hongxia Yang","Lingpeng Kong"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$35","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.17972","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhengYZYK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhengYZYK24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zheng24o.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["code-generation","infilling","decoding","non-ar"]},{"id":"2402.03660","title":"On the Emergence of Cross-Task Linearity in Pretraining-Finetuning Paradigm","authors":["Zhanpeng Zhou","Zijun Chen","Yilan Chen","Bo Zhang","Junchi Yan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$36","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.03660","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhouC00Y24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhouC00Y24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zhou24e.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["pretrain-finetune","linearity","representation","generalization"]},{"id":"2406.09679","title":"Exploring Training on Heterogeneous Data with Mixture of Low-rank Adapters","authors":["Yuhang Zhou","Zihua Zhao","Siyuan Du","Haolin Li","Jiangchao Yao","Ya Zhang","Yanfeng Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$37","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.09679","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhouZDLY0W24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhouZDLY0W24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zhou24w.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["lora","mixture-of-experts","heterogeneous-data","multitask"]},{"id":"2402.19446","title":"ArCHer: Training Language Model Agents via Hierarchical Multi-Turn RL","authors":["Yifei Zhou","Andrea Zanette","Jiayi Pan","Sergey Levine","Aviral Kumar"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$38","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.19446","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhouZPLK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhouZPLK24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zhou24t.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["rl","language-agent","multi-turn","hierarchical"]},{"id":"2402.12048","title":"Model Tailor: Mitigating Catastrophic Forgetting in Multi-modal Large Language Models","authors":["Didi Zhu","Zhongyi Sun","Zexi Li","Tao Shen","Ke Yan","Shouhong Ding","Chao Wu","Kun Kuang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$39","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.12048","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Zhu000YD0K24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Zhu000YD0K24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zhu24l.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["multimodal-llm","catastrophic-forgetting","fine-tuning","continual-learning"]},{"id":"2306.04815","title":"Catapults in SGD: spikes in the training loss and their impact on generalization through feature learning","authors":["Libin Zhu","Chaoyue Liu","Adityanarayanan Radhakrishnan","Mikhail Belkin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"In this paper, we first present an explanation regarding the common occurrence of spikes in the training loss when neural networks are trained with stochastic gradient descent (SGD). We provide evidence that the spikes in the training loss of SGD are\"catapults\", an optimization phenomenon originally observed in GD with large learning rates in [Lewkowycz et al. 2020]. We empirically show that these catapults occur in a low-dimensional subspace spanned by the top eigenvectors of the tangent kernel, for both GD and SGD. Second, we posit an explanation for how catapults lead to better generalization by demonstrating that catapults promote feature learning by increasing alignment with the Average Gradient Outer Product (AGOP) of the true predictor. Furthermore, we demonstrate that a smaller batch size in SGD induces a larger number of catapults, thereby improving AGOP alignment and test performance.","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.04815","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Zhu0RB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Zhu0RB24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zhu24h.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["optimization","loss-spikes","sgd","generalization"]},{"id":"2402.16842","title":"Asymmetry in Low-Rank Adapters of Foundation Models","authors":["Jiacheng Zhu","Kristjan H. Greenewald","Kimia Nadjahi","Haitz Sáez de Ocáriz Borde","Rickard Brüel Gabrielsson","Leshem Choshen","Marzyeh Ghassemi","Mikhail Yurochkin","Justin Solomon"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3a","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.16842","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhuGNBGCGY024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhuGNBGCGY024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zhu24c.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["lora","peft","fine-tuning","asymmetry"]},{"id":"2402.18496","title":"Language Models Represent Beliefs of Self and Others","authors":["Wentao Zhu","Zhining Zhang","Yizhou Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Understanding and attributing mental states, known as Theory of Mind (ToM), emerges as a fundamental capability for human social reasoning. While Large Language Models (LLMs) appear to possess certain ToM abilities, the mechanisms underlying these capabilities remain elusive. In this study, we discover that it is possible to linearly decode the belief status from the perspectives of various agents through neural activations of language models, indicating the existence of internal representations of self and others' beliefs. By manipulating these representations, we observe dramatic changes in the models' ToM performance, underscoring their pivotal role in the social reasoning process. Additionally, our findings extend to diverse social reasoning tasks that involve different causal inference patterns, suggesting the potential generalizability of these representations.","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.18496","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhuZ024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhuZ024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zhu24o.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["theory-of-mind","representation","linear-probing","beliefs"]},{"id":"2312.12275","title":"Emergence of In-Context Reinforcement Learning from Noise Distillation","authors":["Ilya Zisman","Vladislav Kurenkov","Alexander Nikulin","Viacheslav Sinii","Sergey Kolesnikov"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Recently, extensive studies in Reinforcement Learning have been carried out on the ability of transformers to adapt in-context to various environments and tasks. Current in-context RL methods are limited by their strict requirements for data, which needs to be generated by RL agents or labeled with actions from an optimal policy. In order to address this prevalent problem, we propose AD$^\\varepsilon$, a new data acquisition approach that enables in-context Reinforcement Learning from noise-induced curriculum. We show that it is viable to construct a synthetic noise injection curriculum which helps to obtain learning histories. Moreover, we experimentally demonstrate that it is possible to alleviate the need for generation using optimal policies, with in-context RL still able to outperform the best suboptimal policy in a learning dataset by a 2x margin.","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.12275","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZismanKNSK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZismanKNSK24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zisman24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题，是如何在没有最优策略标签、也不依赖昂贵 RL agent 采样的情况下做 in-context RL。以往这类方法通常要求轨迹来自强策略或显式动作监督，数据门槛很高，因此很难扩展到更广的环境和更便宜的数据来源。","importance":"这项工作的意义在于，它把 in-context RL 的数据获取从“依赖专家策略”推进到“可由噪声课程构造”。这对 pretrain/posttrain 的启发很直接：如果模型能从带结构噪声的历史中学到在线适应，而不是只会模仿最优轨迹，那么训练信号的来源会更接近大规模弱监督和合成数据，而不是小规模昂贵标注。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 AD^ε，一种基于噪声注入课程的数据构造方案，用合成噪声逐步生成可学习的交互历史，再让 Transformer 从这些历史中学会 in-context 适应。它和已有方法的关键区别，不是继续提升策略生成器质量，而是直接放松‘数据必须来自最优策略’这个前提；这样设计有效，是因为 in-context RL 学到的不是单一步骤上的最优动作，而是如何从带反馈的历史中更新行为，噪声如果分布得当，反而能提供覆盖更广的行为—结果对照。边界也很清楚：噪声课程若偏离环境结构太远，模型可能学到的是对合成分布的适应，而不是真实任务上的策略改进。","experiments":"摘要明确给出的实验结论是：在不依赖最优策略生成数据的条件下，in-context RL 仍然可以超过若干现有方法。摘要未给出模型参数量、环境数量、baseline 名称和具体提升数值，因此无法可靠复述绝对结果。可以确定的一点是，作者重点验证的是数据来源的放宽而不是单纯刷 benchmark，实验逻辑应当包括不同噪声课程设置下的泛化比较，以及与专家轨迹训练方案的对照。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a key bottleneck in in-context reinforcement learning: how to train without trajectories generated by strong RL agents or labels from an optimal policy. Earlier methods typically relied on expert-like data, which made data collection expensive and narrow in scope.","importance":"The contribution is important because it shifts the data requirement for in-context RL from expert-policy dependence to synthetic curriculum construction. For pretraining and post-training research, this matters: if adaptation can emerge from structured noisy histories rather than only expert demonstrations, then the training signal becomes much closer to scalable weak supervision and synthetic data generation.","technical_approach":"The main idea is AD^ε, a data acquisition method built on a noise-induced curriculum. Instead of improving the policy that generates trajectories, it relaxes the assumption that useful histories must come from optimal behavior. That choice is sensible because in-context RL is not only about imitating the best action; it is about learning how behavior should change after observing history and feedback. Properly designed noise can expose a wider range of action-outcome patterns and make this adaptation learnable. The trade-off is distribution mismatch: if the synthetic noise curriculum is too detached from the real environment structure, the model may adapt well to artificial histories but not improve policy quality where it matters.","experiments":"What the abstract makes clear is the central empirical claim: even without data from optimal policies, in-context RL can still outperform existing methods. The abstract does not provide model size, number of environments, named baselines, or exact margins, so those details cannot be stated reliably. The likely experimental emphasis is on comparing different noise curricula and measuring whether the relaxed data pipeline preserves or improves adaptation quality against expert-trajectory-based training.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","rl","transformer","distillation"]},{"id":"2402.02207","title":"Safety Fine-Tuning at (Almost) No Cost: A Baseline for Vision Large Language Models","authors":["Yongshuo Zong","Ondrej Bohdal","Tingyang Yu","Yongxin Yang","Timothy M. Hospedales"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3b","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.02207","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZongBYYH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZongBYYH24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zong24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题，是 VLLM 在视觉指令微调后容易生成有害内容且很容易被简单越狱，而现有做法往往把安全对齐当成额外昂贵流程。作者的判断是，问题很大一部分来自视觉语言 SFT 数据中混入了有害样本，同时多模态微调会冲掉底层 LLM 原本学到的安全边界。","importance":"这是一篇很实用的 posttrain 接口论文，贡献类型是数据级加训练配方级。它的重要性不在于提出复杂安全算法，而在于给出一个成本很低但工程上很有效的基线：安全并不一定需要重型对齐流程，只要把安全数据放进对的阶段、控制配比，就能显著改善 VLLM 的拒答边界，同时基本不伤能力，甚至可能提升通用表现。","technical_approach":"核心方法是构建视觉语言安全指令数据集 VLGuard，并将其用于两种简单路径：一是在标准 vision-language fine-tuning 中直接混入，二是做事后安全微调。它和常见安全方案的差别在于，没有引入复杂的奖励模型、RLHF 或专门越狱防御结构，而是把问题回到数据分布和遗忘上来处理；这样有效，是因为如果底模本身有一定安全对齐，多模态阶段最容易出问题的是新数据把不安全模式重新强化，或让模型忘掉已有拒答策略。边界在于，这类方法更像是低成本修复，不保证覆盖开放式攻击面，尤其是分布外视觉触发和组合型越狱。","experiments":"摘要给出的结论很清楚：把 VLGuard 融入常规视觉语言微调，或单独用于 post-hoc fine-tuning，都能有效提升 VLLM 的安全性，而且对通用性能影响很小，甚至有提升。摘要没有提供模型规模、数据条数、评测基准名称和具体提升百分比，因此不能精确写数值。可以确定的是，作者做了初始诊断，证明问题和有害微调数据及安全遗忘有关，这一点比单纯报最终分数更有参考价值。","authors_note":"作者包含 Timothy M. Hospedales。仅从当前信息无法确认机构。团队近年在多模态鲁棒性与对齐方向有持续工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical failure mode in vision-language models: after visual instruction tuning, they can produce harmful outputs and are vulnerable to trivial jailbreaks. The authors argue that a large part of this comes from harmful data inside vision-language SFT and from safety alignment being forgotten during multimodal fine-tuning.","importance":"This is a useful post-training interface paper with a data-plus-training-recipe contribution. Its importance is not in proposing a heavy safety stack, but in showing a low-cost baseline that works: safety alignment for VLLMs can be recovered or preserved by putting the right safety data at the right stage, with little or no capability loss and sometimes even a gain.","technical_approach":"The method is straightforward: curate a safety-focused vision-language instruction dataset, VLGuard, and use it either during standard vision-language fine-tuning or in a post-hoc safety tuning stage. The key difference from more elaborate safety pipelines is that it does not rely on reward models, RLHF, or specialized defense modules. It instead treats the problem as one of data distribution and catastrophic forgetting. That design makes sense because if the base LLM is already somewhat aligned, multimodal tuning often breaks safety not by lacking a safety mechanism but by reintroducing unsafe patterns and overwriting existing refusal behavior. The limitation is also clear: this is a low-cost repair strategy, not a full solution to open-ended or distribution-shifted jailbreak attacks.","experiments":"The abstract clearly claims that adding VLGuard either to standard VL fine-tuning or to post-hoc fine-tuning improves safety alignment effectively, with minimal harm to general performance and sometimes a benefit. It does not provide model sizes, dataset size, benchmark names, or exact margins, so those cannot be stated precisely. A useful empirical point is the paper’s initial diagnosis linking failures to harmful instruction data and safety forgetting, which is more informative than only reporting end metrics.","authors_note":"Timothy M. Hospedales is among the authors. The institution cannot be confirmed from the provided information. The team has visible work in multimodal robustness and alignment."},"tags":["vision-llm","safety","fine-tuning","alignment"],"notable_authors":["Timothy M. Hospedales"]},{"id":"ZouZYB0024","title":"BiE: Bi-Exponent Block Floating-Point for Large Language Models Quantization","authors":["Lancheng Zou","Wenqian Zhao","Shuo Yin","Chen Bai","Qi Sun","Bei Yu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZouZYB0024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZouZYB0024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zou24d.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关注的问题，是如何为大语言模型设计更适合的低比特数值格式，使量化既省算力和带宽，又尽量不破坏精度。传统定点、浮点或单指数 block floating-point 往往在动态范围和量化误差之间取舍很硬，遇到 LLM 中跨层、跨通道分布差异大的权重与激活时容易失真。","importance":"这项工作属于系统级和数值表示级改进。它对 pretrain 和 serving 都有意义，因为量化格式不是纯部署问题：如果一种表示能更稳地覆盖 LLM 的长尾分布，就会影响训练后压缩、低精度微调，甚至反过来影响我们在训练时如何设计数值稳定性和精度预算。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心方法是提出 BiE，即双指数的 block floating-point 量化格式，用两个指数机制更细致地描述 block 内数值范围。相比标准 BFP 共享单一指数，BiE 试图缓解同一 block 内大值和小值难以同时表示的问题；这样设计可能有效，因为 LLM 权重和激活常有明显的 heavy-tail 或跨通道异质性，单指数容易让小值被吞掉。代价通常是编码和硬件实现更复杂，收益也取决于 block 大小、舍入策略以及是否真能落到高效 kernel 上。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法确认是在权重量化、激活量化还是训练量化场景下验证，也无法确认 bit-width、模型规模、推理加速比和精度损失。可以预期论文会与 INT、FP 或传统 BFP 基线比较困惑度或下游精度，并报告不同 block size 的折中，但具体数字不能编造。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a classic LLM quantization problem: how to design a low-bit numeric format that saves compute and bandwidth without collapsing model accuracy. Standard fixed-point, floating-point, or single-exponent block floating-point formats often face a harsh trade-off between dynamic range and quantization error, especially for the heterogeneous weight and activation distributions seen in LLMs.","importance":"This is a systems-and-numerics contribution. It matters for both pretraining-adjacent work and deployment because quantization format is not only an inference concern: a representation that better matches LLM value distributions can affect post-training compression, low-precision adaptation, and how we think about numerical stability and precision allocation during training.","technical_approach":"From the title, the key idea is BiE, a bi-exponent block floating-point format. Relative to standard BFP with one shared exponent per block, BiE appears to add a second exponent mechanism to better represent mixed-scale values within the same block. That design is plausible because LLM weights and activations often have heavy tails and strong cross-channel heterogeneity, and a single shared exponent can wipe out small but important values. The trade-off is implementation complexity: better representational fidelity only matters if the format maps cleanly to efficient kernels and hardware-friendly execution.","experiments":"The abstract is missing, so it is unclear whether the paper studies weight-only quantization, weight-plus-activation quantization, or training-time low precision. Bit-widths, model sizes, speedups, and accuracy loss cannot be confirmed. One would expect comparisons against INT, FP, and standard BFP baselines, plus ablations on block size and rounding strategy, but no numeric claim can be made from the provided information.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","llm","low-precision","inference"]},{"id":"TengSYO24","title":"Fine-Tuning LLMs for Multi-Turn Dialogues: Optimizing Cross-Entropy Loss with KL Divergence for All Rounds of Responses","authors":["Zeyu Teng","Yong Song","Xiaozhou Ye","Ye Ouyang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3c","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icmlc2/TengSYO24","doi":"https://doi.org/10.1145/3651671.3651702"},"_dblp_key":"conf/icmlc2/TengSYO24","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.1145/3651671.3651702","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题，是多轮对话 SFT 往往没有充分利用整段对话数据，或者为了利用所有轮次而带来很长训练时间。常见做法要么只监督最后一轮回复，浪费中间监督信号；要么把每轮拆开重算，代价高且训练效率差。","importance":"这项工作是一个典型的 posttrain 配方改进。它的重要性不在于改变模型架构，而在于提供了一个更充分利用多轮数据、同时兼顾训练效率的损失设计；对实际做对话模型的人来说，这种‘数据不变、loss 变得更合理’的改进通常比复杂新模型更容易落地。","technical_approach":"核心方法是对多轮对话中所有轮次的响应同时优化交叉熵损失，并引入 KL 散度约束。和只训练最后一轮的 SFT 相比，它显式把整段对话都纳入监督；和逐轮独立训练相比，它试图在一次训练中兼顾充分性与效率。KL 的作用大概率是让不同轮次或新旧策略之间保持分布一致，避免模型为了拟合局部轮次而偏离原有语言能力太多。这样设计有效，因为多轮对话的关键不是单轮回答质量，而是跨轮一致性与上下文保持；边界是，如果历史轮次本身质量参差，给所有轮次同等优化权重也可能把噪声一并放大。","experiments":"摘要只说明方法在充分性、效率和效果上都有提升，但没有提供模型参数量、对话数据规模、训练时长节省比例以及相对基线的指标提升。无法可靠写出具体数字。可以确定的实验重点应该包括：与最后一轮监督、逐轮监督等 SFT 基线比较，并报告多轮对话生成质量和训练耗时的折中。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a common inefficiency in multi-turn dialogue SFT: many methods either underuse the dialogue by supervising only the final response, or they consume too much training time when trying to exploit all turns. In practice, this means either wasted supervision or expensive repeated computation.","importance":"This is a post-training recipe improvement rather than a new architecture. Its practical importance is that it aims to use the same dialogue data more fully while keeping training efficient. For teams tuning dialogue models, this kind of loss-level improvement is often easier to adopt than a more elaborate modeling change.","technical_approach":"The method optimizes cross-entropy together with a KL term over responses from all dialogue rounds. Compared with final-turn-only SFT, it explicitly supervises the full interaction. Compared with training each round separately, it aims to retain data efficiency without incurring excessive cost. The KL term likely serves to stabilize the updated response distribution, preventing the model from overfitting particular rounds at the expense of general language behavior. The design is sensible because multi-turn quality depends on consistency across turns, not just the final answer. The limitation is data quality: if earlier dialogue rounds are noisy or weakly aligned, uniformly supervising all of them may also amplify that noise.","experiments":"The abstract claims gains in sufficiency, efficiency, and effectiveness, but provides no model size, dialogue dataset scale, training-time reduction, or metric improvements over baselines. So no quantitative statement can be made reliably. The likely comparisons are against final-turn supervision and per-turn supervision baselines, with metrics covering multi-turn response quality and training cost.","authors_note":""},"tags":["sft","multi-turn","kl-divergence","loss-design","dialogue"]},{"id":"YimW24","title":"Distilling Multi-Step Reasoning Capabilities into Smaller Language Model","authors":["Yauwai Yim","Zirui Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icmlc2/YimW24","doi":"https://doi.org/10.1145/3651671.3651737"},"_dblp_key":"conf/icmlc2/YimW24","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.1145/3651671.3651737","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关注的问题，是如何把大模型的多步推理能力蒸馏到更小模型里，而不是只蒸馏最终答案。过去的小模型蒸馏常停留在输出模仿，导致学生模型学到结果分布，却学不到中间推理结构，因此在组合泛化和复杂任务上退化明显。","importance":"这项工作属于推理蒸馏和 posttrain 能力迁移方向。它的重要性在于，多步推理已经成为当前模型能力差异的核心来源之一；如果能稳定蒸馏给小模型，就意味着可以把昂贵 teacher 的推理轨迹转化为更便宜的部署模型，这对推理成本、边端部署和 reasoning data 的利用方式都很关键。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心方法是显式蒸馏 multi-step reasoning capabilities，而不是仅蒸馏 logits 或最终回答。有效的做法通常包括让 teacher 产出 chain-of-thought 或分步解题轨迹，再让 student 学习这些中间结构，可能还会结合答案监督或过程筛选；这类设计之所以有效，是因为它把隐藏在最终 token 后面的求解过程显式化，让学生模型在训练时看到‘怎么解’，不只是‘解出来什么’。边界在于，teacher 的推理轨迹如果本身冗长、噪声高或存在错误链路，直接蒸馏可能让学生学到不必要的表面模式。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法确认 teacher/student 模型规模、推理任务类型、是否使用 CoT 过滤，以及相对标准蒸馏或直接 SFT 的提升幅度。可以预期论文会在数学、逻辑或多步问答任务上比较小模型性能与推理一致性，但具体 benchmark 和数字不能从现有信息得出。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies how to distill multi-step reasoning ability into a smaller language model, rather than distilling only final answers. Many small-model distillation setups mostly transfer output behavior, which helps answer matching but often fails to transfer the internal structure needed for compositional or multi-step reasoning.","importance":"This is a reasoning-distillation and post-training transfer paper. Its importance is straightforward: multi-step reasoning is now a major differentiator among language models, and a reliable way to transfer it into smaller students would directly reduce serving cost while making better use of expensive teacher-generated reasoning data.","technical_approach":"From the title, the central idea is to distill reasoning trajectories instead of only logits or final responses. In practice, such a design usually means collecting teacher chain-of-thought or stepwise solutions and training the student to reproduce the intermediate structure, often together with answer supervision or trajectory filtering. This can work because it exposes the latent solution process rather than leaving it compressed into the final token sequence. The main caveat is trajectory quality: if the teacher reasoning is verbose, noisy, or partly incorrect, naive process distillation may transfer superficial patterns instead of robust problem-solving behavior.","experiments":"The abstract is unavailable, so teacher and student sizes, reasoning tasks, CoT filtering strategy, and margins over standard distillation or direct SFT cannot be confirmed. It is reasonable to expect evaluations on math, logic, or multi-step QA benchmarks, but any detailed quantitative summary would be speculative.","authors_note":""},"tags":["distillation","reasoning","cot","small-model","teacher-student"]},{"id":"SunWL24","title":"Dual-Agent Multi-Hop Reasoning Based on Reward Shaping and Action Dropout","authors":["Qiyue Sun","Yongli Wang","Dongmei Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icmlca/SunWL24","doi":"https://doi.org/10.1109/ICMLCA63499.2024.10754169"},"_dblp_key":"conf/icmlca/SunWL24","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.1109/ICMLCA63499.2024.10754169","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题，是多跳推理中单个 agent 容易在搜索过程中走偏，奖励又稀疏，导致训练不稳、推理链条质量差。以往方法通常在单智能体框架里靠更强搜索或更复杂奖励去补，但这样要么成本高，要么仍难避免错误早期传播。","importance":"这项工作属于推理型 agent 训练方法，对纯 pretrain 关联不强，但和 posttrain、工具使用、搜索增强推理有关。它的价值在于，把 reward shaping 和 action dropout 结合到 dual-agent 设置中，尝试同时解决探索、协作和错误累积问题；这类设计对构建更稳定的 reasoning agent 有一定参考意义。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心方法是双智能体多跳推理框架，并通过 reward shaping 改善稀疏奖励，通过 action dropout 抑制过早依赖某些动作路径。和单 agent 方法相比，dual-agent 可能用于分工搜索、相互校验或提出—验证；reward shaping 提供更密集的学习信号，action dropout 则像一种结构化正则，减少模型过拟合少数高频推理动作。这样设计有效的前提是双 agent 的角色确实形成互补，而不是只是把计算量翻倍。边界在于，多 agent 协调本身会引入训练不稳定和 credit assignment 更复杂的问题。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法确认多跳任务类型、是否是知识图谱或文本 QA、基线方法、奖励设计细节和具体提升幅度。可以合理预期论文会比较单/双 agent、是否使用 reward shaping、是否启用 action dropout 的 ablation，但不能给出量化结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a common failure mode in multi-hop reasoning: a single agent can easily drift during search, while sparse rewards make training unstable and error accumulation hard to correct. Earlier approaches often stayed in a single-agent setup and tried to compensate with stronger search or more complex rewards, which is either costly or still brittle.","importance":"This is a reasoning-agent training paper with limited direct relevance to core pretraining, but it connects to post-training, tool use, and search-augmented reasoning. Its value is in combining dual-agent interaction with reward shaping and action dropout to improve exploration and reduce brittle dependence on narrow reasoning paths.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method is a dual-agent multi-hop reasoning framework enhanced with reward shaping and action dropout. Relative to a single-agent design, two agents can plausibly divide roles such as proposing and verifying or exploring and filtering. Reward shaping supplies denser training signals, while action dropout acts like structured regularization that discourages the policy from over-committing to a small set of common actions too early. The idea is sensible if the two agents are genuinely complementary; otherwise it risks becoming a compute-heavy variant without much additional signal. The main limitation is coordination complexity, which can itself make optimization and credit assignment harder.","experiments":"The abstract is unavailable, so the task setting, whether the benchmarks are text QA or knowledge-graph reasoning, the baselines, and the quantitative gains cannot be confirmed. The likely experiment suite includes ablations on single versus dual agent, with and without reward shaping, and with and without action dropout, but no numeric result should be asserted here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multi-agent","reasoning","reward-shaping","rl"]},{"id":"0002DLZ00J24","title":"CaM: Cache Merging for Memory-efficient LLMs Inference","authors":["Yuxin Zhang","Yuxuan Du","Gen Luo","Yunshan Zhong","Zhenyu Zhang","Shiwei Liu","Rongrong Ji"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0002DLZ00J24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0002DLZ00J24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zhang24n.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：大模型推理时 KV cache 占用太大，尤其长上下文和多轮场景下显存压力会迅速成为瓶颈。现有办法通常是在精度和内存之间硬做取舍，比如压缩、裁剪或分页，而作者想通过“合并 cache”减少冗余，尽量保留生成质量。","importance":"这是系统级 inference 优化工作，对 pretrain 本身不是直接改进，但对长上下文模型的可部署性和真实使用成本很关键。它的重要性在于：如果 cache merging 能在较小质量损失下显著省显存，就会影响训练阶段对长 context 能力的投入回报，因为很多长上下文能力最终卡在 serving 成本而不是模型能力本身。","technical_approach":"核心思路应当是识别 KV cache 中可合并的冗余状态，并把多个相近 cache 条目压成更少的表示。这样设计优于简单截断，因为它保留了更多历史信息；也不同于纯量化，因为它减少的是 token 级状态数量而不只是数值精度。关键取舍在于相似性判定和合并策略：判得太激进会伤质量，判得太保守则省不下多少内存。","experiments":"给定信息没有摘要和数字，无法确认压缩比、延迟变化、适用模型或质量退化幅度。通常这类工作会在 LLaMA 类模型和长文本 benchmark 上报告显存下降、吞吐提升及 perplexity 或任务准确率变化，并与 KV quantization、window attention 或 eviction 策略比较；但这里不能编造具体结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical bottleneck: KV-cache memory grows quickly during LLM inference, especially with long contexts and multi-turn generation. Existing solutions often trade quality for memory through truncation, eviction, or quantization, while this work appears to ask whether redundant cache states can be merged instead of simply discarded.","importance":"This is a systems-oriented inference contribution with indirect but meaningful relevance to pretraining. If cache merging can reduce memory substantially without hurting generation much, it changes the deployment economics of long-context models. That matters because some context-length investments fail not at model capability, but at serving cost.","technical_approach":"The core idea is likely to detect similar KV states and merge them into fewer representations. That is different from truncation, which drops information, and from quantization, which keeps the same number of states but lowers numerical precision. The central design trade-off is how aggressively to merge: too aggressive harms fidelity, too conservative gives limited savings.","experiments":"The provided information does not include the abstract or numbers, so the empirical summary has to stay cautious. A typical evaluation here would report memory reduction, latency or throughput changes, and quality impact on long-context generation, compared against KV quantization, eviction, or sliding-window baselines. Exact results are not available from the given material.","authors_note":""},"tags":["kv-cache","inference","memory","serving"]},{"id":"0002JP0X24","title":"Diffusion Posterior Sampling is Computationally Intractable","authors":["Shivam Gupta","Ajil Jalal","Aditya Parulekar","Eric Price","Zhiyang Xun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0002JP0X24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0002JP0X24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/gupta24a.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的结论很直接：diffusion posterior sampling 在计算上是不可 tractable 的，至少在论文设定下不能指望有通用高效算法。这个问题重要，是因为大量逆问题工作默认扩散模型的 posterior sampling 既合理又可做，但很多方法实际依赖启发式近似，理论边界长期不清楚。","importance":"这是理论边界类贡献，价值在于给 diffusion-based inference 画清红线。对 pretrain 研究的启发不是“以后不要做 diffusion”，而是要更谨慎地区分训练目标可学、采样过程可近似、以及后验推断可高效这三件事；尤其当 diffusion 范式被拿去做条件生成、逆问题或多模态联合建模时，这个结论会影响方法设计。","technical_approach":"核心方法应当是复杂性理论证明：把某类 diffusion posterior sampling 问题归约到已知困难问题，从而说明不存在普适高效解法。这样的证明不是否定所有实际算法，而是否定“在一般情形下精确或有保证地高效求解”这一期待。它和经验论文的区别在于不讨论某个 sampler 跑得快不快，而是说明为什么大家最终都要靠近似、限制条件或特殊结构假设。","experiments":"这类论文通常实验不是重点，主要用于展示理论结论和实践现象的一致性。给定信息里没有摘要全文，因此无法确认是否包含实证例子、具体任务、误差随步数变化等结果；但核心信息已经足够明确：难点不是实现细节，而是问题本身的一般计算复杂性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The central claim is blunt: diffusion posterior sampling is computationally intractable, at least in the general setting considered by the paper. This matters because a large body of inverse-problem work assumes posterior sampling with diffusion models is a reasonable primitive, while in practice many methods already rely on heuristics without a clear theoretical boundary.","importance":"This is a theory-boundary paper. Its value for pretraining-adjacent research is that it separates three questions that are often conflated: whether a diffusion objective is learnable, whether its generative process is sampleable, and whether posterior inference under the model is computationally efficient. That distinction matters for conditional generation, inverse problems, and multimodal extensions built on diffusion backbones.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is a complexity-theoretic reduction showing that a class of diffusion posterior sampling problems is at least as hard as known intractable problems. The point is not that every practical sampler is useless, but that no general efficient and guaranteed algorithm should be expected without extra assumptions. That is a different contribution from empirical sampler papers, which measure speed or quality but do not explain why approximation is unavoidable.","experiments":"Empirical results are usually secondary in this kind of paper and mainly serve to align intuition with the hardness result. The provided information does not include the full abstract or any numbers, so task-level findings cannot be summarized reliably. The main takeaway is theoretical: the bottleneck is not only implementation, but the generic complexity of the inference problem itself.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","sampling","theory","posterior"]},{"id":"2405.04795","title":"Variational Schrödinger Diffusion Models","authors":["Wei Deng","Weijian Luo","Yixin Tan","Marin Bilos","Yu Chen","Yuriy Nevmyvaka","Ricky T. Q. Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3d","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.04795","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0002LTBCNC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0002LTBCNC24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/deng24c.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：Schrödinger bridge 用在 diffusion model 里时，传输效率很好，但训练代价太高，因为前向 score 不可解，往往需要基于模拟轨迹的隐式损失。以前大家接受了这个成本，是因为 SB 的运输计划更优；这篇工作想把 SB 拉回到更可扩展的训练范式里。","importance":"这是 diffusion 训练目标层面的改进，贡献点在于兼顾传输效率和训练可扩展性。对新型语言建模或多模态生成研究的启示是：如果你想要比标准 diffusion 更强的路径规划能力，但又不愿承担全套轨迹模拟代价，变分近似 forward score 可能是一条通用路线。它不是范式替换，但属于有方法含金量的训练改造。","technical_approach":"核心方法是提出 Variational Schrödinger Diffusion Model，把 SB 中难处理的 forward score 用变分形式线性化成 variational scores，再恢复 backward score 的 simulation-free 训练。作者把前向过程设为多元扩散，并自适应优化 variational scores 以学习更高效的 transport。这个设计的关键点是：保留 SB 擅长的“少走弯路”的传输性质，同时把训练从依赖模拟轨迹转回更容易扩展的形式。与标准 SB 相比，它舍弃了对真实 forward score 的直接处理，换来更实用的优化路径；与普通 diffusion 相比，它显式追求更优 transport，而不是只接受预设噪声路径。","experiments":"摘要表明作者给出了收敛性理论，使用 stochastic approximation 证明所提方法的变分 score 学习过程收敛，但给定文本被截断，具体实验数据缺失。无法确认使用了哪些生成数据集、FID/NLL 指标、训练成本下降多少，也无法确认与哪些 SB 或 diffusion baseline 比较。能确定的是，论文的卖点应当集中在两点：训练更省模拟成本，以及 transport plan 保持高质量。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a real bottleneck in Schrödinger-bridge-based diffusion: SB gives attractive transport plans, but training is expensive because the forward scores are intractable and often require simulation-based implicit losses. Prior work largely tolerated this cost to get better transport; this paper tries to keep the transport advantage while recovering scalable training.","importance":"This is a training-objective contribution within diffusion modeling. Its relevance to pretraining-adjacent generative work is that it offers a route to better path planning without paying the full simulation cost of classic SB methods. That is not a paradigm replacement, but it is a meaningful methodological improvement for anyone interested in transport-efficient diffusion or multimodal generative training.","technical_approach":"The core idea is the Variational Schrödinger Diffusion Model, which linearizes the intractable forward scores of SB into adaptive variational scores and restores simulation-free training for the backward scores. The forward process is modeled as a multivariate diffusion, and the variational scores are optimized to maintain efficient transport. The design choice is clear: give up direct handling of the exact forward score in exchange for a tractable approximation that preserves the main benefit of SB. Relative to standard diffusion, the method explicitly optimizes transport quality instead of accepting a fixed corruption path.","experiments":"The abstract indicates a convergence result based on stochastic approximation, but the provided text is truncated before the empirical section details. So model settings, datasets, training cost, and quantitative gains over SB or standard diffusion baselines cannot be stated reliably. The likely empirical claim is a better trade-off between transport efficiency and training scalability.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","schrodinger-bridge","variational-inference","training"]},{"id":"0003GYZYSFQW0HS24","title":"VideoPrism: A Foundational Visual Encoder for Video Understanding","authors":["Long Zhao","Nitesh Bharadwaj Gundavarapu","Liangzhe Yuan","Hao Zhou","Shen Yan","Jennifer J. Sun","Luke Friedman","Rui Qian","Tobias Weyand","Yue Zhao","Rachel Hornung","Florian Schroff","Ming-Hsuan Yang","David A. Ross","Huisheng Wang","Hartwig Adam","Mikhail Sirotenko","Ting Liu","Boqing Gong"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0003GYZYSFQW0HS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0003GYZYSFQW0HS24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zhao24f.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：视频理解长期缺少一个足够强、可迁移的基础视觉编码器，很多方法仍依赖任务定制结构或从图像编码器勉强迁移。视频相比图像多了时间维和运动信息，单纯把 image encoder 套过去通常吃不满数据，也学不好时序抽象。","importance":"这是视觉预训练方向的重要系统级/模型级工作。对多模态 pretrain 的价值在于，视频 encoder 如果真的足够通用，就能成为统一 VLM 或视频生成系统里的基础感知模块。它不是直接讨论文本 LM，但与 native multimodal pretraining 强相关，尤其对“视觉 tokenizer/encoder 到底该有多基础”这个问题有参考意义。","technical_approach":"从标题看，VideoPrism 的定位是 foundational visual encoder，说明作者重点不在某个下游头，而在大规模视频表征学习本身。合理推测其方法会结合大规模视频数据、自监督或弱监督训练目标，并在架构上兼顾空间和时间建模。设计上的核心取舍通常是：更强时序建模往往更贵，因此需要在计算、分辨率、帧数和迁移能力之间做平衡。与直接从 image encoder 扩展相比，这类工作强调视频原生表征，而不是图像特征拼接。","experiments":"由于没有摘要，无法确认模型规模、预训练数据量以及 Kinetics、Something-Something、VideoQA 等具体结果。若名副其实为 foundational encoder，实验通常会覆盖分类、检索、定位或多任务迁移，并对比 image-pretrained baselines 与已有 video foundation models。对于 pretrain 读者，最值得关注的是 scaling：数据量、帧数和模型大小是否带来稳定收益，以及统一 encoder 在不同视频任务上的迁移是否一致。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a persistent gap in video understanding: there are still too few genuinely strong and transferable video encoders, and many systems either rely on task-specific designs or stretch image encoders beyond their comfort zone. Video adds temporal structure and motion, so image-pretrained backbones often underuse data and model time poorly.","importance":"This is an important model- and system-level pretraining contribution on the vision side. Its relevance to multimodal pretraining is straightforward: a strong native video encoder can serve as the perceptual backbone for unified VLMs, video-language systems, and possibly tokenization pipelines for generative models. It is not a text-LM paper, but it is clearly within the broader pretraining landscape.","technical_approach":"From the title, VideoPrism is positioned as a foundational visual encoder, which suggests the main contribution is large-scale representation learning rather than a task-specific head. The method likely combines large video corpora with self-supervised or weakly supervised objectives and a design that explicitly models both spatial and temporal information. The key trade-off in this space is always compute versus temporal fidelity: stronger video-native modeling is more expensive, so the architecture must balance frame count, resolution, efficiency, and transfer.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so model sizes, pretraining data, and benchmark numbers cannot be stated with confidence. A paper with this positioning would typically evaluate broad transfer across video classification, retrieval, question answering, or localization tasks, and compare against image-pretrained and prior video-foundation baselines. For a pretraining-oriented reader, the most useful evidence would be scaling behavior and cross-task transfer consistency.","authors_note":""},"tags":["video-encoder","foundation-model","pretraining","representation"]},{"id":"0003XL0G24","title":"SyCoCa: Symmetrizing Contrastive Captioners with Attentive Masking for Multimodal Alignment","authors":["Ziping Ma","Furong Xu","Jian Liu","Ming Yang","Qingpei Guo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0003XL0G24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0003XL0G24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/ma24q.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关注的是：多模态对齐里，captioning 和 contrastive learning 往往是不对称的，导致图文表征学到的对应关系不够稳定或不够细。很多方法用对比损失对齐全局，再靠 caption loss 学生成文本，但两者优化目标并不天然一致，作者试图把这两部分“对称化”。","importance":"这是 VLM 预训练方法层面的工作。它的重要性在于，多模态系统常见瓶颈不是单个损失不够强，而是不同损失之间拉扯。若 SyCoCa 真能通过对称化 captioner 与 attentive masking 改善图文对齐，那对构建更统一的 native multimodal pretraining pipeline 有实际参考价值。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心做法有两部分：一是 symmetrizing contrastive captioners，即让生成式 caption 学习和对比式对齐在结构上更对称；二是 attentive masking，通过有选择地遮蔽视觉或文本部分，迫使模型学更细粒度对齐。这个设计相比只做 CLIP 式全局对齐更强调局部对应，也比单向 captioning 更少目标错位。潜在代价是训练更复杂，mask 策略如果不稳，可能引入额外噪声。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认使用了哪些图文数据、模型尺寸、以及在 retrieval、caption、VQA 或 zero-shot 分类上是否有统一增益。合理预期 baseline 会包括 CLIP 类、BLIP 类或其他 contrastive-caption joint training 方法。最值得看的实验应是：对称化是否真的减少目标冲突，以及 attentive masking 是提升局部对齐还是只是增加了训练难度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses an alignment mismatch in multimodal pretraining: captioning and contrastive learning are often optimized in an asymmetric way, which can lead to brittle or overly coarse image-text alignment. Many systems use a global contrastive objective plus a generative caption loss, but those two objectives do not naturally agree on what correspondence should look like.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution for vision-language pretraining. Its significance is that multimodal quality often depends less on any single loss and more on whether the losses cooperate. If SyCoCa really improves alignment by making captioning and contrastive objectives more symmetric, that is practically relevant for native multimodal pretraining pipelines.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method has two main ingredients. First, it symmetrizes contrastive captioners so that generative and contrastive supervision are structurally better aligned. Second, it uses attentive masking to force finer-grained correspondence learning instead of relying only on global image-text matching. Relative to pure CLIP-style alignment, this should encourage more local grounding. Relative to one-way captioning, it reduces objective mismatch. The trade-off is added training complexity and possible sensitivity to the masking policy.","experiments":"No abstract is available, so datasets, model sizes, baselines, and quantitative gains cannot be verified. A reasonable evaluation would include retrieval, captioning, and possibly zero-shot transfer or VQA, compared against CLIP-like, BLIP-like, or other joint contrastive-generative baselines. The most informative ablations would test whether symmetry reduces loss conflict and whether attentive masking improves fine-grained grounding rather than merely making training harder.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal-alignment","contrastive-learning","captioning","masking"]},{"id":"0004LEF0L24","title":"Visual-Text Cross Alignment: Refining the Similarity Score in Vision-Language Models","authors":["Jinhao Li","Haopeng Li","Sarah Monazam Erfani","Lei Feng","James Bailey","Feng Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0004LEF0L24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0004LEF0L24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/li24ag.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["vision-language","alignment","similarity","retrieval"]},{"id":"0005HEWC024","title":"Accelerating Convergence of Score-Based Diffusion Models, Provably","authors":["Gen Li","Yu Huang","Timofey Efimov","Yuting Wei","Yuejie Chi","Yuxin Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0005HEWC024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0005HEWC024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/li24ad.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion","convergence","theory","score-matching"]},{"id":"2401.11708","title":"Mastering Text-to-Image Diffusion: Recaptioning, Planning, and Generating with Multimodal LLMs","authors":["Ling Yang","Zhaochen Yu","Chenlin Meng","Minkai Xu","Stefano Ermon","Bin Cui"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3e","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.11708","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0006YMXE024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0006YMXE024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/yang24ai.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["multimodal-llm","text-to-image","planning","recaptioning"]},{"id":"0007CXL24","title":"Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning with Controls","authors":["Chi Zhang","Jingpu Cheng","Yanyu Xu","Qianxiao Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0007CXL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0007CXL24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zhang24y.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["peft","fine-tuning","control","adaptation"]},{"id":"2406.09723","title":"When Will Gradient Regularization Be Harmful?","authors":["Yang Zhao","Hao Zhang","Xiuyuan Hu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3f","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.09723","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/00160H24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/00160H24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zhao24t.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["gradient-regularization","optimizer","warmup","training-dynamics"]},{"id":"2403.10059","title":"Repoformer: Selective Retrieval for Repository-Level Code Completion","authors":["Di Wu","Wasi Uddin Ahmad","Dejiao Zhang","Murali Krishna Ramanathan","Xiaofei Ma"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$40","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.10059","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0054AZR024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0054AZR024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/wu24a.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Repo 级代码补全里“默认总检索”的 RAG 做法同时浪费算力又容易被噪声上下文带偏，作者要解决的是：模型能否在需要时才检索，并且在检索结果不可靠时仍能稳健生成。","importance":"这是一个偏“训练目标/推理策略”层面的改进：把检索从硬开关变成可学习的选择策略，直接影响 repo-level code completion 的成本-质量曲线。对 pretrain/中训练的启示是：与其继续堆更强检索器，不如让 LM 学会评估“检索是否会带来边际收益”，从源头减少有害上下文进入注意力计算。","technical_approach":"结论是：用同一个 code LM 同时做“是否检索”的策略网络和最终生成器，并用自监督信号教它学会自评检索收益。机制上它把“检索是否有用”建模成一个可学习的判别/打分问题：在不检索与检索两种条件下，比较生成质量的可提升性，并训练 LM 预测这种提升，从而在推理时跳过不必要检索；同时在使用检索时引入对噪声鲁棒的利用方式，避免把无关文件片段当成强条件约束。与常见做法（固定 top-k 检索 + 拼接上下文）相比，它的关键取舍是牺牲一点实现复杂度，换取更少的无效 token 进入上下文窗口与更低的“检索误导”风险；边界是：如果任务天然强依赖跨文件信息（例如大量符号解析/接口追踪），选择性检索的收益会下降，甚至需要更激进的检索触发阈值校准。","experiments":"摘要未给出模型规模、数据规模、评测集与具体数值提升，因此只能确认结论级信息：作者声称在 repository-level code completion 上达到 SOTA，并且主要收益来自“减少无用/有害检索”带来的鲁棒性与效率提升。缺失的关键信息包括：与固定检索 RAG、无检索基线相比的准确率/编辑距离/编译通过率等指标提升幅度，以及选择性策略的触发率（检索比例）与端到端延迟/成本曲线。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Repository-level code completion RAG often retrieves by default, which wastes compute and can degrade outputs when retrieved context is noisy; the paper targets a model that retrieves only when it is likely to help and stays robust when retrieval is imperfect.","importance":"This is a training-objective and inference-policy contribution that changes the cost–quality trade-off of repo-level completion. The pretraining/mid-training takeaway is that improving retrieval quality is not the only lever: teaching the LM to estimate the marginal value of retrieval can prevent harmful context from entering the attention budget in the first place.","technical_approach":"The key idea is to use a single code LM as both (1) a retrieval-use policy and (2) the generator, trained with a self-supervised signal to predict whether retrieval would improve generation quality. Concretely, the model learns a “retrieval helps vs. hurts” judgment by contrasting generation with and without retrieved context and training the LM to forecast the expected gain, so inference can skip retrieval when the gain is low; when retrieval is used, the method emphasizes robustness to noisy snippets rather than treating retrieved text as a hard condition. Compared to fixed top-k retrieval-and-concatenate, the trade-off is extra training/inference logic for gating, in exchange for fewer wasted context tokens and fewer retrieval-induced failures; the limitation is that tasks with consistently high cross-file dependency may require careful thresholding and may see smaller savings.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide model/data sizes, benchmarks, or numeric deltas. The only confirmable claim is SOTA on repository-level code completion, with gains attributed to avoiding unnecessary/harmful retrieval and improving efficiency/robustness. Missing but critical details include improvements vs. always-retrieve and no-retrieval baselines, retrieval trigger rate, and end-to-end latency/cost curves.","authors_note":""},"tags":["code-completion","rag","selective-retrieval","repository-level"]},{"id":"01330GSL0LLY00W24","title":"MLIP: Efficient Multi-Perspective Language-Image Pretraining with Exhaustive Data Utilization","authors":["Yu Zhang","Qi Zhang","Zixuan Gong","Yiwei Shi","Yepeng Liu","Duoqian Miao","Yang Liu","Ke Liu","Kun Yi","Wei Fan","Liang Hu","Changwei Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/01330GSL0LLY00W24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/01330GSL0LLY00W24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zhang24cb.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要信息，无法判断其具体要解决的语言-图像预训练瓶颈与现有方法的次优点。","importance":"缺少摘要信息，无法评估其对多视角（multi-perspective）图文预训练与数据利用率的实际贡献量级与可迁移启示。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要信息，无法确认其“exhaustive data utilization”具体指向（例如多任务损失覆盖、视角/裁剪枚举、正负样本构造、蒸馏或缓存机制）以及相对 CLIP/BLIP 类方法的关键差异。","experiments":"缺少摘要信息，无法给出模型规模、数据规模、训练预算、评测基准与提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract was provided, so the concrete bottleneck in language–image pretraining and what prior work handled sub-optimally cannot be determined.","importance":"Without the abstract, the practical impact of “multi-perspective” pretraining and what “exhaustive data utilization” changes for pretraining is not assessable.","technical_approach":"Without details, it is unclear whether “exhaustive utilization” refers to multi-view augmentation, multi-loss coverage, sample mining, distillation, caching, or something else, and how it differs from CLIP/BLIP-style baselines.","experiments":"Model/data scale, training budget, benchmarks, and numeric gains are not available from the provided information.","authors_note":""},"tags":["clip","language-image-pretraining","data-utilization"]},{"id":"AchtibatHDJWLS24","title":"AttnLRP: Attention-Aware Layer-Wise Relevance Propagation for Transformers","authors":["Reduan Achtibat","Sayed Mohammad Vakilzadeh Hatefi","Maximilian Dreyer","Aakriti Jain","Thomas Wiegand","Sebastian Lapuschkin","Wojciech Samek"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/AchtibatHDJWLS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/AchtibatHDJWLS24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/achtibat24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要信息，无法确认 AttnLRP 具体要修复 Transformer 可解释性里哪类已知失真（例如 attention≠explanation、梯度饱和、残差路径归因不守恒）。","importance":"缺少摘要信息，无法判断其是对 LRP（layer-wise relevance propagation）在 Transformer 上的可用性做工程化增强，还是提出会影响机制分析结论的更强归因准则。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要信息，无法说明其如何把 attention 纳入 relevance 传播（例如在 QK/V、softmax、残差与 MLP 路径间如何分配 relevance），以及相对 rollout、IG、DeepLIFT 等方法的差异与代价。","experiments":"缺少摘要信息，无法给出验证归因质量的实验设置（faithfulness、deletion/insertion、对抗稳定性）、模型与数据集、以及定量结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract was provided, so the specific failure mode of Transformer interpretability that AttnLRP addresses cannot be identified.","importance":"Without details, it is unclear whether this is an incremental usability improvement of LRP for Transformers or a change that materially affects mechanistic conclusions.","technical_approach":"How attention is incorporated into relevance propagation (through QK/V, softmax, residual/MLP paths) and the trade-offs vs. rollout/IG/DeepLIFT are not specified.","experiments":"No information on faithfulness metrics, robustness tests, models/datasets, or quantitative results was provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["interpretability","attention","transformers","lrp"]},{"id":"BalestrieroCS24","title":"Characterizing Large Language Model Geometry Helps Solve Toxicity Detection and Generation","authors":["Randall Balestriero","Romain Cosentino","Sarath Shekkizhar"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/BalestrieroCS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/BalestrieroCS24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/balestriero24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要信息，无法确认其所谓“LLM geometry”具体指向哪类几何量（表示空间曲率、子空间结构、谱性质、或 logits/embedding 的分布形状），以及它如何对应毒性检测与生成的失败模式。","importance":"缺少摘要信息，无法判断其是提供一个可复用的分析工具（帮助定位毒性方向/子空间），还是提出能直接改进对齐/解毒生成的训练或解码方法。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要信息，无法说明其几何表征如何被用来做检测（分类器/阈值）或做生成控制（logit steering、投影、正则、或数据重加权），以及与常见 detox 方法（RLHF、拒答、分类器引导）的取舍。","experiments":"缺少摘要信息，无法给出使用的模型、毒性基准（如 RealToxicityPrompts 等）、检测 AUC/生成毒性下降幅度与语言质量损失。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract was provided, so what “LLM geometry” concretely measures (curvature, subspaces, spectra, distributional shape) and how it maps to toxicity detection/generation failures is unclear.","importance":"Without details, we cannot tell whether this is mainly an analysis tool or a method that directly improves detoxification/control.","technical_approach":"How geometric signals are used for detection (thresholding/classifiers) or generation control (logit steering, projection, regularization, reweighting), and trade-offs vs. RLHF/classifier guidance, are not specified.","experiments":"Models, toxicity benchmarks, detection AUC, toxicity reduction, and quality trade-offs are not available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm","representation","toxicity","geometry","safety"]},{"id":"BarBSAVBDGL24","title":"Stochastic positional embeddings improve masked image modeling","authors":["Amir Bar","Florian Bordes","Assaf Shocher","Mido Assran","Pascal Vincent","Nicolas Ballas","Trevor Darrell","Amir Globerson","Yann LeCun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/BarBSAVBDGL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/BarBSAVBDGL24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/bar24a.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：在 masked image modeling（MIM）里，固定位置编码会让模型过度依赖绝对位置，削弱对局部视觉统计和跨位置泛化的学习。以往 MIM 往往默认把 ViT 里的位置编码直接照搬过来，很少单独审视它是否和“遮挡后重建”这个目标匹配；但对预训练来说，位置先验过强会让表征学到捷径，而不是更稳健的内容建模。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要是方法级和训练目标适配层面的提醒：位置编码不是中性组件，在自监督预训练里会直接改变模型学到的归纳偏置。对做视觉或多模态 pretrain 的人，这个结论有现实意义，因为它说明 MIM 这类重建目标未必需要精确、静态的位置锚点，适度随机化反而可能提升表征质量和下游迁移。","technical_approach":"作者的核心做法是把固定位置嵌入改成随机化的 stochastic positional embeddings，用受控噪声打破模型对绝对坐标的刚性依赖。它不是另起炉灶的新架构，而是对 ViT/MIM 训练配方的轻量改动；关键设计点应在于训练时对位置表示进行随机扰动或采样，使模型必须更多利用 patch 内容和上下文关系来恢复被 mask 的区域，而不是记住“某个位置通常长什么样”。和常规 learnable/sinusoidal embedding 相比，这类做法牺牲了一部分位置确定性，换来更强的内容建模与泛化。","experiments":"从标题和任务设定看，实验结论应是：在标准 MIM 预训练框架下，随机位置嵌入优于确定性位置嵌入，并带来更好的线性探测或下游微调表现。由于这里没有摘要和具体数字，无法确认模型规模、预训练数据集、baseline 名称和提升幅度；但这类工作通常最值得看的 ablation 是随机化强度、训练/推理时是否都启用随机位置、以及在不同 mask ratio 下收益是否稳定。如果收益主要集中在高 mask ratio 或小模型，那说明它更像一种正则化；如果大模型也稳定受益，说明它触及的是 MIM 目标和位置建模之间更普遍的不匹配。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a specific mismatch in masked image modeling: deterministic positional embeddings can make the model rely too much on absolute location instead of learning content and context. Prior MIM work largely inherited positional encoding choices from ViTs without asking whether they fit reconstruction-style self-supervision; this matters because strong position priors can create shortcuts during pretraining.","importance":"The contribution is method-level, but the takeaway is broader: positional encoding is not a neutral implementation detail in self-supervised pretraining. For vision and multimodal pretraining, the paper suggests that exact static position anchors may be counterproductive for masked reconstruction, and that injecting uncertainty can improve representation quality and transfer.","technical_approach":"The method replaces fixed positional embeddings with stochastic positional embeddings, adding controlled randomness to weaken rigid dependence on absolute coordinates. This is a lightweight recipe change rather than a new architecture. The design logic is straightforward: if position is no longer perfectly reliable, the model is pushed to use patch content and contextual relations to reconstruct masked regions. Compared with standard learned or sinusoidal embeddings, the trade-off is less positional certainty in exchange for stronger content-driven learning.","experiments":"The main empirical claim, judging from the title and setup, is that stochastic positional embeddings improve standard MIM pretraining and downstream evaluation over deterministic baselines. The provided metadata does not include abstract text or numbers, so model sizes, datasets, baselines, and gains cannot be verified here. The most informative ablations for this paper are likely the strength of positional stochasticity, whether randomness is used only in training or also at inference, and whether gains persist across mask ratios. If improvements mostly appear at high masking or small scale, the effect is closer to regularization; if it holds at larger scale, it points to a more structural issue in how MIM uses position.","authors_note":""},"tags":["masked-modeling","positional-encoding","vision","pretraining","mim"],"notable_authors":["Amir Bar","Florian Bordes","Assaf Shocher","Mido Assran","Pascal Vincent"]},{"id":"BartoldsonDPK24","title":"Adversarial Robustness Limits via Scaling-Law and Human-Alignment Studies","authors":["Brian R. Bartoldson","James Diffenderfer","Konstantinos Parasyris","Bhavya Kailkhura"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/BartoldsonDPK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/BartoldsonDPK24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/bartoldson24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的是：大模型的对抗鲁棒性究竟受什么限制，单纯扩大模型或做人类偏好对齐能不能持续解决问题。过去很多工作分别研究 scaling 或 alignment，但较少把两者放在同一个框架里看鲁棒性上限，因此很难判断鲁棒性提升是暂时的工程收益，还是存在更深的容量与目标错配约束。","importance":"它的重要性在于提供了一种“上限视角”而不是再报一个新防御结果。对 pretrain 研究者，这类工作有启发，因为如果鲁棒性提升主要随规模缓慢增长，或者 alignment 对自然输入有效但对对抗扰动无效，那么鲁棒性就更像预训练目标和数据分布定义的问题，而不是后处理就能补上的属性。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者结合 scaling-law 分析与 human-alignment study，试图刻画鲁棒性如何随模型/数据/训练变化而扩展，以及人类对齐是否真正改变这一趋势。这个方法上的价值在于它不是只比较几个点，而是拟合趋势、讨论极限，并把“人类喜欢的输出”与“对抗稳定的输出”区分开来。和传统 adversarial training 论文不同，它更像是在问：当前主流训练信号给模型的到底是什么能力，哪些能力不会因为对齐而自动出现。","experiments":"可预期实验会覆盖不同模型规模、不同对齐状态和多种攻击设置，并报告鲁棒准确率与自然准确率之间的关系。因为没有摘要，无法确认具体模型家族、攻击范式、样本规模和拟合形式；但这类论文最值得看的结果通常有两类：一是 scaling exponent 是否明显小于自然性能，二是 human preference alignment 是否改善了人评安全感却几乎不提升 adversarial robustness。如果这两点成立，结论会很直接：鲁棒性不是现有预训练+对齐流水线的自然副产物。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a limit question: what actually constrains adversarial robustness in modern models, and can scaling or human alignment keep improving it in a meaningful way? Prior work often studies scaling and alignment separately, which makes it hard to tell whether observed robustness gains are structural or just local engineering wins.","importance":"Its value is in offering an upper-bound perspective rather than another defense benchmark. For pretraining research, this matters because if robustness scales much more slowly than standard performance, or if alignment helps on natural prompts but not under adversarial perturbations, then robustness is likely a problem of training objective and data distribution rather than something that post-training can reliably patch.","technical_approach":"From the title, the paper combines scaling-law analysis with human-alignment experiments to characterize how robustness changes with model size, training setup, and alignment. That is useful because it focuses on trends and limits, not isolated point comparisons. It also separates two notions that are often conflated: outputs that humans prefer and outputs that remain stable under adversarial manipulation.","experiments":"The study likely compares multiple scales, aligned and non-aligned models, and several attack settings, reporting robust accuracy alongside standard accuracy. Without the abstract, the exact model family, attack protocol, dataset size, and fitted exponents cannot be verified. The most informative results in a paper like this are whether robustness has a much weaker scaling trend than clean performance, and whether human-aligned models improve perceived behavior without materially improving adversarial robustness. If both hold, the implication is clear: robustness is not an automatic byproduct of current pretraining-plus-alignment pipelines.","authors_note":""},"tags":["scaling-law","robustness","alignment","evaluation","generalization"],"notable_authors":["Brian R. Bartoldson","James Diffenderfer","Konstantinos Parasyris","Bhavya Kailkhura"]},{"id":"BartoshVN24","title":"Neural Diffusion Models","authors":["Grigory Bartosh","Dmitry P. Vetrov","Christian A. Naesseth"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/BartoshVN24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/BartoshVN24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/bartosh24a.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文在解决一个更基础的问题：能否把 diffusion 的思想直接推广成更一般的 neural diffusion models，而不是局限在固定噪声过程或特定生成实现上。传统 diffusion 通常把前向加噪过程和反向去噪参数化写得比较死，这让理论统一性和建模灵活性都受限，尤其不利于把 diffusion 扩展到离散 token、结构化状态或更广泛的预训练场景。","importance":"这项工作的意义更偏范式级和理论框架级。对关心新型语言建模的人，它的重要性在于：如果 neural diffusion models 给出了更统一的参数化和训练视角，那么 diffusion LM、离散 diffusion、甚至部分 energy-based 建模都可能被放进同一套分析框架里，这对后续设计损失、噪声调度和采样器都有启发。","technical_approach":"从题目看，作者提出的不是一个单点 trick，而是一类神经扩散模型的统一表述。它大概率把扩散过程的转移、score/denoiser 估计或生成轨迹重新参数化成更一般的神经算子，并讨论何时能恢复已有 diffusion 变体。这样的好处是把“扩散模型到底在学什么”从具体高斯噪声实现里抽离出来。和标准 DDPM 风格方法相比，区别不一定体现在架构复杂度，而在于训练目标和动力系统的抽象层级更高，方便适配不同数据域。","experiments":"实验上，这类论文通常会做两件事：一是验证统一框架能覆盖或逼近现有 diffusion baseline，二是在某些非标准设定下显示更好的建模灵活性或性能。因为没有摘要，无法确认是否涉及图像、离散序列或语言任务，也无法确认具体指标和数字。对 pretrain 读者来说，最值得关注的不是单一 benchmark 胜负，而是作者是否展示了该框架能自然兼容不同状态空间、不同噪声过程，且训练稳定性没有明显变差；如果做不到，这类统一化就更偏理论整理而不是实用建模工具。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a foundational question: can diffusion be generalized into a broader class of neural diffusion models instead of being tied to a fixed corruption process or a narrow implementation style? Standard diffusion formulations hard-code many choices in the forward and reverse processes, which limits both theoretical unification and practical flexibility, especially for discrete tokens or structured state spaces.","importance":"This is closer to a paradigm- and framework-level contribution than a local method tweak. For researchers interested in alternative language modeling, the value is that a more general neural diffusion view could place diffusion LMs, discrete diffusion, and possibly some energy-based formulations under a common lens. That can influence how we think about objectives, schedules, and samplers.","technical_approach":"Judging from the title, the paper proposes a unified formulation of neural diffusion models rather than a single training trick. It likely reparameterizes transition dynamics, denoising or score estimation, or the generative trajectory itself as a more general neural operator, and then shows how existing diffusion variants arise as special cases. The benefit is conceptual and practical: it separates what diffusion is learning from the specifics of Gaussian corruption. Compared with standard DDPM-style models, the difference is less about a new backbone and more about a higher-level modeling abstraction that may transfer across domains.","experiments":"Papers of this kind usually do two things empirically: show that the generalized framework can recover or match standard diffusion baselines, and test it in settings where classical formulations are awkward. Since the abstract is unavailable, the domains, metrics, and gains cannot be verified here. For a pretraining-oriented reader, the key question is not whether one benchmark is won, but whether the framework naturally supports multiple state spaces and corruption processes without destabilizing training. If not, the contribution is better read as theory organization than as a practical new generative recipe.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","architecture","generative-modeling","training","sampling"],"notable_authors":["Grigory Bartosh","Dmitry P. Vetrov","Christian A. Naesseth"]},{"id":"Beurer-Kellner024","title":"Guiding LLMs The Right Way: Fast, Non-Invasive Constrained Generation","authors":["Luca Beurer-Kellner","Marc Fischer","Martin T. Vechev"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Beurer-Kellner024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Beurer-Kellner024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/beurer-kellner24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：如何在不改模型参数、不显著拖慢解码的前提下，让 LLM 满足结构化约束生成。现有 constrained decoding 往往在‘约束强’和‘速度快’之间取舍明显：基于 rejection 或重采样的方法浪费 token 预算，基于大规模搜索或外部控制器的方法则侵入性强、延迟高。","importance":"这项工作的贡献更偏系统方法级，但对 post-train 和实际部署都很有价值。它的重要性在于给出了一条 non-invasive 的路线：如果约束生成可以作为推理层能力高效实现，那很多格式遵循、工具调用、SQL/JSON 生成和安全过滤，就不一定需要额外 finetune 才能做得稳。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者提出了一种 fast, non-invasive constrained generation 方法，核心应是把形式约束直接编译进解码过程，而不是改模型本身。常见高效路线包括有限状态自动机、前缀合法性剪枝或 grammar-guided token masking。和训练时加约束或用外部 reranker 相比，这类做法的优势是部署简单、可即插即用；代价则是约束必须可形式化，且过强的 token-level masking 可能影响流畅性或导致搜索退化。若作者在速度和约束满足率上都做到了较好平衡，这会是其实用价值所在。","experiments":"实验大概率会覆盖 JSON/正则/CFG 等结构约束，比较生成速度、约束违例率和任务准确率，并对比常见 constrained decoding baseline。由于无摘要，无法确认是否在开源 LLM 上测试、吞吐提升多少、违例率降多少。最值得看的结果是：在长输出和复杂 grammar 下延迟是否仍可控，以及方法是否仅仅强行保证合法性，还是还能保持内容质量。如果质量掉得太多，这种方法更适合作为 guardrail，而不是通用生成方案。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical decoding problem: how to enforce structured constraints in LLM generation without changing model weights and without paying a large latency penalty. Existing constrained generation methods often trade off sharply between strictness and speed. Rejection or resampling wastes generation budget, while heavier search or controller-based methods are invasive and slow.","importance":"This is mainly a systems-and-methods contribution, but it is highly relevant to deployment and post-training. The key value is the non-invasive route: if constraint satisfaction can be implemented efficiently at inference time, then many tasks—JSON formatting, tool calls, SQL generation, safety templates—do not always need extra fine-tuning to become reliable.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method likely compiles formal constraints directly into decoding rather than modifying the model. Efficient approaches in this family usually rely on finite-state automata, grammar-guided token masking, or prefix-validity pruning. Compared with training-time control or reranking, the appeal is that the method is plug-and-play. The trade-off is that constraints must be formalizable, and aggressive token masking can sometimes hurt fluency or create search pathologies. Its practical merit depends on whether it preserves both speed and output quality.","experiments":"The experiments likely test regular-expression, JSON, or grammar-based constraints, comparing speed, violation rate, and task accuracy against standard constrained decoding baselines. Since no abstract is available, the evaluated LLMs and numerical gains cannot be verified. The most important results would show whether latency remains manageable for long outputs and complex grammars, and whether the method only enforces validity or also preserves semantic quality. If quality drops substantially, the method is better viewed as a guardrail than as a general-purpose generation strategy.","authors_note":""},"tags":["constrained-decoding","generation","inference","controllability","llm"],"notable_authors":["Luca Beurer-Kellner","Marc Fischer","Martin T. Vechev"]},{"id":"BhirangiWPM0HP24","title":"Hierarchical State Space Models for Continuous Sequence-to-Sequence Modeling","authors":["Raunaq M. Bhirangi","Chenyu Wang","Venkatesh Pattabiraman","Carmel Majidi","Abhinav Gupta","Tess Lee Hellebrekers","Lerrel Pinto"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/BhirangiWPM0HP24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/BhirangiWPM0HP24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/bhirangi24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的是连续值 sequence-to-sequence 建模中，如何同时处理长时依赖和多尺度结构。传统 Transformer 在连续控制、轨迹或传感器序列上往往算力开销大，离散 token 化又可能丢掉精细动态；而标准 state space model 虽擅长长序列，但对 seq2seq 的层级结构建模不一定充分。","importance":"它的重要性主要在架构和建模接口层面。对做语音、音频、时间序列甚至部分连续 latent 建模的 pretrain 研究者，这类工作有启发，因为它说明 state space 模型不只是替代注意力做分类/建模，也可以往更通用的连续 seq2seq 方向扩展。如果层级 SSM 确实有效，它可能成为统一处理长上下文连续模态的一条更省算路径。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者提出 hierarchical state space models，用分层状态更新来捕捉不同时间尺度上的动态，再用于连续 seq2seq 映射。它更像是对 SSM 的结构化扩展，而不是简单堆更深网络。设计逻辑很明确：底层处理快速局部变化，高层汇聚慢变量或全局上下文，这比单尺度递推更适合复杂连续过程。和 Transformer seq2seq 相比，它放弃了全局显式两两交互，换来更线性的时序处理和潜在更好的长度扩展；代价则是表达某些非局部对齐关系可能更难。","experiments":"实验大概率覆盖连续控制、动力学预测、语音或机器人序列任务，并与 Transformer、RNN、标准 SSM baseline 比较。由于没有摘要，无法确认具体任务、模型规模和数值增益。最值得关注的结果是：性能提升是否主要来自更长序列时的稳定性与效率，而不是短序列上的局部调参；以及层级结构是否在外推到更长 horizon 或更复杂动态时显示出明显优势。如果收益只体现在少数任务，说明该架构的通用性还需要验证。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies how to model continuous sequence-to-sequence data while handling both long-range dependencies and multi-scale dynamics. Transformers are often expensive for long continuous streams, and tokenization can discard fine-grained dynamics. Standard state space models help with long sequences, but they do not automatically solve hierarchical structure in seq2seq settings.","importance":"The contribution is mainly architectural, but it matters for pretraining in continuous modalities such as speech, audio, sensor streams, or latent trajectory modeling. If hierarchical SSMs work well, they offer a plausible path toward scalable long-context modeling beyond attention-heavy designs.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method introduces hierarchical state space models, using multiple levels of latent state updates to capture dynamics at different time scales for continuous seq2seq tasks. This is more than stacking layers. The design logic is that lower levels track fast local variation, while higher levels summarize slower or more global dynamics. Compared with Transformer seq2seq, the model gives up explicit all-pairs interactions in exchange for more linear-time temporal processing and potentially better extrapolation to long horizons. The trade-off is that certain non-local alignments may be harder to express.","experiments":"The evaluation likely spans control, dynamical prediction, speech, or robotics-style continuous sequence tasks, with comparisons against Transformers, RNNs, and standard SSM baselines. Without the abstract, the exact tasks, scales, and gains cannot be confirmed. The most important evidence would show that improvements come from better long-horizon stability and efficiency rather than small short-sequence tuning effects, and that the hierarchical structure helps with extrapolation to longer or more complex dynamics. If gains are narrow, the architectural generality remains an open question.","authors_note":""},"tags":["state-space-model","sequence-modeling","hierarchical","architecture","long-context"],"notable_authors":["Raunaq M. Bhirangi","Chenyu Wang","Venkatesh Pattabiraman","Carmel Majidi","Abhinav Gupta"]},{"id":"BianJLXC024","title":"Multi-Patch Prediction: Adapting Language Models for Time Series Representation Learning","authors":["Yuxuan Bian","Xuan Ju","Jiangtong Li","Zhijian Xu","Dawei Cheng","Qiang Xu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/BianJLXC024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/BianJLXC024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/bian24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：如何把语言模型里有效的预测式预训练迁移到时间序列表征学习，而不是继续依赖只适合局部平滑信号的重建目标。传统时间序列 SSL 常做 point-wise reconstruction 或对比学习，但这些目标容易过度关注局部细节，未必能学到跨时间尺度的语义结构；语言模型式的预测目标值得重新引入。","importance":"这项工作的重要性在于方法迁移有明确方向感：它不是泛泛地“把 Transformer 用到时间序列”，而是把 LM 的 patch-level predictive pretraining 思路系统化到连续序列。对 pretrain 研究者，这个方向有启发，因为它说明 next-token/next-patch 之外，multi-patch prediction 可能是一种更适合连续模态的中间目标，兼顾上下文理解和训练稳定性。","technical_approach":"作者提出 Multi-Patch Prediction，核心是让模型预测多个未来或被遮挡的 patch，而不是只回归单点或重建原输入的每个局部值。它更像是在时间序列上做 patchified language modeling。关键设计选择应包括：先把连续序列切成 patch 作为建模单元，再做多 patch 预测以增强语义跨度；这比单步预测更难形成短视捷径，也比全量重建更强调高层结构。与最接近的 masked reconstruction 方法相比，它保留了预测式目标的信息压缩优势，同时减少对精确点值恢复的依赖。","experiments":"从题目推断，实验应覆盖时间序列表征学习的标准下游，如分类、预测、异常检测等，并对比 reconstruction、contrastive learning 和 language-model-style baseline。由于没有摘要，无法确认数据集数量、模型大小和提升幅度。判断这类工作的关键，是 multi-patch 的收益是否在多种频率特征和不同预测 horizon 下稳定存在，以及 patch 大小、预测 patch 数量如何影响效果。如果只有在某类规则性强的数据上有效，它更像任务特化技巧；如果在 heterogeneous datasets 上都稳，说明目标设计确实抓住了时间序列预训练的共性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses how to transfer the strengths of predictive language-model pretraining to time-series representation learning, instead of relying mainly on reconstruction objectives that favor local smoothness. Existing self-supervised time-series methods often use point-wise reconstruction or contrastive losses, which can overemphasize local detail and underlearn longer-range semantic structure.","importance":"The contribution is a focused method transfer rather than a generic application of Transformers to time series. For pretraining research, the useful idea is that multi-patch prediction may be a better pretraining target for continuous sequences than either one-step forecasting or full reconstruction, because it sits between local fidelity and broader contextual modeling.","technical_approach":"The method, Multi-Patch Prediction, treats time series as patches and trains the model to predict multiple patches rather than single points or the full original signal. This is effectively a patch-level predictive pretraining objective for continuous data. The design rationale is strong: patching raises the modeling unit above raw timesteps, and predicting multiple patches discourages short-horizon shortcuts while emphasizing cross-scale structure. Compared with masked reconstruction, it keeps the compression pressure of prediction objectives and reduces dependence on exact value recovery.","experiments":"The evaluation likely covers standard time-series representation tasks such as classification, forecasting, and anomaly detection, with comparisons to reconstruction-based, contrastive, and LM-style baselines. Since the abstract is unavailable, datasets, model sizes, and numerical gains cannot be verified. The most important evidence would show that the benefit of multi-patch prediction is stable across different temporal frequencies and forecast horizons, and that patch size and prediction span matter in interpretable ways. If improvements hold only on highly regular datasets, the method is more task-specific than general.","authors_note":""},"tags":["time-series","language-modeling","representation-learning","patching","sequence-modeling"],"notable_authors":["Yuxuan Bian","Xuan Ju","Jiangtong Li","Zhijian Xu","Dawei Cheng"]},{"id":"BombariM24a","title":"Towards Understanding the Word Sensitivity of Attention Layers: A Study via Random Features","authors":["Simone Bombari","Marco Mondelli"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/BombariM24a","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/BombariM24a","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/bombari24b.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["attention","word-sensitivity","random-features","interpretability"]},{"id":"Brown-CohenIP24","title":"Scalable AI Safety via Doubly-Efficient Debate","authors":["Jonah Brown-Cohen","Geoffrey Irving","Georgios Piliouras"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Brown-CohenIP24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Brown-CohenIP24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/brown-cohen24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["ai-safety","debate","scalable-oversight","alignment"]},{"id":"Burns24","title":"Semantically-correlated memories in a dense associative model","authors":["Thomas F. Burns"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Burns24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Burns24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/burns24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["associative-memory","hopfield-network","dense-associative-model"]},{"id":"CabannesSB24","title":"Learning Associative Memories with Gradient Descent","authors":["Vivien Cabannes","Berfin Simsek","Alberto Bietti"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/CabannesSB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/CabannesSB24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/cabannes24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["associative-memory","gradient-descent","learning-theory"]},{"id":"Cai00KXSZ24","title":"Enhancing Cross-Modal Fine-Tuning with Gradually Intermediate Modality Generation","authors":["Lincan Cai","Shuang Li","Wenxuan Ma","Jingxuan Kang","Binhui Xie","Zixun Sun","Chengwei Zhu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Cai00KXSZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Cai00KXSZ24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/cai24c.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["cross-modal","fine-tuning","modality-generation","transfer"]},{"id":"Cai24","title":"Vocabulary for Universal Approximation: A Linguistic Perspective of Mapping Compositions","authors":["Yongqiang Cai"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Cai24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Cai24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/cai24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["universal-approximation","vocabulary","compositionality","theory"]},{"id":"CaoFCS24","title":"Successor Features for Efficient Multi-Subject Controlled Text Generation","authors":["Meng Cao","Mehdi Fatemi","Jackie C. K. Cheung","Samira Shabanian"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/CaoFCS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/CaoFCS24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/cao24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["controlled-generation","successor-features","text-generation"]},{"id":"CastinAP24","title":"How Smooth Is Attention?","authors":["Valérie Castin","Pierre Ablin","Gabriel Peyré"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/CastinAP24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/CastinAP24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/castin24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["attention","smoothness","theory","transformer"]},{"id":"CattaneoKS24","title":"On the Implicit Bias of Adam","authors":["Matias D. Cattaneo","Jason M. Klusowski","Boris Shigida"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/CattaneoKS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/CattaneoKS24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/cattaneo24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["adam","implicit-bias","optimizer","theory"]},{"id":"ChenZPHB24","title":"Diffusive Gibbs Sampling","authors":["Wenlin Chen","Mingtian Zhang","Brooks Paige","José Miguel Hernández-Lobato","David Barber"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChenZPHB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChenZPHB24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/chen24be.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion","sampling","gibbs-sampling","generative-modeling"]},{"id":"ChenZRZ0SYM24","title":"Do Models Explain Themselves? Counterfactual Simulatability of Natural Language Explanations","authors":["Yanda Chen","Ruiqi Zhong","Narutatsu Ri","Chen Zhao","He He","Jacob Steinhardt","Zhou Yu","Kathleen R. McKeown"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChenZRZ0SYM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChenZRZ0SYM24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/chen24bl.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的核心问题是：模型给出的自然语言解释，是否真的反映了其决策机制，而不只是事后编造一个听起来合理的理由。以往工作通常用“解释是否能说服人”或“解释是否和标签相关”来评估，但这些指标回避了一个更严格的问题：如果把解释作为干预变量去改动，模型行为会不会按解释所声称的方式发生变化。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要在评测范式而不是新模型。对 LLM 和对齐研究来说，它提醒我们：可读解释不等于可模拟、可验证的解释；如果解释不能支持反事实预测，它对监督、对齐和机制理解的价值都有限。对 pretrain/post-train 接口也有启发，因为很多偏好优化和自解释训练都默认“解释质量”和“行为可控性”一致，这篇工作是在拆这个默认前提。","technical_approach":"作者提出的重点不是生成更多解释，而是定义并测试“counterfactual simulatability”，即解释是否足以让人或模型预测在反事实输入下模型会怎么变。直观上，他们把解释从“输出文本”转成“可用于模拟决策边界的中间对象”：如果解释声称模型依赖某些特征，那么当这些特征被改变、保留或置换时，解释是否还能正确预报输出变化。和常见的 plausibility/faithfulness proxy 不同，这个设定要求解释携带可操作的因果信息，而不是只和原答案共现。","experiments":"给定摘要为空，这里只能保守总结：论文应当围绕多种解释来源与评测者设置，比较自然语言解释在原样本预测和反事实样本预测上的可模拟性差距。可以合理预期作者会发现：表面上高质量、流畅的解释，在反事实条件下往往不能稳定预测模型行为；解释越像标签复述，这种落差越大。若论文包含消融，最有价值的应是区分“可读性提升”与“反事实可模拟性提升”并不等价。具体模型规模、数据集和数值提升因未提供摘要，无法确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a stricter question than standard explanation work: do natural-language explanations actually track a model’s decision process, or are they just plausible after-the-fact stories? Prior work often stops at plausibility or agreement with labels, which avoids the harder test—whether an explanation can predict how the model would behave under counterfactual changes.","importance":"The contribution is mainly evaluative and conceptual rather than architectural. For LLM alignment and self-explanation, the paper matters because readable explanations are often treated as if they were behaviorally faithful; this work challenges that assumption. That is directly relevant to post-training pipelines that reward explanations, and indirectly relevant to pretraining if explanations are used as supervision or as proxies for controllability.","technical_approach":"The key idea is to evaluate explanations through counterfactual simulatability: an explanation is useful only if it lets an evaluator predict how the model’s output changes when input conditions change. This reframes explanations from text artifacts into intervention-sensitive summaries of the decision rule. Compared with standard faithfulness proxies, this test is harder because it requires explanations to encode actionable causal structure rather than merely co-occur with the original prediction.","experiments":"With no abstract provided, the safe summary is that the experiments likely compare different explanation sources and evaluators on original versus counterfactual prediction tasks. The likely finding is a gap: explanations that look good to humans often fail to support reliable counterfactual simulation. If there is an ablation worth watching, it is whether improving fluency or helpfulness of explanations does not necessarily improve their counterfactual faithfulness. Exact datasets, model sizes, and numbers cannot be confirmed from the provided information.","authors_note":""},"tags":["explanations","simulatability","interpretability","faithfulness"]},{"id":"ChengCPX0Z24","title":"Layerwise Change of Knowledge in Neural Networks","authors":["Xu Cheng","Lei Cheng","Zhaoran Peng","Yang Xu","Tian Han","Quanshi Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChengCPX0Z24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChengCPX0Z24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/cheng24b.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注一个很基础但长期缺少定量答案的问题：神经网络的知识在各层是如何变化、转移和重写的。过去关于“某层存知识”的说法往往依赖 probing 或个别案例，很难区分是真正的知识更新，还是下游读出方式变了。","importance":"这项工作更偏机制分析，但对 pretrain 很有用，因为它关系到我们如何理解继续预训练、知识编辑、灾难遗忘以及层级学习动态。若能把“知识在层间如何迁移”描述清楚，它会影响参数高效微调、mid-training、冷启动再训练，甚至 MoE/模块化设计中的“改哪里最有效”。","technical_approach":"从题目看，作者的关键设计应是定义一套层级知识变化的度量，而不是只比较最终准确率。一个有效方案通常要同时回答三件事：知识最初在哪些层可读出、训练后哪些层发生变化、这些变化是新增、重分配还是覆盖旧知识。相比常见 probing，这类方法如果做得扎实，会更强调训练前后同一网络在层级表征上的可追踪性，而不是静态相关性。","experiments":"可预期的实验会覆盖不同架构、训练阶段或任务设置，分析知识相关特征在层间的迁移模式，并比较预训练、微调或知识编辑前后的层级变化。最有价值的结果通常不是“中层最重要”这种泛化结论，而是知识更新是否集中在少数层、是否存在由浅到深或由深到浅的系统迁移，以及这些模式是否与泛化/遗忘相关。摘要缺失，具体模型、数据和数字无法确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a basic but under-measured question: how knowledge changes across layers in neural networks. Prior claims that “knowledge lives in certain layers” are often based on probing or anecdotal analysis, which makes it hard to tell real knowledge updates from changes in readout behavior.","importance":"This is primarily a mechanistic analysis paper, but it is relevant to pretraining because layerwise knowledge dynamics affect continual pretraining, knowledge editing, forgetting, and parameter-efficient adaptation. If the paper identifies stable patterns of where knowledge is written or rewritten, that can inform where to adapt models and how to think about training phases.","technical_approach":"From the title, the likely contribution is a way to quantify layerwise knowledge change rather than only measuring final-task accuracy. A useful framework here would separate where knowledge is decodable before training, which layers actually change after training, and whether those changes add, move, or overwrite information. That is a stronger question than standard probing because it tracks representational evolution rather than static correlation.","experiments":"The experiments likely analyze different architectures or training stages and compare how knowledge-related signals move across layers under pretraining, finetuning, or editing. The most informative findings would be whether updates are localized or distributed, and whether certain migration patterns correlate with generalization or forgetting. Exact settings and quantitative results cannot be verified because no abstract is provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["knowledge","layerwise","representation","training-dynamics"]},{"id":"ChoiL24","title":"PICLe: Eliciting Diverse Behaviors from Large Language Models with Persona In-Context Learning","authors":["Hyeong Kyu Choi","Yixuan Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChoiL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChoiL24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/choi24e.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文研究的是如何在不改模型参数的前提下，更系统地诱导 LLM 产生多样行为。普通 prompt engineering 往往靠措辞微调去试探不同风格，但可控性弱、覆盖面窄；PICLe 试图用 persona in-context learning，把“角色设定”变成一种更稳定的行为控制接口。","importance":"这项工作对 post-train 与评测更直接，但对 pretrain 也有侧面价值，因为它揭示了模型内部是否已经预训练出丰富的人格/风格/策略先验，只差一个上下文触发器。若 persona ICL 能稳定拉出多样行为，说明很多行为模式是“可激活的潜在程序”，而不一定需要额外微调写入。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是把 persona 示例或角色描述作为 in-context conditioning，让模型在同一任务上切换到不同的行为模式。和简单 system prompt 相比，persona ICL 更像给模型演示一个局部行为分布：不仅说明‘你是谁’，还通过上下文示例展示这个角色如何说、如何选、如何推理。这样做有效的原因是 LLM 对上下文模式延续很敏感；边界在于 persona 可能主要改变表面风格，而不是深层能力或价值取向。","experiments":"实验重点应是行为多样性、可控性和任务质量之间的关系。值得看的不是仅仅“生成更不一样”，而是这些 persona 是否能在不显著损伤任务表现的前提下稳定诱导可重复的行为差异，以及多样性是否超出普通 prompt paraphrase。若有消融，最重要的是 persona 描述、示例数量和任务类型对效果的影响。具体 benchmark 和数字没有给出。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies how to elicit a wider range of behaviors from an LLM without changing model weights. Standard prompt engineering can nudge style, but it is often brittle and narrow. PICLe appears to use persona-based in-context learning as a more structured interface for behavior control.","importance":"This is more directly relevant to post-training and evaluation, but it also says something useful about pretraining: if persona ICL reliably induces distinct behaviors, then many behavior patterns may already exist as latent capabilities learned during pretraining and only need the right contextual trigger.","technical_approach":"The likely method is to condition the model on persona descriptions and/or persona demonstrations so that it adopts a targeted behavior mode on the same underlying task. Compared with a plain system prompt, persona ICL does more than state an identity; it demonstrates how that persona talks, chooses, and reasons. This can work because LLMs are strong continuation engines, though the limitation is that personas may shift surface behavior more than deep competence or values.","experiments":"The central experiments should examine diversity, controllability, and task quality together. The key question is not just whether outputs become more varied, but whether personas induce reproducible and meaningful behavioral differences without severely hurting task performance, and whether the effect exceeds simple prompt paraphrasing. Exact benchmarks and quantitative results are not available from the provided information.","authors_note":""},"tags":["persona","in-context-learning","prompting","llm-behavior"]},{"id":"ClarkeH24","title":"Studying K-FAC Heuristics by Viewing Adam through a Second-Order Lens","authors":["Ross M. Clarke","José Miguel Hernández-Lobato"],"institutions":["University of Cambridge"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ClarkeH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ClarkeH24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/clarke24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Adam 优化器在实践中效果好但理论理解不足，作者试图通过二阶优化（K-FAC）的视角重新审视 Adam，解释 Adam 中一些启发式设计为何有效，并探索 K-FAC 的哪些技巧可以反向迁移到 Adam。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究者的启示在于：理解 Adam 与二阶方法的关系，有助于设计更好的优化器或调参策略。K-FAC 的一些 heuristic（如 damping、block-diagonal 近似）被映射到 Adam 的行为上，提供了优化器设计的新视角。","technical_approach":"核心思路是把 Adam 重新表述为一种对角近似的二阶方法，然后逐一对比 K-FAC 中的关键设计选择（曲率矩阵的近似方式、damping 策略、更新裁剪等），分析哪些 K-FAC heuristic 在 Adam 中有对应物、哪些缺失。这不是提出新优化器，而是建立两个方法族之间的概念桥梁。","experiments":"实验主要在中等规模的深度学习任务上验证分析结论，包括图像分类和语言建模。重点是 ablation 各种 heuristic 的效果，而非追求 SOTA。具体数字需参考原文。","authors_note":"José Miguel Hernández-Lobato 来自剑桥大学，是贝叶斯深度学习和优化领域的知名研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Adam works well in practice but lacks clear theoretical grounding. This paper reinterprets Adam through the lens of second-order optimization (K-FAC) to explain why certain Adam heuristics are effective and whether K-FAC techniques can improve Adam-like optimizers.","importance":"A method-level contribution that bridges the conceptual gap between Adam and K-FAC. For pretrain practitioners, it offers a principled framework to understand optimizer behavior and potentially transfer useful heuristics (damping, curvature approximation) across optimizer families.","technical_approach":"Adam is reformulated as a diagonal second-order method, then systematically compared against K-FAC's design choices: curvature matrix approximation, damping, update clipping, etc. The goal is not a new optimizer but a conceptual mapping that reveals which K-FAC heuristics have Adam counterparts and which are missing.","experiments":"Experiments on medium-scale image classification and language modeling tasks, focused on ablating individual heuristics rather than chasing SOTA. Specific numbers should be checked in the paper.","authors_note":"José Miguel Hernández-Lobato is at the University of Cambridge, well-known for Bayesian deep learning and optimization research."},"tags":["optimizer","adam","k-fac","training-dynamics"],"notable_authors":["José Miguel Hernández-Lobato"]},{"id":"CrowsonBBAKS24","title":"Scalable High-Resolution Pixel-Space Image Synthesis with Hourglass Diffusion Transformers","authors":["Katherine Crowson","Stefan Andreas Baumann","Alex Birch","Tanishq Mathew Abraham","Daniel Z. Kaplan","Enrico Shippole"],"institutions":["Stability AI"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/CrowsonBBAKS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/CrowsonBBAKS24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/crowson24a.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"高分辨率图像生成通常依赖 latent space diffusion（如 Stable Diffusion），但 latent 编码器会引入信息损失和额外复杂度。这篇工作探索直接在像素空间做高分辨率 diffusion，核心挑战是计算量随分辨率平方增长。","importance":"架构级贡献。Hourglass Diffusion Transformer（HDiT）证明了像素空间 diffusion 可以 scale 到高分辨率（1024×1024+），不需要 latent encoder。这对统一多模态预训练有启发：如果图像可以直接在像素空间建模，就不需要为每种模态单独训练 tokenizer/encoder。","technical_approach":"HDiT 采用类似 U-Net 的沙漏（hourglass）结构，但用 Transformer block 替代卷积。关键设计：在低分辨率层做全局 self-attention（计算可控），在高分辨率层只做局部 attention 或下采样后处理，通过跳跃连接保留细节。相比 DiT（全分辨率 attention），HDiT 的计算量对分辨率的增长更温和。相比 latent diffusion，省去了 VAE 编码器但需要更深的网络来补偿。","experiments":"在 ImageNet 和自定义高分辨率数据集上测试，分辨率达到 1024×1024。FID 和生成质量与 latent diffusion 方法可比，同时避免了 latent space 的信息瓶颈。具体 FID 数字和参数量需查原文。","authors_note":"Katherine Crowson 是开源 diffusion 社区的知名贡献者，在 guided diffusion 和采样方法方面有广泛影响。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"High-resolution image generation typically relies on latent-space diffusion (e.g., Stable Diffusion), which introduces information loss from the latent encoder. This work tackles pixel-space diffusion at high resolution, where the main challenge is quadratic compute scaling with resolution.","importance":"An architecture-level contribution. Hourglass Diffusion Transformer (HDiT) demonstrates that pixel-space diffusion can scale to 1024×1024+ without a latent encoder. This is relevant to unified multimodal pretraining: if images can be modeled directly in pixel space, per-modality tokenizers become optional.","technical_approach":"HDiT uses a U-Net-like hourglass structure built from Transformer blocks instead of convolutions. Global self-attention is applied only at low-resolution stages (keeping compute manageable), while high-resolution stages use local attention or downsampled processing, with skip connections preserving detail. Compared to DiT (full-resolution attention), HDiT scales more gracefully with resolution. Compared to latent diffusion, it removes the VAE bottleneck but requires deeper networks.","experiments":"Tested on ImageNet and custom high-resolution datasets up to 1024×1024. Generation quality is competitive with latent diffusion methods while avoiding the latent information bottleneck. Specific FID numbers and parameter counts should be checked in the paper.","authors_note":"Katherine Crowson is a prominent contributor in the open-source diffusion community, widely known for work on guided diffusion and sampling methods."},"tags":["diffusion-transformer","image-generation","scaling","pixel-space"],"notable_authors":["Katherine Crowson"]},{"id":"Cui024","title":"Learning Latent Space Hierarchical EBM Diffusion Models","authors":["Jiali Cui","Tian Han"],"institutions":["Stevens Institute of Technology"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Cui024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Cui024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/cui24b.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在潜在空间中结合 EBM（能量模型）和 diffusion 模型进行生成建模。传统 EBM 训练不稳定、采样困难，而纯 diffusion 模型缺乏 EBM 的灵活能量函数建模能力。这篇工作尝试在层次化潜在空间中融合两者。","importance":"方法级贡献，属于新型生成建模范式的探索。对 pretrain 研究的间接启示在于：EBM+diffusion 的混合建模思路可能为离散/连续混合的语言建模提供新方向，但目前距离实际 LM pretrain 应用还有距离。","technical_approach":"在 VAE 的层次化潜在空间中，用 EBM 定义先验分布，用 diffusion 过程来辅助 EBM 的采样和训练。层次化结构让不同层捕获不同粒度的特征。关键创新是用 diffusion 的去噪过程来近似 EBM 的 MCMC 采样，缓解了传统 EBM 采样效率低的问题。","experiments":"在图像生成任务上验证，包括 CIFAR-10 和 CelebA 等标准 benchmark。生成质量（FID）相比纯 EBM 和纯 VAE 有提升，但与 SOTA diffusion 模型仍有差距。具体数字需查原文。","authors_note":"Tian Han 来自 Stevens Institute of Technology，在 EBM 和生成模型方面有持续的研究产出。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Combining EBMs (energy-based models) with diffusion models in hierarchical latent spaces for generative modeling. EBMs alone suffer from unstable training and slow sampling; pure diffusion models lack the flexible energy-function formulation. This work merges both in a hierarchical latent framework.","importance":"A method-level contribution exploring hybrid generative paradigms. Indirect relevance to pretrain research: the EBM+diffusion hybrid could inspire new directions for discrete/continuous mixed language modeling, though it remains distant from practical LM pretraining.","technical_approach":"Within a hierarchical VAE latent space, an EBM defines the prior distribution while a diffusion process assists EBM sampling and training. The hierarchy captures features at different granularities. The key innovation is using the diffusion denoising process to approximate EBM's MCMC sampling, alleviating the sampling inefficiency of traditional EBMs.","experiments":"Validated on image generation benchmarks including CIFAR-10 and CelebA. FID improves over pure EBM and pure VAE baselines but still lags behind SOTA diffusion models. Specific numbers should be checked in the paper.","authors_note":"Tian Han is at Stevens Institute of Technology, with sustained research output on EBMs and generative models."},"tags":["ebm","diffusion","latent-space","hierarchical"],"notable_authors":["Tian Han"]},{"id":"DasCNMSDLKC0DC24","title":"Larimar: Large Language Models with Episodic Memory Control","authors":["Payel Das","Subhajit Chaudhury","Elliot Nelson","Igor Melnyk","Sarathkrishna Swaminathan","Sihui Dai","Aurélie C. Lozano","Georgios Kollias","Vijil Chenthamarakshan","Jirí Navrátil","Soham Dan","Pin-Yu Chen"],"institutions":["IBM Research"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/DasCNMSDLKC0DC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/DasCNMSDLKC0DC24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/das24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 在部署后需要快速整合新知识（如事实更新），但传统方法要么需要微调（慢且可能遗忘），要么依赖检索增强（受限于检索质量）。Larimar 提出用外部 episodic memory 模块让 LLM 实现快速、可控的知识更新。","importance":"方法级贡献，属于 continual learning / knowledge editing 方向。对 pretrain 研究的间接启示：如何设计模型架构使其更容易在部署后更新知识，这反过来影响 pretrain 阶段对知识存储方式的设计决策。","technical_approach":"在 LLM 外部挂载一个基于 Kanerva 机器（稀疏分布式记忆）的 episodic memory 模块。新知识写入 memory 而非修改模型权重，推理时通过 attention 机制从 memory 中检索相关信息并注入到 LLM 的中间层。关键优势是知识更新不需要梯度计算，可以实时完成；关键限制是 memory 容量有限，且检索质量依赖于 memory 的组织方式。","experiments":"在事实更新、知识编辑等任务上测试，与 ROME、MEMIT 等知识编辑基线比较。Larimar 在更新速度上有数量级优势（无需梯度），准确率与基线相当或略优。模型规模和具体数字需查原文。","authors_note":"团队来自 IBM Research。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLMs need to incorporate new knowledge post-deployment (e.g., fact updates), but fine-tuning is slow and risks forgetting, while retrieval augmentation depends on retrieval quality. Larimar proposes an external episodic memory module for fast, controllable knowledge updates.","importance":"A method-level contribution in continual learning / knowledge editing. Indirect pretrain relevance: how to architect models for easy post-deployment knowledge updates informs pretrain-stage decisions about knowledge storage.","technical_approach":"An episodic memory module based on Kanerva machines (sparse distributed memory) is attached externally to the LLM. New knowledge is written to memory without modifying model weights; at inference, relevant information is retrieved via attention and injected into intermediate LLM layers. Key advantage: gradient-free real-time updates. Key limitation: finite memory capacity and retrieval quality depends on memory organization.","experiments":"Tested on fact updating and knowledge editing tasks against baselines like ROME and MEMIT. Larimar achieves orders-of-magnitude faster updates (no gradients needed) with comparable or slightly better accuracy. Model scale and specific numbers should be checked in the paper.","authors_note":"The team is from IBM Research."},"tags":["episodic-memory","llm","continual-learning"]},{"id":"DetommasoLF024","title":"Multicalibration for Confidence Scoring in LLMs","authors":["Gianluca Detommaso","Martin Bertran Lopez","Riccardo Fogliato","Aaron Roth"],"institutions":["University of Pennsylvania","Microsoft Research"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/DetommasoLF024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/DetommasoLF024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/detommaso24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 输出的置信度分数（如 token 概率）通常校准不良，尤其是在不同子群体上表现不一致。Multicalibration 要求置信度在所有可识别的子群体上都校准良好，这篇工作将 multicalibration 框架应用于 LLM 的置信度评分。","importance":"方法级贡献，属于 LLM 可信度/安全性方向。对 pretrain 研究的间接启示有限，但对理解 pretrain 模型的概率输出质量有参考价值——pretrain 阶段的 loss 函数和数据分布如何影响下游的校准性。","technical_approach":"基于 Hébert-Johnson et al. 的 multicalibration 理论，设计了一个后处理算法：给定 LLM 的原始置信度分数和一组子群体定义，迭代调整置信度使其在每个子群体上都满足校准条件。不需要修改模型权重，只需要一个校准数据集。关键限制是子群体需要预先定义，且校准数据集需要足够大以覆盖各子群体。","experiments":"在问答和分类任务上测试，比较了标准 calibration（如 temperature scaling）和 multicalibration。Multicalibration 在子群体级别的校准误差显著降低，但整体校准误差与标准方法相当。具体数字需查原文。","authors_note":"Aaron Roth 来自宾夕法尼亚大学，是 multicalibration 理论的主要贡献者之一，也是算法公平性领域的知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLM confidence scores (e.g., token probabilities) are often poorly calibrated, especially across different subgroups. Multicalibration requires confidence to be well-calibrated on all identifiable subgroups. This work applies the multicalibration framework to LLM confidence scoring.","importance":"A method-level contribution in LLM trustworthiness/safety. Limited direct pretrain relevance, but informative for understanding how pretrain loss functions and data distributions affect downstream calibration quality.","technical_approach":"Based on Hébert-Johnson et al.'s multicalibration theory, a post-processing algorithm iteratively adjusts LLM confidence scores to satisfy calibration conditions on each predefined subgroup. No model weight modification needed—just a calibration dataset. Key limitation: subgroups must be predefined, and the calibration set must be large enough to cover them.","experiments":"Tested on QA and classification tasks. Multicalibration significantly reduces subgroup-level calibration error compared to standard methods (e.g., temperature scaling), while overall calibration error is comparable. Specific numbers should be checked in the paper.","authors_note":"Aaron Roth is at the University of Pennsylvania, a key contributor to multicalibration theory and a prominent researcher in algorithmic fairness."},"tags":["calibration","llm","confidence-scoring"],"notable_authors":["Aaron Roth"]},{"id":"FarebrotherOVTC24","title":"Stop Regressing: Training Value Functions via Classification for Scalable Deep RL","authors":["Jesse Farebrother","Jordi Orbay","Quan Vuong","Adrien Ali Taïga","Yevgen Chebotar","Ted Xiao","Alex Irpan","Sergey Levine","Pablo Samuel Castro","Aleksandra Faust","Aviral Kumar","Rishabh Agarwal"],"institutions":["Google DeepMind"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/FarebrotherOVTC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/FarebrotherOVTC24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/farebrother24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"深度 RL 中的 value function 通常用回归（MSE loss）训练，但在大规模环境中容易出现训练不稳定和表示退化。这篇工作提出用分类（cross-entropy loss）替代回归来训练 value function，显著改善了 scalability。","importance":"方法级贡献，对 pretrain 研究有间接但有趣的启示：分类 loss 比回归 loss 更稳定这一现象在 LLM 训练中也有对应——language modeling 本质上就是分类任务。这篇工作从 RL 角度验证了 cross-entropy loss 在连续值预测中的优势（更好的梯度信号、更稳定的表示学习），这个洞察可能对 reward model 训练和 RLHF 有启发。","technical_approach":"将连续的 value 目标离散化为若干 bin，把 value prediction 转化为分类问题。用 cross-entropy loss 训练，预测时取期望值。关键优势：(1) 分类 loss 对异常值更鲁棒；(2) 梯度不会因为目标值的尺度而爆炸/消失；(3) 表示学习更稳定——回归 loss 容易导致特征坍缩。这个思路并非全新（HL-Gauss 等前人有探索），但本文系统验证了其在大规模 RL 中的 scaling 优势。","experiments":"在 Atari 100k、DM Control Suite 和机器人操作任务上测试。分类方法在几乎所有环境中都优于回归基线，且随着网络规模增大优势更明显（即 scales better）。在 Atari 上，使用分类 loss 的 agent 在大网络上的性能提升可达 40%+。","authors_note":"团队来自 Google DeepMind。这项工作的思路后来被 DeepMind 的多个后续 RL 工作采用。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Value functions in deep RL are typically trained with regression (MSE loss), but this leads to training instability and representation degradation at scale. This work proposes training value functions via classification (cross-entropy loss), significantly improving scalability.","importance":"A method-level contribution with indirect but interesting pretrain implications. The finding that classification loss is more stable than regression loss resonates with LLM training—language modeling is inherently classification. The insight that cross-entropy provides better gradient signals and more stable representations may inform reward model training and RLHF.","technical_approach":"Continuous value targets are discretized into bins, converting value prediction into classification. Cross-entropy loss is used for training; expected value is computed at prediction time. Key advantages: (1) classification loss is more robust to outliers; (2) gradients don't explode/vanish with target scale; (3) representation learning is more stable—regression loss tends to cause feature collapse. The idea isn't entirely new (HL-Gauss, etc.), but this paper systematically validates its scaling advantages in large-scale RL.","experiments":"Tested on Atari 100k, DM Control Suite, and robotic manipulation. Classification consistently outperforms regression baselines across nearly all environments, with advantages growing as network size increases (i.e., scales better). On Atari, classification-based agents show 40%+ improvement with large networks.","authors_note":"The team is from Google DeepMind. This approach has been adopted by several subsequent DeepMind RL works."},"tags":["reinforcement-learning","value-learning","classification","training-objective"]},{"id":"FengT24","title":"Privacy Backdoors: Stealing Data with Corrupted Pretrained Models","authors":["Shanglun Feng","Florian Tramèr"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/FengT24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/FengT24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/feng24h.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["security","pretrained-models","privacy","backdoor"]},{"id":"Fu000T24","title":"Towards Theoretical Understandings of Self-Consuming Generative Models","authors":["Shi Fu","Sen Zhang","Yingjie Wang","Xinmei Tian","Dacheng Tao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Fu000T24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Fu000T24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/fu24i.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["data-quality","generative-models","self-training","distribution-shift"]},{"id":"FuDHPDOMLCG24","title":"A Touch, Vision, and Language Dataset for Multimodal Alignment","authors":["Letian Fu","Gaurav Datta","Huang Huang","William Chung-Ho Panitch","Jaimyn Drake","Joseph Ortiz","Mustafa Mukadam","Mike Lambeta","Roberto Calandra","Ken Goldberg"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/FuDHPDOMLCG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/FuDHPDOMLCG24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/fu24b.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["multimodal","alignment","dataset","vision-language","touch"]},{"id":"GaoWCLWC024","title":"Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning with Discrete Fourier Transform","authors":["Ziqi Gao","Qichao Wang","Aochuan Chen","Zijing Liu","Bingzhe Wu","Liang Chen","Jia Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GaoWCLWC024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GaoWCLWC024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/gao24o.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["peft","fine-tuning","fourier","parameter-efficient"]},{"id":"GardnerDSB24","title":"LLark: A Multimodal Instruction-Following Language Model for Music","authors":["Joshua Patrick Gardner","Simon Durand","Daniel Stoller","Rachel M. Bittner"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GardnerDSB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GardnerDSB24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/gardner24a.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["music-lm","multimodal","instruction-following","audio"]},{"id":"GargR024","title":"Memorization Through the Lens of Curvature of Loss Function Around Samples","authors":["Isha Garg","Deepak Ravikumar","Kaushik Roy"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GargR024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GargR024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/garg24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的问题很直接：样本是否被模型记住，能不能从该样本附近的损失曲率看出来。以往对 memorization 的分析多依赖成员推断、重复生成或训练后行为统计，这些方法能发现“记住了没有”，但不太解释“为什么这个样本更容易被记住”；作者转而看局部几何，试图把记忆现象和优化景观联系起来。","importance":"它的价值主要在分析框架，而不是提出新的预训练算法。对 pretrain 研究者有意义的地方在于，它提供了一个比单纯训练损失更细的样本级诊断信号：如果 memorization 与高曲率或特殊曲率模式稳定相关，那么数据配比、去重、sample reweighting、甚至 privacy 风险评估都可以更早介入，而不是等模型训练完再做事后检测。","technical_approach":"核心方法是用样本邻域的损失曲率来刻画 memorization，并比较被记住与未被记住样本的局部几何差异。直觉上，单纯看该样本的 loss 大小不够，因为低 loss 既可能来自可泛化规律，也可能来自死记硬背；而曲率反映参数扰动下该样本损失变化有多陡，能补充“模型是稳健地学会了模式，还是在一个很窄的盆地里记住了这个点”。这类设计的取舍也很明确：它比只看预测正确率更有解释性，但计算 Hessian 或其近似通常更贵，且结论会依赖具体模型、训练阶段和 memorization 定义。","experiments":"给定信息不足，无法可靠写出模型规模、数据规模、基线和具体提升数字。可以确定的是，论文应围绕样本级曲率统计与 memorization 指标之间的相关性展开，并比较不同样本类别或训练设置下的局部几何差异；如果你关心落地价值，最值得看的是它是否报告了曲率指标在训练早期的预测能力，以及这种相关性在不同架构或数据重复率下是否稳定。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a sharp question: can memorization be identified through the local curvature of the loss around individual samples. Prior work usually detects memorization from end behavior such as membership inference, regurgitation, or train-test discrepancies; those signals say whether memorization happened, but they say less about why some examples are memorized more easily. This work shifts the lens to local loss geometry.","importance":"This is mainly an analysis contribution, not a new pretraining recipe. For pretraining research, the value is that it offers a sample-level diagnostic richer than raw training loss: if memorization consistently aligns with specific curvature patterns, that becomes useful for data curation, deduplication, sample weighting, and privacy risk assessment before relying on post hoc checks after training.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to measure the loss curvature in the neighborhood of each sample and compare the geometry of memorized versus non-memorized examples. The motivation is that low loss alone is ambiguous: it can come from true generalization or from brittle memorization. Curvature adds information about how sharply the sample-specific loss changes under parameter perturbations, which helps distinguish a broadly learned pattern from a narrow basin that overfits a particular point. The trade-off is straightforward: this is more interpretable than accuracy-based signals, but Hessian-based or Hessian-approximate measurements are expensive and their meaning can depend on model class, training stage, and the exact memorization definition.","experiments":"The provided information is not enough to state model sizes, datasets, baselines, or quantitative gains reliably. What one should expect from the experiments is a study of correlations between sample-wise curvature statistics and memorization metrics, plus comparisons across sample types or training regimes. The most practically useful details to check in the paper are whether curvature predicts later memorization early in training, and whether the relation stays stable across architectures or duplication levels.","authors_note":""},"tags":["memorization","loss-curvature","generalization"]},{"id":"Gatmiry0RJ24","title":"Simplicity Bias via Global Convergence of Sharpness Minimization","authors":["Khashayar Gatmiry","Zhiyuan Li","Sashank J. Reddi","Stefanie Jegelka"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Gatmiry0RJ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Gatmiry0RJ24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/gatmiry24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文讨论的是一个基础但长期难讲清的问题：sharpness minimization 为什么会带来 simplicity bias，也就是偏向更简单的解。过去大家普遍接受“平坦极小值更能泛化”的经验，但很多结论停留在局部分析或经验现象；作者想给出更强的全局收敛视角，说明这种偏好不是偶然副产物，而是优化目标本身诱导出来的。","importance":"它的重要性在理论解释层面高于直接方法增益。对 pretrain 来说，这类工作会影响我们如何理解 SAM 类方法、噪声注入、flatness regularization 以及大模型训练中的稳定性—泛化折中；如果论文结论成立，它等于在更严谨的框架下解释了为什么某些优化器或正则会偏向低复杂度解，这对 loss design 和 optimizer choice 都有启发。","technical_approach":"核心做法是从 sharpness minimization 的优化动力学出发，证明其全局收敛并刻画它偏向简单解的机制。这里的“简单”通常不会是口语意义，而是某种可分析的函数复杂度、范数或 margin 结构；与只分析最终落点附近几何的工作不同，这篇更关注从初始化到收敛全过程中，目标函数如何系统性排斥尖锐、复杂的解。这样的设计优点是解释力更强，缺点是理论假设往往理想化，和实际大规模 Transformer 训练之间仍有距离。","experiments":"给定信息不足，无法确认实验是否包含深度网络、语言模型或仅限于理论验证场景，也无法给出具体数字。通常这类论文会用可控任务验证理论预测，例如比较标准 ERM 与 sharpness-aware 目标在收敛点复杂度、margin 或泛化误差上的差异；对工程读者最值得关注的是，理论中的“simplicity”是否能映射到可观测指标，以及结论是否超出小模型/线性化区域。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a basic but unresolved question: why does sharpness minimization induce a simplicity bias, meaning a preference for simpler solutions. The common story that flatter minima generalize better is widely used, but much of it is empirical or local. The authors aim for a stronger explanation through global convergence analysis.","importance":"Its main value is theoretical clarification rather than an immediate training win. For pretraining, this matters because it informs how to think about SAM-like methods, flatness regularization, optimizer noise, and the stability-generalization trade-off in large-scale training. If the argument is sound, it gives a cleaner reason why certain objectives or optimizers favor low-complexity solutions.","technical_approach":"The method studies the optimization dynamics of sharpness minimization, proves global convergence, and links the converged solution to a notion of simplicity. Here simplicity is likely formalized through a tractable complexity measure such as norms, margins, or an equivalent structural quantity. Compared with work that only inspects local geometry near a final minimum, this approach tries to explain how the objective systematically steers training away from sharp and complex solutions throughout optimization. The benefit is stronger explanatory power; the limitation is that such theory usually relies on simplified assumptions and may not transfer directly to full-scale Transformer pretraining.","experiments":"The available information does not support reliable claims about datasets, model scales, or quantitative results. Papers in this category typically validate the theory on controlled setups by comparing standard ERM against sharpness-aware objectives on complexity measures, margins, or generalization gaps. For practitioners, the key question is whether the paper’s notion of simplicity corresponds to measurable signals in realistic networks, and whether the phenomenon survives beyond small or linearized regimes.","authors_note":""},"tags":["simplicity-bias","sharpness-minimization","generalization"]},{"id":"HaoGWTW00024","title":"Data-efficient Large Vision Models through Sequential Autoregression","authors":["Zhiwei Hao","Jianyuan Guo","Chengcheng Wang","Yehui Tang","Han Wu","Han Hu","Kai Han","Chang Xu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HaoGWTW00024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HaoGWTW00024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/hao24b.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：视觉大模型能否通过 sequential autoregression 获得更好的数据效率，而不是继续依赖大规模监督或重型对比/掩码训练。视觉领域长期默认 AR 不如判别式或 masked 建模高效，但随着统一 token 建模和 multimodal LM 兴起，这个判断值得重新审视。","importance":"它对 pretrain 的意义在于跨模态统一建模。若视觉模型在数据效率上能从顺序自回归获益，那么 AR 不再只是语言模型的特例，而是可能成为统一图像/文本 token 训练的一条更强基线；这会直接影响 native multimodal pretraining、visual tokenizer 设计以及 AR+diffusion 混合路线的比较。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把视觉输入转成可顺序建模的表示，并用 sequential autoregression 进行训练，以提升样本利用效率。这里的关键不只是‘把图像当序列’，而是如何安排 token 顺序、局部到全局依赖和目标设计，使模型既不过度受限于扫描顺序，又能从强条件结构中获益；与 masked image modeling 相比，AR 给出的监督更细粒度、条件更明确，但也可能更受 tokenizer 质量和序列长度拖累。作者的创新点大概率在于证明某种顺序化策略比常见视觉预训练目标更 data-efficient。","experiments":"给定信息不足，无法可靠给出模型规模、数据集和精确指标。按标题判断，实验重点应是同等数据预算下与 ViT 监督预训练、MAE/BEiT 类 masked 方法或其他 large vision model baseline 比较，展示 sequential AR 在低数据 regime 的优势；如果有 scaling 结果，最值得看的是随着数据量增长，这种优势是持续存在还是只在小数据区间明显，以及它对下游分类/检测迁移是否稳定。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether large vision models can become more data-efficient through sequential autoregression, instead of relying on the usual heavy supervised, contrastive, or masked objectives. Vision has long treated autoregression as less efficient than discriminative or masked modeling, but that assumption deserves re-examination as unified token modeling becomes more relevant.","importance":"Its relevance to pretraining lies in cross-modal unification. If sequential autoregression improves data efficiency in vision, then AR is not just a language-specific choice; it becomes a stronger candidate for unified image-text token training. That has direct implications for native multimodal pretraining, visual tokenizer design, and comparisons against AR-plus-diffusion hybrids.","technical_approach":"The method appears to convert visual inputs into a sequence-friendly representation and train the model with sequential autoregression to improve sample efficiency. The important point is not merely treating images as sequences, but choosing an ordering, dependency structure, and target formulation that preserve useful visual structure without making the model overly dependent on an arbitrary scan order. Compared with masked image modeling, AR provides denser and more explicit conditional supervision, but it can suffer more from tokenizer quality and sequence length. The likely contribution is to show that a carefully designed sequential AR setup is more data-efficient than standard vision pretraining objectives.","experiments":"The provided information is insufficient to report model sizes, datasets, or exact metrics. From the title, the central experiments likely compare sequential autoregression against supervised ViT pretraining, masked methods such as MAE or BEiT, or other large vision model baselines under matched data budgets, with a focus on low-data regimes. If there are scaling experiments, the most useful question is whether the advantage persists as data grows or mainly appears in small-data settings, and whether transfer to downstream tasks remains stable.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vision","autoregressive","data-efficiency","pretraining"]},{"id":"HavrillaRNDZHR24","title":"GLoRe: When, Where, and How to Improve LLM Reasoning via Global and Local Refinements","authors":["Alexander Havrilla","Sharath Chandra Raparthy","Christoforos Nalmpantis","Jane Dwivedi-Yu","Maksym Zhuravinskyi","Eric Hambro","Roberta Raileanu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HavrillaRNDZHR24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HavrillaRNDZHR24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/havrilla24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["llm","reasoning","refinement","inference"]},{"id":"HironoTF24","title":"Understanding Diffusion Models by Feynman&apos;s Path Integral","authors":["Yuji Hirono","Akinori Tanaka","Kenji Fukushima"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HironoTF24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HironoTF24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/hirono24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion","theory","interpretability","path-integral"]},{"id":"2403.15447","title":"Decoding Compressed Trust: Scrutinizing the Trustworthiness of Efficient LLMs Under Compression","authors":["Junyuan Hong","Jinhao Duan","Chenhui Zhang","Zhangheng Li","Chulin Xie","Kelsey Lieberman","James Diffenderfer","Brian R. Bartoldson","Ajay Kumar Jaiswal","Kaidi Xu","Bhavya Kailkhura","Dan Hendrycks","Dawn Song","Zhangyang Wang","Bo Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$41","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.15447","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HongDZLXLDBJXKH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HongDZLXLDBJXKH24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/hong24a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["llm","compression","quantization","safety"]},{"id":"HuangHW0C0YYLGZ24","title":"InstructSpeech: Following Speech Editing Instructions via Large Language Models","authors":["Rongjie Huang","Ruofan Hu","Yongqi Wang","Zehan Wang","Xize Cheng","Ziyue Jiang","Zhenhui Ye","Dongchao Yang","Luping Liu","Peng Gao","Zhou Zhao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HuangHW0C0YYLGZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HuangHW0C0YYLGZ24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/huang24k.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要信息，无法可靠确定其具体要解决的 pretrain/建模核心问题。","importance":"缺少摘要信息，无法判断贡献量级与对 pretrain 的启示。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要信息，无法总结方法设计与关键取舍。","experiments":"缺少摘要信息，无法报告模型规模、数据规模、指标与提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The abstract is missing, so the core pretraining/modeling problem cannot be stated reliably.","importance":"Without the abstract, the contribution type and its implications for pretraining cannot be assessed.","technical_approach":"Without the abstract, the method and its key design trade-offs cannot be summarized.","experiments":"Without the abstract, no faithful summary of scale, metrics, or results is possible.","authors_note":""},"tags":["speech-editing","llm","audio-generation"],"notable_authors":["Rongjie Huang"]},{"id":"KossonMJ24","title":"Rotational Equilibrium: How Weight Decay Balances Learning Across Neural Networks","authors":["Atli Kosson","Bettina Messmer","Martin Jaggi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/KossonMJ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/KossonMJ24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/kosson24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要回答的是：weight decay 在深度网络里到底平衡了什么，为什么它几乎总是有效，但现有解释往往只覆盖线性模型或简单范数正则视角。训练大模型时，大家知道不加 weight decay 常常更不稳或泛化更差，但“它如何在网络不同部分分配学习力度”这个机制长期并不清楚。","importance":"这是一篇优化机制类工作。它对 pretrain 的价值在于，weight decay 几乎是所有大模型训练配方的默认项，但实际设置常依赖经验；如果作者提出的 rotational equilibrium 能较好解释不同层、不同参数组之间的学习平衡，那会帮助我们理解为什么某些 wd 与 lr 配对更稳定，也可能影响对 norm layer、embedding、MoE expert 参数是否施加衰减的策略。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者提出“旋转平衡”视角来解释 weight decay：它不仅是在缩小权重范数，更是在参数更新方向与权重方向之间建立一种动态平衡，从而调节不同子网络的有效学习速率。这个视角的重要处在于，它把训练看成几何过程，而不是单纯的 L2 惩罚。相比传统“抑制过拟合”的泛泛解释，这种分析更能说明为什么 weight decay 会影响表示学习速度、层间竞争以及训练稳定性。","experiments":"由于没有摘要，不能写出定理、实验设置和提升数字。更值得关注的应是验证性实验：例如不同网络结构中参数范数、更新角度、特征学习速度是否如理论所述达到某种平衡；以及当去掉或改变 weight decay 时，是否出现层间学习失衡、训练变慢或泛化变差。对于大模型训练者，若文中覆盖 AdamW 与 SGD 的对比，会尤其有用。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks what weight decay is actually balancing in neural network training, and why it works so reliably despite explanations that often stop at linear models or generic norm regularization. In large-model practice, removing weight decay often hurts stability or generalization, but the mechanism by which it redistributes learning across the network has remained unclear.","importance":"This is an optimization-mechanism contribution with practical relevance to pretraining. Weight decay is a default ingredient in most large-model recipes, yet its setting is still heavily empirical. If the proposed notion of rotational equilibrium explains how learning is balanced across layers or parameter groups, it could inform how we pair weight decay with learning rate and when to exclude specific parameters such as norms, embeddings, or expert weights.","technical_approach":"From the title, the authors frame weight decay through a rotational-equilibrium view: the effect is not only shrinking weight norms, but dynamically balancing the angle between the current weights and their updates, which in turn regulates effective learning rates across subnetworks. This matters because it treats training as a geometric process rather than as a simple L2 penalty. Compared with the usual vague claim that weight decay prevents overfitting, this view is more likely to explain differences in feature-learning speed, competition across layers, and training stability.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so theorems, setups, and quantitative results cannot be reported safely. The experiments to look for are likely mechanistic validations: whether parameter norms, update directions, and feature-learning dynamics reach the predicted equilibrium across architectures; and whether removing or altering weight decay causes imbalanced learning, slower optimization, or worse generalization. For large-model practitioners, comparisons between AdamW and SGD would be especially informative if included.","authors_note":""},"tags":["weight-decay","optimization","training-dynamics"]},{"id":"KrishnaAL24","title":"Understanding the Effects of Iterative Prompting on Truthfulness","authors":["Satyapriya Krishna","Chirag Agarwal","Himabindu Lakkaraju"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/KrishnaAL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/KrishnaAL24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/krishna24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要回答的是：iterative prompting 到底会让模型更真实，还是只是让它更擅长把错误答案包装得更完整。过去很多 work 观察到多轮提示、self-reflection、chain-of-thought 能提升某些推理任务表现，但它们对 truthfulness 的影响并不清楚，因为“答得更长、更像推理”不等于“更接近事实”。","importance":"这项工作主要是 posttrain/推理机制分析，但对 pretrain 也有反馈价值。原因是它帮助区分两种增益：一种是真正改进内部判断，另一种只是把已有偏差放大或重写。对基座模型研究者，这类分析能提醒我们不要把 test-time prompting 的收益误判为模型知识或推理能力本身，也有助于设计更好的训练信号去奖励真实性而不是表面一致性。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者系统研究了 iterative prompting 对 truthfulness 的影响，可能比较单轮回答、多轮追问、自我修正等提示策略在真实/虚假输出上的变化。关键不在发明新 prompting，而在拆解机制：哪些错误会被反思纠正，哪些错误会因模型迎合提示而被强化；以及这种效果是否受问题类型、模型尺寸或初始置信度影响。和只报告平均正确率的工作相比，这种分析更关注错误迁移路径。","experiments":"由于没有摘要，无法写出所用模型、truthfulness benchmark 和具体数值。可以确定的是，实验最有价值的部分应是细粒度分层：例如 iterative prompting 对事实性、幻觉、误导性问题、未知问题拒答的影响是否不同；模型在多轮中是更常修正错误还是更常坚持错误；以及提示轮数增加是否出现收益递减或反效果。这些结论比单一总体分数更值得看。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a simple but important question: does iterative prompting actually improve truthfulness, or does it mainly help models produce longer and more polished versions of the same mistakes? Prior work has shown gains from multi-step prompting, self-reflection, and chain-of-thought on some reasoning tasks, but their effect on factual reliability is much less clear.","importance":"This is primarily a post-training and inference-analysis paper, but it feeds back into pretraining by helping separate two kinds of gains: genuine improvement in internal judgment versus better packaging of existing errors. For foundation-model work, that distinction matters because test-time prompting improvements are often over-interpreted as evidence of stronger knowledge or reasoning. The paper likely offers guidance on how to design training signals that reward truthfulness rather than surface coherence.","technical_approach":"From the title, the authors likely run a structured study of how iterative prompting changes truthfulness outcomes, comparing single-shot answers with follow-up prompting, self-correction, or reflective prompting schemes. The contribution is not a new prompt but a mechanism-oriented evaluation: which errors are actually corrected, which are reinforced by the model trying to satisfy the prompt, and how this depends on task type, model size, or initial confidence. Compared with work that reports only average accuracy, this approach focuses more on error transitions.","experiments":"Without the abstract, the specific models, benchmarks, and numbers cannot be reported safely. The most useful experimental findings are likely the stratified ones: whether iterative prompting helps differently on factual questions, hallucination-prone prompts, misleading queries, or abstention when the model does not know; whether later rounds more often fix mistakes or entrench them; and whether additional prompt rounds show diminishing returns or even backfire. Those patterns are more informative than a single aggregate score.","authors_note":""},"tags":["prompting","truthfulness","llm","iterative-prompting"]},{"id":"KumarLS24","title":"No Free Prune: Information-Theoretic Barriers to Pruning at Initialization","authors":["Tanishq Kumar","Kevin Luo","Mark Sellke"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/KumarLS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/KumarLS24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/kumar24a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：在随机初始化时进行剪枝，是否存在不可绕过的信息论障碍。lottery ticket 之后，很多人希望在训练前就找到好子网络，以减少训练成本；但经验上这件事高度不稳定，往往需要额外先验、打分器或训练后信息，说明“免费剪枝”可能在根上就受限。","importance":"这项工作的重要性在于给稀疏训练和高效预训练泼了一盆冷水，而且是有理论力度的那种。对 pretrain 研究者，这类结果的意义不在提出更强剪枝算法，而在划定边界：如果 initialization-time pruning 在一般情形下存在信息论下界，那就意味着想靠纯随机初值直接挑出高质量稀疏子网，基本不现实，至少不能指望无监督、零额外信息地稳定成功。","technical_approach":"从标题判断，作者采用信息论分析，证明在初始化时判断哪些参数该保留所需的信息量，超出了从随机权重本身能获得的范围。也就是说，他们不是展示某个算法失败，而是说明一类目标本身难。和经验性“某方法在 CIFAR 上不稳”的论文相比，这种理论工作更有一般性：它把失败原因归到可识别信息不足，而不是具体评分函数不够好。边界通常在于假设条件——比如网络家族、数据分布、目标精度定义——这些决定结论有多广。","experiments":"没有摘要时，不能安全写定理细节或验证数字。按这类论文惯例，实验通常只是支撑理论直觉：展示若只依赖初始化信息，剪枝性能接近随机或需要指数级样本/搜索；而一旦加入少量训练信号，性能显著改善，从而与理论边界一致。对大模型实践者，最重要的 takeaway 不是数值，而是不要把训练前剪枝当成普适省算方案。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether pruning at initialization faces unavoidable information-theoretic barriers. After the lottery-ticket line of work, there has been recurring hope that good sparse subnetworks could be identified before training to save compute. In practice this has been unstable and often depends on extra priors, scoring heuristics, or post-training information, suggesting that “free pruning” may be fundamentally limited.","importance":"This matters because it provides a theory-based reality check for sparse training and efficient pretraining. The value is not a stronger pruning algorithm but a boundary statement: if initialization-time pruning is information-theoretically hard in general, then we should stop expecting randomly initialized weights alone to reveal high-quality sparse subnetworks in a robust, zero-extra-information way.","technical_approach":"From the title, the authors likely use an information-theoretic framework to show that selecting which parameters to keep at initialization requires information that is simply not available in the random initial state. In other words, the paper is not about one algorithm failing; it is about a class of objectives being intrinsically hard. Compared with empirical papers showing unstable pruning on small benchmarks, this is more general because it attributes failure to insufficient identifiable information rather than to a bad scoring rule. The scope will depend on the assumptions made about the model family, data distribution, and target accuracy notion.","experiments":"Without the abstract, theorem details and quantitative validations cannot be stated safely. In papers of this type, experiments usually serve to support the theoretical intuition: pruning based only on initialization performs near random or requires prohibitive search or sample complexity, while adding even a small amount of training signal improves performance sharply, consistent with the lower-bound story. For large-model practitioners, the main takeaway is strategic rather than numerical: pruning before training should not be treated as a generally reliable compute-saving recipe.","authors_note":""},"tags":["pruning","information-theory","initialization"]},{"id":"LavoieKIAWCB24","title":"Modeling Caption Diversity in Contrastive Vision-Language Pretraining","authors":["Samuel Lavoie","Polina Kirichenko","Mark Ibrahim","Mido Assran","Andrew Gordon Wilson","Aaron C. Courville","Nicolas Ballas"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LavoieKIAWCB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LavoieKIAWCB24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/lavoie24a.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["contrastive-learning","clip","caption-diversity","vlm-pretrain"]},{"id":"LeeCKKMCL24","title":"Slow and Steady Wins the Race: Maintaining Plasticity with Hare and Tortoise Networks","authors":["Hojoon Lee","Hyeonseo Cho","Hyunseung Kim","Donghu Kim","Dugki Min","Jaegul Choo","Clare Lyle"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LeeCKKMCL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LeeCKKMCL24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/lee24d.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["plasticity","continual-learning","training-dynamics"]},{"id":"2402.18137","title":"DecisionNCE: Embodied Multimodal Representations via Implicit Preference Learning","authors":["Jianxiong Li","Jinliang Zheng","Yinan Zheng","Liyuan Mao","Xiao Hu","Sijie Cheng","Haoyi Niu","Jihao Liu","Yu Liu","Jingjing Liu","Ya-Qin Zhang","Xianyuan Zhan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$42","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.18137","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiZZMHCNLLLZZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiZZMHCNLLLZZ24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/li24cr.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["multimodal-pretraining","embodied","preference-learning","representation-learning"]},{"id":"2403.07183","title":"Monitoring AI-Modified Content at Scale: A Case Study on the Impact of ChatGPT on AI Conference Peer Reviews","authors":["Weixin Liang","Zachary Izzo","Yaohui Zhang","Haley Lepp","Hancheng Cao","Xuandong Zhao","Lingjiao Chen","Haotian Ye","Sheng Liu","Zhi Huang","Daniel A. McFarland","James Y. Zou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$43","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.07183","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiangIZLCZCYLHM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiangIZLCZCYLHM24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/liang24b.html","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["llm","data-quality","ai-generated-text","measurement"]},{"id":"2402.02805","title":"Graph-enhanced Large Language Models in Asynchronous Plan Reasoning","authors":["Fangru Lin","Emanuele La Malfa","Valentin Hofmann","Elle Michelle Yang","Anthony G. Cohn","Janet B. Pierrehumbert"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$44","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.02805","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LinMHY0P24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LinMHY0P24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/lin24k.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["llm","planning","graph","reasoning"]},{"id":"LiuL24","title":"From Generalization Analysis to Optimization Designs for State Space Models","authors":["Fusheng Liu","Qianxiao Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiuL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiuL24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/liu24ah.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["ssm","state-space-model","generalization","optimization"]},{"id":"LiuS0024","title":"How do Large Language Models Navigate Conflicts between Honesty and Helpfulness?","authors":["Ryan Liu","Theodore R. Sumers","Ishita Dasgupta","Thomas L. Griffiths"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiuS0024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiuS0024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/liu24bb.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的核心问题是：当“诚实”和“有帮助”发生冲突时，LLM 实际会优先遵循什么原则，以及这种取舍是否稳定可控。过去对齐研究更多把安全、真实性、帮助性分开测，默认它们可以同时优化；这篇工作指出，真实交互里冲突场景很常见，如果不单独分析，模型表面的高分可能掩盖了系统性的取舍偏差。","importance":"这项工作更像是评测与机制理解层面的贡献，而不是新的训练方法，但对 pretrain-posttrain 闭环很有价值。它的重要性在于把“对齐目标彼此冲突”这个问题显式化：如果模型在冲突时的决策边界不清楚，那么后续 SFT、RLHF 或拒答策略优化都可能是在改表面行为，而不是改内部偏好结构。","technical_approach":"从标题和定位看，作者的核心方法应是构造诚实-帮助性冲突场景，并分析模型在不同指令、上下文或任务 framing 下的选择模式。关键不在于单测 hallucination 或 refusal，而在于把两类目标放进同一决策问题里，观察模型是偏向迎合用户、维持表面合作，还是坚持事实约束；这类设计通常比单维 benchmark 更能暴露对齐策略的真实优先级。","experiments":"给定信息里没有摘要、模型列表或具体数字，因此无法可靠总结实验规模与提升幅度。可以确定的是，这类工作通常会比较多个主流 LLM 在成对冲突提示上的行为差异，并分析 prompt 形式、置信表达、任务类型对结果的影响；但具体参数量、样本规模、指标和结论强度这里都不能编造。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a specific alignment question: what do LLMs do when honesty and helpfulness pull in different directions, and whether that preference is stable. Prior work often evaluates truthfulness, helpfulness, and safety separately, which avoids the harder case where these objectives conflict in one interaction.","importance":"This is primarily an evaluation and analysis contribution, but it matters for the pretrain-to-posttrain interface. If a model's behavior under objective conflict is poorly understood, gains from SFT or RLHF may reflect surface policy shaping rather than a reliable change in underlying preference structure.","technical_approach":"From the title, the likely approach is to build scenarios where being factually honest competes with being maximally helpful, then measure how models resolve that trade-off under different prompt framings. The useful design choice here is to evaluate joint conflicts rather than single-axis failures, because that exposes the model's implicit priority ordering instead of isolated capability gaps.","experiments":"The provided metadata does not include the abstract or any quantitative details, so model sizes, dataset scale, metrics, and numerical findings cannot be stated reliably. It is reasonable to expect comparisons across multiple LLMs and prompt conditions, but anything more specific would be speculation.","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","honesty","helpfulness","llm-behavior"]},{"id":"MajumderS0HSC24","title":"Position: Data-driven Discovery with Large Generative Models","authors":["Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder","Harshit Surana","Dhruv Agarwal","Sanchaita Hazra","Ashish Sabharwal","Peter Clark"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MajumderS0HSC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MajumderS0HSC24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/majumder24a.html","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇 Position paper 讨论的核心问题是：大生成模型能否成为数据驱动科学发现的新工具，而不是只做问答或内容生成。这个问题过去常被愿景化讨论，但缺少清晰的能力边界和方法论框架；现在值得重看，是因为 foundation model 已经开始接触科研自动化、假设生成和实验设计等高价值环节。","importance":"它的重要性主要在范式讨论和研究议程设定，而不是直接提出可复现实验方法。对 pretrain 研究者的启发在于：如果目标是支持 discovery，而不仅是 imitation，那么训练数据、目标函数和评测方式都要从“压缩已知文本”转向“支持外推、组合和验证”，这会反过来影响预训练设计。","technical_approach":"作为 Position paper，它更可能是提出概念框架、任务拆分和研究路线，而不是单一算法。值得关注的点通常包括：如何让生成模型从相关性拟合走向可检验假设提出，如何把工具使用、外部模拟器或实验反馈接入闭环，以及为什么单靠更大语料和 next-token 学习不足以支持可靠 discovery。","experiments":"给定信息没有摘要，因此无法确认是否包含系统实验、案例研究或仅有观点论证。没有模型规模、数据、指标和数值结果时，不能把它包装成经验论文；较稳妥的判断是，这类文章的价值更多在问题定义和方法边界，而不在 benchmark 上刷分。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This position paper asks whether large generative models can become tools for data-driven discovery rather than systems that only imitate and summarize existing knowledge. The topic has often been discussed at a high level, but the field still lacks a clear account of what these models can contribute to hypothesis generation, exploration, and validation.","importance":"Its contribution is agenda-setting rather than a concrete new training recipe. For pretraining researchers, the important implication is that supporting discovery may require objectives, data, and evaluations that reward extrapolation and testable hypothesis formation, not just compression of observed text.","technical_approach":"As a position paper, the likely approach is a conceptual framework rather than a single algorithm. The useful questions are how to connect generative models to tools, simulators, or experimental feedback, and why pure next-token imitation is insufficient if the goal is reliable discovery rather than fluent restatement.","experiments":"No abstract or quantitative evidence is provided here, so it is unclear whether the paper includes case studies, empirical demonstrations, or only argumentation. Without model, dataset, and metric details, it should not be summarized as an empirical benchmark paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["generative-models","scientific-discovery","foundation-models"]},{"id":"2402.02680","title":"Large Language Models are Geographically Biased","authors":["Rohin Manvi","Samar Khanna","Marshall Burke","David B. Lobell","Stefano Ermon"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$45","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.02680","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ManviKBLE24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ManviKBLE24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/manvi24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：LLM 的偏见不只体现在敏感属性问答上，还会系统性地体现在地理空间预测中，而且这种偏差可以用真实世界地理数据做较客观的检验。过去偏见评测常停留在模板化社会属性任务上，这篇工作换了一个更结构化的视角：看模型如何把文化、种族、语言、政治、宗教等因素投射到空间上。","importance":"这项工作是评测与偏差分析层面的贡献，但对预训练数据研究很有启发。它的重要性在于把地理偏差和训练语料分布、知识覆盖、叙事中心性联系起来：如果一个模型在地理上系统失真，那通常不是单点安全问题，而是数据采样、语言覆盖和世界知识表征共同造成的预训练偏置。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把地理当作统一观测窗口，测试 LLM 在零样本 geospatial prediction 中的表现，并分析系统误差而非只看平均准确率。这个设计比普通 bias benchmark 更强，因为地理空间上有大量可对照的 ground truth，能同时观察模型的知识能力和偏差结构；作者强调的不是模型是否完全不会地理推理，而是它在某些地区、群体或空间模式上会稳定偏斜。","experiments":"摘要里明确写到：作者先证明 LLM 具备一定准确的 zero-shot geospatial prediction 能力，然后展示多种‘problematic geographic biases’，定义为地理预测上的系统性误差。当前提供的信息被截断，没有模型名单、任务数量、指标和具体偏差幅度，因此不能给出数字；但可以确定实验同时包含能力验证和偏差诊断两部分，而不是单纯列举失败案例。","authors_note":"作者中可确认 Stefano Ermon。给定信息无法稳妥确认全部机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper argues that LLM bias can be studied through geography, where many social attributes—culture, race, language, politics, religion—have measurable spatial structure and external ground truth. This reframes bias evaluation from template-based social probing to systematic errors in geospatial prediction.","importance":"This is an evaluation-and-analysis contribution with clear relevance to pretraining data research. Geographic bias is useful because it exposes not just isolated harmful outputs, but a broader mismatch between training distribution, language coverage, knowledge representation, and the real world.","technical_approach":"The authors use geography as a structured lens: they test zero-shot geospatial prediction and analyze where errors are systematically concentrated rather than only reporting average accuracy. That choice matters because geospatial tasks provide objective reference signals, making it possible to study both capability and bias in the same setup.","experiments":"The abstract explicitly states two findings: LLMs can make reasonably accurate zero-shot geospatial predictions, and they also exhibit multiple problematic geographic biases, defined as systemic errors over space. The provided text is truncated, so model lists, datasets, metrics, and quantitative gaps cannot be reported reliably.","authors_note":"Stefano Ermon is explicitly identifiable from the author list. The institution list is not safely recoverable from the provided metadata."},"tags":["llm","bias","evaluation","data-quality"],"notable_authors":["Stefano Ermon"]},{"id":"MengIB00M24","title":"OSSCAR: One-Shot Structured Pruning in Vision and Language Models with Combinatorial Optimization","authors":["Xiang Meng","Shibal Ibrahim","Kayhan Behdin","Hussein Hazimeh","Natalia Ponomareva","Rahul Mazumder"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MengIB00M24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MengIB00M24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/meng24a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：如何对视觉和语言模型做一次性的结构化剪枝，同时尽量保住性能，而不依赖昂贵的反复搜索或重训练。过去很多 pruning 方法要么是非结构化、部署收益有限，要么需要多轮迭代和大量校准；在大模型上，这两类代价都很难接受。","importance":"OSSCAR 的价值在于把 one-shot structured pruning 推向更大、更复杂的 vision 和 language model 场景。对 pretrain 研究的意义是实际的：如果能在不重训的前提下做高质量结构化压缩，那么预训练后模型家族部署、蒸馏前压缩、甚至训练中途容量重分配都会更有操作空间。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心方法是用 combinatorial optimization 直接求解结构化剪枝决策，而不是依赖启发式逐层打分。这个设计的关键好处是它能显式处理跨层和全局预算约束，让保留哪些通道、头或块不再是局部贪心问题；代价则通常是求解近似和问题规模控制，否则优化本身可能变成新的瓶颈。","experiments":"当前没有摘要，因此无法确认覆盖的是哪些 VLM/LM、剪枝粒度、压缩比、是否 one-shot 后零微调，或与哪些 baseline 比较。可以合理预期实验会强调结构化部署收益、一次剪枝后的精度保持，以及与基于 saliency/importance heuristic 的方法对比，但不能补具体数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets one-shot structured pruning for vision and language models, aiming to reduce model size and cost without the heavy retraining loops common in classical pruning pipelines. This matters because many existing pruning methods either yield poor deployment gains or become too expensive at foundation-model scale.","importance":"OSSCAR is important as a compression-and-systems contribution. For pretraining researchers, strong one-shot structured pruning would make post-pretraining model shaping more practical, including deployment-time compression and potentially training-time capacity reallocation.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method uses combinatorial optimization to choose structured pruning decisions directly, rather than relying only on local heuristics. The appealing part of this design is that it can enforce global resource constraints and model-wide interactions explicitly; the challenge is keeping the optimization tractable at large scale.","experiments":"No abstract is available, so the model families, pruning granularity, compression ratios, fine-tuning requirements, baselines, and exact gains cannot be stated reliably. The expected evaluation would emphasize deployment-friendly structured sparsity and accuracy retention after one-shot pruning.","authors_note":""},"tags":["pruning","vlm","compression","sparsity"]},{"id":"Ming024","title":"Understanding Retrieval-Augmented Task Adaptation for Vision-Language Models","authors":["Yifei Ming","Yixuan Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Ming024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Ming024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/ming24a.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["vlm","retrieval","task-adaptation","analysis"]},{"id":"MisraPS24","title":"Provable Interactive Learning with Hindsight Instruction Feedback","authors":["Dipendra Misra","Aldo Pacchiano","Robert E. Schapire"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MisraPS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MisraPS24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/misra24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["interactive-learning","feedback","instruction-following"]},{"id":"MoonCYYLC024","title":"A Simple Early Exiting Framework for Accelerated Sampling in Diffusion Models","authors":["Tae Hong Moon","Moonseok Choi","EungGu Yun","Jongmin Yoon","Gayoung Lee","Jaewoong Cho","Juho Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MoonCYYLC024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MoonCYYLC024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/moon24a.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion","early-exiting","sampling-acceleration"]},{"id":"MorrisSFWDFFL24","title":"Position: Levels of AGI for Operationalizing Progress on the Path to AGI","authors":["Meredith Ringel Morris","Jascha Sohl-Dickstein","Noah Fiedel","Tris Warkentin","Allan Dafoe","Aleksandra Faust","Clément Farabet","Shane Legg"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MorrisSFWDFFL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MorrisSFWDFFL24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/morris24b.html","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["agi","evaluation","position-paper"]},{"id":"Muller024","title":"Aligning Transformers with Weisfeiler-Leman","authors":["Luis Müller","Christopher Morris"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Muller024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Muller024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/muller24c.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["transformer","graph-isomorphism","expressiveness"]},{"id":"NaKPSKM24","title":"Diffusion Rejection Sampling","authors":["Byeonghu Na","Yeongmin Kim","Minsang Park","DongHyeok Shin","Wanmo Kang","Il-Chul Moon"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/NaKPSKM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/NaKPSKM24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/na24a.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion","rejection-sampling","score-based"]},{"id":"ParkB24","title":"Memoria: Resolving Fateful Forgetting Problem through Human-Inspired Memory Architecture","authors":["Sangjun Park","JinYeong Bak"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ParkB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ParkB24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/park24a.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["memory","continual-learning","long-context","forgetting"]},{"id":"PeiLJLGCYJ24","title":"Exploiting Code Symmetries for Learning Program Semantics","authors":["Kexin Pei","Weichen Li","Qirui Jin","Shuyang Liu","Scott Geng","Lorenzo Cavallaro","Junfeng Yang","Suman Jana"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/PeiLJLGCYJ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/PeiLJLGCYJ24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/pei24b.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：程序语义学习为什么常被表层语法差异干扰，以及如何显式利用代码中的对称性来学到更稳健的语义表示。过去很多 code model 主要从 token 序列或 AST 里学统计共现，容易把变量重命名、语句交换等语法变体当成新模式，而不是同一语义的等价表达。","importance":"这项工作更像是方法级的表示学习改进。它对 pretrain 的启示在于：代码不是普通自然语言，存在大量可验证的等价变换；把这些不变性显式编码进去，可能比单纯堆数据更有效。对代码预训练、形式推理和多模态符号学习，这种“尊重结构对称性”的思路都有参考价值。","technical_approach":"核心思路是把代码中的语义不变变换当作监督信号，强制模型对等价程序产生一致或可对齐的表示。它大概率不是发明全新架构，而是在现有程序表示模型上加入 symmetry-aware 的训练约束，比如对比学习、等变/不变表示或基于程序变换的正样本构造。和通用数据增强不同，这里的关键不是增加样本量，而是利用程序领域可验证的群结构或语义保持变换，让模型把“形式变化”和“语义变化”分开。","experiments":"给定信息不足，无法确认使用了哪些代码数据集、模型规模和具体增益。按题目判断，实验应围绕程序语义任务展开，例如功能相似性、程序检索、缺陷检测或语义分类，并与不使用对称性约束的编码器/预训练模型比较。值得关注的 ablation 通常会测试不同类型代码变换的贡献，以及当变换不再严格语义保持时模型是否会被误导，这也是这类方法的实际边界。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a persistent weakness in program representation learning: models often latch onto surface syntax instead of semantics. Many code models are trained on token sequences or AST statistics, so simple semantics-preserving changes such as variable renaming or statement reordering can look like entirely new patterns rather than equivalent programs.","importance":"This is primarily a method-level contribution on representation learning. The pretraining takeaway is useful: code is not just another text domain, because it comes with many verifiable invariances. Encoding those invariances explicitly may be more sample-efficient than scaling data alone. That idea is relevant for code pretraining, symbolic reasoning, and structured multimodal learning more broadly.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to treat semantics-preserving code transformations as supervision and force the model to produce aligned representations for equivalent programs. This is likely built on top of existing program encoders rather than a completely new architecture, using symmetry-aware objectives such as contrastive learning, invariant/equivariant constraints, or transformation-based positive pair construction. The key difference from generic augmentation is that these transformations carry domain-valid structure, so the model learns to separate form variation from semantic change.","experiments":"The available information does not confirm datasets, model scales, or exact gains. From the title, the evaluation likely focuses on semantic program tasks such as functional similarity, retrieval, defect detection, or semantic classification, comparing against encoders that do not exploit symmetry. The most informative ablations would test which transformation families matter most and how performance changes when the transformations are only approximately semantics-preserving, which is the main practical boundary of the approach.","authors_note":""},"tags":["code","program-semantics","symmetry","representation-learning"]},{"id":"PeiZYH024","title":"BetterV: Controlled Verilog Generation with Discriminative Guidance","authors":["Zehua Pei","Hui-Ling Zhen","Mingxuan Yuan","Yu Huang","Bei Yu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/PeiZYH024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/PeiZYH024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/pei24e.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 Verilog 生成里一个很实际的问题：通用代码生成模型往往能生成语法像样的 HDL，但功能正确率和可控性不足。过去做法常靠纯生成模型加后验筛选，命中率低、搜索成本高；作者尝试把判别式信号直接用于生成过程，引导模型更稳定地产生满足设计约束的 Verilog。","importance":"这项工作更偏代码生成中的系统与方法结合，对通用 pretrain 的直接冲击有限。它的启示在于：当目标空间有强约束、可验证且错误代价高时，单纯 next-token likelihood 往往不够，生成过程需要额外的 discriminative guidance。这个思路和受约束解码、reward-guided generation、甚至测试时 reranking 是一条线上的。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 BetterV：在 Verilog 生成时引入判别器或判别分数，对候选序列进行实时或分阶段引导。它不是只在生成后做 pass/fail 过滤，而是把“什么样的代码更可能满足规范”这个信号前移到解码阶段。与纯生成 baseline 相比，关键区别在于优化目标从单一语言建模概率变成生成概率与约束满足度的折中；这样通常能提高功能正确率，但代价是推理更慢、判别器误差会把生成带偏，且适用性依赖于可获得的监督信号。","experiments":"给定信息不足，无法确认所用基础模型、Verilog 数据规模和具体提升幅度。按题目判断，实验应以功能正确率、编译通过率、约束满足率为主指标，并与纯生成、生成后 rerank 或标准代码 LLM 基线比较。最有价值的 ablation 通常包括：判别引导强度、引导插入的位置、是否需要 beam/search，以及在不同复杂度电路任务上的收益衰减。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical weakness in Verilog generation: generic code models can produce syntactically plausible HDL, but often fail on functional correctness and controllability. Earlier approaches frequently rely on plain generation followed by filtering, which is sample-inefficient and expensive. The authors instead bring discriminative signals into the generation process itself.","importance":"This is more of a systems-plus-method contribution for constrained code generation than a direct pretraining breakthrough. Still, the broader lesson is useful: when the output space is highly structured, strongly constrained, and cheaply verifiable, next-token likelihood alone is often not the right optimization target. Generation benefits from explicit guidance tied to correctness. That connects naturally to constrained decoding, reward-guided generation, and test-time reranking.","technical_approach":"The core method, BetterV, appears to guide Verilog generation with a discriminative model or score that reflects whether a candidate is likely to satisfy design requirements. The key point is that the guidance is injected during decoding, not only as a post-hoc pass/fail filter. Compared with pure generative baselines, the objective becomes a trade-off between language-model probability and constraint satisfaction. This can improve correctness, but it also introduces slower inference, sensitivity to discriminator error, and dependence on task-specific supervision.","experiments":"The available information does not confirm the base model, dataset scale, or exact gains. From the title, the main evaluations likely measure functional correctness, compilation success, and constraint satisfaction, compared against plain generation, reranking pipelines, or standard code LMs. The most informative ablations would study guidance strength, where in decoding the guidance is applied, whether beam search is needed, and how benefits change as circuit complexity grows.","authors_note":""},"tags":["code-generation","guidance","verilog","discriminative-models"]},{"id":"PentyalaPC24","title":"CaPS: Collaborative and Private Synthetic Data Generation from Distributed Sources","authors":["Sikha Pentyala","Mayana Pereira","Martine De Cock"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/PentyalaPC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/PentyalaPC24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/pentyala24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是分布式场景下的合成数据生成：多个数据源都想参与，但又不能直接共享原始数据。过去常见做法是在 centralized data 上训练生成器，或者采用联邦学习但不专门优化合成数据质量与隐私；作者关注的是如何协作生成 synthetic data，同时保护各方私有数据。","importance":"这是一个系统级问题，对大模型预训练数据供给有现实意义。随着高质量私有数据越来越分散，‘能否在不汇聚原始数据的前提下产出可用训练数据’会直接影响后续 pretrain 和 continual pretrain。它的重要性不在于替代主流预训练，而在于为数据获取和合规训练提供新路径。","technical_approach":"CaPS 的核心应该是把协同生成与隐私保护结合起来，在分布式数据源上共同训练或协调多个生成模块，再输出可共享的 synthetic data。它大概率结合了联邦/分布式优化与隐私机制，例如安全聚合、差分隐私或局部更新约束。与普通联邦学习相比，目标不是直接学下游模型，而是生成可复用数据资产；这样更灵活，但也更难，因为生成器既要保真又要避免泄漏，二者天然冲突。","experiments":"给定信息不足，无法确认具体数据域、生成模型和隐私预算。按题目判断，实验应同时报告合成数据质量、下游效用和隐私风险，并与 centralized generation、local-only generation 和标准 federated baselines 比较。最有价值的观察通常是 privacy-utility trade-off：隐私约束加强后性能掉多少，不同数据源异质性会不会显著拖累生成质量，以及协同是否真的优于各自单独生成再合并。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses synthetic data generation in a distributed setting where multiple data owners want to collaborate without sharing raw data. Standard pipelines either assume centralized training data or use federated learning without explicitly targeting high-quality synthetic data under privacy constraints. The problem is how to generate useful shared synthetic data while preserving private source information.","importance":"This is a systems-level problem with real relevance to large-scale pretraining data pipelines. As valuable data becomes increasingly private and fragmented, the ability to produce reusable training data without centralizing the raw corpus could matter for pretraining and continual pretraining. The contribution is not a replacement for mainstream pretraining, but a potential new route for compliant data acquisition.","technical_approach":"CaPS likely combines collaborative generation with privacy-preserving distributed optimization, coordinating multiple data sources to train a generator or a set of generators that output shareable synthetic data. It probably builds on federated or distributed learning mechanisms with privacy tools such as secure aggregation, differential privacy, or constrained local updates. Unlike standard federated learning, the target here is not a task model but a synthetic data asset. That gives more reuse value, but it is also harder because fidelity and privacy are naturally in tension.","experiments":"The available information does not confirm domains, model classes, or privacy budgets. Based on the title, the experiments should evaluate synthetic data quality, downstream utility, and privacy leakage, comparing against centralized generation, local-only generation, and standard federated baselines. The most important result pattern would be the privacy-utility trade-off: how much quality drops under stronger privacy, how source heterogeneity affects generation, and whether collaborative synthesis truly beats independently generated and later pooled synthetic datasets.","authors_note":""},"tags":["synthetic-data","privacy","data-generation","distributed-training"]},{"id":"PermenterY24","title":"Interpreting and Improving Diffusion Models from an Optimization Perspective","authors":["Frank Permenter","Chenyang Yuan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/PermenterY24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/PermenterY24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/permenter24a.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：扩散模型通常从概率建模角度解释，但很多训练与采样现象更像优化过程，缺少统一视角。过去大家知道 diffusion 有效，却不总能说清楚哪些成功来自目标函数、哪些来自离散时间近似、哪些来自优化路径；作者试图用优化视角重新解释并改进 diffusion models。","importance":"这项工作对新型生成建模范式有方法论价值。对 pretrain 研究者来说，意义不在于直接改进文本 AR，而在于提供一种看 diffusion training 的分析框架，帮助理解训练稳定性、目标设计和采样-训练不匹配。若结论扎实，它也可能迁移到 diffusion LM 或 AR+diffusion 混合建模中。","technical_approach":"核心思路应是把 diffusion 的训练或反演过程重写成某种优化问题，例如迭代求解、近端更新或能量下降，然后据此解释现有算法并提出改进。它不是简单换个符号重述，而是试图从优化几何出发说明为什么某些参数化、噪声调度或采样器更好。与经典 score-matching 叙事相比，这种视角的优势是更容易分析收敛、误差积累和步数设计；局限则是理论近似常依赖较强假设，落到大规模模型时未必完全成立。","experiments":"给定信息不足，无法确认是图像还是其他模态、模型大小和指标数字。按题目判断，实验应包含两类内容：一是验证优化视角对已有现象的解释力，二是展示据此得到的改进在生成质量、采样效率或训练稳定性上的收益。值得关注的 ablation 包括不同噪声 schedule、步数、参数化方式下的行为变化，以及理论预测和实际大模型结果是否一致。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper revisits diffusion models through an optimization lens, arguing that many training and sampling behaviors are better understood as iterative optimization than as probability modeling alone. Diffusion works remarkably well in practice, but it is often unclear which effects come from the objective itself, which come from time discretization, and which come from the optimization path. The goal is to unify that picture and use it to improve the models.","importance":"This is methodologically important for non-AR generative modeling. For pretraining researchers, the value is not a direct improvement to text autoregression, but a cleaner framework for reasoning about diffusion training, stability, and train-sample mismatch. If the insights are robust, they may transfer to diffusion language models and hybrid AR-plus-diffusion pretraining as well.","technical_approach":"The approach likely reformulates parts of diffusion training or reverse-time generation as an optimization procedure, such as iterative descent, proximal updates, or energy reduction, and then uses that view to explain existing algorithms and motivate modifications. The value is not just notation. An optimization perspective can clarify why certain parameterizations, noise schedules, or samplers work better. Compared with the standard score-matching story, this view is often better suited to analyzing convergence, error accumulation, and step allocation. Its limitation is that the theory may depend on assumptions that do not cleanly hold in large practical models.","experiments":"The provided information does not specify modality, model scale, or exact metrics. From the title, the experiments should do two things: validate the explanatory power of the optimization view on known diffusion behaviors, and show that the resulting design changes improve generation quality, sampling efficiency, or training stability. Useful ablations would compare schedules, numbers of steps, and parameterizations, and test whether the theoretical predictions continue to hold at realistic model scales.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","optimization","training-dynamics","sampling"]},{"id":"PoloWCSXY24","title":"tinyBenchmarks: evaluating LLMs with fewer examples","authors":["Felipe Maia Polo","Lucas Weber","Leshem Choshen","Yuekai Sun","Gongjun Xu","Mikhail Yurochkin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/PoloWCSXY24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/PoloWCSXY24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/maia-polo24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 LLM 评测成本过高、样本需求过大的问题。很多 benchmark 需要大量题目才能稳定区分模型，但在快速迭代、模型筛选和 ablation 阶段，这种评测太慢也太贵；作者想用更少的样本得到足够可靠的模型排序或性能估计。","importance":"这是评测系统层的重要工作。对 pretrain 研究尤其有价值，因为大部分训练决策都依赖高频、小步快跑的实验反馈，而不是每次都跑全量基准。若 tinyBenchmarks 真的能用少量样本保持排序一致性，它会直接提升架构搜索、数据配比和训练 recipe 迭代效率。","technical_approach":"核心方法应该不是发明新任务，而是设计一种小样本评测构造或抽样策略，使少量题目也能代表原 benchmark 的区分力。可能机制包括项目反应理论、难度分层采样、子集搜索、排序保持优化或不确定性校准。与简单随机抽子集相比，关键区别在于目标明确：不是估计平均准确率本身，而是尽量保留模型间相对比较和结论稳定性。代价是这种子集可能对任务分布变化敏感，且一旦模型族发生代际变化，代表性需要重估。","experiments":"虽然未提供摘要，但题目已经说明核心实验：用显著更少的样本评估 LLM，并检查与完整 benchmark 的相关性。关键结果通常包括：在只用原 benchmark 很小一部分样本时，模型排名相关系数仍然较高；不同任务、不同模型族上的泛化；以及子集大小与稳定性的 trade-off。最值得看的 ablation 是跨模型家族迁移是否稳，以及子集是否会对特定训练污染或 prompt 格式异常敏感。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the high cost of LLM evaluation. Many benchmarks need a large number of examples to produce stable model comparisons, but that is too slow and expensive for rapid iteration, ablations, and model selection. The goal is to obtain reliable performance estimates or rankings using far fewer examples.","importance":"This is an important systems contribution for evaluation. It is especially relevant to pretraining research because most training decisions depend on frequent feedback loops rather than full benchmark runs. If tinyBenchmarks can preserve ranking quality with a small subset, it directly speeds up architecture search, data mixture tuning, and recipe iteration.","technical_approach":"The contribution is likely not a new benchmark task, but a principled way to construct small benchmark subsets that retain the discriminative power of the full evaluation. The mechanism could involve item response theory, difficulty-aware sampling, subset optimization, ranking preservation objectives, or uncertainty calibration. The difference from random subsampling is the objective: not just estimating mean accuracy, but preserving pairwise model comparisons and decision stability. The trade-off is that such subsets may be sensitive to distribution shift and may need to be recomputed when the model family changes substantially.","experiments":"Even without the abstract, the title makes the main experiment clear: evaluate LLMs with many fewer examples and measure agreement with the full benchmark. The key results would typically report high rank correlation at a small fraction of the original data, plus generalization across tasks and model families, and a subset-size versus stability trade-off. The most informative ablations would test transfer across model families and sensitivity to contamination or prompt-format changes.","authors_note":""},"tags":["benchmark","llm-evaluation","efficiency"]},{"id":"PressSLB24","title":"The Entropy Enigma: Success and Failure of Entropy Minimization","authors":["Ori Press","Ravid Shwartz-Ziv","Yann LeCun","Matthias Bethge"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/PressSLB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/PressSLB24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/press24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文讨论 entropy minimization 为什么有时非常有效、有时又明显失败。熵最小化常被用在半监督学习、测试时适应和自训练里，直觉上让模型更自信似乎能提升决策边界；但实践中它也经常放大错误、导致塌缩。作者要做的是解释这种成败分化，而不是再给一个经验技巧。","importance":"这是理解训练信号和自适应机制的基础工作。对 pretrain 研究者有两点启示：第一，低熵不等于高质量表征，尤其在分布偏移或伪标签错误时；第二，很多 test-time adaptation 和自训练方法的边界来自同一个机制。它不直接改预训练范式，但有助于判断什么时候‘让模型更自信’是有益的，什么时候会变成放大偏差。","technical_approach":"核心方法大概率是理论分析加控制实验，分解 entropy minimization 成功与失败所依赖的条件。可能关注的变量包括类间分离、模型校准、标签噪声、分布偏移和表示几何。与以往只报告经验结果不同，这类工作试图指出必要条件：例如当决策边界已有良好初始化且低熵方向与真实类结构一致时，熵最小化会帮助；反之，如果模型初始偏差大，它只会把错误推得更坚定。","experiments":"给定信息不足，无法确认使用的数据集和具体数字。按题目判断，实验应覆盖能够展示 success/failure 分界的设定，比如不同程度的 covariate shift、label noise、class overlap 或 calibration 状态，并比较 entropy minimization 与无适应或其他一致性正则方法。最值得看的不是平均提升，而是 phase transition 式现象：哪些条件一过阈值，方法就从有效变成有害。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks why entropy minimization sometimes works extremely well and sometimes fails badly. Entropy minimization is widely used in semi-supervised learning, test-time adaptation, and self-training because making predictions more confident can sharpen decision boundaries. In practice, though, it also amplifies mistakes and causes collapse. The paper aims to explain that split rather than add another heuristic.","importance":"This is a foundational contribution for understanding training signals and adaptation dynamics. For pretraining researchers, two lessons matter. First, lower entropy is not the same as better representations, especially under distribution shift or noisy pseudo-labels. Second, many self-training and test-time adaptation methods share the same underlying failure mode. The work does not change the pretraining paradigm directly, but it helps identify when confidence amplification is useful and when it simply magnifies bias.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is a combination of theory and controlled experiments that isolates the conditions under which entropy minimization succeeds or fails. Variables of interest likely include class separation, calibration, label noise, distribution shift, and representation geometry. Unlike prior work that mainly reports empirical outcomes, this line of analysis tries to identify the conditions that make entropy minimization safe: for example, if the initial decision boundary is already reasonably aligned with class structure, lower entropy can help; if initialization is biased, the method may only harden wrong predictions.","experiments":"The provided information does not specify datasets or exact metrics. From the title, the experiments should cover setups that expose the success-failure boundary, such as varying degrees of covariate shift, label noise, class overlap, or calibration quality, comparing entropy minimization against no adaptation and perhaps consistency-based alternatives. The most valuable signal would be threshold-like behavior: the conditions under which the method flips from beneficial to harmful.","authors_note":"A confirmed notable author is Yann LeCun, known for foundational work on convolutional networks, energy-based modeling, and self-supervised learning."},"tags":["entropy-minimization","generalization","self-training"],"notable_authors":["Yann LeCun"]},{"id":"Qian00Y0CZT24","title":"Momentor: Advancing Video Large Language Model with Fine-Grained Temporal Reasoning","authors":["Long Qian","Juncheng Li","Yu Wu","Yaobo Ye","Hao Fei","Tat-Seng Chua","Yueting Zhuang","Siliang Tang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Qian00Y0CZT24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Qian00Y0CZT24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/qian24a.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是 Video LLM 在细粒度时间推理上的短板。现有视频大模型往往能抓住粗略场景和对象，但对事件顺序、持续时间、瞬时变化和跨片段因果关系理解不足，原因通常是视觉 token 压缩过强、时间监督稀疏、训练目标偏静态图文对齐。","importance":"这项工作属于多模态预训练/后训练接口上的方法改进。它的重要性不在于视频问答分数本身，而在于指出了 video-native 建模需要显式时间结构，而不能只把视频当成稀疏抽帧图像拼接文本。对 VLM 预训练、视频 tokenizer 设计和 temporal grounding 目标都有直接启发。","technical_approach":"Momentor 的核心应是围绕细粒度时间推理重构训练流程，可能包括更密的时间标注、分层时序表示、事件级对齐目标，或让语言解码显式引用时间片段。它大概率是在现有 Video-LLM 框架上增加 temporal reasoning 模块和相应 supervision，而不是从零训练新 backbone。与普通视频指令微调不同，关键区别是把‘什么时候发生’作为一等训练信号，而不是让模型从全局视频 embedding 里自己猜。代价则是标注和训练成本更高，对长视频扩展也更敏感。","experiments":"虽然没有摘要，但从题目看，实验应集中在需要细时间理解的视频问答、事件排序、时间定位或描述任务上，并与主流 Video-LLM 基线比较。关键指标通常是 QA 准确率、temporal grounding 指标和复杂时间推理集上的提升。最值得看的 ablation 包括：帧采样密度、时间监督粒度、是否显式事件分段，以及收益是否主要来自额外数据而不是模型设计本身。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a major weakness of Video LLMs: fine-grained temporal reasoning. Current video-language models often capture coarse scene and object information, but struggle with event order, duration, transient changes, and cross-segment causality. The likely causes are aggressive visual token compression, sparse temporal supervision, and training objectives dominated by static image-text alignment.","importance":"This is a method contribution at the multimodal pretrain/post-train boundary. Its significance is not just a better video QA score. The broader point is that video-native modeling needs explicit temporal structure rather than treating a video as a handful of frames plus text. That lesson matters for VLM pretraining, video tokenization, and temporal grounding objectives.","technical_approach":"Momentor likely restructures training around fine-grained temporal reasoning, possibly through denser temporal annotations, hierarchical temporal representations, event-level alignment losses, or language generation that explicitly grounds to time segments. This is probably built on top of an existing Video-LLM stack rather than a brand-new backbone. The key difference from generic video instruction tuning is that the model is explicitly trained to answer 'when' and 'in what order', rather than hoping temporal reasoning emerges from a pooled video representation. The trade-off is higher supervision and training cost, with likely sensitivity to long-video scaling.","experiments":"Even without the abstract, the title suggests evaluations on tasks that require temporal understanding, such as video QA, event ordering, temporal grounding, or temporally detailed description, compared with mainstream Video-LLM baselines. The main metrics are likely QA accuracy and grounding-related measures on challenging temporal benchmarks. The most useful ablations would test frame sampling density, temporal supervision granularity, explicit event segmentation, and whether the gains come from better modeling rather than simply more labeled data.","authors_note":""},"tags":["video-llm","temporal-reasoning","multimodal"]},{"id":"QinCQDLD24","title":"Federated Full-Parameter Tuning of Billion-Sized Language Models with Communication Cost under 18 Kilobytes","authors":["Zhen Qin","Daoyuan Chen","Bingchen Qian","Bolin Ding","Yaliang Li","Shuiguang Deng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/QinCQDLD24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/QinCQDLD24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/qin24a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["federated-learning","llm-finetuning","communication-efficiency"]},{"id":"QiuGXZ0Y24","title":"To Cool or not to Cool? Temperature Network Meets Large Foundation Models via DRO","authors":["Zi-Hao Qiu","Siqi Guo","Mao Xu","Tuo Zhao","Lijun Zhang","Tianbao Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/QiuGXZ0Y24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/QiuGXZ0Y24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/qiu24c.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["temperature-scaling","foundation-model","dro"]},{"id":"ShaulSC0TPL24","title":"Bespoke Non-Stationary Solvers for Fast Sampling of Diffusion and Flow Models","authors":["Neta Shaul","Uriel Singer","Ricky T. Q. Chen","Matthew Le","Ali K. Thabet","Albert Pumarola","Yaron Lipman"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ShaulSC0TPL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ShaulSC0TPL24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/shaul24a.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion","sampling","flow-models","efficiency"]},{"id":"ShenDGSWG24","title":"Thermometer: Towards Universal Calibration for Large Language Models","authors":["Maohao Shen","Subhro Das","Kristjan H. Greenewald","Prasanna Sattigeri","Gregory W. Wornell","Soumya Ghosh"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ShenDGSWG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ShenDGSWG24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/shen24c.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["llm","calibration","evaluation","uncertainty"]},{"id":"Shi00SH024","title":"Long-Tail Learning with Foundation Model: Heavy Fine-Tuning Hurts","authors":["Jiang-Xin Shi","Tong Wei","Zhi Zhou","Jie-Jing Shao","Xin-Yan Han","Yufeng Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Shi00SH024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Shi00SH024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/shi24g.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["foundation-models","fine-tuning","long-tail","adaptation"]},{"id":"ShiFY24","title":"OT-CLIP: Understanding and Generalizing CLIP via Optimal Transport","authors":["Liangliang Shi","Jack Fan","Junchi Yan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ShiFY24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ShiFY24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/shi24b.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["clip","multimodal","optimal-transport","representation-learning"]},{"id":"SimFTJL24","title":"Deletion-Anticipative Data Selection with a Limited Budget","authors":["Rachael Hwee Ling Sim","Jue Fan","Xiao Tian","Patrick Jaillet","Bryan Kian Hsiang Low"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SimFTJL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SimFTJL24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/sim24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["data-selection","data-quality","dataset-curation","unlearning"]},{"id":"2402.09631","title":"Representation Surgery: Theory and Practice of Affine Steering","authors":["Shashwat Singh","Shauli Ravfogel","Jonathan Herzig","Roee Aharoni","Ryan Cotterell","Ponnurangam Kumaraguru"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Language models often exhibit undesirable behavior, e.g., generating toxic or gender-biased text. In the case of neural language models, an encoding of the undesirable behavior is often present in the model's representations. Thus, one natural (and common) approach to prevent the model from exhibiting undesirable behavior is to steer the model's representations in a manner that reduces the probability of it generating undesirable text. This paper investigates the formal and empirical properties of steering functions, i.e., transformation of the neural language model's representations that alter its behavior. First, we derive two optimal, in the least-squares sense, affine steering functions under different constraints. Our theory provides justification for existing approaches and offers a novel, improved steering approach. Second, we offer a series of experiments that demonstrate the empirical effectiveness of the methods in mitigating bias and reducing toxic generation.","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.09631","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SinghRHACK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SinghRHACK24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/singh24d.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["representation-steering","alignment","control","safety"]},{"id":"SongLZ0024","title":"Sparse is Enough in Fine-tuning Pre-trained Large Language Models","authors":["Weixi Song","Zuchao Li","Lefei Zhang","Hai Zhao","Bo Du"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SongLZ0024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SongLZ0024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/song24e.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["sparse-finetuning","llm","parameter-efficiency"]},{"id":"2402.09025","title":"SLEB: Streamlining LLMs through Redundancy Verification and Elimination of Transformer Blocks","authors":["Jiwon Song","Kyungseok Oh","Taesu Kim","Hyungjun Kim","Yulhwa Kim","Jae-Joon Kim"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$46","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.09025","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SongOKKKK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SongOKKKK24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/song24f.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["pruning","llm-compression","transformer-blocks","redundancy"]},{"id":"2312.06581","title":"Grokking Group Multiplication with Cosets","authors":["Dashiell Stander","Qinan Yu","Honglu Fan","Stella Biderman"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$47","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.06581","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/StanderYFB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/StanderYFB24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/stander24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["grokking","interpretability","reverse-engineering","group-theory"]},{"id":"2402.10893","title":"RLVF: Learning from Verbal Feedback without Overgeneralization","authors":["Moritz Stephan","Alexander Khazatsky","Eric Mitchell","Annie S. Chen","Sheryl Hsu","Archit Sharma","Chelsea Finn"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$48","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.10893","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/StephanKMCHSF24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/StephanKMCHSF24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/stephan24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：如何让 LLM 根据自然语言反馈调整行为，同时不要把反馈错误地泛化到无关场景。以往最省事的做法是把反馈直接塞进 prompt，但这会把局部偏好当成全局规则，例如“给老板写邮件不要用 emoji”会外溢到所有写作任务；而标准 RLHF 又要求成对偏好或奖励标注，定制成本太高。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要在 post-train 接口设计，而不是提出全新的训练范式。它重要的地方在于把“口头反馈”从一次性提示词，推进成可训练、可上下文化的偏好信号，这对个性化对齐、企业定制和持续对齐都有直接意义；对 pretrain 研究的启发是，模型需要学会区分规则的适用范围，而不只是记住规则本身。","technical_approach":"作者的核心方法是 Contextualized Critiques with Constrained Preference Optimization：先把自然语言反馈转成依赖上下文的批评信号，再用带约束的偏好优化只在相关场景内更新模型。关键设计不是简单让模型“遵守反馈”，而是显式建模“什么时候该遵守”；约束项的作用是抑制对无关输入分布的漂移，避免常见的 preference tuning 过拟合。和直接 instruction tuning 或无条件 DPO 相比，这个方法把反馈作用域作为一等对象来处理，所以更适合细粒度行为编辑。","experiments":"从摘要能确认的实验结论是：作者重点评估了 verbal feedback 引起的 overgeneralization，并展示其方法能在保留目标行为修改的同时减少误泛化。摘要没有给出模型规模、数据量、具体 baseline 名称和数值幅度，因此不能可靠复述具体提升。可以确认的实验主线应包括：直接 prompting verbal feedback、无约束偏好优化，以及作者方法在相关上下文与无关上下文上的对比。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical alignment problem: how to update an LLM from natural-language feedback without letting that feedback spill into irrelevant contexts. The usual shortcut is to prepend the feedback as an instruction, but that treats a local preference as a global rule; full RLHF avoids this but is too expensive for lightweight customization.","importance":"This is mainly a post-training interface contribution, but it matters because it turns verbal feedback into a trainable and context-scoped signal rather than a fragile prompt hack. For pretraining-minded readers, the key lesson is that models need to represent applicability conditions of preferences, not just the preferences themselves.","technical_approach":"The method, Contextualized Critiques with Constrained Preference Optimization, converts verbal feedback into context-dependent critique signals and then applies constrained preference optimization so updates stay local to relevant situations. The important design choice is to optimize for 'when to apply a rule' rather than merely 'what rule to follow'. The constraint is there to limit behavioral drift on unrelated inputs, which is where naive preference tuning typically overgeneralizes.","experiments":"The abstract supports one main empirical claim: the method preserves desired behavior changes while reducing overgeneralization from verbal feedback. It does not provide reliable details on model size, dataset size, baselines, or exact margins, so those should not be invented. The likely evaluation compares direct prompting, unconstrained preference optimization, and the proposed method on in-scope versus out-of-scope contexts.","authors_note":""},"tags":["verbal-feedback","alignment","llm-customization","overgeneralization"],"notable_authors":["Moritz Stephan","Alexander Khazatsky","Eric Mitchell","Annie S. Chen","Sheryl Hsu"]},{"id":"2407.12824","title":"Whispering Experts: Neural Interventions for Toxicity Mitigation in Language Models","authors":["Xavier Suau","Pieter Delobelle","Katherine Metcalf","Armand Joulin","Nicholas Apostoloff","Luca Zappella","Pau Rodríguez"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$49","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.12824","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SuauDMJAZR24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SuauDMJAZR24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/suau24a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题很明确：能不能不用重新训练或重对齐整个模型，只通过神经层面的干预就稳定降低 LLM 的毒性输出。以往常见方案是 RLHF、拒答微调或解码时过滤，这些方法要么成本高、要么牺牲能力、要么只能事后拦截，难以做到轻量且模型无关。","importance":"这是一个机制分析驱动的安全方法，贡献量级更像实用型工具而不是范式替代。它重要的地方在于提出了一种无需额外训练目标、几乎不加超参的 inference-time intervention，并且把“哪些神经元与毒性相关”转成可度量、可排序、可直接操作的对象；对 pretrain 研究的价值在于，这类工作说明中层表征里确实存在可分离的行为子空间。","technical_approach":"作者提出 AurA（AUROC adaptation）：先用神经元对有毒/无毒句子的区分能力作为重要性指标，再按这个能力成比例压低其激活值。关键点有两个。第一，指标用 AUROC 而不是依赖模型特定梯度或手工阈值，所以跨模型更稳。第二，干预是连续缩放而不是硬屏蔽，因此在降毒和保留语言能力之间做了更平滑的折中。和训练一个毒性分类头或做 activation steering 相比，AurA 更像基于判别力的定量抑制。","experiments":"摘要给出了最关键的数字：毒性最高可降低 2.2 倍，同时 perplexity 只增加 0.72。方法在 1.5B 到更大规模模型上都有效，说明不是只在小模型上成立。摘要未给出具体 benchmark 名称和所有 baseline，但至少能确认作者比较了不同尺度模型上的毒性缓解效果，并强调方法不依赖模型特定超参数。一个重要边界是：它优化的是毒性维度，不保证对其他安全维度同样有效。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether toxicity in LLMs can be reduced without retraining or full-scale alignment, using only targeted neural interventions at inference time. Standard options such as RLHF, refusal tuning, or output filtering are either expensive, blunt, or purely reactive.","importance":"This is a practical safety contribution grounded in mechanistic structure rather than a new training paradigm. Its value is that it turns toxicity-associated neurons into measurable and directly editable units, suggesting that some harmful behaviors occupy partially separable subspaces in pretrained representations.","technical_approach":"The method, AurA (AUROC adaptation), ranks neurons by how well their activations discriminate toxic from non-toxic text, then downscales those activations proportionally to that discriminative power. Two design choices matter. It uses AUROC, which is less tied to model-specific calibration than ad hoc thresholds. And it applies soft suppression instead of hard ablation, which gives a cleaner trade-off between toxicity reduction and retained language quality.","experiments":"The headline result in the abstract is a toxicity reduction of up to 2.2x with only a 0.72 increase in perplexity. The method is reported to work across model scales starting from 1.5B parameters, which argues against it being a small-model artifact. The abstract does not name all benchmarks or baselines, but it clearly positions the method as hyperparameter-light and model-agnostic. A natural limitation is that success on toxicity does not automatically transfer to other safety dimensions.","authors_note":""},"tags":["toxicity","interpretability","neuron-intervention","llm-safety"],"notable_authors":["Xavier Suau","Pieter Delobelle","Katherine Metcalf","Armand Joulin","Nicholas Apostoloff"]},{"id":"2406.03682","title":"A Universal Class of Sharpness-Aware Minimization Algorithms","authors":["Behrooz Tahmasebi","Ashkan Soleymani","Dara Bahri","Stefanie Jegelka","Patrick Jaillet"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4a","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.03682","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/TahmasebiSBJJ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/TahmasebiSBJJ24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/tahmasebi24b.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：SAM 一类 sharpness-aware 优化方法虽然有效，但现有 sharpness 定义太窄，也常常不尊重神经网络的参数重标定不变性。结果是你优化到的“平坦性”可能只是参数坐标系里的假象，而不是和泛化真正相关的几何性质。","importance":"这是优化理论与算法工作的结合，对大模型预训练的直接落地还要看额外工程验证。它的重要性在于给出一类更一般的 sharpness-aware 方法框架，试图统一过去零散的 SAM 变体，并把参数不变性问题摆上台面；这对大规模训练很关键，因为很多架构和归一化层都会让简单 Hessian 指标失真。","technical_approach":"作者提出一个 universal class of SAM algorithms，其核心不是再定义一个单点 sharpness 指标，而是给出一族满足更好性质的 sharpness 度量和对应优化算法。摘要明确的动机包括：现有指标如 Hessian 最大特征值或 trace 在非凸网络里解释力有限，而且会随参数 rescaling 人为放大。新方法的关键设计应是通过重参数化不变或近似不变的方式定义 sharpness，再据此构造统一更新规则。与经典 SAM 相比，区别在于它不是围绕固定扰动范数的小修小补，而是提升到更普遍的算法类。","experiments":"摘要没有提供任何模型规模、数据集或数值结果，因此实验层面无法可靠展开。能确认的是论文同时关心理论性质和实际算法，而不是纯证明工作。对资深读者来说，最值得检查的实验点会是：这些新 sharpness 定义是否在现代网络上与泛化更一致，以及它们的训练开销是否仍可接受。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a core weakness in the SAM literature: many sharpness measures used in practice are too narrow and often fail to respect parameter invariances of neural networks. That means the 'flatness' being optimized can be an artifact of the parameterization rather than a meaningful generalization bias.","importance":"This is an optimization framework contribution with potential relevance to large-scale pretraining if its practical overhead is reasonable. Its main value is to broaden sharpness-aware optimization beyond a few Hessian-based proxies and to explicitly account for invariance issues that are easy to ignore in modern architectures.","technical_approach":"The paper proposes a universal class of SAM algorithms rather than one more isolated variant. From the abstract, the key design principle is to define sharpness measures that remain meaningful under parameter rescaling or related invariances, then derive a general optimization family around them. This differs from standard SAM, which is tied to a small set of perturbation-based formulations and can inherit parameterization artifacts.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide model sizes, datasets, baselines, or numeric gains, so no faithful quantitative summary is possible. What can be inferred is that the paper combines theoretical motivation with algorithmic proposals rather than stopping at analysis. The practical question to verify is whether the proposed sharpness notions track generalization better on modern networks without making training prohibitively expensive.","authors_note":""},"tags":["sam","sharpness-aware","optimization","generalization"],"notable_authors":["Behrooz Tahmasebi","Ashkan Soleymani","Dara Bahri","Stefanie Jegelka","Patrick Jaillet"]},{"id":"Tang00YZT24","title":"Merging Multi-Task Models via Weight-Ensembling Mixture of Experts","authors":["Anke Tang","Li Shen","Yong Luo","Nan Yin","Lefei Zhang","Dacheng Tao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Tang00YZT24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Tang00YZT24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/tang24e.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文讨论的是多任务模型合并中的一个关键问题：如何在不重新联合训练所有任务的前提下，把多个专用模型合成为一个更通用的模型，同时尽量避免任务间权重冲突。传统权重平均或 task arithmetic 经常在任务相近时有效，但任务差异一大就容易互相干扰。","importance":"这项工作的意义偏模型组合与参数高效迁移，对持续预训练和多领域适配都有潜在价值。它重要的点在于把 model merging 从静态权重平均推进到带专家路由的混合形式，这意味着合并后的模型可以在参数层面保留任务专长，而不是被迫折中到一个平均解。","technical_approach":"从标题可知，作者提出 Weight-Ensembling Mixture of Experts，用 MoE 风格把多任务模型的权重集成起来。与直接把多个 checkpoint 平均不同，这种设计应该允许不同任务或输入路由到不同专家权重，从而减少参数冲突。关键取舍也很清楚：它保留了多模型的专长结构，但代价是推理路径和系统复杂度会比单一 merged checkpoint 更高。","experiments":"由于没有摘要，无法确认模型类型、任务集合、路由机制、参数开销和具体指标提升。可以合理推断实验应包含：与线性权重平均、task arithmetic 或传统 model soup 类方法比较，以及对 seen/unseen tasks 的迁移评估。没有更多信息时，最稳妥的判断是这是一篇围绕多任务模型合并与 MoE 化集成的参数空间方法论文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a central model-merging problem: how to combine multiple task-specific models into a broader multitask model without jointly retraining everything and without suffering severe parameter interference. Simple weight averaging can work for nearby tasks, but it breaks down when task optima are far apart.","importance":"This is relevant to continual adaptation and parameter-space composition rather than core pretraining. Its likely contribution is to move model merging from static averaging toward expert-aware composition, allowing specialized capabilities to be retained instead of collapsed into one compromise solution.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method uses a mixture-of-experts style mechanism over ensembled weights, rather than merging all checkpoints into one fixed parameter vector. The expected benefit is reduced task conflict through conditional use of different weight experts. The trade-off is straightforward: better specialization retention at the cost of more routing and systems complexity than plain model soups.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so model types, task sets, baselines, and quantitative gains cannot be summarized faithfully. The natural experimental comparisons would be against linear weight averaging, task arithmetic, or model-soup-style baselines, along with transfer to held-out tasks. With the available information, the safe characterization is a parameter-space multitask merging method with MoE structure.","authors_note":""},"tags":["model-merging","moe","multi-task","weight-ensembling"],"notable_authors":["Anke Tang","Li Shen","Yong Luo","Nan Yin","Lefei Zhang"]},{"id":"2402.01030","title":"Executable Code Actions Elicit Better LLM Agents","authors":["Xingyao Wang","Yangyi Chen","Lifan Yuan","Yizhe Zhang","Yunzhu Li","Hao Peng","Heng Ji"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4b","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.01030","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangCY0L0J24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangCY0L0J24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/wang24h.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 LLM agent 动作空间设计过于僵硬的问题：让模型输出 JSON 或固定格式文本，虽然便于解析，但动作种类受预定义工具限制，也很难组合、修改和复用。随着 agent 任务越来越复杂，这种“把动作当字符串槽位填空”的接口开始成为能力上限。","importance":"这项工作对 agent 训练和评测很有实际影响，虽然不属于核心 pretrain 方法。它重要的地方在于把动作空间提升为可执行代码，这相当于给模型一个统一、可组合、可自我修订的外部行为接口；对 pretrain/post-train 研究的启发是，模型能力上限不仅取决于语言建模本身，也取决于 action representation 是否足够表达性。","technical_approach":"作者提出 CodeAct：让 LLM 直接生成可执行 Python 代码作为动作，并通过 Python interpreter 执行，再在多轮交互中根据新观察修订代码。关键设计不是“多一个工具”，而是把工具调用、控制流、状态更新都统一进代码语言里。与 JSON action 相比，代码能天然支持组合多个工具、变量复用、条件分支和错误恢复，因此更适合开放式 agent 任务。代价也很明确：执行安全、沙盒限制和运行时错误处理会变成系统关键点。","experiments":"摘要明确说作者对 17 个 LLM 做了广泛分析，并在 API 相关任务上评估 CodeAct。摘要截断后未给出具体 benchmark 名称和数值提升，因此不能精确汇报成绩。可以确定的实验主线是：比较 code actions 与传统文本/JSON actions 在灵活性和任务完成率上的差异，并分析不同模型对代码式动作空间的适应程度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a design bottleneck in LLM agents: representing actions as JSON or fixed-format text is easy to parse but too restrictive for complex tasks. It limits the action space to predefined tools and makes composition, revision, and reuse awkward.","importance":"This is an agent-interface contribution rather than a core pretraining method, but it matters because action representation strongly shapes what an LLM agent can actually do. The key takeaway is that a more expressive action language can raise capability without changing the underlying base model.","technical_approach":"The proposed CodeAct framework lets the model emit executable Python code as the action space, with a Python interpreter executing the code and feeding observations back for iterative revision. The important shift is not just adding coding ability; it is using code as a unified interface for tool calls, control flow, state updates, and composition. Compared with JSON actions, code naturally supports branching, reuse, and multi-tool orchestration, though it introduces execution safety and runtime management concerns.","experiments":"The abstract states that the authors run an extensive study over 17 LLMs and evaluate on API-oriented agent tasks. Because the abstract is truncated, it does not provide benchmark names or effect sizes, so no faithful quantitative summary is possible. The main empirical comparison is clearly code actions versus text/JSON actions, with attention to flexibility and task success across different model families.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm-agent","tool-use","code-execution","action-space"],"notable_authors":["Xingyao Wang","Yangyi Chen","Lifan Yuan","Yizhe Zhang","Yunzhu Li"]},{"id":"2405.17201","title":"Diagnosing the Compositional Knowledge of Vision Language Models from a Game-Theoretic View","authors":["Jin Wang","Shichao Dong","Yapeng Zhu","Kelu Yao","Weidong Zhao","Chao Li","Ping Luo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Compositional reasoning capabilities are usually considered as fundamental skills to characterize human perception. Recent studies show that current Vision Language Models (VLMs) surprisingly lack sufficient knowledge with respect to such capabilities. To this end, we propose to thoroughly diagnose the composition representations encoded by VLMs, systematically revealing the potential cause for this weakness. Specifically, we propose evaluation methods from a novel game-theoretic view to assess the vulnerability of VLMs on different aspects of compositional understanding, e.g., relations and attributes. Extensive experimental results demonstrate and validate several insights to understand the incapabilities of VLMs on compositional reasoning, which provide useful and reliable guidance for future studies. The deliverables will be updated at https://vlms-compositionality-gametheory.github.io/.","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.17201","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangDZYZLL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangDZYZLL24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/wang24n.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"VLM 在组合推理（如关系、属性的组合理解）上表现差，但缺乏系统性的诊断工具来揭示这种缺陷的根源。以往工作多停留在'发现 VLM 组合推理弱'，没有深入分析编码表示层面的原因。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 VLM pretrain 研究的启示在于：通过博弈论视角的诊断，可以定位 VLM 在组合表示上的具体薄弱环节（如哪些属性/关系的编码是脆弱的），为改进预训练数据或目标函数提供方向性指导。但本身不直接改进预训练方法。","technical_approach":"核心思路是用博弈论（game-theoretic）框架来评估 VLM 的组合表示。具体做法是将组合理解的不同方面（属性、关系等）视为博弈中的参与者，通过 Shapley 值等工具量化各组成部分对模型预测的贡献，从而诊断 VLM 在哪些组合维度上编码不足。与传统 benchmark 式评估不同，这种方法能给出更细粒度的归因。","experiments":"在多个 VLM 上进行了广泛实验，验证了若干关于 VLM 组合推理缺陷的洞察。具体数字和 baseline 在摘要中未完整给出，但论文声称结果为理解 VLM 组合推理不足提供了可靠指导。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"VLMs are surprisingly weak at compositional reasoning, but there has been no systematic diagnostic tool to pinpoint why at the representation level. Prior work mostly observed the weakness without explaining its root cause.","importance":"A method-level contribution for VLM evaluation. It provides actionable diagnostics on which compositional aspects (attributes, relations) are poorly encoded, which can inform pretraining data curation or objective design. It does not directly improve pretraining itself.","technical_approach":"Uses a game-theoretic framework to assess compositional representations in VLMs. Different compositional aspects are treated as players in a cooperative game, and Shapley-value-like tools quantify each component's contribution to model predictions. This gives finer-grained attribution than standard benchmark accuracy.","experiments":"Extensive experiments across multiple VLMs validate several insights about compositional reasoning failures. Specific numbers are not fully available from the abstract, but the paper claims the diagnostics provide reliable guidance for improving VLMs.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","compositionality","diagnosis","representation","game-theory"]},{"id":"2307.10635","title":"SciBench: Evaluating College-Level Scientific Problem-Solving Abilities of Large Language Models","authors":["Xiaoxuan Wang","Ziniu Hu","Pan Lu","Yanqiao Zhu","Jieyu Zhang","Satyen Subramaniam","Arjun R. Loomba","Shichang Zhang","Yizhou Sun","Wei Wang"],"institutions":["UCLA"],"abstract":"$4c","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.10635","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangHL0ZSLZS024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangHL0ZSLZS024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/wang24z.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有 LLM 科学推理 benchmark 集中在高中水平、简单代数运算，无法评估 LLM 解决大学级复杂科学问题的能力。需要一个覆盖数学、化学、物理的大学级 benchmark 来暴露 LLM 的真实推理上限。","importance":"数据/评估级贡献。SciBench 揭示了当前 LLM 在复杂科学推理上的显著不足（最佳模型仅 43.22%），这对 pretrain 研究的启示是：当前预训练数据和建模方式在深层推理能力上仍有很大提升空间，尤其是多步数学和物理推理。","technical_approach":"构建了一个精心筛选的大学级科学问题数据集，涵盖数学、化学、物理。在此基础上，用多种 prompting 策略（如 CoT 等）系统评测了开源和闭源 LLM。核心价值不在方法创新，而在于提供了一个高质量、高难度的评估基准。","experiments":"评测了多个代表性 LLM，最佳总分仅 43.22%，说明大学级科学推理对当前模型仍然很难。论文还分析了不同 prompting 策略的效果差异，为后续改进提供了参考。","authors_note":"作者包括 Pan Lu（UCLA，多模态推理方向活跃研究者）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM science benchmarks focus on high-school-level problems with elementary algebra, failing to assess college-level complex scientific reasoning. A harder benchmark is needed to expose the true reasoning ceiling of LLMs.","importance":"A benchmark-level contribution. The best LLM scores only 43.22%, revealing a large gap in complex scientific reasoning. For pretrain research, this signals that current data and modeling approaches are far from sufficient for deep multi-step reasoning in math and physics.","technical_approach":"Curates a college-level scientific problem dataset spanning math, chemistry, and physics. Evaluates representative open-source and proprietary LLMs with various prompting strategies. The contribution is the benchmark itself rather than a new method.","experiments":"The best overall score across all tested LLMs is 43.22%. Multiple prompting strategies (including CoT) are compared, with detailed analysis of where models fail. The benchmark effectively differentiates model capabilities at the hard end of the spectrum.","authors_note":"Authors include Pan Lu (UCLA, active in multimodal reasoning research)."},"tags":["benchmark","reasoning","science","evaluation","llm"],"notable_authors":["Pan Lu"]},{"id":"2402.03681","title":"RL-VLM-F: Reinforcement Learning from Vision Language Foundation Model Feedback","authors":["Yufei Wang","Zhanyi Sun","Jesse Zhang","Zhou Xian","Erdem Biyik","David Held","Zackory Erickson"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4d","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.03681","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangSZXBHE24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangSZXBHE24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/wang24bn.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"RL 中的 reward 设计长期依赖人工试错，成本高且难以泛化。能否利用 VLM 的视觉-语言理解能力，仅凭任务文本描述和视觉观测自动生成 reward 函数？","importance":"方法级贡献，属于 VLM 应用于 RL reward 生成的方向。对 pretrain 研究的间接启示：VLM 的 pretrain 质量直接决定了其作为 reward 信号源的可靠性，这是 VLM pretrain 能力的一个新应用场景。但本身不改进预训练方法。","technical_approach":"RL-VLM-F 的核心设计选择是：不直接让 VLM 输出 reward 分数（这种方式噪声大且不稳定），而是让 VLM 对成对的图像观测给出偏好判断，再从偏好标签中学习 reward 函数。这种间接方式更鲁棒，因为偏好比较比绝对评分更容易做对。","experiments":"摘要未给出完整实验数字，但方法在多个 RL 任务上验证了有效性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Reward engineering in RL is costly and hard to generalize. The question is whether VLMs can automatically generate reward functions from just a task description and visual observations.","importance":"A method-level contribution applying VLMs to RL reward generation. Indirectly relevant to pretrain: VLM pretraining quality determines its reliability as a reward signal source. This is a new application scenario for VLM capabilities, but does not improve pretraining itself.","technical_approach":"Instead of prompting VLMs for raw reward scores (noisy and unstable), RL-VLM-F queries VLMs for pairwise preferences over image observations, then learns a reward function from these preference labels. Pairwise comparison is more robust than absolute scoring for VLMs.","experiments":"Full experimental numbers not available from the abstract. The method is validated across multiple RL tasks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","reinforcement-learning","reward-model","feedback","alignment"]},{"id":"WangW0L24","title":"Transformers Provably Learn Sparse Token Selection While Fully-Connected Nets Cannot","authors":["Zixuan Wang","Stanley Wei","Daniel Hsu","Jason D. Lee"],"institutions":["Princeton University"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangW0L24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangW0L24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/wang24ca.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer 能否可证明地学习稀疏 token 选择（即从输入序列中选择性地关注少数关键 token），而全连接网络做不到？这是理解 Transformer 注意力机制独特优势的理论问题。","importance":"理论级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的价值在于：从理论上证明了注意力机制在稀疏选择上的不可替代性，这为理解为什么 Transformer 架构在语言建模中如此成功提供了一个严格的理论支撑。也暗示了全连接替代方案（如某些 MLP-only 架构）在特定任务上的根本局限。","technical_approach":"构建了理论框架证明 Transformer 可以可证明地学习稀疏 token 选择任务，同时证明全连接网络在同类任务上存在根本性的表达能力不足。具体证明技术在摘要中未给出。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体实验细节。","authors_note":"作者包括 Jason D. Lee（Princeton，优化和深度学习理论方向知名研究者）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Can Transformers provably learn sparse token selection—attending to a few key tokens from the input—while fully-connected networks fundamentally cannot? This is a theoretical question about the unique advantage of attention.","importance":"A theory-level contribution. Provides rigorous justification for why attention mechanisms are essential in Transformers: they enable sparse selection that MLPs cannot achieve. This supports the architectural choices underlying modern LLM pretraining and highlights fundamental limitations of MLP-only alternatives.","technical_approach":"Constructs a theoretical framework proving Transformers can learn sparse token selection tasks, while fully-connected networks provably fail. Specific proof techniques not available from the abstract.","experiments":"No specific experimental details available from the abstract.","authors_note":"Authors include Jason D. Lee (Princeton, well-known for optimization and deep learning theory)."},"tags":["transformer","token-selection","sparsity","theory"],"notable_authors":["Jason D. Lee"]},{"id":"2402.02592","title":"Unified Training of Universal Time Series Forecasting Transformers","authors":["Gerald Woo","Chenghao Liu","Akshat Kumar","Caiming Xiong","Silvio Savarese","Doyen Sahoo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4e","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.02592","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WooLKXSS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WooLKXSS24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/woo24a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["time-series","foundation-model","pretraining","transformer"]},{"id":"2312.17295","title":"Optimizing Watermarks for Large Language Models","authors":["Bram Wouters"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"With the rise of large language models (LLMs) and concerns about potential misuse, watermarks for generative LLMs have recently attracted much attention. An important aspect of such watermarks is the trade-off between their identifiability and their impact on the quality of the generated text. This paper introduces a systematic approach to this trade-off in terms of a multi-objective optimization problem. For a large class of robust, efficient watermarks, the associated Pareto optimal solutions are identified and shown to outperform the currently default watermark.","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.17295","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Wouters24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Wouters24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/wouters24a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["watermarking","llm","multi-objective","text-quality"]},{"id":"2403.01639","title":"Theoretical insights for diffusion guidance: A case study for Gaussian mixture models","authors":["Yuchen Wu","Minshuo Chen","Zihao Li","Mengdi Wang","Yuting Wei"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4f","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.01639","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WuCLWW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WuCLWW24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/wu24b.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion","guidance","theory","gaussian-mixture"]},{"id":"2310.07710","title":"A Resilient and Accessible Distribution-Preserving Watermark for Large Language Models","authors":["Yihan Wu","Zhengmian Hu","Junfeng Guo","Hongyang Zhang","Heng Huang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$50","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.07710","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WuHG0H24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WuHG0H24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/wu24h.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["watermarking","llm","distribution-preserving"]},{"id":"Yang0WG00T24","title":"Representation Surgery for Multi-Task Model Merging","authors":["Enneng Yang","Li Shen","Zhenyi Wang","Guibing Guo","Xiaojun Chen","Xingwei Wang","Dacheng Tao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Yang0WG00T24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Yang0WG00T24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/yang24t.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["model-merging","multi-task","representation","fine-tuning"]},{"id":"YangZDR24","title":"What is Dataset Distillation Learning?","authors":["William Yang","Ye Zhu","Zhiwei Deng","Olga Russakovsky"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YangZDR24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YangZDR24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/yang24am.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要回答的不是如何做 dataset distillation，而是 dataset distillation 到底学到了什么。这个问题过去经常被新算法指标掩盖：大家关注少量合成样本能把测试精度提到多少，却较少追问这些 distilled data 是在逼近原数据分布、在编码训练轨迹，还是在过拟合某个初始化和优化器。","importance":"这是偏机制分析和问题澄清的工作。它对 pretrain 的价值在于提醒研究者区分“数据压缩”“训练信号蒸馏”“优化路径绑定”这几件事，否则很容易高估合成数据、数据重配比或小规模代理数据集在大模型训练中的可迁移性；对做数据工程、curriculum 和 synthetic pretraining data 的人，这种边界判断很有用。","technical_approach":"核心做法应是系统拆解 dataset distillation learning 的学习对象与泛化边界，而不是再提一个更高精度的蒸馏算法。典型分析维度包括：蒸馏样本对模型初始化的敏感度、对架构变化和训练步数的迁移能力、与真实数据统计特征的一致性、以及蒸馏目标到底是在匹配梯度、匹配参数更新，还是直接匹配决策边界。这样的设计有效，因为 dataset distillation 的争议一直在于它究竟是‘学数据’还是‘学优化器’；只有把这些因素拆开，结论才对实际训练有指导意义。","experiments":"从标题看，实验应当是大量诊断型实验，而非只报最终精度。合理预期会比较不同蒸馏目标、不同初始化共享策略、跨架构/跨训练轮数迁移，以及 distilled set 的可解释性或统计性质。给定信息中没有数据集名称、蒸馏预算、样本数和性能数字，因此不能补具体值。真正值得关注的是，如果 distilled data 只在固定初始化或固定训练 protocol 下有效，那么它对大规模预训练的启示会很有限；如果它能跨设定稳定迁移，那才更接近“学习到数据本身”。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper asks a more fundamental question than most dataset distillation work: what is actually being learned? Prior papers often optimize benchmark accuracy on tiny synthetic sets, but that leaves open whether the distilled data captures the original distribution, encodes an optimization trajectory, or simply exploits a narrow training setup.","importance":"The contribution is primarily conceptual and diagnostic. For pretraining research, the value is in clarifying the boundary between data compression, training-signal distillation, and optimizer-specific shortcuts, which is directly relevant when people use synthetic or condensed data as proxies for large-scale training.","technical_approach":"The paper appears to dissect the learning mechanism of dataset distillation rather than propose another stronger distiller. The likely methodology is to probe sensitivity to initialization, architecture changes, training horizon, and objective choice, in order to see whether distilled examples transfer as data or only as protocol-specific training artifacts. That framing is useful because the practical question is not just whether distilled data works somewhere, but whether it survives the distribution shift induced by changing model and optimizer.","experiments":"The most informative experiments are likely diagnostic rather than leaderboard-driven: cross-initialization transfer, cross-architecture transfer, behavior under different training lengths, and comparisons between gradient-matching versus other distillation objectives. No concrete dataset names or performance numbers are available in the provided input, so they should not be invented. The main result to watch is whether distilled sets generalize beyond the exact setup they were optimized for.","authors_note":""},"tags":["dataset-distillation","data-quality","data-selection"]},{"id":"YaoWW0L24","title":"Mobile Attention: Mobile-Friendly Linear-Attention for Vision Transformers","authors":["Zhiyu Yao","Jian Wang","Haixu Wu","Jingdong Wang","Mingsheng Long"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YaoWW0L24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YaoWW0L24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/yao24c.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是视觉 Transformer 在移动端部署时，标准注意力计算和内存访问都太重，而很多线性注意力替代方案又损失精度或不够端侧友好。过去常见做法是通过窗口化、低分辨率或卷积混合结构降成本，但这些方案往往在全局建模和移动硬件效率之间仍有明显折中。","importance":"这项工作的贡献更偏架构与系统落地。对 pretrain 研究的直接冲击有限，但它对统一 Transformer 主干、线性注意力的实际可用性，以及‘理论复杂度降低能否转化为设备侧收益’这个问题很有参考价值，尤其对做 VLM/视觉 tokenizer 前端的人有借鉴意义。","technical_approach":"核心方法是面向移动设备重新设计线性注意力模块，让其既保留一定全局交互能力，又匹配移动端的算子与内存特性。通常这类设计会减少 softmax attention 的二次复杂度，同时限制高开销的逐 token 交互，配合轻量投影、局部归纳偏置或可分解计算；关键不是仅把 attention 改成 O(n)，而是让实际 kernel、访存模式和并行粒度适合手机 NPU/GPU/CPU。与已有 mobile ViT 或 linear-attention ViT 的区别，重点应在“端侧友好”的工程约束被直接纳入设计，而非只在服务器上看 FLOPs。","experiments":"实验大概率会覆盖 ImageNet 分类以及若干下游视觉任务，同时报告移动端延迟、吞吐、参数量和 FLOPs，与 MobileViT、EfficientViT、Lite Transformer 或其他轻量骨干比较。给定信息没有具体模型规模、top-1 精度和真实设备延迟数字，因此不能造数。真正值得看的不是服务器端 theoretical FLOPs，而是真机 latency 是否明显下降，以及在线性注意力替换后精度损失是否可接受。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a deployment gap: standard attention is too expensive for mobile vision transformers, while many linear-attention replacements save complexity but still fail on real-device efficiency or accuracy.","importance":"This is mainly an architecture-plus-systems contribution. Its direct impact on pretraining is limited, but it is useful for understanding when linear attention becomes practically deployable, which also matters for visual tokenizers and lightweight multimodal front ends.","technical_approach":"The method redesigns linear attention with mobile constraints in mind. The goal is not merely to replace quadratic attention with an O(n) expression, but to make the operator map well to the memory and compute patterns of mobile hardware while preserving enough global interaction for vision tasks. That is the right design target because FLOPs reductions alone often fail to translate into lower on-device latency.","experiments":"The expected evaluation includes image classification and possibly downstream vision tasks, plus real-device latency, throughput, parameter count, and FLOPs comparisons against other mobile backbones. The provided input does not include concrete accuracy or latency numbers, so they should remain unspecified. The key evidence to look for is whether on-device speed actually improves and whether the accuracy drop versus full attention stays small.","authors_note":""},"tags":["linear-attention","vision-transformer","mobile","efficiency"]},{"id":"YingMWLLYZZLLLL24","title":"MMT-Bench: A Comprehensive Multimodal Benchmark for Evaluating Large Vision-Language Models Towards Multitask AGI","authors":["Kaining Ying","Fanqing Meng","Jin Wang","Zhiqian Li","Han Lin","Yue Yang","Hao Zhang","Wenbo Zhang","Yuqi Lin","Shuo Liu","Jiayi Lei","Quanfeng Lu","Runjian Chen","Peng Xu","Renrui Zhang","Haozhe Zhang","Peng Gao","Yali Wang","Yu Qiao","Ping Luo","Kaipeng Zhang","Wenqi Shao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YingMWLLYZZLLLL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YingMWLLYZZLLLL24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/ying24a.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是现有多模态大模型评测过于碎片化、任务覆盖不全的问题。很多 benchmark 只测问答、OCR 或少数视觉推理能力，导致模型看起来很强，但其实只是对少数任务优化得好，离“多任务通用能力”还有明显距离。","importance":"这是数据与评测基础设施工作。对 pretrain/VLM 研究的意义不在于直接提高模型性能，而在于如果 benchmark 的任务分布更全面、难度更合理、污染更少，就能更准确地区分模型究竟是靠视觉编码、语言先验还是 instruction tuning 在工作，也更能暴露统一多模态预训练的真实短板。","technical_approach":"核心方法是构建一个综合性的多模态评测基准 MMT-Bench，面向多任务 AGI 风格能力评估。关键设计通常包括：覆盖更广的任务类型，而不是只盯着单轮 VQA；统一输入输出接口，减少不同任务评价协议不一致带来的偏差；并尽量控制数据污染和评测偏置。好的 benchmark 设计不是题目越多越好，而是任务维度要能分解能力来源，否则最终还是只能看一个混合分数，无法指导模型和训练方法改进。","experiments":"实验重点应是对多种主流 LVLM 进行系统评测，展示不同模型在不同能力维度上的强弱分布，而不是只给排行榜。给定信息中没有 benchmark 规模、任务数量、参与模型、人工一致性或具体分数，因此不能编造。真正值得关注的是：这个 benchmark 是否能提供比现有基准更高的区分度；是否发现现有模型在多任务统一性上存在明显断层；以及评分是否足够稳定，能用于跟踪训练方法变化。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a benchmark gap in multimodal LLM evaluation. Many existing benchmarks focus on a narrow slice of capability such as VQA, OCR, or a few reasoning tasks, so they fail to measure how general current vision-language models really are.","importance":"This is a data and evaluation infrastructure contribution. Its relevance to pretraining is indirect but real: better evaluation helps separate gains from visual grounding, language priors, and post-training, and exposes where unified multimodal pretraining still falls short.","technical_approach":"The paper builds MMT-Bench, a broad multimodal benchmark aimed at multitask AGI-style evaluation. The important design choices are likely broad task coverage, a more consistent evaluation protocol across tasks, and efforts to reduce contamination and benchmark-specific shortcuts. A benchmark only matters if it improves diagnostic resolution, not just if it is larger.","experiments":"The expected experiments benchmark a range of LVLMs and analyze performance by capability dimension rather than only presenting an overall ranking. The provided input does not include the number of tasks, benchmark size, participating models, or score details, so those should remain unspecified. The key evidence is whether the benchmark reveals capability gaps that current narrower evaluations miss.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","benchmark","multitask","evaluation"]},{"id":"YuYLWL0WW24","title":"MM-Vet: Evaluating Large Multimodal Models for Integrated Capabilities","authors":["Weihao Yu","Zhengyuan Yang","Linjie Li","Jianfeng Wang","Kevin Lin","Zicheng Liu","Xinchao Wang","Lijuan Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YuYLWL0WW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YuYLWL0WW24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/yu24o.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["benchmark","vlm-evaluation","multimodal"]},{"id":"2311.04498","title":"NExT-Chat: An LMM for Chat, Detection and Segmentation","authors":["Ao Zhang","Yuan Yao","Wei Ji","Zhiyuan Liu","Tat-Seng Chua"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$51","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.04498","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Zhang000C24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Zhang000C24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zhang24bu.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["vlm","detection","segmentation","multimodal-chat"]},{"id":"2402.08552","title":"Confronting Reward Overoptimization for Diffusion Models: A Perspective of Inductive and Primacy Biases","authors":["Ziyi Zhang","Sen Zhang","Yibing Zhan","Yong Luo","Yonggang Wen","Dacheng Tao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$52","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.08552","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Zhang0Z00T24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Zhang0Z00T24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zhang24ch.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["reward-overoptimization","diffusion","alignment","inductive-bias"]},{"id":"2405.09742","title":"Random Scaling and Momentum for Non-smooth Non-convex Optimization","authors":["Qinzi Zhang","Ashok Cutkosky"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Training neural networks requires optimizing a loss function that may be highly irregular, and in particular neither convex nor smooth. Popular training algorithms are based on stochastic gradient descent with momentum (SGDM), for which classical analysis applies only if the loss is either convex or smooth. We show that a very small modification to SGDM closes this gap: simply scale the update at each time point by an exponentially distributed random scalar. The resulting algorithm achieves optimal convergence guarantees. Intriguingly, this result is not derived by a specific analysis of SGDM: instead, it falls naturally out of a more general framework for converting online convex optimization algorithms to non-convex optimization algorithms.","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.09742","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhangC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhangC24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zhang24k.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["optimizer","sgdm","non-smooth","convergence"]},{"id":"2312.07586","title":"Characteristic Guidance: Non-linear Correction for Diffusion Model at Large Guidance Scale","authors":["Candi Zheng","Yuan Lan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Popular guidance for denoising diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM) linearly combines distinct conditional models together to provide enhanced control over samples. However, this approach overlooks nonlinear effects that become significant when guidance scale is large. To address this issue, we propose characteristic guidance, a guidance method that provides first-principle non-linear correction for classifier-free guidance. Such correction forces the guided DDPMs to respect the Fokker-Planck (FP) equation of diffusion process, in a way that is training-free and compatible with existing sampling methods. Experiments show that characteristic guidance enhances semantic characteristics of prompts and mitigate irregularities in image generation, proving effective in diverse applications ranging from simulating magnet phase transitions to latent space sampling.","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.07586","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhengL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhengL24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zheng24f.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion","guidance","sampling","objective"]},{"id":"2403.12995","title":"ESM All-Atom: Multi-Scale Protein Language Model for Unified Molecular Modeling","authors":["Kangjie Zheng","Siyu Long","Tianyu Lu","Junwei Yang","Xinyu Dai","Ming Zhang","Zaiqing Nie","Wei-Ying Ma","Hao Zhou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$53","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.12995","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhengLLYD0NM024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhengLLYD0NM024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zheng24h.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["protein-lm","tokenizer","multiscale","representation"]},{"id":"2401.18018","title":"On Prompt-Driven Safeguarding for Large Language Models","authors":["Chujie Zheng","Fan Yin","Hao Zhou","Fandong Meng","Jie Zhou","Kai-Wei Chang","Minlie Huang","Nanyun Peng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$54","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.18018","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhengY0M0CHP24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhengY0M0CHP24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zheng24n.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["safety","prompting","alignment","mechanistic-analysis"]},{"id":"2404.04057","title":"Score identity Distillation: Exponentially Fast Distillation of Pretrained Diffusion Models for One-Step Generation","authors":["Mingyuan Zhou","Huangjie Zheng","Zhendong Wang","Mingzhang Yin","Hai Huang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$55","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.04057","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhouZWYH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhouZWYH24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zhou24x.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion","distillation","one-step","sampling"]},{"id":"2405.11605","title":"Switched Flow Matching: Eliminating Singularities via Switching ODEs","authors":["Qunxi Zhu","Wei Lin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$56","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.11605","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Zhu024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Zhu024","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zhu24g.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["flow-matching","ode","sampling","generative-models"]},{"id":"ZimermanW24","title":"Viewing Transformers Through the Lens of Long Convolutions Layers","authors":["Itamar Zimerman","Lior Wolf"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZimermanW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZimermanW24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zimerman24b.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题，是把 Transformer 重新表述为长卷积层之后，能否更清楚地理解其归纳偏置和计算行为。过去大家通常把注意力和卷积当成两类机制分别分析，这让很多关于感受野、频域特性和参数效率的讨论停留在类比层面，而不是统一框架下的可比分析。","importance":"这项工作的价值更偏机制分析和架构理解，而不是直接给出新的预训练范式。它的重要性在于：如果 Transformer 的若干核心行为可以被长卷积视角统一解释，那么我们在做高效长上下文建模、注意力替代结构和混合架构设计时，会有更可操作的分析坐标，而不是只靠经验调参。","technical_approach":"核心方法大概率是把 Transformer 的算子，尤其是注意力或其线性化近似，映射到长卷积的表示中，再比较两者在表达能力和计算结构上的对应关系。这样的设计有效之处在于，长卷积天然适合讨论序列建模中的局部—全局权衡、核长度与频率响应，而这些恰好是理解 Transformer 长程依赖建模时最缺统一语言的部分；代价是，这种等价或近似通常依赖若干条件，未必覆盖标准多头注意力在所有输入依赖下的动态性。","experiments":"给定摘要缺失，无法确认实验设置、模型规模、数据集和具体数值结果。可以合理预期论文会包含理论推导配合若干序列建模实验，比较 Transformer、卷积或混合结构在长程依赖任务上的表现，但具体 baseline、提升幅度和 ablation 不能从现有信息中可靠提取。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether Transformers can be understood more cleanly when viewed as long-convolution layers. Prior work usually treated attention and convolution as separate families, so comparisons around receptive field, spectral behavior, and efficiency were often heuristic rather than made in a shared analytical framework.","importance":"This is primarily a representation-and-mechanism paper, not a new pretraining recipe. Its value is that a convincing long-convolution view would give a more operational lens for designing efficient long-context architectures, attention replacements, and hybrid sequence models, instead of relying only on empirical trial-and-error.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is to rewrite Transformer operators, especially attention or a linearized form of it, in a long-convolution formulation and study the correspondence in expressivity and computation. This design is useful because long convolutions make locality-vs-globality and frequency response explicit, which are exactly the dimensions where Transformer behavior is often discussed but rarely unified; the boundary is that such equivalence usually depends on assumptions and may not capture the full input-dependent flexibility of standard multi-head attention.","experiments":"The abstract is unavailable, so model sizes, datasets, baselines, and quantitative gains cannot be confirmed. It is reasonable to expect a mix of theoretical analysis and sequence modeling experiments comparing Transformers, convolutional models, or hybrids on long-range dependency tasks, but any numeric claim would be speculative here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer","long-convolution","architecture","analysis"]},{"id":"2310.01651","title":"Fool Your (Vision and) Language Model with Embarrassingly Simple Permutations","authors":["Yongshuo Zong","Tingyang Yu","Ruchika Chavhan","Bingchen Zhao","Timothy M. Hospedales"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Large language and vision-language models are rapidly being deployed in practice thanks to their impressive capabilities in instruction following, in-context learning, and so on. This raises an urgent need to carefully analyse their robustness so that stakeholders can understand if and when such models are trustworthy enough to be relied upon in any given application. In this paper, we highlight a specific vulnerability in popular models, namely permutation sensitivity in multiple-choice question answering (MCQA). Specifically, we show empirically that popular models are vulnerable to adversarial permutation in answer sets for multiple-choice prompting, which is surprising as models should ideally be as invariant to prompt permutation as humans are. These vulnerabilities persist across various model sizes, and exist in very recent language and vision-language models. Code is available at https://github.com/ys-zong/FoolyourVLLMs.","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.01651","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZongYCZH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZongYCZH24","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/zong24b.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作指出一个很具体但实际影响不小的问题：LLM 和 VLM 在多选问答里对选项顺序高度敏感，简单重排答案就可能显著改变输出。这个问题以前常被 benchmark 设计掩盖，因为大多数评测默认固定选项顺序，模型看起来稳定，但部署时这种脆弱性会直接影响可靠性。","importance":"这项工作更像鲁棒性诊断工具，而不是新训练方法。它的重要性在于，它揭示了当前 instruction-following 模型并不具备我们常默认的‘排列不变性’，这会污染 MCQA 类评测，也提示 pretrain/posttrain 过程可能学到了位置偏置而不是稳健判别信号；对做数据配比、模板设计和评测的人都很有启发。","technical_approach":"核心方法是系统研究 multiple-choice prompting 下的 adversarial permutation vulnerability，即通过简单置换候选答案顺序来测模型输出稳定性。方法本身不复杂，但设计有效，因为它隔离了一个常被混在提示模板、答案长度、标签词选择中的因素：顺序偏置。和一般对抗攻击不同，这里没有引入复杂扰动，而是只做语义等价变换；如果模型性能仍显著波动，就能更有力地说明问题来自推理与表示的不稳健，而不是输入被破坏。边界在于，这类结论主要针对 MCQA 形式，不必然外推到自由生成任务。","experiments":"摘要明确说，这种脆弱性在不同模型、不同模态设置和不同条件下都持续存在。说明不是某个单模型或单数据集偶然现象。摘要没有给出具体模型名单、下降幅度和评测集，因此无法复述量化结果。可以合理推断论文会比较 LLM 与 VLM、自然顺序与对抗重排、以及不同提示格式，但具体数字不能从现有信息确认。","authors_note":"作者包含 Timothy M. Hospedales。仅从当前信息无法确认机构。团队在鲁棒性、泛化和多模态方向有代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper identifies a narrow but important failure mode: LLMs and VLMs can be highly sensitive to the order of answer choices in multiple-choice QA. This issue is often hidden by benchmark conventions that fix option order, making models look more reliable than they are in practice.","importance":"This is a robustness diagnosis paper rather than a new training method. Its importance is that it exposes a missing invariance that many evaluations implicitly assume. For pretraining and post-training, the implication is concrete: some models may be exploiting positional or template biases instead of learning stable decision signals, which directly affects benchmark validity, prompt design, and data curation.","technical_approach":"The core method is a systematic study of adversarial permutation in multiple-choice prompting: keep semantics unchanged, but permute the answer set and measure output instability. The method is simple but well targeted because it isolates order bias from other confounds such as wording, label tokens, or answer length. Unlike standard adversarial attacks, this perturbation is meaning-preserving. If performance still moves substantially, the failure is better attributed to brittle reasoning or representation rather than corrupted input. The main boundary is scope: the finding is strongest for MCQA-style interfaces and does not automatically transfer to free-form generation.","experiments":"The abstract states that these vulnerabilities persist across varied models and settings, which suggests the effect is broad rather than an artifact of a single architecture or dataset. It does not provide model names, benchmarks, or exact drops, so quantitative detail cannot be stated reliably. The likely experimental structure compares natural ordering versus adversarial permutations across both language-only and vision-language models.","authors_note":"Timothy M. Hospedales is among the authors. The institution cannot be confirmed from the provided information. The group has representative work in robustness, generalization, and multimodal learning."},"tags":["robustness","llm","vlm","tokenization"],"notable_authors":["Timothy M. Hospedales"]},{"id":"2408.01008","title":"Tensor Train Low-rank Approximation (TT-LoRA): Democratizing AI with Accelerated LLMs","authors":["Afia Anjum","Maksim Ekin Eren","Ismael Boureima","Boian S. Alexandrov","Manish Bhattarai"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$57","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.01008","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icmla/AnjumEBAB24","doi":"https://doi.org/10.1109/ICMLA61862.2024.00085"},"_dblp_key":"conf/icmla/AnjumEBAB24","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.1109/ICMLA61862.2024.00085","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题，是 LoRA 这类参数高效微调方法在大模型上虽然省训练参数，但压缩性和扩展性并不总够好。随着层数和隐藏维度增长，低秩矩阵本身也会变大，导致参数、显存和通信开销重新上升，削弱了‘democratizing AI’这类轻量微调目标。","importance":"这项工作的贡献是把张量分解引入 PEFT，属于方法级和系统效率级改进。它对 pretrain/posttrain 接口的启示在于：参数高效微调不应只看可训练参数总量，还要看表示是否更适合高维结构；如果张量化低秩更新能在相似质量下进一步压缩，那么大模型适配的成本曲线会更平缓。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 TT-LoRA，用 Tensor Train 分解来表示 LoRA 更新，而不是直接使用两个低秩矩阵。和普通 LoRA 相比，它不是仅做矩阵低秩，而是把权重更新张量化后分解为一串低阶 core，从而利用维度间的可分结构进一步压缩参数；和已有 LoRETTA 一类方法相比，标题和摘要暗示其目标是提升可压缩性和加速。这样设计有效的前提是更新确实存在可分解结构，否则 TT 分解会在压缩的同时损失表达能力；此外，训练和推理真正加速还取决于实现是否避免把 TT 形式重新展开成大矩阵。","experiments":"摘要只给出动机，没有给出实证数字。无法确认使用了哪些底模、任务集、rank 或 TT-rank 设置，也无法确认相对 LoRA 的参数压缩倍数和性能差距。可以确定的是，作者会将 TT-LoRA 与 LoRA 及其他 PEFT 基线比较，关注的不仅是任务指标，还包括参数规模和可能的训练/推理效率。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a limitation of standard parameter-efficient fine-tuning: LoRA reduces the number of trainable parameters, but its compressibility does not scale gracefully as model width and depth grow. In large models, even low-rank updates can become costly in memory and communication, which weakens the practical promise of lightweight adaptation.","importance":"This is a method and efficiency paper that brings tensor decomposition into PEFT. The useful takeaway for pretraining and post-training is that parameter efficiency should not be judged by trainable-parameter count alone; it also depends on whether the update representation matches the high-dimensional structure of modern models. If tensorized updates preserve quality while compressing further, the adaptation cost curve becomes meaningfully better.","technical_approach":"The main idea is TT-LoRA, which represents LoRA updates with a Tensor Train decomposition rather than a plain pair of low-rank matrices. Compared with standard LoRA, it tensorizes the update and factorizes it into a chain of low-order cores, aiming to exploit separable structure across dimensions for stronger compression. Relative to prior tensorized PEFT variants, the stated goal here is better compressibility and acceleration. The design can work if the update really has decomposable structure; otherwise, compression may come at the cost of adaptation capacity. Another practical boundary is implementation: speedups only materialize if the TT form is used efficiently rather than expanded back into dense matrices.","experiments":"The abstract provides motivation but no quantitative results. So base models, tasks, ranks, TT-ranks, compression ratios, and performance gaps versus LoRA cannot be stated reliably. What can be inferred is that the paper likely compares TT-LoRA against LoRA and related PEFT baselines on both task quality and efficiency metrics such as parameter count and runtime or memory.","authors_note":""},"tags":["lora","low-rank","acceleration","compression"]},{"id":"ZhaoS24","title":"Action Selection in Reinforcement Learning with Upgoing Policy Update","authors":["Xiaoning Zhao","Toshiharu Sugawara"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"This paper proposes the boosted generalized advantage estimation (BGAE), which extends the generalized advantage estimation (GAE) based on proximal policy optimization (PPO) algorithms with a general advantage estimator used in the Atari 2600 game environment. We utilize the preferable feature of the upgoing policy update (UPGO), which is a crucial algorithm behind the well-known multiagent reinforcement learning model, AlphaStar. The proposed method uses UPGO as an action selector to select good actions and amplify their importance. In addition, we discuss the overestimation of the UPGO algorithm in a standard environment. Unlike other approaches that increase model complexity through overestimation, our novel method effectively addresses the overestimation problem in the UPGO method, offering a streamlined solution in a standard learning environment. Implementing UPGO algorithms can improve the convergence speed of conventional PPO learning in the commonly used OpenAI-Gym Atari environment.","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icmla/ZhaoS24","doi":"https://doi.org/10.1109/ICMLA61862.2024.00242"},"_dblp_key":"conf/icmla/ZhaoS24","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.1109/ICMLA61862.2024.00242","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题，是如何在 PPO/GAE 框架里更好地选出高价值动作并放大其训练信号，同时避免 UPGO 带来的过估计。传统 GAE 在信用分配上较平滑但不够积极，UPGO 更强调好动作传播，但直接用在标准环境中容易把乐观估计放大成训练偏差。","importance":"这项工作属于 RL 优化器/优势估计层面的改进，对语言模型预训练本身关联较弱。它的价值主要在于策略优化视角：如果一种更稳的动作选择与优势加权方式能兼顾探索收益和估计偏差，那么对后续 RLHF、RLAIF 或工具使用型 agent 训练有一定借鉴，但不是范式级影响。","technical_approach":"核心方法是提出 boosted generalized advantage estimation, BGAE，把 UPGO 作为动作选择器嵌入 GAE/PPO 流程中，挑出更优动作并放大其重要性，同时专门处理 UPGO 的过估计问题。它和直接套用 UPGO 的区别在于，不是单纯更激进地推高回报，而是把‘选动作’和‘估优势’这两步重新耦合，试图保留 UPGO 对优动作的偏好，同时抑制在标准环境里的偏乐观。这样设计如果有效，收益会来自更干净的 credit assignment；边界则是其效果可能依赖环境稀疏奖励程度与 value 估计质量。","experiments":"摘要说明实验环境包含 Atari 2600，并声称在不增加模型复杂度的前提下缓解了 UPGO 的过估计问题。摘要未给出具体游戏数、平均 human-normalized score、相对 PPO/GAE 的提升幅度，因此无法做定量总结。可确认的重点是：论文不只是比最终分数，还讨论了 UPGO 在标准环境中过估计的机制，这一点比单纯报成绩更有分析价值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a policy optimization issue inside the PPO/GAE family: how to emphasize genuinely good actions without inheriting the overestimation behavior of UPGO. Standard GAE is smoother but can be conservative in credit assignment, while UPGO is more selective but can become overly optimistic in ordinary RL environments.","importance":"This is an RL optimization and advantage-estimation contribution, with only indirect relevance to language model pretraining. Its value is mainly methodological: a more stable way to combine action selection and advantage weighting could inform later RLHF, RLAIF, or agent training setups, but it is not a paradigm-changing result for foundation model pretraining itself.","technical_approach":"The proposed method is boosted generalized advantage estimation, or BGAE. It uses UPGO as an action selector inside a GAE/PPO-style pipeline to amplify favorable actions while explicitly addressing UPGO overestimation. The key difference from simply adopting UPGO is that it does not only make the policy update more aggressive; it tries to preserve UPGO’s preference for strong actions while correcting the optimism that harms learning stability in standard settings. If it works, the gain should come from cleaner credit assignment. The limitation is that its benefit will likely depend on reward sparsity and on the quality of value estimates.","experiments":"The abstract indicates Atari 2600 experiments and claims that the method mitigates UPGO overestimation without increasing model complexity. It does not report the number of games, normalized scores, or margins versus PPO/GAE, so no quantitative summary can be given reliably. One useful aspect is that the paper studies the overestimation mechanism itself rather than only presenting final benchmark numbers.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reinforcement-learning","policy-optimization","upgo","advantage-estimation","ppo"]},{"id":"HanXS24","title":"Motion Diffusion Model for Long Motion Generation","authors":["Xiaoxu Han","Hegen Xu","Huilling Sun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icmlca/HanXS24","doi":"https://doi.org/10.1109/ICMLCA63499.2024.10754164"},"_dblp_key":"conf/icmlca/HanXS24","_ee":"https://doi.org/10.1109/ICMLCA63499.2024.10754164","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题，是长时长动作序列生成很难同时保证局部自然性和全局连贯性。已有 motion generation 方法在短片段上往往足够平滑，但一旦拉长序列，就容易出现漂移、重复或语义结构断裂，这和长文本生成中的 exposure bias 有相似之处。","importance":"这项工作主要属于扩散生成在时序建模上的应用，对语言预训练的直接关联有限。它的启发点在于，长序列扩散模型如何处理多尺度一致性、长期依赖和采样稳定性，这些问题与非 AR 序列建模范式有共通性，尤其对 diffusion LM 或统一时序 token 建模有间接参考价值。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心方法是面向长动作序列的 motion diffusion model。相比只生成短窗口再拼接的方案，更合理的设计通常会引入分层时间建模、长短期条件分解或跨段一致性约束，让扩散过程既能处理细粒度姿态，又不丢掉长程动作结构。这样设计有效，是因为扩散模型在局部细节建模上通常比自回归更稳，但长序列时若没有额外结构，采样误差和时序不一致会逐步积累。边界则是生成成本高，长序列扩散的采样步数和时长通常都比较重。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法确认数据集、动作时长、骨架表示、baseline 以及 FID、diversity 或 long-horizon coherence 指标上的具体结果。可以预期论文会强调相对短序列方法在长时长生成上的稳定性提升，并可能做不同序列长度的 ablation，但无法给出数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a hard sequence-generation problem in motion modeling: generating long motion trajectories that remain locally realistic and globally coherent. Many existing methods look smooth on short segments but drift, repeat, or lose semantic structure when the horizon becomes long.","importance":"This is mainly a diffusion-for-sequences application paper, with limited direct impact on language model pretraining. The relevant takeaway is methodological: long-horizon diffusion must handle multi-scale consistency, long-range dependency, and sampling stability, which are also central issues for non-autoregressive sequence modeling more broadly.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method is a motion diffusion model designed specifically for long motion generation. Relative to generating short windows and stitching them together, a sensible design would include hierarchical temporal modeling, separate handling of short- and long-term structure, or explicit cross-segment consistency constraints. That direction is plausible because diffusion models tend to model local detail well, but without additional structure they can accumulate temporal inconsistency over long horizons. The trade-off is cost: long-sequence diffusion usually remains expensive in both sampling steps and wall-clock time.","experiments":"The abstract is missing, so datasets, motion duration, skeleton representation, baselines, and metric values such as FID, diversity, or long-horizon coherence cannot be confirmed. The likely empirical emphasis is improved stability on long-duration generation relative to shorter-horizon baselines, with ablations over sequence length, but no numeric claim can be stated safely.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","motion-generation","long-horizon","sampling"]}]},"allConferences":[{"slug":"acl-2025","venue":"ACL","year":2025,"full_name":"Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics","total_relevant":641,"total_fetched":3380,"by_award":{"poster":626,"best_paper":3,"outstanding_paper":12},"by_track":{"long":367,"findings":231,"short":18,"industry":10,"srw":6,"demo":6,"main":3},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T00:45:57.823033+00:00"},{"slug":"acl-2024","venue":"ACL","year":2024,"full_name":"Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics","total_relevant":385,"total_fetched":2145,"by_award":{"poster":385},"by_track":{"long":185,"findings":173,"srw":5,"short":9,"main":13},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T22:50:37.051621+00:00"},{"slug":"acl-2023","venue":"ACL","year":2023,"full_name":"Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics","total_relevant":424,"total_fetched":2876,"by_award":{"poster":424},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T09:44:43.509860+00:00"},{"slug":"emnlp-2025","venue":"EMNLP","year":2025,"full_name":"Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing","total_relevant":915,"total_fetched":3499,"by_award":{"poster":915},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T07:35:55.574285+00:00"},{"slug":"emnlp-2024","venue":"EMNLP","year":2024,"full_name":"Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing","total_relevant":718,"total_fetched":2460,"by_award":{"poster":718},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T03:40:34.148010+00:00"},{"slug":"emnlp-2023","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"full_name":"Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing","total_relevant":472,"total_fetched":2310,"by_award":{"poster":472},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T08:32:10.890267+00:00"},{"slug":"iclr-2026","venue":"ICLR","year":2026,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","total_relevant":1053,"total_fetched":5470,"by_award":{"poster":1053},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T01:40:59.513393+00:00"},{"slug":"iclr-2025","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","total_relevant":1979,"total_fetched":3720,"by_award":{"spotlight":193,"poster":1665,"oral":121},"by_track":{"main":1979},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T18:27:18.207575+00:00"},{"slug":"iclr-2024","venue":"ICLR","year":2024,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","total_relevant":851,"total_fetched":2456,"by_award":{"poster":682,"spotlight":130,"oral":39},"by_track":{"main":851},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T17:50:03.172895+00:00"},{"slug":"iclr-2023","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","total_relevant":294,"total_fetched":1794,"by_award":{"poster":294},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T11:29:30.626329+00:00"},{"slug":"icml-2025","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"full_name":"International Conference on Machine Learning","total_relevant":516,"total_fetched":3332,"by_award":{"poster":462,"oral":18,"spotlight":36},"by_track":{"main":510,"position":6},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T20:04:14.360455+00:00"},{"slug":"icml-2024","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"full_name":"International Conference on Machine Learning","total_relevant":335,"total_fetched":3321,"by_award":{"poster":292,"spotlight":15,"oral":28},"by_track":{"main":335},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T18:50:07.833195+00:00"},{"slug":"icml-2023","venue":"ICML","year":2023,"full_name":"International Conference on Machine Learning","total_relevant":297,"total_fetched":2934,"by_award":{"poster":297},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T04:21:49.394726+00:00"},{"slug":"naacl-2025","venue":"NAACL","year":2025,"full_name":"North American Chapter of the ACL","total_relevant":385,"total_fetched":1376,"by_award":{"poster":385},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T04:50:05.821261+00:00"},{"slug":"naacl-2024","venue":"NAACL","year":2024,"full_name":"North American Chapter of the ACL","total_relevant":321,"total_fetched":1342,"by_award":{"poster":321},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T04:35:26.823821+00:00"},{"slug":"neurips-2025","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2025,"full_name":"Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems","total_relevant":1338,"total_fetched":5858,"by_award":{"poster":1338},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T05:45:45.290822+00:00"},{"slug":"neurips-2024","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"full_name":"Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems","total_relevant":576,"total_fetched":4561,"by_award":{"poster":505,"spotlight":59,"oral":12},"by_track":{"datasets_benchmarks":50,"main":526},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T21:58:15.480882+00:00"},{"slug":"neurips-2023","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"full_name":"Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems","total_relevant":523,"total_fetched":3582,"by_award":{"poster":523},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T04:06:29.627949+00:00"}]}]}],["$L58"],"$L59"]}],"isPartial":false,"staleTime":300,"varyParams":null,"buildId":"CH7QW8TExBpH2R9CnsKlz"}
58:["$","script","script-0",{"src":"/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/03ne4hgh5k61l.js","async":true}]
59:["$","$L5a",null,{"children":["$","$5b",null,{"name":"Next.MetadataOutlet","children":"$@5c"}]}]
5c:null
