1:"$Sreact.fragment"
2:I[44048,["/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0u8r51s9xyykl.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0d3shmwh5_nmn.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0eajwm.uf2h.~.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/03ne4hgh5k61l.js"],"ConferenceView"]
12b:I[97367,["/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0u8r51s9xyykl.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0d3shmwh5_nmn.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0eajwm.uf2h.~.js"],"OutletBoundary"]
12c:"$Sreact.suspense"
3:T4a2,Scaling the capacity of language models has consistently proven to be a reliable approach for improving performance and unlocking new capabilities. Capacity can be primarily defined by two dimensions: the number of model parameters and the compute per example. While scaling typically involves increasing both, the precise interplay between these factors and their combined contribution to overall capacity remains not fully understood. We explore this relationship in the context of sparse Mixture-of-Experts (MoEs), which allow scaling the number of parameters without proportionally increasing the FLOPs per example. We investigate how varying the sparsity level, i.e., the fraction of inactive parameters, impacts model's performance during pretraining and downstream few-shot evaluation. We find that under different constraints (e.g., parameter size and total training compute), there is an optimal level of sparsity that improves both training efficiency and model performance. These results provide a better understanding of the impact of sparsity in scaling laws for MoEs and complement existing works in this area, offering insights for designing more efficient architectures.4:T533,Selecting a layer normalization (LN) strategy that stabilizes training and speeds convergence in Transformers remains difficult, even for today's large language models (LLM). We present a comprehensive analytical foundation for understanding how different LN strategies influence training dynamics in large-scale Transformers. Until recently, Pre-LN and Post-LN have long dominated practices despite their limitations in large-scale training. However, several open-source models have recently begun silently adopting a third strategy without much explanation. This strategy places normalization layer peripherally around sublayers, a design we term Peri-LN. While Peri-LN has demonstrated promising performance, its precise mechanisms and benefits remain almost unexplored. Our in-depth analysis delineates the distinct behaviors of LN strategies, showing how each placement shapes activation variance and gradient propagation. To validate our theoretical insight, we conduct extensive experiments on Transformers up to $3.2$B parameters, showing that Peri-LN consistently achieves more balanced variance growth, steadier gradient flow, and convergence stability. Our results suggest that Peri-LN warrants broader consideration for large-scale Transformer architectures, providing renewed insights into the optimal placement of LN.5:T48e,In recent years, masked diffusion models (MDMs) have emerged as a promising alternative approach for generative modeling over discrete domains. Compared to autoregressive models (ARMs), MDMs trade off complexity at training time with flexibility at inference time. At training time, they must learn to solve an exponentially large number of infilling problems, but at inference time, they can decode tokens in essentially arbitrary order. In this work, we closely examine these two competing effects. On the training front, we theoretically and empirically demonstrate that MDMs indeed train on computationally intractable subproblems compared to their autoregressive counterparts. On the inference front, we show that a suitable strategy for adaptively choosing the token decoding order significantly enhances the capabilities of MDMs, allowing them to sidestep hard subproblems. On logic puzzles like Sudoku, we show that adaptive inference can boost solving accuracy in pretrained MDMs from $<7$% to $\approx 90$%, even outperforming ARMs with $7\times$ as many parameters and that were explicitly trained via teacher forcing to learn the right order of decoding.6:T414,While state-of-the-art language models achieve impressive results through next-token prediction, they have inherent limitations such as the inability to revise already generated tokens. This has prompted exploration of alternative approaches such as discrete diffusion. However, masked diffusion, which has emerged as a popular choice due to its simplicity and effectiveness, reintroduces this inability to revise words. To overcome this, we generalize masked diffusion, deriving a new family of general interpolating discrete diffusion (GIDD) which offers greater flexibility in the design of the noising processes. Leveraging a novel diffusion ELBO, we achieve compute-matched state-of-the-art performance in diffusion language modeling. Exploiting GIDD's flexibility, we explore a hybrid approach combining masking and uniform noise, leading to improved sample quality and unlocking the ability for the model to correct its own mistakes, an area where autoregressive models notoriously have struggled. Code: https://github.com/dvruette/gidd/7:T443,Uniform-state discrete diffusion models hold the promise of fast text generation due to their inherent ability to self-correct. However, they are typically outperformed by autoregressive models and masked diffusion models. In this work, we narrow this performance gap by leveraging a key insight: Uniform-state diffusion processes naturally emerge from an underlying Gaussian diffusion. Our method, Duo, transfers powerful techniques from Gaussian diffusion to improve both training and sampling. First, we introduce a curriculum learning strategy guided by the Gaussian process, doubling training speed by reducing variance. Models trained with curriculum learning surpass autoregressive models in zero-shot perplexity on 3 of 7 benchmarks. Second, we present Discrete Consistency Distillation, which adapts consistency distillation from the continuous to the discrete setting. This algorithm unlocks few-step generation in diffusion language models by accelerating sampling by two orders of magnitude. We provide the code and model checkpoints on the project page: https://s-sahoo.com/duo.8:T5db,Language model pretraining involves training on extensive corpora, where data quality plays a pivotal role. In this work, we aim to directly estimate the contribution of data during pretraining and select pretraining data in an efficient manner. Specifically, we draw inspiration from recent findings showing that compression efficiency (i.e., the normalized loss) of diverse models on certain text correlates strongly with their downstream performance, when the text domain aligns with the downstream benchmarks(Huang et al., 2024). Building on this observation, we hypothesize that data on which model losses are predictive of downstream abilities also contribute effectively to learning, which shares similar intuition with Thrush et al.(2024). To leverage this insight, we introduce predictive data selection (PreSelect), a lightweight and efficient data selection method that requires training and deploying only a fastText-based scorer. Through comprehensive experiments with 1B and 3B parameter models, we demonstrate that models trained on 30B tokens selected with PreSelect surpass the performance of the vanilla baseline trained on 300B tokens, achieving a 10x reduction in compute requirements. Furthermore, PreSelect significantly outperforms other competitive data selection baselines, such as DCLM and FineWeb-Edu on a scale of 3B models trained on 100B tokens. We open-source our trained data selection scorer along with the curated datasets at https://github.com/hkust-nlp/PreSelect.9:T530,Modern machine learning pipelines are increasingly combining and mixing data from diverse and disparate sources, e.g., pre-training large language models. Yet, finding the optimal data mixture is a challenging and open problem. We formalize this data mixing problem as a bi-level objective: the best mixture is the one that would lead to the best model for a downstream objective. Unfortunately, this objective is generally intractable. In this paper, we make the observation that the bi-level data mixing objective becomes convex as our model class becomes larger. We develop and study a gradient-based approach for optimizing this convex objective, which we call MixMin, and test it on language modeling and chemistry tasks. MixMin was the only method that uniformly improved the data mixture in all our experiments. With MixMin, we improved the data mixture using less than 0.2% additional compute for a pythia-410M model trained on 8.2B tokens, resulting between 1-5% relative improvement to negative log likelihood on PIQA, ARC Easy, SciQ, and OpenWebMath. Crucially, we found that MixMin mixtures for smaller models improved training of larger models, suggesting that MixMin mixtures may be scale-invariant. When mixing bioassay data to train an XGBoost model, we saw improvements to average precision scores of 0.03-0.15.a:T49c,Inspired by the impressive capabilities of GPT-4o, there is growing interest in enabling speech language models (SLMs) to engage in natural, fluid spoken interactions with humans. Recent advancements have led to the development of several SLMs that demonstrate promising results in this area. However, current approaches have yet to fully exploit dual-channel speech data, which inherently captures the structure and dynamics of human conversation. In this work, we systematically explore the use of dual-channel speech data in the context of modern large language models, and introduce a novel generative modeling paradigm, Next-Token-Pair Prediction (NTPP), to enable speaker-independent dual-channel spoken dialogue learning using decoder-only architectures for the first time. We evaluate our approach on standard benchmarks, and empirical results show that our proposed method, NTPP, significantly improves the conversational abilities of SLMs in terms of turn-taking prediction, response coherence, and naturalness. Moreover, compared to existing methods, NTPP achieves substantially lower inference latency, highlighting its practical efficiency for real-time applications.b:T4da,Continual Pre-Training (CPT) has become a popular and effective method to apply strong foundation models to specific downstream tasks. In this work, we explore the learning dynamics throughout the CPT process for large language models. We specifically focus on how general and downstream domain performance evolves at each training step, with domain performance measured via validation losses. We have observed that the CPT loss curve fundamentally characterizes the transition from one curve to another hidden curve, and could be described by decoupling the effects of distribution shift and learning rate annealing. We derive a CPT scaling law that combines the two factors, enabling the prediction of loss at any (continual) training steps and across learning rate schedules (LRS) in CPT. Our formulation presents a comprehensive understanding of several critical factors in CPT, including loss potential, peak learning rate, training steps, replay ratio, etc. Moreover, our approach can be adapted to customize training hyper-parameters to different CPT goals such as balancing general and domain-specific performance. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our scaling law holds across various CPT datasets and training hyper-parameters.c:T4eb,In large language model (LLM) pretraining, data quality is believed to determine model quality. In this paper, we re-examine the notion of"quality"from the perspective of pre- and post-training co-design. Specifically, we explore the possibility that pre-training on more toxic data can lead to better control in post-training, ultimately decreasing a model's output toxicity. First, we use a toy experiment to study how data composition affects the geometry of features in the representation space. Next, through controlled experiments with Olmo-1B models trained on varying ratios of clean and toxic data, we find that the concept of toxicity enjoys a less entangled linear representation as the proportion of toxic data increases. Furthermore, we show that although toxic data increases the generational toxicity of the base model, it also makes the toxicity easier to remove. Evaluations on Toxigen and Real Toxicity Prompts demonstrate that models trained on toxic data achieve a better trade-off between reducing generational toxicity and preserving general capabilities when detoxifying techniques such as inference-time intervention (ITI) are applied. Our findings suggest that, with post-training taken into account, bad data may lead to good models.d:T498,In aligning large language models (LLMs), reward models have played an important role, but are standardly trained as discriminative models and rely only on labeled human preference data. In this paper, we explore methods that train reward models using both unlabeled and labeled data. Building on the generative models in LLMs, we develop a generative reward model that is first trained via large-scale unsupervised learning and then fine-tuned via supervised learning. We also show that by using label smoothing, we are in fact optimizing a regularized pairwise ranking loss. This result, in turn, provides a new view of training reward models, which links generative models and discriminative models under the same class of training objectives. The outcome of these techniques is a foundation reward model, which can be applied to a wide range of tasks with little or no further fine-tuning effort. Extensive experiments show that this model generalizes well across several tasks, including response ranking, reinforcement learning from human feedback, and task adaptation with fine-tuning, achieving significant performance improvements over several strong baseline models.e:T455,LLMs are typically trained to answer user questions or follow instructions similarly to how human experts respond. However, in the standard alignment framework they lack the basic ability of explicit thinking before answering. Thinking is important for complex questions that require reasoning and planning -- but can be applied to any task. We propose a training method for equipping existing LLMs with such thinking abilities for general instruction following without use of additional human data. We achieve this by an iterative search and optimization procedure that explores the space of possible thought generations, allowing the model to learn how to think without direct supervision. For each instruction, the thought candidates are scored using a judge model to evaluate their responses only, and then optimized via preference optimization. We show that this procedure leads to superior performance on AlpacaEval and Arena-Hard, and shows gains from thinking on non-reasoning categories such as marketing, health and general knowledge, in addition to more traditional reasoning&problem-solving tasks.f:T500,Scaling laws are powerful tools to predict the performance of large language models. However, current scaling laws fall short of accounting for inference costs. In this work, we first show that model architecture affects inference latency, where models of the same size can have up to 3.5x difference in latency. To tackle this challenge, we modify the Chinchilla scaling laws to co-optimize the model parameter count, the number of training tokens, and the model architecture. Due to the reason that models of similar training loss exhibit gaps in downstream evaluation, we also propose a novel method to train inference-efficient models based on the revised scaling laws. We perform extensive empirical studies to fit and evaluate our inference-aware scaling laws. We vary model parameters from 80M to 1B, training tokens from 1.6B to 30B, and model shapes, training 63 models. Guided by our inference-efficient scaling law and model selection method, we release the Morph-1B model, which improves inference latency by 1.8x while maintaining accuracy on downstream tasks compared to open-source models, pushing the Pareto frontier of accuracy-latency tradeoff. Notably, our experiments reveal that wider and shallower models can yield efficiency gains while preserving accuracy.10:T498,Transformers consist of diverse building blocks, such as embedding layers, normalization layers, self-attention mechanisms, and point-wise feedforward networks. Thus, understanding the differences and interactions among these blocks is important. In this paper, we uncover a clear Sharpness Disparity across these blocks, which emerges early in training and intriguingly persists throughout the training process. Motivated by this finding, we propose Blockwise Learning Rate (LR), a strategy that tailors the LR to each block's sharpness, accelerating large language model (LLM) pre-training. By integrating Blockwise LR into AdamW, we consistently achieve lower terminal loss and nearly $2\times$ speedup compared to vanilla AdamW. We demonstrate this acceleration across GPT-2 and LLaMA, with model sizes ranging from 0.12B to 2B and datasets of OpenWebText, MiniPile, and C4. Finally, we incorporate Blockwise LR into Adam-mini (Zhang et al., 2024), a recently proposed memory-efficient variant of Adam, achieving a combined $2\times$ speedup and $2\times$ memory saving. These results underscore the potential of exploiting the sharpness disparity to improve LLM training.11:T576,Large language models (LLMs) have exhibited impressive performance and surprising emergent properties. However, their effectiveness remains limited by the fixed context window of the transformer architecture, posing challenges for long-context modeling. Among these challenges, length generalization -- the ability to generalize to sequences longer than those seen during training -- is a classical and fundamental problem. In this work, we propose a fresh perspective on length generalization, shifting the focus from the conventional emphasis on input features such as positional encodings or data structures to the output distribution of the model. Specifically, through case studies on synthetic tasks, we highlight the critical role of \textbf{long-short alignment} -- the consistency of output distributions across sequences of varying lengths. Extending this insight to natural language tasks, we propose a metric called Long-Short Misalignment to quantify this phenomenon, uncovering a strong correlation between the metric and length generalization performance. Building on these findings, we develop a regularization term that promotes long-short alignment during training. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of our approach, offering new insights for achieving more effective long-context modeling in LLMs. Code is available at https://github.com/PKU-ML/LongShortAlignment.12:T503,Large language models are susceptible to memorizing repeated sequences, posing privacy and copyright concerns. A popular mitigation strategy is to remove memorized information from specific neurons post-hoc. However, such approaches have shown limited success so far. In a controlled setting, we show that the memorization of natural sequences (those that resemble linguistically plausible text) become mechanistically entangled with general language abilities, thereby becoming challenging to remove post-hoc. In this work, we put forward a new paradigm of MemSinks that promotes isolation of memorization by design. We leverage a sequence identifier that activates a unique set of memorization neurons for each sequence across repetitions. By analyzing the dynamics of learning and forgetting, we argue that MemSinks facilitates isolation of memorized content, making it easier to remove without compromising general language capabilities. We implement MemSinks at the billion-parameter and billion-token scale, and observe both effective isolation and strong generalization. To our knowledge, this is the first proof-of-concept on real data demonstrating that simultaneous generalization and isolation is achievable. We open-source our code at http://github.com/grghosal/MemSinks.13:T4c4,In-context learning (ICL) is a remarkable capability of pretrained transformers that allows models to generalize to unseen tasks after seeing only a few examples. We investigate empirically the conditions necessary on the pretraining distribution for ICL to emerge and generalize \emph{out-of-distribution}. Previous work has focused on the number of distinct tasks necessary in the pretraining dataset. Here, we use a different notion of task diversity to study the emergence of ICL in transformers trained on linear functions. We find that as task diversity increases, transformers undergo a transition from a specialized solution, which exhibits ICL only within the pretraining task distribution, to a solution which generalizes out of distribution to the entire task space. We also investigate the nature of the solutions learned by the transformer on both sides of the transition, and observe similar transitions in nonlinear regression problems. We construct a phase diagram to characterize how our concept of task diversity interacts with the number of pretraining tasks. In addition, we explore how factors such as the depth of the model and the dimensionality of the regression problem influence the transition.14:T5b5,Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive real-world utility, exemplifying artificial useful intelligence (AUI). However, their ability to reason adaptively and robustly -- the hallmarks of artificial general intelligence (AGI) -- remains fragile. While LLMs seemingly succeed in commonsense reasoning, programming, and mathematics, they struggle to generalize algorithmic understanding across novel contexts. Our experiments with algorithmic tasks in esoteric programming languages reveal that LLM's reasoning overfits to the training data and is limited in its transferability. We hypothesize that the core issue underlying such limited transferability is the coupling of reasoning and knowledge in LLMs. To transition from AUI to AGI, we propose disentangling knowledge and reasoning through three key directions: (1) pretaining to reason using RL from scratch as an alternative to the widely used next-token prediction pretraining, (2) using a curriculum of synthetic tasks to ease the learning of a reasoning prior for RL that can then be transferred to natural language tasks, and (3) learning more generalizable reasoning functions using a small context window to reduce exploiting spurious correlations between tokens. Such a reasoning system coupled with a trained retrieval system and a large external memory bank as a knowledge store can overcome several limitations of existing architectures at learning to reason in novel scenarios.15:T760,Visual tokenization via auto-encoding empowers state-of-the-art image and video generative models by compressing pixels into a latent space. Although scaling Transformer-based generators has been central to recent advances, the tokenizer component itself is rarely scaled, leaving open questions about how auto-encoder design choices influence both its objective of reconstruction and downstream generative performance. Our work aims to conduct an exploration of scaling in auto-encoders to fill in this blank. To facilitate this exploration, we replace the typical convolutional backbone with an enhanced Vision Transformer architecture for Tokenization (ViTok). We train ViTok on large-scale image and video datasets far exceeding ImageNet-1K, removing data constraints on tokenizer scaling. We first study how scaling the auto-encoder bottleneck affects both reconstruction and generation -- and find that while it is highly correlated with reconstruction, its relationship with generation is more complex. We next explored the effect of separately scaling the auto-encoders' encoder and decoder on reconstruction and generation performance. Crucially, we find that scaling the encoder yields minimal gains for either reconstruction or generation, while scaling the decoder boosts reconstruction but the benefits for generation are mixed. Building on our exploration, we design ViTok as a lightweight auto-encoder that achieves competitive performance with state-of-the-art auto-encoders on ImageNet-1K and COCO reconstruction tasks (256p and 512p) while outperforming existing auto-encoders on 16-frame 128p video reconstruction for UCF-101, all with 2-5x fewer FLOPs. When integrated with Diffusion Transformers, ViTok demonstrates competitive performance on image generation for ImageNet-1K and sets new state-of-the-art benchmarks for class-conditional video generation on UCF-101.16:T532,Despite the success of Transformers, handling long contexts remains challenging due to the limited length generalization and quadratic complexity of self-attention. Thus Transformers often require post-training with a larger attention window, significantly increasing computational and memory costs. In this paper, we propose a novel attention mechanism based on dynamic context, Grouped Cross Attention (GCA), which can generalize to 1000 times the pre-training context length while maintaining the ability to access distant information with a constant attention window size. For a given input sequence, we split it into chunks and use each chunk to retrieve top-k relevant past chunks for subsequent text generation. Specifically, unlike most previous works that use an off-the-shelf retriever, our key innovation allows the retriever to learn how to retrieve past chunks that better minimize the auto-regressive loss of subsequent tokens in an end-to-end manner. Such a mechanism accommodates retrieved chunks with a fixed-size attention window to achieve long-range information access, significantly reducing computational and memory costs during training and inference. Experiments show that GCA-based models achieve near-perfect accuracy in passkey retrieval for 16M context lengths, which is 1000 times the training length.17:T4a3,Several recent studies have attempted to autoregressively generate continuous speech representations without discrete speech tokens by combining diffusion and autoregressive models, yet they often face challenges with excessive computational loads or suboptimal outcomes. In this work, we propose Diffusion Transformer Autoregressive Modeling (DiTAR), a patch-based autoregressive framework combining a language model with a diffusion transformer. This approach significantly enhances the efficacy of autoregressive models for continuous tokens and reduces computational demands. DiTAR utilizes a divide-and-conquer strategy for patch generation, where the language model processes aggregated patch embeddings and the diffusion transformer subsequently generates the next patch based on the output of the language model. For inference, we propose defining temperature as the time point of introducing noise during the reverse diffusion ODE to balance diversity and determinism. We also show in the extensive scaling analysis that DiTAR has superb scalability. In zero-shot speech generation, DiTAR achieves state-of-the-art performance in robustness, speaker similarity, and naturalness.18:T534,A key paradigm to improve the reasoning capabilities of large language models (LLMs) is to allocate more inference-time compute to search against a verifier or reward model. This process can then be utilized to refine the pretrained model or distill its reasoning patterns into more efficient models. In this paper, we study inference-time compute by viewing chain-of-thought (CoT) generation as a metastable Markov process: easy reasoning steps (e.g., algebraic manipulations) form densely connected clusters, while hard reasoning steps (e.g., applying a relevant theorem) create sparse, low-probability edges between clusters, leading to phase transitions at longer timescales. Under this framework, we prove that implementing a search protocol that rewards sparse edges improves CoT by decreasing the expected number of steps to reach different clusters. In contrast, we establish a limit on reasoning capability when the model is restricted to local information of the pretrained graph. We also show that the information gained by search can be utilized to obtain a better reasoning model: (1) the pretrained model can be directly finetuned to favor sparse edges via policy gradient methods, and moreover (2) a compressed metastable representation of the reasoning dynamics can be distilled into a smaller, more efficient model.19:T58a,We propose a novel class of language models, Latent Thought Models (LTMs), which incorporate explicit latent thought vectors that follow an explicit prior model in latent space. These latent thought vectors guide the autoregressive generation of ground tokens through a Transformer decoder. Training employs a dual-rate optimization process within the classical variational Bayes framework: fast learning of local variational parameters for the posterior distribution of latent vectors (inference-time computation), and slow learning of global decoder parameters. Empirical studies reveal that LTMs possess additional scaling dimensions beyond traditional Large Language Models (LLMs), such as the number of iterations in inference-time computation and number of latent thought vectors. Higher sample efficiency can be achieved by increasing training compute per token, with further gains possible by trading model size for more inference steps. Designed based on these scaling properties, LTMs demonstrate superior sample and parameter efficiency compared to autoregressive models and discrete diffusion models. They significantly outperform these counterparts in validation perplexity and zero-shot language modeling tasks. Additionally, LTMs exhibit emergent few-shot in-context reasoning capabilities that scale with model size, and achieve competitive performance in conditional and unconditional text generation.1a:T679,We introduce Orthus, an autoregressive (AR) transformer that excels in generating images given textual prompts, answering questions based on visual inputs, and even crafting lengthy image-text interleaved contents. Unlike prior arts on unified multimodal modeling, Orthus simultaneously copes with discrete text tokens and continuous image features under the AR modeling principle. The continuous treatment of visual signals minimizes the information loss for both image understanding and generation while the fully AR formulation renders the characterization of the correlation between modalities straightforward. The key mechanism enabling Orthus to leverage these advantages lies in its modality-specific heads -- one regular language modeling (LM) head predicts discrete text tokens and one diffusion head generates continuous image features conditioning on the output of the backbone. We devise an efficient strategy for building Orthus -- by substituting the Vector Quantization (VQ) operation in the existing unified AR model with a soft alternative, introducing a diffusion head, and tuning the added modules to reconstruct images, we can create an Orthus-base model effortlessly (e.g., within mere 72 A100 GPU hours). Orthus-base can further embrace post-training to better model interleaved images and texts. Empirically, Orthus surpasses competing baselines including Show-o and Chameleon across standard benchmarks, achieving a GenEval score of 0.58 and an MME-P score of 1265.8 using 7B parameters. Orthus also shows exceptional mixed-modality generation capabilities, reflecting the potential for handling intricate practical generation tasks.1b:T4f9,We introduce Hibiki, a decoder-only model for simultaneous speech translation. Hibiki leverages a multistream language model to synchronously process source and target speech, and jointly produces text and audio tokens to perform speech-to-text and speech-to-speech translation. We furthermore address the fundamental challenge of simultaneous interpretation, which unlike its consecutive counterpart, where one waits for the end of the source utterance to start translating, adapts its flow to accumulate just enough context to produce a correct translation in real-time, chunk by chunk. To do so, we introduce a weakly-supervised method that leverages the perplexity of an off-the-shelf text translation system to identify optimal delays on a per-word basis and create aligned synthetic data. After supervised training, Hibiki performs adaptive, simultaneous speech translation with vanilla temperature sampling. On a French-English simultaneous speech translation task, Hibiki demonstrates state-of-the-art performance in translation quality, speaker fidelity and naturalness. Moreover, the simplicity of its inference process makes it compatible with batched translation and even real-time on-device deployment. We provide examples as well as models and inference code.1c:T662,Transformers with linear recurrent modeling offer linear-time training and constant-memory inference. Despite their demonstrated efficiency and performance, pretraining such non-standard architectures from scratch remains costly and risky. The linearization of large language models (LLMs) transforms pretrained standard models into linear recurrent structures, enabling more efficient deployment. However, current linearization methods typically introduce additional feature map modules that require extensive fine-tuning and overlook the gating mechanisms used in state-of-the-art linear recurrent models. To address these issues, this paper presents Liger, short for Linearizing LLMs to gated recurrent structures. Liger is a novel approach for converting pretrained LLMs into gated linear recurrent models without adding extra parameters. It repurposes the pretrained key matrix weights to construct diverse gating mechanisms, facilitating the formation of various gated recurrent structures while avoiding the need to train additional components from scratch. Using lightweight fine-tuning with Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA), Liger restores the performance of the linearized gated recurrent models to match that of the original LLMs. Additionally, we introduce Liger Attention, an intra-layer hybrid attention mechanism, which significantly recovers 93\% of the Transformer-based LLM at 0.02\% pre-training tokens during the linearization process, achieving competitive results across multiple benchmarks, as validated on models ranging from 1B to 8B parameters. Code is available at https://github.com/OpenSparseLLMs/Linearization.1d:T4f2,Scaling has been a major driver of recent advancements in deep learning. Numerous empirical studies have found that scaling laws often follow the power-law and proposed several variants of power-law functions to predict the scaling behavior at larger scales. However, existing methods mostly rely on point estimation and do not quantify uncertainty, which is crucial for real-world applications involving decision-making problems such as determining the expected performance improvements achievable by investing additional computational resources. In this work, we explore a Bayesian framework based on Prior-data Fitted Networks (PFNs) for neural scaling law extrapolation. Specifically, we design a prior distribution that enables the sampling of infinitely many synthetic functions resembling real-world neural scaling laws, allowing our PFN to meta-learn the extrapolation. We validate the effectiveness of our approach on real-world neural scaling laws, comparing it against both the existing point estimation methods and Bayesian approaches. Our method demonstrates superior performance, particularly in data-limited scenarios such as Bayesian active learning, underscoring its potential for reliable, uncertainty-aware extrapolation in practical applications.1e:T592,Non-autoregressive (NAR) generative models are valuable because they can handle diverse conditional generation tasks in a more principled way than their autoregressive (AR) counterparts, which are constrained by sequential dependency requirements. Recent advancements in NAR models, such as diffusion language models, have demonstrated superior performance in unconditional generation compared to AR models (e.g., GPTs) of similar sizes. However, such improvements do not always lead to improved conditional generation performance. We show that a key reason for this gap is the difficulty in generalizing to conditional probability queries (i.e., the set of unknown variables) unseen during training. As a result, strong unconditional generation performance does not guarantee high-quality conditional generation. This paper proposes Tractable Transformers (Tracformer), a Transformer-based generative model that is more robust to different conditional generation tasks. Unlike existing models that rely solely on global contextual features derived from full inputs, Tracformers incorporate a sparse Transformer encoder to capture both local and global contextual information. This information is routed through a decoder for conditional generation. Empirical results demonstrate that Tracformers achieve state-of-the-art conditional generation performance on text modeling compared to recent diffusion and AR model baselines.1f:T5fa,One approach to reducing the massive costs of large language models (LLMs) is the use of quantized or sparse representations for training or deployment. While post-training compression methods are very popular, the question of obtaining even more accurate compressed models by directly training over such representations, i.e., Quantization-Aware Training (QAT), is still open: for example, a recent study (arXiv:2411.04330) put the"optimal"bit-width at which models can be trained using QAT, while staying accuracy-competitive with standard FP16/BF16 precision, at 8-bits weights and activations. We advance this state-of-the-art via a new method called QuEST, for which we demonstrate optimality at 4-bits and stable convergence as low as 1-bit weights and activations. QuEST achieves this by improving two key aspects of QAT methods: (1) accurate and fast quantization of the (continuous) distributions of weights and activations via Hadamard normalization and MSE-optimal fitting; (2) a new trust gradient estimator based on the idea of explicitly minimizing the error between the noisy gradient computed over quantized states and the"true"(but unknown) full-precision gradient. Experiments on Llama-type architectures show that QuEST induces stable scaling laws across the entire range of hardware-supported precisions, and can be extended to sparse representations. We provide GPU kernel support showing that models produced by QuEST can be executed efficiently. Our code is available at https://github.com/IST-DASLab/QuEST.20:T53a,We consider the generative modeling of speech over multiple minutes, a requirement for long-form multimedia generation and audio-native voice assistants. However, textless spoken language models struggle to generate plausible speech past tens of seconds, due to high temporal resolution of speech tokens causing loss of coherence, architectural issues with long-sequence training or extrapolation, and memory costs at inference time. From these considerations we derive SpeechSSM, the first speech language model family to learn from and sample long-form spoken audio (e.g., 16 minutes of read or extemporaneous speech) in a single decoding session without text intermediates. SpeechSSMs leverage recent advances in linear-time sequence modeling to greatly surpass current Transformer spoken LMs in coherence and efficiency on multi-minute generations while still matching them at the utterance level. As we found current spoken language evaluations uninformative, especially in this new long-form setting, we also introduce: LibriSpeech-Long, a benchmark for long-form speech evaluation; new embedding-based and LLM-judged metrics; and quality measurements over length and time. Speech samples, the LibriSpeech-Long dataset, and any future code or model releases can be found at https://google.github.io/tacotron/publications/speechssm/.21:T46f,Diffusion models have demonstrated remarkable performance in generating unimodal data across various tasks, including image, video, and text generation. On the contrary, the joint generation of multimodal data through diffusion models is still in the early stages of exploration. Existing approaches heavily rely on external preprocessing protocols, such as tokenizers and variational autoencoders, to harmonize varied data representations into a unified, unimodal format. This process heavily demands the high accuracy of encoders and decoders, which can be problematic for applications with limited data. To lift this restriction, we propose a novel framework for building multimodal diffusion models on arbitrary state spaces, enabling native generation of coupled data across different modalities. By introducing an innovative decoupled noise schedule for each modality, we enable both unconditional and modality-conditioned generation within a single model simultaneously. We empirically validate our approach for text-image generation and mixed-type tabular data synthesis, demonstrating that it achieves competitive performance.22:T4e0,Using large teacher models to guide the training of smaller student models has become the prevailing paradigm for efficient and effective learning. However, vocabulary mismatches between teacher and student language models pose significant challenges in language modeling, resulting in divergent token sequences and output distributions. To overcome these limitations, we propose Vocabulary-agnostic Teacher Guided Language Modeling (VocAgnoLM), a novel approach that bridges the gap caused by vocabulary mismatch through two key methods: (1) Token-level Lexical Alignment, which aligns token sequences across mismatched vocabularies, and (2) Teacher Guided Loss, which leverages the loss of teacher model to guide effective student training. We demonstrate its effectiveness in language modeling with 1B student model using various 7B teacher models with different vocabularies. Notably, with Qwen2.5-Math-Instruct, a teacher model sharing only about 6% of its vocabulary with TinyLlama, VocAgnoLM achieves a 46% performance improvement compared to naive continual pretraining. Furthermore, we demonstrate that VocAgnoLM consistently benefits from stronger teacher models, providing a robust solution to vocabulary mismatches in language modeling.23:T575,Modern language models represent probability distributions over character strings as distributions over (shorter) token strings derived via a deterministic tokenizer, such as byte-pair encoding. While this approach is highly effective at scaling up language models to large corpora, its current incarnations have a concerning property: the model assigns nonzero probability mass to an exponential number of $\it{noncanonical}$ token encodings of each character string -- these are token strings that decode to valid character strings but are impossible under the deterministic tokenizer (i.e., they will never be seen in any training corpus, no matter how large). This misallocation is both erroneous, as noncanonical strings never appear in training data, and wasteful, diverting probability mass away from plausible outputs. These are avoidable mistakes! In this work, we propose methods to enforce canonicality in token-level language models, ensuring that only canonical token strings are assigned positive probability. We present two approaches: (1) canonicality by conditioning, leveraging test-time inference strategies without additional training, and (2) canonicality by construction, a model parameterization that guarantees canonical outputs but requires training. We demonstrate that fixing canonicality mistakes improves the likelihood of held-out data for several models and corpora.24:T612,Rapidly developing large language models (LLMs) have brought tremendous intelligent applications. Especially, the GPT-4o's excellent duplex speech interaction ability has brought impressive experience to users. Researchers have recently proposed several multi-modal LLMs in this direction that can achieve user-agent speech-to-speech conversations. This paper proposes a novel speech-text multimodal LLM architecture called Freeze-Omni. Our main contribution is that the speech input and output modalities can be easily connected to a textual LLM while keeping the LLM's parameters frozen throughout the training process. We design a three-stage training strategy for modeling both the speech input and output, enabling Freeze-Omni to obtain speech-to-speech conversation ability using text-speech paired data (such as ASR and TTS data) and only 60,000 multi-round text Q&A data on 8 GPUs. Moreover, we can effectively ensure that the intelligence of the Freeze-Omni in the speech modality is at the same level compared with that in the text modality of its backbone LLM, while achieving low latency end-to-end spoken response. In addition, we also designed a method to achieve duplex dialogue ability through multi-task training, giving Freeze-Omni a more natural style of dialogue ability between users and agents. In summary, Freeze-Omni holds great potential to conduct speech-to-speech dialogue based on a multimodal LLM under the condition of a frozen LLM, avoiding the catastrophic forgetting problem caused by limited data and training resources.25:T56c,This paper formalizes an emerging learning paradigm that uses a trained model as a reference to guide and enhance the training of a target model through strategic data selection or weighting, named $\textbf{model steering}$. While ad-hoc methods have been used in various contexts, including the training of large foundation models, its underlying principles remain insufficiently understood, leading to sub-optimal performance. In this work, we propose a theory-driven framework for model steering called $\textbf{DRRho risk minimization}$, which is rooted in Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO). Through a generalization analysis, we provide theoretical insights into why this approach improves generalization and data efficiency compared to training without a reference model. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time such theoretical insights are provided for the new learning paradigm, which significantly enhance our understanding and practice of model steering. Building on these insights and the connection between contrastive learning and DRO, we introduce a novel method for Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) with a reference model, termed DRRho-CLIP. Extensive experiments validate the theoretical insights, reveal a superior scaling law compared to CLIP without a reference model, and demonstrate its strength over existing heuristic approaches.26:T4a8,Autoregressive next-token prediction with the Transformer decoder has become a de facto standard in large language models (LLMs), achieving remarkable success in Natural Language Processing (NLP) at scale. Extending this paradigm to audio poses unique challenges due to its inherently continuous nature. We research audio generation with a causal language model (LM) without discrete tokens. We leverage token-wise diffusion to model the continuous distribution of the next continuous-valued token. Our approach delivers significant improvements over previous discrete solution, AudioGen, achieving 20% and 40% relative gains on AudioCaps in Frechet Audio Distance (FAD) and Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, respectively. Additionally, we propose a novel masked next-token prediction task that incorporates masked prediction into the causal LM framework. On AudioCaps, the innovation yields 41% and 33% relative FAD improvements over AudioGen Base (285M) and AudioGen Large (1B) models, respectively, and is on par with the state-of-the-art (SOTA) diffusion models. Furthermore, we achieve these results with significantly fewer parameters -- 193M for our Base and 462M for our Large models.27:T582,Recent advancements in audio language models have underscored the pivotal role of audio tokenization, which converts audio signals into discrete tokens, thereby facilitating the application of language model architectures to the audio domain. In this study, we introduce ALMTokenizer, a novel low-bitrate and semantically rich audio codec tokenizer for audio language models. Prior methods, such as Encodec, typically encode individual audio frames into discrete tokens without considering the use of context information across frames. Unlike these methods, we introduce a novel query-based compression strategy to capture holistic information with a set of learnable query tokens by explicitly modeling the context information across frames. This design not only enables the codec model to capture more semantic information but also encodes the audio signal with fewer token sequences. Additionally, to enhance the semantic information in audio codec models, we introduce the following: (1) A masked autoencoder (MAE) loss, (2) Vector quantization based on semantic priors, and (3) An autoregressive (AR) prediction loss. As a result, ALMTokenizer achieves competitive reconstruction performance relative to state-of-the-art approaches while operating at a lower bitrate. Within the same audio language model framework, ALMTokenizer outperforms previous tokenizers in audio understanding and generation tasks.28:T466,Transformer-based Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized Natural Language Processing by demonstrating exceptional performance across diverse tasks. This study investigates the impact of the parameter initialization scale on the training behavior and task preferences of LLMs. We discover that smaller initialization scales encourage models to favor reasoning tasks, whereas larger initialization scales lead to a preference for memorization tasks. We validate this reasoning bias via real datasets and meticulously designed anchor functions. Further analysis of initial training dynamics suggests that specific model components, particularly the embedding space and self-attention mechanisms, play pivotal roles in shaping these learning biases. We provide a theoretical framework from the perspective of model training dynamics to explain these phenomena. Additionally, experiments on real-world language tasks corroborate our theoretical insights. This work enhances our understanding of how initialization strategies influence LLM performance on reasoning tasks and offers valuable guidelines for training models.29:T5b2,We introduce~\textsc{Domain2Vec}, a novel approach that decomposes any dataset into a linear combination of several \emph{meta-domains}, a new concept designed to capture the key underlying features of datasets. \textsc{Domain2Vec} maintains a vocabulary of meta-domains and uses a classifier to decompose any given dataset into a domain vector that corresponds to a distribution over this vocabulary. These domain vectors enable the identification of the optimal data mixture for language model (LM) pretraining in a training-free manner under the \emph{\textbf{D}istribution \textbf{A}lignment \textbf{A}ssumption} (DA$^{2}$), which suggests that when the data distributions of the training set and the validation set are better aligned, a lower validation loss is achieved. Moreover, \textsc{Domain2vec} can be seamlessly integrated into previous works to model the relationship between domain vectors and LM performance, greatly enhancing the efficiency and scalability of previous methods. Extensive experiments demonstrate that \textsc{Domain2Vec} helps find the data mixture that enhances downstream task performance with minimal computational overhead. Specifically, \textsc{Domain2Vec} achieves the same validation loss on Pile-CC using only $51.5\%$ of the computation required when training on the original mixture of The Pile dataset. Under equivalent compute budget, \textsc{Domain2Vec} improves downstream performance by an average of $2.83\%$.2a:T536,Discrete diffusion is a promising framework for modeling and generating discrete data. In this work, we present Target Concrete Score Matching (TCSM), a novel and versatile objective for training and fine-tuning discrete diffusion models. TCSM provides a general framework with broad applicability. It supports pre-training discrete diffusion models directly from data samples, and many existing discrete diffusion approaches naturally emerge as special cases of our more general TCSM framework. Furthermore, the same TCSM objective extends to post-training of discrete diffusion models, including fine-tuning using reward functions or preference data, and distillation of knowledge from pre-trained autoregressive models. These new capabilities stem from the core idea of TCSM, estimating the concrete score of the target distribution, which resides in the original (clean) data space. This allows seamless integration with reward functions and pre-trained models, which inherently only operate in the clean data space rather than the noisy intermediate spaces of diffusion processes. Our experiments on language modeling tasks demonstrate that TCSM matches or surpasses current methods. Additionally, TCSM is versatile, applicable to both pre-training and post-training scenarios, offering greater flexibility and sample efficiency.2b:T47e,Scaling multi-dimensional transformers to long sequences is indispensable across various domains. However, the challenges of large memory requirements and slow speeds of such sequences necessitate sequence parallelism. All existing approaches fall under the category of embedded sequence parallelism, which are limited to shard along a single sequence dimension, thereby introducing significant communication overhead. However, the nature of multi-dimensional transformers involves independent calculations across multiple sequence dimensions. To this end, we propose Dynamic Sequence Parallelism (DSP) as a novel abstraction of sequence parallelism. DSP dynamically switches the parallel dimension among all sequences according to the computation stage with efficient resharding strategy. DSP offers significant reductions in communication costs, adaptability across modules, and ease of implementation with minimal constraints. Experimental evaluations demonstrate DSP's superiority over state-of-the-art embedded sequence parallelism methods by remarkable throughput improvements ranging from 32.2% to 10x, with less than 25% communication volume.2c:T675,Long-context LLMs are increasingly in demand for applications such as retrieval-augmented generation. To defray the cost of pretraining LLMs over long contexts, recent work takes an approach of synthetic context extension: fine-tuning LLMs with synthetically generated long-context data in a post-training stage. However, it remains unclear how and why this synthetic context extension imparts abilities for downstream long-context tasks. In this paper, we investigate fine-tuning on synthetic data for three long-context tasks that require retrieval and reasoning. We vary the realism of"needle"concepts to be retrieved and diversity of the surrounding"haystack"context, from using LLMs to construct synthetic documents to using templated relations and creating symbolic datasets. We find that models trained on synthetic data fall short of the real data, but surprisingly, the mismatch can be interpreted and even predicted in terms of a special set of attention heads that are responsible for retrieval over long context, retrieval heads (Wu et al., 2024). The retrieval heads learned on synthetic data have high overlap with retrieval heads learned on real data, and there is a strong correlation between the recall of heads learned and the downstream performance of a model. Furthermore, with attention knockout and activation patching, we mechanistically show that retrieval heads are necessary and explain model performance, although they are not totally sufficient. Our results shed light on how to interpret synthetic data fine-tuning performance and how to approach creating better data for learning real-world capabilities over long contexts.2d:T5d3,Large Language Models (LLMs) are discovered to suffer from accurately retrieving key information. To address this, we propose Mask-Enhanced Autoregressive Prediction (MEAP), a simple yet effective training paradigm that seamlessly integrates Masked Language Modeling (MLM) into Next-Token Prediction (NTP) to enhance the latter's in-context retrieval capabilities. Specifically, MEAP first randomly masks a small fraction of input tokens and then directly performs the standard next-token prediction autoregressive using a decoder-only Transformer. MEAP eliminates the need for bidirectional attention or encoder-decoder architectures for MLM, incurring no additional computational overhead during pre-training or inference. Intensive experiments demonstrate that MEAP substantially outperforms NTP on key information retrieval and long-context reasoning tasks, while performing on par or better on commonsense reasoning tasks. The benefits of MEAP also extend to supervised fine-tuning, where it shows remarkable advantages in lost-in-the-middle scenarios, outperforming NTP by 11.77 percentage points. Our analysis indicates that MEAP's effectiveness arises from its ability to promote more distinguishable attention scores by concentrating on a reduced set of non-masked tokens. This mechanism improves the model's focus on task-relevant signals while mitigating the influence of peripheral context. These findings position MEAP as a promising training paradigm for large language models.2e:T553,Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in complex reasoning tasks, yet generating reliable reasoning processes remains a significant challenge. We present a unified probabilistic framework that formalizes LLM reasoning through a novel graphical model incorporating latent thinking processes and evaluation signals. Within this framework, we introduce the Bootstrapping Reinforced Thinking Process (BRiTE) algorithm, which works in two steps. First, it generates high-quality rationales by approximating the optimal thinking process through reinforcement learning, using a novel reward shaping mechanism. Second, it enhances the base LLM by maximizing the joint probability of rationale generation with respect to the model's parameters. Theoretically, we demonstrate BRiTE's convergence at a rate of $1/T$ with $T$ representing the number of iterations. Empirical evaluations on math and coding benchmarks demonstrate that our approach consistently improves performance across different base models without requiring human-annotated thinking processes. In addition, BRiTE demonstrates superior performance compared to existing algorithms that bootstrap thinking processes use alternative methods such as rejection sampling, and can even match or exceed the results achieved through supervised fine-tuning with human-annotated data.2f:T5d5,In this work, we upgrade the multi-head attention mechanism, the core of the Transformer model, to improve efficiency while maintaining or surpassing the previous accuracy level. We show that multi-head attention can be expressed in the summation form. Drawing on the insight that not all attention heads hold equal significance, we propose Mixture-of-Head attention (MoH), a new architecture that treats attention heads as experts in the Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) mechanism. MoH has two significant advantages: First, MoH enables each token to select the appropriate attention heads, enhancing inference efficiency without compromising accuracy or increasing the number of parameters. Second, MoH replaces the standard summation in multi-head attention with a weighted summation, introducing flexibility to the attention mechanism and unlocking extra performance potential. Extensive experiments on ViT, DiT, and LLMs demonstrate that MoH outperforms multi-head attention by using only 50%-90% of the attention heads. Moreover, we demonstrate that pre-trained multi-head attention models, such as LLaMA3-8B, can be further continue-tuned into our MoH models. Notably, MoH-LLaMA3-8B achieves an average accuracy of 64.0% across 14 benchmarks, outperforming LLaMA3-8B by 2.4% by utilizing only 75% of the attention heads. We believe the proposed MoH is a promising alternative to multi-head attention and provides a strong foundation for developing advanced and efficient attention-based models.30:T484,The autoregressive decoding for text generation in large language models (LLMs), while widely used, is inherently suboptimal due to the lack of a built-in mechanism to perform refinement and/or correction of the generated content. In this paper, we consider optimality in terms of the joint probability over the generated response, when jointly considering all tokens at the same time. We theoretically characterize the potential deviation of the autoregressively generated response from its globally optimal counterpart that is of the same length. Our analysis suggests that we need to be cautious when noticeable uncertainty arises during text generation, which may signal the sub-optimality of the generation history. To address the pitfall of autoregressive decoding for text generation, we propose an approach that incorporates a sliding reflection window and a pausing criterion, such that refinement and generation can be carried out interchangeably as the decoding proceeds. Our selective refinement framework strikes a balance between efficiency and optimality, and our extensive experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.31:T5b8,Supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on domain-specific data is the dominant approach for adapting foundation models to specialized tasks. However, it has been observed that SFT models tend to forget knowledge acquired during pretraining. In vision models, ensembling a pretrained model with its fine-tuned counterpart has been shown to mitigate this issue. In this work, we demonstrate that the same holds for language models, and, more strikingly, we observe an overadaptation phenomenon: the ensemble model not only retains general knowledge from the foundation model but also outperforms the fine-tuned model even on the fine-tuning domain itself. Despite the empirical success of ensembling, a theoretical understanding of its benefits remains underexplored. We develop a formal theoretical analysis of the overadaptation phenomenon. Ensembling mitigates this by balancing two primary sources of error: bias, caused by insufficient fine-tuning, and variance, introduced by overfitting to fine-tuning data. While regularization techniques aim to address this trade-off, we show that ensembling provides a more effective solution. We analyze this phenomenon in over-parameterized linear settings and demonstrate that interpolating between pretrained and fine-tuned weights significantly improves performance. These findings offer theoretical justification for the observed advantages of model ensembling, supported by empirical experiments consistent with our analysis.32:T63b,Recent studies have revealed various manifestations of position bias in transformer architectures, from the"lost-in-the-middle"phenomenon to attention sinks, yet a comprehensive theoretical understanding of how attention masks and positional encodings shape these biases remains elusive. This paper presents a graph-theoretic framework for analyzing position bias in multi-layer attention. Modeling attention masks as directed graphs, we quantify how tokens interact with contextual information based on their sequential positions. We uncover two key insights: First, causal masking inherently biases attention toward earlier positions, as tokens in deeper layers attend to increasingly more contextualized representations of earlier tokens. Second, we characterize the competing effects of the causal mask and relative positional encodings, such as the decay mask and rotary positional encoding (RoPE): while both mechanisms introduce distance-based decay within individual attention maps, their aggregate effect across multiple attention layers$\unicode{x2013}$coupled with the causal mask$\unicode{x2013}$leads to a trade-off between the long-term decay effects and the cumulative importance of early sequence positions. Through controlled numerical experiments, we not only validate our theoretical findings but also reproduce position biases observed in real-world LLMs. Our framework offers a principled foundation for understanding positional biases in transformers, shedding light on the complex interplay of attention mechanism components and guiding more informed architectural design.33:T54c,Self-evolving trainin--where models iteratively learn from their own outputs--has emerged as a key approach for complex reasoning tasks, addressing the scarcity of high-quality chain-of-thought data. However, its effectiveness in multimodal reasoning, a domain more intricate than text-only reasoning, remains underexplored, and the understanding of critical factors in this training paradigm remains limited. Furthermore, a central challenge for this training method is performance saturation, which impedes further improvements and scalability. Inspired by reinforcement learning (RL), in this paper, we reframe self-evolving training for multimodal reasoning through the lens of RL, identifying three pivotal factors: Training Method, Reward Model, and Prompt Variation. Through systematic analysis, we establish relatively optimal design principles that significantly enhance multimodal reasoning capabilities. Moreover, delving deeper into training dynamics, we uncover the roots of saturation and propose a new automatic balancing mechanism to mitigate this limitation. Building on these insights, we propose M-STAR (Multimodal Self-evolving Training for Reasoning), a framework that achieves consistent performance gains across models of varying sizes and diverse benchmarks. All resources are made publicly available at https://mstar-lmm.github.io.34:T4c9,Equipping large language models (LLMs) with latent-space memory has attracted increasing attention as they can extend the context window of existing language models. However, retaining information from the distant past remains a challenge. For example, MemoryLLM (Wang et al., 2024a), as a representative work with latent-space memory, compresses past information into hidden states across all layers, forming a memory pool of 1B parameters. While effective for sequence lengths up to 16k tokens, it struggles to retain knowledge beyond 20k tokens. In this work, we address this limitation by introducing M+, a memory-augmented model based on MemoryLLM that significantly enhances long-term information retention. M+ integrates a long-term memory mechanism with a co-trained retriever, dynamically retrieving relevant information during text generation. We evaluate M+ on diverse benchmarks, including long-context understanding and knowledge retention tasks. Experimental results show that M+ significantly outperforms MemoryLLM and recent strong baselines, extending knowledge retention from under 20k to over 160k tokens with similar GPU memory overhead. We open-source our code at https://github.com/wangyu-ustc/MemoryLLM35:T459,Language models (LMs) have shown impressive performance on tasks within their training distribution, but often struggle with structurally novel tasks even when given a small number of in-context task examples. We investigate the effectiveness of test-time training (TTT) -- temporarily updating model parameters during inference using a loss derived from input data -- as a mechanism for improving LMs' reasoning and few-shot learning capabilities. On the Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (ARC), performing TTT with in-context examples yields up to $6\times$ higher accuracy compared to fine-tuned baselines -- reaching $53.0\%$ on the public validation set with an 8B-parameter LM and $61.9\%$ when ensembled with program-synthesis methods, matching average human performance. On BIG-Bench Hard (BBH), TTT on in-context examples surpasses standard few-shot prompting in the $10$-shot setting by $7.3$ percentage points ($50.5\%$ to $57.8\%$). Our findings highlight the limitations of in-context learning for novel tasks and demonstrate the potential of test-time training to enhance language model adaptability.36:T462,The success of large language models in text processing has inspired their adaptation to speech modeling. However, since speech is continuous and complex, it is often discretized for autoregressive modeling. Speech tokens derived from self-supervised models (known as semantic tokens) typically focus on the linguistic aspects of speech but neglect prosodic information. As a result, models trained on these tokens can generate speech with reduced naturalness. Existing approaches try to fix this by adding pitch features to the semantic tokens. However, pitch alone cannot fully represent the range of paralinguistic attributes, and selecting the right features requires careful hand-engineering. To overcome this, we propose an end-to-end variational approach that automatically learns to encode these continuous speech attributes to enhance the semantic tokens. Our approach eliminates the need for manual extraction and selection of paralinguistic features. Moreover, it produces preferred speech continuations according to human raters. Code, samples and models are available at https://github.com/b04901014/vae-gslm.37:T4c5,Sparse Mixture-of-Experts (SMoE) models represent a significant advancement in large language model (LLM) development through their efficient parameter utilization. These models achieve substantial performance improvements at reduced inference costs. However, the deployment of SMoE models faces constraints from extensive memory requirements of expert components in resource-limited environments. To address these limitations, this paper introduces Hierarchical Clustering for Sparsely activated Mixture of Experts (HC-SMoE), a task-agnostic expert merging framework for parameter reduction without retraining. HC-SMoE introduces a novel hierarchical clustering approach based on expert outputs to ensure merging robustness independent of routing decisions. The proposed output-based clustering method enables effective capture of functional relationships between experts for large-scale architectures. We provide theoretical analysis and comprehensive evaluations across multiple zero-shot language tasks to demonstrate HC-SMoE's effectiveness in state-of-the-art models including Qwen and Mixtral. The experimental results validate HC-SMoE's superior performance and practical applicability for real-world deployments.38:T55d,Large Language Models (LLMs) have exhibited exceptional performance across a spectrum of natural language processing tasks. However, their substantial sizes pose considerable challenges, particularly in computational demands and inference speed, due to their quadratic complexity. In this work, we have identified a key pattern: certain seemingly meaningless separator tokens (i.e., punctuations) contribute disproportionately to attention scores compared to semantically meaningful tokens. This observation suggests that information of the segments between these separator tokens can be effectively condensed into the separator tokens themselves without significant information loss. Guided by this insight, we introduce SepLLM, a plug-and-play framework that accelerates inference by compressing these segments and eliminating redundant tokens. Additionally, we implement efficient kernels for training acceleration. Experimental results across training-free, training-from-scratch, and post-training settings demonstrate SepLLM's effectiveness. Notably, using the Llama-3-8B backbone, SepLLM achieves over 50% reduction in KV cache on the GSM8K-CoT benchmark while maintaining comparable performance. Furthermore, in streaming settings, SepLLM effectively processes sequences of up to 4 million tokens or more while maintaining consistent language modeling capabilities.39:T50f,Neural scaling laws offer valuable insights for designing robust sequence processing architectures. While these laws have been extensively characterized in other modalities, their behavior in speech remains comparatively underexplored. In this work, we introduce OWLS, an open-access, reproducible suite of multilingual speech recognition and translation models spanning 0.25B to 18B parameters, with the 18B version being the largest speech model, to the best of our knowledge. OWLS leverages up to 360K hours of public speech data across 150 languages, enabling a systematic investigation into how data, model, and compute scaling each influence performance in multilingual speech tasks. We use OWLS to derive neural scaling laws, showing how final performance can be reliably predicted when scaling. One of our key findings is that scaling enhances performance on low-resource languages/dialects, helping to mitigate bias and improve the accessibility of speech technologies. Finally, we show how OWLS can be used to power new research directions by discovering emergent abilities in large-scale speech models. Model checkpoints will be released on https://huggingface.co/collections/espnet/owls-scaling-laws-for-speech-recognition-and-translation-67ab7f991c194065f057ce8d for future studies.3a:T53e,The emergence of multimodal large models has advanced artificial intelligence, introducing unprecedented levels of performance and functionality. However, optimizing these models remains challenging due to historically isolated paths of model-centric and data-centric developments, leading to suboptimal outcomes and inefficient resource utilization. In response, we present a new sandbox suite tailored for integrated data-model co-development. This sandbox provides a feedback-driven experimental platform, enabling cost-effective iteration and guided refinement of both data and models. Our proposed ``Probe-Analyze-Refine'' workflow, validated through practical use cases on multimodal tasks such as image-text pre-training with CLIP, image-to-text generation with LLaVA-like models, and text-to-video generation with DiT-based models, yields transferable and notable performance boosts, such as topping the VBench leaderboard. A comprehensive set of over 100 experiments demonstrated the suite's usability and extensibility, while also uncovering insights into the interplay between data quality, diversity, model behavior, and computational costs. All codes, datasets, and models are open-sourced to foster future research and applications that would otherwise be infeasible due to the lack of a dedicated co-development infrastructure.3b:T469,Interventions in language models (LMs) are applied strategically to steer model behavior during the forward pass. Learnable interventions, also known as representation fine-tuning, aim to apply pointwise control within the concept subspace and have proven effective in altering high-level behaviors. In this work, we extend this approach to the distribution level, enabling the model to learn not only pointwise transformations but also the surrounding regions of the concept subspace. We demonstrate that these methods perform effectively in early layers, with larger standard deviations correlating strongly with improved performance. Across eight commonsense reasoning and seven arithmetic reasoning benchmarks, our distribution-wise interventions consistently outperform pointwise interventions in controllability and robustness. These results illustrate that distribution-wise interventions provide a more comprehensive method for steering model behavior and enabling finer-grained control over language models. The code is at: \href{https://github.com/chili-lab/D-Intervention}{https://github.com/chili-lab/D-Intervention}.3c:T640,A fundamental challenge in formal theorem proving by LLMs is the lack of high-quality training data. Although reinforcement learning or expert iteration partially mitigates this issue by alternating between LLM generating proofs and finetuning them on correctly generated ones, performance quickly plateaus due to the scarcity of correct proofs (sparse rewards). To keep improving the models with limited data, we draw inspiration from mathematicians, who continuously develop new results, partly by proposing novel conjectures or exercises (which are often variants of known results) and attempting to solve them. We design the Self-play Theorem Prover (STP) that simultaneously takes on two roles, conjecturer and prover, each providing training signals to the other. The conjecturer is trained iteratively on previously generated conjectures that are barely provable by the current prover, which incentivizes it to generate increasingly challenging conjectures over time. The prover attempts to prove the conjectures with standard expert iteration. We evaluate STP with both Lean and Isabelle formal versifiers. With 51.3 billion tokens generated during the training in Lean, STP proves 28.5% of the statements in the LeanWorkbook dataset, doubling the previous best result of 13.2% achieved through expert iteration. The final model achieves state-of-the-art performance among whole-proof generation methods on miniF2F-test (65.0%, pass@3200), Proofnet-test (23.9%, pass@3200) and PutnamBench (8/644, pass@3200). We release our code, model, and dataset in this URL: https://github.com/kfdong/STP.3d:T4a9,Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) models face deployment challenges due to their large parameter counts and computational demands. We explore quantization for MoE models and highlight two key insights: 1) linear blocks exhibit varying quantization sensitivity, and 2) divergent expert activation frequencies create heterogeneous computational characteristics. Based on these observations, we introduce MxMoE, a mixed-precision optimization framework for MoE models that considers both algorithmic and system perspectives. MxMoE navigates the design space defined by parameter sensitivity, expert activation dynamics, and hardware resources to derive efficient mixed-precision configurations. Additionally, MxMoE automatically generates optimized mixed-precision GroupGEMM kernels, enabling parallel execution of GEMMs with different precisions. Evaluations show that MxMoE outperforms existing methods, achieving 2.4 lower Wikitext-2 perplexity than GPTQ at 2.25-bit and delivering up to 3.4x speedup over full precision, as well as up to 29.4% speedup over uniform quantization at equivalent accuracy with 5-bit weight-activation quantization. Our code is available at https://github.com/cat538/MxMoE.3e:T4e0,Transformers have had tremendous impact for several sequence related tasks, largely due to their ability to retrieve from any part of the sequence via softmax based dot-product attention. This mechanism plays a crucial role in Transformer's performance. We analyze the gradients backpropagated through the softmax operation in the attention mechanism and observe that these gradients can often be small. This poor gradient signal backpropagation can lead to inefficient learning of parameters preceeding the attention operations. To this end, we introduce a new attention mechanism called LASER, which we analytically show to admit a larger gradient signal. We show that LASER attention can be implemented by making small modifications to existing attention implementations. We conduct experiments on autoregressive large language models (LLMs) with upto 7.7 billion parameters with an average improvement of upto 1.44% over standard attention on downstream evaluations and 1.65% finetuning improvements. Additionally, LASER demonstrates generalization performance improvement across a variety of tasks (vision, text and speech):Vision Transformer (ViT) on Imagenet, Conformer on the Librispeech speech-to-text and BERT with 2.2 billion parameters.3f:T60f,Sparse autoencoders (SAEs) have been successfully used to discover sparse and human-interpretable representations of the latent activations of LLMs. However, we would ultimately like to understand the computations performed by LLMs and not just their representations. The extent to which SAEs can help us understand computations is unclear because they are not designed to"sparsify"computations in any sense, only latent activations. To solve this, we propose Jacobian SAEs (JSAEs), which yield not only sparsity in the input and output activations of a given model component but also sparsity in the computation (formally, the Jacobian) connecting them. With a na\"ive implementation, the Jacobians in LLMs would be computationally intractable due to their size. One key technical contribution is thus finding an efficient way of computing Jacobians in this setup. We find that JSAEs extract a relatively large degree of computational sparsity while preserving downstream LLM performance approximately as well as traditional SAEs. We also show that Jacobians are a reasonable proxy for computational sparsity because MLPs are approximately linear when rewritten in the JSAE basis. Lastly, we show that JSAEs achieve a greater degree of computational sparsity on pre-trained LLMs than on the equivalent randomized LLM. This shows that the sparsity of the computational graph appears to be a property that LLMs learn through training, and suggests that JSAEs might be more suitable for understanding learned transformer computations than standard SAEs.40:T4c0,The computational cost of softmax-based attention in transformers limits their applicability to long-context tasks. Adaptive sparsity, of which $\alpha$-entmax attention is an example, offers a flexible data-dependent alternative, but existing implementations are inefficient and do not leverage the sparsity to obtain runtime and memory gains. In this work, we propose AdaSplash, which combines the efficiency of GPU-optimized algorithms with the sparsity benefits of $\alpha$-entmax. We first introduce a hybrid Halley-bisection algorithm, resulting in a 7-fold reduction in the number of iterations needed to compute the $\alpha$-entmax transformation. Then, we implement custom Triton kernels to efficiently handle adaptive sparsity. Experiments with RoBERTa and ModernBERT for text classification and single-vector retrieval, along with GPT-2 for language modeling, show that our method achieves substantial improvements in runtime and memory efficiency compared to existing $\alpha$-entmax implementations. It approaches -- and in some cases surpasses -- the efficiency of highly optimized softmax implementations like FlashAttention-2, enabling long-context training while maintaining strong task performance.41:T5cc,Large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable success, yet aligning their generations with human preferences remains a critical challenge. Existing approaches to preference modeling often rely on an explicit or implicit reward function, overlooking the intricate and multifaceted nature of human preferences that may encompass conflicting factors across diverse tasks and populations. To address this limitation, we introduce Latent Preference Coding (LPC), a novel framework that models the implicit factors as well as their combinations behind holistic preferences using discrete latent codes. LPC seamlessly integrates with various offline alignment algorithms, automatically inferring the underlying factors and their importance from data without relying on pre-defined reward functions and hand-crafted combination weights. Extensive experiments on multiple benchmarks demonstrate that LPC consistently improves upon three alignment algorithms (DPO, SimPO, and IPO) using three base models (Mistral-7B, Llama3-8B, and Llama3-8B-Instruct). Furthermore, deeper analysis reveals that the learned latent codes effectively capture the differences in the distribution of human preferences and significantly enhance the robustness of alignment against noise in data. By providing a unified representation for the multifarious preference factors, LPC paves the way towards developing more robust and versatile alignment techniques for the responsible deployment of powerful LLMs.42:T5ce,We present rStar-Math to demonstrate that small language models (SLMs) can rival or even surpass the math reasoning capability of OpenAI o1, without distillation from superior models. rStar-Math achieves this by exercising"deep thinking"through Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), where a math policy SLM performs test-time search guided by an SLM-based process reward model. rStar-Math introduces three innovations to tackle the challenges in training the two SLMs: (1) a novel code-augmented CoT data sythesis method, which performs extensive MCTS rollouts to generate step-by-step verified reasoning trajectories used to train the policy SLM; (2) a novel process reward model training method that avoids na\"ive step-level score annotation, yielding a more effective process preference model (PPM); (3) a self-evolution recipe in which the policy SLM and PPM are built from scratch and iteratively evolved to improve reasoning capabilities. Through 4 rounds of self-evolution with millions of synthesized solutions for 747k math problems, rStar-Math boosts SLMs' math reasoning to state-of-the-art levels. On the MATH benchmark, it improves Qwen2.5-Math-7B from 58.8% to 90.0% and Phi3-mini-3.8B from 41.4% to 86.4%, surpassing o1-preview by +4.5% and +0.9%. On the USA Math Olympiad (AIME), rStar-Math solves an average of 53.3% (8/15) of problems, ranking among the top 20% the brightest high school math students. Code and data will be available at https://github.com/microsoft/rStar.43:T53a,Autoregressive transformers exhibit adaptive learning through in-context learning (ICL), which begs the question of how. Prior works have shown that transformers represent the ICL tasks as vectors in their representations. In this paper, we leverage the encoding-decoding framework to study how transformers form task vectors during pretraining and how their task encoding quality predicts ICL task performance. On synthetic ICL tasks, we analyze the training dynamics of a small transformer and report the coupled emergence of task encoding and decoding. As the model learns to encode different latent tasks (e.g.,"Finding the first noun in a sentence.") into distinct, separable representations, it concurrently builds conditional decoding algorithms and improves its ICL performance. We validate this phenomenon across pretrained models of varying scales (Gemma-2 2B/9B/27B, Llama-3.1 8B/70B) and over the course of pretraining in OLMo-7B. Further, we demonstrate that the quality of task encoding inferred from representations predicts ICL performance, and that, surprisingly, finetuning the earlier layers can improve the task encoding and performance more than finetuning the latter layers. Our empirical insights shed light into better understanding the success and failure modes of large language models via their representations.44:T5e2,The generated responses of large language models (LLMs) are often fine-tuned to human preferences through a process called reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF). As RLHF relies on a challenging training sequence, whereby a separate reward model is independently learned and then later applied to LLM policy updates, ongoing research effort has targeted more straightforward alternatives. In this regard, direct preference optimization (DPO) and its many offshoots circumvent the need for a separate reward training step. Instead, through the judicious use of a reparameterization trick that induces an \textit{implicit} reward, DPO and related methods consolidate learning to the minimization of a single loss function. And yet despite demonstrable success in some real-world settings, we prove that DPO-based objectives are nonetheless subject to sub-optimal regularization and counter-intuitive interpolation behaviors, underappreciated artifacts of the reparameterizations upon which they are based. To this end, we introduce an \textit{explicit} preference optimization framework termed EXPO that requires no analogous reparameterization to achieve an implicit reward. Quite differently, we merely posit intuitively-appealing regularization factors from scratch that transparently avoid the potential pitfalls of key DPO variants, provably satisfying regularization desiderata that prior methods do not. Empirical results serve to corroborate our analyses and showcase the efficacy of EXPO.45:T5e2,While Large Language Models (LLMs) have exhibited remarkable emergent capabilities through extensive pre-training, they still face critical limitations in generalizing to specialized domains and handling diverse linguistic variations, known as distribution shifts. In this paper, we propose a Test-Time Learning (TTL) paradigm for LLMs, namely TLM, which dynamically adapts LLMs to target domains using only unlabeled test data during testing. Specifically, we first provide empirical evidence and theoretical insights to reveal that more accurate predictions from LLMs can be achieved by minimizing the input perplexity of the unlabeled test data. Based on this insight, we formulate the Test-Time Learning process of LLMs as input perplexity minimization, enabling self-supervised enhancement of LLM performance. Furthermore, we observe that high-perplexity samples tend to be more informative for model optimization. Accordingly, we introduce a Sample Efficient Learning Strategy that actively selects and emphasizes these high-perplexity samples for test-time updates. Lastly, to mitigate catastrophic forgetting and ensure adaptation stability, we adopt Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) instead of full-parameter optimization, which allows lightweight model updates while preserving more original knowledge from the model. We introduce the AdaptEval benchmark for TTL and demonstrate through experiments that TLM improves performance by at least 20% compared to original LLMs on domain knowledge adaptation.46:T63d,Inference-time computation offers a powerful axis for scaling the performance of language models. However, naively increasing computation in techniques like Best-of-N sampling can lead to performance degradation due to reward hacking. Toward a theoretical understanding of how to best leverage additional computation, we focus on inference-time alignment, which we formalize as the problem of improving the quality of responses drawn from a pre-trained policy, given a prompt of interest and access to an imperfect reward model. We analyze the performance of inference-time alignment algorithms in terms of (i) response quality, and (ii) compute, and provide new results that highlight the importance of the pre-trained policy's coverage over high-quality responses for performance and compute scaling: 1. We show that Best-of-$N$ alignment with an ideal choice for $N$ can achieve optimal performance under stringent notions of coverage, but provably suffers from reward hacking when $N$ is large, and fails to achieve tight guarantees under more realistic coverage conditions. 2. We introduce $\texttt{InferenceTimePessimism}$, a new algorithm which mitigates reward hacking through deliberate use of inference-time compute, implementing the principle of pessimism in the face of uncertainty via rejection sampling; we prove that its performance is optimal and does not degrade with $N$, meaning it is scaling-monotonic. We complement our theoretical results with an experimental evaluation that demonstrate the benefits of $\texttt{InferenceTimePessimism}$ across a variety of tasks and models.47:T4d4,Sample efficiency is critical for online Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF). While existing works investigate sample-efficient online exploration strategies, the potential of utilizing misspecified yet relevant reward models to accelerate learning remains underexplored. This paper studies how to transfer knowledge from those imperfect reward models in online RLHF. We start by identifying a novel property due to KL-regularization in the RLHF objective: \emph{a policy's coverability of the optimal policy is captured by its sub-optimality}. Building on this insight, we propose novel transfer learning principles and a theoretical algorithm -- \emph{\textbf{T}ransfer \textbf{P}olicy \textbf{O}ptimization (\textbf{TPO})} -- with provable benefits compared to standard online learning. Empirically, inspired by our theoretical findings, we develop a win-rate-based transfer policy selection strategy with improved computational efficiency. Moreover, our empirical transfer learning technique is modular and can be integrated with various policy optimization methods, such as DPO, IPO and XPO, to further enhance their performance. We validate the effectiveness of our method through experiments on summarization tasks.48:T61d,Large Language Models' (LLMs) weight matrices can often be expressed in low-rank form with potential to relax memory and compute resource requirements. Unlike prior efforts that focus on developing novel matrix decompositions, in this work we study the non-uniform low-rank properties of weight matrices in LLMs through the lens of stabilizing gradient subspace. First, we provide a theoretical framework to understand the stabilization of gradient subspaces through Hessian analysis. Second, we empirically establish an important relationship between gradient dynamics and low-rank expressiveness of weight matrices. Our findings reveal that different LLM components exhibit varying levels of converged low-rank structures, necessitating variable rank reduction across them to minimize drop in performance due to compression. Drawing on this result, we present Weight Low-Rank Projection(WeLore) that unifies weight compression and memory-efficient fine-tuning into one, in a data-agnostic and one-shot manner. When used as a compression technique, WeLore categorizes weight matrices into Low-rank Components (LRCs) and Non-Low-rank Components (N-LRCs) and suitably encodes them for minimum performance loss. Our gradient dynamics perspective illustrates that LRCs tend to have better fine-tuning capabilities and their standalone fine-tuning can closely mimic and sometimes outperform the training loss trajectory and performance of full fine-tuning with notable memory and compute footprint reduction. Codes are available at https://github.com/VITA-Group/WeLore.49:T64a,As large language models have evolved, it has become crucial to distinguish between process supervision and outcome supervision -- two key reinforcement learning approaches to complex reasoning tasks. While process supervision offers intuitive advantages for long-term credit assignment, the precise relationship between these paradigms has remained an open question. Conventional wisdom suggests that outcome supervision is fundamentally more challenging due to the trajectory-level coverage problem, leading to significant investment in collecting fine-grained process supervision data. In this paper, we take steps towards resolving this debate. Our main theorem shows that, under standard data coverage assumptions, reinforcement learning through outcome supervision is no more statistically difficult than through process supervision, up to polynomial factors in horizon. At the core of this result lies the novel Change of Trajectory Measure Lemma -- a technical tool that bridges return-based trajectory measure and step-level distribution shift. Furthermore, for settings with access to a verifier or a rollout capability, we prove that any policy's advantage function can serve as an optimal process reward model, providing a direct connection between outcome and process supervision. These findings suggest that the empirically observed performance gap -- if any -- between outcome and process supervision likely stems from algorithmic limitations rather than inherent statistical difficulties, potentially transforming how we approach data collection and algorithm design for reinforcement learning.4a:T52e,Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) activates only a subset of experts during inference, allowing the model to maintain low inference FLOPs and latency even as the parameter count scales up. However, since MoE dynamically selects the experts, all the experts need to be loaded into VRAM. Their large parameter size still limits deployment, and offloading, which load experts into VRAM only when needed, significantly increase inference latency. To address this, we propose Mixture of Lookup Experts (MoLE), a new MoE architecture that is efficient in both communication and VRAM usage. In MoLE, the experts are Feed-Forward Networks (FFNs) during training, taking the output of the embedding layer as input. Before inference, these experts can be re-parameterized as lookup tables (LUTs) that retrieves expert outputs based on input ids, and offloaded to storage devices. Therefore, we do not need to perform expert computations during inference. Instead, we directly retrieve the expert's computation results based on input ids and load them into VRAM, and thus the resulting communication overhead is negligible. Experiments show that, with the same FLOPs and VRAM usage, MoLE achieves inference speeds comparable to dense models and significantly faster than MoE with experts offloading, while maintaining performance on par with MoE.4b:T54f,Training large language models (LLMs) increasingly relies on geographically distributed accelerators, causing prohibitive communication costs across regions and uneven utilization of heterogeneous hardware. We propose HALoS, a hierarchical asynchronous optimization framework that tackles these issues by introducing local parameter servers (LPSs) within each region and a global parameter server (GPS) that merges updates across regions. This hierarchical design minimizes expensive inter-region communication, reduces straggler effects, and leverages fast intra-region links. We provide a rigorous convergence analysis for HALoS under non-convex objectives, including theoretical guarantees on the role of hierarchical momentum in asynchronous training. Empirically, HALoS attains up to 7.5x faster convergence than synchronous baselines in geo-distributed LLM training and improves upon existing asynchronous methods by up to 2.1x. Crucially, HALoS preserves the model quality of fully synchronous SGD-matching or exceeding accuracy on standard language modeling and downstream benchmarks-while substantially lowering total training time. These results demonstrate that hierarchical, server-side update accumulation and global model merging are powerful tools for scalable, efficient training of new-era LLMs in heterogeneous, geo-distributed environments.4c:T57f,The core component of attention is the scoring function, which transforms the inputs into low-dimensional queries and keys and takes the dot product of each pair. While the low-dimensional projection improves efficiency, it causes information loss for certain tasks that have intrinsically high-dimensional inputs. Additionally, attention uses the same scoring function for all input pairs, without imposing a distance-dependent compute bias for neighboring tokens in the sequence. In this work, we address these shortcomings by proposing new scoring functions based on computationally efficient structured matrices with high ranks, including Block Tensor-Train (BTT) and Multi-Level Low Rank (MLR) matrices. On in-context regression tasks with high-dimensional inputs, our proposed scoring functions outperform standard attention for any fixed compute budget. On language modeling, a task that exhibits locality patterns, our MLR-based attention method achieves improved scaling laws compared to both standard attention and variants of sliding window attention. Additionally, we show that both BTT and MLR fall under a broader family of efficient structured matrices capable of encoding either full-rank or distance-dependent compute biases, thereby addressing significant shortcomings of standard attention. Finally, we show that MLR attention has promising results for long-range time-series forecasting.4d:T447,Large language models often struggle with length generalization and solving complex problem instances beyond their training distribution. We present a self-improvement approach where models iteratively generate and learn from their own solutions, progressively tackling harder problems while maintaining a standard transformer architecture. Across diverse tasks including arithmetic, string manipulation, and maze solving, self-improving enables models to solve problems far beyond their initial training distribution-for instance, generalizing from 10-digit to 100-digit addition without apparent saturation. We observe that in some cases filtering for correct self-generated examples leads to exponential improvements in out-of-distribution performance across training rounds. Additionally, starting from pretrained models significantly accelerates this self-improvement process for several tasks. Our results demonstrate how controlled weak-to-strong curricula can systematically teach a model logical extrapolation without any changes to the positional embeddings, or the model architecture.4e:T61c,Preference alignment is pivotal for empowering large language models (LLMs) to generate helpful and harmless responses. However, the performance of preference alignment is highly sensitive to the prevalent noise in the preference data. Recent efforts for this problem either marginally alleviate the impact of noise without the ability to actually reduce its presence, or rely on costly teacher LLMs prone to reward misgeneralization. To address these challenges, we propose the RObust Preference Optimization (ROPO) framework, an iterative alignment approach that integrates noise-tolerance and filtering of noisy samples without the aid of external models. Specifically, ROPO iteratively solves a constrained optimization problem, where we dynamically assign a quality-aware weight for each sample and constrain the sum of the weights to the number of samples we intend to retain. For noise-tolerant training and effective noise identification, we derive a robust loss by suppressing the gradients of samples with high uncertainty. We demonstrate both empirically and theoretically that the derived loss is critical for distinguishing noisy samples from clean ones. Furthermore, inspired by our derived loss, we propose a robustness-guided rejection sampling technique to compensate for the potential important information in discarded queries. Experiments on three widely-used datasets with Mistral-7B and Llama-2-7B demonstrate that ROPO significantly outperforms existing preference alignment methods, with its superiority growing as the noise rate increases.4f:T4f5,An important question today is whether a given text was used to train a large language model (LLM). A \emph{completion} test is often employed: check if the LLM completes a sufficiently complex text. This, however, requires a ground-truth definition of membership; most commonly, it is defined as a member based on the $n$-gram overlap between the target text and any text in the dataset. In this work, we demonstrate that this $n$-gram based membership definition can be effectively gamed. We study scenarios where sequences are \emph{non-members} for a given $n$ and we find that completion tests still succeed. We find many natural cases of this phenomenon by retraining LLMs from scratch after removing all training samples that were completed; these cases include exact duplicates, near-duplicates, and even short overlaps. They showcase that it is difficult to find a single viable choice of $n$ for membership definitions. Using these insights, we design adversarial datasets that can cause a given target sequence to be completed without containing it, for any reasonable choice of $n$. Our findings highlight the inadequacy of $n$-gram membership, suggesting membership definitions fail to account for auxiliary information available to the training algorithm.50:T5a9,Text-to-song generation, the task of creating vocals and accompaniment from textual inputs, poses significant challenges due to domain complexity and data scarcity. Existing approaches often employ multi-stage generation procedures, leading to cumbersome training and inference pipelines, as well as suboptimal overall generation quality due to error accumulation across stages. In this paper, we propose SongGen, a fully open-source, single-stage auto-regressive transformer designed for controllable song generation. The proposed model facilitates fine-grained control over diverse musical attributes, including lyrics and textual descriptions of instrumentation, genre, mood, and timbre, while also offering an optional three-second reference clip for voice cloning. Within a unified auto-regressive framework, SongGen supports two output modes: mixed mode, which generates a mixture of vocals and accompaniment directly, and dual-track mode, which synthesizes them separately for greater flexibility in downstream applications. We explore diverse token pattern strategies for each mode, leading to notable improvements and valuable insights. Furthermore, we design an automated data preprocessing pipeline with effective quality control. To foster community engagement and future research, we will release our model weights, training code, annotated data, and preprocessing pipeline. The code is available at https://github.com/LiuZH-19/SongGen.51:T748,Learning a reward model (RM) from human preferences has been an important component in aligning large language models (LLMs). The canonical setup of learning RMs from pairwise preference data is rooted in the classic Bradley-Terry (BT) model that accepts binary feedback, i.e., the label being either Response 1 is better than Response 2, or the opposite. Such a setup inevitably discards potentially useful samples (such as"tied"between the two responses) and loses more fine-grained information (such as"slightly better"). In this paper, we propose a framework for learning RMs under ordinal feedback which generalizes the case of binary preference feedback to any arbitrary granularity. Specifically, we first identify a marginal unbiasedness condition, which generalizes the assumption of the BT model in the existing binary feedback setting. The condition validates itself via the sociological concept of the wisdom of the crowd. Under the condition, we develop a natural probability model for pairwise preference data under ordinal feedback and analyze its properties. We prove the statistical benefits of ordinal feedback in terms of reducing the Rademacher complexity compared to the case of binary feedback. The proposed learning objective and the theory also extend to hinge loss and direct policy optimization (DPO). In particular, the theoretical analysis may be of independent interest when applying to a seemingly unrelated problem of knowledge distillation to interpret the bias-variance trade-off therein. The framework also sheds light on writing guidance for human annotators. Our numerical experiments validate that fine-grained feedback leads to better reward learning for both in-distribution and out-of-distribution settings. Further experiments show that incorporating a certain proportion of samples with tied preference boosts RM learning.52:T415,We formally study the logical reasoning capabilities of decoder-only Transformers in the context of the boolean satisfiability (SAT) problem. First, we prove by construction that decoder-only Transformers can decide 3-SAT, in a non-uniform model of computation, using backtracking and deduction via Chain-of-Thought (CoT). %We prove its correctness by showing trace equivalence to the well-known DPLL SAT-solving algorithm. Second, we implement our construction as a PyTorch model with a tool (PARAT) that we designed to empirically demonstrate its correctness and investigate its properties. Third, rather than \textit{programming} a transformer to reason, we evaluate empirically whether it can be \textit{trained} to do so by learning directly from algorithmic traces (``reasoning paths'') from our theoretical construction. The trained models demonstrate strong out-of-distribution generalization on problem sizes seen during training but has limited length generalization, which is consistent with the implications of our theoretical result53:T520,Recent studies show that in supervised fine-tuning (SFT) of large language models (LLMs), data quality matters more than quantity. While most data cleaning methods concentrate on filtering entire samples, the quality of individual tokens within a sample can vary significantly. After pre-training, even in high-quality samples, patterns or phrases that are not task-related can be redundant, uninformative, or even harmful. Continuing to fine-tune on these patterns may offer limited benefit and even degrade downstream task performance. In this paper, we investigate token quality from a noisy-label perspective and propose a generic token cleaning pipeline for SFT tasks. Our method filters out uninformative tokens while preserving those carrying key task-specific information. Specifically, we first evaluate token quality by examining the influence of model updates on each token, then apply a threshold-based separation. The token influence can be measured in a single pass with a fixed reference model or iteratively with self-evolving reference models. The benefits and limitations of both methods are analyzed theoretically by error upper bounds. Extensive experiments show that our framework consistently improves downstream performance. Code is available at https://github.com/UCSC-REAL/TokenCleaning.54:T613,The need to develop a general framework for architecture analysis is becoming increasingly important, given the expanding design space of sequence models. To this end, we draw insights from classical signal processing and control theory, to develop a quantitative measure of \textit{memory utilization}: the internal mechanisms through which a model stores past information to produce future outputs. This metric, which we call \textbf{\textit{effective state-size}} (ESS), is tailored to the fundamental class of systems with \textit{input-invariant} and \textit{input-varying linear operators}, encompassing a variety of computational units such as variants of attention, convolutions, and recurrences. Unlike prior work on memory utilization, which either relies on raw operator visualizations (e.g. attention maps), or simply the total \textit{memory capacity} (i.e. cache size) of a model, our metrics provide highly interpretable and actionable measurements. In particular, we show how ESS can be leveraged to improve initialization strategies, inform novel regularizers and advance the performance-efficiency frontier through model distillation. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the effect of context delimiters (such as end-of-speech tokens) on ESS highlights cross-architectural differences in how large language models utilize their available memory to recall information. Overall, we find that ESS provides valuable insights into the dynamics that dictate memory utilization, enabling the design of more efficient and effective sequence models.55:T696,While the activations of neurons in deep neural networks usually do not have a simple human-understandable interpretation, sparse autoencoders (SAEs) can be used to transform these activations into a higher-dimensional latent space which may be more easily interpretable. However, these SAEs can have millions of distinct latent features, making it infeasible for humans to manually interpret each one. In this work, we build an open-source automated pipeline to generate and evaluate natural language explanations for SAE features using LLMs. We test our framework on SAEs of varying sizes, activation functions, and losses, trained on two different open-weight LLMs. We introduce five new techniques to score the quality of explanations that are cheaper to run than the previous state of the art. One of these techniques, intervention scoring, evaluates the interpretability of the effects of intervening on a feature, which we find explains features that are not recalled by existing methods. We propose guidelines for generating better explanations that remain valid for a broader set of activating contexts, and discuss pitfalls with existing scoring techniques. We use our explanations to measure the semantic similarity of independently trained SAEs, and find that SAEs trained on nearby layers of the residual stream are highly similar. Our large-scale analysis confirms that SAE latents are indeed much more interpretable than neurons, even when neurons are sparsified using top-$k$ postprocessing. Our code is available at https://github.com/EleutherAI/sae-auto-interp, and our explanations are available at https://huggingface.co/datasets/EleutherAI/auto_interp_explanations.56:T5b7,What computational structures emerge in transformers trained on next-token prediction? In this work, we provide evidence that transformers implement constrained Bayesian belief updating -- a parallelized version of partial Bayesian inference shaped by architectural constraints. We integrate the model-agnostic theory of optimal prediction with mechanistic interpretability to analyze transformers trained on a tractable family of hidden Markov models that generate rich geometric patterns in neural activations. Our primary analysis focuses on single-layer transformers, revealing how the first attention layer implements these constrained updates, with extensions to multi-layer architectures demonstrating how subsequent layers refine these representations. We find that attention carries out an algorithm with a natural interpretation in the probability simplex, and create representations with distinctive geometric structure. We show how both the algorithmic behavior and the underlying geometry of these representations can be theoretically predicted in detail -- including the attention pattern, OV-vectors, and embedding vectors -- by modifying the equations for optimal future token predictions to account for the architectural constraints of attention. Our approach provides a principled lens on how architectural constraints shape the implementation of optimal prediction, revealing why transformers develop specific intermediate geometric structures.57:T58d,Fine-tuning a pre-trained model on a downstream task often degrades its original capabilities, a phenomenon known as"catastrophic forgetting". This is especially an issue when one does not have access to the data and recipe used to develop the pre-trained model. Under this constraint, most existing methods for mitigating forgetting are inapplicable. To address this challenge, we propose a sample weighting scheme for the fine-tuning data solely based on the pre-trained model's losses. Specifically, we upweight the easy samples on which the pre-trained model's loss is low and vice versa to limit the drift from the pre-trained model. Our approach is orthogonal and yet complementary to existing methods; while such methods mostly operate on parameter or gradient space, we concentrate on the sample space. We theoretically analyze the impact of fine-tuning with our method in a linear setting, showing that it stalls learning in a certain subspace which inhibits overfitting to the target task. We empirically demonstrate the efficacy of our method on both language and vision tasks. As an example, when fine-tuning Gemma 2 2B on MetaMathQA, our method results in only a $0.8\%$ drop in accuracy on GSM8K (another math dataset) compared to standard fine-tuning, while preserving $5.4\%$ more accuracy on the pre-training datasets. Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/sanyalsunny111/FLOW_finetuning .58:T6b8,Predicting changes from scaling advanced AI systems is a desirable property for engineers, economists, governments and industry alike, and, while a well-established literature exists on how pretraining performance scales, predictable scaling behavior on downstream capabilities remains elusive. While many factors are certainly responsible, this paper identifies a significant factor that makes predicting scaling behavior on widely used multiple-choice question answering benchmarks challenging and illuminates a path towards making such downstream evaluations predictable with scale. Using five model families and twelve well-established multiple-choice benchmarks, we demonstrate that downstream performance is computed from negative log likelihoods via a sequence of transformations that progressively degrades the statistical relationship between performance and scale. We then pinpoint the mechanism causing this degradation: downstream metrics require comparing the correct choice against a small number of specific incorrect choices, meaning accurately predicting downstream capabilities requires predicting not just how probability mass concentrates on the correct choice with scale, but also how probability mass fluctuates on the alternative incorrect choices with scale. We empirically study how probability mass on the correct choice co-varies with probability mass on incorrect choices with increasing compute, suggesting that scaling laws for \textit{incorrect} choices might be achievable. Our work also explains why pretraining scaling laws are commonly regarded as more predictable than downstream capabilities and contributes towards establishing scaling-predictable evaluations of frontier AI models.59:T52c,State-space models (SSMs) and transformers dominate the language modeling landscape. However, they are constrained to a lower computational complexity than classical recurrent neural networks (RNNs), limiting their expressivity. In contrast, RNNs lack parallelization during training, raising fundamental questions about the trade off between parallelization and expressivity. We propose implicit SSMs, which iterate a transformation until convergence to a fixed point. Theoretically, we show that implicit SSMs implement the non-linear state-transitions of RNNs. Empirically, we find that only approximate fixed-point convergence suffices, enabling the design of a scalable training curriculum that largely retains parallelization, with full convergence required only for a small subset of tokens. Our approach demonstrates superior state-tracking capabilities on regular languages, surpassing transformers and SSMs. We further scale implicit SSMs to natural language reasoning tasks and pretraining of large-scale language models up to 1.3B parameters on 207B tokens representing, to our knowledge, the largest implicit model trained to date. Notably, our implicit models outperform their explicit counterparts on standard benchmarks. Our code is publicly available at http://github.com/microsoft/implicit_languagemodels .5a:T5e7,Attention mechanisms are central to the success of large language models (LLMs), enabling them to capture intricate token dependencies and implicitly assign importance to each token. Recent studies have revealed the sink token, which receives disproportionately high attention despite their limited semantic role. In this paper, we first expand the relationship between the sink token and other tokens, moving beyond attention to explore their similarity in hidden states, considering the layer depth. We observe that as the layers get deeper, the cosine similarity between the normalized hidden states of the sink token and those of other tokens increases, and that the normalized hidden states of the sink token exhibit negligible changes. These imply that other tokens consistently are directed toward the sink token throughout the layers. Next, we propose a dynamic token selection method, called OrthoRank, using these findings to select important tokens. Specifically, in a certain layer, we define token importance by the speed at which the token moves toward the sink token. This is converted into orthogonality with the sink token, meaning that tokens that are more orthogonal to the sink token are assigned greater importance. Finally, through extensive experiments, we demonstrated that our method results in lower perplexity and higher zero-shot accuracy compared to layer pruning methods at the same sparsity ratio with comparable throughput, while also achieving superior performance on LongBench.5b:T54e,Efficient real-world deployments of large language models (LLMs) rely on Key-Value (KV) caching for processing and generating long outputs, reducing the need for repetitive computation. For large contexts, Key-Value caches can take up tens of gigabytes of device memory, as they store vector representations for each token and layer. Recent work has shown that the cached vectors can be compressed through quantization, pruning or merging, but these techniques often compromise quality towards higher compression rates. In this work, we aim to improve Key&Value compression by exploiting two observations: 1) the inherent dependencies between keys and values across different layers, and 2) high-compression mechanisms for internal network states. We propose AQUA-KV, an adaptive quantization for Key-Value caches that relies on compact adapters to exploit existing dependencies between Keys and Values, and aims to"optimally"compress the information that cannot be predicted. AQUA-KV significantly improves compression rates, while maintaining high accuracy on state-of-the-art LLM families. On Llama 3.2 LLMs, we achieve near-lossless inference at 2-2.5 bits per value with under $1\%$ relative error in perplexity and LongBench scores. AQUA-KV is one-shot, simple, and efficient: it can be calibrated on a single GPU within 1-6 hours, even for 70B models.5c:T5da,Long-context models(LCMs) have shown great potential in processing long input sequences(even more than 100M tokens) conveniently and effectively. With significant progress, recent research has pointed out that LCMs can accurately locate token-level salient information within the context. Yet, the generation performance of these LCMs is far from satisfactory and might result in misaligned responses, such as hallucinations. To enhance the generation capability of LCMs, existing works have investigated the effects of data size and quality for both pre-training and instruction tuning. Though achieving meaningful improvement, previous methods fall short in either effectiveness or efficiency. In this paper, we introduce LOGO(Long cOntext aliGnment via efficient preference Optimization), a training strategy that first introduces preference optimization for long-context alignment. To overcome the GPU memory-bound issue caused by the long sequence, LOGO employs a reference-free preference optimization strategy and adopts a position synthesis method to construct the training data. By training with only 0.3B data on a single 8$\times$A800 GPU machine for 16 hours, LOGO allows the Llama-3-8B-Instruct-80K model to achieve comparable performance with GPT-4 in real-world long-context tasks while preserving the model's original capabilities on other tasks, e.g., language modeling and MMLU. Moreover, LOGO can extend the model's context window size while enhancing its generation performance.5d:T5f3,Post-training of language models (LMs) increasingly relies on the following two stages: (i) knowledge distillation, where the LM is trained to imitate a larger teacher LM, and (ii) reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF), where the LM is aligned by optimizing a reward model. In the second RLHF stage, a well-known challenge is reward hacking, where the LM over-optimizes the reward model. Such phenomenon is in line with Goodhart's law and can lead to degraded performance on the true objective. In this paper, we investigate whether a similar phenomenon, that we call teacher hacking, can occur during knowledge distillation. This could arise because the teacher LM is itself an imperfect approximation of the true distribution. To study this, we propose a controlled experimental setup involving: (i) an oracle LM representing the ground-truth distribution, (ii) a teacher LM distilled from the oracle, and (iii) a student LM distilled from the teacher. Our experiments reveal the following insights. When using a fixed offline dataset for distillation, teacher hacking occurs; moreover, we can detect it by observing when the optimization process deviates from polynomial convergence laws. In contrast, employing online data generation techniques effectively mitigates teacher hacking. More precisely, we identify data diversity as the key factor in preventing hacking. Overall, our findings provide a deeper understanding of the benefits and limitations of distillation for building robust and efficient LMs.5e:T40d,Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated considerable reasoning abilities in various tasks such as mathematics and coding. However, recent studies indicate that even the best models lack true comprehension of their reasoning processes. In this paper, we explore how self-play can enhance the rationality of models in the reasoning process without supervision from humans or superior models. We design a Critic-Discernment Game(CDG) in which a prover first provides a solution to a given problem and is subsequently challenged by critiques of its solution. These critiques either aim to assist or mislead the prover. The objective of the prover is to maintain the correct answer when faced with misleading comments, while correcting errors in response to constructive feedback. Our experiments on tasks involving mathematical reasoning, stepwise error detection, self-correction, and long-chain reasoning demonstrate that CDG training can significantly improve the ability of well-aligned LLMs to comprehend their reasoning process.5f:T4a4,Training safe LLMs remains a critical challenge. The most widely used method, Refusal Training (RT), struggles to generalize against various Out-of-Distribution (OOD) jailbreaking attacks. Although various advanced methods have been proposed to address this issue, we instead question whether OOD attacks inherently surpass the capability of vanilla RT. Evaluations using Best-of-N (BoN) reveal significant safety improvements as N increases, indicating models possess adequate latent safety knowledge but RT fails to consistently elicit it under OOD scenarios. Further domain adaptation analysis reveals that direct RT causes reliance on superficial shortcuts, resulting in non-generalizable representation mappings. Inspired by our findings, we propose training model to perform safety reasoning for each query. Specifically, we synthesize reasoning supervision aligned with specified guidelines that reflect diverse perspectives on safety knowledge. This encourages model to engage in deeper reasoning, explicitly eliciting and utilizing latent safety knowledge for each query. Extensive experiments show that our method significantly improves model generalization against OOD attacks.60:T56a,While Rotary Position Embedding (RoPE) and its variants are widely adopted for their long-context capabilities, the extension of the 1D RoPE to video, with its complex spatio-temporal structure, remains an open challenge. This work first introduces a comprehensive analysis that identifies four key characteristics essential for the effective adaptation of RoPE to video, which have not been fully considered in prior work. As part of our analysis, we introduce a challenging V-NIAH-D (Visual Needle-In-A-Haystack with Distractors) task, which adds periodic distractors into V-NIAH. The V-NIAH-D task demonstrates that previous RoPE variants, lacking appropriate temporal dimension allocation, are easily misled by distractors. Based on our analysis, we introduce \textbf{VideoRoPE}, with a \textit{3D structure} designed to preserve spatio-temporal relationships. VideoRoPE features \textit{low-frequency temporal allocation} to mitigate periodic oscillations, a \textit{diagonal layout} to maintain spatial symmetry, and \textit{adjustable temporal spacing} to decouple temporal and spatial indexing. VideoRoPE consistently surpasses previous RoPE variants, across diverse downstream tasks such as long video retrieval, video understanding, and video hallucination. Our code will be available at \href{https://github.com/Wiselnn570/VideoRoPE}{https://github.com/Wiselnn570/VideoRoPE}.61:T66a,Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback (RLHF) is a widely used fine-tuning approach that aligns machine learning model, particularly Language Model (LM) with human preferences. There are typically multiple objectives driving the preference, hence humans find it easier to express per-objective comparisons rather than a global preference between two choices. Multi-Objective RLHF (MORLHF) aims to use per-objective preference feedback and achieve Pareto optimality among these objectives by aggregating them into a single unified objective for optimization. However, nearly all prior works rely on linear aggregation, which rules out policies that favor specific objectives such as the worst one. The only existing approach using non-linear aggregation is computationally expensive due to its reward-based nature and the need for retraining whenever the aggregation parameters change. In this work, we address this limitation by transforming the non-linear aggregation maximization problem into a series of sub-problems. Each sub-problem involves only linear aggregation, making it computationally efficient to solve. We further extend our framework to handle multi-group scenarios, where each group has distinct weights for the objectives. Our method enables achieving consensus or maximizing the aggregated objective across all groups. Theoretically, we demonstrate that our algorithmic framework achieves sublinear regret and can be easily adapted to a reward-free algorithm. Empirically, leveraging our theoretical insights, we propose a nearly training-free algorithm once the optimal policies for individual objectives are obtained.62:T428,Many recent studies have found evidence for emergent reasoning capabilities in large language models (LLMs), but debate persists concerning the robustness of these capabilities, and the extent to which they depend on structured reasoning mechanisms. To shed light on these issues, we study the internal mechanisms that support abstract reasoning in LLMs. We identify an emergent symbolic architecture that implements abstract reasoning via a series of three computations. In early layers, symbol abstraction heads convert input tokens to abstract variables based on the relations between those tokens. In intermediate layers, symbolic induction heads perform sequence induction over these abstract variables. Finally, in later layers, retrieval heads predict the next token by retrieving the value associated with the predicted abstract variable. These results point toward a resolution of the longstanding debate between symbolic and neural network approaches, suggesting that emergent reasoning in neural networks depends on the emergence of symbolic mechanisms.63:T4a1,While state-of-the-art LLMs have demonstrated great promise of using long Chains-of-Thought (CoT) to boost reasoning, scaling it up to more challenging problems at test-time is fundamentally limited by suboptimal memory usage -- intermediate computations accumulate indefinitely in context even when no longer needed for future thoughts. We introduce PENCIL, which incorporates a novel reduction mechanism into the autoregressive generation process that recursively cleans up intermediate thoughts based on patterns learned from training. By iteratively generating and erasing thoughts, PENCIL can think deeper to solve harder problems using shorter context and less compute. Empirically, we observe PENCIL is significantly more effective and efficient than CoT. For example, we demonstrate PENCIL with a small 25M-parameter transformer and 2048 context length solves Einstein's puzzle -- a task that challenges much larger models like GPT-4. Theoretically, we prove PENCIL can perform universal efficient computation by simulating any Turing machines with optimal time and space complexity, and thus can solve arbitrary computable tasks that are otherwise intractable for vanilla CoT.64:T45d,Large Language Models (LLMs), despite their impressive capabilities, often fail to accurately repeat a single word when prompted to, and instead output unrelated text. This unexplained failure mode represents a vulnerability, allowing even end-users to diverge models away from their intended behavior. We aim to explain the causes for this phenomenon and link it to the concept of ``attention sinks'', an emergent LLM behavior crucial for fluency, in which the initial token receives disproportionately high attention scores. Our investigation identifies the neural circuit responsible for attention sinks and shows how long repetitions disrupt this circuit. We extend this finding to other non-repeating sequences that exhibit similar circuit disruptions. To address this, we propose a targeted patch that effectively resolves the issue without negatively impacting the model's overall performance. This study provides a mechanistic explanation for an LLM vulnerability, demonstrating how interpretability can diagnose and address issues, and offering insights that pave the way for more secure and reliable models.65:T5f9,While direct policy optimization methods exist, pioneering LLMs are fine-tuned with reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) to generate better responses under the supervision of a reward model learned from preference data. One major challenge of RLHF is the inaccuracy of the intermediate reward model, especially in the tasks that requires complex reasoning for the reward model to score a response. We find that the reliability of the reward model varies across responses assigned with different rewards. This motivates us to filter the samples whose rewards may be unreliable to improve the signal-to-noise ratio during policy learning, resulting in Policy Filtration for Proximal Policy Optimization (PF-PPO). To choose a proper policy filtering strategy, we use the coefficient of determination (R2) between the rewards and actual scores on filtered samples as the metrics to help us find promising strategies since it measures how well the rewards filtered by PF-PPO indicate real performance. We provide extensive experiments to validate the effectiveness of PF-PPO in code generation and math reasoning tasks. In code generation, PF-PPO achieves the state-of-the-art performance of 7-billion-parameter models on HumanEval (+7.9%), MBPP (+0.7%), and LeetCode Contest (+10.0%) which is a more challenging benchmark created by us. In math reasoning, PF-PPO yields performance increase using different reward models and benchmarks (Ape210K and CMATH). Code is available on https://github.com/DtYXs/verl/tree/pf-ppo.66:T644,Preference alignment in Large Language Models (LLMs) has significantly improved their ability to adhere to human instructions and intentions. However, existing direct alignment algorithms primarily focus on relative preferences and often overlook the qualitative aspects of responses, despite having access to preference data that includes reward scores from judge models during AI feedback. Striving to maximize the implicit reward gap between the chosen and the slightly inferior rejected responses can cause overfitting and unnecessary unlearning of the high-quality rejected responses. The unawareness of the reward scores also drives the LLM to indiscriminately favor the low-quality chosen responses and fail to generalize to optimal responses that are sparse in data. To overcome these shortcomings, our study introduces reward-conditioned LLM policies that discern and learn from the entire spectrum of response quality within the dataset, helping extrapolate to more optimal regions. We propose an effective yet simple data relabeling method that conditions the preference pairs on quality scores to construct a reward-augmented dataset. The experiments across various benchmarks and diverse models demonstrate that our approach consistently boosts DPO by a considerable margin. Through comprehensive ablation studies, we demonstrate that our method not only maximizes the utility of preference data but also mitigates the issue of unlearning, demonstrating its broad effectiveness beyond mere data expansion. Our code is available at https://github.com/shenao-zhang/reward-augmented-preference.67:T561,Preference learning, or the task of aligning generative models to preference comparison data, has yet to reach the conceptual maturity of classification, density estimation, etc. To close this gap, this work presents a framework to understand preference learning starting from the sampling distribution of pairwise preference data. First, we prove that the only evaluation of a generative model that respects both preferences and prevalences in the data distribution is a form of win rate, justifying win rate as the focal point to understand preference learning. We then analyze preference learning methods as win rate optimization (WRO) or non-WRO. We present novel instances of WRO beyond existing examples (RLHF, NLHF) and identify two key theoretical benefits of all such methods. We prove that common non-WRO methods like DPO and SFT on preferred samples lack these properties and suggest ways to mitigate such theoretical limitations. We also show that WRO underperforms in practice due optimization difficulties and that optimization success predicts performance better than choices which affect the objective's solution. Our analysis highlights best practices for existing methods and provides recommendations for future research, guided by the principle that one should either align non-WRO methods more closely with WRO or improve the optimization of WRO objectives.68:T5a9,While attention-based models have demonstrated the remarkable ability of in-context learning (ICL), the theoretical understanding of how these models acquired this ability through gradient descent training is still preliminary. Towards answering this question, we study the gradient descent dynamics of multi-head linear self-attention trained for in-context linear regression. We examine two parametrizations of linear self-attention: one with the key and query weights merged as a single matrix (common in theoretical studies), and one with separate key and query matrices (closer to practical settings). For the merged parametrization, we show that the training dynamics has two fixed points and the loss trajectory exhibits a single, abrupt drop. We derive an analytical time-course solution for a certain class of datasets and initialization. For the separate parametrization, we show that the training dynamics has exponentially many fixed points and the loss exhibits saddle-to-saddle dynamics, which we reduce to scalar ordinary differential equations. During training, the model implements principal component regression in context with the number of principal components increasing over training time. Overall, we provide a theoretical description of how ICL abilities evolve during gradient descent training of linear attention, revealing abrupt acquisition or progressive improvements depending on how the key and query are parametrized.69:T4dd,An efficient attention implementation is essential for large models due to its quadratic time complexity. Fortunately, attention commonly exhibits sparsity, i.e., many values in the attention map are near zero, allowing for the omission of corresponding computations. Many studies have utilized the sparse pattern to accelerate attention. However, most existing works focus on optimizing attention within specific models by exploiting certain sparse patterns of the attention map. A universal sparse attention that guarantees both the speedup and end-to-end performance of diverse models remains elusive. In this paper, we propose SpargeAttn, a universal sparse and quantized attention for any model. Our method uses a two-stage online filter: in the first stage, we rapidly and accurately predict the attention map, enabling the skip of some matrix multiplications in attention. In the second stage, we design an online softmax-aware filter that incurs no extra overhead and further skips some matrix multiplications. Experiments show that our method significantly accelerates diverse models, including language, image, and video generation, without sacrificing end-to-end metrics. The code is available at https://github.com/thu-ml/SpargeAttn.6a:T4c3,Large Language Models (LLMs) face significant deployment challenges due to their substantial resource requirements. While low-bit quantized weights can reduce memory usage and improve inference efficiency, current hardware lacks native support for mixed-precision General Matrix Multiplication (mpGEMM), resulting in inefficient dequantization-based implementations. Moreover, uniform quantization methods often fail to capture weight distributions adequately, leading to performance degradation. We propose GANQ (GPU-Adaptive Non-Uniform Quantization), a layer-wise post-training non-uniform quantization framework optimized for hardware-efficient lookup table-based mpGEMM. GANQ achieves superior quantization performance by utilizing a training-free, GPU-adaptive optimization algorithm to efficiently reduce layer-wise quantization errors. Extensive experiments demonstrate GANQ's ability to reduce the perplexity gap from the FP16 baseline compared to state-of-the-art methods for both 3-bit and 4-bit quantization. Furthermore, when deployed on a single NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU, GANQ's quantized models achieve up to 2.57$\times$ speedup over the baseline, advancing memory and inference efficiency in LLM deployment.6b:T695,With the increase in the number of parameters in large language models, the process of pre-training and fine-tuning increasingly demands larger volumes of GPU memory. A significant portion of this memory is typically consumed by the optimizer state. To overcome this challenge, recent approaches such as low-rank adaptation (LoRA (Hu et al., 2021)), low-rank gradient projection (GaLore (Zhao et al., 2024)), and blockwise optimization (BAdam (Luo et al., 2024)) have been proposed. However, in all these algorithms, the $\textit{effective rank of the weight updates remains low-rank}$, which can lead to a substantial loss of information from the gradient. This loss can be critically important, especially during the pre-training stage. In this paper, we introduce $\texttt{FRUGAL}$ ($\textbf{F}$ull-$\textbf{R}$ank $\textbf{U}$pdates with $\textbf{G}$r$\textbf{A}$dient sp$\textbf{L}$itting), a new memory-efficient optimization framework. $\texttt{FRUGAL}$ leverages gradient splitting to perform low-dimensional updates using advanced algorithms (such as Adam), while updates along the remaining directions are executed via state-free methods like SGD or signSGD (Bernstein et al., 2018). Our framework can be integrated with various low-rank update selection techniques, including GaLore and BAdam. We provide theoretical convergence guarantees for our framework when using SGDM for low-dimensional updates and SGD for state-free updates. Additionally, our method consistently outperforms concurrent approaches across various fixed memory budgets, achieving state-of-the-art results in pre-training and fine-tuning tasks while balancing memory efficiency and performance metrics.6c:T54d,Speculative decoding (SPD) aims to accelerate the auto-regressive token generation process of a target Large Language Model (LLM). Some approaches employ a draft model with multiple heads to predict a sequence of future tokens, where each head handles a token in the sequence. The target LLM verifies the predicted sequence and accepts aligned tokens, enabling efficient multi-token generation. However, existing methods assume that all tokens within a sequence are equally important, employing identical head structures and relying on a single-generation paradigm, either serial or parallel. To this end, we theoretically demonstrate that initial tokens in the draft sequence are more important than later ones. Building on this insight, we propose Gumiho, a hybrid model combining serial and parallel heads. Specifically, given the critical importance of early tokens, we employ a sophisticated Transformer architecture for the early draft heads in a serial configuration to improve accuracy. For later tokens, we utilize multiple lightweight MLP heads operating in parallel to enhance efficiency. By allocating more advanced model structures and longer running times to the early heads, Gumiho achieves improved overall performance. The experimental results demonstrate that our method outperforms existing approaches, fully validating its effectiveness.6d:T559,Speculative decoding has emerged as a popular method to accelerate the inference of Large Language Models (LLMs) while retaining their superior text generation performance. Previous methods either adopt a fixed speculative decoding configuration regardless of the prefix tokens, or train draft models in an offline or online manner to align them with the context. This paper proposes a training-free online learning framework to adaptively choose the configuration of the hyperparameters for speculative decoding as text is being generated. We first formulate this hyperparameter selection problem as a Multi-Armed Bandit problem and provide a general speculative decoding framework BanditSpec. Furthermore, two bandit-based hyperparameter selection algorithms, UCBSpec and EXP3Spec, are designed and analyzed in terms of a novel quantity, the stopping time regret. We upper bound this regret under both stochastic and adversarial reward settings. By deriving an information-theoretic impossibility result, it is shown that the regret performance of UCBSpec is optimal up to universal constants. Finally, extensive empirical experiments with LLaMA3 and Qwen2 demonstrate that our algorithms are effective compared to existing methods, and the throughput is close to the oracle best hyperparameter in simulated real-life LLM serving scenarios with diverse input prompts.6e:T49f,In-Context Learning (ICL) empowers Large Language Models (LLMs) to tackle diverse tasks by incorporating multiple input-output examples, known as demonstrations, into the input of LLMs. More recently, advancements in the expanded context windows of LLMs have led to many-shot ICL, which uses hundreds of demonstrations and outperforms few-shot ICL, which relies on fewer examples. However, this approach is often hindered by the high cost of obtaining large amounts of labeled data. To address this challenge, we propose Many-Shot Adaptive Pseudo-LabEling, namely MAPLE, a novel influence-based many-shot ICL framework that utilizes pseudo-labeled samples to compensate for the lack of label information. We first identify a subset of impactful unlabeled samples and perform pseudo-labeling on them by querying LLMs. These pseudo-labeled samples are then adaptively selected and tailored to each test query as input to improve the performance of many-shot ICL, without significant labeling costs. Extensive experiments on real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework, showcasing its ability to enhance LLM adaptability and performance with limited labeled data.6f:T577,Vision Language Models (VLMs) are impressive at visual question answering and image captioning. But they underperform on multi-step visual reasoning -- even compared to LLMs on the same tasks presented in text form -- giving rise to perceptions of modality imbalance or brittleness. Towards a systematic study of such issues, we introduce a synthetic framework for assessing the ability of VLMs to perform algorithmic visual reasoning, comprising three tasks: Table Readout, Grid Navigation, and Visual Analogy. Each has two levels of difficulty, SIMPLE and HARD, and even the SIMPLE versions are difficult for frontier VLMs. We propose strategies for training on the SIMPLE version of tasks that improve performance on the corresponding HARD task, i.e., simple-to-hard (S2H) generalization. This controlled setup, where each task also has an equivalent text-only version, allows a quantification of the modality imbalance and how it is impacted by training strategy. We show that 1) explicit image-to-text conversion is important in promoting S2H generalization on images, by transferring reasoning from text; 2) conversion can be internalized at test time. We also report results of mechanistic study of this phenomenon. We identify measures of gradient alignment that can identify training strategies that promote better S2H generalization. Ablations highlight the importance of chain-of-thought.70:T650,Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) can reason effectively over both textual and visual inputs, but they tend to hallucinate syntactically coherent yet visually ungrounded contents. In this paper, we investigate the internal dynamics of hallucination by examining the tokens logits ranking throughout the generation process, revealing three key patterns in how LVLMs process information: (1) gradual visual information loss - visually grounded tokens gradually become less favored throughout generation, and (2) early excitation - semantically meaningful tokens achieve peak activation in the layers earlier than the final layer. (3) hidden genuine information - visually grounded tokens though not being eventually decoded still retain relatively high rankings at inference. Based on these insights, we propose VISTA (Visual Information Steering with Token-logit Augmentation), a training-free inference-time intervention framework that reduces hallucination while promoting genuine information. VISTA works by combining two complementary approaches: reinforcing visual information in activation space and leveraging early layer activations to promote semantically meaningful decoding. Compared to existing methods, VISTA requires no external supervision and is applicable to various decoding strategies. Extensive experiments show that VISTA on average reduces hallucination by about 40% on evaluated open-ended generation task, and it consistently outperforms existing methods on four benchmarks across four architectures under three decoding strategies. Code is available at https://github.com/LzVv123456/VISTA.71:T55e,Sampling-based search, a simple paradigm for utilizing test-time compute, involves generating multiple candidate responses and selecting the best one -- typically by having models self-verify each response for correctness. In this paper, we study the scaling trends governing sampling-based search. Among our findings is that simply scaling up a minimalist implementation of sampling-based search, using only random sampling and direct self-verification, provides a practical inference method that, for example, elevates the reasoning capabilities of Gemini v1.5 Pro above that of o1-Preview on popular benchmarks. We partially attribute the scalability of sampling-based search to a phenomenon of implicit scaling, where sampling a larger pool of responses in turn improves self-verification accuracy. We further identify two useful principles for improving self-verification capabilities with test-time compute: (1) comparing across responses provides helpful signals about the locations of errors and hallucinations, and (2) different model output styles are useful for different contexts -- chains of thought are useful for reasoning but harder to verify. We also find that, though accurate verification can be elicited, frontier models demonstrate remarkably weak out-of-box verification capabilities and introduce a benchmark to measure progress on these deficiencies.72:T63e,Supervised fine-tuning (SFT) has become a crucial step for aligning pretrained large language models (LLMs) using supervised datasets of input-output pairs. However, despite being supervised, SFT is inherently limited by its generative training objective. To address its limitations, the existing common strategy is to follow SFT with a separate phase of preference optimization (PO), which relies on either human-labeled preference data or a strong reward model to guide the learning process. In this paper, we address the limitations of SFT by exploring one of the most successful techniques in conventional supervised learning: discriminative learning. We introduce Discriminative Fine-Tuning (DFT), an improved variant of SFT, which mitigates the burden of collecting human-labeled preference data or training strong reward models. Unlike SFT that employs a generative approach and overlooks negative data, DFT adopts a discriminative paradigm that increases the probability of positive answers while suppressing potentially negative ones, aiming for data prediction instead of token prediction. Our contributions include: (i) a discriminative probabilistic framework for fine-tuning LLMs by explicitly modeling the discriminative likelihood of an answer among all possible outputs given an input; (ii) efficient algorithms to optimize this discriminative likelihood; and (iii) extensive experiments demonstrating DFT's effectiveness, achieving performance better than SFT and comparable to if not better than SFT$\rightarrow$PO. The code can be found at https://github.com/Optimization-AI/DFT.73:T543,In generative modeling, tokenization simplifies complex data into compact, structured representations, creating a more efficient, learnable space. For high-dimensional visual data, it reduces redundancy and emphasizes key features for high-quality generation. Current visual tokenization methods rely on a traditional autoencoder framework, where the encoder compresses data into latent representations, and the decoder reconstructs the original input. In this work, we offer a new perspective by proposing denoising as decoding, shifting from single-step reconstruction to iterative refinement. Specifically, we replace the decoder with a diffusion process that iteratively refines noise to recover the original image, guided by the latents provided by the encoder. We evaluate our approach by assessing both reconstruction (rFID) and generation quality (FID), comparing it to state-of-the-art autoencoding approaches. By adopting iterative reconstruction through diffusion, our autoencoder, namely Epsilon-VAE, achieves high reconstruction quality, which in turn enhances downstream generation quality by 22% at the same compression rates or provides 2.3x inference speedup through increasing compression rates. We hope this work offers new insights into integrating iterative generation and autoencoding for improved compression and generation.74:T770,Despite notable advancements in Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs), most state-of-the-art models have not undergone thorough alignment with human preferences. This gap exists because current alignment research has primarily achieved progress in specific areas (e.g., hallucination reduction), while the broader question of whether aligning models with human preferences can systematically enhance MLLM capability remains largely unexplored. To this end, we introduce MM-RLHF, a dataset containing $\mathbf{120k}$ fine-grained, human-annotated preference comparison pairs. This dataset represents a substantial advancement over existing resources, offering superior size, diversity, annotation granularity, and quality. Leveraging this dataset, we propose several key innovations to improve both the quality of reward models and the efficiency of alignment algorithms. Notably, we introduce a Critique-Based Reward Model, which generates critiques of model outputs before assigning scores, offering enhanced interpretability and more informative feedback compared to traditional scalar reward mechanisms. Additionally, we propose Dynamic Reward Scaling, a method that adjusts the loss weight of each sample according to the reward signal, thereby optimizing the use of high-quality comparison pairs. Our approach is rigorously evaluated across $\mathbf{10}$ distinct dimensions and $\mathbf{27}$ benchmarks, with results demonstrating significant and consistent improvements in model performance. Specifically, fine-tuning LLaVA-ov-7B with MM-RLHF and our alignment algorithm leads to a $\mathbf{19.5}$% increase in conversational abilities and a $\mathbf{60}$% improvement in safety. We have open-sourced the preference dataset, reward model, training and evaluation code, as well as reward modeling and safety benchmarks. For more details, please visit our project page: https://mm-rlhf.github.io.75:T521,The rapid growth of Large Language Models has driven demand for effective model compression techniques to reduce memory and computation costs. Low-rank pruning has gained attention for its GPU compatibility across all densities. However, low-rank pruning struggles to match the performance of semi-structured pruning, often doubling perplexity at similar densities. In this paper, we propose Pivoting Factorization (PIFA), a novel lossless meta low-rank representation that unsupervisedly learns a compact form of any low-rank representation, effectively eliminating redundant information. PIFA identifies pivot rows (linearly independent rows) and expresses non-pivot rows as linear combinations, achieving 24.2% additional memory savings and 24.6% faster inference over low-rank layers at rank = 50% of dimension. To mitigate the performance degradation caused by low-rank pruning, we introduce a novel, retraining-free reconstruction method that minimizes error accumulation (M). MPIFA, combining M and PIFA into an end-to-end framework, significantly outperforms existing low-rank pruning methods, and achieves performance comparable to semi-structured pruning, while surpassing it in GPU efficiency and compatibility. Our code is available at https://github.com/biomedical-cybernetics/pivoting-factorization.76:T5c7,The growing demands on GPU memory posed by the increasing number of neural network parameters call for training approaches that are more memory-efficient. Previous memory reduction training techniques, such as Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) and ReLoRA, face challenges, with LoRA being constrained by its low-rank structure, particularly during intensive tasks like pre-training, and ReLoRA suffering from saddle point issues. In this paper, we propose Sparse Spectral Training (SST) to optimize memory usage for pre-training. SST updates all singular values and selectively updates singular vectors through a multinomial sampling method weighted by the magnitude of the singular values. Furthermore, SST employs singular value decomposition to initialize and periodically reinitialize low-rank parameters, reducing distortion relative to full-rank training compared to other low-rank methods. Through comprehensive testing on both Euclidean and hyperbolic neural networks across various tasks, SST demonstrates its ability to outperform existing memory reduction training methods and is comparable to full-rank training in various cases. On LLaMA-1.3B, with only 18.7\% of the parameters trainable compared to full-rank training (using a rank equivalent to 6\% of the embedding dimension), SST reduces the perplexity gap between other low-rank methods and full-rank training by 97.4\%. This result highlights SST as an effective parameter-efficient technique for model pre-training.77:T4d9,Recent advances in latent diffusion models have demonstrated their effectiveness for high-resolution image synthesis. However, the properties of the latent space from tokenizer for better learning and generation of diffusion models remain under-explored. Theoretically and empirically, we find that improved generation quality is closely tied to the latent distributions with better structure, such as the ones with fewer Gaussian Mixture modes and more discriminative features. Motivated by these insights, we propose MAETok, an autoencoder (AE) leveraging mask modeling to learn semantically rich latent space while maintaining reconstruction fidelity. Extensive experiments validate our analysis, demonstrating that the variational form of autoencoders is not necessary, and a discriminative latent space from AE alone enables state-of-the-art performance on ImageNet generation using only 128 tokens. MAETok achieves significant practical improvements, enabling a gFID of 1.69 with 76x faster training and 31x higher inference throughput for 512x512 generation. Our findings show that the structure of the latent space, rather than variational constraints, is crucial for effective diffusion models. Code and trained models are released.78:T4f4,Protein language models (pLMs) are powerful predictors of protein structure and function, learning through unsupervised training on millions of protein sequences. pLMs are thought to capture common motifs in protein sequences, but the specifics of pLM features are not well understood. Identifying these features would not only shed light on how pLMs work, but potentially uncover novel protein biology––studying the model to study the biology. Motivated by this, we train sparse autoencoders (SAEs) on the residual stream of a pLM, ESM-2. By characterizing SAE features, we determine that pLMs use a combination of generic features and family-specific features to represent a protein. In addition, we demonstrate how known sequence determinants of properties such as thermostability and subcellular localization can be identified by linear probing of SAE features. For predictive features without known functional associations, we hypothesize their role in unknown mechanisms and provide visualization tools to aid their interpretation. Our study gives a better understanding of the limitations of pLMs, and demonstrates how SAE features can be used to help generate hypotheses for biological mechanisms. We release our code, model weights and feature visualizer.79:T4a4,Automated code generation with large language models has gained significant traction, but there remains no guarantee on the correctness of generated code. We aim to use formal verification to provide mathematical guarantees that the generated code is correct. However, generating formally verified code with LLMs is hindered by the scarcity of training data and the complexity of formal proofs. To tackle this challenge, we introduce AlphaVerus, a self-improving framework that bootstraps formally verified code generation by iteratively translating programs from a higher-resource language and leveraging feedback from a verifier. AlphaVerus operates in three phases: exploration of candidate translations, Treefinement -- a novel tree search algorithm for program refinement using verifier feedback, and filtering misaligned specifications and programs to prevent reward hacking. Through this iterative process, AlphaVerus enables a LLaMA-3.1-70B model to generate verified code without human intervention or model finetuning. AlphaVerus shows an ability to generate formally verified solutions for HumanEval and MBPP, laying the groundwork for truly trustworthy code-generation agents.7a:T4e0,Language exhibits a fractal structure in its information-theoretic complexity (i.e. bits per token), with self-similarity across scales and long-range dependence (LRD). In this work, we investigate whether large language models (LLMs) can replicate such fractal characteristics and identify conditions-such as temperature setting and prompting method-under which they may fail. Moreover, we find that the fractal parameters observed in natural language are contained within a narrow range, whereas those of LLMs' output vary widely, suggesting that fractal parameters might prove helpful in detecting a non-trivial portion of LLM-generated texts. Notably, these findings, and many others reported in this work, are robust to the choice of the architecture; e.g. Gemini 1.0 Pro, Mistral-7B and Gemma-2B. We also release a dataset comprising of over 240,000 articles generated by various LLMs (both pretrained and instruction-tuned) with different decoding temperatures and prompting methods, along with their corresponding human-generated texts. We hope that this work highlights the complex interplay between fractal properties, prompting, and statistical mimicry in LLMs, offering insights for generating, evaluating and detecting synthetic texts.7b:T45b,Neural network training is inherently sensitive to initialization and the randomness induced by stochastic gradient descent. However, it is unclear to what extent such effects lead to meaningfully different networks, either in terms of the models' weights or the underlying functions that were learned. In this work, we show that during the initial"chaotic"phase of training, even extremely small perturbations reliably causes otherwise identical training trajectories to diverge-an effect that diminishes rapidly over training time. We quantify this divergence through (i) $L^2$ distance between parameters, (ii) the loss barrier when interpolating between networks, (iii) $L^2$ and barrier between parameters after permutation alignment, and (iv) representational similarity between intermediate activations; revealing how perturbations across different hyperparameter or fine-tuning settings drive training trajectories toward distinct loss minima. Our findings provide insights into neural network training stability, with practical implications for fine-tuning, model merging, and diversity of model ensembles.7c:T4f0,Accommodating human preferences is essential for creating aligned LLM agents that deliver personalized and effective interactions. Recent work has shown the potential for LLMs acting as writing agents to infer a description of user preferences. Agent alignment then comes from conditioning on the inferred preference description. However, existing methods often produce generic preference descriptions that fail to capture the unique and individualized nature of human preferences. This paper introduces PROSE, a method designed to enhance the precision of preference descriptions inferred from user writing samples. PROSE incorporates two key elements: (1) iterative refinement of inferred preferences, and (2) verification of inferred preferences across multiple user writing samples. We evaluate PROSE with several LLMs (i.e., Qwen2.5 7B and 72B Instruct, GPT-mini, and GPT-4o) on a summarization and an email writing task. We find that PROSE more accurately infers nuanced human preferences, improving the quality of the writing agent's generations over CIPHER (a state-of-the-art method for inferring preferences) by 33\%. Lastly, we demonstrate that ICL and PROSE are complementary methods, and combining them provides up to a 9\% improvement over ICL alone.7d:T48f,In-context learning (ICL) has garnered significant attention for its ability to grasp functions/tasks from demonstrations. Recent studies suggest the presence of a latent task/function vector in LLMs during ICL. Merullo et al. (2024) showed that LLMs leverage this vector alongside the residual stream for Word2Vec-like vector arithmetic, solving factual-recall ICL tasks. Additionally, recent work empirically highlighted the key role of Question-Answer data in enhancing factual-recall capabilities. Despite these insights, a theoretical explanation remains elusive. To move one step forward, we propose a theoretical framework building on empirically grounded hierarchical concept modeling. We develop an optimization theory, showing how nonlinear residual transformers trained via gradient descent on cross-entropy loss perform factual-recall ICL tasks via vector arithmetic. We prove 0-1 loss convergence and show the strong generalization, including robustness to concept recombination and distribution shifts. These results elucidate the advantages of transformers over static embedding predecessors. Empirical simulations corroborate our theoretical insights.7e:T51c,Reinforcement learning (RL) training is inherently unstable due to factors such as moving targets and high gradient variance. Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) and Reinforcement Learning from AI Feedback (RLAIF) can introduce additional difficulty. Differing preferences can complicate the alignment process, and prediction errors in a trained reward model can become more severe as the LLM generates unseen outputs. To enhance training robustness, RL has adopted techniques from supervised learning, such as ensembles and layer normalization. In this work, we improve the stability of RL training by adapting the reverse cross entropy (RCE) from supervised learning for noisy data to define a symmetric RL loss. We demonstrate performance improvements across various tasks and scales. We conduct experiments in discrete action tasks (Atari games) and continuous action space tasks (MuJoCo benchmark and Box2D) using Symmetric A2C (SA2C) and Symmetric PPO (SPPO), with and without added noise with especially notable performance in SPPO across different hyperparameters. Furthermore, we validate the benefits of the symmetric RL loss when using SPPO for large language models through improved performance in RLHF tasks, such as IMDB positive sentiment sentiment and TL;DR summarization tasks.7f:T657,Pretraining robust vision or multimodal foundation models (e.g., CLIP) relies on large-scale datasets that may be noisy, potentially misaligned, and have long-tail distributions. Previous works have shown promising results in augmenting datasets by generating synthetic samples. However, they only support domain-specific ad hoc use cases (e.g., either image or text only, but not both), and are limited in data diversity due to a lack of fine-grained control over the synthesis process. In this paper, we design a \emph{controllable} image-text synthesis pipeline, CtrlSynth, for data-efficient and robust multimodal learning. The key idea is to decompose the visual semantics of an image into basic elements, apply user-specified control policies (e.g., remove, add, or replace operations), and recompose them to synthesize images or texts. The decompose and recompose feature in CtrlSynth allows users to control data synthesis in a fine-grained manner by defining customized control policies to manipulate the basic elements. CtrlSynth leverages the capabilities of pretrained foundation models such as large language models or diffusion models to reason and recompose basic elements such that synthetic samples are natural and composed in diverse ways. CtrlSynth is a closed-loop, training-free, and modular framework, making it easy to support different pretrained models. With extensive experiments on 31 datasets spanning different vision and vision-language tasks, we show that CtrlSynth substantially improves zero-shot classification, image-text retrieval, and compositional reasoning performance of CLIP models.80:T525,Formal logic enables computers to reason in natural language by representing sentences in symbolic forms and applying rules to derive conclusions. However, in what our study characterizes as"rulebreaker"scenarios, this method can lead to conclusions that are typically not inferred or accepted by humans given their common sense and factual knowledge. Inspired by works in cognitive science, we create RULEBREAKERS, the first dataset for rigorously evaluating the ability of large language models (LLMs) to recognize and respond to rulebreakers (versus non-rulebreakers) in a human-like manner. Evaluating seven LLMs, we find that most models, including GPT-4o, achieve mediocre accuracy on RULEBREAKERS and exhibit some tendency to over-rigidly apply logical rules unlike what is expected from typical human reasoners. Further analysis suggests that this apparent failure is potentially associated with the models'poor utilization of their world knowledge and their attention distribution patterns. Whilst revealing a limitation of current LLMs, our study also provides a timely counterbalance to a growing body of recent works that propose methods relying on formal logic to improve LLMs'general reasoning capabilities, highlighting their risk of further increasing divergence between LLMs and human-like reasoning.81:T553,Cross-attention is commonly adopted in multimodal large language models (MLLMs) for integrating visual information into the language backbone. However, in applications with large visual inputs, such as video understanding, processing a large number of visual tokens in cross-attention layers leads to high memory demands and often necessitates distributed computation across multiple GPUs. Existing distributed attention mechanisms face significant communication overheads, making cross-attention layers a critical bottleneck for efficient training and inference of MLLMs. To address this, we propose LV-XAttn, a distributed, exact cross-attention mechanism with minimal communication overhead. We observe that in applications involving large visual inputs, the size of the query block is typically much smaller than that of the key-value blocks. Thus, in LV-XAttn we keep the large key-value blocks locally on each GPU and exchange smaller query blocks across GPUs. We also introduce an efficient activation recomputation technique to support longer visual context. We theoretically analyze the communication benefits of LV-XAttn and show that it can achieve speedups for a wide range of models. Our evaluations with Llama 3-V, mPLUG-Owl3 and OpenFlamingo models find that LV-XAttn achieves up to 10.62$\times$ end-to-end speedup compared to existing approaches.82:T457,We aim to develop a fundamental understanding of modality collapse, a recently observed empirical phenomenon wherein models trained for multimodal fusion tend to rely only on a subset of the modalities, ignoring the rest. We show that modality collapse happens when noisy features from one modality are entangled, via a shared set of neurons in the fusion head, with predictive features from another, effectively masking out positive contributions from the predictive features of the former modality and leading to its collapse. We further prove that cross-modal knowledge distillation implicitly disentangles such representations by freeing up rank bottlenecks in the student encoder, denoising the fusion-head outputs without negatively impacting the predictive features from either modality. Based on the above findings, we propose an algorithm that prevents modality collapse through explicit basis reallocation, with applications in dealing with missing modalities. Extensive experiments on multiple multimodal benchmarks validate our theoretical claims. Project page: https://abhrac.github.io/mmcollapse/.83:T62e,Length generalization is the ability of a learning algorithm to learn a hypothesis which generalizes to longer inputs than the inputs in the training set. In this paper, we provide provable guarantees of length generalization for various classes of functions in an idealized setting. First, we formalize the framework of non-asymptotic length generalization, which requires a computable upper bound for the minimum input length that guarantees length generalization, as a function of the complexity of ground-truth function under some given complexity measure. We refer to this minimum input length to length generalize as length complexity. We show the Minimum-Complexity Interpolator learning algorithm achieves optimal length complexity. We further show that whether a function class admits non-asymptotic length generalization is equivalent to the decidability of its language equivalence problem, which implies that there is no computable upper bound for the length complexity of Context-Free Grammars. On the positive side, we show that the length complexity of Deterministic Finite Automata is $2n - 2$ where $n$ is the number of states of the ground-truth automaton. Our main results are upper bounds of length complexity for a subset of a transformer-related function class called C-RASP (Yang&Chiang, 2024). We show that the length complexity of 1-layer C-RASP functions is $O(T^2)$ when the ground-truth function has precision $T$, and that the length complexity of 2-layer C-RASP functions is $O(T^{O(K)})$ when the ground-truth function has precision $T$ and $K$ heads.84:T646,Process reward models (PRMs) provide more nuanced supervision compared to outcome reward models (ORMs) for optimizing policy models, positioning them as a promising approach to enhancing the capabilities of LLMs in complex reasoning tasks. Recent efforts have advanced PRMs from step-level to token-level granularity by integrating reward modeling into the training of generative models, with reward scores derived from token generation probabilities. However, the conflict between generative language modeling and reward modeling may introduce instability and lead to inaccurate credit assignments. To address this challenge, we revisit token-level reward assignment by decoupling reward modeling from language generation and derive a token-level reward model through the optimization of a discriminative policy, termed the Q-function Reward Model (Q-RM). We theoretically demonstrate that Q-RM explicitly learns token-level Q-functions from preference data without relying on fine-grained annotations. In our experiments, Q-RM consistently outperforms all baseline methods across various benchmarks. For example, when integrated into PPO/REINFORCE algorithms, Q-RM enhances the average Pass@1 score by 5.85/4.70 points on mathematical reasoning tasks compared to the ORM baseline, and by 4.56/5.73 points compared to the token-level PRM counterpart. Moreover, reinforcement learning with Q-RM significantly enhances training efficiency, achieving convergence 12 times faster than ORM on GSM8K and 11 times faster than step-level PRM on MATH. Code and data are available at https://github.com/homzer/Q-RM.85:T58d,Low-Dimension-to-High-Dimension (LDHD) generalization is a special case of Out-of-Distribution (OOD) generalization, where the training data are restricted to a low-dimensional subspace of the high-dimensional testing space. Assuming that each instance is generated from a latent variable and the dimension of the latent variable reflects the problem scale, the inherent scaling challenge in length generalization can be captured by the LDHD generalization in the latent space. We theoretically demonstrate that LDHD generalization is generally unattainable without exploiting prior knowledge to provide appropriate inductive bias. Specifically, we explore LDHD generalization in Boolean functions. We verify that different architectures trained with (S)GD converge to \emph{min-degree interpolators w.r.t. different independent sets}. LDHD generalization is achievable if and only if the target function coincides with this inductive bias. Applying the insights from LDHD generalization to length generalization, we explain the effectiveness of CoT as changing the structure latent space to enable better LDHD generalization. We also propose a principle for position embedding design to handle both the inherent LDHD generalization and the nuisances such as the data format. Following the principle, we propose a novel position embedding called RPE-Square that remedies the RPE for dealing with the data format nuisance.86:T72d,Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) large language models (LLMs), which leverage dynamic routing and sparse activation to enhance efficiency and scalability, have achieved higher performance while reducing computational costs. However, these models face significant memory overheads, limiting their practical deployment and broader adoption. Post-training quantization (PTQ), a widely used method for compressing LLMs, encounters severe accuracy degradation and diminished generalization performance when applied to MoE models. This paper investigates the impact of MoE's sparse and dynamic characteristics on quantization and identifies two primary challenges: (1) Inter-expert imbalance, referring to the uneven distribution of samples across experts, which leads to insufficient and biased calibration for less frequently utilized experts; (2) Intra-expert imbalance, arising from MoE's unique aggregation mechanism, which leads to varying degrees of correlation between different samples and their assigned experts. To address these challenges, we propose MoEQuant, a novel quantization framework tailored for MoE LLMs. MoE-Quant includes two novel techniques: 1) Expert-Balanced Self-Sampling (EBSS) is an efficient sampling method that efficiently constructs a calibration set with balanced expert distributions by leveraging the cumulative probabilities of tokens and expert balance metrics as guiding factors. 2) Affinity-Guided Quantization (AGQ), which incorporates affinities between experts and samples into the quantization process, thereby accurately assessing the impact of individual samples on different experts within the MoE layer. Experiments demonstrate that MoEQuant achieves substantial performance gains (more than 10 points accuracy gain in the HumanEval for DeepSeekMoE-16B under 4-bit quantization) and boosts efficiency.87:T560,Sparse autoencoders (SAEs) decompose language model representations into a sparse set of linear latent vectors. Recent works have improved SAEs using language model gradients, but these techniques require many expensive backward passes during training and still cause a significant increase in cross entropy loss when SAE reconstructions are inserted into the model. In this work, we improve on these limitations by taking a fundamentally different approach: we use low-rank adaptation (LoRA) to finetune the \textit{language model itself} around a previously trained SAE. We analyze our method across SAE sparsity, SAE width, language model size, LoRA rank, and model layer on the Gemma Scope family of SAEs. In these settings, our method reduces the cross entropy loss gap by 30\% to 55\% when SAEs are inserted during the forward pass. We also find that compared to end-to-end (e2e) SAEs, our approach achieves the same downstream cross entropy loss 3$\times$ to 20$\times$ faster on \gemma and 2$\times$ to 10$\times$ faster on \llama. We further show that our technique improves downstream metrics and can adapt multiple SAEs at once without harming general language model capabilities. Our results demonstrate that improving model interpretability is not limited to post-hoc SAE training; Pareto improvements can also be achieved by directly optimizing the model itself.88:T5cf,Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) has been a celebrated method for training vision encoders to generate image/text representations facilitating various applications. Recently, CLIP has been widely adopted as the vision backbone of multimodal large language models (MLLMs) to connect image inputs for language interactions. The success of CLIP as a vision-language foundation model relies on aligning web-crawled noisy text annotations at image levels. Nevertheless, such criteria may become insufficient for downstream tasks in need of fine-grained vision representations, especially when region-level understanding is demanding for MLLMs. In this paper, we improve the localization capability of CLIP with several advances. We propose a pre-training method called Contrastive Localized Language-Image Pre-training (CLOC) by complementing CLIP with region-text contrastive loss and modules. We formulate a new concept, promptable embeddings, of which the encoder produces image embeddings easy to transform into region representations given spatial hints. To support large-scale pre-training, we design a visually-enriched and spatially-localized captioning framework to effectively generate region-text pseudo-labels at scale. By scaling up to billions of annotated images, CLOC enables high-quality regional embeddings for image region recognition and retrieval tasks, and can be a drop-in replacement of CLIP to enhance MLLMs, especially on referring and grounding tasks.89:T613,Leveraging long contexts is crucial for advanced AI systems, but attention computation poses a scalability challenge. While scaled dot-product attention (SDPA) exhibits token sparsity, i.e. only a few pivotal tokens significantly contribute to output, exploiting this sparsity remains challenging. Existing methods either suffer from quality degradation or require substantial additional resources. We show that identifying pivotal tokens is a Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS) problem. However, existing MIPS solutions are not well-suited for SDPA, as they are not GPU-friendly and often underperform due to the separated query and key distributions. This paper introduces HashAttention, framing pivotal token identification as a recommendation problem. Given a query, HashAttention encodes keys and queries in Hamming space, capturing the required semantic similarity, using learned mapping functions. HashAttention efficiently identifies pivotal tokens for a given query using bitwise operations and computes attention using only these tokens, improving the overall attention efficiency. Trained on generic data, HashAttention reduces tokens used by up to $16\times$ with minimal quality loss, requiring only 32 bits of auxiliary memory per token. Sparsity can be further improved to $32\times$ through task-specific fine-tuning. On A100 GPU, at $32\times$ sparsity, incorporating HashAttention reduces attention latency by up to $4.3\times$ in GPT-FAST and $2.54\times$ in FlashDecode, and achieves up to $3.12\times$ higher throughput for GPT-FAST.8a:T50b,Weak-to-strong (W2S) generalization is a type of finetuning (FT) where a strong (large) student model is trained on pseudo-labels generated by a weak teacher. Surprisingly, W2S FT often outperforms the weak teacher. We seek to understand this phenomenon through the observation that FT often occurs in intrinsically low-dimensional spaces. Leveraging the low intrinsic dimensionality of FT, we analyze W2S in the ridgeless regression setting from a variance reduction perspective. For a strong student-weak teacher pair with sufficiently expressive low-dimensional feature subspaces $\mathcal{V}_s, \mathcal{V}_w$, we provide an exact characterization of the variance that dominates the generalization error of W2S. This unveils a virtue of discrepancy between the strong and weak models in W2S: the variance of the weak teacher is inherited by the strong student in $\mathcal{V}_s \cap \mathcal{V}_w$, while reduced by a factor of $\mathrm{dim}(\mathcal{V}_s)/N$ in the subspace of discrepancy $\mathcal{V}_w \setminus \mathcal{V}_s$ with $N$ pseudo-labels for W2S. Our analysis further casts light on the sample complexities and the scaling of performance gap recovery in W2S. The analysis is supported by experiments on synthetic regression problems, as well as real vision and NLP tasks.8b:T475,Understanding the learning process and the embedded computation in transformers is becoming a central goal for the development of interpretable AI. In the present study, we introduce a hierarchical filtering procedure for data models of sequences on trees, allowing us to hand-tune the range of positional correlations in the data. Leveraging this controlled setting, we provide evidence that vanilla encoder-only transformers can approximate the exact inference algorithm when trained on root classification and masked language modeling tasks, and study how this computation is discovered and implemented. We find that correlations at larger distances, corresponding to increasing layers of the hierarchy, are sequentially included by the network during training. By comparing attention maps from models trained with varying degrees of filtering and by probing the different encoder levels, we find clear evidence of a reconstruction of correlations on successive length scales corresponding to the various levels of the hierarchy, which we relate to a plausible implementation of the exact inference algorithm within the same architecture.8c:T644,Continual multimodal instruction tuning is crucial for adapting Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) to evolving tasks. However, most existing methods adopt a fixed architecture, struggling with adapting to new tasks due to static model capacity. We propose to evolve the architecture under parameter budgets for dynamic task adaptation, which remains unexplored and imposes two challenges: 1) task architecture conflict, where different tasks require varying layer-wise adaptations, and 2) modality imbalance, where different tasks rely unevenly on modalities, leading to unbalanced updates. To address these challenges, we propose a novel Dynamic Mixture of Curriculum LoRA Experts (D-MoLE) method, which automatically evolves MLLM's architecture with controlled parameter budgets to continually adapt to new tasks while retaining previously learned knowledge. Specifically, we propose a dynamic layer-wise expert allocator, which automatically allocates LoRA experts across layers to resolve architecture conflicts, and routes instructions layer-wisely to facilitate knowledge sharing among experts. Then, we propose a gradient-based inter-modal continual curriculum, which adjusts the update ratio of each module in MLLM based on the difficulty of each modality within the task to alleviate the modality imbalance problem. Extensive experiments show that D-MoLE significantly outperforms state-of-the-art baselines, achieving a 15% average improvement over the best baseline. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study of continual learning for MLLMs from an architectural perspective.8d:T48e,Understanding and reasoning over non-speech sounds and music are crucial for both humans and AI agents to interact effectively with their environments. In this paper, we introduce Audio Flamingo 2 (AF2), an Audio-Language Model (ALM) with advanced audio understanding and reasoning capabilities. AF2 leverages (i) a custom CLAP model, (ii) synthetic Audio QA data for fine-grained audio reasoning, and (iii) a multi-stage curriculum learning strategy. AF2 achieves state-of-the-art performance with only a 3B parameter small language model, surpassing large open-source and proprietary models across over 20 benchmarks. Next, for the first time, we extend audio understanding to long audio segments (30 secs to 5 mins) and propose LongAudio, a large and novel dataset for training ALMs on long audio captioning and question-answering tasks. Fine-tuning AF2 on LongAudio leads to exceptional performance on our proposed LongAudioBench, an expert annotated benchmark for evaluating ALMs on long audio understanding capabilities. We conduct extensive ablation studies to confirm the efficacy of our approach. Project Website: https://research.nvidia.com/labs/adlr/AF2/.8e:T4cf,Recent advances in visual generation have made significant strides in producing content of exceptional quality. However, most methods suffer from a fundamental problem - a bottleneck of inference computational efficiency. Most of these algorithms involve multiple passes over a transformer model to generate tokens or denoise inputs. However, the model size is kept consistent throughout all iterations, which makes it computationally expensive. In this work, we aim to address this issue primarily through two key ideas - (a) not all parts of the generation process need equal compute, and we design a decode time model scaling schedule to utilize compute effectively, and (b) we can cache and reuse some of the computation. Combining these two ideas leads to using smaller models to process more tokens while large models process fewer tokens. These different-sized models do not increase the parameter size, as they share parameters. We rigorously experiment with ImageNet256$\times$256 , UCF101, and Kinetics600 to showcase the efficacy of the proposed method for image/video generation and frame prediction. Our experiments show that with almost $3\times$ less compute than baseline, our model obtains competitive performance.8f:T4e0,Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architectures in large language models (LLMs) achieve exceptional performance, but face prohibitive storage and memory requirements. To address these challenges, we present $D^2$-MoE, a new delta decompression compressor for reducing the parameters of MoE LLMs. Based on observations of expert diversity, we decompose their weights into a shared base weight and unique delta weights. Specifically, our method first merges each expert's weight into the base weight using the Fisher information matrix to capture shared components. Then, we compress delta weights through Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) by exploiting their low-rank properties. Finally, we introduce a semi-dynamical structured pruning strategy for the base weights, combining static and dynamic redundancy analysis to achieve further parameter reduction while maintaining input adaptivity. In this way, our $D^2$-MoE successfully compact MoE LLMs to high compression ratios without additional training. Extensive experiments highlight the superiority of our approach, with over 13% performance gains than other compressors on Mixtral|Phi-3.5|DeepSeek|Qwen2 MoE LLMs at 40$\sim$60% compression rates. Codes are available in https://github.com/lliai/D2MoE.90:T549,Methods for knowledge editing and unlearning in large language models seek to edit or remove undesirable knowledge or capabilities without compromising general language modeling performance. This work investigates how mechanistic interpretability -- which, in part, aims to identify model components (circuits) associated to specific interpretable mechanisms that make up a model capability -- can improve the precision and effectiveness of editing and unlearning. We find a stark difference in unlearning and edit robustness when training components localized by different methods. We highlight an important distinction between methods that localize components based primarily on preserving outputs, and those finding high level mechanisms with predictable intermediate states. In particular, localizing edits/unlearning to components associated with the lookup-table mechanism for factual recall 1) leads to more robust edits/unlearning across different input/output formats, and 2) resists attempts to relearn the unwanted information, while also reducing unintended side effects compared to baselines, on both a sports facts dataset and the CounterFact dataset across multiple models. We also find that certain localized edits disrupt the latent knowledge in the model more than any other baselines, making unlearning more robust to various attacks.91:T512,Multi-preference optimization enriches language-model alignment beyond pairwise preferences by contrasting entire sets of helpful and undesired responses, thereby enabling richer training signals for large language models. During self-play alignment, these models often produce numerous candidate answers per query, rendering it computationally infeasible to include all responses in the training objective. In this work, we propose $\textit{Active Multi-Preference Optimization}$ (AMPO), a novel approach that combines on-policy generation, a multi-preference group-contrastive loss, and active subset selection. Specifically, we score and embed large candidate pools of responses and then select a small, yet informative, subset that covers reward extremes and distinct semantic clusters for preference optimization. Our contrastive training scheme is capable of identifying not only the best and worst answers but also subtle, underexplored modes that are crucial for robust alignment. Theoretically, we provide guarantees for expected reward maximization using our active selection method, and empirically, AMPO achieves state-of-the-art results on $\textit{AlpacaEval}$ using Llama 8B and Mistral 7B. We release our datasets $\href{https://huggingface.co/Multi-preference-Optimization}{here}$.92:T4b3,Length generalization refers to the ability to extrapolate from short training sequences to long test sequences and is a challenge for current large language models. While prior work has proposed some architecture or data format changes to achieve length generalization, these proposals typically apply to a limited set of tasks. Building on prior scratchpad and Chain-of-Thought (CoT) techniques, we propose Turing Programs, a novel CoT strategy that decomposes an algorithmic task into steps mimicking the computation of a Turing Machine. This framework is both universal, as it can accommodate any algorithmic task, and simple, requiring only copying text from the context with small modifications. We show that by using Turing Programs, we obtain robust length generalization on a range of algorithmic tasks: addition, multiplication and in-context SGD. We then demonstrate that transformers achieve length generalization on random Turing Programs, suggesting that length generalization is possible for any algorithmic task. Finally, we theoretically prove that transformers can implement Turing Programs, constructing a simple RASP (Weiss et al.) program that simulates an arbitrary Turing machine.93:T57b,Increasing model size has unlocked a dazzling array of capabilities in modern language models. At the same time, even frontier models remain vulnerable to jailbreaks and prompt injections, despite concerted efforts to make them robust. As both attack and defense gain access to more compute, and as models become larger, what happens to robustness? We argue that to answer this question requires a \emph{scaling} approach, which we employ in an extensive study of language model robustness across several classification tasks, model families, and adversarial attacks. We find that in the absence of explicit safety training, larger models are not consistently more robust; however, scale improves sample efficiency in adversarial training, though it worsens compute efficiency. Further, we find that increasing attack compute smoothly improves attack success rate against both undefended and adversarially trained models. Finally, after exploring robustness transfer across attacks and threat models, we combine attack and defense scaling rates to study the offense-defense balance. We find that while attack scaling outpaces adversarial training across all models studied, larger adversarially trained models might give defense the advantage in the long run. These results underscore the utility of the scaling lens, and provide a paradigm for evaluating future attacks and defenses on frontier models.94:T620,Language recognition tasks are fundamental in natural language processing (NLP) and have been widely used to benchmark the performance of large language models (LLMs). These tasks also play a crucial role in explaining the working mechanisms of transformers. In this work, we focus on two representative tasks in the category of regular language recognition, known as `even pairs' and `parity check', the aim of which is to determine whether the occurrences of certain subsequences in a given sequence are even. Our goal is to explore how a one-layer transformer, consisting of an attention layer followed by a linear layer, learns to solve these tasks by theoretically analyzing its training dynamics under gradient descent. While even pairs can be solved directly by a one-layer transformer, parity check need to be solved by integrating Chain-of-Thought (CoT), either into the inference stage of a transformer well-trained for the even pairs task, or into the training of a one-layer transformer. For both problems, our analysis shows that the joint training of attention and linear layers exhibits two distinct phases. In the first phase, the attention layer grows rapidly, mapping data sequences into separable vectors. In the second phase, the attention layer becomes stable, while the linear layer grows logarithmically and approaches in direction to a max-margin hyperplane that correctly separates the attention layer outputs into positive and negative samples, and the loss decreases at a rate of $O(1/t)$. Our experiments validate those theoretical results.95:T547,State-Space Models (SSMs), and particularly Mamba, have recently emerged as a promising alternative to Transformers. Mamba introduces input selectivity to its SSM layer (S6) and incorporates convolution and gating into its block definition. While these modifications do improve Mamba's performance over its SSM predecessors, it remains largely unclear how Mamba leverages the additional functionalities provided by input selectivity, and how these interact with the other operations in the Mamba architecture. In this work, we demystify the role of input selectivity in Mamba, investigating its impact on function approximation power, long-term memorization, and associative recall capabilities. In particular: (i) we prove that the S6 layer of Mamba can represent projections onto Haar wavelets, providing an edge over its Diagonal SSM (S4D) predecessor in approximating discontinuous functions commonly arising in practice; (ii) we show how the S6 layer can dynamically counteract memory decay; (iii) we provide analytical solutions to the MQAR associative recall task using the Mamba architecture with different mixers -- Mamba, Mamba-2, and S4D. We demonstrate the tightness of our theoretical constructions with empirical results on concrete tasks. Our findings offer a mechanistic understanding of Mamba and reveal opportunities for improvement.96:T4e5,Text-to-audio generation synthesizes realistic sounds or music given a natural language prompt. Diffusion-based frameworks, including the Tango and the AudioLDM series, represent the state-of-the-art in text-to-audio generation. Despite achieving high audio fidelity, they incur significant inference latency due to the slow diffusion sampling process. MAGNET, a mask-based model operating on discrete tokens, addresses slow inference through iterative mask-based parallel decoding. However, its audio quality still lags behind that of diffusion-based models. In this work, we introduce IMPACT, a text-to-audio generation framework that achieves high performance in audio quality and fidelity while ensuring fast inference. IMPACT utilizes iterative mask-based parallel decoding in a continuous latent space powered by diffusion modeling. This approach eliminates the fidelity constraints of discrete tokens while maintaining competitive inference speed. Results on AudioCaps demonstrate that IMPACT achieves state-of-the-art performance on key metrics including Fr\'echet Distance (FD) and Fr\'echet Audio Distance (FAD) while significantly reducing latency compared to prior models. The project website is available at https://audio-impact.github.io/.97:T593,The deployment of mixture-of-experts (MoE) large language models (LLMs) presents significant challenges due to their high memory demands. These challenges become even more pronounced in multi-tenant environments, where shared resources must accommodate multiple models, limiting the effectiveness of conventional virtualization techniques. This paper addresses the problem of efficiently serving multiple fine-tuned MoE-LLMs on a single-GPU. We propose a serving system that employs \textit{similarity-based expert consolidation} to reduce the overall memory footprint by sharing similar experts across models. To ensure output quality, we introduce \textit{runtime partial reconfiguration}, dynamically replacing non-expert layers when processing requests from different models. As a result, our approach achieves a competitive output quality while maintaining throughput comparable to serving a single model while incurring a negligible increase in time-to-first-token (TTFT). Experiments on a server with a single NVIDIA A100 GPU (80GB) using Mixtral-8x7B models demonstrate an 85\% average reduction in turnaround time compared to NVIDIA's multi-instance GPU (MIG). Furthermore, experiments on Google's Switch Transformer Base-8 model with up to four variants demonstrate the scalability and resilience of our approach in maintaining output quality compared to other model merging baselines, highlighting its effectiveness.98:T506,Language models lack the notion of interchangeable tokens: symbols that are semantically equivalent yet distinct, such as bound variables in formal logic. This limitation prevents generalization to larger vocabularies and hinders the model's ability to recognize alpha-equivalence, where renaming bound variables preserves meaning. We formalize this machine learning problem and introduce alpha-covariance, a metric for evaluating robustness to such transformations. To tackle this task, we propose a dual-part token embedding strategy: a shared component ensures semantic consistency, while a randomized component maintains token distinguishability. Compared to a baseline that relies on alpha-renaming for data augmentation, our approach demonstrates improved generalization to unseen tokens in linear temporal logic solving, propositional logic assignment prediction, and copying with an extendable vocabulary, while introducing a favorable inductive bias for alpha-equivalence. Our findings establish a foundation for designing language models that can learn interchangeable token representations, a crucial step toward more flexible and systematic reasoning in formal domains. Our code and project page are available at https://necrashter.github.io/interchangeable-token-embeddings99:T54f,Transformer-based large language models (LLMs) have already achieved remarkable results on long-text tasks, but the limited GPU memory (VRAM) resources struggle to accommodate the linearly growing demand for key-value (KV) cache as the sequence length increases, which has become a bottleneck for the application of LLMs on long sequences. Existing KV cache compression methods include eviction, merging, or quantization of the KV cache to reduce its size. However, compression results in irreversible information forgetting, potentially affecting the accuracy of subsequent decoding. In this paper, we propose SpeCache, which takes full advantage of the large and easily expandable CPU memory to offload the complete KV cache, and dynamically fetches KV pairs back in each decoding step based on their importance measured by low-bit KV cache copy in VRAM. To avoid inference latency caused by CPU-GPU communication, SpeCache speculatively predicts the KV pairs that the next token might attend to, allowing us to prefetch them before the next decoding step which enables parallelization of prefetching and computation. Experiments on LongBench and Needle-in-a-Haystack benchmarks verify that SpeCache effectively reduces VRAM usage while avoiding information forgetting for long sequences without re-training, even with a 10x high KV cache compression ratio.9a:T4d5,We introduce Reward-Guided Speculative Decoding (RSD), a novel framework aimed at improving the efficiency of inference in large language models (LLMs). RSD synergistically combines a lightweight draft model with a more powerful target model, incorporating a controlled bias to prioritize high-reward outputs, in contrast to existing speculative decoding methods that enforce strict unbiasedness. RSD employs a process reward model to evaluate intermediate decoding steps and dynamically decide whether to invoke the target model, optimizing the trade-off between computational cost and output quality. We theoretically demonstrate that a threshold-based mixture strategy achieves an optimal balance between resource utilization and performance. Extensive evaluations on challenging reasoning benchmarks, including Olympiad-level tasks, show that RSD delivers significant efficiency gains against decoding with the target model only (up to 4.4x fewer FLOPs), while achieving significant better accuracy than parallel decoding method on average (up to +3.5). These results highlight RSD as a robust and cost-effective approach for deploying LLMs in resource-intensive scenarios. The code is available at https://github.com/BaohaoLiao/RSD.9b:T5b3,Multi-objective test-time alignment aims to adapt large language models (LLMs) to diverse multi-dimensional user preferences during inference while keeping LLMs frozen. Recently, GenARM (Xu et al., 2025) first independently trains Autoregressive Reward Models (ARMs) for each preference dimension without awareness of each other, then combines their outputs based on user-specific preference vectors during inference to achieve multi-objective test-time alignment, leading to two key limitations: the need for \textit{multiple} ARMs increases the inference cost, and the separate training of ARMs causes the misalignment between the guided generation and the user preferences. To address these issues, we propose Preference-aware ARM (PARM), a single unified ARM trained across all preference dimensions. PARM uses our proposed Preference-Aware Bilinear Low-Rank Adaptation (PBLoRA), which employs a bilinear form to condition the ARM on preference vectors, enabling it to achieve precise control over preference trade-offs during inference. Experiments demonstrate that PARM reduces inference costs and achieves better alignment with preference vectors compared with existing methods. Additionally, PARM enables weak-to-strong guidance, allowing a smaller PARM to guide a larger frozen LLM without expensive training, making multi-objective alignment accessible with limited computing resources. The code is available at https://github.com/Baijiong-Lin/PARM.9c:T5e6,Large Language Models (LLM) alignment aims to prevent models from producing content that misaligns with human expectations, which can lead to ethical and legal concerns. In the last few years, Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) has been the most prominent method for achieving alignment. Due to challenges in stability and scalability with RLHF stages, which arise from the complex interactions between multiple models, researchers are exploring alternative methods to achieve effects comparable to those of RLHF. However, these methods often rely on large high-quality datasets. Despite some methods considering the generation of additional data to expand datasets, they often treat model training and data generation as separate and static processes, overlooking the fact that these processes are highly interdependent, leading to inefficient utilization of the generated data. To deal with this problem, we propose PLE, i.e., Progressively Label Enhancement for LLM Alignment, a framework that dynamically adjusts the model's training process based on the evolving quality of the generated data. Specifically, we prompt the model to generate responses for both the original query and the query guided by a set of carefully designed principles, and then utilize a dynamic threshold to determine the appropriate training approach for both responses based on their corresponding reward scores. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of PLE compared to existing LLM alignment methods.9d:T50d,Recent advancements in Large Vision-Language Models built upon Large Language Models have established aligning visual features with LLM representations as the dominant paradigm. However, inherited LLM architectural designs introduce suboptimal characteristics for multimodal processing. First, LVLMs exhibit a bimodal distribution in attention allocation, leading to the progressive neglect of middle visual content as context expands. Second, conventional positional encoding schemes fail to preserve vital 2D structural relationships when processing dynamic high-resolution images. To address these limitations, we propose CoMemo - a dual-path architecture that combines a Context image path with an image Memory path for visual processing, effectively alleviating visual information neglect. Additionally, we introduce RoPE-DHR, a novel positional encoding mechanism that employs thumbnail-based positional aggregation to maintain 2D spatial awareness while mitigating remote decay in extended sequences. Evaluations across seven benchmarks,including long-context comprehension, multi-image reasoning, and visual question answering, demonstrate CoMemo's superior performance compared to conventional LVLM architectures. Project page is available at https://lalbj.github.io/projects/CoMemo/.9e:T4fb,Improving time-to-first-token (TTFT) is an essentially important objective in modern large language model (LLM) inference engines. Optimizing TTFT directly results in higher maximal QPS and meets the requirements of many critical applications. However, boosting TTFT is notoriously challenging since it is compute-bounded and the performance bottleneck shifts from the self-attention that many prior works focus on to the MLP part. In this work, we present SpecPrefill, a training free framework that accelerates the inference TTFT for both long and medium context queries based on the following insight: LLMs are generalized enough to preserve the quality given only a carefully chosen subset of prompt tokens. At its core, SpecPrefill leverages a lightweight model to speculate locally important tokens based on the context. These tokens, along with the necessary positional information, are then sent to the main model for processing. We evaluate SpecPrefill with a diverse set of tasks, followed by a comprehensive benchmarking of performance improvement both in a real end-to-end setting and ablation studies. SpecPrefill manages to serve Llama-3.1-405B-Instruct-FP8 with up to 7$\times$ maximal end-to-end QPS on real downstream tasks and 7.66$\times$ TTFT improvement.9f:T4d6,Current approaches for training Process Reward Models (PRMs) often involve breaking down responses into multiple reasoning steps using rule-based techniques, such as using predefined placeholder tokens or setting the reasoning step's length into a fixed size. These approaches overlook the fact that specific words do not typically mark true decision points in a text. To address this, we propose AdaptiveStep, a method that divides reasoning steps based on the model's confidence in predicting the next word. This division method provides more decision-making information at each step, enhancing downstream tasks, such as reward model learning. Moreover, our method does not require manual annotation. We demonstrate its effectiveness through experiments with AdaptiveStep-trained PRMs in mathematical reasoning and code generation tasks. Experimental results indicate that the outcome PRM achieves state-of-the-art Best-of-N performance, surpassing greedy search strategy with token-level value-guided decoding, while also reducing construction costs by over 30% compared to existing open-source PRMs. In addition, we provide a thorough analysis and case study on the PRM's performance, transferability, and generalization capabilities.a0:T4ff,We introduce two complementary techniques for efficient optimization that reduce memory requirements while accelerating training of large-scale neural networks. The first technique, Subset-Norm step size, generalizes AdaGrad-Norm and AdaGrad(-Coordinate) through step-size sharing. Subset-Norm (SN) reduces AdaGrad's memory footprint from $O(d)$ to $O(\sqrt{d})$, where $d$ is the model size. For non-convex smooth objectives under coordinate-wise sub-gaussian noise, we show a noise-adapted high-probability convergence guarantee with improved dimensional dependence of SN over existing methods. Our second technique, Subspace-Momentum, reduces the momentum state's memory footprint by restricting momentum to a low-dimensional subspace while performing SGD in the orthogonal complement. We prove a high-probability convergence result for Subspace-Momentum under standard assumptions. Empirical evaluation on pre-training and fine-tuning LLMs demonstrates the effectiveness of our methods. For instance, combining Subset-Norm with Subspace-Momentum achieves Adam's validation perplexity for LLaMA 1B in approximately half the training tokens (6.8B vs 13.1B) while reducing Adam's optimizer-states memory footprint by more than 80\% with minimal additional hyperparameter tuning.a1:T60b,Past work has studied the effects of fine-tuning on large language models'(LLMs) overall performance on certain tasks. However, a quantitative and systematic method for analyzing its effect on individual outputs is still lacking. Here, we propose a new method for measuring the contribution that fine-tuning makes to individual LLM responses, assuming access to the original pre-trained model. Our method tracks the model's intermediate hidden states, providing a more fine-grained insight into the effects of fine-tuning than a simple comparison of final outputs from pre-trained and fine-tuned models. We introduce and theoretically analyze an exact decomposition of any fine-tuned LLM into a pre-training component and a fine-tuning component. Empirically, we find that model behavior and performance can be steered by up- or down-scaling the fine-tuning component during the forward pass. Motivated by this finding and our theoretical analysis, we define the Tuning Contribution (TuCo) as the ratio of the magnitudes of the fine-tuning component to the pre-training component. We observe that three prominent adversarial attacks on LLMs circumvent safety measures in a way that reduces TuCo, and that TuCo is consistently lower on prompts where these attacks succeed compared to those where they do not. This suggests that attenuating the effect of fine-tuning on model outputs plays a role in the success of such attacks. In summary, TuCo enables the quantitative study of how fine-tuning influences model behavior and safety, and vice versa.a2:T49b,The study of representation universality in AI models reveals growing convergence across domains, modalities, and architectures. However, the practical applications of representation universality remain largely unexplored. We bridge this gap by demonstrating that safety interventions can be transferred between models through learned mappings of their shared activation spaces. We demonstrate this approach on two well-established AI safety tasks: backdoor removal and refusal of harmful prompts, showing successful transfer of steering vectors that alter the models'outputs in a predictable way. Additionally, we propose a new task, \textit{corrupted capabilities}, where models are fine-tuned to embed knowledge tied to a backdoor. This tests their ability to separate useful skills from backdoors, reflecting real-world challenges. Extensive experiments across Llama, Qwen and Gemma model families show that our method enables using smaller models to efficiently align larger ones. Furthermore, we demonstrate that autoencoder mappings between base and fine-tuned models can serve as reliable ``lightweight safety switches", allowing dynamic toggling between model behaviors.a3:T50b,Large Language Models' safety-aligned behaviors, such as refusing harmful queries, can be represented by linear directions in activation space. Previous research modeled safety behavior with a single direction, limiting mechanistic understanding to an isolated safety feature. In this work, we discover that safety-aligned behavior is jointly controlled by multi-dimensional directions. Namely, we study the vector space of representation shifts during safety fine-tuning on Llama 3 8B for refusing jailbreaks. By studying orthogonal directions in the space, we first find that a dominant direction governs the model's refusal behavior, while multiple smaller directions represent distinct and interpretable features like hypothetical narrative and role-playing. We then measure how different directions promote or suppress the dominant direction, showing the important role of secondary directions in shaping the model's refusal representation. Finally, we demonstrate that removing certain trigger tokens in harmful queries can mitigate these directions to bypass the learned safety capability, providing new insights on understanding safety alignment vulnerability from a multi-dimensional perspective. Code and artifacts are available at https://github.com/BMPixel/safety-residual-space.a4:T584,Linear recurrent neural networks enable powerful long-range sequence modeling with constant memory usage and time-per-token during inference. These architectures hold promise for streaming applications at the edge, but deployment in resource-constrained environments requires hardware-aware optimizations to minimize latency and energy consumption. Unstructured sparsity offers a compelling solution, enabling substantial reductions in compute and memory requirements--when accelerated by compatible hardware platforms. In this paper, we conduct a scaling study to investigate the Pareto front of performance and efficiency across inference compute budgets. We find that highly sparse linear RNNs consistently achieve better efficiency-performance trade-offs than dense baselines, with 2x less compute and 36% less memory at iso-accuracy. Our models achieve state-of-the-art results on a real-time streaming task for audio denoising. By quantizing our sparse models to fixed-point arithmetic and deploying them on the Intel Loihi 2 neuromorphic chip for real-time processing, we translate model compression into tangible gains of 42x lower latency and 149x lower energy consumption compared to a dense model on an edge GPU. Our findings showcase the transformative potential of unstructured sparsity, paving the way for highly efficient recurrent neural networks in real-world, resource-constrained environments.a5:T43b,Self-alignment, whereby models learn to improve themselves without human annotation, is a rapidly growing research area. However, existing techniques often fail to improve complex reasoning tasks due to the difficulty of assigning correct rewards. An orthogonal approach that is known to improve correctness is self-consistency, a method applied at inference time based on multiple sampling in order to find the most consistent answer. In this work, we extend the self-consistency concept to help train models. We thus introduce self-consistency preference optimization (ScPO), which iteratively trains consistent answers to be preferred over inconsistent ones on unsupervised new problems. We show ScPO leads to large improvements over conventional reward model training on reasoning tasks such as GSM8K and MATH, closing the gap with supervised training with gold answers or preferences, and that combining ScPO with standard supervised learning improves results even further. On ZebraLogic, ScPO finetunes Llama-3 8B to be superior to Llama-3 70B, Gemma-2 27B, and Claude-3 Haiku.a6:T44e,Are generative pre-trained transformer (GPT) models, trained only to predict the next token, implicitly learning a world model from which sequences are generated one token at a time? We address this question by deriving a causal interpretation of the attention mechanism in GPT and presenting a causal world model that arises from this interpretation. Furthermore, we propose that GPT models, at inference time, can be utilized for zero-shot causal structure learning for input sequences, and introduce a corresponding confidence score. Empirical tests were conducted in controlled environments using the setups of the Othello and Chess strategy games. A GPT, pre-trained on real-world games played with the intention of winning, was tested on out-of-distribution synthetic data consisting of sequences of random legal moves. We find that the GPT model is likely to generate legal next moves for out-of-distribution sequences for which a causal structure is encoded in the attention mechanism with high confidence. In cases where it generates illegal moves, it also fails to capture a causal structure.a7:T4b0,Large language models (LLMs) can leak sensitive training data through memorization and membership inference attacks. Prior work has primarily focused on strong adversarial assumptions, including attacker access to entire samples or long, ordered prefixes, leaving open the question of how vulnerable LLMs are when adversaries have only partial, unordered sample information. For example, if an attacker knows a patient has"hypertension,"under what conditions can they query a model fine-tuned on patient data to learn the patient also has"osteoarthritis?"In this paper, we introduce a more general threat model under this weaker assumption and show that fine-tuned LLMs are susceptible to these fragment-specific extraction attacks. To systematically investigate these attacks, we propose two data-blind methods: (1) a likelihood ratio attack inspired by methods from membership inference, and (2) a novel approach, PRISM, which regularizes the ratio by leveraging an external prior. Using examples from both medical and legal settings, we show that both methods are competitive with a data-aware baseline classifier that assumes access to labeled in-distribution data, underscoring their robustness.a8:T4ec,In this paper, we present a benchmark to pressure-test today's frontier models' multimodal decision-making capabilities in the very long-context regime (up to one million tokens) and investigate whether these models can learn from large numbers of expert demonstrations in their context. We evaluate the performance of Claude 3.5 Sonnet, Gemini 1.5 Flash, Gemini 1.5 Pro, Gemini 2.0 Flash Experimental, GPT-4o, o1-mini, o1-preview, and o1 as policies across a battery of simple interactive decision-making tasks: playing tic-tac-toe, chess, and Atari, navigating grid worlds, solving crosswords, and controlling a simulated cheetah. We study increasing amounts of expert demonstrations in the context $\unicode{x2013}$ from no demonstrations to 512 full episodes. Across our tasks, models rarely manage to fully reach expert performance, and often, presenting more demonstrations has little effect. Some models steadily improve with more demonstrations on a few tasks. We investigate the effect of encoding observations as text or images and the impact of chain-of-thought prompting. To help quantify the impact of other approaches and future innovations, we open source our benchmark that covers the zero-, few-, and many-shot regimes in a unified evaluation.a9:T44f,Evaluating Large Language Models (LLMs) often requires costly human annotations. To address this, LLM-based judges have been proposed, which compare the outputs of two LLMs enabling the ranking of models without human intervention. While several approaches have been proposed, many confounding factors are present between different papers. For instance the model, the prompt and other hyperparameters are typically changed at the same time making apple-to-apple comparisons challenging. In this paper, we propose to systematically analyze and tune the hyperparameters of LLM judges. To alleviate the high cost of evaluating a judge, we propose to leverage multi-objective multi-fidelity which allows to find judges that trade accuracy for cost and also significantly reduce the cost of the search. Our method identifies judges that not only outperform existing benchmarks in accuracy and cost-efficiency but also utilize open-weight models, ensuring greater accessibility and reproducibility. The code to reproduce our experiments is available at this repository https://github.com/geoalgo/judgetuning .aa:T587,Recently, quantization has been widely used for the compression and acceleration of large language models (LLMs). Due to the outliers in LLMs, it is crucial to flatten weights and activations to minimize quantization error with equally spaced quantization points. Prior research explores various pre-quantization transformations to suppress outliers, such as per-channel scaling and Hadamard transformation. However, we observe that these transformed weights and activations can still exhibit steep and dispersed distributions. In this paper, we propose FlatQuant (Fast and Learnable Affine Transformation), a new post-training quantization approach that enhances the flatness of weights and activations. Our approach identifies optimal affine transformations for each linear layer, calibrated in hours via a lightweight objective. To reduce runtime overhead of affine transformation, we apply Kronecker product with two lightweight matrices, and fuse all operations in FlatQuant into a single kernel. Extensive experiments demonstrate that FlatQuant establishes a new state-of-the-art benchmark for quantization. For example, it achieves less than 1\% accuracy drop for W4A4 quantization on the LLaMA-3-70B model, surpassing SpinQuant by 7.5\%. Additionally, it provides up to 2.3x prefill speedup and 1.7x decoding speedup compared to the FP16 model. Code is available at: https://github.com/ruikangliu/FlatQuant.ab:T4f0,In this work, we unveil and study idiosyncrasies in Large Language Models (LLMs) -- unique patterns in their outputs that can be used to distinguish the models. To do so, we consider a simple classification task: given a particular text output, the objective is to predict the source LLM that generates the text. We evaluate this synthetic task across various groups of LLMs and find that simply fine-tuning text embedding models on LLM-generated texts yields excellent classification accuracy. Notably, we achieve 97.1% accuracy on held-out validation data in the five-way classification problem involving ChatGPT, Claude, Grok, Gemini, and DeepSeek. Our further investigation reveals that these idiosyncrasies are rooted in word-level distributions. These patterns persist even when the texts are rewritten, translated, or summarized by an external LLM, suggesting that they are also encoded in the semantic content. Additionally, we leverage LLM as judges to generate detailed, open-ended descriptions of each model's idiosyncrasies. Finally, we discuss the broader implications of our findings, including training on synthetic data, inferring model similarity, and robust evaluation of LLMs. Code is available at https://github.com/locuslab/llm-idiosyncrasies.ac:T40b,We address the problem of extending a pretrained large language model to a new domain that was not seen during training. Standard techniques, such as finetuning or low-rank adaptation (LoRA) are successful at domain adaptation, but do not formally add capacity to the model. This often leads to a trade-off, between performing well on the new domain vs. degrading performance on the original domain. Here, we revisit and improve adapters to extend LLMs from three angles: data, architecture and training procedure, which are advantageously considered jointly. The resulting method, called neutral residues, modifies adapters in a way that leads each new residual block to output near-zeros on the original domain. This solution leads to strong results when adapting a state-of-the-art model originally trained on English to a new language. Neutral residues significantly outperform competing approaches such as finetuning, LoRA or vanilla adapters in terms of the trade-off between learning the new language and not forgetting English.ad:T44b,We present PepTune, a multi-objective discrete diffusion model for simultaneous generation and optimization of therapeutic peptide SMILES. Built on the Masked Discrete Language Model (MDLM) framework, PepTune ensures valid peptide structures with a novel bond-dependent masking schedule and invalid loss function. To guide the diffusion process, we introduce Monte Carlo Tree Guidance (MCTG), an inference-time multi-objective guidance algorithm that balances exploration and exploitation to iteratively refine Pareto-optimal sequences. MCTG integrates classifier-based rewards with search-tree expansion, overcoming gradient estimation challenges and data sparsity. Using PepTune, we generate diverse, chemically-modified peptides simultaneously optimized for multiple therapeutic properties, including target binding affinity, membrane permeability, solubility, hemolysis, and non-fouling for various disease-relevant targets. In total, our results demonstrate that MCTG for masked discrete diffusion is a powerful and modular approach for multi-objective sequence design in discrete state spaces.ae:T61b,Transformers excel at discovering patterns in sequential data, yet their fundamental limitations and learning mechanisms remain crucial topics of investigation. In this paper, we study the ability of Transformers to learn pseudo-random number sequences from linear congruential generators (LCGs), defined by the recurrence relation $x_{t+1} = a x_t + c \;\mathrm{mod}\; m$. We find that with sufficient architectural capacity and training data variety, Transformers can perform in-context prediction of LCG sequences with unseen moduli ($m$) and parameters ($a,c$). By analyzing the embedding layers and attention patterns, we uncover how Transformers develop algorithmic structures to learn these sequences in two scenarios of increasing complexity. First, we investigate how Transformers learn LCG sequences with unseen ($a, c$) but fixed modulus; and demonstrate successful learning up to $m = 2^{32}$. We find that models learn to factorize $m$ and utilize digit-wise number representations to make sequential predictions. In the second, more challenging scenario of unseen moduli, we show that Transformers can generalize to unseen moduli up to $m_{\text{test}} = 2^{16}$. In this case, the model employs a two-step strategy: first estimating the unknown modulus from the context, then utilizing prime factorizations to generate predictions. For this task, we observe a sharp transition in the accuracy at a critical depth $d= 3$. We also find that the number of in-context sequence elements needed to reach high accuracy scales sublinearly with the modulus.af:T403,Accelerating the inference of large language models (LLMs) is a critical challenge in generative AI. Speculative decoding (SD) methods offer substantial efficiency gains by generating multiple tokens using a single target forward pass. However, existing SD approaches require the drafter and target models to share the same vocabulary, thus limiting the pool of possible drafters, often necessitating the training of a drafter from scratch. We present three new SD methods that remove this shared-vocabulary constraint. All three methods preserve the target distribution (i.e., they are lossless) and work with off-the-shelf models without requiring additional training or modifications. Empirically, on summarization, programming, and long-context tasks, our algorithms demonstrate significant speedups of up to 2.8x over standard autoregressive decoding. By enabling any off-the-shelf model to serve as a drafter and requiring no retraining, this work substantially broadens the applicability of the SD framework in practice.b0:T5a1,Multimodal representation learning is fundamentally about transforming incomparable modalities into comparable representations. While prior research primarily focused on explicitly aligning these representations through targeted learning objectives and model architectures, a recent line of work has found that independently trained unimodal models of increasing scale and performance can become implicitly aligned with each other. These findings raise fundamental questions regarding the emergence of aligned representations in multimodal learning. Specifically: (1) when and why does alignment emerge implicitly? and (2) is alignment a reliable indicator of performance? Through a comprehensive empirical investigation, we demonstrate that both the emergence of alignment and its relationship with task performance depend on several critical data characteristics. These include, but are not necessarily limited to, the degree of similarity between the modalities and the balance between redundant and unique information they provide for the task. Our findings suggest that alignment may not be universally beneficial; rather, its impact on performance varies depending on the dataset and task. These insights can help practitioners determine whether increasing alignment between modalities is advantageous or, in some cases, detrimental to achieving optimal performance. Code is released at https://github.com/MeganTj/multimodal_alignment.b1:T430,Foundation models are premised on the idea that sequence prediction can uncover deeper domain understanding, much like how Kepler's predictions of planetary motion later led to the discovery of Newtonian mechanics. However, evaluating whether these models truly capture deeper structure remains a challenge. We develop a technique for evaluating foundation models that examines how they adapt to synthetic datasets generated from some postulated world model. Our technique measures whether the foundation model's inductive bias aligns with the world model, and so we refer to it as an inductive bias probe. Across multiple domains, we find that foundation models can excel at their training tasks yet fail to develop inductive biases towards the underlying world model when adapted to new tasks. We particularly find that foundation models trained on orbital trajectories consistently fail to apply Newtonian mechanics when adapted to new physics tasks. Further analysis reveals that these models behave as if they develop task-specific heuristics that fail to generalize.b2:T605,Inference latency stands as a critical bottleneck in the large-scale deployment of Large Language Models (LLMs). Speculative decoding methods have recently shown promise in accelerating inference without compromising the output distribution. However, existing work typically relies on a dualistic draft-verify framework and lacks rigorous theoretical grounding. In this paper, we introduce a novel \emph{polybasic} speculative decoding framework, underpinned by a comprehensive theoretical analysis. Specifically, we prove a fundamental theorem that characterizes the optimal inference time for multi-model speculative decoding systems, shedding light on how to extend beyond the dualistic approach to a more general polybasic paradigm. Through our theoretical investigation of multi-model token generation, we expose and optimize the interplay between model capabilities, acceptance lengths, and overall computational cost. Our framework supports both standalone implementation and integration with existing speculative techniques, leading to accelerated performance in practice. Experimental results across multiple model families demonstrate that our approach yields speedup ratios ranging from $3.31\times$ to $4.01\times$ for LLaMA2-Chat 7B, up to $3.87 \times$ for LLaMA3-8B, up to $4.43 \times$ for Vicuna-7B and up to $3.85 \times$ for Qwen2-7B -- all while preserving the original output distribution. We release our theoretical proofs and implementation code to facilitate further investigation into polybasic speculative decoding.b3:T76d,Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly used for long-content generation (e.g., long Chain-of-Thought reasoning) where decoding efficiency becomes a critical bottleneck: Autoregressive decoding is inherently limited by its sequential token generation process, where each token must be generated before the next can be processed. This sequential dependency restricts the ability to fully leverage modern hardware's parallel processing capabilities. Existing methods like speculative decoding and layer skipping offer potential speedups but have notable drawbacks: speculative decoding relies on an auxiliary"drafter"model, which can be challenging to acquire and increases memory overhead, while layer skipping may introduce discrepancies in the outputs due to the missing key-value cache at skipped layers. In this work, we propose AdaDecode, which accelerates LLM decoding without requiring auxiliary models or changes to the original model parameters, while ensuring output consistency. AdaDecode leverages the insight that many tokens can accurately be generated at intermediate layers, as further layers often do not significantly alter predictions once the model reaches a certain confidence. By adaptively generating tokens at intermediate layers when confidence is high, AdaDecode enables the next token's computation to begin immediately. The remaining layer computations for early-predicted tokens are deferred and executed in parallel with subsequent tokens when needed, maximizing hardware utilization and reducing decoding latency. A final verification step ensures that early predictions match the results of standard autoregressive decoding, preserving output parity. Experiments across diverse generation tasks shows that AdaDecode consistently achieves superior decoding throughput with up to 1.73x speedup, while guaranteeing output parity with standard autoregressive decoding.b4:T414,Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable in-context learning (ICL) capabilities. In this study, we explore a surprising phenomenon related to ICL: LLMs can perform multiple, computationally distinct ICL tasks simultaneously, during a single inference call, a capability we term"task superposition". We provide empirical evidence of this phenomenon across various LLM families and scales and show that this phenomenon emerges even if we train the model to in-context learn one task at a time. We offer theoretical explanations that this capability is well within the expressive power of transformers. We also explore how LLMs internally compose task vectors during superposition. Furthermore, we show that larger models can solve more ICL tasks in parallel, and better calibrate their output distribution. Our findings offer insights into the latent capabilities of LLMs, further substantiate the perspective of"LLMs as superposition of simulators", and raise questions about the mechanisms enabling simultaneous task execution.b5:T632,Extrapolating ultra-long contexts (text length>128K) remains a major challenge for large language models (LLMs), as most training-free extrapolation methods are not only severely limited by memory bottlenecks, but also suffer from the attention sink, which restricts their scalability and effectiveness in practice. In this work, we propose ParallelComp, a parallel long-context compression method that effectively overcomes the memory bottleneck, enabling 8B-parameter LLMs to extrapolate from 8K to 128K tokens on a single A100 80GB GPU in a training-free setting. ParallelComp splits the input into chunks, dynamically evicting redundant chunks and irrelevant tokens, supported by a parallel KV cache eviction mechanism. Importantly, we present a systematic theoretical and empirical analysis of attention biases in parallel attention-including the attention sink, recency bias, and middle bias-and reveal that these biases exhibit distinctive patterns under ultra-long context settings. We further design a KV cache eviction technique to mitigate this phenomenon. Experimental results show that ParallelComp enables an 8B model (trained on 8K context) to achieve 91.17% of GPT-4's performance under ultra-long contexts, outperforming closed-source models such as Claude-2 and Kimi-Chat. We achieve a 1.76x improvement in chunk throughput, thereby achieving a 23.50x acceleration in the prefill stage with negligible performance loss and pave the way for scalable and robust ultra-long contexts extrapolation in LLMs. We release the code at https://github.com/menik1126/ParallelComp.b6:T4c3,Automatic evaluation methods based on large language models (LLMs) are emerging as the standard tool for assessing the instruction-following abilities of LLM-based agents. The most common method in this paradigm, pairwise comparisons with a baseline model, critically depends on the assumption of transitive preferences. However, the validity of this assumption remains largely unexplored. In this study, we investigate the presence of non-transitivity within the AlpacaEval framework and analyze its effects on model rankings. We find that LLM judges exhibit non-transitive preferences, leading to rankings that are sensitive to the choice of the baseline model. To mitigate this issue, we show that round-robin tournaments combined with Bradley-Terry models of preference can produce more reliable rankings. Notably, our method increases both the Spearman correlation and the Kendall correlation with Chatbot Arena (95.0% ->96.4% and 82.1% ->86.3% respectively). To address the computational cost of round-robin tournaments, we propose Swiss-Wise Iterative Matchmaking (Swim) tournaments, using a dynamic matching strategy to capture the benefits of round-robin tournaments while maintaining computational efficiency.b7:T553,While recent code-specific large language models (LLMs) have greatly enhanced their code generation capabilities, the safety of these models remains under-explored, posing potential risks as insecure code generated by these models may introduce vulnerabilities into real-world systems. Existing methods collect security-focused datasets from real-world vulnerabilities for instruction tuning in order to mitigate such issues. However, they are largely constrained by the data sparsity of vulnerable code, and have limited applicability in the multi-stage post-training workflows of modern LLMs. In this paper, we propose ProSec, a novel proactive security alignment approach designed to align code LLMs with secure coding practices. ProSec systematically exposes the vulnerabilities in a code LLM by synthesizing vulnerability-inducing coding scenarios from Common Weakness Enumerations (CWEs) and generates fixes to vulnerable code snippets, allowing the model to learn secure practices through preference learning objectives. The scenarios synthesized by ProSec trigger 25x more vulnerable code than a normal instruction-tuning dataset, resulting in a security-focused alignment dataset 7x larger than the previous work. Experiments show that models trained with ProSec are 25.2% to 35.4% more secure compared to previous work without degrading models' utility.b8:T5bf,Long-Context Transformer Models (LCTMs) are vital for real-world applications but suffer high computational costs due to attention's quadratic complexity. Block-sparse attention mitigates this by focusing computation on critical regions, yet existing methods struggle with balancing accuracy and efficiency due to costly block importance measurements. In this paper, we introduce XAttention, a plug-and-play framework that dramatically accelerates long-context inference in Transformers models using sparse attention. XAttention's key innovation is the insight that the sum of antidiagonal values (i.e., from the lower-left to upper-right) in the attention matrix provides a powerful proxy for block importance. This allows for precise identification and pruning of non-essential blocks, resulting in high sparsity and dramatically accelerated inference. Across comprehensive evaluations on demanding long-context benchmarks-including RULER and LongBench for language, VideoMME for video understanding, and VBench for video generation. XAttention achieves accuracy comparable to full attention while delivering substantial computational gains. We demonstrate up to 13.5x acceleration in attention computation. These results underscore XAttention's ability to unlock the practical potential of block sparse attention, paving the way for scalable and efficient deployment of LCTMs in real-world applications. Code is available at https://github.com/mit-han-lab/x-attention.b9:T478,Large Language Models (LLMs) have expanded their capabilities beyond language generation to interact with external tools, enabling automation and real-world applications. However, tool hallucinations, where models either select inappropriate tools or misuse them, pose significant challenges, leading to erroneous task execution, increased computational costs, and reduced system reliability. To systematically address this issue, we define and categorize tool hallucinations into two main types, tool selection hallucination and tool usage hallucination. To evaluate and mitigate these issues, we introduce RelyToolBench, which integrates specialized test cases and novel metrics to assess hallucination-aware task success and efficiency. Finally, we propose Relign, a reliability alignment framework that expands the tool-use action space to include indecisive actions, allowing LLMs to defer tool use, seek clarification, or adjust tool selection dynamically. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that Relign significantly reduces tool hallucinations, improves task reliability, and enhances the efficiency of LLM tool interactions.ba:T54a,Weak-to-Strong Generalization (W2SG), where a weak model supervises a stronger one, serves as an important analogy for understanding how humans might guide superhuman intelligence in the future. Promising empirical results revealed that a strong model can surpass its weak supervisor. While recent work has offered theoretical insights into this phenomenon, a clear understanding of the interactions between weak and strong models that drive W2SG remains elusive. We investigate W2SG through a theoretical lens and show that it can be characterized using kernels derived from the principal components of weak and strong models' internal representations. These kernels can be used to define a space that, at a high level, captures what the weak model is unable to learn but is learnable by the strong model. The projection of labels onto this space quantifies how much the strong model falls short of its full potential due to weak supervision. This characterization also provides insights into how certain errors in weak supervision can be corrected by the strong model, regardless of overfitting. Our theory has significant practical implications, providing a representation-based metric that predicts W2SG performance trends without requiring labels, as shown in experiments on molecular predictions with transformers and 5 NLP tasks involving 52 LLMs.bb:T44e,The alignment of large language models (LLMs) with human preferences remains a key challenge. While post-training techniques like Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) and Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) have achieved notable success, they often introduce computational inefficiencies and training instability. In this paper, we propose Feature-level constrained Preference Optimization (FPO), a novel method designed to simplify the alignment process while ensuring stability. FPO leverages pre-trained Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs) and introduces feature-level constraints, allowing for efficient, sparsity-enforced alignment. Our approach enjoys efficiency by using sparse features activated in a well-trained sparse autoencoder and the quality of sequential KL divergence by using the feature-level offline reference. Experimental results on benchmark datasets demonstrate that FPO achieves a 5.08% absolute improvement in win rate with much lower computational cost compared to state-of-the-art baselines, making it a promising solution for efficient and controllable LLM alignments.bc:T4ea,Although quantization for linear layers has been widely used, its application to accelerate the attention process remains limited. To further enhance the efficiency of attention computation compared to SageAttention while maintaining precision, we propose SageAttention2, which utilizes significantly faster 4-bit matrix multiplication (Matmul) alongside additional precision-enhancing techniques. First, we propose to quantize matrices $(Q, K)$ to INT4 in a hardware-friendly thread-level granularity and quantize matrices $(\widetilde P, V)$ to FP8. Second, we propose a method to smooth $Q$, enhancing the accuracy of INT4 $QK^\top$. Third, we propose a two-level accumulation strategy for $\widetilde PV$ to enhance the accuracy of FP8 $\widetilde PV$. The operations per second (OPS) of SageAttention2 surpass FlashAttention2 and xformers by about 3x and 4.5x on RTX4090, respectively. Moreover, SageAttention2 matches the speed of FlashAttention3(fp8) on the Hopper GPUs, while delivering much higher accuracy. Comprehensive experiments confirm that our approach incurs negligible end-to-end metrics loss across diverse models, including those for language, image, and video generation. The code is available at https://github.com/thu-ml/SageAttention.bd:T408,We examine diverging preferences in human-labeled preference datasets. We develop a taxonomy of disagreement sources spanning ten categories across four high-level classes and find that the majority of disagreements are due to factors such as task underspecification or response style. Our findings challenge a standard assumption in reward modeling methods that annotator disagreements can be attributed to simple noise. We then explore how these findings impact two areas of LLM development: reward modeling training and evaluation. In our experiments, we demonstrate how standard reward modeling (e.g., Bradley-Terry) and LLM-as-Judge evaluation methods fail to account for divergence between annotators. These findings highlight challenges in LLM evaluations, which are greatly influenced by divisive features like response style, and in developing pluralistically aligned LLMs. To address these issues, we develop methods for identifying diverging preferences to mitigate their influence in evaluations and during LLM training.be:T4f4,Modeling human preferences is crucial for aligning foundation models with human values. Traditional reward modeling methods, such as the Bradley-Terry (BT) reward model, fall short in expressiveness, particularly in addressing intransitive preferences. In this paper, we introduce preference embedding, an approach that embeds responses into a latent space to capture intricate preference structures efficiently, achieving linear query complexity. Additionally, we propose preference score-based General Preference Optimization (GPO), which generalizes reward-based reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF). Experimental results show that our General Preference embedding Model (GPM) consistently outperforms the BT reward model on the RewardBench benchmark and effectively models cyclic preferences where any BT reward model behaves like a random guess. Furthermore, evaluations on downstream tasks such as AlpacaEval2.0, following the language model post-training with GPO and our general preference model, reveal performance improvements over BT models. These findings indicate that our method may enhance the alignment of foundation models with nuanced human values. The code is available at https://github.com/general-preference/general-preference-model.bf:T583,Existing training-time safety alignment techniques for large language models (LLMs) remain vulnerable to jailbreak attacks. Direct preference optimization (DPO), a widely deployed alignment method, exhibits limitations in both experimental and theoretical contexts as its loss function proves suboptimal for refusal learning. Through gradient-based analysis, we identify these shortcomings and propose an improved safety alignment that disentangles DPO objectives into two components: (1) robust refusal training, which encourages refusal even when partial unsafe generations are produced, and (2) targeted unlearning of harmful knowledge. This approach significantly increases LLM robustness against a wide range of jailbreak attacks, including prefilling, suffix, and multi-turn attacks across both in-distribution and out-of-distribution scenarios. Furthermore, we introduce a method to emphasize critical refusal tokens by incorporating a reward-based token-level weighting mechanism for refusal learning, which further improves the robustness against adversarial exploits. Our research also suggests that robustness to jailbreak attacks is correlated with token distribution shifts in the training process and internal representations of refusal and harmful tokens, offering valuable directions for future research in LLM safety alignment. The code is available at https://github.com/wicai24/DOOR-Alignmentc0:T56a,Recent advances in Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) have shown that KL-regularization plays a pivotal role in improving the efficiency of RL fine-tuning for large language models (LLMs). Despite its empirical advantage, the theoretical difference between KL-regularized RL and standard RL remains largely under-explored. While there is a recent line of work on the theoretical analysis of KL-regularized objective in decision making \citep{xiong2024iterative, xie2024exploratory,zhao2024sharp}, these analyses either reduce to the traditional RL setting or rely on strong coverage assumptions. In this paper, we propose an optimism-based KL-regularized online contextual bandit algorithm, and provide a novel analysis of its regret. By carefully leveraging the benign optimization landscape induced by the KL-regularization and the optimistic reward estimation, our algorithm achieves an $\mathcal{O}\big(\eta\log (N_{\mathcal R} T)\cdot d_{\mathcal R}\big)$ logarithmic regret bound, where $\eta, N_{\mathcal R},T,d_{\mathcal R}$ denote the KL-regularization parameter, the cardinality of the reward function class, number of rounds, and the complexity of the reward function class. Furthermore, we extend our algorithm and analysis to reinforcement learning by developing a novel decomposition over transition steps and also obtain a similar logarithmic regret bound.c1:T671,While likelihood-based generative models, particularly diffusion and autoregressive models, have achieved remarkable fidelity in visual generation, the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) objective, which minimizes the forward KL divergence, inherently suffers from a mode-covering tendency that limits the generation quality under limited model capacity. In this work, we propose Direct Discriminative Optimization (DDO) as a unified framework that integrates likelihood-based generative training and GAN-type discrimination to bypass this fundamental constraint by exploiting reverse KL and self-generated negative signals. Our key insight is to parameterize a discriminator implicitly using the likelihood ratio between a learnable target model and a fixed reference model, drawing parallels with the philosophy of Direct Preference Optimization (DPO). Unlike GANs, this parameterization eliminates the need for joint training of generator and discriminator networks, allowing for direct, efficient, and effective finetuning of a well-trained model to its full potential beyond the limits of MLE. DDO can be performed iteratively in a self-play manner for progressive model refinement, with each round requiring less than 1% of pretraining epochs. Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of DDO by significantly advancing the previous SOTA diffusion model EDM, reducing FID scores from 1.79/1.58/1.96 to new records of 1.30/0.97/1.26 on CIFAR-10/ImageNet-64/ImageNet 512x512 datasets without any guidance mechanisms, and by consistently improving both guidance-free and CFG-enhanced FIDs of visual autoregressive models on ImageNet 256x256.c2:T526,Aligning Large Language Model (LLM) responses with human preferences is vital for building safe and controllable AI systems. While preference optimization methods based on Plackett-Luce (PL) and Bradley-Terry (BT) models have shown promise, they face challenges such as poor handling of harmful content, inefficient use of dispreferred responses, and, specifically for PL, high computational costs. To address these issues, we propose Hard Preference Sampling (HPS), a novel framework for robust and efficient human preference alignment. HPS introduces a training loss that prioritizes the most preferred response while rejecting all dispreferred and harmful ones. It emphasizes"hard"dispreferred responses -- those closely resembling preferred ones -- to enhance the model's rejection capabilities. By leveraging a single-sample Monte Carlo sampling strategy, HPS reduces computational overhead while maintaining alignment quality. Theoretically, HPS improves sample efficiency over existing PL methods and maximizes the reward margin between preferred and dispreferred responses, ensuring clearer distinctions. Experiments on HH-RLHF and PKU-Safety datasets validate HPS's effectiveness, achieving comparable BLEU and reward scores while greatly improving reward margins and thus reducing harmful content generation.c3:T529,Many real-world applications collect data in a streaming environment, where learning tasks are encountered sequentially. This necessitates continual learning (CL) to update models online, enabling adaptation to new tasks while preserving past knowledge to prevent catastrophic forgetting. Nowadays, with the flourish of large pre-trained models (LPMs), efficiency has become increasingly critical for CL, due to their substantial computational demands and growing parameter sizes. In this paper, we introduce TreeLoRA (K-D Tree of Low-Rank Adapters), a novel approach that constructs layer-wise adapters by leveraging hierarchical gradient similarity to enable efficient CL, particularly for LPMs. To reduce the computational burden of task similarity estimation, we employ bandit techniques to develop an algorithm based on lower confidence bounds to efficiently explore the task structure. Furthermore, we use sparse gradient updates to facilitate parameter optimization, making the approach better suited for LPMs. Theoretical analysis is provided to justify the rationale behind our approach, and experiments on both vision transformers (ViTs) and large language models (LLMs) demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our approach across various domains, including vision and natural language processing tasks.c4:T5e6,Supervised fine-tuning is a standard method for adapting pre-trained large language models (LLMs) to downstream tasks. Quantization has been recently studied as a post-training technique for efficient LLM deployment. To obtain quantized fine-tuned LLMs, conventional pipelines would first fine-tune the pre-trained models, followed by post-training quantization. This often yields suboptimal performance as it fails to leverage the synergy between fine-tuning and quantization. To effectively realize low-bit quantization of weights, activations and KV caches in LLMs, we propose an algorithm named Rotated Straight-Through-Estimator (RoSTE), which combines quantization-aware supervised fine-tuning (QA-SFT) with an adaptive rotation strategy that identifies an effective rotation configuration to reduce activation outliers. We provide theoretical insights on RoSTE by analyzing its prediction error when applied to an overparameterized least square quantized training problem. Our findings reveal that the prediction error is directly proportional to the quantization error of the converged weights, which can be effectively managed through an optimized rotation configuration. Experiments on Pythia, Qwen and Llama models of different sizes demonstrate the effectiveness of RoSTE. Compared to existing post-SFT quantization baselines, our method consistently achieves superior performances across various tasks and different LLM architectures. Our code is available at https://github.com/OptimAI-Lab/RoSTE.c5:T4d7,The wide deployment of the generative pre-trained transformer (GPT) has raised privacy concerns for both clients and servers. While cryptographic primitives can be employed for secure GPT inference to protect the privacy of both parties, they introduce considerable performance overhead.To accelerate secure inference, this study proposes a public decoding and secure verification approach that utilizes public GPT models, motivated by the observation that securely decoding one and multiple tokens takes a similar latency. The client uses the public model to generate a set of tokens, which are then securely verified by the private model for acceptance. The efficiency of our approach depends on the acceptance ratio of tokens proposed by the public model, which we improve from two aspects: (1) a private sampling protocol optimized for cryptographic primitives and (2) model alignment using knowledge distillation. Our approach improves the efficiency of secure decoding while maintaining the same level of privacy and generation quality as standard secure decoding. Experiments demonstrate a $2.1\times \sim 6.0\times$ speedup compared to standard decoding across three pairs of public-private models and different network conditions.c6:T532,Vision-Language Models (VLMs) combine visual perception with the general capabilities, such as reasoning, of Large Language Models (LLMs). However, the mechanisms by which these two abilities can be combined and contribute remain poorly understood. In this work, we explore to compose perception and reasoning through model merging that connects parameters of different models. Unlike previous works that often focus on merging models of the same kind, we propose merging models across modalities, enabling the incorporation of the reasoning capabilities of LLMs into VLMs. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that model merging offers a successful pathway to transfer reasoning abilities from LLMs to VLMs in a training-free manner. Moreover, we utilize the merged models to understand the internal mechanism of perception and reasoning and how merging affects it. We find that perception capabilities are predominantly encoded in the early layers of the model, whereas reasoning is largely facilitated by the middle-to-late layers. After merging, we observe that all layers begin to contribute to reasoning, whereas the distribution of perception abilities across layers remains largely unchanged. These observations shed light on the potential of model merging as a tool for multimodal integration and interpretation.c7:T57a,Online fine-tuning vision-language model (VLM) agents with reinforcement learning (RL) has shown promise for equipping agents with multi-step, goal-oriented capabilities in dynamic environments. However, their open-ended textual action space and non-end-to-end nature of action generation present significant challenges to effective online exploration in RL, e.g., explosion of the exploration space. We propose a novel online fine-tuning method, Counterfactual Soft Reinforcement Learning (CoSo), better suited to the textual output space of VLM agents. Compared to prior methods that assign uniform uncertainty to all tokens, CoSo leverages counterfactual reasoning to dynamically assess the causal influence of individual tokens on post-processed actions. By prioritizing the exploration of action-critical tokens while reducing the impact of semantically redundant or low-impact tokens, CoSo enables a more targeted and efficient online rollout process. We provide theoretical analysis proving CoSo's convergence and policy improvement guarantees, and extensive empirical evaluations supporting CoSo's effectiveness. Our results across a diverse set of agent tasks, including Android device control, card gaming, and embodied AI, highlight its remarkable ability to enhance exploration efficiency and deliver consistent performance gains. The code is available at https://github.com/langfengQ/CoSo.c8:T524,Recently, there has been a surge of interest in extending the success of large language models (LLMs) from texts to molecules. Most existing approaches adopt a graph neural network to represent a molecule as a series of node tokens for molecule-language alignment, which, however, have overlooked the inherent hierarchical structures in molecules. Notably, higher-order molecular structures contain rich semantics of functional groups, which encode crucial biochemical functionalities of the molecules. We show that neglecting the hierarchical information in tokenization will lead to subpar molecule-language alignment and severe hallucination. To address this limitation, we propose HIerarchical GrapH Tokenization (HIGHT). HIGHT employs a hierarchical graph tokenizer that encodes the hierarchy of atom, motif, and molecular levels of informative tokens to improve the molecular perception of LLMs. HIGHT also adopts an augmented instruction tuning dataset, enriched with the hierarchical graph information, to further enhance the molecule-language alignment. Extensive experiments on 14 real-world benchmarks verify the effectiveness of HIGHT in reducing hallucination by 40%, and significant improvements in various molecule-language downstream tasks. The project is available at https: //higraphllm.github.io/.c9:T538,Large Vision Language Models (VLMs) have long struggled with spatial reasoning tasks. Surprisingly, even simple spatial reasoning tasks, such as recognizing"under"or"behind"relationships between only two objects, pose significant challenges for current VLMs. In this work, we study the spatial reasoning challenge from the lens of mechanistic interpretability, diving into the model's internal states to examine the interactions between image and text tokens. By tracing attention distribution over the image through out intermediate layers, we observe that successful spatial reasoning correlates strongly with the model's ability to align its attention distribution with actual object locations, particularly differing between familiar and unfamiliar spatial relationships. Motivated by these findings, we propose ADAPTVIS based on inference-time confidence scores to sharpen the attention on highly relevant regions when confident, while smoothing and broadening the attention window to consider a wider context when confidence is lower. This training-free decoding method shows significant improvement (e.g., up to a 50 absolute point improvement) on spatial reasoning benchmarks such as WhatsUp and VSR with negligible cost. We make code and data publicly available for research purposes at https://github.com/shiqichen17/AdaptVis.ca:T4ad,The locate-then-edit paradigm has shown significant promise for knowledge editing (KE) in Large Language Models (LLMs). While previous methods perform well on single-hop fact recall tasks, they consistently struggle with multi-hop factual recall tasks involving newly edited knowledge. In this paper, leveraging tools in mechanistic interpretability, we first identify that in multi-hop tasks, LLMs tend to retrieve knowledge with implicit subject information from deeper MLP layers, unlike single-hop tasks, which rely on shallow layers. This distinction explains the poor performance of current methods in multi-hop queries, as they primarily focus on editing shallow layers with single-hop edit prompts, leaving deeper layers unchanged. To address this, we propose IFMET, a novel locate-then-edit KE approach designed to edit both shallow and deep MLP layers. Beyond single-hop editing prompts, IFMET further incorporates multi-hop editing prompts to locate and modify knowledge across different stages of reasoning. Experimental results demonstrate that IFMET significantly improves performance on multi-hop factual recall tasks, overcoming the limitations of previous locate-then-edit methodscb:T4c7,Large language models (LLMs) have shown great potential as general-purpose AI assistants across various domains. To fully leverage this potential in specific applications, many companies provide fine-tuning API services, enabling users to upload their own data for LLM customization. However, fine-tuning services introduce a new safety threat: user-uploaded data, whether harmful or benign, can break the model's alignment, leading to unsafe outputs. Moreover, existing defense methods struggle to address the diversity of fine-tuning datasets (e.g., varying sizes, tasks), often sacrificing utility for safety or vice versa. To address this issue, we propose Safe Delta, a safety-aware post-training defense method that adjusts the delta parameters (i.e., the parameter change before and after fine-tuning). Specifically, Safe Delta estimates the safety degradation, selects delta parameters to maximize utility while limiting overall safety loss, and applies a safety compensation vector to mitigate residual safety loss. Through extensive experiments on four diverse datasets with varying settings, our approach consistently preserves safety while ensuring that the utility gain from benign datasets remains unaffected.cc:T6d4,Large language models (LLMs) provide excellent text-generation capabilities, but standard prompting and generation methods generally do not lead to intentional or goal-directed agents and might necessitate considerable prompt tuning. This becomes particularly apparent in multi-turn conversations: even the best current LLMs rarely ask clarifying questions, engage in explicit information gathering, or take actions now that lead to better decisions after multiple turns. Reinforcement learning has the potential to leverage the powerful modeling capabilities of LLMs, as well as their internal representation of textual interactions, to create capable goal-directed language agents. This can enable intentional and temporally extended interactions, such as with humans, through coordinated persuasion and carefully crafted questions, or in goal-directed play through text games to bring about desired final outcomes. However, enabling this requires the community to develop stable and reliable reinforcement learning algorithms that can effectively train LLMs. Developing such algorithms requires tasks that can gauge progress on algorithm design, provide accessible and reproducible evaluations for multi-turn interactions, and cover a range of task properties and challenges in improving reinforcement learning algorithms. Our paper introduces the LMRL-Gym benchmark for evaluating multi-turn RL for LLMs, together with an open-source research framework containing a basic toolkit for getting started on multi-turn RL with offline value-based and policy-based RL methods. Our benchmark consists of 8 different language tasks, which require multiple rounds of language interaction and cover a range of tasks in open-ended dialogue and text games.cd:T5ea,Transformers have achieved great success in numerous NLP tasks but continue to exhibit notable gaps in multi-step factual reasoning, especially when real-world knowledge is sparse. Recent advances in grokking have demonstrated that neural networks can transition from memorizing to perfectly generalizing once they detect underlying logical patterns - yet these studies have primarily used small, synthetic tasks. In this paper, for the first time, we extend grokking to real-world factual data and address the challenge of dataset sparsity by augmenting existing knowledge graphs with carefully designed synthetic data to raise the ratio $\phi_r$ of inferred facts to atomic facts above the threshold required for grokking. Surprisingly, we find that even factually incorrect synthetic data can strengthen emergent reasoning circuits rather than degrade accuracy, as it forces the model to rely on relational structure rather than memorization. When evaluated on multi-hop reasoning benchmarks, our approach achieves up to 95-100% accuracy on 2WikiMultiHopQA - substantially improving over strong baselines and matching or exceeding current state-of-the-art results. We further provide an in-depth analysis of how increasing $\phi_r$ drives the formation of generalizing circuits inside Transformers. Our findings suggest that grokking-based data augmentation can unlock implicit multi-hop reasoning capabilities, opening the door to more robust and interpretable factual reasoning in large-scale language models.ce:T47d,While there has been plenty of work on generating tests from existing code, there has been limited work on generating tests from issues. A correct test must validate the code patch that resolves the issue. This paper focuses on the scenario where that code patch does not yet exist. Doing so supports two major use-cases. First, it supports TDD (test-driven development), the discipline of"test first, write code later"that has well-documented benefits for human software engineers. Second, it also validates SWE (software engineering) agents, which generate code patches for resolving issues. This paper introduces TDD-Bench-Verified, a benchmark for generating tests from issues, and Otter, an LLM-based solution for this task. Otter augments LLMs with rule-based analysis to check and repair their outputs, and introduces a novel self-reflective action planner. Experiments show Otter outperforming state-of-the-art systems for generating tests from issues, in addition to enhancing systems that generate patches from issues. We hope that Otter helps make developers more productive at resolving issues and leads to more robust, well-tested code.cf:T43e,Contrastive losses have been extensively used as a tool for multimodal representation learning. However, it has been empirically observed that their use is not effective to learn an aligned representation space. In this paper, we argue that this phenomenon is caused by the presence of modality-specific information in the representation space. Although some of the most widely used contrastive losses maximize the mutual information between representations of both modalities, they are not designed to remove the modality-specific information. We give a theoretical description of this problem through the lens of the Information Bottleneck Principle. We also empirically analyze how different hyperparameters affect the emergence of this phenomenon in a controlled experimental setup. Finally, we propose a regularization term in the loss function that is derived by means of a variational approximation and aims to increase the representational alignment. We analyze in a set of controlled experiments and real-world applications the advantages of including this regularization term.d0:T5a7,Relational reasoning is a central component of generally intelligent systems, enabling robust and data-efficient inductive generalization. Recent empirical evidence shows that many existing neural architectures, including Transformers, struggle with tasks requiring relational reasoning. In this work, we distinguish between two types of information: sensory information about the properties of individual objects, and relational information about the relationships between objects. While neural attention provides a powerful mechanism for controlling the flow of sensory information between objects, the Transformer lacks an explicit computational mechanism for routing and processing relational information. To address this limitation, we propose an architectural extension of the Transformer framework that we call the Dual Attention Transformer (DAT), featuring two distinct attention mechanisms: sensory attention for directing the flow of sensory information, and a novel relational attention mechanism for directing the flow of relational information. We empirically evaluate DAT on a diverse set of tasks ranging from synthetic relational benchmarks to complex real-world tasks such as language modeling and visual processing. Our results demonstrate that integrating explicit relational computational mechanisms into the Transformer architecture leads to significant performance gains in terms of data efficiency and parameter efficiency.d1:T677,With the increasing size of datasets used for training neural networks, data pruning becomes an attractive field of research. However, most current data pruning algorithms are limited in their ability to preserve accuracy compared to models trained on the full data, especially in high pruning regimes. In this paper we explore the application of data pruning while incorporating knowledge distillation (KD) when training on a pruned subset. That is, rather than relying solely on ground-truth labels, we also use the soft predictions from a teacher network pre-trained on the complete data. By integrating KD into training, we demonstrate significant improvement across datasets, pruning methods, and on all pruning fractions. We first establish a theoretical motivation for employing self-distillation to improve training on pruned data. Then, we empirically make a compelling and highly practical observation: using KD, simple random pruning is comparable or superior to sophisticated pruning methods across all pruning regimes. On ImageNet for example, we achieve superior accuracy despite training on a random subset of only 50% of the data. Additionally, we demonstrate a crucial connection between the pruning factor and the optimal knowledge distillation weight. This helps mitigate the impact of samples with noisy labels and low-quality images retained by typical pruning algorithms. Finally, we make an intriguing observation: when using lower pruning fractions, larger teachers lead to accuracy degradation, while surprisingly, employing teachers with a smaller capacity than the student's may improve results. Our code will be made available.d2:T4ce,The Dreamer algorithm has recently obtained remarkable performance across diverse environment domains by training powerful agents with simulated trajectories. However, the compressed nature of its world model's latent space can result in the loss of crucial information, negatively affecting the agent's performance. Recent approaches, such as $\Delta$-IRIS and DIAMOND, address this limitation by training more accurate world models. However, these methods require training agents directly from pixels, which reduces training efficiency and prevents the agent from benefiting from the inner representations learned by the world model. In this work, we propose an alternative approach to world modeling that is both accurate and efficient. We introduce EMERALD (Efficient MaskEd latent tRAnsformer worLD model), a world model using a spatial latent state with MaskGIT predictions to generate accurate trajectories in latent space and improve the agent performance. On the Crafter benchmark, EMERALD achieves new state-of-the-art performance, becoming the first method to surpass human experts performance within 10M environment steps. Our method also succeeds to unlock all 22 Crafter achievements at least once during evaluation.d3:T46c,Machine unlearning methods aim to remove sensitive or unwanted content from trained models, but typically demand extensive model updates at significant computational cost while potentially degrading model performance on both related and unrelated tasks. We propose Single Layer Unlearning Gradient (SLUG) as an efficient method to unlearn targeted information by updating a single critical layer using a one-time gradient computation. SLUG uses layer importance and gradient alignment metrics to identify the optimal layer for targeted information removal while preserving the model utility. We demonstrate the effectiveness of SLUG for CLIP, Stable Diffusion, and vision-language models (VLMs) in removing concrete (e.g., identities and objects) and abstract concepts (e.g., artistic styles). On the UnlearnCanvas benchmark, SLUG achieves comparable unlearning performance to existing methods while requiring significantly less computational resources. Our proposed approach offers a practical solution for targeted unlearning that is computationally efficient and precise. Our code is available at https://github.com/CSIPlab/SLUG.d4:T4f7,Despite extensive safety alignment efforts, large language models (LLMs) remain vulnerable to jailbreak attacks that elicit harmful behavior. While existing studies predominantly focus on attack methods that require technical expertise, two critical questions remain underexplored: (1) Are jailbroken responses truly useful in enabling average users to carry out harmful actions? (2) Do safety vulnerabilities exist in more common, simple human-LLM interactions? In this paper, we demonstrate that LLM responses most effectively facilitate harmful actions when they are both actionable and informative--two attributes easily elicited in multi-step, multilingual interactions. Using this insight, we propose HarmScore, a jailbreak metric that measures how effectively an LLM response enables harmful actions, and Speak Easy, a simple multi-step, multilingual attack framework. Notably, by incorporating Speak Easy into direct request and jailbreak baselines, we see an average absolute increase of 0.319 in Attack Success Rate and 0.426 in HarmScore in both open-source and proprietary LLMs across four safety benchmarks. Our work reveals a critical yet often overlooked vulnerability: Malicious users can easily exploit common interaction patterns for harmful intentions.d5:T491,With the emergence of diffusion models as a frontline generative model, many researchers have proposed molecule generation techniques with conditional diffusion models. However, the unavoidable discreteness of a molecule makes it difficult for a diffusion model to connect raw data with highly complex conditions like natural language. To address this, here we present a novel latent diffusion model dubbed LDMol for text-conditioned molecule generation. By recognizing that the suitable latent space design is the key to the diffusion model performance, we employ a contrastive learning strategy to extract novel feature space from text data that embeds the unique characteristics of the molecule structure. Experiments show that LDMol outperforms the existing autoregressive baselines on the text-to-molecule generation benchmark, being one of the first diffusion models that outperforms autoregressive models in textual data generation with a better choice of the latent domain. Furthermore, we show that LDMol can be applied to downstream tasks such as molecule-to-text retrieval and text-guided molecule editing, demonstrating its versatility as a diffusion model.d6:T50c,While Foundation Models provide a general tool for rapid content creation, they regularly require task-specific adaptation. Traditionally, this exercise involves careful curation of datasets and repeated fine-tuning of the underlying model. Fine-tuning techniques enable practitioners to adapt foundation models for many new applications but require expensive and lengthy training while being notably sensitive to hyperparameter choices. To overcome these limitations, we introduce Text-to-LoRA (T2L), a model capable of adapting large language models (LLMs) on the fly solely based on a natural language description of the target task. T2L is a hypernetwork trained to construct LoRAs in a single inexpensive forward pass. After training T2L on a suite of 9 pre-trained LoRA adapters (GSM8K, Arc, etc.), we show that the ad-hoc reconstructed LoRA instances match the performance of task-specific adapters across the corresponding test sets. Furthermore, T2L can compress hundreds of LoRA instances and zero-shot generalize to entirely unseen tasks. This approach provides a significant step towards democratizing the specialization of foundation models and enables language-based adaptation with minimal compute requirements. Our code is available at https://github.com/SakanaAI/text-to-lorad7:T50b,Aligning large language models with humans is challenging due to the inherently multifaceted nature of preference feedback. While existing approaches typically frame this as a multi-objective optimization problem, they often overlook how humans actually make decisions. Research on bounded rationality suggests that human decision making follows satisficing strategies-optimizing primary objectives while ensuring others meet acceptable thresholds. To bridge this gap and operationalize the notion of satisficing alignment, we propose SITAlign: an inference time framework that addresses the multifaceted nature of alignment by maximizing a primary objective while satisfying threshold-based constraints on secondary criteria. We provide theoretical insights by deriving sub-optimality bounds of our satisficing based inference alignment approach. We empirically validate SITAlign's performance through extensive experimentation on multiple benchmarks. For instance, on the PKU-SafeRLHF dataset with the primary objective of maximizing helpfulness while ensuring a threshold on harmlessness, SITAlign outperforms the state-of-the-art multi objective decoding strategy by a margin of 22.3% in terms of GPT-4 win-tie rate for helpfulness reward while adhering to the threshold on harmlessness.d8:T497,Large language models (LLMs) have emerged as powerful tools but pose significant safety risks through harmful outputs and vulnerability to adversarial attacks. We propose SaP, short for Safety Polytope, a geometric approach to LLM safety that learns and enforces multiple safety constraints directly in the model's representation space. We develop a framework that identifies safe and unsafe regions via the polytope's facets, enabling both detection and correction of unsafe outputs through geometric steering. Unlike existing approaches that modify model weights, SaP operates post-hoc in the representation space, preserving model capabilities while enforcing safety constraints. Experiments across multiple LLMs demonstrate that our method can effectively detect unethical inputs, reduce adversarial attack success rates while maintaining performance on standard tasks, thus highlighting the importance of having an explicit geometric model for safety. Analysis of the learned polytope facets reveals emergence of specialization in detecting different semantic notions of safety, providing interpretable insights into how safety is captured in LLMs' representation space.d9:T4ee,Classifier-Free Guidance (CFG) has been a default technique in various visual generative models, yet it requires inference from both conditional and unconditional models during sampling. We propose to build visual models that are free from guided sampling. The resulting algorithm, Guidance-Free Training (GFT), matches the performance of CFG while reducing sampling to a single model, halving the computational cost. Unlike previous distillation-based approaches that rely on pretrained CFG networks, GFT enables training directly from scratch. GFT is simple to implement. It retains the same maximum likelihood objective as CFG and differs mainly in the parameterization of conditional models. Implementing GFT requires only minimal modifications to existing codebases, as most design choices and hyperparameters are directly inherited from CFG. Our extensive experiments across five distinct visual models demonstrate the effectiveness and versatility of GFT. Across domains of diffusion, autoregressive, and masked-prediction modeling, GFT consistently achieves comparable or even lower FID scores, with similar diversity-fidelity trade-offs compared with CFG baselines, all while being guidance-free. Code will be available at https://github.com/thu-ml/GFT.da:T49f,We present three improvements to the standard model-based RL paradigm based on transformers: (a)"Dyna with warmup", which trains the policy on real and imaginary data, but only starts using imaginary data after the world model has been sufficiently trained; (b)"nearest neighbor tokenizer"for image patches, which improves upon previous tokenization schemes, which are needed when using a transformer world model (TWM), by ensuring the code words are static after creation, thus providing a constant target for TWM learning; and (c)"block teacher forcing", which allows the TWM to reason jointly about the future tokens of the next timestep, instead of generating them sequentially. We then show that our method significantly improves upon prior methods in various environments. We mostly focus on the challenging Craftax-classic benchmark, where our method achieves a reward of 69.66% after only 1M environment steps, significantly outperforming DreamerV3, which achieves 53.2%, and exceeding human performance of 65.0% for the first time. We also show preliminary results on Craftax-full, MinAtar, and three different two-player games, to illustrate the generality of the approach.db:T5e7,Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable advancements in natural language processing tasks, yet they encounter challenges in complex decision-making scenarios that require long-term reasoning and alignment with high-level objectives. Existing methods either rely on short-term auto-regressive action generation or face limitations in accurately simulating rollouts and assessing outcomes, leading to sub-optimal decisions. This paper introduces a novel LLM-based Actor-Critic framework, termed LAC, that effectively improves LLM policies with long-term action evaluations in a principled and scalable way. Our approach addresses two key challenges: (1) extracting robust action evaluations by computing Q-values via token logits associated with positive/negative outcomes, enhanced by future trajectory rollouts and reasoning; and (2) enabling efficient policy improvement through a gradient-free mechanism. Experiments across diverse environments -- including high-level decision-making (ALFWorld), low-level action spaces (BabyAI-Text), and large action spaces (WebShop) -- demonstrate the framework's generality and superiority over state-of-the-art methods. Notably, our approach achieves competitive performance using 7B/8B parameter LLMs, even outperforming baseline methods employing GPT-4 in complex tasks. These results underscore the potential of integrating structured policy optimization with LLMs' intrinsic knowledge to advance decision-making capabilities in multi-step environments.dc:T5c7,Transformer models have achieved remarkable empirical successes, largely due to their in-context learning capabilities. Inspired by this, we explore training an autoregressive transformer for in-context reinforcement learning (ICRL). In this setting, we initially train a transformer on an offline dataset consisting of trajectories collected from various RL tasks, and then fix and use this transformer to create an action policy for new RL tasks. Notably, we consider the setting where the offline dataset contains trajectories sampled from suboptimal behavioral policies. In this case, standard autoregressive training corresponds to imitation learning and results in suboptimal performance. To address this, we propose the Decision Importance Transformer(DIT) framework, which emulates the actor-critic algorithm in an in-context manner. In particular, we first train a transformer-based value function that estimates the advantage functions of the behavior policies that collected the suboptimal trajectories. Then we train a transformer-based policy via a weighted maximum likelihood estimation loss, where the weights are constructed based on the trained value function to steer the suboptimal policies to the optimal ones. We conduct extensive experiments to test the performance of DIT on both bandit and Markov Decision Process problems. Our results show that DIT achieves superior performance, particularly when the offline dataset contains suboptimal historical data.dd:T51e,Post-training compression reduces the computational and memory costs of large language models (LLMs), enabling resource-efficient deployment. However, existing compression benchmarks only focus on language modeling (e.g., perplexity) and natural language understanding tasks (e.g., GLUE accuracy), ignoring the agentic capabilities - workflow, tool use/function call, long-context understanding and real-world application. We introduce the Agent Compression Benchmark (ACBench), the first comprehensive benchmark for evaluating how compression impacts LLMs' agentic abilities. ACBench spans (1) 12 tasks across 4 capabilities (e.g., WorfBench for workflow generation, Needle-in-Haystack for long-context retrieval), (2) quantization (GPTQ, AWQ) and pruning (Wanda, SparseGPT), and (3) 15 models, including small (Gemma-2B), standard (Qwen2.5 7B-32B), and distilled reasoning LLMs (DeepSeek-R1-Distill). Our experiments reveal compression tradeoffs: 4-bit quantization preserves workflow generation and tool use (1%-3% drop) but degrades real-world application accuracy by 10%-15%. We introduce ERank, Top-k Ranking Correlation and Energy to systematize analysis. ACBench provides actionable insights for optimizing LLM compression in agentic scenarios. The code can be found in https://github.com/pprp/ACBench.de:T4c1,Language Models (LMs) are prone to ''memorizing'' training data, including substantial sensitive user information. To mitigate privacy risks and safeguard the right to be forgotten, machine unlearning has emerged as a promising approach for enabling LMs to efficiently ''forget'' specific texts. However, despite the good intentions, is textual unlearning really as effective and reliable as expected? To address the concern, we first propose Unlearning Likelihood Ratio Attack+ (U-LiRA+), a rigorous textual unlearning auditing method, and find that unlearned texts can still be detected with very high confidence after unlearning. Further, we conduct an in-depth investigation on the privacy risks of textual unlearning mechanisms in deployment and present the Textual Unlearning Leakage Attack (TULA), along with its variants in both black- and white-box scenarios. We show that textual unlearning mechanisms could instead reveal more about the unlearned texts, exposing them to significant membership inference and data reconstruction risks. Our findings highlight that existing textual unlearning actually gives a false sense of unlearning, underscoring the need for more robust and secure unlearning mechanisms.df:T5cc,With the advance of diffusion models, today's video generation has achieved impressive quality. To extend the generation length and facilitate real-world applications, a majority of video diffusion models (VDMs) generate videos in an autoregressive manner, i.e., generating subsequent clips conditioned on the last frame(s) of the previous clip. However, existing autoregressive VDMs are highly inefficient and redundant: The model must re-compute all the conditional frames that are overlapped between adjacent clips. This issue is exacerbated when the conditional frames are extended autoregressively to provide the model with long-term context. In such cases, the computational demands increase significantly (i.e., with a quadratic complexity w.r.t. the autoregression step). In this paper, we propose Ca2-VDM, an efficient autoregressive VDM with Causal generation and Cache sharing. For causal generation, it introduces unidirectional feature computation, which ensures that the cache of conditional frames can be precomputed in previous autoregression steps and reused in every subsequent step, eliminating redundant computations. For cache sharing, it shares the cache across all denoising steps to avoid the huge cache storage cost. Extensive experiments demonstrated that our Ca2-VDM achieves state-of-the-art quantitative and qualitative video generation results and significantly improves the generation speed. Code is available: https://github.com/Dawn-LX/CausalCache-VDMe0:T47e,Guidance techniques are simple yet effective for improving conditional generation in diffusion models. Albeit their empirical success, the practical implementation of guidance diverges significantly from its theoretical motivation. In this paper, we reconcile this discrepancy by replacing the scaled marginal distribution target, which we prove theoretically invalid, with a valid scaled joint distribution objective. Additionally, we show that the established guidance implementations are approximations to the intractable optimal solution under no future foresight constraint. Building on these theoretical insights, we propose rectified gradient guidance (REG), a versatile enhancement designed to boost the performance of existing guidance methods. Experiments on 1D and 2D demonstrate that REG provides a better approximation to the optimal solution than prior guidance techniques, validating the proposed theoretical framework. Extensive experiments on class-conditional ImageNet and text-to-image generation tasks show that incorporating REG consistently improves FID and Inception/CLIP scores across various settings compared to its absence.e1:T527,Understanding the decision-making processes of large language models is critical given their widespread applications. To achieve this, we aim to connect a formal mathematical framework - zigzag persistence from topological data analysis - with practical and easily applicable algorithms. Zigzag persistence is particularly effective for characterizing data as it dynamically transforms across model layers. Within this framework, we introduce topological descriptors that measure how topological features, $p$-dimensional holes, persist and evolve throughout the layers. Unlike methods that assess each layer individually and then aggregate the results, our approach directly tracks the full evolutionary path of these features. This offers a statistical perspective on how prompts are rearranged and their relative positions changed in the representation space, providing insights into the system's operation as an integrated whole. To demonstrate the expressivity and applicability of our framework, we highlight how sensitive these descriptors are to different models and a variety of datasets. As a showcase application to a downstream task, we use zigzag persistence to establish a criterion for layer pruning, achieving results comparable to state-of-the-art methods while preserving the system-level perspective.e2:T50f,To circumvent the alignment of large language models (LLMs), current optimization-based adversarial attacks usually craft adversarial prompts by maximizing the likelihood of a so-called affirmative response. An affirmative response is a manually designed start of a harmful answer to an inappropriate request. While it is often easy to craft prompts that yield a substantial likelihood for the affirmative response, the attacked model frequently does not complete the response in a harmful manner. Moreover, the affirmative objective is usually not adapted to model-specific preferences and essentially ignores the fact that LLMs output a distribution over responses. If low attack success under such an objective is taken as a measure of robustness, the true robustness might be grossly overestimated. To alleviate these flaws, we propose an adaptive and semantic optimization problem over the population of responses. We derive a generally applicable objective via the REINFORCE policy-gradient formalism and demonstrate its efficacy with the state-of-the-art jailbreak algorithms Greedy Coordinate Gradient (GCG) and Projected Gradient Descent (PGD). For example, our objective doubles the attack success rate (ASR) on Llama3 and increases the ASR from 2% to 50% with circuit breaker defense.e3:T491,Vision-language models, such as CLIP, have achieved significant success in aligning visual and textual representations, becoming essential components of many multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) like LLaVA and OpenFlamingo. However, numerous studies have identified CLIP's limited fine-grained perception as a critical drawback, leading to substantial failures in downstream MLLMs. In contrast, vision-centric foundation models like DINOv2 demonstrate remarkable capabilities in capturing fine details from images. In this work, we propose a novel kernel-based method to align CLIP's visual representation with that of DINOv2, ensuring that the resulting embeddings maintain compatibility with text embeddings while enhancing perceptual capabilities. Our alignment objective is designed for efficient stochastic optimization. Following this image-only alignment fine-tuning, the visual encoder retains compatibility with the frozen text encoder and exhibits significant improvements in zero-shot object recognition, fine-grained spatial reasoning, and localization. By integrating the aligned visual encoder, downstream MLLMs also demonstrate enhanced performance.e4:T653,Attention mechanisms are critical to the success of large language models (LLMs), driving significant advancements in multiple fields. However, for graph-structured data, which requires emphasis on topological connections, they fall short compared to message-passing mechanisms on fixed links, such as those employed by Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). This raises a question: ``Does attention fail for graphs in natural language settings?'' Motivated by these observations, we embarked on an empirical study from the perspective of attention mechanisms to explore how LLMs process graph-structured data. The goal is to gain deeper insights into the attention behavior of LLMs over graph structures. We uncovered unique phenomena regarding how LLMs apply attention to graph-structured data and analyzed these findings to improve the modeling of such data by LLMs. The primary findings of our research are: 1) While LLMs can recognize graph data and capture text-node interactions, they struggle to model inter-node relationships within graph structures due to inherent architectural constraints. 2) The attention distribution of LLMs across graph nodes does not align with ideal structural patterns, indicating a failure to adapt to graph topology nuances. 3) Neither fully connected attention nor fixed connectivity is optimal; each has specific limitations in its application scenarios. Instead, intermediate-state attention windows improve LLM training performance and seamlessly transition to fully connected windows during inference. Source code: \href{https://github.com/millioniron/LLM_exploration}{LLM4Exploration}e5:T451,We study Variational Rectified Flow Matching, a framework that enhances classic rectified flow matching by modeling multi-modal velocity vector-fields. At inference time, classic rectified flow matching 'moves' samples from a source distribution to the target distribution by solving an ordinary differential equation via integration along a velocity vector-field. At training time, the velocity vector-field is learnt by linearly interpolating between coupled samples one drawn from the source and one drawn from the target distribution randomly. This leads to ''ground-truth'' velocity vector-fields that point in different directions at the same location, i.e., the velocity vector-fields are multi-modal/ambiguous. However, since training uses a standard mean-squared-error loss, the learnt velocity vector-field averages ''ground-truth'' directions and isn't multi-modal. In contrast, variational rectified flow matching learns and samples from multi-modal flow directions. We show on synthetic data, MNIST, CIFAR-10, and ImageNet that variational rectified flow matching leads to compelling results.e6:T5ec,Our ability to continuously acquire, organize, and leverage knowledge is a key feature of human intelligence that AI systems must approximate to unlock their full potential. Given the challenges in continual learning with large language models (LLMs), retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) has become the dominant way to introduce new information. However, its reliance on vector retrieval hinders its ability to mimic the dynamic and interconnected nature of human long-term memory. Recent RAG approaches augment vector embeddings with various structures like knowledge graphs to address some of these gaps, namely sense-making and associativity. However, their performance on more basic factual memory tasks drops considerably below standard RAG. We address this unintended deterioration and propose HippoRAG 2, a framework that outperforms standard RAG comprehensively on factual, sense-making, and associative memory tasks. HippoRAG 2 builds upon the Personalized PageRank algorithm used in HippoRAG and enhances it with deeper passage integration and more effective online use of an LLM. This combination pushes this RAG system closer to the effectiveness of human long-term memory, achieving a 7% improvement in associative memory tasks over the state-of-the-art embedding model while also exhibiting superior factual knowledge and sense-making memory capabilities. This work paves the way for non-parametric continual learning for LLMs. Code and data are available at https://github.com/OSU-NLP-Group/HippoRAG.e7:T5bc,Despite the remarkable success of diffusion models (DMs) in data generation, they exhibit specific failure cases with unsatisfactory outputs. We focus on one such limitation: the ability of DMs to learn hidden rules between image features. Specifically, for image data with dependent features ($\mathbf{x}$) and ($\mathbf{y}$) (e.g., the height of the sun ($\mathbf{x}$) and the length of the shadow ($\mathbf{y}$)), we investigate whether DMs can accurately capture the inter-feature rule ($p(\mathbf{y}|\mathbf{x})$). Empirical evaluations on mainstream DMs (e.g., Stable Diffusion 3.5) reveal consistent failures, such as inconsistent lighting-shadow relationships and mismatched object-mirror reflections. Inspired by these findings, we design four synthetic tasks with strongly correlated features to assess DMs' rule-learning abilities. Extensive experiments show that while DMs can identify coarse-grained rules, they struggle with fine-grained ones. Our theoretical analysis demonstrates that DMs trained via denoising score matching (DSM) exhibit constant errors in learning hidden rules, as the DSM objective is not compatible with rule conformity. To mitigate this, we introduce a common technique - incorporating additional classifier guidance during sampling, which achieves (limited) improvements. Our analysis reveals that the subtle signals of fine-grained rules are challenging for the classifier to capture, providing insights for future exploration.e8:T4d0,With the rapid scaling of large language models (LLMs), structured pruning has become a widely used technique to learn efficient, smaller models from larger ones, delivering superior performance compared to training similarly sized models from scratch. In this paper, we move beyond the traditional static pruning approach of determining a fixed pruning mask for a model, and propose a dynamic approach to structured pruning. In our method, the pruning mask is input-dependent and adapts dynamically based on the information described in a user instruction. Our approach, termed"instruction-following pruning", introduces a sparse mask predictor that takes the user instruction as input and dynamically selects the most relevant model parameters for the given task. To identify and activate effective parameters, we jointly optimize the sparse mask predictor and the LLM, leveraging both instruction-following data and the pre-training corpus. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on a wide range of evaluation benchmarks. For example, our 3B activated model improves over the 3B dense model by 5-8 points of absolute margin on domains such as math and coding, and rivals the performance of a 9B model.e9:T5bc,Visual language is a system of communication that conveys information through symbols, shapes, and spatial arrangements. Diagrams are a typical example of a visual language depicting complex concepts and their relationships in the form of an image. The symbolic nature of diagrams presents significant challenges for building models capable of understanding them. Recent studies suggest that Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) can even tackle complex reasoning tasks involving diagrams. In this paper, we investigate this phenomenon by developing a comprehensive test suite to evaluate the diagram comprehension capability of LVLMs. Our test suite uses a variety of questions focused on concept entities and their relationships over a set of synthetic as well as real diagrams across domains to evaluate the recognition and reasoning abilities of models. Our evaluation of LVLMs shows that while they can accurately identify and reason about entities, their ability to understand relationships is notably limited. Further testing reveals that the decent performance on diagram understanding largely stems from leveraging their background knowledge as shortcuts to identify and reason about the relational information. Thus, we conclude that LVLMs have a limited capability for genuine diagram understanding, and their impressive performance in diagram reasoning is an illusion emanating from other confounding factors, such as the background knowledge in the models.ea:T4a1,Large Language Models (LLMs) show great capabilities in a wide range of applications, but serving them efficiently becomes increasingly challenging as requests (prompts) become more complex. Context caching improves serving performance by reusing Key-Value (KV) vectors, the intermediate representations of tokens that are repeated across requests. However, existing context caching requires exact prefix matches across requests, limiting reuse cases in settings such as few-shot learning and retrieval-augmented generation, where immutable content (e.g., documents) remains unchanged across requests but is preceded by varying prefixes. Position-Independent Caching (PIC) addresses this issue by enabling modular reuse of the KV vectors regardless of prefixes. We formalize PIC and advance prior work by introducing EPIC, a serving system incorporating our new LegoLink algorithm, which mitigates the inappropriate"attention sink"effect at every document beginning, to maintain accuracy with minimal computation. Experiments show that EPIC achieves up to 8x improvements in Time-To-First-Token (TTFT) and 7x throughput gains over existing systems, with negligible or no accuracy loss.eb:T45f,The practical applications of diffusion models have been limited by the misalignment between generated images and corresponding text prompts. Recent studies have introduced direct preference optimization (DPO) to enhance the alignment of these models. However, the effectiveness of DPO is constrained by the issue of visual inconsistency, where the significant visual disparity between well-aligned and poorly-aligned images prevents diffusion models from identifying which factors contribute positively to alignment during fine-tuning. To address this issue, this paper introduces D-Fusion, a method to construct DPO-trainable visually consistent samples. On one hand, by performing mask-guided self-attention fusion, the resulting images are not only well-aligned, but also visually consistent with given poorly-aligned images. On the other hand, D-Fusion can retain the denoising trajectories of the resulting images, which are essential for DPO training. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of D-Fusion in improving prompt-image alignment when applied to different reinforcement learning algorithms.ec:T6b8,In this paper, we address the challenge of determining the layer-wise sparsity rates of large language models (LLMs) through a theoretical perspective. Specifically, we identify a critical issue of ''$\textbf{reconstruction error explosion}$'' in existing LLMs sparsification methods. This refers to the cumulative effect of reconstruction errors throughout the sparsification process, where errors from earlier layers propagate and amplify in subsequent layers. As a result, the overall reconstruction error increases significantly, leading to a substantial degradation in model performance. Through theoretical analysis, we derive a simple yet effective approach to layer-wise sparsity allocation that mitigates this issue. Our method uses a monotonically increasing arithmetic progression, reducing the process of determining sparsity rates for multiple layers to the determination of a single common difference hyperparameter. Remarkably, this allows for the optimal layer-wise sparsity rates to be identified with just a few trials. Both our theoretical analysis and experimental results demonstrate that this sparsity allocation scheme is near optimal. Extensive experiments show that our method significantly improves the performance of sparse LLMs across various architectures, outperforming existing layer-wise sparsity methods. Furthermore, it enhances the performance of various compression techniques and is applicable to vision and multimodal models. Notably, our method achieves a reduction of 52.10 in perplexity for the 70$\%$ sparse LLaMA2-7B model obtained via Wanda, improves average zero-shot accuracy by 10.50$\%$, and delivers speedups of 2.63$\times$ and 2.23$\times$ on CPU and GPU, respectively.ed:T4eb,Large Video Models (LVMs) built upon Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown promise in video understanding but often suffer from misalignment with human intuition and video hallucination issues. To address these challenges, we introduce VistaDPO, a novel framework for Video Hierarchical Spatial-Temporal Direct Preference Optimization. VistaDPO enhances text-video preference alignment across three hierarchical levels: i) Instance Level, aligning overall video content with responses; ii) Temporal Level, aligning video temporal semantics with event descriptions; and iii) Perceptive Level, aligning spatial objects with language tokens. Given the lack of datasets for fine-grained video-language preference alignment, we construct VistaDPO-7k, a dataset of 7.2K QA pairs annotated with chosen and rejected responses, along with spatial-temporal grounding information such as timestamps, keyframes, and bounding boxes. Extensive experiments on benchmarks such as Video Hallucination, Video QA, and Captioning performance tasks demonstrate that VistaDPO significantly improves the performance of existing LVMs, effectively mitigating video-language misalignment and hallucination. The code and data are available at https://github.com/HaroldChen19/VistaDPO.ee:T5d7,Recent advances in natural language processing (NLP) have opened up greater opportunities to enable fine-tuned large language models (LLMs) to behave as more powerful interactive agents through improved instruction-following ability. However, understanding how this impacts confidence calibration for reliable model output has not been researched in full. In this work, we examine various open-sourced LLMs, identifying significant calibration degradation after instruction tuning in each. Seeking a practical solution, we look towards label smoothing, which has been shown as an effective method to regularize for overconfident predictions but has yet to be widely adopted in the supervised fine-tuning (SFT) of LLMs. We first provide insight as to why label smoothing is sufficient to maintain calibration throughout the SFT process. However, settings remain where the effectiveness of smoothing is severely diminished, in particular the case of large vocabulary LLMs (LV-LLMs). We posit the cause to stem from the ability to become over-confident, which has a direct relationship with the hidden size and vocabulary size, and justify this theoretically and experimentally. Finally, we address an outstanding issue regarding the memory footprint of the cross-entropy loss computation in the label smoothed loss setting, designing a customized kernel to dramatically reduce memory consumption without sacrificing speed or performance in comparison to existing solutions for non-smoothed losses.ef:T48c,Large language models (LLMs) often produce incorrect or outdated information, necessitating efficient and precise knowledge updates. Current model editing methods, however, struggle with long-form knowledge in diverse formats, such as poetry, code snippets, and mathematical derivations. These limitations arise from their reliance on editing a single token's hidden state, a limitation we term"efficacy barrier". To solve this, we propose AnyEdit, a new autoregressive editing paradigm. It decomposes long-form knowledge into sequential chunks and iteratively edits the key token in each chunk, ensuring consistent and accurate outputs. Theoretically, we ground AnyEdit in the Chain Rule of Mutual Information, showing its ability to update any knowledge within LLMs. Empirically, it outperforms strong baselines by 21.5% on benchmarks including UnKEBench, AKEW, and our new EditEverything dataset for long-form diverse-formatted knowledge. Additionally, AnyEdit serves as a plug-and-play framework, enabling current editing methods to update knowledge with arbitrary length and format, significantly advancing the scope and practicality of LLM knowledge editing.f0:T550,Recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) have led to increasingly diverse requests, accompanied with varying resource (compute and memory) demands to serve them. However, this in turn degrades the cost-efficiency of LLM serving as common practices primarily rely on homogeneous GPU resources. In response to this problem, this work conducts a thorough study about serving LLMs over heterogeneous GPU resources on cloud platforms. The rationale is that different GPU types exhibit distinct compute and memory characteristics, aligning well with the divergent resource demands of diverse requests. Particularly, through comprehensive benchmarking, we discover that the cost-efficiency of LLM serving can be substantially optimized by meticulously determining GPU composition, deployment configurations, and workload assignments. Subsequently, we design a scheduling algorithm via mixed-integer linear programming, aiming at deducing the most cost-efficient serving plan under the constraints of price budget and real-time GPU availability. Remarkably, our approach effectively outperforms homogeneous and heterogeneous baselines under a wide array of scenarios, covering diverse workload traces, varying GPU availablilities, and multi-model serving. This casts new light on more accessible and efficient LLM serving over heterogeneous cloud resources.f1:T554,Answering questions with Chain-of-Thought (CoT) has significantly enhanced the reasoning capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs), yet its impact on Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) still lacks a systematic assessment and in-depth investigation. In this paper, we introduce MME-CoT, a specialized benchmark evaluating the CoT reasoning performance of LMMs, spanning six domains: math, science, OCR, logic, space-time, and general scenes. As the first comprehensive study in this area, we propose a thorough evaluation suite incorporating three novel metrics that assess the reasoning quality, robustness, and efficiency at a fine-grained level. Leveraging curated high-quality data and a unique evaluation strategy, we conduct an in-depth analysis of state-of-the-art LMMs, uncovering several key insights: 1) Models with reflection mechanism demonstrate a superior CoT quality, with Kimi k1.5 outperforming GPT-4o and demonstrating the highest quality results; 2) CoT prompting often degrades LMM performance on perception-heavy tasks, suggesting a potentially harmful overthinking behavior; and 3) Although the CoT quality is high, LMMs with reflection exhibit significant inefficiency in both normal response and self-correction phases. We hope MME-CoT serves as a foundation for advancing multimodal reasoning in LMMs. Project Page: https://mmecot.github.io/f2:T439,Post-training quantization is a key technique for reducing the memory and inference latency of large language models by quantizing weights and activations without requiring retraining. However, existing methods either (1) fail to account for the varying importance of hidden features to the end loss or, when incorporating end loss, (2) neglect the critical interactions between model weights. To address these limitations, we propose GuidedQuant, a novel quantization approach that integrates gradient information from the end loss into the quantization objective while preserving cross-weight dependencies within output channels. GuidedQuant consistently boosts the performance of state-of-the-art quantization methods across weight-only scalar, weight-only vector, and weight-and-activation quantization. Additionally, we introduce a novel non-uniform scalar quantization algorithm, which is guaranteed to monotonically decrease the quantization objective value, and outperforms existing methods in this category. We release the code at https://github.com/snu-mllab/GuidedQuant.f3:T4b2,We introduce ResGen, an efficient Residual Vector Quantization (RVQ)-based generative model for high-fidelity generation with fast sampling. RVQ improves data fidelity by increasing the number of quantization steps, referred to as depth, but deeper quantization typically increases inference steps in generative models. To address this, ResGen directly predicts the vector embedding of collective tokens rather than individual ones, ensuring that inference steps remain independent of RVQ depth. Additionally, we formulate token masking and multi-token prediction within a probabilistic framework using discrete diffusion and variational inference. We validate the efficacy and generalizability of the proposed method on two challenging tasks across different modalities: conditional image generation on ImageNet 256x256 and zero-shot text-to-speech synthesis. Experimental results demonstrate that ResGen outperforms autoregressive counterparts in both tasks, delivering superior performance without compromising sampling speed. Furthermore, as we scale the depth of RVQ, our generative models exhibit enhanced generation fidelity or faster sampling speeds compared to similarly sized baseline models.f4:T4fa,Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods, such as LoRA, are commonly used to adapt LLMs. However, the effectiveness of standard PEFT methods is limited in low-resource scenarios with only a few hundred examples. Recent advances in interpretability research have inspired the emergence of activation editing (or steering) techniques, which modify the activations of specific model components. Due to their extremely small parameter counts, these methods show promise for small datasets. However, their performance is highly dependent on identifying the correct modules to edit and often lacks stability across different datasets. In this paper, we propose Joint Localization and Activation Editing (JoLA), a method that jointly learns (1) which heads in the Transformer to edit (2) whether the intervention should be additive, multiplicative, or both and (3) the intervention parameters themselves - the vectors applied as additive offsets or multiplicative scalings to the head output. Through evaluations on three benchmarks spanning commonsense reasoning, natural language understanding, and natural language generation, we demonstrate that JoLA consistently outperforms existing methods. The code for the method is released at https://github.com/wenlai-lavine/jola.f5:T56e,Recent years have seen significant progress in Text-To-Audio (TTA) synthesis, enabling users to enrich their creative workflows with synthetic audio generated from natural language prompts. Despite this progress, the effects of data, model architecture, training objective functions, and sampling strategies on target benchmarks are not well understood. With the purpose of providing a holistic understanding of the design space of TTA models, we set up a large-scale empirical experiment focused on diffusion and flow matching models. Our contributions include: 1) AF-Synthetic, a large dataset of high quality synthetic captions obtained from an audio understanding model; 2) a systematic comparison of different architectural, training, and inference design choices for TTA models; 3) an analysis of sampling methods and their Pareto curves with respect to generation quality and inference speed. We leverage the knowledge obtained from this extensive analysis to propose our best model dubbed Elucidated Text-To-Audio (ETTA). When evaluated on AudioCaps and MusicCaps, ETTA provides improvements over the baselines trained on publicly available data, while being competitive with models trained on proprietary data. Finally, we show ETTA's improved ability to generate creative audio following complex and imaginative captions -- a task that is more challenging than current benchmarks.f6:T476,Low rank adaptation (LoRA) has emerged as a prominent technique for fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) thanks to its superb efficiency gains over previous methods. While extensive studies have examined the performance and structural properties of LoRA, its behavior upon training-time attacks remain underexplored, posing significant security risks. In this paper, we theoretically investigate the security implications of LoRA's low-rank structure during fine-tuning, in the context of its robustness against data poisoning and backdoor attacks. We propose an analytical framework that models LoRA's training dynamics, employs the neural tangent kernel to simplify the analysis of the training process, and applies information theory to establish connections between LoRA's low rank structure and its vulnerability against training-time attacks. Our analysis indicates that LoRA exhibits better robustness to backdoor attacks than full fine-tuning, while becomes more vulnerable to untargeted data poisoning due to its over-simplified information geometry. Extensive experimental evaluations have corroborated our theoretical findings.f7:T52a,We investigate the logical reasoning capabilities of large language models (LLMs) and their scalability in complex non-monotonic reasoning. To this end, we introduce ZebraLogic, a comprehensive evaluation framework for assessing LLM reasoning performance on logic grid puzzles derived from constraint satisfaction problems (CSPs). ZebraLogic enables the generation of puzzles with controllable and quantifiable complexity, facilitating a systematic study of the scaling limits of models such as Llama, o1 models, and DeepSeek-R1. By encompassing a broad range of search space complexities and diverse logical constraints, ZebraLogic provides a structured environment to evaluate reasoning under increasing difficulty. Our results reveal a significant decline in accuracy as problem complexity grows -- a phenomenon we term the curse of complexity. This limitation persists even with larger models and increased inference-time computation, suggesting inherent constraints in current LLM reasoning capabilities. Additionally, we explore strategies to enhance logical reasoning, including Best-of-N sampling, backtracking mechanisms, and self-verification prompts. Our findings offer critical insights into the scalability of LLM reasoning, highlight fundamental limitations, and outline potential directions for improvement.f8:T433,Large Language Models (LLMs) are expected to be predictable and trustworthy to support reliable decision-making systems. Yet current LLMs often show inconsistencies in their judgments. In this work, we examine logical preference consistency as a foundational requirement for building more dependable LLM systems, ensuring stable and coherent decision-making while minimizing erratic or contradictory outputs. To quantify the logical preference consistency, we propose a universal evaluation framework based on three fundamental properties: transitivity, commutativity and negation invariance. Through extensive experimentation across diverse LLMs, we demonstrate that these properties serve as strong indicators of judgment robustness. Furthermore, we introduce a data refinement and augmentation technique, REPAIR, that enhances logical consistency while maintaining alignment with human preferences. Finally, we show that improving consistency leads to better performance in LLM-driven logic-based algorithms, reinforcing stability and coherence in decision-making systems.f9:T530,Multimodal learning faces challenges in effectively fusing information from diverse modalities, especially when modality quality varies across samples. Dynamic fusion strategies, such as attention mechanism in Transformers, aim to address such challenge by adaptively emphasizing modalities based on the characteristics of input data. However, through amounts of carefully designed experiments, we surprisingly observed that the dynamic adaptability of widely-used self-attention models diminishes. Model tends to prefer one modality regardless of data characteristics. This bias triggers a self-reinforcing cycle that progressively overemphasizes the favored modality, widening the distribution gap in attention keys across modalities and deactivating attention mechanism's dynamic properties. To revive adaptability, we propose a simple yet effective method Rolling Query (RollingQ), which balances attention allocation by rotating the query to break the self-reinforcing cycle and mitigate the key distribution gap. Extensive experiments on various multimodal scenarios validate the effectiveness of RollingQ and the restoration of cooperation dynamics is pivotal for enhancing the broader capabilities of widely deployed multimodal Transformers. The source code is available at https://github.com/GeWu-Lab/RollingQ_ICML2025.fa:T4a0,Jailbreak attacks bypass the guardrails of large language models to produce harmful outputs. In this paper, we ask whether the model outputs produced by existing jailbreaks are actually useful. For example, when jailbreaking a model to give instructions for building a bomb, does the jailbreak yield good instructions? Since the utility of most unsafe answers (e.g., bomb instructions) is hard to evaluate rigorously, we build new jailbreak evaluation sets with known ground truth answers, by aligning models to refuse questions related to benign and easy-to-evaluate topics (e.g., biology or math). Our evaluation of eight representative jailbreaks across five utility benchmarks reveals a consistent drop in model utility in jailbroken responses, which we term the jailbreak tax. For example, while all jailbreaks we tested bypass guardrails in models aligned to refuse to answer math, this comes at the expense of a drop of up to 92% in accuracy. Overall, our work proposes the jailbreak tax as a new important metric in AI safety, and introduces benchmarks to evaluate existing and future jailbreaks. We make the benchmark available at https://github.com/ethz-spylab/jailbreak-taxfb:T5aa,Knowledge Editing (KE) algorithms alter models' weights to perform targeted updates to incorrect, outdated, or otherwise unwanted factual associations. However, recent work has shown that applying KE can adversely affect models' broader factual recall accuracy and diminish their reasoning abilities. Although these studies give insights into the potential harms of KE algorithms, e.g., performance evaluations on benchmarks, little is understood about why such destructive failures occur. Motivated by this, we define a novel synthetic task in which a Transformer is trained from scratch to internalize a"structured"knowledge graph. The structure enforces relationships between entities of the graph, such that editing a factual association has"trickling effects"on other entities (e.g., altering X's parent is Y to Z affects who X's siblings' parent is). Through evaluations of edited models on this task, we show that KE inadvertently affects representations of entities beyond the targeted one, distorting relevant structures that allow a model to infer unseen knowledge about an entity. We call this phenomenon representation shattering and demonstrate that it degrades models' factual recall and reasoning performance. We further corroborate our findings in naturalistic settings with pre-trained Llama and Mamba models as well. Overall, our work yields a precise mechanistic hypothesis to explain why KE has adverse effects on model abilities.fc:T4b9,Foundation models pre-trained on massive unlabeled datasets have revolutionized natural language and computer vision, exhibiting remarkable generalization capabilities, thus highlighting the importance of pre-training. Yet, efforts in robotics have struggled to achieve similar success, limited by either the need for costly robotic annotations or the lack of representations that effectively model the physical world. In this paper, we introduce ARM4R, an Auto-regressive Robotic Model that leverages low-level 4D Representations learned from human video data to yield a better pre-trained robotic model. Specifically, we focus on utilizing 3D point tracking representations from videos derived by lifting 2D representations into 3D space via monocular depth estimation across time. These 4D representations maintain a shared geometric structure between the points and robot state representations up to a linear transformation, enabling efficient transfer learning from human video data to low-level robotic control. Our experiments show that ARM4R can transfer efficiently from human video data to robotics and consistently improves performance on tasks across various robot environments and configurations.fd:T440,Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have shown promising capabilities but struggle under distribution shifts, where evaluation data differ from instruction tuning distributions. Although previous works have provided empirical evaluations, we argue that establishing a formal framework that can characterize and quantify the risk of MLLMs is necessary to ensure the safe and reliable application of MLLMs in the real world. By taking an information-theoretic perspective, we propose the first theoretical framework that enables the quantification of the maximum risk of MLLMs under distribution shifts. Central to our framework is the introduction of Effective Mutual Information (EMI), a principled metric that quantifies the relevance between input queries and model responses. We derive an upper bound for the EMI difference between in-distribution (ID) and out-of-distribution (OOD) data, connecting it to visual and textual distributional discrepancies. Extensive experiments on real benchmark datasets, spanning 61 shift scenarios, empirically validate our theoretical insights.fe:T47c,Hallucinations in LLMs pose a significant concern to their safe deployment in real-world applications. Recent approaches have leveraged the latent space of LLMs for hallucination detection, but their embeddings, optimized for linguistic coherence rather than factual accuracy, often fail to clearly separate truthful and hallucinated content. To this end, we propose the Truthfulness Separator Vector (TSV), a lightweight and flexible steering vector that reshapes the LLM's representation space during inference to enhance the separation between truthful and hallucinated outputs, without altering model parameters. Our two-stage framework first trains TSV on a small set of labeled exemplars to form compact and well-separated clusters. It then augments the exemplar set with unlabeled LLM generations, employing an optimal transport-based algorithm for pseudo-labeling combined with a confidence-based filtering process. Extensive experiments demonstrate that TSV achieves state-of-the-art performance with minimal labeled data, exhibiting strong generalization across datasets and providing a practical solution for real-world LLM applications.ff:T497,Many program synthesis tasks prove too challenging for even state-of-the-art language models to solve in single attempts. Search-based evolutionary methods offer a promising alternative by exploring solution spaces iteratively, but their effectiveness remain limited by the fixed capabilities of the underlying generative model. We propose SOAR, a method that learns program synthesis by integrating language models into a self-improving evolutionary loop. SOAR alternates between (1) an evolutionary search that uses an LLM to sample and refine candidate solutions, and (2) a hindsight learning phase that converts search attempts into valid problem-solution pairs used to fine-tune the LLM's sampling and refinement capabilities\, -- \,enabling increasingly effective search in subsequent iterations. On the challenging ARC-AGI benchmark, SOAR achieves significant performance gains across model scales and iterations, leveraging positive transfer between the sampling and refinement finetuning tasks. These improvements carry over to test-time adaptation, enabling SOAR to solve 52\% of the public test set. Our code is open-sourced at: https://github.com/flowersteam/SOAR100:T4a4,A key challenge in training Large Language Models (LLMs) is properly aligning them with human preferences. Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback (RLHF) uses pairwise comparisons from human annotators to train reward functions and has emerged as a popular alignment method. However, input datasets in RLHF are not necessarily balanced in the types of questions and answers that are included. Therefore, we want RLHF algorithms to perform well even when the set of alternatives is not uniformly distributed. Drawing on insights from social choice theory, we introduce robustness to approximate clones, a desirable property of RLHF algorithms which requires that adding near-duplicate alternatives does not significantly change the learned reward function. We first demonstrate that the standard RLHF algorithm based on regularized maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) fails to satisfy this property. We then propose the weighted MLE, a new RLHF algorithm that modifies the standard regularized MLE by weighting alternatives based on their similarity to other alternatives. This new algorithm guarantees robustness to approximate clones while preserving desirable theoretical properties.101:T545,The in-context learning paradigm with LLMs has been instrumental in advancing a wide range of natural language processing tasks. The selection of few-shot examples (exemplars / demonstration samples) is essential for constructing effective prompts under context-length budget constraints. In this paper, we formulate the exemplar selection task as a top-m best arms identification problem. A key challenge in this setup is the exponentially large number of arms that need to be evaluated to identify the m-best arms. We propose CASE (Challenger Arm Sampling for Exemplar selection), a novel sample-efficient selective exploration strategy that maintains a shortlist of"challenger"arms, which are current candidates for the top-m arms. In each iteration, only one of the arms from this shortlist or the current topm set is pulled, thereby reducing sample complexity and, consequently, the number of LLM evaluations. Furthermore, we model the scores of exemplar subsets (arms) using a parameterized linear scoring function, leading to stochastic linear bandits setting. CASE achieves remarkable efficiency gains of up to 7x speedup in runtime while requiring 7x fewer LLM calls (87% reduction) without sacrificing performance compared to state-of-the-art exemplar selection methods. We release our code and data at https://github.com/kiranpurohit/CASE102:T5bf,Continual Instruction Tuning (CIT) is adopted to continually instruct Large Models to follow human intent data by data. It is observed that existing gradient update would heavily destroy the performance on previous datasets during CIT process. Instead, Exponential Moving Average (EMA), owns the ability to trace previous parameters, which can aid in decreasing forgetting. Nonetheless, its stable balance weight fails to deal with the ever-changing datasets, leading to the out-of-balance between plasticity and stability. In this paper, we propose a general continual instruction tuning framework to address the challenge. Starting from the trade-off prerequisite and EMA update, we propose the plasticity and stability ideal condition. Based on Taylor expansion in the loss function, we find the optimal balance weight can be automatically determined by the gradients and learned parameters. Therefore, we propose a stable-plasticity balanced coefficient to avoid knowledge interference. Based on the semantic similarity of the instructions, we can determine whether to retrain or expand the training parameters and allocate the most suitable parameters for the testing instances. Extensive experiments across multiple continual instruction tuning benchmarks demonstrate that our approach not only enhances anti-forgetting capabilities but also significantly improves overall continual tuning performance. Our code is available at https://github.com/JingyangQiao/CoIN.103:T4fd,Despite significant advances in quality and complexity of the generations in text-to-image models, prompting does not always lead to the desired outputs. Controlling model behaviour by directly steering intermediate model activations has emerged as a viable alternative allowing to reach concepts in latent space that may otherwise remain inaccessible by prompt. In this work, we introduce a set of experiments to deepen our understanding of concept reachability. We design a training data setup with three key obstacles: scarcity of concepts, underspecification of concepts in the captions, and data biases with tied concepts. Our results show: (i) concept reachability in latent space exhibits a distinct phase transition, with only a small number of samples being sufficient to enable reachability, (ii) where in the latent space the intervention is performed critically impacts reachability, showing that certain concepts are reachable only at certain stages of transformation, and (iii) while prompting ability rapidly diminishes with a decrease in quality of the dataset, concepts often remain reliably reachable through steering. Model providers can leverage this to bypass costly retraining and dataset curation and instead innovate with user-facing control mechanisms.104:T411,Post-training quantization (PTQ) has emerged as a critical technique for efficient deployment of large language models (LLMs). This work proposes NestQuant, a novel PTQ scheme for weights and activations that is based on self-similar nested lattices. Recent works have mathematically shown such quantizers to be information-theoretically optimal for low-precision matrix multiplication. We implement a practical low-complexity version of NestQuant based on Gosset lattice, making it a drop-in quantizer for any matrix multiplication step (e.g., in self-attention, MLP etc). For example, NestQuant quantizes weights, KV-cache, and activations of Llama-3-8B to 4 bits, achieving perplexity of 6.6 on wikitext2. This represents more than 55% reduction in perplexity gap with respect to unquantized model (perplexity of 6.14) compared to state-of-the-art Metas SpinQuant (perplexity 7.3), OstQuant (7.3) and QuaRot (8.2). Comparisons on bigger models (up to 70B) and on various LLM evaluation benchmarks confirm uniform superiority of NestQuant.105:T50f,Post-training quantization (PTQ) of large language models (LLMs) holds the promise in reducing the prohibitive computational cost at inference time. Quantization of all weight, activation and key-value (KV) cache tensors to 4-bit without significantly degrading generalizability is challenging, due to the high quantization error caused by extreme outliers in activations. To tackle this problem, we propose ResQ, a PTQ method that pushes further the state-of-the-art. By means of principal component analysis (PCA), it identifies a low-rank subspace (in practice 1/8 of the hidden dimension) in which activation variances are highest, and keep the coefficients within this subspace in high precision, e.g. 8-bit, while quantizing the rest to 4-bit. Within each subspace, invariant random rotation is applied to further suppress outliers. We show that this is a provably optimal mixed precision quantization scheme that minimizes error. With the Llama and Qwen2.5 families of models, we demonstrate that ResQ outperforms recent uniform and mixed precision PTQ methods on a variety of benchmarks, achieving up to 33\% lower perplexity on Wikitext than the next best method SpinQuant, and upto 3\times speedup over 16-bit baseline. Code is available at https://github.com/utkarsh-dmx/project-resq.106:T611,Large Language Models (LLMs) have become indispensable in numerous real-world applications. However, fine-tuning these models at scale, especially in federated settings where data privacy and communication efficiency are critical, presents significant challenges. Existing approaches often resort to parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) to mitigate communication overhead, but this typically comes at the cost of model accuracy. To this end, we propose federated full-parameter tuning at scale for LLMs (Ferret), the first first-order method with shared randomness to enable scalable full-parameter tuning of LLMs across decentralized data sources while maintaining competitive model accuracy. Ferret accomplishes this through three aspects: (i) it employs widely used first-order methods for efficient local updates; (ii) it projects these updates into a low-dimensional space to considerably reduce communication overhead; and (iii) it reconstructs local updates from this low-dimensional space with shared randomness to facilitate effective full-parameter global aggregation, ensuring fast convergence and competitive final performance. Our rigorous theoretical analyses and insights along with extensive experiments, show that Ferret significantly enhances the scalability of existing federated full-parameter tuning approaches by achieving high computational efficiency, reduced communication overhead, and fast convergence, all while maintaining competitive model accuracy. Our implementation is available at https://github.com/allen4747/Ferret.107:T427,Multi-task model merging offers a promising paradigm for integrating multiple expert models into a unified model without additional training. Existing state-of-the-art techniques, such as Task Arithmetic and its variants, merge models by accumulating task vectors -- the parameter differences between pretrained and finetuned models. However, task vector accumulation is often hindered by knowledge conflicts, leading to performance degradation. To address this challenge, we propose Conflict-Aware Task Merging (CAT Merging), a novel training-free framework that selectively trims conflict-prone components from the task vectors. CAT Merging introduces several parameter-specific strategies, including projection for linear weights and masking for scaling and shifting parameters in normalization layers. Extensive experiments on vision, language, and vision-language tasks demonstrate that CAT Merging effectively suppresses knowledge conflicts, achieving average accuracy improvements of up to 2.5% (ViT-B/32) and 2.0% (ViT-L/14) over state-of-the-art methods.108:T45e,In order to streamline the fine-tuning of foundation models, Low-Rank Adapters (LoRAs) have been substantially adopted across various fields, including instruction tuning and domain adaptation. The underlying concept of LoRA involves decomposing a full-rank matrix into the product of two lower-rank matrices, which reduces storage consumption and accelerates the training process. Furthermore, to address the limited expressive capacity of LoRA, the Mixture-of-Expert (MoE) has been introduced for incorporating multiple LoRA adapters. The integration of LoRA experts leads to a visible improvement across several downstream scenes. However, the mixture of LoRAs (MoE-LoRA) still exhibits its low robustness during tuning and inferring. Inspired by the Riemannian Preconditioners which train LoRA as a sub-space projector, we propose a new training strategy for MoE-LoRA, to stabilize and boost its feature learning procedure by multi-space projections. Examinations on SGD and AdamW optimizers demonstrate the effectiveness of our methodology. Source code is available at https://github.com/THUDM/MoELoRA_Riemannian.109:T694,Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown remarkable capabilities, yet ensuring their outputs conform to strict structural or grammatical constraints remains challenging, which is critical in function calls and domain-specific language (DSL) generation. Constrained decoding with context-free grammar is a flexible approach to guarantee LLMs' adherence to a specific format by dynamically building a token logits mask. However, creating this mask requires checking the validity of all tokens in the LLM vocabulary at every decoding step, which often incurs significant overheads in existing constrained decoding engines. To address this challenge, we propose $\textbf{ZapFormat}$, a novel $\textbf{dynamic pruning}$ strategy based on the Earley algorithm that identifies and eliminates invalid or redundant Earley states in real-time, significantly reducing memory occupation of the Earley algorithm's states. This further enables us to use a state cache to speed up structured generations on a large number of queries. We implemented ZapFormat in a new constrained decoding engine called Formatron which also incorporates existing optimizations. Through comprehensive experiments on structured generation tasks, including JSON generation, JSON Schema validation, and semantic parsing, we demonstrate that Formatron not only $\textbf{consistently maintains}$ high-precision compliant outputs but also achieves $\textbf{significant improvements}$ in inference speed up to 2x compared to state-of-the-art implementations. More importantly, Formatron is generally applicable across various LLM architectures. We release Formatron as open source at https://github.com/Dan-wanna-M/formatron.10a:T575,While recent advancements in reasoning optimization have significantly enhanced the capabilities of large language models (LLMs), existing efforts to improve reasoning have been limited to solving mathematical problems and focusing on visual graphical inputs, neglecting broader applications in general video understanding.This paper proposes video-SALMONN-o1, the first open-source reasoning-enhanced audio-visual LLM designed for general video understanding tasks. To enhance its reasoning abilities, we develop a reasoning-intensive dataset featuring challenging audio-visual questions with step-by-step solutions. We also propose process direct preference optimization (pDPO), which leverages contrastive step selection to achieve efficient step-level reward modelling tailored for multimodal inputs. Additionally, we introduce RivaBench, the first reasoning-intensive video understanding benchmark, featuring over 4,000 high-quality, expert-curated question-answer pairs across scenarios such as standup comedy, academic presentations, and synthetic video detection. video-SALMONN-o1 achieves 3-8% accuracy improvements over the LLaVA-OneVision baseline across different video reasoning benchmarks. Besides, pDPO achieves 6-8% improvements compared to the supervised fine-tuning model on RivaBench. Enhanced reasoning enables video-SALMONN-o1 zero-shot synthetic video detection capabilities.10b:T51e,Aligning large language models (LLMs) with human values is essential for their safe deployment and widespread adoption. Current LLM safety benchmarks often focus solely on the refusal of individual problematic queries, which overlooks the importance of the context where the query occurs and may cause undesired refusal of queries under safe contexts that diminish user experience. Addressing this gap, we introduce CASE-Bench, a Context-Aware SafEty Benchmark that integrates context into safety assessments of LLMs. CASE-Bench assigns distinct, formally described contexts to categorized queries based on Contextual Integrity theory. Additionally, in contrast to previous studies which mainly rely on majority voting from just a few annotators, we recruited a sufficient number of annotators necessary to ensure the detection of statistically significant differences among the experimental conditions based on power analysis. Our extensive analysis using CASE-Bench on various open-source and commercial LLMs reveals a substantial and significant influence of context on human judgments (p<0.0001 from a z-test), underscoring the necessity of context in safety evaluations. We also identify notable mismatches between human judgments and LLM responses, particularly in commercial models within safe contexts.10c:T4f6,Efficient exploration is essential for intelligent systems interacting with their environment, but existing language models often fall short in scenarios that require strategic information gathering. In this paper, we present Paprika, a fine-tuning approach that enables language models to develop general decision-making capabilities that are not confined to particular environments. By training on synthetic interaction data from different tasks that require diverse strategies, Paprika teaches models to explore and adapt their behavior on a new task based on environment feedback in-context without more gradient updates. Experimental results show that models fine-tuned with Paprika can effectively transfer their learned decision-making capabilities to entirely unseen tasks without additional training. Unlike traditional training, our approach's primary bottleneck lies in sampling useful interaction data instead of model updates. To improve sample efficiency, we propose a curriculum learning strategy that prioritizes sampling trajectories from tasks with high learning potential. These results suggest a promising path towards AI systems that can autonomously solve novel sequential decision-making problems that require interactions with the external world.10d:T779,Despite the success in specific scenarios, existing foundation agents still struggle to generalize across various virtual scenarios, mainly due to the dramatically different encapsulations of environments with manually designed observation and action spaces. To handle this issue, we propose the General Computer Control (GCC) setting to restrict foundation agents to interact with software through the most unified and standardized interface, i.e., using screenshots as input and keyboard and mouse actions as output. We introduce Cradle, a modular and flexible LMM-powered framework, as a preliminary attempt towards GCC. Enhanced by six key modules, Cradle can understand input screenshots and output executable code for low-level keyboard and mouse control after high-level planning, so that Cradle can interact with any software and complete long-horizon complex tasks without relying on any built-in APIs. Experimental results show that Cradle exhibits remarkable generalizability and impressive performance across four previously unexplored commercial video games, five software applications, and a comprehensive benchmark, OSWorld. Cradle is the first to enable foundation agents to follow the main storyline and complete 40-minute-long real missions in the complex AAA game Red Dead Redemption 2 (RDR2). Cradle can also create a city of a thousand people in Cities: Skylines, farm and harvest parsnips in Stardew Valley, and trade and bargain with a maximal weekly total profit of 87% in Dealer's Life 2. Cradle can not only operate daily software, like Chrome, Outlook, and Feishu, but also edit images and videos using Meitu and CapCut. Cradle greatly extends the reach of foundation agents by enabling the easy conversion of any software, especially complex games, into benchmarks to evaluate agents' various abilities and facilitate further data collection, thus paving the way for generalist agents.10e:T592,In this work, we focus on the alignment problem of diffusion models with a continuous reward function, which represents specific objectives for downstream tasks, such as increasing darkness or improving the aesthetics of images. The central goal of the alignment problem is to adjust the distribution learned by diffusion models such that the generated samples maximize the target reward function. We propose a novel alignment approach, named Direct Noise Optimization (DNO), that optimizes the injected noise during the sampling process of diffusion models. By design, DNO operates at inference-time, and thus is tuning-free and prompt-agnostic, with the alignment occurring in an online fashion during generation. We rigorously study the theoretical properties of DNO and also propose variants to deal with non-differentiable reward functions. Furthermore, we identify that naive implementation of DNO occasionally suffers from the out-of-distribution reward hacking problem, where optimized samples have high rewards but are no longer in the support of the pretrained distribution. To remedy this issue, we leverage classical high-dimensional statistics theory to an effective probability regularization technique. We conduct extensive experiments on several important reward functions and demonstrate that the proposed DNO approach can achieve state-of-the-art reward scores within a reasonable time budget for generation.10f:T571,For reasons such as privacy, there are use cases for language models at the edge. This has given rise to small language models targeted for deployment in resource-constrained devices where energy efficiency is critical. Spiking neural networks (SNNs) offer a promising solution due to their energy efficiency, and there are already works on realizing transformer-based models on SNNs. However, key operations like softmax and layer normalization (LN) are difficult to implement on neuromorphic hardware, and many of these early works sidestepped them. To address these challenges, we introduce Sorbet, a transformer-based spiking language model that is more neuromorphic hardware-compatible. Sorbet incorporates a novel shifting-based softmax called PTsoftmax and a Bit Shifting PowerNorm (BSPN), both designed to replace the respective energy-intensive operations. By leveraging knowledge distillation and model quantization, Sorbet achieved a highly compressed binary weight model that maintains competitive performance while achieving $27.16\times$ energy savings compared to BERT. We validate Sorbet through extensive testing on the GLUE benchmark and a series of ablation studies, demonstrating its potential as an energy-efficient solution for language model inference. Our code is publicly available at \href{https://github.com/Kaiwen-Tang/Sorbet}{https://github.com/Kaiwen-Tang/Sorbet}110:T4a7,Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly being deployed on edge devices for long-context settings, creating a growing need for fast and efficient long-context inference. In these scenarios, the Key-Value (KV) cache is the primary bottleneck in terms of both GPU memory and latency, as the full KV cache must be loaded for each decoding step. While speculative decoding is a widely accepted technique to accelerate autoregressive decoding, existing methods often struggle to achieve significant speedups due to inefficient KV cache optimization strategies and result in low acceptance rates. To address these challenges, we propose a novel self-speculative decoding framework, QuantSpec, where the draft model shares the architecture of the target model but employs a hierarchical 4-bit quantized KV cache and 4-bit quantized weights for acceleration. QuantSpec maintains high acceptance rates ($>$90%) and reliably provides consistent end-to-end speedups upto $\sim2.5\times$, outperforming other self-speculative decoding methods that use sparse KV cache for long-context LLM inference. QuantSpec also reduces the memory requirements by $\sim 1.3\times$ compared to these alternatives.111:T44c,Low-rank Adaptation (LoRA) has emerged as a powerful method for fine-tuning large-scale foundation models. Despite its popularity, the theoretical understanding of LoRA has remained limited. This paper presents a theoretical analysis of LoRA by examining its connection to the Mixture of Experts models. Under this framework, we show that simple reparameterizations of the LoRA matrices can notably accelerate the low-rank matrix estimation process. In particular, we prove that reparameterization can reduce the data needed to achieve a desired estimation error from an exponential to a polynomial scale. Motivated by this insight, we propose Reparameterized Low-Rank Adaptation (RepLoRA), which incorporates lightweight MLPs to reparameterize the LoRA matrices. Extensive experiments across multiple domains demonstrate that RepLoRA consistently outperforms vanilla LoRA. Notably, with limited data, RepLoRA surpasses LoRA by a margin of up to 40.0% and achieves LoRA's performance with only 30.0% of the training data, highlighting both the theoretical and empirical robustness of our PEFT method.112:T6d1,Comprehensive evaluations of language models (LM) during both development and deployment phases are necessary because these models possess numerous capabilities (e.g., mathematical reasoning, legal support, or medical diagnostic) as well as safety risks (e.g., racial bias, toxicity, or misinformation). The average score across a wide range of benchmarks provides a signal that helps guide the use of these LMs in practice. Currently, holistic evaluations are costly due to the large volume of benchmark questions, making frequent evaluations impractical. A popular attempt to lower the cost is to compute the average score on a subset of the benchmark. This approach, unfortunately, often renders an unreliable measure of LM performance because the average score is often confounded with the difficulty of the questions in the benchmark subset. Item response theory (IRT) was designed to address this challenge, providing a reliable measurement by careful controlling for question difficulty. Unfortunately, question difficulty is expensive to estimate. Facing this challenge, we train a model that predicts question difficulty from its content, enabling a reliable measurement at a fraction of the cost. In addition, we leverage this difficulty predictor to further improve the evaluation efficiency through training a question generator given a difficulty level. This question generator is essential in adaptive testing, where, instead of using a random subset of the benchmark questions, informative questions are adaptively chosen based on the current estimation of LLM performance. Experiments on 22 common natural language benchmarks and 172 LMs show that this approach is more reliable and efficient compared to current common practice.113:T51a,Self-attention has emerged as a core component of modern neural architectures, yet its theoretical underpinnings remain elusive. In this paper, we study self-attention through the lens of interacting entities, ranging from agents in multi-agent reinforcement learning to alleles in genetic sequences, and show that a single layer linear self-attention can efficiently represent, learn, and generalize functions capturing pairwise interactions, including out-of-distribution scenarios. Our analysis reveals that self-attention acts as a mutual interaction learner under minimal assumptions on the diversity of interaction patterns observed during training, thereby encompassing a wide variety of real-world domains. In addition, we validate our theoretical insights through experiments demonstrating that self-attention learns interaction functions and generalizes across both population distributions and out-of-distribution scenarios. Building on our theories, we introduce HyperFeatureAttention, a novel neural network module designed to learn couplings of different feature-level interactions between entities. Furthermore, we propose HyperAttention, a new module that extends beyond pairwise interactions to capture multi-entity dependencies, such as three-way, four-way, or general n-way interactions.114:T56e,For text-based AI systems to interact in the real world, causal reasoning is an essential skill. Since active interventions are costly, we study to what extent a system can learn causal reasoning from symbolic demonstrations of causal axioms. Specifically, we present an axiomatic training method where the system learns from multiple demonstrations of a causal axiom (or rule), rather than incorporating the axiom as an inductive bias or inferring it from data values. A key question is whether the system would learn to generalize from the axiom demonstrations to more complex scenarios. Our results, based on applying axiomatic training to learn the transitivity axiom and d-separation rule, indicate that such generalization is possible. To avoid data contamination issues, we start with a 67 million parameter transformer model and train it from scratch. On both tasks, we find that a model trained on linear causal chains (along with some noisy variations) can generalize well to complex graphs, including longer causal chains, causal chains with reversed order, and graphs with branching.To handle diverse text inputs, the same method is extended to finetune language models. Finetuning Llama-3-8B-Instruct model on our axiomatic data leads to significant gains on causal benchmarks such as Corr2Cause and CLEAR, in some cases providing state-of-the-art performance surpassing GPT-4.115:T40d,Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown remarkable capabilities in text and multimodal processing, yet they fundamentally lack physical awareness--understanding of real-world physical phenomena. In this work, we present ACORN, a framework that teaches LLMs physical awareness through sound, focusing on fundamental physical phenomena like the Doppler effect, multipath effect, and spatial relationships. To overcome data scarcity, ACORN introduce a physics-based simulator combining real-world sound sources with controlled physical channels to generate diverse training data. Using this simulator, we build AQA-PHY, a comprehensive Audio Question-Answer dataset, and propose an audio encoder that processes both magnitude and phase information. By connecting our audio encoder to state-of-the-art LLMs, we demonstrate reasonable results in both simulated and real-world tasks, such as line-of-sight detection, Doppler effect estimation, and Direction-of-Arrival estimation, paving the way for enabling LLMs to understand physical world.116:T53d,The recent rapid adoption of large language models (LLMs) highlights the critical need for benchmarking their fairness. Conventional fairness metrics, which focus on discrete accuracy-based evaluations (i.e., prediction correctness), fail to capture the implicit impact of model uncertainty (e.g., higher model confidence about one group over another despite similar accuracy). To address this limitation, we propose an uncertainty-aware fairness metric, UCerF, to enable a fine-grained evaluation of model fairness that is more reflective of the internal bias in model decisions compared to conventional fairness measures. Furthermore, observing data size, diversity, and clarity issues in current datasets, we introduce a new gender-occupation fairness evaluation dataset with 31,756 samples for co-reference resolution, offering a more diverse and suitable dataset for evaluating modern LLMs. We establish a benchmark, using our metric and dataset, and apply it to evaluate the behavior of ten open-source LLMs. For example, Mistral-7B exhibits suboptimal fairness due to high confidence in incorrect predictions, a detail overlooked by Equalized Odds but captured by UCerF. Overall, our proposed LLM benchmark, which evaluates fairness with uncertainty awareness, paves the way for developing more transparent and accountable AI systems.117:T4d5,For question-answering (QA) tasks, in-context learning (ICL) enables language models to generate responses without modifying their parameters by leveraging examples provided in the input. However, the effectiveness of ICL heavily depends on the availability of high-quality examples, which are often scarce due to data privacy constraints, annotation costs, and distribution disparities. A natural solution is to utilize examples stored on client devices, but existing approaches either require transmitting model parameters - incurring significant communication overhead - or fail to fully exploit local datasets, limiting their effectiveness. To address these challenges, we propose Federated In-Context Learning (Fed-ICL), a general framework that enhances ICL through an iterative, collaborative process. Fed-ICL progressively refines responses by leveraging multi-round interactions between clients and a central server, improving answer quality without the need to transmit model parameters. We establish theoretical guarantees for the convergence of Fed-ICL and conduct extensive experiments on standard QA benchmarks, demonstrating that our proposed approach achieves strong performance while maintaining low communication costs.118:T591,Vision-Language Models (VLMs) excel across diverse tasks but suffer from high inference costs in time and memory. Token sparsity mitigates inefficiencies in token usage, while neuron sparsity reduces high-dimensional computations, both offering promising solutions to enhance efficiency. Recently, these two sparsity paradigms have evolved largely in parallel, fostering the prevailing assumption that they function independently. However, a fundamental yet underexplored question remains: Do they truly operate in isolation, or is there a deeper underlying interplay that has yet to be uncovered? In this paper, we conduct the first comprehensive investigation into this question. By introducing and analyzing the matching mechanism between Core Neurons and Core Tokens, we found that key neurons and tokens for inference mutually influence and reinforce each other. Building on this insight, we propose CoreMatching, a co-adaptive sparse inference framework, which leverages the synergy between token and neuron sparsity to enhance inference efficiency. Through theoretical analysis and efficiency evaluations, we demonstrate that the proposed method surpasses state-of-the-art baselines on ten image understanding tasks and three hardware devices. Notably, on the NVIDIA Titan Xp, it achieved 5x FLOPs reduction and a 10x overall speedup. Code is released at https://github.com/wangqinsi1/2025-ICML-CoreMatching/tree/main.119:T476,We present a perception in reflection paradigm designed to transcend the limitations of current large vision-language models (LVLMs), which are expected yet often fail to achieve perfect perception initially. Specifically, we propose Reflective Perception (RePer), a dual-model reflection mechanism that systematically alternates between policy and critic models, enables iterative refinement of visual perception. This framework is powered by Reflective Perceptual Learning (RPL), which reinforces intrinsic reflective capabilities through a methodically constructed visual reflection dataset and reflective unlikelihood training. Comprehensive experimental evaluation demonstrates RePer's quantifiable improvements in image understanding, captioning precision, and hallucination reduction. Notably, RePer achieves strong alignment between model attention patterns and human visual focus, while RPL optimizes fine-grained and free-form preference alignment. These advancements establish perception in reflection as a robust paradigm for future multimodal agents, particularly in tasks requiring complex reasoning and multi-step manipulation.11a:T556,Many large-scale systems rely on high-quality deep representations (embeddings) to facilitate tasks like retrieval, search, and generative modeling. Matryoshka Representation Learning (MRL) recently emerged as a solution for adaptive embedding lengths, but it requires full model retraining and suffers from noticeable performance degradations at short lengths. In this paper, we show that sparse coding offers a compelling alternative for achieving adaptive representation with minimal overhead and higher fidelity. We propose Contrastive Sparse Representation (CSR), a method that sparsifies pre-trained embeddings into a high-dimensional but selectively activated feature space. By leveraging lightweight autoencoding and task-aware contrastive objectives, CSR preserves semantic quality while allowing flexible, cost-effective inference at different sparsity levels. Extensive experiments on image, text, and multimodal benchmarks demonstrate that CSR consistently outperforms MRL in terms of both accuracy and retrieval speed-often by large margins-while also cutting training time to a fraction of that required by MRL. Our results establish sparse coding as a powerful paradigm for adaptive representation learning in real-world applications where efficiency and fidelity are both paramount. Code is available at https://github.com/neilwen987/CSR_Adaptive_Rep11b:T466,In this work, we explore a cost-effective framework for multilingual image generation. We find that, unlike models tuned on high-quality images with multilingual annotations, leveraging text encoders pre-trained on widely available, noisy Internet image-text pairs significantly enhances data efficiency in text-to-image (T2I) generation across multiple languages.Based on this insight, we introduce MuLan, Multi-Language adapter, a lightweight language adapter with fewer than 20M parameters, trained alongside a frozen text encoder and image diffusion model. Compared to previous multilingual T2I models, this framework offers: (1) Cost efficiency. Using readily accessible English data and off-the-shelf multilingual text encoders minimizes the training cost; (2) High performance. Achieving comparable generation capabilities in over 110 languages with CLIP similarity scores nearly matching those in English (39.57 for English vs. 39.61 for other languages); and (3) Broad applicability. Seamlessly integrating with compatible community tools like LoRA, LCM, ControlNet, and IP-Adapter, expanding its potential use cases.11c:T49e,Recent Large Language Models (LLMs) have reported high accuracy on reasoning benchmarks. However, it is still unclear whether the observed results arise from true reasoning or from statistical recall of the training set. Inspired by the ladder of causation (Pearl, 2009) and its three levels (associations, interventions and counterfactuals), this paper introduces RE-IMAGINE, a framework to characterize a hierarchy of reasoning ability in LLMs, alongside an automated pipeline to generate problem variations at different levels of the hierarchy. By altering problems in an intermediate symbolic representation, RE-IMAGINE generates arbitrarily many problems that are not solvable using memorization alone. Moreover, the framework is general and can work across reasoning domains, including math, code, and logic. We demonstrate our framework on four widely-used benchmarks to evaluate several families of LLMs, and observe reductions in performance when the models are queried with problem variations. These assessments indicate a degree of reliance on statistical recall for past performance, and open the door to further research targeting skills across the reasoning hierarchy.11d:T51d,RWKV is a modern RNN architecture with comparable performance to Transformer, but still faces challenges when deployed to resource-constrained devices. Post Training Quantization (PTQ), which is a an essential technique to reduce model size and inference latency, has been widely used in Transformer models. However, it suffers significant degradation of performance when applied to RWKV. This paper investigates and identifies two key constraints inherent in the properties of RWKV: (1) Non-linear operators hinder the parameter-fusion of both smooth- and rotation-based quantization, introducing extra computation overhead. (2) The larger amount of uniformly distributed weights poses challenges for cluster-based quantization, leading to reduced accuracy. To this end, we propose RWKVQuant, a PTQ framework tailored for RWKV models, consisting of two novel techniques: (1) a coarse-to-fine proxy capable of adaptively selecting different quantization approaches by assessing the uniformity and identifying outliers in the weights, and (2) a codebook optimization algorithm that enhances the performance of cluster-based quantization methods for element-wise multiplication in RWKV. Experiments show that RWKVQuant can quantize RWKV-6-14B into about 3-bit with less than 1% accuracy loss and 2.14x speed up.11e:T4c0,Model merging aims to integrate the strengths of multiple fine-tuned models into a unified model while preserving task-specific capabilities. Existing methods, represented by task arithmetic, are typically classified into global- and local-aware methods. However, global-aware methods inevitably cause parameter interference, while local-aware methods struggle to maintain the effectiveness of task-specific details in the merged model. To address these limitations, we propose a Consensus-Aware Localized Merging (CALM) method which incorporates localized information aligned with global task consensus, ensuring its effectiveness post-merging. CALM consists of three key components: (1) class-balanced entropy minimization sampling, providing a more flexible and reliable way to leverage unsupervised data; (2) an efficient-aware framework, selecting a small set of tasks for sequential merging with high scalability; (3) a consensus-aware mask optimization, aligning localized binary masks with global task consensus and merging them conflict-free. Experiments demonstrate the superiority and robustness of our CALM, significantly outperforming existing methods and achieving performance close to traditional MTL.11f:T4a2,Despite the remarkable performance of Large Language Models (LLMs), they remain vulnerable to jailbreak attacks, which can compromise their safety mechanisms. Existing studies often rely on brute-force optimization or manual design, failing to uncover potential risks in real-world scenarios. To address this, we propose a novel jailbreak attack framework, ICRT, inspired by heuristics and biases in human cognition. Leveraging the simplicity effect, we employ cognitive decomposition to reduce the complexity of malicious prompts. Simultaneously, relevance bias is utilized to reorganize prompts, enhancing semantic alignment and inducing harmful outputs effectively. Furthermore, we introduce a ranking-based harmfulness evaluation metric that surpasses the traditional binary success-or-failure paradigm by employing ranking aggregation methods such as Elo, HodgeRank, and Rank Centrality to comprehensively quantify the harmfulness of generated content. Experimental results show that our approach consistently bypasses mainstream LLMs'safety mechanisms and generates high-risk content, providing insights into jailbreak attack risks and contributing to stronger defense strategies.120:T458,Model merging based on task vectors, i.e., the parameter differences between fine-tuned models and a shared base model, provides an efficient way to integrate multiple task-specific models into a multitask model without retraining. Recent works have endeavored to address the conflicts between task vectors, one of the significant challenges faced by model merging, through sparsification; however, two issues significantly limit their performance: high parameter overlap and unbalanced weight distribution. To address these issues, we propose a simple, yet effective framework called CABS (Conflict-Aware and Balanced Sparsification), consisting of Conflict-Aware Sparsification (CA) and Balanced Sparsification (BS). CA can reduce parameter overlap by applying masks during sequential pruning, ensuring that each task vector retains distinct, non-overlapping parameters. BS leverages $n$: $m$ pruning to preserve critical weights while maintaining an even distribution across layers. Our comprehensive experiments demonstrate that CABS outperforms state-of-the-art methods across diverse tasks and model sizes.121:T633,Loss reweighting has shown significant benefits for machine unlearning with large language models (LLMs). However, their exact functionalities are left unclear and the optimal strategy remains an open question, thus impeding the understanding and improvement of existing methodologies. In this paper, we identify two distinct goals of loss reweighting, namely, Saturation and Importance -- the former indicates that those insufficiently optimized data should be emphasized, while the latter stresses some critical data that are most influential for loss minimization. To study their usefulness, we design specific reweighting strategies for each goal and evaluate their respective effects on unlearning. We conduct extensive empirical analyses on well-established benchmarks, and summarize some important observations as follows: (i) Saturation enhances efficacy more than importance-based reweighting, and their combination can yield additional improvements. (ii) Saturation typically allocates lower weights to data with lower likelihoods, whereas importance-based reweighting does the opposite. (iii) The efficacy of unlearning is also largely influenced by the smoothness and granularity of the weight distributions. Based on these findings, we propose SatImp, a simple reweighting method that combines the advantages of both saturation and importance. Empirical results on extensive datasets validate the efficacy of our method, potentially bridging existing research gaps and indicating directions for future research. Our code is available at https://github.com/tmlr-group/SatImp.122:T45a,This paper considers the sample-efficiency of preference learning, which models and predicts human choices based on comparative judgments. The minimax optimal estimation error rate $\Theta(d/n)$ in classical estimation theory requires that the number of samples $n$ scales linearly with the dimensionality of the feature space $d$. However, the high dimensionality of the feature space and the high cost of collecting human-annotated data challenge the efficiency of traditional estimation methods. To remedy this, we leverage sparsity in the preference model and establish sharp error rates. We show that under the sparse random utility model, where the parameter of the reward function is $k$-sparse, the minimax optimal rate can be reduced to $\Theta(k/n \log(d/k))$. Furthermore, we analyze the $\ell_{1}$-regularized estimator and show that it achieves near-optimal rate under mild assumptions on the Gram matrix. Experiments on synthetic data and LLM alignment data validate our theoretical findings, showing that sparsity-aware methods significantly reduce sample complexity and improve prediction accuracy.123:T47d,This paper explores how theory can guide and enhance practical algorithms, using Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA, Hu et al. 2022) in large language models as a case study. We rigorously prove that, under gradient descent, LoRA adapters align with specific singular subspaces of the one-step full fine-tuning gradient. This result suggests that, by properly initializing the adapters using the one-step full gradient, subspace alignment can be achieved immediately and applicable to both linear and nonlinear models. Building on our theory, we propose a theory-driven algorithm, LoRA-One, where the linear convergence (as well as generalization) is built and incorporating preconditioners theoretically helps mitigate the effects of ill-conditioning. Besides, our theory reveals connections between LoRA-One and other gradient-alignment-based methods, helping to clarify misconceptions in the design of such algorithms. LoRA-One achieves significant empirical improvements over LoRA and its variants across benchmarks in natural language understanding, mathematical reasoning, and code generation. Code is available at: https://github.com/YuanheZ/LoRA-One.124:T6b1,Large language model inference is both memory-intensive and time-consuming, often requiring distributed algorithms to efficiently scale. Various model parallelism strategies are used in multi-gpu training and inference to partition computation across multiple devices, reducing memory load and computation time. However, using model parallelism necessitates communication of information between GPUs, which has been a major bottleneck and limits the gains obtained by scaling up the number of devices. We introduce Ladder Residual, a simple architectural modification applicable to all residual-based models that enables straightforward overlapping that effectively hides the latency of communication. Our insight is that in addition to systems optimization, one can also redesign the model architecture to decouple communication from computation. While Ladder Residual can allow communication-computation decoupling in conventional parallelism patterns, we focus on Tensor Parallelism in this paper, which is particularly bottlenecked by its heavy communication. For a Transformer model with 70B parameters, applying Ladder Residual to all its layers can achieve 29% end-to-end wall clock speed up at inference time with TP sharding over 8 devices. We refer the resulting Transformer model as the Ladder Transformer. We train a 1B and 3B Ladder Transformer from scratch and observe comparable performance to a standard dense transformer baseline. We also show that it is possible to convert parts of the Llama-3.1 8B model to our Ladder Residual architecture with minimal accuracy degradation by only retraining for 3B tokens. We release our code for training and inference for easier replication of experiments.125:T558,Symmetry in the parameter space of deep neural networks (DNNs) has proven beneficial for various deep learning applications. A well-known example is the permutation symmetry in Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs), where permuting the rows of weight matrices in one layer and applying the inverse permutation to adjacent layers yields a functionally equivalent model. While permutation symmetry fully characterizes the equivalence set for MLPs, its discrete nature limits its utility for transformers. In this paper, we introduce rotation symmetry, a novel form of parameter space symmetry for transformers that generalizes permutation symmetry by rotating parameter matrices in self-attention layers. Unlike permutation symmetry, rotation symmetry operates in a continuous domain, thereby significantly expanding the equivalence set for transformers. Based on this property, we propose a theoretically optimal parameter matching algorithm as a plug-and-play module to enhance model fusion. We evaluate our approach using pre-trained transformers across diverse natural language and vision tasks. Experimental results demonstrate that our rotation symmetry-based matching algorithm substantially improves model fusion, highlighting the potential of parameter space symmetry to facilitate model fusion. Our code is available on https://github.com/zhengzaiyi/RotationSymmetry.126:T52f,Ensuring the safety and harmlessness of Large Language Models (LLMs) has become equally critical as their performance in applications. However, existing safety alignment methods typically suffer from safety-performance trade-offs and the susceptibility to jailbreak attacks, primarily due to their reliance on direct refusals for malicious queries. In this paper, we propose STAIR, a novel framework that integrates SafeTy Alignment with Itrospective Reasoning. We enable LLMs to identify safety risks through step-by-step analysis by self-improving chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning with safety awareness. STAIR first equips the model with a structured reasoning capability and then advances safety alignment via iterative preference optimization on step-level reasoning data generated using our newly proposed Safety-Informed Monte Carlo Tree Search (SI-MCTS). We further train a process reward model on this data to guide test-time searches for improved responses. Extensive experiments show that STAIR effectively mitigates harmful outputs while better preserving helpfulness, compared to instinctive alignment strategies. With test-time scaling, STAIR achieves a safety performance comparable to Claude-3.5 against popular jailbreak attacks. Relevant resources in this work are available at https://github.com/thu-ml/STAIR.127:T606,The remarkable capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) can be mainly attributed to their massive training datasets, which are often scraped from the internet without respecting data owners' intellectual property rights. Dataset Inference (DI) offers a potential remedy by identifying whether a suspect dataset was used in training, thereby enabling data owners to verify unauthorized use. However, existing DI methods require a private set-known to be absent from training-that closely matches the compromised dataset's distribution. Such in-distribution, held-out data is rarely available in practice, severely limiting the applicability of DI. In this work, we address this challenge by synthetically generating the required held-out set. Our approach tackles two key obstacles: (1) creating high-quality, diverse synthetic data that accurately reflects the original distribution, which we achieve via a data generator trained on a carefully designed suffix-based completion task, and (2) bridging likelihood gaps between real and synthetic data, which is realized through post-hoc calibration. Extensive experiments on diverse text datasets show that using our generated data as a held-out set enables DI to detect the original training sets with high confidence, while maintaining a low false positive rate. This result empowers copyright owners to make legitimate claims on data usage and demonstrates our method's reliability for real-world litigations. Our code is available at https://github.com/sprintml/PostHocDatasetInference.128:T44b,Low-rank adaptation (LoRA) has emerged as a leading parameter-efficient fine-tuning technique for adapting large foundation models, yet it often locks adapters into suboptimal minima near their initialization. This hampers model generalization and limits downstream operators such as adapter merging and pruning. Here, we propose CoTo, a progressive training strategy that gradually increases adapters'activation probability over the course of fine-tuning. By stochastically deactivating adapters, CoTo encourages more balanced optimization and broader exploration of the loss landscape. We provide a theoretical analysis showing that CoTo promotes layer-wise dropout stability and linear mode connectivity, and we adopt a cooperative-game approach to quantify each adapter's marginal contribution. Extensive experiments demonstrate that CoTo consistently boosts single-task performance, enhances multi-task merging accuracy, improves pruning robustness, and reduces training overhead, all while remaining compatible with diverse LoRA variants. Code is available at https://github.com/zwebzone/coto.0:{"rsc":["$","$1","c",{"children":[["$","div",null,{"className":"mx-auto max-w-5xl px-4 py-8","children":["$","$L2",null,{"data":{"venue":"ICML","venue_slug":"icml-2025","year":2025,"full_name":"International Conference on Machine Learning","generated_at":"2026-04-18T20:04:14.360455+00:00","stats":{"total_fetched":3332,"total_relevant":516,"by_award":{"poster":462,"oral":18,"spotlight":36},"by_category":{"efficient":75,"post_train":129,"llm_pretrain":91,"mechanism":126,"multimodal":43,"agent":10,"multimodal_gen":30,"coding_agent":9,"industry":3},"by_track":{"main":510,"position":6}},"papers":[{"id":"00560ZTH0T25","title":"LLM Data Selection and Utilization via Dynamic Bi-level Optimization","authors":["Yang Yu","Kai Han","Hang Zhou","Yehui Tang","Kaiqi Huang","Yunhe Wang","Dacheng Tao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/00560ZTH0T25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/00560ZTH0T25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/yu25g.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 预训练的数据选择（选哪些样本、怎么配比）直接影响模型质量，但传统方法要么是静态配比，要么需要昂贵的代理实验。本文提出用动态双层优化（bi-level optimization）来在训练过程中自适应地选择和利用数据。","importance":"数据级贡献，直接面向 pretrain 数据配比这一核心问题。如果方法能在大规模上 work，意味着可以用更少的数据或更智能的采样达到同等甚至更好的效果，这对降低训练成本有实际意义。与 DoReMi、DSIR 等数据选择工作属于同一赛道。","technical_approach":"采用双层优化框架：外层优化数据选择/权重策略，内层是标准的 LLM 训练。关键在于如何高效近似外层梯度——直接做双层优化在 LLM 规模上计算量巨大，因此需要轻量的代理信号或隐式梯度近似。'动态'意味着数据权重随训练进程变化，而非一次性决定。","experiments":"具体实验规模、baseline 和数字在摘要中未给出。预期与静态配比、DoReMi 等方法对比，在下游任务或 perplexity 上展示优势。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Data selection and domain weighting for LLM pretraining is typically static or requires expensive proxy experiments. This work proposes dynamic bi-level optimization to adaptively select and weight training data during the training process itself.","importance":"Data-level contribution targeting a core pretrain concern. If scalable, it could reduce training cost by smarter sampling. Competes with DoReMi, DSIR, and similar data selection methods.","technical_approach":"A bi-level optimization framework where the outer level optimizes data selection/weighting and the inner level runs standard LLM training. The key challenge is efficiently approximating outer-level gradients at LLM scale. 'Dynamic' means the data weights evolve throughout training rather than being fixed upfront.","experiments":"Specific scales, baselines, and numbers are not available from the abstract. Expected comparisons against static weighting and methods like DoReMi.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-selection","data-quality","bilevel-optimization","training-dynamics"]},{"id":"2501.12370","title":"Parameters vs FLOPs: Scaling Laws for Optimal Sparsity for Mixture-of-Experts Language Models","authors":["Samira Abnar","Harshay Shah","Dan Busbridge","Alaaeldin El-Nouby","Joshua M. Susskind","Vimal Thilak"],"institutions":["Apple"],"abstract":"$3","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.12370","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/AbnarSBEST25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/AbnarSBEST25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/abnar25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"MoE 模型通过增加参数量而不等比增加计算量来提升容量，但参数量和 FLOPs 之间的最优权衡关系（即最优稀疏度）此前缺乏系统的 scaling law 研究。本文回答：给定总计算预算，MoE 应该设多稀疏？","importance":"Scaling law 级贡献，对 MoE 预训练的资源分配有直接指导。核心发现是最优稀疏度并非固定值，而是随计算预算和模型规模变化。这对 DeepSeek-MoE、Mixtral 等实际 MoE 训练的超参选择有参考价值。属于 pretrain 方法论的基础性工作。","technical_approach":"系统性地在不同稀疏度（即激活参数占总参数的比例）下训练 MoE 模型，测量预训练 loss 和下游 few-shot 性能。通过拟合 scaling law 来刻画参数量、FLOPs、稀疏度三者的关系。关键变量是稀疏度（fraction of inactive parameters），实验覆盖多个模型规模和计算预算。","experiments":"在预训练 loss 和下游 few-shot 评估上都做了测量。具体模型规模范围、专家数量、训练 token 数在截断摘要中未完整给出。核心结果是拟合出的 scaling law 曲线，展示最优稀疏度如何随计算预算变化。","authors_note":"作者包括 Samira Abnar（Apple），在 Transformer scaling 和效率方面有多篇工作。团队来自 Apple MLR。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"MoE models scale parameters without proportionally scaling FLOPs, but the optimal sparsity level—the fraction of inactive parameters—lacks systematic scaling law analysis. This work asks: given a compute budget, how sparse should an MoE be?","importance":"Scaling law contribution with direct implications for MoE pretraining resource allocation. The finding that optimal sparsity varies with compute budget and model scale is practically useful for teams training MoE models (DeepSeek-MoE, Mixtral, etc.). Foundational pretrain methodology work.","technical_approach":"Systematically trains MoE models across different sparsity levels, measuring pretraining loss and downstream few-shot performance. Fits scaling laws characterizing the relationship between parameters, FLOPs, and sparsity. The key experimental variable is the fraction of inactive parameters, swept across multiple model scales and compute budgets.","experiments":"Measurements on both pretraining loss and downstream few-shot evaluation. Specific model scale ranges, expert counts, and training tokens are truncated. The core result is fitted scaling law curves showing how optimal sparsity shifts with compute budget.","authors_note":"Authors include Samira Abnar (Apple), who has published on Transformer scaling and efficiency. Team from Apple MLR."},"tags":["moe","scaling-law","sparsity","compute-optimal"],"notable_authors":["Samira Abnar"]},{"id":"2501.16975","title":"Over-Tokenized Transformer: Vocabulary is Generally Worth Scaling","authors":["Hongzhi Huang","Defa Zhu","Banggu Wu","Yutao Zeng","Ya Wang","Qiyang Min","Xun Zhou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Tokenization is a fundamental component of large language models (LLMs), yet its influence on model scaling and performance is not fully explored. In this paper, we introduce Over-Tokenized Transformers, a novel framework that decouples input and output vocabularies to improve language modeling performance. Specifically, our approach scales up input vocabularies to leverage multi-gram tokens. Through extensive experiments, we uncover a log-linear relationship between input vocabulary size and training loss, demonstrating that larger input vocabularies consistently enhance model performance, regardless of model size. Using a large input vocabulary, we achieve performance comparable to double-sized baselines with no additional cost. Our findings highlight the importance of tokenization in scaling laws and provide practical insight for tokenizer design, paving the way for more efficient and powerful LLMs.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.16975","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HuangZWZWMZ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HuangZWZWMZ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/huang25bb.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：tokenizer 的词表规模到底该不该随模型一起 scale，以及如何在不显著增加训练/推理成本的情况下吃到“大词表”的收益。以往很多工作默认词表大小是工程常数，更多靠更大模型或更多数据来降 loss。","importance":"贡献是方法级但对 pretrain 很“硬”：给出输入词表大小与训练 loss 的近似 log-linear 关系，并展示“扩大输入词表”可以在几乎不增加成本的情况下达到接近“参数翻倍”的效果。它直接挑战了常见的 scaling 直觉：除了参数/数据/算力，tokenization 也是可持续带来收益的 scaling 轴。","technical_approach":"Over-Tokenized Transformer 的关键设计是解耦 input vocab 和 output vocab：输入端用更大的 multi-gram 词表提升压缩率与局部模式匹配，输出端保持较小词表以避免 softmax 计算与参数量膨胀。这样做的原因是：大词表的主要收益来自更好的分词与更短序列（更少 token），但把大词表放到输出会把训练成本推高且更难优化；解耦后把收益留在输入侧，把代价隔离在输出侧。边界是：multi-gram 词表会改变 token 分布与稀有 token 覆盖，若构造不当可能引入长尾稀疏与 domain shift 下的分词不稳。","experiments":"摘要给出两点关键事实：1）输入词表大小与训练 loss 呈 log-linear 关系，且对不同模型规模都成立；2）使用大输入词表时，在“无额外成本”下可达到与“参数量翻倍 baseline”相当的性能。摘要未提供具体模型参数量、数据规模、loss 数值或下游评测提升幅度，因此无法补充更细的量化对比与 ablation 细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether vocabulary size should be a first-class scaling axis, and how to benefit from larger vocabularies without paying the usual softmax/parameter cost. Many LLM pipelines treat vocab size as a fixed engineering constant and rely on model/data scaling instead.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution with direct pretraining impact: it reports an approximately log-linear relationship between input vocabulary size and training loss, and claims that a large input vocab can match a 2×-parameter baseline at no extra cost. This reframes tokenization as a scalable lever alongside parameters, data, and compute.","technical_approach":"The key idea is to decouple input and output vocabularies: scale up the input vocab with multi-gram tokens to improve segmentation and shorten sequences, while keeping the output vocab small to avoid expensive large-softmax training. The design isolates where large-vocab helps (representation/sequence length) from where it hurts (output-layer cost and optimization). The boundary is distributional: multi-gram vocab construction can create long-tail sparsity and unstable segmentation under domain shift if not carefully built.","experiments":"From the abstract: (1) input vocab size vs. training loss follows a log-linear trend across model sizes; (2) large input vocab achieves performance comparable to a 2×-size baseline with no additional cost. The abstract does not provide model sizes, dataset scale, exact loss values, or downstream deltas.","authors_note":""},"tags":["tokenizer","vocabulary-scaling","language-modeling","scaling-law"]},{"id":"2502.02732","title":"Peri-LN: Revisiting Normalization Layer in the Transformer Architecture","authors":["Jeonghoon Kim","Byeongchan Lee","Cheonbok Park","Yeontaek Oh","Beomjun Kim","Taehwan Yoo","Seongjin Shin","Dongyoon Han","Jinwoo Shin","Kang Min Yoo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.02732","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Kim0POKYSHSY25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Kim0POKYSHSY25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/kim25u.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心结论是：Transformer 里的归一化层位置并不是 Pre-LN 和 Post-LN 二选一，Peri-LN 代表了一种在大规模训练中更稳、更快收敛的第三条路线，而且其有效性此前缺少机制解释。这个问题值得重看，是因为很多开源大模型已经悄悄采用类似设计，但社区对它为什么好、好在哪个训练阶段并不清楚，导致实践在跟、理论没跟上。","importance":"这是典型的方法与训练稳定性交叉的工作。它的重要性不在于发明了全新模块，而在于为大模型训练里一个高频但常靠经验拍板的设计点提供了分析基础。对 pretrain 研究者，这类结论很实用：LN 放置方式会影响梯度传播、深层信号缩放和优化可控性，直接关系到大规模训练的稳定边界和学习率选择空间。","technical_approach":"作者做的是系统性的理论与机制分析，并围绕 Peri-LN 给出解释。Peri-LN 指的是把归一化层放在子层外围，而不是只在输入前或残差后处理。它之所以可能有效，一般是因为这种位置安排更好地平衡了前向信号尺度和反向梯度稳定性：Pre-LN 训练稳但表达受限，Post-LN 表达自然但深层训练容易不稳，Peri-LN 试图兼顾两者。论文的关键不是“提出 Peri-LN”本身，而是说明它如何影响训练动态，以及为什么最近的大模型实践会偏向它。","experiments":"摘要说明论文提供了全面分析，并暗示 Peri-LN 在训练稳定性和收敛速度上有可观优势，但未给出参数规模、数据规模和具体提升数字。真正值得看的实验点包括：不同深度/宽度下的稳定边界、学习率容忍度、梯度范数演化，以及在相同训练 token 预算下的收敛速度。若这些结果清晰，这篇会比单纯报 benchmark 分数更有长期价值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The key message is that normalization placement in Transformers is not just a Pre-LN versus Post-LN choice. Peri-LN appears to be a meaningful third option for large-scale training, and the paper aims to explain why. This matters now because several open-source LLMs have started adopting similar designs without a clear public rationale.","importance":"This is a method-and-training-dynamics paper with practical value. Its contribution is not a flashy new module, but a better analytical foundation for a design decision that directly affects stability, convergence, and hyperparameter headroom in pretraining. For practitioners, that is often more useful than a narrow benchmark gain.","technical_approach":"The paper revisits normalization strategies through analysis and focuses on Peri-LN, where normalization is placed peripherally around sublayers. The likely reason this helps is that it balances two competing properties: Pre-LN is stable but can constrain signal flow, while Post-LN preserves a more natural residual structure but is harder to optimize at scale. Peri-LN aims to keep the favorable parts of both. The real contribution is explaining the mechanism, not merely naming the pattern.","experiments":"The abstract suggests stronger training stability and faster convergence for Peri-LN, but the excerpt does not provide model sizes or exact gains. The most informative experiments will be scaling studies across depth and width, learning-rate tolerance, gradient behavior, and convergence under equal token budgets.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer","normalization","training-dynamics","optimization","stability"]},{"id":"2502.06768","title":"Train for the Worst, Plan for the Best: Understanding Token Ordering in Masked Diffusions","authors":["Jaeyeon Kim","Kulin Shah","Vasilis Kontonis","Sham M. Kakade","Sitan Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$5","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.06768","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/KimSKKC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/KimSKKC25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/kim25ah.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion-lm","masked-lm","token-ordering","sampling","training-objective"]},{"id":"2502.03009","title":"Scaling Laws for Upcycling Mixture-of-Experts Language Models","authors":["Seng Pei Liew","Takuya Kato","Sho Takase"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Pretraining large language models (LLMs) is resource-intensive, often requiring months of training time even with high-end GPU clusters. There are two approaches of mitigating such computational demands: reusing smaller models to train larger ones (upcycling), and training computationally efficient models like mixture-of-experts (MoE). In this paper, we study the upcycling of LLMs to MoE models, of which the scaling behavior remains underexplored. Through extensive experiments, we identify empirical scaling laws that describe how performance depends on dataset size and model configuration. Particularly, we show that, while scaling these factors improves performance, there is a novel interaction term between the dense and upcycled training dataset that limits the efficiency of upcycling at large computational budgets. Based on these findings, we provide guidance to scale upcycling, and establish conditions under which upcycling outperforms from-scratch trainings within budget constraints.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.03009","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiewKT25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiewKT25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/liew25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["moe","scaling-law","upcycling","pretrain-efficiency"]},{"id":"MagnussonTBHHSB25","title":"DataDecide: How to Predict Best Pretraining Data with Small Experiments","authors":["Ian Magnusson","Nguyen Tai","Ben Bogin","David Heineman","Jena D. Hwang","Luca Soldaini","Akshita Bhagia","Jiacheng Liu","Dirk Groeneveld","Oyvind Tafjord","Noah A. Smith","Pang Wei Koh","Jesse Dodge"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MagnussonTBHHSB25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MagnussonTBHHSB25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/magnusson25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是预训练里最现实也最昂贵的问题之一：如何在不做完整大规模训练的前提下，预测哪种预训练数据最好。过去数据选择常靠经验、启发式过滤或昂贵的大实验回路，问题在于数据效果高度依赖模型规模、配比和训练阶段，小试验和大训练经常不一致；作者试图让小实验真正变成可用的决策工具。","importance":"这是非常直接的 pretrain 数据方法工作，而且如果结果可靠，价值很大。原因很简单：数据试错是当前基座模型开发里成本最高、反馈最慢的环节之一；能用小规模实验预测大规模最优数据，等于缩短研究闭环，也会改变数据筛选、数据混合和 curriculum 的开发方式。","technical_approach":"从标题看，DataDecide 的核心不是构造更好的数据本身，而是提出一种用 small experiments 预测 full-scale pretraining data 优劣的程序。可预期它会定义一套可转移的代理指标、缩放外推方法，或比较不同数据子集在小模型/短训练上的排序稳定性；与简单地看 validation loss 不同，这类方法的关键难点是处理 proxy-target mismatch，即小实验里看起来好的数据，放大后未必好。若作者做得好，方法应该明确告诉你何时用短跑结果可信，何时不可信。","experiments":"实验最关键的事实应该是排序相关性：小实验给出的数据优先级，能否预测大规模训练后的真实排名。理想结果会报告跨模型规模、跨训练步数、跨数据类型的相关系数，并和常见 proxy（如 perplexity、去重率、质量分数）对比；还应有 ablation 显示需要多小的实验才能稳定预测。摘要缺失，所以无法提供具体相关系数、模型大小和数据规模。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper tackles one of the most expensive decisions in pretraining: how to predict the best pretraining data without running full-scale training for every option. In practice, data selection still relies heavily on intuition, heuristics, and slow large-scale loops, partly because small pilots often fail to predict large-run outcomes.","importance":"This is a highly relevant pretraining-data paper, and the upside is substantial if the method is reliable. Better small-experiment prediction would shorten the data iteration loop, reduce waste, and directly affect mixture design, filtering, and curriculum choices.","technical_approach":"From the title, DataDecide is not about building better data, but about building a better decision procedure from small experiments. The likely ingredients are transferable proxy metrics, scaling-aware extrapolation, or rank-based comparisons of candidate datasets under small models and short runs. The hard part is proxy-target mismatch: data that looks good in a toy run often does not remain best at scale. A useful method here needs to tell you when a pilot is informative and when it is misleading.","experiments":"The central empirical question is rank correlation: does the ordering induced by small experiments match the ordering after large-scale pretraining. Strong evidence would report correlations across model scales, training horizons, and data types, and compare against standard proxies such as validation loss, deduplication statistics, or heuristic quality scores. The abstract is missing, so exact correlations, model sizes, and dataset scales cannot be stated with confidence.","authors_note":""},"tags":["pretraining-data","data-mixture","scaling-law","small-scale-predictors"]},{"id":"2503.04482","title":"Generalized Interpolating Discrete Diffusion","authors":["Dimitri von Rütte","Janis Fluri","Yuhui Ding","Antonio Orvieto","Bernhard Schölkopf","Thomas Hofmann"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.04482","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/RutteFDOS025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/RutteFDOS025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/von-rutte25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion-lm","non-ar","discrete-diffusion","sampling"]},{"id":"2506.10892","title":"The Diffusion Duality","authors":["Subham Sekhar Sahoo","Justin Deschenaux","Aaron Gokaslan","Guanghan Wang","Justin T. Chiu","Volodymyr Kuleshov"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$7","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.10892","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SahooDGWCK25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SahooDGWCK25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/sahoo25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion-lm","discrete-diffusion","gaussian-diffusion","non-ar"]},{"id":"ShangZWZL0C025","title":"LongRoPE2: Near-Lossless LLM Context Window Scaling","authors":["Ning Shang","Li Lyna Zhang","Siyuan Wang","Gaokai Zhang","Gilsinia Lopez","Fan Yang","Weizhu Chen","Mao Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ShangZWZL0C025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ShangZWZL0C025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/shang25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["long-context","rope","position-encoding","scaling"]},{"id":"2503.00808","title":"Predictive Data Selection: The Data That Predicts Is the Data That Teaches","authors":["KaShun Shum","Yuzhen Huang","Hongjian Zou","Qi Ding","Yixuan Liao","Xiaoxin Chen","Qian Liu","Junxian He"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$8","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.00808","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ShumHZDLC0H25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ShumHZDLC0H25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/shum25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["data-selection","data-quality","pretraining","compression"]},{"id":"2502.10510","title":"MixMin: Finding Data Mixtures via Convex Minimization","authors":["Anvith Thudi","Evianne Rovers","Yangjun Ruan","Tristan Thrush","Chris J. Maddison"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$9","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.10510","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ThudiRRTM25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ThudiRRTM25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/thudi25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["data-mixture","scaling-law","data-quality","optimization"]},{"id":"2506.00975","title":"NTPP: Generative Speech Language Modeling for Dual-Channel Spoken Dialogue via Next-Token-Pair Prediction","authors":["Qichao Wang","Ziqiao Meng","Wenqian Cui","Yifei Zhang","Pengcheng Wu","Bingzhe Wu","Irwin King","Liang Chen","Peilin Zhao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.00975","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangMCZWWKCZ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangMCZWWKCZ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wang25by.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["speech-lm","audio-tokenizer","dialogue","multichannel"]},{"id":"2505.07796","title":"Learning Dynamics in Continual Pre-Training for Large Language Models","authors":["Xingjin Wang","Howe Tissue","Lu Wang","Linjing Li","Daniel Dajun Zeng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.07796","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangTWLZ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangTWLZ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wang25cx.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：持续预训练里，loss 曲线看起来在变，但我们缺少一个能分解其来源、能跨训练步和学习率计划做预测的统一描述。过去大家通常把 CPT 当成经验工程，知道会有 domain adaptation、遗忘和学习率退火效应，但很少把这些因素拆开建模，因此很难提前判断训练会收敛到哪里、什么时候该停、不同 LRS 有什么代价。","importance":"这是比较典型的 pretrain 研究，贡献落在训练动力学和 scaling law。它的重要性不在于提出一个新模型，而在于给 CPT 提供了可预测、可解释的 loss 公式：如果成立，工程上可以更系统地设计 continual pretrain 的预算、学习率退火和 checkpoint 选择，而不是靠试错。对于做 domain adaptation、mid-training、annealing/cooldown 的团队，这种工作很有实用价值。","technical_approach":"作者的核心观点是：CPT 的 loss 曲线可以看成从原始隐藏曲线过渡到目标隐藏曲线的过程，而这个过程主要由两件事决定——分布偏移带来的曲线迁移，以及学习率退火带来的优化速度变化。基于这种分解，他们导出了一个结合 distribution shift 和 learning rate schedule 的 CPT scaling law，用来预测任意持续训练步上的 loss。这个设计的好处是把原本缠在一起的‘数据变了’和‘优化器状态变了’分开分析；边界在于它主要建模 validation loss，不直接保证下游任务指标也完全服从同样规律。","experiments":"摘要能确认的关键结果是：作者验证了该 scaling law 可以预测 CPT 过程中不同训练步、不同学习率计划下的 loss 演化，并据此分析 general domain 与 downstream domain 性能的变化。摘要没有给出所用基座模型规模、继续训练 token 数、domain 类型、拟合误差、以及相对已有 scaling 公式的提升幅度，因此目前最稳妥的结论是：这是一篇偏分析和预测的工作，价值在于解释力和训练决策支持，而不是直接报告新 SOTA。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical gap in continual pretraining: loss curves change in recognizable ways, but we still lack a predictive description that separates where the change comes from and how it depends on the learning-rate schedule. In practice, CPT is often run as empirical engineering, with adaptation and annealing effects mixed together.","importance":"This is squarely a pretraining-dynamics contribution. Its value is not a new model architecture but a scaling-law style description for CPT. If the formulation holds, it can help teams choose training budget, annealing strategy, and stopping points more systematically instead of relying on repeated pilot runs. That is directly useful for domain adaptation, mid-training, and cooldown design.","technical_approach":"The main idea is to view the CPT loss trajectory as a transition between hidden curves, driven by two factors: distribution shift and learning-rate annealing. The proposed scaling law combines these terms to predict loss at arbitrary continual-training steps and across different learning-rate schedules. The benefit of this decomposition is clear: it separates changes due to new data from changes due to optimization dynamics. The natural boundary is also clear: the object being modeled is validation loss, so the mapping to downstream task metrics may still be task-dependent.","experiments":"From the abstract, the paper validates that the proposed CPT scaling law can predict loss throughout continual pretraining and across learning-rate schedules, while tracking the evolution of both general-domain and downstream-domain performance. The abstract does not provide model sizes, token counts, domain details, fit errors, or comparisons against prior scaling-law baselines, so the safest interpretation is that this is an analysis and forecasting paper rather than a benchmark-chasing one.","authors_note":""},"tags":["continual-pretraining","training-dynamics","domain-adaptation","forgetting"]},{"id":"WettigLMH0S25","title":"Organize the Web: Constructing Domains Enhances Pre-Training Data Curation","authors":["Alexander Wettig","Kyle Lo","Sewon Min","Hannaneh Hajishirzi","Danqi Chen","Luca Soldaini"],"institutions":["Princeton University","Allen Institute for AI (AI2)","University of Washington"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WettigLMH0S25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WettigLMH0S25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wettig25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"Web数据是LLM预训练的主要来源，但其组织方式（如何划分domain）直接影响数据筛选和配比的效果。现有做法通常用URL等粗粒度信号划分domain，本文研究如何更好地构建domain来提升预训练数据筛选质量。","importance":"数据级贡献，直接关系到pretrain数据pipeline的核心环节。这是一个被低估但极其实际的问题：domain划分的好坏直接决定了下游数据选择（如DoReMi、DSIR等方法）的上限。作者团队（Danqi Chen、Sewon Min、Hannaneh Hajishirzi）在预训练数据研究方面有深厚积累（如Dolma、OLMo等）。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失，无法提供完整技术细节。从标题推断，核心贡献是提出更好的web数据domain构建方法，可能涉及基于内容/语义的聚类而非简单URL划分，并证明更好的domain划分能提升数据筛选效果。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法提供实验细节。预期在预训练数据筛选和下游任务性能上进行系统评估。","authors_note":"Alexander Wettig是Princeton的博士生，Danqi Chen组成员。Danqi Chen是Princeton教授，LLM预训练数据研究的代表性学者。Sewon Min和Hannaneh Hajishirzi来自UW/AI2，是OLMo/Dolma项目的核心成员。Kyle Lo来自AI2。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How web data is organized into domains directly affects pretraining data curation quality. Existing approaches use coarse signals like URLs for domain partitioning. This work studies how to better construct domains to enhance data curation for pretraining.","importance":"A data-level contribution directly relevant to the pretrain data pipeline. Domain construction is an underappreciated but critical bottleneck: it determines the ceiling for downstream data selection methods like DoReMi and DSIR. The author team has deep expertise in pretraining data (Dolma, OLMo).","technical_approach":"Abstract unavailable for full details. From the title, the core contribution is a better method for constructing web data domains, likely involving content/semantic-based clustering rather than simple URL partitioning, with evidence that better domains improve data curation outcomes.","experiments":"Abstract unavailable. Expected to include systematic evaluation on pretraining data curation quality and downstream task performance.","authors_note":"Alexander Wettig is a PhD student at Princeton in Danqi Chen's group. Danqi Chen is a leading researcher in LLM pretraining data. Sewon Min and Hannaneh Hajishirzi (UW/AI2) are core members of the OLMo/Dolma projects. Kyle Lo is from AI2."},"tags":["data-curation","pretraining-data","web-data","domain-construction"],"notable_authors":["Danqi Chen","Hannaneh Hajishirzi","Sewon Min","Alexander Wettig","Kyle Lo"]},{"id":"2505.04741","title":"When Bad Data Leads to Good Models","authors":["Kenneth Li","Yida Chen","Fernanda B. Viégas","Martin Wattenberg"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04741","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0002CVW25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0002CVW25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/li25d.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["data-quality","post-training","toxicity","data-mixture"]},{"id":"2506.14175","title":"GRAM: A Generative Foundation Reward Model for Reward Generalization","authors":["Chenglong Wang","Yang Gan","Yifu Huo","Yongyu Mu","Qiaozhi He","Murun Yang","Bei Li","Tong Xiao","Chunliang Zhang","Tongran Liu","JingBo Zhu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.14175","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0002GHMHYLXZLZ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0002GHMHYLXZLZ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wang25ad.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["reward-model","alignment","generative-modeling","semi-supervised"]},{"id":"2410.10630","title":"Thinking LLMs: General Instruction Following with Thought Generation","authors":["Tianhao Wu","Janice Lan","Weizhe Yuan","Jiantao Jiao","Jason E. Weston","Sainbayar Sukhbaatar"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.10630","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0002LYJWS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0002LYJWS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wu25o.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["reasoning","cot","instruction-tuning","post-training"]},{"id":"2501.18107","title":"Scaling Inference-Efficient Language Models","authors":["Song Bian","Minghao Yan","Shivaram Venkataraman"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.18107","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0002YV25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0002YV25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/bian25b.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["scaling-law","inference","architecture","latency"]},{"id":"2502.19002","title":"The Sharpness Disparity Principle in Transformers for Accelerating Language Model Pre-Training","authors":["Jinbo Wang","Mingze Wang","Zhanpeng Zhou","Junchi Yan","Weinan E","Lei Wu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$10","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.19002","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0003WZYEW25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0003WZYEW25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wang25dl.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：Transformer 各个模块的优化难度并不一样，但预训练时通常对所有 block 用同一个学习率，这可能白白浪费收敛速度。过去大家会分析全局 sharpness 或调统一 LR schedule，却较少系统讨论 embedding、attention、FFN、norm 这些部件之间持续存在的 sharpness disparity，以及能否据此改写优化器。","importance":"这是一个很有 pretrain 味道的系统+优化方法工作。它的重要性不在于换了个小技巧，而在于给出一个可操作的训练加速原则：不同 block 的局部曲率不同，就不该被同一 LR 约束。若摘要中的近 2× 加速可复现，这会直接影响大模型预训练的最优训练栈选择，尤其对长周期训练和大算力集群非常有意义。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Blockwise Learning Rate：先观察并量化不同 Transformer block 的 sharpness 差异，再把学习率按 block 自适应分配，并集成进 AdamW。它不是另起一种全新优化器，而是在 AdamW 框架上做块级 LR 重参数化，因此工程接入成本相对低。与统一 LR 的做法相比，它承认某些模块处在更尖锐的损失地形中，需要更保守步长，而更平坦的模块可以走得更快。这样设计有效的原因是：统一 LR 通常由最敏感模块决定，结果是大量不那么敏感的参数被迫欠更新，整体训练被慢模块拖住。","experiments":"摘要给出的最关键数字是：在 GPT-2 和 LLaMA 上，集成 Blockwise LR 后相对 vanilla AdamW 能达到近 2× speedup，同时终局 loss 更低。作者还强调 sharpness disparity 早期就出现并持续整个训练过程，这意味着该现象不是训练后期偶然噪声，而是稳定结构特征。摘要没有给出模型具体参数量、训练 token 数、wall-clock 定义、在哪些规模上验证，因此不能补充。即便如此，已有信息足够说明两点：第一，这不是只换来相同 loss 更快，还可能改进最终收敛点；第二，收益建立在 block 间差异稳定存在这一前提上，若架构变化很大，例如 MoE、线性注意力或极强 norm 变体，block 划分和 sharpness 估计方式可能需要重做。","authors_note":"作者包含 Junchi Yan、Weinan E。若作者列表无误，这两位在优化、理论与大模型训练方法上都有持续影响力；但仅凭摘要无法确认具体机构归属。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper starts from a practical optimization mismatch: transformer blocks do not have the same training geometry, yet pretraining usually applies one learning rate policy to all of them. Prior work mostly tuned global schedules or optimizer variants, but rarely exploited persistent sharpness differences across embeddings, attention, feedforward, and normalization blocks.","importance":"This is a pretraining optimization contribution with clear systems relevance. The significance is not just a new heuristic, but a concrete principle for speeding up large-scale training: if different blocks sit in different local curvature regimes, a single LR is unnecessarily conservative. The claimed nearly 2x speedup, if robust, would be highly consequential for long-run foundation model training.","technical_approach":"The method is Blockwise Learning Rate, built on top of AdamW. The authors first identify stable sharpness disparity across transformer building blocks, then assign learning rates according to that disparity. This is not a brand-new optimizer so much as a block-level adaptation of a standard one. The rationale is simple: the global LR is often constrained by the sharpest modules, which leaves flatter modules under-updated. Blockwise LR relaxes that bottleneck.","experiments":"The main quantitative claim in the abstract is a nearly 2x speedup over vanilla AdamW on GPT-2 and LLaMA, along with lower terminal loss. Another important observation is temporal: the sharpness disparity appears early and persists throughout training, suggesting it is a structural property rather than a late-training artifact. The abstract does not report model sizes, token budgets, or the exact speed metric, so no further numbers should be added. A reasonable boundary is that the approach assumes a meaningful and stable block decomposition; architectures like MoE or substantially modified transformer variants may require rethinking how sharpness is measured and how LR is assigned.","authors_note":"The author list includes Junchi Yan and Weinan E, both well known for work on optimization, theory, and large-scale model training. The specific affiliations cannot be confirmed from the provided information alone."},"tags":["sharpness","training-dynamics","optimizer","pretrain-acceleration"],"notable_authors":["Junchi Yan","Weinan E"]},{"id":"2502.01804","title":"Soup-of-Experts: Pretraining Specialist Models via Parameters Averaging","authors":["Pierre Ablin","Angelos Katharopoulos","Skyler Seto","David Grangier"],"institutions":["Apple"],"abstract":"Machine learning models are routinely trained on a mixture of different data domains. Different domain weights yield very different downstream performances. We propose the Soup-of-Experts, a novel architecture that can instantiate a model at test time for any domain weights with minimal computational cost and without re-training the model. Our architecture consists of a bank of expert parameters, which are linearly combined to instantiate one model. We learn the linear combination coefficients as a function of the input domain weights. To train this architecture, we sample random domain weights, instantiate the corresponding model, and backprop through one batch of data sampled with these domain weights. We demonstrate how our approach obtains small specialized models on several language modeling tasks quickly. Soup-of-Experts are particularly appealing when one needs to ship many different specialist models quickly under a model size constraint.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.01804","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/AblinKSG25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/AblinKSG25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/ablin25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"多领域数据混合训练 LLM 时，不同的领域配比会导致截然不同的下游表现，但为每种配比单独训练一个模型成本极高。本文提出 Soup-of-Experts (SoE)：训练一组专家参数，在推理时根据目标领域权重线性组合出一个定制模型，无需重新训练。","importance":"方法级贡献，直接面向 pretrain 数据配比问题。核心价值在于将'数据配比→模型'的映射参数化了：训练一次，推理时可以按需实例化任意配比的模型。这比 DoReMi 等方法更灵活——后者优化一个固定配比，而 SoE 支持连续的配比空间。对需要服务多个下游场景的 pretrain 模型有实际意义。","technical_approach":"维护一组专家参数（parameter bank），每个专家对应一个基础方向。推理时，给定目标领域权重向量，通过学到的线性组合系数将专家参数混合成一个模型。训练过程：随机采样领域权重→实例化对应模型→用该权重采样的数据做一步训练→反向传播更新专家参数和组合系数。这本质上是在参数空间做 model soup，但组合系数是领域权重的函数而非固定的。与 MoE 的区别：MoE 是 token 级路由，SoE 是模型级的参数混合。","experiments":"在多个语言建模任务上验证，展示 SoE 能用较小的专家模型在不同领域配比下获得接近单独训练的专用模型的效果。具体模型规模和数字在截断摘要中未完整给出。","authors_note":"作者 Pierre Ablin 和 David Grangier 来自 Apple MLR。Grangier 在 NLP/序列建模领域有长期积累。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Different domain mixtures in LLM pretraining yield very different downstream performance, but training a separate model per mixture is prohibitively expensive. Soup-of-Experts (SoE) trains a bank of expert parameters that can be linearly combined at test time for any target domain weights without retraining.","importance":"Method-level contribution directly addressing pretrain data mixing. The key value is parameterizing the 'domain weights → model' mapping: train once, instantiate any mixture at inference. More flexible than fixed-mixture approaches like DoReMi, as it supports a continuous mixture space.","technical_approach":"Maintains a bank of expert parameters. At inference, given target domain weights, learned linear combination coefficients mix experts into one model. Training: sample random domain weights → instantiate model → train on one batch sampled with those weights → backprop through expert parameters and coefficients. Unlike MoE (token-level routing), SoE does model-level parameter mixing where combination coefficients are a function of domain weights.","experiments":"Demonstrated on multiple language modeling tasks. SoE with small expert models approaches the performance of separately trained specialized models across different domain mixtures. Full model scales and numbers truncated.","authors_note":"Pierre Ablin and David Grangier are from Apple MLR. Grangier has extensive experience in NLP and sequence modeling."},"tags":["moe","pretraining","parameter-averaging","data-mixture"],"notable_authors":["David Grangier"]},{"id":"2502.06861","title":"Design Considerations in Offline Preference-based RL","authors":["Alekh Agarwal","Christoph Dann","Teodor Vanislavov Marinov"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Offline algorithms for Reinforcement Learning from Human Preferences (RLHF), which use only a fixed dataset of sampled responses given an input, and preference feedback among these responses, have gained increasing prominence in the literature on aligning language models. In this paper, we study how the different design choices made in methods such as DPO, IPO, SLiC and many variants influence the quality of the learned policy, from a theoretical perspective. Our treatment yields insights into the choices of loss function, the policy which is used to normalize log-likelihoods, and also the role of the data sampling policy. Notably, our results do not rely on the standard reparameterization-style arguments used to motivate some of the algorithms in this family, which allows us to give a unified treatment to a broad class of methods. We also conduct a small empirical study to verify some of the theoretical findings on a standard summarization benchmark.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.06861","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/AgarwalDM25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/AgarwalDM25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/agarwal25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["rlhf","offline-rl","preference-learning","dpo"]},{"id":"2501.15781","title":"Large Language Models to Diffusion Finetuning","authors":["Edoardo Cetin","Tianyu Zhao","Yujin Tang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We propose a new finetuning method to provide pre-trained large language models (LMs) the ability to scale test-time compute through the diffusion framework. By increasing the number of diffusion steps, we show our finetuned models achieve monotonically increasing accuracy, directly translating to improved performance across downstream tasks. Furthermore, our finetuned models can expertly answer questions on specific topics by integrating powerful guidance techniques, and autonomously determine the compute required for a given problem by leveraging adaptive ODE solvers. Our method is universally applicable to any foundation model pre-trained with a cross-entropy loss and does not modify any of its original weights, fully preserving its strong single-step generation capabilities. We show our method is more effective and fully compatible with traditional finetuning approaches, introducing an orthogonal new direction to unify the strengths of the autoregressive and diffusion frameworks.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.15781","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Cetin0T25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Cetin0T25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/cetin25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion-lm","test-time-compute","fine-tuning","non-ar"]},{"id":"ChenYZLL0T25","title":"Core Context Aware Transformers for Long Context Language Modeling","authors":["Yaofo Chen","Zeng You","Shuhai Zhang","Haokun Li","Yirui Li","Yaowei Wang","Mingkui Tan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChenYZLL0T25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChenYZLL0T25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chen25cg.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：长上下文语言建模里，并非所有历史 token 都同等重要，模型真正需要稳定访问的是一小部分“核心上下文”。传统 full attention 计算代价高，而很多长上下文近似方法只按位置或局部窗口保留信息，容易把真正关键的远程依赖也一起丢掉。","importance":"从题目看，这是长上下文建模的架构方法，价值在于把“哪些上下文重要”显式结构化。对 pretrain 的启示是，长上下文扩展不一定只能靠更大的窗口和更重的 attention kernel，也可以通过 core-context selection 重新分配注意力预算，从而改善长度-质量-成本三者之间的折中。","technical_approach":"根据题目，Core Context Aware Transformers 的核心思想是让 Transformer 在长序列中识别并重点建模核心上下文，而不是均匀处理全部 token。它和纯局部窗口、线性 attention 或简单记忆 token 的区别，应该在于“core context aware”意味着模型对关键历史有显式感知或选择机制。这样的设计可能更适合处理稀疏但关键的远程依赖；代价则通常是需要一个可靠的核心上下文估计模块，若估计错误，收益会迅速反转。无摘要，具体机制无法确认。","experiments":"给定信息不足，无法确认模型规模、上下文长度、所用 long-context benchmark、与 Transformer/稀疏注意力基线的对比，以及吞吐和困惑度的具体变化。只能保留定性判断。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a central inefficiency in long-context language modeling: not all past tokens are equally useful, and what really matters may be a small set of core context tokens. Full attention is expensive, while many approximations keep tokens by position or locality and may discard the truly important long-range dependencies.","importance":"Judging from the title, this is an architecture contribution for long-context modeling. The interesting pretraining implication is that context extension need not rely only on larger windows or faster kernels; attention budget can also be reallocated toward a selected core context, which may improve the quality-cost trade-off.","technical_approach":"Core Context Aware Transformers appear to let the model identify and prioritize core context instead of processing all history uniformly. The likely distinction from local windows, linear attention, or simple memory tokens is that importance is explicitly modeled rather than assumed from position. This could help with sparse but crucial long-range dependencies, though the obvious risk is that a bad core-context estimator will erase the very information the model needs. The abstract is unavailable, so the exact mechanism cannot be confirmed.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so model scale, context length, benchmarks, baselines, and quantitative throughput/perplexity trade-offs are unknown. A detailed empirical summary would therefore be unreliable.","authors_note":""},"tags":["long-context","transformer","attention","core-context"]},{"id":"2506.11769","title":"Long-Short Alignment for Effective Long-Context Modeling in LLMs","authors":["Tianqi Du","Haotian Huang","Yifei Wang","Yisen Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$11","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.11769","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/DuH0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/DuH0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/du25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：LLM 为什么在训练没见过的更长序列上会“长度泛化”失败，以及如何用一个更可控的目标来修复它，而不是继续只在位置编码/结构上打补丁。作者认为关键不在输入侧怎么编码位置，而在输出分布是否在“短上下文”和“长上下文”下保持一致。","importance":"贡献更偏“训练目标/诊断视角”而不是新架构：把长度泛化从“位置表示问题”改写成“输出分布一致性问题”，给出了一个可操作的对齐指标与训练信号。对 pretrain 的启示是：长上下文能力可能主要受训练动态与分布对齐约束，而不是单纯靠 RoPE/ALiBi 等位置技巧堆出来。","technical_approach":"方法核心是“long-short alignment”：要求同一任务在短窗口推理与长窗口推理时的输出分布保持一致，并把这种一致性作为训练/正则目标来优化。设计取舍是放弃只改输入特征（位置编码、分块结构）的路径，转而直接约束模型的预测分布，从而把长度外推问题变成一个可度量、可优化的对齐问题；边界在于它更像训练约束，不能替代真正的长上下文信息瓶颈（注意力/缓存/检索）带来的容量限制。","experiments":"从给定摘要只能确认：作者在合成任务（synthetic tasks）上做了 case study 来展示 long-short alignment 的关键性，并以此支撑其视角与方法。摘要未提供模型规模、数据规模、具体 baseline、指标与提升数字，因此无法可靠复述定量结论；如果论文主体给出真实 LLM/长上下文基准（如 LongBench/PG19/Passkey 等）与训练长度外推曲线，这将是判断其工程价值的关键。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets length generalization failures in LLMs—why models break when evaluated on contexts longer than seen in training—and argues this is better addressed by constraining the output distribution rather than tweaking input-side positional features.","importance":"This is mainly a training-objective/diagnostic contribution: it reframes long-context generalization as an output-distribution consistency problem and proposes an actionable alignment signal. For pretraining, the takeaway is that long-context robustness may be limited by training dynamics and distribution mismatch, not only by the choice of positional encoding.","technical_approach":"They propose “long-short alignment”: enforce that the model’s predictive distribution stays consistent when the same underlying task is run under short vs. long context windows, and optimize this consistency as a training regularizer/objective. The key design choice is to directly constrain predictions (what the model outputs) instead of only modifying representations (how positions are encoded); the limitation is that alignment cannot bypass fundamental capacity/compute bottlenecks of true long-context modeling.","experiments":"From the abstract alone: evidence is based on case studies on synthetic tasks highlighting the role of long-short alignment. The abstract does not report model sizes, data scale, baselines, metrics, or numeric gains, so quantitative claims cannot be summarized faithfully without the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["long-context","length-generalization","alignment","positional-encoding"]},{"id":"2507.09937","title":"Memorization Sinks: Isolating Memorization during LLM Training","authors":["Gaurav Rohit Ghosal","Pratyush Maini","Aditi Raghunathan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$12","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.09937","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GhosalMR25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GhosalMR25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/ghosal25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是：LLM 对重复序列的记忆往往与一般语言能力纠缠在一起，导致事后删忆很难干净生效。现有 post-hoc neuron editing 常希望找到“负责记住某条序列”的局部神经元并删除它们，但自然语言序列如果本身语言上合理，其记忆会渗入通用建模回路，删掉就容易伤及正常能力。","importance":"这是一个很有价值的训练机制工作。它的重要性不在于又提出一种删忆算法，而是提出“隔离记忆”的训练范式：与其事后清除，不如在训练时就把 memorization 导向专门的通道。对预训练研究，这是直接相关的，因为它触及数据重复、版权/隐私风险与参数表示结构之间的关系，也给数据治理和可删除学习提供了新思路。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 MemSinks。作者引入 sequence identifier，使同一序列在多次重复出现时激活一组独特的 memorization neurons，从而把针对特定序列的记忆尽量隔离到专门子空间。这个设计不是抑制记忆，而是改变记忆落点；这样后续遗忘或删除时，可以更局部地处理而少伤通用语言能力。论文还通过学习与遗忘动态分析支持这一点。这样的设计有效，是因为它把“记忆共享表示”改成“记忆专用路由”；边界在于需要额外标识机制，而且对自然分布中模糊重复、近似重复是否同样可隔离，还要看实验。","experiments":"摘要给出一个关键负面结论和一个正面结果：自然且语言上合理的重复序列，其记忆会与一般能力机制纠缠，因此 post-hoc removal 很难成功；MemSinks 则能通过设计隔离 memorization。摘要未给出模型规模、数据集、删除成功率或遗忘-性能权衡数字。最值得看的实验应包括：标准模型与 MemSinks 在记忆定位、删除成功率和困惑度损伤上的对比；自然序列与随机/不自然序列的差异；以及随着重复次数增加，隔离程度是否更明显。如果这些结果扎实，这篇论文对“可删除预训练”会很有启发。","authors_note":"作者中 Aditi Raghunathan 较为知名，长期关注模型鲁棒性、隐私与学习理论相关问题。其余机构与团队代表作无法从给定信息中确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a central obstacle in unlearning memorized content from LLMs: memorization of natural repeated sequences becomes mechanistically entangled with general language ability. This makes post-hoc neuron editing far less effective than hoped, because the same circuitry supports both recall of repeated text and ordinary modeling competence.","importance":"This is a genuinely useful training-mechanism contribution. Its significance is not another deletion method, but a different paradigm: isolate memorization during training instead of trying to scrub it afterward. That is directly relevant to pretraining because it connects data repetition, privacy and copyright risk, and representational organization inside the model.","technical_approach":"The proposed MemSinks framework introduces a sequence identifier that routes repeated occurrences of the same sequence into a unique set of memorization neurons. The point is not to eliminate memorization, but to localize it into a more separable subspace so later forgetting or removal can be more targeted. This is a sensible design because it replaces shared generic storage with sequence-specific routing. The main limitation is obvious: it depends on an identifier mechanism and may be less clean for approximate or semantically similar repetitions than for exact repeated sequences.","experiments":"The abstract gives one important negative finding and one positive result. First, memorization of natural, linguistically plausible sequences is entangled with general language modeling behavior, which explains why post-hoc removal is difficult. Second, MemSinks can isolate memorization by design. The abstract does not provide model sizes, datasets, or numerical deletion-versus-utility trade-offs. The most informative results to inspect are removal success, collateral damage on perplexity or downstream ability, and differences between natural repeated text and synthetic or unnatural repetitions.","authors_note":"Aditi Raghunathan is a notable author known for work on robustness, privacy, and learning theory. Other institutional details cannot be confirmed from the provided information."},"tags":["memorization","training-dynamics","data-quality","privacy","interpretability"],"notable_authors":["Aditi Raghunathan"]},{"id":"2506.05574","title":"When can in-context learning generalize out of task distribution?","authors":["Page C. Goddard","Lindsay M. Smith","Vudtiwat Ngampruetikorn","David J. Schwab"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$13","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.05574","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GoddardSNS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GoddardSNS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/goddard25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"ICL 何时能泛化到预训练任务分布之外？之前的工作主要关注预训练数据中需要多少不同任务才能涌现 ICL，但对 OOD 泛化的条件缺乏系统研究。本文用线性函数族作为受控环境，研究任务多样性如何决定 ICL 的泛化边界。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：预训练数据的任务多样性不仅影响 ICL 是否涌现，还决定了模型能否超越训练分布泛化。这为理解 pretrain 数据配比和多样性设计提供了理论视角——多样性存在一个相变点，跨过后模型从'记忆式 ICL'切换到'泛化式 ICL'。","technical_approach":"在线性回归任务族上训练 Transformer，通过控制任务协方差矩阵的结构来调节任务多样性（不同于简单计数任务数量）。观察到随着多样性增加，模型经历从专用解（只在训练分布内做 ICL）到通用解（泛化到整个任务空间）的相变。还分析了这一转变与模型内部表示的关系。","experiments":"实验在合成线性回归设置下进行，模型规模较小（用于可控分析）。核心发现：任务多样性存在明确的阈值，低于阈值时 ICL 仅在分布内有效，高于阈值后 OOD 性能急剧提升。具体数字和 scaling 行为需参考原文，但相变现象本身是清晰且可复现的。","authors_note":"David J. Schwab 是统计物理与深度学习交叉领域的知名研究者，曾在 CUNY/Meta 等机构工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"When does ICL generalize beyond the pretraining task distribution? Prior work focused on how many distinct tasks are needed for ICL to emerge; this paper instead studies what kind of task diversity enables OOD generalization, using linear function families as a controlled testbed.","importance":"Provides a concrete mechanistic insight for pretrain data design: task diversity has a phase transition threshold—below it, ICL only works in-distribution; above it, the model generalizes across the entire task space. This is a useful lens for thinking about pretraining data composition.","technical_approach":"Trains Transformers on linear regression tasks with controlled task covariance structure to vary diversity. Identifies a sharp transition from a specialized ICL solution (in-distribution only) to a general one (full task space). The diversity metric is based on the structure of the task covariance, not just task count.","experiments":"Synthetic linear regression setup with small Transformers for controlled analysis. The phase transition is clear and reproducible: OOD ICL performance jumps sharply once diversity crosses a threshold. Exact numbers require the full paper, but the qualitative finding is robust.","authors_note":"David J. Schwab is known for work at the intersection of statistical physics and deep learning."},"tags":["in-context-learning","generalization","pretraining-data","ood","scaling-law"],"notable_authors":["David J. Schwab"]},{"id":"2502.19402","title":"Position: General Intelligence Requires Reward-based Pretraining","authors":["Seungwook Han","Jyothish Pari","Samuel J. Gershman","Pulkit Agrawal"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$14","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"position","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.19402","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HanPG025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HanPG025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/han25n.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["reward-based-pretraining","agi","rl-pretrain","position-paper"]},{"id":"2501.09755","title":"Learnings from Scaling Visual Tokenizers for Reconstruction and Generation","authors":["Philippe Hansen-Estruch","David Yan","Ching-Yao Chuang","Orr Zohar","Jialiang Wang","Tingbo Hou","Tao Xu","Sriram Vishwanath","Peter Vajda","Xinlei Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$15","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.09755","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Hansen-EstruchY25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Hansen-EstruchY25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/hansen-estruch25a.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是视觉 tokenizer 长期被“够用就行”处理的问题：生成模型在扩 scale，但上游 auto-encoder/tokenizer 本身很少系统地扩规模、换架构、换数据，因此我们并不清楚 tokenizer 的容量、训练数据和设计选择到底如何影响重建质量以及下游生成质量。这个问题现在值得重做，因为统一多模态 LM 和 image/video token-based generation 都越来越依赖离散或压缩视觉表示，tokenizer 不再只是前处理模块。","importance":"这项工作的重要性是方法级加系统级的，而且和 pretrain 非常相关。它直接触及统一建模中的表示瓶颈：如果 tokenizer 本身信息丢失严重，再大的生成器也只能在低质量 latent 上工作；相反，tokenizer scale 上去后，可能带来比单纯扩生成器更划算的收益。对做原生多模态预训练的人，这篇工作提供的是一个很实用的判断框架——先别急着只堆 decoder，视觉编码器/离散器本身可能是你真正的 cap。","technical_approach":"作者的核心方法是用增强版 ViT 结构替代传统卷积式 auto-encoder backbone，构建一个可扩展的视觉 tokenizer ViTok，并在远大于 ImageNet-1K 的图像和视频数据上系统研究 tokenizer scaling。关键点不只是“把 CNN 换成 ViT”，而是把 tokenizer 本身当成一等模型对象来扩：架构更适合大规模训练，数据规模不再受限，评估同时覆盖 reconstruction 和 downstream generation。和已有工作相比，区别在于他们不是只比某个压缩率下的重建指标，而是试图总结 scaling 规律：哪些设计会先改善感知重建，哪些会真正帮助后续生成器学到更好的分布。预期上的 trade-off 也很明确：更强 tokenizer 往往意味着更高编码成本、更大 latent 带宽，未必在所有部署场景都划算。","experiments":"从摘要可确认的事实有三点。第一，他们训练了基于 ViT 的 tokenizer，并使用远超 ImageNet-1K 的大规模图像和视频数据，这意味着实验重点确实是 scaling 而非小数据技巧。第二，论文同时看 reconstruction 和 generation，这一点很关键，因为这两者并不总一致：更低重建误差不一定带来更好生成。第三，论文宣称给出 auto-encoder scaling 的系统探索，但当前摘要片段被截断，无法可靠写出参数规模、token compression ratio、主要 baseline、FID/PSNR/LPIPS 或视频指标的具体数字。读这篇论文时，最值得抓的 ablation 应该是：1）tokenizer 容量相对生成器容量的最优配比；2）图像与视频是否共享同一 scaling law；3）重建最优点与生成最优点是否偏离；4）更低码率是否在统一多模态 LM 中反而更伤信息保真。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles an underexplored bottleneck: visual generators have been scaled aggressively, but the tokenizer upstream of them has usually been left relatively small and fixed. That leaves a basic question unanswered: how tokenizer architecture, capacity, and training data affect both reconstruction quality and downstream generation quality. This matters now because visual tokenization is no longer just preprocessing; it is part of the representation layer in unified multimodal pretraining.","importance":"This is a method-and-systems contribution with direct pretraining relevance. It addresses the representation bottleneck in token-based image and video modeling: if the tokenizer throws away too much information, scaling the generator alone has diminishing returns. For multimodal LM work, the practical message is important: the limiting factor may be the tokenizer, not the decoder.","technical_approach":"The central move is to replace the usual convolutional autoencoder backbone with an enhanced ViT-based tokenizer, ViTok, and then study tokenizer scaling on much larger image and video datasets than ImageNet-1K. The contribution is not merely 'use a ViT'; it is to treat the tokenizer itself as a first-class scalable model and evaluate it jointly on reconstruction and downstream generation. Compared with prior tokenizer papers that often optimize one compression point or one reconstruction metric, this work appears to ask scaling-law style questions: which design choices improve perceptual fidelity, and which ones actually help the downstream generator model the data distribution better. The trade-off is predictable: stronger tokenizers typically cost more compute and may increase latent bandwidth.","experiments":"Three points are clear from the abstract. First, the tokenizer is trained at significantly larger data scale than standard practice, including both images and videos. Second, the evaluation spans both reconstruction and generation, which is essential because the two objectives do not always agree. Third, the paper is positioned as a systematic scaling study rather than a single architecture tweak. However, the provided abstract is truncated, so model sizes, compression ratios, baselines, and exact FID/PSNR/LPIPS-style numbers cannot be stated reliably. The most informative ablations to look for are the tokenizer-generator capacity balance, whether image and video follow similar scaling trends, and how reconstruction-optimal settings differ from generation-optimal ones.","authors_note":""},"tags":["visual-tokenizer","scaling","autoencoder","image-generation","reconstruction"]},{"id":"HouLLZL0L0D25","title":"T1: Advancing Language Model Reasoning through Reinforcement Learning and Inference Scaling","authors":["Zhenyu Hou","Xin Lv","Rui Lu","Jiajie Zhang","Yujiang Li","Zijun Yao","Juanzi Li","Jie Tang","Yuxiao Dong"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HouLLZL0L0D25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HouLLZL0L0D25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/hou25e.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的核心问题是：如何通过强化学习和 inference scaling 真正提升语言模型的推理能力，而不是只靠更长 CoT 或更大的 SFT 数据堆出表面增益。这个问题现在重要，是因为后训练领域正在从“静态监督模仿答案”转向“通过搜索、验证和奖励塑造推理过程”，但很多方法要么训练不稳，要么推理时成本过高。","importance":"从标题看，这很可能是一篇 post-train 推理增强工作，对 pretrain 的直接贡献有限，但对 pretrain↔posttrain 闭环是相关的。若它证明 RL 与 inference scaling 可以协同而非互相替代，那么启示是：基础模型预训练出的潜在推理能力，可能需要通过更强的 test-time compute 利用方式和更合适的奖励信号才能真正释放；这会反过来影响大家如何设计中期训练、合成数据和 verifier。","technical_approach":"仅凭标题可以判断，T1 的方法核心应是把强化学习训练与推理时的计算扩展结合起来，目标不是只让单条轨迹更强，而是让模型在增加采样、反思、搜索或重排时表现出更好的 scaling。和单纯 RLHF 或单纯 best-of-N 不同，这类方法通常需要让训练目标与推理策略一致，否则会出现训练时学的是偏好，测试时靠的是采样运气。若论文做得扎实，关键技术点通常会包括：过程级或结果级奖励的设计、对长推理轨迹的 credit assignment、以及在推理成本上升时如何保持收益递增而非快速饱和。边界在于：如果缺少可靠 verifier 或任务主要是开放式生成，这类方法的收益会明显变弱。","experiments":"由于没有摘要，无法确认 T1 的模型规模、训练配方、任务基准以及提升数字。判断这篇论文价值最关键的实验应包括：1）在数学、代码、科学问答等需要多步推理的 benchmark 上，相对 SFT、DPO、RFT 或已有 RL reasoning 方法的绝对提升；2）性能随 test-time samples / rollouts 增长的曲线是否更陡，证明它真的改善 inference scaling；3）同等推理预算下是否优于简单 best-of-N；4）训练稳定性、reward hacking、长度偏置等副作用。没有这些定量结果，只能保守地把它归为值得关注的 reasoning post-training 方向。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The title suggests a straightforward goal: improve LM reasoning by combining reinforcement learning with inference-time scaling, rather than relying only on larger supervised datasets or longer chains of thought. This is timely because post-training is moving from imitation to search-and-reward-driven reasoning, but many current methods are either unstable or too expensive at test time.","importance":"This is likely a post-training reasoning paper, so its direct pretraining impact is limited. Still, it matters for the pretrain–posttrain loop. If the paper shows that RL and inference scaling work synergistically, the implication is that pretrained reasoning potential may require the right test-time compute strategy and reward signal to become visible in practice.","technical_approach":"From the title alone, the core idea is likely to train the model in a way that benefits from increased inference compute, not just from a single greedy trajectory. That usually means aligning the training objective with the intended inference procedure, such as sampling, reranking, search, or self-refinement. The important distinction from plain RLHF or plain best-of-N is that the method should improve the scaling curve with more test-time compute, not merely shift the zero-compute baseline. In solid versions of this approach, the hard parts are reward design, long-horizon credit assignment, and avoiding rapid saturation as more inference budget is added.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so model size, benchmarks, and exact gains cannot be verified. The decisive evidence would be: strong gains on reasoning-heavy tasks such as math and code, steeper performance scaling with additional test-time samples or rollouts, clear wins over simple best-of-N at matched compute, and an honest account of reward hacking and stability issues. Without those details, the paper should be treated as a promising reasoning post-training direction rather than a settled result.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reinforcement-learning","reasoning","inference-scaling","alignment","test-time-compute"]},{"id":"2410.01651","title":"Efficient Length-Generalizable Attention via Causal Retrieval for Long-Context Language Modeling","authors":["Xiang Hu","Zhihao Teng","Jun Zhao","Wei Wu","Kewei Tu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$16","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.01651","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HuTZWT25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HuTZWT25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/hu25v.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是 transformer 长上下文建模里的两个老问题同时存在：一是自注意力二次复杂度太高，二是预训练时学到的注意模式很难长度外推，通常需要再做更大窗口的 post-training，成本高且不稳。作者的目标是找到一种既能保留远距离信息访问能力，又能用常数窗口运行、还能泛化到远超训练长度的注意力机制。","importance":"这项工作的贡献是方法级，并且和 pretrain 强相关。它提供了一个值得注意的方向：不是继续逼近 full attention，而是用因果检索形成动态上下文，把长距离依赖转化成检索问题。若这一思路成立，对长上下文预训练的启示很直接——训练时不一定非要覆盖目标窗口，只要模型学会了稳定的 chunk-level retrieval，长度外推可能比传统位置插值或窗口扩展更自然。","technical_approach":"作者提出 Grouped Cross Attention（GCA）。核心做法是把输入序列切成 chunks，每个 chunk 在生成时从过去的 chunks 中检索 top-k 相关片段，再用 grouped cross attention 访问这些被检索出的上下文，而不是对整个历史做 full self-attention。和很多直接接外部 retriever 的方法不同，摘要强调他们不是用 off-the-shelf retriever，这很关键：若检索器与语言模型目标脱节，检到的片段常常不利于生成；把检索纳入同一机制，可以让“取什么上下文”和“如何利用上下文”共同适配训练目标。设计取舍也很明显：它把信息访问压缩成 chunk 粒度检索，换来常数窗口和更强长度泛化，但若相关信息过于细碎或跨 chunk 边界，可能会有召回损失。","experiments":"摘要给出了一个很强的主结论：GCA 可以在保持常数 attention window 的同时，泛化到预训练上下文长度的 1000 倍，并继续访问远距离信息。这是论文最值得关注的卖点。它还指出，相比需要在更大窗口上 post-train 的 transformer，GCA 试图直接规避这一步。由于摘要片段被截断，无法确认使用的模型规模、预训练长度、测试长度、baseline（如 full attention、sliding window、RMT、retrieval transformer 等）以及困惑度或下游任务数字。读这篇论文时，最关键的实验点应是：1）1000x 泛化是在合成任务、语言建模还是 needle/QA 任务上成立；2）top-k 检索的召回与质量如何随长度增长变化；3）检索器与语言模型是否联合训练；4）相比更简单的 chunk recurrence 或 external retrieval，收益来自因果检索本身还是 grouped cross attention 结构。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles two long-context problems at once: standard self-attention is quadratic, and transformers often generalize poorly beyond the context lengths seen in training unless they are further trained with larger windows. The goal here is to keep access to distant information while running with a constant attention window and extrapolating far beyond pretraining length.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution with direct pretraining relevance. The notable idea is to stop approximating full attention and instead turn long-range dependency access into a causal retrieval problem. If that works, it suggests a different route for long-context pretraining: teach stable chunk-level retrieval rather than forcing the model to attend densely across the full target window.","technical_approach":"The proposed Grouped Cross Attention splits the sequence into chunks, retrieves the top-k relevant past chunks for each current chunk, and attends only to those retrieved contexts. The key distinction from many retrieval-augmented approaches is that the paper does not rely on an off-the-shelf retriever. That matters because a separately trained retriever can be poorly aligned with the language modeling objective. By integrating retrieval into the attention mechanism, the model can learn what to fetch and how to use it together. The trade-off is clear: chunk-level retrieval buys constant-window computation and better extrapolation, but it may miss information when dependencies are highly fragmented or cross chunk boundaries in difficult ways.","experiments":"The strongest claim in the abstract is that GCA can generalize to 1000x the pretraining context length while maintaining access to distant information with a constant attention window. That is the headline result. The method is also explicitly framed as an alternative to expensive post-training with larger windows. The abstract is truncated, so model sizes, training lengths, baselines, and exact language-modeling or downstream numbers cannot be reported reliably. The main things to inspect are where the 1000x claim holds, how retrieval quality scales with length, whether retrieval is jointly learned, and how much of the gain comes from the retrieval formulation versus the grouped cross-attention design itself.","authors_note":""},"tags":["long-context","attention","length-generalization","efficient-attention","architecture"]},{"id":"2502.03930","title":"DiTAR: Diffusion Transformer Autoregressive Modeling for Speech Generation","authors":["Dongya Jia","Zhuo Chen","Jiawei Chen","Chenpeng Du","Jian Wu","Jian Cong","Xiaobin Zhuang","Chumin Li","Zhen Wei","Yuping Wang","Yuxuan Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$17","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.03930","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Jia0CDWCZ0WWW25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Jia0CDWCZ0WWW25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/jia25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：在不使用离散语音 token 的前提下做连续语音表征的自回归生成，如何避免计算量过大或效果不稳。已有 AR+diffusion 混合方案常在连续空间里采样成本高，或 AR 直接建连续值时质量受限。","importance":"贡献是一个“AR 负责长程结构、diffusion 负责局部细节”的可扩展折中，属于语音 LM 里对建模范式的工程化推进。对统一建模/跨模态预训练的启示是：连续 token 的 AR 生成可以通过 patch 化与后续扩散细化来降低序列长度与采样难度，把计算集中在更局部的生成单元上。","technical_approach":"DiTAR 提出 patch-based 的自回归框架，把连续语音表示按 patch 分块并用 divide-and-conquer 生成。语言模型先在“聚合后的 patch embedding”层面做 AR，负责预测下一个 patch 的高层条件；随后 diffusion transformer 在该条件下生成具体的下一个 patch，负责把连续细节补全。这样设计的原因是：LM 在长上下文建模上更高效，diffusion 在连续高频细节上更稳；代价是两阶段系统更复杂，且 patch 大小/重叠会决定信息瓶颈与伪影风险。","experiments":"摘要未给出语音表示类型（如 mel/codec latent）、模型规模、训练数据规模、生成速度、以及客观/主观指标（MOS、WER on ASR proxy、speaker similarity 等）与提升数字，只宣称相较以往方法“提升效果并降低计算”。因此目前只能总结结构性设计与预期 trade-off。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets autoregressive generation of continuous speech representations without discrete speech tokens, aiming to avoid excessive compute or unstable quality. Prior AR+diffusion hybrids can be expensive in continuous sampling, while pure AR over continuous values often underperforms in fidelity.","importance":"It offers a scalable division of labor—AR for long-range structure, diffusion for local detail—pushing an engineering-friendly modeling paradigm for speech LMs. For unified/multimodal pretraining, it suggests that continuous-token AR can be made practical via patching plus diffusion refinement, reducing sequence length and localizing expensive generation.","technical_approach":"DiTAR is a patch-based AR framework with a divide-and-conquer pipeline: a language model autoregresses over aggregated patch embeddings to produce high-level conditioning for the next patch, then a diffusion transformer generates the actual continuous patch conditioned on that output. The rationale is efficiency and stability: LMs handle long context well; diffusion handles continuous high-frequency detail. The trade-off is a more complex two-stage system where patch size/overlap controls the information bottleneck and artifact risk.","experiments":"The abstract does not specify representation type (mel vs. codec latents), model/data scale, generation speed, or objective/subjective metrics (e.g., MOS) with numeric deltas; it only claims improved outcomes with reduced compute.","authors_note":""},"tags":["speech-lm","diffusion","autoregressive","speech-generation"]},{"id":"2502.01694","title":"Metastable Dynamics of Chain-of-Thought Reasoning: Provable Benefits of Search, RL and Distillation","authors":["Juno Kim","Denny Wu","Jason D. Lee","Taiji Suzuki"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$18","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.01694","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/KimWLS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/KimWLS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/kim25aj.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["cot","reasoning","rl","distillation","theory"]},{"id":"2502.01567","title":"Latent Thought Models with Variational Bayes Inference-Time Computation","authors":["Deqian Kong","Minglu Zhao","Dehong Xu","Bo Pang","Shu Wang","Edouardo Honig","Zhangzhang Si","Chuan Li","Jianwen Xie","Sirui Xie","Ying Nian Wu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$19","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.01567","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/KongZX00HSLXXW25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/KongZX00HSLXXW25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/kong25c.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["latent-reasoning","language-modeling","variational-inference","inference-time","non-ar"]},{"id":"2412.00127","title":"Orthus: Autoregressive Interleaved Image-Text Generation with Modality-Specific Heads","authors":["Siqi Kou","Jiachun Jin","Zhihong Liu","Chang Liu","Ye Ma","Jian Jia","Quan Chen","Peng Jiang","Zhijie Deng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1a","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.00127","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/KouJLLMJ00D25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/KouJLLMJ00D25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/kou25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["multimodal-ar","image-text","unified-modeling","tokenizer","native-multimodal"]},{"id":"2502.03382","title":"High-Fidelity Simultaneous Speech-To-Speech Translation","authors":["Tom Labiausse","Laurent Mazaré","Edouard Grave","Alexandre Défossez","Neil Zeghidour"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1b","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.03382","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LabiausseMGDZ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LabiausseMGDZ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/labiausse25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["speech-lm","simultaneous-translation","multistream","decoder-only"]},{"id":"2503.01496","title":"Liger: Linearizing Large Language Models to Gated Recurrent Structures","authors":["Disen Lan","Weigao Sun","Jiaxi Hu","Jusen Du","Yu Cheng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1c","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.01496","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LanSHD025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LanSHD025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/lan25b.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["linearization","recurrent","architecture","inference-efficiency"]},{"id":"2505.23032","title":"Bayesian Neural Scaling Law Extrapolation with Prior-Data Fitted Networks","authors":["Dongwoo Lee","Dong Bok Lee","Steven Adriaensen","Juho Lee","Sung Ju Hwang","Frank Hutter","Seon Joo Kim","Hae Beom Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1d","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.23032","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LeeLALHHKL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LeeLALHHKL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/lee25q.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["scaling-law","extrapolation","bayesian","uncertainty"]},{"id":"LiTH0ZXRM0ZZX25","title":"What If We Recaption Billions of Web Images with LLaMA-3?","authors":["Xianhang Li","Haoqin Tu","Mude Hui","Zeyu Wang","Bingchen Zhao","Junfei Xiao","Sucheng Ren","Jieru Mei","Qing Liu","Huangjie Zheng","Yuyin Zhou","Cihang Xie"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiTH0ZXRM0ZZX25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiTH0ZXRM0ZZX25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/li25ch.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["data-quality","recaptioning","webdata","vlm-pretrain"]},{"id":"LiuHQHW0Y25","title":"Elucidating the design space of language models for image generation","authors":["Xuantong Liu","Shaozhe Hao","Xianbiao Qi","Tianyang Hu","Jun Wang","Rong Xiao","Yuan Yao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiuHQHW0Y25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiuHQHW0Y25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/liu25w.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要信息，无法确定其具体要解决的“语言模型做图像生成”的设计空间里哪一类核心矛盾（tokenizer、训练目标、AR vs diffusion、对齐损失等）。","importance":"缺少摘要信息，无法判断贡献量级与对 pretrain 的具体启示。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要信息，无法可靠概括方法设计与关键取舍。","experiments":"缺少摘要信息，无法给出模型规模、数据规模、指标与提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract is provided, so the specific “design space” question for LM-based image generation (tokenization, objective, AR vs diffusion, alignment loss, etc.) cannot be identified reliably.","importance":"Without the abstract, the contribution type and its implications for pretraining cannot be assessed.","technical_approach":"Without the abstract, the method and its key design trade-offs cannot be summarized faithfully.","experiments":"Without the abstract, model/data scale, metrics, and quantitative results cannot be reported.","authors_note":""},"tags":["image-generation","language-model","autoregressive","design-space"]},{"id":"2502.07616","title":"Tractable Transformers for Flexible Conditional Generation","authors":["Anji Liu","Xuejie Liu","Dayuan Zhao","Mathias Niepert","Yitao Liang","Guy Van den Broeck"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1e","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.07616","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiuLZNLB25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiuLZNLB25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/liu25ao.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：很多 NAR（非自回归）生成模型在无条件生成上很强，但一旦做“任意条件变量集合”的条件生成/补全查询就明显掉点，因为训练时见过的条件形态有限，模型难以泛化到未见过的条件概率查询。","importance":"贡献偏范式与建模接口：它把“条件生成泛化”明确成 NAR/diffusion LM 的关键短板，并提出可 tractable（可精确/可控计算）的 Transformer 结构来支持灵活的条件化查询，这对统一建模（any-order / infilling / multi-query）比单纯追 unconditional perplexity 更有指导意义。","technical_approach":"核心思路是构造一类 Tractable Transformers，使得对不同条件集合的概率查询在结构上可处理，而不是依赖训练时固定的 mask/顺序；论文论证性能缺口来自“未见过的 unknown-set 查询”而非单纯采样质量，并据此在模型结构或因子分解上做约束，让模型在训练与测试面对不同条件模式时仍能一致地计算/近似条件分布。取舍是：为了 tractability 往往需要对注意力/因子结构加限制，可能牺牲部分表达能力或带来工程复杂度。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体模型大小、数据集、与哪些 diffusion/NAR/AR baseline 对比、以及在 conditional generation 上的提升数字；已知的是作者展示了“unconditional 强不代表 conditional 强”，并把原因归结为条件查询泛化困难。缺少定量与任务覆盖（例如 infilling、任意子集条件化、结构化条件）使得目前难判断其在真实多任务条件生成中的收益上限。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a key gap in non-autoregressive generation: models that excel at unconditional generation can still fail badly on conditional generation when the set of observed/unknown variables at test time differs from training, i.e., they do not generalize to unseen conditional probability queries.","importance":"This is a modeling-paradigm contribution focused on the pretraining interface: it reframes conditional generalization as the central weakness of NAR/diffusion LMs and proposes a tractable Transformer family designed for flexible conditioning, which is more actionable for any-order/infill/multi-query generation than optimizing unconditional metrics alone.","technical_approach":"The approach builds Tractable Transformers where conditional queries over varying unknown sets remain computationally manageable by design, rather than being an accidental byproduct of a fixed masking/order during training; the paper argues the unconditional–conditional mismatch is driven by poor generalization to unseen query patterns and introduces structural/factorization constraints to make conditional distributions consistent across query types. The trade-off is that tractability typically requires restricting attention/factor structure, which may limit expressivity or add implementation complexity.","experiments":"The abstract does not report model sizes, datasets, baselines, or numeric gains; it mainly claims to diagnose the unconditional-vs-conditional gap and address it with the proposed architecture. Without quantitative coverage across conditional tasks (e.g., infilling, arbitrary-subset conditioning), the practical ceiling is hard to judge from the abstract alone.","authors_note":""},"tags":["non-autoregressive","diffusion-lm","tractable-model","conditional-generation"]},{"id":"LuoL00C0025","title":"Occult: Optimizing Collaborative Communications across Experts for Accelerated Parallel MoE Training and Inference","authors":["Shuqing Luo","Pingzhi Li","Jie Peng","Yang Zhao","Yu Cao","Yu Cheng","Tianlong Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LuoL00C0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LuoL00C0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/luo25f.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要信息，无法确定论文在 MoE 并行训练与推理中具体优化的是哪类“专家间协同通信”瓶颈（all-to-all、路由聚合、跨节点带宽、重计算等）。","importance":"缺少摘要信息，无法判断它是系统级吞吐优化、成本降低，还是对 MoE 训练稳定性也有影响。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要信息，无法概括 Occult 的核心机制与相对现有 MoE 通信/并行策略的差异。","experiments":"缺少摘要信息，无法给出集群规模、吞吐提升、端到端训练加速与推理延迟数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract is provided, so the exact MoE bottleneck being optimized (expert all-to-all, routing aggregation, cross-node bandwidth, recomputation, etc.) cannot be identified.","importance":"Without the abstract, we cannot judge whether this is mainly a systems throughput/cost win or also affects MoE training stability.","technical_approach":"Without the abstract, the core mechanism of Occult and how it differs from prior MoE communication/parallelization strategies cannot be summarized.","experiments":"Without the abstract, cluster scale and quantitative speedup/latency numbers cannot be reported.","authors_note":""},"tags":["moe","training","parallelism","inference","systems"]},{"id":"LuoS0CXMDW0025","title":"Sparsing Law: Towards Large Language Models with Greater Activation Sparsity","authors":["Yuqi Luo","Chenyang Song","Xu Han","Yingfa Chen","Chaojun Xiao","Xiaojun Meng","Liqun Deng","Jiansheng Wei","Zhiyuan Liu","Maosong Sun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LuoS0CXMDW0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LuoS0CXMDW0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/luo25i.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要信息，无法确定论文提出的“激活稀疏 scaling law（Sparsing Law）”具体回答什么问题（稀疏度-性能-算力的规律、训练动态、还是架构/门控设计）。","importance":"缺少摘要信息，无法判断它是经验规律总结、可指导的训练配方，还是新的稀疏化目标函数。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要信息，无法概括其实现稀疏激活的机制（门控、正则、阈值化、MoE/稀疏 FFN、token-level sparsity 等）与关键取舍。","experiments":"缺少摘要信息，无法给出模型规模、稀疏度范围、算力节省与精度变化的量化曲线。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract is provided, so it is unclear what question the proposed “Sparsing Law” answers (sparsity–quality–compute scaling, training dynamics, or architecture/gating design).","importance":"Without the abstract, we cannot assess whether this is an empirical scaling result, a practical training recipe, or a new sparsity objective.","technical_approach":"Without the abstract, the mechanism for achieving activation sparsity (gating, regularization, thresholding, MoE/sparse FFN, token-level sparsity, etc.) and its trade-offs cannot be summarized.","experiments":"Without the abstract, model scales, sparsity ranges, and compute-vs-quality curves cannot be reported.","authors_note":""},"tags":["sparsity","scaling-law","architecture","efficiency"]},{"id":"LuoZQZ0025","title":"MERIT: Maximum-normalized Element-wise Ratio for Language Model Large-batch Training","authors":["Yang Luo","Zangwei Zheng","Ziheng Qin","Zirui Zhu","Yong Liu","Yang You"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LuoZQZ0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LuoZQZ0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/luo25u.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要信息，无法确定 MERIT 具体要解决的大 batch 训练问题是哪一种（梯度爆炸/不稳定、学习率缩放失效、不同层梯度尺度不均、还是自适应优化器在大 batch 下退化）。","importance":"缺少摘要信息，无法判断它对大规模预训练的直接价值（更大 batch、更少 step、更稳 loss）与适用边界。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要信息，无法可靠解释“Maximum-normalized Element-wise Ratio”这一更新规则/归一化策略的关键机制与相对 LAMB/LARS/AdamW 的差异。","experiments":"缺少摘要信息，无法给出 batch size、模型规模、训练吞吐、收敛速度与最终指标的量化对比。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract is provided, so the specific large-batch training failure mode targeted by MERIT (instability, LR scaling breakdown, layer-wise gradient scale mismatch, optimizer degradation, etc.) cannot be identified.","importance":"Without the abstract, we cannot assess its practical value for large-scale pretraining (larger batches, fewer steps, stabler loss) or its applicability limits.","technical_approach":"Without the abstract, the mechanism behind “Maximum-normalized Element-wise Ratio” and how it differs from LAMB/LARS/AdamW cannot be summarized faithfully.","experiments":"Without the abstract, batch sizes, model scales, throughput, convergence speed, and final-metric comparisons cannot be reported.","authors_note":""},"tags":["optimization","large-batch","training-stability","language-model"]},{"id":"MayilvahananWMB25","title":"LLMs on the Line: Data Determines Loss-to-Loss Scaling Laws","authors":["Prasanna Mayilvahanan","Thaddäus Wiedemer","Sayak Mallick","Matthias Bethge","Wieland Brendel"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MayilvahananWMB25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MayilvahananWMB25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/mayilvahanan25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["scaling-law","data-quality","loss-prediction","transfer"]},{"id":"Miao000ZT25","title":"The Energy Loss Phenomenon in RLHF: A New Perspective on Mitigating Reward Hacking","authors":["Yuchun Miao","Sen Zhang","Liang Ding","Yuqi Zhang","Lefei Zhang","Dacheng Tao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Miao000ZT25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Miao000ZT25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/miao25c.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["rlhf","reward-hacking","energy-loss","alignment"]},{"id":"NguyenLBMRM25","title":"Synthetic Text Generation for Training Large Language Models via Gradient Matching","authors":["Dang Nguyen","Zeman Li","MohammadHossein Bateni","Vahab Mirrokni","Meisam Razaviyayn","Baharan Mirzasoleiman"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/NguyenLBMRM25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/NguyenLBMRM25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/nguyen25c.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["synthetic-data","data-quality","gradient-matching","llm-training"]},{"id":"2502.05003","title":"QuEST: Stable Training of LLMs with 1-Bit Weights and Activations","authors":["Andrei Panferov","Jiale Chen","Soroush Tabesh","Mahdi Nikdan","Dan Alistarh"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1f","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.05003","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Panferov0TNA25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Panferov0TNA25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/panferov25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：QAT 训练 LLM 到底能压到多低比特而不彻底失稳。此前较新的结论认为，想在训练期保持接近 FP16/BF16 的精度，8-bit 权重和激活已经接近“最优”下限；这篇工作直接挑战这个边界。","importance":"这是典型的方法级加系统级贡献，而且对预训练成本有直接意义。若结论成立，它把“可训练的有效比特宽度”从 8-bit 推到 4-bit，甚至在 1-bit 权重和激活上实现稳定收敛，这对大规模预训练的算力、显存、带宽都是实打实的冲击。对 pretrain 研究者来说，重点不只是低比特本身，而是它如何重新定义训练稳定性瓶颈。","technical_approach":"作者提出 QuEST，用于稳定 1-bit 到 4-bit 的权重与激活训练。摘要显示它的核心不是单一量化格式，而是改进了低比特训练的整体机制；虽然提供信息被截断，但可以确定作者把问题定义成 QAT 稳定性和精度保持，而不是只做后训练量化。与已有结论相比，它的关键差异是把“8-bit 是训练下限”改写为“4-bit 可竞争，1-bit 也可稳定优化”。这样的设计如果有效，通常意味着它在梯度估计、尺度校准、优化器交互或误差补偿上做了系统处理，因为单靠更硬的量化函数通常不够。","experiments":"摘要给出的最关键实验结论有两个：第一，QuEST 将此前认为 accuracy-competitive 的最优比特宽度从 8-bit 推进到 4-bit；第二，它能让 1-bit 权重和激活稳定收敛。这个表述已经说明它不只是 toy setting。遗憾的是，摘要没有给出模型规模、训练 token 数、具体精度差距或 baseline 名称，因此不能判断它在多大模型上成立，也无法评估 1-bit 的最终质量与标准精度之间还有多大差距。","authors_note":"作者列表中可确认 Dan Alistarh。若为其常见团队背景，这通常与高效训练、量化和系统优化方向高度相关，但给定信息不足以确认机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a hard practical question: how far can QAT for LLMs be pushed before training becomes unstable or accuracy collapses? Recent evidence had suggested that around 8-bit weights and activations was the lowest competitive regime for training, and this work explicitly pushes below that boundary.","importance":"This is a method-plus-systems contribution with direct relevance to pretraining cost. If the claim holds broadly, it moves the practical training frontier from 8-bit down to 4-bit, while also enabling stable convergence with 1-bit weights and activations. That matters not just for compression, but for the basic compute, memory, and bandwidth economics of large-scale training.","technical_approach":"The authors propose QuEST, a method for stable low-bit training down to 1-bit weights and activations. The abstract does not expose all details, but it is clear that the contribution is not just a new quantizer: it targets end-to-end QAT stability and accuracy retention. The main difference from prior work is the claim that 8-bit is not the practical lower limit for competitive training. If this works, the method is likely addressing the usual failure modes of extreme low-bit optimization, such as scale mismatch, poor gradient surrogates, or optimizer interaction, rather than only changing the quantization rule itself.","experiments":"Two headline results are explicit in the abstract: QuEST makes 4-bit training accuracy-competitive with standard higher-precision baselines, and it achieves stable convergence even at 1-bit weights and activations. Those are meaningful claims and suggest the evaluation goes beyond toy setups. However, the abstract does not provide model sizes, token budgets, exact accuracy gaps, or baseline names, so it is not yet possible to judge how large the models are or how close the final quality remains to FP16/BF16 training.","authors_note":"Dan Alistarh is a notable author on the paper. He is well known for work on efficient training, quantization, and systems for large models. The institution cannot be confirmed from the provided information."},"tags":["quantization-aware-training","1-bit","training-stability","llm-training"],"notable_authors":["Dan Alistarh"]},{"id":"2412.18603","title":"Long-Form Speech Generation with Spoken Language Models","authors":["Se Jin Park","Julian Salazar","Aren Jansen","Keisuke Kinoshita","Yong Man Ro","R. J. Skerry-Ryan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$20","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.18603","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ParkSJKRS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ParkSJKRS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/park25k.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是：textless spoken language model 很难稳定生成超过几十秒的长语音，原因不是单一的，而是语音 token 时间分辨率太高、长序列训练和外推不稳、推理时内存成本也过高。这个问题现在值得重点做，因为语音助手和多媒体生成都开始要求分钟级连续语音，而不是短句 TTS。","importance":"这是语音 LM / 新模态预训练里相当重要的方法级工作。它直接触碰了 spoken LM 的核心瓶颈：如果长程一致性做不起来，语音作为统一 LM 模态就始终停留在短片段玩具阶段。对基座研究的启示是，长序列建模架构选择在语音里比在文本里更致命，因为 token rate 高得多，Transformer 的二次复杂度和上下文外推问题会更早暴露。","technical_approach":"作者提出 SpeechSSM，据称是首个能在单次解码会话中学习并采样长达 16 分钟语音的 speech language model family，而且不借助文本中间表示。关键路线很明确：不用标准 Transformer 直接硬扛超长语音 token 序列，而是利用近年的线性时间序列建模进展，也就是 SSM 一类架构，来控制训练长度、推理内存和长期一致性。这个设计背后的判断是对的：语音长程生成的主要瓶颈先是时序长度和状态保持，再才是局部声学细节。与 AudioLM/VALL-E 风格依赖分层 token 和较短上下文的做法相比，SpeechSSM更强调原生长上下文能力。","experiments":"摘要给出的最关键数字是：SpeechSSM 能在单次解码中生成长达 16 分钟的朗读或即兴语音，并且在长程连贯性上显著超过现有 Transformer spoken LM。这里的比较重点不是短句自然度，而是多分钟级 coherence。摘要没有给出模型参数、tokenizer 细节、训练数据规模、评测指标或相对提升幅度，因此目前只能确认其在“可扩展到多分钟语音生成”这一点上有实质推进。","authors_note":"作者列表中可确认 Julian Salazar、Aren Jansen、Keisuke Kinoshita，这些名字与语音生成、语音表征和 spoken LM 方向有较强相关性。机构信息无法从给定内容确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a central bottleneck in textless spoken language modeling: current models struggle to generate plausible speech beyond a few tens of seconds. The issue is structural—speech has a much higher token rate than text, which makes long-range coherence, sequence extrapolation, and inference memory substantially harder.","importance":"This is an important method-level contribution for speech LM and multimodal pretraining. If spoken language models cannot sustain coherence over minutes, they remain limited as foundation models for audio-native assistants or long-form media generation. The paper matters because it attacks the sequence-modeling bottleneck directly rather than treating long-form speech as a downstream stitching problem.","technical_approach":"The authors propose SpeechSSM, described as the first spoken language model family that can learn from and sample long-form speech, up to 16 minutes, in a single decoding session and without text intermediates. The key design choice is to replace standard Transformer-style long-context modeling with recent linear-time sequence modeling, likely state space model variants, to better manage sequence length, memory, and long-range state retention. This is a sensible trade-off: for long-form speech, scaling the temporal model is usually more important than maximizing local attention flexibility.","experiments":"The headline empirical claim is clear: SpeechSSM can generate up to 16 minutes of read or extemporaneous speech in one decoding run and greatly surpasses Transformer spoken LMs on coherence in that long-form regime. The abstract focuses on sustained generation length and coherence rather than short-form naturalness. It does not provide model sizes, tokenizer details, training data scale, evaluation metrics, or exact gains, so the quantitative margin and the source of improvement cannot be pinned down from the provided information.","authors_note":"Notable authors include Julian Salazar, Aren Jansen, and Keisuke Kinoshita, all closely associated with speech generation, representation learning, or spoken language modeling. The institutions cannot be confirmed from the provided information."},"tags":["speech-lm","long-form-generation","spoken-language-model","autoregressive"],"notable_authors":["Julian Salazar","Aren Jansen","Keisuke Kinoshita"]},{"id":"2506.07903","title":"Diffuse Everything: Multimodal Diffusion Models on Arbitrary State Spaces","authors":["Kevin Rojas","Yuchen Zhu","Sichen Zhu","Felix X.-F. Ye","Molei Tao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$21","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.07903","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/RojasZZYT25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/RojasZZYT25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/rojas25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion","multimodal","tokenizer","unified-modeling"]},{"id":"ShenZQHCLWDC025","title":"Satori: Reinforcement Learning with Chain-of-Action-Thought Enhances LLM Reasoning via Autoregressive Search","authors":["Maohao Shen","Guangtao Zeng","Zhenting Qi","Zhang-Wei Hong","Zhenfang Chen","Wei Lu","Gregory W. Wornell","Subhro Das","David Daniel Cox","Chuang Gan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ShenZQHCLWDC025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ShenZQHCLWDC025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/shen25o.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["rl","reasoning","chain-of-thought","autoregressive-search"]},{"id":"2503.19123","title":"Overcoming Vocabulary Mismatch: Vocabulary-agnostic Teacher Guided Language Modeling","authors":["Haebin Shin","Lei Ji","Xiao Liu","Yeyun Gong"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$22","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.19123","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Shin0LG25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Shin0LG25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/shin25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["knowledge-distillation","tokenizer","vocabulary-mismatch","pretraining"]},{"id":"SuZXJTZ25","title":"Token Assorted: Mixing Latent and Text Tokens for Improved Language Model Reasoning","authors":["DiJia Su","Hanlin Zhu","Yingchen Xu","Jiantao Jiao","Yuandong Tian","Qinqing Zheng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SuZXJTZ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SuZXJTZ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/su25g.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["reasoning","latent-token","token-mixing","language-modeling"]},{"id":"2506.07956","title":"Language Models over Canonical Byte-Pair Encodings","authors":["Tim Vieira","Tianyu Liu","Clemente Pasti","Yahya Emara","Brian DuSell","Benjamin LeBrun","Mario Giulianelli","Juan Luis Gastaldi","Timothy J. O&apos;Donnell","Ryan Cotterell"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$23","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.07956","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Vieira0PEDLGGOC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Vieira0PEDLGGOC25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/vieira25b.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["tokenizer","bpe","language-modeling","probability-mass"]},{"id":"2411.00774","title":"Freeze-Omni: A Smart and Low Latency Speech-to-speech Dialogue Model with Frozen LLM","authors":["Xiong Wang","Yangze Li","Chaoyou Fu","Yike Zhang","Yunhang Shen","Lei Xie","Ke Li","Xing Sun","Long Ma"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$24","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.00774","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangLFZS000M25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangLFZS000M25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wang25aw.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["speech-lm","multimodal","latency","frozen-llm"]},{"id":"2505.06699","title":"Model Steering: Learning with a Reference Model Improves Generalization Bounds and Scaling Laws","authors":["Xiyuan Wei","Ming Lin","Fanjiang Ye","Fengguang Song","Liangliang Cao","My T. Thai","Tianbao Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$25","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.06699","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WeiLYSCTY25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WeiLYSCTY25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wei25f.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"用一个已训练好的参考模型来指导目标模型训练（通过数据选择或加权）这一范式已在大模型预训练中被广泛使用（如DoReMi、DSIR等），但缺乏统一的理论理解，导致实践中方法选择和调参缺少原则性指导。本文要为这类'model steering'范式建立理论框架。","importance":"对pretrain数据配比和数据选择研究有直接价值。这是范式级的理论贡献：将散落的reference-model-guided数据选择方法（包括大模型训练中常用的ad-hoc做法）统一到DRO框架下，给出了泛化界和scaling law层面的理论解释。对理解为什么reference model能改善数据效率、以及如何设计更好的数据选择策略有指导意义。","technical_approach":"提出DRRho risk minimization框架，根植于分布鲁棒优化（DRO）。核心思路是：用参考模型定义一个数据分布上的不确定集，目标模型在这个不确定集上做最坏情况优化，等价于对数据做自适应加权。理论上证明了这种方法相比无参考模型训练能获得更紧的泛化界和更好的数据效率。与已有ad-hoc方法的区别在于有原则性的DRO推导，而非启发式设计。","experiments":"摘要截断，具体实验细节不完整。从描述推断，应包含与无参考模型训练、已有数据选择方法的对比，以及泛化性能和scaling law的实证验证。","authors_note":"作者包括Liangliang Cao，曾在Google等机构从事大规模ML研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Using a trained reference model to guide target model training via data selection/weighting is widely practiced in foundation model pretraining (e.g., DoReMi, DSIR), but lacks a unified theoretical understanding, leading to suboptimal ad-hoc implementations. This work formalizes this 'model steering' paradigm.","importance":"A paradigm-level theoretical contribution directly relevant to pretrain data curation. It unifies scattered reference-model-guided data selection methods under a DRO framework, providing generalization bounds and scaling law insights. Offers principled guidance for designing better data selection strategies in pretraining.","technical_approach":"Proposes DRRho risk minimization, grounded in Distributionally Robust Optimization. The reference model defines an uncertainty set over data distributions; the target model optimizes for the worst case within this set, effectively performing adaptive data reweighting. Theoretically shown to yield tighter generalization bounds and better data efficiency than training without a reference model. The key distinction from prior ad-hoc methods is the principled DRO derivation.","experiments":"Abstract truncated; full experimental details unavailable. Expected to include comparisons against no-reference training and existing data selection methods, with empirical validation of generalization and scaling law predictions.","authors_note":"Liangliang Cao has worked on large-scale ML research at Google and other institutions."},"tags":["data-selection","scaling-law","reference-model","generalization"],"notable_authors":["Liangliang Cao"]},{"id":"WenZZTLZL0PF25","title":"DiffusionVLA: Scaling Robot Foundation Models via Unified Diffusion and Autoregression","authors":["Junjie Wen","Yichen Zhu","Minjie Zhu","Zhibin Tang","Jinming Li","Zhongyi Zhou","Xiaoyu Liu","Chaomin Shen","Yaxin Peng","Feifei Feng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WenZZTLZL0PF25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WenZZTLZL0PF25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wen25g.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"机器人基础模型需要同时处理高层语言指令理解和低层连续动作生成，现有方法要么用纯AR建模动作（离散化损失信息），要么用纯diffusion（缺乏语言理解能力）。本文提出统一diffusion和autoregression来构建可扩展的机器人基础模型。","importance":"对AR+diffusion联合建模范式有直接参考价值。虽然应用场景是机器人，但其核心贡献——如何在一个模型中统一离散token的AR建模和连续信号的diffusion建模——与Transfusion等跨模态统一预训练工作属于同一研究脉络。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失，无法提供完整技术细节。从标题DiffusionVLA推断，采用Vision-Language-Action架构，将diffusion用于连续动作空间建模，AR用于语言/视觉token处理，两者在统一框架内联合训练。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法提供实验细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Robot foundation models need both high-level language understanding and low-level continuous action generation. Pure AR discretizes actions losing information; pure diffusion lacks language understanding. This work unifies diffusion and autoregression for scalable robot foundation models.","importance":"Directly relevant to the AR+diffusion unified modeling paradigm. Though applied to robotics, the core contribution—unifying discrete token AR modeling with continuous signal diffusion in one model—aligns with the Transfusion line of cross-modal unified pretraining research.","technical_approach":"Abstract unavailable for full details. From the title DiffusionVLA, it likely uses a Vision-Language-Action architecture with diffusion for continuous action space and AR for language/vision tokens, jointly trained in a unified framework.","experiments":"Abstract unavailable; no experimental details can be provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","autoregression","robot-foundation-model","unified-modeling"]},{"id":"XieTC25","title":"Chameleon: A Flexible Data-mixing Framework for Language Model Pretraining and Finetuning","authors":["Wanyun Xie","Francesco Tonin","Volkan Cevher"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/XieTC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/XieTC25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/xie25i.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["data-mixture","pretraining","finetuning","curriculum"]},{"id":"2411.19574","title":"KV Shifting Attention Enhances Language Modeling","authors":["Mingyu Xu","Bingning Wang","Weipeng Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"The current large language models are mainly based on decode-only structure transformers, which have great in-context learning (ICL) capabilities. It is generally believed that the important foundation of its ICL capability is the induction heads mechanism, which requires at least two layers attention. In order to more efficiently implement the ability of the model's induction, we revisit the induction heads mechanism and proposed a KV shifting attention. We theoretically prove that the KV shifting attention reducing the model's requirements for the depth and width of the induction heads mechanism. Our experimental results demonstrate that KV shifting attention is beneficial to learning induction heads and language modeling, which lead to better performance or faster convergence from toy models to the pre-training models with more than 10 B parameters.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.19574","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/XuWC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/XuWC25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/xu25ac.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文想解决的是：标准 decode-only Transformer 的 induction 能力通常需要至少两层注意力配合，导致模型要用更深或更宽的结构才能学到有效的 in-context pattern copying。作者认为这不是语言建模目标本身要求的，而是注意力实现 induction 的方式不够直接，因此值得从算子层改。","importance":"这是一个小而硬的建模改动，重要性在于它直指 ICL 常被讨论的一个机械基础——induction heads。若结论成立，它意味着部分上下文学习能力可以通过更合适的 attention 参数化更早出现、以更低深度出现；这对小模型、收敛速度和架构搜索都有启发，但目前更像机制导向的架构改进，不是范式级变化。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 KV shifting attention：通过对 key/value 做位移式构造，让模型更直接表达序列中“匹配前缀后复制后续”的 induction 行为。它不是增加外部记忆，也不是改训练目标，而是把原本需要多层组合实现的模式匹配-转移过程压缩进更高效的注意力形式。作者声称有理论证明，表明该设计降低了实现 induction head 所需的深度和宽度条件；和标准注意力相比，关键差别在于它显式编码了相邻位置或偏移位置之间的转移结构，因此学习难度更低。","experiments":"摘要只明确说从 toy models 到较大语言模型都观察到更好性能或更快收敛，但没有给出参数量、数据规模和具体指标，所以不能判断收益量级。可以较可信地推断，实验重点应包括 induction 相关合成任务、困惑度或下游 LM 指标、以及收敛曲线比较。若该方法真正有效，最有价值的 ablation 应该是：收益在浅层/窄层模型上是否更明显，以及当模型足够大时，这个结构优势会不会被容量掩盖。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether standard decode-only Transformers need so much depth and width to realize induction-like in-context learning, or whether the attention operator itself is making induction unnecessarily hard. The motivation is that induction heads are widely viewed as a core mechanism behind ICL, yet in vanilla attention they typically emerge only through multi-layer composition.","importance":"This is a focused architectural paper with potentially meaningful implications. If the claim holds, part of ICL can be made easier to learn by changing the attention parameterization rather than scaling model depth. That matters for small models, convergence speed, and mechanistic architecture design, though it is still an incremental paradigm-level contribution rather than a new training framework.","technical_approach":"The method is KV shifting attention, an attention variant that shifts keys and values so the model can express prefix-match-then-copy behavior more directly. It does not change the language modeling objective and does not add an external memory; it changes the operator so that the transition structure needed for induction is more explicit. The stated theory claim is that this reduces the depth and width requirements for implementing induction heads compared with standard attention.","experiments":"The abstract only says the method improves performance or accelerates convergence from toy settings to larger language models, with no model sizes, data sizes, or metric values. So the empirical magnitude is unclear. The likely important evidence is on synthetic induction tasks, language modeling metrics such as perplexity, and convergence curves. The most informative ablations would test whether gains are strongest in shallow or narrow models, and whether the benefit shrinks once scale makes standard induction easy anyway.","authors_note":""},"tags":["attention","language-modeling","architecture","icl"]},{"id":"2507.09834","title":"Generative Audio Language Modeling with Continuous-valued Tokens and Masked Next-Token Prediction","authors":["Shu-Wen Yang","Byeonggeun Kim","Kuan-Po Huang","Qingming Tang","Huy Phan","Bo-Ru Lu","Harshavardhan Sundar","Shalini Ghosh","Hung-yi Lee","Chieh-Chi Kao","Chao Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$26","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.09834","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YangKHTPLSGLKW25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YangKHTPLSGLKW25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/yang25n.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"音频生成中，将连续信号强行离散化为 token 会丢失信息，但现有 audio LM 几乎都依赖离散 codec token。本文探索不使用离散 token、直接在连续值 token 上做自回归语言建模的音频生成方案。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：连续值 token + token-wise diffusion 是绕过离散化瓶颈的一条可行路线，且在音频域已经给出了比 AudioGen 显著更好的结果。这为多模态统一建模中'是否一定要离散化'这个问题提供了新的实验证据。","technical_approach":"核心是用 causal LM 框架，但每个 token 位置不做 softmax 分类，而是用 token-wise diffusion 来建模下一个连续值 token 的分布。此外提出 masked next-token prediction 任务，在自回归生成过程中引入 mask 机制，兼顾局部上下文利用。关键选择是保留 causal 结构（兼容 LLM 生态），同时用 diffusion 替代离散 codebook 的量化损失。","experiments":"在 AudioCaps 上相比 AudioGen（离散 token 方案）取得 FAD 20% 和 KL 散度 40% 的相对提升。具体模型规模和数据量未在摘要中披露。masked next-token prediction 任务对生成质量有额外增益。","authors_note":"作者包括 Shu-Wen Yang、Byeonggeun Kim 等，Shu-Wen Yang 此前在语音自监督学习（SUPERB benchmark）方面有代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Discretizing continuous audio into tokens loses information, yet most audio LMs rely on discrete codec tokens. This work explores autoregressive audio generation directly on continuous-valued tokens, bypassing discrete quantization entirely.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It provides concrete evidence that token-wise diffusion over continuous tokens can outperform discrete-token baselines in audio generation, informing the broader debate on whether discretization is necessary for unified multimodal LMs.","technical_approach":"A causal LM generates continuous-valued tokens, where each position's distribution is modeled by a token-wise diffusion process instead of softmax classification. Additionally, a masked next-token prediction task is introduced to improve context utilization during autoregressive generation. The key design choice is retaining the causal structure for LLM compatibility while replacing the codebook bottleneck with diffusion.","experiments":"On AudioCaps, the method achieves 20% relative improvement in FAD and 40% in KL divergence over AudioGen. Model scale and data size are not detailed in the abstract. The masked next-token prediction task provides additional gains.","authors_note":"Authors include Shu-Wen Yang, known for the SUPERB benchmark in speech self-supervised learning."},"tags":["audio-lm","continuous-tokens","masked-prediction","autoregressive"],"notable_authors":["Shu-Wen Yang"]},{"id":"2504.10344","title":"ALMTokenizer: A Low-bitrate and Semantic-rich Audio Codec Tokenizer for Audio Language Modeling","authors":["Dongchao Yang","Songxiang Liu","Haohan Guo","Jiankun Zhao","Yuanyuan Wang","Helin Wang","Zeqian Ju","Xubo Liu","Xueyuan Chen","Xu Tan","Xixin Wu","Helen M. Meng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$27","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.10344","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YangLGZWWJLC0WM25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YangLGZWWJLC0WM25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/yang25q.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"现有音频 codec tokenizer（如 Encodec）逐帧独立编码，不利用帧间上下文，导致在低比特率下语义信息丢失严重，限制了 audio language model 的建模效率。","importance":"方法级贡献，直接影响音频 LM 的 tokenizer 设计。低比特率 + 高语义保留意味着 LM 需要建模的序列更短、每个 token 信息密度更高，这对音频 LM 的 scaling 和训练效率有直接好处。","technical_approach":"提出 ALMTokenizer，核心创新是 query-based compression：用一组可学习的 query token 通过注意力机制聚合跨帧上下文信息，而非逐帧独立量化。这样 codec 能在更少的 token 数量下保留更完整的语义和声学信息。与 Encodec 的关键区别在于显式建模帧间依赖，而非仅靠 RVQ 层级结构。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体数字和 baseline 对比细节。核心卖点是在低比特率条件下保持语义丰富度，适配下游 audio LM 任务。","authors_note":"作者包括 Dongchao Yang，此前在音频生成和语音合成方向有多篇工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing audio codec tokenizers like Encodec encode frames independently without cross-frame context, leading to poor semantic retention at low bitrates and inefficient sequences for audio language models.","importance":"Method-level contribution to audio tokenizer design. Lower bitrate with richer semantics means shorter sequences and higher information density per token, directly benefiting audio LM training efficiency and scaling.","technical_approach":"ALMTokenizer introduces a query-based compression strategy: learnable query tokens aggregate cross-frame context via attention, replacing the frame-independent encoding of prior codecs. The key distinction from Encodec is explicit modeling of inter-frame dependencies rather than relying solely on RVQ hierarchy.","experiments":"Specific numbers and baselines are not detailed in the abstract. The main claim is maintaining semantic richness at low bitrates for downstream audio LM tasks.","authors_note":"Authors include Dongchao Yang, who has prior work in audio generation and speech synthesis."},"tags":["audio-tokenizer","audio-lm","codec","low-bitrate"],"notable_authors":["Dongchao Yang"]},{"id":"2502.04375","title":"An Analysis for Reasoning Bias of Language Models with Small Initialization","authors":["Junjie Yao","Zhongwang Zhang","Zhi-Qin John Xu"],"institutions":["Shanghai Jiao Tong University"],"abstract":"$28","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.04375","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YaoZX25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YaoZX25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/yao25g.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer LLM 的参数初始化尺度如何影响模型的学习偏好——是倾向推理还是记忆？这个问题此前缺乏系统研究。","importance":"分析级贡献，对 pretrain 实践有直接启示。发现小初始化尺度让模型偏好推理任务、大初始化偏好记忆任务，这意味着初始化策略不只是影响训练稳定性，还会系统性地影响模型能力的分布。对 pretrain 超参选择和训练动态理解都有价值。","technical_approach":"通过真实数据集和精心设计的 anchor function 验证初始化尺度对推理/记忆偏好的影响。进一步分析初始训练动态，发现 embedding 空间和 self-attention 机制在塑造学习偏好中起关键作用。提供了理论框架从频率角度解释这一现象。","experiments":"在真实数据集和合成 anchor function 上验证了推理偏好（reasoning bias）。分析了 embedding 和 attention 组件在初始训练阶段的行为差异。具体模型规模和数字未在摘要中给出。","authors_note":"作者包括 Zhi-Qin John Xu（上海交大/SJTU，在神经网络频率偏好和训练动态方面有系列工作，如 frequency principle）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How does parameter initialization scale affect whether a Transformer LLM prefers reasoning vs. memorization tasks? This has not been systematically studied before.","importance":"Analysis-level contribution with direct pretrain implications. The finding that smaller initialization favors reasoning while larger initialization favors memorization means initialization is not just about training stability—it systematically shapes the distribution of model capabilities. Valuable for hyperparameter selection and understanding training dynamics.","technical_approach":"Validates the reasoning bias through real datasets and carefully designed anchor functions. Analyzes early training dynamics, identifying embedding space and self-attention as pivotal components shaping learning biases. Provides a theoretical framework from a frequency perspective to explain the phenomenon.","experiments":"Reasoning bias validated on real datasets and synthetic anchor functions. Analysis of embedding and attention behavior during early training. Specific model scales and numbers not provided in the abstract.","authors_note":"Authors include Zhi-Qin John Xu (SJTU, known for the frequency principle and neural network training dynamics)."},"tags":["initialization","training-dynamics","reasoning-bias","transformer"],"notable_authors":["Zhi-Qin John Xu"]},{"id":"2506.10952","title":"Domain2Vec: Vectorizing Datasets to Find the Optimal Data Mixture without Training","authors":["Mozhi Zhang","Howe Tissue","Lu Wang","Xipeng Qiu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$29","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.10952","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhangTWQ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhangTWQ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhang25bu.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：能不能不真正训练语言模型，就先判断一组候选数据源该怎么配比。过去数据混合通常靠经验、少量试训、或 expensive 的 scaling sweep 来找，成本高且迁移性差；作者试图把“数据集”本身向量化，从分布匹配角度直接预测更优 mixture。","importance":"这是典型的数据级工作，对预训练很有现实价值。它如果成立，意义不在于把最优配比做得绝对更好，而在于把找 mixture 的成本从“训练很多次模型”降到“训练一个数据表示器再做推断”；对大规模 pretrain，哪怕只少走几轮试训，节省都很可观。更重要的是，它把数据配比问题从启发式搜索转成了可解释的分布对齐问题。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Domain2Vec：先构造一个 meta-domain 词表，再把任意数据集分解成这些 meta-domain 的线性组合，得到一个 domain vector。作者依赖一个 Distribution Alignment Assumption（DA^2）：训练集和验证集分布越对齐，验证 loss 越低。基于这个假设，问题就变成在候选数据源上找一个 mixture，使其 domain vector 更接近目标验证分布。这个设计的关键取舍是：它放弃了直接模拟完整训练动态，转而用较粗粒度但训练无关的分布表示做代理，因此速度快、可解释，但上限取决于 meta-domain 词表是否足够表达真实数据差异，以及 DA^2 在多任务、多阶段训练里是否稳定成立。","experiments":"摘要没有给出具体模型规模、数据量和数值结果，因此不能报告准确提升幅度。可以确认的是，作者声称在 training-free 设定下能识别更优的数据 mixture，并将 domain vector 用于数据分析与选择。对这类工作，真正需要关注的实验点通常是三类：一是与 random / heuristic mixture、少量 trial training、已有 data selection 方法相比的接近度；二是跨模型规模与跨验证集目标的稳健性；三是 meta-domain 数量和分类器质量对 mixture 推荐结果的敏感性。摘要未提供这些数字，结论应保守看待。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a very practical question: can we choose pretraining data mixtures without actually training the model? Today mixture design is usually driven by heuristics, expensive pilot runs, or repeated scaling sweeps. The authors try to replace that loop with a dataset representation that predicts good mixtures from distribution alignment alone.","importance":"This is a data-centric contribution with clear pretraining relevance. If the approach holds up, the biggest win is not necessarily finding a globally better mixture, but reducing mixture search from many training runs to a training-free inference step. That matters because data mixture tuning is one of the most expensive and least principled parts of large-scale pretraining.","technical_approach":"The core idea is Domain2Vec: represent any dataset as a linear combination of learned meta-domains, producing a domain vector over a shared vocabulary. The method relies on a Distribution Alignment Assumption, namely that lower validation loss is achieved when the training distribution is better aligned with the validation distribution. Under that assumption, mixture selection becomes a vector matching problem rather than a model training problem. The main trade-off is clear: the method gives up direct simulation of optimization and uses a coarse but cheap proxy. That makes it scalable and interpretable, but its ceiling depends on how expressive the meta-domain basis is and how often the alignment assumption survives real multi-stage pretraining settings.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide model sizes, dataset sizes, baselines, or exact gains, so there are no trustworthy numbers to report. What can be said is that the authors claim the domain vectors can identify better pretraining mixtures in a training-free way and support broader dataset analysis. For a paper like this, the critical evidence would be how closely its recommended mixtures match those found by actual training, how robust the method is across scales and targets, and how sensitive it is to the number and quality of meta-domains. Those details are not available here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-mixture","data-quality","scaling-law","dataset-selection"]},{"id":"2504.16431","title":"Target Concrete Score Matching: A Holistic Framework for Discrete Diffusion","authors":["Ruixiang Zhang","Shuangfei Zhai","Yizhe Zhang","James Thornton","Zijing Ou","Joshua M. Susskind","Navdeep Jaitly"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2a","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.16431","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhangZ0TOSJ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhangZ0TOSJ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhang25cw.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：离散 diffusion 模型缺少一个统一、可扩展到预训练和后训练的目标函数。过去 D3PM、SEDD、MDLM 一类方法各自有自己的训练目标，彼此关系不够统一；更麻烦的是，离散 diffusion 在 reward fine-tuning、preference optimization、AR teacher distillation 这些 post-train 场景下工具箱还很弱。","importance":"这是明显的范式级工作，且和 pretrain/posttrain 闭环直接相关。它的重要性不只是“又一个 discrete diffusion loss”，而是试图把离散 diffusion 的训练、偏好微调、奖励优化、从 AR 模型蒸馏，统一到同一个目标里。如果这个统一是干净的，它会显著降低 diffusion LM 生态的碎片化，也让非 AR 生成模型更容易接入今天的对齐与蒸馏基础设施。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Target Concrete Score Matching（TCSM），一个围绕 concrete score 估计构造的统一目标。作者的关键设计不是继续为某一种 corruption process 或某一种参数化单独推损失，而是定义一个更一般的目标，使许多已有离散 diffusion 方法都变成它的特例。更有价值的是，这个目标天然延伸到 post-training：可以用 reward function 或 preference data 做 fine-tuning，也可以从预训练好的 AR 模型蒸馏知识到 diffusion 模型。这样设计有效的原因是，它把训练信号统一成了对离散空间中某种 score/相对概率结构的估计，而不是绑死在 teacher forcing 式 next-token likelihood 上。边界在于：统一目标不等于统一优化难度，离散 diffusion 仍然可能受采样步数、噪声调度和方差控制影响。","experiments":"摘要没有给出模型大小、数据规模、具体 benchmark 和数值提升，因此无法报告精确结果。可以确定的实验主张有三点：第一，TCSM 能直接从数据样本做离散 diffusion 预训练；第二，已有多种离散 diffusion 方法可被还原为它的特例；第三，同一目标还能支持 reward/preference fine-tuning 以及从 AR 模型蒸馏。这类论文最值得关注的实验通常是：和 D3PM/SEDD/MDLM 的同规模比较，post-train 后在 win rate 或 reward 上的改善，以及蒸馏后生成质量/推理成本的变化。摘要未给数字，但问题设定本身很强。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a real gap in discrete diffusion: there is still no single objective that cleanly spans pretraining and post-training. Existing approaches such as D3PM, SEDD, and MDLM use related but fragmented objectives, and discrete diffusion has had a much weaker story than autoregressive models when it comes to reward tuning, preference optimization, or teacher distillation.","importance":"This is a paradigm-level contribution with direct relevance to the pretrain-posttrain loop. The significance is not merely another loss for discrete diffusion. The more important claim is that pretraining, preference or reward fine-tuning, and distillation from autoregressive teachers can all be expressed within one framework. If that unification is technically sound, it lowers fragmentation in diffusion LM research and makes non-AR models easier to integrate into today’s alignment stack.","technical_approach":"The method is Target Concrete Score Matching, a unified objective built around estimating a concrete score in discrete spaces. The key move is not to derive yet another loss tied to one corruption process or one parameterization, but to define a broader objective under which many existing discrete diffusion methods become special cases. More importantly, the same objective extends to post-training: it can use reward functions or preference data, and it can distill knowledge from pretrained autoregressive teachers. The design is compelling because it shifts the supervision target toward score-like relative probability structure rather than teacher-forced next-token likelihood alone. The boundary is that a unified objective does not remove the usual optimization and sampling issues of discrete diffusion, such as step count, schedule design, and variance.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide model sizes, dataset scales, benchmarks, or exact gains, so no numeric summary can be trusted. What is clear is that the authors claim three capabilities: direct pretraining of discrete diffusion from samples, recovery of multiple prior methods as special cases, and extension to reward/preference fine-tuning plus AR-teacher distillation. For this kind of paper, the decisive evidence would be same-scale comparisons against D3PM/SEDD/MDLM, post-training gains in reward or preference win rate, and the quality-cost trade-off after distillation. Those details are not available in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["discrete-diffusion","diffusion-lm","score-matching","training-objective"],"notable_authors":["Shuangfei Zhai","Yizhe Zhang"]},{"id":"2403.10266","title":"DSP: Dynamic Sequence Parallelism for Multi-Dimensional Transformers","authors":["Xuanlei Zhao","Shenggan Cheng","Chang Chen","Zangwei Zheng","Ziming Liu","Zheming Yang","Yang You"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2b","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.10266","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhaoCCZLY025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhaoCCZLY025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhao25g.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["sequence-parallelism","long-context","multi-dimensional-transformer","distributed-training"]},{"id":"2410.22316","title":"Understanding Synthetic Context Extension via Retrieval Heads","authors":["Xinyu Zhao","Fangcong Yin","Greg Durrett"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2c","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.22316","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhaoYD25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhaoYD25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhao25ad.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["long-context","synthetic-data","retrieval-heads","context-extension"]},{"id":"2502.07490","title":"Mask-Enhanced Autoregressive Prediction: Pay Less Attention to Learn More","authors":["Xialie Zhuang","Zhikai Jia","Jianjin Li","Zhenyu Zhang","Li Shen","Zheng Cao","Shiwei Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2d","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.07490","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhuangJL00C025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhuangJL00C025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhuang25b.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["masked-lm","autoregressive","training-objective","in-context-learning","retrieval"]},{"id":"2501.18858","title":"BRiTE: Bootstrapping Reinforced Thinking Process to Enhance Language Model Reasoning","authors":["Han Zhong","Yutong Yin","Shenao Zhang","Xiaojun Xu","Yuanxin Liu","Yifei Zuo","Zhihan Liu","Boyi Liu","Sirui Zheng","Hongyi Guo","Liwei Wang","Mingyi Hong","Zhaoran Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2e","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.18858","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0001YZXLZL0ZG0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0001YZXLZL0ZG0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhong25e.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["reasoning","rl","cot","post-training"]},{"id":"2410.11842","title":"MoH: Multi-Head Attention as Mixture-of-Head Attention","authors":["Peng Jin","Bo Zhu","Li Yuan","Shuicheng Yan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2f","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.11842","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0001Z0Y25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0001Z0Y25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/jin25l.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["attention","architecture","efficiency","moe"]},{"id":"2502.03492","title":"Teaching Language Models to Critique via Reinforcement Learning","authors":["Zhihui Xie","Jie Chen","Liyu Chen","Weichao Mao","Jingjing Xu","Lingpeng Kong"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Teaching large language models (LLMs) to critique and refine their outputs is crucial for building systems that can iteratively improve, yet it is fundamentally limited by the ability to provide accurate judgments and actionable suggestions. In this work, we study LLM critics for code generation and propose $\\texttt{CTRL}$, a framework for $\\texttt{C}$ritic $\\texttt{T}$raining via $\\texttt{R}$einforcement $\\texttt{L}$earning, which trains a critic model to generate feedback that maximizes correction performance for a fixed generator model without human supervision. Our results demonstrate that critics trained with $\\texttt{CTRL}$ significantly enhance pass rates and mitigate compounding errors across both base and stronger generator models. Furthermore, we show that these critic models act as accurate generative reward models and enable test-time scaling through iterative critique-revision, achieving up to 106.1% relative improvements across challenging code generation benchmarks.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.03492","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0002CCMXK25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0002CCMXK25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/xie25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["rl","critique","code","post-training"]},{"id":"2502.03678","title":"Reflection-Window Decoding: Text Generation with Selective Refinement","authors":["Zeyu Tang","Zhenhao Chen","Xiangchen Song","Loka Li","Yunlong Deng","Yifan Shen","Guangyi Chen","Peter Spirtes","Kun Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$30","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.03678","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0002CSLD00S025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0002CSLD00S025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/tang25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["decoding","non-autoregressive","refinement","generation"]},{"id":"2506.01901","title":"Understanding Overadaptation in Supervised Fine-Tuning: The Role of Ensemble Methods","authors":["Yifan Hao","Xingyuan Pan","Hanning Zhang","Chenlu Ye","Rui Pan","Tong Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$31","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.01901","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0002PZY0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0002PZY0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/hao25d.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["sft","forgetting","ensemble","adaptation"]},{"id":"2502.01951","title":"On the Emergence of Position Bias in Transformers","authors":["Xinyi Wu","Yifei Wang","Stefanie Jegelka","Ali Jadbabaie"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$32","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.01951","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/00030JJ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/00030JJ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wu25ad.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["position-bias","attention","positional-encoding","transformer-theory"]},{"id":"00030LS025","title":"Fundamental Limits of Visual Autoregressive Transformers: Universal Approximation Abilities","authors":["Yifang Chen","Xiaoyu Li","Yingyu Liang","Zhenmei Shi","Zhao Song"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/00030LS025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/00030LS025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chen25ak.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["visual-autoregressive","universal-approximation","theory"]},{"id":"2412.17451","title":"Diving into Self-Evolving Training for Multimodal Reasoning","authors":["Wei Liu","Junlong Li","Xiwen Zhang","Fan Zhou","Yu Cheng","Junxian He"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$33","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.17451","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0131LZZ0H25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0131LZZ0H25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/liu25aj.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"自我进化训练（模型用自己的输出迭代训练自己）是解决高质量 CoT 数据稀缺的关键方法，但在多模态推理场景下效果不明，且普遍面临性能饱和问题。本文系统研究了多模态推理中自我进化训练的关键因素，并提出缓解饱和的方案。","importance":"对 pretrain→posttrain 闭环有直接启示。自我进化训练本质上是一种数据飞轮——模型生成训练数据再训练自己，理解其在多模态场景下的瓶颈（性能饱和）和关键因素（训练方法、奖励模型、prompt 多样性），对设计 VLM 的 posttrain 流程和理解 RL 信号质量都有价值。","technical_approach":"从 RL 视角重新框架化自我进化训练，识别出三个关键因素：(1) 训练方法——reject sampling vs on-policy 等；(2) 奖励模型——如何评估自生成数据的质量；(3) Prompt 变体——输入多样性对打破饱和的作用。通过系统消融实验分析每个因素的贡献，并提出组合策略来缓解性能饱和。这不是一个全新方法，而是对已有范式的系统性诊断和改进。","experiments":"在多模态推理 benchmark 上做系统实验，具体模型规模和数字在截断摘要中未完整给出。核心价值在 ablation：分别控制训练方法、奖励模型、prompt 多样性，量化各因素对性能饱和的影响。","authors_note":"作者包括 Yu Cheng，在 NLP/多模态领域有多篇高引工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Self-evolving training—where models learn from their own outputs iteratively—is a key approach for reasoning tasks with scarce CoT data, but its effectiveness in multimodal reasoning is underexplored, and performance saturation is a central bottleneck.","importance":"Directly relevant to the pretrain-posttrain loop. Understanding why self-evolving training saturates in multimodal settings, and which factors (training method, reward model, prompt diversity) matter most, informs VLM post-training pipeline design and RL signal quality.","technical_approach":"Reframes self-evolving training through an RL lens, identifying three pivotal factors: (1) training method (reject sampling vs on-policy, etc.), (2) reward model quality, (3) prompt variation for input diversity. Systematic ablations diagnose each factor's contribution to saturation, and a combined strategy is proposed. This is a diagnostic and improvement study, not a novel method.","experiments":"Systematic experiments on multimodal reasoning benchmarks. Full model scales and numbers are truncated. The main value is in ablations isolating the effect of each factor on performance saturation.","authors_note":"Authors include Yu Cheng, who has multiple highly-cited works in NLP and multimodal learning."},"tags":["multimodal-reasoning","self-training","cot","data-synthesis"],"notable_authors":["Yu Cheng"]},{"id":"2502.00592","title":"M+: Extending MemoryLLM with Scalable Long-Term Memory","authors":["Yu Wang","Dmitry Krotov","Yuanzhe Hu","Yifan Gao","Wangchunshu Zhou","Julian J. McAuley","Dan Gutfreund","Rogério Feris","Zexue He"],"institutions":["IBM","MIT"],"abstract":"$34","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.00592","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0170KH0ZMGFH25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0170KH0ZMGFH25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wang25au.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"将记忆压缩到 LLM 隐状态空间（latent-space memory）可以扩展上下文窗口，但现有方法（如 MemoryLLM）在超过 ~20k token 后就无法有效保留信息。本文要解决的是如何让这类记忆机制支持真正的长期信息保留。","importance":"方法级贡献，面向长上下文 LLM 的记忆增强。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：纯靠扩大上下文窗口来处理长文档有计算瓶颈，latent memory + retrieval 是一条互补路径。M+ 的设计思路——将短期压缩记忆与长期可检索记忆结合——可能影响未来长上下文预训练架构的设计。","technical_approach":"在 MemoryLLM 基础上增加长期记忆模块：当短期 latent memory pool（~1B 参数的隐状态压缩）容量不足时，信息被转移到长期存储中，并通过一个与模型联合训练的 retriever 按需检索。关键设计是 retriever 与 LLM 共同训练（co-trained），而非后接一个独立的检索模块，这样检索信号可以直接影响 LLM 的表示学习。","experiments":"在超过 16k-20k token 的长序列任务上验证，具体数字在截断摘要中未完整给出。预期与 MemoryLLM、标准长上下文方法（如 RoPE 扩展）对比，展示在更长距离上的信息保留能力提升。","authors_note":"基于 MemoryLLM (Wang et al., 2024a) 的后续工作。作者包括 Dmitry Krotov（IBM/MIT），在 Hopfield 网络和联想记忆方面有深入研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Latent-space memory approaches like MemoryLLM compress past context into hidden states but fail to retain information beyond ~20k tokens. This work addresses long-term retention by augmenting latent memory with a co-trained retrieval mechanism.","importance":"Method-level contribution to memory-augmented LLMs. The combination of short-term compressed memory and long-term retrievable memory is a complementary path to pure context-window scaling, potentially informing future long-context pretraining architectures.","technical_approach":"Builds on MemoryLLM by adding a long-term memory store. When the short-term latent memory pool (~1B parameters of compressed hidden states) overflows, information is offloaded to long-term storage and retrieved on demand by a co-trained retriever. Co-training the retriever with the LLM is the key design choice—it allows retrieval signals to directly shape the LLM's representations.","experiments":"Evaluated on long-sequence tasks beyond 16k-20k tokens. Full numbers truncated in abstract. Expected comparisons against MemoryLLM and standard long-context methods like RoPE extension.","authors_note":"Builds on MemoryLLM (Wang et al., 2024a). Authors include Dmitry Krotov (IBM/MIT), known for modern Hopfield networks and associative memory research."},"tags":["long-context","memory","architecture","latent-memory"],"notable_authors":["Dmitry Krotov"]},{"id":"2411.07279","title":"The Surprising Effectiveness of Test-Time Training for Few-Shot Learning","authors":["Ekin Akyürek","Mehul Damani","Adam Zweiger","Linlu Qiu","Han Guo","Jyothish Pari","Yoon Kim","Jacob Andreas"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$35","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.07279","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/AkyurekDZQGPKA25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/AkyurekDZQGPKA25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/akyurek25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["test-time-training","few-shot","adaptation","inference-time"]},{"id":"BarceloKS25","title":"Ehrenfeucht-Haussler Rank and Chain of Thought","authors":["Pablo Barceló","Alexander Kozachinskiy","Tomasz Steifer"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/BarceloKS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/BarceloKS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/barcelo25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文想回答的是：Chain-of-Thought 为什么有效，能否用更基础的表达能力刻画来解释，而不是只把它当经验技巧。更具体地说，作者似乎把 CoT 的作用与 Ehrenfeucht-Haussler rank 这类容量/可表示性量联系起来，试图说明哪些问题需要中间推理链，哪些不需要。","importance":"这项工作属于理论机制分析，直接贡献不在训练方法，而在于给 CoT 的能力边界提供形式化语言。对 pretrain 和推理研究的价值在于：如果能把 CoT 的增益和某种结构复杂度对应起来，就能更清楚地区分‘模型不会’、‘模型会但提示不对’、以及‘任务本来就需要更长中间计算’。这种理论对设计 synthetic curriculum、scratchpad 监督和推理时 compute allocation 都有参考意义。","technical_approach":"没有摘要，只能从标题推断：作者可能借用 Ehrenfeucht-Haussler rank 这一学习理论中的复杂度概念，分析带或不带 CoT 的模型在概念类/任务类上的可区分能力。关键点应该不是证明某个具体架构更强，而是把‘中间推理步骤’解释为对函数类表达的扩展，或者对样本复杂度/泛化能力的改善。和单纯 circuit-complexity 分析相比，这条路线如果成立，优势在于它可能更贴近学习问题而不只是可计算性问题。边界是，这类结果通常依赖较强假设，与真实大模型中的训练启发式、检索和 sampling 机制仍有距离。","experiments":"没有摘要，因此不能确认是否有实证实验，也无法给出具体规模和数值。若论文包含实验，最有价值的应是构造一组复杂度可控的任务，验证理论预测：当任务的相关 rank 或结构复杂度上升时，CoT 带来的收益是否同步增加；以及短 CoT、长 CoT、无 CoT 之间是否存在清晰相变。若仅为纯理论论文，也应诚实理解为‘提供解释框架’，而不是直接指导现成大模型训练配方。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper appears to ask a foundational question: why does chain-of-thought help, and can its benefit be explained using a more principled notion of representational or learning complexity rather than treated as an empirical trick? The title suggests that Ehrenfeucht-Haussler rank is used to characterize when intermediate reasoning steps are necessary.","importance":"This is a theory and mechanism paper. Its value is not a new training recipe but a sharper language for the capability boundary of CoT. For pretraining and inference research, that matters because it can help separate different failure modes: cases where the model lacks the relevant computation entirely, cases where the computation exists but prompting is insufficient, and cases where the task inherently requires longer intermediate computation.","technical_approach":"Without an abstract, the cautious reading is that the paper connects chain-of-thought to Ehrenfeucht-Haussler rank or a related complexity measure over concept classes. The likely goal is to show that allowing explicit intermediate steps changes what can be represented, learned, or generalized under that complexity lens. Compared with circuit-based analyses, this could be useful if it ties CoT more directly to learning-theoretic structure rather than bare computability. The limitation is the usual one for theory papers of this kind: the conclusions are likely to rely on stylized assumptions that do not fully capture large-scale training, retrieval, or stochastic decoding.","experiments":"No abstract is available, so it is unclear whether the paper includes empirical validation. If it does, the most useful experiments would construct tasks with controlled structural complexity and test whether CoT gains grow in the way the theory predicts. In particular, one would want to see whether no-CoT, short-CoT, and long-CoT regimes show a clear transition as task complexity increases. If the paper is purely theoretical, it should be read as an explanatory framework rather than a directly actionable recipe for current LLM training.","authors_note":""},"tags":["chain-of-thought","expressivity","transformer-theory"],"notable_authors":["Pablo Barceló","Alexander Kozachinskiy","Tomasz Steifer"]},{"id":"2502.02393","title":"Lower Bounds for Chain-of-Thought Reasoning in Hard-Attention Transformers","authors":["Alireza Amiri Bavandpour","Xinting Huang","Mark Rofin","Michael Hahn"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Chain-of-thought reasoning and scratchpads have emerged as critical tools for enhancing the computational capabilities of transformers. While theoretical results show that polynomial-length scratchpads can extend transformers'expressivity from $TC^0$ to $PTIME$, their required length remains poorly understood. Empirical evidence even suggests that transformers need scratchpads even for many problems in $TC^0$, such as Parity or Multiplication, challenging optimistic bounds derived from circuit complexity. In this work, we initiate the study of systematic lower bounds for the number of chain-of-thought steps across different algorithmic problems, in the hard-attention regime. We study a variety of algorithmic problems, and provide bounds that are tight up to logarithmic factors. Overall, these results contribute to emerging understanding of the power and limitations of chain-of-thought reasoning.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.02393","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/BavandpourHR025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/BavandpourHR025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/bavandpour25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是：在 hard-attention Transformer 中，完成某些算法任务究竟至少需要多长的 Chain-of-Thought/scratchpad，而不是只知道‘有 scratchpad 会更强’。过去理论工作更多给上界，说明多项式长度 scratchpad 可以把表达能力从较弱电路类扩展到 PTIME，但这并没有回答实际中为什么连一些看上去不难的问题也需要显式中间步骤。","importance":"这项工作是 CoT 理论中的基础补全。它的重要性在于给出了系统性的下界视角，告诉我们‘需要 CoT’不是经验现象，而可能是由任务结构决定的。对 pretrain 和推理系统的启发是：如果某类任务在结构上就需要足够长的中间计算，那么单靠更强监督或更好提示词，未必能把短思维链压到极短；推理时 compute budget 与任务难度之间可能存在硬约束。","technical_approach":"作者研究的是 hard-attention 设定下不同算法问题所需的 CoT 步数下界，并且摘要称这些界在对数因子内是紧的。这里 hard attention 可以理解为一种更离散、可分析的 Transformer 变体，便于证明中间步骤数量与可计算问题族之间的关系。和已有工作主要证明‘足够长就能做’不同，这篇论文的关键增量是证明‘不够长就一定做不了’，并覆盖了多个算法问题。这样做有效，因为它把经验上观察到的 Parity、Multiplication 等任务对 scratchpad 的依赖，转化成形式化的复杂度约束。边界也要明确：下界是在 hard-attention 模型下证明的，不能直接等同于现代 soft-attention LLM 的精确能力边界，但它提供了很强的参照系。","experiments":"摘要给出的核心事实是理论性的：他们为一系列算法问题建立了 CoT 步数下界，而且紧到仅差对数因子。没有参数量、数据规模或 benchmark 数字，因为重点不是实证 SOTA。值得关注的不是‘分数提升’，而是问题族之间下界的差异：哪些任务只需很短 scratchpad，哪些任务步数必然随输入长度增长，以及这些结论如何与已有经验结果相呼应。若正文有实验，价值主要在 sanity check——验证理论趋势而非追求绝对性能。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a sharper question than prior expressivity results: for hard-attention Transformers, how many chain-of-thought or scratchpad steps are actually necessary for different algorithmic problems? Earlier theory mostly provided upper bounds, showing that polynomial-length scratchpads can increase expressivity, but that does not explain why even seemingly simple tasks often appear to require explicit intermediate computation in practice.","importance":"This is a foundational contribution to CoT theory. Its importance comes from supplying lower bounds, which turn the empirical observation that some tasks need scratchpads into a structural statement about computational requirements. For pretraining and inference systems, the implication is practical: if certain tasks inherently require a minimum amount of intermediate computation, then better prompting or better supervision alone may not compress reasoning length arbitrarily.","technical_approach":"The paper studies lower bounds on the number of CoT steps required for various algorithmic tasks in the hard-attention regime, and the abstract states that the bounds are tight up to logarithmic factors. Hard attention gives a more discrete and analyzable Transformer model, making it possible to relate reasoning length to problem structure. The main advance over prior work is the shift from 'long enough scratchpads are sufficient' to 'short scratchpads are provably insufficient,' across multiple task families. That is valuable because it formalizes why tasks such as parity or multiplication can resist short-horizon reasoning. The limitation is that these are lower bounds for a stylized model, not exact capability statements about modern soft-attention LLMs.","experiments":"The main results are theoretical rather than empirical: the paper derives lower bounds for a range of algorithmic problems and matches them up to logarithmic factors. There are no model sizes, datasets, or benchmark gains in the abstract. The interesting content is instead the shape of the lower bounds across task classes: which problems admit short scratchpads, which require reasoning length that grows with input size, and how those patterns line up with prior empirical findings. If there are experiments, they would mainly serve as sanity checks for the theoretical trends.","authors_note":""},"tags":["chain-of-thought","transformer-theory","expressivity","lower-bounds"],"notable_authors":["Alireza Amiri Bavandpour","Xinting Huang","Mark Rofin","Michael Hahn"]},{"id":"2502.08606","title":"Distillation Scaling Laws","authors":["Dan Busbridge","Amitis Shidani","Floris Weers","Jason Ramapuram","Etai Littwin","Russell Webb"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We propose a distillation scaling law that estimates distilled model performance based on a compute budget and its allocation between the student and teacher. Our findings mitigate the risks associated with large-scale distillation by enabling compute-optimal allocation for both the teacher and student to maximize student performance. We provide compute-optimal distillation recipes for two key scenarios: when a teacher already exists, and when a teacher needs training. In settings involving many students or an existing teacher, distillation outperforms supervised learning up to a compute level that scales predictably with student size. Conversely, if only one student is to be distilled and a teacher also requires training, supervised learning is generally preferable. Additionally, our large-scale study of distillation increases our understanding of the process and helps inform experimental design.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.08606","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/BusbridgeSWRLW25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/BusbridgeSWRLW25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/busbridge25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["distillation","scaling-law","compute-allocation","teacher-student"]},{"id":"2505.07067","title":"Learning curves theory for hierarchically compositional data with power-law distributed features","authors":["Francesco Cagnetta","Hyunmo Kang","Matthieu Wyart"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Recent theories suggest that Neural Scaling Laws arise whenever the task is linearly decomposed into power-law distributed units. Alternatively, scaling laws also emerge when data exhibit a hierarchically compositional structure, as is thought to occur in language and images. To unify these views, we consider classification and next-token prediction tasks based on probabilistic context-free grammars -- probabilistic models that generate data via a hierarchy of production rules. For classification, we show that having power-law distributed production rules results in a power-law learning curve with an exponent depending on the rules' distribution and a large multiplicative constant that depends on the hierarchical structure. By contrast, for next-token prediction, the distribution of production rules controls the local details of the learning curve, but not the exponent describing the large-scale behaviour.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.07067","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/CagnettaKW25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/CagnettaKW25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/cagnetta25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["scaling-law","learning-curves","compositionality","theory"]},{"id":"CaiJQC0025","title":"Shortcut-connected Expert Parallelism for Accelerating Mixture of Experts","authors":["Weilin Cai","Juyong Jiang","Le Qin","Junwei Cui","Sunghun Kim","Jiayi Huang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/CaiJQC0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/CaiJQC0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/cai25c.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["moe","expert-parallelism","systems","training-efficiency"]},{"id":"CaiVZOJ25","title":"Attention-Level Speculation","authors":["Jack Cai","Ammar Vora","Randolph Zhang","Mark O&apos;Connor","Mark C. Jeffrey"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/CaiVZOJ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/CaiVZOJ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/cai25g.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["speculative-decoding","attention","inference","latency"]},{"id":"2506.14767","title":"A Variational Framework for Improving Naturalness in Generative Spoken Language Models","authors":["Li-Wei Chen","Takuya Higuchi","Zakaria Aldeneh","Ahmed Hussen Abdelaziz","Alexander Rudnicky"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$36","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.14767","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChenHAAR25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChenHAAR25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chen25z.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["speech-lm","variational","prosody","autoregressive","speech-tokens"]},{"id":"2410.08589","title":"Retraining-free Merging of Sparse MoE via Hierarchical Clustering","authors":["I-Chun Chen","Hsu-Shen Liu","Wei-Fang Sun","Chen-Hao Chao","Yen-Chang Hsu","Chun-Yi Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$37","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.08589","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChenLSCHL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChenLSCHL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chen25aq.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：稀疏 MoE 虽然推理时激活参数少，但部署时仍要把大量 experts 常驻显存，内存开销并不“稀疏”。过去常见压缩办法依赖蒸馏、再训练或基于路由统计的裁剪，但这些方法成本高，且容易受路由不稳定影响，因此作者聚焦于一个更实际的问题：能否在不重训的前提下直接合并 experts。","importance":"这是一个系统与模型压缩交叉的问题，贡献更偏 deployment-facing，但对 MoE 预训练也有直接启发。它的重要性在于指出：MoE 的收益不仅取决于训练时的参数效率，也取决于训练后能否把 expert 冗余真正压掉；如果合并能稳定工作，那么预训练阶段可以更激进地使用冗余 experts，再在部署侧回收容量。","technical_approach":"核心方法 HC-SMoE 是一个无需重训练的 expert merging 框架，关键创新是用 expert 输出行为而不是路由决策做层次聚类。这样设计的原因很直接：路由分配高度依赖输入分布和门控波动，同一个 expert 是否“相似”用路由频率衡量并不稳；而输出表征更接近 expert 的函数行为，用它做聚类后再合并，更容易保住模型功能。和简单的参数空间平均相比，它先做分层聚类，意味着作者希望先在局部近邻中合并、再逐步扩大粒度，以降低一次性全局合并造成的灾难性退化。","experiments":"从摘要能确认的实验结论是：作者验证了 output-based clustering 相比依赖 routing 的方案更稳健，并且在不重训条件下实现了参数压缩。摘要未给出具体 MoE 架构、参数规模、合并比例、评测任务、性能下降幅度或与蒸馏/剪枝基线的精确对比，因此这些数字无法可靠填写。值得关注的实证点应当包括不同 merge ratio 下的性能曲线，以及跨任务泛化是否保持 task-agnostic，但给定信息不足。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical bottleneck of sparse MoE deployment: activation sparsity does not remove the memory cost of storing all experts. Prior compression routes often need retraining, distillation, or routing-based pruning, which is costly and brittle, so the authors focus on retraining-free expert merging.","importance":"This is mainly a systems-plus-model-compression contribution, but it matters for pretraining too. The broader implication is that the value of MoE depends not only on sparse activation during training and inference, but also on whether expert redundancy can be collapsed after training without paying another full optimization bill.","technical_approach":"HC-SMoE is a retraining-free expert merging framework built on hierarchical clustering of expert outputs rather than routing patterns. That choice is sensible because routing is input-distribution dependent and noisy, while output behavior is a more direct proxy for functional similarity between experts. Compared with naive parameter averaging, hierarchical clustering suggests a more conservative merge schedule: merge nearby experts first, then merge at larger scales, which should reduce sharp quality drops.","experiments":"From the abstract, the main empirical claim is that output-based clustering yields robust expert merging independent of routing decisions and reduces parameters without retraining. The provided text does not include the MoE backbone, model scale, compression ratio, benchmark suite, or exact loss/accuracy trade-offs, so those details cannot be stated confidently.","authors_note":""},"tags":["moe","expert-merging","model-compression","clustering"]},{"id":"ChenS0SLW00025","title":"Mixture of Hidden-Dimensions: Not All Hidden-States&apos; Dimensions are Needed in Transformer","authors":["Yilong Chen","Junyuan Shang","Zhenyu Zhang","Jiawei Sheng","Tingwen Liu","Shuohuan Wang","Yu Sun","Hua Wu","Haifeng Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChenS0SLW00025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChenS0SLW00025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chen25bc.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关注的是：Transformer 的 hidden dimension 通常被当作必须统一密集计算的整体，但不同维度的重要性并不相同，继续一刀切地全算会带来冗余。这个问题过去多通过 token pruning、layer dropping 或 MoE 在 token/expert 维度上处理，而对 hidden-state 维度本身的条件化利用研究较少。","importance":"从题目看，这是一类架构与效率方法，潜在价值在于把 MoE 的思想从“专家选择”推进到“维度选择”。如果成立，它对 pretrain 的启示是：模型容量不一定只靠增加层数、宽度或 experts，也可以通过输入相关的 hidden-dimension 激活来重新分配计算。","technical_approach":"根据题目，方法核心是 Mixture of Hidden-Dimensions：不是所有隐藏状态维度都需要在每次前向中被同等使用。可以推断作者提出了某种按维度混合、选择或重加权的机制，用更细粒度的条件计算替代全维密集变换。它和传统 MoE 的区别在于路由对象从 token 映射到子网络，变成了在特征维度上做选择；这样做的潜在好处是更细粒度、更容易嵌入 Transformer 主干，但代价通常是实现复杂度和硬件友好性未必理想。由于没有摘要，具体是作用于 attention、MLP 还是 residual stream，无法确认。","experiments":"给定信息不足，无法确认模型规模、任务、基线、指标和提升数字。仅从题目判断，实验大概率会围绕计算量下降、吞吐提升以及与标准 Transformer 的质量保持展开，并可能分析不同维度激活比例的 trade-off，但这里不做事实性陈述。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper questions a default assumption in Transformers: all hidden dimensions are treated as equally necessary and are always computed densely. Earlier efficiency work mostly targets tokens, layers, or experts, while conditional computation over hidden-state dimensions has been much less explored.","importance":"Judging from the title, this is an architecture/efficiency contribution with a potentially useful pretraining implication. If the idea works, capacity allocation does not have to be controlled only through depth, width, or token-level MoE; some of it can be pushed into input-dependent activation over hidden dimensions.","technical_approach":"The method appears to be a Mixture of Hidden-Dimensions scheme, where only a subset or weighted combination of hidden dimensions is used rather than uniformly processing the full state every time. The closest conceptual link is MoE, but the routing target shifts from experts to feature dimensions. That finer granularity could make capacity allocation more precise, though the trade-off is likely implementation complexity and weaker hardware efficiency than regular dense blocks. Without an abstract, it is not possible to say whether this is applied in attention, MLPs, or the residual stream.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so model scale, tasks, baselines, and numeric gains cannot be verified. It is reasonable to expect compute-quality trade-off experiments, but that would be speculation rather than summary.","authors_note":""},"tags":["moe","hidden-dimensions","architecture","efficiency"]},{"id":"2412.12094","title":"SepLLM: Accelerate Large Language Models by Compressing One Segment into One Separator","authors":["Guoxuan Chen","Han Shi","Jiawei Li","Yihang Gao","Xiaozhe Ren","Yimeng Chen","Xin Jiang","Zhenguo Li","Weiyang Liu","Chao Huang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$38","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.12094","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChenSLGRCJLLH25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChenSLGRCJLLH25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chen25bf.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：长上下文推理的成本主要被 attention 的二次复杂度拖住，而许多 token 对语义贡献并不均匀。作者观察到某些 separator token（如标点）获得了异常高的注意力权重，这意味着模型已经在把段落级信息聚合到这些边界 token 上；如果这种现象稳定存在，就有机会把一整个 segment 压缩成一个 separator 来减少长度。","importance":"这是一个偏推理时系统优化的方法，但它对预训练也有启发，因为它揭示了 LM 在自然文本中自动形成的段边界压缩行为。重要性不在于提出新的主干，而在于给出一种 plug-and-play 的 context compression 路线：不改模型参数，只利用 tokenizer/文本结构与注意力分布的耦合来提速，这对长上下文 serving 很实际。","technical_approach":"SepLLM 的核心是把若干由分隔符划定的 token 段压缩到分隔符本身上，用更短的序列近似原始上下文。它不是训练一个额外摘要器，也不是 learned token pruning，而是直接利用模型已经偏爱的 separator token 作为信息载体。这样设计有效的前提是：分隔符真的承担了足够多的段级聚合信息；否则压缩会伤害需要精确逐 token 依赖的任务。和通用 KV 压缩相比，它依赖文本的自然分段结构，因此实现简单、无需重训，但边界也很明确——代码、数学式、无标点文本或 separator 语义弱的场景可能不稳。","experiments":"摘要只说明 SepLLM 是 plug-and-play 框架，并以压缩 segment 以加速推理为主目标。未提供具体模型、上下文长度、速度提升倍数、质量损失、对比基线或不同压缩率下的曲线，因此无法给出定量结果。可以确认的是，作者的论证建立在 attention 分析之上，而不是纯经验裁剪。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles long-context inefficiency by exploiting a structural asymmetry in text: not all tokens matter equally, and separator tokens often absorb disproportionately high attention. If separators already act as segment-level summary anchors, then entire spans may be compressible into those separators with limited loss.","importance":"This is mainly an inference-time systems idea, but it is also an interesting observation about pretrained LMs: they seem to internalize segment boundaries and use punctuation-like tokens as aggregation points. The value is not a new backbone, but a practical plug-and-play route to context compression that does not require retraining.","technical_approach":"SepLLM compresses each separator-delimited segment into the separator token itself, shortening the effective sequence before attention is applied. Unlike learned summarizers or token-pruning modules, it reuses a structure the model already seems to rely on. The design is attractive because it is simple and training-free, but it is only as good as the assumption that separators carry enough segment information. That assumption may fail on code, formulas, or poorly punctuated text, which is an important boundary.","experiments":"From the abstract, the method is presented as a plug-and-play acceleration framework motivated by attention analysis. The provided text does not include model identities, context lengths, speedup numbers, quality degradation, or baseline comparisons, so no quantitative claims should be added.","authors_note":""},"tags":["kv-cache","attention-compression","separator-tokens","long-context"]},{"id":"2502.10373","title":"OWLS: Scaling Laws for Multilingual Speech Recognition and Translation Models","authors":["William Chen","Jinchuan Tian","Yifan Peng","Brian Yan","Chao-Han Huck Yang","Shinji Watanabe"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$39","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.10373","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChenT0YY025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChenT0YY025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chen25bj.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：语音模型的 scaling law 远不如文本和视觉清楚，导致大规模语音预训练/多语语音建模缺少可操作的设计规则。过去语音工作往往在特定数据集和模型族上做经验扩展，但很难回答“参数、数据、算力各自怎么影响最终性能”，尤其在 multilingual ASR/ST 场景中更明显。","importance":"这是一个数据级与规律级的工作，量级不在新架构，而在把语音模型带入可预测扩展的工程阶段。对 pretrain 的启示很直接：如果 speech LM / speech encoder-decoder 也能建立稳定 scaling law，那么模型规模、数据配比和训练 compute 的预算分配就能从经验主义走向更可规划的最优化。","technical_approach":"作者构建了 OWLS，一套开放且可复现的多语语音识别与翻译模型族，规模从 0.25B 到 18B，并用最多 36 万小时、150 种语言的公开语音数据系统研究缩放规律。方法重点不是提出新网络，而是控制变量地跨模型规模、数据规模和 compute 做系统实验，再拟合可以预测最终表现的 scaling curves。这样的设计有效，是因为 scaling law 的价值依赖于同一训练配方下的大范围可比性；如果模型、数据和 recipe 改动太多，拟合出的规律就不稳。","experiments":"关键事实是：模型覆盖 0.25B 到 18B 参数，其中 18B 被作者称为目前最大的 speech model；数据覆盖最多 360K 小时、150 语言；任务包含 multilingual speech recognition 和 translation。摘要明确声称，当放大模型、数据和算力时，最终性能可以被可靠预测，但未给出具体拟合指数、误差、WERR/BLEU 提升或 compute-optimal 拐点，因此无法补充精确数字。值得关注的观察应包括多语低资源语言是否遵循同一斜率，以及 ASR 与 ST 的 scaling 是否一致。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a gap that has become increasingly limiting: speech models still lack the kind of usable scaling laws that now guide text and vision systems. Prior speech work scaled models empirically, but without a clear picture of how parameters, data, and compute trade off in multilingual ASR and speech translation.","importance":"This is a scaling-law and dataset-suite contribution rather than a new architecture. Its importance is practical: if speech modeling also admits stable predictive scaling behavior, then model sizing, data budgeting, and compute allocation can be planned rather than guessed, which is directly relevant to large-scale speech pretraining.","technical_approach":"The authors build OWLS, an open and reproducible family of multilingual speech recognition and translation models ranging from 0.25B to 18B parameters, trained on up to 360K hours of public speech data from 150 languages. The technical contribution is the controlled scaling study itself: keep the recipe coherent across scales, vary model/data/compute, and fit predictive laws for end performance. That design choice matters because scaling laws are only useful when cross-scale comparisons are genuinely comparable.","experiments":"The main verified facts are the scale of the suite: 0.25B to 18B models, up to 360K hours of speech, and 150 languages, with the 18B model claimed as the largest speech model to date. The abstract says final performance can be reliably predicted under scaling, but it does not provide exponents, fit errors, WER/BLEU improvements, or compute-optimal frontiers, so those numbers cannot be stated here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["scaling-law","speech-lm","multilingual","speech-translation"]},{"id":"2407.11784","title":"Data-Juicer Sandbox: A Feedback-Driven Suite for Multimodal Data-Model Co-development","authors":["Daoyuan Chen","Haibin Wang","Yilun Huang","Ce Ge","Yaliang Li","Bolin Ding","Jingren Zhou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3a","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.11784","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChenW0GLD025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChenW0GLD025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chen25bm.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：多模态模型的优化长期被拆成“改模型”和“改数据”两条线，导致迭代慢、结论不闭环。现实里很多性能问题并不单纯来自模型或数据一侧，而是两者耦合出的失配；如果没有一个低成本的反馈回路，就很难知道该改数据配比、数据过滤、模型结构还是训练 recipe。","importance":"这是一个系统与研发流程级的贡献，重要性在于把 data-centric 和 model-centric 开发重新连起来。对 pretrain 的启示很强：随着 multimodal pretraining 成本越来越高，真正稀缺的不是单点技巧，而是能快速验证“数据变了，模型该怎么跟着变”的 sandbox；这类工具往往比单篇新 loss 更能改变团队产出效率。","technical_approach":"Data-Juicer Sandbox 的核心是一个反馈驱动的多模态数据-模型协同开发套件，工作流概括为 Probe-Analyze-Refine。Probe 用小成本试验快速暴露问题，Analyze 用观测结果定位是数据质量、配比还是模型配置在限制性能，Refine 再针对性调整数据和模型。它不是一个单一训练算法，而是把数据处理、实验编排、分析和回路更新做成统一平台。这样设计的价值在于缩短验证链路；代价是它更像工程基础设施，效果高度依赖平台提供的诊断指标是否足够有辨识度。","experiments":"摘要给出的事实是：该 sandbox 在多种多模态任务上做了案例验证，包括 CLIP 式图文预训练、LLaVA 式图像到文本生成，以及 text-to-? 的场景（摘要截断）。但具体模型、数据规模、节省的实验成本、性能收益和与常规手工调参流程的对照数字都没有给出，因此无法定量概述。可以确认的是，作者强调的是 cost-effective iteration，而不是单点 SOTA。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a development bottleneck rather than a single modeling flaw: multimodal systems are still often improved through separate data-centric and model-centric loops. In practice, many failures come from their interaction, so without a tight feedback loop it is hard to know whether to change data composition, filtering, architecture, or training recipe.","importance":"This is a systems and workflow contribution with real pretraining relevance. As multimodal pretraining gets more expensive, the scarce resource is not just compute but iteration bandwidth. A sandbox that closes the loop between data and model decisions can have more impact on real research velocity than another isolated loss term.","technical_approach":"Data-Juicer Sandbox is a feedback-driven suite for multimodal data-model co-development built around a Probe-Analyze-Refine workflow. Probe runs cheap experiments to surface failure modes, Analyze attributes them to data or model issues, and Refine updates both sides in a targeted way. It is not a new training objective; it is an integrated experimentation and diagnosis platform. The upside is faster iteration and better attribution, while the limitation is that its usefulness depends heavily on whether the diagnostics are actually informative.","experiments":"The abstract states that the sandbox is validated through practical use cases including CLIP-style image-text pretraining, LLaVA-like image-to-text generation, and an additional text-to- modality setup that is truncated in the provided text. No concrete model scales, dataset sizes, cost savings, or quality gains are given, so the empirical summary must stay qualitative.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-quality","multimodal","data-model-co-development","sandbox"]},{"id":"ChenXL0P0SLZ00T25","title":"Do NOT Think That Much for 2+3=? On the Overthinking of Long Reasoning Models","authors":["Xingyu Chen","Jiahao Xu","Tian Liang","Zhiwei He","Jianhui Pang","Dian Yu","Linfeng Song","Qiuzhi Liu","Mengfei Zhou","Zhuosheng Zhang","Rui Wang","Zhaopeng Tu","Haitao Mi","Dong Yu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChenXL0P0SLZ00T25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChenXL0P0SLZ00T25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chen25bx.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：长推理模型在极简单问题上也倾向生成冗长 reasoning，出现 overthinking，既浪费算力也可能拉低正确率。过去社区更多关注“怎么让模型多想一步”，但当长链推理成为默认行为后，另一个同样重要的问题变成了“什么时候不该想那么多”。","importance":"这是 post-train 与推理行为控制相关的工作，但对 pretrain 也有反馈价值，因为它触及一个越来越关键的训练信号问题：如果训练过程系统性奖励更长的思维链，模型会学到把长度当作安全策略。它的重要性不在于提升极限推理上界，而在于校正长推理范式的副作用，避免无谓 token 开销和错误传播。","technical_approach":"从题目看，作者围绕 long reasoning models 的 overthinking 做了诊断，核心主张是简单题不应触发长链推理。可能的方法方向包括难度感知的推理长度控制、早停、简答优先的训练或 decoding 调节，但没有摘要，无法确认是分析论文还是提出了具体干预方法。无论具体实现如何，这类工作的关键设计点都在于：既要减少简单题上的冗余推理，又不能压制真正需要深推理的问题。","experiments":"无摘要，不能确认测试基准、模型类型、overthinking 的定义、推理长度变化、准确率变化以及效率收益。仅能从标题推断，实验至少会比较简单算术等低复杂度任务上的 reasoning length 与正确率关系，但不应补写未给出的数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a growing failure mode of long-reasoning models: they often produce unnecessarily long chains even for trivial questions, wasting compute and sometimes reducing accuracy. The field has spent a lot of effort teaching models to reason longer; this work asks when they should not.","importance":"This is primarily about post-training and inference behavior, but it feeds back into pretraining and supervision design. If training signals consistently reward longer reasoning traces, models may learn length as a default safe policy. Correcting that matters not for pushing the hardest reasoning ceiling, but for avoiding unnecessary token cost and error accumulation on easy problems.","technical_approach":"From the title, the contribution is centered on diagnosing overthinking in long-reasoning models, with the main claim that simple problems should not trigger long reasoning traces. The exact intervention is not available, but the likely design space includes difficulty-aware reasoning control, early stopping, shorter-trace preference, or decoding-time regulation. The core trade-off is clear: reduce redundant reasoning on easy inputs without suppressing genuinely needed deep reasoning.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so benchmarks, model families, the operational definition of overthinking, and the accuracy-efficiency trade-offs cannot be verified. More detailed claims would be speculative.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reasoning","overthinking","chain-of-thought","efficiency"]},{"id":"2507.04250","title":"Just Enough Shifts: Mitigating Over-Refusal in Aligned Language Models with Targeted Representation Fine-Tuning","authors":["Mahavir Dabas","Si Chen","Charles Fleming","Ming Jin","Ruoxi Jia"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Safety alignment is crucial for large language models (LLMs) to resist malicious instructions but often results in over-refusals, where benign prompts are unnecessarily rejected, impairing user experience and model utility. We introduce ACTOR (Activation-Based Training for Over-Refusal Reduction), a robust and compute- and data-efficient training framework that minimizes over-refusals by leveraging internal activation patterns from diverse queries. ACTOR precisely identifies and adjusts the activation components that trigger refusals, providing stronger control over the refusal mechanism. By fine-tuning only a single model layer, ACTOR effectively reduces over-refusals across multiple benchmarks while maintaining the model's ability to handle harmful queries and preserve overall utility.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.04250","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Dabas0F0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Dabas0F0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/dabas25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：安全对齐后的 LLM 常出现 over-refusal，对无害请求也过度拒绝，导致模型可用性明显下降。过去常见缓解方法要么继续做全参数对齐微调，要么依赖额外偏好数据和复杂 reward 设计，但这些方法往往会连带削弱安全边界，因此作者聚焦于更细粒度的问题：能否只改动触发拒答的内部表示，而不是整体重写模型行为。","importance":"这是一个 post-train 接口问题，但对 pretrain 研究也有价值，因为它说明对齐副作用可以定位到相对局部的表示子空间，而不一定需要全模型再训练。它的重要性在于给出一种低成本、高控制性的修复思路：如果 refusal 机制在内部激活上是可分离的，那么安全与效用之间的张力就不必总靠大规模数据和 RLHF 重新平衡。","technical_approach":"ACTOR 的核心是 activation-based 的 targeted fine-tuning：先利用多样化查询识别会触发过度拒答的激活成分，再只微调单层去调整这些成分。它不是常规 LoRA/SFT 那种基于输出行为的整体适配，而是直接干预 refusal 相关表示。这样设计有效的原因是，over-refusal 往往不是知识缺失，而是某些安全判别特征被过度泛化；如果能局部压低这些特征，就有机会在不碰其他能力的前提下恢复正常回答。边界也很清楚：如果拒答机制分布在多层且高度纠缠，只调单层的上限会受限。","experiments":"摘要明确给出的事实是：ACTOR 只微调单个模型层，在多个 benchmark 上降低 over-refusal，同时保持对有害查询的处理能力和总体 utility。作者强调其 compute- 和 data-efficient，但未给出所用模型、层位选择、数据规模、具体 benchmark 名称以及提升幅度，因此不能补充数字。实验上最值得关注的点应是：与全参数 SFT 或普通参数高效微调相比，安全保持是否更稳，以及单层干预的迁移性如何。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles over-refusal in aligned LLMs: models reject benign requests too often after safety tuning, hurting usefulness. Standard fixes usually require another round of broad fine-tuning or preference optimization, which can blur safety boundaries, so the authors instead ask whether the refusal mechanism can be adjusted more locally.","importance":"This is a post-training interface contribution with broader relevance to pretraining and alignment. The key implication is that some alignment side effects may live in relatively localized representation subspaces rather than requiring another full-model behavioral rewrite. That makes the safety-utility trade-off potentially more controllable and much cheaper to edit.","technical_approach":"ACTOR is a targeted, activation-based fine-tuning method. It identifies activation components associated with refusal across diverse queries and then adjusts only a single layer to reduce excessive refusals. This differs from standard SFT or LoRA-style adaptation that learns from output behavior more globally. The design makes sense because over-refusal is often not a knowledge problem; it is a decision-boundary problem where safety features get overgeneralized. A local representation edit can therefore help without broadly disturbing the model. The limitation is obvious: if refusal behavior is distributed across many layers, a one-layer intervention may have a ceiling.","experiments":"The abstract clearly states that ACTOR fine-tunes only one layer and reduces over-refusal across multiple benchmarks while preserving the handling of harmful queries and overall utility. However, the provided text does not include the base models, datasets, benchmark names, or quantitative gains, so no exact numbers should be reported.","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","representation-finetuning","safety","over-refusal"]},{"id":"2505.14826","title":"FisherSFT: Data-Efficient Supervised Fine-Tuning of Language Models Using Information Gain","authors":["Rohan Deb","Kiran Koshy Thekumparampil","Kousha Kalantari","Gaurush Hiranandani","Shoham Sabach","Branislav Kveton"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Supervised fine-tuning (SFT) is a standard approach to adapting large language models (LLMs) to new domains. In this work, we improve the statistical efficiency of SFT by selecting an informative subset of training examples. Specifically, for a fixed budget of training examples, which determines the computational cost of fine-tuning, we determine the most informative ones. The key idea in our method is to select examples that maximize information gain, measured by the Hessian of the log-likelihood of the LLM. We approximate it efficiently by linearizing the LLM at the last layer using multinomial logistic regression models. Our approach is computationally efficient, analyzable, and performs well empirically. We demonstrate this on several problems, and back our claims with both quantitative results and an LLM evaluation.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.14826","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/DebTKHSK25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/DebTKHSK25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/deb25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：SFT 的算力预算往往由训练样本数决定，但大多数样本并不等价，有些样本对参数更新的信息增益明显更高。过去常见做法是随机采样或基于启发式质量分数筛数据，这些方法简单但和模型当前参数状态脱节，因此数据效率并不理想。","importance":"这是一个 post-train 数据选择方法，但它对 pretrain 也有广泛启发，因为它把“选什么数据最值”写成了近似可计算的信息量问题。重要性在于，它不是又一个经验性的 data scoring，而是试图用 Fisher/Hessian 近似把样本价值和模型不确定性联系起来；如果这条路线稳，预训练和 continual pretrain 的数据配比都可能受益。","technical_approach":"FisherSFT 的核心是：在固定样本预算下，选择能最大化信息增益的训练样本，信息增益由 LLM 对数似然 Hessian 衡量。直接算全模型 Hessian 代价太高，所以作者把 LLM 在最后一层线性化，并用多项逻辑回归近似来高效估计样本信息量。这个设计是一个明确的精度-成本折中：它放弃全模型二阶精确性，换来可分析、可落地的选择器。与基于困惑度或 embedding 覆盖度的筛选相比，它更关注“样本会如何改变参数”，因此更贴近真正的微调目标。","experiments":"摘要能确认的结论是：该方法在多个问题上经验效果良好，并主打 data-efficient SFT。未提供具体基础模型、任务、预算比例、基线方法和提升幅度，因此无法写出量化结果。最值得关注的实验通常会包括：在 10%/20% 数据预算下相对随机采样的收益、最后一层线性化近似与全模型行为的一致性，以及不同域迁移场景下信息增益选择是否稳健。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a simple but important inefficiency in SFT: the compute budget is usually tied to the number of training examples, yet examples are not equally informative. Random sampling and heuristic data scoring are easy to use, but they are only weakly connected to how a specific model would actually update.","importance":"This is a data-selection method for post-training, with wider relevance to pretraining as well. The key contribution is that it frames example selection as an approximate information-gain problem rather than another heuristic ranking rule. If this works robustly, it could inform not only SFT but also data curation for continual pretraining.","technical_approach":"FisherSFT selects a subset of examples that maximizes information gain under a fixed sample budget, using the Hessian of the log-likelihood as the signal. Since full-model second-order computation is too expensive, the method linearizes the LLM at the last layer and approximates the problem with multinomial logistic regression. This is a deliberate accuracy-cost trade-off: give up full second-order fidelity to get a selector that is efficient, analyzable, and practical. Compared with perplexity-based or diversity-based selection, it focuses more directly on how much an example is expected to move the model.","experiments":"What the abstract supports is that the method is computationally efficient, analyzable, and performs well empirically across several problems. It does not provide the base models, tasks, data budgets, baselines, or exact gains, so a quantitative experimental summary would be unreliable. The most informative results to look for would be low-budget comparisons against random sampling and checks on how well the last-layer approximation tracks true fine-tuning behavior.","authors_note":""},"tags":["sft","data-selection","information-gain","sample-efficiency"]},{"id":"2506.06686","title":"Learning Distribution-wise Control in Representation Space for Language Models","authors":["Chunyuan Deng","Ruidi Chang","Hanjie Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3b","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.06686","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/DengCC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/DengCC25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/deng25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["representation-finetuning","steering","alignment","control"]},{"id":"2502.00212","title":"STP: Self-play LLM Theorem Provers with Iterative Conjecturing and Proving","authors":["Kefan Dong","Tengyu Ma"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3c","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.00212","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Dong025a","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Dong025a","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/dong25h.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["self-play","theorem-proving","data-synthesis","rl"]},{"id":"2502.06258","title":"Emergent Response Planning in LLMs","authors":["Zhichen Dong","Zhanhui Zhou","Zhixuan Liu","Chao Yang","Chaochao Lu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"In this work, we argue that large language models (LLMs), though trained to predict only the next token, exhibit emergent planning behaviors: $\\textbf{their hidden representations encode future outputs beyond the next token}$. Through simple probing, we demonstrate that LLM prompt representations encode global attributes of their entire responses, including $\\textit{structure attributes}$ (e.g., response length, reasoning steps), $\\textit{content attributes}$ (e.g., character choices in storywriting, multiple-choice answers at the end of response), and $\\textit{behavior attributes}$ (e.g., answer confidence, factual consistency). In addition to identifying response planning, we explore how it scales with model size across tasks and how it evolves during generation. The findings that LLMs plan ahead for the future in their hidden representations suggest potential applications for improving transparency and generation control.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.06258","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/DongZL0L25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/DongZL0L25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/dong25p.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["planning","representation","probing","reasoning"]},{"id":"2505.05799","title":"MxMoE: Mixed-precision Quantization for MoE with Accuracy and Performance Co-Design","authors":["Haojie Duanmu","Xiuhong Li","Zhihang Yuan","Size Zheng","Jiangfei Duan","Xingcheng Zhang","Dahua Lin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3d","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.05799","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/DuanmuLY0DZL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/DuanmuLY0DZL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/duanmu25a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：MoE 模型部署时“参数巨大但每次只激活少数专家”的结构性矛盾，导致常规量化/内核优化要么掉精度要么吃不到吞吐。以往把 MoE 当成均匀结构做统一 bit-width 量化，会忽略不同线性层的敏感度差异与专家负载不均。","importance":"贡献是把 MoE 量化从单纯算法问题推进到“算法-系统共设计”：同时考虑精度敏感度、专家激活频率与硬件资源，自动给出混合精度配置并配套高效 GroupGEMM 内核。对大规模 pretrain 的启示是：MoE 的真实瓶颈常在系统侧（负载不均、kernel 形状多样），量化策略必须显式建模路由分布才能兑现性价比。","technical_approach":"MxMoE 的核心是混合精度搜索/分配框架：一方面按线性模块的量化敏感度分配更高精度，另一方面按专家激活频率与计算异质性分配更合适的精度与执行策略。与“全模型统一 4/8bit”不同，它把路由导致的稀疏激活当成一等公民来优化，并自动生成优化过的 mixed-precision GroupGEMM kernel 以并行执行多个专家；代价是实现复杂度更高，且收益依赖于路由分布稳定性与目标硬件特性。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体 MoE 架构（如 Switch/DeepSeekMoE）、参数量、量化位宽组合、吞吐/延迟提升倍数、精度下降幅度或对比 baseline（如 SmoothQuant/AWQ/GPTQ + MoE kernel）。只能确认作者报告了两点经验事实：不同线性块量化敏感度不同，且专家激活频率差异带来异质计算特征；以及系统侧提供了自动生成的 GroupGEMM 内核来提升并行执行效率。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a deployment pain point for MoE: huge parameter counts with sparse expert activation make naive, uniform quantization and generic kernels either lose accuracy or fail to deliver throughput due to heterogeneous sensitivity and skewed expert loads.","importance":"It is an algorithm–system co-design contribution: jointly optimize mixed-precision choices using quantization sensitivity and expert activation dynamics, and back it with optimized mixed-precision GroupGEMM kernels. For large-scale pretraining, it reinforces that MoE efficiency hinges on modeling routing distributions, not just picking a global bit-width.","technical_approach":"MxMoE searches/derives mixed-precision configurations by (1) allocating precision based on per-block quantization sensitivity and (2) accounting for heterogeneous compute induced by non-uniform expert activation. Unlike uniform 4/8-bit quantization, it treats routing sparsity and load imbalance as first-class signals, and auto-generates optimized mixed-precision GroupGEMM kernels for parallel expert execution; the trade-off is higher implementation complexity and hardware/routing dependence.","experiments":"The abstract provides no concrete model sizes, bit-width mixes, throughput/latency gains, accuracy deltas, or baselines (e.g., GPTQ/AWQ/SmoothQuant plus MoE kernels). It only states two empirical observations (varying sensitivity across linear blocks; heterogeneous compute from skewed expert activation) and that optimized kernels are generated to enable parallel execution.","authors_note":""},"tags":["moe","quantization","mixed-precision","inference-efficiency"]},{"id":"2411.03493","title":"LASER: Attention with Exponential Transformation","authors":["Sai Surya Duvvuri","Inderjit S. Dhillon"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3e","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.03493","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/DuvvuriD25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/DuvvuriD25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/duvvuri25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：标准 softmax 点积注意力在反向传播时可能产生过小的梯度，导致注意力前的参数学习效率低，从而拖慢训练或影响收敛质量。以往更多从数值稳定或注意力近似（线性注意力）角度改注意力，而不是直接针对梯度信号强度。","importance":"贡献是一个“训练动态/优化友好”的注意力替代：通过指数变换构造 LASER attention，并给出解析分析说明其梯度信号更大。对 pretrain 的意义在于它瞄准的是大模型训练中常见的梯度衰减与学习效率问题，潜在收益是更快收敛或更稳定的训练，但代价是需要验证其对长上下文、混合精度与注意力数值范围的鲁棒性。","technical_approach":"LASER 的核心是用指数变换替换/重参数化 softmax 注意力中的关键环节，使得反传梯度在理论上更强，从而改善注意力模块前序参数的学习信号。作者强调实现上只需对现有注意力实现做小改动，意味着它更像可插拔的算子替换而非新架构；边界在于指数变换可能放大数值动态范围，需要依赖良好的归一化与稳定实现，否则可能引入溢出或训练不稳定。","experiments":"摘要未提供任务、模型规模、训练 token 数、与标准 softmax attention 的定量对比（收敛速度、最终 loss/困惑度、下游指标）以及消融（不同温度/归一化/精度设置）。只能确认作者做了梯度分析并声称在实验中验证有效，但缺少数字使得很难判断它是“更快”还是“更好”，以及收益是否在大规模预训练下仍成立。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a training inefficiency: gradients backpropagated through softmax dot-product attention can be small, weakening learning signals for parameters before attention and potentially slowing or degrading optimization.","importance":"It proposes an optimization-friendly attention variant (LASER) with an analytic argument for stronger gradient signals. For pretraining, the promise is improved convergence speed or stability, but it must be weighed against numerical-range risks and the need to validate behavior under long context and mixed precision.","technical_approach":"LASER introduces an attention mechanism using an exponential transformation that reparameterizes the softmax pathway to admit larger backpropagated gradients. It is positioned as a small modification to existing attention implementations (operator swap rather than a new architecture); the main trade-off is that exponentials can amplify dynamic range, so stability and normalization details become critical.","experiments":"The abstract does not report tasks, model sizes, training tokens, quantitative deltas vs. standard attention (speed, final loss/perplexity, downstream metrics), or ablations (temperature/normalization/precision). It claims empirical validation plus gradient analysis, but the lack of numbers limits assessability.","authors_note":""},"tags":["attention","softmax","gradient-flow","transformer-architecture"]},{"id":"ElhoushiJ25","title":"any4: Learned 4-bit Numeric Representation for LLMs","authors":["Mostafa Elhoushi","Jeff Johnson"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ElhoushiJ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ElhoushiJ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/elhoushi25a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"摘要缺失：无法从给定信息判断作者具体要解决的 4-bit 数值表示在 LLM 量化中针对的是精度、吞吐、还是可训练性问题。","importance":"摘要缺失：只能从标题推测其贡献可能是“学习到的 4-bit 数值格式”以替代固定的 int4/fp4/nf4，但缺少机制与结果无法评估对 pretrain/serving 的实际冲击。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失：无法确认 any4 是学习量化码本、学习浮点格式（指数/尾数分配）、还是逐层/逐通道的自适应表示，也无法说明其为何优于现有 4-bit 方案（NF4、FP4、GPTQ/AWQ 等）。","experiments":"摘要缺失：没有模型规模、任务、对比方法、精度-速度权衡数字，无法总结。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract provided, so the exact quantization pain point targeted by a learned 4-bit numeric representation (accuracy, throughput, or trainability) cannot be determined.","importance":"Without the abstract, the contribution magnitude is unclear; the title suggests a learned 4-bit number format as an alternative to fixed int4/fp4/nf4, but impact on pretraining/serving cannot be assessed.","technical_approach":"No abstract: it is unknown whether any4 learns a codebook, a floating-point-like format (exponent/mantissa allocation), or layer/channel-wise adaptive representations, and why it would outperform existing 4-bit methods (NF4/FP4/GPTQ/AWQ).","experiments":"No abstract: model sizes, tasks, baselines, and accuracy–speed trade-offs are not available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","4-bit","numeric-representation","llm-training"]},{"id":"2502.18147","title":"Jacobian Sparse Autoencoders: Sparsify Computations, Not Just Activations","authors":["Lucy Farnik","Tim Lawson","Conor Houghton","Laurence Aitchison"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3f","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.18147","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/FarnikLHA25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/FarnikLHA25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/farnik25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：传统 SAE 只能让“激活”稀疏，难以让“计算过程”稀疏，因此对理解 LLM 的电路/算法帮助有限。以前我们用 SAE 找到可解释特征，但这些特征之间的映射仍是稠密的黑箱。","importance":"贡献是把可解释性从“表示层”推进到“计算层”：JSAE 直接约束 Jacobian（输入到输出的局部线性映射）稀疏，从而让某个模块的因果依赖更稀疏、更像可读的计算图。对机制分析与可控编辑的启示是：如果 Jacobian 真能被稀疏化，你不仅能说“有哪些特征”，还能说“哪些特征驱动了哪些输出变化”，但代价是训练与近似 Jacobian 的工程复杂度更高。","technical_approach":"JSAE 的核心是同时对输入/输出激活与 Jacobian 施加稀疏性约束，把“稀疏特征”与“稀疏影响路径”绑定在一起。关键技术点是 Jacobian 在 LLM 中维度巨大，直接显式计算不可行，因此作者提出了可 tractable 的近似/估计方法来训练该目标；与标准 SAE 相比，它牺牲了一部分实现简单性，换来对计算依赖结构的更强约束，边界在于 Jacobian 稀疏是局部性质，可能随输入分布变化而不稳定。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体模型（如哪个 LLM 层/MLP/attention 子模块）、训练数据、字典大小、稀疏度指标、以及相对 SAE 的定量改进（可解释性评分、重构误差、下游可控性实验）。只能确认作者强调了“naive Jacobian 不可计算”并提供了关键技术贡献来使其可行；判断价值需要看：在同等重构误差下 Jacobian 稀疏度提升多少，以及是否带来更清晰的因果干预结果（例如 feature patching/activation steering 的可预测性）。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a limitation of standard sparse autoencoders (SAEs): they sparsify activations but not computations, so they reveal features without making the underlying input→output mapping any less dense or interpretable.","importance":"It pushes interpretability from representations to computations by enforcing sparsity in the Jacobian (local input–output dependency structure). For mechanistic analysis, a sparse Jacobian can make causal pathways more readable and interventions more predictable, at the cost of higher training/estimation complexity.","technical_approach":"Jacobian SAEs (JSAEs) impose sparsity not only on input/output activations but also on the Jacobian connecting them, effectively tying sparse features to sparse influence paths. Since explicit Jacobians in LLM components are intractably large, the key technical contribution is a tractable approximation/estimation scheme to optimize this objective; the limitation is that Jacobian sparsity is local and may vary across input distributions.","experiments":"The abstract does not report the target model/component, data, dictionary size, sparsity metrics, or quantitative gains over standard SAEs (reconstruction error vs. interpretability/causal metrics). It highlights the intractability of naive Jacobians and claims a practical solution; the key missing evidence is how much Jacobian sparsity improves at matched reconstruction, and whether this yields clearer causal intervention results.","authors_note":""},"tags":["sparse-autoencoder","interpretability","jacobian","computation-analysis"]},{"id":"2410.02089","title":"RLEF: Grounding Code LLMs in Execution Feedback with Reinforcement Learning","authors":["Jonas Gehring","Kunhao Zheng","Jade Copet","Vegard Mella","Taco Cohen","Gabriel Synnaeve"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Large language models (LLMs) deployed as agents solve user-specified tasks over multiple steps while keeping the required manual engagement to a minimum. Crucially, such LLMs need to ground their generations in any feedback obtained to reliably achieve the desired outcomes. We propose an end-to-end reinforcement learning method for teaching models to leverage execution feedback in the realm of code synthesis, where state-of-the-art LLMs struggle to improve code iteratively compared to independent sampling. We benchmark on competitive programming tasks, where we achieve new state-of-the art results with both small (8B parameters) and large (70B) models while reducing the amount of samples required by an order of magnitude. Our analysis of inference-time behavior demonstrates that our method produces LLMs that effectively leverage automatic feedback over multiple steps.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.02089","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GehringZCMCS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GehringZCMCS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/gehring25a.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：代码 LLM 在多轮编程中拿到执行反馈后，仍然不擅长真正利用反馈来迭代修正。现有模型常能一次性采样出还不错的程序，但在 agent 式多步场景里，面对编译错误、测试失败或运行结果，改进幅度反而有限，说明模型没有学会把环境反馈纳入策略。","importance":"这是一个后训练范式上比较有分量的结果。它的重要性在于把 execution feedback 从推理时提示信息，提升为 RL 中的状态转移与奖励来源，并在 competitive programming 上展示了显著的样本效率增益。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：某些能力，尤其是“根据外部可验证反馈反复修正”的能力，很难靠 next-token 预训练自然长出来，需要显式交互式训练信号补足。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 RLEF，用强化学习把代码生成和执行反馈闭环打通。与把测试结果简单拼进上下文再继续采样不同，这里是端到端训练模型把反馈视为决策依据，在多轮生成中优化最终成功率。它针对的是 code synthesis 的交互性，而不是静态补全。这个设计有效，因为执行反馈是高信息密度、可验证、低歧义的学习信号，能直接指出哪一步策略有问题。代价在于环境回报稀疏、训练成本高，而且代码场景的可执行反馈优势不一定能原样迁移到开放域语言任务。","experiments":"摘要给出了几个关键事实：在 competitive programming 上，RLEF 在 8B 和 70B 模型上都取得了新的 SOTA，并将达到同等效果所需的样本数降低了一个数量级。作者还分析了推理时行为，说明模型确实学会了利用反馈，而不是仅靠更强的独立采样。摘要未给出具体 benchmark 名称和精确分数，但“8B 与 70B 双规模成立 + 样本效率提升 10x”已经说明结论比较稳。值得进一步关注的是：收益主要来自更好的错误定位、测试驱动修复，还是更优的探索策略。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a clear weakness in code LLM agents: they often receive execution feedback but still fail to use it effectively for iterative improvement. Strong one-shot code generation does not automatically translate into strong multi-step problem solving when compilation errors, test failures, and runtime outputs become part of the loop.","importance":"This is a meaningful post-training result because it upgrades execution feedback from a prompt artifact to a training signal inside reinforcement learning. The paper matters beyond code because it shows that some capabilities—especially iterative correction grounded in external, verifiable feedback—are not reliably induced by standard language modeling alone. They may need explicit interactive training.","technical_approach":"The method, RLEF, trains code models end-to-end with reinforcement learning so they can condition on execution feedback across multiple rounds. This is different from simply appending test outputs to the context and sampling again. The policy is optimized for eventual task success in an environment where feedback is part of the state. The reason this works in code is that execution signals are dense in information and objectively checkable. The trade-off is environment cost and reward sparsity, and the setup may not transfer cleanly to open-ended language tasks.","experiments":"The abstract provides several strong facts: on competitive programming, RLEF reaches new state of the art with both 8B and 70B models, and reduces the number of required samples by an order of magnitude. The authors also analyze inference-time behavior and claim the model truly learns to use feedback, rather than benefiting from stronger independent sampling alone. Exact benchmark names and scores are not given here, but the dual-scale result plus 10x sample-efficiency gain already makes the paper notable.","authors_note":""},"tags":["code-llm","rl","execution-feedback","agent","post-training"]},{"id":"Ghadia0JN025","title":"Dialogue Without Limits: Constant-Sized KV Caches for Extended Response in LLMs","authors":["Ravi Ghadia","Avinash Kumar","Gaurav Jain","Prashant J. Nair","Poulami Das"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Ghadia0JN025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Ghadia0JN025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/ghadia25a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：LLM 在超长对话或长响应生成时，KV cache 会随上下文线性膨胀，最终受显存和带宽限制而无法持续扩展。现有办法通常在保留历史质量和控制缓存大小之间做折中，要么压缩上下文损失信息，要么只在特定任务上成立。","importance":"从题目判断，这是一个推理系统方向的工作，贡献点在于把 extended response 的 KV cache 压到常数级。它对 pretrain 的直接影响有限，但对长上下文建模和 serving 很相关，因为如果推理侧能稳定支持 constant-sized cache，就会反过来影响训练时对长序列分布、注意力模式和记忆接口的设计选择。由于没有摘要，暂时无法判断这是严格等价方法、近似压缩方法，还是架构性改造。","technical_approach":"仅从标题看，方法核心应是让生成过程中用于后续注意力的状态保持常数大小，而不是保留全部历史 token 的标准 KV。常见实现思路可能包括状态汇总、递归压缩、滑窗配合摘要记忆，或把旧上下文投影到固定维持久状态。若论文声称“without limits”，关键就不只是压缩，而是如何保留对长程依赖真正有用的信息；否则 cache 小了，响应质量和事实一致性可能会明显下降。没有摘要，无法确认其设计是训练时配合的，还是纯 inference-time 技术。","experiments":"缺少摘要，无法给出模型规模、上下文长度、吞吐、显存节省和质量变化等关键数字。判断这类论文是否成立，最重要看四点：第一，缓存是否真的与对话轮数无关；第二，在长响应和长对话上，相比 full KV 的质量退化有多大；第三，是否支持现有模型无训练迁移；第四，收益主要来自显存节省、带宽降低还是解码加速。如果没有这些量化，这类“常数缓存”主张通常很难成立。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper appears to target the obvious bottleneck in long-form generation: KV cache grows with context length, eventually hitting memory and bandwidth limits. Existing approaches usually trade away either fidelity to old context or general applicability when trying to control cache growth.","importance":"This is likely an inference-systems paper. Its importance would come from making extended dialogue or long responses feasible with constant-sized cache, which is highly relevant for serving and long-context modeling. The direct impact on pretraining is limited, but if such a method works well, it changes the practical constraints under which long-context model design is evaluated. Without the abstract, it is unclear whether the method is exact, approximate, or architecture-dependent.","technical_approach":"From the title alone, the core idea is likely to replace the standard ever-growing token-wise KV history with a fixed-size state used for future attention. Plausible implementations include recurrent state summaries, compressed memory, sliding windows with summaries, or learned projections of old context into a persistent representation. The hard part is not compression by itself, but preserving the information needed for long-range dependency tracking. If that fails, cache savings will come at a noticeable quality cost. The provided information is insufficient to tell whether this is an inference-only method or requires training adaptation.","experiments":"The abstract is missing, so there is no reliable basis for model sizes, context lengths, throughput, memory savings, or quality deltas. The critical checks for a paper like this are whether cache size is truly independent of dialogue length, how much quality is lost relative to full KV attention, whether existing models can use it without retraining, and whether the main gain is memory, bandwidth, or latency. Without those numbers, the central claim remains hard to assess.","authors_note":""},"tags":["kv-cache","long-context","inference","memory","serving"]},{"id":"2502.12082","title":"AdaSplash: Adaptive Sparse Flash Attention","authors":["Nuno Gonçalves","Marcos V. Treviso","André F. T. Martins"],"institutions":["Instituto de Telecomunicações","Unbabel"],"abstract":"$40","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.12082","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GoncalvesTM25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GoncalvesTM25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/goncalves25a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"Softmax 注意力在长上下文场景下计算开销大，而自适应稀疏注意力（如 α-entmax）虽然理论上能利用稀疏性加速，但现有实现无法真正将稀疏性转化为运行时和内存的收益。AdaSplash 要解决的就是让自适应稀疏注意力在 GPU 上真正快起来。","importance":"系统级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示：如果自适应稀疏注意力能在效率上与 FlashAttention 竞争，它就可能成为长上下文预训练的实际选项。α-entmax 的数据依赖稀疏性比固定模式稀疏注意力更灵活，但之前一直受限于实现效率。这项工作可能打开这个瓶颈。","technical_approach":"两个关键设计：(1) 用混合 Halley-bisection 算法计算 α-entmax 变换，将迭代次数减少 7 倍；(2) 用自定义 Triton kernel 高效处理自适应稀疏模式。核心思路是把 α-entmax 的计算瓶颈（求根问题）和稀疏模式的不规则内存访问都用 GPU 友好的方式解决。","experiments":"在 RoBERTa 和 ModernBERT 上做了文本分类实验（摘要截断，完整结果需看原文）。关键数字：α-entmax 计算的迭代次数减少 7 倍。具体的端到端加速比和内存节省需参考原文。","authors_note":"André F. T. Martins 是 Instituto de Telecomunicações / Unbabel 的研究者，是稀疏注意力（entmax、sparsemax）方向的开创者之一。Marcos Treviso 也是该团队的核心成员。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Adaptive sparse attention (e.g., α-entmax) theoretically offers data-dependent sparsity, but existing implementations fail to translate sparsity into actual runtime/memory gains on GPUs. AdaSplash bridges this gap.","importance":"System-level contribution. If adaptive sparse attention can compete with FlashAttention in efficiency, it becomes a viable option for long-context pretraining. α-entmax's data-dependent sparsity is more flexible than fixed-pattern sparse attention, but was previously bottlenecked by implementation.","technical_approach":"Two key ideas: (1) a hybrid Halley-bisection root-finding algorithm that reduces α-entmax computation iterations by 7×; (2) custom Triton kernels that handle irregular sparse memory access patterns efficiently on GPU.","experiments":"Tested on RoBERTa and ModernBERT for text classification (abstract truncated). Key number: 7× reduction in iterations for α-entmax computation. End-to-end speedup and memory savings require the full paper.","authors_note":"André F. T. Martins is a pioneer of sparse attention methods (entmax, sparsemax) at Instituto de Telecomunicações / Unbabel."},"tags":["attention","long-context","sparsity","flash-attention","efficiency"],"notable_authors":["André F. T. Martins","Marcos V. Treviso"]},{"id":"2505.04993","title":"Latent Preference Coding: Aligning Large Language Models via Discrete Latent Codes","authors":["Zhuocheng Gong","Jian Guan","Wei Wu","Huishuai Zhang","Dongyan Zhao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$41","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.04993","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Gong00Z025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Gong00Z025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/gong25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"现有 LLM 对齐方法依赖显式或隐式的奖励函数，但人类偏好本质上是多因素、多维度的，不同任务和人群之间可能存在冲突。单一奖励函数难以捕捉这种复杂性。本文要解决的是：如何建模偏好背后的隐含因素及其组合。","importance":"对 pretrain↔posttrain 接口有启示。如果偏好信号本身是多维的，那么 RL 阶段用单一 reward model 可能系统性地丢失信息。LPC 的离散隐码框架提供了一种更结构化的偏好建模方式，可能减少 reward hacking 并提升对齐质量。方法级贡献。","technical_approach":"引入 Latent Preference Coding (LPC)，用离散隐码（discrete latent codes）表示偏好背后的隐含因素。框架自动从数据中推断这些因素及其重要性权重，不依赖预定义的奖励函数。LPC 可以与各种离线对齐算法（DPO 等）无缝集成。关键设计选择是用离散码而非连续隐变量，可能是为了更好的可解释性和组合性。","experiments":"摘要截断，具体实验数字不详。预期在多种对齐 benchmark 上与标准 DPO/RLHF 对比。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing alignment methods rely on explicit/implicit reward functions that fail to capture the multifaceted, sometimes conflicting nature of human preferences across tasks and populations.","importance":"Relevant to the pretrain-posttrain interface. If preference signals are inherently multi-dimensional, single reward models systematically lose information. LPC's discrete latent code framework offers a more structured approach that may reduce reward hacking.","technical_approach":"Introduces Latent Preference Coding (LPC): models implicit preference factors and their combinations using discrete latent codes. Automatically infers factors and their importance from data, integrates with offline alignment algorithms like DPO. Uses discrete rather than continuous latent variables, likely for better interpretability and compositionality.","experiments":"Abstract truncated; specific numbers unavailable.","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","preference-modeling","discrete-latent","post-training","reward-model"]},{"id":"GozetenI0SMO25","title":"Test-Time Training Provably Improves Transformers as In-context Learners","authors":["Halil Alperen Gozeten","Muhammed Emrullah Ildiz","Xuechen Zhang","Mahdi Soltanolkotabi","Marco Mondelli","Samet Oymak"],"institutions":["USC"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GozetenI0SMO25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GozetenI0SMO25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/gozeten25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"Test-Time Training (TTT) 能否可证明地提升 Transformer 作为 in-context learner 的能力？TTT 在推理时对模型参数进行临时更新，直觉上应该帮助 ICL，但之前缺乏理论保证。本文提供了形式化的证明。","importance":"理论级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示：TTT 本质上是在推理时做 mini-pretrain/finetune，如果它能可证明地改善 ICL，这说明 pretrain 阶段学到的表示存在可以被推理时优化进一步释放的潜力。这对理解 pretrain 表示的性质和 ICL 的机制都有价值。","technical_approach":"摘要未提供详细方法。从标题和作者背景推测，可能在特定的函数类（如线性函数）上，证明 TTT 后的 Transformer 在 ICL 任务上的误差界优于不做 TTT 的情况。","experiments":"摘要未提供，具体实验不详。","authors_note":"Mahdi Soltanolkotabi 是 USC 的教授，在优化理论和深度学习理论方面有大量工作。Marco Mondelli 在信息论和深度学习理论交叉领域有重要贡献。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Can Test-Time Training (TTT) provably improve Transformers as in-context learners? TTT temporarily updates model parameters at inference, but lacked formal guarantees for ICL improvement until this work.","importance":"Theoretical contribution. Implies that pretrained representations have latent potential that can be further unlocked by inference-time optimization, informing our understanding of what pretraining learns and how ICL works.","technical_approach":"Abstract not available. Likely proves that TTT reduces ICL error bounds on specific function classes (e.g., linear functions) compared to standard inference.","experiments":"Abstract not available; experimental details unknown.","authors_note":"Mahdi Soltanolkotabi (USC) and Marco Mondelli are known for optimization theory and deep learning theory."},"tags":["test-time-training","in-context-learning","transformer","generalization","theory"],"notable_authors":["Mahdi Soltanolkotabi","Marco Mondelli"]},{"id":"2501.04519","title":"rStar-Math: Small LLMs Can Master Math Reasoning with Self-Evolved Deep Thinking","authors":["Xinyu Guan","Li Lyna Zhang","Yifei Liu","Ning Shang","Youran Sun","Yi Zhu","Fan Yang","Mao Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$42","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.04519","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GuanZLSSZ0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GuanZLSSZ0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/guan25f.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["mcts","math-reasoning","self-play","process-reward-model","test-time-compute"]},{"id":"2412.12276","title":"Emergence and Effectiveness of Task Vectors in In-Context Learning: An Encoder Decoder Perspective","authors":["Seungwook Han","Jinyeop Song","Jeff Gore","Pulkit Agrawal"],"institutions":["MIT"],"abstract":"$43","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.12276","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HanSG025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HanSG025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/han25h.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的核心问题是：ICL 里被反复观察到的 task vector 到底是在预训练/训练中怎样形成的，以及它和最终任务表现之间是不是有可预测的对应关系。过去很多工作只是在训练后做表征分析，证明“模型里有 task vector”，但没有把 task encoding 的形成过程、conditional decoding 的形成过程和 ICL 成功联系成一个动态机制；这篇工作试图把这三件事放到同一个 encoder-decoder 视角里解释。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要在机制层，而不是提出一个更强的新模型。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：ICL 可能不是单纯靠更大的模型或更长的上下文自然涌现，而是依赖两个耦合能力同时长出来——先把上下文里的隐含任务压成可分离表示，再学会基于该表示调用合适的解码算法；这给分析训练动态、设计 probing 指标、甚至构造更有利于 ICL 的训练目标都提供了更具体的抓手。","technical_approach":"作者的方法核心是把 ICL 明确拆成 encoding 和 decoding 两步来研究，而不是把整个前向过程当黑盒。具体做法看起来是：在合成 ICL 任务上训练小型 transformer，跟踪不同训练阶段的隐藏表示，检查模型是否已经把不同 latent task 编成彼此可分的向量，同时观察输出端是否已经学会根据该向量执行条件解码。这个设计的关键选择是用可控的 synthetic task，而不是直接上真实自然语言任务；代价是生态有效性有限，但好处是可以把“任务表征是否可分”“解码算法是否就位”“最终 ICL 精度如何”三者做清晰对应。和已有只做 post-hoc linear probe 的工作相比，它更强调 emergence 的时间顺序和二者耦合关系。","experiments":"从摘要可确认的实验事实是：作者在合成 ICL 任务上分析了一个小型 transformer 的训练动态，并报告了 task encoding 与 decoding 的耦合涌现；随着模型逐步把不同 latent task 编成更清晰、可分离的表示，ICL 表现同步提升。任务示例包括类似“找出句子中的第一个名词”这类潜在规则型任务。摘要还说他们在更真实的 setting 上做了验证，但给出的片段被截断了，因此无法可靠写出模型规模、数据规模、baseline 名称和具体提升数字。这篇论文更像是机制验证，不像以 SOTA 指标为主的工作；若要判断外推价值，重点应看他们是否展示了：1）task encoding 质量与测试任务精度有稳定相关性；2）encoding/decoding 的出现是否存在先后或瓶颈层；3）该相关性是否能跨任务族成立。","authors_note":"MIT；Pulkit Agrawal 是 MIT 方向上较知名的研究者，长期做表征学习、控制与具身智能相关工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a precise question: how task vectors emerge during training and whether their quality actually predicts in-context learning performance. Prior work mostly stopped at post-hoc observations that transformers contain task-like directions in representation space, but did not connect representation formation, conditional decoding, and ICL success into one training-time account.","importance":"This is a mechanism paper, not a headline benchmark paper, and that is exactly why it matters. For pretraining research, it suggests that ICL may depend on two coupled capabilities emerging together: encoding the latent task from demonstrations into a separable internal state, and decoding conditionally using that state. That gives a more actionable lens than the vague claim that ICL simply appears with scale.","technical_approach":"The key idea is to decompose ICL into task encoding and task-conditioned decoding, then study both during training instead of treating the transformer as a black box. The authors train a small transformer on synthetic ICL tasks and track hidden representations over time, asking whether different latent tasks become separable and whether the model simultaneously acquires the decoding algorithm needed for each task. Using synthetic tasks is a deliberate trade-off: it limits realism but makes the latent task identity controllable, so representation quality, decoding behavior, and final task accuracy can be compared directly. Relative to earlier probing-style work, the contribution is the coupled emergence story rather than a static representation analysis.","experiments":"From the abstract, the main empirical result is that task encoding and decoding emerge together during training on synthetic ICL tasks, and ICL performance improves as latent tasks become more distinctly represented. The tasks include rule-like settings such as identifying the first noun in a sentence. The abstract also claims validation beyond the synthetic setup, but the provided text is truncated, so model size, data scale, baselines, and exact gains cannot be stated reliably. The paper should therefore be read mainly for its training-dynamics evidence: whether encoding quality tracks downstream ICL accuracy, whether there is a consistent emergence order, and whether the correlation transfers across task families.","authors_note":"MIT; Pulkit Agrawal is a well-known MIT researcher with representative work in representation learning, control, and embodied intelligence."},"tags":["in-context-learning","task-vectors","pretraining-dynamics","encoder-decoder"],"notable_authors":["Pulkit Agrawal"]},{"id":"2506.07492","title":"Explicit Preference Optimization: No Need for an Implicit Reward Model","authors":["Xiangkun Hu","Lemin Kong","Tong He","David Wipf"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$44","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.07492","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HuK0W25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HuK0W25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/hu25l.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是 DPO 一类方法的一个核心隐含假设：它们通过重参数化技巧引入一个 implicit reward，从而跳过单独训练 reward model，但这种做法虽然简洁，优化行为并不总是透明，也未必总和我们真正想要的偏好目标一致。作者的主张从标题看很直接——做 preference optimization 不一定需要 implicit reward，可以显式地写出来并直接优化。","importance":"这项工作的意义在 post-training 方法层，而且和 pretrain 的闭环有关。因为偏好优化越来越像基础模型能力释放和行为塑形的主要接口；如果 implicit reward 的便利性带来了偏差、不可控性或不稳定，那么显式 reward 形式可能更便于分析训练信号质量、做 reward shaping，并理解为什么某些偏好算法会 reward hack 或过拟合偏好数据。","technical_approach":"作者提出 Explicit Preference Optimization（EPO），核心思想是绕开 DPO 的隐式奖励构造，直接使用显式 reward 目标进行优化。这里的关键不是‘重新发明 RLHF’，而是找到一种不需要单独训练隐式/显式 reward model、同时又比 DPO 的 reparameterization 更清晰的目标写法。若方法成立，它和 DPO 的主要区别应在两点：第一，优化目标对偏好数据与策略更新之间的关系更直接；第二，可以更容易分析梯度、温度、reference policy 等因素各自扮演的角色。边界在于：显式化并不自动保证更强，如果缺少合适正则和 reference 约束，也可能更容易过度放大偏好信号。","experiments":"摘要已给出足够多的背景，但关键结果部分在提供的片段中被截断，因此不能确认它在什么模型和数据上优于 DPO，也无法写具体提升数字。可以确定的是，论文会把 EPO 与 DPO 及其变体放在一起比较，并围绕 RLHF 简化路线展开。对这类工作，最重要的实验通常不是单个 benchmark 冠军，而是：1）在不同偏好数据质量下是否更稳；2）是否减少 reference model 敏感性；3）在 win rate、长度偏置、KL 控制和训练稳定性上是否优于 DPO；4）是否能解释某些 DPO 变体成功只是因为隐式 reward 近似得比较好。若这些点做扎实，这篇论文会比单纯再提一个 preference loss 更有价值。","authors_note":"作者列表含 David Wipf；其在稀疏学习、贝叶斯方法与机器学习优化方向较为知名。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper questions a central convenience of DPO-style methods: they avoid training a separate reward model by introducing an implicit reward through reparameterization, but that convenience can obscure what objective is really being optimized. The title makes the claim plainly: preference optimization does not need to rely on an implicit reward construction.","importance":"This is a post-training methods contribution with meaningful implications for the pretrain–posttrain loop. Preference optimization is increasingly the interface through which pretrained capability is turned into usable behavior. If implicit rewards are hard to interpret or control, then making the objective more explicit could improve signal quality analysis, reward shaping, and diagnosis of reward hacking.","technical_approach":"The proposed Explicit Preference Optimization aims to optimize a directly specified preference objective instead of leaning on DPO’s implicit reward parameterization. The interesting part is not simply returning to full RLHF; it is to preserve the simplicity of single-stage preference training while making the optimization target more transparent. Relative to DPO, the likely advantages are cleaner gradient interpretation and a more direct view of how preference labels, reference policies, and regularization interact. The caution is that explicitness alone does not guarantee better behavior; without the right constraints, it may amplify preference noise or overfit more aggressively.","experiments":"The abstract provides substantial motivation but the result section is truncated in the provided text, so model scales, datasets, and exact gains over DPO cannot be stated reliably. The most meaningful experiments for a paper like this are robustness across preference data quality, sensitivity to the reference policy, effects on win rate versus verbosity bias, KL control, and training stability. If the paper shows advantages on those axes rather than only on a single benchmark score, it would be a substantive contribution.","authors_note":"The author list includes David Wipf, known for work in sparse learning, Bayesian methods, and optimization."},"tags":["dpo","preference-optimization","alignment","reward-model","rlhf"],"notable_authors":["David Wipf"]},{"id":"2505.20633","title":"Test-Time Learning for Large Language Models","authors":["Jinwu Hu","Zitian Zhang","Guohao Chen","Xutao Wen","Chao Shuai","Wei Luo","Bin Xiao","Yuanqing Li","Mingkui Tan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$45","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.20633","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HuZCWSL00T25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HuZCWSL00T25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/hu25z.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 在面对分布偏移（专业领域、语言变体等）时泛化能力不足，而传统做法要么靠 domain-specific fine-tuning（需要标注数据），要么靠 prompt engineering（效果有限）。本文提出在推理阶段仅用无标注测试数据动态适配 LLM。","importance":"方法级贡献。提出了一种不需要任何标注数据、不修改预训练流程的 test-time 自适应范式。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：它从理论和实验两个角度揭示了输入 perplexity 与预测准确率之间的关系——降低输入 perplexity 可以改善输出质量，这为理解 LLM 的泛化机制提供了一个新视角。","technical_approach":"核心思路是把 test-time learning 形式化为输入 perplexity 最小化。具体做法：在推理时，用无标注测试数据对 LLM 做自监督更新，目标函数就是最小化测试输入的 perplexity。作者先给出了理论分析说明为什么更低的输入 perplexity 对应更准确的预测，再据此设计了 TLM 框架。与 test-time training（TTT）在视觉领域的工作类似，但针对 LLM 的自回归特性做了适配，关键选择是直接用语言建模损失而非设计辅助任务。","experiments":"摘要中未给出具体数字和 baseline 细节。从描述看，实验应覆盖多个 domain shift 场景，验证 TLM 在无标注条件下的自适应效果。具体模型规模、数据集和提升幅度需查阅全文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLMs struggle to generalize under distribution shifts (specialized domains, linguistic variations). Existing solutions require labeled data or domain-specific fine-tuning. This work proposes adapting LLMs at test time using only unlabeled test data.","importance":"A method-level contribution introducing a test-time self-supervised adaptation paradigm for LLMs. The key insight for pretrain researchers: minimizing input perplexity on test data improves prediction accuracy, providing both theoretical grounding and a practical mechanism for understanding LLM generalization under distribution shift.","technical_approach":"Formulates test-time learning as input perplexity minimization. During inference, the LLM is updated via self-supervised learning on unlabeled test inputs using the standard language modeling loss. The authors provide theoretical justification linking lower input perplexity to better predictions. The key design choice is using the native autoregressive loss directly rather than designing auxiliary tasks, which is natural for LLMs and avoids extra engineering.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide specific numbers, model sizes, or baselines. The approach is validated across domain shift scenarios. Full experimental details require reading the paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["test-time-learning","continual-learning","domain-adaptation","llm","distribution-shift"]},{"id":"2503.21878","title":"Is Best-of-N the Best of Them? Coverage, Scaling, and Optimality in Inference-Time Alignment","authors":["Audrey Huang","Adam Block","Qinghua Liu","Nan Jiang","Akshay Krishnamurthy","Dylan J. Foster"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$46","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.21878","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HuangBL0KF25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HuangBL0KF25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/huang25c.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Best-of-N 采样是推理时对齐（inference-time alignment）最常用的方法，但朴素地增加 N 会因 reward hacking 导致性能先升后降。本文从理论角度分析推理时对齐算法的最优性和 compute scaling 行为。","importance":"理论级贡献，对理解 inference-time compute scaling 有直接价值。核心发现是：预训练策略对高质量回复的覆盖度（coverage）决定了推理时对齐的性能上限和 compute 效率。这对 pretrain 研究有明确启示——pretrain 阶段的多样性和覆盖度直接影响下游 inference-time scaling 的天花板。","technical_approach":"将 inference-time alignment 形式化为：给定预训练策略和不完美的 reward model，如何通过增加推理计算来提升回复质量。分析了 Best-of-N 及其他算法在 (i) 回复质量和 (ii) 计算量两个维度上的表现。关键理论结果是：预训练策略的 coverage（对最优策略的覆盖度）是决定性因素——coverage 不足时，无论怎么增加 N 都无法弥补；reward model 的不完美会在 N 增大时导致 hacking。这为设计更好的 inference-time 算法提供了理论指导。","experiments":"这是一篇偏理论的工作，核心贡献是分析框架和理论结果。摘要未提及大规模实验，但理论预测（如 coverage 对 scaling 行为的影响）应有实验验证。","authors_note":"作者包括 Nan Jiang 和 Akshay Krishnamurthy，均为 RL 理论领域的知名研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Best-of-N sampling is the most common inference-time alignment method, but naively increasing N causes performance degradation due to reward hacking. This work provides a theoretical analysis of optimality and compute scaling for inference-time alignment algorithms.","importance":"A theory-level contribution with direct implications for pretrain. The central finding: the pre-trained policy's coverage over high-quality responses determines both the performance ceiling and compute efficiency of inference-time alignment. This means pretrain-stage diversity directly caps downstream inference-time scaling.","technical_approach":"Formalizes inference-time alignment as improving response quality from a pre-trained policy given an imperfect reward model. Analyzes algorithms along two axes: response quality and compute. The key theoretical result: coverage of the pre-trained policy over the optimal policy is the bottleneck—insufficient coverage cannot be compensated by more compute, and reward model imperfection causes hacking as N grows. This provides principled guidance for designing better inference-time algorithms.","experiments":"Primarily a theoretical work. The abstract does not mention large-scale experiments, though theoretical predictions (e.g., coverage's impact on scaling) are likely validated empirically.","authors_note":"Authors include Nan Jiang and Akshay Krishnamurthy, both well-known RL theory researchers."},"tags":["best-of-n","inference-scaling","alignment","reward-hacking","sampling"],"notable_authors":["Nan Jiang","Akshay Krishnamurthy"]},{"id":"2502.19255","title":"Can RLHF be More Efficient with Imperfect Reward Models? A Policy Coverage Perspective","authors":["Jiawei Huang","Bingcong Li","Christoph Dann","Niao He"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$47","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.19255","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HuangLDH25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HuangLDH25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/huang25o.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在线 RLHF 的样本效率是瓶颈。现有工作关注探索策略，但忽略了一个实际场景：我们通常有不完美但相关的 reward model（比如旧版本或不同领域的），如何利用它们来加速学习？","importance":"理论+方法级贡献。核心发现是 RLHF 中 KL 正则化带来的一个优雅性质：策略的次优性（sub-optimality）恰好刻画了它对最优策略的覆盖度（coverability）。这意味着一个次优但合理的策略可以作为好的探索起点。对 pretrain 研究的启示：pretrain 策略的质量直接决定了 RLHF 阶段的样本效率，这从理论上解释了为什么更好的 base model 在 RLHF 中收益更大。","technical_approach":"首先识别出 KL 正则化 RLHF 目标的一个新性质：策略的 sub-optimality 等价于其对最优策略的 coverage。基于此提出 Transfer Policy Optimization (TPO)：利用不完美 reward model 产生的策略作为初始化或引导，加速在线 RLHF 学习。TPO 有可证明的理论优势——相比从头开始的在线学习，能减少所需样本量。关键 trade-off 是：transfer 来源的 reward model 越好（sub-optimality 越小），coverage 越好，加速越明显。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体实验数字，主要是理论贡献（provable benefits）。具体实验验证需查阅全文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Sample efficiency in online RLHF is a bottleneck. While exploration strategies have been studied, the potential of leveraging imperfect but relevant reward models (e.g., older versions, different domains) to accelerate learning remains underexplored.","importance":"A theory+method contribution. The key finding: KL regularization in RLHF creates an elegant property where a policy's sub-optimality exactly captures its coverage of the optimal policy. This theoretically explains why better base models benefit more from RLHF—their coverage is inherently better.","technical_approach":"Identifies a novel property of KL-regularized RLHF: sub-optimality equals coverability of the optimal policy. Based on this, proposes Transfer Policy Optimization (TPO): uses policies from imperfect reward models as initialization or guidance to accelerate online RLHF. TPO has provable sample complexity improvements over learning from scratch. The key trade-off: better source reward models (lower sub-optimality) provide better coverage and larger speedups.","experiments":"Primarily a theoretical contribution with provable benefits. No specific experimental numbers in the abstract; full experiments require reading the paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["rlhf","reward-model","sample-efficiency","policy-coverage","alignment"]},{"id":"2407.11239","title":"From Low Rank Gradient Subspace Stabilization to Low-Rank Weights: Observations, Theories, and Applications","authors":["Ajay Kumar Jaiswal","Yifan Wang","Lu Yin","Shiwei Liu","Runjin Chen","Jiawei Zhao","Ananth Grama","Yuandong Tian","Zhangyang Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$48","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.11239","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/JaiswalW00CZGTW25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/JaiswalW00CZGTW25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/jaiswal25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：LLM 权重的低秩性到底从何而来、在训练中何时出现、以及为什么不同模块的可低秩程度不一样，从而指导“该压哪里、压多少”。以往低秩压缩多从分解技巧出发，缺少与训练动态/梯度结构的因果联系。","importance":"贡献是把低秩结构与梯度子空间稳定化联系起来，给出理论框架并配合经验观察，属于“机制解释 + 可操作压缩策略”的组合。对 pretrain/finetune 工程的启示是：低秩不是全模型均匀成立的性质，按模块自适应 rank 才能在同等压缩率下减少性能损失；同时梯度/Hessian 视角可用于判断何时开始做低秩化更安全。","technical_approach":"作者从 Hessian 分析出发刻画梯度子空间的稳定化，并提出梯度动态与权重低秩可表达性之间的关系：当训练进入某种“梯度主要落在低维子空间”的阶段，对应的权重更新也更容易收敛到低秩结构。基于这一观察，论文主张对不同组件采用不同的 rank reduction，而不是统一 rank。边界在于：Hessian/梯度子空间的估计在大模型上成本高且噪声大，实际落地需要近似与工程折中。","experiments":"摘要提到两类结果：1）经验上不同 LLM 组件呈现不同程度的收敛低秩结构；2）据此需要 variable rank reduction 才能最小化性能下降。摘要未给出具体模型（如 LLaMA/OPT）、参数量、压缩率、困惑度/下游指标下降幅度与对比方法，因此无法量化复述。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper investigates where low-rank structure in LLM weights comes from, when it emerges during training, and why it is non-uniform across components—so rank reduction can be targeted instead of applied blindly. Prior low-rank compression often focused on decomposition tricks without tying them to training dynamics.","importance":"It combines mechanism-level explanation with actionable compression guidance by linking low-rank expressiveness to gradient-subspace stabilization (via Hessian analysis). For pretrain/finetune engineering, the key takeaway is that low-rankness is component-dependent, so adaptive per-module ranks can reduce quality loss at a given compression budget; gradient/Hessian signals may also indicate safer timing for rank reduction.","technical_approach":"Using a Hessian-based framework, the authors characterize stabilization of the gradient subspace and empirically connect gradient dynamics to low-rank expressiveness of weight matrices. The claim is that once gradients concentrate in a low-dimensional subspace, the resulting weight updates tend to converge to low-rank structure, but at different strengths across modules—motivating variable rank reduction. The boundary is practicality: estimating Hessian/gradient subspaces at scale is expensive and noisy, requiring approximations for real deployments.","experiments":"The abstract states (1) different LLM components exhibit different degrees of converged low-rank structure, and (2) variable rank reduction is needed to minimize performance drop. It does not provide model names/sizes, compression ratios, perplexity/downstream deltas, or baseline comparisons.","authors_note":""},"tags":["low-rank","gradient-subspace","training-dynamics","weight-decomposition"]},{"id":"2502.10581","title":"Do We Need to Verify Step by Step? Rethinking Process Supervision from a Theoretical Perspective","authors":["Zeyu Jia","Alexander Rakhlin","Tengyang Xie"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$49","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.10581","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/JiaRX25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/JiaRX25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/jia25f.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心结论是：在标准覆盖假设下，结果监督（outcome supervision）在统计难度上并不比过程监督（process supervision）更差。这个问题之所以重要，是因为当前很多复杂推理训练都默认“逐步监督更容易学”，于是投入大量成本采集 step-level 标注，但这一共识此前更多来自直觉和经验，而不是清晰的理论刻画。","importance":"这是一个直接影响 post-train 数据策略的理论工作。它的冲击不在于提出了一个新训练算法，而在于削弱了“过程监督天然更优”的理论正当性：如果 outcome supervision 在统计上并不更难，那么高成本过程标注就不再是默认选项，而是要看优化、探索和工程实现是否真的带来净收益。对 pretrain/post-train 闭环的启示也很直接：训练信号的粒度未必是瓶颈，覆盖和偏差可能更关键。","technical_approach":"方法上，这篇工作走的是理论分析而不是经验比较。作者把复杂推理任务中的 RL 学习形式化后，比较了过程监督和结果监督在标准数据覆盖条件下的统计可学性，并证明 outcome supervision 不存在额外的本质统计障碍。这个结论有力的地方在于它把常说的“trajectory-level coverage 更难”拆开来看：如果覆盖已经满足，那么难点不来自监督落在终点而不是中间步骤；真正麻烦的部分更可能是探索、优化稳定性或函数逼近误差。边界也很明确：这是在给定假设下的统计结论，不自动等价于真实大模型训练中的优化效率和 sample efficiency 结论。","experiments":"从给出的摘要看，论文主轴是理论结果，未提供可总结的统一实验数字。关键事实是其主定理直接比较了两类监督在标准 coverage assumptions 下的统计难度，而不是通过某几个 benchmark 经验性地宣称 outcome supervision 足够好。若正文包含模拟或实证，作用更可能是验证理论趋势，而不是追求 SOTA。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The main claim is sharp: under standard coverage assumptions, outcome supervision is not statistically harder than process supervision. This matters because current reasoning pipelines often assume step-level supervision is inherently easier, which has justified expensive annotation efforts without a clean theoretical basis.","importance":"This is a theory paper with practical consequences for how we collect supervision. Its contribution is not a new training recipe but a correction to a widely held assumption: if outcome supervision is not fundamentally harder in the statistical sense, then process supervision should be treated as a cost-benefit choice rather than a default. For pretrain/post-train work, the implication is that signal granularity may be less important than coverage, bias, and optimization.","technical_approach":"The paper formalizes reinforcement learning for complex reasoning and compares process- and outcome-level supervision through a statistical lens. The central theorem shows that once standard data coverage is assumed, the usual argument against outcome supervision largely disappears. That is useful because it separates two issues that are often conflated: statistical identifiability versus optimization and exploration. The result does not say process supervision never helps; it says the advantage is not information-theoretic under the assumed conditions.","experiments":"The abstract emphasizes theory rather than benchmark performance, so there are no reliable model sizes or quantitative gains to report here. The key evidence is the theorem itself, not a leaderboard result. If empirical sections exist, they are likely supportive rather than the core contribution.","authors_note":""},"tags":["process-supervision","outcome-supervision","rl","reward-model","reasoning"]},{"id":"2503.15798","title":"Mixture of Lookup Experts","authors":["Shibo Jie","Yehui Tang","Kai Han","Yitong Li","Duyu Tang","Zhi-Hong Deng","Yunhe Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4a","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15798","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/JieT0LT0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/JieT0LT0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/jie25b.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是 MoE 在部署时一个很现实的痛点：虽然每次只激活少数专家，但所有专家参数通常都得放进显存，导致 VRAM 占用仍然很大。已有 offloading 方案能减少常驻显存，却会把延迟拉高，因为专家是动态选择的，按需加载很容易卡住推理路径。","importance":"这项工作的价值在于，它不是继续优化路由器或负载均衡，而是直接重写了“专家在推理时应该以什么形态存在”这个假设。对大模型部署很有启发，因为它表明 MoE 的部署瓶颈不一定要通过更聪明的调度解决，也可以通过 re-parameterization 改写专家表示。若效果稳定，这属于架构-系统联合设计，而不是单点工程 trick。","technical_approach":"MoLE 的核心做法是：训练时专家仍是 FFN，推理前把专家重参数化成 lookup tables，让专家输出通过查表检索得到。关键点在于这些专家只接 embedding layer 的输出，这使得输入空间更容易离散化或映射到可检索表示，从而把原本昂贵的 FFN 计算与专家参数常驻需求，转成更轻的 LUT 访问。和标准 MoE 相比，它牺牲的是专家对深层上下文的直接适配能力，换来更低通信和更低显存；因此成败取决于 embedding-level expert 是否足够表达，以及 LUT 近似是否保留了专家选择收益。","experiments":"摘要说明 MoLE 同时提升 communication 和 VRAM efficiency，但没有给出参数规模和具体指标。论文最值得看的实验应包括：与标准 MoE、专家 offloading、以及 dense FFN 的延迟/显存/精度三方对比；不同 LUT 粒度下的质量退化；以及随着专家数增大，MoLE 是否比传统 MoE 更接近理想扩展。没有数字前，不能声称它在质量上完全无损。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a deployment bottleneck in MoE models: only a few experts are active per token, but all experts usually need to reside in VRAM because routing is dynamic. Existing offloading methods reduce resident memory, but often hurt latency because experts must be loaded on demand.","importance":"Its contribution is notable because it does not just tweak routing or scheduling. Instead, it changes the inference-time form of the expert itself. That is a useful systems-architecture idea: the bottleneck of MoE deployment may be addressed by reparameterizing experts, not only by serving heuristics.","technical_approach":"MoLE keeps experts as FFNs during training, but reparameterizes them into lookup tables before inference. A key design choice is that experts take embedding-layer outputs as input, which makes lookup-style retrieval feasible. The benefit is lower communication and lower VRAM demand at inference. The cost is reduced flexibility: embedding-level experts may be less expressive than deep-context experts, and the quality depends on how well the LUT approximation preserves expert behavior.","experiments":"The abstract claims gains in both communication and VRAM efficiency, but does not provide exact numbers here. The most important experiments will compare MoLE against standard MoE, offloaded MoE, and dense baselines on memory, latency, and accuracy, as well as scaling behavior with more experts and different lookup granularities.","authors_note":""},"tags":["moe","lookup-table","inference-efficiency","memory"]},{"id":"2506.04531","title":"HALoS: Hierarchical Asynchronous Local SGD over Slow Networks for Geo-Distributed Large Language Model Training","authors":["Geon-Woo Kim","Junbo Li","Shashidhar Gandham","Omar Baldonado","Adithya Gangidi","Pavan Balaji","Zhangyang Wang","Aditya Akella"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4b","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.04531","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/KimLGBGBWA25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/KimLGBGBWA25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/kim25y.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：当大模型训练必须跨地域使用异构加速器时，跨区域通信慢、硬件速度不一、straggler 严重，传统同步训练会把整体效率拖得很低。随着算力供给越来越碎片化，这已经不是边缘场景，而是越来越常见的现实约束。","importance":"这是系统级训练工作，但对大规模 pretrain 很重要，因为它直面了一个会改变最优训练组织方式的约束：算力不再默认同机房、同网络、同构。HALoS 的意义不只是提速，而是给出了 geo-distributed LLM training 的一个可分析框架，说明在慢网络下，层次化异步优化可能比强同步更现实。对真正做大规模训练的人，这类工作往往比小幅算法增益更有落地价值。","technical_approach":"HALoS 提出层次化异步 local SGD：每个区域内部有 local parameter servers，区域之间由一个 global parameter server 汇总更新。这个结构减少了昂贵的跨区域通信，把高频同步留在快的区域内网络上，同时通过异步设计降低慢节点拖累。论文还给出了非凸目标下的收敛分析，并特别讨论 hierarchical momentum 在异步训练中的作用。设计上它明显是在收敛速度、通信开销和参数陈旧性之间做权衡：跨区同步变少会引入 stale updates，但如果网络足够慢，减少阻塞带来的收益可能远大于陈旧性的代价。","experiments":"摘要给出了一个明确数字：HALoS 最多实现 7.5× faster 的效果，但截断内容没有说明是训练吞吐、time-to-accuracy 还是相对哪条 baseline。可以确认的是，实验目标是 geo-distributed、heterogeneous hardware、slow networks 这几个强现实约束下的训练效率。正文里最值得看的，是它在相同最终质量下的 wall-clock 收益、不同地域网络延迟下的鲁棒性，以及参数陈旧性对收敛曲线的影响。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a growing training constraint: when LLM training spans geographically distributed and heterogeneous accelerators, inter-region communication becomes slow, hardware speeds differ, and synchronous training suffers badly from stragglers. This is increasingly a practical reality rather than an edge case.","importance":"This is a systems paper, but highly relevant to large-scale pretraining. Its significance is that it treats geo-distributed training as a first-class setting and proposes an optimization framework designed for it, rather than assuming a single fast datacenter. For teams training at scale, that can matter more than modest algorithmic gains under idealized hardware assumptions.","technical_approach":"HALoS introduces hierarchical asynchronous local SGD with local parameter servers inside each region and a global parameter server across regions. The design minimizes expensive cross-region communication, exploits faster intra-region links, and reduces straggler sensitivity through asynchrony. The paper also provides convergence guarantees for non-convex objectives and analyzes hierarchical momentum. The trade-off is the expected one: less synchronization lowers communication cost but increases staleness, so the method works best when slow networks make strict synchrony too expensive.","experiments":"The abstract reports up to 7.5x faster performance, though the excerpt does not specify whether that is throughput or time-to-target-quality, nor the exact baseline. The meaningful experimental questions are whether the speedup holds at equal final quality, how performance changes with cross-region latency, and how much stale updates affect convergence in practice.","authors_note":""},"tags":["distributed-training","async-sgd","llm-training","optimization","systems"]},{"id":"2506.05967","title":"Preference Learning for AI Alignment: a Causal Perspective","authors":["Kasia Kobalczyk","Mihaela van der Schaar"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Reward modelling from preference data is a crucial step in aligning large language models (LLMs) with human values, requiring robust generalisation to novel prompt-response pairs. In this work, we propose to frame this problem in a causal paradigm, providing the rich toolbox of causality to identify the persistent challenges, such as causal misidentification, preference heterogeneity, and confounding due to user-specific factors. Inheriting from the literature of causal inference, we identify key assumptions necessary for reliable generalisation and contrast them with common data collection practices. We illustrate failure modes of naive reward models and demonstrate how causally-inspired approaches can improve model robustness. Finally, we outline desiderata for future research and practices, advocating targeted interventions to address inherent limitations of observational data.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.05967","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/KobalczykS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/KobalczykS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/kobalczyk25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["alignment","preference-learning","reward-model","causality","generalization"]},{"id":"2509.07963","title":"Customizing the Inductive Biases of Softmax Attention using Structured Matrices","authors":["Yilun Kuang","Noah Amsel","Sanae Lotfi","Shikai Qiu","Andres Potapczynski","Andrew Gordon Wilson"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4c","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.07963","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/KuangALQPW25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/KuangALQPW25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/kuang25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["attention","inductive-bias","structured-matrices","architecture","transformer"]},{"id":"2502.01612","title":"Self-Improving Transformers Overcome Easy-to-Hard and Length Generalization Challenges","authors":["Nayoung Lee","Ziyang Cai","Avi Schwarzschild","Kangwook Lee","Dimitris Papailiopoulos"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4d","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.01612","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LeeCS0P25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LeeCS0P25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/lee25d.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["self-improvement","length-generalization","training-dynamics","curriculum"]},{"id":"Levi25","title":"A Simple Model of Inference Scaling Laws","authors":["Noam Itzhak Levi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Levi25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Levi25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/levi25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["inference-scaling","scaling-law","test-time-compute"]},{"id":"2404.04102","title":"ROPO: Robust Preference Optimization for Large Language Models","authors":["Xize Liang","Chao Chen","Shuang Qiu","Jie Wang","Yue Wu","Zhihang Fu","Hanzhu Chen","Feng Wu","Jieping Ye"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4e","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.04102","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Liang0Q0WFC0Y25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Liang0Q0WFC0Y25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/liang25d.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：偏好数据里的噪声会显著破坏 preference alignment，而现有方法不是只能被动抗噪，就是依赖外部教师模型做样本过滤，成本高且容易引入 reward misgeneralization。作者的目标是不用额外教师，也能在训练过程中识别并压低噪声样本的影响。","importance":"这是一个很实用的对齐方法改进，价值在训练信号质量而不是模型结构。对 pretrain/post-train 闭环的启示是：偏好优化的上限常常被数据噪声卡住，谁能把‘优化目标’和‘样本筛选’合成一个闭环，谁就更可能在真实 noisy preference 数据上稳定落地。相比只提新损失，这种迭代式鲁棒优化更接近工业对齐问题。","technical_approach":"ROPO 的核心是一个迭代式 robust preference optimization 框架：在每轮训练里动态给样本分配质量感知权重，同时过滤疑似噪声样本，并把这个过程写成约束优化问题。关键设计点在于它不依赖外部 teacher，而是让模型从当前训练动态中估计哪些偏好更可信；这比一次性清洗数据更合理，因为样本质量判断会随策略变化而变化。与只做 noise-tolerant loss 的方法相比，ROPO 还显式尝试降低噪声存在量，而不是仅在目标函数里“硬扛”。","experiments":"从摘要可确认，论文关注 noisy preference alignment，并和两类基线比较：一类是只能缓解噪声影响的方法，另一类是依赖 teacher LLM 的过滤方法。但题面截断了后半段，无法确认具体模型、数据集、噪声比例和提升幅度。最值得看的实验应包括不同噪声率下的对齐性能、迭代过滤是否会误删 hard samples、以及无外部模型条件下相对 teacher-based 方法的性价比。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a central weakness of preference alignment: noisy preference data can seriously degrade training, and current solutions either only dampen the damage or rely on expensive external teacher models for filtering. ROPO aims to identify and downweight noisy samples during alignment without such external supervision.","importance":"This is a practical alignment-method contribution focused on training-signal quality. The broader lesson is that preference optimization is often bottlenecked by annotation noise, and methods that jointly optimize the policy and clean the supervision signal are likely to be more deployable than methods that merely tweak the loss while trusting the dataset.","technical_approach":"ROPO is an iterative robust preference optimization framework that assigns quality-aware sample weights and filters suspected noisy pairs by solving a constrained optimization problem. The important design choice is that it uses the evolving training state itself to estimate sample reliability, rather than outsourcing denoising to a teacher model. Compared with pure noise-tolerant objectives, it attempts to actively reduce the amount of noise that remains in the training set.","experiments":"From the provided abstract, we can confirm that the paper compares against both noise-tolerant baselines and teacher-based filtering approaches, but the quantitative section is truncated. The critical results to inspect would be alignment quality under varying noise rates, whether iterative filtering accidentally removes difficult but valid samples, and the cost-performance trade-off relative to teacher-assisted methods. Exact models, datasets, and gains are not visible here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["preference-optimization","alignment","noise-robustness","dpo"]},{"id":"2503.17514","title":"Language Models May Verbatim Complete Text They Were Not Explicitly Trained On","authors":["Ken Liu","Christopher A. Choquette-Choo","Matthew Jagielski","Peter Kairouz","Sanmi Koyejo","Percy Liang","Nicolas Papernot"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4f","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.17514","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiuCJKKLP25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiuCJKKLP25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/liu25h.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["memorization","data-contamination","training-data","generalization"]},{"id":"2502.13128","title":"SongGen: A Single Stage Auto-regressive Transformer for Text-to-Song Generation","authors":["Zihan Liu","Shuangrui Ding","Zhixiong Zhang","Xiaoyi Dong","Pan Zhang","Yuhang Zang","Yuhang Cao","Dahua Lin","Jiaqi Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$50","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.13128","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiuDZD0ZCL025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiuDZD0ZCL025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/liu25m.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["audio-lm","autoregressive","music-generation","song-generation"]},{"id":"LiuHWHZC25","title":"What Makes In-context Learning Effective for Mathematical Reasoning","authors":["Jiayu Liu","Zhenya Huang","Chaokun Wang","Xunpeng Huang","ChengXiang Zhai","Enhong Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiuHWHZC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiuHWHZC25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/liu25ac.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要信息，无法确定论文对“数学推理的 ICL 为什么有效”究竟是在分解哪些因素（示例选择、格式、隐式 scratchpad、检索、长度/难度匹配等）。","importance":"缺少摘要信息，无法判断它是机制分析、训练配方建议，还是评测框架贡献。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要信息，无法概括其分析方法（对照实验、因果干预、表征探针、合成数据等）与关键结论。","experiments":"缺少摘要信息，无法给出模型/数据/指标与主要发现的量化幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract is provided, so it is unclear which factors behind effective ICL for math reasoning are being isolated (example selection, formatting, implicit scratchpads, retrieval, difficulty matching, etc.).","importance":"Without the abstract, we cannot judge whether this is primarily mechanistic analysis, a training recipe, or an evaluation contribution.","technical_approach":"Without the abstract, the analysis methodology (controlled interventions, probing, synthetic data, etc.) and the key claims cannot be summarized reliably.","experiments":"Without the abstract, model/data scale, metrics, and quantitative findings cannot be reported.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","reasoning","math"]},{"id":"2411.12843","title":"Reward Modeling with Ordinal Feedback: Wisdom of the Crowd","authors":["Shang Liu","Yu Pan","Guanting Chen","Xiaocheng Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$51","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.12843","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiuP0L25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiuP0L25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/liu25az.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：传统 RM 训练把人类偏好压成二元胜负（Bradley–Terry），会丢掉“平局/接近/略好”等细粒度信息，导致样本利用率低、噪声更大，尤其在多人标注时更浪费。","importance":"贡献是对 reward modeling 统计建模的直接升级：把反馈从二元扩展到任意粒度的序数（ordinal）等级，并给出无偏学习条件，使得“群众智慧”式的多等级标注能更高效地转化为可训练的 RM 信号。","technical_approach":"方法框架将 BT 的二元比较推广到 K 级序数反馈，核心是提出一个“边际无偏性条件”（marginal unbiasedness）来刻画在什么假设下，用序数标签训练得到的 RM 仍能无偏地恢复潜在效用排序；在实现上，它允许把 tie、slightly better 等标签纳入同一似然/损失中，而不是丢弃或硬映射成胜负，从而在相同标注预算下提高信息量。边界是：序数标注的一致性与校准更难，若不同标注者对等级语义不一致，模型可能学到标注风格而非真实偏好。","experiments":"摘要未给出数据规模、标注设置（几级序数）、RM 架构、以及相对 BT 的具体提升数字；已知的是作者提出了通用到任意粒度的学习框架并强调能利用更多样本（含平局）与更细信息。缺少“同等标注成本下的收益曲线”与“多人标注噪声下的鲁棒性”量化，使得工程落地时仍需自行评估标注协议与收益。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses an inefficiency in standard reward modeling: reducing human preference to binary Bradley–Terry comparisons discards ties and graded judgments (e.g., slightly better), wasting annotation signal—especially in crowd settings.","importance":"It is a direct statistical upgrade to reward modeling: it generalizes binary preference learning to arbitrary-granularity ordinal feedback and provides an unbiasedness condition, enabling more of the crowd’s graded information to translate into a trainable RM signal.","technical_approach":"The framework extends BT-style modeling from binary to K-level ordinal labels, centered on a “marginal unbiasedness” condition that specifies when learning from ordinal feedback can still recover the underlying utility ordering without bias; practically, it incorporates ties and graded labels into a unified likelihood/loss instead of discarding or collapsing them, increasing information per annotation. The key limitation is annotation semantics: if graders interpret ordinal levels inconsistently, the RM may learn rater style rather than true preference.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide dataset scale, number of ordinal levels, RM architecture, or numeric gains over BT; it mainly claims broader label utilization and finer signal. Missing cost-normalized improvement curves and robustness under rater noise leaves open questions for deployment.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reward-model","ordinal-feedback","alignment","preference-learning"]},{"id":"Ma0D25","title":"Improving Multimodal Learning Balance and Sufficiency through Data Remixing","authors":["Xiaoyu Ma","Hao Chen","Yongjian Deng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Ma0D25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Ma0D25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/ma25c.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是多模态训练中的一个老问题：不同模态和不同样本类型在训练中贡献不均，导致模型既学不平衡，也学不充分。很多 VLM 训练默认用静态数据配比，但这常让强模态压制弱模态，或者让容易样本过度主导优化过程，所以作者尝试通过 data remixing 重新分配训练信号。","importance":"这是一个很典型的 pretrain 数据层工作，价值在于它直接作用于数据配比和训练动态，而不是只改模型头部。对统一多模态预训练的启示很明确：数据混合策略不只是工程细节，它会决定视觉-语言对齐是否充分、模态间是否出现能力偏科，以及同等 token 预算下能否更高效地利用稀缺高价值样本。","technical_approach":"核心方法应该是一种面向多模态训练的 data remixing 方案，不是新架构，而是重新定义 batch 中不同数据来源、模态组合或难度层级的比例。与固定混采相比，它可能根据训练阶段、模态学习饱和度或样本价值进行重混合，目标是同时提升 balance 和 sufficiency：前者避免某一模态主导梯度，后者确保关键跨模态模式被看够。这样设计有效的原因很直接——多模态训练常见的问题不是模型不会学，而是梯度预算被错误样本分走；remixing 本质上是在做更好的优化预算分配。边界是，如果数据本身质量差或模态 tokenization 有硬缺陷，单靠重配比很难完全补救。","experiments":"预期实验会比较不同 remixing 策略与静态混合基线，在图文检索、VQA、caption 或多模态理解任务上报告提升。最有价值的证据应该包括：1）不同模态相关指标更均衡，而不是只提升单一任务；2）在相同总训练量下，重混合比简单加数据更有效；3）ablation 显示收益来自配比动态而非额外训练步骤。由于缺少摘要，无法可靠提供数据规模、模型大小和具体数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a persistent issue in multimodal training: learning is often both imbalanced across modalities and insufficient within the important cross-modal regions. Static data mixtures are convenient, but they frequently let dominant modalities or easy examples consume most of the optimization budget.","importance":"This is a data-centric pretraining contribution. Its value is that it treats mixture design as a first-order lever for multimodal pretraining, with direct implications for alignment quality, modality balance, and token efficiency under fixed budgets.","technical_approach":"The method appears to be a data remixing strategy for multimodal training rather than a new architecture. Instead of using a fixed mixture, it likely adjusts the proportions of modalities, paired/unpaired data, or difficulty levels across training, aiming to improve both balance and sufficiency: balance so one modality does not dominate gradients, and sufficiency so critical multimodal patterns are seen often enough. The rationale is simple and practical: many multimodal failures are optimization allocation problems more than representational impossibilities.","experiments":"The most convincing experiments would compare remixing against static mixtures on retrieval, VQA, captioning, or general multimodal understanding tasks. Useful evidence would show more even gains across modalities, better efficiency at fixed training compute, and ablations proving the effect comes from the remix policy rather than longer training. The abstract is missing, so model scales, dataset sizes, and exact margins cannot be reported reliably.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal","data-mixture","data-quality","training"]},{"id":"MahdaviLLTSL25","title":"Leveraging Online Olympiad-Level Math Problems for LLMs Training and Contamination-Resistant Evaluation","authors":["Sadegh Mahdavi","Muchen Li","Kaiwen Liu","Christos Thrampoulidis","Leonid Sigal","Renjie Liao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MahdaviLLTSL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MahdaviLLTSL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/mahdavi25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是数学训练数据和评测数据越来越容易污染的问题，尤其是高水平竞赛数学。许多现有数学 benchmark 已被广泛收录、讨论和蒸馏，导致模型分数很难解释；作者选择在线奥赛题，试图同时获得更难的新鲜训练信号和更抗污染的评测集。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要在数据与评测两端，对推理型 posttrain 和持续预训练都很有现实意义。它重要，不是因为“又多了一个数学数据集”，而是它抓住了当前 LLM 研究的一个硬问题：如果你不能区分真正提升和数据记忆，所有关于 reasoning 的结论都会变脆弱。","technical_approach":"核心方法应该是收集、清洗并结构化在线 Olympiad-level 数学问题，用于训练和 contamination-resistant evaluation。与传统静态 benchmark 不同，这类在线来源具有时间新鲜度和分布多样性，能降低被预训练语料提前覆盖的风险；同时，若作者做得仔细，还会设计时间切分、来源审计或去重策略，尽量把训练与评测隔离。技术上它更像高质量数据工程，但难点不低：竞赛数学题的格式噪声大、证明型答案难标准化、自动验证也不容易。","experiments":"实验最重要的是两类证据：一类是用该数据训练后，模型在高难数学推理上是否提升；另一类是该评测集相对已有 benchmark 是否更抗污染，比如对已知强模型形成更合理区分，或对时间切分更敏感。最好还会有 contamination analysis，例如网页重合率、近重复比例、发布时间切分前后的性能变化。摘要缺失，无法给出题目数量、模型规模和具体提升数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a growing problem in math LLM research: both training sets and evaluation benchmarks for advanced math are increasingly contaminated. When olympiad-style problems are already present in pretraining corpora or derivative datasets, benchmark scores become hard to interpret.","importance":"Its main value is in data and evaluation design, with clear relevance to reasoning-focused post-training and continual pretraining. The key contribution is not merely another math dataset, but a stronger attempt to separate genuine reasoning gains from data memorization.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is to collect and curate online olympiad-level math problems for both training and contamination-resistant evaluation. Compared with static benchmark sets, online sources offer freshness and broader distributional coverage, reducing the chance that evaluation items were already absorbed during pretraining. If done carefully, the pipeline should include source auditing, temporal splits, and deduplication, since noisy formatting and proof-style answers make this much harder than standard QA curation.","experiments":"The most important empirical evidence should cover two fronts: whether the new training data improves hard math reasoning, and whether the resulting evaluation is more contamination-resistant than older benchmarks. Useful analyses would include overlap estimates, near-duplicate checks, temporal split sensitivity, and stronger discrimination among frontier models. The abstract is unavailable, so exact dataset size, model scales, and numerical gains cannot be reported safely.","authors_note":""},"tags":["math","data-quality","post-training","evaluation","contamination"]},{"id":"MakF25","title":"Residual Matrix Transformers: Scaling the Size of the Residual Stream","authors":["Brian Mak","Jeffrey Flanigan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MakF25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MakF25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/mak25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文研究的是 Transformer 里一个很少被单独系统扩展的部位：residual stream 的维度大小。现有 scaling 通常同时放大隐藏维度、FFN 和注意力头数，但 residual stream 既是信息汇总通道也是层间通信瓶颈，作者想知道能否通过矩阵化 residual stream 获得更好的扩展规律。","importance":"这是一个架构层面的探索，对预训练很相关，因为它触及表示带宽而不只是参数总量。若结论成立，它会提醒我们：Transformer 的瓶颈可能不只在 attention 或 FFN 容量，还在单向量 residual 通道的信息拥塞；这对长上下文、检索增强和多模态统一建模都可能有启发。","technical_approach":"从标题看，Residual Matrix Transformers 的核心是把传统一维 residual stream 扩展成更高秩或矩阵形式，让每层传递的不再只是单个 token 向量。与标准 Transformer 相比，这相当于增大层间通信带宽，而不是只在层内算子里堆参数；它可能允许不同子空间并行保存不同类型的信息，减少在同一 residual 向量里竞争容量的问题。为什么这样设计可能有效：如果 attention/MLP 已能提取复杂特征，但 residual 通道太窄，这些特征在层间传输时会被压缩损失。代价则是显存、带宽和实现复杂度都会上升。","experiments":"实验最关键的应是 scaling 对比：在相近参数量或相近 FLOPs 下，矩阵 residual 是否带来更好的 loss、下游精度或训练稳定性。好的 ablation 会区分收益究竟来自更大总宽度、更多参数，还是 residual 结构本身；也应观察这种架构在更深模型或更长序列上是否更占优。摘要缺失，无法报告具体模型尺寸、训练语料和增益数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper studies a less examined scaling axis in Transformers: the size and structure of the residual stream. Standard scaling mostly increases hidden width, heads, and FFN size, while the residual path remains a narrow communication bottleneck across layers.","importance":"This is an architecture-level contribution with direct pretraining relevance because it targets representational bandwidth, not just parameter count. If the hypothesis is right, some scaling limits in Transformers may come from information congestion in the residual channel rather than insufficient compute inside attention or MLP blocks.","technical_approach":"From the title, Residual Matrix Transformers replace or augment the usual vector residual stream with a matrix-like residual representation. The key difference from a standard Transformer is that more information can be carried across layers, potentially preserving multiple subspaces or feature groups without forcing them to compete within a single vector. This could help when layer-local computation is rich but cross-layer transmission is lossy. The cost is clear: more memory traffic, more implementation complexity, and possibly worse hardware efficiency.","experiments":"The critical experiments should compare scaling behavior under matched parameters or matched FLOPs, asking whether matrix residuals improve loss, downstream metrics, or optimization stability. Strong ablations would isolate whether the gain comes from the residual structure itself rather than simply wider models. The abstract is missing, so exact model sizes, corpora, and numerical margins cannot be stated reliably.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer-architecture","residual-stream","scaling"]},{"id":"McKennaHSBCCGK025","title":"Scaling Laws for Differentially Private Language Models","authors":["Ryan McKenna","Yangsibo Huang","Amer Sinha","Borja Balle","Zachary Charles","Christopher A. Choquette-Choo","Badih Ghazi","Georgios Kaissis","Ravi Kumar","Ruibo Liu","Da Yu","Chiyuan Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/McKennaHSBCCGK025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/McKennaHSBCCGK025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/mckenna25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["differential-privacy","scaling-law","language-model","privacy"]},{"id":"MiWQYLTA025","title":"I Think, Therefore I Diffuse: Enabling Multimodal In-Context Reasoning in Diffusion Models","authors":["Zhenxing Mi","Kuan-Chieh Wang","Guocheng Qian","Hanrong Ye","Runtao Liu","Sergey Tulyakov","Kfir Aberman","Dan Xu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MiWQYLTA025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MiWQYLTA025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/mi25a.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion","in-context-reasoning","multimodal","chain-of-thought"]},{"id":"NishikawaSOWS25","title":"Nonlinear transformers can perform inference-time feature learning","authors":["Naoki Nishikawa","Yujin Song","Kazusato Oko","Denny Wu","Taiji Suzuki"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/NishikawaSOWS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/NishikawaSOWS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/nishikawa25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["transformer","inference-time-learning","representation-learning","theory"]},{"id":"2407.13594","title":"Validating Mechanistic Interpretations: An Axiomatic Approach","authors":["Nils Palumbo","Ravi Mangal","Zifan Wang","Saranya Vijayakumar","Corina S. Pasareanu","Somesh Jha"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Mechanistic interpretability aims to reverse engineer the computation performed by a neural network in terms of its internal components. Although there is a growing body of research on mechanistic interpretation of neural networks, the notion of a mechanistic interpretation itself is often ad-hoc. Inspired by the notion of abstract interpretation from the program analysis literature that aims to develop approximate semantics for programs, we give a set of axioms that formally characterize a mechanistic interpretation as a description that approximately captures the semantics of the neural network under analysis in a compositional manner. We demonstrate the applicability of these axioms for validating mechanistic interpretations on an existing, well-known interpretability study as well as on a new case study involving a Transformer-based model trained to solve the well-known 2-SAT problem.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.13594","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/PalumboM0VPJ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/PalumboM0VPJ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/palumbo25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：mechanistic interpretability 里“什么算一个有效解释”一直缺少统一标准，导致很多解释看起来合理，但其实难验证、难比较、也难复用。过去这类工作常靠案例说服和人工直觉支撑，现在模型越来越大，这种做法的上限已经很明显。","importance":"它的重要性在于给 interpretability 提供了评估框架，而不是再提一个新的解释算法。对 pretrain 研究的意义是间接但不小：如果没有可验证的解释标准，我们很难把机制分析真正变成训练反馈信号、架构诊断工具或 scaling 规律研究的一部分；这篇工作试图把 mechanistic interpretation 从“会讲故事”推进到“可检验的近似语义描述”。","technical_approach":"作者借用了程序分析里的 abstract interpretation 思路，提出一组公理来形式化“机械解释”应满足什么条件。核心点有两个：第一，解释不是任意可视化，而是对神经网络语义的近似描述；第二，这个描述必须具备组合性，也就是局部组件的解释能拼成整体计算的解释。这样的设计是在给解释设边界：如果一个解释不能近似语义，或者不能跨层、跨模块组合，它就更像 post-hoc 叙事而不是机制模型。与常见 interpretability 工作不同，这篇论文的重点不是找 circuit，而是验证 circuit 解释是否站得住。","experiments":"摘要说明作者把这套公理用在一个已有、知名的 interpretability 案例上做验证，并且还展示了进一步应用，但截断后缺少细节。已知的关键事实是：论文有实证部分，不是纯理论；它应该在现有解释案例上检验哪些解释满足公理、哪些不满足。摘要没有给模型规模、任务、评价指标或定量结果，因此更适合把它看成评估准则论文，而不是 benchmark 冲榜论文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a basic weakness in mechanistic interpretability: the field still lacks a principled notion of what counts as a valid interpretation. Many interpretations are persuasive case studies, but without a standard they are hard to validate, compare, or use operationally.","importance":"Its contribution is primarily evaluative and foundational rather than algorithmic. This matters for pretraining-adjacent research because mechanism analysis only becomes useful as a debugging or design tool if interpretations can be checked as approximate semantic descriptions, not just narrated after the fact.","technical_approach":"The authors draw on abstract interpretation from program analysis and propose axioms that a mechanistic interpretation should satisfy. The key move is to treat an interpretation as an approximate, compositional description of the network’s semantics: it must capture meaning well enough to be useful, and it must compose across internal components rather than living as a one-off story about isolated neurons or heads. This shifts the goal from discovering circuits per se to validating whether a proposed circuit-level explanation actually has semantic content.","experiments":"The abstract states that the axioms are applied to validate at least one existing, well-known interpretability study, and likely additional examples, though the provided text is truncated. The important fact is that this is not purely formal work; it includes empirical validation on prior interpretations. No model sizes, tasks, or quantitative metrics are given in the provided abstract, so it is best read as a framework for evaluating interpretability claims rather than a benchmark-driven paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["mechanistic-interpretability","evaluation","theory","circuits"]},{"id":"2410.07432","title":"Can Transformers Reason Logically? A Study in SAT Solving","authors":["Leyan Pan","Vijay Ganesh","Jacob D. Abernethy","Chris Esposo","Wenke Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$52","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.07432","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Pan0AEL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Pan0AEL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/pan25d.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的是：decoder-only Transformer 到底能不能做严格意义上的逻辑推理，而不只是看起来会“模仿推理文本”。这个问题过去常被经验结果模糊带过，但 SAT 是一个足够干净的测试床，因为它有清晰的算法、正确性定义和推理轨迹。","importance":"它的重要性偏范式澄清和能力边界刻画，而不是直接给 pretrain 带来新算法。对基座研究的价值在于，它把“Transformer 能否学会算法式推理”拆成了两个层次：表示能力上能不能实现，以及训练上能不能从轨迹中学到；这比单纯看 benchmark 分数更接近我们关心的 reasoning 机制问题。","technical_approach":"作者先从构造角度证明 decoder-only Transformer 在非一致计算模型下可以决定 3-SAT，并且可以通过 CoT 形式实现回溯和演绎，其执行轨迹与 DPLL 算法可做 trace equivalence 对齐。这个部分说明的是“存在性”：架构容量足够，不是天生做不到。然后作者把这个构造落成 PyTorch 模型和一个叫 PARAT 的工具，用来检查实现正确性与性质。最后再研究“可训练性”：不是手工编程 Transformer，而是让模型直接从算法轨迹，也就是 reasoning paths，去学习 SAT 求解过程。这个三段式设计很合理，因为它区分了架构可表达、人工构造可运行、以及梯度训练可获得三件本来就不同的事。","experiments":"从摘要可确认的实验重点不是传统 NLP 指标，而是验证构造模型的正确性，以及测试模型能否从 DPLL 风格轨迹中学到 SAT 求解。作者明确实现了一个 PyTorch 版本和配套工具 PARAT。摘要没有给出 SAT 规模、变量数、训练数据量、成功率或泛化区间，因此无法判断学习到的是完整算法还是局部模式拟合。即便如此，这篇工作的实验价值依然在于把“证明可行”和“训练能否做到”放到同一框架下比较。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a sharper question than most reasoning benchmarks do: can decoder-only Transformers perform logical reasoning in a formal sense, rather than merely imitate reasoning text? SAT is a good test bed because the task has clean algorithmic structure, exact correctness, and explicit reasoning traces.","importance":"This is more of a capability-boundary and paradigm-clarification paper than a new pretraining method. Its value for foundation-model research is that it separates three questions that are often conflated: whether the architecture can represent the algorithm, whether a correct Transformer implementation can be constructed, and whether gradient training can actually recover that behavior from traces.","technical_approach":"The authors first give a constructive proof that decoder-only Transformers can decide 3-SAT in a non-uniform computation model, using Chain-of-Thought to implement backtracking and deduction, with trace equivalence to DPLL. That establishes representational possibility. They then instantiate the construction as a PyTorch model and provide a tool, PARAT, to empirically verify correctness and inspect properties. Finally, they study learnability by training models directly on algorithmic traces instead of hard-coding the solver. This progression is well designed because expressivity, constructive implementation, and trainability are not the same claim.","experiments":"The experiments, as described in the abstract, focus on validating the constructed Transformer solver and probing whether models can learn SAT solving from DPLL-like traces. A PyTorch implementation and the PARAT tool are explicit contributions. The abstract does not provide problem sizes, dataset scale, accuracy, or generalization ranges, so it is not possible to tell whether the learned models acquire the full algorithm or mostly fit local patterns. Still, the setup is useful because it puts formal capability and empirical learnability side by side.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer","reasoning","chain-of-thought","theory"]},{"id":"2502.01968","title":"Token Cleaning: Fine-Grained Data Selection for LLM Supervised Fine-Tuning","authors":["Jinlong Pang","Na Di","Zhaowei Zhu","Jiaheng Wei","Hao Cheng","Chen Qian","Yang Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$53","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.01968","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/PangDZWC0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/PangDZWC0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/pang25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：SFT 数据清洗为什么几乎都停留在样本级，而忽略了 token 级噪声。现实里即便一条样本整体高质量，其中仍可能混有和任务无关、无信息量、甚至有害的片段；继续对这些 token 做监督，会稀释真正有效的训练信号。","importance":"它的贡献是一个很实用的数据级/训练信号级改进。对 pretrain-posttrain 接口的启示很直接：后训练质量不只是“选哪条样本”，还包括“样本里哪些 token 值得继续学”；这和 pretrain 里的数据质量、loss weighting、curriculum 是同一类问题，只不过粒度更细。若方法稳定，它会比样本级过滤更节省数据，也更符合实际噪声分布。","technical_approach":"作者把 token 质量看成 noisy-label 问题，提出一个通用的 token cleaning pipeline，用来过滤无信息或有害 token，同时保留任务关键信号。这个 framing 很合理，因为 SFT 的 supervision 本来就不是每个 token 同等可靠：有些只是模板、口头禅或风格残留。与整样本过滤相比，token cleaning 不会因为局部噪声而丢掉整条高价值样本，也避免了模型在后训练阶段继续过拟合冗余模式。摘要没有展开具体打分器和阈值策略，但可以确认核心是细粒度 token 选择，而不是重新生成数据。","experiments":"摘要给出的实验结论被截断，没有数字。可以确认的是，作者把方法定位为 generic pipeline，意味着它应在多个 SFT 任务上评估，并比较 token cleaning 与 sample-level cleaning 或直接全量 SFT。当前无法从提供信息中提取模型规模、数据集、评价指标或提升幅度，因此只能保守地说：论文强调 token 级噪声是真问题，并声称过滤后能保留关键信息、改善 SFT 效果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper argues that SFT data cleaning is too coarse because it operates almost entirely at the sample level. In practice, even high-quality examples often contain tokens that are irrelevant, redundant, or harmful for the downstream objective, and continuing to train on them dilutes the useful supervision.","importance":"This is a practical data-level contribution with clear relevance to the pretrain–posttrain interface. The broader lesson is that data quality is not only about which samples to keep, but also which tokens inside those samples are worth learning from. That makes this work conceptually close to token-level weighting and curriculum ideas in pretraining, but applied to supervised post-training.","technical_approach":"The authors cast token quality as a noisy-label problem and propose a generic token-cleaning pipeline for SFT. The goal is to filter uninformative or harmful tokens while preserving task-critical ones. This is a sensible design because supervision is rarely uniform across all tokens in an instruction-tuning sample: some tokens carry the task signal, while others are template residue or stylistic filler. Compared with sample-level filtering, token cleaning can preserve valuable examples that would otherwise be discarded due to local noise.","experiments":"The abstract is truncated and does not provide quantitative results. What can be inferred safely is that the method is evaluated as a generic pipeline across SFT settings and is intended to be compared with standard full-token SFT and likely sample-level cleaning baselines. No model sizes, datasets, metrics, or deltas are available in the provided information.","authors_note":""},"tags":["sft","data-quality","data-selection","token-level"]},{"id":"2504.19561","title":"Quantifying Memory Utilization with Effective State-Size","authors":["Rom N. Parnichkun","Neehal Tumma","Armin W. Thomas","Alessandro Moro","Qi An","Taiji Suzuki","Atsushi Yamashita","Michael Poli","Stefano Massaroli"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$54","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19561","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ParnichkunTTMAS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ParnichkunTTMAS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/parnichkun25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：我们缺少一个统一、可量化的指标来比较不同序列模型到底把多少历史信息真正用进了未来预测。过去很多分析要么看原始算子图，要么看特定架构下的经验 probing，解释性和可比性都不够。","importance":"这是架构分析层面的基础工具工作。对 pretrain 的价值在于，它尝试给 attention、卷积、递归、SSM 等不同单元一个共同的“记忆利用率”刻度，这有助于我们更系统地讨论长上下文建模、状态压缩和有效历史窗口，而不是只靠 perplexity 或 attention map 直觉做判断。尤其在当前序列模型设计空间迅速扩张时，这类统一度量很有必要。","technical_approach":"作者借用信号处理和控制理论，提出 effective state-size（ESS）来量化 memory utilization。它面向一类具有 input-invariant 和 input-varying linear operators 的系统，因此覆盖 attention、卷积、递归等多种常见计算单元。ESS 的关键点不是看理论最大状态维度，而是度量模型实际用于存储过去信息、支持未来输出的有效状态规模。这样做比单纯看核函数或可视化算子更接近功能层面的记忆容量。与已有工作相比，它想解决的是‘不同架构之间怎么公平比较记忆机制’这一更基础的问题。","experiments":"摘要表明论文不只是定义指标，还会把 ESS 应用于多类架构分析，并且强调它优于单看原始 operator visualization 的做法。由于提供内容截断，暂时拿不到具体模型、实验设置或 ESS 与下游性能的相关性数字。稳妥的结论是：这篇工作提出了一个跨架构的记忆利用定量工具，潜在用途包括分析长序列模型设计是否真的把额外状态转化成了有效记忆。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a missing piece in sequence-model analysis: we do not have a common quantitative way to compare how much past information different architectures actually use for future predictions. Existing analyses often rely on raw operator visualizations or architecture-specific probing, which are hard to compare across model families.","importance":"This is a foundational analysis-tool contribution. Its relevance to pretraining is that long-context modeling is now a major design axis, and a shared metric for memory utilization could make comparisons across attention, convolutional, recurrent, and state-space models much more disciplined than relying only on perplexity or informal attention plots.","technical_approach":"The authors draw from signal processing and control theory to define effective state-size (ESS), a metric for memory utilization. ESS is designed for systems with input-invariant and input-varying linear operators, which makes it broad enough to cover many common sequence-model primitives, including attention, convolutions, and recurrences. The key distinction is that ESS aims to measure the effective state actually used to retain past information, not just the nominal state dimension or a visual property of the operator. That makes it closer to functional memory capacity than to architectural bookkeeping.","experiments":"The abstract indicates that ESS is applied to analyze a range of architectures and is presented as an improvement over raw operator visualizations. The provided text is truncated, so there are no concrete model names, datasets, or quantitative correlations with downstream performance. The safe summary is that the paper proposes a cross-architecture metric intended to reveal whether added state or context capacity is being used effectively, not merely exposed by design.","authors_note":""},"tags":["memory","state-space-model","architecture-analysis","sequence-modeling"]},{"id":"2410.13928","title":"Automatically Interpreting Millions of Features in Large Language Models","authors":["Gonçalo Paulo","Alex Mallen","Caden Juang","Nora Belrose"],"institutions":["EleutherAI"],"abstract":"$55","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.13928","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/PauloMJB25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/PauloMJB25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/paulo25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"SAE（稀疏自编码器）可以把 LLM 的激活分解为数百万个潜在特征，但人工逐一解释这些特征不可行。之前的自动化解释方法（如 Anthropic 的 neuron explanation）成本高且评估指标有限，需要一个更便宜、更可靠的自动化解释与评估流水线。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：SAE 特征解释是理解 LLM 内部表示的关键工具，如果能大规模自动化，就能系统性地审计模型学到了什么。这篇工作提供了开源流水线和五种新的评估指标，降低了 interpretability 研究的门槛。","technical_approach":"构建了一个开源的自动化流水线：用 LLM 为 SAE 特征生成自然语言解释，然后用五种新的评分方法评估解释质量。这些评分方法比之前的 SOTA（主要是 Anthropic 的 simulation-based scoring）计算成本更低。流水线在不同大小、不同激活函数、不同损失函数的 SAE 上测试，覆盖了两个开源 LLM。关键设计选择是用更轻量的评估替代昂贵的模拟评分，同时保持评估的区分度。","experiments":"在多种 SAE 配置（不同规模、激活函数、损失）上测试，基座模型为两个开源 LLM（具体模型名未在摘要中给出）。五种新评分方法在成本上显著低于之前方法，同时能有效区分解释质量。具体数字未在摘要中披露，但强调了开源和可复现性。","authors_note":"Nora Belrose 是 EleutherAI 的核心成员，在 interpretability 和 SAE 方向有持续产出。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"SAEs decompose LLM activations into millions of latent features, but manually interpreting each is infeasible. Prior automated explanation methods (e.g., Anthropic's approach) are expensive and have limited evaluation metrics. This work builds a cheaper, open-source pipeline for generating and scoring natural language explanations of SAE features.","importance":"A method-level contribution to mechanistic interpretability. For pretrain researchers, scalable SAE feature interpretation enables systematic auditing of what models learn internally. The open-source pipeline and five new cheaper evaluation metrics lower the barrier significantly.","technical_approach":"An automated pipeline that uses LLMs to generate natural language explanations for SAE features, then scores them with five new evaluation techniques that are cheaper than prior simulation-based scoring. Tested across SAEs with varying sizes, activation functions, and losses, trained on two open-weight LLMs. The key design choice is replacing expensive simulation scoring with lightweight alternatives while maintaining discriminative power.","experiments":"Evaluated on SAEs of varying configurations on two open-weight LLMs. The five new scoring methods are reported to be substantially cheaper than prior SOTA while maintaining evaluation quality. Specific numbers not provided in the abstract, but the work emphasizes open-source reproducibility.","authors_note":"Nora Belrose is a core member of EleutherAI with sustained work on interpretability and SAEs."},"tags":["interpretability","sparse-autoencoder","feature-analysis","mechanistic-interpretability"],"notable_authors":["Nora Belrose"]},{"id":"2502.01954","title":"Constrained Belief Updates Explain Geometric Structures in Transformer Representations","authors":["Mateusz Piotrowski","Paul M. Riechers","Daniel Filan","Adam S. Shai"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$56","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.01954","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/PiotrowskiRFS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/PiotrowskiRFS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/piotrowski25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer 在 next-token prediction 训练后，内部表示中涌现出什么样的计算结构？之前的 mechanistic interpretability 工作多聚焦于特定电路，缺乏对 Transformer 整体计算原理的统一刻画。这篇工作提出 Transformer 实现的是一种受架构约束的贝叶斯信念更新。","importance":"机制分析级贡献。如果 Transformer 的注意力层确实在做受约束的贝叶斯推断，这为理解 ICL（in-context learning）的工作原理提供了理论锚点。对 pretrain 研究者来说，这有助于理解为什么某些架构设计（如注意力头数、层数）会影响模型的推断能力。","technical_approach":"将最优预测理论（optimal prediction theory）与 mechanistic interpretability 结合，在一族可解析的隐马尔可夫模型（HMM）上训练 Transformer，分析其内部表示的几何结构。核心发现：单层 Transformer 的注意力层实现了并行化的部分贝叶斯推断（constrained Bayesian belief updating），多层架构中后续层进一步精炼这些表示。注意力机制执行的是一种近似后验更新。","experiments":"在可控的 HMM 数据上训练单层和多层 Transformer，分析神经激活的几何模式。验证了注意力层的计算与贝叶斯信念更新的对应关系。实验规模较小（可解析的合成数据），但理论洞察清晰。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"What computational structures emerge in transformers trained on next-token prediction? Prior mechanistic interpretability work focused on specific circuits without a unifying account. This work proposes that transformers implement constrained Bayesian belief updating—a parallelized form of partial Bayesian inference shaped by architectural constraints.","importance":"A mechanism-analysis contribution. If attention layers indeed perform constrained Bayesian inference, this provides a theoretical anchor for understanding ICL and why architectural choices (number of heads, layers) affect reasoning capability. Directly relevant to pretrain researchers thinking about architecture design.","technical_approach":"Combines optimal prediction theory with mechanistic interpretability, training transformers on a tractable family of hidden Markov models that produce rich geometric patterns in activations. Key finding: single-layer attention implements parallelized partial Bayesian inference; multi-layer architectures refine these representations in subsequent layers. Attention performs an approximate posterior update.","experiments":"Trains single-layer and multi-layer transformers on controlled HMM-generated data, analyzing geometric patterns in neural activations. Confirms correspondence between attention computation and Bayesian belief updating. Small-scale synthetic experiments, but the theoretical insight is clear and well-supported.","authors_note":""},"tags":["mechanistic-interpretability","bayesian","transformer-representations","geometry"]},{"id":"2502.02797","title":"Upweighting Easy Samples in Fine-Tuning Mitigates Forgetting","authors":["Sunny Sanyal","Hayden Prairie","Rudrajit Das","Ali Kavis","Sujay Sanghavi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$57","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.02797","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SanyalPDKS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SanyalPDKS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/sanyal25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：在拿不到预训练数据和原始训练配方的情况下，如何缓解微调导致的灾难性遗忘。过去很多抗遗忘方法依赖 replay、额外正则、参数约束或梯度控制，但这些方法往往默认你还能访问旧数据、旧梯度统计，或者至少能保存较重的训练状态，这在闭源大模型微调里经常不成立。","importance":"这项工作的贡献属于一个很实用的接口层改进：它不改模型结构，也不依赖原始预训练语料，只通过重加权微调样本就能减少能力漂移。对 pretrain↔post-train 接口的启示是，预训练模型自己的 loss 已经包含了“哪些样本更容易让模型保持原有表示”的信息；如果利用得当，可以在几乎不增加系统复杂度的情况下减轻遗忘。","technical_approach":"核心方法很简单：根据预训练模型在微调样本上的 loss 做 sample weighting，并上调 easy sample、下调 hard sample 的权重。它不是常见的 curriculum learning 逻辑；这里强调 easy sample 的原因是，这些样本与预训练模型当前表示更一致，放大它们可以让参数更新更贴近原模型的决策边界，减少为了少数高损失样本而发生的大幅漂移。和参数级抗遗忘方法相比，它的取舍是更轻量、更易部署，但前提是微调任务里确实存在一批与基座知识兼容的“稳态样本”；如果任务分布与预训练分布差得过大，单纯偏向 easy sample 也可能牺牲任务适应速度。","experiments":"摘要没有给出具体模型规模、数据集和数字，因此不能补充准确率提升或遗忘下降幅度。从摘要可以确认的实验结论只有两点：第一，这种基于 loss 的样本重加权在无预训练数据访问的设定下有效；第二，它与现有主要在参数空间或梯度空间工作的抗遗忘方法是正交且可叠加的。一个值得关注的实验点应该是：它是否在保持下游任务性能的同时减缓原能力退化，而不是简单靠降低学习难度换来“看起来不忘”。","authors_note":"机构信息无法确认。作者名单中未能仅凭给定信息确认特定代表性团队。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses catastrophic forgetting under a realistic constraint: you do not have access to the pretraining data or recipe. Many existing anti-forgetting methods rely on replay, old statistics, or parameter-space constraints that are awkward or impossible to use in closed-weight fine-tuning settings.","importance":"This is a practical interface contribution between pretraining and fine-tuning. It does not change the model or require old data; it only reweights fine-tuning examples. The broader lesson is that the pretrained model’s own loss already carries information about which updates are likely to preserve its prior capabilities.","technical_approach":"The method is to compute the pretrained model’s loss on fine-tuning samples and upweight easy examples while downweighting hard ones. That is not standard curriculum logic. The point here is that easy examples are more aligned with the model’s existing representation, so emphasizing them limits parameter drift and reduces the need to reshape the model around a small set of high-loss examples. Compared with parameter- or gradient-based forgetting mitigation, this is lighter and easier to deploy, but it may trade off adaptation speed when the downstream task is genuinely far from the pretraining distribution.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide model sizes, datasets, or numerical gains, so those should not be fabricated. What can be stated is that the method works in the no-pretraining-data setting and is complementary to existing methods that operate in parameter or gradient space. The important empirical question is whether it preserves downstream task quality while reducing forgetting, rather than merely slowing learning.","authors_note":"Institutional details cannot be confirmed from the provided text."},"tags":["fine-tuning","forgetting","continual-pretrain","data-weighting"],"notable_authors":["Sunny Sanyal","Hayden Prairie","Rudrajit Das","Ali Kavis","Sujay Sanghavi"]},{"id":"2406.04391","title":"Why Has Predicting Downstream Capabilities of Frontier AI Models with Scale Remained Elusive?","authors":["Rylan Schaeffer","Hailey Schoelkopf","Brando Miranda","Gabriel Mukobi","Varun Madan","Adam Ibrahim","Herbie Bradley","Stella Biderman","Sanmi Koyejo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$58","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.04391","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SchaefferSMMMIB25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SchaefferSMMMIB25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/schaeffer25b.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：为什么预训练 loss 的 scaling 常常相当可预测，但 frontier model 的下游能力，尤其多选题 benchmark 表现，却一直很难随规模稳定预测。过去大家常把这种“不好预测”归因于涌现或任务复杂性，但作者指出，问题很大一部分来自评测指标本身对 token-level likelihood 做了多层非线性变换，导致尺度关系被扭曲了。","importance":"这项工作的意义在于把“能力不可预测”从神秘现象拉回到测量问题。对 pretrain 研究很重要，因为我们经常用下游 benchmark 做模型选型、训练中止和 scaling 决策；如果 benchmark 的变换链条本身破坏了可预测性，那问题不一定出在模型，而出在评测接口。它属于评测与 scaling law 交叉处的方法论贡献。","technical_approach":"核心思路是分析多选问答 benchmark 的得分如何由负对数似然经过一连串变换得到，并说明这些变换会让原本平滑的 token-level scaling 关系在最终 accuracy 上变得不稳定。作者使用五个模型家族和十二个经典多选 benchmark 做分析，目标不是提出一个新模型，而是识别下游能力预测失效的主要机制，并给出如何让这类评测重新变得可随规模预测的路径。和“直接在 benchmark accuracy 上拟合 scaling curve”相比，这种分解式分析更接近问题源头。","experiments":"摘要明确给出实验范围：5 个模型家族、12 个成熟的多选 QA benchmark。核心实验结论是，下游表现并不是直接从一个平滑量得到，而是负对数似然经过一系列转换后的结果，因此每一层转换都可能放大噪声、压平差异或制造非线性，从而让预测变难。摘要没有给出具体模型名、参数范围和拟合误差改进数字，因此不能补写数值；但可以确认这篇工作更偏 benchmark measurement analysis，而不是传统意义上的新训练方法。","authors_note":"机构信息无法从给定内容确认。Rylan Schaeffer 是较活跃于 scaling 与 AI forecasting 交叉方向的作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks why pretraining loss often scales predictably while downstream capability, especially on multiple-choice benchmarks, remains hard to forecast with model scale. The authors argue that a major part of the problem is not mysterious emergence but the evaluation pipeline itself: benchmark scores are derived from token-level negative log likelihood through several nonlinear transformations.","importance":"This is an important measurement contribution at the intersection of scaling laws and evaluation. For pretraining research, it matters because downstream benchmarks are often used for model selection, stopping decisions, and scaling forecasts. If the benchmark interface destroys predictability, then some apparent unpredictability of capability may come from the metric, not the model.","technical_approach":"The core approach is to decompose how multiple-choice benchmark performance is computed from negative log likelihoods and to show how each transformation can distort an otherwise smooth scaling relationship. The paper studies five model families and twelve established multiple-choice benchmarks. The contribution is not a new model but an explanation of where downstream scaling predictability breaks and how one might recover it.","experiments":"The abstract specifies experiments over five model families and twelve well-known multiple-choice benchmarks. The main empirical claim is that downstream scores arise through a sequence of transformations from token-level losses, and those transformations make scaling behavior harder to predict. The abstract does not list exact model families, parameter ranges, or quantitative improvements in forecasting error, so those should not be invented.","authors_note":"Institutions cannot be confirmed from the provided text. Rylan Schaeffer is active in work around scaling and AI forecasting."},"tags":["scaling-law","downstream-capabilities","evaluation","frontier-models"],"notable_authors":["Rylan Schaeffer","Hailey Schoelkopf","Brando Miranda","Gabriel Mukobi","Varun Madan"]},{"id":"2502.02562","title":"Learning the RoPEs: Better 2D and 3D Position Encodings with STRING","authors":["Connor Schenck","Isaac Reid","Mithun George Jacob","Alex Bewley","Joshua Ainslie","David Rendleman","Deepali Jain","Mohit Sharma","Kumar Avinava Dubey","Ayzaan Wahid","Sumeet Singh","René Wagner","Tianli Ding","Chuyuan Fu","Arunkumar Byravan","Jake Varley","Alexey A. Gritsenko","Matthias Minderer","Dmitry Kalashnikov","Jonathan Tompson","Vikas Sindhwani","Krzysztof Marcin Choromanski"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We introduce STRING: Separable Translationally Invariant Position Encodings. STRING extends Rotary Position Encodings, a recently proposed and widely used algorithm in large language models, via a unifying theoretical framework. Importantly, STRING still provides exact translation invariance, including token coordinates of arbitrary dimensionality, whilst maintaining a low computational footprint. These properties are especially important in robotics, where efficient 3D token representation is key. We integrate STRING into Vision Transformers with RGB(-D) inputs (color plus optional depth), showing substantial gains, e.g. in open-vocabulary object detection and for robotics controllers. We complement our experiments with a rigorous mathematical analysis, proving the universality of our methods.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.02562","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SchenckRJBARJ0D25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SchenckRJBARJ0D25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/schenck25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：如何把 RoPE 这类高效、平移不变的位置编码自然扩展到 2D/3D token，而不丢掉计算效率和几何一致性。过去很多视觉或机器人场景的位置编码要么在高维坐标上不够自然，要么会牺牲平移不变性，导致模型难以同时兼顾泛化和效率。","importance":"这项工作的贡献是位置编码层面的统一扩展。它对纯文本 LLM 不是直接冲击，但对统一多模态预训练、视觉 tokenizer 以及 3D/机器人 token 建模很有价值，因为它试图保留 RoPE 在语言模型里最有用的性质——精确的相对平移结构和低计算开销——同时把它推广到任意维度坐标。对做 native multimodal pretrain 的人，这类表示层设计很关键。","technical_approach":"核心方法 STRING 是 Separable Translationally Invariant Position Encodings，可视作在统一理论框架下对 RoPE 的推广。它的设计重点有两个：第一，保持 exact translation invariance，而不是只做近似相对位置；第二，支持任意维 token 坐标，同时维持低计算负担。和直接把 1D RoPE 拼接或硬扩展到 2D/3D 的做法相比，STRING 强调可分离结构与理论普适性，这样做的好处是更容易在视觉和机器人输入上得到稳定的几何归纳偏置。","experiments":"摘要明确给出的实验结论是：作者把 STRING 集成到处理 RGB/RGB-D 输入的 ViT 中，在 open-vocabulary object detection 和 robotics controller 上都有显著提升。摘要没有给出具体模型大小、数据集名、指标值和提升幅度，因此不能补数字。除主结果外，论文还声称给出了严格数学分析并证明方法的 universality，这意味着实验和理论是并行推进，而不是仅靠经验堆结果。","authors_note":"机构信息无法从给定内容确认。Joshua Ainslie 是较知名作者，常见于大型模型与高效建模相关工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a clean representation problem: how to extend RoPE-style positional encoding to 2D and 3D tokens without losing the efficiency and translation structure that made RoPE useful in language models. Many existing vision or robotics encodings either handle higher-dimensional coordinates awkwardly or give up exact translation invariance.","importance":"This is a representation-level contribution with clear relevance to multimodal pretraining. It does not directly change text-only LLMs, but it matters for unified token modeling over images, depth, and 3D observations because it tries to preserve the best properties of RoPE—exact relative translation structure and low overhead—while generalizing beyond 1D sequences.","technical_approach":"STRING, short for Separable Translationally Invariant Position Encodings, is a principled extension of RoPE under a unified theoretical framework. The key design goals are exact translation invariance and support for arbitrary-dimensional token coordinates at low computational cost. Compared with ad hoc 2D or 3D extensions of 1D RoPE, the separable construction is meant to provide a cleaner geometric inductive bias and stronger theoretical coverage.","experiments":"The abstract states that STRING is integrated into ViTs with RGB and RGB-D inputs and yields substantial gains on open-vocabulary object detection and robotics controllers. No model sizes, datasets, or numerical improvements are provided in the abstract, so they should not be fabricated. The paper also claims a rigorous mathematical analysis proving universality, suggesting that the empirical and theoretical stories are tightly linked.","authors_note":"Institutions cannot be confirmed from the provided text. Joshua Ainslie is a recognizable author from work on large-scale modeling and efficient architectures."},"tags":["rope","position-encoding","long-context","multimodal"],"notable_authors":["Connor Schenck","Isaac Reid","Mithun George Jacob","Alex Bewley","Joshua Ainslie"]},{"id":"2502.07827","title":"Implicit Language Models are RNNs: Balancing Parallelization and Expressivity","authors":["Mark Schöne","Babak Rahmani","Heiner Kremer","Fabian Falck","Hitesh Ballani","Jannes Gladrow"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$59","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.07827","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SchoneRKFBG25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SchoneRKFBG25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/schone25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：语言建模里并行化和表达能力之间是否存在更细致的中间地带，而不只是“Transformer/SSM 易并行但受限”与“RNN 更强表达但训练慢”二选一。过去 SSM 和 Transformer 之所以主流，一个核心原因就是并行训练友好；但这也意味着它们通常限制在比经典非线性 RNN 更低的计算复杂度类别里。","importance":"这项工作的意义接近建模范式层面的探索。它试图把 fixed-point/implicit computation 引回语言模型，给出一种既保留部分并行训练能力、又恢复更强递归状态转移表达力的路线。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，AR Transformer 可能不是表达力—吞吐 trade-off 的唯一点，隐式状态模型或许能提供新的 scaling 轴。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 implicit SSM：不再做一次显式状态更新，而是反复迭代一个变换直到收敛到 fixed point。理论上作者证明，这样的 implicit SSM 可以实现 RNN 式的非线性状态转移；经验上则发现，不需要所有 token 都完全收敛，近似 fixed-point 已经足以工作，因此可以设计一种训练 curriculum：大部分 token 保持较强并行化，只有少量 token 做完整收敛。和标准 SSM 相比，它牺牲了部分简单性来换表达力；和传统 RNN 相比，它又避免了全序列严格串行。","experiments":"摘要给出的主要实验结论是：近似 fixed-point convergence 已足够支撑有效训练，因此 full convergence 只需要用于一小部分 token。这个结果很关键，因为如果所有 token 都要求完全求解固定点，训练代价通常会过高。摘要没有报告具体模型规模、语言建模 benchmark、吞吐损失或相对 Transformer/SSM 的性能数字，因此不能进一步量化。值得重点看的是 scaling 曲线：表达力收益是否能持续覆盖额外求解开销。","authors_note":"机构信息无法从给定内容确认。Hitesh Ballani 是较知名作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether language modeling really forces a binary choice between highly parallel but constrained models such as transformers and SSMs, and more expressive but sequential RNNs. The motivation is that modern sequence models gain scalability from parallelism, but that parallelism may come with a real expressivity ceiling.","importance":"This is close to a paradigm-level modeling exploration. It revisits implicit computation and fixed-point dynamics as a way to recover richer recurrent state transitions without giving up all training parallelism. For pretraining research, the interesting message is that the current transformer/SSM operating point may not be the only viable expressivity-throughput trade-off.","technical_approach":"The method is an implicit SSM that repeatedly applies a transformation until reaching a fixed point, rather than performing a single explicit state update. Theoretical analysis shows that such implicit SSMs can realize nonlinear RNN-like state transitions. Empirically, the authors find that approximate convergence is often enough, which enables a practical curriculum: keep most tokens relatively parallel and reserve full fixed-point solving for only a small subset. Compared with standard SSMs, this buys expressivity at the cost of more computation; compared with classic RNNs, it avoids full sequence-level serialization.","experiments":"The main experimental takeaway in the abstract is that approximate fixed-point convergence suffices, so full convergence is required for only a small subset of tokens. That point matters because solving every token to convergence would usually be too expensive. The abstract does not report model sizes, language modeling benchmarks, throughput costs, or quantitative gains over transformers or SSM baselines, so those cannot be summarized reliably.","authors_note":"Institutions cannot be confirmed from the provided text. Hitesh Ballani is a recognizable author."},"tags":["rnn","ssm","language-modeling","architecture"],"notable_authors":["Mark Schöne","Babak Rahmani","Heiner Kremer","Fabian Falck","Hitesh Ballani"]},{"id":"SetlurRLK25","title":"Scaling Test-Time Compute Without Verification or RL is Suboptimal","authors":["Amrith Setlur","Nived Rajaraman","Sergey Levine","Aviral Kumar"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SetlurRLK25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SetlurRLK25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/setlur25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文讨论的是：仅靠增加 test-time compute，而不引入 verification 或 RL 信号，效果是次优的。也就是说，更多采样或更长思维链本身并不保证推理质量持续提升；如果缺少外部校验或训练出的搜索偏好，模型很容易把额外算力浪费在低质量轨迹上。","importance":"这项工作的重要性在于，它直接触到当前 post-train 里最热的 test-time scaling 路线，并对 pretrain/post-train 闭环有明显启示。它在提醒研究者：test-time compute 不是免费的能力放大器，必须和更好的选择机制结合；否则 compute 增加只是扩大了搜索空间，却没有同步提高命中好轨迹的概率。这对于理解 R1 类方法、过程监督和 verifier 的真实作用都很关键。","technical_approach":"从标题和给定摘要句可以确认的核心立场是：test-time scaling 若没有 verification 或 RL 是次优的。更具体地说，作者大概率比较了纯采样扩展与带 verifier / RL 训练策略的方案，论证后者能更有效地把额外计算转化为正确率。它和“多 sample 就够了”的观点相反，强调搜索必须配套打分信号；否则模型无法稳定地区分有前途的中间推理与无效展开。","experiments":"摘要只给出论文主张，没有提供模型、任务和数字，因此不能补充具体结果。可以明确的是，实验应围绕 test-time compute 扩展的收益曲线展开，并比较无验证、带验证、带 RL 等不同设置。最值得关注的事实将是：在相同 compute 预算下，verification 或 RL 是否显著提高 scaling efficiency，即每增加一单位推理预算能换来多少准确率提升。","authors_note":"机构信息无法从给定内容确认。Sergey Levine 和 Aviral Kumar 是强化学习方向知名作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper argues that simply scaling test-time compute is suboptimal unless it is paired with verification or reinforcement learning. More samples or longer reasoning traces do not automatically translate into better answers if the system lacks a strong mechanism for selecting promising trajectories.","importance":"This matters because test-time scaling is one of the central themes in current post-training research, and it also feeds back into how we think about pretrain-posttrain interfaces. The paper’s likely message is that compute alone is not a capability amplifier; it needs a selection signal. That is directly relevant to understanding why verifier-based methods, process supervision, and RL-style training can outperform naive sampling.","technical_approach":"From the title and provided line, the core claim is clear: test-time scaling without verification or RL leaves performance on the table. The likely technical comparison is between naive compute scaling and variants that use a verifier or RL-trained search policy to turn extra computation into higher-quality reasoning. This pushes against the view that more sampling alone is sufficient.","experiments":"The abstract snippet does not provide models, tasks, or quantitative results, so those should not be invented. What can be said is that the experiments are presumably organized around test-time compute scaling curves, comparing no-verification settings against verifier- or RL-assisted ones. The key quantity to watch is scaling efficiency: how much accuracy gain is obtained per unit of extra inference compute.","authors_note":"Institutions cannot be confirmed from the provided text. Sergey Levine and Aviral Kumar are well-known researchers in reinforcement learning."},"tags":["test-time-compute","verification","rl","scaling"],"notable_authors":["Amrith Setlur","Nived Rajaraman","Sergey Levine","Aviral Kumar"]},{"id":"ShaoM025","title":"Continuous Visual Autoregressive Generation via Score Maximization","authors":["Chenze Shao","Fandong Meng","Jie Zhou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ShaoM025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ShaoM025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/shao25b.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["visual-autoregressive","continuous-tokens","score-maximization"]},{"id":"Shen0T25","title":"Active Reward Modeling: Adaptive Preference Labeling for Large Language Model Alignment","authors":["Yunyi Shen","Hao Sun","Jean-Francois Ton"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Shen0T25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Shen0T25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/shen25c.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["reward-model","active-learning","alignment","preference-labeling"]},{"id":"ShenZ0025","title":"On the Training Convergence of Transformers for In-Context Classification of Gaussian Mixtures","authors":["Wei Shen","Ruida Zhou","Jing Yang","Cong Shen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ShenZ0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ShenZ0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/shen25q.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["in-context-learning","transformer-theory","training-convergence"]},{"id":"ShiFYYYL0K0L25","title":"LaCache: Ladder-Shaped KV Caching for Efficient Long-Context Modeling of Large Language Models","authors":["Dachuan Shi","Yonggan Fu","Xiangchi Yuan","Zhongzhi Yu","Haoran You","Sixu Li","Xin Dong","Jan Kautz","Pavlo Molchanov","Yingyan Celine Lin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ShiFYYYL0K0L25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ShiFYYYL0K0L25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/shi25b.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["kv-cache","long-context","inference-efficiency"]},{"id":"2507.03865","title":"OrthoRank: Token Selection via Sink Token Orthogonality for Efficient LLM inference","authors":["Seungjun Shin","Jaehoon Oh","Dokwan Oh"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$5a","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.03865","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ShinOO25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ShinOO25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/shin25e.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["kv-cache","token-selection","attention-sink","inference-efficiency"]},{"id":"2501.19392","title":"Cache Me If You Must: Adaptive Key-Value Quantization for Large Language Models","authors":["Alina Shutova","Vladimir Malinovskii","Vage Egiazarian","Denis Kuznedelev","Denis Mazur","Nikita Surkov","Ivan Ermakov","Dan Alistarh"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$5b","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.19392","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ShutovaMEKMSEA25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ShutovaMEKMSEA25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/shutova25a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["kv-cache","quantization","long-context","inference-efficiency"]},{"id":"SunLX0WYLWLXCTK25","title":"Scaling Laws for Floating-Point Quantization Training","authors":["Xingwu Sun","Shuaipeng Li","Ruobing Xie","Weidong Han","Kan Wu","Zhen Yang","Yixing Li","An Wang","Shuai Li","Jinbao Xue","Yu Cheng","Yangyu Tao","Zhanhui Kang","Cheng-zhong Xu","Di Wang","Jie Jiang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SunLX0WYLWLXCTK25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SunLX0WYLWLXCTK25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/sun25j.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["quantization","training","scaling-law","numerics"]},{"id":"SunSL0DCJ25","title":"DS-VLM: Diffusion Supervision Vision Language Model","authors":["Zhen Sun","Yunhang Shen","Jie Li","Xing Sun","Pingyang Dai","Liujuan Cao","Rongrong Ji"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SunSL0DCJ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SunSL0DCJ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/sun25p.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["vlm","diffusion","vision-language","supervision"]},{"id":"2410.18533","title":"LOGO - Long cOntext aliGnment via efficient preference Optimization","authors":["Zecheng Tang","Zechen Sun","Juntao Li","Qiaoming Zhu","Min Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$5c","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.18533","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/TangSLZ025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/TangSLZ025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/tang25j.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注长上下文模型的一个现实短板：检索和定位能力已经很强，但生成仍然容易失真、幻觉或不贴合长上下文约束。过去改进多依赖加长预训练或更好的指令数据，这有效但成本高、反馈信号稀疏，因此作者尝试用更高效的偏好优化专门做 long-context alignment。","importance":"它的贡献属于 post-train 方法级，但对 pretrain 接口很有价值。关键启示是，长上下文能力不只是‘能看见更多 token’，还需要专门的生成对齐目标；也就是说，长 context retrieval 和 long-form faithful generation 是两件不同的事，后者可以通过更针对性的 preference optimization 获得较高性价比提升。","technical_approach":"作者提出 LOGO，即面向长上下文的高效偏好优化训练框架。虽然摘要未展开公式细节，但从定位看，它不是再做大规模 continued pretraining，而是利用偏好信号直接优化长上下文响应质量，目标是同时兼顾效果和效率。与现有方法的差异应在于：偏好构造、样本组织或优化目标针对长上下文场景专门设计，而不是把短上下文对齐方法原样搬过去；这样做的原因是长上下文错误往往来自跨段依赖、证据整合和注意力稀释，普通 preference data 覆盖不到这些失败模式。","experiments":"摘要提到模型可处理超过 100M token 的上下文，并声称现有方法在效果或效率上不足，但没有给出具体 backbone、训练规模、baseline、评测任务和数值提升。能确认的是，实验重点应该是长文生成质量而不只是 needle-in-a-haystack 检索；若阅读正文，最值得看的是与 SFT、DPO 类方法在长文问答/摘要/证据约束生成上的比较，以及上下文长度增长时收益是否保持。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical weakness of long-context models: they can often locate relevant evidence, yet still generate hallucinated or poorly aligned responses over long inputs. Prior improvements mostly came from more pretraining data or better instruction tuning, which are expensive and do not directly optimize long-context generation fidelity.","importance":"This is a post-training method contribution with direct relevance to the pretrain-posttrain interface. The main lesson is that long-context capability is not just about extending context windows or retrieval accuracy; faithful generation over long contexts needs its own alignment objective, and preference optimization may offer a more efficient path than more continued pretraining.","technical_approach":"LOGO is presented as an efficient preference-optimization framework for long-context alignment. The abstract does not expose the exact objective, but the positioning is clear: instead of scaling continued pretraining, it uses preference signals to directly improve long-context generation quality while keeping training efficient. The likely distinction from standard preference methods is that the data construction or optimization is tailored to failure modes unique to long contexts, such as cross-document consistency, evidence aggregation, and attention dilution.","experiments":"The abstract notes that long-context models can handle contexts beyond 100M tokens and argues existing methods are lacking in effectiveness or efficiency, but it does not give model backbones, training scale, baselines, tasks, or gains. The important experimental question is long-context generation quality rather than retrieval-only metrics. In the full paper, the key comparisons would be against SFT and DPO-style baselines on long-form QA, summarization, and evidence-grounded generation across increasing context lengths.","authors_note":""},"tags":["long-context","alignment","preference-optimization","post-training"]},{"id":"2503.19595","title":"Optimizing Language Models for Inference Time Objectives using Reinforcement Learning","authors":["Yunhao Tang","Kunhao Zheng","Gabriel Synnaeve","Rémi Munos"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"In this work, we investigate the merits of explicitly optimizing for inference time algorithmic performance during model training. We show how optimizing for inference time performance can improve overall model efficacy. We consider generic inference time objectives with $k$ samples, with a focus on pass@$k$ and majority voting as two main applications. With language model training on reasoning datasets, we showcase the performance trade-off enabled by training with such objectives. When training on code generation tasks, we show that the approach significantly improves pass@$k$ objectives compared to the baseline method.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.19595","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/TangZSM25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/TangZSM25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/tang25o.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是一个经常被忽略的问题：训练目标通常优化单样本 next-token likelihood，但实际使用时我们常靠多次采样、pass@k 或多数投票拿最终结果，导致 train-test objective 不一致。过去大家更多在 inference 端调采样策略，这篇工作则反过来问：能不能把 inference-time 目标直接写进训练里。","importance":"这是一个很值得重视的 post-train / objective design 方向。它对 pretrain 和 reasoning 训练的启示是，模型能力并不只取决于单次输出质量，还取决于候选分布是否适合被 test-time selection 利用；如果目标是 pass@k 或 self-consistency，训练时就应该显式塑造这种分布，而不是默认 MLE 足够。","technical_approach":"作者用强化学习来直接优化 inference-time objective，重点覆盖 pass@k 和 majority voting 这两类 k-sample 目标。方法的核心不是再提高单样本 token-level logprob，而是优化‘采 k 次后至少一次对’或‘多样本聚合后更对’这类最终使用指标。这样设计有效，是因为这些目标要求模型在候选集合层面有更好的覆盖、多样性和校准，而纯 MLE 更偏向压高平均似然，不一定提升 best-of-k 表现。和常规 RLHF 的区别在于，这里 reward 面向算法式推理/采样聚合结果，而非人类偏好。","experiments":"摘要明确说在 reasoning 数据集训练时展示了不同 inference-time objective 间的性能 trade-off，并在代码生成任务上显著提升 pass@k，但没有给出模型大小、数据规模、具体 baseline、任务集和增益数字。可以可靠提炼的结论是：显式优化 k-sample 指标会改变模型的输出分布，从而改善实际推理时的聚合结果；若看全文，重点应看 pass@1 是否受损、不同 k 下的最优策略是否一致，以及 majority voting 改善是否来自答案正确率提升还是样本相关性下降。","authors_note":"已知作者包括 Gabriel Synnaeve、Rémi Munos。机构信息无法从给定内容完整确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a training-serving mismatch that is easy to overlook: models are typically trained with single-sample likelihood objectives, yet deployed with multi-sample procedures such as pass@k and majority voting. Prior work mostly adjusts sampling at inference time; this work asks whether those inference-time objectives should be optimized directly during training.","importance":"This is an important direction in post-training and objective design. The main lesson for pretraining and reasoning work is that model usefulness depends not only on one-shot quality, but also on whether its output distribution is well shaped for test-time selection and aggregation. If pass@k or self-consistency is how the model is actually used, MLE alone is not the right target.","technical_approach":"The method uses reinforcement learning to optimize generic inference-time objectives, with pass@k and majority voting as the main cases. Instead of improving token-level likelihood for a single sample, it optimizes the final utility of a set of k samples, such as getting at least one correct answer or improving the aggregate vote. This is a meaningful shift because such objectives require the candidate set to have the right diversity, coverage, and calibration, not just high average likelihood. Unlike standard RLHF, the reward here is tied to algorithmic inference-time performance rather than human preference scores.","experiments":"The abstract states that the method exposes trade-offs among inference-time objectives on reasoning datasets and significantly improves pass@k on code generation tasks, but it does not provide model sizes, data scale, baselines, task names, or gains. The safe conclusion is that explicitly training for k-sample utility reshapes the output distribution in ways that improve practical decoding-time performance. In the full paper, the key questions are whether pass@1 degrades, how the optimal training target varies with k, and whether majority-voting gains come from higher answer quality or lower inter-sample correlation.","authors_note":"Known authors include Gabriel Synnaeve and Rémi Munos. Full institutional details cannot be confirmed from the provided information."},"tags":["reinforcement-learning","inference-time","reasoning","pass@k"],"notable_authors":["Gabriel Synnaeve","Rémi Munos"]},{"id":"2502.02671","title":"On Teacher Hacking in Language Model Distillation","authors":["Daniil Tiapkin","Daniele Calandriello","Johan Ferret","Sarah Perrin","Nino Vieillard","Alexandre Ramé","Mathieu Blondel"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$5d","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.02671","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/TiapkinCFPVRB25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/TiapkinCFPVRB25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/tiapkin25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["distillation","reward-hacking","rlhf","teacher-hacking"]},{"id":"VarreYF25","title":"Learning In-context n-grams with Transformers: Sub-n-grams Are Near-Stationary Points","authors":["Aditya Varre","Gizem Yüce","Nicolas Flammarion"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/VarreYF25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/VarreYF25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/varre25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["in-context-learning","n-gram","transformer-theory","stationary-points"]},{"id":"2508.09654","title":"Improving Diversity in Language Models: When Temperature Fails, Change the Loss","authors":["Alexandre Verine","Florian Le Bronnec","Kunhao Zheng","Alexandre Allauzen","Yann Chevaleyre","Benjamin Négrevergne"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Increasing diversity in language models is a challenging yet essential objective. A common approach is to raise the decoding temperature. In this work, we investigate this approach through a simplistic yet common case to provide insights into why decreasing temperature can improve quality (Precision), while increasing it often fails to boost coverage (Recall). Our analysis reveals that for a model to be effectively tunable through temperature adjustments, it must be trained toward coverage. To address this, we propose rethinking loss functions in language models by leveraging the Precision-Recall framework. Our results demonstrate that this approach achieves a substantially better trade-off between Precision and Recall than merely combining negative log-likelihood training with temperature scaling. These findings offer a pathway toward more versatile and robust language modeling techniques.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.09654","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/VerineBZACN25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/VerineBZACN25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/verine25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diversity","loss-function","temperature","decoding","language-modeling"]},{"id":"WangLBYQ025","title":"MVA: Linear Attention with High-order Query-Keys Integration and Multi-level Vocabulary Decomposition","authors":["Ning Wang","Zekun Li","Tongxin Bai","Man Yao","Zhen Qin","Guoqi Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangLBYQ025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangLBYQ025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/ning25b.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["linear-attention","architecture","efficiency","tokenizer"]},{"id":"2506.22920","title":"Improving Rationality in the Reasoning Process of Language Models through Self-playing Game","authors":["Pinzheng Wang","Juntao Li","Zecheng Tang","Haijia Gui","Min Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$5e","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.22920","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangLTG025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangLTG025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wang25bb.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["reasoning","self-play","alignment","rl"]},{"id":"2502.04040","title":"Safety Reasoning with Guidelines","authors":["Haoyu Wang","Zeyu Qin","Li Shen","Xueqian Wang","Dacheng Tao","Minhao Cheng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$5f","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.04040","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangQ00TC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangQ00TC25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wang25cg.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心判断是：安全对齐失败不一定是模型不会，而是现有 refusal training 没有稳定调出模型内部已有的安全知识。作者针对的是 RT 在 OOD jailbreak 下泛化差的问题，并进一步追问：这些攻击真的是能力缺口，还是训练把模型带到了依赖表面捷径的表示上。","importance":"这项工作的意义在于，它把安全训练从“学会拒绝模板”转向“学会按规则推理”，属于 post-train 但对 pretrain-interface 很有价值的方法级工作。对做基座模型的人，最重要的启示不是又多了一个 safety trick，而是 BoN 和域适应分析共同表明：模型里可能已经有 latent safety knowledge，问题在于监督信号把它压成了脆弱 shortcut；这和推理、对齐、奖励建模里经常出现的训练信号错配是同一类现象。","technical_approach":"方法上，作者提出让模型基于安全指南进行 safety reasoning，而不是直接学“遇到危险请求就拒绝”这类单步映射。这个设计的关键点，是把标签从最终动作扩展为中间判定过程：先识别请求是否违反规则、违反了哪类规则、再决定回应策略。相比直接 RT，这样做减少了模型对表层 trigger pattern 的依赖，因为它必须显式利用可迁移的规则结构；代价是训练和推理都更长，而且效果依赖指南本身是否覆盖、是否一致。","experiments":"摘要给出的最关键事实是：在 Best-of-N 评测下，随着 N 增大，模型安全性明显提升，这说明模型存在未被稳定激活的潜在安全能力；同时域适应分析显示，直接 RT 会导致依赖非泛化的表示映射。摘要没有提供具体模型规模、攻击基准名称、BoN 的 N 取值、拒答率/attack success rate 的精确数字，因此不能量化其超过哪些强 baseline；但可以确认，论文的实验主张重点不是“绝对分数刷新”，而是证明安全泛化瓶颈来自训练目标而不只是模型容量。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper makes a sharp claim: poor safety under OOD jailbreaks is not necessarily a missing capability problem; vanilla refusal training often fails to reliably elicit safety knowledge the model already has. The core question is whether jailbreaks truly exceed model capability, or whether training pushes the model toward brittle shortcuts.","importance":"This matters because it reframes safety tuning from learning refusal templates to learning rule-based reasoning. That is a post-training result, but it is highly relevant to the pretrain–posttrain interface. The strongest takeaway is not just a new safety recipe. Best-of-N and adaptation analysis together suggest that latent safety knowledge may already exist in the model, while the training objective collapses it into non-generalizable behavior. That has direct parallels with failures seen in reasoning supervision and reward modeling.","technical_approach":"The proposed method trains the model to perform safety reasoning with explicit guidelines instead of directly mapping unsafe prompts to refusals. The key design choice is to supervise the intermediate decision process: determine whether a request violates policy, identify which guideline is triggered, and then choose the response strategy. Compared with direct refusal training, this reduces reliance on superficial triggers because the model must use transferable rule structure. The trade-off is straightforward: longer supervision, longer inference traces, and dependence on the quality and coverage of the guidelines.","experiments":"The most important empirical result in the abstract is that safety improves substantially under Best-of-N evaluation as N increases, implying that the model already contains latent safety knowledge that is not consistently activated. The paper also reports domain adaptation evidence that direct refusal training induces shortcut-based, non-generalizable representations. The abstract does not give model sizes, benchmark names, attack suites, N values, or exact gains, so the safe reading is that the contribution is more diagnostic and objective-level than leaderboard-centric.","authors_note":""},"tags":["safety","alignment","jailbreak","reasoning"],"notable_authors":["Dacheng Tao"]},{"id":"2502.05173","title":"VideoRoPE: What Makes for Good Video Rotary Position Embedding?","authors":["Xilin Wei","Xiaoran Liu","Yuhang Zang","Xiaoyi Dong","Pan Zhang","Yuhang Cao","Jian Tong","Haodong Duan","Qipeng Guo","Jiaqi Wang","Xipeng Qiu","Dahua Lin"],"institutions":["Shanghai AI Lab"],"abstract":"$60","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.05173","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WeiLZD0CTDG0QL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WeiLZD0CTDG0QL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wei25h.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"RoPE及其变体在1D文本上表现优异，但扩展到视频的3D时空结构时，如何分配频率资源给空间和时间维度仍是开放问题。已有视频RoPE变体在时间维度分配不足，容易被周期性干扰帧误导。本文系统分析了视频RoPE的设计要素，并提出VideoRoPE。","importance":"对视频多模态LM预训练有直接价值。RoPE是当前主流LLM的位置编码方案，将其正确扩展到视频是视频理解/生成模型的基础设施问题。本文提出的V-NIAH-D评测任务也有独立价值——它暴露了现有方法在时间维度上的脆弱性，这在之前的评测中被忽略了。","technical_approach":"首先提出四个视频RoPE应满足的关键特性（摘要截断未完整列出），然后设计V-NIAH-D任务（在视觉大海捞针中加入周期性干扰帧）来检验这些特性。基于分析结果提出VideoRoPE，核心设计选择是给时间维度分配足够的频率资源，采用3D分解的RoPE结构。与已有方法的关键区别在于对时间维度的显式重视。","experiments":"摘要截断，完整实验数据不可得。V-NIAH-D任务显示已有RoPE变体在有干扰帧时性能显著下降，VideoRoPE通过合理的时间维度分配解决了这一问题。预期在视频理解benchmark上有系统性提升。","authors_note":"作者来自上海AI Lab等机构，Xiaoyi Dong、Pan Zhang等是InternVL系列的核心成员。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Extending RoPE from 1D text to video's 3D spatiotemporal structure remains an open challenge. Prior video RoPE variants under-allocate frequency resources to the temporal dimension, making them vulnerable to periodic distractors. This work systematically analyzes what makes good video RoPE and proposes VideoRoPE.","importance":"Directly relevant to video multimodal LM pretraining. RoPE extension to video is an infrastructure-level problem for video understanding/generation models. The proposed V-NIAH-D benchmark independently exposes temporal fragility in existing methods that prior evaluations missed.","technical_approach":"Identifies four key characteristics for effective video RoPE adaptation, introduces V-NIAH-D (Visual Needle-In-A-Haystack with periodic Distractors) to test them, and proposes VideoRoPE with a 3D-decomposed RoPE structure that explicitly allocates sufficient frequency resources to the temporal dimension. The key design choice distinguishing it from prior work is this temporal emphasis.","experiments":"Abstract truncated. V-NIAH-D reveals that existing RoPE variants degrade significantly under periodic distractors; VideoRoPE resolves this through proper temporal allocation. Systematic improvements on video understanding benchmarks expected.","authors_note":"Authors from Shanghai AI Lab and related institutions. Xiaoyi Dong and Pan Zhang are core members of the InternVL series."},"tags":["rope","video","position-embedding","long-context"],"notable_authors":["Xiaoyi Dong","Pan Zhang"]},{"id":"2502.15145","title":"Projection Optimization: A General Framework for Multi-Objective and Multi-Group RLHF","authors":["Nuoya Xiong","Aarti Singh"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$61","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.15145","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/XiongS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/XiongS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/xiong25c.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["rlhf","multi-objective","alignment","optimization"]},{"id":"2502.13417","title":"RLTHF: Targeted Human Feedback for LLM Alignment","authors":["Yifei Xu","Tusher Chakraborty","Emre Kiciman","Bibek Aryal","Srinagesh Sharma","Songwu Lu","Ranveer Chandra"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) to align with user preferences is challenging due to the high cost of quality human annotations in Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) and the generalizability limitations of AI Feedback. To address these challenges, we propose RLTHF, a human-AI hybrid framework that combines LLM-based initial alignment with selective human annotations to achieve full-human annotation alignment with minimal effort. RLTHF identifies hard-to-annotate samples mislabeled by LLMs using a reward model's reward distribution and iteratively enhances alignment by integrating strategic human corrections while leveraging LLM's correctly labeled samples. Evaluations on HH-RLHF and TL;DR datasets show that RLTHF reaches full-human annotation-level alignment with only 6-7% of the human annotation effort. Furthermore, models trained on RLTHF's curated datasets for downstream tasks outperform those trained on fully human-annotated datasets, underscoring the effectiveness of RLTHF.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.13417","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/XuCKASLC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/XuCKASLC25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/xu25c.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["rlhf","human-feedback","alignment","data-efficiency"]},{"id":"2502.20332","title":"Emergent Symbolic Mechanisms Support Abstract Reasoning in Large Language Models","authors":["Yukang Yang","Declan Campbell","Kaixuan Huang","Mengdi Wang","Jonathan D. Cohen","Taylor Whittington Webb"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$62","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.20332","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YangCHW0W25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YangCHW0W25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/yang25c.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心结论是：LLM 的抽象推理并不只是模糊统计拟合，内部会自发形成一套近似符号式的机制，用来把表面 token 映射成抽象变量、在变量上做归纳，再把结果检索回具体 token。它要解决的是围绕“LLM 是否真的依赖结构化机制推理”的争论，并试图给出更细的层级化机制证据。","importance":"这是机制分析工作，但对 pretrain 很有价值，因为它把抽象推理能力与特定 attention head 功能分解对应起来。其意义不在刷新 benchmark，而在于提供了一个可操作的解释框架：如果抽象推理依赖 symbol abstraction heads、symbolic induction heads 和 retrieval heads 这样的分工，那么训练数据、架构深度以及 attention 设计都可能影响这套机制是否出现、何时出现、出现后有多稳。","technical_approach":"方法上，作者通过内部表征与头功能分析，识别出一个三阶段 emergent symbolic architecture。早期层的 symbol abstraction heads 依据 token 之间关系把具体输入压成抽象变量；中间层的 symbolic induction heads 在这些变量上做序列归纳；后期层的 retrieval heads 再把抽象关系映射回具体 token 预测。与很多只证明“某些头重要”的 mechanistic interpretability 工作不同，这篇论文试图给出端到端功能链条，而不是孤立组件。这个设计之所以有解释力，是因为它把抽象、规则迁移和最终生成连接成一条可定位的计算路径。","experiments":"摘要没有给出具体模型规模、任务集或定量效果，但可以确认作者研究的是 abstract reasoning，并且给出了支持三类机制分工的证据。最关键的实验应包括：跨层 patching/ablation 验证三阶段缺一不可；在关系变换或变量替换任务上检查这些头是否保持功能稳定；以及这种符号机制随模型规模或训练程度是否出现涌现阈值。没有数字，不能判断其结论覆盖面有多广，但如果这些控制实验充分，这会是一篇机制上很有分量的论文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The central claim is that abstract reasoning in LLMs is supported by an emergent symbolic-like mechanism rather than only diffuse statistical pattern matching. The paper addresses the ongoing debate over whether robust reasoning in LLMs depends on structured internal computations, and it tries to provide layer-wise mechanistic evidence rather than behavioral hints.","importance":"This is a mechanistic interpretability paper with real relevance to pretraining. Its value is not in benchmark gains, but in decomposing abstract reasoning into interpretable attention-head functions. If reasoning depends on a pipeline of symbol abstraction, symbolic induction, and retrieval, then data mixture, depth, and attention design may directly affect whether this machinery emerges and how robust it is.","technical_approach":"The paper identifies a three-stage emergent symbolic architecture through internal representation and head-function analysis. Early-layer symbol abstraction heads map concrete tokens into abstract variables based on relations among tokens. Mid-layer symbolic induction heads perform sequence induction over these variables. Late-layer retrieval heads map the abstract result back to the correct token prediction. Unlike mechanistic work that only highlights isolated important heads, this paper proposes a functional chain spanning abstraction, rule application, and output recovery.","experiments":"The abstract gives no model sizes, task suites, or quantitative effect sizes, but it clearly studies abstract reasoning and claims evidence for a three-part mechanism. The most important experiments should include cross-layer ablations or activation patching to test whether all three stages are necessary, relation-preserving probes to verify functional stability under variable substitution, and scaling analyses of when the symbolic mechanism emerges. Without numbers, breadth of coverage is unclear, but if these controls are strong, this is a meaningful mechanistic result.","authors_note":""},"tags":["interpretability","abstract-reasoning","emergent-mechanisms","icl"]},{"id":"2503.14337","title":"PENCIL: Long Thoughts with Short Memory","authors":["Chenxiao Yang","Nathan Srebro","David McAllester","Zhiyuan Li"],"institutions":["TTIC","Northwestern University"],"abstract":"$63","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14337","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YangSM025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YangSM025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/yang25ac.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"长 Chain-of-Thought 推理的根本瓶颈是上下文中累积了大量不再需要的中间计算结果，导致内存浪费和计算开销随问题难度线性增长，无法 scale 到更难的问题。","importance":"范式级贡献。PENCIL 提出了一种在自回归生成过程中递归清理中间思维的 reduction 机制，本质上是让 LM 学会'用完即擦'，突破了 CoT 必须保留全部中间步骤的假设。这对理解 LM 的计算能力边界和 test-time compute 的高效利用有直接启示。","technical_approach":"在自回归生成中引入 reduction 机制：模型在生成思维链的同时，学习识别哪些中间结果可以被擦除，通过迭代'生成-擦除'实现更深的推理而不需要更长的上下文。关键设计是 reduction pattern 从训练数据中学习，而非手工规则。与标准 CoT 的区别在于上下文长度不再单调增长。","experiments":"摘要中提到 PENCIL 在效果和效率上都显著优于 CoT，使用更短的上下文和更少的计算解决更难的问题。具体数字和任务未在摘要中完整披露。","authors_note":"作者包括 Nathan Srebro（机器学习理论领域知名学者，Northwestern/TTIC）和 Zhiyuan Li（优化理论方向有多篇代表性工作）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Long CoT reasoning is bottlenecked by indefinite accumulation of intermediate computations in context, wasting memory and compute. This fundamentally limits scaling to harder problems at test time.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution. PENCIL introduces a reduction mechanism that lets the model recursively erase intermediate thoughts during autoregressive generation, breaking the assumption that all CoT steps must be retained. Directly relevant to understanding LM computational capacity and efficient test-time compute.","technical_approach":"A reduction mechanism is integrated into autoregressive generation: the model learns from training data which intermediate results can be erased, enabling iterative generate-and-erase cycles for deeper reasoning within shorter context. The key distinction from standard CoT is that context length no longer grows monotonically.","experiments":"PENCIL is reported to be significantly more effective and efficient than CoT, solving harder problems with shorter context and less compute. Specific numbers and tasks are not fully detailed in the abstract.","authors_note":"Authors include Nathan Srebro (prominent ML theory researcher, Northwestern/TTIC) and Zhiyuan Li (known for optimization theory work)."},"tags":["long-cot","memory-efficiency","reasoning","test-time-compute"],"notable_authors":["Nathan Srebro","Zhiyuan Li"]},{"id":"YangTNNY25","title":"Demystifying Long Chain-of-Thought Reasoning","authors":["Shiming Yang","Yuxuan Tong","Xinyao Niu","Graham Neubig","Xiang Yue"],"institutions":["CMU"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YangTNNY25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YangTNNY25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/yang25ae.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"长 Chain-of-Thought 推理近期在 LLM 中展现出强大能力，但其内部机制——为什么长思维链有效、什么条件下有效、边界在哪——尚不清楚。本文旨在系统性地揭示长 CoT 推理的关键因素。","importance":"分析级贡献。对 pretrain 和 posttrain 研究都有价值：理解长 CoT 的工作机制有助于设计更好的训练数据、RL 奖励信号和推理策略。在 R1-Zero 等范式兴起的背景下，这类分析工作的时效性很高。","technical_approach":"摘要未提供，无法给出具体方法细节。从标题判断是实证分析工作（demystifying），可能涉及对不同长度、结构、内容的 CoT 的消融和机制分析。","experiments":"摘要未提供，无法给出实验细节。","authors_note":"作者包括 Graham Neubig（CMU，NLP 和代码生成方向知名学者）和 Xiang Yue。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Long CoT reasoning has shown strong results in LLMs, but the underlying mechanisms—why it works, under what conditions, and where it breaks—remain unclear. This paper aims to systematically demystify these factors.","importance":"Analysis-level contribution relevant to both pretrain and posttrain. Understanding long CoT mechanics informs training data design, RL reward signals, and inference strategies, especially timely given the rise of R1-Zero-style paradigms.","technical_approach":"Abstract not available. Based on the title, this is likely an empirical analysis studying ablations over CoT length, structure, and content to identify key factors driving long CoT effectiveness.","experiments":"Abstract not available; no experimental details can be reported.","authors_note":"Authors include Graham Neubig (CMU, prominent in NLP and code generation) and Xiang Yue."},"tags":["long-cot","reasoning","analysis"],"notable_authors":["Graham Neubig","Xiang Yue"]},{"id":"2502.14010","title":"Which Attention Heads Matter for In-Context Learning?","authors":["Kayo Yin","Jacob Steinhardt"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Large language models (LLMs) exhibit impressive in-context learning (ICL) capability, enabling them to perform new tasks using only a few demonstrations in the prompt. Two different mechanisms have been proposed to explain ICL: induction heads that find and copy relevant tokens, and function vector (FV) heads whose activations compute a latent encoding of the ICL task. To better understand which of the two distinct mechanisms drives ICL, we study and compare induction heads and FV heads in 12 language models. Through detailed ablations, we discover that few-shot ICL performance depends primarily on FV heads, especially in larger models. In addition, we uncover that FV and induction heads are connected: many FV heads start as induction heads during training before transitioning to the FV mechanism. This leads us to speculate that induction facilitates learning the more complex FV mechanism that ultimately drives ICL.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.14010","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YinS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YinS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/yin25e.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["icl","attention-heads","induction-heads","interpretability"]},{"id":"2503.08908","title":"Interpreting the Repeated Token Phenomenon in Large Language Models","authors":["Itay Yona","Ilia Shumailov","Jamie Hayes","Yossi Gandelsman"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$64","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.08908","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YonaSHG25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YonaSHG25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/yona25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["attention-sinks","repeated-token","interpretability","llm-failure"]},{"id":"2409.06957","title":"Policy Filtration for RLHF to Mitigate Noise in Reward Models","authors":["Chuheng Zhang","Wei Shen","Li Zhao","Xuyun Zhang","Xiaolong Xu","Wanchun Dou","Jiang Bian"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$65","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.06957","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Zhang00Z0D025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Zhang00Z0D025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhang25bq.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["rlhf","reward-model","alignment","noise"]},{"id":"2410.08067","title":"Reward-Augmented Data Enhances Direct Preference Alignment of LLMs","authors":["Shenao Zhang","Zhihan Liu","Boyi Liu","Yufeng Zhang","Yingxiang Yang","Yongfei Liu","Liyu Chen","Tao Sun","Zhaoran Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$66","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.08067","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhangL00YLCS025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhangL00YLCS025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhang25az.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["dpo","preference-learning","reward-model","alignment"]},{"id":"2502.10505","title":"Preference learning made easy: Everything should be understood through win rate","authors":["Lily H. Zhang","Rajesh Ranganath"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$67","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.10505","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhangR25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhangR25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhang25bm.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["preference-learning","win-rate","alignment","evaluation"]},{"id":"2501.16265","title":"Training Dynamics of In-Context Learning in Linear Attention","authors":["Yedi Zhang","Aaditya K. Singh","Peter E. Latham","Andrew M. Saxe"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$68","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.16265","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhangSLS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhangSLS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhang25br.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的是：线性注意力模型的 in-context learning 能力是如何在梯度下降中长出来的。过去大家知道 Transformer 能做 ICL，也有少量理论工作分析简化设定，但对“训练过程中为何会突然学会”“参数化形式会不会改变动力学”理解很不完整，尤其是理论里常用的 merged key-query 参数化和实际模型更接近的 separate key/query 之间差异没有讲清。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要是机制级而不是方法级。它不直接改进预训练配方，但它把 ICL 的形成拆成可分析的训练动力学问题，给出固定点、相变式 loss drop、不同参数化下阶段性学习行为的解释；这对理解为什么某些架构更容易在预训练中涌现出 ICL、以及训练曲线中的突变意味着什么，有直接启发。","technical_approach":"核心方法是对多头线性自注意力在线性回归型 ICL 任务上的梯度下降动力学做解析研究。作者比较了两种参数化：一种把 key 和 query 合并成单矩阵，便于理论推导；另一种把 key、query 分开，更接近真实 Transformer。对 merged 形式，论文指出训练存在两个固定点，loss 轨迹会经历一次明显的单次陡降，并且可以写出解析时间演化；这说明 ICL 不是平滑积累出来的，而更像是动力系统跨过某个阈值后的相变。对 separate 形式，训练过程更复杂，通常会出现多个阶段，意味着参数自由度增加后，模型可以先学到部分结构，再逐步逼近完整的 ICL 解。","experiments":"从给到的信息看，论文的证据以理论推导和受控实验为主，不是大规模预训练 benchmark。摘要没有给出模型参数量、数据规模或标准语言建模指标，因此这里不能编造。可以确认的关键实验点是：作者验证了 merged 参数化下的单次 abrupt loss drop，以及 separate 参数化下更分阶段的学习轨迹；这类实验更像是在可控合成任务上对理论预测做数值验证。对读者真正有价值的不是绝对指标，而是训练曲线形状、固定点稳定性、以及参数化改变后动力学定性变化。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a clean mechanistic question: how does gradient descent produce in-context learning in linear attention? Prior work established that attention models can perform ICL and gave partial theory in simplified settings, but it remained unclear why the capability appears abruptly during training and how much this depends on the attention parameterization.","importance":"This is a mechanism paper, not a new pretraining recipe. Its value is that it turns ICL emergence into an analyzable training-dynamics problem and ties observable loss transitions to fixed points and parameterization choices; that is useful if you care about when ICL should emerge, what sudden loss drops mean, and why architecture details may matter for capability formation.","technical_approach":"The method is an analytical study of gradient descent on multi-head linear self-attention trained for in-context linear regression. The authors compare two parameterizations: a merged key-query matrix often used in theory, and separate key and query matrices that are closer to practical transformers. For the merged case, they show two fixed points and a single sharp loss drop, and derive a closed-form time course; the message is that ICL can emerge as a phase-transition-like event rather than smooth accumulation. For the separate case, training becomes multi-stage, suggesting that added parameter freedom changes the route by which the model discovers the in-context algorithm.","experiments":"Based on the available abstract, the evidence is primarily theory plus controlled numerical verification rather than large-scale LM pretraining. No model sizes, token counts, or standard LM metrics are provided, so there is nothing reliable to report on that front. What can be stated is that the experiments validate the predicted abrupt loss drop for the merged parameterization and more staged dynamics for the separate one. The useful takeaway is the shape of learning dynamics, not benchmark SOTA.","authors_note":""},"tags":["icl","training-dynamics","linear-attention","theory"],"notable_authors":["Andrew M. Saxe","Peter E. Latham"]},{"id":"2502.18137","title":"SpargeAttention: Accurate and Training-free Sparse Attention Accelerating Any Model Inference","authors":["Jintao Zhang","Chendong Xiang","Haofeng Huang","Jia Wei","Haocheng Xi","Jun Zhu","Jianfei Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$69","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.18137","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhangXHWX0C25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhangXHWX0C25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhang25ch.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：能不能做一种真正通用、无需重训的 sparse attention，在不同模型上都稳定加速且几乎不掉效果。过去稀疏注意力大多依赖特定模型的注意力图模式、要么需要训练适配、要么泛化差，所以很难作为“任何模型都能插”的推理层优化。","importance":"这是系统级工作，但对大模型训练和推理研究都有关联。它的重要性不在算法新奇，而在于如果真能 training-free 地跨模型部署，就说明 attention 稀疏性可以被在线可靠估计，而不必在预训练时就把稀疏模式写死。对长上下文 serving、蒸馏和训练时 profile 分析也有启发，因为它给出了一种更通用的 attention 重要性筛选思路。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 SpargeAttn：一个通用的稀疏加量化注意力框架，采用两阶段在线过滤。第一阶段快速预测哪些 attention 值大到值得保留，目的是用很低成本筛掉大部分不重要项；第二阶段再对候选项做更精确的判别，从而控制误删带来的精度损失。相比依赖固定局部窗口、块稀疏模式或特定模型统计规律的方法，它的关键选择是在线根据当前输入决定保留项，因此更通用；代价是要额外做过滤开销，只有当预测足够准、稀疏率足够高时，端到端加速才成立。","experiments":"摘要没有提供模型规模、序列长度、实际 wall-clock speedup、精度损失和比较基线的具体数字，所以不能给出量化结论。可以确定的实验主张是：方法是 training-free，能用于 any model，并兼顾速度和端到端性能。对这类论文，真正关键的实验通常包括：不同架构上的吞吐/时延收益，长短上下文下的转折点，和 FlashAttention、静态块稀疏、token pruning 等基线的对比，以及过滤误差与速度收益的 trade-off 曲线。摘要未给数字，需看正文再判断成色。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a hard deployment problem: a truly universal sparse attention method that speeds up inference without retraining and without noticeably hurting model quality. Existing sparse attention methods usually depend on model-specific attention patterns, require adaptation, or fail to generalize across architectures, which makes them hard to use as a drop-in optimization.","importance":"This is primarily a systems contribution, but it also matters for model research because it tests whether attention sparsity can be estimated online rather than baked into architecture or training. If that works broadly, it informs long-context serving and may also feed back into how we think about attention importance during training and distillation.","technical_approach":"The method, SpargeAttn, is a universal sparse-and-quantized attention module with a two-stage online filter. Stage one cheaply predicts which attention entries are likely large enough to matter, removing most candidates at low cost. Stage two refines the selection to avoid quality loss from false negatives. Relative to fixed local windows, block sparsity, or model-specific sparse patterns, the main design choice is input-dependent filtering at inference time. The obvious trade-off is overhead: the filtering only helps if the prediction is accurate enough and the resulting sparsity is high enough to beat the cost of the filter itself.","experiments":"The abstract gives no concrete model sizes, context lengths, speedups, quality deltas, or baseline numbers, so there is no reliable quantitative summary to provide. What can be stated is that the authors claim the method is training-free, broadly applicable, and able to preserve end-to-end model performance while accelerating attention. The decisive evidence for a paper like this would be wall-clock gains across architectures, break-even points across sequence lengths, and trade-off curves versus FlashAttention-style dense kernels and prior sparse baselines. Those details are not available here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["sparse-attention","inference-acceleration","training-free","long-context"]},{"id":"ZhangYCWWQ0T25","title":"Curse of High Dimensionality Issue in Transformer for Long Context Modeling","authors":["Shuhai Zhang","Zeng You","Yaofo Chen","Zhiquan Wen","Qianyue Wang","Zhijie Qiu","Yuanqing Li","Mingkui Tan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhangYCWWQ0T25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhangYCWWQ0T25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhang25cr.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注 Transformer 在长上下文建模中的高维诅咒问题，但当前提供的信息不足，无法准确概括作者具体要打掉的是表示退化、注意力失效、还是统计估计效率问题。仅从标题判断，它是在质疑随着上下文和特征维度增大，Transformer 的某些核心机制会遭遇维度带来的结构性瓶颈，而不是单纯工程实现慢。","importance":"如果论文确实把长上下文里的高维瓶颈刻画清楚，它会更偏机制级和理论级价值。对 pretrain 的意义在于：很多长上下文方法默认只要算力和位置编码跟上，模型就能继续扩展；但如果存在高维导致的归纳偏置失效或信号稀释，那么仅靠扩长度未必有效。不过在没有摘要和实验细节的情况下，这个判断必须保守。","technical_approach":"当前没有摘要，无法确认作者是做理论证明、构造反例、提出新架构，还是分析现有 long-context trick 的失败边界。能合理推测的是，论文会把“高维诅咒”具体化为某种随维度增长恶化的量，并据此解释 Transformer 长上下文表现下降的原因。但任何进一步的机制描述都属于猜测，因此不应展开。","experiments":"没有摘要，也没有模型规模、数据规模、基线和指标信息，无法提供可靠实验总结。对于这类主题，最关键的实验本应包括：上下文长度扩展时性能如何随维度变化、不同位置编码或注意力变体是否受影响、以及理论预言是否在真实 LLM 或合成任务上成立。当前信息无法确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The title suggests a study of a curse-of-dimensionality bottleneck in transformers for long-context modeling, but the available information is too sparse to state the exact failure mode. The likely question is not just computational cost, but whether increasing context length and representation dimension creates a structural limitation for transformer-based sequence modeling.","importance":"If the paper truly characterizes such a bottleneck, the contribution would be mechanistic or theoretical rather than a new recipe. That would matter for pretraining because many long-context efforts assume scaling context is mostly an engineering problem. A real high-dimensional limitation would imply that more tokens and better kernels are not enough by themselves. Still, without an abstract, this has to be treated cautiously.","technical_approach":"There is no abstract here, so it is not possible to tell whether the paper provides theory, counterexamples, architectural changes, or empirical diagnosis. A reasonable guess is that it formalizes some quantity that degrades with dimensionality and links it to long-context failures in transformers, but anything more specific would be speculation and should be avoided.","experiments":"No abstract, model sizes, datasets, baselines, or metrics are available, so there is no reliable experimental summary to provide. For a paper on this topic, the key evidence would normally include how performance changes with context length and dimension, whether different positional schemes or attention variants are affected, and whether the theory matches both synthetic and real-model behavior. None of that can be confirmed from the current information.","authors_note":""},"tags":["long-context","transformer","high-dimensionality","attention"]},{"id":"2501.12956","title":"GANQ: GPU-Adaptive Non-Uniform Quantization for Large Language Models","authors":["Pengxiang Zhao","Xiaoming Yuan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6a","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.12956","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Zhao025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Zhao025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhao25ae.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：低比特量化虽然能省显存，但现有方案往往和 GPU 硬件不匹配，导致实际推理并不高效，而且 uniform quantization 对 LLM 权重分布拟合不够好。换句话说，问题不只是量化误差，还包括量化格式是否真的适合 GPU 上的矩阵乘实现。","importance":"这是系统级部署工作，但对模型研究也有启发。它提醒我们，量化方法不能只看 perplexity 或 task score，还要看硬件原语是否支持；否则 paper 上的 bit-width 优势会被 dequantization 开销吃掉。对大模型 serving 很实际，对预训练研究的间接价值是：未来如果训练时就考虑部署友好的权重分布，可能能进一步放大量化收益。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 GANQ，一个 layer-wise 的训练后非均匀量化框架，专门针对基于查找表的、硬件友好的 mixed-precision GEMM 设计。它的关键选择有两个：一是用 non-uniform quantization 更贴合层内权重分布，减少 uniform quantization 的失真；二是让量化配置适应具体 GPU，实现真正高效的 lookup-table mpGEMM，而不是退回到低效的反量化实现。相比只优化误差的 PTQ 方法，GANQ 更强调“算法-硬件共同设计”；代价是方案可能对特定硬件特性更敏感，跨设备迁移未必免费。","experiments":"摘要没有给出具体模型名称、参数规模、量化位宽、吞吐提升和精度损失数字，因此不能报告精确结果。可以确认的结论是：作者声称 GANQ 在量化精度上优于现有方法，并且由于针对 GPU 自适应优化，部署效率也更好。对这类工作，真正关键的实验应该同时看三件事：准确率或困惑度退化、真实 wall-clock latency/throughput、以及不同 GPU 代际上的泛化。摘要只给方向，没有给硬数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical mismatch in LLM quantization: lower bit-width reduces memory, but current methods often map poorly to GPU hardware, so real inference speed does not improve much. At the same time, uniform quantization is often a poor fit for the actual weight distributions of LLM layers.","importance":"This is primarily a deployment and systems paper, but the lesson is broader. Quantization should not be judged only by perplexity or downstream accuracy; it also has to match the hardware primitives that will execute it. Otherwise the nominal bit savings are lost to dequantization overhead. For model researchers, it is a reminder that hardware-aware representations matter.","technical_approach":"GANQ is a layer-wise post-training non-uniform quantization framework designed for hardware-efficient lookup-table-based mixed-precision GEMM. The two main choices are straightforward: use non-uniform quantization to better fit layer-specific weight distributions, and optimize the quantization scheme for the target GPU so that the implementation stays in an efficient lookup-table path instead of falling back to expensive dequantization. Relative to PTQ methods that mostly optimize reconstruction error, GANQ is more explicitly an algorithm-hardware co-design. The trade-off is potential hardware specificity: what is optimal for one GPU stack may not transfer cleanly to another.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide the exact model families, parameter scales, bit-widths, latency gains, throughput gains, or quality losses, so no quantitative summary can be trusted. What can be stated is that the authors claim better quantization quality than prior methods and higher deployment efficiency through GPU-adaptive optimization. For this kind of work, the decisive evidence would be the joint curve over quality degradation, wall-clock speed, and memory savings across multiple GPU generations. Those numbers are not included in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","non-uniform","gpu-adaptive","inference"]},{"id":"Zhao0FTXFS025","title":"SkipGPT: Each Token is One of a Kind","authors":["Anhao Zhao","Fanghua Ye","Yingqi Fan","Junlong Tong","Jing Xiong","Zhiwei Fei","Hui Su","Xiaoyu Shen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Zhao0FTXFS025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Zhao0FTXFS025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhao25ab.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"从标题看，这篇论文关注的是 token 级异质性：不是每个 token 都需要同样的计算路径，因此统一的逐 token 处理存在浪费。但当前没有摘要，无法确认作者具体是在做 token skipping、动态深度、早退，还是别的条件计算机制。","importance":"如果工作确实围绕 token-level adaptive computation，它对推理效率和训练时的计算分配都可能有价值。对大模型研究者来说，这类方向的重要性在于它挑战了“每个 token 一视同仁”的 dense 计算范式，尤其在长上下文或多模态输入中，token 重要性差异通常很大。不过在没有方法和结果细节前，不能判断它是方法级进展还是仅工程优化。","technical_approach":"没有摘要，无法准确描述技术路线。仅从题目“Each Token is One of a Kind”推测，作者可能通过识别 token 的难度、信息量或冗余度，动态决定是否跳过部分计算或分配不同计算预算。若是如此，设计的关键会在于：跳过机制如何避免破坏上下文依赖，门控代价是否小于节省下来的计算，以及训练和推理目标是否一致。除此之外不应臆测。","experiments":"当前没有任何实验信息，无法报告模型规模、基线、速度收益或精度变化。对这类工作，最关键的实验通常包括：不同任务和上下文长度下的加速比、质量退化是否受控、以及 token 选择策略在不同层上的稳定性。现有信息不足以给出可靠摘要。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"From the title alone, the paper appears to argue that tokens should not all receive the same computation, and that per-token heterogeneity is currently underused. Without an abstract, however, it is impossible to tell whether the focus is token skipping, dynamic depth, early exit, or another form of conditional computation.","importance":"If the work is indeed about token-level adaptive computation, it could matter for both inference efficiency and compute allocation during training. The broader reason this line matters is that dense transformers treat all tokens uniformly even though their difficulty and informational value vary substantially, especially in long-context and multimodal settings. Still, without methodological details, it is not possible to judge the actual contribution level.","technical_approach":"No abstract is available, so the technical approach cannot be summarized reliably. The title suggests a mechanism that estimates token importance, difficulty, or redundancy and then allocates different amounts of computation accordingly. If that is the case, the crucial design questions would be whether skipping harms contextual dependencies, whether the gating cost is lower than the saved compute, and whether training-time and inference-time behavior are aligned. Anything beyond that would be speculation.","experiments":"There is no experimental information in the prompt, so no model sizes, baselines, speedups, or accuracy trade-offs can be reported. For this type of paper, the decisive evidence would normally include acceleration across tasks and context lengths, quality retention, and stability of the token selection policy across layers. None of that can be confirmed here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["token-skipping","inference-efficiency","adaptive-compute"]},{"id":"2411.07837","title":"FRUGAL: Memory-Efficient Optimization by Reducing State Overhead for Scalable Training","authors":["Philip Zmushko","Aleksandr Beznosikov","Martin Takác","Samuel Horváth"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6b","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.07837","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZmushkoB0H25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZmushkoB0H25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zmushko25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["optimizer","memory","scalable-training","training-efficiency","fine-tuning"]},{"id":"2503.10135","title":"Gumiho: A Hybrid Architecture to Prioritize Early Tokens in Speculative Decoding","authors":["Jinze Li","Yixing Xu","Haiduo Huang","Xuanwu Yin","Dong Li","Edith C. H. Ngai","Emad Barsoum"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6c","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.10135","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0001XHY0NB25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0001XHY0NB25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/li25dg.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["speculative-decoding","inference","latency","architecture"]},{"id":"2505.15141","title":"BanditSpec: Adaptive Speculative Decoding via Bandit Algorithms","authors":["Yunlong Hou","Fengzhuo Zhang","Cunxiao Du","Xuan Zhang","Jiachun Pan","Tianyu Pang","Chao Du","Vincent Y. F. Tan","Zhuoran Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6d","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.15141","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0001ZDZPPDTY25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0001ZDZPPDTY25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/hou25h.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["speculative-decoding","bandit","inference","latency"]},{"id":"2505.16225","title":"MAPLE: Many-Shot Adaptive Pseudo-Labeling for In-Context Learning","authors":["Zihan Chen","Song Wang","Zhen Tan","Jundong Li","Cong Shen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6e","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.16225","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/000200L025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/000200L025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chen25bo.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["icl","long-context","pseudo-labeling","adaptation"]},{"id":"2501.02669","title":"Generalizing from SIMPLE to HARD Visual Reasoning: Can We Mitigate Modality Imbalance in VLMs?","authors":["Simon Park","Abhishek Panigrahi","Yun Cheng","Dingli Yu","Anirudh Goyal","Sanjeev Arora"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6f","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.02669","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0002PCYGA25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0002PCYGA25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/park25j.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["vlm","visual-reasoning","modality-imbalance","benchmark"]},{"id":"2502.03628","title":"The Hidden Life of Tokens: Reducing Hallucination of Large Vision-Language Models Via Visual Information Steering","authors":["Zhuowei Li","Haizhou Shi","Yunhe Gao","Di Liu","Zhenting Wang","Yuxiao Chen","Ting Liu","Long Zhao","Hao Wang","Dimitris N. Metaxas"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$70","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.03628","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0002SG0WC000M25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0002SG0WC000M25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/li25ca.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["vlm","hallucination","interpretability","steering"]},{"id":"2502.01839","title":"Sample, Scrutinize and Scale: Effective Inference-Time Search by Scaling Verification","authors":["Eric Zhao","Pranjal Awasthi","Sreenivas Gollapudi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$71","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.01839","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0003AG25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0003AG25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhao25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的核心问题是：最朴素的 test-time search——多采样再自验证——到底能不能靠规模本身变强，而不是依赖复杂搜索策略。过去大家往往把 inference-time scaling 做成树搜索、过程打分或多代理协作，默认简单 sampling + self-verification 很快会遇到瓶颈；这篇工作指出，瓶颈没有想象中来得那么早，而且验证器本身会随着候选池变大而“隐式变强”，因此这个问题值得重新审视。","importance":"这是一篇方法与 scaling 规律层面的工作，重要性在于它重新抬高了简单 test-time compute 的上限。对 pretrain / posttrain 接口的启示很直接：如果基础模型同时具备足够的采样多样性和一定的自检能力，那么不必先上复杂 PRM 或外部 verifier，就能从推理时算力中拿到很大收益；这会影响我们如何评估预训练模型的“可搜索性”和后训练阶段是否真的需要重型偏好/奖励基础设施。","technical_approach":"核心方法并不复杂，关键结论反而来自系统地把简单方法做大：只用随机采样生成多份候选，再让模型直接判断哪一个正确或最好。它不是发明一种新搜索算法，而是把 sampling-based search 分解成两个可扩展部件：候选生成质量和验证准确率，并分析两者如何随 sample 数增长共同提升。与常见做法相比，它刻意舍弃树式扩展、过程监督和人工设计的 verifier，目的是隔离出“规模化验证”本身的收益；论文特别强调一种 implicit scaling 现象，即候选越多，越容易出现明显正确和明显错误的对比样本，从而让同一个 verifier 更容易做对选择。","experiments":"论文最核心的实验事实是：仅靠随机采样加直接自验证，就能把 Gemini v1.5 Pro 的推理表现推到 popular benchmarks 上超过 o1-Preview。摘要没有给出参数量、采样数、具体 benchmark 名称和分数，因此这里不能补写数字；但从摘要可确认，作者关注的是随 sample budget 扩大时的性能曲线，而不是单点最好成绩。最有价值的观察不是“又涨了几分”，而是验证模块的准确率并非固定常数，而会随着候选池扩大而提升，这说明 test-time scaling 的收益不是只来自更高 hit rate，也来自 reranking 难度下降。边界也很清楚：这种方法依赖模型已经具备可用的自检能力；如果模型会系统性偏好流畅但错误的答案，扩 sample 只会放大计算成本，不一定带来同等收益。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a simple but important question: how far can plain sampling plus self-verification go if you just scale it up. Prior work often moved quickly to tree search, process supervision, or external verifiers, implicitly assuming that naive sample-and-rerank saturates early. This work argues that the ceiling is higher than expected, partly because verification itself gets easier when the candidate pool is larger.","importance":"This is a scaling-law style contribution for inference-time compute rather than a new training algorithm. Its relevance to pretrain research is that it reframes what a strong base model should provide: not only next-token quality, but also enough diversity and enough internal judgment for cheap search to work. That has direct implications for how we value pretraining decisions that improve calibratability and self-verification, and when heavy post-training infrastructure is actually necessary.","technical_approach":"The method is intentionally minimal: generate many candidates by random sampling, then ask the model to directly verify or choose the best one. The contribution is not a new search heuristic but a scaling analysis of two coupled components: candidate generation and verification. Unlike more elaborate systems, it avoids process reward models, handcrafted search trees, and specialized judges, so the observed gains can be attributed to scaling verification itself. The key mechanism is what the authors call implicit scaling: with more samples, the pool contains clearer contrasts, making the same verifier more likely to identify the correct answer.","experiments":"The headline empirical result is that this minimalist setup lifts Gemini v1.5 Pro above o1-Preview on popular reasoning benchmarks. The abstract does not provide model sizes, sample counts, benchmark names, or exact scores, so those details cannot be stated reliably here. The most useful empirical takeaway is not just that accuracy improves with more samples, but that verifier accuracy also improves as the pool grows. That means the gain is not only from a better chance of sampling a good answer, but also from easier selection. The limitation is equally clear: if the model's self-evaluation is systematically miscalibrated, extra samples mainly add cost.","authors_note":""},"tags":["inference-time-compute","self-verification","scaling","search"]},{"id":"2502.18679","title":"Discriminative Finetuning of Generative Large Language Models without Reward Models and Human Preference Data","authors":["Siqi Guo","Ilgee Hong","Vicente Balmaseda","Changlong Yu","Liang Qiu","Xin Liu","Haoming Jiang","Tuo Zhao","Tianbao Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$72","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.18679","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0003HBYQLJZY25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0003HBYQLJZY25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/guo25d.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：SFT 虽然用了监督数据，但目标函数仍是生成式的 token likelihood，因此它不擅长直接学“区分好坏答案”。现有主流做法通常是在 SFT 之后再接 preference optimization，用人类偏好数据或 reward model 补上这一步；作者想证明，不借助这两类额外基础设施，也可以把判别式学习直接塞进 finetuning。","importance":"这项工作的价值在于，它挑战了“SFT 不够、必须再接 RM/PO”的常见流水线，属于 post-train 方法级改造，但对 pretrain/posttrain 接口也有启发。如果 DFT 能稳定替代一部分偏好优化，那么后训练会更接近传统监督学习，数据与训练栈都会更简单；这会降低高质量偏好标注和 reward modeling 的门槛，尤其适合资源受限团队或领域定制场景。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Discriminative Fine-Tuning，简而言之是在 generative LM 上引入更直接的判别式训练信号，让模型不仅学会“生成参考答案”，还学会“把好答案排在坏答案前面”。它不是另起一个独立 reward model，而是直接改造 finetuning 目标，因此部署和训练流程都比 SFT+PO 更短。与标准 SFT 相比，它不再把所有监督都压缩成对单个 target 序列的条件似然；与 DPO、RLHF 一类方法相比，它尽量避免显式偏好数据和额外奖励器。这样设计有效的原因是：很多对齐失败并不是模型不会写，而是训练目标没有迫使它在多个 plausible outputs 中做清晰判别。","experiments":"从摘要可确认，作者将 DFT 与常规 SFT 以及依赖偏好/奖励信号的后续优化范式做比较，并主张在不使用 human preference data 和 reward models 的条件下取得更好的对齐效果。摘要没有给出基座模型规模、数据规模、评测集和具体提升数字，因此不能补写。可以确定的实验信息只有两点：第一，作者关注的是替代 SFT 后续 PO 阶段的能力，而不是单纯提高训练集拟合；第二，论文的论证重点应当是判别式目标是否能系统性弥补 SFT 的生成式偏差。边界在于，如果训练数据本身没有提供足够的好坏对比结构，纯判别式改造未必能完全替代偏好数据带来的额外监督。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a specific weakness of SFT: even with supervised data, the objective is still generative next-token likelihood, so it does not explicitly teach the model to distinguish better responses from worse ones. The standard fix is a second-stage preference optimization step with human preferences or a reward model. This work asks whether discriminative learning can be brought directly into fine-tuning and remove that dependency.","importance":"This is a post-training method contribution with broader implications for the pretrain-to-posttrain interface. If it works well, it weakens the assumption that alignment must rely on a separate reward modeling stack. That matters operationally because preference data and reward models are expensive, brittle, and often domain-specific. A stronger discriminative fine-tuning stage could simplify alignment pipelines and make customization more accessible.","technical_approach":"The method, Discriminative Fine-Tuning, modifies the training objective of a generative LM so the model learns not just to imitate a target response but to favor better responses over worse ones. It is not a separate reward model and not an RL stage. Compared with vanilla SFT, it adds explicit discriminative pressure. Compared with DPO or RLHF-style methods, it aims to do so without human preference labels or an external reward signal. The intuition is straightforward: many alignment failures are ranking failures, not pure generation failures, and likelihood alone is a weak proxy for ranking quality.","experiments":"From the abstract, the empirical claim is that DFT improves over standard SFT while avoiding reward models and human preference data. The abstract does not provide model sizes, dataset sizes, benchmarks, or exact gains, so those should not be fabricated. What can be said reliably is that the evaluation is meant to test whether discriminative objectives can substitute for a separate preference-optimization phase. The likely boundary is also clear: if the supervision data lacks meaningful contrast between good and bad outputs, discriminative fine-tuning may have less room to help.","authors_note":""},"tags":["sft","discriminative-finetuning","alignment","preference-optimization"]},{"id":"2410.04081","title":"Epsilon-VAE: Denoising as Visual Decoding","authors":["Long Zhao","Sanghyun Woo","Ziyu Wan","Yandong Li","Han Zhang","Boqing Gong","Hartwig Adam","Xuhui Jia","Ting Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$73","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.04081","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0003WWL0GAJ025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0003WWL0GAJ025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhao25w.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：视觉 tokenizer 里的 decoder 仍停留在传统单步重建范式，这会限制 latent 表示的压缩效率和生成质量。过去视觉 tokenization 大多用 autoencoder：encoder 压缩，decoder 一次性还原；作者认为对高维图像来说，这种解码器过于刚性，而 diffusion 的逐步去噪更适合作为“解码”过程本身。","importance":"这是一篇视觉 tokenization / 生成表征范式层面的工作，对统一多模态预训练有现实价值。原因很简单：视觉离散化或紧凑连续表征的质量，直接决定后续用 AR LM、diffusion transformer 或混合范式建模时的 token 效率和可学性。如果 denoising decoder 能在相同或更小 latent 容量下保住重建与生成质量，那么它对视觉 tokenizer 设计会是一个有含金量的方向。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Epsilon-VAE，它把 VAE/autoencoder 里的 decoder 替换成一个 diffusion 去噪过程，也就是“把 denoising 当 decoding”。这不是简单把扩散模型接在后面做 refinement，而是把 encoder 输出的 latent 作为条件，引导从噪声到图像的迭代恢复，因此 decoder 的工作从单步像素回归变成多步误差校正。与传统 AE 相比，它牺牲了解码一步到位的速度，换来更强的重建表达能力；与纯 latent diffusion 相比，它强调的是 tokenization 视角，即如何得到更适合下游生成建模的表征，而不仅是最终采样质量。","experiments":"根据摘要，作者通过重建与生成两个维度评估 Epsilon-VAE，以验证“denoising as decoding”是否能得到更好的视觉表征。摘要没有提供数据集、latent 压缩比、FID、重建误差、吞吐或与哪些 tokenizer baseline 比较，因此不能补具体数字。可以明确的实验关注点有两类：一是相同 latent budget 下重建质量是否更好，二是该 latent 是否更适合后续生成模型使用。重要的 trade-off 也比较明确：迭代式 decoder 往往提升质量，但会增加解码时延；因此它更适合把 tokenizer 当预训练基础设施的场景，不一定适合要求极低重建延迟的应用。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper revisits a basic design choice in visual tokenization: most methods still rely on a standard autoencoder decoder that reconstructs the image in one shot. The authors argue that this is a poor fit for high-dimensional visual data and propose to treat iterative denoising as the decoding process itself.","importance":"This is relevant at the representation and tokenizer level, which makes it useful for multimodal pretraining. Better visual tokenizers are not just a vision-side concern; they determine token efficiency, reconstruction fidelity, and how easy it is for downstream AR or diffusion-based foundation models to learn from image latents. If an iterative decoder preserves more information at the same latent budget, that is a meaningful design shift.","technical_approach":"Epsilon-VAE replaces the usual decoder with a diffusion process conditioned on encoder latents. In other words, the decoder no longer maps latent to pixels in one pass; it gradually denoises a noisy sample into the image using the latent as guidance. This is more than a post-hoc refinement module. It changes the role of the decoder from direct reconstruction to iterative error correction. Compared with a classical autoencoder, it trades decoding speed for a more expressive reconstruction mechanism. Compared with latent diffusion used mainly for generation, the emphasis here is tokenization quality.","experiments":"The abstract states that the method is evaluated on both reconstruction and generation, which is the right way to test whether the learned latent space is useful rather than only visually pleasing. However, it does not provide datasets, compression ratios, FID, reconstruction metrics, or baseline names, so no numbers should be added. The likely empirical questions are whether the same latent budget yields better reconstructions and whether the resulting latents support stronger downstream generation. The main trade-off is clear: iterative decoding can improve quality but increases latency.","authors_note":""},"tags":["visual-tokenizer","vae","denoising","image-generation"]},{"id":"2502.10391","title":"MM-RLHF: The Next Step Forward in Multimodal LLM Alignment","authors":["Yifan Zhang","Tao Yu","Haochen Tian","Chaoyou Fu","Peiyan Li","Jianshu Zeng","Wulin Xie","Yang Shi","Huanyu Zhang","Junkang Wu","Xue Wang","Yibo Hu","Bin Wen","Tingting Gao","Zhang Zhang","Fan Yang","Di Zhang","Liang Wang","Rong Jin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$74","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.10391","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0004Y0FLZX0ZW0H25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0004Y0FLZX0ZW0H25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhang25cs.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：多模态大模型已经很强，但对“人类偏好”的系统对齐明显落后于文本 LLM，现有工作大多只修补局部问题，比如幻觉或拒答。作者关注的是更 general 的问题——RLHF 式偏好对齐，能不能像在文本模型中那样，系统性提升 MLLM 的整体能力与可用性。","importance":"这是一篇多模态后训练数据与方法的基础设施型工作。重要性主要来自两个层面：一是给出 120k 细粒度人工偏好比较对，这在 MLLM 对齐数据上是比较稀缺的高成本资产；二是它把“偏好对齐提升能力”这件事从文本域往多模态域推进。对 pretrain 研究的启发是，native multimodal pretraining 的上限不只受表征和融合方式约束，也受后训练偏好信号质量强烈影响。","technical_approach":"核心方法由两部分组成：先构建 MM-RLHF 数据集，再围绕这个数据集设计若干提升 MLLM 对齐效果的训练创新。摘要没有展开具体算法细节，但可以明确它不是只做一个 benchmark，而是把数据、标注粒度和训练策略放在一起，作为多模态 RLHF 的系统方案。与已有资源相比，它强调更大的规模、更高的多样性和更细的标注粒度；这样设计的原因是，多模态偏好往往不是单一维度，例如事实性、视觉 grounding、帮助性和安全性会纠缠在一起，粗糙二元偏好很难稳定训练出高质量 reward 或 policy。","experiments":"摘要中唯一可确定的硬数字是数据集规模为 120k 人工标注偏好对。作者声称基于该数据与方法，既提升 alignment，也提升 capability，说明评测不局限于偏好胜率，应该还覆盖任务性能或通用 MLLM benchmark。摘要没有给出基座模型、训练范式是 DPO 还是 RL、评测集名称和具体增益，因此不能补数字。能提炼出的实验判断是：论文试图回答“对齐是否提升能力”这一更高层问题，而不仅是做一个更安全的模型。边界在于，多模态偏好标注的一致性通常低于纯文本；如果标注协议处理不好，更多数据未必自动转化为更好的 reward 信号。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a gap that has become hard to ignore: multimodal LLMs have improved rapidly, but human-preference alignment for them still lags behind text-only LLMs. Most prior work focused on narrow fixes such as hallucination reduction. This work asks the broader question of whether RLHF-style alignment can systematically improve overall MLLM quality.","importance":"This is primarily a data-and-training infrastructure contribution for multimodal post-training. The 120k human-annotated preference pairs are valuable on their own, because high-quality multimodal preference data is scarce and expensive. More importantly, the paper pushes the idea that preference alignment in multimodal models may do more than improve style or safety; it may also improve capability, which matters for how we think about the full training stack beyond pretraining.","technical_approach":"The contribution has two parts: a large fine-grained preference dataset, MM-RLHF, and several training innovations built around it for multimodal alignment. The abstract does not specify the exact optimization method, so it should not be overinterpreted. What is clear is that this is not merely a benchmark release. The authors treat data scale, diversity, annotation granularity, and training design as a coupled system. That makes sense because multimodal preferences are entangled: correctness, visual grounding, helpfulness, and safety often interact in one response.","experiments":"The only explicit number in the abstract is the dataset size: 120k fine-grained human preference comparisons. The authors claim improvements in both alignment and capability, implying that evaluation goes beyond preference win rate and includes broader MLLM benchmarks. The abstract does not report base model size, training recipe, benchmark names, or numerical gains, so none of those should be fabricated. The main value of the experiments is the framing: testing whether better preference alignment can raise multimodal capability, not just reduce a narrow failure mode. A likely limitation is annotation consistency, which is generally harder in multimodal settings than in text-only comparisons.","authors_note":""},"tags":["rlhf","multimodal-alignment","mllm","benchmark"]},{"id":"2501.19090","title":"Pivoting Factorization: A Compact Meta Low-Rank Representation of Sparsity for Efficient Inference in Large Language Models","authors":["Jialin Zhao","Yingtao Zhang","Carlo Vittorio Cannistraci"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$75","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.19090","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0004ZC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0004ZC25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhao25af.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：低秩剪枝虽然对 GPU 友好，但在相同稀疏度下常常明显逊于半结构化剪枝，尤其 perplexity 代价偏大。作者认为问题不一定只在“低秩不够表达”，而在于现有低秩表示本身还冗余，没有把可压缩的线性相关结构继续挖干净。","importance":"这项工作的贡献更偏推理效率与压缩表示层面，而不是预训练算法本身。它对大模型研究的价值在于提供一种和 GPU 执行友好的低秩路线相兼容的二次压缩方法：如果能在不损失表示能力的前提下进一步压低低秩层的存储与访存，那么 serving 成本和边缘部署门槛都会下降。对 pretrain 的直接启发有限，但对训练后模型形态设计有现实意义。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Pivoting Factorization，作者将其定义为一种无损的 meta low-rank representation。做法是从任意低秩表示中找出 pivot rows，也就是线性无关的关键行，再把其他非 pivot 行表示成它们的线性组合，从而去掉冗余。它不是重新训练一个新的低秩模型，而是在已有低秩表示之上再做一层更紧凑的参数化。与传统 low-rank pruning 相比，它利用了低秩层内部仍然存在的可解析线性依赖；与半结构化稀疏相比，它追求的是保持 GPU 友好的密集线性代数路径，而不是追求特定稀疏 pattern。","experiments":"摘要给出的关键数字是：在 rank = 50 的低秩层设置下，PIFA 相比原始 low-rank layers 进一步节省 24.2% 内存，并带来 24.6% 更快推理。摘要还指出，常规低秩剪枝在相近密度下 perplexity 往往会翻倍，PIFA 的定位是缓解这类低秩路线的效率短板，但摘要没有给出具体 perplexity 恢复幅度、模型规模和 baseline 名称，因此不能补更多数字。可以提炼的实验意义是，PIFA 的收益来自“压缩已有低秩表示的冗余”，因此与低秩 pruning 方法大概率可叠加。边界在于，它依赖层内线性相关性足够强；如果某些层已经接近最简低秩形式，额外收益会下降。","authors_note":"作者包含 Carlo Vittorio Cannistraci。仅凭给定信息无法确认机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical weakness of low-rank pruning: it is GPU-friendly, but at a given density it often underperforms semi-structured pruning and can incur a large perplexity hit. The authors argue that part of the issue is representational redundancy inside the low-rank form itself, not just the low-rank assumption.","importance":"This is mainly an inference-efficiency and compression paper rather than a pretraining-method paper. Its value is that it makes the low-rank route more competitive without giving up its hardware friendliness. For large-model deployment, reducing memory traffic and storage inside already compressed layers can matter as much as reducing parameter count on paper.","technical_approach":"Pivoting Factorization is presented as a lossless meta low-rank representation. Starting from any low-rank factorization, it identifies pivot rows that are linearly independent and expresses the remaining rows as linear combinations of them. This is not retraining a new compressed model from scratch; it is a second-stage compaction of an existing low-rank representation. Relative to standard low-rank pruning, the key insight is that low-rank layers can still contain removable linear redundancy. Relative to semi-structured sparsity, the method keeps a dense-linear-algebra-friendly execution path.","experiments":"The headline numbers are a further 24.2% memory reduction and 24.6% faster inference over standard low-rank layers at rank 50. The abstract also notes that plain low-rank pruning can roughly double perplexity at similar densities, which motivates the need for a stronger representation. However, the abstract does not provide model sizes, baseline names, or detailed perplexity results, so those should not be invented. A useful way to read the result is that PIFA is likely compositional with existing low-rank pruning schemes. Its benefit will depend on how much residual linear dependence remains in the layer after factorization.","authors_note":"The author list includes Carlo Vittorio Cannistraci. The affiliation cannot be confirmed from the provided information."},"tags":["pruning","low-rank","compression","llm-inference"],"notable_authors":["Carlo Vittorio Cannistraci"]},{"id":"2405.15481","title":"Sparse Spectral Training and Inference on Euclidean and Hyperbolic Neural Networks","authors":["Jialin Zhao","Yingtao Zhang","Xinghang Li","Huaping Liu","Carlo Vittorio Cannistraci"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$76","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15481","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0004ZL0C25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0004ZL0C25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhao25ah.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：LoRA 在预训练这类重负载场景下容量和结构都受限，ReLoRA 虽然尝试周期性回归全参数训练，但会遇到 saddle point 等优化问题，因此内存高效训练还缺一个更稳的方案。作者从谱分解角度切入，试图在保留全参数更新覆盖面的同时，减少需要显式训练的参数量。","importance":"这是一篇训练效率方法论文，和大模型预训练比较相关。它的重要性在于，如果 SST 真能在预训练中替代部分全量优化开销，又不像 LoRA 那样明显受低秩瓶颈限制，那么它会为 memory-constrained pretraining 提供另一条路。它还把 SVD 结构化参数化带回训练过程本身，而不只是用于后处理压缩。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Sparse Spectral Training。做法上，它更新全部奇异值，但只按奇异值大小加权采样更新一部分奇异向量，从而把参数更新集中到当前更重要的谱方向上；同时利用 SVD 初始化，并定期重新初始化低秩参数化。与 LoRA 相比，它不是固定在一个低秩增量子空间里训练，而是让被更新的谱方向可动态变化；与 ReLoRA 相比，它试图通过谱域的选择性更新与周期性重构，缓解训练停滞和 saddle point 问题。这样设计有效的直觉是：很多参数更新能量集中在少数主导谱方向，全部显式追踪代价高，但完全固定低秩子空间又太僵硬。","experiments":"从摘要能确认的实验点是：作者将 SST 定位为面向 pre-training 的内存优化方法，并且不仅在欧氏网络上，也讨论到双曲网络。摘要没有给出模型规模、预训练任务、内存节省比例、吞吐变化或最终 loss/accuracy，因此无法补具体数字。实验上最值得关注的应是三类对比：与全量训练比终局性能损失多少，与 LoRA/ReLoRA 比 memory-performance trade-off 是否更优，以及周期性 SVD 重初始化是否真能改善优化稳定性。边界也比较明显：SVD 相关操作本身可能带来额外计算与实现复杂度，是否划算取决于模型规模、更新频率和并行系统开销。","authors_note":"作者包含 Carlo Vittorio Cannistraci。仅凭给定信息无法确认机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a gap in memory-efficient training for pretraining-scale workloads. LoRA is often too restrictive because of its fixed low-rank structure, while ReLoRA tries to recover full-model flexibility but can run into optimization issues such as saddle points. The authors propose a spectral alternative that keeps broader update coverage while reducing memory cost.","importance":"This is directly relevant to efficient pretraining. If SST can approach full-training quality with lower optimizer-state and update cost, it offers a practical option for memory-constrained training regimes where LoRA-style methods are too limiting. It is also interesting conceptually because it treats spectral structure as part of the training parameterization, not just a compression trick applied after training.","technical_approach":"Sparse Spectral Training updates all singular values but only a sampled subset of singular vectors, where the sampling is weighted by singular value magnitude. It also uses SVD-based initialization and periodic reinitialization of the low-rank parameterization. Compared with LoRA, the updated subspace is not fixed once and for all. Compared with ReLoRA, the method aims to avoid some optimization pathologies by selecting and refreshing spectral directions more explicitly. The intuition is that much of the useful update energy lies in a relatively small set of dominant spectral directions, but that set should not be frozen permanently.","experiments":"The abstract makes clear that SST is proposed for pretraining-oriented memory reduction and is evaluated on both Euclidean and hyperbolic neural networks. It does not provide model sizes, tasks, memory savings, throughput, or quality metrics, so no numerical claims beyond the abstract should be made. The most relevant empirical questions are whether SST improves the memory-quality trade-off versus LoRA and ReLoRA, and whether periodic spectral reinitialization stabilizes optimization. A likely practical caveat is the overhead of repeated SVD-related operations, which may or may not be worthwhile depending on system scale and update frequency.","authors_note":"The author list includes Carlo Vittorio Cannistraci. The affiliation cannot be confirmed from the provided information."},"tags":["spectral-training","memory-efficiency","pretrain","lora"],"notable_authors":["Carlo Vittorio Cannistraci"]},{"id":"0047Y0ZYX25","title":"Scaling Laws in Patchification: An Image Is Worth 50, 176 Tokens And More","authors":["Feng Wang","Yaodong Yu","Wei Shao","Yuyin Zhou","Alan L. Yuille","Cihang Xie"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0047Y0ZYX25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0047Y0ZYX25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wang25ed.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的核心问题是：视觉 patchification 的 token 数该怎么定，是否存在像语言模型 scaling law 那样的可预测规律。过去图像 patch size 往往是经验拍脑袋设定，例如 14×14 或 16×16，再围绕算力做权衡；作者显然想把这个问题从经验超参选择提升为可缩放规律分析。","importance":"如果论文确实建立了 patchification scaling law，这对视觉 tokenizer、ViT 预训练以及多模态统一建模都很重要。原因在于 patch 数直接决定序列长度、注意力成本、局部细节保真度和跨模态 token 对齐方式。对 pretrain 研究而言，这属于典型的表示粒度问题：token 太粗会损失信息，太细则训练成本和优化难度急升，找到规律比单点最优更有价值。","technical_approach":"仅从标题可以判断，论文应当系统研究不同 patchification 粒度下的 scaling 行为，并尝试给出“图像值多少 token”的经验或理论关系。标题里的“50, 176 Tokens And More”暗示作者比较了多个离散 token budget，而不是只报告单一 patch size。由于没有摘要，无法确认它是纯经验拟合、理论推导，还是结合模型/数据/分辨率的联合 scaling 分析；因此不能进一步展开技术细节。","experiments":"目前没有摘要，无法可靠给出实验设置、模型规模、数据规模、baseline 和具体数字。唯一可从标题推断的是，实验大概率围绕 patch token 数变化带来的性能-计算 trade-off 展开，并可能给出某种 scaling curve。严格起见，这里不补任何未提供的结果。","authors_note":"作者包含 Alan L. Yuille。仅凭给定信息无法确认机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper appears to ask a basic but under-formalized question: how many visual tokens should patchification produce, and is there a scaling law behind that choice. In practice, patch size in vision models is often chosen heuristically and then justified by compute constraints. This work seems aimed at turning that heuristic into a more predictable scaling relationship.","importance":"If the paper indeed establishes scaling laws for patchification, it would matter for vision pretraining, visual tokenizers, and multimodal foundation models. Patch count directly controls sequence length, attention cost, local detail retention, and the ease of aligning image tokens with language tokens. For pretraining, this is a representation-granularity problem, not a minor hyperparameter choice.","technical_approach":"From the title alone, the likely approach is a systematic study of model behavior under different patchification granularities, with an attempt to characterize scaling trends rather than report a single best patch size. The phrase '50, 176 Tokens And More' suggests comparisons across multiple token budgets. Without the abstract, it is not possible to determine whether the paper is empirical, theoretical, or a hybrid scaling analysis, so further detail would be speculative.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so model sizes, datasets, baselines, and numerical results cannot be stated reliably. The only safe inference from the title is that the experiments likely examine the performance-compute trade-off as the number of image patches varies, and may fit a scaling curve. No additional claims should be made.","authors_note":"The author list includes Alan L. Yuille. The affiliation cannot be confirmed from the provided information."},"tags":["vision-tokenizer","patchification","scaling-law","token-count"],"notable_authors":["Alan L. Yuille"]},{"id":"0098LYP0025","title":"Attention-Only Transformers via Unrolled Subspace Denoising","authors":["Peng Wang","Yifu Lu","Yaodong Yu","Druv Pai","Qing Qu","Yi Ma"],"institutions":["University of Michigan"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0098LYP0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0098LYP0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wang25bu.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"标准 Transformer 中 FFN 层占了大量参数和计算，本文探索能否用纯注意力（attention-only）架构替代，同时保持表达能力。核心动机是从子空间去噪（subspace denoising）的展开迭代角度推导出 attention-only 架构的理论基础。","importance":"架构级贡献，对 pretrain 有直接启示。如果 attention-only 架构在实践中可行，将简化模型设计、可能改善并行效率和内存占用。更重要的是，它提供了一个理论视角来理解 attention 层到底在做什么——本质上是在做迭代子空间去噪。","technical_approach":"从信号处理/优化的角度出发，将 Transformer 的前向传播解释为对输入信号在低维子空间上做迭代去噪。每一层 attention 对应一步去噪迭代。在这个框架下，FFN 的功能可以被 attention 机制吸收，从而推导出 attention-only 的架构。这不是简单地删掉 FFN，而是重新设计 attention 的结构使其承担 FFN 的角色。","experiments":"具体实验细节在摘要中未给出。预期在语言建模或其他标准任务上与标准 Transformer 对比，验证 attention-only 架构的可行性和效率。","authors_note":"作者包括 Qing Qu（密歇根大学），在信号处理与深度学习理论交叉领域有系列工作。Yaodong Yu 在 Transformer 理论分析方面也有多篇代表作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"FFN layers consume a large share of parameters and compute in Transformers. This work asks whether an attention-only architecture can match standard Transformers, deriving such an architecture from the perspective of unrolled subspace denoising iterations.","importance":"Architecture-level contribution. If attention-only designs are viable at scale, they simplify model design and may improve memory/compute efficiency. The theoretical lens—attention as iterative subspace denoising—also deepens mechanistic understanding of Transformers.","technical_approach":"The forward pass is interpreted as iterative denoising of input signals onto low-dimensional subspaces. Each attention layer corresponds to one denoising step. Under this framework, FFN functionality is absorbed into redesigned attention blocks, yielding an attention-only architecture with theoretical grounding rather than ad-hoc FFN removal.","experiments":"Specific experimental details not available from the abstract. Expected to compare against standard Transformers on language modeling or similar benchmarks.","authors_note":"Authors include Qing Qu (University of Michigan), known for work at the intersection of signal processing and deep learning theory, and Yaodong Yu who has published on Transformer theory."},"tags":["attention","transformer","denoising","architecture"],"notable_authors":["Qing Qu","Yaodong Yu"]},{"id":"2502.03444","title":"Masked Autoencoders Are Effective Tokenizers for Diffusion Models","authors":["Hao Chen","Yujin Han","Fangyi Chen","Xiang Li","Yidong Wang","Jindong Wang","Ze Wang","Zicheng Liu","Difan Zou","Bhiksha Raj"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$77","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.03444","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0102HC0W00LZR25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0102HC0W00LZR25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chen25v.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Latent diffusion model 的生成质量高度依赖 tokenizer（autoencoder）产出的潜空间结构，但什么样的潜空间对 diffusion 学习最友好，此前缺乏系统研究。本文发现：潜空间的高斯混合模态数越少、特征判别性越强，diffusion 生成质量越好。","importance":"对视觉 tokenizer 设计有直接指导意义，属于方法级贡献。核心发现是 VAE 的变分约束并非必要——判别性更强的潜空间反而更利于 diffusion 学习。这挑战了 latent diffusion 社区长期依赖 VAE/KL 正则的惯例，对跨模态统一预训练中视觉 tokenizer 的选择也有参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出 MAETok：用 masked autoencoder（MAE）风格的掩码建模来训练 autoencoder，使潜空间学到语义丰富的表示，同时保持重建质量。关键洞察是：MAE 的掩码预测迫使编码器捕获全局语义结构，产出的潜空间自然具有更少的混合模态和更强的判别性，比 VAE 的 KL 正则更适合 diffusion 采样。这是一个简洁的设计选择——用 MAE loss 替代 KL loss。","experiments":"在图像生成任务上做了大量实验，验证了理论分析。具体数字在截断的摘要中未完整给出，但声称 MAETok 在多个指标上优于标准 VAE tokenizer。Ablation 应包括不同潜空间正则方式（KL vs MAE vs 无正则）的对比。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The quality of latent diffusion models depends heavily on the latent space structure from the tokenizer, yet what makes a good latent space for diffusion learning was poorly understood. This work shows that fewer Gaussian mixture modes and more discriminative features in the latent space lead to better generation.","importance":"Method-level contribution to visual tokenizer design. The key finding—that VAE's variational constraint is unnecessary and discriminative latent spaces work better for diffusion—challenges the standard practice of KL-regularized autoencoders in latent diffusion. Relevant to visual tokenizer choices in unified multimodal pretraining.","technical_approach":"MAETok trains an autoencoder with masked modeling (MAE-style) instead of KL regularization. The mask prediction objective forces the encoder to capture global semantic structure, producing latent spaces with fewer mixture modes and stronger discriminability. This is a clean swap: MAE loss replaces KL loss, yielding latent spaces more amenable to diffusion sampling.","experiments":"Extensive image generation experiments validate the theoretical analysis. Full numbers are truncated in the abstract, but MAETok is claimed to outperform standard VAE tokenizers across multiple metrics. Ablations likely compare KL vs MAE vs no regularization.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vision-tokenizer","mae","diffusion","latent-space"]},{"id":"0201Y00CZCHL25","title":"Synthesizing Software Engineering Data in a Test-Driven Manner","authors":["Lei Zhang","Jiaxi Yang","Min Yang","Jian Yang","Mouxiang Chen","Jiajun Zhang","Zeyu Cui","Binyuan Hui","Junyang Lin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0201Y00CZCHL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0201Y00CZCHL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhang25cn.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"高质量软件工程训练数据稀缺，本文提出以测试驱动的方式合成软件工程数据——先有测试用例，再生成满足测试的代码，从而保证合成数据的正确性和质量。","importance":"数据级贡献，面向代码 LLM 的预训练/微调数据合成。测试驱动的合成方式天然提供了验证信号（代码能否通过测试），这比纯 LLM 生成的代码数据质量更可控。对代码预训练数据的扩充和质量提升有实际价值。","technical_approach":"核心思路是反转传统的代码生成流程：先生成或收集测试用例作为规约（specification），再让模型生成满足这些测试的代码实现。通过测试通过率来过滤和筛选合成数据，确保数据的功能正确性。这本质上是用测试作为自动化的奖励/验证信号。","experiments":"具体实验细节在摘要中未给出。预期在代码生成 benchmark（如 HumanEval、MBPP 等）上验证合成数据的效果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"High-quality software engineering training data is scarce. This work proposes test-driven data synthesis: generate test cases first, then synthesize code that passes them, ensuring correctness of the synthetic data.","importance":"Data-level contribution for code LLM pretraining/fine-tuning. Test-driven synthesis provides a built-in verification signal (pass/fail), making data quality more controllable than unchecked LLM-generated code.","technical_approach":"Inverts the standard code generation pipeline: test cases serve as specifications, and the model generates implementations that must pass them. Test pass rate acts as an automatic filter for synthetic data quality—essentially using tests as a reward signal.","experiments":"Specific experimental details not available from the abstract. Expected evaluation on code generation benchmarks like HumanEval or MBPP.","authors_note":""},"tags":["code-data","data-synthesis","test-driven","software-engineering"]},{"id":"2502.08991","title":"Task Generalization with Autoregressive Compositional Structure: Can Learning from D Tasks Generalize to DT Tasks?","authors":["Amirhesam Abedsoltan","Huaqing Zhang","Kaiyue Wen","Hongzhou Lin","Jingzhao Zhang","Mikhail Belkin"],"institutions":["MIT","Tsinghua University"],"abstract":"Large language models (LLMs) exhibit remarkable task generalization, solving tasks they were never explicitly trained on with only a few demonstrations. This raises a fundamental question: When can learning from a small set of tasks generalize to a large task family? In this paper, we investigate task generalization through the lens of autoregressive compositional structure, where each task is a composition of $T$ operations, and each operation is among a finite family of $D$ subtasks. This yields a total class of size $D^T$. We first show that generalization to all $D^T$ tasks is theoretically achievable by training on only $\\widetilde{O}(D)$ tasks. Empirically, we demonstrate that Transformers achieve such exponential task generalization on sparse parity functions via In-context Learning (ICL) and chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning. We further show generalization in arithmetic and translation, beyond parity functions.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.08991","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Abedsoltan0WLZB25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Abedsoltan0WLZB25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/abedsoltan25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 展现出惊人的任务泛化能力——只需少量示例就能解决从未见过的任务。本文从理论上回答：当任务具有自回归组合结构（每个任务是 T 个操作的组合，每个操作有 D 种选择，共 D^T 种任务）时，训练 O(D) 个任务是否足以泛化到全部 D^T 个任务？","importance":"理论级贡献，对理解 ICL 和 pretrain 泛化有重要意义。核心结论是：组合结构使得指数级的任务空间可以被多项式级的训练覆盖——这为 LLM 的 few-shot 泛化提供了一个优雅的理论解释。对 pretrain 数据多样性设计（需要覆盖多少'原子操作'而非所有任务组合）有直接指导。","technical_approach":"理论上证明：当任务具有 T 步组合结构时，只需 Õ(D) 个训练任务即可泛化到 D^T 个任务——指数级压缩。关键假设是任务可分解为独立子操作的组合。实验上在稀疏奇偶校验函数（sparse parity functions）上验证 Transformer 通过 ICL 确实能实现这种指数级任务泛化。这不是一个新算法，而是一个理论框架加实验验证。","experiments":"在稀疏奇偶校验函数上做实验，验证 Transformer 在 ICL 设置下确实能从 O(D) 个训练任务泛化到 D^T 个任务。具体的 D、T 取值和模型规模在截断摘要中未完整给出。理论与实验的吻合度是核心看点。","authors_note":"作者包括 Jingzhao Zhang（清华），在优化理论方面有系列工作。团队跨 MIT 和清华。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLMs generalize to unseen tasks from few demonstrations. This work theoretically asks: when tasks have autoregressive compositional structure (T operations, D choices each, D^T total tasks), can training on O(D) tasks generalize to all D^T?","importance":"Theory-level contribution to understanding ICL and pretrain generalization. The core result—compositional structure enables exponential task coverage from polynomial training—provides an elegant explanation for few-shot generalization and directly informs pretrain data diversity design.","technical_approach":"Proves that Õ(D) training tasks suffice to generalize to D^T tasks when tasks decompose into T independent sub-operations. Empirically validates on sparse parity functions, showing Transformers achieve this exponential task generalization via ICL. This is a theoretical framework with experimental validation, not a new algorithm.","experiments":"Experiments on sparse parity functions confirm Transformers generalize from O(D) training tasks to D^T tasks in ICL settings. Specific D, T values and model scales are truncated. The theory-experiment alignment is the main result.","authors_note":"Authors include Jingzhao Zhang (Tsinghua), known for optimization theory. Team spans MIT and Tsinghua."},"tags":["generalization","autoregressive","compositionality","icl"],"notable_authors":["Jingzhao Zhang"]},{"id":"AbellaST25","title":"Consensus Is All You Get: The Role of Attention in Transformers","authors":["Álvaro Rodríguez Abella","João Pedro Silvestre","Paulo Tabuada"],"institutions":["UCLA"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/AbellaST25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/AbellaST25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/abella25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer 中 attention 机制的计算本质是什么？本文从共识（consensus）动力学的角度给出一个新的理论解释：attention 层本质上在驱动 token 表示趋向某种共识状态。","importance":"理论/机制分析级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于提供了一个新的理论透镜来理解 attention 的行为——为什么 attention 会导致 token 表示趋同（over-smoothing）、以及残差连接和 FFN 如何对抗这种趋同。这类理论工作不直接改进训练，但能指导架构设计决策。","technical_approach":"将 attention 的 softmax 加权平均操作与分布式系统中的共识协议（consensus protocol）建立联系。在这个框架下，每一层 attention 都在推动 token 表示向加权平均方向收敛。论文可能分析了收敛速率、与深度的关系、以及其他组件（LayerNorm、FFN、残差）如何调节这一动态。","experiments":"作为理论工作，实验可能以验证性为主。具体细节在摘要中未给出。","authors_note":"作者 Paulo Tabuada 是 UCLA 的控制理论教授，将控制/动力系统理论引入深度学习分析是其研究特色。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"What is the computational essence of attention in Transformers? This work provides a theoretical characterization: attention layers drive token representations toward consensus, analogous to consensus protocols in distributed systems.","importance":"Theory/mechanistic analysis contribution. Offers a new lens for understanding attention behavior—why representations converge (over-smoothing), and how residual connections and FFN counteract this. Doesn't directly improve training but can inform architecture design.","technical_approach":"Connects the softmax-weighted averaging in attention to consensus dynamics from distributed systems theory. Each attention layer pushes token representations toward a weighted average. The analysis likely covers convergence rates, depth dependence, and how other components (LayerNorm, FFN, residuals) modulate this dynamic.","experiments":"Primarily a theoretical work; experiments are likely validation-oriented. Specifics not available from the abstract.","authors_note":"Paulo Tabuada is a control theory professor at UCLA, known for bringing control/dynamical systems perspectives to deep learning analysis."},"tags":["attention","transformer-analysis","representation","theory"],"notable_authors":["Paulo Tabuada"]},{"id":"2411.17116","title":"Star Attention: Efficient LLM Inference over Long Sequences","authors":["Shantanu Acharya","Fei Jia","Boris Ginsburg"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Inference with Transformer-based Large Language Models (LLMs) on long sequences is both costly and slow due to the quadratic complexity of the self-attention mechanism. We introduce Star Attention, a two-phase block-sparse approximation that improves computational efficiency by sharding attention across multiple hosts while minimizing communication overhead. In the first phase, the context is processed using blockwise-local attention across hosts, in parallel. In the second phase, query and response tokens attend to all prior cached tokens through sequence-global attention. Star Attention integrates seamlessly with most Transformer-based LLMs trained with global attention, reducing memory requirements and inference time by up to 11x while preserving 97-100% of accuracy.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.17116","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/AcharyaJG25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/AcharyaJG25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/acharya25a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["long-context","attention","inference","distributed"]},{"id":"AdamsBLYA25","title":"From Mechanistic Interpretability to Mechanistic Biology: Training, Evaluating, and Interpreting Sparse Autoencoders on Protein Language Models","authors":["Etowah Adams","Liam Bai","Minji Lee","Yiyang Yu","Mohammed AlQuraishi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$78","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/AdamsBLYA25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/AdamsBLYA25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/adams25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["interpretability","sparse-autoencoder","protein-lm","feature-analysis"]},{"id":"AgarwalS25","title":"The Missing Alignment Link of In-context Learning on Sequences","authors":["Harshvardhan Agarwal","Sunita Sarawagi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/AgarwalS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/AgarwalS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/agarwal25d.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["in-context-learning","sequence-modeling","alignment","generalization"]},{"id":"2412.06176","title":"AlphaVerus: Bootstrapping Formally Verified Code Generation through Self-Improving Translation and Treefinement","authors":["Pranjal Aggarwal","Bryan Parno","Sean Welleck"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$79","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.06176","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/AggarwalPW25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/AggarwalPW25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/aggarwal25a.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["code-generation","self-improvement","formal-verification","data-synthesis"]},{"id":"2502.14924","title":"A Tale of Two Structures: Do LLMs Capture the Fractal Complexity of Language?","authors":["Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin","Andreas Peter Steiner"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$7a","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.14924","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/AlabdulmohsinS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/AlabdulmohsinS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/alabdulmohsin25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["language-modeling","long-range-dependence","evaluation","sampling"]},{"id":"2506.13234","title":"The Butterfly Effect: Neural Network Training Trajectories Are Highly Sensitive to Initial Conditions","authors":["Gül Sena Altintas","Devin Kwok","Colin Raffel","David Rolnick"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$7b","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.13234","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/AltintasKRR25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/AltintasKRR25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/altintas25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的是：训练随机性到底只是让参数表面上不同，还是会把模型推到真正不同的函数与表示上。这个问题以前常被经验性地承认——大家知道 seed 很重要——但缺少对“何时分叉、分叉多深、后来是否收敛到等价解”的系统刻画。","importance":"这项工作对训练动力学研究是系统级的补充，重要性不在于提出新模型，而在于更精细地刻画了训练早期的混沌区间。对 pretrain 的启示很直接：如果极小扰动会在早期迅速放大，那么 warmup、数据顺序、batch 噪声、并行非确定性这些工程细节都不是可忽略噪声，而是决定最终解盆地的重要因素；这会影响可复现实验、checkpoint 选点、以及多阶段训练接口设计。","technical_approach":"作者的方法是训练动力学分析而非新算法，核心做法是对几乎完全相同的训练运行施加极小扰动，然后沿训练轨迹比较模型的参数、损失地形和内部表示。摘要提到四类度量：参数 L2 距离、两模型线性插值时的 loss barrier、做 permutation alignment 后的参数距离与 barrier、以及中间表示相似性。这里 permutation alignment 的意义是排除神经元重排导致的表面差异，去看是否存在更本质的功能分叉。论文的关键结论是：训练初期处在高敏感、易分叉的“chaotic phase”，之后这种敏感性快速减弱。这样的框架有价值，因为它把“seed effect”从结果差异，推进到了时间局部化的动力学现象。","experiments":"摘要没有给出具体模型规模、数据集和数值，但给出了明确的实验结论：极小扰动在训练早期会可靠地导致轨迹分叉，而且这种效应会随着训练推进迅速减弱。作者不仅比较未经处理的参数距离，还比较 permutation alignment 后的距离和 barrier，这意味着他们在区分‘只是坐标系不同’和‘学到的函数真的不同’。如果正文完整，这类工作最值得看的通常是三点：分叉时刻与学习率/批大小的关系、表示相似性何时重新靠拢、以及不同架构或数据规模下 chaotic phase 是否缩短。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a precise question: does training randomness merely produce different parameterizations of the same solution, or does it push optimization toward genuinely different functions and representations? The community has long known that seeds matter, but we have had limited understanding of when trajectories diverge, how deeply they diverge, and whether they later reconverge in any meaningful sense.","importance":"This is a training-dynamics contribution with clear systems implications. Its value is not in a new optimizer or architecture, but in localizing sensitivity to an early chaotic phase. For pretraining, that matters because warmup, data ordering, SGD noise, and hardware-level nondeterminism may be shaping which basin the model ends up in, rather than adding harmless variance around a fixed solution.","technical_approach":"The method is an analysis framework: start from nearly identical training runs, introduce tiny perturbations, and measure divergence over time using complementary views of the solution. The abstract lists four: parameter-space L2 distance, interpolation loss barriers, permutation-aligned parameter distance and barrier, and representational similarity of intermediate activations. The permutation alignment step is important because it controls for neuron relabeling and asks whether the networks are still close after accounting for symmetries. The main finding is that sensitivity is concentrated early in training and decays quickly afterward. That makes the seed effect a time-localized dynamical phenomenon rather than a vague end-state observation.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide model sizes, datasets, or exact numbers, but it does make one strong empirical claim: extremely small perturbations reliably cause divergence during an initial chaotic phase, and this sensitivity drops rapidly later in training. The use of both raw and permutation-aligned metrics suggests the paper is trying to separate superficial parameter drift from deeper functional divergence. The most useful details to look for in the full paper would be how the chaotic window changes with learning rate and batch size, whether representations reconverge after early divergence, and how architecture or scale affects the duration of the sensitive regime.","authors_note":""},"tags":["training-dynamics","initialization","loss-landscape","sensitivity"],"notable_authors":["Gül Sena Altintas","Devin Kwok","Colin Raffel","David Rolnick"]},{"id":"2505.23815","title":"Aligning LLMs by Predicting Preferences from User Writing Samples","authors":["Stéphane Aroca-Ouellette","Natalie Mackraz","Barry-John Theobald","Katherine Metcalf"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$7c","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.23815","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Aroca-Ouellette25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Aroca-Ouellette25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/aroca-ouellette25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是：如何从用户的写作样本里更准确地恢复个体偏好，从而做真正个性化的 LLM 对齐。以往方法往往只能生成很泛的偏好描述，能反映“平均用户喜欢什么”，却抓不住某个具体用户稳定而细微的写作偏好，因此条件化后的代理仍然显得模板化。","importance":"这项工作属于 post-train 对齐方法，但对 pretrain/posttrain 闭环有实际意义。它的重要性不在于提升通用能力，而在于把‘偏好建模’从一次性标注扩展到由用户自有文本驱动的 personalization，这对个体代理、长期记忆和持续对齐都很关键。更具体地说，它提醒我们：对齐信号不一定只能来自显式 preference pairs，也可以来自用户生产数据中的风格、结构和价值偏好。","technical_approach":"作者提出 PROSE，核心是一个更严格的偏好推断流程，而不是直接让模型看几段样本后一次性生成用户画像。它有两个关键机制：第一，迭代式 refinement，反复修正初始偏好描述，避免模型停在高层、空泛的总结上；第二，跨多个写作样本做 verification，只保留能在不同样本中重复被支持的偏好，减少偶然话题或单篇文风带来的误判。和最接近的做法相比，它不是把用户偏好当单次 summarization 任务，而是当作需要交叉验证的潜变量恢复问题。这样设计有效，因为个体偏好通常稀疏、隐含且跨样本才稳定出现；如果不做验证，模型很容易把主题偏好、上下文约束和真实长期偏好混在一起。","experiments":"摘要只说明作者评估了个性化偏好描述与写作代理设置中的对齐效果，没有给出模型规模、数据集、baseline 名称或具体提升数字，因此不能补写。按任务设定，合理的 baseline 应包括直接从样本生成 preference summary 的方法，以及不做个性化、只用通用 instruction 的代理。最关键的实验若做得扎实，应包含两类：一是人评或偏好胜率，验证生成文本是否更贴合个体；二是泛化测试，验证从少量样本推断出的偏好能否迁移到新写作任务。若有消融，最值得看的就是 iterative refinement 和 cross-sample verification 是否都必要，以及样本数量增加时收益是否饱和。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical alignment gap: how to infer a specific user’s preferences from their writing samples well enough to support genuinely personalized LLM behavior. Prior methods can often produce plausible but generic preference profiles, which capture broad user tendencies but miss the stable, individual signals that matter in personalized generation.","importance":"This is a post-training alignment paper, but it matters for the broader pretrain–posttrain loop because it treats user-produced text itself as an alignment signal. The contribution is not about improving raw model capability; it is about making preference modeling more individualized and more data-grounded. That matters for long-horizon agents, personalization, and continual alignment, where explicit preference labels are scarce but user traces are abundant.","technical_approach":"PROSE is best understood as a stricter preference inference pipeline rather than a one-shot prompt to summarize a user. It adds two mechanisms: iterative refinement of the inferred preference description, and cross-sample verification so that only preferences consistently supported across multiple writings are retained. Compared with direct preference summarization, this reframes the task as recovering a latent user profile under evidence constraints. That design makes sense because true preferences are usually implicit and only become reliable when they recur across contexts. Without verification, the model can easily confuse topic choice, situational constraints, and transient style with durable preference.","experiments":"The abstract states that the method is evaluated in personalized writing settings, but it does not provide model sizes, datasets, baseline names, or numerical gains. The most relevant baselines would be direct preference-description methods and non-personalized writing agents. The most meaningful evaluations, if done well, would test both preference fidelity on held-out tasks and ablations showing that iterative refinement and cross-sample verification each contribute materially. Another useful result would be whether performance saturates quickly or keeps improving with more user writing samples.","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","personalization","preference-learning","llm"],"notable_authors":["Stéphane Aroca-Ouellette","Natalie Mackraz","Barry-John Theobald","Katherine Metcalf"]},{"id":"AshutoshGCMG25","title":"LLMs can see and hear without any training","authors":["Kumar Ashutosh","Yossi Gandelsman","Xinlei Chen","Ishan Misra","Rohit Girdhar"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/AshutoshGCMG25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/AshutoshGCMG25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/ashutosh25a.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文试图回答一个很强的命题：LLM 是否在完全不做多模态训练的前提下，也能直接“看见”和“听见”。如果成立，它挑战的不是某个视觉/语音模块，而是我们对模态对齐必要性的默认假设——过去一般认为没有跨模态配对训练，就不会有稳定的感知能力。","importance":"这项工作的潜在意义是范式级的，但前提是结果足够扎实。对 pretrain 研究来说，它涉及两个核心问题：第一，语言模型内部是否已经学到某种足够通用的结构先验，可以被无训练地接到新模态表示上；第二，统一 token 空间或共享表示是否能替代一部分昂贵的跨模态训练。如果结论成立，说明某些多模态能力更多依赖表示接口而不是大量 end-to-end 对齐；如果不成立，负结果同样有价值，因为它能界定“纯语言先验”的边界。","technical_approach":"由于没有摘要，这里只能做保守概括：从标题看，方法核心不是再训练一个 VLM，而是构造某种无需更新参数的视觉/音频到语言接口，让现有 LLM 直接消费非文本信号。最可能的设计空间包括固定编码器+离散 token 接口、检索式桥接、或把感知输入映射到 LLM 已有嵌入流形的零训练适配。真正的技术关键不在‘接进去’，而在于避免接口只传递浅层统计相关性；如果没有经过训练还能工作，通常意味着输入表示本身已经带有足够强的语义结构，或者 LLM 对某类序列化接口具有异常强的鲁棒性。边界也很明确：无训练方法往往依赖预训练编码器质量、提示模板和任务形式，开放域细粒度感知通常很难完全靠零训练解决。","experiments":"目前给到的信息只有标题，缺少实验细节，因此不能报告模型规模、数据、指标和提升幅度。若论文要支撑标题中的强结论，实验至少需要覆盖图像和音频两种模态、多个无需 task-specific finetune 的评测，并与训练过的轻量适配器或标准 VLM/AudioLM 做对比。最值得关注的不是单点分数，而是失败模式：能力是否只存在于 coarse semantics、是否依赖特定编码器、是否对输入扰动或 domain shift 非常脆弱。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper appears to ask a deliberately provocative question: can LLMs acquire usable vision and audio capabilities without any multimodal training at all? If the answer is yes, the target is not just a better adapter, but a core assumption in multimodal learning—that cross-modal alignment must be learned from paired data.","importance":"The potential significance is paradigm-level, assuming the evidence is strong. For pretraining, the paper touches two important issues: whether language models already contain sufficiently general structural priors to interface with new modalities, and whether a good representation interface can replace part of expensive end-to-end multimodal training. A positive result would suggest that some multimodal competence is bottlenecked more by representation mismatch than by missing capability. A negative or narrow result would still be useful because it would mark the limits of language-only priors.","technical_approach":"Without an abstract, the safest reading from the title is that the method builds a no-training interface from visual/audio inputs into an existing LLM, rather than training a standard VLM. Plausible routes include frozen encoders with discrete token interfaces, retrieval-style bridging, or zero-shot mappings into the LLM embedding manifold. The hard part is not simply plugging modalities in, but doing so in a way that preserves enough semantics to support downstream reasoning. If the method works without updating parameters, that would imply either that the upstream encoders already provide highly aligned semantic structure, or that LLMs are unexpectedly robust to certain serialized non-text inputs. The trade-off is obvious: such methods often work on coarse semantics but break on fine-grained perception, domain shift, or weak upstream representations.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so model sizes, datasets, baselines, and numeric results cannot be stated. To support the title’s claim, the experiments would need to cover both image and audio inputs, multiple zero-training evaluations, and comparisons against trained adapters or standard multimodal baselines. The most informative outcomes would be where the method fails: whether it only captures broad semantics, whether it depends heavily on a particular encoder, and how brittle it is under perturbation or domain transfer.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal-llm","zero-shot","vision-language"],"notable_authors":["Kumar Ashutosh","Yossi Gandelsman","Xinlei Chen","Ishan Misra","Rohit Girdhar"]},{"id":"BaiL025","title":"SKIM: Any-bit Quantization Pushing The Limits of Post-Training Quantization","authors":["Runsheng Bai","Bo Liu","Qiang Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/BaiL025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/BaiL025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/bai25c.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：后训练量化在极低比特和非标准比特宽下仍然很难稳定保精度，导致部署通常只能停在少数几个“安全档位”。现有 PTQ 方法往往围绕 2/4/8 bit 设计，对任意 bit 设置、尤其是混合硬件约束下的细粒度量化，鲁棒性和通用性都不够。","importance":"这项工作属于系统与部署方法，但对大模型训练研究也有反馈价值。它的重要性在于把 PTQ 从固定 bit 宽推进到 any-bit 设定，这对 serving 很实际：同一模型可以更细粒度地匹配不同内存、带宽和延迟预算。对 pretrain 侧的启示是，模型的量化友好性值得在训练阶段就考虑，因为后处理再强，也受限于权重分布、激活异常值和层间灵敏度。","technical_approach":"由于没有摘要，只能基于标题做保守判断：SKIM 的核心应是一种支持任意 bit 宽的后训练量化框架，而不是只为某个特定 bit 设计校准技巧。若要真正做到 any-bit，方法通常需要同时解决三个问题：量化尺度如何跨 bit 共享或快速重估、不同层对 bit 降低的敏感度如何建模、以及 rounding/clip 策略如何避免在低 bit 下误差激增。和传统 PTQ 相比，关键区别不是单一量化算子，而是能否在一个统一框架下覆盖多个 bit 目标，并在切换 bit 宽时无需重新昂贵搜索。这样的设计有效，是因为部署场景常常不是‘找到一个最好 bit’，而是‘在多种预算下都要可用’。边界在于 any-bit 框架若过于追求通用，可能在某几个固定 bit 上不如专门定制的方法。","experiments":"没有摘要，因此无法确认模型类别、量化位宽范围、基线和数值结果。若论文标题中的‘pushing the limits’成立，实验通常应覆盖语言模型或 VLM 的多种规模，并在 2/3/4 bit 甚至非整数有效 bit 设定上对比主流 PTQ baseline。最值得看的结果不是平均分，而是最低可用 bit 宽、长尾层是否成为瓶颈、以及校准数据量变化对性能的影响。若有消融，应重点看 any-bit 共享机制与逐 bit 单独优化相比的精度-成本 trade-off。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical bottleneck in post-training quantization: once we move to very low precision or non-standard bit widths, accuracy becomes hard to preserve, so deployment usually falls back to a small set of safe operating points. Existing PTQ methods are often tuned for specific bit widths such as 2, 4, or 8 bits and do not generalize well across arbitrary precision targets.","importance":"This is mainly a systems and deployment contribution, but it is still relevant to model training because quantization-friendliness is partly determined upstream. The significance lies in pushing PTQ toward an any-bit regime, which is operationally useful when the same model must fit diverse memory, bandwidth, and latency constraints. For pretraining, the takeaway is that weight and activation distributions matter: post hoc quantization can only go so far if the model was not trained with compressibility in mind.","technical_approach":"Without an abstract, the safest interpretation is that SKIM proposes a unified PTQ framework that supports arbitrary bit widths instead of a method specialized to one precision point. To make that work, such a framework would normally need to handle shared or rapidly adaptable scaling across bits, model layer-wise sensitivity to lower precision, and choose clipping or rounding strategies that do not collapse at low bit. The meaningful distinction from standard PTQ is not one more quantizer, but whether the method can cover a wide precision range without expensive re-optimization for every target. That is useful because real deployment rarely asks for a single best bit width; it asks for graceful behavior across many hardware budgets. The trade-off is that a fully general framework may underperform a carefully specialized method at a few fixed precision points.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so the model families, bit-width range, baselines, and numeric results are unknown. To justify the title, the experiments would need to evaluate multiple low-precision settings, likely including 2/3/4-bit regimes, and compare against strong PTQ baselines on large models. The most informative findings would be the lowest usable precision, whether a small number of outlier-sensitive layers dominates failure, and how much calibration data is needed. A strong ablation would compare the cost and accuracy of a unified any-bit setup against separately optimized quantizers for each bit width.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","post-training-quantization","compression"],"notable_authors":["Runsheng Bai","Bo Liu","Qiang Liu"]},{"id":"BalashankarSBE025","title":"InfAlign: Inference-aware language model alignment","authors":["Ananth Balashankar","Ziteng Sun","Jonathan Berant","Jacob Eisenstein","Michael Collins","Adrian Hutter","Jong Lee","Chirag Nagpal","Flavien Prost","Aradhana Sinha","Ananda Theertha Suresh","Ahmad Beirami"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/BalashankarSBE025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/BalashankarSBE025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/balashankar25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：现有语言模型对齐大多只优化训练时定义的偏好目标，却没有把推理阶段的实际行为约束显式纳入目标，因此训练好的策略在 test-time 推理策略变化后可能失真。换句话说，模型是按一种生成过程被对齐的，但用户真正使用的是另一种生成过程，这中间存在不小的分布落差。","importance":"这项工作对 post-train 很重要，也和 pretrain/posttrain 接口有关。它的价值在于把‘alignment’从静态 policy 优化，推进到 inference-aware 的视角。对工程上做 SFT/DPO/RL 的团队，这个问题很真实：temperature、best-of-n、self-consistency、工具调用、拒答策略都会改变最终行为。如果训练目标不考虑这些推理时机制，离线对齐分数可能并不能转化成线上安全性或有用性。","technical_approach":"从标题看，InfAlign 的核心是把推理过程纳入对齐目标或训练近似中，而不是只对单步 token policy 做偏好优化。可能的实现路线包括：对采样后的候选集进行风险/效用建模，把最终选择策略显式写进 loss；或者在训练中模拟 test-time inference，使模型优化的对象接近真实部署分布。与标准 DPO/RLHF 相比，区别在于后者通常把‘模型一次采样出的响应’当作优化对象，而 InfAlign 关注用户最终看到的响应是如何经过推理策略产生的。这样设计合理，因为对齐失败经常不是 base policy 单点出错，而是 search/selection 放大了某类模式。边界是，inference-aware 训练往往更贵，且容易绑定特定推理配置，换采样策略后收益可能下降。","experiments":"没有摘要，所以无法给出模型规模、对齐数据、baseline 和数字。若论文扎实，关键实验应比较：标准对齐方法在不同 test-time inference 策略下的性能波动，以及 InfAlign 是否能在真实部署策略下更稳定。最值得看的不是单一 benchmark，而是分布迁移鲁棒性——比如训练按 greedy 对齐、测试用 best-of-n 是否崩；或训练未见 self-consistency、测试启用后是否出现 reward hacking/过度冗长。消融上需要确认收益来自 inference-aware objective 本身，而不是额外算力或更多候选样本。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a mismatch in alignment practice: we usually optimize models under a simplified training-time generation setup, but users interact with responses produced under a different inference procedure. That gap means a model can look aligned under the training objective yet behave differently once test-time sampling, reranking, or search enters the loop.","importance":"This is an important post-training contribution with clear relevance to the pretrain–posttrain interface. The main value is conceptual: alignment should be evaluated and optimized with the actual inference process in mind, not just the underlying token policy. In practical terms, decoding temperature, best-of-n, self-consistency, tool use, and refusal heuristics all change the final behavior the user sees. If the objective ignores that, offline alignment gains may not transfer online.","technical_approach":"From the title, InfAlign likely incorporates the inference procedure directly into the alignment objective or its training approximation. That could mean modeling risk or utility over sampled candidate sets, or simulating deployment-time generation during training so the optimized distribution is closer to what will actually be used. The key difference from standard DPO or RLHF is that those methods typically optimize a one-shot response distribution, whereas InfAlign focuses on the post-inference response that reaches the user. This is a sensible design because many alignment failures are amplified by decoding or selection rather than originating in a single local token decision. The trade-off is cost and specificity: inference-aware training is usually more expensive and may overfit to a particular decoding setup.","experiments":"No abstract is available, so model sizes, alignment datasets, baselines, and exact gains cannot be reported. The critical experiments should compare standard alignment methods under varying test-time inference strategies and ask whether InfAlign is more stable under the actual deployment procedure. The most informative results would be robustness to inference shift—for example, whether a model aligned under greedy decoding degrades under best-of-n, or whether self-consistency triggers unwanted verbosity or reward hacking unless explicitly accounted for. A strong ablation would separate gains from the objective itself versus gains from extra compute or larger candidate pools.","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","inference-aware","llm"],"notable_authors":["Ananth Balashankar","Ziteng Sun","Jonathan Berant","Jacob Eisenstein","Michael Collins"]},{"id":"2508.09820","title":"Provable In-Context Vector Arithmetic via Retrieving Task Concepts","authors":["Dake Bu","Wei Huang","Andi Han","Atsushi Nitanda","Qingfu Zhang","Hau-San Wong","Taiji Suzuki"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$7d","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.09820","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Bu0HN0WS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Bu0HN0WS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/bu25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解释的是：ICL 中被广泛讨论的“任务向量”现象，特别是为何模型能像做向量算术那样通过示例检索并组合任务概念。此前已有经验工作观察到 factual recall 场景里存在类似 Word2Vec 的向量结构，也看到 QA 数据会增强这种能力，但缺少一个成体系的理论框架说明这些现象为何出现。","importance":"这项工作属于 ICL 机制理论，价值在于把经验观察推进到可证明的优化与表示分析。对 pretrain 研究的意义有两层：一是帮助理解为什么某些数据形态——尤其 QA 格式——会更利于形成可检索的任务概念；二是提示我们 ICL 能力不只是‘上下文拟合’，而可能依赖预训练中形成的层级概念空间和可线性操作的残差表示。这对数据配比、格式设计和 latent reasoning 都有启发。","technical_approach":"作者基于一个由经验启发的层级概念建模框架，建立了非线性 residual Transformer 在梯度下降训练下如何形成并检索任务概念的优化理论。摘要提到他们证明模型能够利用 latent task/function vector 做类向量算术，这里的关键不只是存在某个抽象向量，而是该向量如何由示例触发、如何与 residual stream 协同、以及为什么 QA 数据特别有利于形成这种结构。和仅做表示可视化的工作不同，这篇论文试图从训练动力学上解释概念为何稳定出现。这样设计有效，是因为 ICL 中最难解释的部分不是‘模型能记住示例’，而是‘模型能从示例抽取任务并在新输入上迁移’。边界在于理论模型必然做了简化，对真实超大模型中的多层注意力交互和数据异质性只能部分覆盖。","experiments":"摘要没有给出实验数字，但说明论文是建立在近期经验发现之上的，并向前推进一步给出理论解释。可以确定的重点不是刷 benchmark，而是验证理论预测是否与事实一致，例如：QA 数据是否比其他格式更有利于 factual-recall ICL；任务概念向量是否能通过某些表示运算被识别；以及 residual transformer 的训练是否确实导向可检索的层级概念结构。若正文有实验，最有价值的应是把理论变量映射到可测量量，而不是只展示漂亮 case study。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper aims to explain a specific phenomenon in in-context learning: why models seem to form latent task vectors that can be retrieved and combined in a vector-arithmetic-like way from demonstrations. Prior empirical work suggested such structure for factual-recall ICL and highlighted the role of question-answer data, but there has been no satisfying theory for why these effects emerge.","importance":"This is a mechanism and theory paper for ICL. Its importance lies in turning a set of empirical observations into a more principled account of how training can produce retrievable task concepts. For pretraining, the implications are useful: data format may matter not just for supervision quality but for whether the model learns a concept space that supports in-context task abstraction and transfer.","technical_approach":"The paper proposes a theory built on hierarchically structured concepts and analyzes how nonlinear residual Transformers trained by gradient descent can form and retrieve task concepts. The key claim, as suggested by the abstract, is not merely that a latent task vector exists, but that it can support vector-arithmetic-like behavior together with the residual stream. The role of QA data is central because the theory seeks to explain why that format is especially helpful for factual recall. This goes beyond representation probing by tying the phenomenon to optimization and training dynamics. That is valuable because the hard part of ICL is not memorizing demonstrations; it is abstracting the task from them and transferring it to a new query. The limitation is that the theory necessarily uses a simplified model of real LLM training.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide numerical results, and the emphasis appears to be theoretical rather than benchmark-driven. The most relevant empirical checks would test whether QA data indeed improves factual-recall ICL in the way the theory predicts, whether latent task vectors can be identified through controlled representation operations, and whether residual Transformers develop the proposed hierarchical concept structure during training. The strongest experiments would map theoretical quantities to measurable observables rather than relying only on illustrative examples.","authors_note":""},"tags":["icl","task-vector","theory","generalization"],"notable_authors":["Dake Bu","Wei Huang","Andi Han","Atsushi Nitanda","Qingfu Zhang"]},{"id":"2405.17618","title":"Symmetric Reinforcement Learning Loss for Robust Learning on Diverse Tasks and Model Scales","authors":["Ju-Seung Byun","Andrew Perrault"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$7e","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.17618","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ByunP25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ByunP25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/byun25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["rlhf","rl","loss-function","stability"]},{"id":"2410.11963","title":"CtrlSynth: Controllable Image Text Synthesis for Data-Efficient Multimodal Learning","authors":["Qingqing Cao","Mahyar Najibi","Sachin Mehta"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$7f","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.11963","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/CaoNM25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/CaoNM25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/cao25g.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["synthetic-data","data-quality","multimodal","pretraining"]},{"id":"2410.16502","title":"RULEBREAKERS: Challenging LLMs at the Crossroads between Formal Logic and Human-like Reasoning","authors":["Jason Chan","Robert J. Gaizauskas","Zhixue Zhao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$80","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.16502","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChanGZ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChanGZ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chan25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["reasoning","evaluation","logic","generalization"]},{"id":"2502.02406","title":"LV-XAttn: Distributed Cross-Attention for Long Visual Inputs in Multimodal Large Language Models","authors":["Tzu-Tao Chang","Shivaram Venkataraman"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$81","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.02406","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChangV25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChangV25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chang25c.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["cross-attention","video","multimodal","distributed-training"]},{"id":"2505.22483","title":"A Closer Look at Multimodal Representation Collapse","authors":["Abhra Chaudhuri","Anjan Dutta","Tu Bui","Serban Georgescu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$82","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.22483","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Chaudhuri0BG25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Chaudhuri0BG25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chaudhuri25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["multimodal","representation-learning","modality-collapse","optimization"]},{"id":"2506.03085","title":"Non-Asymptotic Length Generalization","authors":["Thomas Chen","Tengyu Ma","Zhiyuan Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$83","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.03085","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Chen0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Chen0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chen25ar.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["length-generalization","generalization-theory","transformers"]},{"id":"2505.23363","title":"Discriminative Policy Optimization for Token-Level Reward Models","authors":["Hongzhan Chen","Tao Yang","Shiping Gao","Ruijun Chen","Xiaojun Quan","Hongtao Tian","Ting Yao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$84","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.23363","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Chen0G0QTY25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Chen0G0QTY25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chen25ca.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["process-reward-model","token-level-reward","dpo","reasoning"]},{"id":"2410.08898","title":"Low-Dimension-to-High-Dimension Generalization and Its Implications for Length Generalization","authors":["Yang Chen","Long Yang","Yitao Liang","Zhouchen Lin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$85","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.08898","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Chen0LL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Chen0LL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chen25cb.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["length-generalization","ood-generalization","latent-variable"]},{"id":"2505.03804","title":"MoEQuant: Enhancing Quantization for Mixture-of-Experts Large Language Models via Expert-Balanced Sampling and Affinity Guidance","authors":["Zhixuan Chen","Xing Hu","Dawei Yang","Zukang Xu","Chen Xu","Zhihang Yuan","Sifan Zhou","Jiangyong Yu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$86","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03804","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Chen0YXXYZY25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Chen0YXXYZY25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chen25aa.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["moe","quantization","post-training-quantization","llm-compression"]},{"id":"2501.19406","title":"Low-Rank Adapting Models for Sparse Autoencoders","authors":["Matthew Chen","Joshua Engels","Max Tegmark"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$87","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.19406","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChenET25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChenET25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chen25r.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["sparse-autoencoder","interpretability","lora","representation"]},{"id":"ChenFN0S25","title":"RAPID: Long-Context Inference with Retrieval-Augmented Speculative Decoding","authors":["Guanzheng Chen","Qilong Feng","Jinjie Ni","Xin Li","Michael Qizhe Shieh"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChenFN0S25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChenFN0S25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chen25s.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["speculative-decoding","long-context","retrieval-augmented"]},{"id":"2410.02746","title":"Contrastive Localized Language-Image Pre-Training","authors":["Hong-You Chen","Zhengfeng Lai","Haotian Zhang","Xinze Wang","Marcin Eichner","Keen You","Meng Cao","Bowen Zhang","Yinfei Yang","Zhe Gan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$88","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.02746","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChenL0WEYC0YG25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChenL0WEYC0YG25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chen25ah.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：CLIP 的图文对齐主要停留在整图-整句层面，导致它作为 MLLM 视觉骨干时，细粒度区域理解和定位能力不够。过去这类问题通常靠下游检测器、region proposal 或额外密集标注去补，但这会破坏 CLIP 预训练的简洁性，也不适合大规模弱监督场景，因此重新从预训练目标上增强 localization 是值得做的。","importance":"这是一个方法级的预训练改进，价值在于把“更强定位”直接做进 CLIP，而不是下游再补模块。对 pretrain 的启示是明确的：图文对齐如果只做 image-level，很容易把局部语义压平；而 MLLM 真正需要的是既能保留全局语义，又能让 patch/region 表征对文本局部概念更敏感。","technical_approach":"核心方法是一个 localized 的对比式图文预训练框架，目标不是替代 CLIP，而是在其对比学习范式里显式注入区域级监督。根据题目和摘要可确认的关键信息，它通过“localized language-image pre-training”提升视觉编码器的定位能力；设计上重点不是依赖路由式区域模块，而是让局部视觉单元与文本中的对应语义建立更直接的对齐。和标准 CLIP 相比，区别在于监督粒度更细；和基于检测器的方法相比，它更接近端到端预训练，因此更适合继续作为 MLLM backbone 使用。摘要截断，具体损失构造、区域来源和负样本机制无法确认。","experiments":"从已给信息只能确认：作者围绕 CLIP 视觉编码器的 localization 能力做了系统评估，并强调其对需要 region-level understanding 的下游任务和 MLLM 更有帮助。摘要未给出模型规模、数据规模、具体基线、指标和提升数字，因此不能可靠填写。可以合理预期其评测会覆盖零样本定位、细粒度检索或 MLLM 视觉理解，但这里不做猜测。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a real weakness of CLIP: image-level alignment is often too coarse when the downstream model needs region grounding. Earlier fixes usually bolt on detectors or region supervision after pretraining, which adds complexity and weakens the appeal of CLIP-style scalable weak supervision, so revisiting the pretraining objective itself is well motivated.","importance":"This is a method-level upgrade to vision-language pretraining rather than a downstream patch. The main takeaway for pretraining is that pure global contrastive alignment tends to wash out local semantics, while modern MLLMs need visual features that preserve both scene-level semantics and region-level text correspondence.","technical_approach":"The method is a localized contrastive language-image pretraining scheme that extends CLIP instead of replacing it. From the available abstract, the key idea is to inject finer-grained supervision into the contrastive setup so local visual units become more text-groundable. Relative to standard CLIP, the supervision granularity is finer; relative to detector-based pipelines, it stays closer to end-to-end pretraining and is therefore easier to reuse as an MLLM vision backbone. The abstract is truncated, so the exact localization source, loss design, and negative construction cannot be stated reliably.","experiments":"What can be stated safely is that the paper evaluates improved localization behavior of a CLIP-style vision encoder and positions that gain as useful for region-sensitive downstream tasks and MLLMs. The provided text does not include model sizes, dataset scale, baselines, metrics, or absolute gains, so those fields should be treated as unavailable rather than inferred.","authors_note":""},"tags":["clip","vision-language","localized-pretraining","vision-encoder"]},{"id":"2412.14468","title":"HashAttention: Semantic Sparsity for Faster Inference","authors":["Aditya Desai","Shuo Yang","Alejandro Cuadron","Matei Zaharia","Joseph E. Gonzalez","Ion Stoica"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$89","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.14468","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/DesaiYCZGS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/DesaiYCZGS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/desai25a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["attention","long-context","sparse-attention","inference"]},{"id":"2502.05075","title":"Discrepancies are Virtue: Weak-to-Strong Generalization through Lens of Intrinsic Dimension","authors":["Yijun Dong","Yicheng Li","Yunai Li","Jason D. Lee","Qi Lei"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$8a","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.05075","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/DongLLLL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/DongLLLL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/dong25g.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["weak-to-strong","generalization","fine-tuning","intrinsic-dimension"]},{"id":"2503.01926","title":"Unnatural Languages Are Not Bugs but Features for LLMs","authors":["Keyu Duan","Yiran Zhao","Zhili Feng","Jinjie Ni","Tianyu Pang","Qian Liu","Tianle Cai","Longxu Dou","Kenji Kawaguchi","Anirudh Goyal","J. Zico Kolter","Michael Qizhe Shieh"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Large Language Models (LLMs) have been observed to process non-human-readable text sequences, such as jailbreak prompts, often viewed as a bug for aligned LLMs. In this work, we present a systematic investigation challenging this perception, demonstrating that unnatural languages - strings that appear incomprehensible to humans but maintain semantic meanings for LLMs - contain latent features usable by models. Notably, unnatural languages possess latent features that can be generalized across different models and tasks during inference. Furthermore, models fine-tuned on unnatural versions of instruction datasets perform on-par with those trained on natural language, achieving 49.71 win rates in Length-controlled AlpacaEval 2.0 in average across various base models. In addition, through comprehensive analysis, we demonstrate that LLMs process unnatural languages by filtering noise and inferring contextual meaning from filtered words.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.01926","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Duan0FNP0CDKGKS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Duan0FNP0CDKGKS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/duan25c.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的是：LLM 能理解“人类不可读”的字符串（越狱提示、乱码式 prompt）到底是对齐漏洞还是一种可利用的表示能力，以及这种能力能否跨模型、跨任务泛化。以往社区多把它当 bug 去压制，但作者把它当成一种“非自然语言通道”。","importance":"贡献是把“非自然语言”从安全/对齐边角问题提升为可复用的推理与训练信号，并给出实证表明它能在不同模型与任务间迁移。对 pretrain/posttrain 的冲击在于：模型的语义通道不等同于人类语言表面形式，指令微调与对齐可能在无意中学到更抽象的可组合特征；同时也提示了新的攻击面与评测盲区。","technical_approach":"方法上是系统性构造与分析“unnatural languages”：表面不可读但对模型保持语义可解码的字符串，并测试其潜在特征是否可在推理时跨模型/跨任务复用。关键选择是把这种字符串当作一种可控的“语义保持变换”（类似对指令数据做编码/扰动但保留可学习信号），从而检验模型是否依赖更底层的统计/表示而非自然语言表层；代价是可解释性与可控性更差，且容易与安全对齐目标冲突。","experiments":"摘要给出的关键数字是：在多种 base model 上，用“非自然语言版本”的指令数据微调，Length-controlled AlpacaEval 2.0 平均 win rate 达到 49.71，表现与自然语言训练“相当”。摘要还声称存在跨模型、跨任务的推理泛化，但未给出具体模型列表、参数量、数据规模、方差/置信区间与更细分的 ablation（例如不同编码方式、不同扰动强度、是否影响安全基准），这些决定了结论能否外推到真实对齐与长尾任务。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether “unnatural languages” (human-unreadable strings used in jailbreak-like prompts) are merely alignment bugs, or a genuine semantic channel that LLMs can exploit and generalize across models and tasks.","importance":"It elevates an often-dismissed phenomenon into a reusable capability: semantics need not be tied to human-readable surface forms, and models can leverage latent features in such strings. For pretrain/post-train, it suggests instruction tuning may operate on more abstract features than natural language, while also exposing new evaluation and security blind spots.","technical_approach":"They systematically construct and study unnatural-language variants that remain semantically meaningful to LLMs, then test transfer at inference time across tasks/models and via finetuning on unnatural instruction data. The core bet is to treat these strings as controlled, semantics-preserving transformations, probing whether models rely on deeper representational/statistical structure rather than natural-language form; the trade-off is reduced interpretability and potential conflict with safety objectives.","experiments":"Key reported number: finetuning on unnatural versions of instruction datasets achieves on-par performance with natural-language finetuning, with an average 49.71 win rate on Length-controlled AlpacaEval 2.0 across multiple base models. The abstract does not specify model sizes, data scale, variance, or critical ablations (encoding type/strength, safety impact), which limits how far the claim can be generalized.","authors_note":""},"tags":["unnatural-language","jailbreak","llm-internals","interpretability"]},{"id":"ElmozninoMKGMFS25","title":"In-Context Learning and Occam&apos;s Razor","authors":["Eric Elmoznino","Tom Marty","Tejas Kasetty","Léo Gagnon","Sarthak Mittal","Mahan Fathi","Dhanya Sridhar","Guillaume Lajoie"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ElmozninoMKGMFS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ElmozninoMKGMFS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/elmoznino25b.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"摘要缺失：无法确认论文如何把 ICL（in-context learning）与 Occam’s Razor（偏好更简单假设）联系起来，是解释 ICL 的归纳偏置、还是给出可检验的预测。","importance":"摘要缺失：仅从标题看可能提供 ICL 机制层面的解释框架，对理解 pretrain 诱导的归纳偏置有潜在价值，但缺少结论与证据无法评估贡献量级。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失：无法总结其理论模型（如贝叶斯/MDL/最小描述长度）、关键假设、以及与现有 ICL 理论（如隐式元学习、线性回归视角等）的差异。","experiments":"摘要缺失：无法确认是否有合成任务或真实 LLM 实验、指标与定量结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract: it is unclear how the paper connects in-context learning to Occam’s Razor—whether as an inductive-bias explanation or as testable predictions.","importance":"No abstract: the title hints at a mechanistic/theoretical account of ICL that could inform pretraining-induced inductive biases, but contribution size cannot be judged without results.","technical_approach":"No abstract: the underlying framework (Bayesian/MDL/etc.), assumptions, and differences from prior ICL theories are unknown.","experiments":"No abstract: no information on synthetic or real-LLM experiments, metrics, or quantitative findings.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","occams-razor","generalization","theory"]},{"id":"GaoLL0L025","title":"MARGE: Improving Math Reasoning with Guided Exploration","authors":["Jingyue Gao","Runji Lin","Keming Lu","Bowen Yu","Junyang Lin","Jianyu Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GaoLL0L025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GaoLL0L025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/gao25h.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：如何让模型在数学推理中学会“探索后再收敛”，而不是只依赖单一路径的答案监督。现有数学推理方法常把探索当作采样时的技巧，或把过程监督限制在少量标注轨迹上，因此模型容易会做“模板化推理”，却不会在中间步骤主动试错、修正和利用反馈。","importance":"从题目判断，这更像一篇后训练/推理增强方向的工作，而不是预训练范式论文；它的价值在于把 guided exploration 明确做成数学推理训练信号。对 pretrain 研究的启示主要不在于提出新基座目标，而在于说明：如果想让模型获得更强的可恢复推理能力，训练时需要显式鼓励分支探索与反馈利用，而不是只优化最终答案似然。由于未提供摘要，暂时无法判断其贡献量级是方法级微调改进，还是对 RL/搜索式训练有更普遍的结论。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心方法应是把“引导式探索”嵌入数学推理学习流程，即在解题过程中鼓励模型尝试多个中间路径，同时用某种外部或内部信号筛选、纠偏和强化有效轨迹。相比只做 best-of-N 或只做答案级奖励，这类设计通常更关心中间状态的可达性与可恢复性；优势是能减少早期错误把整条推理链拖死，代价是训练与采样开销会上升，而且需要稳定的轨迹评价机制。由于没有摘要，具体是 SFT、RL、MCTS 风格搜索，还是 self-training 变体，无法确认。","experiments":"缺少摘要，无法确认实验设置、模型规模、数据量、基线和具体提升幅度。仅从题目推测，合理的关键实验应包括：与 chain-of-thought SFT、self-consistency、过程奖励或搜索增强基线比较；在 GSM8K、MATH、AIME 或 Olympiad 风格数据上报告最终正确率；并分析 guided exploration 对长链题、易走偏题和低采样预算场景的影响。如果论文没有给出探索成本与收益曲线，这类方法的实际价值会比较难判断。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper appears to target a clear bottleneck: math reasoning models usually learn to imitate a single successful trace, but not to explore, recover, and refine intermediate reasoning paths. Existing practice often pushes exploration to inference-time sampling or relies on sparse process supervision, which leaves models brittle when they drift off the correct path.","importance":"This is likely a post-training or reasoning-time method rather than a pretraining paper, but it is still relevant because it treats exploration itself as a trainable signal. The main takeaway for pretrain-minded readers is not a new base objective, but a practical reminder: answer-only likelihood is a weak proxy for robust reasoning, and training may need explicit incentives for branching and feedback use. Without the abstract, the contribution level is hard to place precisely.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method likely injects guided exploration into the math reasoning loop, encouraging multiple candidate trajectories and using some guidance signal to select, revise, or reinforce useful ones. Compared with plain best-of-N or answer-level reward, this class of approach usually tries to improve recoverability at intermediate states. The upside is better resilience to early reasoning mistakes; the downside is higher compute cost and dependence on a stable trajectory evaluation signal. The exact form—SFT, RL, search, or self-training—cannot be verified from the provided information.","experiments":"The abstract is missing, so model sizes, datasets, baselines, and gains cannot be stated reliably. A convincing experimental package would normally compare against CoT SFT, self-consistency, process-reward, or search-based baselines on datasets such as GSM8K, MATH, or AIME-style benchmarks, and include analysis on long-horizon problems and low-sampling-budget settings. If the paper does not quantify the cost-quality trade-off of exploration, its practical value would be harder to assess.","authors_note":""},"tags":["math-reasoning","rl","exploration","reasoning","alignment"]},{"id":"2408.15138","title":"How Transformers Learn Structured Data: Insights From Hierarchical Filtering","authors":["Jerome Garnier-Brun","Marc Mézard","Emanuele Moscato","Luca Saglietti"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$8b","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.15138","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Garnier-BrunMMS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Garnier-BrunMMS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/garnier-brun25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要回答的是：Transformer 在结构化数据上到底学到了什么计算过程，尤其是在存在多层级长程相关性时。很多关于 Transformer 机制的结论来自自然数据，变量难控；这篇论文转向树结构上的可控序列生成模型，用手工调节层级相关范围，来观察网络如何逐步发现并实现对应推断算法。","importance":"这是偏机制理解的工作，但对预训练研究有方法论价值。它的重要性在于提供了一个能控制统计结构复杂度的实验平台，并给出一个清晰结论：vanilla encoder-only Transformer 不只是记模式，它可以在合适任务上逼近精确推断算法，而且不同层级的相关性会按训练过程被逐步吸收。这个发现对理解 scaling、curriculum 和层功能形成有启发。","technical_approach":"核心方法是构造一种 hierarchical filtering 程序来生成树上序列数据，并可精确控制不同位置间相关性的层级和作用距离。然后在 root classification 和 masked language modeling 两类任务上训练标准 encoder-only Transformer，比较模型行为与精确推断算法，并分析注意力图与训练动态。设计上的关键点是：他们没有直接在真实语料里找解释，而是先把数据分布变成可解析对象。这样做的好处是能把“模型为什么学会某种机制”说清楚；代价是外推到真实语言时要谨慎，因为真实语料结构远比树模型复杂。","experiments":"摘要给出的核心实验结论有两点：第一，vanilla encoder-only Transformer 能近似 exact inference algorithm；第二，较远距离、也就是更高层级的相关性，会在训练中按层级顺序被网络逐步纳入。作者还把模型学到的注意力模式与推断算法对齐，说明注意力不是任意可视化产物，而与任务所需计算有关。摘要没有提供参数规模、训练步数或误差数字，因此这篇文章更适合看机制结论和训练动态，而不是追求 benchmark SOTA。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies what transformers actually learn when the data contain explicit hierarchical structure and long-range correlations. Much of the current mechanistic discussion relies on natural data where the underlying statistics are poorly controlled, so the authors move to a synthetic but analyzable tree-based sequence setting.","importance":"This is primarily a mechanistic paper, but it has real value for pretraining researchers because it provides a controlled testbed for how computation emerges during learning. The main result is strong: a vanilla encoder-only transformer can approximate the exact inference algorithm on these structured tasks, and it absorbs longer-range correlations progressively during training. That is useful evidence for how curriculum-like effects and layer specialization can arise without architectural changes.","technical_approach":"The key contribution is a hierarchical filtering procedure that generates sequence data on trees while allowing precise control over the range and hierarchy of positional correlations. Standard encoder-only transformers are then trained on root classification and masked language modeling, and their behavior is compared with the exact inference algorithm. The strength of this design is that the data distribution is interpretable, so learned computation can be matched to a known target procedure. The limitation is external validity: tree-structured synthetic data do not capture the full messiness of natural language.","experiments":"The abstract reports two main findings: vanilla encoder-only transformers can approximate exact inference, and correlations at larger distances are incorporated sequentially during training, reflecting the hierarchy in the data. The paper also compares learned attention maps to those implied by the inference procedure, which strengthens the mechanistic claim. It does not provide model sizes or quantitative performance numbers in the abstract, so the value here is in the training dynamics and computational interpretation rather than benchmark gains.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer","structured-data","mechanistic-interpretability","generalization","hierarchy"]},{"id":"2506.11672","title":"Dynamic Mixture of Curriculum LoRA Experts for Continual Multimodal Instruction Tuning","authors":["Chendi Ge","Xin Wang","Zeyang Zhang","Hong Chen","Jiapei Fan","Longtao Huang","Hui Xue","Wenwu Zhu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$8c","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.11672","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Ge000FH0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Ge000FH0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/ge25d.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是持续式多模态指令微调中的容量僵化问题。现有方法通常固定 LoRA 或适配器结构去接收新任务，但连续到来的任务对层级改造需求不同、对模态依赖也不同，结果要么容量不够，要么更新失衡，最终表现为灾难遗忘和预算浪费。","importance":"这是一个偏 post-train 系统方法的工作，直接面向 continual multimodal instruction tuning。它对 pretrain 研究的间接启示在于：多模态模型在后续适配时，参数预算不应该只按总量控制，还要按任务和模态动态分配。换句话说，固定形状的低秩适配并不是持续学习的自然接口，尤其当任务间的视觉/语言依赖差异很大时。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 D-MoLE，Dynamic Mixture of Curriculum LoRA Experts。它不是简单堆更多 LoRA，而是在预算约束下动态演化架构：针对不同任务自动决定哪些层需要更多专家、哪些模态需要更多更新，并通过 curriculum 方式安排学习顺序，缓解 task architecture conflict 和 modality imbalance。和传统固定 LoRA 最大的区别是，它把“在哪些层、给哪个模态、分配多少适配容量”当成动态决策问题。这样设计有效，因为连续任务的梯度需求并不均匀；但代价是训练控制逻辑更复杂，也更依赖任务切换边界和预算设定。","experiments":"摘要说明方法用于 continual multimodal instruction tuning，并强调在参数预算下自动演化结构，但没有给出具体模型底座、任务数、总参数开销或性能提升数字。读者应重点看四类实验：与固定 LoRA、adapter、经验回放或正则化基线相比的平均性能和遗忘率；不同预算下的性能-参数曲线；视觉主导任务和语言主导任务上是否都有效；以及 curriculum 与 mixture 这两个组件分别贡献多少。如果没有这些拆解，方法是否真的优于“多加一点 LoRA”会不够清楚。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a real limitation in continual multimodal instruction tuning: most methods keep the adaptation architecture fixed while tasks keep changing. Different tasks need different layer-wise updates and different modality emphasis, so a static LoRA-style design often wastes budget on the wrong places and amplifies forgetting.","importance":"This is a post-training systems method, but it carries a useful broader lesson: parameter budget should be allocated dynamically across layers and modalities, not just capped globally. For researchers thinking about the pretrain-to-posttrain interface, the paper suggests that fixed-shape low-rank adaptation is a poor match for continual multimodal workloads.","technical_approach":"The proposed method, D-MoLE, uses a dynamic mixture of curriculum LoRA experts under a parameter budget. Instead of attaching the same adaptation pattern everywhere, it evolves the architecture over tasks, deciding where extra capacity is needed and how much update each modality should receive. The curriculum component is meant to stabilize this evolution over time. Relative to standard fixed LoRA, the key difference is that adaptation placement itself becomes part of the learning problem. The rationale is strong because continual tasks do not produce uniform gradient demand, but the trade-off is more orchestration complexity and more dependence on the task sequence.","experiments":"The abstract confirms the setting and the claimed budget-aware dynamic adaptation, but it does not expose model backbone, benchmark suite, parameter overhead, or quantitative gains. The most important evidence to inspect would be average performance across tasks, forgetting metrics, performance under different budget limits, and ablations separating the effects of dynamic expert allocation and curriculum scheduling. Without those, it is hard to tell whether the gains come from smarter allocation or simply more effective total capacity.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal","continual-learning","instruction-tuning","lora","moe"]},{"id":"2503.03983","title":"Audio Flamingo 2: An Audio-Language Model with Long-Audio Understanding and Expert Reasoning Abilities","authors":["Sreyan Ghosh","Zhifeng Kong","Sonal Kumar","S. Sakshi","Jaehyeon Kim","Wei Ping","Rafael Valle","Dinesh Manocha","Bryan Catanzaro"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$8d","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.03983","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GhoshKKSKPVMC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GhoshKKSKPVMC25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/ghosh25b.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：现有音频语言模型在非语音声音、音乐以及长音频理解上能力不足，而且小模型通常缺少细粒度推理。过去很多 ALM 更偏语音问答或短音频事件理解，对 30 秒到数分钟的长时程音频建模、跨片段整合和专家级推理支持不够。","importance":"这是一篇对音频 LM 和跨模态统一建模都比较重要的工作。它的重要性有三点：第一，用仅 3B 的小语言模型做到跨 20 多个 benchmark 的强结果，说明音频侧表示、数据和训练策略的改造可以部分替代盲目堆大参数；第二，首次把 ALM 明确扩展到 30 秒到 5 分钟的长音频理解；第三，引入 LongAudio 数据集，补上了长音频训练数据这个长期缺口。对 pretrain 研究，这属于典型的“新模态 tokenizer/表示 + 课程学习 + 数据构造”联合推进。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Audio Flamingo 2，一个面向长音频理解和音频推理的音频-语言模型。它结合了三项关键设计：定制 CLAP 模型提供更合适的音频表征；合成 Audio QA 数据补足细粒度推理监督；多阶段 curriculum learning 让模型先学基础感知，再过渡到复杂推理与长音频整合。和很多只换 encoder 或只加指令数据的做法不同，这篇论文把表示、数据和训练顺序一起调。这样设计有效，因为音频任务瓶颈通常不只在语言头，也在前端表征和时长分布错配。代价是 pipeline 更复杂，而且合成 QA 的质量会直接决定推理能力上限。","experiments":"摘要给出的关键事实比较充分：AF2 使用 3B 参数的小语言模型，在 20 多个 benchmark 上超过大型开源和专有模型；同时将音频理解扩展到 30 秒至 5 分钟，并提出 LongAudio 作为新的长音频训练数据集。摘要没有列出每个 benchmark 的具体分数，但“3B 小模型 + 广泛超越大模型 + 新的长音频数据集”已经说明贡献不只是某个数据集调参。建议重点看两类消融：定制 CLAP、合成 Audio QA、课程学习三者各自贡献多少；以及随着音频长度增长，性能衰减是否明显。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a real weakness in current audio-language models: they are still limited on non-speech sounds, music, fine-grained reasoning, and especially long-audio understanding. Many prior ALMs are tuned for short clips or speech-centric tasks, leaving a gap in multi-minute audio comprehension and cross-segment reasoning.","importance":"This is an important paper for audio LMs and multimodal pretraining. It makes three points that matter. First, a 3B language backbone can beat larger open and proprietary systems if the audio representation, data, and training curriculum are designed well. Second, it explicitly extends ALMs to long audio from 30 seconds to 5 minutes. Third, it introduces LongAudio, addressing a major data bottleneck for long-horizon audio understanding. For pretraining researchers, this is a strong example of representation, data construction, and curriculum working together.","technical_approach":"Audio Flamingo 2 combines three main ingredients: a custom CLAP model for audio representation, synthetic audio QA data for fine-grained reasoning supervision, and a multi-stage curriculum to move from basic perception toward harder reasoning and long-context understanding. The design is notable because it does not assume the language model alone is the bottleneck. It adjusts the front-end representation, the supervision source, and the training schedule together. That is a sensible choice for audio, where failure often comes from representation mismatch and missing long-duration supervision rather than from language modeling capacity alone.","experiments":"The abstract provides strong headline evidence: AF2 uses only a 3B language model yet achieves state-of-the-art performance across more than 20 benchmarks, outperforming larger open-source and proprietary models. It also extends evaluation and training to 30-second to 5-minute audio and introduces the LongAudio dataset. Exact benchmark numbers are not included here, but the combination of broad benchmark coverage, small model size, and new long-audio data makes the contribution substantial. The most useful ablations will be the separate effects of custom CLAP, synthetic QA, and curriculum learning, plus degradation curves as audio length increases.","authors_note":""},"tags":["audio-language","long-context","reasoning","multimodal","synthetic-data"]},{"id":"GolowichJBKM25","title":"The Role of Sparsity for Length Generalization in LLMs","authors":["Noah Golowich","Samy Jelassi","David Brandfonbrener","Sham M. Kakade","Eran Malach"],"institutions":["Harvard"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GolowichJBKM25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GolowichJBKM25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/golowich25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"研究稀疏性在 LLM 长度泛化中的作用。长度泛化是指模型在短序列上训练后能否正确处理更长序列的能力，这是 Transformer 的已知弱点。本文探索稀疏性（可能指注意力模式或参数的稀疏性）是否以及如何帮助改善这一问题。","importance":"长度泛化是 pretrain 和架构设计中的实际痛点，尤其对需要处理长上下文的场景。如果稀疏性确实是长度泛化的关键因素，这对架构选择（稀疏注意力、MoE）和训练策略都有直接指导意义。理论+实验级贡献。","technical_approach":"摘要未提供，具体方法不详。从作者阵容（Jelassi、Kakade、Malach 等理论背景强的研究者）推测，可能结合了理论分析和实验验证，研究稀疏性条件下 Transformer 的泛化边界。","experiments":"摘要未提供，具体实验不详。","authors_note":"Sham Kakade 是机器学习理论领域的顶级研究者（Harvard/曾在 Microsoft Research）。Samy Jelassi 和 Eran Malach 在 Transformer 理论分析方面有多篇重要工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Investigates the role of sparsity in enabling length generalization in LLMs—the ability to handle longer sequences than seen during training, a known Transformer weakness.","importance":"Length generalization is a practical pain point for pretrain and architecture design. If sparsity is a key enabler, this has direct implications for architecture choices (sparse attention, MoE) and training strategies.","technical_approach":"Abstract not available. Given the authors' strong theoretical backgrounds, likely combines formal analysis with experiments on how sparsity conditions affect Transformer generalization bounds for length extrapolation.","experiments":"Abstract not available; experimental details unknown.","authors_note":"Sham Kakade is a top ML theory researcher (Harvard). Samy Jelassi and Eran Malach have multiple influential works on Transformer theory."},"tags":["sparsity","length-generalization","llm","generalization","architecture"],"notable_authors":["Sham M. Kakade","Samy Jelassi","Eran Malach"]},{"id":"2502.00382","title":"Masked Generative Nested Transformers with Decode Time Scaling","authors":["Sahil Goyal","Debapriya Tula","Gagan Jain","Pradeep Shenoy","Prateek Jain","Sujoy Paul"],"institutions":["Google Research"],"abstract":"$8e","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.00382","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GoyalTJS0P25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GoyalTJS0P25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/goyal25a.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"视觉生成模型（如 masked generative models）在推理时需要多次过 Transformer，且每次都用相同大小的模型，计算效率低。核心洞察是：生成过程的不同阶段需要的计算量不同，早期粗略阶段不需要大模型。","importance":"对跨模态统一预训练和视觉生成有直接启示。Masked generative model 是 diffusion 之外的重要视觉生成范式（与 masked LM 同源），本文的 decode-time scaling 思路可以迁移到任何迭代式生成框架。效率级贡献，但思路有普适性。","technical_approach":"两个核心设计：(1) Decode-time model scaling——在生成的不同阶段使用不同大小的模型（嵌套 Transformer 架构，小模型是大模型的子集），早期用小模型，后期用大模型；(2) 计算缓存复用——跨迭代复用部分计算结果。嵌套 Transformer 的关键优势是不需要训练多个独立模型，一个模型天然包含不同规模的子模型。","experiments":"摘要截断，具体数字不详。预期在图像生成质量（FID 等）和推理速度之间展示更好的 trade-off。","authors_note":"Prateek Jain 是 Google Research India 的资深研究者，在优化和高效 ML 方面有大量工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Masked generative Transformers for visual generation use the same model size across all iterative decoding steps, wasting compute on early steps that only need coarse generation.","importance":"Directly relevant to visual generation and cross-modal unified pretraining. The decode-time scaling idea generalizes to any iterative generation framework. Efficiency contribution with broad applicability.","technical_approach":"Two key ideas: (1) decode-time model scaling via nested Transformers—smaller sub-models (subsets of the full model) handle early coarse steps, full model handles later refinement; (2) cross-iteration computation caching. Nested architecture avoids training separate models.","experiments":"Abstract truncated; specific numbers unavailable. Expected to show better quality-speed tradeoffs on image generation benchmarks.","authors_note":"Prateek Jain is a senior researcher at Google Research India, known for optimization and efficient ML."},"tags":["masked-generation","non-autoregressive","decode-scaling","transformer","vision-generation"],"notable_authors":["Prateek Jain"]},{"id":"2502.17298","title":"Delta Decompression for MoE-based LLMs Compression","authors":["Hao Gu","Wei Li","Lujun Li","Qiyuan Zhu","Mark G. Lee","Shengjie Sun","Wei Xue","Yike Guo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$8f","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.17298","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GuL0ZLS0G25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GuL0ZLS0G25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/gu25c.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"MoE 架构的 LLM 性能优异但参数量巨大，存储和内存需求极高。现有压缩方法没有充分利用 MoE 专家之间的结构相似性。本文的核心思路是：将专家权重分解为共享基础权重 + 独特的 delta 权重，然后分别压缩。","importance":"系统级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示：MoE 专家之间存在大量冗余（共享基础 + 低秩 delta），这个观察本身对理解 MoE 的工作机制有价值——专家的差异化可能比我们想象的更小。压缩方法的成功反过来说明 MoE 的参数效率还有很大提升空间。","technical_approach":"D²-MoE 分三步：(1) 用 Fisher 信息矩阵将各专家权重合并为共享基础权重，捕捉共性成分；(2) 对 delta 权重（专家与基础的差异）做 SVD 低秩分解，利用其低秩特性；(3) 对基础权重做半动态结构化剪枝，结合静态和动态冗余分析。关键设计选择是用 Fisher 信息矩阵而非简单平均来合并专家，这能更好地保留对输出影响大的参数。","experiments":"摘要截断，具体压缩比和性能保持数字不详。预期在 Mixtral 等 MoE 模型上验证，展示在大幅减少参数量的同时保持下游任务性能。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"MoE LLMs achieve strong performance but have prohibitive storage/memory costs. Existing compression methods don't exploit the structural similarity between experts. This work decomposes expert weights into shared base + unique delta, then compresses each component differently.","importance":"System-level contribution. The observation that MoE experts share substantial structure (low-rank deltas) is itself informative about how MoE works—expert differentiation may be smaller than assumed. Successful compression implies significant room for improving MoE parameter efficiency.","technical_approach":"D²-MoE has three steps: (1) merge expert weights into a shared base using Fisher information matrix (not simple averaging—preserves parameters with high output impact); (2) compress delta weights via SVD exploiting their low-rank nature; (3) semi-dynamic structured pruning on base weights combining static and dynamic redundancy analysis.","experiments":"Abstract truncated; specific compression ratios and performance retention numbers unavailable. Expected to validate on MoE models like Mixtral.","authors_note":""},"tags":["moe","compression","quantization","inference","serving"]},{"id":"2410.12949","title":"Mechanistic Unlearning: Robust Knowledge Unlearning and Editing via Mechanistic Localization","authors":["Phillip Guo","Aaquib Syed","Abhay Sheshadri","Aidan Ewart","Gintare Karolina Dziugaite"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$90","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.12949","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GuoSSED25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GuoSSED25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/guo25k.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["mechanistic-interpretability","unlearning","knowledge-editing","circuit-analysis"]},{"id":"2502.18293","title":"AMPO: Active Multi Preference Optimization for Self-play Preference Selection","authors":["Taneesh Gupta","Rahul Madhavan","Xuchao Zhang","Chetan Bansal","Saravan Rajmohan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$91","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.18293","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GuptaMZBR25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GuptaMZBR25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/gupta25c.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["preference-optimization","self-play","alignment","multi-preference"]},{"id":"GuptaTSZHSGLKZA25","title":"AlphaPO: Reward Shape Matters for LLM Alignment","authors":["Aman Gupta","Shao Tang","Qingquan Song","Sirou Zhu","Jiwoo Hong","Ankan Saha","Viral Gupta","Noah Lee","Eunki Kim","Siyu Zhu","Parag Agrawal","Natesh S. Pillai","S. Sathiya Keerthi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GuptaTSZHSGLKZA25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GuptaTSZHSGLKZA25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/gupta25d.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["reward-shaping","alignment","preference-optimization"]},{"id":"HanZ0025","title":"Heads up! Large Language Models Can Perform Tasks Without Your Instruction via Selective Attention Head Masking","authors":["Senyu Han","Hongchuan Zeng","Kai Yu","Lu Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HanZ0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HanZ0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/han25l.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文想解决的问题是：LLM 是否已经在参数里具备执行某些任务的能力，只是默认注意力路由把这种能力压住了，因此即便不给明确指令，也可能通过干预少数 attention heads 把任务能力显露出来。传统 instruction following 研究默认“能力触发”主要靠 prompt，本工作把焦点移到模型内部电路选择上。","importance":"如果论文结论成立，它的重要性在于解释层和可控性层，而不是训练范式层。对 pretrain 的启示是：部分任务能力可能在预训练中已经被分布式学到，但是否被表面激活，取决于少数头部的选择性注意模式；这会影响我们怎么看 instruction tuning 的作用——它未必总是在教新能力，也可能是在重配已有能力的调用路径。","technical_approach":"从标题可以判断，核心方法是 selective attention head masking：通过系统性屏蔽或保留部分注意力头，观察模型在没有明确指令时是否仍能完成目标任务。这个设计和常见的 activation steering、logit lens 或单头 ablation 不同，它强调“任务能力是否可由结构性抑制解除”而不是“某一层是否编码某个特征”。若结果成立，机制上的含义是一些头可能承担通用语言先验或对齐约束，另一些头负责更直接的任务执行，两者之间存在竞争；masking 改变了这种竞争关系。边界也很明显：这种方法更像分析与控制工具，不是实际部署时稳健可靠的通用 prompting 方案。","experiments":"由于题目未附摘要，无法确认实验设置、模型规模、任务类型、baseline 和具体数字。按题意推测，关键实验应包括：1）在无指令或弱指令条件下，mask 特定 heads 后任务准确率是否显著上升；2）这种现象是否在不同模型、层、任务上稳定出现；3）随机 masking 或按重要性评分 masking 的对照；4）是否存在性能-安全性的 trade-off，例如放出任务能力同时破坏一般对话质量。没有这些数字前，只能把它当作一个值得关注的 interpretability/controllability 方向，不能下更强结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper appears to ask whether LLMs already contain latent task competence that can be exposed without explicit instruction by changing which attention heads participate. Standard instruction-following work usually treats prompting as the main trigger; this work shifts the question to internal routing.","importance":"If the result holds, the contribution is mostly interpretability and controllability rather than a new training paradigm. For pretraining, the implication is that some abilities may already be learned and merely suppressed or overridden by default attention patterns. That would make instruction tuning look less like teaching brand-new skills and more like reconfiguring access paths to existing ones.","technical_approach":"Based on the title, the method is selective attention head masking: mask or preserve chosen attention heads and test whether the model can execute tasks even without explicit instruction. This differs from standard ablations that ask whether a head stores a feature; the more interesting claim here is that masking can release a dormant behavior by altering the competition among circuits. Mechanistically, one plausible reading is that some heads enforce generic conversational priors or alignment behavior while others support direct task execution, and masking changes that balance. The limitation is clear: this is more a diagnostic or steering tool than a practical, robust interface for deployment.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so model sizes, tasks, baselines, and quantitative gains cannot be verified. The decisive evidence would need to show at least four things: clear gains under no-instruction or weak-instruction settings, consistency across layers and models, strong controls such as random masking, and the cost on general chat quality or safety. Without those details, this should be treated as an intriguing interpretability paper rather than a confirmed capability claim.","authors_note":""},"tags":["attention-head","selective-masking","llm-behavior","interpretability"]},{"id":"2407.03310","title":"Universal Length Generalization with Turing Programs","authors":["Kaiying Hou","David Brandfonbrener","Sham M. Kakade","Samy Jelassi","Eran Malach"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$92","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.03310","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HouBKJM25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HouBKJM25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/hou25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是 length generalization 的通用性问题：模型在短序列上训练，却希望在长得多的序列上稳定执行算法任务。过去常见办法要么依赖特定架构改造，要么只对少数任务和特定 scratchpad 格式有效，缺少一个能覆盖广泛算法任务、又足够简单可学的统一推理模板。","importance":"这项工作的意义更接近范式级 prompt/program 设计，而不是预训练方法本身的改造。它对 pretrain 研究的价值在于提供了一个清晰信号：长度泛化失败常常不是容量不够，而是训练时没有把计算轨迹写成模型容易外推的形式；如果把推理过程重写成接近图灵机执行的局部、可复制步骤，通用 transformer 也能获得强得多的外推能力。这会反过来影响我们怎么看 CoT、scratchpad 和合成 curriculum 的设计。","technical_approach":"作者提出 Turing Programs，核心思想是把算法任务分解成模仿图灵机计算的细粒度步骤，并把这些步骤写成简单的文本操作，主要是从上下文复制并做少量修改。这个设计的好处是每一步局部、规则稳定、长度扩展时形式不变，因此模型不需要隐式记住长程算法状态迁移，只需反复执行相同局部操作。和一般 CoT 相比，它不是鼓励模型自由地产生解释，而是强约束中间表示的语法和执行模式；牺牲了自然性，但换来了更好的可验证性和长度外推。边界也很明确：它主要适用于可程序化的算法任务，对开放域自然语言推理未必直接成立。","experiments":"摘要明确声称，使用 Turing Programs 后，模型在一系列算法任务上获得了稳健的长度泛化，而且该框架具有通用性，可容纳任意算法任务。它还强调方法简单，基本只需从上下文复制文本并做少量变换，这暗示收益主要来自表示格式，而不是更复杂的监督信号。由于摘要片段被截断，无法确认具体任务集、训练长度与测试长度倍率、模型规模、主要 baseline 以及提升数字。真正值得关注的实验点是：1）是否能在多个任务族上统一工作，而不是只在加法/排序类任务上成功；2）长度增长几个数量级后性能是否平滑退化；3）与普通 CoT / scratchpad 相比，增益来自结构化中间步骤还是 simply more tokens。","authors_note":"Google DeepMind / Harvard / Cornell / Weizmann 相关作者组合中可识别研究者包括 Sham Kakade、Eran Malach；两人都长期做学习理论、优化与泛化相关工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a recurring failure mode in language models: they can solve algorithmic tasks at training lengths but break badly when the sequence becomes much longer. Existing fixes are often tied either to special architectures or to narrow task formats, so the missing piece is a general reasoning format that makes length extrapolation easier across tasks.","importance":"The contribution is closer to a reasoning/program representation paradigm than to a new pretraining recipe, but it is still relevant to pretraining research. The main lesson is that poor length generalization is often a representation problem, not just a scale problem. If the computation trace is written in a form the model can repeat locally, a standard transformer can extrapolate much better.","technical_approach":"The proposed Turing Programs decompose an algorithm into small steps that mimic Turing-machine-style computation. Those steps are intentionally simple, mostly copying text from context with minor edits. That design matters: each step stays local and structurally stable as sequence length grows, so the model can reuse a fixed transition pattern instead of implicitly learning a long-horizon algorithm in one shot. Compared with generic chain-of-thought, this is much more constrained. It sacrifices naturalness for repeatability and extrapolation.","experiments":"The abstract claims robust length generalization across a range of algorithmic tasks and presents Turing Programs as a universal framework rather than a task-specific trick. It also stresses that the method is simple, suggesting that gains come mainly from the intermediate representation format. The provided text is truncated, so task list, train/test length ratios, model sizes, baselines, and exact numbers cannot be verified. The key evidence to look for is whether the same format works across multiple task families, how gracefully performance decays with much longer inputs, and how much of the gain survives against strong scratchpad and CoT baselines with matched token budgets.","authors_note":"The author list includes recognizable researchers such as Sham Kakade and Eran Malach, known for work on learning theory, optimization, and generalization."},"tags":["length-generalization","cot","scratchpad","reasoning","training-dynamics"],"notable_authors":["Sham M. Kakade","Eran Malach"]},{"id":"2407.18213","title":"Scaling Trends in Language Model Robustness","authors":["Nikolaus H. R. Howe","Ian R. McKenzie","Oskar John Hollinsworth","Michal Zajac","Tom Tseng","Aaron David Tucker","Pierre-Luc Bacon","Adam Gleave"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$93","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.18213","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HoweMH0TTBG25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HoweMH0TTBG25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/howe25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是一个经常被忽视的问题：随着模型变大，鲁棒性会不会自然变好，尤其是在 jailbreak、prompt injection 和对抗攻击场景下。很多讨论默认能力 scaling 会顺带带来更强防御，但系统性证据并不充分，特别是在安全训练、攻击预算和模型规模同时变化时，很难分清哪些趋势是真的。","importance":"这项工作的贡献是系统级 empirical scaling study。对 pretrain/posttrain 研究都重要，因为它直接挑战一个常见误解：更大的基础模型并不会自动更鲁棒；真正改善鲁棒性的，往往是显式安全训练，而 scale 更多是改变训练效率和攻击/防御曲线的形状。这个结论会影响资源分配——是继续扩 base model，还是把算力投到 adversarial training 和数据构造上。","technical_approach":"作者采用 scaling 视角，跨多个分类任务、模型家族和对抗攻击系统研究鲁棒性。关键设计不是提出新 defense，而是把模型规模、是否显式安全训练、攻击方式和训练计算量放到统一实验框架里比较。摘要里最有信息量的一点是：在没有显式 safety training 的前提下，更大模型并不稳定地更鲁棒；而在 adversarial training 下，scale 提升了 sample efficiency，但降低了 compute efficiency。这说明更大模型也许更容易“学会”对抗样本模式，但每单位计算获得的鲁棒性收益不一定更高。这样的 trade-off 对安全训练非常现实。","experiments":"摘要已经给出了几条关键结论。第一，在没有显式安全训练时，更大模型不一致地更鲁棒，这是否定“scale cures robustness”的直接证据。第二，scale 能提高 adversarial training 的 sample efficiency，但会恶化 compute efficiency，意味着用更大模型做鲁棒训练不是无脑划算。第三，作者做的是跨任务、跨模型家族、跨攻击方式的大规模研究，而不是单一点结果。遗憾的是摘要片段在‘Further, we find that ...’处截断，缺少后续更细结论，也没有给出具体模型规模、攻击类型、准确率/鲁棒准确率数字和 scaling exponent。即便如此，这篇论文的阅读重点已经很明确：要看鲁棒性曲线是否在某些 regime 出现相变、不同家族是否有一致趋势，以及显式 safety training 与 scale 的交互是否强于二者单独效应。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a practical scaling question: does robustness improve automatically as language models get larger, especially under jailbreaks, prompt injection, and adversarial attacks? The field often assumes that more capable models should also be harder to break, but the evidence has been mixed and confounded by differences in safety training and attack strength.","importance":"This is a systems-level empirical study with direct relevance to both pretraining and post-training. Its main value is to challenge a lazy assumption: scale alone does not reliably buy robustness. If the paper’s results hold broadly, they argue for spending more effort on explicit safety training and data construction rather than expecting larger base models to solve the problem for free.","technical_approach":"The authors take a scaling-law perspective on robustness, comparing multiple model families, classification tasks, and adversarial attacks under a common framework. The contribution is not a new defense but a cleaner decomposition of factors: model size, attack type, and the presence or absence of explicit safety training. The most informative finding in the abstract is the split between sample efficiency and compute efficiency: larger models appear to benefit more quickly from adversarial examples in terms of data, but less efficiently in terms of total compute spent. That is exactly the kind of trade-off that matters in real safety pipelines.","experiments":"The abstract already gives two key empirical takeaways. First, without explicit safety training, larger models are not consistently more robust. Second, scale improves sample efficiency in adversarial training while worsening compute efficiency. The study is also explicitly broad, spanning several tasks, model families, and attacks. The provided text is truncated after 'Further, we find that ...', so model sizes, exact attack suites, and quantitative robustness numbers are missing. Even so, the most important things to inspect are whether robustness scaling changes across regimes, whether trends are family-specific, and how strongly explicit safety training interacts with scale.","authors_note":""},"tags":["scaling-law","robustness","jailbreak","prompt-injection","evaluation"]},{"id":"HuaJLZSFZQ0025","title":"Fourier Position Embedding: Enhancing Attention&apos;s Periodic Extension for Length Generalization","authors":["Ermo Hua","Che Jiang","Xingtai Lv","Kaiyan Zhang","Youbang Sun","Yuchen Fan","Xuekai Zhu","Biqing Qi","Ning Ding","Bowen Zhou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HuaJLZSFZQ0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HuaJLZSFZQ0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/hua25b.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer 在处理超出训练长度的序列时泛化能力差（length generalization），根源之一是现有位置编码（如 RoPE）在外推时注意力模式的周期性扩展不理想。本文提出 Fourier Position Embedding 来改善这一问题。","importance":"方法级贡献，直接影响 pretrain 阶段的位置编码设计。长度泛化是 LLM pretrain 的核心痛点之一——训练时用短序列，推理时要处理长序列。如果位置编码本身能更好地支持外推，就能减少对长序列训练数据的依赖，降低 pretrain 成本。","technical_approach":"摘要为空，无法获取具体方法细节。从标题推断，核心思路是利用 Fourier 基函数的天然周期性来设计位置编码，使注意力的周期性扩展（periodic extension）在外推时更平滑、更可控。这与 RoPE 的旋转频率设计有本质联系，但可能提供了更系统的频率选择或衰减机制。","experiments":"摘要为空，无实验细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Transformers generalize poorly to sequences longer than those seen during training. A key bottleneck is that existing position embeddings (e.g., RoPE) do not extend their periodic patterns cleanly beyond the training length. This work proposes Fourier Position Embedding to improve length generalization.","importance":"A method-level contribution directly relevant to pretrain position encoding design. Better length generalization from the position embedding itself reduces the need for expensive long-context training data, a practical concern for pretrain.","technical_approach":"Abstract is empty. Based on the title, the approach likely leverages the natural periodicity of Fourier basis functions to design position embeddings whose periodic extension in attention is smoother and more controllable during extrapolation. This connects to RoPE's rotary frequency design but may offer a more principled frequency selection or decay mechanism.","experiments":"No abstract available; no experimental details.","authors_note":""},"tags":["position-embedding","length-generalization","attention","long-context","architecture"]},{"id":"2505.00926","title":"How Transformers Learn Regular Language Recognition: A Theoretical Study on Training Dynamics and Implicit Bias","authors":["Ruiquan Huang","Yingbin Liang","Jing Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$94","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00926","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HuangL025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HuangL025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/huang25s.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer 如何学会识别正则语言（regular language）？具体研究 even pairs 和 parity check 两个任务，分析单层 Transformer 在梯度下降训练过程中的动态行为和隐式偏置。","importance":"理论级贡献，属于 Transformer 机制分析。对 pretrain 研究的价值在于：它揭示了 Transformer 学习计数/奇偶性等基础能力的训练动态——even pairs 可以被单层 Transformer 直接解决，而 parity check 需要额外机制。这有助于理解 LLM 在 pretrain 中如何获得基础推理能力的微观机制。","technical_approach":"理论分析单层 Transformer（attention + linear layer）在梯度下降下学习 even pairs 和 parity check 的训练动态。关键发现是两个任务的难度差异：even pairs 可以被单层 Transformer 直接学会，而 parity check 更难（摘要截断，具体机制需查阅全文）。分析方法是追踪梯度下降过程中参数的演化轨迹，揭示隐式偏置如何引导模型收敛到特定解。","experiments":"这是一篇理论工作，核心是训练动态的数学分析。可能有验证性实验但摘要未提及具体数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How does a Transformer learn to recognize regular languages? This work theoretically analyzes the training dynamics and implicit bias of a one-layer Transformer on two representative tasks: even pairs and parity check.","importance":"A theory-level contribution in Transformer mechanistic understanding. Reveals the micro-level training dynamics of how Transformers acquire basic counting/parity capabilities—useful for understanding how fundamental reasoning abilities emerge during pretrain.","technical_approach":"Theoretically analyzes a one-layer Transformer (attention + linear) trained with gradient descent on even pairs and parity check. Key finding: even pairs can be directly solved by one layer, while parity check requires additional mechanisms (abstract truncated). The analysis tracks parameter evolution under gradient descent to reveal how implicit bias guides convergence to specific solutions.","experiments":"Primarily a theoretical work with mathematical analysis of training dynamics. Specific experimental numbers not mentioned in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer","training-dynamics","implicit-bias","theory","generalization"]},{"id":"2506.11891","title":"Understanding Input Selectivity in Mamba: Impact on Approximation Power, Memorization, and Associative Recall Capacity","authors":["Ningyuan Teresa Huang","Miguel Sarabia","Abhinav Moudgil","Pau Rodríguez","Luca Zappella","Federico Danieli"],"institutions":["Apple"],"abstract":"$95","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.11891","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HuangSMRZD25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HuangSMRZD25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/huang25ab.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Mamba 引入了 input selectivity（S6 层的输入依赖参数化）、卷积和门控，但这些组件各自的贡献和交互机制不清楚。特别是 input selectivity 到底在逼近能力、长期记忆和关联召回中起什么作用？","importance":"理论级贡献，属于 SSM 架构的机制分析。对 pretrain 研究有直接价值：Mamba 是当前最有竞争力的非 Transformer 架构之一，理解其核心组件的作用边界有助于判断 SSM 在哪些场景下能替代 Transformer、在哪些场景下不能。","technical_approach":"从三个维度分析 input selectivity 的作用：(i) 函数逼近能力——证明 S6 层能表示 Haar 小波投影，说明 input selectivity 赋予了 Mamba 自适应的频率分解能力；(ii) 长期记忆——分析 selectivity 对信息保持的影响；(iii) 关联召回（associative recall）——这是 in-context learning 的基础能力。通过理论证明和分析揭示 selectivity 与卷积、门控的交互效应。","experiments":"主要是理论分析工作。摘要未提及具体实验数字，但理论结果（如 Haar 小波表示能力）应有实验验证。","authors_note":"作者来自 Apple（Pau Rodríguez, Luca Zappella 等）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Mamba introduces input selectivity (input-dependent parameterization in S6), convolution, and gating, but how each component contributes and how they interact remains unclear. Specifically: what role does input selectivity play in approximation power, long-term memorization, and associative recall?","importance":"A theory-level contribution in SSM architecture analysis. Directly valuable for pretrain: Mamba is the most competitive non-Transformer architecture, and understanding the boundaries of its core components helps determine where SSMs can and cannot replace Transformers.","technical_approach":"Analyzes input selectivity along three dimensions: (i) Approximation power—proves S6 can represent Haar wavelet projections, showing selectivity enables adaptive frequency decomposition; (ii) Long-term memorization—analyzes how selectivity affects information retention; (iii) Associative recall—a foundational capability for in-context learning. Reveals interactions between selectivity, convolution, and gating through theoretical proofs.","experiments":"Primarily theoretical. No specific experimental numbers in the abstract, though theoretical results (e.g., Haar wavelet representation) are likely validated empirically.","authors_note":"Authors include researchers from Apple (Pau Rodríguez, Luca Zappella, et al.)."},"tags":["mamba","ssm","memorization","associative-recall","theory"]},{"id":"2412.14415","title":"DriveGPT: Scaling Autoregressive Behavior Models for Driving","authors":["Xin Huang","Eric M. Wolff","Paul Vernaza","Tung Phan-Minh","Hongge Chen","David S. Hayden","Mark Edmonds","Brian Pierce","Xinxin Chen","Pratik Elias Jacob","Xiaobai Chen","Chingiz Tairbekov","Pratik Agarwal","Tianshi Gao","Yuning Chai","Siddhartha S. Srinivasa"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We present DriveGPT, a scalable behavior model for autonomous driving. We model driving as a sequential decision-making task, and learn a transformer model to predict future agent states as tokens in an autoregressive fashion. We scale up our model parameters and training data by multiple orders of magnitude, enabling us to explore the scaling properties in terms of dataset size, model parameters, and compute. We evaluate DriveGPT across different scales in a planning task, through both quantitative metrics and qualitative examples, including closed-loop driving in complex real-world scenarios. In a separate prediction task, DriveGPT outperforms state-of-the-art baselines and exhibits improved performance by pretraining on a large-scale dataset, further validating the benefits of data scaling.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.14415","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HuangWVPCHEPCJC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HuangWVPCHEPCJC25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/huang25ak.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：把自动驾驶的“行为/规划”做成可规模化的自回归序列建模，并系统回答“模型/数据/算力放大后是否像语言模型一样稳定变好”。以往驾驶行为模型常被当作小模型的 imitation learning 或特定规划器问题做，缺少可复用的 scaling 规律与统一 token 化表述。","importance":"贡献更偏“预训练范式迁移 + scaling 证据”而不是单点算法技巧。它把驾驶状态预测明确成 token 级 AR 生成，并用多数量级的模型与数据扩展去验证数据规模带来的收益，这对做多模态/具身 pretrain 的人有直接启示：驾驶也能像 LM 一样用统一序列目标吃规模红利，但收益主要取决于数据覆盖与闭环分布偏移是否被缓解。","technical_approach":"方法核心是把多智能体未来状态离散/序列化成 token，然后用 Transformer 做自回归预测来驱动规划。设计上选择了“预测未来轨迹/状态”而不是直接输出控制量，目的是让模型学习可泛化的场景动力学与交互模式；代价是闭环时误差会累积，需要在评测中用 closed-loop 场景检验稳定性。论文强调通过扩大预训练数据与参数量来提升泛化，而不是依赖复杂的手工规则或任务特化损失。","experiments":"摘要层面只给出定性结论：作者将参数量与训练数据提升多个数量级，并在规划任务上做了不同 scale 的量化指标与复杂真实场景的闭环演示；在单独的预测任务上，DriveGPT 超过了当时的 SOTA baseline，并显示“大规模预训练数据”能进一步提升。具体的模型规模、数据规模、指标名称与提升数值在摘要中未给出，因此无法在此复述。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles one question: can autonomous driving behavior/planning be cast as scalable autoregressive token prediction, and does it improve predictably with model/data/compute scaling. Prior work often treated driving behavior as small-scale imitation learning or planner-specific engineering, leaving scaling behavior and a reusable pretraining recipe underexplored.","importance":"The main value is a “pretraining + scaling” transfer rather than a new planner trick. By framing future agent states as AR tokens and scaling both parameters and data by orders of magnitude, it provides evidence that driving models can benefit from the same scale-driven gains as LMs—while also highlighting the boundary: closed-loop distribution shift and compounding errors can dominate if data coverage is insufficient.","technical_approach":"DriveGPT tokenizes multi-agent future states and trains a Transformer to autoregressively predict them, then uses those predictions for planning. Predicting trajectories/states (instead of direct controls) is meant to force learning of interaction dynamics that generalize across scenarios; the trade-off is error accumulation in closed-loop rollouts, which must be evaluated in realistic closed-loop settings. The approach leans on large-scale pretraining rather than heavy task-specific losses or rule-based components.","experiments":"From the abstract: the authors scale parameters and training data by multiple orders of magnitude and evaluate across scales on a planning task with quantitative metrics plus closed-loop real-world scenarios; on a separate prediction task, DriveGPT beats SOTA baselines and improves further with large-scale pretraining. Exact model sizes, dataset sizes, metrics, and deltas are not provided in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["autoregressive","scaling-law","behavior-model","tokenization","sequence-modeling"]},{"id":"2506.00736","title":"IMPACT: Iterative Mask-based Parallel Decoding for Text-to-Audio Generation with Diffusion Modeling","authors":["Kuan-Po Huang","Shu-Wen Yang","Huy Phan","Bo-Ru Lu","Byeonggeun Kim","Sashank Macha","Qingming Tang","Shalini Ghosh","Hung-yi Lee","Chieh-Chi Kao","Chao Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$96","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.00736","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HuangYPLKMTGLKW25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HuangYPLKMTGLKW25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/huang25ap.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：在 text-to-audio 里同时拿到“扩散模型级别的音质”和“mask 并行解码级别的低延迟”。现状是扩散（Tango/AudioLDM）音质好但采样慢，离散 token 的 mask 并行（如 MAGNET）快但音质落后。","importance":"贡献是把“并行解码的速度优势”带回到“扩散建模的质量区间”，属于推理效率驱动的建模折中改造。对音频 LM/跨模态预训练的启示是：如果你的生成目标仍需要扩散的连续表征能力，可以用 mask-based 的迭代填充把采样步数从串行扩散改成更并行的更新，从而把延迟从系统瓶颈变成可调超参。","technical_approach":"IMPACT 的核心是把迭代 mask 并行解码用在连续潜变量（continuous latent）上的扩散式建模框架里，而不是只在离散 token 上做。直觉上，它用“逐轮填充/修正”的并行更新替代传统扩散的长链采样，从而减少有效串行深度；同时保留扩散模型在连续空间里表达细节与高频的能力。边界在于：迭代轮数、mask 策略与噪声/score 估计的耦合会决定质量-速度曲线，若轮数过少可能出现细节缺失或一致性问题。","experiments":"摘要没有给出训练数据规模、模型大小、具体采样步数、客观指标（如 FAD/CLAPScore）或相对提升百分比，只声明在“音质与保真度”上达到高性能且推理更快，并以 MAGNET 与扩散系方法为对比背景。缺少数字使得目前只能确认方向性结论，无法量化收益。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper aims to get diffusion-level audio fidelity with mask-based parallel decoding latency for text-to-audio generation. Today, diffusion systems (e.g., Tango/AudioLDM) sound strong but sample slowly, while iterative masked token models (e.g., MAGNET) decode fast but trail in quality.","importance":"This is an efficiency-motivated modeling trade-off that tries to reclaim diffusion quality without paying full diffusion sampling cost. For audio LMs and multimodal pretraining, the takeaway is practical: if continuous latents are still needed for fidelity, iterative masked updates can reduce the effective sequential depth and make latency a tunable knob rather than a hard bottleneck.","technical_approach":"IMPACT integrates iterative mask-based parallel decoding into a diffusion-style framework operating on continuous latents, not only discrete tokens. Mechanistically, it replaces long sequential diffusion chains with round-based parallel fill-and-refine updates, while keeping diffusion’s representational advantages in continuous space. The boundary is the quality–speed curve: too few iterations or a poorly matched masking/noise schedule can hurt fine details or global consistency.","experiments":"The abstract does not report model size, dataset, sampling steps, objective metrics (e.g., FAD), or numeric deltas; it only claims strong fidelity with fast inference, positioning against MAGNET and diffusion baselines. Without numbers, the result is directionally clear but not yet quantifiable here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["text-to-audio","mask-based-decoding","diffusion","discrete-tokens"]},{"id":"2505.06481","title":"QoS-Efficient Serving of Multiple Mixture-of-Expert LLMs Using Partial Runtime Reconfiguration","authors":["Hamid Reza Imani","Jiaxin Peng","Peiman Mohseni","Abdolah Amirany","Tarek A. El-Ghazawi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$97","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.06481","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ImaniPMAE25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ImaniPMAE25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/imani25a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：在单 GPU、多租户场景下同时服务多个微调后的 MoE LLM 时，如何把显存占用压到可用并维持 QoS。传统做法要么每个模型各自常驻导致显存爆炸，要么频繁换模型导致延迟不可控。","importance":"贡献是系统级的 MoE serving 方案，核心启示是“MoE 的专家层天然可共享/可合并”，从而把多模型部署从‘复制整模型’变成‘共享专家 + 局部重配’。对 pretrain 研究的间接价值在于：如果你的训练策略产生了高度相似的专家（例如多任务/多域微调），那在部署侧可以把这种相似性变成显存红利，但代价是需要额外的相似度度量与质量守护。","technical_approach":"方法由两部分组成：1）similarity-based expert consolidation，把不同模型中相似的 experts 合并/共享以减少总显存；2）runtime partial reconfiguration，在处理不同模型请求时动态替换非 expert 层以保持输出质量。这样设计的原因是：专家层占用大且跨模型可能冗余，适合共享；非专家层更决定“模型身份”，需要按请求切换。边界在于：专家相似度估计若不可靠会引入隐性质量退化；运行时重配会带来切换开销与工程复杂度，QoS 改善取决于请求分布与切换频率。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体 MoE 结构（专家数/激活数）、模型规模、共享比例、显存节省百分比、吞吐/延迟指标或质量回归幅度，只描述目标是在单 GPU 上高效服务多个 fine-tuned MoE-LLMs 并维持输出质量。因此目前只能确认系统思路，无法复述量化结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical bottleneck: serving multiple fine-tuned MoE LLMs on a single GPU in a multi-tenant setting, where naive residency blows up memory and frequent model swapping breaks latency/QoS.","importance":"This is a systems contribution that leverages a MoE-specific property: experts can be redundant across related models and thus shareable. For pretraining teams, the indirect implication is that if training/fine-tuning yields highly similar experts across variants, deployment can convert that similarity into memory savings—at the cost of needing robust similarity measures and quality safeguards.","technical_approach":"It combines (1) similarity-based expert consolidation to merge/share similar experts across models, and (2) runtime partial reconfiguration to dynamically swap non-expert layers per request to preserve model identity/quality. The rationale is that experts are large and often redundant, while non-expert layers are more model-specific. The boundary is reliability and overhead: poor similarity matching can silently degrade quality, and runtime reconfiguration adds switching cost that depends on request mix and churn.","experiments":"The abstract does not report MoE configuration, model sizes, sharing ratios, memory savings, latency/throughput numbers, or quality deltas. As a result, only the system design intent can be summarized here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["moe","serving","multi-tenant","memory-efficiency"]},{"id":"2410.17161","title":"Interchangeable Token Embeddings for Extendable Vocabulary and Alpha-Equivalence","authors":["Ilker Isik","Ramazan Gokberk Cinbis","Ebru Aydin Gol"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$98","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.17161","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/IsikCG25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/IsikCG25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/isik25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：语言模型缺乏“可互换 token”的归纳偏置，导致对更大词表泛化差、也难以识别形式系统里的 alpha-equivalence（仅重命名绑定变量但语义不变）。以往常用 alpha-renaming 做数据增强，但这更像补丁，不能保证模型学到结构性不变性。","importance":"贡献是问题定义 + 表示层改造：提出 alpha-covariance 作为衡量对变量重命名鲁棒性的指标，并给出一种可训练的 embedding 结构让模型同时保持“语义等价”和“符号可区分”。对做代码/形式推理预训练的人，这相当于在 tokenizer/embedding 层面补上一个长期缺失的对称性约束，可能比单纯扩大数据更稳定。","technical_approach":"方法是双部分 token embedding：共享分量负责把可互换 token 拉到一致的语义子空间，随机分量负责保留 token 身份以便模型仍能追踪绑定关系与位置依赖。这样设计的原因是：只用共享 embedding 会让不同变量完全不可区分，破坏指代与约束；只用独立 embedding 又学不到 alpha 等价的不变性。边界在于：随机分量的尺度与训练动态需要平衡，过强会回到“记 token id”，过弱会丢失可区分性。","experiments":"摘要只说明：相对“用 alpha-renaming 做数据增强”的 baseline，该方法在某些任务上对未见 token 的泛化更好，并用 alpha-covariance 做评估；但未给出数据集、模型规模、指标数值与提升幅度，因此无法量化复述。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a missing inductive bias in LMs: handling interchangeable symbols (e.g., bound variables) so that alpha-equivalent programs/formulas map to the same meaning. Data augmentation via alpha-renaming is common but does not reliably enforce the invariance.","importance":"It contributes both a formalization and an embedding-level fix: it proposes alpha-covariance to measure robustness to renaming, and introduces an embedding structure that preserves semantic equivalence while keeping tokens distinguishable. For code/formal-reasoning pretraining, this is a targeted symmetry constraint that can be more stable than “just add more augmented data.”","technical_approach":"The approach uses a two-part token embedding: a shared component aligns interchangeable tokens in a common semantic subspace, while a randomized component preserves token identity so the model can still track bindings and references. The design balances two failure modes: fully shared embeddings erase identity; fully separate embeddings fail to learn alpha-invariance. The boundary is tuning and dynamics: if the random component dominates, the model reverts to token-id memorization; if too weak, distinguishability collapses.","experiments":"The abstract claims improved generalization to unseen tokens compared to an alpha-renaming augmentation baseline and evaluates with alpha-covariance, but provides no datasets, model sizes, or numeric deltas.","authors_note":""},"tags":["tokenizer","embedding","alpha-equivalence","vocabulary"]},{"id":"2502.20380","title":"Multi-Turn Code Generation Through Single-Step Rewards","authors":["Arnav Kumar Jain","Gonzalo Gonzalez-Pumariega","Wayne Chen","Alexander M. Rush","Wenting Zhao","Sanjiban Choudhury"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We address the problem of code generation from multi-turn execution feedback. Existing methods either generate code without feedback or use complex, hierarchical reinforcement learning to optimize multi-turn rewards. We propose a simple yet scalable approach, $\\mu$Code, that solves multi-turn code generation using only single-step rewards. Our key insight is that code generation is a one-step recoverable MDP, where the correct code can be recovered from any intermediate code state in a single turn. $\\mu$Code iteratively trains both a generator to provide code solutions conditioned on multi-turn execution feedback and a verifier to score the newly generated code. Experimental evaluations show that our approach achieves significant improvements over the state-of-the-art baselines. We provide analysis of the design choices of the reward models and policy, and show the efficacy of $\\mu$Code at utilizing the execution feedback. Our code is available at https://github.com/portal-cornell/muCode.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.20380","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/JainGCRZC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/JainGCRZC25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/jain25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：多轮执行反馈下的代码生成如何训练得足够简单且可扩展，而不依赖复杂的分层 RL 或长回合 credit assignment。以往方法要么忽略反馈一次性生成，要么用多步奖励优化导致训练不稳定、工程成本高。","importance":"贡献是把一个看似需要多步 RL 的问题改写成“单步奖励就够”的训练范式，属于 posttrain 信号设计对生成建模的直接启示。对做代码模型/工具调用模型的人，这意味着可以用更便宜、更稳定的训练闭环去逼近多轮交互能力，但前提是任务满足其提出的可恢复性条件。","technical_approach":"μCode 的核心主张是：多轮代码修复是 one-step recoverable MDP——从任何中间代码状态，都存在一次生成就能恢复到正确解的路径，因此可以只用单步 reward 学到有效策略。实现上它迭代训练 generator（条件输入包含多轮执行反馈）与 verifier（给新生成代码打分），用 verifier 的单步评分替代稀疏的多轮回报。取舍是：该假设对“可一次修复”的错误更成立，对需要长链规划/多文件重构的场景可能不满足 recoverable 条件，从而需要更强的多步信号。","experiments":"摘要只给出结论：相对 SOTA baseline 有显著提升，但未提供基座模型规模、训练数据/交互轮数、评测基准（如 HumanEval/MBPP/CodeContests 或执行通过率）及具体提升数字，也未给出 verifier 误差对训练的敏感性分析，因此无法量化复述。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks how to train code generation with multi-turn execution feedback without resorting to complex hierarchical RL or brittle long-horizon credit assignment. Prior approaches either ignore feedback or optimize multi-step rewards with high instability and engineering cost.","importance":"It reframes a seemingly multi-step RL problem into a single-step-reward training recipe, offering a concrete lesson about post-training signal design for interactive generation. For code/tool-use models, it suggests a cheaper and more stable loop—if the task satisfies the recoverability condition they rely on.","technical_approach":"μCode argues multi-turn code fixing forms a one-step recoverable MDP: from any intermediate code state, the correct solution can be recovered in one generation step. Practically, it iteratively trains a generator conditioned on multi-turn execution feedback and a verifier that scores newly generated code, using the verifier’s single-step score as the learning signal. The trade-off is assumption-bound: it fits errors that are “fixable in one shot,” but may break for tasks requiring long-horizon planning, multi-file refactors, or staged reasoning.","experiments":"The abstract reports significant gains over SOTA baselines but does not provide base model size, data/interaction scale, benchmarks, pass-rate metrics, or numeric deltas; it also does not describe sensitivity to verifier errors.","authors_note":""},"tags":["code-generation","rl","multi-turn","reward-design"]},{"id":"JangT25","title":"BlockDialect: Block-wise Fine-grained Mixed Format Quantization for Energy-Efficient LLM Inference","authors":["Wonsuk Jang","Thierry Tambe"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/JangT25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/JangT25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/jang25c.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题与结论无法从当前信息确认，因为未提供摘要与关键实验信息。","importance":"无法判断其对 pretrain/serving 的贡献量级，因为缺少方法细节、对比对象与量化结果。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失，无法说明其 block-wise mixed format quantization 的具体量化粒度、格式组合（如 INT8/INT4/FP8）、以及如何在能耗与精度间做约束。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法给出模型规模、量化设置、吞吐/能耗/精度回归等关键数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The core problem and claims cannot be verified from the provided input because the abstract and key details are missing.","importance":"The contribution magnitude for pretraining/serving cannot be assessed without method specifics, baselines, and quantitative results.","technical_approach":"With no abstract, it is unclear what “block-wise fine-grained mixed-format quantization” concretely means (granularity, format mix such as INT4/INT8/FP8, and the constraints used to trade accuracy for energy).","experiments":"No abstract means no reported model sizes, quantization settings, throughput/energy numbers, or accuracy regressions to summarize.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","mixed-precision","inference-efficiency","llm"]},{"id":"JiaLW0HD025","title":"Controlling Large Language Model with Latent Action","authors":["Chengxing Jia","Ziniu Li","Pengyuan Wang","Yi-Chen Li","Zhenyu Hou","Yuxiao Dong","Yang Yu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/JiaLW0HD025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/JiaLW0HD025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/jia25e.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：如何用一个可学习的潜变量动作空间去更稳地控制大语言模型，而不是每次都直接在离散 token 序列上做高维、脆弱且难归因的控制。现有做法通常依赖 prompt、拒答模板、RL 或 token 级编辑来施加控制，但这些方法往往控制信号稀疏、局部扰动大、泛化差，尤其在多步生成和风格/行为约束上不够稳定。","importance":"如果方法成立，它的重要性在于提供了一个连接 pretrain 表征与 post-train 控制的新接口：不是直接改输出 token，而是在隐空间里施加更结构化的动作。对 pretrain 研究者，这类工作有启发，因为它把“生成行为控制”从表面文本操作转成了表示层操作，可能影响后续对 latent planning、reasoning control、以及 policy head 设计的理解。不过从题面信息看，这更像方法级探索，而不是足以替代现有 AR 训练范式的范式级结果。","technical_approach":"核心方法大概率是为 LLM 引入 latent action，即先预测或选择一个低维/离散的隐动作，再由该动作调制后续文本生成。这样的设计有效的原因很直接：动作变量可以压缩长程控制意图，把原本分散在多个 token 上的约束集中到少量中间变量上，从而改善 credit assignment。和直接在 hidden state 上一次性打补丁不同，latent action 更像给模型增加一个显式控制通道；和纯 prompt 控制相比，它牺牲了一部分开放式灵活性，换来更一致的行为约束。由于摘要缺失，是否采用 VAE、离散码本、策略学习或条件解码，无法确认。","experiments":"给定信息不足，无法可靠总结实验设置、参数规模、数据量和具体提升数字。可以合理预期论文会比较 latent action 控制与 prompt-based control、adapter 或 RL-based control 在任务成功率、稳定性、可迁移性上的差异，但没有摘要就不能写具体数字。严格说，这篇只能判断研究方向有价值，实验结论需看正文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper appears to tackle a clear problem: how to control LLM behavior through a latent action space instead of manipulating long token sequences directly. Existing control methods mostly operate at the prompt, token, or reward level, which often makes control brittle, hard to assign credit to, and inconsistent over long generations.","importance":"Its likely value is as a method-level interface between pretrained representations and downstream control. If latent actions work, they offer a more structured control channel than prompt engineering or token-level interventions, which matters for reasoning control, behavior shaping, and latent planning. That said, based on the available information, this looks more like a promising control mechanism than a paradigm shift for pretraining itself.","technical_approach":"The core idea is likely to introduce an explicit latent action variable that is selected or inferred before generation and then used to steer decoding. This design can help because it compresses high-level intent into a smaller intermediate representation, making long-horizon control easier than spreading constraints across many output tokens. Compared with prompt-only control, it trades some flexibility for more consistency. Compared with direct hidden-state editing, it adds a cleaner control interface. The exact implementation cannot be confirmed from the missing abstract.","experiments":"There is not enough information to summarize experiments reliably. The paper likely compares latent-action control against prompting, adapters, or RL-style control on controllability and robustness, but model sizes, datasets, baselines, and gains are not available here. Any stronger claim would be speculative.","authors_note":""},"tags":["latent-action","controllable-generation","llm"]},{"id":"JiangLZHHS0LLY25","title":"CateKV: On Sequential Consistency for Long-Context LLM Inference Acceleration","authors":["Haoyun Jiang","Haolin Li","Jianwei Zhang","Fei Huang","Qiang Hu","Minmin Sun","Shuai Xiao","Yong Li","Junyang Lin","Jiangchao Yao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/JiangLZHHS0LLY25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/JiangLZHHS0LLY25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/jiang25e.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"从标题看，这篇论文聚焦于长上下文推理加速中的一个关键矛盾：为了提速而重排或近似 KV 访问时，如何保持 sequential consistency，也就是不破坏自回归解码应有的时序一致性。现有长上下文加速方法常在缓存复用、分页、近似检索或分块调度上做优化，但一旦打乱了 token 依赖的顺序语义，速度收益会以质量回退为代价。","importance":"如果论文确实围绕 sequential consistency 给出系统化方案，它的重要性在于把“能加速”和“不会偷偷改模型语义”分开讨论。对 serving 和长上下文架构研究，这类工作很关键，因为很多工程优化在短 benchmark 上看不出问题，但会在长链依赖、跨段引用和多轮对话里暴露非局部错误。它更像系统-算法接口问题，而不是单纯 kernel 优化。","technical_approach":"基于标题，CateKV 很可能是一种对 KV cache 进行分类、分段或级联管理的机制，用来在加速访问的同时维持严格或近似严格的时序一致性。设计上大概率不是一味压缩 KV，而是利用序列中不同 token 对未来解码的重要性差异，配合受约束的调度或缓存组织方式，减少违背因果依赖的近似。和纯 eviction/quantization 路线相比，这种方法更强调 consistency-aware acceleration；代价通常是实现复杂度上升，以及在最坏情况下提速受限。由于摘要缺失，具体机制无法确认。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法给出参数规模、任务、延迟改善或质量保持数字。合理预期的实验应包含长上下文问答、检索增强或代码补全场景下，与 paged KV、压缩 KV、稀疏注意力近似等方法比较延迟、吞吐和准确率退化。没有正文前，不宜写更具体结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"From the title, the paper seems to target a core long-context inference issue: how to accelerate KV-cache handling without breaking sequential consistency in autoregressive decoding. Many acceleration methods gain speed by reordering, approximating, or selectively retaining cache entries, but that can silently damage causal correctness.","importance":"If that reading is correct, the paper matters because it focuses on a failure mode that standard throughput metrics often miss. In long-context serving, preserving model semantics is as important as reducing latency. This makes the work relevant at the systems-algorithm boundary rather than as a pure kernel optimization.","technical_approach":"CateKV likely proposes a structured way to organize or access KV cache so that acceleration remains consistency-aware. The probable design is not just compression, but constrained cache management that respects temporal dependencies while exploiting differences in token importance. Compared with simple eviction or quantization, this would prioritize correctness under long-range dependencies. The exact mechanism cannot be confirmed without the abstract.","experiments":"There is not enough information to summarize the experiments reliably. Likely evaluations include long-context tasks with comparisons against paged KV, compression, or sparse attention baselines, reporting latency-throughput gains versus quality loss. Anything more specific would be conjecture.","authors_note":""},"tags":["kv-cache","long-context","inference-acceleration"]},{"id":"2503.16163","title":"SpeCache: Speculative Key-Value Caching for Efficient Generation of LLMs","authors":["Shibo Jie","Yehui Tang","Kai Han","Zhi-Hong Deng","Jing Han"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$99","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.16163","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/JieT00H25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/JieT00H25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/jie25a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是长序列生成里的一个老问题：KV cache 随上下文线性增长，GPU 显存先耗尽，而现有压缩方法虽然省显存，却会不可逆地丢信息。也就是说，eviction、merging、quantization 这几条主流路线都在拿质量换容量，长上下文一旦依赖被删掉，后续解码无法补救。","importance":"这项工作的意义在于提出了一个不同于“压缩 KV”的方向：利用 CPU 大内存保存完整 KV，再按需预测性取回。对 serving 很有价值，因为它试图把显存瓶颈转成带宽和调度问题，而不是直接接受信息损失。对模型侧的启示是，很多长上下文限制并不一定要通过改模型或改注意力结构解决，也可以通过 cache hierarchy 和 speculative access 改善。","technical_approach":"SpeCache 的核心是 speculative KV caching：完整 KV cache 常驻 CPU，GPU 只保留当前最可能需要的一部分，并在每个 decoding step 动态取回预测会用到的 KV 对。它和普通 offloading 的区别不是“搬出去”，而是“有预测地搬回来”，从而减少同步等待。这个设计有效，因为自回归解码对最近 token 和某些关键历史片段的访问模式通常有结构可循；如果预取命中率高，就能用较小显存近似获得完整 cache 的效果。代价也明显：方法高度依赖 CPU-GPU 通信、prefetch 准确率和调度开销，一旦预测失误，延迟可能被 fetch stall 吃掉。","experiments":"摘要没有给出具体数值，但论文应当会和 KV eviction、KV quantization、以及直接 CPU offloading baseline 比较长上下文生成中的吞吐、延迟和质量保持。最关键的实验不是单一平均吞吐，而是随着上下文增长，SpeCache 能否把质量退化压到接近零，同时把延迟控制在可接受范围内。若有消融，预取策略和 CPU 带宽敏感性会是最值得看的部分。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a central long-context inference bottleneck: KV cache grows linearly with sequence length, exhausting GPU memory, while compression-based solutions save memory by irreversibly discarding information. Once important cache entries are evicted, merged, or heavily quantized, later decoding quality can suffer with no recovery path.","importance":"Its main contribution is to shift the design space from KV compression to hierarchical KV storage with speculative retrieval. That is important for serving because it treats GPU memory as the scarce resource and CPU memory as the abundant one, turning the problem into bandwidth and scheduling rather than mandatory information loss. For model researchers, it is a reminder that not every long-context bottleneck requires a new attention mechanism.","technical_approach":"SpeCache stores the full KV cache in CPU memory and dynamically fetches back likely-needed KV pairs during decoding. The novelty is the speculative part: it does not merely offload cache, but predicts what to bring back early enough to avoid stalls. This can work because autoregressive access patterns are structured, not random. The trade-off is straightforward: if prefetch accuracy is high, memory pressure drops with limited quality loss; if it is low, latency becomes dominated by fetch misses and transfer overhead.","experiments":"The abstract snippet does not include exact numbers, but the relevant comparisons are clear: against eviction, quantization, and naive CPU offloading on long-context generation. The most meaningful results will be latency-throughput-quality trade-offs as context length grows, plus ablations on speculative fetching accuracy and bandwidth sensitivity.","authors_note":""},"tags":["kv-cache","speculative-decoding","long-context","inference"]},{"id":"2506.07962","title":"Correlated Errors in Large Language Models","authors":["Elliot Myunghoon Kim","Avi Garg","Kenny Peng","Nikhil Garg"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Diversity in training data, architecture, and providers is assumed to mitigate homogeneity in LLMs. However, we lack empirical evidence on whether different LLMs differ meaningfully. We conduct a large-scale empirical evaluation on over 350 LLMs overall, using two popular leaderboards and a resume-screening task. We find substantial correlation in model errors -- on one leaderboard dataset, models agree 60% of the time when both models err. We identify factors driving model correlation, including shared architectures and providers. Crucially, however, larger and more accurate models have highly correlated errors, even with distinct architectures and providers. Finally, we show the effects of correlation in two downstream tasks: LLM-as-judge evaluation and hiring -- the latter reflecting theoretical predictions regarding algorithmic monoculture.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.07962","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/KimGP025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/KimGP025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/kim25e.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心结论是：不同大语言模型的错误并没有大家想的那么独立，反而存在显著相关性，而且模型越大、越准，这种相关错误越明显。这个问题重要，是因为很多应用默认“多模型投票能去偏”“换供应商能分散风险”，但如果错误高度共振，这些策略的收益会被高估。","importance":"这项工作的意义是评估与部署层面的，但对 pretrain 研究也有直接启发。它提示我们，数据、架构和 provider 多样性并不自动带来认知多样性；如果更强模型在训练语料、对齐目标或评测偏置上收敛到相近决策边界，那么 ensemble、judge model 和安全冗余设计都要重算。对训练研究者，这也间接指向一个问题：当前主流 pretrain/post-train 流水线可能在系统性地塑造同类错误。","technical_approach":"作者做了一个大规模经验分析，覆盖 350+ LLM，并在两个流行 leaderboard 与一个简历筛选任务上测量模型错误的一致性。关键不是简单比较平均准确率，而是看“当两个模型都错时，它们有多常在同一样本上错”，这能更直接反映 error correlation。摘要给出的核心数字是：在一个 leaderboard 数据集上，两模型在同时出错时有 60% 的时间错在相同样本上。作者进一步分析了相关性的驱动因素，包括共享架构和共享 provider，但更值得注意的是，即便架构和 provider 不同，规模更大、更准确的模型仍表现出高度相关错误。","experiments":"实验的关键事实已经很明确：样本规模是 350+ LLM，任务包括两个 leaderboard 和一个 hiring 场景；一个数据集上错误一致率达到 60%。另外，论文还展示了这种相关性会影响两类下游应用：LLM-as-judge 和招聘筛选，后者说明问题不只是评测层面的统计现象，而会进入真实决策流程。值得进一步关注的点是，他们是否控制了 prompt、temperature 和数据泄露等混杂因素，以及相关性是否随着能力提升单调上升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The main finding is stark: errors across LLMs are substantially correlated, and the correlation is especially strong among larger, more accurate models. This matters because many deployment strategies assume model diversity reduces shared failure modes, whether through ensembling, cross-provider redundancy, or LLM-as-judge pipelines.","importance":"This is an evaluation paper with direct implications for training and deployment. Its value lies in showing that diversity in provider, architecture, or model family does not automatically translate into diversity in mistakes. For pretraining researchers, that points to a deeper issue: current pretrain and post-train pipelines may be inducing convergent error patterns across ostensibly different systems.","technical_approach":"The paper performs a large-scale empirical study over 350+ LLMs across two popular leaderboards and a resume-screening task. The key metric is not average accuracy but error overlap: when two models are both wrong, how often are they wrong on the same examples? That directly measures correlated failure. The abstract reports a headline number of 60% agreement in errors on one leaderboard dataset. The analysis also studies likely drivers such as shared architectures and providers, while noting that high-performing models remain highly correlated even without those overlaps.","experiments":"The important facts are already in the abstract: 350+ models, two leaderboard datasets, one hiring task, and 60% error agreement in one setting when both models fail. The downstream analysis on LLM-as-judge and hiring is especially useful because it shows the problem is operational, not merely descriptive. The main details to inspect in the full paper are controls for prompting, sampling, and dataset contamination, plus how correlation scales with capability.","authors_note":""},"tags":["evaluation","generalization","data-contamination","model-behavior","benchmark"]},{"id":"2412.08890","title":"Lexico: Extreme KV Cache Compression via Sparse Coding over Universal Dictionaries","authors":["Junhyuck Kim","Jongho Park","Jaewoong Cho","Dimitris Papailiopoulos"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We introduce Lexico, a novel KV cache compression method that leverages sparse coding with a universal dictionary. Our key finding is that key-value cache in modern LLMs can be accurately approximated using sparse linear combination from a small, input-agnostic dictionary of ~4k atoms, enabling efficient compression across different input prompts, tasks and models. Using orthogonal matching pursuit for sparse approximation, Lexico achieves flexible compression ratios through direct sparsity control. On GSM8K, across multiple model families (Mistral, Llama 3, Qwen2.5), Lexico maintains 90-95% of the original performance while using only 15-25% of the full KV-cache memory, outperforming both quantization and token eviction methods. Notably, Lexico remains effective in low memory regimes where 2-bit quantization fails, achieving up to 1.7x better compression on LongBench and GSM8K while maintaining high accuracy.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.08890","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/KimPCP25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/KimPCP25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/kim25ae.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["kv-cache","compression","serving","long-context","inference"]},{"id":"2503.07067","title":"DistiLLM-2: A Contrastive Approach Boosts the Distillation of LLMs","authors":["Jongwoo Ko","Tianyi Chen","Sungnyun Kim","Tianyu Ding","Luming Liang","Ilya Zharkov","Se-Young Yun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Despite the success of distillation in large language models (LLMs), most prior work applies identical loss functions to both teacher- and student-generated data. These strategies overlook the synergy between loss formulations and data types, leading to a suboptimal performance boost in student models. To address this, we propose DistiLLM-2, a contrastive approach that simultaneously increases the likelihood of teacher responses and decreases that of student responses by harnessing this synergy. Our extensive experiments show that DistiLLM-2 not only builds high-performing student models across a wide range of tasks, including instruction-following and code generation, but also supports diverse applications, such as preference alignment and vision-language extensions. These findings highlight the potential of a contrastive approach to enhance the efficacy of LLM distillation by effectively aligning teacher and student models across varied data types.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.07067","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/KoCKDLZY25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/KoCKDLZY25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/ko25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["distillation","student-teacher","contrastive-learning","llm","synthetic-data"]},{"id":"KocyigitBDLCF25","title":"Overestimation in LLM Evaluation: A Controlled Large-Scale Study on Data Contamination&apos;s Impact on Machine Translation","authors":["Muhammed Yusuf Kocyigit","Eleftheria Briakou","Daniel Deutsch","Jiaming Luo","Colin Cherry","Markus Freitag"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/KocyigitBDLCF25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/KocyigitBDLCF25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/kocyigit25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["evaluation","data-contamination","benchmark","llm","machine-translation"]},{"id":"2502.03032","title":"Analyze Feature Flow to Enhance Interpretation and Steering in Language Models","authors":["Daniil Laptev","Nikita Balagansky","Yaroslav Aksenov","Daniil Gavrilov"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We introduce a new approach to systematically map features discovered by sparse autoencoder across consecutive layers of large language models, extending earlier work that examined inter-layer feature links. By using a data-free cosine similarity technique, we trace how specific features persist, transform, or first appear at each stage. This method yields granular flow graphs of feature evolution, enabling fine-grained interpretability and mechanistic insights into model computations. Crucially, we demonstrate how these cross-layer feature maps facilitate direct steering of model behavior by amplifying or suppressing chosen features, achieving targeted thematic control in text generation. Together, our findings highlight the utility of a causal, cross-layer interpretability framework that not only clarifies how features develop through forward passes but also provides new means for transparent manipulation of large language models.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.03032","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LaptevBAG25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LaptevBAG25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/laptev25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["interpretability","sparse-autoencoder","feature-flow","mechanistic"]},{"id":"LeiCQWHGWJ25","title":"M3-JEPA: Multimodal Alignment via Multi-gate MoE based on the Joint-Embedding Predictive Architecture","authors":["Hongyang Lei","Xiaolong Cheng","Qi Qin","Dan Wang","Huazhen Huang","Qingqing Gu","Yetao Wu","Luo Ji"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LeiCQWHGWJ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LeiCQWHGWJ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/lei25b.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["multimodal-alignment","moe","jepa","representation-learning"]},{"id":"LiW025","title":"PIPA: Preference Alignment as Prior-Informed Statistical Estimation","authors":["Junbo Li","Zhangyang Wang","Qiang Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiW025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiW025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/li25cl.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：偏好对齐不该只被当成一个经验风险最小化问题，而应该显式利用先验，把有限且带噪的偏好数据当作统计估计问题来做。现有 DPO、IPO 一类方法大多默认样本独立同分布、标签可信，结果是在数据少、偏好分布偏、或奖励信号不稳定时容易过拟合观测偏好，缺少对“先验上什么样的策略更合理”的建模。","importance":"它的重要性在于把 preference alignment 重新表述成“带先验的统计估计”，这是方法层的视角修正，不只是再提一个损失函数。对 pretrain/post-train 接口的启示是：偏好学习的有效样本量通常比表面看起来更小，谁能把先验、噪声模型和估计偏差讲清楚，谁就更可能在小数据或分布偏移下稳定训练；这对 DPO 类方法的可解释性和鲁棒性都有价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法大概率是把偏好优化写成 prior-informed estimation：先定义一个先验策略或参数先验，再用偏好观测做后验更新，而不是只最大化成对偏好似然。这个设计的关键不是“加正则”这么简单，而是把正则解释成统计先验，从而能区分哪些约束是在抑制方差、哪些约束会引入系统偏差；与标准 DPO 相比，它更强调估计稳定性和数据稀疏下的归纳偏置。因为题面没有摘要，具体是贝叶斯化目标、闭式校正还是广义估计方程，目前无法确认。","experiments":"题面没有提供实验摘要，所以不能确认模型规模、数据集、基线和提升幅度。可以合理预期作者会在合成偏好噪声、标准对齐数据集以及不同先验强度下比较 DPO/IPO/其他 preference optimization 基线，并报告在 noisy preference 或 low-resource 条件下的稳定性收益；但具体数字不能编造。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper appears to argue that preference alignment should be treated as prior-informed statistical estimation, not just empirical risk minimization on noisy pairwise labels. Existing methods such as DPO-style objectives usually trust observed preferences too much, which is workable at scale but brittle when preference data are scarce, biased, or noisy.","importance":"Its value is mostly conceptual but still practically relevant: it reframes preference optimization as an estimation problem with explicit priors. For pretrain-to-posttrain research, this matters because alignment data often have low effective sample size, and methods that control variance and encode sensible priors can be more stable than purely likelihood-driven fitting.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is to introduce a prior over policies or parameters and derive preference updates as posterior-style estimation rather than pure pairwise preference maximization. The important design choice is that the prior is not just an ad hoc regularizer: it gives a statistical interpretation for the bias-variance trade-off and makes the objective easier to reason about under noisy supervision. Without the abstract, it is not possible to confirm the exact formulation or how it differs mathematically from DPO/IPO beyond this framing.","experiments":"The submission details here do not include the experimental section, so model sizes, datasets, baselines, and gains cannot be verified. A reasonable expectation is evaluation under noisy preference labels, limited-data alignment, and sensitivity to prior strength, but any concrete numbers would be speculative.","authors_note":""},"tags":["preference-optimization","alignment","statistical-estimation"]},{"id":"LiWLEGL0J25","title":"Geometry Informed Tokenization of Molecules for Language Model Generation","authors":["Xiner Li","Limei Wang","Youzhi Luo","Carl Edwards","Shurui Gui","Yuchao Lin","Heng Ji","Shuiwang Ji"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiWLEGL0J25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiWLEGL0J25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/li25cn.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：分子生成里的 tokenization 过于依赖 1D 字符串表示，忽略了 3D 几何，而几何信息恰恰决定了很多化学性质和可行构象。过去常见做法是用 SMILES/SELFIES 训练 LM，再把几何留给下游预测或后处理，这会让生成模型在结构合法但空间构型不合理时没有足够约束。","importance":"它的意义是把“tokenizer 设计”从文本问题推进到结构科学数据，这对统一离散表示和跨模态 pretrain 很有参考价值。对做基础模型的人，启示不在分子这个垂类本身，而在于：如果底层 token 不能保留决定性结构变量，LM 再大也只是在错误压缩上做拟合；几何感知 tokenization 是一种先把表示做对、再谈生成能力的路线。","technical_approach":"核心方法应该是将分子几何信息编码进 tokenization，而不是只在模型输入侧附加坐标特征。合理的设计方向包括：把局部几何单元、相对位置或构象相关模式离散成 token，使序列模型在生成时直接操控几何语义；这和“先用普通 token，再让模型自己学几何”不同，因为前者在表示层就减少了等价字符串、多对一映射和几何退化。没有摘要，具体是基于片段、子图还是几何码本，以及是否联合 SELFIES/graph token，都无法确认。","experiments":"实验细节未提供，不能确认参数规模、数据集或指标。此类工作通常会评估 validity、uniqueness、novelty、property distribution、3D conformation quality，可能还会看 docking 或 geometry-aware generation 指标；最有价值的对比应是与 SMILES/SELFIES tokenization、图生成模型以及是否显式几何监督的 ablation，但具体结果缺失。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a representation bottleneck in molecular language modeling: standard tokenizations are mostly 1D and throw away geometry, even though 3D structure drives much of molecular behavior. In practice, many generation pipelines still model SMILES-like strings first and hope geometry can be recovered later, which is often a poor inductive bias.","importance":"Its broader relevance is not limited to molecules. This is a tokenizer-design paper for structured data, and the lesson for foundation-model pretraining is clear: if the discrete interface hides the variables that matter, scaling the LM only improves modeling of a lossy representation. Geometry-aware tokenization is therefore a pretraining question, not just a downstream chemistry trick.","technical_approach":"The likely contribution is a tokenization scheme that embeds geometric information into the discrete sequence itself instead of treating geometry as an auxiliary feature appended after tokenization. That choice matters because it gives the language model direct control over spatially meaningful units during generation and reduces ambiguities that arise when many strings map to similar structures. The exact construction—fragment-based, subgraph-based, codebook-based, or hybrid with existing molecular strings—is not available from the provided information.","experiments":"The abstract is missing, so model scale, datasets, and metrics cannot be confirmed. A strong evaluation would compare against SMILES/SELFIES tokenization and graph-based baselines on validity, novelty, property matching, and geometry quality, plus ablations showing which geometric components in the tokenizer drive the gains. No quantitative claims can be made here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["tokenizer","molecule","discrete-representation","generation"]},{"id":"LiWLJ0HZ025","title":"The Devil Is in the Details: Tackling Unimodal Spurious Correlations for Generalizable Multimodal Reward Models","authors":["Zichao Li","Xueru Wen","Jie Lou","Yuqiu Ji","Yaojie Lu","Xianpei Han","Debing Zhang","Le Sun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiWLJ0HZ025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiWLJ0HZ025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/li25cw.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：多模态奖励模型常常学到单模态伪相关，而不是跨模态一致性的真实偏好，所以一旦分布变化就会失效。过去很多 reward model 看似在图文偏好数据上训练，但其实可能主要靠文字长度、图像风格、水印、模板化拒答等捷径做判断，这会让对齐信号在训练内有效、在泛化时崩掉。","importance":"这项工作对多模态 post-train 很关键，也会反过来影响原生多模态预训练。原因很直接：如果 reward model 学的是单模态 shortcut，那么后续 PPO/DPO/RLAIF 优化得到的不是更好的多模态能力，而是更擅长迎合捷径；因此这篇工作的价值在于把“奖励建模泛化性”从平均分问题提升到数据构造和评测协议问题。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者不是靠一个大而全的新模型解决，而是从数据和训练细节入手，专门压制 unimodal spurious correlations。可能的关键机制包括：构造反事实配对、做难负样本、控制文本或图像边际分布、分解奖励头，或引入显式一致性约束；这些设计的共同点是强迫模型使用跨模态交互信号，而不是任何单边线索。与普通 reward modeling 最大不同在于，它把“细节处理”视为泛化的主要决定因素，而不是训练规模的副产品。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认具体 benchmark、基线和提升数字。按题意，实验应该会专门设计 distribution shift 或 shortcut stress test，而不是只报 in-domain 偏好准确率；最有价值的结果通常是：常规多模态 RM 在 IID 上看起来不错，但在控制了单模态线索后显著掉点，而作者方法掉得更少。具体幅度无法确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a common failure mode in multimodal reward modeling: the model exploits unimodal shortcuts instead of learning true cross-modal preferences. Many reward models trained on image-text preference data can still lean on text-only or image-only artifacts, which looks fine in-distribution but breaks under shift.","importance":"This is highly relevant to multimodal alignment and indirectly to native multimodal pretraining. If the reward model relies on shortcuts, downstream RL or preference optimization will reinforce the wrong behavior, so improving reward-model generalization is not a cosmetic evaluation issue but a training-signal quality issue.","technical_approach":"From the title, the contribution is likely in the data and training details rather than a radically new architecture. The probable strategy is to suppress unimodal spurious correlations through controlled pair construction, counterfactuals, hard negatives, or explicit cross-modal consistency constraints, so that the reward model is forced to use interaction signals rather than marginal cues. The distinguishing idea is that generalization depends heavily on these design details, not just on scaling the reward model.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so datasets, baselines, and effect sizes cannot be verified. The most informative experiments would stress-test reward models under distribution shifts where unimodal shortcuts are neutralized, showing that standard multimodal RMs degrade sharply while the proposed method is more stable. Exact numbers are unavailable.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reward-model","multimodal","spurious-correlation","alignment"]},{"id":"LiWZ0M0VW25","title":"Imagine While Reasoning in Space: Multimodal Visualization-of-Thought","authors":["Chengzu Li","Wenshan Wu","Huanyu Zhang","Yan Xia","Shaoguang Mao","Li Dong","Ivan Vulic","Furu Wei"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiWZ0M0VW25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiWZ0M0VW25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/li25cz.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：空间推理任务里，纯文本链式思维经常不够，因为中间状态本来就更适合被“画出来”而不是“说出来”。过去多模态推理通常让模型看图答题，但很少让模型在推理过程中主动生成视觉化中间表示；这样会把空间关系、几何变换和多步跟踪都硬塞进 token 序列里，推理负担过高。","importance":"它的重要性偏范式和系统接口：把 visualization-of-thought 当成测试时推理资源，而不是仅当最终输出模态。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，如果模型未来要原生支持图文混合思维，那么中间状态的表示形式和训练信号设计可能和最终答案同样重要；这和只做视觉输入、文本输出的 VLM 不是同一个问题。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是让模型在空间推理时生成或调用中间视觉草图/结构化可视化，并把它与文本推理交替使用。设计上关键在于两点：第一，中间可视化必须足够便宜，否则收益会被生成成本吞掉；第二，它要真正服务推理状态更新，而不是变成漂亮但无用的解释。与常规 CoT 相比，它增加了一条显式外部工作记忆；与纯图像生成方法相比，它强调的是 reasoning-time visualization，而不是高保真视觉输出。","experiments":"题面没有摘要，不能确认任务集合、模型规模和提升数字。合理预期的实验会覆盖 maze、折纸、视角变换、几何问答等空间任务，并比较 text-only CoT、tool-assisted reasoning、以及是否需要人工标注中间图；最关键的观察应是：收益集中在需要维护空间状态的任务，而不是所有多模态任务都有效。具体数据缺失。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a simple limitation: text-only chain-of-thought is often a poor working memory for spatial reasoning. Many multimodal systems can read images and answer questions, but they do not externalize intermediate spatial states in a visual form, even when that representation is more natural than text.","importance":"This is interesting as a reasoning paradigm rather than just a benchmark trick. It suggests that intermediate representations may need to be multimodal if we want models to reason natively over space, which has implications for unified pretraining and for how we think about test-time compute beyond longer text traces.","technical_approach":"The likely method is to interleave textual reasoning with generated or structured visual intermediate states—a visualization-of-thought mechanism. The design trade-off is important: the visual trace must be cheap enough to justify itself and structured enough to update the reasoning state, otherwise it becomes an expensive explanation artifact rather than a useful computational tool. That distinguishes it from both standard CoT and high-fidelity image generation.","experiments":"The abstract is not included, so tasks, models, and gains cannot be confirmed. A convincing setup would evaluate spatial tasks such as navigation, viewpoint transformation, or geometric reasoning, compare against text-only CoT and tool-based baselines, and show that the benefits concentrate on problems requiring persistent spatial state tracking. No quantitative claims can be verified here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal-reasoning","visualization","reasoning","cot"]},{"id":"LiXG25","title":"Reasoning-as-Logic-Units: Scaling Test-Time Reasoning in Large Language Models Through Logic Unit Alignment","authors":["Cheryl Li","Tianyuan Xu","Steven Y. Guo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiXG25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiXG25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/li25df.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：测试时推理扩展常靠更长 CoT 或更多采样，但这些额外 token 并不总是有效，很多只是冗长重述。作者想把推理拆成更稳定、可对齐的“逻辑单元”，从而让 test-time scaling 增加的是有效推理步骤，而不是无约束的长度。","importance":"这对 post-train 很直接，也对 pretrain 有启发。因为它触及一个核心问题：模型到底是在生成表面上的长文本，还是在执行可组合的推理操作？如果逻辑单元对齐确实能提高测试时扩展效率，那么未来的预训练/中训练目标可能也要更多约束中间推理粒度，而不只是监督最终答案或整段 CoT。","technical_approach":"核心方法应该是定义 logic units 作为推理的基本片段，并让模型在训练或对齐阶段学习这些片段的边界、顺序或合法组合。这个思路不同于普通 process supervision：它不是只给每一步打分，而是试图把步骤组织成更稳定的原子单元，便于在测试时组合、搜索或扩展。设计上的收益是减少冗余和错误扩散，代价则是逻辑单元的标注或归纳偏置可能过强，限制开放式推理。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认是否用了 GSM8K、MATH、Game of 24、逻辑推理或代码任务，也无法确认是否比较了 self-consistency、best-of-N、process reward 或 verifier-based scaling。若论文成立，最重要的实验应展示：在相同测试时预算下，逻辑单元对齐比单纯拉长 CoT 或加采样更有效，且错误率增长更慢。具体数值不能确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper aims to improve test-time reasoning by replacing unconstrained long chain-of-thought with aligned ‘logic units’. The motivation is straightforward: scaling inference by adding more tokens or more samples often wastes compute on verbose but low-value reasoning steps.","importance":"This is mainly a post-training and inference-time idea, but it has pretraining implications. If useful reasoning can be decomposed into stable units, then future training objectives may need to supervise or induce those units explicitly rather than only rewarding final answers or full free-form traces.","technical_approach":"The likely method is to define logic units as basic reasoning segments and align the model to produce, compose, or search over them during inference. Compared with generic process supervision, the emphasis here is on structure: not every token-level step is equally meaningful, and better unitization can reduce redundancy and error propagation when test-time compute is scaled up. The risk is that the chosen units may impose a brittle inductive bias on open-ended reasoning.","experiments":"The provided metadata do not include the abstract, so tasks, baselines, and gains cannot be verified. The key experiment to look for would be a fixed compute comparison showing that logic-unit alignment beats simply generating longer CoT or sampling more trajectories, ideally on arithmetic, symbolic, or planning-style benchmarks. No confirmed numbers are available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reasoning","test-time-scaling","alignment","cot"]},{"id":"LiZ0X00C25","title":"LaRA: Benchmarking Retrieval-Augmented Generation and Long-Context LLMs - No Silver Bullet for LC or RAG Routing","authors":["Kuan Li","Liwen Zhang","Yong Jiang","Pengjun Xie","Fei Huang","Shuai Wang","Minhao Cheng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiZ0X00C25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiZ0X00C25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/li25dv.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：RAG 和长上下文并不存在一个稳定的一刀切路由规则，不同任务、证据形态和噪声条件下，两者各有失效模式。过去很多讨论喜欢问“LC 能否替代 RAG”或“什么时候该走 RAG”，但多数结论来自局部 benchmark，缺少系统性对比和真实路由代价分析。","importance":"它的重要性在于提供了一个更务实的系统结论：长上下文不是银弹，RAG 也不是银弹，路由本身就是难题。对 pretrain 和 serving 的启示都很明确——如果模型的长上下文利用率、检索抗噪性、证据整合能力彼此不均衡，那么单纯扩 context window 或堆 retriever 都可能是低效投入；需要把模型能力和系统策略联合评估。","technical_approach":"核心方法是构建 LaRA 这个对比基准，系统评估 Retrieval-Augmented Generation 与 Long-Context LLMs，并分析自动路由是否可行。好的 benchmark 不只是拼几个任务，而是要控制证据长度、位置、干扰项密度、相关文档数量和跨文档整合难度；标题里的“No Silver Bullet”说明作者更关注边界条件和失败案例，而不是追求某个绝对赢家。","experiments":"虽然题面没有摘要，但从标题可确认实验重点应是 LC、RAG 以及 routing 策略的横向比较。最值得关注的结果通常包括：不同任务上最优策略显著变化；简单基于长度或置信度的路由器效果不稳；LC 在高噪声长证据下退化，RAG 在召回不足或需要全局整合时退化。具体模型、数据规模和数字未提供，无法进一步细化。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a practical question that the field often oversimplifies: there is no universally reliable routing rule between retrieval-augmented generation and long-context LLMs. Prior claims that long context can replace RAG, or vice versa, are often benchmark-specific and ignore routing difficulty under varied evidence conditions.","importance":"Its contribution is system-level but broadly relevant. The key message is that neither larger context windows nor retrieval pipelines are silver bullets; their failure modes differ, and routing between them is itself nontrivial. This matters for both serving design and model research, because context utilization and retrieval robustness are uneven capabilities.","technical_approach":"The core contribution is likely the LaRA benchmark, designed to compare LC and RAG under controlled evidence regimes and to test routing strategies explicitly. A useful benchmark here must vary evidence length, distractor density, evidence placement, and cross-document synthesis demands; otherwise it cannot explain when one paradigm fails and the other survives. The title suggests the paper is more diagnostic than promotional.","experiments":"Without the abstract, model list, benchmark scale, and numerical results cannot be confirmed. The main experimental pattern to expect is heterogeneous task-wise winners, unstable simple routers based on heuristics such as input length or confidence, and complementary failure modes: LC suffering under noisy long evidence and RAG under recall bottlenecks or tasks needing broad document integration. Exact figures are unavailable.","authors_note":""},"tags":["rag","long-context","benchmark","routing"]},{"id":"2501.19324","title":"Reward-Guided Speculative Decoding for Efficient LLM Reasoning","authors":["Baohao Liao","Yuhui Xu","Hanze Dong","Junnan Li","Christof Monz","Silvio Savarese","Doyen Sahoo","Caiming Xiong"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$9a","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.19324","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiaoXD0MSSX25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiaoXD0MSSX25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/liao25f.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：推测解码能提速，但标准方法要求无偏接受规则，难以针对 reasoning 任务把算力集中到高价值路径上。作者认为在复杂推理里，完全无偏未必是最优目标，适度引入偏置、优先探索高 reward 的中间步骤，可能能在几乎不牺牲质量的前提下显著降低目标模型调用成本。","importance":"这项工作对高成本推理 serving 很有现实价值，也对 test-time scaling 研究有方法启发。它的重要点不只是“更快”，而是把 speculative decoding 从纯分布近似问题改成受 reward 引导的资源分配问题；这意味着推理效率优化开始显式依赖过程奖励模型，而不仅是 draft-target 的概率匹配。","technical_approach":"RSD 的核心是用轻量 draft model 先走，再用 process reward model 评估中间解码步骤，并根据阈值策略动态决定何时调用更强的 target model。与传统 speculative decoding 最大不同在于，RSD 接受受控偏置，不追求严格无偏采样，而是优先保留高 reward 候选；作者还从理论上说明阈值混合策略能在资源消耗和输出质量之间达到最优平衡。这个设计有效的前提是 process reward model 足够可靠，否则偏置会把系统引向错误但看起来“高分”的轨迹。","experiments":"从摘要可确认，论文在 challenging reasoning benchmarks 上做了广泛评估，并以 draft model + target model + process reward model 的框架和现有 speculative decoding 方法比较。但摘要未给出具体模型大小、数据集名称、加速比和准确率变化。最关键的实验应包括：不同 reward threshold 下的质量-延迟曲线、PRM 误差对整体性能的影响，以及 reasoning 任务相对普通生成任务的收益差异。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a limitation of standard speculative decoding for reasoning: unbiased acceptance rules are efficient for matching the target distribution, but they do not actively allocate compute toward high-value reasoning paths. The authors argue that for difficult reasoning, a controlled bias toward high-reward continuations can be a better trade-off than strict unbiasedness.","importance":"This is an inference-efficiency contribution with broader implications for test-time scaling. Its significance is that speculative decoding is reframed from pure distribution-preserving acceleration into reward-guided compute allocation, making process reward models part of the decoding stack rather than an external reranking tool.","technical_approach":"RSD combines a lightweight draft model with a stronger target model and uses a process reward model to score intermediate decoding steps. A threshold-based mixture policy then decides when to trust the draft path and when to invoke the target model. The key departure from classical speculative decoding is the introduction of controlled bias: the method does not insist on exact unbiasedness if favoring high-reward trajectories yields better compute-quality trade-offs. This works only if the reward model is reliable enough; otherwise the bias can systematically favor wrong reasoning paths.","experiments":"From the abstract, we can confirm broad evaluation on challenging reasoning benchmarks and comparison against existing speculative decoding methods, but concrete details such as model sizes, benchmark names, speedups, and quality deltas are not included in the provided snippet. The most important results to inspect are the quality-latency frontier under different reward thresholds and the sensitivity to process reward model quality.","authors_note":""},"tags":["speculative-decoding","reasoning","reward-model","inference"],"notable_authors":["Junnan Li","Christof Monz"]},{"id":"2505.06274","title":"PARM: Multi-Objective Test-Time Alignment via Preference-Aware Autoregressive Reward Model","authors":["Baijiong Lin","Weisen Jiang","Yuancheng Xu","Hao Chen","Ying-Cong Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$9b","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.06274","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LinJXCC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LinJXCC25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/lin25h.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["reward-model","alignment","multi-objective","test-time"]},{"id":"LinLXL0LSL0T25","title":"Critical Tokens Matter: Token-Level Contrastive Estimation Enhances LLM&apos;s Reasoning Capability","authors":["Zicheng Lin","Tian Liang","Jiahao Xu","Qiuzhi Liu","Xing Wang","Ruilin Luo","Chufan Shi","Siheng Li","Yujiu Yang","Zhaopeng Tu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LinLXL0LSL0T25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LinLXL0LSL0T25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/lin25j.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["reasoning","contrastive-learning","token-level","sft"]},{"id":"LioubashevskiSS25","title":"Looking Beyond the Top-1: Transformers Determine Top Tokens in Order","authors":["Daria Lioubashevski","Tomer Schlank","Gabriel Stanovsky","Ariel Goldstein"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LioubashevskiSS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LioubashevskiSS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/lioubashevski25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["transformer","interpretability","top-k-prediction"]},{"id":"2408.02599","title":"Progressively Label Enhancement for Large Language Model Alignment","authors":["Biao Liu","Ning Xu","Xin Geng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$9c","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.02599","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Liu0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Liu0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/liu25cg.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["alignment","rlhf","label-enhancement","dpo"]},{"id":"2506.06279","title":"CoMemo: LVLMs Need Image Context with Image Memory","authors":["Shi Liu","Weijie Su","Xizhou Zhu","Wenhai Wang","Jifeng Dai"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$9d","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.06279","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Liu0ZWD25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Liu0ZWD25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/liu25bn.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["lvlm","attention","image-context","memory"]},{"id":"2502.02789","title":"Speculative Prefill: Turbocharging TTFT with Lightweight and Training-Free Token Importance Estimation","authors":["Jingyu Liu","Beidi Chen","Ce Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$9e","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.02789","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiuC025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiuC025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/liu25g.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["speculative-decoding","ttft","inference","prefill"]},{"id":"LiuD25","title":"Iterative Vectors: In-Context Gradient Steering without Backpropagation","authors":["Yiting Liu","Zhi-Hong Deng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiuD25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiuD25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/liu25j.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["in-context-learning","steering-vectors","gradient-free"]},{"id":"2502.13943","title":"AdaptiveStep: Automatically Dividing Reasoning Step through Model Confidence","authors":["Yuliang Liu","Junjie Lu","Chaofeng Qu","Zhaoling Chen","Zefan Cai","Jason Klein Liu","Chonghan Liu","Yunhui Xia","Li Zhao","Jiang Bian","Chuheng Zhang","Wei Shen","Zhouhan Lin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$9f","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.13943","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiuLQCCLLX00Z0L25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiuLQCCLLX00Z0L25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/liu25aq.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：PRM（过程奖励模型）训练时常用的“按规则切分推理步骤”并不对应真实决策点，导致每步监督信号含糊、学习效率低，进而限制 PRM 对数学推理等任务的收益。","importance":"贡献是一个对齐数据管线层面的改进：用模型自身的不确定性来自动切步，减少人工规则与标注依赖，把“步骤”从格式工程变成可学习的分割准则，对 PRM 训练稳定性与泛化更直接。","technical_approach":"AdaptiveStep 的核心是用 next-token 预测置信度来定义“决策边界”：当模型对下一个词的分布变得不确定（置信度下降/熵上升）时更可能处在推理转折点，于是把文本在这些位置切成步骤；这样每个 step 更接近一个语义决策单元，PRM 在 step-level 打分时获得更高信息量的中间监督。取舍是：分割依赖于某个参考模型的置信度校准，若模型置信度与真实难点不对齐（例如过度自信或被格式诱导），切分质量可能下降。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体模型规模、数据规模、PRM 结构、数学任务基准与提升数字；已知的是作者在数学推理等下游上验证 AdaptiveStep 训练的 PRM 能提升效果，并强调无需人工标注。缺少量化结果与对照（固定长度切分、占位符切分、人工切分）使得目前难以判断收益来自“更好切分”还是来自额外的数据处理与正则化效应。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a bottleneck in Process Reward Model (PRM) training: rule-based step segmentation (fixed length or placeholder tokens) rarely matches real decision points, making step-level supervision noisy and limiting PRM gains on tasks like math reasoning.","importance":"This is a pipeline-level alignment contribution: it turns “step” from a formatting heuristic into an automatic, model-driven segmentation criterion, reducing manual rules/annotations and potentially improving PRM training signal quality and generalization.","technical_approach":"AdaptiveStep segments reasoning by the model’s next-token confidence: low confidence (or higher uncertainty) is treated as a boundary where a new reasoning step should start, so each step better corresponds to a semantic decision unit and carries more informative intermediate supervision for PRM learning. The trade-off is reliance on confidence calibration of a reference model; if the model is miscalibrated or overconfident, boundaries may drift away from true reasoning pivots.","experiments":"The abstract provides no model sizes, data scale, benchmarks, baselines, or numeric improvements; it only claims AdaptiveStep-trained PRMs improve downstream performance (e.g., math reasoning) without manual annotation. Without quantitative comparisons to fixed-size/placeholder/manual segmentation, the source of gains remains under-specified.","authors_note":""},"tags":["process-reward-model","reasoning","step-division"]},{"id":"LiuLY0025","title":"Revisiting Chain-of-Thought in Code Generation: Do Language Models Need to Learn Reasoning before Coding?","authors":["Renbiao Liu","Anqi Li","Chaoding Yang","Hui Sun","Ming Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiuLY0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiuLY0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/liu25ah.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要信息，无法确定论文对“代码生成是否需要先学 CoT 推理”的具体问题设定（哪类代码任务、哪种 CoT 形式、训练还是推理时提示）。","importance":"缺少摘要信息，无法判断其对 pretrain/posttrain 的启示是数据配方、解码策略，还是能力分解结论。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要信息，无法概括其方法（对照训练、蒸馏、显式推理轨迹监督、无 CoT 的结构化中间表示等）。","experiments":"缺少摘要信息，无法给出模型规模、数据规模、代码基准与量化结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract is provided, so the exact setup behind “whether LMs need to learn CoT-style reasoning before coding” (task types, CoT format, training vs prompting) is unclear.","importance":"Without the abstract, we cannot assess whether the main takeaway impacts data recipes, decoding strategies, or capability decomposition relevant to pretrain/posttrain.","technical_approach":"Without the abstract, the methodology (controlled training, distillation, explicit rationale supervision, alternative intermediate representations, etc.) cannot be summarized.","experiments":"Without the abstract, model/data scale, coding benchmarks, and quantitative conclusions cannot be reported.","authors_note":""},"tags":["code-generation","chain-of-thought","reasoning"]},{"id":"LuoCL0L25","title":"Probing Visual Language Priors in VLMs","authors":["Tiange Luo","Ang Cao","Gunhee Lee","Justin Johnson","Honglak Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LuoCL0L25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LuoCL0L25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/luo25b.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要信息，无法确定论文具体在“VLM 的视觉-语言先验”上探测什么（数据偏置、组合泛化、对象共现、语义对齐还是生成先验）。","importance":"缺少摘要信息，无法判断它对 VLM 预训练的启示是数据治理、目标函数，还是表征诊断工具。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要信息，无法概括其 probing 设计（合成对照、干预、表征线性探针、因果评估等）与关键结论。","experiments":"缺少摘要信息，无法给出模型、数据、基准与量化发现。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract is provided, so it is unclear which visual-language priors in VLMs are being probed (dataset bias, compositionality, co-occurrence, alignment vs generation priors, etc.).","importance":"Without the abstract, we cannot assess whether the main impact is on data curation, objectives, or diagnostic tooling for VLM pretraining.","technical_approach":"Without the abstract, the probing methodology (synthetic controls, interventions, linear probes, causal evaluation, etc.) and key claims cannot be summarized.","experiments":"Without the abstract, models, datasets, benchmarks, and quantitative findings cannot be reported.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","visual-priors","representation","evaluation"]},{"id":"LuoDB25","title":"Vision-Language Models Create Cross-Modal Task Representations","authors":["Grace Luo","Trevor Darrell","Amir Bar"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LuoDB25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LuoDB25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/luo25c.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要信息，无法确定论文对“VLM 形成跨模态任务表征”的具体定义与验证方式（任务向量、表征可迁移性、跨模态对齐后的任务分解等）。","importance":"缺少摘要信息，无法判断它是机制分析贡献还是提出了可用于预训练/对齐的新训练信号。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要信息，无法概括其表征分析方法与关键对照实验设计。","experiments":"缺少摘要信息，无法给出模型规模、数据、任务集与量化结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract is provided, so the definition and validation of “cross-modal task representations” created by VLMs (task vectors, transferability, decomposition after alignment, etc.) cannot be determined.","importance":"Without the abstract, we cannot tell whether this is primarily mechanistic analysis or introduces new training signals relevant to pretraining/alignment.","technical_approach":"Without the abstract, the representation analysis methodology and key controls cannot be summarized.","experiments":"Without the abstract, model scale, data, task suites, and quantitative results cannot be reported.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","cross-modal","representation","generalization"]},{"id":"LvXQWSK0025","title":"Autonomy-of-Experts Models","authors":["Ang Lv","Ruobing Xie","Yining Qian","Songhao Wu","Xingwu Sun","Zhanhui Kang","Di Wang","Rui Yan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LvXQWSK0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LvXQWSK0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/lv25b.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的问题是：MoE 里“专家”通常只是被动路由的子网络，缺乏真正的功能自治，导致专家分工不稳定、协同低效。现有 MoE 往往通过更复杂的 router 或 load balancing 来缓解，但没有真正回答专家怎样形成持续、可迁移的独立能力。","importance":"如果这项工作成立，它属于架构与训练机制层面的改进，对大规模稀疏预训练是直接相关的。它重要的地方不在于再做一个 MoE 变体，而在于把“专家”从计算切片提升为更接近独立学习单元的对象；这可能影响 expert specialization、路由稳定性、灾难性干扰和扩展效率。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者提出的是 Autonomy-of-Experts 模型，核心思想应是增强单个 expert 的自主更新或自主决策能力，而不是完全依赖全局 router。可能的机制包括：让专家拥有局部状态、局部目标、局部路由判断，或者引入更弱耦合的训练规则，使专家对输入分布和职责边界有更稳定的响应；与标准 Switch / GShard 风格 MoE 相比，它的区别大概率是减少中央路由器对专家行为的单点控制。这样设计的好处是分工更清晰、训练中更少出现专家塌缩；代价则可能是实现更复杂，且专家之间的全局最优协调更难保证。","experiments":"可以预期实验会围绕专家负载均衡、路由熵、专家利用率、下游精度和扩展性展开，并与标准稀疏 MoE 基线比较。真正有价值的结果应当不是单点分数，而是显示自治机制在规模增大或分布变化时更稳定，例如更少的 expert collapse、更好的 specialization 或更高的 compute efficiency。由于没有摘要，无法确认模型大小、训练 token、具体数据集和提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper appears to tackle a structural weakness in MoE: experts are usually passive shards controlled by a router, not autonomous learners with stable roles. Existing fixes often tune routing or balancing losses, but that does not really explain how experts acquire durable specialization.","importance":"If the claim holds, this is an architecture-and-training contribution directly relevant to sparse pretraining. Its importance is not just another MoE variant; it reframes experts as more independent learning units, which could matter for specialization quality, routing stability, interference, and scaling efficiency.","technical_approach":"Judging from the title, the proposal is to increase expert autonomy rather than relying entirely on a central router. That could mean local objectives, local state, expert-side routing decisions, or weaker coupling during optimization; compared with Switch-style MoE, the likely difference is reduced single-point control by the global gate. The upside is clearer division of labor and less expert collapse, while the downside is added system complexity and potentially harder global coordination.","experiments":"The most relevant experiments would measure utilization, routing entropy, specialization, downstream quality, and scaling behavior against standard sparse MoE baselines. The strongest evidence would show that autonomy helps more as scale grows or distributions shift, rather than only improving one benchmark score. The abstract is unavailable, so model sizes, tokens, datasets, and exact gains cannot be stated safely.","authors_note":""},"tags":["moe","architecture","routing","sparsity"]},{"id":"MaZW025","title":"Efficient Multi-modal Long Context Learning for Training-free Adaptation","authors":["Zehong Ma","Shiliang Zhang","Longhui Wei","Qi Tian"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MaZW025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MaZW025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/ma25v.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是多模态长上下文场景下的一个实用瓶颈：训练好的模型很难无训练地适配更长、更复杂的跨模态输入。现有长上下文扩展常依赖再训练、位置插值或昂贵缓存机制，但对多模态输入尤其麻烦，因为不同模态 token 密度和冗余度差异很大。","importance":"它的贡献更偏系统与推理时适配，对预训练本身不是直接方法创新，但对统一多模态模型很有现实意义。原因是很多多模态模型在预训练时并没有覆盖足够长上下文，若能训练后无适配成本地提升可处理长度，就能显著改善部署和评测覆盖，也能反向说明预训练阶段哪些长度泛化能力是可迁移的。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者提出的是一种 training-free adaptation 方法，目标是在不更新参数的前提下高效处理多模态长上下文。可预期的技术路径包括：输入压缩、重要性筛选、跨模态 token 重排、KV 管理优化或位置编码层面的无训练修正；与常见需要 continued pretraining 的长上下文方法不同，它强调推理时直接生效。这样设计的关键是利用多模态输入中的高冗余区域，只保留对回答最关键的视觉或文本片段。边界也很清楚：如果任务依赖细粒度全局一致性，过强压缩会伤害性能。","experiments":"实验最应关注的是长度扩展倍数、推理延迟/显存节省，以及在多图、多视频帧或长文档图文任务上的精度保持率。一个有说服力的结果应同时展示效率和质量，例如在更长上下文下明显降低成本且相比原模型退化有限，并与 position interpolation、token pruning 或 retrieval-style baseline 比较。摘要缺失，所以没有模型规模、上下文长度和具体指标可引用。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical bottleneck in multimodal long-context use: pretrained models often do not handle much longer mixed-modality inputs without extra training. Existing extensions usually need continued training or expensive inference machinery, and multimodal inputs make the problem harder because token density and redundancy differ sharply across modalities.","importance":"This is more of a systems and inference-time adaptation contribution than a direct pretraining advance, but it is highly relevant for unified multimodal models. If training-free length extension works, it reduces deployment cost and also tells us which long-context behaviors are already latent in pretraining.","technical_approach":"From the title, the proposal is a training-free adaptation method for efficient multimodal long-context handling. Plausible ingredients include token compression, saliency-based selection, cross-modal reordering, KV management, or positional fixes applied at inference time rather than through continued pretraining. The design likely exploits redundancy in multimodal inputs, keeping the parts most likely to affect the answer. The trade-off is straightforward: the more aggressively you compress, the more you risk losing global fine-grained consistency.","experiments":"The key evidence should be context-length scaling, memory and latency savings, and quality retention on long multimodal tasks such as multi-image reasoning, long document understanding, or video-text settings. A strong result would show clear efficiency gains with limited accuracy loss, compared against baselines like position interpolation, pruning, or retrieval-style selection. The abstract is missing, so exact lengths, model sizes, and metrics cannot be given reliably.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal","long-context","training-free","adaptation"]},{"id":"MaaschHXN025","title":"Compositional Causal Reasoning Evaluation in Language Models","authors":["Jacqueline R. M. A. Maasch","Alihan Hüyük","Xinnuo Xu","Aditya V. Nori","Javier González"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MaaschHXN025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MaaschHXN025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/maasch25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：现有语言模型评测很少真正考查组合式因果推理，导致模型在会“讲因果语言”和会“做因果组合推断”之间被混淆。以前很多测试只看常识问答或单步因果判断，模型可以靠语料统计过关，但这不足以测出其在多变量、组合规则下的真实因果能力。","importance":"这是一个高价值评测工作，因为它对 reasoning、world modeling 和数据污染都有直接关系。对 pretrain 的意义在于：如果组合因果能力确实薄弱，那么继续堆通用 token 可能不会自动解决问题，数据构造、目标设计和合成环境训练都要重新考虑。","technical_approach":"核心应是一个专门的 compositional causal reasoning evaluation，重点不在训练新模型，而在构造能隔离因果组合能力的测试任务。与普通因果 QA 不同，这类 benchmark 通常会显式控制因果图结构、干预类型、组合深度和语言表述变化，避免模型通过表层模板或记忆命中答案。这样设计有效，是因为只有把结构组合性和语义表述解耦，才能看清模型是在做因果推断还是在做文本匹配。","experiments":"预期实验会评测多个主流 LLM，在 zero-shot / few-shot / CoT 等设置下比较表现，并分析错误是否随着因果链长度或图复杂度快速恶化。最有信息量的结果通常是：表面任务简单时模型看似不错，但一旦引入组合变化、反事实或干预嵌套，性能明显下滑。没有摘要，无法准确给出 benchmark 规模、模型名单和具体分数。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a gap in current LLM evaluation: most benchmarks do not genuinely test compositional causal reasoning. They often reward plausible causal language or single-step associations, which lets models pass through corpus statistics rather than structured causal inference.","importance":"This is an important evaluation contribution with direct implications for reasoning, world modeling, and contamination robustness. For pretraining, the message would be that scaling generic text alone may not reliably produce compositional causal competence, which points back to data construction and objective design.","technical_approach":"The work appears to build a dedicated benchmark for compositional causal reasoning rather than proposing a new model. The likely design explicitly controls causal graph structure, intervention type, compositional depth, and linguistic variation, so that textual shortcuts do not substitute for causal reasoning. That matters because only a controlled benchmark can separate structural inference from surface matching.","experiments":"The most useful experiments would compare a range of LLMs under zero-shot, few-shot, and CoT prompting, while varying graph complexity and intervention composition. A strong empirical pattern would be decent performance on simple cases but sharp degradation once compositionality, counterfactuals, or nested interventions are introduced. The abstract is unavailable, so benchmark size, model list, and exact scores cannot be reported safely.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reasoning","causal-reasoning","evaluation","language-models"]},{"id":"MancoridisWVM25","title":"Potemkin Understanding in Large Language Models","authors":["Marina Mancoridis","Bec Weeks","Keyon Vafa","Sendhil Mullainathan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MancoridisWVM25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MancoridisWVM25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/mancoridis25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的问题是：LLM 往往表现出一种“看起来懂、其实没懂”的假理解，作者称之为 Potemkin Understanding。很多现有评测把流畅解释、术语匹配或局部正确当作理解证据，但模型可能只是拼出了高可信表象，没有形成可迁移、可干预、可一致化的内部能力。","importance":"这是评测与机制判断上的重要提醒，对 pretrain 和 posttrain 都有影响。它之所以重要，是因为一旦研究社区把表面成功误认成真实理解，就会错误地优化数据、奖励函数和 benchmark，最终导致模型越来越会“展示理解”，却不一定更可靠。","technical_approach":"从标题判断，作者应提出了 Potemkin Understanding 的定义、诊断框架或实验协议，用来区分外观上的理解和稳健意义上的理解。最可能的做法是构造一组一致性、反事实、迁移或因果干预测试：如果模型真理解了概念，换表述、换上下文、换任务接口后能力应保持；如果只是表面拟合，性能会迅速崩塌。与普通 benchmark 相比，这类框架更关注能力是否能跨视角稳定，而不是单点正确率。","experiments":"实验最有价值的结果应展示：同一模型在标准测试上表现不错，但在作者设计的稳定性或可迁移性检验上显著失效，从而暴露“假理解”。若分析足够深入，还会比较不同模型规模、CoT、工具使用或 instruction tuning 对这种现象的影响，回答哪些训练手段是在修复理解，哪些只是在强化表演。摘要缺失，无法给出任务规模与具体数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper focuses on a failure mode where LLMs look like they understand but do not actually possess robust, transferable understanding. The term Potemkin Understanding points to a gap between convincing surface behavior and deeper competence that survives rephrasing, intervention, and task transfer.","importance":"This is an important warning for both evaluation and model development. If the field mistakes polished performance for real understanding, it will optimize the wrong datasets, rewards, and benchmarks, producing models that are better at displaying understanding than at using it reliably.","technical_approach":"The likely contribution is a definition and diagnostic framework for Potemkin Understanding. The natural way to test this is with consistency checks, counterfactual variations, transfer settings, or intervention-style probes: genuine understanding should remain stable across these changes, while surface mimicry should collapse quickly. The difference from standard benchmarking is that stability across views matters more than isolated accuracy.","experiments":"The most useful results would show a clear gap between strong performance on standard tests and poor robustness under the paper's diagnostic interventions, thereby exposing false understanding. A deeper analysis might compare model scale, CoT prompting, tool use, or instruction tuning to see which techniques improve real competence and which mainly improve presentation. Without the abstract, exact tasks and numerical findings cannot be stated safely.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm-understanding","evaluation","interpretability"]},{"id":"MarsdenDA0SH25","title":"Provable Length Generalization in Sequence Prediction via Spectral Filtering","authors":["Annie Marsden","Evan Dogariu","Naman Agarwal","Xinyi Chen","Daniel Suo","Elad Hazan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MarsdenDA0SH25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MarsdenDA0SH25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/marsden25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["length-generalization","spectral-filtering","sequence-prediction"]},{"id":"MedvedevLYA0S25","title":"Weak-to-Strong Generalization Even in Random Feature Networks, Provably","authors":["Marko Medvedev","Kaifeng Lyu","Dingli Yu","Sanjeev Arora","Zhiyuan Li","Nathan Srebro"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MedvedevLYA0S25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MedvedevLYA0S25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/medvedev25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["weak-to-strong","generalization","random-features","theory"]},{"id":"2411.07120","title":"Lean and Mean Adaptive Optimization via Subset-Norm and Subspace-Momentum with Convergence Guarantees","authors":["Thien Hang Nguyen","Huy L. Nguyen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a0","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.07120","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/NguyenN25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/NguyenN25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/nguyen25f.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["optimizer","memory-efficiency","training-stability","large-scale-training"]},{"id":"Nie000CLC25","title":"EVOLvE: Evaluating and Optimizing LLMs For In-Context Exploration","authors":["Allen Nie","Yi Su","Bo Chang","Jonathan Lee","Ed H. Chi","Quoc V. Le","Minmin Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Nie000CLC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Nie000CLC25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/nie25b.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["in-context-learning","exploration","evaluation","reasoning"]},{"id":"2506.23423","title":"TuCo: Measuring the Contribution of Fine-Tuning to Individual Responses of LLMs","authors":["Felipe Pinto Coelho Nuti","Tim Franzmeyer","João F. Henriques"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a1","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.23423","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/NutiFH25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/NutiFH25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/nuti25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["fine-tuning","attribution","alignment","evaluation"]},{"id":"OikarinenYW25","title":"Evaluating Neuron Explanations: A Unified Framework with Sanity Checks","authors":["Tuomas P. Oikarinen","Ge Yan","Tsui-Wei Weng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/OikarinenYW25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/OikarinenYW25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/oikarinen25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["interpretability","neuron-analysis","evaluation","sanity-check"]},{"id":"2503.04429","title":"Activation Space Interventions Can Be Transferred Between Large Language Models","authors":["Narmeen Oozeer","Dhruv Nathawani","Nirmalendu Prakash","Michael Lan","Abir Harrasse","Amir Abdullah"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a2","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.04429","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/OozeerNPLHA25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/OozeerNPLHA25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/oozeer25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["activation-space","transfer","safety","representation"]},{"id":"OstmeierAVMCL25","title":"LieRE: Lie Rotational Positional Encodings","authors":["Sophie Ostmeier","Brian Axelrod","Maya Varma","Michael E. Moseley","Akshay S. Chaudhari","Curtis Langlotz"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/OstmeierAVMCL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/OstmeierAVMCL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/ostmeier25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的位置编码问题：标准 RoPE 一类方法在表达几何关系时有很强工程实用性，但其旋转结构基本固定，难以更系统地利用更一般的群结构或连续对称性。这个问题值得重看，因为长上下文、跨模态和非欧几里得结构建模都在逼迫位置编码从“工程技巧”走向“几何建模部件”。","importance":"从题目看，这更像是方法级工作，重要性取决于它是否把 Lie 群视角真正落到了可训练、可扩展的 positional encoding 设计上。对 pretrain 的潜在启示是：如果位置编码可以更自然地表示旋转或连续变换，那么它可能改善长序列泛化、模态统一建模，或者让现有 RoPE 的启发式设计变得更有原则；但没有摘要，现阶段无法判断它是理论整理、局部改进，还是有实质训练收益。","technical_approach":"仅从标题可判断，作者提出的是 LieRE，即基于 Lie rotational 的位置编码方案，应该是在旋转位置编码框架上引入 Lie 群/李代数参数化。这样的设计通常想解决两个问题：一是把位置变换写成更一般的连续群作用，而不是手工固定频率的二维旋转；二是通过代数结构获得更好的组合性与外推性。它大概率是对 RoPE 的泛化而不是完全替代，但具体如何参数化、是否保持高效、与 attention 的耦合方式如何，给定信息无法确认。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法可靠总结实验。能合理预期的是，这类工作通常会在长上下文语言建模、图像或医学序列建模、以及位置外推设置上与 RoPE、ALiBi 等方法比较；但数据集、模型规模、指标和提升都不能编造。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper appears to revisit positional encoding: practical schemes such as RoPE work well, but their rotational structure is largely fixed and does not fully exploit more general continuous symmetries. This matters now because long-context modeling and multimodal sequence modeling increasingly expose positional encoding as a real modeling choice rather than a minor implementation detail.","importance":"From the title, this is most likely a method-level contribution whose impact depends on whether the Lie-group perspective leads to a trainable and scalable encoding rather than just a cleaner formulation. The potential pretraining relevance is straightforward: a more principled rotational encoding could improve extrapolation and geometric consistency, but without the abstract it is not possible to tell whether this is a theoretical reframing or an empirically meaningful advance.","technical_approach":"The proposed method is LieRE, presumably a Lie-rotational positional encoding that generalizes rotational schemes through Lie group or Lie algebra parameterization. The likely motivation is to replace hand-designed fixed rotations with a more general continuous transformation family, which could improve compositionality and extrapolation. It is best viewed as a probable generalization of RoPE rather than a fully different paradigm, but the exact parameterization, efficiency, and integration into attention cannot be established from the provided information.","experiments":"No abstract was provided, so the experimental summary cannot be made reliably. A typical evaluation for this line of work would compare against RoPE and ALiBi on long-context language modeling or extrapolation setups, but any concrete claim about model sizes, datasets, or gains would be speculative.","authors_note":""},"tags":["positional-encoding","transformer","long-context"]},{"id":"2502.09674","title":"The Hidden Dimensions of LLM Alignment: A Multi-Dimensional Analysis of Orthogonal Safety Directions","authors":["Wenbo Pan","Zhichao Liu","Qiguang Chen","Xiangyang Zhou","Haining Yu","Xiaohua Jia"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a3","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.09674","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/PanLCZYJ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/PanLCZYJ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/pan25f.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：安全对齐是否真的可以被单一线性方向解释。此前很多工作用一个 safety direction 来描述拒答行为，这很方便，但把多种安全相关行为压成一根向量，解释力和可操作性都有限。","importance":"这是一个有价值的机制分析工作，贡献主要在于把 alignment 的表征结构从一维扩展到多维子空间。对 pretrain/post-train 接口的启示很直接：SFT 或安全微调引入的不是单一“安全开关”，而是多个近似正交、语义不同的控制因素；这意味着后续做 steering、对抗、拒答强弱调节时，单方向方法容易过拟合到表面 refusal，而忽略 role-play、假设叙事等旁路特征。","technical_approach":"作者分析了 Llama 3 8B 在安全微调前后的表示偏移，把 refusal jailbreak 所对应的变化看成一个向量空间而不是单一向量。核心做法是对这个空间做正交分解，找出主导方向和多个较小方向，并分别解释这些方向对应的行为语义。论文的关键判断是：主导方向主要控制拒答，而其他较小方向承载诸如 hypothetical narrative、role-playing 等可解释特征。这样设计的好处是把“拒答”从混合行为里拆出来，能更细地分析不同方向对安全与能力的副作用。与先前单方向安全表征工作相比，这篇论文更关注方向之间的解耦和功能分工。","experiments":"摘要明确了实验对象是 Llama 3 8B，分析场景是 safety fine-tuning 后对 jailbreak 的拒答行为。关键发现包括：存在一个 dominant direction 主导 refusal，同时还有多个更小、近似正交的方向控制其他可解释行为特征。摘要提到作者进一步测量不同方向的影响，但后半句被截断，没有给出具体 benchmark、干预方式或数值增益/损失。因此现在能确认的是结论方向，而不是量化幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper challenges a common simplification in alignment analysis: safety behavior is usually modeled as a single linear direction in activation space, but that picture may be too coarse. A one-direction view is convenient, yet it collapses several distinct behaviors into one latent control axis.","importance":"This is a useful mechanistic contribution because it upgrades the representation of alignment from a single feature to a structured subspace. The relevance to the pretrain–posttrain interface is immediate: safety tuning appears to introduce multiple nearly orthogonal control dimensions, so methods that steer or erase only one refusal direction may miss important side channels such as role-play or hypothetical framing.","technical_approach":"The authors analyze representation shifts induced by safety fine-tuning on Llama 3 8B and treat them as a vector space rather than a single direction. They then decompose this space into orthogonal components and study what each component controls. The central finding is that one dominant direction governs refusal behavior, while smaller directions correspond to more specific and interpretable features like hypothetical narrative and role-playing. This decomposition is useful because it separates core refusal from entangled stylistic or contextual behaviors, which single-direction approaches cannot do cleanly.","experiments":"The abstract clearly identifies the main setting: Llama 3 8B and safety fine-tuning for jailbreak refusal. The strongest empirical result is qualitative but meaningful: refusal is dominated by one direction, while multiple smaller orthogonal directions capture distinct interpretable safety-related behaviors. The abstract also says the authors measure how different directions affect behavior, but the provided text is truncated and contains no benchmark names, intervention details, or numerical results.","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","safety","activation-space","interpretability"]},{"id":"2411.04434","title":"Scaling Laws for Pre-training Agents and World Models","authors":["Tim Pearce","Tabish Rashid","David Bignell","Raluca Georgescu","Sam Devlin","Katja Hofmann"],"institutions":["Microsoft Research"],"abstract":"The performance of embodied agents has been shown to improve by increasing model parameters, dataset size, and compute. This has been demonstrated in domains from robotics to video games, when generative learning objectives on offline datasets (pre-training) are used to model an agent's behavior (imitation learning) or their environment (world modeling). This paper characterizes the role of scale in these tasks more precisely. Going beyond the simple intuition that `bigger is better', we show that the same types of power laws found in language modeling also arise in world modeling and imitation learning (e.g. between loss and optimal model size). However, the coefficients of these laws are heavily influenced by the tokenizer, task \\&architecture -- this has important implications on the optimal sizing of models and data.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.04434","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/PearceRBGDH25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/PearceRBGDH25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/pearce25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在具身智能领域（机器人、游戏等），增大模型参数、数据和算力能提升性能，但具体的 scaling law 形式和系数如何受 tokenizer、任务、架构影响，之前缺乏系统刻画。这篇工作要回答：language modeling 中发现的幂律关系是否也适用于 world modeling 和 imitation learning，以及系数差异意味着什么。","importance":"对 pretrain 研究有直接启示：scaling law 的系数高度依赖 tokenizer 和任务，这意味着在新模态（如 world model）上照搬语言模型的 scaling 经验可能导致次优的资源分配。这是一个方法级贡献，帮助理解 scaling law 的迁移边界。","technical_approach":"在 world modeling（环境预测）和 imitation learning（行为克隆）两类任务上，系统测量 loss 与最优模型大小、数据量、计算量之间的幂律关系。核心发现是幂律形式与语言建模一致，但系数受 tokenizer 选择、任务类型和架构显著影响。这意味着不同领域需要独立拟合 scaling law 系数，不能简单外推。","experiments":"在多个具身智能域（机器人、视频游戏）上进行实验，系统变化模型参数量和数据规模。关键观察：(1) 幂律关系确实成立；(2) tokenizer 的选择对系数影响很大，直接影响最优模型大小的预测；(3) 不同任务（world modeling vs imitation learning）的系数差异显著。具体数字未在摘要中给出。","authors_note":"Tim Pearce、Sam Devlin 等来自 Microsoft Research，在 RL 和 scaling 方向有持续工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Scaling up model size, data, and compute improves embodied agent performance, but the precise form and coefficients of scaling laws for world modeling and imitation learning—and how they depend on tokenizer, task, and architecture—were not systematically characterized.","importance":"Directly relevant to pretrain research: the finding that scaling law coefficients are heavily influenced by tokenizer and task means that naively transferring language model scaling intuitions to new modalities can lead to suboptimal resource allocation. A method-level contribution clarifying the boundaries of scaling law transferability.","technical_approach":"Systematically measures power-law relationships between loss and optimal model size / data / compute for world modeling and imitation learning across multiple embodied domains. The key finding is that the functional form matches language modeling, but coefficients vary significantly with tokenizer choice, task type, and architecture—requiring domain-specific fitting rather than extrapolation from language.","experiments":"Experiments span robotics and video game domains with systematic variation of model and data scale. Key observations: (1) power laws hold; (2) tokenizer choice substantially shifts coefficients and optimal model size predictions; (3) world modeling and imitation learning have notably different coefficients. Specific numbers not provided in the abstract.","authors_note":"Tim Pearce and Sam Devlin are from Microsoft Research, with ongoing work in RL and scaling."},"tags":["scaling-law","world-model","imitation-learning","pretraining"],"notable_authors":["Sam Devlin"]},{"id":"2502.01330","title":"Accelerating Linear Recurrent Neural Networks for the Edge with Unstructured Sparsity","authors":["Alessandro Pierro","Steven Abreu","Jonathan Timcheck","Philipp Stratmann","Andreas Wild","Sumit Bam Shrestha"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a4","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.01330","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/PierroATSWS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/PierroATSWS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/pierro25a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"线性循环神经网络（linear RNN，如 Mamba/S4 等）在推理时具有常数内存和恒定 time-per-token 的优势，适合边缘端流式部署，但在资源受限环境下仍需进一步优化延迟和能耗。这篇工作探索非结构化稀疏性能否在 linear RNN 上实现更好的效率-性能 Pareto 前沿。","importance":"系统级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示：如果高稀疏度的 linear RNN 能在相同计算预算下持续优于稠密模型，这为 pretrain 阶段的模型设计提供了新的效率-质量权衡思路——训练一个更大但更稀疏的模型可能比训练一个小的稠密模型更划算。","technical_approach":"对 linear RNN 进行系统的 scaling study，在不同推理计算预算下比较稀疏与稠密模型的 Pareto 前沿。核心发现是高度稀疏的 linear RNN 在效率-性能权衡上一致优于稠密 baseline，用 2 倍更少的计算即可达到相当性能。关键前提是需要硬件平台支持非结构化稀疏加速。","experiments":"进行了 scaling study，比较不同稀疏度下的 linear RNN 与稠密 baseline。核心结果：高稀疏度模型在 Pareto 前沿上一致占优，2x 计算节省。具体模型规模和数据集未在摘要中详述。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Linear RNNs (Mamba/S4-style) offer constant memory and time-per-token at inference, making them attractive for edge deployment, but further latency and energy reductions are needed for resource-constrained settings. This work investigates whether unstructured sparsity can push the efficiency-performance Pareto front further.","importance":"A systems-level contribution. For pretrain research, the finding that highly sparse linear RNNs consistently dominate dense baselines on the Pareto front suggests a new design axis: training larger but sparser models may be more compute-efficient than smaller dense ones, given compatible hardware.","technical_approach":"Conducts a systematic scaling study comparing sparse vs. dense linear RNNs across inference compute budgets. Key finding: highly sparse linear RNNs consistently achieve better efficiency-performance trade-offs, with 2x less compute needed. The approach requires hardware that can accelerate unstructured sparsity.","experiments":"Scaling study across sparsity levels vs. dense baselines. Core result: sparse models consistently dominate the Pareto front with ~2x compute savings. Specific model sizes and datasets not detailed in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["linear-rnn","sparsity","edge-deployment","inference-efficiency"]},{"id":"2411.04109","title":"Self-Consistency Preference Optimization","authors":["Archiki Prasad","Weizhe Yuan","Richard Yuanzhe Pang","Jing Xu","Maryam Fazel-Zarandi","Mohit Bansal","Sainbayar Sukhbaatar","Jason E. Weston","Jane Yu"],"institutions":["Meta FAIR"],"abstract":"$a5","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.04109","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/PrasadYPXFBSW025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/PrasadYPXFBSW025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/prasad25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"自对齐（self-alignment）方法在复杂推理任务上效果有限，核心瓶颈是难以给出正确的奖励信号。Self-consistency（多次采样取最一致答案）在推理时有效但只用于 inference，没有被用来改进训练。这篇工作把 self-consistency 的信号引入训练阶段。","importance":"对 pretrain↔posttrain 接口有直接启示：ScPO 展示了一种不依赖外部 reward model 的偏好优化方法，用模型自身的一致性作为训练信号。这对理解 self-play/self-improvement 范式的边界很有价值——什么时候模型自身的信号足够可靠？方法级贡献。","technical_approach":"提出 Self-Consistency Preference Optimization（ScPO）：在无标注的新问题上多次采样，将一致的答案标记为偏好（preferred），不一致的标记为非偏好（rejected），然后用偏好优化（如 DPO）迭代训练。核心假设是：在推理任务上，一致性是正确性的良好代理指标。与传统 reward model 训练相比，ScPO 不需要人工标注或外部奖励模型。","experiments":"在 GSM8K 和 MATH 等推理任务上测试，相比传统 reward model 训练有大幅提升。具体数字未在摘要中给出，但强调了在推理任务上的显著改进。","authors_note":"Weizhe Yuan 和 Richard Yuanzhe Pang 来自 Meta FAIR，在自对齐和偏好优化方向有多篇工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Self-alignment methods struggle on complex reasoning tasks because assigning correct rewards is hard. Self-consistency (majority voting over multiple samples) works at inference time but hasn't been used as a training signal. This work bridges that gap.","importance":"Directly relevant to the pretrain-posttrain interface: ScPO shows that model self-consistency can serve as a reliable preference signal for training, without external reward models. This informs the boundaries of self-improvement paradigms—when is the model's own signal trustworthy enough? A method-level contribution.","technical_approach":"Self-Consistency Preference Optimization (ScPO): on unlabeled problems, sample multiple answers, mark consistent ones as preferred and inconsistent ones as rejected, then iteratively train with preference optimization (e.g., DPO). The core assumption is that consistency is a good proxy for correctness on reasoning tasks. No human annotation or external reward model needed.","experiments":"Tested on reasoning tasks like GSM8K and MATH, showing large improvements over conventional reward model training. Specific numbers not provided in the abstract but improvements are described as substantial.","authors_note":"Weizhe Yuan and Richard Yuanzhe Pang are from Meta FAIR, with multiple works on self-alignment and preference optimization."},"tags":["self-alignment","self-consistency","preference-optimization","reasoning"],"notable_authors":["Weizhe Yuan","Richard Yuanzhe Pang"]},{"id":"2412.07446","title":"A Causal World Model Underlying Next Token Prediction: Exploring GPT in a Controlled Environment","authors":["Raanan Yehezkel Rohekar","Yaniv Gurwicz","Sungduk Yu","Estelle Aflalo","Vasudev Lal"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a6","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.07446","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/RohekarGYAL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/RohekarGYAL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/yehezkel-rohekar25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["world-model","next-token","attention","interpretability"]},{"id":"2505.13819","title":"Fragments to Facts: Partial-Information Fragment Inference from LLMs","authors":["Lucas Rosenblatt","Bin Han","Robert Wolfe","Bill Howe"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a7","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.13819","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Rosenblatt0WH25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Rosenblatt0WH25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/rosenblatt25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["memorization","privacy","data-leakage","evaluation"]},{"id":"2412.01441","title":"LMAct: A Benchmark for In-Context Imitation Learning with Long Multimodal Demonstrations","authors":["Anian Ruoss","Fabio Pardo","Harris Chan","Bonnie Li","Volodymyr Mnih","Tim Genewein"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a8","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.01441","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/RuossPCLMG25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/RuossPCLMG25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/ruoss25a.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["benchmark","long-context","multimodal","in-context-learning"]},{"id":"SaadaNT25","title":"Mind the Gap: a Spectral Analysis of Rank Collapse and Signal Propagation in Attention Layers","authors":["Thiziri Nait Saada","Alireza Naderi","Jared Tanner"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SaadaNT25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SaadaNT25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/nait-saada25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["attention","rank-collapse","signal-propagation","training-dynamics"]},{"id":"2502.01633","title":"Adversarial Reasoning at Jailbreaking Time","authors":["Mahdi Sabbaghi","Paul Kassianik","George J. Pappas","Amin Karbasi","Hamed Hassani"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"As large language models (LLMs) are becoming more capable and widespread, the study of their failure cases is becoming increasingly important. Recent advances in standardizing, measuring, and scaling test-time compute suggest new methodologies for optimizing models to achieve high performance on hard tasks. In this paper, we apply these advances to the task of model jailbreaking: eliciting harmful responses from aligned LLMs. We develop an adversarial reasoning approach to automatic jailbreaking that leverages a loss signal to guide the test-time compute, achieving SOTA attack success rates against many aligned LLMs, even those that aim to trade inference-time compute for adversarial robustness. Our approach introduces a new paradigm in understanding LLM vulnerabilities, laying the foundation for the development of more robust and trustworthy AI systems.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.01633","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SabbaghiKPKH25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SabbaghiKPKH25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/sabbaghi25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["jailbreak","reasoning","safety","test-time-compute"]},{"id":"2501.17178","title":"Tuning LLM Judge Design Decisions for 1/1000 of the Cost","authors":["David Salinas","Omar Swelam","Frank Hutter"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a9","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.17178","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SalinasSH25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SalinasSH25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/salinas25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：如何在极低成本下把 LLM-as-a-judge 的设计空间系统地调清楚。过去这类工作常常同时更换 judge 模型、提示词、采样设置和打分规则，结果是结论混杂了多个变量，既难复现，也很难知道到底什么因素真正决定 judge 的准确率、偏差和成本。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要是方法论和评测系统层面的。它不直接改进预训练模型本身，但它提高了模型评测这条信号链的可控性；对 pretrain/post-train 都有现实意义，因为如果 judge 设计本身不稳，后续模型选择、数据筛选、偏好优化和自动化评测都会被噪声带偏。更重要的是，它强调了一个常被忽略的事实：judge 不是单一模型，而是一组设计决策的组合优化问题。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把 LLM judge 的配置搜索建模成多目标、多保真优化问题。多目标指同时优化判分准确率与调用成本，多保真指先用便宜但噪声更大的评测近似筛掉差配置，再把预算集中在有前景的配置上；这样做的原因很直接：judge 搜索本身如果要依赖大规模高质量人工标注，成本会高到失去意义。和已有只做少量手工 ablation 的工作相比，这篇论文的关键区别是把 prompt、模型、推理预算等超参数纳入统一搜索框架，并显式寻找 accuracy-cost Pareto 前沿，而不是默认“更强 judge 一定更好”。","experiments":"从摘要能确认的关键实验结论是：作者用 multi-objective multi-fidelity 搜索，把 judge 调参成本降到约原来的 1/1000，同时还能找到更优的准确率-成本折中点。摘要没有给出具体涉及的 judge 模型规模、数据集名称、人工标注规模、准确率指标或提升幅度，因此这里不能补数字。可以合理推断他们的重点不在追求单一最高相关性，而在证明低保真搜索足以保留配置排序信息，并显著降低总体调参开销。","authors_note":"机构与代表性团队信息无法仅根据当前给定内容确认。Frank Hutter 是自动化机器学习与超参数优化方向的知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a practical question: how do we tune an LLM judge systematically without spending more on the judge than on the evaluation itself. Prior work usually changed the judge model, prompt, decoding setup, and scoring protocol at the same time, so comparisons were confounded and it was hard to tell which choice actually mattered.","importance":"Its main contribution is methodological rather than model-level. It makes evaluation more controllable, which matters for both pretraining and post-training because noisy judges can distort model ranking, data filtering, preference optimization, and automated benchmarking. The useful shift here is to treat an LLM judge as a design space to optimize, not a fixed model to plug in.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to formulate judge design as multi-objective, multi-fidelity optimization. The objectives are judge quality and cost; the fidelities are cheap but noisy evaluations used early in the search, followed by expensive evaluations only for promising configurations. This is a sensible design because exhaustive judge tuning with high-quality human labels would defeat the purpose. Relative to prior manual ablations, the paper’s real step is to jointly search over model, prompt, and inference choices and to target the accuracy-cost Pareto frontier instead of assuming that a stronger judge is always worth it.","experiments":"The key result stated in the abstract is a roughly 1000x reduction in judge tuning cost while still finding better accuracy-cost trade-offs. The abstract does not report concrete model sizes, datasets, annotation budgets, or metric values, so those should not be inferred. The experimental claim appears to be that low-fidelity evaluations preserve enough ranking signal to guide the search effectively.","authors_note":"Institutional details cannot be confirmed from the provided text alone. Frank Hutter is well known for work on AutoML and hyperparameter optimization."},"tags":["llm-as-a-judge","evaluation","data-efficiency"],"notable_authors":["David Salinas","Omar Swelam","Frank Hutter"]},{"id":"2502.07732","title":"Position: When Incentives Backfire, Data Stops Being Human","authors":["Sebastin Santy","Prasanta Bhattacharya","Manoel Horta Ribeiro","Kelsey R. Allen","Sewoong Oh"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Progress in AI has relied on human-generated data, from annotator marketplaces to the wider Internet. However, the widespread use of large language models now threatens the quality and integrity of human-generated data on these very platforms. We argue that this issue goes beyond the immediate challenge of filtering AI-generated content -- it reveals deeper flaws in how data collection systems are designed. Existing systems often prioritize speed, scale, and efficiency at the cost of intrinsic human motivation, leading to declining engagement and data quality. We propose that rethinking data collection systems to align with contributors' intrinsic motivations -- rather than relying solely on external incentives -- can help sustain high-quality data sourcing at scale while maintaining contributor trust and long-term participation.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"position","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.07732","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SantyBRAO25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SantyBRAO25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/santy25a.html","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇文章要解决的不是“怎么过滤 AI 数据”这么窄的问题，而是：当数据采集平台的激励机制失真时，人类数据本身会退化，进而让 AI 训练所依赖的高质量人类信号越来越难获得。过去大家更多把问题视为检测 AI 生成内容，但作者认为更深层的问题在于数据系统为了规模和效率，长期压低了人的内在参与动机。","importance":"这是篇立场论文，贡献在于重新定义数据危机的来源。对 pretrain 来说，它的意义不是提出一个可直接落地的过滤器，而是提醒研究者：未来高质量训练数据的瓶颈可能不是“互联网够不够大”，而是“平台还能不能持续地产生可信、有人类意图的内容”。这会直接影响数据配比、数据治理、合成数据策略以及人类反馈数据的长期供给。","technical_approach":"核心做法是提出一个制度设计视角，而不是一个新模型。作者把当前的数据采集系统理解为过度依赖外部激励——更快、更便宜、可扩张——从而挤压了贡献者的自主性、认同感和长期投入，结果是内容质量下降、参与意愿减弱、AI 污染进一步放大。它与常见“建更强 AI 检测器”的区别在于，后者只是在污染出现后做清洗，而这篇文章主张从数据生产机制源头重构，让平台激励与人的内在动机对齐。","experiments":"这是一篇 Position paper，摘要没有报告模型实验、基准或量化结果，因此没有可填写的参数规模、指标或提升数字。它的证据形式大概率是概念分析、已有文献综合和系统设计论证，而不是新的大规模训练实验。对工程读者来说，最有价值的不是实验数字，而是它提出的风险判断：如果继续只追求低成本大规模收集，人类数据会先失真，再枯竭。","authors_note":"机构信息无法从给定内容中确认。Kelsey R. Allen 和 Sewoong Oh 是较知名作者，但摘要未提供团队背景。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper argues that the real problem is not just filtering AI-generated content. It is that current data collection systems can erode the conditions that produce genuinely human data in the first place. The usual framing focuses on detection after contamination; the authors focus on why the source of human data is degrading.","importance":"The contribution is conceptual but relevant to pretraining. It reframes data quality as an incentive-design problem, which matters because future training pipelines may be limited less by raw web scale and more by whether platforms can still generate trustworthy human-origin content. That has direct implications for data sourcing, synthetic data policy, and the long-run supply of human feedback.","technical_approach":"This is a position piece, not a new modeling method. The core argument is that systems optimized for speed, scale, and marketplace efficiency often undermine intrinsic motivation, which then lowers participation quality and makes AI contamination harder to reverse. The key distinction from the common 'build a better detector' line is that detection cleans after the fact, while this paper argues for redesigning the data generation ecosystem itself.","experiments":"No experimental results are reported in the abstract, and this should be treated as a non-empirical or lightly empirical position paper. There are no model sizes, datasets, or benchmark gains to summarize. The practical takeaway is a systems warning: if incentives keep pushing toward cheap throughput, human data quality will likely degrade before it disappears.","authors_note":"Institutions cannot be confirmed from the provided text. Kelsey R. Allen and Sewoong Oh are recognizable authors, but no team context is given here."},"tags":["data-quality","synthetic-data","human-data","ecosystem"],"notable_authors":["Sebastin Santy","Prasanta Bhattacharya","Manoel Horta Ribeiro","Kelsey R. Allen","Sewoong Oh"]},{"id":"2502.10927","title":"The underlying structures of self-attention: symmetry, directionality, and emergent dynamics in Transformer training","authors":["Matteo Saponati","Pascal Sager","Pau Vilimelis Aceituno","Thilo Stadelmann","Benjamin F. Grewe"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Self-attention is essential to Transformer architectures, yet how information is embedded in the self-attention matrices and how different objective functions impact this process remains unclear. We present a mathematical framework to analyze self-attention matrices by deriving the structures governing their weight updates. Using this framework, we demonstrate that bidirectional training induces symmetry in the weight matrices, while autoregressive training results in directionality and column dominance. Our theoretical findings are validated across multiple Transformer models - including ModernBERT, GPT, LLaMA3, and Mistral - and input modalities like text, vision, and audio. Finally, we apply these insights by showing that symmetric initialization improves the performance of encoder-only models on language tasks. This mathematical analysis offers a novel theoretical perspective on how information is embedded through self-attention, thereby improving the interpretability of Transformer models.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.10927","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SaponatiSASG25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SaponatiSASG25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/saponati25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：self-attention 矩阵在训练中到底学出什么结构，以及不同训练目标为什么会导向不同结构。过去大家对注意力的分析往往停留在可视化或经验观察，能看到“有头在看前文/后文”，但很少把权重更新的结构性约束推到数学层面，因而也难把训练目标与最终 attention 形态直接联系起来。","importance":"这项工作的意义更偏机制分析和训练设计启发。它给出了一个跨文本、视觉、音频 Transformer 的统一观察：双向目标倾向于诱导对称结构，自回归目标则更强地诱导方向性和列主导。对 pretrain 的启示在于，训练目标并不只是决定 loss 定义，它还系统性地塑造了 attention 的几何结构；这可以反过来指导初始化、架构归纳偏置和不同模态下的 encoder/decoder 设计。","technical_approach":"核心方法是建立一个分析 self-attention 权重更新的数学框架，并据此刻画训练目标对注意力矩阵结构的影响。作者的关键结论是：bidirectional training 会让权重矩阵更对称，而 autoregressive training 会产生明显方向性，并伴随 column dominance。这个框架的价值不在于提出新的注意力算子，而在于把“目标函数—梯度更新—矩阵结构”连成一条因果链。作者进一步把理论用于设计，提出对 encoder-only 模型采用 symmetric initialization，因为它与双向训练诱导的结构更一致。","experiments":"摘要明确说理论在 ModernBERT、GPT、LLaMA3、Mistral 上得到验证，并覆盖文本、视觉、音频三类输入模态。还给出一个可操作结论：对称初始化可以提升 encoder-only Transformer 的表现。摘要没有提供参数规模、数据集和具体提升数值，因此不能补充数字。值得关注的消融点是：这种结构规律是否在深层、不同头类型、不同归一化/残差设计下都稳定存在，以及初始化收益是否主要出现在 encoder 而非 decoder。","authors_note":"机构与代表性团队信息无法从当前给定内容确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a basic but underformalized question: what structural patterns do self-attention matrices learn during training, and how do different objectives induce those patterns. Prior work often relied on visual inspection or qualitative stories, which made it hard to connect training objectives to the actual geometry of learned attention.","importance":"This is primarily a mechanistic and training-design contribution. The useful result is a cross-modal pattern: bidirectional objectives tend to induce symmetry, while autoregressive objectives induce directionality and column dominance. For pretraining, that matters because the objective is not just a loss definition; it also shapes the internal structure of attention in a systematic way.","technical_approach":"The paper develops a mathematical framework for analyzing the update structure of self-attention matrices. From that framework, it derives why bidirectional training leads to more symmetric weight structure, whereas autoregressive training leads to directional structure. The contribution is not a new attention module but a tighter link between objective, update dynamics, and emergent matrix structure. The authors then use this insight to propose symmetric initialization for encoder-only transformers, which is a natural fit for bidirectional training.","experiments":"The abstract reports validation across ModernBERT, GPT, LLaMA3, and Mistral, and across text, vision, and audio inputs. It also claims that symmetric initialization improves encoder-only transformer performance. No model sizes, datasets, or numerical gains are provided in the abstract, so they should not be invented. The main empirical question to watch is how robust these structural effects are across layers, heads, and architectural details.","authors_note":"Institutional and team details cannot be confirmed from the provided text."},"tags":["self-attention","training-dynamics","bidirectional","objective"],"notable_authors":["Matteo Saponati","Pascal Sager","Pau Vilimelis Aceituno","Thilo Stadelmann","Benjamin F. Grewe"]},{"id":"SchaefferKHJPLJ25","title":"How Do Large Language Monkeys Get Their Power (Laws)?","authors":["Rylan Schaeffer","Joshua Kazdan","John Hughes","Jordan Juravsky","Sara Price","Aengus Lynch","Erik Jones","Robert Kirk","Azalia Mirhoseini","Sanmi Koyejo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SchaefferKHJPLJ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SchaefferKHJPLJ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/schaeffer25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"无法根据当前提供信息可靠总结。标题看起来与 scaling laws 或能力来源有关，但没有摘要，无法判断论文究竟是在做理论解释、经验缩放分析，还是对既有 scaling law 的批评与修正。","importance":"目前无法给出负责任的贡献判断。仅从标题无法区分它是范式级观点文章、经验研究，还是带有讽刺意味的评论性论文；因此不应硬写其对 pretrain 的具体影响。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失，无法确认方法。不能从标题推断它使用了哪些模型家族、拟合形式、实验设计或理论工具。","experiments":"无摘要，无法确认是否包含预训练实验、下游基准、参数规模或 scaling 拟合结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"A reliable summary is not possible from the provided information. The title suggests a connection to scaling laws or the source of model capabilities, but without an abstract it is unclear whether this is theoretical, empirical, or primarily argumentative.","importance":"No responsible assessment of contribution can be made from the title alone. It could be a paradigm-level critique, an empirical scaling paper, or a commentary-style piece, and those carry very different implications for pretraining research.","technical_approach":"The method cannot be determined because the abstract is missing. It would be inappropriate to infer model families, fitted laws, or analytical tools from the title alone.","experiments":"No abstract is available, so there is no basis for summarizing benchmarks, model scales, or empirical findings.","authors_note":""},"tags":["scaling-law","language-models","theory","emergence"],"notable_authors":["Rylan Schaeffer","Joshua Kazdan","John Hughes","Jordan Juravsky","Sara Price"]},{"id":"Sun0LLYCXLZZY25","title":"Parrot: Multilingual Visual Instruction Tuning","authors":["Hai-Long Sun","Da-Wei Zhou","Yang Li","Shiyin Lu","Chao Yi","Qing-Guo Chen","Zhao Xu","Weihua Luo","Kaifu Zhang","De-Chuan Zhan","Han-Jia Ye"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Sun0LLYCXLZZY25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Sun0LLYCXLZZY25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/sun25ad.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["vlm","instruction-tuning","multilingual","vision-language"]},{"id":"SunCB0Z0DCC25","title":"ShadowKV: KV Cache in Shadows for High-Throughput Long-Context LLM Inference","authors":["Hanshi Sun","Li-Wen Chang","Wenlei Bao","Size Zheng","Ningxin Zheng","Xin Liu","Harry Dong","Yuejie Chi","Beidi Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SunCB0Z0DCC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SunCB0Z0DCC25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/sun25b.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["kv-cache","long-context","inference","serving"]},{"id":"2410.09426","title":"FlatQuant: Flatness Matters for LLM Quantization","authors":["Yuxuan Sun","Ruikang Liu","Haoli Bai","Han Bao","Kang Zhao","Yuening Li","Jiaxin Hu","Xianzhi Yu","Lu Hou","Chun Yuan","Xin Jiang","Wulong Liu","Jun Yao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$aa","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.09426","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SunLBBZLHY0Y0LY25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SunLBBZLHY0Y0LY25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/sun25l.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["quantization","llm","flatness","compression"]},{"id":"2502.12150","title":"Idiosyncrasies in Large Language Models","authors":["Mingjie Sun","Yida Yin","Zhiqiu Xu","J. Zico Kolter","Zhuang Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ab","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.12150","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SunYXK025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SunYXK025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/sun25z.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["llm","behavior","model-identity","generation"]},{"id":"2410.02744","title":"Neutral residues: revisiting adapters for model extension","authors":["Franck Signe Talla","Edouard Grave","Hervé Jégou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ac","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.02744","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/TallaGJ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/TallaGJ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/talla25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是 LLM 域扩展时常见的两难：想学新域知识，就容易伤到原域能力；而 LoRA 这类方法虽然便宜，但本质上没有真正增加可控容量。过去 adapter 被认为效果不如 LoRA，因此较少被作为主流扩展方案，这篇论文是在重新设计 adapter，使其更适合做‘加容量但少遗忘’的模型扩展。","importance":"它的重要性在于提供了一种更接近 continual pretrain / domain extension 的参数高效路径。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：如果扩展模块在旧域上被约束为近零输出，就能把新增容量更干净地留给新域，缓解稳定性和遗忘问题；这比单纯低秩更新更像结构化扩容，适合长期演进的大模型。","technical_approach":"作者提出 neutral residues，可以理解为对 adapter 的系统性重做，而不是简单回归老式残差瓶颈。方法同时从数据、结构和训练流程三方面设计，核心约束是新增残差块在原始域上输出接近零，这样旧模型主干在原域行为基本保持不变，而新块主要在新域上承担增量表示。和 LoRA 的关键区别是，LoRA直接修改已有权重的有效映射，容易把旧域功能也一起扭动；neutral residues 则更像在旁路上长出新能力，设计目标就是减小干扰。","experiments":"摘要说明作者在把一个 SOTA 模型扩展到预训练未见新域时得到强结果，但没有给出基座参数量、目标领域、数据规模、评测集、baseline 或具体增益，因此不能填具体数字。即便如此，实验信号已经很明确：论文关注的是新域收益与原域退化的 trade-off，而不是单看新域分数；如果正文完整，最值得看的是与 full finetune、LoRA、经典 adapter 的遗忘曲线比较，以及近零约束强度对容量利用率的影响。","authors_note":"机构与作者信息从给定内容里无法完整确认。已知作者包括 Edouard Grave、Hervé Jégou。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a standard domain-extension trade-off: learning a new domain often degrades the original one, and popular PEFT methods like LoRA do not truly add controlled capacity. Adapters had largely fallen out of favor relative to LoRA, so this work revisits them with a design aimed at capacity growth with less interference.","importance":"This matters as a parameter-efficient route for continual pretraining and domain extension. The key lesson is that if newly added modules are explicitly constrained to behave like near-zero residuals on the original domain, the extra capacity can be reserved for new-domain specialization instead of perturbing old capabilities everywhere.","technical_approach":"Neutral residues is a redesigned adapter scheme, not a simple return to classic bottleneck adapters. The method jointly changes data, architecture, and training procedure, with the central constraint that each new residual block outputs values close to zero on the original domain. That keeps the base model behavior largely intact on old data while letting the added pathway absorb new-domain variation. Compared with LoRA, which directly alters the effective mapping of existing weights, this is a cleaner capacity-extension strategy with an explicit low-interference objective.","experiments":"The abstract says the method delivers strong results when extending a state-of-the-art model to a previously unseen domain, but it does not include model size, domain, data scale, baselines, or numerical gains. The important experimental angle is clearly the trade-off between new-domain improvement and old-domain retention; in the full paper, the most informative comparisons would be against full finetuning, LoRA, and standard adapters, plus ablations on how strict the near-zero constraint should be.","authors_note":"The provided information is insufficient to confirm full institutional details. Known authors include Edouard Grave and Hervé Jégou."},"tags":["adapter","domain-adaptation","capacity","continual-learning"],"notable_authors":["Edouard Grave","Hervé Jégou"]},{"id":"2412.17780","title":"PepTune: De Novo Generation of Therapeutic Peptides with Multi-Objective-Guided Discrete Diffusion","authors":["Sophia Tang","Yinuo Zhang","Pranam Chatterjee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ad","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.17780","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/TangZC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/TangZC25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/tang25n.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是治疗性肽分子生成里的多目标优化难题：既要生成合法的离散序列，又要同时优化多个药物属性，而传统生成或单目标引导往往顾此失彼。作者选择重新利用离散 diffusion，而不是只靠自回归或简单采样后筛选，因为后者在组合空间里效率和 Pareto 质量都有限。","importance":"从方法归类看，它首先是离散 diffusion/MDLM 范式向科学序列设计的迁移与扩展。对 pretrain 研究的意义不在具体生物应用，而在两个技术点：一是如何让 masked discrete diffusion 处理强约束离散结构；二是如何在 inference-time 对离散 diffusion 做多目标引导，这对更一般的非文本离散生成也有参考价值。","technical_approach":"作者提出 PepTune，建立在 MDLM 之上，但做了两类关键增强。第一类是训练侧：用 bond-dependent masking schedule 和 invalid loss 提高 peptide SMILES 的结构合法性，避免普通随机 mask 破坏关键键结构后学不到可恢复模式。第二类是推理侧：提出 Monte Carlo Tree Guidance，把 classifier-based reward 与搜索树扩展结合，在采样过程中平衡探索与利用，逐步逼近 Pareto-optimal 序列。它不走梯度引导路线，原因是离散空间里梯度估计噪声大、数据稀疏时很不稳，用树搜索更容易处理多目标和稀疏奖励。","experiments":"摘要声称能够生成多样、化学修饰充分且同时优化多个治疗属性的肽序列，但没有提供训练数据规模、模型规模、对比 baseline、合法率、性质提升或 Pareto 前沿指标，因此不能给出定量总结。可以确定的是，实验应验证两部分：结构合法性改进来自 masking/invalid loss，多目标优化收益来自 MCTG；如果看全文，最值得关注的是相对 AR、VAE 或标准 MDLM 的 Pareto front 质量，以及 guidance 计算成本。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles multi-objective therapeutic peptide generation, where the challenge is to produce valid discrete molecular sequences while optimizing several biological properties at once. Standard generators and single-objective guidance methods tend to trade one objective against another, and simple generate-then-filter pipelines are inefficient in a large combinatorial space.","importance":"Methodologically, this is an extension of discrete diffusion and MDLM-style modeling to structured scientific sequence design. Its broader relevance is not the peptide application itself, but two transferable ideas: how to adapt masked discrete diffusion to heavily constrained discrete structures, and how to perform multi-objective inference-time guidance in a discrete diffusion setting.","technical_approach":"PepTune builds on the MDLM framework and adds two main components. On the training side, it introduces a bond-dependent masking schedule and an invalid loss to preserve structural validity in peptide SMILES, addressing the fact that uniform masking can destroy chemically critical dependencies. On the inference side, it uses Monte Carlo Tree Guidance, which combines classifier-based rewards with tree expansion to balance exploration and exploitation while refining Pareto-optimal sequences. The choice of search-based guidance instead of gradient-based guidance is sensible in sparse, discrete spaces where gradient estimates can be unstable and weakly informative.","experiments":"The abstract claims diverse chemically modified peptides optimized for multiple therapeutic properties, but it does not report dataset size, model size, baselines, validity rates, reward gains, or Pareto metrics. The main experiments likely separate structural-validity gains from the masking and invalid-loss design, and multi-objective gains from MCTG. In the full paper, the most important comparisons would be against autoregressive, VAE, and vanilla MDLM baselines, plus the compute cost of search-time guidance.","authors_note":""},"tags":["discrete-diffusion","mdlm","masked-lm","generation"]},{"id":"2502.10390","title":"(How) Can Transformers Predict Pseudo-Random Numbers?","authors":["Tao Tao","Darshil Doshi","Dayal Singh Kalra","Tianyu He","Maissam Barkeshli"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ae","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.10390","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/TaoDKHB25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/TaoDKHB25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/tao25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文研究一个很适合做机制分析的问题：Transformer 能否学会预测伪随机数序列，尤其是在模数和参数未见过时还能 in-context 泛化。这个问题重要，是因为 LCG 序列表面上近似随机，但底层有明确算法结构，所以它能测试模型到底是在记模式、拟合统计，还是学到了某种可组合的算法。","importance":"它的价值主要在机制理解和泛化分析，而不是直接提升训练效果。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，Transformer 的 algorithmic generalization 不是全有或全无，而是依赖容量、数据多样性和输入表示；这类受控任务能帮助理解模型何时会形成接近程序执行的内部结构，何时只是在做局部插值。","technical_approach":"作者用线性同余生成器作为可控实验平台，系统研究 Transformer 在两类复杂度递增场景下的学习行为。重点不只是看最终预测对不对，还分析 embedding 层和 attention pattern，试图识别模型内部是否发展出与 LCG 递推规则相对应的算法结构。这样的设计比直接在自然语言任务上做解释更有说服力，因为生成机制已知、可验证，能把‘会做题’和‘学到算法’区分得更清楚。","experiments":"摘要明确说，只要模型容量足够、训练数据覆盖足够多样，Transformer 可以对未见模数 m 和参数 a,c 的 LCG 序列做 in-context prediction。但摘要没有给出层数、宽度、训练样本量、准确率曲线或失败边界的具体数字，因此不能写定量结果。可以确认的关键信号是：泛化需要足够容量与数据多样性共同支持；若看全文，最值得关注的是 tokenization/number representation 如何影响泛化，以及 attention 是否出现显式的模运算或状态跟踪分工。","authors_note":"机构信息无法确认。已知作者包括 Maissam Barkeshli。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a clean mechanistic question: can Transformers predict pseudo-random sequences from linear congruential generators, and can they generalize in context to unseen moduli and parameters? This matters because LCGs look random on the surface but are generated by a simple algorithm, making them a useful probe of whether the model is memorizing patterns, fitting statistics, or learning an algorithmic procedure.","importance":"The contribution is mainly about mechanism and generalization analysis rather than direct model improvement. For pretraining research, the takeaway is that algorithmic generalization in Transformers is graded rather than binary, and depends on capacity, data diversity, and representation. Controlled tasks like this help separate true procedure learning from local interpolation.","technical_approach":"The authors use LCG sequence prediction as a controlled testbed and study Transformer behavior in two scenarios of increasing complexity. Importantly, they do not stop at accuracy; they inspect embeddings and attention patterns to identify whether the model develops internal structures aligned with the recurrence rule. This makes the analysis stronger than post hoc interpretation on natural language tasks, because the underlying generative process is known and falsifiable.","experiments":"The abstract states that with sufficient architectural capacity and enough diversity in training data, Transformers can perform in-context prediction on LCG sequences with unseen moduli and parameters. However, it does not include layer counts, widths, training set size, accuracy numbers, or failure thresholds. The main reliable conclusion is that both capacity and data diversity are necessary. In the full paper, the most valuable details would be the effect of number representation and tokenization, and whether attention heads specialize into modular arithmetic or state-tracking roles.","authors_note":"Institutional information cannot be confirmed from the provided text. Known authors include Maissam Barkeshli."},"tags":["transformer","generalization","algorithmic-reasoning","sequence-modeling"],"notable_authors":["Maissam Barkeshli"]},{"id":"ThasarathanFFKD25","title":"Universal Sparse Autoencoders: Interpretable Cross-Model Concept Alignment","authors":["Harrish Thasarathan","Julian Forsyth","Thomas Fel","Matthew Kowal","Konstantinos G. Derpanis"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ThasarathanFFKD25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ThasarathanFFKD25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/thasarathan25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"从标题判断，这篇论文要解决的是 sparse autoencoder 学到的可解释特征如何在不同模型之间对齐，从而得到跨模型共享的概念空间。现有 SAE 往往在单模型内部做解释，导致概念粒度和坐标系都依赖具体模型，难以比较不同架构、不同规模或不同训练阶段的内部表征。","importance":"如果论文确实实现了‘universal’ SAE，那么它的价值会是机制分析方法级。对 pretrain 研究的意义在于，跨模型概念对齐可以把 interpretability 从单模型现象学推进到可比较科学：我们才能更稳地讨论某些语义特征是否随规模出现、是否被不同训练目标共享，以及 post-train 是否重写了预训练概念。","technical_approach":"给定信息只有标题，没有摘要，因此只能做保守判断。按标题推测，方法核心应是训练一种能在多个模型激活空间上共享或对齐字典的 sparse autoencoder，使同一 latent feature 对应跨模型相近概念，而不是每个模型各自学一套不可比的 feature basis。这样做的难点在于不同模型的激活分布、层级语义和坐标变换都不一致，因此有效方法通常需要显式对齐约束、共享投影，或在重建损失之外加入跨模型一致性目标；但具体实现无法确认。","experiments":"由于没有摘要，模型范围、数据、指标、baseline 和主要结论都无法确认，不能编造任何定量结果。若全文如标题所示，最值得看的是三类实验：跨模型概念匹配质量、在不同架构/规模上的可迁移性，以及这种统一 SAE 是否牺牲单模型重建或稀疏性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Based on the title, the paper appears to address how sparse autoencoders can align interpretable features across different models, rather than discovering concepts only within one model at a time. Standard SAE analyses are model-specific, which makes it hard to compare representations across architectures, scales, or training stages.","importance":"If the paper truly delivers a universal SAE, the contribution would be method-level for mechanistic interpretability. Its relevance to pretraining is that cross-model concept alignment could turn interpretability into a comparative tool: we could test whether certain semantic features emerge with scale, survive across objectives, or are rewritten by post-training.","technical_approach":"Only the title is provided, so any method description must remain tentative. The most likely idea is to train a sparse autoencoder whose latent dictionary is shared or aligned across activation spaces from multiple models, so that a latent feature corresponds to a comparable concept across models rather than a model-specific basis. The hard part is that activation distributions, semantic depth, and coordinate systems differ across models, so an effective method would usually need explicit alignment constraints, shared projections, or consistency losses beyond reconstruction; the exact design cannot be confirmed here.","experiments":"No abstract is available, so model scope, datasets, metrics, baselines, and conclusions cannot be verified, and no quantitative claim should be made. If the title reflects the actual contribution, the most important experiments would be cross-model concept matching quality, transfer across architectures and scales, and whether universality comes at the cost of reconstruction fidelity or sparsity.","authors_note":""},"tags":["sparse-autoencoder","interpretability","cross-model-alignment"]},{"id":"2502.05202","title":"Accelerating LLM Inference with Lossless Speculative Decoding Algorithms for Heterogeneous Vocabularies","authors":["Nadav Timor","Jonathan Mamou","Daniel Korat","Moshe Berchansky","Gaurav Jain","Oren Pereg","Moshe Wasserblat","David Harel"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$af","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.05202","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/TimorMKBJPWH25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/TimorMKBJPWH25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/timor25a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["speculative-decoding","vocabulary-mismatch","inference-acceleration"]},{"id":"2502.16282","title":"Understanding the Emergence of Multimodal Representation Alignment","authors":["Megan Tjandrasuwita","Chanakya Ekbote","Liu Ziyin","Paul Pu Liang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b0","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.16282","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/TjandrasuwitaE025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/TjandrasuwitaE025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/tjandrasuwita25a.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["representation-alignment","multimodal","scaling","emergence"]},{"id":"2411.11984","title":"Understanding Chain-of-Thought in LLMs through Information Theory","authors":["Jean-Francois Ton","Muhammad Faaiz Taufiq","Yang Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown impressive performance in complex reasoning tasks through the use of Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning, allowing models to break down problems into manageable sub-tasks. However, existing CoT evaluation techniques either require annotated CoT data or fall short in accurately assessing intermediate reasoning steps, leading to high rates of false positives. In this paper, we formalize CoT reasoning in LLMs through an information-theoretic lens. Specifically, our framework quantifies the `information-gain'at each reasoning step, enabling the identification of failure modes in LLMs without the need for expensive annotated datasets. We demonstrate the efficacy of our approach through extensive experiments on toy arithmetic, GSM8K and PRM800k datasets, where it significantly outperforms existing outcome-based methods by providing more accurate insights into model performance on individual subtasks.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.11984","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/TonT025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/TonT025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/ton25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["chain-of-thought","information-theory","reasoning","evaluation"]},{"id":"2507.06952","title":"What Has a Foundation Model Found? Using Inductive Bias to Probe for World Models","authors":["Keyon Vafa","Peter G. Chang","Ashesh Rambachan","Sendhil Mullainathan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b1","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.06952","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/VafaCRM25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/VafaCRM25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/vafa25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["world-model","foundation-model","inductive-bias","evaluation"]},{"id":"2510.26527","title":"polybasic Speculative Decoding Through a Theoretical Perspective","authors":["Ruilin Wang","Huixia Li","Yuexiao Ma","Xiawu Zheng","Fei Chao","Xuefeng Xiao","Rongrong Ji"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b2","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26527","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangLMZ00J25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangLMZ00J25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wang25az.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["speculative-decoding","inference","theory","latency"]},{"id":"WangW000D025","title":"GRU: Mitigating the Trade-off between Unlearning and Retention for LLMs","authors":["Yue Wang","Qizhou Wang","Feng Liu","Wei Huang","Yali Du","Xiaojiang Du","Bo Han"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangW000D025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangW000D025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wang25de.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"从标题看，这篇论文要解决的是 LLM unlearning 中最核心的矛盾：删得干净往往留不住通用能力，保留得多又删不彻底。现有遗忘方法经常在 unlearning efficacy 和 retention 之间做硬交换，因此很难在真实部署里兼顾合规删除与模型可用性。","importance":"如果方法可靠，这类工作对基座模型的 continual editing、数据删除合规和 post-train 安全都很重要，因为它直接影响“训练过的数据能否被可控移除”这一能力边界。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，参数中知识的纠缠程度、表示不变性以及后续微调鲁棒性，都会决定 unlearning 是否只是局部补丁还是可扩展机制。","technical_approach":"仅凭标题可以判断，作者提出了名为 GRU 的方法，目标是缓解 unlearning 与 retention 的 trade-off。但当前没有摘要，无法确认它到底是梯度重加权、表示约束、对抗目标、局部参数编辑，还是某种正则化框架；也无法说明与最接近已有方法相比，它保留了什么、舍弃了什么。","experiments":"当前没有摘要，因此无法确认实验设置、模型规模、遗忘基准、保留指标、以及具体提升幅度。唯一能安全给出的判断是，实验大概率围绕删除目标知识后的 attack success / extractability 与通用任务保真度之间的平衡展开，但不能据此写成确定事实。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Judging from the title, the paper addresses the central tension in LLM unlearning: stronger deletion often hurts retained utility, while better retention usually means incomplete forgetting. Existing methods frequently make this trade-off explicit, which limits their practical use in compliance-sensitive settings.","importance":"If the method is solid, this line of work matters for controllable data deletion, model editing, and post-training safety. For pretraining research, the deeper implication is about how entangled knowledge is in the parameters and whether unlearning can be made robust rather than acting as a local patch.","technical_approach":"The title indicates a method called GRU that aims to mitigate the unlearning–retention trade-off. However, without an abstract, it is not possible to state whether the mechanism is based on gradient reweighting, representation constraints, adversarial objectives, parameter editing, or some other regularization strategy.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so model sizes, benchmarks, forgetting metrics, retention metrics, and numerical gains cannot be confirmed. The only safe statement is that the evaluation likely studies the balance between removing target knowledge and preserving general utility, but that remains an inference rather than a verified result.","authors_note":""},"tags":["unlearning","llm","retention","alignment"]},{"id":"WangXB0CD25","title":"Efficient and Privacy-Preserving Soft Prompt Transfer for LLMs","authors":["Xun Wang","Jing Xu","Franziska Boenisch","Michael Backes","Christopher A. Choquette-Choo","Adam Dziedzic"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangXB0CD25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangXB0CD25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wang25ds.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"从标题判断，这篇论文试图解决 soft prompt transfer 中两个经常冲突的目标：一是迁移要高效，二是不能泄露源任务或源用户的信息。过去软提示迁移通常默认 prompt embedding 可以直接共享，但这在跨组织或隐私敏感场景里并不安全，而且迁移成本也不低。","importance":"如果方法成立，这属于参数高效适配与隐私保护交叉处的实用工作。它对 pretrain 本身不是直接冲击，但对大模型生态很 relevant：软提示被广泛当作轻量适配接口，如果 transfer 既高效又隐私可控，会直接影响多租户部署、协作训练和 prompt-as-asset 这类场景。","technical_approach":"标题表明作者提出了一种高效且隐私保护的 soft prompt transfer 方法。合理推测它会在提示表示变换、压缩、扰动或安全协议上做设计，以便在不暴露原始 prompt 信息的前提下实现迁移；但没有摘要，无法确认它依赖差分隐私、安全聚合、蒸馏式迁移，还是某种表示映射机制，也无法说明效率收益来自减少参数、减少通信还是减少优化步骤。","experiments":"当前没有摘要，因此无法确认实验覆盖哪些任务、使用哪些基座模型、采用哪种隐私威胁模型，以及 accuracy 与 privacy loss 的量化权衡。也无法判断它相比直接共享 soft prompt、LoRA transfer 或 full fine-tuning 的具体优势有多大。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The title suggests that the paper addresses a common tension in soft prompt transfer: transfer should be efficient, but it should also avoid leaking information about the source task or user. Standard soft prompt sharing is lightweight, but not necessarily privacy-safe in cross-party settings.","importance":"If validated, this is a practically useful contribution at the intersection of parameter-efficient adaptation and privacy. It does not directly change pretraining, but it matters for the broader LLM stack because soft prompts are increasingly used as an adaptation interface. Safe and efficient transfer would affect multi-tenant deployment and collaborative model customization.","technical_approach":"The title indicates an efficient and privacy-preserving method for soft prompt transfer. A plausible design would involve transforming, compressing, perturbing, or securely communicating prompt representations so that useful task information transfers without exposing the original prompt content. Without the abstract, however, the exact mechanism and source of efficiency gains cannot be verified.","experiments":"No abstract is available, so the tasks, backbone models, threat model, privacy guarantees, and utility trade-offs remain unknown. It is therefore not possible to quantify how it compares with direct prompt sharing, LoRA transfer, or full fine-tuning.","authors_note":""},"tags":["soft-prompt","privacy","parameter-efficient-tuning","transfer-learning"]},{"id":"WangXZWADS0025","title":"Improving Model Alignment Through Collective Intelligence of Open-Source Models","authors":["Junlin Wang","Roy Xie","Shang Zhu","Jue Wang","Ben Athiwaratkun","Bhuwan Dhingra","Shuaiwen Leon Song","Ce Zhang","James Zou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangXZWADS0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangXZWADS0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wang25dr.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"从标题看，这篇论文要解决的是模型对齐成本高、闭源教师稀缺的问题，尝试利用多个开源模型的集体智能来改进目标模型 alignment。过去常见做法依赖单一强教师或人工偏好数据，但单教师容易带偏见，人工数据又贵且覆盖有限。","importance":"这类工作对 post-train 很直接，对 pretrain-interface 也有价值，因为它涉及训练信号如何从多模型协同中合成。重要性在于：如果多个开源模型的判断能稳定聚合出更好的偏好/回复监督，那么 alignment 不再必须依赖单一 frontier teacher，这会改变对齐数据供给方式和训练成本结构。","technical_approach":"标题暗示方法核心是聚合多个开源模型的响应、偏好或批评信号，形成更强的集体监督，再用于改进目标模型。它相对单教师蒸馏的潜在优势，是能平均掉个体模型的盲点，并利用模型间分歧作为不确定性信号；代价则是聚合规则本身可能把噪声放大，而且如果参与模型共享同类偏见，集体智能并不会自动变成高质量监督。没有摘要，无法确认作者采用投票、rank aggregation、debate、judge ensemble 还是合成偏好学习。","experiments":"目前缺少摘要，因此无法确认目标模型规模、参与的开源教师集合、使用的是 SFT 还是 preference optimization、以及具体提升指标。也无法判断该方法在 helpfulness、harmlessness、truthfulness 或 reward model 评估上分别改善多少。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"From the title, the paper targets the cost and brittleness of alignment pipelines that rely on a single strong teacher or expensive human preference data. The proposed direction is to improve alignment by leveraging the collective intelligence of multiple open-source models.","importance":"This is directly relevant to post-training and also useful for the pretrain–posttrain interface because it changes how supervision signals can be synthesized. If multiple open models can be aggregated into better alignment signals, frontier-quality alignment no longer depends as heavily on one proprietary teacher. That would matter for data generation cost and alignment scalability.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is to aggregate responses, preferences, critiques, or judgments from multiple open-source models and use that aggregated signal to train a target model. Compared with single-teacher distillation, the advantage is potential error averaging and the ability to use disagreement as uncertainty information. The trade-off is that bad aggregation can amplify noise, and correlated biases across models do not disappear automatically. Without the abstract, the actual aggregation mechanism cannot be confirmed.","experiments":"No abstract is available, so the target model size, teacher pool, training recipe, and exact evaluation gains cannot be stated. It is also unclear whether improvements are concentrated on helpfulness, safety, truthfulness, or reward-model judged preference win rate.","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","model-merging","data-synthesis","open-models"],"notable_authors":["Ben Athiwaratkun"]},{"id":"2502.04348","title":"Prompt-based Depth Pruning of Large Language Models","authors":["Juyun Wee","Minjae Park","Jaeho Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Depth pruning aims to reduce the inference cost of a large language model without any hardware-specific complications, by simply removing several less important transformer blocks. However, our empirical findings suggest that the importance of a transformer block may be highly task-dependent -- a block that is crucial for a task can be removed without degrading the accuracy on another task. Based on this observation, we develop a dynamic depth pruning algorithm, coined PuDDing (Prompt-routed Dynamic Depth Pruning), which determines which blocks to omit from the model based on the input prompt. PuDDing operates by training a lightweight router to predict the best omission set among a set of options, where this option set has also been constructed in a data-driven manner. Empirical results on commonsense reasoning benchmarks demonstrate that PuDDing effectively accelerates the inference language models, and achieves better on-task performance than static depth pruning baselines.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.04348","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WeePL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WeePL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wee25a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心结论是：LLM 的层重要性强烈依赖任务，因此静态 depth pruning 很容易在某些任务上删错层。过去深度裁剪通常寻找一组全局可删层，但作者发现，同一层对一个任务至关重要，对另一个任务却可以移除而几乎不掉点，这说明固定剪枝方案天然受限。","importance":"这是推理效率方向的方法级工作，对 serving 很直接，对理解模型内部功能分工也有启发。它的重要性在于把 depth pruning 从“离线选一个通用子网络”推进到“根据 prompt 动态路由层使用”，这更符合 LLM 在多任务场景下的实际计算需求。对大模型研究者，这也侧面说明 block specialization 比很多静态压缩设定假设得更强。","technical_approach":"作者提出 PuDDing，一种基于 prompt 路由的动态深度裁剪方法。核心不是逐层打分后在线决定跳过与否，而是先用数据驱动方式构造一组候选 omission set，再训练一个轻量 router 根据输入 prompt 预测当前最合适的删层方案。这个设计比逐 token 或逐层动态控制更稳，因为搜索空间被压缩到了少量高质量选项；同时又比固定子网灵活，因为不同输入可走不同深度路径。代价是候选集质量很关键，如果预构造的 omission set 覆盖不全，router 再好也选不出最优路径。","experiments":"摘要明确给出的事实是：作者先实证证明 block importance 高度 task-dependent，再在此基础上提出 PuDDing，并在多种设定下取得经验优势。摘要没有提供所用模型规模、保留层数、延迟/吞吐收益、以及相对静态 depth pruning 的精确准确率差距，因此目前只能确认它在方法逻辑上成立：动态按 prompt 选择删层，比全局固定删层更符合任务异质性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The main claim is that transformer block importance is strongly task-dependent, which makes static depth pruning fundamentally limited. A block that is essential for one task may be safely removed for another, so any single global pruning pattern will inevitably be suboptimal somewhere.","importance":"This is an inference-efficiency method with direct serving relevance and some interpretability value. The important shift is from choosing one universal shallow subnetwork to routing different prompts through different depth profiles. For LLM practitioners, that is a more realistic view of compute allocation in multi-task settings and a useful signal that block specialization is stronger than many static compression methods assume.","technical_approach":"The paper proposes PuDDing, a prompt-routed dynamic depth pruning method. The key idea is not to make a fully open-ended per-layer decision online. Instead, it first builds a data-driven set of candidate omission patterns and then trains a lightweight router to pick the best option for a given prompt. This keeps routing tractable while still allowing task-specific depth usage. Compared with a fixed pruned model, it is more adaptive; compared with unrestricted dynamic control, it is more stable and easier to train. The main limitation is obvious: if the candidate omission set is poorly constructed, the router can only choose among mediocre options.","experiments":"The abstract clearly states two findings: block importance is highly task-dependent, and the proposed prompt-routed method yields empirical gains over standard depth pruning practice. It does not provide model sizes, pruning ratios, latency or throughput improvements, or exact accuracy differences, so the safe conclusion is conceptual and method-level rather than numerical.","authors_note":""},"tags":["depth-pruning","llm","task-adaptive","compression"]},{"id":"2506.03700","title":"AdaDecode: Accelerating LLM Decoding with Adaptive Layer Parallelism","authors":["Zhepei Wei","Wei-Lin Chen","Xinyu Zhu","Yu Meng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b3","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.03700","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WeiCZ025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WeiCZ025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wei25a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"自回归LLM解码的逐token串行特性严重限制了长内容生成（如长CoT推理）的效率，现有加速方法要么需要额外drafter模型增加显存开销（投机解码），要么因跳层导致KV cache不一致而影响输出质量（层跳过）。本文要在不引入辅助模型的前提下，利用层间并行来加速解码。","importance":"方法级贡献。提出了一种不依赖drafter模型的解码加速方案，对长序列生成场景（长CoT、长文档）有直接的工程价值。对pretrain研究的启示在于：它揭示了LLM不同层之间存在可利用的并行冗余，这与层跳过/early exit等研究方向相呼应，有助于理解深层Transformer的计算分配。","technical_approach":"核心思路是自适应层并行（Adaptive Layer Parallelism）：在解码时动态判断哪些层可以并行执行而非串行，从而减少每个token的wall-clock时间。与投机解码的关键区别是不需要额外的小模型做draft，与层跳过的区别是通过并行而非跳过来保持输出一致性，避免KV cache缺失问题。具体的自适应判断机制和并行调度策略是方法的关键设计点。","experiments":"摘要截断，具体实验数据不完整。从标题和方法描述推断，主要对比baseline应包括标准自回归解码、投机解码和层跳过方法，评估指标应涵盖加速比和生成质量。","authors_note":"作者包括Yu Meng，曾在文本生成和LLM相关方向有多篇工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Autoregressive decoding's sequential token-by-token nature is a major bottleneck for long-content generation (e.g., long CoT). Existing speedups either require an auxiliary drafter model (speculative decoding) adding memory overhead, or skip layers causing KV cache inconsistencies. This work aims to accelerate decoding via adaptive layer parallelism without auxiliary models.","importance":"A method-level contribution offering drafter-free decoding acceleration. Relevant to pretrain research because it exposes exploitable parallelism redundancy across Transformer layers, connecting to broader questions about compute allocation in deep models.","technical_approach":"The key idea is Adaptive Layer Parallelism: dynamically identifying which layers can execute in parallel during decoding rather than sequentially. Unlike speculative decoding, no draft model is needed. Unlike layer skipping, it avoids KV cache gaps by parallelizing rather than omitting layers. The adaptive scheduling mechanism determines parallelizable layers on the fly.","experiments":"Abstract is truncated; full experimental details unavailable. Expected baselines include standard AR decoding, speculative decoding, and layer skipping, with metrics on speedup ratio and generation quality.","authors_note":"Yu Meng has published extensively on text generation and LLM-related topics."},"tags":["llm-decoding","layer-parallelism","inference-acceleration"],"notable_authors":["Yu Meng"]},{"id":"WenZP25","title":"An Efficient Pruner for Large Language Model with Theoretical Guarantee","authors":["Canhong Wen","Yihong Zuo","Wenliang Pan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WenZP25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WenZP25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wen25h.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM剪枝（pruning）在实践中缺乏理论保证，现有方法多为启发式设计。本文旨在提出一种有理论保证的高效LLM剪枝方法。","importance":"方法级贡献，属于模型压缩/效率方向。对pretrain研究的间接价值在于：理解哪些参数可以被安全移除，有助于理解pretrain模型的参数冗余结构和信息分布。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失，无法提供具体技术细节。从标题推断，核心卖点是在剪枝效率和理论保证之间取得平衡。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法提供实验细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLM pruning methods largely lack theoretical guarantees and rely on heuristics. This work aims to provide an efficient pruner for LLMs with provable guarantees.","importance":"A method-level contribution in model compression/efficiency. Indirectly relevant to pretrain research: understanding which parameters can be safely removed informs our understanding of parameter redundancy in pretrained models.","technical_approach":"Abstract unavailable; specific technical details cannot be provided. From the title, the key contribution appears to be balancing pruning efficiency with theoretical guarantees.","experiments":"Abstract unavailable; no experimental details can be provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm-pruning","compression","theoretical-guarantee"]},{"id":"WollschlagerEGC25","title":"The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models: Concept Cones and Representational Independence","authors":["Tom Wollschläger","Jannes Elstner","Simon Geisler","Vincent Cohen-Addad","Stephan Günnemann","Johannes Gasteiger"],"institutions":["TU Munich","Google Research"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WollschlagerEGC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WollschlagerEGC25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wollschlager25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM的拒绝行为（refusal）在表示空间中是如何编码的？已有工作发现存在'拒绝方向'，但对其几何结构缺乏深入理解。本文研究拒绝行为的几何结构，提出concept cones和表示独立性的概念。","importance":"机制分析级贡献，对理解LLM对齐和安全机制有价值。对pretrain研究的启示在于：拒绝行为的几何结构反映了pretrain+alignment后模型表示空间的组织方式，理解这种结构有助于设计更好的对齐训练策略，也与jailbreak防御相关。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失，无法提供完整技术细节。从标题推断，核心贡献是：1）发现拒绝行为在表示空间中形成cone结构（而非简单的线性方向）；2）提出representational independence概念来描述拒绝与其他能力的解耦程度。这比之前的'拒绝方向'理解更精细。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法提供实验细节。","authors_note":"Stephan Günnemann是TU Munich教授，在图神经网络和鲁棒ML方面有代表性工作。Vincent Cohen-Addad来自Google Research。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How is refusal behavior encoded in LLM representation space? Prior work identified 'refusal directions' but lacked deeper geometric understanding. This work studies the geometry of refusal, proposing concept cones and representational independence.","importance":"A mechanistic analysis contribution relevant to understanding LLM alignment and safety. For pretrain research, the geometric structure of refusal reveals how the representation space is organized after pretraining+alignment, informing better alignment training strategies and jailbreak defenses.","technical_approach":"Abstract unavailable for full details. From the title: 1) refusal behavior forms cone structures in representation space (not just linear directions); 2) introduces representational independence to characterize how decoupled refusal is from other capabilities. This is a more nuanced understanding than prior 'refusal direction' work.","experiments":"Abstract unavailable; no experimental details can be provided.","authors_note":"Stephan Günnemann is a professor at TU Munich with notable work on graph neural networks and robust ML. Vincent Cohen-Addad is from Google Research."},"tags":["refusal","interpretability","representation-geometry","safety"],"notable_authors":["Stephan Günnemann","Vincent Cohen-Addad"]},{"id":"Wu00WGD0025","title":"AlphaDPO: Adaptive Reward Margin for Direct Preference Optimization","authors":["Junkang Wu","Xue Wang","Zhengyi Yang","Jiancan Wu","Jinyang Gao","Bolin Ding","Xiang Wang","Xiangnan He"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Wu00WGD0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Wu00WGD0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wu25af.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"DPO（Direct Preference Optimization）使用固定的reward margin来区分偏好对，但不同样本对的难度差异很大，固定margin导致简单样本过拟合、困难样本欠拟合。本文提出自适应reward margin来改进DPO。","importance":"方法级贡献，属于posttrain对齐方向。对pretrain研究的价值在于：DPO是当前主流的对齐方法之一，其改进直接影响pretrain→posttrain闭环的效果。自适应margin的思路也可能启发pretrain阶段的数据加权策略。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失，无法提供完整技术细节。从标题AlphaDPO推断，核心是为每个偏好对动态计算reward margin（可能基于样本难度或模型置信度），替代DPO中的固定margin。这类似于分类任务中focal loss的思路——对难样本给更大权重。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法提供实验细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"DPO uses a fixed reward margin for all preference pairs, but sample difficulty varies widely, causing overfitting on easy pairs and underfitting on hard ones. This work proposes adaptive reward margins for DPO.","importance":"A method-level contribution in posttrain alignment. Relevant to pretrain research as DPO improvements directly affect the pretrain→posttrain pipeline. The adaptive margin idea may also inspire data weighting strategies during pretraining.","technical_approach":"Abstract unavailable for full details. From the title AlphaDPO, the core idea is dynamically computing reward margins per preference pair (likely based on sample difficulty or model confidence), replacing DPO's fixed margin. Analogous to focal loss in classification—upweighting hard samples.","experiments":"Abstract unavailable; no experimental details can be provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["dpo","reward-margin","alignment","preference-optimization"]},{"id":"WuAG00JMP25","title":"AxBench: Steering LLMs? Even Simple Baselines Outperform Sparse Autoencoders","authors":["Zhengxuan Wu","Aryaman Arora","Atticus Geiger","Zheng Wang","Jing Huang","Dan Jurafsky","Christopher D. Manning","Christopher Potts"],"institutions":["Stanford University"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WuAG00JMP25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WuAG00JMP25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wu25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Sparse Autoencoders（SAE）近来被广泛用于LLM的可解释性和模型steering（通过激活特定特征来控制模型行为），但其实际steering效果是否真的优于简单baseline缺乏系统评估。本文构建AxBench来系统评测，发现简单baseline就能超过SAE。","importance":"评测/分析级贡献，对可解释性和模型控制研究有重要校准价值。对pretrain研究的启示在于：SAE被认为能揭示pretrain模型的内部特征结构，但如果其steering效果不如简单方法，说明我们对pretrain表示空间的理解可能需要重新审视。Zhengxuan Wu是Stanford的mechanistic interpretability方向的活跃研究者。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失，无法提供完整技术细节。从标题和描述推断，AxBench是一个系统性的LLM steering评测基准，对比SAE-based steering与简单baseline（如线性探针、激活加法等）。核心发现是SAE在steering任务上并不优于这些简单方法，挑战了SAE在模型控制方面的价值假设。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法提供实验细节。预期包含多种SAE变体和简单baseline在多个steering任务上的系统对比。","authors_note":"Zhengxuan Wu来自Stanford，是mechanistic interpretability和causal abstraction方向的活跃研究者。Atticus Geiger也是该方向的代表性人物。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs) are increasingly used for LLM interpretability and model steering, but whether they actually outperform simple baselines for steering lacks systematic evaluation. This work builds AxBench and finds simple baselines beat SAEs.","importance":"An evaluation/analysis contribution that recalibrates expectations for SAE-based model control. For pretrain research: if SAE steering underperforms simple methods, our understanding of pretrained representation structure via SAEs may need reassessment.","technical_approach":"Abstract unavailable for full details. AxBench is a systematic LLM steering benchmark comparing SAE-based steering against simple baselines (likely linear probes, activation addition, etc.). The key finding is that SAEs do not outperform these simple methods for steering, challenging SAE's assumed value for model control.","experiments":"Abstract unavailable. Expected to include systematic comparisons of multiple SAE variants against simple baselines across diverse steering tasks.","authors_note":"Zhengxuan Wu is from Stanford, active in mechanistic interpretability and causal abstraction. Atticus Geiger is also a prominent figure in this direction."},"tags":["sparse-autoencoder","llm-steering","interpretability","benchmark"],"notable_authors":["Zhengxuan Wu","Atticus Geiger"]},{"id":"XieWRKL25","title":"Structured Preconditioners in Adaptive Optimization: A Unified Analysis","authors":["Shuo Xie","Tianhao Wang","Sashank J. Reddi","Sanjiv Kumar","Zhiyuan Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/XieWRKL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/XieWRKL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/xie25j.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["optimizer","preconditioner","training-stability","theory"]},{"id":"XieZFJ25","title":"Robust Reward Alignment via Hypothesis Space Batch Cutting","authors":["Zhixian Xie","Haode Zhang","Yizhe Feng","Wanxin Jin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/XieZFJ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/XieZFJ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/xie25l.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["reward-model","alignment","robustness","rlhf"]},{"id":"2410.05603","title":"Everything Everywhere All at Once: LLMs can In-Context Learn Multiple Tasks in Superposition","authors":["Zheyang Xiong","Ziyang Cai","John Cooper","Albert Ge","Vasilis Papageorgiou","Zack Sifakis","Angeliki Giannou","Ziqian Lin","Liu Yang","Saurabh Agarwal","Grigorios Chrysos","Samet Oymak","Kangwook Lee","Dimitris Papailiopoulos"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b4","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.05603","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/XiongCCGPSGL0A025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/XiongCCGPSGL0A025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/xiong25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["icl","superposition","generalization","reasoning"]},{"id":"2502.14317","title":"ParallelComp: Parallel Long-Context Compressor for Length Extrapolation","authors":["Jing Xiong","Jianghan Shen","Chuanyang Zheng","Zhongwei Wan","Chenyang Zhao","Chiwun Yang","Fanghua Ye","Hongxia Yang","Lingpeng Kong","Ngai Wong"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b5","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.14317","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/XiongSZWZY0YK025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/XiongSZWZY0YK025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/xiong25b.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["long-context","compression","length-extrapolation","inference"]},{"id":"2502.14074","title":"Investigating Non-Transitivity in LLM-as-a-Judge","authors":["Yi Xu","Laura Ruis","Tim Rocktäschel","Robert Kirk"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b6","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.14074","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/XuRRK25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/XuRRK25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/xu25w.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["llm-as-a-judge","evaluation","preference-modeling","alignment"]},{"id":"2411.12882","title":"ProSec: Fortifying Code LLMs with Proactive Security Alignment","authors":["Xiangzhe Xu","Zian Su","Jinyao Guo","Kaiyuan Zhang","Zhenting Wang","Xiangyu Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b7","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.12882","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/XuSG0W025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/XuSG0W025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/xu25aa.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：代码 LLM 会稳定地产生带漏洞的代码，但现有安全对齐主要依赖真实漏洞数据做指令微调，数据稀缺、覆盖窄，而且很难适配多阶段 post-training 流水线。问题现在值得重做，是因为代码模型已经进入真实开发链路，安全错误不是回答风格问题，而是会直接变成可执行缺陷。","importance":"这是一个偏 post-train 接口层的方法工作，价值在于把“安全对齐”从被动收集漏洞样本，推进到主动暴露模型脆弱性再回灌训练信号。对 pretrain 研究的启示不在于改变基础建模范式，而在于说明代码域对齐数据的稀缺性可以通过模型自暴露、自生成困难样本来缓解，这和合成数据、red teaming、reward 设计是同一闭环里的问题。","technical_approach":"核心方法是一个 proactive security alignment 框架，重点不是只喂更多安全数据，而是系统性诱发模型暴露潜在漏洞生成倾向，再把这些失败样本转成安全对齐信号。按摘要可确认的设计看，它针对现有真实漏洞数据覆盖不足的问题，走的是“先找模型会犯什么错，再围绕这些错训练”的路线；这比直接收集 CVE 风格样本更可扩展，也更适合接在现代多阶段后训练流程里。摘要被截断，具体是如何构造触发、如何筛选脆弱代码、以及采用 SFT、偏好优化还是迭代自训练，当前信息不足，不能再细化。","experiments":"摘要没有给出模型规模、数据规模、基线和具体指标，因此不能判断它是显著提升还是中等增益。可以确定的是，论文应当围绕代码安全生成质量而不是通用代码能力做评测，合理预期会比较 instruction tuning on vulnerability datasets 这类基线，并考察多阶段后训练兼容性；但没有数字就不能代填。现阶段只能保守判断：如果它的收益主要来自主动挖掘失败样本，那么最关键的实验应当是对未见漏洞模式的泛化和在不显著损害功能正确率前提下的安全提升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical failure mode: code LLMs can generate insecure code, while existing safety alignment mostly relies on scarce real-world vulnerability data and does not fit well into modern multi-stage post-training pipelines. This matters now because code models are increasingly used in real development workflows, where a safety miss becomes an executable bug rather than a harmless bad response.","importance":"This is mainly a post-training method paper, but its broader value is in reframing security alignment from passive data collection to proactive vulnerability exposure. For pretraining researchers, the takeaway is not a new base modeling paradigm; it is that domain-specific alignment data scarcity can be reduced by eliciting model failures and feeding them back into training, which connects directly to synthetic data generation, red teaming, and reward design.","technical_approach":"The method is a proactive security alignment framework that aims to systematically surface a code model's vulnerability tendencies and convert those failures into alignment signals. The key design choice, based on the available abstract, is to train on model-exposed weaknesses instead of depending only on harvested CVE-style examples. That is more scalable and better suited to multi-stage post-training. The abstract is truncated, so the exact mechanism—how failure cases are triggered, filtered, and optimized over—cannot be stated reliably.","experiments":"The abstract provides no model sizes, data sizes, baselines, or quantitative results, so the empirical strength cannot be assessed precisely. What can be inferred is that evaluation is likely centered on secure code generation rather than generic coding ability, with comparisons against vulnerability-data instruction tuning and possibly compatibility with multi-stage alignment recipes. Without numbers, the most meaningful expected checks would be generalization to unseen vulnerability patterns and security gains under limited regression on functional correctness.","authors_note":""},"tags":["code-llm","security","alignment","sft"]},{"id":"2503.16428","title":"XAttention: Block Sparse Attention with Antidiagonal Scoring","authors":["Ruyi Xu","Guangxuan Xiao","Haofeng Huang","Junxian Guo","Song Han"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b8","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.16428","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/XuXHG025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/XuXHG025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/xu25ag.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是长上下文 Transformer 推理里 attention 二次复杂度过高，而现有 block sparse 方法又常常把“哪些块重要”这一步做得太贵，最后省下的算力被打回去。作者抓的不是稀疏注意力这个老问题本身，而是稀疏化判分机制的成本和精度失衡。","importance":"这是一个偏系统与推理效率的方法，重要性在于它试图把长上下文稀疏 attention 从“理论上省”变成“实际可插拔地省”。对 pretrain 本身不是直接增益，但对长上下文训练和 serving 都有现实启发：若块重要性可以用极便宜的 proxy 近似，很多需要昂贵 top-k 打分或额外预测器的稀疏方案就没必要了。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 XAttention，一个 plug-and-play 的 block sparse attention 框架，关键创新是用 attention matrix 反对角线元素和作为 block importance 的 proxy。这个选择的意义在于，它绕开了对每个块做完整细粒度打分的高成本步骤，用一个结构化、可快速计算的统计量近似判断哪些块值得保留。和已有方法相比，它不是训练一个额外重要性模型，也不是完全靠固定模式稀疏，而是在保持数据依赖性的同时，把判分代价压低。这个设计能否成立，取决于反对角线和是否真的稳定对应跨位置依赖强度；摘要的主张是这个 proxy 足够强。","experiments":"摘要没有给出具体模型、上下文长度、速度提升倍数和精度损失数字，因此无法判断它相对 FlashAttention 类 dense kernel 或其他 sparse baselines 的优势幅度。可以确认的是，论文声称在 Transformer 长上下文推理上实现了显著加速，同时较精确地识别并剪除非关键块。最关键的实验应该包括：不同序列长度下的 wall-clock speedup、困惑度或任务精度退化、以及 proxy 质量和真实块重要性的相关性；如果这些曲线稳定，方法才真正有落地价值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical bottleneck in long-context Transformers: quadratic attention is expensive, and many block-sparse methods spend too much compute estimating which blocks matter, giving back much of the theoretical savings. The real target is not sparse attention in general, but the cost-accuracy trade-off in block importance estimation.","importance":"This is primarily a systems and inference-efficiency contribution. Its value is in making sparse attention more deployable by replacing costly importance scoring with a cheap proxy. The pretraining implication is indirect but relevant: if block importance can be approximated cheaply enough, long-context training and serving may not need heavy auxiliary scoring modules or overly rigid fixed sparsity patterns.","technical_approach":"XAttention is a plug-and-play block-sparse attention framework whose main idea is to use the sum of antidiagonal entries in the attention matrix as a proxy for block importance. That choice matters because it preserves data-dependent sparsity while avoiding the cost of fine-grained scoring for every block. Unlike methods that train extra selectors or rely purely on fixed masks, this approach aims to keep adaptive pruning with much lower overhead. The central question is whether this antidiagonal statistic is consistently aligned with useful long-range dependencies; the paper claims it is.","experiments":"The abstract does not report model sizes, context lengths, speedups, or quality-retention numbers, so the empirical magnitude cannot be pinned down. What is clear is that the paper claims substantial long-context inference acceleration with precise pruning of non-essential blocks. The critical evidence should include wall-clock speedup across context lengths, quality loss on perplexity or downstream tasks, and correlation between the proxy score and true block importance. Without those, practical value would remain uncertain.","authors_note":""},"tags":["long-context","sparse-attention","attention","efficiency"]},{"id":"XuZ25","title":"Meta-Reinforcement Learning with Adaptation from Human Feedback via Preference-Order-Preserving Task Embedding","authors":["Siyuan Xu","Minghui Zhu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/XuZ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/XuZ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/xu25ao.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文从标题看要解决的是：在 meta-RL 里利用人类反馈做快速适应，但又不希望任务嵌入破坏偏好顺序信息。传统做法往往把反馈当奖励回归或偏好学习问题单独处理，难点在于跨任务泛化时，学到的任务表示未必保留人类偏好结构。","importance":"仅从标题判断，这是 RLHF 与 meta-learning 的交叉方法，对 pretrain 的直接关联较弱，更偏 post-train / decision making。它的潜在价值在于把“偏好保持的任务表示”作为快速适应载体，如果做得好，会对多任务对齐、个性化偏好控制和数据效率有启发；但没有摘要，无法判断贡献量级。","technical_approach":"从标题可推断，方法核心是 preference-order-preserving task embedding：把人类反馈诱导出的偏好顺序约束进任务嵌入，再用于 meta-RL 适应。这个设计的意图很明确：不是只拟合一个静态奖励函数，而是让任务表示本身携带可迁移的偏好结构，从而在新任务上更快对齐。没有摘要，无法确认其采用 pairwise preference、ranking loss、context encoder 还是 MAML/上下文式 meta-RL 框架，也无法确认它与标准 RLHF 或 PEFT 的关系。","experiments":"没有摘要，因此没有数据集、环境、基线、指标和数字。最应该关注的实验会是：新任务 few-shot 适应速度、对偏好顺序扰动的鲁棒性、以及与直接 reward modeling 或不保序任务嵌入方法相比的泛化差距。没有这些信息，不能给出更具体判断。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"From the title, the paper appears to address a meta-RL setting where adaptation should be guided by human feedback without losing the ordering structure of preferences in the task representation. The likely issue with prior work is that feedback is often modeled as rewards or preferences in isolation, while cross-task adaptation depends on whether the learned task embedding actually preserves what humans prefer.","importance":"Based on the title alone, this is a post-training and decision-making paper rather than a direct pretraining contribution. Its potential significance lies in treating preference-preserving task representations as the unit of fast adaptation, which could matter for multi-task alignment, personalized preference control, and data efficiency. With no abstract, the contribution scale cannot be assessed.","technical_approach":"The method likely centers on a preference-order-preserving task embedding that encodes human feedback into a task representation used by meta-RL. The design rationale is sensible: instead of only fitting a reward model, preserve transferable preference structure inside the task embedding so adaptation to new tasks becomes faster and more aligned. Without an abstract, the exact formulation—pairwise preferences, ranking losses, context encoders, or a specific meta-RL backbone—cannot be stated reliably.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so there are no confirmed environments, datasets, baselines, metrics, or quantitative results. The most important evidence would be few-shot adaptation on unseen tasks, robustness to preference-order perturbations, and comparison against direct reward modeling or task embeddings that do not preserve preference order. Anything more specific would be speculation.","authors_note":""},"tags":["meta-rl","human-feedback","preference-learning","alignment"]},{"id":"2412.04141","title":"Reducing Tool Hallucination via Reliability Alignment","authors":["Hongshen Xu","Zichen Zhu","Lei Pan","Zihan Wang","Su Zhu","Da Ma","Ruisheng Cao","Lu Chen","Kai Yu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b9","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.04141","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/XuZPWZMC0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/XuZPWZMC0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/xu25ap.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是工具调用型 LLM 中的 tool hallucination，也就是模型要么选错工具，要么工具用法出错，而现有评测和对齐通常只看最终任务成功率，没把这类失败系统化拆开。这个问题值得单独处理，因为工具调用一旦出错，不只是回答质量下降，还会带来外部 API 成本、执行错误和系统不可靠。","importance":"这是一个较完整的 reliability 方向工作，贡献覆盖了问题定义、基准和对齐方法三层。对 pretrain 的直接冲击有限，但对 agentic LLM 和 post-train 很有意义：它提醒我们，面向工具使用的模型不能只用答案正确率训练，必须把“何时该调用、调用后是否按规约使用”显式纳入训练信号和评测指标。","technical_approach":"核心方法包含两部分：先提出 RelyToolBench，把 tool hallucination 分成 tool selection hallucination 和 tool usage hallucination，并设计面向 hallucination-aware 成功率与效率的指标；再提出 Relign 做 reliability alignment。这个设计的关键判断是，工具错误不是单一现象，若不把“选错工具”和“用错工具”拆开，训练信号会非常混杂。相比只做工具调用 SFT 或只看 end-task success 的方法，它更强调过程可靠性，并把成本/效率一起纳入优化目标，这对真实系统更重要。","experiments":"摘要没有给出模型名称、参数规模、数据量和具体提升数字，因此无法量化效果强弱。可以确定的是，实验会依托 RelyToolBench 对两类 hallucination 分别评测，并比较 reliability alignment 前后的任务成功率与效率。若论文做得扎实，最有价值的结果应当包括：在维持或提升成功率的同时减少不必要工具调用，以及区分 selection 和 usage 两类错误后，不同训练策略的收益差异。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets tool hallucination in tool-using LLMs: models either choose the wrong tool or misuse the selected tool, while existing evaluation often collapses these failures into coarse end-task success. This deserves separate treatment because tool errors affect not just answer quality, but API cost, execution correctness, and overall system reliability.","importance":"This is a fairly complete reliability paper spanning problem formulation, benchmark design, and alignment. Its direct impact on pretraining is limited, but it is highly relevant to agentic LLM post-training: it argues that tool-capable models should not be trained and evaluated only on final task correctness, but also on when to call tools and whether they follow tool-use constraints correctly.","technical_approach":"The contribution has two parts. First, RelyToolBench formalizes two categories of tool hallucination—selection hallucination and usage hallucination—and introduces metrics that account for hallucination-aware success and efficiency. Second, Relign performs reliability alignment using this framing. The key design choice is to separate choosing the wrong tool from using a tool incorrectly, because otherwise the training signal is too mixed. Compared with plain tool-use SFT or end-task-only optimization, this approach puts process reliability and cost efficiency at the center.","experiments":"The abstract does not include model names, parameter counts, dataset sizes, or quantitative improvements, so the empirical effect size is unclear. What can be inferred is that the experiments evaluate both hallucination types on RelyToolBench and compare reliability alignment before and after Relign. The most useful evidence would show reduced unnecessary tool calls while maintaining or improving task success, and different gains for selection versus usage errors under different training strategies.","authors_note":""},"tags":["tool-use","hallucination","alignment","reliability"]},{"id":"2502.00620","title":"Representations Shape Weak-to-Strong Generalization: Theoretical Insights and Empirical Predictions","authors":["Yihao Xue","Jiping Li","Baharan Mirzasoleiman"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ba","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.00620","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/XueLM25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/XueLM25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/xue25d.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解释 weak-to-strong generalization 为什么可能发生，而且不是停留在“强模型比弱模型容量大”这种粗解释上，而是试图刻画两者表征之间的结构关系。过去对 W2SG 的理解多半停在经验现象或粗粒度理论，现在值得深入，是因为它直接关系到用弱监督训练更强模型、以及对齐未来更强系统的可行性。","importance":"这是偏理论但对对齐和训练信号设计都很关键的工作。它的重要性不在给一个新算法，而在提供一个可操作的分析视角：W2SG 能否发生，与弱模型学不到但强模型表征可表达的那部分函数空间有关。对 pretrain/post-train 接口的启示很直接：监督信号不必完全强，只要强模型的表示里存在能从弱标签中被恢复出来的结构，超越教师就有可能。","technical_approach":"核心方法是用弱模型和强模型内部表示的主成分构造 kernel，并用这些 kernel 描述两者可学习函数空间的差异。作者的关键观点是，W2SG 的条件可以表述为：存在一部分由强模型表示支持、但弱模型表示无法充分捕捉的结构，而弱监督仍能为这部分结构提供足够线索。和以往只从容量、噪声或优化角度讨论不同，这篇工作把焦点放在 representation geometry 上，因此能够导出对何时会出现 W2SG 的经验预测。","experiments":"摘要没有给出具体模型、数据集和数字，但明确说有 theoretical insights and empirical predictions。合理预期实验会验证由表示 kernel 推导出的预测，例如不同弱/强模型对之间的 W2SG 成功率、以及表征主成分对泛化增益的解释力。最有价值的结果不是单次超过基线多少，而是预测和真实增益之间是否稳健相关；如果相关性强，这个理论框架就有实际指导价值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper aims to explain when weak-to-strong generalization can happen, moving beyond the vague claim that a stronger model simply has more capacity. Prior understanding has been largely empirical or coarse-grained, and the question matters because W2SG is central to using weak supervision to train stronger systems and to thinking about future alignment.","importance":"This is a theory-oriented paper with real relevance to alignment and training-signal design. Its contribution is not a new algorithm, but an actionable lens: whether W2SG occurs depends on the part of function space that the weak model cannot learn but the strong model's representation can express. For the pretrain-posttrain interface, the takeaway is important: supervision need not be fully strong if the strong model's representation can recover useful structure from weak labels.","technical_approach":"The core approach constructs kernels from the principal components of weak and strong models' internal representations, and uses them to characterize differences in learnable function spaces. The main claim is that W2SG becomes possible when the strong model supports structure that the weak model's representation misses, yet weak supervision still contains enough signal for that structure to be recovered. Unlike prior discussions centered on capacity, noise, or optimization alone, this work puts representation geometry at the center.","experiments":"The abstract gives no specific models, datasets, or numerical results, but it does indicate both theoretical analysis and empirical predictions. The likely empirical focus is whether representation-derived kernel predictions match observed W2SG across different weak/strong model pairs. The key evidence is not a single performance delta, but whether the theory predicts when strong models exceed their weak supervisors with stable correlation across settings.","authors_note":""},"tags":["weak-to-strong","generalization","representation","theory"]},{"id":"2411.07618","title":"Constrain Alignment with Sparse Autoencoders","authors":["Qingyu Yin","Chak Tou Leong","Hongbo Zhang","Minjun Zhu","Hanqi Yan","Qiang Zhang","Yulan He","Wenjie Li","Jun Wang","Yue Zhang","Linyi Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$bb","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.07618","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YinLZZY00000Y25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YinLZZY00000Y25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/yin25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"RLHF/DPO 等对齐方法存在计算开销大和训练不稳定的问题。本文提出利用预训练好的 Sparse Autoencoder (SAE) 在特征层面施加约束来简化对齐过程。","importance":"方法级贡献，处于 interpretability 与 alignment 的交叉点。SAE 近年在 mechanistic interpretability 中被广泛使用，本文将其引入对齐优化，思路新颖。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：SAE 提取的稀疏特征可能捕捉了 pretrain 阶段形成的关键表示结构，用这些特征约束 posttrain 可以减少对齐过程中的表示漂移。","technical_approach":"提出 Feature-level constrained Preference Optimization (FPO)。核心是用预训练好的 SAE 提取稀疏特征，在偏好优化过程中对这些特征施加约束（类似 KL 散度但在稀疏特征空间中）。利用 SAE 的稀疏性天然降低了约束的计算成本，同时通过 sequential KL divergence 保证对齐质量。与标准 DPO 的区别在于约束从参数/logit 空间转移到了可解释的稀疏特征空间。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体数字。核心卖点是效率（稀疏特征降低计算量）和稳定性（特征层约束减少训练波动）。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"RLHF/DPO alignment methods suffer from computational overhead and training instability. This paper proposes using pre-trained Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs) to impose feature-level constraints that simplify alignment.","importance":"Method-level contribution at the intersection of interpretability and alignment. SAEs are widely used in mechanistic interpretability; applying them to alignment optimization is novel. For pretrain research, the insight is that sparse features from SAEs may capture key representational structures formed during pretraining, and constraining posttrain with these features can reduce representation drift.","technical_approach":"Proposes Feature-level constrained Preference Optimization (FPO). Uses pre-trained SAEs to extract sparse features and imposes constraints on these features during preference optimization (analogous to KL divergence but in sparse feature space). SAE sparsity naturally reduces constraint computation cost, while sequential KL divergence maintains alignment quality. Key distinction from standard DPO: constraints move from parameter/logit space to interpretable sparse feature space.","experiments":"Specific numbers not provided in the abstract. Main claims are efficiency (sparse features reduce compute) and stability (feature-level constraints reduce training fluctuations).","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","sparse-autoencoder","dpo","interpretability"]},{"id":"Zhang0DCS025","title":"Improving Reward Model Generalization from Adversarial Process Enhanced Preferences","authors":["Zhilong Zhang","Tian Xu","Xinghao Du","Xingchen Cao","Yihao Sun","Yang Yu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Zhang0DCS025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Zhang0DCS025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhang25ci.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["reward-model","alignment","generalization","preference-learning"]},{"id":"Zhang0ZL25","title":"Robust Multimodal Large Language Models Against Modality Conflict","authors":["Zongmeng Zhang","Wengang Zhou","Jie Zhao","Houqiang Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Zhang0ZL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Zhang0ZL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhang25dq.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["multimodal-llm","robustness","modality-conflict","alignment"]},{"id":"2411.10958","title":"SageAttention2: Efficient Attention with Thorough Outlier Smoothing and Per-thread INT4 Quantization","authors":["Jintao Zhang","Haofeng Huang","Pengle Zhang","Jia Wei","Jun Zhu","Jianfei Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$bc","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.10958","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhangHZW0C25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhangHZW0C25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhang25ae.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["attention","quantization","int4","inference"]},{"id":"ZhangK0LZBL25","title":"Position: Language model developers should report train-test overlap","authors":["Andy K. Zhang","Kevin Klyman","Yifan Mai","Yoav Levine","Yian Zhang","Rishi Bommasani","Percy Liang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"position","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhangK0LZBL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhangK0LZBL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhang25dt.html","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["data-contamination","evaluation","benchmarking","data-quality"]},{"id":"2410.14632","title":"Diverging Preferences: When do Annotators Disagree and do Models Know?","authors":["Michael J. Q. Zhang","Zhilin Wang","Jena D. Hwang","Yi Dong","Olivier Delalleau","Yejin Choi","Eunsol Choi","Xiang Ren","Valentina Pyatkin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$bd","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.14632","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhangWHDD0C0P25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhangWHDD0C0P25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhang25bx.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心结论是：偏好标注中的分歧大多不是简单噪声，而是系统性差异。过去 reward modeling 往往默认同一对回答只存在一个潜在“正确偏好”，不同标注者的冲突只是 noisy observation；作者说明这个假设经常不成立，尤其在任务规范不充分、风格偏好不同、价值取向不同的场景下。","importance":"这项工作对 post-train 很重要，对 pretrain 也有间接但实质的启发。它挑战了 Bradley-Terry 一类单标量奖励模型的基本前提，也提醒我们对齐数据和评测数据里的“标签质量”不能只看一致率；如果分歧本身有结构，那么 reward model、LM-as-Judge、偏好优化算法都会系统性失真。对 pretrain/posttrain 接口而言，这意味着后训练信号未必是干净监督，而可能把标注分布的混杂偏好压成单一目标。","technical_approach":"方法上，作者先构建了一个分歧来源 taxonomy：10 个类别，归于 4 个高层类，用来分析人类偏好为何冲突。然后他们把这个分析落到两个具体问题上：reward model 训练，以及 LLM-as-Judge 评估。关键点不在于提出一个更复杂的新模型，而在于证明现有做法把多模态、条件化、甚至不可比较的偏好都硬塞进单轴排序框架里，因此会把真实分歧误当噪声。如果不显式建模这些分歧来源，模型学到的往往只是“平均标注者”，而这个平均体在很多例子上并不存在。","experiments":"摘要给出的硬信息不多，但至少有三点可以确认。第一，作者做了系统的人类偏好分歧分析，并发现多数分歧来自任务欠规定和回答风格等结构性因素，而不是随机错误。第二，他们展示了标准 reward modeling（如 Bradley-Terry）和 LLM-as-Judge 都无法妥善处理这些分歧。第三，论文把影响落到训练和评测两个层面，而不是只做描述性分析。没有给出数据集规模、模型参数、具体基准分数和提升幅度，因此不能虚构数值；但就问题重要性而言，这类负面结果本身已经足够值得关注。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The main point is simple and important: disagreement in preference data is usually structured, not mere annotation noise. Standard reward modeling often assumes there is one latent correct preference per pair and that annotator conflicts are just noisy measurements. This paper argues that the assumption frequently breaks, especially when tasks are underspecified or style and value judgments differ.","importance":"This matters directly for alignment and indirectly for pretraining via the pretrain-posttrain interface. It challenges the core premise behind Bradley-Terry-style reward models and warns that preference labels and evaluator judgments should not be treated as clean supervision just because they are abundant. If disagreement has structure, then reward models, preference optimization, and LLM-as-a-judge pipelines can all be systematically biased rather than merely noisy.","technical_approach":"The authors build a taxonomy of disagreement sources, with ten categories grouped into four higher-level classes, and then use it to analyze where human preferences diverge. They connect that analysis to two concrete settings: reward model training and LLM-as-Judge evaluation. The contribution is less about a new algorithm and more about showing why current pipelines fail: they force multimodal, conditional, or even incomparable preferences into a single-axis ranking model. When that happens, the model learns an artificial average annotator that may not correspond to any real human.","experiments":"The abstract provides limited quantitative detail, but three claims are clear. First, the empirical study finds that much of the disagreement comes from structured causes such as underspecified tasks and response-style differences, not random mistakes. Second, standard reward modeling, including Bradley-Terry, fails to capture these divergences. Third, the issue affects both training and evaluation, not just annotation analysis. No dataset sizes, model sizes, or exact benchmark numbers are given, so there is no basis for reporting metrics here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["preference-data","annotator-disagreement","reward-model","alignment"]},{"id":"2410.02197","title":"Beyond Bradley-Terry Models: A General Preference Model for Language Model Alignment","authors":["Yifan Zhang","Ge Zhang","Yue Wu","Kangping Xu","Quanquan Gu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$be","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.02197","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhangZWXG25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhangZWXG25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhang25de.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：Bradley-Terry 这类标量奖励模型表达力不够，无法刻画语言模型对齐中常见的非传递偏好。过去很多 RLHF/偏好优化都默认存在一个单维 reward，使 A 胜 B、B 胜 C、就意味着 A 胜 C；但真实人类偏好常有循环和情境依赖，这让 BT 模型在训练和评测上都受限。","importance":"这是对齐建模层面的实质改动，重要性高于普通 reward model 小修小补。它的价值在于把偏好从“一个分数排序一切”升级为“在潜在空间中建模相对关系”，从而容纳更复杂的偏好结构。对 post-train 直接有用，对 pretrain 的间接启示则是：后训练目标如果过度简化，会把基础模型已有的多样能力压扁成单一奖励方向。","technical_approach":"核心方法有两部分。第一是 preference embedding：把回答嵌入一个潜在空间，用几何关系而不是单标量 reward 去表达偏好结构，这样可以表示 intransitive 或 cyclic preference，同时保持线性查询复杂度。第二是 preference score-based 的 General Preference Optimization（GPO），把这种更一般的偏好表示接到类似 RLHF 的优化流程里。和 BT 的关键区别在于，BT 假设每个回答只需一个标量即可比较；而这里比较关系来自嵌入中的结构，因此表达力更强，但代价是模型和训练目标更复杂，解释性也从“分数高低”转成了“几何关系”。","experiments":"摘要中明确给出两点结果。第一，General Preference embedding Model（GPM）在 RewardBench 上稳定优于 BT reward model。第二，它能有效刻画 cyclic preference，这正是 BT 无法处理的情形。摘要没有给出模型规模、训练数据量、具体分数和提升幅度，也没有说明用了哪些 RLHF baseline，因此不能补数字。即便如此，实验方向已经足够清楚：作者不仅看静态拟合，还关心更复杂偏好结构能否被实际建模并用于优化。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a core limitation of Bradley-Terry-style reward models: they are too restrictive to represent the non-transitive preferences that often appear in language model alignment. Standard RLHF pipelines usually assume a single latent scalar reward, so if A is preferred to B and B to C, then A should also beat C. Real human preferences often violate that assumption.","importance":"This is a meaningful change to the preference modeling layer, not a minor tweak. The contribution matters because it moves alignment away from forcing everything onto one scalar axis and toward modeling relative preference structure in a latent space. That is directly useful for post-training and indirectly important for pretraining-aware readers, since overly simplified alignment objectives can collapse valid diversity already present in the base model.","technical_approach":"The method has two parts. First, preference embedding maps responses into a latent space where preference is expressed through geometry rather than a single scalar reward. That gives the model enough expressive power to represent intransitive and cyclic preferences while keeping query complexity linear. Second, the paper proposes General Preference Optimization, a preference-score-based extension of reward-driven RLHF. Compared with Bradley-Terry, the difference is fundamental: BT assumes each response can be summarized by one score, while this framework lets the comparison depend on richer latent structure. The benefit is expressiveness; the cost is more complex learning and less direct interpretability than a scalar reward.","experiments":"The abstract makes two concrete claims. First, the General Preference embedding Model outperforms the BT reward model on RewardBench. Second, it can effectively model cyclic preferences, which BT cannot represent. The abstract does not provide model sizes, dataset sizes, exact scores, or gain margins, and it does not detail the full baseline set, so no numeric summary should be invented. Even so, the evaluation target is clear: better fit to realistic preference structure, not just better pairwise accuracy under BT assumptions.","authors_note":""},"tags":["preference-model","reward-model","alignment","intransitive-preference"],"notable_authors":["Quanquan Gu"]},{"id":"2503.03710","title":"Improving LLM Safety Alignment with Dual-Objective Optimization","authors":["Xuandong Zhao","Will Cai","Tianneng Shi","David Huang","Licong Lin","Song Mei","Dawn Song"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$bf","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.03710","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhaoCSHLMS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhaoCSHLMS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhao25c.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["safety-alignment","dpo","jailbreak","loss-function"]},{"id":"ZhaoXX0WZ025","title":"Unveiling Markov heads in Pretrained Language Models for Offline Reinforcement Learning","authors":["Wenhao Zhao","Qiushui Xu","Linjie Xu","Lei Song","Jinyu Wang","Chunlai Zhou","Jiang Bian"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhaoXX0WZ025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhaoXX0WZ025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhao25z.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["markov-heads","attention-heads","pretrained-lm","offline-rl"]},{"id":"2502.07460","title":"Logarithmic Regret for Online KL-Regularized Reinforcement Learning","authors":["Heyang Zhao","Chenlu Ye","Wei Xiong","Quanquan Gu","Tong Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c0","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.07460","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhaoY0G025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhaoY0G025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhao25ac.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["kl-regularization","rlhf","regret-bound","theory"]},{"id":"2503.01103","title":"Direct Discriminative Optimization: Your Likelihood-Based Visual Generative Model is Secretly a GAN Discriminator","authors":["Kaiwen Zheng","Yongxin Chen","Huayu Chen","Guande He","Ming-Yu Liu","Jun Zhu","Qinsheng Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c1","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.01103","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhengCCH00Z25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhengCCH00Z25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zheng25b.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion","autoregressive","discriminative-training","visual-generation"]},{"id":"2502.14400","title":"HPS: Hard Preference Sampling for Human Preference Alignment","authors":["Xiandong Zou","Wanyu Lin","Yuchen Li","Pan Zhou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c2","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.14400","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZouLLZ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZouLLZ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zou25c.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["preference-optimization","alignment","rlhf","sampling","safety"]},{"id":"2506.10355","title":"TreeLoRA: Efficient Continual Learning via Layer-Wise LoRAs Guided by a Hierarchical Gradient-Similarity Tree","authors":["Yu-Yang Qian","Yuan-Ze Xu","Zhen-Yu Zhang","Peng Zhao","Zhi-Hua Zhou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c3","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.10355","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0001XZ0Z25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0001XZ0Z25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/qian25b.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["continual-learning","lora","forgetting","adaptation"]},{"id":"2502.09003","title":"RoSTE: An Efficient Quantization-Aware Supervised Fine-Tuning Approach for Large Language Models","authors":["Quan Wei","Chung-Yiu Yau","Hoi-To Wai","Yang Zhao","Dongyeop Kang","Youngsuk Park","Mingyi Hong"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c4","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.09003","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0001YWZKP025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0001YWZKP025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wei25n.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["quantization","sft","efficiency","adaptation"]},{"id":"2505.15252","title":"An Efficient Private GPT Never Autoregressively Decodes","authors":["Zhengyi Li","Yue Guan","Kang Yang","Yu Feng","Ning Liu","Yu Yu","Jingwen Leng","Minyi Guo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c5","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.15252","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0002000L0LG25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0002000L0LG25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/li25q.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["non-autoregressive","secure-inference","verification","decoding"]},{"id":"2505.05464","title":"Bring Reason to Vision: Understanding Perception and Reasoning through Model Merging","authors":["Shiqi Chen","Jinghan Zhang","Tongyao Zhu","Wei Liu","Siyang Gao","Miao Xiong","Manling Li","Junxian He"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c6","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.05464","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/00020Z0GXLH25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/00020Z0GXLH25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chen25cm.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["vlm","model-merging","reasoning","perception"]},{"id":"2505.03792","title":"Towards Efficient Online Tuning of VLM Agents via Counterfactual Soft Reinforcement Learning","authors":["Lang Feng","Weihao Tan","Zhiyi Lyu","Longtao Zheng","Haiyang Xu","Ming Yan","Fei Huang","Bo An"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c7","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03792","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0002TLZ000025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0002TLZ000025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/feng25n.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["vlm-agent","rl","online-tuning","counterfactual"]},{"id":"2406.14021","title":"Hierarchical Graph Tokenization for Molecule-Language Alignment","authors":["Yongqiang Chen","Quanming Yao","Juzheng Zhang","James Cheng","Yatao Bian"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c8","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.14021","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0002YZCB25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0002YZCB25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chen25cf.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["tokenizer","multimodal","molecule-language","alignment"]},{"id":"2503.01773","title":"Why Is Spatial Reasoning Hard for VLMs? An Attention Mechanism Perspective on Focus Areas","authors":["Shiqi Chen","Tongyao Zhu","Ruochen Zhou","Jinghan Zhang","Siyang Gao","Juan Carlos Niebles","Mor Geva","Junxian He","Jiajun Wu","Manling Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c9","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.01773","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0002ZZ0GNGH0L25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0002ZZ0GNGH0L25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chen25cr.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["vlm","spatial-reasoning","attention-analysis","interpretability"]},{"id":"00030K25","title":"On Exact Bit-level Reversible Transformers Without Changing Architecture","authors":["Guoqiang Zhang","J. P. Lewis","W. Bastiaan Kleijn"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/00030K25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/00030K25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhang25ao.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["reversible-transformer","architecture","memory-efficiency"]},{"id":"2410.06331","title":"Locate-then-edit for Multi-hop Factual Recall under Knowledge Editing","authors":["Zhuoran Zhang","Yongxiang Li","Zijian Kan","Keyuan Cheng","Lijie Hu","Di Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ca","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.06331","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0003LKCH025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0003LKCH025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhang25aq.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：现有 locate-then-edit 知识编辑方法在单跳事实修改上有效，但一到 multi-hop factual recall 就明显失效。过去这类方法默认要改的知识主要存放在浅层并可由单跳编辑提示激活；作者通过机制分析指出，多跳查询会调用更深 MLP 层里带隐式主语信息的知识，因此只改浅层会导致新知识在组合推理时用不起来。","importance":"这项工作的贡献是把知识编辑从“单事实替换”推进到“可被多跳推理调用的事实替换”，属于机制分析驱动的方法改进。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于，它进一步说明参数知识不是均匀存放的，调用路径会随任务结构变化；如果这个结论稳健，那么无论是编辑、continual pretrain 还是安全定向修改，都需要按查询类型理解层间分工，而不是把记忆定位看成静态问题。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 IFMET，一种针对多跳知识召回设计的 locate-then-edit 框架。它的关键不是简单扩大编辑层数，而是先借助 mechanistic interpretability 工具区分单跳与多跳在层内检索路径上的差异，再根据这种差异去定位应被修改的更深层 MLP 表征。与已有方法相比，它不再假设单跳编辑 prompt 足以传播到复杂组合查询，而是显式为多跳任务编辑那些承载隐式 subject information 的深层模块。这样设计有效的原因是：多跳召回失败并不一定来自新事实没写进去，而是来自模型仍在更深处沿用旧的桥接实体表示。","experiments":"摘要能确定的实验事实是：作者先做了机制层面的定位分析，证明多跳任务比单跳更依赖深层 MLP；随后 IFMET 在多跳 factual recall 的知识编辑场景中优于现有 locate-then-edit 方法。摘要没有给出模型规模、编辑基准名称、成功率、泛化率或副作用指标，因此不能补数字。可以合理提炼的实验价值有两点：第一，这篇论文不是只报编辑成功率，而是把性能差异和层级检索机制对应起来；第二，它暗示单跳 benchmark 上的好结果不能外推到组合查询。边界在于，这类方法仍依赖可解释工具对层位点做较准定位，若知识分布更分散或任务跨多个推理模板，编辑难度还会继续上升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a known failure mode in knowledge editing: locate-then-edit methods work reasonably well for single-hop factual recall but break down on multi-hop queries. Earlier methods largely assumed that the edited fact lives in shallow layers and can be updated with single-hop prompts. The authors show that multi-hop recall relies more on deeper MLP layers that encode implicit subject information, so shallow edits often do not propagate to compositional retrieval.","importance":"This is a mechanism-informed advance in knowledge editing rather than a generic benchmark improvement. Its broader relevance is that it treats parametric knowledge as query-dependent circuitry, not a static memory slot. That matters for editing, continual pretraining, and targeted safety interventions: if different query structures recruit different layers, editing policies should be conditioned on retrieval pathways rather than only on the fact being changed.","technical_approach":"The proposed method, IFMET, follows a locate-then-edit recipe but redesigns the localization step for multi-hop recall. The key move is to use mechanistic interpretability tools to identify the deeper MLP components involved in multi-hop retrieval, then edit those components rather than focusing mainly on shallow layers. This differs from prior methods that rely on single-hop edit prompts and shallow-layer interventions. The design is effective because many multi-hop failures are not caused by the new fact being absent, but by the model still using old bridge representations in deeper computation.","experiments":"The abstract supports two main empirical claims: first, multi-hop factual recall relies more on deeper MLP layers than single-hop recall; second, IFMET improves knowledge editing performance on multi-hop tasks over prior locate-then-edit methods. The abstract does not report model sizes, benchmark names, edit success rates, locality metrics, or side-effect measures, so those details cannot be stated. The main experimental value is the coupling between mechanistic analysis and editing outcomes. A practical boundary is that the method still depends on reliable localization; if knowledge is highly distributed or the query template changes substantially, editing remains difficult.","authors_note":""},"tags":["knowledge-editing","multi-hop-reasoning","interpretability"]},{"id":"2502.06737","title":"VersaPRM: Multi-Domain Process Reward Model via Synthetic Reasoning Data","authors":["Thomas Zeng","Shuibai Zhang","Shutong Wu","Christian Classen","Daewon Chae","Ethan Ewer","Minjae Lee","Heeju Kim","Wonjun Kang","Jackson Kunde","Ying Fan","Jungtaek Kim","Hyung Il Koo","Kannan Ramchandran","Dimitris Papailiopoulos","Kangwook Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Process Reward Models (PRMs) have proven effective at enhancing mathematical reasoning for Large Language Models (LLMs) by leveraging increased inference-time computation. However, they are predominantly trained on mathematical data and their generalizability to non-mathematical domains has not been rigorously studied. In response, this work first shows that current PRMs have poor performance in other domains. To address this limitation, we introduce VersaPRM, a multi-domain PRM trained on synthetic reasoning data generated using our novel data generation and annotation method. VersaPRM achieves consistent performance gains across diverse domains. For instance, in the MMLU-Pro category of Law, VersaPRM via weighted majority voting, achieves a 7.9% performance gain over the majority voting baseline -- surpassing Qwen2.5-Math-PRM's gain of 1.3%. We further contribute to the community by open-sourcing all data, code and models for VersaPRM.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.06737","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0003ZWCCELKKKF025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0003ZWCCELKKKF025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zeng25h.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：现有 Process Reward Model 大多只在数学推理上训练和评估，跨到法律等非数学领域后效果很差。过去社区默认 PRM 是一种通用 test-time verifier，但这个假设缺乏系统验证；作者先证明它并不通用，再尝试用合成 reasoning data 把 PRM 做成多领域版本。","importance":"这项工作的意义在于，它把 PRM 从“数学专项工具”往“通用推理基础设施”推进了一步。对 pretrain/posttrain 接口的启发是：如果验证器只在某个狭窄推理分布上可靠，那么 inference-time scaling 的收益很难泛化；相反，多域 PRM 若能成立，会让搜索、reranking 和 self-correction 这类后训练能力更像基础模型能力的延伸，而不是题型特化补丁。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 VersaPRM，一个用合成多领域推理数据训练的 PRM。方法重点不只是扩大数据域，而是提出一套新的 synthetic data generation and annotation 方法，把不同领域的中间推理步骤转成可监督的过程级奖励信号。与已有主要依赖数学解题轨迹的 PRM 相比，它明确追求 domain coverage；与只看最终答案对错的 verifier 相比，它仍保留 process-level 监督，以便在 test-time compute 下更细粒度地筛选候选链路。这样设计有效，是因为跨域泛化的瓶颈通常不是“判最终对错”本身，而是不同领域的有效推理过程形态差异很大。","experiments":"摘要给出的最明确数字是：在 MMLU-Pro 的 Law 类别上，VersaPRM 配合 weighted majority voting，相比原始 majority voting baseline 提升 7.9%。此外，作者声称它在 diverse domains 上有一致增益，这说明评测不只限数学。摘要没有给出基座 LLM、PRM 规模、合成数据量、其他领域的具体分数和与现有数学 PRM 的差距，因此不能继续补。一个值得注意的实验点是，论文先证明现有 PRM 在非数学领域表现差，再给出改进，这让结论更扎实。边界也很清楚：多域 PRM 仍依赖合成轨迹质量；若某些领域的高质量推理步骤难以自动标注，PRM 的泛化上限会受数据生成器限制。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a blind spot in process reward modeling: most PRMs are trained and validated on math, and their behavior outside math has not been carefully established. The authors first show that current PRMs generalize poorly to non-mathematical domains, then build a multi-domain alternative using synthetic reasoning data.","importance":"This matters because PRMs are increasingly treated as general-purpose inference-time tools, not just math-specific rerankers. If that assumption is false, a lot of test-time compute results are narrower than they appear. A PRM that works across domains would make search, reranking, and self-correction much more broadly usable, which is relevant for how we think about post-training infrastructure on top of pretrained models.","technical_approach":"The proposed model, VersaPRM, is a multi-domain process reward model trained on synthetic reasoning data. The main contribution is not only adding more domains, but designing a generation-and-annotation pipeline that produces process-level supervision outside pure math. Compared with prior PRMs trained largely on mathematical traces, VersaPRM is explicitly optimized for domain coverage. Compared with simple outcome verifiers, it keeps step-level reward signals so that inference-time selection can use richer evidence than final-answer correctness alone.","experiments":"The clearest number in the abstract is a 7.9% gain on the Law category of MMLU-Pro when VersaPRM is used with weighted majority voting over a majority-voting baseline. The authors also claim consistent gains across diverse domains, indicating the contribution is not restricted to mathematics. The abstract does not provide the base LLM, PRM size, synthetic data volume, or detailed scores on other tasks, so those details should not be invented. A strong point of the evaluation is that it first establishes the weakness of existing PRMs outside math. The main limitation is data quality: if synthetic reasoning traces are poor in a given domain, process supervision may not transfer well.","authors_note":""},"tags":["process-reward-model","synthetic-data","reasoning","generalization"]},{"id":"2505.01382","title":"Provable Efficiency of Guidance in Diffusion Models for General Data Distribution","authors":["Gen Li","Yuchen Jiao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Diffusion models have emerged as a powerful framework for generative modeling, with guidance techniques playing a crucial role in enhancing sample quality. Despite their empirical success, a comprehensive theoretical understanding of the guidance effect remains limited. Existing studies only focus on case studies, where the distribution conditioned on each class is either isotropic Gaussian or supported on a one-dimensional interval with some extra conditions. How to analyze the guidance effect beyond these case studies remains an open question. Towards closing this gap, we make an attempt to analyze diffusion guidance under general data distributions. Rather than demonstrating uniform sample quality improvement, which does not hold in some distributions, we prove that guidance can improve the whole sample quality, in the sense that the average reciprocal of the classifier probability decreases with the existence of guidance. This aligns with the motivation of introducing guidance.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01382","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0005J25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0005J25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/li25as.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：diffusion guidance 在经验上很有效，但理论理解长期停留在极简分布案例，无法解释一般数据分布下何时有效、有效到什么程度。过去的理论通常假设条件分布是各向同性高斯或一维区间支撑，这离真实生成任务太远；作者试图把 guidance 的分析推进到更一般的数据分布。","importance":"这是一篇理论工作，但对生成预训练研究有方法论价值。它的重要结论不是“guidance 总会 uniformly 提升样本质量”，而是这种强结论在一般分布下并不成立，真正能证明的是更有条件、更局部的效率改进。这个结论有助于纠正社区对 classifier/classifier-free guidance 的过强直觉，也提醒实际系统不要把 guidance 当成无代价万能旋钮。","technical_approach":"核心方法是对 general data distribution 下的 diffusion guidance 建立可证明分析框架。作者没有沿用只在玩具分布上闭式求解的套路，而是直接承认“全局一致提升”不成立，转而证明 guidance 在更合理的目标下可以提升某种效率指标。与以往理论相比，差异不在于换了一个 guidance 公式，而在于分析对象从特殊案例扩展到一般分布，并且把结论收紧到确实成立的范围。这样做的价值是，理论不再通过强假设换漂亮结论，而是更贴近实际使用 guidance 时的边界条件。","experiments":"这是偏理论论文，摘要没有给出经验实验数字。可确认的结果是：作者证明了在一般数据分布下，guidance 虽不能保证统一的样本质量提升，但可以提高某种 provable efficiency。由于摘要没写明具体效率定义、假设条件和是否有数值模拟，不能补充。对工程读者而言，最值得带走的不是一个 benchmark 结果，而是一个边界判断：guidance 的收益依赖数据分布与评价目标，不应默认任何 guidance strength 都朝着更好样本单调前进。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a long-standing theory gap in diffusion models: guidance works well empirically, but existing analyses only cover very narrow distributional settings. Those toy settings are too limited to explain what guidance does under realistic data distributions. The authors try to extend the theory beyond such case studies.","importance":"Although theoretical, the paper has practical value because it sharpens what we should and should not expect from guidance. The key message is not that guidance uniformly improves sample quality for all data distributions. In fact, that claim is false in general. What can be proved is a more conditional notion of efficiency improvement. That is a useful correction to the common intuition that stronger guidance is always better.","technical_approach":"The contribution is a proof framework for diffusion guidance under general data distributions. Instead of pursuing elegant but overly narrow assumptions, the paper explicitly acknowledges that uniform quality improvement does not hold and proves a weaker but more realistic result. The novelty is therefore in the scope and honesty of the analysis, not in proposing a new guidance rule. This makes the theory more aligned with the way guidance behaves in practice: beneficial, but not universally so.","experiments":"This is primarily a theory paper, and the abstract does not report empirical benchmarks or numerical simulations. The supported claim is that guidance can provably improve an efficiency-related objective under general distributions, even though uniform sample-quality improvement fails in some cases. Because the abstract does not define the exact efficiency metric or assumptions, those details should not be inferred. For practitioners, the main takeaway is a boundary condition: the benefit of guidance depends on the data distribution and the target criterion, so it should not be treated as a universally monotonic knob.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion-theory","guidance","classifier-free-guidance"]},{"id":"2505.12038","title":"Safe Delta: Consistently Preserving Safety when Fine-Tuning LLMs on Diverse Datasets","authors":["Ning Lu","Shengcai Liu","Jiahao Wu","Weiyu Chen","Zhirui Zhang","Yew-Soon Ong","Qi Wang","Ke Tang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$cb","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.12038","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0006L0CZO0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0006L0CZO0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/lu25g.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：面向用户开放的 fine-tuning API 带来了新的安全风险，用户上传的任意数据——无论恶意还是无意——都可能破坏原模型的安全对齐。现有防御方法往往对数据规模、任务类型和域差异不够稳，要么安全保住了但实用性大幅下降，要么保住性能却挡不住 alignment drift。","importance":"这是一篇 post-train 安全方法工作，但与 pretrain/posttrain 闭环高度相关。它的重要性在于把“安全保持”建模为对 fine-tuning delta 的约束，而不是把问题简单归结为过滤坏数据。对于提供微调服务的基础模型平台，这类方法属于系统级安全基础设施；对研究侧的启发是，安全对齐能否在参数更新后被稳定保留，已经成为基础模型可部署性的核心约束之一。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Safe Delta：在模型微调前后比较参数变化，并对这部分 delta parameters 做安全感知调整，以在保留任务适应能力的同时维持原有安全性。它不是重新做一轮完整对齐，也不是只在数据侧做过滤，而是直接干预参数更新结果。与传统正则化或混合安全数据再训练相比，这种设计抓住了问题的关键对象——导致安全偏移的更新增量本身。这样做有效的原因是，很多不安全行为并不是整个模型重学了一遍，而是由少量方向性很强的参数变化触发的；如果能识别并修正这些 delta，就有机会同时保住 utility 和 safety。","experiments":"摘要能确认的实验结论是：Safe Delta 在面对 diverse fine-tuning datasets 时，能够更一致地 preserving safety，同时兼顾 utility。这里的“多样”明确包括数据规模和任务类型差异。摘要没有给出模型名称、微调任务、攻击或越狱评测协议、具体安全/效用指标和提升幅度，因此不能补数字。比较有价值的实验点应当是跨多种微调场景的稳定性，而不仅是某一个危险数据集上的防御成功率。边界在于，如果下游任务本身强烈要求接近危险领域知识或风格，单纯修正 delta 可能会遇到 safety-utility 更尖锐的冲突。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a deployment-critical problem: fine-tuning APIs let users customize a model with arbitrary uploaded data, and that update can easily break the model's original safety alignment. Existing defenses often fail to generalize across dataset sizes and task types, or they preserve safety only by hurting utility too much.","importance":"This is a post-training safety contribution with clear systems relevance. For model providers, preserving alignment under third-party fine-tuning is not a niche problem; it is part of the core product surface. The paper is also conceptually useful because it frames the issue around the fine-tuning update itself rather than treating it only as a data filtering problem.","technical_approach":"Safe Delta operates on the parameter delta induced by fine-tuning. Instead of retraining alignment from scratch or relying only on safer data curation, it modifies the update so that task adaptation is retained while harmful alignment drift is suppressed. This design is compelling because many unsafe behaviors are triggered by relatively concentrated parameter shifts rather than a full rewrite of model behavior. Controlling the delta directly is therefore a targeted way to preserve safety without discarding all adaptation.","experiments":"The abstract supports the claim that Safe Delta preserves safety more consistently across diverse fine-tuning datasets while maintaining utility. Diversity here explicitly includes differences in dataset size and task type. The abstract does not provide model names, evaluation protocols, safety metrics, or exact gains, so those should not be added. The most meaningful experimental question is robustness across many customization settings, not a single jailbreak benchmark. A natural limitation is that some downstream tasks may sit close to safety boundaries by construction, where utility and safety are harder to reconcile.","authors_note":""},"tags":["safety","fine-tuning","alignment","llm"]},{"id":"0055SHGT25","title":"Learning-Order Autoregressive Models with Application to Molecular Graph Generation","authors":["Zhe Wang","Jiaxin Shi","Nicolas Heess","Arthur Gretton","Michalis K. Titsias"],"institutions":["Google DeepMind","UCL"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/0055SHGT25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/0055SHGT25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wang25cn.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"自回归模型在序列数据（如分子图）上的生成顺序通常是人为指定的（如 SMILES 字符串顺序），但最优生成顺序往往未知且依赖数据分布。本文要解决的是：如何让模型自己学出最佳的自回归分解顺序，而非依赖固定或随机排列。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：AR 模型的 token 生成顺序本身是一个可优化的自由度，这与 XLNet/任意顺序 LM 的思路相呼应，但本文给出了更明确的优化框架。对分子生成等结构化数据尤其有价值，对文本 LM 的直接迁移性有待验证。","technical_approach":"核心思路是把生成顺序作为一个离散潜变量，与自回归模型联合优化。模型在每一步不仅预测下一个 token 的值，还预测下一个应该生成哪个位置。这相当于在排列空间上做搜索，通过变分推断或策略梯度来优化顺序选择。与 XLNet 式的随机排列训练不同，这里的顺序是学出来的、数据自适应的。","experiments":"主要在分子图生成任务上验证，具体数字和 baseline 信息在摘要中未给出。预期与固定顺序 AR 和随机顺序 AR 做对比，展示学习到的顺序能提升生成质量。","authors_note":"作者包括 DeepMind 的 Jiaxin Shi、Nicolas Heess、Michalis Titsias，以及 UCL 的 Arthur Gretton。Titsias 是变分推断领域的知名研究者，Heess 在序列决策和生成模型方面有深厚积累。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Autoregressive models on structured data like molecular graphs rely on a fixed or arbitrary generation order (e.g., SMILES ordering), which is suboptimal. This work learns the generation order jointly with the AR model, treating it as a latent variable to be optimized.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It formalizes generation order as a learnable degree of freedom in AR models—relevant to the broader question of whether next-token prediction benefits from non-canonical orderings. Direct applicability to text LMs is unclear but the framework is principled.","technical_approach":"The model jointly predicts what to generate and where to generate next, optimizing over the permutation space via variational inference or policy gradient. Unlike XLNet-style random permutation training, the order here is data-adaptive and explicitly optimized for generation quality.","experiments":"Evaluated primarily on molecular graph generation. Specific metrics and baselines are not available from the abstract alone. The expected comparison is against fixed-order and random-order AR baselines.","authors_note":"Authors include Jiaxin Shi, Nicolas Heess, and Michalis Titsias from DeepMind, and Arthur Gretton from UCL. Titsias is well-known for variational inference methods; Heess for sequential decision-making and generative models."},"tags":["autoregressive","order-modeling","non-ar","generation"],"notable_authors":["Arthur Gretton","Nicolas Heess","Michalis K. Titsias"]},{"id":"2311.18232","title":"LMRL Gym: Benchmarks for Multi-Turn Reinforcement Learning with Language Models","authors":["Marwa Abdulhai","Isadora White","Charlie Victor Snell","Charles Sun","Joey Hong","Yuexiang Zhai","Kelvin Xu","Sergey Levine"],"institutions":["UC Berkeley"],"abstract":"$cc","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.18232","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/AbdulhaiWSSHZXL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/AbdulhaiWSSHZXL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/abdulhai25a.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"当前 LLM 在多轮交互中缺乏目标导向行为——不会主动提问、收集信息或做出有利于长期目标的决策。现有 benchmark 也缺乏对多轮 RL 与 LLM 结合的系统评估。本文提出 LMRL Gym，一个专门用于评估多轮 RL 语言智能体的 benchmark 套件。","importance":"Benchmark/系统级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的间接启示在于：LLM 的预训练目标（next-token prediction）天然不鼓励目标导向的多轮规划，这个 benchmark 可以帮助量化 pretrain 表示对 RL fine-tuning 的支持程度，以及 RL 信号能在多大程度上弥补 pretrain 的不足。","technical_approach":"设计了一系列多轮交互环境，涵盖信息收集、说服、协商等场景，每个环境都有明确的奖励信号。在这些环境上评估不同的 RL 算法（如 PPO、ILQL 等）与 LLM 的结合效果。Benchmark 的设计重点是：交互是多轮的、奖励是延迟的、需要策略性行为。","experiments":"作者 Charlie Snell 是 LMRL 和后续 RL for LLM 方向的活跃研究者。具体环境数量、模型规模、RL 算法对比结果在截断摘要中未完整给出。预期展示当前 LLM+RL 在多轮任务上的能力边界。","authors_note":"作者包括 Charlie Snell（UC Berkeley），是 RL for LLM 方向的活跃研究者，后续参与了多项相关工作。团队来自 UC Berkeley。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Current LLMs lack goal-directed behavior in multi-turn interactions—they don't proactively gather information or plan across turns. Existing benchmarks don't systematically evaluate multi-turn RL with LLMs. LMRL Gym fills this gap.","importance":"Benchmark-level contribution. Indirectly relevant to pretraining: next-token prediction doesn't incentivize strategic multi-turn planning, and this benchmark helps quantify how well pretrained representations support RL fine-tuning for goal-directed behavior.","technical_approach":"A suite of multi-turn interaction environments (information gathering, persuasion, negotiation, etc.) with well-defined delayed rewards. Various RL algorithms (PPO, ILQL, etc.) are evaluated in combination with LLMs. The design emphasis is on multi-turn, delayed-reward, strategy-requiring tasks.","experiments":"Specific environment count, model scales, and RL comparison results are truncated. Expected to characterize the capability frontier of current LLM+RL approaches on multi-turn tasks.","authors_note":"Authors include Charlie Snell (UC Berkeley), an active researcher in RL for LLMs who has contributed to multiple follow-up works in this direction."},"tags":["rl","benchmark","multi-turn","language-agent"],"notable_authors":["Charlie Victor Snell"]},{"id":"2504.20752","title":"Grokking in the Wild: Data Augmentation for Real-World Multi-Hop Reasoning with Transformers","authors":["Roman Abramov","Felix Steinbauer","Gjergji Kasneci"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$cd","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20752","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/AbramovSK25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/AbramovSK25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/abramov25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["grokking","reasoning","data-augmentation","generalization"]},{"id":"AggarwalSA0N25","title":"NextCoder: Robust Adaptation of Code LMs to Diverse Code Edits","authors":["Tushar Aggarwal","Swayam Singh","Abhijeet Awasthi","Aditya Kanade","Nagarajan Natarajan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/AggarwalSA0N25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/AggarwalSA0N25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/aggarwal25b.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["code-lm","adaptation","code-editing","robustness"]},{"id":"2502.05368","title":"Otter: Generating Tests from Issues to Validate SWE Patches","authors":["Toufique Ahmed","Jatin Ganhotra","Rangeet Pan","Avraham Shinnar","Saurabh Sinha","Martin Hirzel"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ce","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.05368","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/AhmedGPS0H25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/AhmedGPS0H25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/ahmed25b.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["test-generation","software-engineering","code-eval","issue-resolution"]},{"id":"AjanthanRZAL25","title":"Nesterov Method for Asynchronous Pipeline Parallel Optimization","authors":["Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan","Sameera Ramasinghe","Yan Zuo","Gil Avraham","Alexander Long"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/AjanthanRZAL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/AjanthanRZAL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/ajanthan25a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["pipeline-parallelism","optimization","distributed-training","nesterov"]},{"id":"2506.04870","title":"Aligning Multimodal Representations through an Information Bottleneck","authors":["Antonio Almudévar","José Miguel Hernández-Lobato","Sameer Khurana","Ricard Marxer","Alfonso Ortega"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$cf","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.04870","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/AlmudevarHKM025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/AlmudevarHKM025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/almudevar25a.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["contrastive-learning","multimodal-alignment","information-bottleneck"]},{"id":"2405.16727","title":"Disentangling and Integrating Relational and Sensory Information in Transformer Architectures","authors":["Awni Altabaa","John Lafferty"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d0","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.16727","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/AltabaaL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/AltabaaL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/altabaa25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：标准 Transformer 能高效传递对象自身的“感知信息”，但缺少一个显式处理“对象间关系信息”的计算通路，因此在关系推理任务上经常学得慢、泛化差。过去这类问题通常靠更多数据、位置编码技巧或专门的关系网络补救，但这些办法没有真正把“属性”和“关系”分开建模，所以一旦任务要求组合泛化，模型还是容易失效。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要是方法和架构层面的：它不是再给 Transformer 加一个小 trick，而是直接指出现有注意力机制在关系表示上的结构性短板。对 pretrain 研究的启发在于，如果模型目标包含组合推理、程序归纳或多对象世界建模，仅靠扩大 AR/MLM 训练规模未必能补上架构缺口；显式的关系通道可能比单纯堆参数更有效。","technical_approach":"作者提出的是对 Transformer 的架构扩展，核心思想是把“对象属性的路由”和“对象关系的路由”拆开，再在后续层中整合。按摘要判断，标准注意力继续负责在 token 或对象之间传递感知特征，而新增模块显式表示 pairwise relation，并让模型能对关系本身做选择、组合和传播；这和把关系隐含塞进注意力权重不同，因为后者只是用相似度决定信息流，不会留下稳定、可复用的关系变量。这样的设计有效的原因是：关系推理通常需要对‘谁和谁之间是什么关系’做中间计算，如果中间态不显式存在，模型只能把它压进激活里，训练会更脆弱、样本效率更差。边界也很清楚：显式关系建模通常带来二次复杂度或额外内存开销，适合对象数可控、关系结构关键的场景，不一定适合超长纯文本预训练的主干直接替换。","experiments":"从给到的信息里看，实验重点应当是关系推理与组合泛化，而不是大规模语言建模基准。摘要没有给出参数量、数据规模、具体 baseline 和数值提升，因此这里不能编造。可以合理推断作者会与标准 Transformer 及可能的关系网络/图网络变体比较，并展示在需要区分属性信息与关系信息的任务上更强的泛化；若有消融，最有价值的会是：只加更大模型无效、只增强注意力不够、必须显式建模关系通道才有稳定收益。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a concrete limitation: vanilla Transformers can route object-level sensory features well, but they lack an explicit mechanism for representing and manipulating relations between objects, which hurts relational generalization. Prior work often sidestepped this with scale, positional tricks, or task-specific architectures, but those approaches do not actually separate object properties from object relations.","importance":"The contribution is primarily architectural. The paper does more than add another reasoning heuristic; it argues that attention is structurally well-suited for feature routing, but not for relation computation. For pretraining, the implication is useful: if we care about compositional reasoning or structured world models, scaling alone may not close the gap when the intermediate relational state is missing from the architecture.","technical_approach":"The method appears to extend the Transformer by disentangling sensory and relational information paths, then integrating them later in the network. Standard attention still handles feature exchange across tokens or objects, while an added component explicitly encodes pairwise relations and allows the model to process those relations as first-class states. That is the key difference from ordinary attention, where relation-like signals are only implicit in similarity scores. The design is plausible because many reasoning tasks require computing and reusing intermediate predicates over object pairs. If those predicates are never explicit, optimization becomes fragile and data efficiency suffers. The trade-off is also straightforward: explicit relation states likely add quadratic cost or memory, so the approach is most compelling when relational structure is central rather than incidental.","experiments":"The likely experimental focus is relational reasoning and compositional generalization, not large-scale language modeling. The abstract does not provide model sizes, data scale, baselines, or numerical gains, so those details cannot be stated reliably. The most informative ablations, if included, would be whether larger vanilla Transformers still fail, whether stronger attention variants are insufficient, and whether the gains specifically come from making relation variables explicit.","authors_note":""},"tags":["relational-reasoning","transformer","architecture"],"notable_authors":["Awni Altabaa","John Lafferty"]},{"id":"BachuSLCDS0A025","title":"Layer-wise Alignment: Examining Safety Alignment Across Image Encoder Layers in Vision Language Models","authors":["Saketh Bachu","Erfan Shayegani","Rohit Lal","Trishna Chakraborty","Arindam Dutta","Chengyu Song","Yue Dong","Nael B. Abu-Ghazaleh","Amit Roy-Chowdhury"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/BachuSLCDS0A025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/BachuSLCDS0A025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/bachu25a.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的是：VLM 的安全对齐到底主要发生在图像编码器的哪几层，而不是把整个视觉塔当成一个黑盒。过去安全研究更常看整体输入输出行为，或者只讨论语言侧拒答，但这会掩盖一个关键问题：有害视觉语义是在视觉前端就被过滤、被放大，还是一直保留到跨模态融合后才被语言模型处理。","importance":"这项工作的意义偏机制分析和系统诊断。对多模态预训练的启示是，安全对齐未必只是 decoder 或 RLHF 的结果，视觉表示层本身可能已经决定了后续可被调用的风险信息。这个视角很重要，因为它关系到安全训练该加在何处：如果风险主要在视觉中层形成，就需要动 encoder 表示；如果风险主要在语言侧触发，仅改视觉塔收益会有限。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者的核心方法是做 layer-wise alignment analysis，也就是逐层检查图像编码器输出与安全相关行为之间的关系。典型做法可能包括：在不同层接线性 probe、替换/冻结特定层、观察跨层表示对有害请求、越狱图像或敏感概念的可分性，以及这些层表示进入语言侧后对拒答或服从行为的影响。它和常见整体评测的区别在于，不只看模型是否安全，而是定位安全信号在哪一层出现、在哪一层被削弱或放大。这样设计的价值是可以把‘安全失败’拆成表示问题还是解码问题。边界是，层分析通常揭示相关性强于因果性，若没有干预实验，结论容易停留在诊断而非机制闭环。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认所用 VLM、数据集、指标和具体数值。若论文完整，最关键的实验应包括：不同层特征对安全分类或有害内容检出的性能差异；替换或截断某些层后，模型安全行为如何变化；以及不同架构的视觉塔是否呈现一致的层位分布。若存在有价值的消融，应该是对比冻结 encoder、只调 projector、只调语言侧安全头，来判断安全对齐到底落在哪一段管线。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks where safety alignment lives inside the image encoder of a vision-language model, instead of treating the entire visual stack as a black box. Most safety work evaluates end behavior or focuses on the language side, which leaves open a more mechanistic question: are harmful visual signals suppressed early, amplified in the middle, or passed through until the language model decides what to do with them?","importance":"This is primarily a mechanistic and diagnostic contribution. For multimodal pretraining, the key implication is that safety may not be only a decoder- or RLHF-level phenomenon. The visual representation itself may already determine which risky concepts are available downstream. That matters because it changes where safety interventions should be applied: in the encoder, in the projector, or only in the language model.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method is a layer-wise analysis of safety alignment across image encoder representations. A reasonable reading is that the authors probe or intervene on different layers, measure how separable safety-relevant content is at each stage, and test how those layer outputs affect downstream refusal or compliance once fused with the language model. The difference from standard benchmarking is that this localizes safety behavior in the stack rather than reporting a single model-level score. That is useful because it helps distinguish representation-level problems from decoding-level problems. The limitation is also clear: without strong interventions, layer-wise analysis can remain correlational rather than fully causal.","experiments":"No abstract is available, so the specific VLMs, datasets, metrics, and numerical findings are unknown. The most valuable experiments would compare safety-relevant probing accuracy across encoder layers, test what happens when certain layers are replaced, truncated, or frozen, and check whether different VLM families show similar alignment depth profiles. Strong ablations would separate the effects of the vision encoder, multimodal projector, and language-side safety tuning.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","safety-alignment","image-encoder"],"notable_authors":["Saketh Bachu","Erfan Shayegani","Rohit Lal","Trishna Chakraborty","Arindam Dutta"]},{"id":"2403.07854","title":"Distilling the Knowledge in Data Pruning","authors":["Emanuel Ben Baruch","Adam Botach","Igor Kviatkovsky","Manoj Aggarwal","Gérard G. Medioni"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d1","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.07854","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/BaruchBKAM25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/BaruchBKAM25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/ben-baruch25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：数据剪枝在高剪枝率下往往显著掉点，因为被保留下来的子集无法完整承载原始数据分布的信息。过去的数据剪枝方法主要只优化‘选哪些样本’，训练时仍然只看硬标签，因此一旦子集太小，许多被删掉数据中的类间结构和暗知识就一起丢失了。","importance":"这项工作的贡献是把知识蒸馏系统地引入数据剪枝训练流程，属于数据级与训练策略级的结合。对 pretrain 的启示很明确：数据选择不是只有‘保留/删除’两种状态，被删掉样本的信息仍可通过 teacher 的软目标部分回流。对于大规模预训练中的 dedup、过滤、重加权和 curriculum，这个思路都值得重视，因为 aggressive pruning 的真正问题不只是样本数减少，而是目标分布被过度离散化。","technical_approach":"作者的方法并不复杂，但思路很扎实：先用完整数据训练 teacher，再在被剪枝后的子集上训练 student，同时结合真实标签和 teacher soft predictions。摘要提到他们先给出 self-distillation 用于 pruning 的理论动机，再在多种剪枝方法和不同 pruning fraction 上验证有效性。和传统数据剪枝相比，关键区别不是换了更聪明的打分函数，而是在子集训练阶段补回了被删除数据承载的相似类关系、难样本边界和不确定性信息。这样做有效，是因为剪枝本质上改变了经验分布；蒸馏则用 teacher 对全量分布的近似，把部分分布信息压缩回训练目标。代价也清楚：需要先训练 teacher，且 teacher 偏差会传给 student；如果 teacher 本身不强，蒸馏收益会受限。","experiments":"摘要明确声称：在不同数据集、不同剪枝算法和所有剪枝比例上，引入 KD 都带来显著提升，但没有给出具体数字。可确定的关键信息有两点：第一，收益不是绑定某一种 pruning 方法，而是跨方法成立；第二，收益在高 pruning regime 下尤其重要，因为这是传统方法最容易失真的区间。若看正文，最值得关注的实验应包括：不同 teacher 强度对恢复效果的影响、极端高剪枝率下与全量训练的差距能缩小多少、以及 self-distillation 是否已足够接近外部更强 teacher。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a common failure mode in data pruning: at high pruning ratios, accuracy drops sharply because the retained subset no longer carries enough information about the full training distribution. Most pruning methods focus on selecting which examples to keep, but training on the subset still uses only hard labels, so much of the class structure and dark knowledge from discarded samples is lost.","importance":"The contribution is a clean combination of data pruning and knowledge distillation. For pretraining, the lesson is broader than classification: data selection is not just a keep-or-drop decision. Information from removed examples can still be partially recovered through soft targets from a teacher trained on the full data. That perspective is relevant to deduplication, filtering, reweighting, and aggressive curation pipelines in large-scale pretraining.","technical_approach":"The method is conceptually simple and well-motivated. Train a teacher on the full dataset, then train a student on the pruned subset using both ground-truth labels and the teacher’s soft predictions. The abstract also mentions a theoretical motivation for self-distillation under pruning. The key difference from standard pruning work is that the paper does not only try to choose a better subset; it changes the objective on the subset so that information about inter-class similarity, uncertainty, and boundary structure is not completely discarded when samples are removed. This makes sense because pruning changes the empirical distribution, and distillation can act as a compressed proxy for the full-data target distribution. The trade-off is straightforward: a teacher is required, and any teacher bias will propagate into the student.","experiments":"The abstract makes one strong empirical claim: adding KD improves performance across datasets, across pruning methods, and at all pruning fractions, though it does not give exact numbers. Two points are still clear. First, the effect is not tied to one specific pruning criterion. Second, the gain should matter most in the high-pruning regime where subset-only training degrades the most. In the full paper, the most useful details would be how much stronger teachers help, how close the approach gets to full-data training at extreme pruning levels, and whether self-distillation already captures most of the benefit.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-pruning","knowledge-distillation","data-quality"],"notable_authors":["Emanuel Ben Baruch","Adam Botach","Igor Kviatkovsky","Manoj Aggarwal","Gérard G. Medioni"]},{"id":"2507.04075","title":"Accurate and Efficient World Modeling with Masked Latent Transformers","authors":["Maxime Burchi","Radu Timofte"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d2","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.04075","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/BurchiT25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/BurchiT25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/burchi25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是：如何在世界模型里同时兼顾预测精度和训练效率。Dreamer 一类方法训练高效，但其紧凑 latent space 可能丢失对控制关键的细节；而更精确的像素级世界模型虽然补回了信息，却通常训练更慢，也难以让 agent 直接复用世界模型学到的内部表示。","importance":"这项工作的意义在于提出了一条折中路线：不回到昂贵的纯像素建模，也不完全接受过压缩 latent 的信息损失。虽然论文主要面向强化学习世界模型，但从 pretrain 视角看，它和 masked/latent sequence modeling 很相关：如何在离散或连续潜空间中保留足够可预测、可规划的状态信息，同时维持训练和 rollout 效率。这对视频 tokenization、latent dynamics、以及非 AR 生成建模都有借鉴价值。","technical_approach":"作者提出 EMERALD，一种 masked latent Transformer world model。核心不是直接从像素自回归预测未来，而是在潜表示空间里用 masked 建模学习动态，这样既保留比 Dreamer 更丰富的信息，又避免像素级建模的巨大成本。摘要强调它是‘accurate and efficient’的替代方案，说明设计重点应包括：使用较高保真度的 latent 表示、通过 masked 预测提升上下文利用率或并行训练效率、并让 agent 能消费世界模型内部表征而非只依赖重建像素。与 Δ-IRIS、DIAMOND 这类从像素训练 agent 的方法相比，它舍弃了端到端像素控制的纯粹性，换来更高的样本/算力效率；与 Dreamer 相比，它则牺牲了部分极致压缩，换取更强的状态保真。","experiments":"摘要没有给出具体环境、模型规模和分数，但清楚给出了比较对象：Dreamer、Δ-IRIS 和 DIAMOND。可确定的实验目标是证明 EMERALD 在保持高效的同时，世界模型更准确，且最终 agent 性能更好。最值得关注的指标通常包括 imagined rollout 误差、下游控制回报、以及训练吞吐或样本效率。若有消融，关键应是：masked latent modeling 相比其他预测目标是否更优，latent 表示维度与控制性能之间是否存在明显 trade-off，以及 agent 直接利用世界模型中间表示能否带来稳定收益。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a familiar trade-off in world models: Dreamer-style approaches are efficient, but their compressed latent states can discard information that matters for control, while more accurate pixel-level world models recover detail at a much higher training cost. The question is how to get both strong predictive fidelity and practical efficiency.","importance":"The contribution is important as a modeling trade-off rather than a pure benchmark win. Although framed in reinforcement learning, it is relevant to pretraining because it sits at the intersection of latent sequence modeling, masked prediction, and efficient dynamics learning. The broader lesson is that a latent model can be both trainable and useful for planning if the representation is rich enough and the objective is chosen carefully.","technical_approach":"The method, EMERALD, is a masked latent Transformer world model. Instead of autoregressively predicting future pixels, it models dynamics in latent space with a masked objective, aiming to preserve more information than highly compressed latent models while avoiding the heavy cost of full pixel-level modeling. The design likely relies on higher-fidelity latent states, parallelizable masked prediction, and a training setup where the agent can benefit directly from the world model’s internal representations rather than only reconstructed observations. Relative to pixel-based approaches such as Delta-IRIS and DIAMOND, this gives up some end-to-end purity for efficiency. Relative to Dreamer, it gives up some compression in exchange for better state fidelity.","experiments":"The abstract names Dreamer, Delta-IRIS, and DIAMOND as reference points, but it does not provide environments, model sizes, or numerical gains. The intended empirical claim is clear: EMERALD should produce a more accurate world model than Dreamer while remaining more efficient than pixel-heavy alternatives, and that should translate into better downstream control. The most informative metrics would be rollout accuracy in imagination, final return, and training or sample efficiency. Useful ablations would test the masked latent objective against alternative prediction targets, characterize the trade-off between latent dimensionality and control performance, and measure whether exposing the agent to internal world-model representations really helps.","authors_note":""},"tags":["masked-modeling","latent-transformer","world-model"],"notable_authors":["Maxime Burchi","Radu Timofte"]},{"id":"2407.11867","title":"Targeted Unlearning with Single Layer Unlearning Gradient","authors":["Zikui Cai","Yaoteng Tan","M. Salman Asif"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d3","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.11867","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/CaiTA25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/CaiTA25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/cai25f.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["unlearning","model-editing","safety","efficiency"]},{"id":"2502.04322","title":"Speak Easy: Eliciting Harmful Jailbreaks from LLMs with Simple Interactions","authors":["Yik Siu Chan","Narutatsu Ri","Yuxin Xiao","Marzyeh Ghassemi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d4","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.04322","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChanRXG25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChanRXG25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chan25b.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["safety","jailbreak","alignment","evaluation"]},{"id":"2405.17829","title":"LDMol: A Text-to-Molecule Diffusion Model with Structurally Informative Latent Space Surpasses AR Models","authors":["Jinho Chang","Jong Chul Ye"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d5","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.17829","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChangY25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChangY25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chang25d.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion","text-to-molecule","latent-space","non-ar"]},{"id":"2506.06105","title":"Text-to-LoRA: Instant Transformer Adaption","authors":["Rujikorn Charakorn","Edoardo Cetin","Yujin Tang","Robert Tjarko Lange"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d6","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.06105","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/CharakornCTL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/CharakornCTL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/charakorn25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["lora","adaptation","hypernetwork","fine-tuning"]},{"id":"2505.23729","title":"Bounded Rationality for LLMs: Satisficing Alignment at Inference-Time","authors":["Mohamad Fares El Hajj Chehade","Soumya Suvra Ghosal","Souradip Chakraborty","Avinash Reddy","Dinesh Manocha","Hao Zhu","Amrit Singh Bedi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d7","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.23729","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChehadeGCRMZB25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChehadeGCRMZB25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chehade25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["alignment","inference-time","bounded-rationality","multi-objective"]},{"id":"2505.24445","title":"Learning Safety Constraints for Large Language Models","authors":["Xin Chen","Yarden As","Andreas Krause"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d8","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.24445","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChenA025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChenA025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chen25b.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["safety","alignment","representation-space","constraints"]},{"id":"2501.15420","title":"Visual Generation Without Guidance","authors":["Huayu Chen","Kai Jiang","Kaiwen Zheng","Jianfei Chen","Hang Su","Jun Zhu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d9","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.15420","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChenJZ00025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChenJZ00025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chen25ac.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["cfg-free","diffusion","training-objective","visual-generation"]},{"id":"ChenX0025","title":"Oscillation-Reduced MXFP4 Training for Vision Transformers","authors":["Yuxiang Chen","Haocheng Xi","Jun Zhu","Jianfei Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ChenX0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ChenX0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/chen25bu.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关注的是：在 MXFP4 这类超低精度训练下，Vision Transformer 容易出现训练震荡，导致收敛变差甚至失稳。过去低比特训练常靠损失缩放、量化校准或局部高精度回退来缓解，但这些办法未必能直接解决训练动态中的 oscillation 问题。","importance":"从题目看，这是训练稳定性与数值格式设计相关的方法。它的重要性在于，如果 MXFP4 训练能更稳，超低精度预训练才真正有工程价值；否则显存和吞吐收益会被调参成本、复现困难和收敛风险抵消。","technical_approach":"根据题目，作者提出的是一种针对 Vision Transformer 的 oscillation-reduced MXFP4 training 方案，核心目标不是单纯降低精度，而是在 4-bit 浮点训练中抑制梯度或激活统计的周期性震荡。可能的技术路径包括更稳的缩放策略、更新规则修正、关键路径保留更高精度或量化噪声抑制，但由于没有摘要，具体机制无法确认。可以确定的是，这类方法的设计关键在于平衡两件事：一是维持低精度带来的吞吐/内存收益，二是不要把稳定性修补做成大量 hidden FP16 fallback，后者会削弱方法意义。","experiments":"无摘要，无法确认使用的 ViT 规模、数据集、训练配方、与 BF16/FP8 或其他 FP4 方法的对比，以及收敛和精度提升数字。仅能从题目判断，实验重点应是训练曲线稳定性和最终精度保持，但这里不做事实性补充。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper appears to address a familiar low-precision failure mode: ViT training in MXFP4 can become oscillatory and unstable, hurting convergence or final quality. Prior low-bit methods often rely on loss scaling, selective high-precision fallbacks, or quantization calibration, but those do not necessarily fix the training dynamics themselves.","importance":"This is a training-stability contribution tied to numeric format design. Its practical importance is clear: ultra-low-precision pretraining only matters if the instability tax stays low enough that the memory and throughput gains are not erased by tuning overhead and brittle convergence.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method is an oscillation-reduced MXFP4 training recipe for Vision Transformers. The likely focus is to suppress oscillatory behavior in gradients or activations under 4-bit floating-point training rather than simply making quantization more accurate. The exact mechanism is not available, but the core design tension is predictable: preserve the hardware and memory benefits of FP4 while avoiding so many hidden higher-precision escapes that the method loses its point.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so there is no reliable information on model size, datasets, training setup, baselines, or quantitative gains. Any more specific experimental summary would be speculation.","authors_note":""},"tags":["low-precision-training","mxfp4","vision-transformer"]},{"id":"2411.08324","title":"Are LLMs Prescient? A Continuous Evaluation using Daily News as the Oracle","authors":["Hui Dai","Ryan Teehan","Mengye Ren"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Many existing evaluation benchmarks for Large Language Models (LLMs) quickly become outdated due to the emergence of new models and training data. These benchmarks also fall short in assessing how LLM performance changes over time, as they consist of a static set of questions without a temporal dimension. To address these limitations, we propose using future event prediction as a continuous evaluation method to assess LLMs'temporal generalization and forecasting abilities. Our benchmark, Daily Oracle, automatically generates question-answer (QA) pairs from daily news, challenging LLMs to predict\"future\"event outcomes. Our findings reveal that as pre-training data becomes outdated, LLM performance degrades over time. While Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) has the potential to enhance prediction accuracy, the performance degradation pattern persists, highlighting the need for continuous model updates. Code and data are available at https://agenticlearning.ai/daily-oracle.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.08324","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/DaiTR25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/DaiTR25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/dai25l.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：静态 benchmark 很快过时，越来越难反映 LLM 在真实时间流中的泛化能力，尤其无法测“知识过期后性能如何衰减”。过去大多数评测默认问题集固定不变，因此更像一次性考试，而不是持续监控模型是否还能跟上世界变化。","importance":"这是一个评测方法级工作，重要性在于把时间维度引入 LLM evaluation。对 pretrain 的启示很实在：预训练数据的截止时间不是一个背景变量，而是会系统性影响模型能力；如果没有连续评测，团队很难判断是模型规模不够、数据更新不够，还是 RAG/后训练补救策略失效。","technical_approach":"作者提出 Daily Oracle，用每日新闻自动构造未来事件预测问答，把“能否预测随后发生的真实结果”作为持续评测信号。这个设计比传统静态 QA 更合理，因为它天然带时间戳，可以观测模型随着知识老化而产生的性能漂移。方法上关键不是让模型做开放式宏观预测，而是把新闻事件转成可验证 QA，从而得到可自动化、可持续更新的评测管线。和手工构造 benchmark 相比，它的优势是新鲜度和自动化；边界则是新闻事件本身有报道偏差，且问题生成质量会直接影响评测噪声。","experiments":"摘要明确给出的结论有两点：第一，随着预训练数据变旧，LLM 性能会随时间下降；第二，RAG 虽然有潜力提升预测能力，但效果受多种因素影响，摘要截断后无法确认具体结论。未提供模型名单、时间跨度、题目数量、准确率下降幅度或 RAG 带来的增益，因此不能写具体数字。就研究价值而言，最值得看的会是不同模型的衰减斜率，以及闭源/开源模型在时间泛化上的差异。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a clear weakness of current LLM evaluation: static benchmarks age quickly and say little about how performance changes as the world moves on. They test models once, but they do not measure temporal generalization or how capabilities decay as pretraining data becomes stale.","importance":"This is an evaluation-method contribution with direct relevance to pretraining. The practical message is that the data cutoff date is not just metadata; it systematically affects model behavior. Without continuous evaluation, it is hard to disentangle whether failures come from insufficient scale, outdated pretraining, or ineffective retrieval-based compensation.","technical_approach":"The authors introduce Daily Oracle, which automatically builds future-event QA pairs from daily news and uses outcome prediction as a continuous evaluation signal. This is stronger than static QA because every example is timestamped and naturally supports measuring performance drift over time. The design also keeps evaluation verifiable by converting news events into checkable question-answer pairs rather than open-ended forecasting. The strengths are freshness and automation; the main limitations are news coverage bias and noise from the QA generation pipeline.","experiments":"Two findings are explicit in the abstract. First, model performance degrades over time as pretraining data becomes outdated. Second, RAG can help future prediction, though the provided text is truncated before the full qualification is stated. The abstract does not list model names, time horizon, benchmark size, exact degradation rates, or RAG gains, so those details cannot be added reliably.","authors_note":""},"tags":["evaluation","temporal-generalization","benchmark","reasoning"]},{"id":"2502.01591","title":"Improving Transformer World Models for Data-Efficient RL","authors":["Antoine Dedieu","Joseph Ortiz","Xinghua Lou","Carter Wendelken","J. Swaroop Guntupalli","Wolfgang Lehrach","Miguel Lázaro-Gredilla","Kevin Patrick Murphy"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$da","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.01591","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/DedieuOLWGLLM25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/DedieuOLWGLLM25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/dedieu25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["world-model","tokenizer","transformer","rl"]},{"id":"2502.03029","title":"On Zero-Initialized Attention: Optimal Prompt and Gating Factor Estimation","authors":["Nghiem Tuong Diep","Huy Nguyen","Chau Nguyen","Minh Le","Duy Minh Ho Nguyen","Daniel Sonntag","Mathias Niepert","Nhat Ho"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"The LLaMA-Adapter has recently emerged as an efficient fine-tuning technique for LLaMA models, leveraging zero-initialized attention to stabilize training and enhance performance. However, despite its empirical success, the theoretical foundations of zero-initialized attention remain largely unexplored. In this paper, we provide a rigorous theoretical analysis, establishing a connection between zero-initialized attention and mixture-of-expert models. We prove that both linear and non-linear prompts, along with gating functions, can be optimally estimated, with non-linear prompts offering greater flexibility for future applications. Empirically, we validate our findings on the open LLM benchmarks, demonstrating that non-linear prompts outperform linear ones. Notably, even with limited training data, both prompt types consistently surpass vanilla attention, highlighting the robustness and adaptability of zero-initialized attention.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.03029","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/DiepNNLNSNH25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/DiepNNLNSNH25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/diep25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["attention","peft","theory","adapter"]},{"id":"Dong00L25","title":"A Lens into Interpretable Transformer Mistakes via Semantic Dependency","authors":["Ruo-Jing Dong","Yu Yao","Bo Han","Tongliang Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Dong00L25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Dong00L25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/dong25n.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["interpretability","transformer","error-analysis","semantics"]},{"id":"2506.06376","title":"Enhancing Decision-Making of Large Language Models via Actor-Critic","authors":["Heng Dong","Kefei Duan","Chongjie Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$db","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.06376","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/DongDZ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/DongDZ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/dong25c.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["actor-critic","decision-making","reasoning","rl"]},{"id":"2601.20116","title":"In-Context Reinforcement Learning From Suboptimal Historical Data","authors":["Juncheng Dong","Moyang Guo","Ethan X. Fang","Zhuoran Yang","Vahid Tarokh"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$dc","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.20116","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/DongGFYT25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/DongGFYT25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/dong25d.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["in-context-learning","reinforcement-learning","transformer","offline-data"]},{"id":"2505.19433","title":"Can Compressed LLMs Truly Act? An Empirical Evaluation of Agentic Capabilities in LLM Compression","authors":["Peijie Dong","Zhenheng Tang","Xiang Liu","Lujun Li","Xiaowen Chu","Bo Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$dd","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.19433","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/DongT000025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/DongT000025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/dong25k.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["compression","agent","evaluation","long-context"]},{"id":"2406.13348","title":"Textual Unlearning Gives a False Sense of Unlearning","authors":["Jiacheng Du","Zhibo Wang","Jie Zhang","Xiaoyi Pang","Jiahui Hu","Kui Ren"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$de","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.13348","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Du00PH025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Du00PH025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/du25d.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["unlearning","memorization","privacy","llm-safety"]},{"id":"2502.14096","title":"Aligned Multi Objective Optimization","authors":["Yonathan Efroni","Ben Kretzu","Daniel Jiang","Jalaj Bhandari","Zheqing Zhu","Karen Ullrich"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"To date, the multi-objective optimization literature has mainly focused on conflicting objectives, studying the Pareto front, or requiring users to balance tradeoffs. Yet, in machine learning practice, there are many scenarios where such conflict does not take place. Recent findings from multi-task learning, reinforcement learning, and LLMs training show that diverse related tasks can enhance performance across objectives simultaneously. Despite this evidence, such phenomenon has not been examined from an optimization perspective. This leads to a lack of generic gradient-based methods that can scale to scenarios with a large number of related objectives. To address this gap, we introduce the Aligned Multi-Objective Optimization framework, propose new algorithms for this setting, and provide theoretical guarantees of their superior performance compared to naive approaches.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.14096","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/EfroniK0BZU25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/EfroniK0BZU25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/efroni25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：多目标优化并不总是“目标冲突、找 Pareto 前沿”，在很多 ML 训练里目标是相关且可同时提升的，但缺少能在“大量相关目标”下可扩展的通用梯度方法。以往方法往往要求手动权衡或假设冲突结构，难以解释多任务/LLM 训练里常见的“互相促进”。","importance":"贡献是提出“Aligned Multi-Objective Optimization”这一更贴近实际训练的优化设定，并给出相应算法与理论/经验支撑。对 pretrain 的启示是：把不同数据源/任务/奖励建模为多目标时，若梯度方向天然对齐，优化器应当利用这种对齐结构来提升样本效率与稳定性，而不是一刀切做加权和。","technical_approach":"核心思路是显式刻画“目标梯度对齐”（aligned objectives）的情形，并在此设定下设计新的梯度型算法，目标是在不需要用户调权重的情况下同时推进多个目标。与经典多目标方法不同，它不把重点放在冲突与折中，而是把“相关性/一致性”当成可利用的结构；边界在于当目标确实冲突或对齐随训练阶段变化时，算法需要退化到更保守的策略，否则可能出现对少数目标过拟合或训练震荡。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体实验域（多任务学习/强化学习/LLM 训练）、目标数量规模、模型大小、baseline（如 MGDA/PCGrad/GradNorm 等）以及提升数字。只能确认作者声称覆盖多任务、RL、LLM 训练等场景的动机，并给出新算法与验证；判断其对 pretrain 的直接价值需要看：在多数据配比/多损失（LM+对齐+辅助）下是否带来更稳定的 loss 曲线、更少的调参成本与可复现的收益。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper reframes multi-objective optimization for ML practice: many objectives are related and can improve together, yet most multi-objective methods assume conflict and require explicit trade-off tuning, which does not scale to many objectives.","importance":"It introduces an “Aligned Multi-Objective Optimization” setting plus algorithms tailored to it. For pretraining, it suggests that when gradients from different data sources/losses are naturally aligned, the optimizer should exploit that structure to gain stability and efficiency instead of relying on a fixed weighted sum.","technical_approach":"The approach explicitly models the aligned-gradient regime and designs gradient-based methods that advance many objectives without manual weighting. Unlike Pareto-front-centric methods, it treats objective agreement as exploitable signal; the limitation is that real training can shift between aligned and conflicting phases, where overly aggressive alignment assumptions may cause instability or neglect minority objectives.","experiments":"The abstract does not specify domains, number of objectives, model sizes, baselines (e.g., PCGrad/MGDA/GradNorm), or numeric improvements. Assessing pretraining impact requires seeing results on realistic multi-loss setups (LM + auxiliary + alignment) with clear stability/efficiency gains.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multi-objective","optimization","multi-task","training"]},{"id":"ElmozninoJBL25","title":"Towards a Formal Theory of Representational Compositionality","authors":["Eric Elmoznino","Thomas Jiralerspong","Yoshua Bengio","Guillaume Lajoie"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ElmozninoJBL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ElmozninoJBL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/elmoznino25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"摘要缺失：无法确认论文对“表征可组合性（representational compositionality）”要形式化的具体对象，是针对神经表示的可加性/可分解性，还是针对组合泛化与机制解释。","importance":"摘要缺失：仅从标题看更偏理论/机制分析方向，可能为理解 LLM 表征如何组合提供形式工具，但缺少问题设定与结论无法判断对 pretrain 的直接启示。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失：无法总结其形式化定义、假设条件、定理或与现有 compositionality/representation learning 理论的差异。","experiments":"摘要缺失：无法确认是否包含实证验证、使用哪些模型/数据、以及是否有可复现的定量指标。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract: the specific notion of “representational compositionality” being formalized (additivity, decomposability, compositional generalization, or interpretability) is unclear.","importance":"No abstract: the title suggests a theory/mechanistic-analysis contribution, but its concrete implications for pretraining cannot be assessed without stated results.","technical_approach":"No abstract: definitions, assumptions, theorems, and differentiation from prior theory are not available.","experiments":"No abstract: it is unknown whether there is empirical validation, on which models/datasets, and with what metrics.","authors_note":""},"tags":["compositionality","representation","theory"]},{"id":"FanJZR0025","title":"Towards LLM Unlearning Resilient to Relearning Attacks: A Sharpness-Aware Minimization Perspective and Beyond","authors":["Chongyu Fan","Jinghan Jia","Yihua Zhang","Anil Ramakrishna","Mingyi Hong","Sijia Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/FanJZR0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/FanJZR0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/fan25e.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"摘要缺失：无法确认论文在“可抵抗再学习攻击的 LLM unlearning”中，具体把问题建模为 sharpness（损失曲率/尖锐度）相关的哪一类脆弱性，以及攻击/威胁模型是什么。","importance":"摘要缺失：从标题看贡献可能是把 unlearning 的鲁棒性与 SAM（Sharpness-Aware Minimization）联系起来，提示“让遗忘后的解更平坦”可能降低再学习，但缺少实证与边界条件无法判断对对齐/持续预训练的意义。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失：无法总结其是否直接用 SAM 训练、是否提出新正则/新目标、以及“beyond”部分包含哪些超越 SAM 的方法或理论。","experiments":"摘要缺失：没有数据集（如 TOFU）、模型规模、遗忘质量指标、再学习攻击强度、与现有 unlearning baseline 的对比数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract: the exact vulnerability addressed in unlearning under relearning attacks, and how it is tied to sharpness/curvature, is not specified.","importance":"No abstract: the title suggests linking unlearning robustness to SAM-style flat minima, but impact on alignment/continual pretraining cannot be assessed without stated results and threat models.","technical_approach":"No abstract: it is unknown whether they apply SAM directly, introduce new objectives/regularizers, or what the “and beyond” extensions are.","experiments":"No abstract: datasets, model sizes, forgetting/utility metrics, attack strengths, and numeric comparisons to unlearning baselines are missing.","authors_note":""},"tags":["unlearning","relearning-attack","sharpness-aware","llm-safety"]},{"id":"FanLLGQ0025","title":"Make LoRA Great Again: Boosting LoRA with Adaptive Singular Values and Mixture-of-Experts Optimization Alignment","authors":["Chenghao Fan","Zhenyi Lu","Sichen Liu","Chengfeng Gu","Xiaoye Qu","Wei Wei","Yu Cheng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/FanLLGQ0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/FanLLGQ0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/fan25g.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"摘要缺失：无法确认论文要解决的 LoRA 痛点是容量不足、训练不稳定、还是与 MoE/对齐目标不兼容导致的性能上限。","importance":"摘要缺失：标题暗示贡献是通过“自适应奇异值”提升 LoRA 表达能力，并引入与 MoE 优化对齐的策略，但缺少实验与机制无法判断对大模型 posttrain/continual finetune 的实际价值。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失：无法总结其是否改变 LoRA 的低秩分解形式、是否学习 rank/谱分布、以及“Mixture-of-Experts Optimization Alignment”具体如何作用于 LoRA 参数更新或路由。","experiments":"摘要缺失：没有模型规模、任务（指令/对齐/领域适配）、baseline（LoRA/QLoRA/DoRA 等）、以及提升数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract: the specific limitation of LoRA being addressed (capacity, stability, or incompatibility with MoE/alignment objectives) is unclear.","importance":"No abstract: the title suggests boosting LoRA via adaptive singular values and aligning optimization with MoE, but practical impact on post-training/continual finetuning cannot be assessed without results.","technical_approach":"No abstract: it is unknown how they modify LoRA (rank/spectrum learning, parameterization changes) and what “MoE optimization alignment” concretely means for updates or routing.","experiments":"No abstract: model sizes, tasks, baselines (LoRA/QLoRA/DoRA), and numeric gains are missing.","authors_note":""},"tags":["lora","moe","parameter-efficient","fine-tuning"]},{"id":"FanMDJ25","title":"On-Device Collaborative Language Modeling via a Mixture of Generalists and Specialists","authors":["Dongyang Fan","Bettina Messmer","Nikita Doikov","Martin Jaggi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/FanMDJ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/FanMDJ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/fan25h.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"摘要缺失：无法确认论文在“端侧协同语言建模”里要解决的核心约束是带宽、隐私、算力异构，还是多设备协作下的模型一致性与收敛。","importance":"摘要缺失：从标题看可能是系统与建模结合的部署范式（generalists+specialists 的混合），对 edge pretrain/个性化适配可能有启发，但缺少细节无法判断贡献量级。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失：无法总结其 mixture 结构是类似 MoE 路由、还是多模型协作（联邦/分布式推理），以及 generalist/specialist 如何训练与协同。","experiments":"摘要缺失：没有设备设置、通信成本、延迟/能耗、精度指标与对比方法。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract: the main constraint in on-device collaborative language modeling (bandwidth, privacy, heterogeneous compute, or convergence/consistency) is not specified.","importance":"No abstract: the title hints at a deployment-oriented mixture of generalists and specialists that could matter for edge personalization, but contribution size is unclear without results.","technical_approach":"No abstract: it is unknown whether the mixture resembles MoE routing or multi-model collaboration (federated/distributed inference), and how generalists/specialists are trained and coordinated.","experiments":"No abstract: device setup, communication cost, latency/energy, accuracy metrics, and baselines are missing.","authors_note":""},"tags":["on-device","moe","collaborative","language-model"]},{"id":"2411.16375","title":"Ca2-VDM: Efficient Autoregressive Video Diffusion Model with Causal Generation and Cache Sharing","authors":["Kaifeng Gao","Jiaxin Shi","Hanwang Zhang","Chunping Wang","Jun Xiao","Long Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$df","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.16375","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GaoSZ00025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GaoSZ00025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/gao25m.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是自回归视频扩散模型在长视频生成时的重复计算问题。现有方法把视频按 clip 自回归生成，后一段依赖前一段的末帧或条件帧，但相邻 clip 的重叠条件每一步都要重新编码，导致算力随自回归步数近似二次增长，长上下文时尤其不实用。","importance":"这是一个偏系统与建模接口的贡献，重要性在于它直接打到了 AR+diffusion 联合范式的可扩展性瓶颈。对统一多模态预训练和视频生成研究都有启发：如果跨 clip 的因果依赖能被缓存并复用，那么视频 diffusion 的自回归外循环就更像语言模型的 KV-cache，而不是每次从头算一遍条件上下文。它不改变扩散目标本身，但显著影响长序列生成是否可落地。","technical_approach":"核心方法是提出带因果生成与缓存共享的高效自回归视频扩散框架 Ca2-VDM。设计重点不是重新定义 diffusion，而是把相邻 clip 中不会变化的条件信息做成可复用缓存，并严格按因果顺序组织生成，使新 clip 只为新增内容付费。和已有 AR 视频扩散相比，关键区别在于它显式消除了重叠条件帧的重复前向；这类设计有效的原因很直接：视频自回归里最大浪费来自重复编码同一上下文，而不是去噪步本身。代价是缓存机制需要和时空注意力、条件注入方式紧密对齐，否则共享会失效或引入错位。","experiments":"摘要给出了最核心的实验结论：方法针对长视频自回归生成的效率问题，并宣称避免了随自回归步数上升的二次复杂度。现有摘要被截断，无法确认具体模型规模、数据集、wall-clock 加速倍数、显存节省幅度以及质量指标是否保持不变。读者应重点看三类结果：一是固定质量下的吞吐/时延改善；二是随着条件帧数和自回归步数增加时，复杂度是否从近二次变为更接近线性；三是缓存共享是否在长程一致性上引入质量退化。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a concrete bottleneck in autoregressive video diffusion: repeated recomputation of overlapping conditional frames across adjacent clips. In existing clip-wise AR video diffusion, each new clip re-encodes context that was already processed in the previous step, making cost grow roughly quadratically with the number of autoregressive steps when long context is used.","importance":"This is mainly a systems-plus-modeling contribution, and it matters because it removes a major scalability barrier for the AR+diffusion paradigm. For multimodal pretraining and generative modeling, the key lesson is that clip-level diffusion can benefit from cache reuse in a way analogous to KV caching in language models. The diffusion objective itself may stay unchanged, but the feasibility of long-horizon generation changes materially once redundant context computation is eliminated.","technical_approach":"The method, Ca2-VDM, appears to combine causal clip generation with cache sharing across autoregressive steps. The main idea is not to redesign diffusion, but to reuse representations for context frames that persist across neighboring clips, so each new step pays mainly for newly generated content. The difference from prior AR video diffusion is explicit reuse of overlapping conditional computation. That design is effective because the dominant inefficiency comes from recomputing the same context, not from the denoising loop alone. The trade-off is implementation complexity: cache validity depends on how temporal attention and conditioning are structured.","experiments":"The abstract clearly claims improved efficiency for long autoregressive video generation and avoidance of the quadratic growth pattern, but the provided text is truncated before the quantitative results. Model size, dataset scale, exact speedups, memory savings, and quality-retention numbers cannot be confirmed here. The most important results to inspect are throughput or latency at matched quality, scaling with longer conditional context, and whether cache reuse hurts temporal consistency or perceptual quality.","authors_note":""},"tags":["video-diffusion","autoregressive","cache","efficiency","long-generation"]},{"id":"2501.18865","title":"REG: Rectified Gradient Guidance for Conditional Diffusion Models","authors":["Zhengqi Gao","Kaiwen Zha","Tianyuan Zhang","Zihui Xue","Duane S. Boning"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e0","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.18865","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GaoZZXB25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GaoZZXB25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/gao25t.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：扩散模型里广泛使用的 guidance 在理论目标和实际实现之间存在错位。现有做法通常把引导理解为对边缘分布做缩放，但作者指出这个目标在理论上并不成立，结果是很多经验上有效的 guidance 其实是在用一个不严格、但凑巧有用的近似。","importance":"这是一个方法级但带一定范式澄清意义的工作。它的重要性不在于再发明一种特定条件生成技巧，而在于把 guidance 这类几乎扩散模型标配的组件重新用正确目标表述出来，并给出现有实现为什么有效、又为什么不最优的解释。对做 diffusion LM、图像/视频 diffusion 或 AR+diffusion 联合建模的人，这种目标层面的纠偏有价值，因为它影响的是整个条件生成链路，而不是某个数据集的小改动。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 REG，Rectified Gradient Guidance。作者先证明“缩放边缘分布”的经典目标无效，然后改为一个合法的“缩放联合分布”目标；在这个目标下，现有 guidance 可被解释为在“没有未来信息可用”约束下对最优解的近似。REG 的作用不是替代所有 guidance，而是作为一个通用增强项，把现有梯度引导向更合理的方向校正。这个设计有效的原因是它同时修正了目标定义和近似误差：前者解决理论不一致，后者改善实际采样路径。边界在于，如果原始条件模型本身很弱，单靠 guidance 校正通常不能补齐建模能力缺口。","experiments":"摘要只明确说在 1D 和 2D 实验上验证了 REG 的有效性，但未给出具体数据集、基线和提升数字。从论文定位看，实验重点应是：与 classifier guidance、classifier-free guidance 等标准方法比较；验证 REG 是否在相同采样步数下提高条件一致性、样本质量或 mode coverage；并用 toy setting 展示理论最优解与现有近似之间的差异。如果实验主要停留在低维合成数据，结论会更偏理论澄清；若有图像等高维结果，其方法影响力会更强。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a mismatch that has been largely tolerated in diffusion guidance: the theoretical motivation and the practical implementation do not line up. Standard guidance is often framed as scaling a marginal target, but the authors argue that this objective is theoretically invalid, meaning many successful guidance heuristics have been operating with a flawed target.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution with broader conceptual value. Its importance is not just another conditional generation trick, but a cleanup of one of the most widely used components in diffusion modeling. For diffusion LM, image or video diffusion, and hybrid AR+diffusion systems, this matters because it touches the objective behind conditioning itself, not a narrow benchmark tweak.","technical_approach":"The proposed method is REG, Rectified Gradient Guidance. The paper first replaces the invalid scaled-marginal objective with a valid scaled-joint objective, and then shows that standard guidance implementations can be interpreted as approximations to an intractable optimum under a no-future-foresight constraint. REG is designed as a plug-in correction to existing guidance methods rather than a full replacement. The reason this can work is straightforward: it fixes both the target and the approximation direction. The limit is also clear: if the base conditional model is poor, guidance correction alone cannot recover missing modeling capacity.","experiments":"The abstract only confirms effectiveness on 1D and 2D settings and does not provide benchmark names or numerical gains. The critical evidence to look for is comparison against classifier and classifier-free guidance, behavior at fixed sampling budgets, and whether REG improves conditional fidelity without collapsing diversity. If results stay mostly in low-dimensional settings, the paper should be read primarily as a theoretical correction; high-dimensional image results would make the practical case much stronger.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","guidance","score-matching","objective","sampling"]},{"id":"2410.11042","title":"Persistent Topological Features in Large Language Models","authors":["Yuri Gardinazzi","Karthik Viswanathan","Giada Panerai","Alessio Ansuini","Alberto Cazzaniga","Matteo Biagetti"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e1","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.11042","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GardinazziVPACB25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GardinazziVPACB25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/gardinazzi25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：如何描述 LLM 内部表示沿层演化时的全局结构变化，而不是只做逐层静态快照。现有可解释性分析常在每一层单独测局部几何或聚类结构，再把结果拼起来，但这种做法看不到某种结构是在什么时候出现、持续多久、又在何处消失。","importance":"这是一篇机制分析/可解释性方向的工作，贡献更偏分析工具而不是训练方法。它的重要性在于提供了一种跨层跟踪表示拓扑结构的方式，用来研究 prompt 和 token 表示如何在网络深处被重排。对 pretrain 的直接冲击有限，但对理解层功能分工、表示压缩和训练中形成何种中间结构有参考价值，尤其适合做不同模型、不同任务、不同提示模式之间的表征比较。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把 zigzag persistence 引入 LLM 表示分析，直接追踪拓扑特征在层间如何持续和演化。相比“每层算一次再做统计”的标准做法，这里关注的是同一个 p 维洞等拓扑对象的完整生命史，而不是孤立层上的瞬时计数。这样的设计有效，是因为层间表示变换本来就是连续重组过程，拓扑持续性比单层指标更能反映稳定结构。代价是解释门槛较高，而且拓扑特征与具体语义/功能之间的映射通常不是一一对应，结论更偏描述性。","experiments":"摘要表明论文会用统计视角分析 prompt 在层中的重排和组织方式，但未给出具体模型、任务、样本规模和定量结论。值得关注的实验应包括：不同层深和不同 prompt 类型下拓扑描述子的变化；不同模型之间这些持续特征是否稳定复现；以及这些特征是否与已知功能层，如语法整合层、语义整合层或输出前层，对应。如果缺乏与性能或行为的关联，这项工作更适合看作分析框架，而不是能直接指导训练改进的结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks how to characterize the evolution of internal LLM representations across layers, rather than treating each layer as an isolated snapshot. Many interpretability methods analyze geometry or clustering one layer at a time and then aggregate afterward, which misses when a structure emerges, how long it persists, and where it disappears.","importance":"This is an interpretability and mechanistic-analysis contribution, closer to a new lens than a new training method. Its value is in offering a cross-layer description of how prompts and token representations are reorganized through depth. The direct impact on pretraining is limited, but it can be useful for comparing representational dynamics across model families, tasks, and prompting regimes.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to use zigzag persistence from topological data analysis to track topological features across layers. Instead of measuring each layer separately and summarizing afterward, the method follows the full lifespan of features such as p-dimensional holes as representations transform. This makes sense because hidden states evolve through continuous restructuring, and persistence can capture stable organization better than per-layer statistics. The trade-off is interpretability: topological features are descriptive but not cleanly mapped to specific semantic functions.","experiments":"The abstract indicates a statistical analysis of how prompts are rearranged across layers, but it does not specify models, tasks, datasets, or quantitative findings. The most informative experiments would test whether the proposed descriptors are stable across prompts and architectures, whether they align with known functional layer roles, and whether they correlate with behavior or errors. Without that link, the work is best read as a diagnostic framework rather than a training prescription.","authors_note":""},"tags":["interpretability","topology","llm","representation","analysis"]},{"id":"2502.17254","title":"REINFORCE Adversarial Attacks on Large Language Models: An Adaptive, Distributional, and Semantic Objective","authors":["Simon Geisler","Tom Wollschläger","M. H. I. Abdalla","Vincent Cohen-Addad","Johannes Gasteiger","Stephan Günnemann"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e2","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.17254","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GeislerWACGG25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GeislerWACGG25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/geisler25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作指出，很多针对 LLM 的优化式越狱攻击其实优化错了目标。现有方法常把“让模型高概率接某句肯定式有害开头”当作攻击目标，但模型即便对这句前缀打高分，也未必会继续生成真正有害内容，所以如果用这类目标的失败率来衡量鲁棒性，往往会高估模型安全性。","importance":"这是安全方向的工作，但其价值不只是攻击更强，而是重新定义攻击目标应如何贴近模型真实输出分布和语义结果。对训练研究的启示在于：无论做对齐还是做 robustness 评估，如果训练/评估目标和最终行为之间有代理偏差，结论就可能失真。这和 reward hacking、代理目标错配是同一类问题。","technical_approach":"核心方法是用 REINFORCE 做一种自适应、分布式、语义级的对抗攻击目标。相比手工指定 affirmative response 前缀，这里不再把单一表面字符串当成成功代理，而是直接针对模型输出分布及其语义有害性优化，从而更贴近真正的攻击成功事件。这样设计的好处是攻击目标能适配不同模型的偏好，不被某个固定模板绑死。代价是 REINFORCE 方差通常较高，语义目标的定义也依赖判别器或评估器质量。","experiments":"摘要没有给出具体模型名单、攻击成功率和相对基线提升幅度，但它明确声称：传统 affirmative objective 会系统性低估可攻击性，新方法能更准确地逼近真实有害输出风险。读者应重点看三类结果：第一，在多个开源/闭源模型上的 attack success rate 对比；第二，固定查询预算下，新目标相对旧目标提升多少；第三，语义级目标是否会牺牲攻击可迁移性或引入过强评估器偏差。如果这些都成立，这篇论文的结论会比“又一个更强 attack”更值得重视。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper argues that many optimization-based jailbreak attacks optimize the wrong proxy. A common objective is to maximize the likelihood of a handcrafted affirmative harmful prefix, but a model can assign high probability to that prefix and still fail to continue with an actually harmful response. As a result, low success under that objective can substantially overstate robustness.","importance":"This is a safety paper, but its broader value is about objective design. The key contribution is not just a stronger attack, but a better alignment between the optimization target and the behavior we actually care about. For training researchers, this connects directly to reward hacking and proxy mismatch: if the surrogate objective is poor, both robustness claims and alignment conclusions become unreliable.","technical_approach":"The method uses REINFORCE to optimize an adaptive, distributional, and semantic attack objective. Instead of locking onto a manually chosen affirmative prefix, it targets the response distribution and semantic harmfulness more directly. That makes the attack model-specific and less brittle to stylistic preferences in the target model. The trade-off is standard for policy-gradient methods: higher variance, and dependence on the quality of the semantic evaluator used to score attacks.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide exact models, attack success rates, or gain margins, but it clearly claims that affirmative-response objectives systematically underestimate attackability and that the proposed objective produces stronger and more faithful attacks. The most important evidence will be attack success under fixed query budgets, cross-model generality, and whether the semantic objective introduces evaluator bias or reduces transferability. If those checks are strong, the paper matters beyond red-teaming mechanics.","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","adversarial","safety","reward-hacking","red-teaming"]},{"id":"2506.00557","title":"Score Matching with Missing Data","authors":["Josh Givens","Song Liu","Henry W. J. Reeve"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Score matching is a vital tool for learning the distribution of data with applications across many areas including diffusion processes, energy based modelling, and graphical model estimation. Despite all these applications, little work explores its use when data is incomplete. We address this by adapting score matching (and its major extensions) to work with missing data in a flexible setting where data can be partially missing over any subset of the coordinates. We provide two separate score matching variations for general use, an importance weighting (IW) approach, and a variational approach. We provide finite sample bounds for our IW approach in finite domain settings and show it to have especially strong performance in small sample lower dimensional cases. Complementing this, we show our variational approach to be strongest in more complex high-dimensional settings which we demonstrate on graphical model estimation tasks on both real and simulated data.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.00557","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GivensLR25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GivensLR25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/givens25a.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：score matching 在数据缺失时几乎没有成熟通用方案，而现实数据常常在任意坐标子集上部分缺失。由于 diffusion、energy-based modeling 和图模型估计都依赖 score matching，缺失值问题如果处理不好，这些方法要么只能先做插补，要么只能在很受限的缺失模式下工作。","importance":"这是一篇基础方法论文，重要性在于把 score matching 从“默认完整观测”的理想设定推进到更现实的数据条件。它对 pretrain 的直接作用不是立刻提升大模型效果，但对 diffusion 建模、EBM 以及潜在变量建模都有通用意义。尤其在多模态和真实日志数据中，缺失是常态，不是例外；因此一个能在任意坐标缺失下工作的 score matching 框架有较广泛的基础价值。","technical_approach":"作者提出了两类可泛用的缺失数据 score matching 变体：importance weighting（IW）方法和 variational 方法。IW 路线更直接，通过重加权恢复目标的无偏或可控估计，并在有限域设定下给出有限样本界；variational 路线则更适合更一般或更复杂的场景。这样的双路线设计很合理：IW 往往在低维、小样本时统计效率更好，但可能受权重方差限制；variational 方法灵活性更强，却通常引入优化近似误差。论文的价值就在于把这两个取舍讲清楚，而不是只给一个万能公式。","experiments":"摘要里最明确的实验结论是：IW 方法在小样本、低维场景下表现尤其强。除此之外，摘要没有给出具体任务、数据集或误差数值。对这篇论文，最关键的实验不是追求大规模 benchmark，而是验证不同缺失模式、不同维度和不同样本量下，IW 与 variational 各自的适用区间；以及与先插补再 score matching、或其他不完整数据密度估计方法相比的优劣。如果这些实验覆盖充分，这篇工作会是一个很实用的基础工具。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a basic but underexplored issue: score matching is usually derived for fully observed data, while real datasets often have arbitrary partial missingness across coordinates. Since score matching underpins diffusion models, energy-based models, and graphical model estimation, this gap limits its use in realistic settings.","importance":"This is a foundational methods paper. Its impact is not an immediate large-model gain, but a broader extension of score matching to incomplete data, which matters across diffusion, EBM, and latent-variable-style modeling. In multimodal and real-world data pipelines, missingness is common rather than exceptional, so a general treatment has clear practical value.","technical_approach":"The paper proposes two flexible score-matching variants for missing data: an importance-weighting approach and a variational approach. The split is sensible. Importance weighting is often attractive when low-dimensional, small-sample settings make variance manageable, and the paper backs it with finite-sample bounds in finite domains. The variational route is more general and likely more scalable to harder settings, but it typically pays with approximation and optimization error. The strength of the paper is that it does not pretend one method dominates everywhere.","experiments":"The clearest result stated in the abstract is that the importance-weighting approach performs especially well in small-sample, low-dimensional regimes. The abstract does not provide datasets, metrics, or margins. For a paper like this, the most important experiments are phase-diagram style comparisons across missingness patterns, dimensionality, and sample size, as well as baselines such as imputation-plus-score-matching or other density-estimation methods for incomplete data. If those comparisons are comprehensive, the paper should be a useful general-purpose reference.","authors_note":""},"tags":["score-matching","missing-data","energy-based","objective","diffusion"]},{"id":"2505.00985","title":"Position: Enough of Scaling LLMs! Lets Focus on Downscaling","authors":["Yash Goel","Ayan Sengupta","Tanmoy Chakraborty"],"institutions":["IIT Delhi"],"abstract":"We challenge the dominant focus on neural scaling laws and advocate for a paradigm shift toward downscaling in the development of large language models (LLMs). While scaling laws have provided critical insights into performance improvements through increasing model and dataset size, we emphasize the significant limitations of this approach, particularly in terms of computational inefficiency, environmental impact, and deployment constraints. To address these challenges, we propose a holistic framework for downscaling LLMs that seeks to maintain performance while drastically reducing resource demands. This paper outlines practical strategies for transitioning away from traditional scaling paradigms, advocating for a more sustainable, efficient, and accessible approach to LLM development.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"position","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00985","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GoelS025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GoelS025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/goel25c.html","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"挑战当前以 scaling law 为主导的 LLM 发展路线，主张将研究重心转向 downscaling——在大幅降低资源消耗的同时尽量保持性能。问题背景是：持续扩大模型和数据规模带来的计算成本、环境影响和部署限制已经越来越难以忽视。","importance":"这是一篇 position paper，不提供新方法或新实验，而是倡导范式转向。对 pretrain 研究的启示有限但值得注意：它系统梳理了 downscaling 的策略框架（蒸馏、剪枝、量化、高效架构等），可作为该方向的综述入口。但缺乏原创技术贡献，影响力取决于社区是否认同其立场。","technical_approach":"提出一个 downscaling 的整体框架，涵盖模型压缩（蒸馏、剪枝、量化）、高效架构设计、数据效率提升等策略。本质上是对已有技术路线的重新组织和倡导，没有提出新算法。","experiments":"作为 position paper，没有原创实验。主要通过引用已有工作的结果来支撑论点。","authors_note":"Tanmoy Chakraborty 来自 IIT Delhi，在 NLP 和社交媒体分析方面有较多工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"A position paper arguing that the field should shift focus from scaling LLMs to downscaling—maintaining performance while drastically reducing compute, memory, and environmental costs.","importance":"No new methods or experiments; its value is as a structured advocacy for prioritizing efficiency over scale. Useful as a survey entry point for downscaling strategies (distillation, pruning, quantization, efficient architectures), but limited in original technical contribution.","technical_approach":"Proposes a holistic framework organizing existing downscaling strategies: model compression, efficient architectures, and data efficiency. No novel algorithms—this is a reorganization and advocacy of known techniques.","experiments":"No original experiments. Relies on citing existing results to support the position.","authors_note":"Tanmoy Chakraborty is from IIT Delhi, known for NLP and social media analysis work."},"tags":["scaling-law","efficiency","llm","position-paper","downscaling"],"notable_authors":["Tanmoy Chakraborty"]},{"id":"Goldowsky-DillC25","title":"Detecting Strategic Deception with Linear Probes","authors":["Nicholas Goldowsky-Dill","Bilal Chughtai","Stefan Heimersheim","Marius Hobbhahn"],"institutions":["Apollo Research"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Goldowsky-DillC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Goldowsky-DillC25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/goldowsky-dill25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"检测 LLM 中的策略性欺骗行为——模型在表面上配合但实际上隐藏真实意图的情况。这是对齐安全领域的核心问题之一：如果模型学会了欺骗，传统的行为评估可能失效，需要从内部表示层面进行检测。","importance":"对 pretrain 研究的直接启示有限，但对理解模型内部表示有价值。线性探针能检测欺骗意味着欺骗意图在模型表示中是线性可分的，这对 interpretability 和 alignment 研究都有意义。方法级贡献。","technical_approach":"使用线性探针（linear probes）在模型的中间层激活上训练分类器，判断模型是否在进行策略性欺骗。核心假设是欺骗意图会在隐藏状态中留下线性可分的信号。具体的实验设置和欺骗场景构造需参考原文。","experiments":"摘要未提供，具体实验细节不详。","authors_note":"Marius Hobbhahn 是 Apollo Research 的创始人，专注于 AI 安全和 interpretability。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Detecting strategic deception in LLMs—cases where the model appears cooperative but conceals its true intent. Behavioral evaluation alone may fail here; the approach looks at internal representations instead.","importance":"The finding that linear probes can detect deception implies deceptive intent is linearly separable in hidden states, which is informative for both interpretability and alignment. Limited direct pretrain impact, but relevant to understanding what models learn during pretraining.","technical_approach":"Trains linear probes on intermediate-layer activations to classify whether the model is engaging in strategic deception. The core bet is that deceptive intent leaves a linearly separable signal in hidden states.","experiments":"Abstract not available; experimental details unknown.","authors_note":"Marius Hobbhahn is the founder of Apollo Research, focused on AI safety and interpretability."},"tags":["deception","linear-probes","safety","interpretability","monitoring"],"notable_authors":["Marius Hobbhahn"]},{"id":"2506.02557","title":"Kernel-based Unsupervised Embedding Alignment for Enhanced Visual Representation in Vision-language Models","authors":["Shizhan Gong","Yankai Jiang","Qi Dou","Farzan Farnia"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e3","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.02557","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Gong00F25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Gong00F25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/gong25b.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"CLIP 的视觉表示在细粒度感知上存在明显不足，导致下游多模态 LLM（如 LLaVA）在细节理解上失败。DINOv2 等视觉中心模型在细节捕捉上更强，但其表示与文本不对齐。本文要解决的是：如何在保持文本兼容性的前提下，将 CLIP 的视觉表示与 DINOv2 对齐以增强细粒度感知。","importance":"对 VLM 预训练有直接启示。当前主流 VLM 依赖 CLIP 作为视觉编码器，其细粒度感知弱点是已知瓶颈。如果能用无监督方式将 DINOv2 的细粒度能力注入 CLIP 表示，且不破坏文本对齐，这对 VLM 预训练的视觉 tokenizer 选择和表示设计都有参考价值。方法级贡献。","technical_approach":"提出基于核方法（kernel-based）的无监督嵌入对齐。核心思路是在特征空间中用核函数度量 CLIP 和 DINOv2 表示的分布差异，优化 CLIP 视觉表示使其在保持与文本嵌入兼容的同时，向 DINOv2 的细粒度表示靠拢。无监督意味着不需要额外标注数据。","experiments":"摘要截断，具体实验数字不详。预期在 LLaVA/OpenFlamingo 等下游 VLM 上验证细粒度感知的提升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"CLIP's visual representations lack fine-grained perception, causing failures in downstream multimodal LLMs. DINOv2 captures fine details but isn't text-aligned. This work aligns CLIP's visual embeddings with DINOv2 while preserving text compatibility.","importance":"Directly relevant to VLM pretraining. CLIP's fine-grained weakness is a known bottleneck for VLMs like LLaVA. An unsupervised method to inject DINOv2's perceptual strength into CLIP representations without breaking text alignment is practically useful for visual tokenizer design.","technical_approach":"Uses a kernel-based unsupervised alignment objective to push CLIP's visual representations toward DINOv2's distribution in feature space, while constraining compatibility with text embeddings. No labeled data required.","experiments":"Abstract truncated; specific numbers unavailable. Expected to evaluate on downstream VLMs like LLaVA/OpenFlamingo for fine-grained perception improvements.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","representation","alignment","clip","vision-encoder"]},{"id":"GongSWKTLKGW25","title":"PhantomWiki: On-Demand Datasets for Reasoning and Retrieval Evaluation","authors":["Albert Gong","Kamile Stankeviciute","Chao Wan","Anmol Kabra","Raphael Thesmar","Johann Lee","Julius Klenke","Carla P. Gomes","Kilian Q. Weinberger"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GongSWKTLKGW25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GongSWKTLKGW25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/gong25d.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有推理和检索评估 benchmark 存在数据污染风险——模型可能在预训练阶段就见过测试数据。PhantomWiki 提供按需生成的合成数据集，确保评估时模型面对的是全新内容，从而更可靠地衡量推理和检索能力。","importance":"数据级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示：随着预训练数据规模不断扩大，benchmark 污染问题越来越严重。按需生成的评估数据集是解决这一问题的务实方案。对于评估 pretrain 模型的真实能力（而非记忆能力）有直接价值。","technical_approach":"摘要未提供详细方法。从名称和描述推测，PhantomWiki 通过程序化生成类 Wikipedia 的知识库和对应的推理/检索问题，每次生成的内容不同，从而避免数据泄漏。","experiments":"摘要未提供，具体实验不详。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing reasoning and retrieval benchmarks risk data contamination—models may have seen test data during pretraining. PhantomWiki generates on-demand synthetic datasets to ensure evaluation on genuinely unseen content.","importance":"Data-level contribution. As pretraining corpora grow, benchmark contamination becomes increasingly serious. On-demand generated evaluation datasets are a pragmatic solution for measuring true reasoning/retrieval ability rather than memorization.","technical_approach":"Abstract not available in detail. Likely generates Wikipedia-like knowledge bases and corresponding reasoning/retrieval questions procedurally, with different content each time to prevent data leakage.","experiments":"Abstract not available; experimental details unknown.","authors_note":""},"tags":["benchmark","reasoning","retrieval","evaluation","synthetic-data"]},{"id":"GraldiBL0N25","title":"The Importance of Being Lazy: Scaling Limits of Continual Learning","authors":["Jacopo Graldi","Alessandro Breccia","Giulia Lanzillotta","Thomas Hofmann","Lorenzo Noci"],"institutions":["ETH Zurich"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GraldiBL0N25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GraldiBL0N25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/graldi25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"持续学习（continual learning）的 scaling 极限在哪里？标题中的'lazy'暗示与 lazy training regime（NTK regime）的联系——模型参数变化小、接近线性化的训练状态。本文可能研究的是：在持续学习场景下，模型的 scaling 行为是否存在根本性限制，以及这些限制与训练动态的关系。","importance":"对 continual pretrain 有直接启示。如果持续学习存在 scaling 极限，这意味着简单地增大模型或数据不能无限改善持续学习的效果，需要在方法层面突破。理论级贡献。","technical_approach":"摘要未提供。从标题和作者背景（Thomas Hofmann 组，ETH Zurich）推测，可能结合了 lazy training 理论和持续学习分析，研究模型在持续学习中的参数更新幅度与泛化能力的关系。","experiments":"摘要未提供，具体实验不详。","authors_note":"Thomas Hofmann 是 ETH Zurich 的教授，在机器学习基础理论方面有长期贡献。Lorenzo Noci 在训练动态和 scaling 分析方面有多篇近期工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"What are the fundamental scaling limits of continual learning? The 'lazy' in the title likely refers to the lazy training regime (NTK regime), suggesting the work studies whether continual learning has inherent scaling barriers related to training dynamics.","importance":"Directly relevant to continual pretraining. If scaling limits exist, simply increasing model/data size won't indefinitely improve continual learning—methodological breakthroughs are needed.","technical_approach":"Abstract not available. Likely combines lazy training theory with continual learning analysis, studying how parameter update magnitude relates to generalization in continual settings.","experiments":"Abstract not available; experimental details unknown.","authors_note":"Thomas Hofmann is a professor at ETH Zurich with long-standing contributions to ML foundations. Lorenzo Noci has recent work on training dynamics and scaling."},"tags":["continual-learning","scaling","limits","training-dynamics"],"notable_authors":["Thomas Hofmann","Lorenzo Noci"]},{"id":"2502.07776","title":"Auditing Prompt Caching in Language Model APIs","authors":["Chenchen Gu","Xiang Lisa Li","Rohith Kuditipudi","Percy Liang","Tatsunori Hashimoto"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Prompt caching in large language models (LLMs) results in data-dependent timing variations: cached prompts are processed faster than non-cached prompts. These timing differences introduce the risk of side-channel timing attacks. For example, if the cache is shared across users, an attacker could identify cached prompts from fast API response times to learn information about other users'prompts. Because prompt caching may cause privacy leakage, transparency around the caching policies of API providers is important. To this end, we develop and conduct statistical audits to detect prompt caching in real-world LLM API providers. We detect global cache sharing across users in seven API providers, including OpenAI, resulting in potential privacy leakage about users'prompts. Timing variations due to prompt caching can also result in leakage of information about model architecture. Namely, we find evidence that OpenAI's embedding model is a decoder-only Transformer, which was previously not publicly known.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.07776","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GuLKLH25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GuLKLH25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/gu25b.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["prompt-caching","security","serving","llm-api","side-channel"]},{"id":"2505.02130","title":"Attention Mechanisms Perspective: Exploring LLM Processing of Graph-Structured Data","authors":["Zhong Guan","Likang Wu","Hongke Zhao","Ming He","Jianping Fan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e4","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.02130","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GuanWZH025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GuanWZH025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/guan25e.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["attention","graph-data","llm-analysis","gnn"]},{"id":"2502.09616","title":"Variational Rectified Flow Matching","authors":["Pengsheng Guo","Alex Schwing"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e5","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.09616","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Guo025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Guo025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/guo25i.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["flow-matching","diffusion","variational","multi-modal-velocity"]},{"id":"Guo0T025","title":"SlimLLM: Accurate Structured Pruning for Large Language Models","authors":["Jialong Guo","Xinghao Chen","Yehui Tang","Yunhe Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Guo0T025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Guo0T025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/guo25a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["pruning","structured-pruning","llm-compression"]},{"id":"2502.14802","title":"From RAG to Memory: Non-Parametric Continual Learning for Large Language Models","authors":["Bernal Jiménez Gutiérrez","Yiheng Shu","Weijian Qi","Sizhe Zhou","Yu Su"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e6","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.14802","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/GutierrezSQZ025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/GutierrezSQZ025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/gutierrez25a.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["continual-learning","rag","memory","llm"]},{"id":"Han0Z00YTS25","title":"On the Role of Label Noise in the Feature Learning Process","authors":["Andi Han","Wei Huang","Zhanpeng Zhou","Gang Niu","Wuyang Chen","Junchi Yan","Akiko Takeda","Taiji Suzuki"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Han0Z00YTS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Han0Z00YTS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/han25c.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["label-noise","feature-learning","training-dynamics"]},{"id":"2502.04725","title":"Can Diffusion Models Learn Hidden Inter-Feature Rules Behind Images?","authors":["Yujin Han","Andi Han","Wei Huang","Chaochao Lu","Difan Zou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e7","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.04725","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HanHHLZ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HanHHLZ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/han25b.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion-model","feature-rules","generalization","failure-analysis"]},{"id":"2501.02086","title":"Instruction-Following Pruning for Large Language Models","authors":["Bairu Hou","Qibin Chen","Jianyu Wang","Guoli Yin","Chong Wang","Nan Du","Ruoming Pang","Shiyu Chang","Tao Lei"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e8","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.02086","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HouCWYWDPCL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HouCWYWDPCL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/hou25b.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是结构化剪枝的静态性问题：传统 pruning 训练出一个固定子网络，默认所有输入共用同一套激活参数，但 instruction-following LLM 的任务分布高度异质，不同指令真正需要的子电路并不相同。固定 mask 的结果通常是平均意义上可接受，但对具体任务既不够高效，也牺牲性能。","importance":"这项工作的贡献属于方法级和系统级之间，对 pretrain 本身不是直接改造，但对 posttrain 到部署的接口很有参考价值。它传递出的更一般结论是：LLM 的参数冗余是输入条件相关的，不是全局常数；如果这一点成立，那么以后做压缩、MoE 路由、甚至 continual specialization，都可能更应该做 condition-aware 的稀疏化，而不是一次性全局裁剪。","technical_approach":"作者提出 instruction-following pruning，本质上是一种动态结构化剪枝：不再为整个模型学习一个固定 mask，而是训练一个稀疏 mask predictor，输入用户指令，预测当前任务最相关的参数子集，并只激活这些结构化单元。关键设计点有两个。第一，它不是 token-level 的细粒度动态计算，而是围绕 instruction 条件做较稳定的结构化选择，因此推理实现上比非结构化稀疏更现实。第二，它要解决“怎么知道哪些参数和该指令相关”的识别问题，说明论文大概率设计了某种重要性学习或监督信号来训练 predictor。与静态 pruning 相比，它牺牲了额外控制开销和更复杂的 serving 路径，换来任务自适应的性能/效率折中。","experiments":"从摘要可确认的实验结论是：作者认为动态、指令条件化的结构化剪枝能比传统静态剪枝更有效地在不同任务上选择参数子集。摘要没有给出具体模型规模、剪枝比例、吞吐提升、时延数据或与训练同尺寸小模型 from scratch 的对比数字，因此无法写出定量收益。评估这类工作的关键事实通常应包括：1）在相同稀疏率下，对 instruction-following benchmark 的平均精度是否显著优于静态剪枝；2）mask predictor 的额外开销是否吃掉大部分推理收益；3）task heterogeneity 越强时，动态剪枝相对静态剪枝的优势是否更明显；4）是否存在分布外指令导致 mask 失配的问题。没有这些数字前，可以把它视为“条件化子网络选择”在 LLM 压缩中的一个自然演化方向。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a simple but important mismatch in structured pruning: static pruning assumes one subnetwork works well for all inputs, while instruction-following LLMs serve highly heterogeneous tasks. A single fixed mask is therefore efficient only on average and often suboptimal for any given instruction.","importance":"This is a method/systems contribution rather than a pretraining recipe, but it has useful implications for the pretrain-to-deployment interface. The broader message is that parameter redundancy in LLMs is input-dependent, not a global constant. If that view is right, future pruning, specialization, and even MoE-style routing should be condition-aware rather than one-shot and static.","technical_approach":"The proposed instruction-following pruning replaces a fixed structured mask with a dynamic one predicted from the user instruction. A sparse mask predictor selects the most relevant structured parameters for the current task, activating only that subnetwork at inference. Two design choices matter here. First, the adaptation is conditioned on the instruction, not on every token, so it is more practical than extremely fine-grained dynamic sparsity. Second, the method needs a way to learn which parameters matter for which instruction, so the paper likely includes an importance-learning mechanism or supervision signal for training the predictor. Compared with static pruning, it adds control overhead and serving complexity in exchange for better task-specific efficiency.","experiments":"What can be confirmed from the abstract is the qualitative claim: dynamic, instruction-conditioned structured pruning is more effective than traditional static pruning for selecting useful parameters across tasks. The abstract does not provide model sizes, sparsity levels, latency/throughput numbers, or exact benchmark gains, so quantitative claims cannot be made here. The critical evidence to look for is whether it wins at matched sparsity, whether predictor overhead preserves net speedup, whether the gap grows with task heterogeneity, and how brittle the routing is on out-of-distribution instructions.","authors_note":""},"tags":["pruning","instruction-tuning","compression","efficiency","alignment"]},{"id":"2410.00193","title":"Do Vision-Language Models Really Understand Visual Language?","authors":["Yifan Hou","Buse Giledereli","Yilei Tu","Mrinmaya Sachan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e9","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.00193","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HouGTS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HouGTS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/hou25c.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的是：现有 VLM/LVLM 真的理解 diagram 这类 visual language，还是只是借助表面模式和语言先验做近似匹配。过去很多多模态基准把自然图像理解和图文问答混在一起，难以隔离“视觉符号系统理解”这一更结构化、更接近推理的问题；作者因此专门把 diagram comprehension 拿出来做系统测量。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要在评测层，但它对 VLM 预训练很有现实意义。原因是 diagram 不是普通自然图像，它要求模型处理符号、空间关系、组合结构和跨元素引用，这正好暴露当前视觉 tokenizer、视觉编码器和图文对齐目标的短板。对做 native multimodal pretrain 的团队来说，这类评测能帮助判断：模型失败到底是因为视觉表征没保住结构，还是语言头在瞎猜。","technical_approach":"作者构建了一套较全面的测试集，用合成和真实 diagram，围绕 concept entities 及其关系设计问题，系统评估 LVLM 的图示理解能力。这个方法的重要选择是把题目拆到“实体识别、关系抽取、组合推理”这样的可诊断维度，而不是只看一个总分；同时使用 synthetic 和 real diagrams，前者便于控制干扰因素，后者检验生态有效性。和已有多模态 benchmark 相比，它更强调 visual language 的符号性而非自然图像语义。代价是覆盖面可能较窄，不一定能直接推断到所有视觉任务。","experiments":"摘要明确说明，作者开发了一个 comprehensive test suite，覆盖 synthetic 和 real diagrams，并通过不同领域上的问题去评估 concept entity 与 relation 理解。它还指出 recent studies 暗示 LVLM 可以处理复杂 diagram reasoning，而这篇工作显然是在检验这一说法。可惜摘要片段被截断，无法确认测试集规模、涉及的模型名称、主要指标以及模型之间的性能差异。若从研究价值看，最重要的实验应包括：1）闭源和开源 LVLM 是否都在结构关系题上显著掉点；2）OCR 能力与 diagram reasoning 的相关性是否有限；3）合成图上 controllable error analysis 是否显示模型主要卡在视觉解析还是符号推理；4）是否存在 chain-of-thought 或工具调用只能修补语言侧、无法补齐视觉结构缺失的问题。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a focused question: do current vision-language models actually understand visual language such as diagrams, or are they mostly exploiting shallow visual patterns and language priors? Existing multimodal benchmarks often mix natural-image understanding with text-heavy QA, which makes it hard to isolate symbolic visual reasoning.","importance":"This is primarily an evaluation paper, but it is highly relevant to multimodal pretraining. Diagrams stress exactly the capabilities that many current pipelines under-serve: symbolic structure, spatial relations, compositional references, and precise visual parsing. That makes the benchmark useful for diagnosing whether failures come from weak visual representation, weak alignment, or language-side guessing.","technical_approach":"The core contribution is a dedicated test suite for diagram comprehension, using both synthetic and real diagrams and questions centered on entities and their relations. The methodological strength is diagnostic granularity: instead of reporting one aggregate score, the benchmark appears designed to separate entity recognition, relation understanding, and higher-order reasoning. Mixing synthetic with real data is also a good choice: synthetic examples provide control, while real diagrams test ecological validity. Compared with standard VLM benchmarks, the emphasis here is on visual language as a symbolic system rather than natural image semantics.","experiments":"The abstract confirms that the test suite spans synthetic and real diagrams across domains and evaluates concept/entity and relation understanding. It is framed explicitly as a check on recent claims that LVLMs can handle complex diagram reasoning. However, the provided text is truncated, so dataset size, evaluated models, metrics, and exact gaps cannot be reported reliably. The most informative findings would be whether both open and closed models collapse on relation-heavy questions, how much OCR ability actually explains performance, and whether errors originate more from visual parsing than from downstream textual reasoning.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","multimodal-understanding","diagram","evaluation","generalization"]},{"id":"HuDSA25","title":"Diffusion Models are Secretly Exchangeable: Parallelizing DDPMs via Auto Speculation","authors":["Hengyuan Hu","Aniket Das","Dorsa Sadigh","Nima Anari"],"institutions":["Stanford University"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HuDSA25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HuDSA25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/hu25d.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文试图解决 diffusion 采样串行性的问题：标准 DDPM 需要一步步去噪，天然延迟高，很难像 AR speculative decoding 那样并行加速。作者从标题给出的判断是，扩散模型里存在某种“secretly exchangeable”的结构，因此可以借助 auto speculation 做并行化，而不需要完全改写模型范式。","importance":"如果这个结论站得住，它对新型语言建模和 diffusion serving 都有范式级意义。因为扩散 LM / DDPM 长期的核心短板就是采样速度；如果能像 AR speculative decoding 一样构造并行接受机制，那么 diffusion 方法在实际系统里的竞争力会明显上升。对 pretrain 研究者而言，这类工作也会改变我们比较 AR 和 diffusion 时的成本假设——不能只看训练目标和生成质量，还要重新看可服务性。","technical_approach":"仅凭标题推断，作者的方法大概率是利用扩散过程中某些步骤在条件上近似可交换或可预判的性质，先让一个较便宜的过程做 speculative proposals，再由原模型验证或校正，从而并行跳过部分 sequential denoising。这里的关键不在“能不能近似”，而在“接受率和误差控制是否足够好”。和传统 speculative decoding 类似，真正有效的前提是 proposal 足够便宜、验证足够快、且错误不会导致大量回退。若论文把 exchangeability 说清楚，这会是比单纯工程加速更深一层的贡献，因为它揭示了 DDPM 时间维上的冗余结构。","experiments":"摘要缺失，因此无法确认它研究的是图像 diffusion、文本 diffusion 还是更一般的 DDPM，也无法写出速度提升倍数、质量损失、接受率和 baseline。评估这类工作的关键指标通常包括：1）相对原始 DDPM 的 wall-clock 加速；2）在相同样本质量下能否减少多少 sequential steps；3）不同噪声调度和模型规模下接受率是否稳定；4）并行 speculative 失败时回退成本有多高。若作者确实证明了较强的 exchangeability 并给出明显加速且质量损失很小，这会是 diffusion serving 上很有价值的一步。","authors_note":"Stanford 相关作者中 Dorsa Sadigh 较为知名，长期做机器人、决策与机器学习。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper appears to target the main systems weakness of DDPMs: sampling is inherently sequential, so latency remains high and speculative-style acceleration has been much harder than in autoregressive models. The title suggests a stronger claim—that diffusion steps hide an exchangeable structure that can be exploited for parallelization.","importance":"If that claim is borne out, the contribution is close to paradigm-level for diffusion-based generation and diffusion language modeling. Sampling speed has been one of the biggest practical objections to diffusion alternatives. A credible speculative decoding analogue for DDPMs would materially change the serving-side comparison between AR and diffusion models.","technical_approach":"From the title, the likely approach is to exploit approximate exchangeability across parts of the diffusion trajectory, using an auto-speculative mechanism that proposes multiple denoising outcomes in parallel and then validates or corrects them. The hard part is not proposing faster trajectories; it is maintaining high acceptance and low rollback cost while preserving sample quality. If the paper formalizes when and why this exchangeability holds, that would make it more than an engineering speedup. It would expose redundancy in the time dimension of diffusion itself.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so the exact domain, baselines, speedups, and quality trade-offs cannot be verified. For a paper like this, the decisive evidence would be wall-clock acceleration over standard DDPM sampling, quality retention at matched budgets, acceptance behavior under different schedules and model sizes, and the real cost of rollback when speculation fails. Strong results on those axes would make this a meaningful serving advance for diffusion models.","authors_note":"The author list includes Dorsa Sadigh, a well-known Stanford researcher in robotics, decision-making, and machine learning."},"tags":["diffusion","parallel-decoding","speculative-decoding","sampling","efficiency"],"notable_authors":["Dorsa Sadigh"]},{"id":"2410.15332","title":"EPIC: Efficient Position-Independent Caching for Serving Large Language Models","authors":["Junhao Hu","Wenrui Huang","Weidong Wang","Haoyi Wang","Tiancheng Hu","Qin Zhang","Hao Feng","Xusheng Chen","Yizhou Shan","Tao Xie"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ea","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.15332","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HuHWWHZFCS025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HuHWWHZFCS025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/hu25j.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 context caching 的一个现实瓶颈：现有 KV cache 复用通常要求请求之间有完全相同的前缀，因此在 few-shot learning、RAG 等场景里，即便核心文档内容相同，只要前面拼的指令、示例或检索顺序不同，就没法复用。问题不是模型不会算，而是 serving 系统把‘相同内容处在不同位置’当成了完全不同的上下文。","importance":"这项工作的价值是系统级，但对长上下文预训练和部署都有直接启发。它说明位置编码设计和缓存可复用性是强耦合的：如果模型表示严重依赖绝对前缀位置，那么服务层复用空间就被锁死。对做 pretrain 的人，这类工作会反过来提醒你，位置机制不仅影响困惑度和长度外推，也影响后续 serving 是否能做模块化上下文复用。","technical_approach":"作者提出 EPIC，用于实现 position-independent caching（PIC），核心目标是让某段 immutable content 的 KV 表示不再依赖其前面具体接了什么 prefix，从而可以跨请求模块化复用。摘要里说作者 formalize 了 PIC，并推进了 prior work，说明方法不仅是工程缓存策略，还涉及对位置无关复用条件的建模。关键难点是：标准 transformer 的 KV 明显受位置信息影响，不能直接平移复用；因此有效方案通常需要重参数化位置表示、校正注意力分数，或构建可组合的 cache 片段。和 exact-prefix caching 相比，PIC 的收益是大幅扩大命中范围，但代价是额外的索引、对齐和正确性约束，稍有不慎就会引入语义错位。","experiments":"摘要确认了问题场景和方法目标：在 few-shot learning、RAG 等存在共享内容但前缀变化的请求中，EPIC 旨在实现独立于前缀的 KV 复用。它还强调自己是在 prior PIC 工作上进一步推进，暗示可能解决了精度损失、适用模型范围或系统效率问题。由于摘要片段被截断，无法确认实验所用模型、上下文长度、cache hit 率、吞吐提升、TTFT/latency 降幅以及与 exact-prefix caching 或其他 PIC 方法的比较数字。评估这类工作最关键的是三点：1）在真实请求分布下命中率提升多少；2）复用后是否保持与原始推理几乎一致的输出质量；3）系统开销是否足够低，能把理论复用真正变成端到端收益。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical limitation of context caching: standard KV reuse usually requires exact prefix matches across requests. That is too restrictive for real workloads such as few-shot prompting and RAG, where the core document content may repeat but the leading instruction, demonstrations, or retrieval order changes.","importance":"This is a systems paper, but it has direct implications for long-context model design and deployment. It highlights a tight coupling between positional representations and cache reusability. If a model’s intermediate states are too tied to absolute prefix position, serving systems lose a large amount of potential reuse.","technical_approach":"EPIC proposes efficient position-independent caching, aiming to make the KV representation of immutable content reusable regardless of the prefixes that come before it. The abstract says the paper formalizes PIC and advances prior work, which suggests this is not just a cache-engineering trick but also a statement about when and how position-independent reuse is valid. The technical challenge is obvious: standard transformer KV states are position-sensitive, so naive relocation is wrong. Any workable solution needs some way to re-anchor or correct positional effects while keeping cache fragments composable. Compared with exact-prefix caching, PIC greatly broadens reuse opportunities but introduces alignment and correctness constraints.","experiments":"The abstract clearly states the target workloads—few-shot learning and retrieval-augmented generation—and the intended gain: modular KV reuse even when prefixes differ. It also positions EPIC as a step beyond prior PIC methods, likely in either efficiency, accuracy preservation, or compatibility. The provided text is truncated, so model details, cache hit rates, throughput gains, latency reductions, and accuracy deltas cannot be reported reliably. The key evidence to inspect is real-world hit-rate uplift, fidelity relative to uncached inference, and whether system overhead is low enough to convert theoretical reuse into end-to-end speedup.","authors_note":""},"tags":["kv-cache","serving","context-caching","long-context","inference"]},{"id":"2505.22002","title":"D-Fusion: Direct Preference Optimization for Aligning Diffusion Models with Visually Consistent Samples","authors":["Zijing Hu","Fengda Zhang","Kun Kuang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$eb","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.22002","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HuZK25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HuZK25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/hu25ab.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"DPO 用于对齐 diffusion model 时，正负样本之间视觉差异过大（visual inconsistency），导致模型难以学到真正影响对齐的因素——它分不清哪些视觉变化是因为对齐好坏，哪些只是随机噪声带来的无关差异。","importance":"方法级贡献，聚焦于 diffusion model 的偏好对齐训练。对 pretrain 研究的直接相关性有限，但对理解 DPO 在生成模型中的应用边界有参考价值——特别是当正负样本的差异维度远大于目标维度时，偏好学习会失效。","technical_approach":"D-Fusion 通过 mask-guided self-attention fusion 构造视觉一致的 DPO 训练样本对。具体做法是在生成过程中融合 attention，使得正负样本在整体视觉外观上保持一致，仅在对齐相关的局部区域产生差异。这样 DPO 训练时模型能聚焦于真正影响 text-image 对齐的因素。与直接用随机种子生成正负对相比，关键改进是控制了无关变量。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体数字。方法在 text-to-image 对齐任务上验证，需查阅全文了解具体 baseline 和指标。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"When applying DPO to diffusion models, the large visual disparity between well-aligned and poorly-aligned image pairs makes it hard for the model to identify which factors actually contribute to alignment versus which are irrelevant visual variations.","importance":"A method-level contribution for preference alignment of diffusion models. Limited direct pretrain relevance, but offers a useful lesson: when the difference between positive and negative samples spans many irrelevant dimensions, preference learning degrades. The solution of controlling confounding visual variation is generalizable.","technical_approach":"D-Fusion constructs visually consistent sample pairs for DPO training via mask-guided self-attention fusion during generation. This ensures positive and negative samples differ only in alignment-relevant regions while sharing overall visual appearance. Compared to naively sampling positive/negative pairs with different random seeds, this controls confounding variables so the model can focus on what matters for text-image alignment.","experiments":"No specific numbers provided in the abstract. Validated on text-to-image alignment tasks; full details require reading the paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","dpo","alignment","text-to-image","preference-optimization"]},{"id":"2502.14770","title":"Determining Layer-wise Sparsity for Large Language Models Through a Theoretical Perspective","authors":["Weizhong Huang","Yuxin Zhang","Xiawu Zheng","Fei Chao","Rongrong Ji"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ec","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.14770","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Huang0Z0J25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Huang0Z0J25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/huang25ax.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 剪枝（sparsification）时，各层稀疏率的分配缺乏理论指导。现有方法忽略了一个关键问题：前层的重建误差会在后续层中传播和放大（reconstruction error explosion），导致整体性能严重下降。","importance":"方法级贡献。给出了 layer-wise sparsity 分配的理论分析和简洁实用的解决方案。对 pretrain 研究的启示：它揭示了 LLM 各层对误差传播的敏感度不同，前层误差的放大效应意味着前层应保留更多参数——这个观察对理解 LLM 的层间信息流也有价值。","technical_approach":"通过理论分析推导出：为了抑制重建误差的逐层放大，layer-wise 稀疏率应采用单调递增的等差数列——即前层稀疏率低（保留更多参数），后层稀疏率高。这个设计的直觉是：前层误差会被所有后续层放大，所以前层的精度更关键。方法极其简单，不需要额外的搜索或优化，直接用等差数列公式分配即可。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体模型规模和数字，但提到该方法能显著缓解 reconstruction error explosion，减少整体性能退化。具体 baseline 对比和提升幅度需查阅全文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"When pruning LLMs, there is no principled way to allocate per-layer sparsity rates. Existing methods overlook reconstruction error explosion: errors from earlier layers propagate and amplify through subsequent layers, causing severe performance degradation.","importance":"A method-level contribution providing theoretical grounding for layer-wise sparsity allocation. The insight that earlier layers need lower sparsity because their errors compound through all downstream layers is useful beyond pruning—it informs our understanding of information flow across LLM layers.","technical_approach":"Theoretical analysis shows that layer-wise sparsity should follow a monotonically increasing arithmetic progression: lower sparsity (more parameters retained) in early layers, higher sparsity in later layers. The intuition is that early-layer errors are amplified by every subsequent layer, so early-layer fidelity matters more. The method is dead simple—just apply an arithmetic sequence formula, no search or optimization needed.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide specific model sizes or numbers. The method is reported to significantly mitigate reconstruction error explosion. Detailed baselines and metrics require reading the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["sparsity","pruning","compression","theory","llm"]},{"id":"HuangBJK025","title":"Antidote: Post-fine-tuning Safety Alignment for Large Language Models against Harmful Fine-tuning Attack","authors":["Tiansheng Huang","Gautam Bhattacharya","Pratik Joshi","Joshua Kimball","Ling Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HuangBJK025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HuangBJK025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/huang25b.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 经过 fine-tuning 后安全对齐可能被破坏（harmful fine-tuning attack），即用少量有害数据微调就能让已对齐的模型重新产生有害输出。本文提出一种 post-fine-tuning 的安全恢复方法 Antidote。","importance":"方法级贡献，属于 posttrain 安全对齐领域。对 pretrain 研究的启示有限但值得关注：它反映了 pretrain/alignment 阶段学到的安全行为在参数空间中的脆弱性——少量 fine-tuning 就能覆盖，说明安全对齐可能只改变了浅层特征而非深层表示。","technical_approach":"摘要为空，无法获取具体方法细节。从标题推断，Antidote 是在 fine-tuning 完成后再做一轮安全恢复，而非在 fine-tuning 过程中施加约束。这种 post-hoc 方式的优势是不干扰 fine-tuning 本身的任务性能。","experiments":"摘要为空，无实验细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Safety alignment of LLMs can be undone by harmful fine-tuning attacks—fine-tuning on a small amount of harmful data can make an aligned model produce unsafe outputs again. This work proposes Antidote, a post-fine-tuning safety recovery method.","importance":"A method-level contribution in posttrain safety alignment. For pretrain researchers, the key takeaway is that safety behaviors learned during alignment appear fragile in parameter space—easily overwritten by small fine-tuning updates—suggesting alignment may only modify shallow features rather than deep representations.","technical_approach":"Abstract is empty. Based on the title, Antidote applies safety recovery after fine-tuning is complete, rather than constraining the fine-tuning process itself. This post-hoc approach avoids interfering with task performance during fine-tuning.","experiments":"No abstract available; no experimental details.","authors_note":""},"tags":["safety","alignment","fine-tuning","robustness","llm"]},{"id":"2504.13122","title":"VistaDPO: Video Hierarchical Spatial-Temporal Direct Preference Optimization for Large Video Models","authors":["Haojian Huang","Haodong Chen","Shengqiong Wu","Meng Luo","Jinlan Fu","Xinya Du","Hanwang Zhang","Hao Fei"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ed","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.13122","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HuangCW0FDZ025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HuangCW0FDZ025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/huang25g.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"大型视频模型（LVM）在视频理解中存在与人类直觉不对齐和视频幻觉问题，现有 DPO 方法只做整体偏好对齐，缺乏对视频时空层次结构的细粒度对齐。","importance":"方法级贡献，属于 VLM posttrain 对齐方向。对 pretrain 研究的启示：它提出的层次化对齐（instance/temporal/perceptive）反映了视频理解中不同粒度信息的重要性，这对设计视频 pretrain 的训练目标也有参考价值——单一的全局 loss 可能不足以捕获时空细粒度语义。","technical_approach":"VistaDPO 在三个层次做 text-video 偏好对齐：(i) Instance Level——整体视频内容与回复的对齐；(ii) Temporal Level——视频时序语义与事件描述的对齐；(iii) Perceptive Level——空间物体与语言 token 的对齐。同时构建了 VistaDPO-7k 数据集（7.2K QA 对，标注了 chosen/rejected）。关键设计是把 DPO 的偏好信号从全局扩展到时空多层次，让模型在不同粒度上都能区分好坏回复。","experiments":"构建了 7.2K QA 对的 VistaDPO-7k 数据集。摘要未给出具体 baseline 对比数字，需查阅全文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Large Video Models suffer from misalignment with human intuition and video hallucination. Existing DPO methods only perform holistic preference alignment, lacking fine-grained alignment across video's spatial-temporal hierarchy.","importance":"A method-level contribution in VLM post-training alignment. For pretrain, the hierarchical alignment design (instance/temporal/perceptive levels) suggests that a single global loss may be insufficient for capturing fine-grained spatiotemporal semantics in video—relevant for video pretrain objective design.","technical_approach":"VistaDPO performs text-video preference alignment at three levels: (i) Instance—overall video-response alignment; (ii) Temporal—temporal semantics vs. event descriptions; (iii) Perceptive—spatial objects vs. language tokens. Also introduces VistaDPO-7k, a dataset of 7.2K QA pairs with chosen/rejected annotations. The key design extends DPO's preference signal from global to multi-granularity spatiotemporal levels.","experiments":"Constructed VistaDPO-7k dataset with 7.2K QA pairs. No specific baseline comparison numbers in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["video","dpo","alignment","multimodal","hallucination"]},{"id":"2508.00264","title":"Calibrated Language Models and How to Find Them with Label Smoothing","authors":["Jerry Huang","Peng Lu","Qiuhao Zeng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ee","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00264","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HuangLZ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HuangLZ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/huang25w.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 经过 instruction tuning 后，置信度校准（calibration）显著退化——模型变得过度自信，输出概率不再准确反映正确率。现有 SFT 流程普遍忽略了这个问题。","importance":"方法级贡献，属于 posttrain 质量控制。对 pretrain 研究的启示：它揭示了 SFT 阶段会系统性地破坏 pretrain 阶段学到的校准特性，而 label smoothing 这种简单正则化就能缓解。这提示 pretrain 和 posttrain 之间的接口设计需要更多关注——不只是能力传递，还有校准等统计特性的保持。","technical_approach":"首先系统检验了多个开源 LLM 在 instruction tuning 前后的校准变化，确认了校准退化是普遍现象。然后提出用 label smoothing 作为 SFT 阶段的正则化手段。Label smoothing 把 one-hot 标签软化为平滑分布，防止模型过度自信。作者提供了理论分析解释为什么 label smoothing 足以维持校准。这个方法极其简单，几乎零额外成本。","experiments":"在多个开源 LLM 上验证了 instruction tuning 导致的校准退化，以及 label smoothing 的修复效果。具体模型和数字需查阅全文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Instruction tuning significantly degrades LLM confidence calibration—models become overconfident, with output probabilities no longer reflecting actual correctness. This issue is largely ignored in standard SFT pipelines.","importance":"A method-level contribution in posttrain quality. For pretrain researchers: SFT systematically destroys calibration properties learned during pretrain, and simple label smoothing can mitigate this. This highlights that the pretrain-posttrain interface needs attention not just for capability transfer but also for preserving statistical properties like calibration.","technical_approach":"First systematically demonstrates calibration degradation across multiple open-source LLMs after instruction tuning. Then proposes label smoothing during SFT as a regularizer—softening one-hot labels to prevent overconfidence. Provides theoretical analysis of why label smoothing suffices to maintain calibration. The method is trivially simple with near-zero overhead.","experiments":"Validated calibration degradation and label smoothing's fix across multiple open-source LLMs. Specific models and numbers require reading the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["calibration","label-smoothing","instruction-tuning","confidence","llm"]},{"id":"HuangWC0GDW0025","title":"Larger or Smaller Reward Margins to Select Preferences for LLM Alignment?","authors":["Kexin Huang","Junkang Wu","Ziqian Chen","Xue Wang","Jinyang Gao","Bolin Ding","Jiancan Wu","Xiangnan He","Xiang Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/HuangWC0GDW0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/HuangWC0GDW0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/huang25al.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在 DPO 等偏好对齐方法中，选择偏好数据对时应该用大 reward margin 还是小 reward margin？这个看似简单的数据选择问题缺乏系统研究。","importance":"方法/数据级贡献，属于 LLM 对齐的数据工程。对 pretrain 研究的间接启示：偏好数据的 margin 选择本质上是训练信号强度的问题——太大的 margin 可能导致学到的是表面差异而非深层偏好，太小则信号不足。这与 pretrain 中数据质量/难度的选择逻辑类似。","technical_approach":"摘要为空，无法获取具体方法细节。从标题推断，工作应该系统对比了不同 reward margin 阈值对 DPO 训练效果的影响，可能给出了最优 margin 选择的指导原则或自适应策略。","experiments":"摘要为空，无实验细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"When constructing preference pairs for DPO-style alignment, should we select pairs with larger or smaller reward margins? This seemingly simple data selection question lacks systematic study.","importance":"A method/data-level contribution in alignment data engineering. The margin selection question is fundamentally about training signal strength—too large may capture surface differences rather than deep preferences, too small provides insufficient signal. This parallels data quality/difficulty selection in pretrain.","technical_approach":"Abstract is empty. Based on the title, the work likely systematically compares different reward margin thresholds for DPO training and provides guidelines or adaptive strategies for optimal margin selection.","experiments":"No abstract available; no experimental details.","authors_note":""},"tags":["preference-data","reward-margin","alignment","data-quality","dpo"]},{"id":"JayashankarRW25","title":"Score-of-Mixture Training: One-Step Generative Model Training Made Simple via Score Estimation of Mixture Distributions","authors":["Tejas Jayashankar","Jongha Jon Ryu","Gregory W. Wornell"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/JayashankarRW25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/JayashankarRW25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/jayashankar25a.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题与结论无法从当前信息确认，因为未提供摘要与关键设定。","importance":"无法判断其对 diffusion/score-based 训练范式的实际冲击，因为缺少它相对标准 diffusion/flow matching/score matching 的定位与收益数字。","technical_approach":"仅从标题推断其与“对混合分布做 score 估计以实现一步训练”相关，但缺少摘要无法说明：混合分布如何构造、一步生成/训练的目标函数是什么、以及稳定性与偏差如何控制。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法给出数据集、模型规模、训练步数、采样步数、FID/likelihood 等指标与提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The core problem and main claims cannot be confirmed because the abstract and setup are not provided.","importance":"Impact on diffusion/score-based training cannot be assessed without positioning against standard diffusion, flow matching, or score matching, plus quantitative gains.","technical_approach":"From the title it seems to estimate scores of mixture distributions to enable one-step training, but without an abstract it is unclear how the mixture is defined, what the one-step objective is, and how bias/stability are handled.","experiments":"No abstract means no datasets, model sizes, training/sampling steps, or metrics (e.g., FID/likelihood) to report.","authors_note":""},"tags":["score-matching","one-step-generation","diffusion"]},{"id":"2412.04140","title":"Understanding and Mitigating Memorization in Generative Models via Sharpness of Probability Landscapes","authors":["Dongjae Jeon","Dueun Kim","Albert No"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"In this paper, we introduce a geometric framework to analyze memorization in diffusion models through the sharpness of the log probability density. We mathematically justify a previously proposed score-difference-based memorization metric by demonstrating its effectiveness in quantifying sharpness. Additionally, we propose a novel memorization metric that captures sharpness at the initial stage of image generation in latent diffusion models, offering early insights into potential memorization. Leveraging this metric, we develop a mitigation strategy that optimizes the initial noise of the generation process using a sharpness-aware regularization term. The code is publicly available at https://github.com/Dongjae0324/sharpness_memorization_diffusion.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.04140","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/JeonKN25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/JeonKN25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/jeon25a.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：扩散生成模型的 memorization 如何被可解释、可度量地刻画，并能在生成早期就预警与缓解。以往 memorization 指标多是经验性的相似度或后验检测，难以连接到模型概率几何与可干预的训练/采样变量。","importance":"贡献是把 memorization 连接到“概率景观的 sharpness（尖锐度）”这一几何量，并给出可操作的早期度量与采样期缓解策略。对做扩散预训练的人，这提供了一个更接近机制的诊断视角：memorization 往往对应局部概率密度过尖，从而可以在采样初始噪声层面做正则化干预，而不必只依赖数据去重或训练期启发式。","technical_approach":"作者用 log probability density 的 sharpness 来分析 memorization，并证明已有的 score-difference memorization metric 能有效量化这种 sharpness。进一步地，他们提出一个新指标，专门度量 latent diffusion 在生成初始阶段的 sharpness，以便更早发现潜在 memorization。缓解方法是在生成时优化初始噪声，并加入 sharpness-aware 正则项，让采样起点避开过尖的高密度“记忆口袋”；代价是这会引入额外的生成时优化开销，并可能在强正则下牺牲细节或多样性。","experiments":"摘要未给出所用扩散模型/latent diffusion 具体架构、数据集、memorization 检测协议、以及缓解前后的定量变化（如泄露率、相似度分布、FID/CLIP 等），只说明给出理论论证、提出新指标并提供代码。缺少数字使得目前只能确认方法路径与潜在 trade-off。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies how to characterize and mitigate memorization in diffusion models in a way that is mechanistic, measurable, and detectable early in generation. Prior memorization signals are often heuristic similarity checks or post-hoc detectors with weak links to the model’s probability geometry.","importance":"It contributes a geometric lens—sharpness of the log-density landscape—and turns it into both metrics and an actionable mitigation at sampling time. For diffusion pretraining, the practical takeaway is that memorization can correspond to overly sharp local density regions, suggesting interventions beyond dataset deduplication, including controlling where sampling starts.","technical_approach":"The authors analyze memorization via sharpness of the log probability density and justify a prior score-difference memorization metric by showing it quantifies sharpness. They then propose a new metric targeting sharpness at the initial stage of latent diffusion generation for earlier warning. Mitigation optimizes the initial noise with a sharpness-aware regularizer so sampling avoids sharp “memory pockets”; the trade-off is extra test-time optimization cost and potential quality/diversity loss if regularization is too strong.","experiments":"The abstract does not specify the diffusion/LDM architectures, datasets, memorization evaluation protocol, or quantitative before/after changes (e.g., leakage rates, similarity statistics, FID/CLIP). It mainly states the theoretical justification, a new metric, and released code.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","memorization","sharpness","generalization"]},{"id":"JhooHL25","title":"Pfeife: Automatic Pipeline Parallelism for PyTorch","authors":["Ho Young Jhoo","Chung-Kil Hur","Nuno P. Lopes"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/JhooHL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/JhooHL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/jhoo25a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题与结论无法从当前信息确认，因为未提供摘要与关键功能描述。","importance":"无法判断其对大模型训练系统（pipeline parallel）带来的实际收益，因为缺少支持的并行策略范围、自动切分质量与性能数据。","technical_approach":"仅从标题可知其做 PyTorch 的自动 pipeline parallelism，但缺少摘要无法说明：是否支持异构 stage、重计算、通信调度、micro-batch 策略，以及与现有方案（如 torch.distributed.pipeline.sync、DeepSpeed、Megatron）的差异。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法给出加速比、显存节省、可扩展性（GPU 数）、以及在真实 Transformer 上的端到端吞吐数据。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The core problem and claims cannot be verified because the abstract and key feature description are missing.","importance":"Practical impact on large-model training systems cannot be assessed without supported parallelism features, partition quality, and performance numbers.","technical_approach":"The title suggests automatic pipeline parallelism for PyTorch, but without an abstract it is unclear whether it supports heterogeneous stages, activation checkpointing, comm scheduling, micro-batching policies, and how it differs from existing tooling (PyTorch pipeline APIs, DeepSpeed, Megatron).","experiments":"No abstract means no speedups, memory savings, scaling curves (GPU count), or end-to-end throughput results on real Transformers to report.","authors_note":""},"tags":["pipeline-parallelism","pytorch","distributed-training"]},{"id":"2502.05628","title":"AnyEdit: Edit Any Knowledge Encoded in Language Models","authors":["Houcheng Jiang","Junfeng Fang","Ningyu Zhang","Mingyang Wan","Guojun Ma","Xiang Wang","Xiangnan He","Tat-Seng Chua"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ef","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.05628","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/JiangF0WM00C25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/JiangF0WM00C25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/jiang25b.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是：现有模型编辑方法很难稳定修改长形式知识，尤其是诗歌、代码、数学推导这类不能靠改单个 token 就完成更新的内容。过去很多方法默认“知识集中在某个关键 token 的隐藏状态里”，这对短事实编辑还凑合，但一旦目标知识跨多个位置展开，就会碰到作者说的 efficacy barrier：单点编辑无法保证全局生成一致。","importance":"这项工作的价值在于把模型编辑从“单点事实修补”推进到“长段知识重写”。对 pretrain 研究者，它提示了一件重要的事：知识在 LLM 里未必是一个局部可寻址的点，更像沿自回归轨迹逐段展开的条件分布。AnyEdit 因而不是简单提精度，而是在问题定义上更贴近真实知识更新需求，尤其适合 continual pretrain 与参数内知识维护的交界处。","technical_approach":"核心方法是一个新的自回归编辑范式：把长知识拆成顺序 chunk，迭代编辑每个 chunk 中的关键 token，而不是只修改一次隐藏状态。作者用互信息链式法则给出理论解释，意思是长形式知识可以分解成条件依赖的序列更新，因此分步编辑比单点编辑更符合生成模型的结构。这个设计有效的原因是它承认了知识更新是跨位置传播的，不再赌一次干预就能影响整段输出。和 MEMIT、ROME 这类参数编辑方法相比，它更强调 sequential consistency；代价则是流程更复杂，可能需要定义 chunk 粒度、关键 token 选择策略，以及控制误差累积。","experiments":"摘要明确说它在长形式、多格式知识编辑上优于强基线，但给出的截断信息没有具体数字。可以确认的是，评测场景覆盖 poetry、code snippets 和 mathematical derivations，这比传统 fact editing benchmark 更难也更贴近实际。论文值得重点看两类实验：一类是编辑成功率与泛化保真度，另一类是 sequential chunking 的消融，因为这决定收益到底来自理论上的分解，还是仅仅来自多次编辑机会。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a real limitation in model editing: existing methods struggle to update long-form knowledge such as poems, code, or mathematical derivations. Many prior editors effectively assume that the target knowledge can be changed by modifying the hidden state around a single token, which works only when the edit is highly localized.","importance":"Its contribution is meaningful because it reframes model editing as a sequential generation problem rather than a single-point intervention problem. For pretraining researchers, that matters: it suggests knowledge in LLMs is often distributed along autoregressive trajectories, not cleanly stored in one addressable spot. This makes the work relevant to continual pretraining and parameter-space knowledge maintenance, not just editing benchmarks.","technical_approach":"AnyEdit introduces an autoregressive editing paradigm that decomposes long-form knowledge into chunks and edits them iteratively through key tokens in each chunk. The theoretical justification uses the chain rule of mutual information, which supports the idea that long knowledge can be updated as a sequence of conditional edits. The design is sensible because it aligns the editing mechanism with how autoregressive models actually unfold content. Compared with one-shot editing methods, it aims for better global consistency, at the cost of a more involved pipeline and possible error accumulation across steps.","experiments":"The abstract states that AnyEdit outperforms strong baselines on long-form editing across diverse formats, but the provided text does not include concrete numbers. The important empirical angle is the benchmark choice: poetry, code, and math derivations are materially harder than standard factual edits. The most valuable experimental details will likely be edit success, locality/generalization trade-offs, and ablations on chunk decomposition.","authors_note":""},"tags":["model-editing","knowledge-update","llm"]},{"id":"2502.00722","title":"Demystifying Cost-Efficiency in LLM Serving over Heterogeneous GPUs","authors":["Youhe Jiang","Fangcheng Fu","Xiaozhe Yao","Guoliang He","Xupeng Miao","Ana Klimovic","Bin Cui","Binhang Yuan","Eiko Yoneki"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f0","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.00722","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/JiangFYHMK0YY25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/JiangFYHMK0YY25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/jiang25c.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文回答的是一个很实际但常被粗糙处理的问题：在异构 GPU 环境下，LLM serving 怎样才能真正做到成本效率最优。过去很多系统默认用同构 GPU 部署，因为调度和容量规划更简单，但请求的计算/显存需求差异很大，结果就是要么高端卡被低负载请求浪费，要么便宜卡扛不住长上下文和大 batch，整体成本效率被拉低。","importance":"这是系统级工作，但对模型研究同样有启发。它的重要性不在于“异构 GPU 可以用”，而在于用系统性 benchmark 说明：不同请求类型与不同 GPU 的 compute/memory 特性存在可利用的匹配关系，服务成本不是单靠更好的 kernel 或量化就能解决。对 pretrain 研究者，这提醒我们推理侧 workload 结构会反过来影响模型架构和 KV/cache 设计的真实价值。","technical_approach":"方法上，作者先做全面测量，再决定 GPU 组成、部署配置与请求分配策略，而不是把异构资源当作简单混编。摘要显示其核心洞见来自 profiling：不同 GPU 类型在算力和显存上的优势不同，因此应根据请求特征——例如 prefill/decode 比例、上下文长度、batch 形态——做细粒度映射。这个思路有效，是因为 LLM serving 的瓶颈本来就随阶段变化；例如 prefill 更偏算力，长 decode 更受 KV/cache 和内存带宽影响。边界是这类策略依赖云平台价格模型与负载分布，结论可能不具备完全的跨环境普适性。","experiments":"摘要确认论文进行了 comprehensive benchmarking，并发现通过精细决定 GPU composition、deployment configuration 和 request assignment，LLM serving 的 cost-efficiency 可以显著优化，但这里没有给出具体提升数字。值得关注的实验点应包括：不同模型尺寸、不同上下文长度、不同请求混合分布下的最优资源组合是否稳定，以及与同构部署、静态路由、单指标优化策略相比的真实成本收益。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical serving question: how to maximize cost-efficiency for LLM inference on heterogeneous GPUs. Homogeneous deployments are operationally simpler, but modern request mixes vary widely in compute and memory demand, so a one-size-fits-all GPU choice often wastes money.","importance":"This is a systems contribution with direct relevance to model work. Its value is not merely showing that heterogeneous GPUs can be used, but showing that request diversity and hardware diversity can be matched systematically. That matters because many model-side optimizations are only valuable in deployment when they align with the real serving bottleneck, which is often workload-dependent.","technical_approach":"The paper appears to start from extensive benchmarking and then optimize three coupled decisions: GPU composition, deployment configuration, and request assignment. The underlying logic is sound: different GPUs expose different compute-memory trade-offs, and different requests stress different parts of the serving stack. Prefill-heavy and decode-heavy workloads should not be treated the same. The main trade-off is that such optimization depends on cloud pricing and traffic distributions, so the best policy may not transfer unchanged across environments.","experiments":"The abstract reports substantial gains in cost-efficiency through careful hardware composition and scheduling, but the provided snippet does not include exact numbers. The most informative results will be comparisons against homogeneous baselines under varying context lengths, model sizes, and request mixes, plus sensitivity to platform pricing and load skew.","authors_note":""},"tags":["serving","heterogeneous-gpu","cost-efficiency","llm"]},{"id":"2502.09621","title":"MME-CoT: Benchmarking Chain-of-Thought in Large Multimodal Models for Reasoning Quality, Robustness, and Efficiency","authors":["Dongzhi Jiang","Renrui Zhang","Ziyu Guo","Yanwei Li","Yu Qi","Xinyan Chen","Liuhui Wang","Jianhan Jin","Claire Guo","Shen Yan","Bo Zhang","Chaoyou Fu","Peng Gao","Hongsheng Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f1","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.09621","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/JiangZGLQ0WJGY025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/JiangZGLQ0WJGY025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/jiang25n.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：链式思维（CoT）在大多模态模型里到底有没有稳定提升，以及它提升了什么、牺牲了什么。过去 CoT 在纯文本 LLM 里效果显著，但在 LMM 中一直缺少系统评测，很多结论停留在零散 case study，因为多模态推理同时掺杂了视觉感知误差、OCR 噪声、步骤冗余和解码成本，不能直接照搬文本结论。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要是基准级和分析级。它不是提出新的多模态推理训练方法，而是补上了一个评估缺口：把 LMM 的 CoT 表现拆成质量、鲁棒性和效率三个维度看。对 pretrain 和 post-train 都有意义，因为如果 CoT 在某些模态场景里主要放大感知噪声而不是改善推理，那么继续堆监督链路未必划算，问题可能在视觉 tokenizer、对齐方式或多模态中间表示。","technical_approach":"作者提出 MME-CoT，一个专门面向 LMM CoT 的 benchmark，覆盖数学、科学、OCR、逻辑、时空和通用场景六个领域，并配套三类细粒度指标来衡量 reasoning quality、robustness 和 efficiency。这个设计好的地方在于它不把“最终答对”当唯一标准，而是显式看中间推理是否稳定、是否容易被扰动、以及长链输出的代价是否值得。与一般 benchmark 相比，它更像一个诊断工具，用来区分模型是真的会多模态推理，还是只是通过更长输出碰巧提高命中率。","experiments":"摘要确认作者对多种 state-of-the-art LMM 做了深入分析，并且数据与评测策略是专门构建的，但没有给出具体模型名单和数字。能确定的关键信息是：评测维度不只看 accuracy，还看鲁棒性与效率，因此结果很可能会揭示“更长 CoT 不一定更好”“部分领域收益明显、部分领域退化”这类结构性现象。具体谁好谁差、提升多少，需要正文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a simple but under-studied question: does chain-of-thought actually help large multimodal models, and if so, where and at what cost? CoT is well established in text-only LLMs, but the multimodal setting adds perception errors, OCR noise, and longer reasoning paths, so text-side assumptions do not transfer cleanly.","importance":"This is primarily a benchmark and analysis contribution. Its value is that it turns multimodal CoT from anecdotal observation into something measurable along quality, robustness, and efficiency. That matters for both pretraining and post-training: if CoT mostly amplifies perception noise in some settings, then more reasoning supervision is not the right fix. The bottleneck may instead sit in representation, alignment, or visual tokenization.","technical_approach":"The paper introduces MME-CoT, a dedicated benchmark for CoT in LMMs across six domains: math, science, OCR, logic, space-time, and general scenes. It also defines three fine-grained metrics for reasoning quality, robustness, and efficiency. This is a strong design choice because final-answer accuracy alone cannot tell whether CoT genuinely improves multimodal reasoning or just increases output length and variance.","experiments":"The abstract says the authors conduct an in-depth study of state-of-the-art LMMs using curated high-quality data and a specialized evaluation strategy, but it does not provide model names or quantitative results in the excerpt. The likely value of the experiments is in exposing regime differences, such as domains where CoT helps consistently versus domains where it adds cost without real gains.","authors_note":""},"tags":["chain-of-thought","benchmark","multimodal-reasoning","lmm"]},{"id":"2505.07004","title":"GuidedQuant: Large Language Model Quantization via Exploiting End Loss Guidance","authors":["Jinuk Kim","Marwa El Halabi","Wonpyo Park","Clemens J. S. Schaefer","Deokjae Lee","Yeonhong Park","Jae W. Lee","Hyun Oh Song"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f2","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.07004","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/KimHPSLPLS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/KimHPSLPLS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/kim25d.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 PTQ 里的一个关键缺口：现有量化方法要么没利用最终 loss 对隐藏特征重要性的指导，要么即使用了 end loss，也常把权重当成彼此独立处理，忽略同一输出通道内的交互。结果就是量化误差可能在局部看小，但沿网络传播后对真实任务损失并不友好。","importance":"这是一个方法级但很实用的改进。它的重要性在于把“量化误差最小”进一步改成“最终任务损失更小”，并且不是靠 full retraining，而是仍然属于 post-training quantization 范畴。对大模型部署有直接价值；对 pretrain 研究的间接启示是，很多推理效率优化如果不对齐最终 loss，就会高估局部重构指标的意义。","technical_approach":"GuidedQuant 的核心是把 end loss 的梯度信息引入量化目标，同时保留输出通道内跨权重依赖，而不是逐权重独立近似。这个设计有效，因为神经网络里真正重要的不是单个权重误差，而是误差如何共同影响下游表示和最终预测。相比只看 activation/weight 统计量的方法，它更 task-aware；相比简单 Hessian 近似或逐元素重要性打分，它更强调通道内结构关系。代价通常是校准阶段更复杂，对梯度估计和少量校准数据更敏感。","experiments":"摘要明确说 GuidedQuant 在三类场景上都稳定提升 SOTA 量化方法：weight-only scalar、weight-only vector、以及 weight-and-activation quantization，但没有给出具体模型、bit 宽和数字。可确认的结论是它不是只适用于单一量化设置，而是跨多种 PTQ 配置有效。最值得看的实验包括：低比特区间下的优势是否扩大、不同校准集大小的鲁棒性、以及与 GPTQ/AWQ 类 baseline 的真实差距。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a central weakness in post-training quantization: existing methods either ignore how hidden features matter to the final loss, or they use end-loss information while still treating weights too independently. That means a quantization objective can look locally reasonable yet still hurt the actual task after errors propagate through the network.","importance":"This is a practical method contribution. Its significance is that it makes PTQ more aligned with the model's end objective without requiring full retraining. For deployment, that is directly useful. For pretraining researchers, it is also a reminder that efficiency metrics based only on local reconstruction can be misleading when they are weakly coupled to end loss.","technical_approach":"GuidedQuant incorporates gradient information from the end loss into the quantization objective while preserving cross-weight dependencies within output channels. That is a sensible improvement because model quality is affected by structured interactions among weights, not just isolated quantization errors. Compared with purely statistic-based PTQ methods, it is more loss-aware. Compared with simpler importance-weighted objectives, it better accounts for intra-channel structure. The trade-off is likely higher calibration complexity and greater dependence on gradient quality.","experiments":"The abstract says GuidedQuant consistently improves state-of-the-art methods across three settings: weight-only scalar, weight-only vector, and weight-and-activation quantization. Exact model sizes, bit widths, and gains are not included here. The most important details in the full paper will be performance in low-bit regimes, calibration-data sensitivity, and comparisons against standard PTQ baselines such as GPTQ- or AWQ-style methods.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","ptq","inference","compression","loss-aware"]},{"id":"2412.10208","title":"Efficient Generative Modeling with Residual Vector Quantization-Based Tokens","authors":["Jaehyeon Kim","Taehong Moon","Keon Lee","Jaewoong Cho"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f3","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.10208","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/KimMLC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/KimMLC25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/kim25ab.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["tokenizer","rvq","discrete-tokens","generation","sampling"]},{"id":"2502.01179","title":"Joint Localization and Activation Editing for Low-Resource Fine-Tuning","authors":["Wen Lai","Alexander Fraser","Ivan Titov"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f4","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.01179","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Lai0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Lai0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/lai25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["activation-editing","peft","interpretability","low-resource"]},{"id":"LeaskNM25","title":"Inference-Time Decomposition of Activations (ITDA): A Scalable Approach to Interpreting Large Language Models","authors":["Patrick Leask","Neel Nanda","Noura Al Moubayed"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LeaskNM25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LeaskNM25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/leask25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["interpretability","activation-decomposition","scalable"]},{"id":"2412.19351","title":"ETTA: Elucidating the Design Space of Text-to-Audio Models","authors":["Sang-gil Lee","Zhifeng Kong","Arushi Goel","Sungwon Kim","Rafael Valle","Bryan Catanzaro"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f5","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.19351","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LeeKG0VC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LeeKG0VC25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/lee25m.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["text-to-audio","design-space","training-objective","diffusion"]},{"id":"LiLZC025","title":"From Black Boxes to Transparent Minds: Evaluating and Enhancing the Theory of Mind in Multimodal Large Language Models","authors":["Xinyang Li","Siqi Liu","Bochao Zou","Jiansheng Chen","Huimin Ma"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiLZC025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiLZC025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/li25bj.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["mllm","theory-of-mind","evaluation","reasoning"]},{"id":"LiPKJDCBS0L25","title":"SafetyAnalyst: Interpretable, Transparent, and Steerable Safety Moderation for AI Behavior","authors":["Jing-Jing Li","Valentina Pyatkin","Max Kleiman-Weiner","Liwei Jiang","Nouha Dziri","Anne Collins","Jana Schaich Borg","Maarten Sap","Yejin Choi","Sydney Levine"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiPKJDCBS0L25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiPKJDCBS0L25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/li25bw.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["safety","moderation","interpretability","alignment"]},{"id":"LiTZYS0M025","title":"Improving LLM Video Understanding with 16 Frames Per Second","authors":["Yixuan Li","Changli Tang","Jimin Zhuang","Yudong Yang","Guangzhi Sun","Wei Li","Zejun Ma","Chao Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiTZYS0M025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiTZYS0M025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/li25cg.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["video-understanding","mllm","tokenization","temporal-modeling"]},{"id":"LiW0K0LW25","title":"Reflection-Bench: Evaluating Epistemic Agency in Large Language Models","authors":["Lingyu Li","Yixu Wang","Haiquan Zhao","Shuqi Kong","Yan Teng","Chunbo Li","Yingchun Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiW0K0LW25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiW0K0LW25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/li25cu.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：现有 LLM 评测大多只看答案对不对，却很少测模型是否会主动识别自己不知道、信息不够或推理前提不稳，这就是所谓 epistemic agency。这个问题以前常被“校准”“拒答率”局部替代，但那只能测结果，不够测模型是否会反思证据缺口、主动修正假设或请求更多信息。","importance":"它的贡献更偏 benchmark/measurement，但对后训练和推理范式很关键。因为现在很多系统把长链推理、工具调用、反思机制都堆上去了，如果没有专门评测 epistemic agency，就很容易把“会说很多”误当成“知道自己何时不该说”；这会直接影响 RLHF/RLAIF、测试时扩展以及 agent 训练的奖励设计。","technical_approach":"核心方法应该是构建一个专门测 epistemic agency 的基准：不仅看最终正确率，还看模型在不确定、信息缺失、冲突证据或可请求澄清的场景里怎么行动。好的设计重点不在题目难，而在把“知识缺失”“证据不足”“误导性上下文”“是否应继续求证”这些因素拆开，否则很容易又退化成普通 QA benchmark。由于没有摘要，具体任务组成、评分协议和自动/人工评测方式无法确认。","experiments":"题面没有实验信息，无法确认包含哪些模型、多少任务、以及是否比较了 CoT、reflection prompting、tool use 或 uncertainty prompting。可以预期作者会展示：更强的大模型不一定在 epistemic agency 上同步更强，且标准准确率与该维度的相关性可能有限；但没有数字就不能写成事实。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a missing evaluation dimension: whether an LLM can recognize what it does not know, detect insufficient evidence, and act accordingly. Standard benchmarks mostly score final answers, while epistemic agency is about behavior under uncertainty, ambiguity, and missing information rather than raw task accuracy.","importance":"This is primarily a benchmark contribution, but it matters for alignment and reasoning research. As systems increasingly add chain-of-thought, reflection, and tool use, we need evaluations that separate confident verbosity from genuine epistemic control; otherwise reward models and test-time scaling methods will optimize the wrong behavior.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is to build a benchmark that measures actions under uncertainty: abstaining, asking for clarification, revising assumptions, or acknowledging missing evidence. The design challenge is to isolate epistemic behavior from ordinary task difficulty, so a strong benchmark should vary evidence sufficiency and ambiguity explicitly instead of just making questions harder. The exact task taxonomy and metrics are not available from the provided metadata.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so datasets, model roster, and quantitative findings cannot be verified. A plausible outcome is that stronger models do not automatically exhibit stronger epistemic agency, and that standard QA accuracy correlates only weakly with this ability, but this cannot be stated as a confirmed result without the paper details.","authors_note":""},"tags":["evaluation","epistemic","reasoning","benchmark"]},{"id":"Liang00LWCH25","title":"Boosting Multi-Domain Fine-Tuning of Large Language Models through Evolving Interactions between Samples","authors":["Xize Liang","Lin Yang","Jie Wang","Yiyang Lu","Runyu Wu","Hanzhu Chen","Jianye Hao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Liang00LWCH25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Liang00LWCH25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/liang25q.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：多领域微调时，不同样本之间并不是独立的，样本间关系会随训练动态变化，但现有方法通常只在 batch 或 loss 权重层面静态处理。结果是模型容易被高资源域主导，或者在领域冲突时学到对谁都不太好的折中解。","importance":"它的价值在于把 multi-domain fine-tuning 从“样本加权”推进到“样本交互演化”，属于训练方法层面的改进。对 pretrain/post-train 都有启发：无论是持续预训练还是后训练，多来源数据混合的核心难点都不是简单配比，而是不同样本在不同阶段对彼此梯度方向的影响，这篇工作显然试图利用这种动态结构。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是显式建模样本之间不断演化的交互关系，并把这种关系用于微调过程中的采样、重权重或表示更新。与静态 curriculum、难例挖掘或 domain-wise mixing 不同，它强调 interaction 是训练中逐步形成的，因此策略也应在线更新；这种设计可能更能处理跨域迁移和冲突，但代价是算法复杂度上升，且对交互估计噪声比较敏感。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认覆盖多少领域、采用哪些底座模型、以及相对 LoRA/full FT/mixture baselines 的提升。比较关键的实验应包括：多域平均性能、低资源域是否被明显拉升、以及交互图是否随训练阶段发生结构变化；如果作者做得扎实，还应展示在领域不平衡更严重时收益更大。具体数据无法确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a limitation of multi-domain fine-tuning: training samples are not independent, and their interactions evolve during optimization, yet most methods treat them with static weights or domain-level schedules. That often leads to domination by high-resource domains or mediocre compromises under domain conflict.","importance":"This is a training-method contribution with implications beyond standard fine-tuning. For both continual pretraining and post-training, the hard part of data mixing is not only the ratio of sources but how gradients from different examples help or hurt each other over time. The paper appears to operationalize that idea.","technical_approach":"The likely method explicitly models evolving sample interactions and uses them to guide weighting, selection, or representation updates during fine-tuning. This differs from static curricula or domain-level balancing because the interaction structure is treated as dynamic rather than fixed. The upside is better adaptation under cross-domain transfer and conflict; the downside is added algorithmic overhead and potential sensitivity to noisy interaction estimates.","experiments":"The provided information does not include the abstract, so domains, model sizes, baselines, and gains cannot be verified. The most useful evidence would be improved average multi-domain performance, especially stronger retention for low-resource domains, plus analyses showing that the learned interaction structure changes meaningfully across training stages. No exact numbers are available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["fine-tuning","data-selection","curriculum","llm"]},{"id":"2505.12871","title":"Does Low Rank Adaptation Lead to Lower Robustness against Training-Time Attacks?","authors":["Zi Liang","Haibo Hu","Qingqing Ye","Yaxin Xiao","Ronghua Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f6","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.12871","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Liang00XL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Liang00XL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/liang25f.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：LoRA 虽然高效，但它的低秩参数化是否让模型在训练时更容易被数据投毒或后门攻击成功。过去大家主要关注 LoRA 的效率、容量和可迁移性，很少系统分析低秩结构对安全鲁棒性的影响；这在实际部署里是个空白，因为很多组织默认参数更少就更安全，但这个结论并不成立。","importance":"这项工作的贡献主要是安全分析层面的，但对参数高效微调和后训练很有现实意义。它的重要性不在于提出一个更强 attack，而在于给出理论框架解释为什么低秩约束可能改变攻击面：如果 LoRA 的表示子空间更集中，攻击者也可能更容易把恶意模式塞进这条窄通道。对做大规模对齐的人，这意味着 PEFT 不是纯工程优化，它会改变训练信号的可操控性。","technical_approach":"核心方法是理论分析，不是新的对齐算法。作者用神经切线核近似 LoRA 的训练动态，再结合信息论，把“低秩结构—参数可达空间—投毒/后门鲁棒性”连起来；这比单纯经验比较不同 rank 更有价值，因为它试图解释脆弱性来自哪里。关键设计点是把 LoRA 看成受限更新子空间，从而分析攻击模式在这个子空间里被放大还是被抑制。","experiments":"从摘要可确认，论文同时研究 data poisoning 和 backdoor attacks，但题面截断了后半段，无法看到具体模型、数据集和数值结论。可以确认的是：作者不仅做理论，还应有实验验证 rank 与攻击成功率/干净性能之间的关系；最值得看的 ablation 会是 rank、注入比例、目标任务复杂度，以及与 full fine-tuning 或其他 PEFT 方法的比较。具体提升或退化幅度无法从现有信息中确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a practical security question: does LoRA’s low-rank parameterization make fine-tuned LLMs less robust to training-time attacks such as poisoning and backdoors? The field has studied LoRA mainly through the lens of efficiency and adaptation quality, while its security implications remain underanalyzed.","importance":"This is a security-analysis paper, but it matters directly for PEFT-heavy post-training pipelines. The key point is that low-rank updates are not just an efficiency trick; they change the reachable update subspace, which can also change how easily malicious patterns are implanted. That is a useful warning for large-scale alignment and customization workflows.","technical_approach":"The main contribution is theoretical. The authors model LoRA training dynamics, use an NTK-style approximation to simplify the optimization analysis, and connect the low-rank structure to attack robustness through information-theoretic arguments. The value of this setup is that it goes beyond empirical rank sweeps and tries to explain why constrained update subspaces may amplify or suppress attackability.","experiments":"From the provided abstract, we can confirm that the empirical study covers both data poisoning and backdoor attacks, but the text is truncated before the quantitative details. The most relevant experiments should analyze attack success versus LoRA rank, poisoning ratio, and task setting, with comparisons to full fine-tuning and possibly other PEFT baselines. Exact models, datasets, and numbers cannot be verified from the given snippet.","authors_note":""},"tags":["lora","robustness","security","fine-tuning"]},{"id":"2506.05065","title":"UnHiPPO: Uncertainty-aware Initialization for State Space Models","authors":["Marten Lienen","Abdullah Saydemir","Stephan Günnemann"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"State space models are emerging as a dominant model class for sequence problems with many relying on the HiPPO framework to initialize their dynamics. However, HiPPO fundamentally assumes data to be noise-free; an assumption often violated in practice. We extend the HiPPO theory with measurement noise and derive an uncertainty-aware initialization for state space model dynamics. In our analysis, we interpret HiPPO as a linear stochastic control problem where the data enters as a noise-free control signal. We then reformulate the problem so that the data become noisy outputs of a latent system and arrive at an alternative dynamics initialization that infers the posterior of this latent system from the data without increasing runtime. Our experiments show that our initialization improves the resistance of state-space models to noise both at training and inference time. Find our implementation at https://cs.cit.tum.de/daml/unhippo.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.05065","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LienenSG25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LienenSG25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/lienen25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：很多状态空间模型沿用 HiPPO 初始化，但 HiPPO 默认观测无噪声，这在真实序列数据里往往不成立。结果是初始化的动态系统对噪声过于乐观，模型在含测量噪声的场景里可能学得慢、收敛差，或者对长序列记忆形成不稳。","importance":"这项工作属于训练稳定性与架构细节层面的改进，但对 SSM 作为序列基座模型很有价值。原因是初始化不是小修小补：对 SSM 这类强结构模型，初始动力学会直接影响可训练性和信息保留方式；如果能在不增加运行时的前提下让初始化更符合 noisy data 现实，这是一类低成本高回报的改动。","technical_approach":"UnHiPPO 的核心是把 HiPPO 重新解释成线性随机控制问题，并把原先作为无噪声控制信号输入的数据，改写成来自潜在系统的带噪观测输出。基于这个视角，作者推导出 uncertainty-aware 的动力学初始化，相当于让模型从一开始就按后验估计而不是理想观测来组织状态更新；关键优点是保留了 HiPPO 的运行效率，不增加推理开销。与原始 HiPPO 的区别不在结构换掉，而在初始化所编码的统计假设更贴近真实数据。","experiments":"从摘要可确认，作者报告该初始化在实验中带来改进，并强调不增加运行时；但摘要在结果部分被截断，无法看到任务、模型规模和提升数字。最值得关注的实验应包括：不同噪声水平下的鲁棒性、长序列任务上的收敛速度和最终性能，以及与标准 HiPPO 初始化的稳定性对比。具体指标和幅度无法确认。","authors_note":"作者可确认的是 Stephan Günnemann。题面未提供机构信息，无法可靠补充。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a mismatch in state space model initialization: HiPPO assumes noise-free observations, which is rarely true in real sequence data. That assumption can make the initial dynamics overly optimistic and hurt learning stability or memory formation when measurements are noisy.","importance":"This is an architecture-and-optimization detail, but it matters because initialization is unusually consequential for structured sequence models like SSMs. A better initialization that matches noisy observations without increasing runtime is exactly the kind of small change that can produce outsized practical gains.","technical_approach":"UnHiPPO reinterprets HiPPO through the lens of linear stochastic control. Instead of treating the data as a noise-free control input, the method models observations as noisy outputs from a latent system and derives an uncertainty-aware initialization that effectively tracks the latent posterior. The key point is that the model keeps HiPPO-like runtime efficiency while encoding a more realistic statistical assumption about the data.","experiments":"From the abstract, we can confirm that the proposed initialization improves performance empirically without increasing runtime, but the provided text is truncated before the quantitative details. The most informative experiments should test robustness across noise levels, convergence behavior on long-sequence tasks, and direct comparisons to standard HiPPO initialization. Exact tasks and gains are not visible here.","authors_note":"The only clearly recognizable notable author from the provided metadata is Stephan Günnemann. Institutions cannot be confirmed from the prompt."},"tags":["ssm","hippo","initialization","state-space-model"],"notable_authors":["Stephan Günnemann"]},{"id":"2502.01100","title":"ZebraLogic: On the Scaling Limits of LLMs for Logical Reasoning","authors":["Bill Yuchen Lin","Ronan Le Bras","Kyle Richardson","Ashish Sabharwal","Radha Poovendran","Peter Clark","Yejin Choi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f7","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.01100","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Lin00SPC025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Lin00SPC025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/lin25i.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["reasoning","benchmark","scaling","logical-reasoning"]},{"id":"2502.09838","title":"HealthGPT: A Medical Large Vision-Language Model for Unifying Comprehension and Generation via Heterogeneous Knowledge Adaptation","authors":["Tianwei Lin","Wenqiao Zhang","Sijing Li","Yuqian Yuan","Binhe Yu","Haoyuan Li","Wanggui He","Hao Jiang","Mengze Li","Xiaohui Song","Siliang Tang","Jun Xiao","Hui Lin","Yueting Zhuang","Beng Chin Ooi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We present HealthGPT, a powerful Medical Large Vision-Language Model (Med-LVLM) that integrates medical visual comprehension and generation capabilities within a unified autoregressive paradigm. Our bootstrapping philosophy is to progressively adapt heterogeneous comprehension and generation knowledge to pre-trained large language models (LLMs). This is achieved through a novel heterogeneous low-rank adaptation (H-LoRA) technique, which is complemented by a tailored hierarchical visual perception approach and a three-stage learning strategy. To effectively learn the HealthGPT, we devise a comprehensive medical domain-specific comprehension and generation dataset called VL-Health. Experimental results demonstrate exceptional performance and scalability of HealthGPT in medical visual unified tasks. Our project can be accessed at https://github.com/DCDmllm/HealthGPT.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.09838","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LinZLYY0H00ST0L25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LinZLYY0H00ST0L25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/lin25n.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["medical-vlm","multimodal-generation","unified-model"]},{"id":"2410.02205","title":"Aligning with Logic: Measuring, Evaluating and Improving Logical Preference Consistency in Large Language Models","authors":["Yinhong Liu","Zhijiang Guo","Tianya Liang","Ehsan Shareghi","Ivan Vulic","Nigel Collier"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f8","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.02205","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LiuGLSVC25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LiuGLSVC25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/liu25u.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：LLM 在“偏好/判断”类问题上经常自相矛盾，导致同一模型在等价改写、否定或交换顺序后给出不一致结论，而现有评测往往只看准确率、很少系统量化这种逻辑一致性。","importance":"贡献是“对齐与评测接口”的方法级补齐：把逻辑一致性拆成可操作的三条公理并做成通用评测，再给出无需人工标注的训练数据精炼/增强思路，直接指向 reward/偏好学习里最常见的稳定性痛点（同分布看起来对，但一改写就崩）。","technical_approach":"方法核心是一个通用一致性评测框架：用传递性（A>B 且 B>C 推出 A>C）、交换性（比较对的顺序不应改变偏好）、否定不变性（对命题取反后偏好关系应按逻辑对应变化）来构造测试对/三元组，并把违背比例当作“偏好鲁棒性”的指标；在改进侧，作者提出数据精炼与增强流程，把容易诱发矛盾的样本结构化出来并扩增等价变换样本，用训练信号显式惩罚这些逻辑违背，从而让模型在改写/否定/交换下更稳定。边界是：这些公理覆盖的是偏好关系的形式一致性，不保证偏好本身“正确”或符合人类价值。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体模型规模、数据规模、指标数值与提升幅度；已知的是作者在“多种 LLM、多个设置”上做了系统实验，并声称三条性质能强指示 judgment robustness，同时数据精炼/增强能带来一致性提升。缺少关键数字使得目前只能把它视为评测与训练配方的候选，而非已被大规模验证的稳定增益结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical failure mode: LLM preference/judgment outputs are often logically inconsistent, so equivalent rewrites, negations, or swapped comparison order can flip the model’s decision, while standard evaluations mostly ignore this stability dimension.","importance":"The contribution is a method-level bridge between alignment and evaluation: it operationalizes “logical preference consistency” into three testable axioms and proposes a data refinement/augmentation recipe to train against these violations, directly addressing a common weakness of preference/reward modeling where models look fine in-distribution but break under simple logical transformations.","technical_approach":"The core is a universal consistency evaluation built on transitivity, commutativity, and negation invariance, implemented by generating paired/triadic queries whose preference relations should be logically constrained, and scoring models by violation rates; for improvement, it refines and augments training data with structure-preserving transformations that expose inconsistency cases and adds training pressure to reduce such violations. The key trade-off is scope: these axioms enforce formal coherence of preferences, not the correctness or desirability of the underlying preferences.","experiments":"The abstract does not report model sizes, data scale, baselines, or numeric gains; it only claims extensive experiments across diverse LLMs showing the three properties correlate with robustness, and that the proposed refinement/augmentation improves consistency. Without numbers, the evidence should be treated as suggestive rather than fully quantified.","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","preference-consistency","logical-reasoning"]},{"id":"LuoZZG25","title":"David and Goliath: Small One-step Model Beats Large Diffusion with Score Post-training","authors":["Weijian Luo","Colin Zhang","Debing Zhang","Zhengyang Geng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/LuoZZG25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/LuoZZG25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/luo25s.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：扩散生成里是否真的需要大模型和多步采样，还是可以把能力更多地放到后训练的打分器上。过去很多工作默认生成器越大、采样步数越多越强，但这条路线推理成本高，而且常把“生成能力”和“选择能力”混在一起评估；作者试图把两者拆开，检验小型一步模型配合 score post-training 是否能更高效地取代大型 diffusion。","importance":"它的价值主要是方法定位层面的纠偏，而不是提出一个全新的预训练范式。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：在非 AR 生成里，基础模型容量未必是唯一主轴，后验打分、重排和目标错配修正可能决定了最终性能；如果这个结论成立，训练预算和推理预算的最优分配会改变，尤其会影响 diffusion LM / one-step generator 的设计。","technical_approach":"核心方法看起来是一个“小生成器 + 分数后训练”的两阶段方案，重点不在把生成器继续做大，而在让后验评分函数学会区分好坏样本。它大概率沿用了 diffusion / score-based 生成框架中的一步或少步生成器，再通过额外的 score post-training 目标去校正采样质量；与常见直接扩大 denoiser、增加采样步数的路线相比，这种设计牺牲了一部分原始生成分布拟合能力，换来更低延迟和更强的候选筛选能力。为什么可能有效：一步模型负责覆盖候选空间，post-trained scorer 负责把模糊分布压成任务所需的高质量模式，这比让单个大 diffusion 同时做两件事更省参数，也更容易针对下游偏好做修正。","experiments":"从标题只能确认结论性实验设定：作者比较了小型 one-step 模型和大型 diffusion 模型，并报告前者在 score post-training 后胜出。可以合理预期实验会包含同等推理预算或同等训练预算下的对比，以及是否使用 reranking / scoring 的消融；真正关键的观察应当是，小模型单独生成未必赢，但加入打分后超过大模型，说明收益来自训练后评分而非基础容量本身。摘要缺失，无法可靠给出参数量、数据规模、具体基线和提升数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a pointed question: do diffusion generators really need to be large and multi-step, or can a small one-step model win once quality is pushed into score post-training. Prior work usually scales the generator itself, which is expensive and conflates sample generation with sample selection; this paper appears to separate the two.","importance":"The contribution is mainly a methodological reframing rather than a new pretraining paradigm. The pretraining takeaway is that, for non-AR generation, model capacity may not be the dominant lever once post-hoc scoring and objective mismatch correction are strong enough; that would change how we allocate training and inference budget in diffusion LM style systems.","technical_approach":"The method is best understood as a two-stage recipe: a small one-step generator proposes candidates, and score post-training learns to identify the good ones. Instead of scaling the denoiser or increasing sampling steps, the design shifts complexity into a learned scoring function; the trade-off is less raw distribution modeling in the generator, but better latency and stronger task-aligned selection. This can work when coverage and ranking are easier to optimize separately than in a single large diffusion model.","experiments":"From the title alone, the key empirical claim is that a small one-step model outperforms a larger diffusion model after score post-training. The most informative comparisons are likely equal-budget evaluations and ablations removing the scorer, which would show whether the gain comes from post-training rather than the base generator. The abstract is missing, so model sizes, datasets, baselines, and exact margins cannot be stated reliably.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","post-training","one-step","distillation"]},{"id":"Ma0ZJ25","title":"Benchmarking Abstract and Reasoning Abilities Through A Theoretical Perspective","authors":["Qingchuan Ma","Yuhang Wu","Xiawu Zheng","Rongrong Ji"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Ma0ZJ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Ma0ZJ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/ma25u.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：当前对“抽象能力”和“推理能力”的评测定义含混，容易把表面模式匹配误判为真正推理。现有 benchmark 往往靠题目集合来代表能力，但缺少理论视角去拆分任务结构、控制捷径线索和定义泛化边界，所以作者试图从更形式化的角度重做评测。","importance":"它更像评测与概念澄清工作，而不是直接改进预训练方法，但对机制分析和 posttrain 评价都很相关。它重要之处在于：如果 benchmark 没有把抽象与记忆、组合与模板、推理与启发式区分开，模型改进信号就会被污染，最终反过来误导预训练目标和数据构造。","technical_approach":"从标题判断，作者应当提出了一个带理论刻画的评测框架，用显式任务生成规则或形式化维度来刻画抽象/推理难度。与传统“收集一堆题”不同，这类方法通常会控制输入分布、规则复杂度、组合深度和可利用捷径，从而能回答模型究竟学到了什么而不是只看正确率。设计有效的关键在于把能力拆成可分析维度，否则 benchmark 只能给总分，不能解释失败模式。代价是，这类理论化 benchmark 往往更干净但也更远离真实应用，需要平衡可诊断性和生态有效性。","experiments":"实验上最值得关注的应是：不同模型或 prompting 策略在表面相似但结构不同的任务上表现显著分化，说明 benchmark 确实能区分记忆型成功和抽象型成功。可能还会包含对任务复杂度、样本外泛化、训练分布偏移的系统扫描。摘要缺失，因此无法给出具体 benchmark 规模、模型名单和数值结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a basic evaluation problem: current benchmarks often blur abstract reasoning with pattern matching and memorized heuristics. Many datasets treat a collection of tasks as a proxy for reasoning, but without a theoretical decomposition of structure, shortcuts, and generalization regimes.","importance":"This is primarily an evaluation and conceptual clarification paper, not a direct pretraining method. It still matters for pretraining research because noisy benchmarks feed back into the wrong optimization targets, data construction choices, and post-training claims.","technical_approach":"The title suggests a theoretically grounded benchmarking framework that explicitly characterizes abstraction and reasoning difficulty. Unlike ad hoc task collections, such a framework usually controls rule complexity, compositional depth, input distribution, and shortcut availability, which makes failures interpretable rather than merely measurable. The benefit is diagnostic precision; the trade-off is that cleaner benchmarks may be less naturalistic.","experiments":"The most informative results would show strong separation between models or prompting methods on tasks that look similar on the surface but differ structurally, revealing whether success is due to abstraction or shortcuts. Systematic sweeps over complexity and out-of-distribution generalization would be especially valuable. With no abstract provided, benchmark size, tested models, and exact numbers cannot be confirmed.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reasoning","evaluation","benchmark","theory"]},{"id":"MalkinskiPM25","title":"Reasoning Limitations of Multimodal Large Language Models. A case study of Bongard Problems","authors":["Mikolaj Malkinski","Szymon Pawlonka","Jacek Mandziuk"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MalkinskiPM25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MalkinskiPM25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/malkinski25a.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的是：多模态大模型在真正需要视觉抽象与规则归纳的任务上，推理到底有多强。作者选 Bongard Problems 作为案例，是因为这类任务很难靠表面统计或语言先验蒙对，能比较干净地测模型是否学到“哪种视觉关系构成同一概念”。","importance":"这是一个评测导向工作，但对原生多模态预训练很有价值。它的重要性在于，当前很多 MLLM 在通用 benchmark 上看起来很强，但 Bongard 这类任务更接近抽象视觉概念形成；如果模型在这里明显失败，说明现有视觉 tokenizer、图文对齐方式和语言主导训练范式可能仍不足以支持稳健的视觉推理。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是系统评估一批 MLLM 在 Bongard Problems 上的表现，并分析其失败类型。与普通 VQA 不同，Bongard 题要求模型从一组正例和反例中归纳隐含规则，再判断新样本，这天然测试组合泛化和抽象归纳，而不是单图识别或文本知识调用。这样选题的好处是诊断性强；边界是任务分布较人工，不能完全代表真实世界多模态推理。","experiments":"实验中最有信息量的结果通常包括：闭源/开源 MLLM 在标准 Bongard 及其变体上的准确率，prompt 变化或 CoT 是否真正有帮助，以及错误是否集中在关系型、计数型或高组合深度的实例。若作者做得充分，还应比较纯视觉模型、文本辅助设定和人类表现，帮助定位瓶颈是在视觉表征还是跨模态推理。摘要缺失，无法提供具体模型和分数。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks how strong multimodal LLMs really are on tasks that require visual abstraction and rule induction rather than surface correlation. Bongard Problems are a good stress test because they force the model to infer a latent concept from positive and negative examples, which is much harder to fake with language priors alone.","importance":"This is an evaluation paper, but it is highly relevant to native multimodal pretraining. If current MLLMs fail badly on Bongard-style tasks, that points to weaknesses in visual tokenization, image-language alignment, and the language-dominant training recipe that many systems still use.","technical_approach":"The likely contribution is a systematic evaluation of MLLMs on Bongard Problems, plus an analysis of failure modes. Unlike standard VQA, Bongard reasoning tests concept induction from sets of examples, so it probes compositional generalization and abstraction rather than single-image recognition or factual recall. The benchmark is diagnostic, though less naturalistic than real-world multimodal tasks.","experiments":"The most informative results would include accuracy across open and closed MLLMs, the effect of prompting or CoT, and error breakdowns by relation type, counting, or compositional depth. It would also be useful to compare against pure vision systems, text-assisted settings, or human performance to localize the bottleneck. The abstract is not provided, so exact models and numbers cannot be confirmed.","authors_note":""},"tags":["mllm","reasoning","benchmark","bongard-problems"]},{"id":"MallinarBZRPB25","title":"Emergence in non-neural models: grokking modular arithmetic via average gradient outer product","authors":["Neil Mallinar","Daniel Beaglehole","Libin Zhu","Adityanarayanan Radhakrishnan","Parthe Pandit","Mikhail Belkin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MallinarBZRPB25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MallinarBZRPB25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/mallinar25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是一个更基础的问题：grokking 和 emergent behavior 是否真是神经网络特有现象。过去关于 modular arithmetic 上的 grokking 大多在神经模型里讨论，作者现在把问题放到 non-neural models，并用 average gradient outer product 这类分析量来解释涌现行为的形成。","importance":"这项工作更偏机制分析，但对理解预训练中的涌现、阶段转变和表示学习很有启发。它的重要性在于，如果某些“涌现”并不依赖神经架构细节，而更一般地来自优化动力学和数据结构，那么我们对大模型 scaling 中突然跃迁的解释就需要更谨慎，不能简单归因于深网特殊性。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者研究的是非神经模型在 modular arithmetic 上如何出现类似 grokking 的行为，并用 average gradient outer product 作为分析工具。这个量通常用于刻画梯度方向间的结构和学习动力学中的有效子空间；如果它能预测或解释何时从记忆跃迁到泛化，那就提供了一种比只看 train/test loss 更机制化的视角。与以往神经 grokking 研究相比，这项工作重点不在提出新模型，而在证明现象跨模型类存在，并给出统一的动力学解释。","experiments":"实验最关键的是展示：非神经模型也会出现延迟泛化或突变式性能提升，并且 average gradient outer product 的统计量在跃迁前后呈现可解释变化。理想情况下，作者还会对不同数据规模、正则化强度或模型家族做对比，证明这不是某个设置的偶然现象。摘要缺失，因此无法给出模型类型、任务规模和具体指标。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a fundamental question: is grokking an intrinsically neural phenomenon, or a broader property of learning dynamics. Prior discussions of grokking in modular arithmetic mostly center on neural networks; this work moves the question to non-neural models and studies it through the average gradient outer product.","importance":"This is a mechanistic analysis paper, but it matters for how we interpret emergence in pretraining and scaling. If grokking-like phase transitions also arise in non-neural settings, then some emergent behaviors may reflect optimization geometry and data structure more than architecture-specific neural effects.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is to demonstrate grokking-style behavior in non-neural models on modular arithmetic, and then analyze the transition using the average gradient outer product. That statistic can reveal structure in gradient directions and effective learning subspaces; if it changes predictably around the memorization-to-generalization transition, it offers a more mechanistic lens than train/test loss curves alone. The point is not a new model, but a broader explanatory framework.","experiments":"The key evidence should show delayed generalization or abrupt performance jumps in non-neural models, together with interpretable changes in the average gradient outer product around the transition. Stronger support would come from sweeps over data size, regularization, or model family to show the effect is robust rather than incidental. The abstract is missing, so exact model classes, task sizes, and metrics cannot be stated reliably.","authors_note":""},"tags":["grokking","emergence","modular-arithmetic","non-neural"]},{"id":"MarczakMCTB025","title":"No Task Left Behind: Isotropic Model Merging with Common and Task-Specific Subspaces","authors":["Daniel Marczak","Simone Magistri","Sebastian Cygert","Bartlomiej Twardowski","Andrew D. Bagdanov","Joost van de Weijer"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MarczakMCTB025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MarczakMCTB025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/marczak25a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["model-merging","multitask","subspace"]},{"id":"MencattiniMCSR25","title":"MERGE3: Efficient Evolutionary Merging on Consumer-grade GPUs","authors":["Tommaso Mencattini","Adrian Robert Minut","Donato Crisostomi","Andrea Santilli","Emanuele Rodolà"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MencattiniMCSR25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MencattiniMCSR25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/mencattini25a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["model-merging","evolutionary","efficient-training"]},{"id":"MengTJZ25","title":"CLOVER: Cross-Layer Orthogonal Vectors Pruning","authors":["Fanxu Meng","Pingzhi Tang","Fan Jiang","Muhan Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/MengTJZ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/MengTJZ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/meng25d.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["pruning","cross-layer","model-compression"]},{"id":"Meyerson025","title":"Position: Scaling LLM Agents Requires Asymptotic Analysis with LLM Primitives","authors":["Elliot Meyerson","Xin Qiu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"position","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Meyerson025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Meyerson025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/meyerson25a.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["llm-agent","scaling","asymptotic-analysis","position-paper"]},{"id":"2506.11465","title":"RollingQ: Reviving the Cooperation Dynamics in Multimodal Transformer","authors":["Haotian Ni","Yake Wei","Hang Liu","Gong Chen","Chong Peng","Hao Lin","Di Hu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f9","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.11465","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/NiWLCPL025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/NiWLCPL025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/ni25a.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["multimodal","transformer","fusion","robustness"]},{"id":"2411.19339","title":"Towards a Mechanistic Explanation of Diffusion Model Generalization","authors":["Matthew Niedoba","Berend Zwartsenberg","Kevin Patrick Murphy","Frank Wood"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We propose a simple, training-free mechanism which explains the generalization behaviour of diffusion models. By comparing pre-trained diffusion models to their theoretically optimal empirical counterparts, we identify a shared local inductive bias across a variety of network architectures. From this observation, we hypothesize that network denoisers generalize through localized denoising operations, as these operations approximate the training objective well over much of the training distribution. To validate our hypothesis, we introduce novel denoising algorithms which aggregate local empirical denoisers to replicate network behaviour. Comparing these algorithms to network denoisers across forward and reverse diffusion processes, our approach exhibits consistent visual similarity to neural network outputs, with lower mean squared error than previously proposed methods.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.19339","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/NiedobaZMW25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/NiedobaZMW25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/niedoba25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion","generalization","mechanistic-interpretability"]},{"id":"2504.10694","title":"The Jailbreak Tax: How Useful are Your Jailbreak Outputs?","authors":["Kristina Nikolic","Luze Sun","Jie Zhang","Florian Tramèr"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$fa","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.10694","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/NikolicS0T25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/NikolicS0T25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/nikolic25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["alignment","jailbreak","safety","evaluation"]},{"id":"2410.17194","title":"Representation Shattering in Transformers: A Synthetic Study with Knowledge Editing","authors":["Kento Nishi","Rahul Ramesh","Maya Okawa","Mikail Khona","Hidenori Tanaka","Ekdeep Singh Lubana"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$fb","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.17194","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/NishiROKTL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/NishiROKTL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/nishi25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["knowledge-editing","transformer","representation","generalization"]},{"id":"2502.13142","title":"Pre-training Auto-regressive Robotic Models with 4D Representations","authors":["Dantong Niu","Yuvan Sharma","Haoru Xue","Giscard Biamby","Junyi Zhang","Ziteng Ji","Trevor Darrell","Roei Herzig"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$fc","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.13142","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/NiuSXB0JDH25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/NiuSXB0JDH25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/niu25d.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["autoregressive","robotics","4d-representation","pretraining"]},{"id":"2411.13117","title":"Compute Optimal Inference and Provable Amortisation Gap in Sparse Autoencoders","authors":["Charles O&apos;Neill","Alim Gumran","David A. Klindt"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"A recent line of work has shown promise in using sparse autoencoders (SAEs) to uncover interpretable features in neural network representations. However, the simple linear-nonlinear encoding mechanism in SAEs limits their ability to perform accurate sparse inference. Using compressed sensing theory, we prove that an SAE encoder is inherently insufficient for accurate sparse inference, even in solvable cases. We then decouple encoding and decoding processes to empirically explore conditions where more sophisticated sparse inference methods outperform traditional SAE encoders. Our results reveal substantial performance gains with minimal compute increases in correct inference of sparse codes. We demonstrate this generalises to SAEs applied to large language models, where more expressive encoders achieve greater interpretability. This work opens new avenues for understanding neural network representations and analysing large language model activations.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.13117","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ONeillGK25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ONeillGK25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/o-neill25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["sparse-autoencoder","interpretability","representation-learning","inference"]},{"id":"2502.00577","title":"Understanding Multimodal LLMs Under Distribution Shifts: An Information-Theoretic Approach","authors":["Changdae Oh","Zhen Fang","Shawn Im","Xuefeng Du","Yixuan Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$fd","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.00577","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Oh0ID025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Oh0ID025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/oh25a.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["multimodal-llm","distribution-shift","theory","robustness"]},{"id":"2407.17771","title":"Banyan: Improved Representation Learning with Explicit Structure","authors":["Mattia Opper","N. Siddharth"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We present Banyan, a model that efficiently learns semantic representations by leveraging explicit hierarchical structure. While transformers excel at scale, they struggle in low-resource settings. Conversely recent structured models have shown promise as efficient learners, but lack performance. Banyan bridges this gap with two key innovations: an entangled hierarchical tree structure and diagonalized message passing, enabling it to outperform larger transformer models with just 14 non-embedding parameters. It excels in low-resource settings, offering a viable alternative for under-represented languages and highlighting its potential for efficient, interpretable NLP in resource-constrained environments.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.17771","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Opper025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Opper025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/opper25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：在低资源条件下，能否不用大规模 Transformer 也学到有语义性的语言表示。现有做法基本靠规模和数据量兜底，结构化模型虽然样本效率更高、也更可解释，但通常性能不够强，所以一直没有成为主流替代方案。","importance":"它的价值主要是方法级和范式提醒，而不是立即改写主流 LLM 路线。对 pretrain 的启示是，显式结构偏置在小数据、弱资源语言、以及强调可解释性的场景里可能仍有明显优势，说明“更大模型+更多数据”不是唯一有效路径；但从摘要看，它更像低资源表示学习的强基线，而不是可直接扩展到大规模基座训练的新标准架构。","technical_approach":"作者提出 Banyan，一个带显式层级树结构的表示学习模型，核心创新是“纠缠式层级树”加“对角化消息传递”。前者不是把树结构当成独立先验硬塞进去，而是让层级结构与表征共同建模，以避免传统结构模型表达力太受限；后者把树上的信息传播做成更便宜的近似计算，目标是保留结构归纳偏置的同时把训练和推理成本压下来。和 Transformer 相比，它牺牲了通用的全连接注意力，换取更强的结构约束与参数效率；和以往结构化模型相比，它强调既要效率，也要最终任务表现。","experiments":"摘要里最强的实验结论是：Banyan 在只有 14M 非 embedding 参数时，能超过更大的 Transformer 基线，并且在低资源设置下优势更明显。作者把重点放在参数效率和弱资源语言场景，而不是追求通用大规模 SOTA。可惜摘要没有给出具体数据集、baseline 名称、指标和提升幅度，因此目前只能确认它展示了“小模型借助结构偏置赢过更大 Transformer”的趋势，无法判断这种优势对数据规模、语言类型或任务类型的稳健性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a clear question: can we recover strong semantic representation learning in low-resource settings without relying on large Transformers? Current practice mostly buys performance with scale, while structured models are often more sample-efficient and interpretable but usually underperform, so they have remained niche.","importance":"This is mainly a method-level contribution with a useful paradigm reminder rather than a direct replacement for mainstream LLM pretraining. For pretrain research, the signal is that explicit structural bias may still matter in small-data regimes, under-represented languages, and settings where interpretability is part of the objective; however, from the abstract alone, this looks more like a strong low-resource alternative than a scalable foundation-model recipe.","technical_approach":"The authors propose Banyan, a representation learner built around an explicit hierarchical tree structure. Its two key ingredients are an entangled hierarchical tree and diagonalized message passing: the first couples hierarchy with the learned representation instead of imposing a rigid external structure, and the second makes information propagation over the hierarchy cheaper while preserving the intended inductive bias. Relative to Transformers, Banyan gives up unrestricted attention in exchange for stronger structure and much better parameter efficiency. Relative to prior structured models, it is designed to avoid the usual trade-off where efficiency comes at too large a performance cost.","experiments":"The main experimental claim is that Banyan outperforms larger Transformer baselines with only 14M non-embedding parameters, with especially strong behavior in low-resource settings. The emphasis is on parameter efficiency and weak-resource language scenarios, not on broad benchmark dominance. The abstract does not provide datasets, metrics, baselines, or deltas, so the safe takeaway is limited: explicit structure appears to let a much smaller model beat larger Transformers in the intended regime, but the robustness across tasks and scales cannot be assessed from the provided information.","authors_note":""},"tags":["representation-learning","structure","sample-efficiency","architecture"]},{"id":"2502.03686","title":"Variational Control for Guidance in Diffusion Models","authors":["Kushagra Pandey","Farrin Marouf Sofian","Felix Draxler","Theofanis Karaletsos","Stephan Mandt"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Diffusion models exhibit excellent sample quality, but existing guidance methods often require additional model training or are limited to specific tasks. We revisit guidance in diffusion models from the perspective of variational inference and control, introducing Diffusion Trajectory Matching (DTM) that enables guiding pretrained diffusion trajectories to satisfy a terminal cost. DTM unifies a broad class of guidance methods and enables novel instantiations. We introduce a new method within this framework that achieves state-of-the-art results on several linear, non-linear, and blind inverse problems without requiring additional model training or specificity to pixel or latent space diffusion models. Our code will be available at https://github.com/czi-ai/oc-guidance","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.03686","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/PandeySDKM25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/PandeySDKM25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/pandey25a.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 diffusion guidance 太碎片化的问题：现有引导方法往往为特定任务手工设计，或者需要额外训练模型，缺少一个能统一解释并直接作用于预训练 diffusion 轨迹的框架。这个问题重要，因为在生成模型越来越通用后，真正稀缺的不是先验模型本身，而是如何低成本地把它拉向新约束和新目标。","importance":"它属于方法级且带一定框架统一意义。对 generative pretrain 的启示是：很多 guidance 技术可以被重新理解成同一个控制/变分推断问题，这有助于我们系统比较 classifier guidance、inverse problem guidance 等方法，而不是各做各的启发式。更实际地说，它强调在不额外训练的前提下复用预训练 diffusion 模型，这对多任务适配和后期控制很有价值。","technical_approach":"作者从变分推断和最优控制视角重写 diffusion guidance，提出 Diffusion Trajectory Matching（DTM）这一统一框架。核心思想是：不是局部修改每一步采样规则，而是把整条 diffusion 轨迹看成受终端代价约束的控制对象，并优化引导后的轨迹去满足这个 terminal cost。这样一来，很多已有 guidance 方法都能作为该框架的特例被解释出来。论文进一步在这个框架里提出一种新方法，特点是无需额外训练，也不依赖模型是在 pixel space 还是 latent space 上工作。相比传统 task-specific guidance，它更通用；相比再训练 adapter 或 reward model，它成本更低。","experiments":"摘要给出的关键结论是：新方法在多个线性、非线性和 blind inverse problems 上达到 SOTA，而且不需要额外训练。这个结果很重要，因为 inverse problem 是 guidance 方法最能拉开差距的场景。摘要没有提供数据集、扩散模型规模、具体 baselines 或数值提升，因此无法判断领先幅度和稳定性；但至少可以确认，这篇论文不仅做了理论统一，还给出了一个在实际逆问题上能打的 instantiation。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a recurring weakness in diffusion guidance: existing methods are fragmented, often task-specific, and frequently require extra training. As pretrained diffusion models become stronger, the bottleneck shifts from learning the prior to controlling it cheaply under new constraints.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution with real unifying value. For generative pretraining, the key takeaway is that many guidance procedures can be recast within a single variational-control view, which makes the design space more systematic and supports post-pretraining adaptation without retraining the base model.","technical_approach":"The authors reinterpret diffusion guidance through variational inference and control, and propose Diffusion Trajectory Matching (DTM). The core idea is to guide an entire pretrained diffusion trajectory so as to satisfy a terminal cost, instead of introducing ad hoc local modifications to the sampler. This perspective subsumes a broad class of existing guidance methods and also enables new instantiations. The paper then presents one such new method that requires no additional model training and is not tied to either pixel-space or latent-space diffusion models. The design is attractive because it trades task-specific engineering for a more general control objective over trajectories.","experiments":"The main empirical claim is that the proposed instantiation achieves state-of-the-art results on several linear, non-linear, and blind inverse problems, without any extra training. That is a meaningful result because inverse problems are a strong test of whether guidance is genuinely useful rather than cosmetically changing samples. The abstract does not provide model sizes, datasets, baselines, or numerical margins, so the exact strength and breadth of the gains cannot be assessed from the provided information.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","guidance","variational-inference","sampling"]},{"id":"2503.01917","title":"Steer LLM Latents for Hallucination Detection","authors":["Seongheon Park","Xuefeng Du","Min-Hsuan Yeh","Haobo Wang","Yixuan Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$fe","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.01917","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ParkDY0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ParkDY0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/park25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：现有基于隐藏状态的幻觉检测，受限于原始表示空间并不是为“真实性分离”而训练的，所以 truthful 和 hallucinated 输出常常混在一起，导致检测边界不清。也就是说，问题不只是分类器不够强，而是输入表征本身不好分。","importance":"它属于轻量方法级工作，意义在于把 hallucination detection 从“读 latent 做判别”推进到“先主动整形 latent 再判别”。对 LLM 研究的启示是，很多安全/事实性检测问题不一定要改模型参数，也可以通过推理时表示操控获得更好的可分性；这种思路和 activation steering、representation editing 是同一条线。","technical_approach":"作者提出 Truthfulness Separator Vector（TSV），这是一个推理时使用的 steering vector，用来重塑表示空间，让真实与幻觉输出形成更紧凑且分离更清晰的簇。方法分两阶段：先用少量标注样本学习 TSV，建立初始分离边界；再利用未标注的模型生成做增广，进一步提升分离效果。这个设计的好处是成本低，不改模型参数，且对底座模型侵入性小。与传统 latent-based detector 相比，它不是被动读取 embedding，而是先做定向表示变换再检测，因此更像“判别前校正”。","experiments":"摘要确认了几个关键实验事实：TSV 是 lightweight、无需改动模型参数，只需少量标注 exemplars；并且通过加入未标注生成样本做第二阶段增强。摘要没有给出具体使用哪些 LLM、哪些 hallucination benchmark、AUC/accuracy 提升多少，因此无法判断它相对现有 detector 的实际幅度。现阶段最可靠的结论是：作者展示了推理时 latent steering 对 hallucination detection 有帮助，而不是提出一个新的重训练框架。","authors_note":"作者列表中可确认 Yixuan Li。她在 OOD detection、可靠性与模型行为分析方面有代表性工作。机构信息无法从给定内容确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a weakness in latent-space hallucination detection: hidden representations are optimized for fluent generation, not for separating truthful from hallucinated content. As a result, downstream detectors often start from a poorly separated feature space.","importance":"This is a lightweight method contribution, but the idea is useful: instead of only reading latent states for detection, the model first reshapes them at inference time to make truthfulness more linearly separable. The broader relevance is that some reliability problems may benefit from activation-space intervention without changing model parameters.","technical_approach":"The authors propose a Truthfulness Separator Vector (TSV), an inference-time steering vector that reshapes the representation space so truthful and hallucinated outputs form tighter and more separable clusters. The method has two stages: it first learns TSV from a small labeled exemplar set, then expands the exemplar pool using unlabeled LLM generations. This is a sensible design because it keeps supervision lightweight, avoids parameter updates, and uses steering as a representation preconditioner before detection. Relative to prior latent-based detectors, the novelty is not just classification in latent space but active geometric reshaping of that space.","experiments":"The abstract establishes several practical facts: TSV is lightweight, parameter-free at deployment, and trainable from a small labeled set with unlabeled self-augmentation. It does not provide the underlying LLMs, benchmark names, or quantitative gains, so the empirical strength versus existing hallucination detectors cannot be pinned down from the provided text. The safe takeaway is that inference-time latent steering helps hallucination detection without retraining the base model.","authors_note":"Yixuan Li is a notable author on the paper, known for work on OOD detection, reliability, and model behavior analysis. The institution cannot be confirmed from the provided information."},"tags":["hallucination","latent-space","detection","truthfulness"],"notable_authors":["Yixuan Li"]},{"id":"2502.05111","title":"Flexible and Efficient Grammar-Constrained Decoding","authors":["Kanghee Park","Timothy Zhou","Loris D&apos;Antoni"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Large Language Models (LLMs) are often asked to generate structured outputs that obey precise syntactic rules, such as code snippets or formatted data. Grammar-constrained decoding (GCD) can guarantee that LLM outputs matches such rules by masking out tokens that will provably lead to outputs that do not belong to a specified context-free grammar (CFG). To guarantee soundness, GCD algorithms have to compute how a given LLM subword tokenizer can align with the tokens used by a given context-free grammar and compute token masks based on this information. Doing so efficiently is challenging and existing GCD algorithms require tens of minutes to preprocess common grammars. We present a new GCD algorithm together with an implementation that offers 17.71x faster offline preprocessing than existing approaches while preserving state-of-the-art efficiency in online mask computation.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.05111","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ParkZD25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ParkZD25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/park25l.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：grammar-constrained decoding 在理论上能保证结构化输出合法，但实际部署时预处理太慢，尤其当 CFG 和子词 tokenizer 对齐复杂时，离线成本高到影响可用性。过去方法能保证 soundness，却常常要为常见语法花几十分钟做预处理，这使它很难进入高频生产场景。","importance":"这是系统级加算法级的实用改进。对 LLM 研究的意义不在预训练本身，而在推理约束接口：当结构化输出越来越常见，解码阶段的形式约束会成为模型能力的一部分。更快的 GCD 让我们更容易把 base model 接到代码生成、JSON/DSL 生成等场景，也让 tokenizer 与 formal grammar 的耦合问题从小众工程细节变成值得单独优化的方向。","technical_approach":"作者提出了一个新的 grammar-constrained decoding 算法及实现，目标是在保持 soundness 的前提下，大幅降低 CFG 与 subword tokenizer 对齐的预处理成本。核心难点在于，GCD 不是只看词法 token 是否允许，还要判断某个子词前缀未来是否可能拼成语法合法串，因此需要同时处理 grammar 状态与 tokenizer 分词路径。新算法的价值在于把这一步做得更高效，而不是放松约束换速度。相比已有方法，它看起来是在编译阶段和 mask 计算阶段都做了优化。","experiments":"摘要给出了一个非常明确的数字：离线预处理比现有方法快 17.71 倍。这是论文最硬的结果，因为预处理正是 GCD 最主要的落地瓶颈。摘要没有继续给在线解码延迟、内存占用、适用语法种类或不同 tokenizer 下的稳健性，因此暂时只能确认它显著改善了 preprocessing，而无法判断端到端收益有多大。","authors_note":"作者 Timothy Zhou、Loris D'Antoni 可确认。Loris D'Antoni 在程序语言、形式方法和程序分析方向较有代表性，这与 grammar-constrained decoding 的研究背景一致。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical bottleneck in grammar-constrained decoding: soundness is achievable, but preprocessing is often so slow that deployment becomes unattractive. The main difficulty is aligning a context-free grammar with a subword tokenizer efficiently enough for real use.","importance":"This is a systems-plus-algorithm contribution with direct relevance to structured generation. It does not change pretraining, but it improves an increasingly important inference interface: if models are expected to produce code, JSON, or other formal outputs reliably, grammar-aware decoding has to be fast enough to be operationally viable.","technical_approach":"The authors propose a new grammar-constrained decoding algorithm and implementation that preserve soundness while reducing the cost of CFG–tokenizer alignment and token-mask computation. The hard part in GCD is that masking cannot operate purely at the word or token level: it has to reason about whether subword continuations can still complete to a grammar-valid string. The contribution appears to be a more efficient way to compile or traverse this joint grammar-tokenizer state space, rather than relaxing guarantees for speed.","experiments":"The strongest concrete result in the abstract is a 17.71× speedup in offline preprocessing over prior work. That number matters because preprocessing is the main usability bottleneck for existing GCD systems. The abstract does not report online decoding latency, memory overhead, grammar coverage, or robustness across tokenizers, so the end-to-end practical gain remains only partially visible from the provided text.","authors_note":"Timothy Zhou and Loris D'Antoni are identifiable authors on the paper. Loris D'Antoni is well known for work in programming languages, formal methods, and program analysis, which fits the grammar-constrained decoding setting."},"tags":["grammar-constrained-decoding","structured-output","cfg","inference"],"notable_authors":["Timothy Zhou","Loris D'Antoni"]},{"id":"PhamSOCD25","title":"Discrete Markov Probabilistic Models: An Improved Discrete Score-Based Framework with sharp convergence bounds under minimal assumptions","authors":["Le-Tuyet-Nhi Pham","Dario Shariatian","Antonio Ocello","Giovanni Conforti","Alain Oliviero Durmus"],"institutions":["École Polytechnique"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/PhamSOCD25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/PhamSOCD25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/pham25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"离散扩散模型（如 D3PM、SEDD、MDLM 等）的理论收敛保证此前要么依赖较强假设，要么 bound 不够紧。这篇工作要在最小假设下给出离散马尔可夫概率模型的尖锐收敛界。","importance":"理论级贡献。离散扩散模型是挑战 AR 范式的重要方向（LLaDA、MDLM 等），其理论基础的完善直接影响我们对这类模型能力边界的理解。尖锐的收敛界有助于指导采样步数选择和模型设计。","technical_approach":"在离散状态空间上改进 score-based 扩散框架，给出在最小假设（minimal assumptions）下的收敛速率上界。具体技术细节未在摘要中给出，但核心贡献是理论分析而非实验。","experiments":"摘要未提供实验细节，推测以理论证明为主。","authors_note":"Alain Oliviero Durmus 是 École Polytechnique 的研究者，在扩散模型理论分析方向有多篇工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Prior convergence guarantees for discrete diffusion models (D3PM, SEDD, MDLM, etc.) either relied on strong assumptions or yielded loose bounds. This work aims to provide sharp convergence bounds for discrete Markov probabilistic models under minimal assumptions.","importance":"A theory-level contribution. Discrete diffusion models are a key alternative to AR language modeling (LLaDA, MDLM, etc.), and tighter theoretical understanding of their convergence directly informs sampling schedule design and model capacity requirements.","technical_approach":"Improves the discrete score-based diffusion framework to derive sharp convergence rate upper bounds under minimal assumptions on the discrete state space. Specific technical details not available from the abstract, but the contribution is primarily theoretical.","experiments":"No experimental details provided in the abstract; likely a theory-focused paper.","authors_note":"Alain Oliviero Durmus is a researcher at École Polytechnique with multiple works on diffusion model theory."},"tags":["discrete-diffusion","score-based","convergence","theory"],"notable_authors":["Alain Oliviero Durmus"]},{"id":"2501.19400","title":"Vintix: Action Model via In-Context Reinforcement Learning","authors":["Andrei Polubarov","Nikita Lyubaykin","Alexander Derevyagin","Ilya Zisman","Denis Tarasov","Alexander Nikulin","Vladislav Kurenkov"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"In-Context Reinforcement Learning (ICRL) represents a promising paradigm for developing generalist agents that learn at inference time through trial-and-error interactions, analogous to how large language models adapt contextually, but with a focus on reward maximization. However, the scalability of ICRL beyond toy tasks and single-domain settings remains an open challenge. In this work, we present the first steps toward scaling ICRL by introducing a fixed, cross-domain model capable of learning behaviors through in-context reinforcement learning. Our results demonstrate that Algorithm Distillation, a framework designed to facilitate ICRL, offers a compelling and competitive alternative to expert distillation to construct versatile action models. These findings highlight the potential of ICRL as a scalable approach for generalist decision-making systems. Code released at https://github.com/dunnolab/vintix","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.19400","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/PolubarovLDZTNK25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/PolubarovLDZTNK25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/polubarov25a.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"In-Context Reinforcement Learning（ICRL）让智能体在推理时通过试错学习，类似 LLM 的 in-context learning 但目标是最大化奖励。之前 ICRL 只在玩具任务和单一领域验证过，能否扩展到跨领域的通用动作模型是开放问题。","importance":"对 pretrain 研究的启示有限但有趣：Algorithm Distillation（将 RL 学习过程蒸馏进 Transformer 上下文）作为一种预训练范式，展示了 Transformer 能在上下文中学会 RL 算法本身。这与 ICL 的机制理解相关——模型不只是记忆，而是在上下文中实现了某种优化过程。","technical_approach":"提出 Vintix，一个固定的跨领域模型，通过 Algorithm Distillation 框架实现 in-context RL。核心思路是把多个 RL 训练轨迹（包含探索和改进过程）作为上下文输入，让模型学会在新任务上通过上下文中的试错来提升策略。与专家蒸馏（只学最终策略）相比，Algorithm Distillation 保留了学习过程本身。","experiments":"在跨领域设置下验证，证明 Algorithm Distillation 是专家蒸馏的有竞争力的替代方案。具体任务域和指标未在摘要中详述。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In-Context Reinforcement Learning (ICRL) enables agents to learn via trial-and-error at inference time, but scaling beyond toy tasks and single domains remained open. This work takes first steps toward a fixed, cross-domain model that learns behaviors through in-context RL.","importance":"Moderately relevant to pretrain research: Algorithm Distillation as a pretraining paradigm shows that transformers can learn RL algorithms themselves within context, connecting to our understanding of what ICL actually computes—not just pattern matching but an optimization process.","technical_approach":"Introduces Vintix, a fixed cross-domain model using Algorithm Distillation. Instead of distilling only expert policies, it feeds entire RL training trajectories (including exploration and improvement) as context, enabling the model to improve its policy through in-context trial-and-error on new tasks.","experiments":"Validated in cross-domain settings, showing Algorithm Distillation is a competitive alternative to expert distillation for building versatile action models. Specific domains and metrics not detailed in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-rl","generalist-agent","icl","decision-transformer"]},{"id":"2507.14172","title":"Self-Improving Language Models for Evolutionary Program Synthesis: A Case Study on ARC-AGI","authors":["Julien Pourcel","Cédric Colas","Pierre-Yves Oudeyer"],"institutions":["Inria"],"abstract":"$ff","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.14172","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/PourcelCO25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/PourcelCO25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/pourcel25a.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"很多程序合成任务对 SOTA LLM 来说一次生成就解决太难了，而基于搜索的进化方法受限于底层生成模型的固定能力。如何让 LLM 在进化搜索中自我改进，形成正反馈循环？","importance":"对 pretrain-posttrain 接口有启示：SOAR 展示了一种 self-play 式的自我改进范式——搜索产生训练数据，训练改进搜索能力，循环迭代。这与 R1-Zero 式的自我改进思路相通，但应用在程序合成而非推理任务上。方法级贡献。","technical_approach":"提出 SOAR，交替执行两个阶段：(1) 进化搜索阶段，用 LLM 采样和精炼候选解；(2) 事后学习（hindsight learning）阶段，把搜索过程中的尝试转化为有效的问题-解对，用来微调 LLM 的采样和精炼能力。这样每轮搜索都比上一轮更有效。关键设计是 hindsight learning——即使搜索失败的尝试也能提供有用的训练信号。","experiments":"在 ARC-AGI 基准上测试。具体提升数字未在摘要中给出，但强调了自我改进循环的有效性。","authors_note":"Pierre-Yves Oudeyer 是 Inria 的资深研究者，在好奇心驱动学习和开放式学习方向有长期影响力。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Many program synthesis tasks are too hard for LLMs to solve in a single attempt, and evolutionary search methods are limited by the fixed capabilities of the underlying generative model. The question is how to create a self-improving loop where search and model training reinforce each other.","importance":"Relevant to the pretrain-posttrain interface: SOAR demonstrates a self-play-style improvement loop—search generates training data, training improves search—echoing R1-Zero-style self-improvement but applied to program synthesis. A method-level contribution.","technical_approach":"SOAR alternates between (1) evolutionary search using an LLM to sample and refine candidates, and (2) hindsight learning that converts search attempts (including failures) into valid problem-solution pairs for fine-tuning. Each iteration produces a stronger LLM for the next round of search. The key insight is that hindsight learning extracts useful training signal even from failed attempts.","experiments":"Tested on ARC-AGI benchmark. Specific improvement numbers not provided in the abstract, but the self-improving loop is shown to be effective.","authors_note":"Pierre-Yves Oudeyer is a senior researcher at Inria with long-standing influence in curiosity-driven and open-ended learning."},"tags":["program-synthesis","self-improvement","evolutionary-search","arc-agi"],"notable_authors":["Pierre-Yves Oudeyer"]},{"id":"ProcaDSM25","title":"Learning dynamics in linear recurrent neural networks","authors":["Alexandra Maria Proca","Clémentine Carla Juliette Dominé","Murray Shanahan","Pedro A. M. Mediano"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ProcaDSM25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ProcaDSM25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/proca25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"线性循环神经网络（linear RNN）的训练动态尚未被充分理解。这篇工作分析 linear RNN 在训练过程中的学习动力学特性。","importance":"机制分析级贡献。Linear RNN（如 S4、Mamba 等）作为 Transformer 的替代架构正受到广泛关注，理解其训练动态有助于指导架构设计和超参选择。对 pretrain 研究者来说，这提供了关于 linear RNN 优化景观的理论洞察。","technical_approach":"摘要未提供具体技术细节。推测是对 linear RNN 的损失景观、梯度流、收敛行为等进行理论或实证分析。","experiments":"摘要未提供实验细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The learning dynamics of linear recurrent neural networks are not well understood. This work analyzes how linear RNNs learn during training.","importance":"A mechanism-analysis contribution. With linear RNNs (S4, Mamba, etc.) gaining traction as Transformer alternatives, understanding their training dynamics helps guide architecture design and hyperparameter choices for pretrain researchers.","technical_approach":"No specific technical details available from the abstract. Likely involves theoretical or empirical analysis of loss landscapes, gradient flow, and convergence behavior in linear RNNs.","experiments":"No experimental details available from the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["linear-rnn","training-dynamics","learning-theory"]},{"id":"2501.09254","title":"Clone-Robust AI Alignment","authors":["Ariel D. Procaccia","Benjamin Schiffer","Shirley Zhang"],"institutions":["Harvard University"],"abstract":"$100","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.09254","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ProcacciaS025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ProcacciaS025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/procaccia25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"RLHF 的输入数据集中，问题和答案的分布往往不均匀，添加近似重复的选项（approximate clones）可能会扭曲学到的奖励函数。之前的 RLHF 算法没有考虑这种鲁棒性问题。","importance":"对 pretrain↔posttrain 接口有一定启示：奖励函数的稳定性直接影响对齐质量，而数据分布的不均匀在实际场景中很常见。从社会选择理论引入 clone-robustness 概念，为 RLHF 算法设计提供了新的理论约束。方法级贡献，但偏理论。","technical_approach":"借鉴社会选择理论中的 clone independence 概念，定义了 RLHF 算法的 approximate clone robustness 性质：添加近似重复选项不应显著改变学到的奖励函数。证明标准 RLHF 方法（如 Bradley-Terry 模型）不满足这一性质，并提出改进方案。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体实验数字。主要贡献在理论分析和算法设计层面。","authors_note":"Ariel D. Procaccia 是哈佛大学计算机科学教授，社会选择理论和算法博弈论领域的知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"RLHF input datasets are often imbalanced, and adding near-duplicate alternatives (approximate clones) can distort the learned reward function. Standard RLHF algorithms lack robustness to this issue.","importance":"Relevant to the pretrain-posttrain interface: reward function stability directly affects alignment quality, and data distribution imbalance is common in practice. Importing clone-robustness from social choice theory provides a new theoretical constraint for RLHF algorithm design. A theory-oriented method-level contribution.","technical_approach":"Defines approximate clone robustness for RLHF algorithms, inspired by clone independence in social choice theory: adding near-duplicate alternatives should not significantly change the learned reward. Shows that standard RLHF (e.g., Bradley-Terry model) violates this property and proposes improvements.","experiments":"No specific experimental numbers in the abstract. The contribution is primarily theoretical analysis and algorithm design.","authors_note":"Ariel D. Procaccia is a professor at Harvard, well-known in social choice theory and algorithmic game theory."},"tags":["rlhf","alignment","robustness","reward-model"],"notable_authors":["Ariel D. Procaccia"]},{"id":"2506.08607","title":"Sample Efficient Demonstration Selection for In-Context Learning","authors":["Kiran Purohit","Venktesh V","Sourangshu Bhattacharya","Avishek Anand"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$101","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.08607","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/PurohitVBA25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/PurohitVBA25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/purohit25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"ICL（in-context learning）中 few-shot 示例的选择对性能影响很大，但候选组合数指数级增长，如何高效找到最优的 top-m 示例集合是一个开放问题。之前的方法要么穷举评估，要么启发式选择。","importance":"对 pretrain 研究的直接启示有限，但对理解 ICL 机制有间接价值：如果示例选择的影响如此大，说明 LLM 的 ICL 能力对上下文分布高度敏感。方法级贡献，偏应用。","technical_approach":"将示例选择建模为 top-m best arms identification 问题（多臂老虎机框架）。提出 CASE（Challenger Arm Sampling for Exemplar selection），维护一个候选短名单（challenger arms），每轮只评估短名单中的一个或从全集中探索一个，大幅减少评估次数。核心思路是选择性探索而非穷举。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体数字和基准。强调了样本效率的提升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Few-shot example selection for ICL significantly affects performance, but the combinatorial explosion of candidate sets makes exhaustive evaluation infeasible. Prior methods either enumerate or use heuristics.","importance":"Limited direct relevance to pretrain research, but indirectly informative about ICL mechanisms: the high sensitivity to demonstration selection suggests LLM ICL capability is strongly distribution-dependent. A method-level, application-oriented contribution.","technical_approach":"Formulates exemplar selection as a top-m best arms identification problem (multi-armed bandit framework). Proposes CASE, which maintains a shortlist of challenger arms and selectively explores one per iteration, drastically reducing the number of evaluations needed compared to exhaustive search.","experiments":"Specific numbers and benchmarks not provided in the abstract. Emphasizes sample efficiency gains.","authors_note":""},"tags":["icl","demonstration-selection","few-shot","bandit"]},{"id":"2410.10868","title":"Large Continual Instruction Assistant","authors":["Jingyang Qiao","Zhizhong Zhang","Xin Tan","Yanyun Qu","Shouhong Ding","Yuan Xie"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$102","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.10868","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Qiao00QD025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Qiao00QD025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/qiao25e.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"持续指令微调（Continual Instruction Tuning, CIT）中，标准梯度更新会严重破坏模型在之前数据集上的性能（灾难性遗忘）。EMA（指数移动平均）能缓解遗忘但其固定的平衡权重无法适应不断变化的数据分布，导致可塑性和稳定性失衡。","importance":"对 continual pretrain 和持续微调场景有直接参考价值。提出了一个通用框架来动态平衡可塑性和稳定性，这个问题在 continual pretrain（如领域适配、增量数据更新）中同样核心。方法级贡献。","technical_approach":"从可塑性-稳定性权衡的前提出发，结合 EMA 更新，推导出理想条件。通过对损失函数做 Taylor 展开，找到满足理想条件的最优 EMA 权重调度策略。核心创新是让 EMA 的平衡权重随数据集变化动态调整，而非固定值。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体数字和基准。强调了在 CIT 场景下相比固定 EMA 和标准梯度更新的改进。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In Continual Instruction Tuning (CIT), standard gradient updates cause catastrophic forgetting of previous datasets. EMA mitigates forgetting but its fixed balance weight cannot adapt to changing data distributions, leading to suboptimal plasticity-stability trade-offs.","importance":"Directly relevant to continual pretrain and continual fine-tuning scenarios. The dynamic plasticity-stability balancing framework addresses a core challenge in continual pretrain (domain adaptation, incremental data updates). A method-level contribution.","technical_approach":"Starting from plasticity-stability trade-off prerequisites and EMA update rules, derives ideal conditions via Taylor expansion of the loss function. The key innovation is dynamically adjusting EMA balance weights as datasets change, rather than using a fixed value.","experiments":"Specific numbers and benchmarks not provided in the abstract. Claims improvements over fixed EMA and standard gradient updates in CIT settings.","authors_note":""},"tags":["continual-learning","instruction-tuning","ema","forgetting"]},{"id":"2505.19313","title":"Concept Reachability in Diffusion Models: Beyond Dataset Constraints","authors":["Marta Aparicio Rodriguez","Xenia Miscouridou","Anastasia Borovykh"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$103","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.19313","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/RodriguezMB25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/RodriguezMB25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/rodriguez25a.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion","controllability","representation"]},{"id":"RybkinNFSALK25","title":"Value-Based Deep RL Scales Predictably","authors":["Oleh Rybkin","Michal Nauman","Preston Fu","Charlie Victor Snell","Pieter Abbeel","Sergey Levine","Aviral Kumar"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/RybkinNFSALK25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/RybkinNFSALK25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/rybkin25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["reinforcement-learning","scaling-law","predictability"]},{"id":"RyuSW25","title":"A Unified View on Learning Unnormalized Distributions via Noise-Contrastive Estimation","authors":["Jongha Jon Ryu","Abhin Shah","Gregory W. Wornell"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/RyuSW25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/RyuSW25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/ryu25a.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["energy-based","nce","unnormalized-models","objective"]},{"id":"SakamotoS25","title":"Benign Overfitting in Token Selection of Attention Mechanism","authors":["Keitaro Sakamoto","Issei Sato"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SakamotoS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SakamotoS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/sakamoto25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["attention","token-selection","generalization","theory"]},{"id":"2502.09720","title":"NestQuant: nested lattice quantization for matrix products and LLMs","authors":["Semyon Savkin","Eitan Porat","Or Ordentlich","Yury Polyanskiy"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$104","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.09720","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SavkinPOP25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SavkinPOP25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/savkin25a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：如何把 LLM 的权重、激活和 KV-cache 都压到 4 bit，同时尽量不把困惑度和下游质量打坏。过去很多 PTQ 方法在单一张量类型上能做得不错，但一旦对全链路统一低比特量化，误差会在矩阵乘里叠加，尤其激活和 KV-cache 往往成为真正的瓶颈。","importance":"这项工作的贡献是量化方法级的，而且对 serving 很实际。它把来自信息论上接近最优的嵌套格量化引入 LLM 矩阵乘，说明低比特 PTQ 不一定只能依赖启发式逐通道缩放或简单分组量化。对 pretrain 研究的间接启示是：如果推理端能更稳地支持统一 4-bit，训练端就更有动力考虑面向量化友好的激活分布、KV 表示和架构设计。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 NestQuant：基于 self-similar nested lattices 的后训练量化方案，并给出一个基于 Gosset lattice 的低复杂度实用实现。和常见标量量化不同，它把矩阵乘中的量化视为更结构化的几何逼近问题，目标是在极低精度下保留更多乘法相关信息。论文强调它是 drop-in quantizer，可用于 attention、MLP 等任意矩阵乘步骤；这一设计选择很重要，因为如果方法只适配某个模块，工程价值会大打折扣。","experiments":"摘要给了一个明确数字：Llama-3-8B 的权重、KV-cache 和激活都量化到 4 bit 后，在 WikiText-2 上 perplexity 为 6.6，并且相对未量化模型的 perplexity gap 缩小超过 55%。这说明它不是只在 weight-only 场景有效，而是在全量低比特 PTQ 下仍能显著减小退化。摘要没有给出与哪些具体 baseline 比较、原始 FP 模型 perplexity、吞吐/显存收益和更多下游 benchmark，因此目前只能把结论限定在语言建模困惑度上。","authors_note":"机构信息无法从给定内容确认。Yury Polyanskiy 是信息论方向知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a hard deployment target: quantizing weights, activations, and the KV cache all the way down to 4 bits without a large quality collapse. Many PTQ methods look good in weight-only settings, but end-to-end low-bit inference usually breaks on activation and cache errors that accumulate through matrix multiplications.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution for practical inference. Its broader value is that it imports a more principled quantization object—nested lattice quantizers—into LLM matrix multiplication, instead of relying purely on heuristic scalar quantization schemes. Indirectly, that matters for pretraining too: if inference can support stable uniform 4-bit pipelines, it becomes more worthwhile to design models and activations that are quantization-friendly from the start.","technical_approach":"NestQuant is a post-training quantization scheme based on self-similar nested lattices, with a practical low-complexity implementation built on the Gosset lattice. The key design choice is to treat low-precision matrix multiplication as a structured geometric quantization problem rather than a purely per-value one. The paper also stresses that the method is drop-in and applies to any matrix multiplication block, such as attention and MLP layers, which is important for deployment usefulness.","experiments":"The abstract provides one concrete result: on Llama-3-8B, quantizing weights, activations, and the KV cache to 4 bits yields a WikiText-2 perplexity of 6.6, reducing the perplexity gap to the full-precision model by more than 55%. That is a meaningful claim because it goes beyond weight-only PTQ. The abstract does not specify the exact baselines, the full-precision perplexity, or throughput and memory gains, so the conclusion should stay focused on language modeling quality.","authors_note":"Institutions cannot be confirmed from the provided text. Yury Polyanskiy is a well-known researcher in information theory."},"tags":["quantization","llm","matrix-multiplication","inference"],"notable_authors":["Semyon Savkin","Eitan Porat","Or Ordentlich","Yury Polyanskiy"]},{"id":"2412.14363","title":"ResQ: Mixed-Precision Quantization of Large Language Models with Low-Rank Residuals","authors":["Utkarsh Saxena","Sayeh Sharify","Kaushik Roy","Xin Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$105","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.14363","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SaxenaS0W25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SaxenaS0W25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/saxena25b.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：在 W/A/KV 全 4-bit PTQ 场景下，如何处理激活中的强异常值，否则泛化能力会明显掉。过去很多低比特方案的问题不在平均量化误差，而在少数高方差方向把误差放大，导致模型在长链矩阵乘和缓存复用中快速失真。","importance":"这项工作是一个很典型的工程上有价值的方法改进。它的意义不只是“再做一个混合精度”，而是说明激活量化的难点主要集中在低秩但高能量的子空间；抓住这一点后，可以用极小的高精度预算保住大部分质量。对预训练研究的启发是，激活分布的各向异性和 outlier 结构是影响部署友好度的核心因素，这值得在训练阶段就被关注。","technical_approach":"核心方法 ResQ 是混合精度量化加低秩残差保留。作者先用 PCA 找到激活方差最高的低秩子空间，实际保留维度约为 hidden dimension 的 1/8；这个子空间内的系数用 8-bit，高概率信息较少的其余部分压到 4-bit。再配合每个子空间内的 invariant random rotation，目的是把量化误差打散、减轻局部极端值影响。和统一 4-bit 相比，它承认“所有维度同等重要”这个假设不成立；和完全升到 8-bit 相比，它只在最值钱的方向上花预算。","experiments":"摘要给出的关键数字是：高精度子空间通常只占隐藏维度的 1/8，其他部分维持 4-bit。它要解决的对象包括权重、激活和 KV cache 的低比特 PTQ，但摘要在截断处没有给出具体模型名、benchmark、困惑度或下游提升幅度，因此不能进一步补充。可以预期有价值的 ablation 会包括：PCA 子空间维度的敏感性、随机旋转是否稳定收益、以及在长上下文 KV-cache 场景下的退化曲线。","authors_note":"机构信息无法从给定内容确认。Kaushik Roy 是硬件与高效深度学习方向知名研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a specific failure mode of 4-bit PTQ for weights, activations, and KV cache: extreme activation outliers. In many low-bit settings, the main issue is not average quantization noise but a small number of high-variance directions that dominate the error and damage generalization.","importance":"This is a practically meaningful method contribution. The useful insight is that activation quantization difficulty is concentrated in a low-rank, high-energy subspace. If that subspace is handled with slightly higher precision, much of the model quality can be preserved at small cost. For pretraining, the implication is that anisotropy and outlier structure in activations are deployment-relevant properties, not just analysis curiosities.","technical_approach":"ResQ combines mixed-precision quantization with low-rank residual preservation. It uses PCA to identify the low-rank subspace with the largest activation variance, keeps coefficients in that subspace at higher precision, such as 8-bit, and quantizes the remaining coefficients to 4-bit. In practice, the protected subspace is about one eighth of the hidden dimension. The method also applies invariant random rotation within each subspace to spread quantization error more evenly. The design explicitly rejects the idea that all activation dimensions deserve the same bit budget.","experiments":"The abstract provides one concrete detail: the high-precision subspace is about 1/8 of the hidden dimension in practice. It also states that the method targets low-bit PTQ of weights, activations, and KV cache, but the provided abstract is truncated before numerical benchmark results. So there is not enough information here to summarize model names, perplexities, or gains reliably. The most important ablations would likely be the protected rank size, the effect of random rotations, and robustness under long-context KV reuse.","authors_note":"Institutions cannot be confirmed from the provided text. Kaushik Roy is well known for work in hardware-efficient deep learning."},"tags":["quantization","kv-cache","low-rank","llm"],"notable_authors":["Utkarsh Saxena","Sayeh Sharify","Kaushik Roy","Xin Wang"]},{"id":"SelHR0025","title":"LLMs Can Reason Faster Only If We Let Them","authors":["Bilgehan Sel","Lifu Huang","Naren Ramakrishnan","Ruoxi Jia","Ming Jin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SelHR0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SelHR0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/sel25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"无法根据当前信息可靠总结。标题暗示论文讨论让 LLM 以更低 test-time compute 完成推理，可能涉及推理路径压缩、并行思维或解码控制，但没有摘要就无法判断它是在做训练方法、推理策略还是评测论证。","importance":"目前无法负责任地判断其贡献量级。它可能与 test-time scaling、推理效率或 latent reasoning 相关，但具体是方法级改进还是观点性文章无法确认。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失，无法确认技术路线。不能从标题推断是否用了蒸馏、草稿-验证、并行 CoT、动态预算或其他机制。","experiments":"无摘要，无法确认实验设置、模型规模、基准任务或速度/准确率指标。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"A reliable summary is not possible from the provided information. The title suggests faster reasoning at test time, perhaps through better inference control or more efficient reasoning paths, but the abstract is missing so the actual problem framing is unclear.","importance":"Its contribution level cannot be assessed responsibly. It may relate to test-time scaling, reasoning efficiency, or latent reasoning, but there is not enough information to say whether it is a method paper or a position-style argument.","technical_approach":"The technical approach cannot be determined because no abstract is provided. It would be speculative to infer distillation, draft-and-verify, parallel reasoning, or dynamic compute allocation from the title alone.","experiments":"No abstract is available, so there is no basis for summarizing models, benchmarks, or speed-quality trade-offs.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reasoning","test-time-compute","latency"],"notable_authors":["Bilgehan Sel","Lifu Huang","Naren Ramakrishnan","Ruoxi Jia","Ming Jin"]},{"id":"ShenX0W0ZLXVBL025","title":"LongVU: Spatiotemporal Adaptive Compression for Long Video-Language Understanding","authors":["Xiaoqian Shen","Yunyang Xiong","Changsheng Zhao","Lemeng Wu","Jun Chen","Chenchen Zhu","Zechun Liu","Fanyi Xiao","Balakrishnan Varadarajan","Florian Bordes","Zhuang Liu","Hu Xu","Hyunwoo J. Kim","Bilge Soran","Raghuraman Krishnamoorthi","Mohamed Elhoseiny","Vikas Chandra"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ShenX0W0ZLXVBL025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ShenX0W0ZLXVBL025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/shen25j.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["long-video","vlm","compression","video-understanding"]},{"id":"2409.06277","title":"Ferret: Federated Full-Parameter Tuning at Scale for Large Language Models","authors":["Yao Shu","Wenyang Hu","See-Kiong Ng","Bryan Kian Hsiang Low","Fei Richard Yu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$106","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.06277","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ShuHNLY25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ShuHNLY25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/shu25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["federated-learning","llm-finetuning","full-parameter-tuning"]},{"id":"2502.13129","title":"Is Noise Conditioning Necessary for Denoising Generative Models?","authors":["Qiao Sun","Zhicheng Jiang","Hanhong Zhao","Kaiming He"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"It is widely believed that noise conditioning is indispensable for denoising diffusion models to work successfully. This work challenges this belief. Motivated by research on blind image denoising, we investigate a variety of denoising-based generative models in the absence of noise conditioning. To our surprise, most models exhibit graceful degradation, and in some cases, they even perform better without noise conditioning. We provide a theoretical analysis of the error caused by removing noise conditioning and demonstrate that our analysis aligns with empirical observations. We further introduce a noise-unconditional model that achieves a competitive FID of 2.23 on CIFAR-10, significantly narrowing the gap to leading noise-conditional models. We hope our findings will inspire the community to revisit the foundations and formulations of denoising generative models.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.13129","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SunJZH25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SunJZH25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/sun25g.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion","denoising","noise-conditioning","objective"]},{"id":"2505.06977","title":"CAT Merging: A Training-Free Approach for Resolving Conflicts in Model Merging","authors":["Wenju Sun","Qingyong Li","Yangliao Geng","Boyang Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$107","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.06977","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SunLGL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SunLGL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/sun25i.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["model-merging","fine-tuning","task-vector","adapter"]},{"id":"2502.15828","title":"A Stronger Mixture of Low-Rank Experts for Fine-Tuning Foundation Models","authors":["Mengyang Sun","Yihao Wang","Tao Feng","Dan Zhang","Yifan Zhu","Jie Tang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$108","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.15828","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SunW0Z0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SunW0Z0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/sun25s.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["lora","moe","fine-tuning","adapter"]},{"id":"2506.01151","title":"Earley-Driven Dynamic Pruning for Efficient Structured Decoding","authors":["Xintong Sun","Chi Wei","Minghao Tian","Shiwen Ni"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$109","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.01151","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SunWTN25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SunWTN25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/sun25v.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["structured-decoding","grammar","decoding","efficiency"]},{"id":"2502.11775","title":"video-SALMONN-o1: Reasoning-enhanced Audio-visual Large Language Model","authors":["Guangzhi Sun","Yudong Yang","Jimin Zhuang","Changli Tang","Yixuan Li","Wei Li","Zejun Ma","Chao Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$10a","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.11775","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SunYZTL0M025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SunYZTL0M025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/sun25x.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["audio-visual","reasoning","vlm","post-training"]},{"id":"2501.14940","title":"CASE-Bench: Context-Aware SafEty Benchmark for Large Language Models","authors":["Guangzhi Sun","Xiao Zhan","Shutong Feng","Philip C. Woodland","Jose Such"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$10b","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.14940","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/SunZFWS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/SunZFWS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/sun25ab.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题很明确：现有 LLM 安全评测把单条 query 当作孤立样本，忽略上下文，结果既测不准真实风险，也会把安全场景里的正常请求错判成该拒绝。过去很多 benchmark 默认“有害问题=应拒绝”，这种设定适合做粗粒度红队，但不适合评估模型是否真正理解语境中的许可边界，因此现在需要一个把上下文显式纳入的安全基准。","importance":"它的主要价值是评测范式级，而不是训练方法级。对 pretrain/post-train 研究的启示在于：安全对齐不能只看 refusal rate，必须看 context-conditioned calibration，也就是模型是否会因为语境变化而调整拒答阈值；这直接影响偏好数据构造、拒答 policy 设计，以及安全 SFT / RLHF 的 reward 定义。","technical_approach":"作者提出 CASE-Bench，本质上是一个按上下文组织的安全评测集，而不是新的对齐算法。关键设计有两点：一是基于 Contextual Integrity 理论给同类 query 配置形式化定义的不同上下文，使“同一句话在不同场景下是否安全”可被系统比较；二是增加人工标注规模，而不是像以往工作那样依赖少量标注者多数投票，从而减少边界样本上的标签噪声。这个设计有效的原因是，安全判断本来就是条件性的，不把条件写出来，模型和评测都会把‘谨慎’误当成‘安全’。","experiments":"从给定摘要看，实验重点应是证明主流模型在 context-aware 安全判断上和传统 benchmark 结论不同，但摘要没有提供模型名单、样本量、指标数值或具体提升幅度，因此无法可靠复述定量结果。可以确定的是，作者强调了充分标注人数和上下文分层设定，这通常意味着他们会比较同一 query 在安全/不安全上下文中的拒答一致性，并揭示过度拒答的问题；但在没有正文的情况下，不应编造具体数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a clear gap: current LLM safety benchmarks treat harmful queries in isolation, so they miss context-dependent safety judgments and often reward unnecessary refusals in benign settings. That setup was acceptable for coarse red-teaming, but it is weak for measuring whether a model understands when the same request is allowed, disallowed, or ambiguous under different contexts.","importance":"This is mainly a benchmark-level contribution, not a new alignment method. Its relevance to pretrain/post-train work is that safety should be evaluated as context-conditioned calibration rather than raw refusal rate; that affects how we build preference data, define refusal policies, and shape rewards for safety tuning.","technical_approach":"CASE-Bench is a context-aware safety benchmark rather than a training algorithm. The key design choices are: first, it assigns formally described contexts to categorized queries using Contextual Integrity, so the same query can be tested under meaningfully different situations; second, it uses a larger annotation pool instead of small-group majority voting, which should reduce label noise on boundary cases. This matters because safety is conditional by nature, and without explicit context both models and benchmarks tend to equate over-caution with safety.","experiments":"From the abstract, the experimental goal is likely to show that model rankings and conclusions change once context is introduced, but the provided text does not include model sizes, dataset size, metrics, or numerical gains. What can be said safely is that the paper emphasizes sufficient annotation coverage and context-stratified evaluation, suggesting analyses around over-refusal and context sensitivity; precise numbers cannot be recovered from the given information.","authors_note":""},"tags":["safety","benchmark","alignment","evaluation"]},{"id":"2502.17543","title":"Training a Generally Curious Agent","authors":["Fahim Tajwar","Yiding Jiang","Abitha Thankaraj","Sumaita Sadia Rahman","J. Zico Kolter","Jeff Schneider","Russ Salakhutdinov"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$10c","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.17543","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/TajwarJTRK0S25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/TajwarJTRK0S25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/tajwar25a.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：语言模型在需要主动探索和基于反馈调整策略的任务上，通常只会局部模仿，不会形成可迁移的‘信息采集能力’。以前这类能力多靠特定环境里的 RL 学出来，迁移性差、成本高，因此作者想用更便宜的合成交互数据，把通用决策和探索习惯直接蒸进模型。","importance":"它的贡献更接近 post-train 方法级，但对 pretrain 也有直接启发。关键启示是：‘好奇心’或探索能力不一定非要依赖在线 RL 才能出现，跨任务合成交互微调也能让模型学会在 inference 时用上下文反馈做策略更新；这对 agentic LM、工具使用和环境交互型数据构造都有意义。","technical_approach":"作者提出 Paprika，本质上是一种基于合成交互轨迹的微调方法，用多种需要不同探索策略的任务去训练模型形成通用 decision-making prior。核心不是把模型绑死在某个环境接口上，而是让它从任务—反馈—再决策的序列里学会根据环境返回信号在线调整行为，并在新任务上只靠 in-context adaptation 工作。和传统针对单环境 RL 或 imitation 的差别在于，Paprika强调跨任务策略共性，而不是环境专用动作模板。","experiments":"摘要明确声称迁移到完全未见任务时无需额外梯度更新，但没有提供模型规模、训练任务数量、baseline、指标或提升数值，因此无法严谨复述效果量级。能确认的实验结论是：Paprika 学到的不是单一任务脚本，而是可转移的探索行为；如果正文完整，最值得看的是跨任务泛化、对反馈噪声的鲁棒性，以及与纯监督 imitation 或在线 RL 的 sample efficiency 对比。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a familiar weakness: language models are poor at strategic exploration and feedback-driven adaptation, and they often imitate locally instead of learning a reusable information-gathering policy. Prior work usually relies on environment-specific RL, which is expensive and transfers poorly, so the goal here is to distill general decision-making from synthetic interactions.","importance":"This is primarily a post-training method contribution, but it is relevant to pretraining-style data design. The main takeaway is that general curiosity or exploration behavior may not require online RL to emerge; it can be induced through diverse synthetic interaction data that teaches the model to adapt at inference time from feedback alone.","technical_approach":"Paprika is a fine-tuning recipe built on synthetic interaction traces from multiple tasks requiring different exploration strategies. The model is trained on sequences of action, feedback, and revised action so it learns a transferable decision-making prior, rather than a policy tied to one environment API. The distinction from standard imitation or task-specific RL is that Paprika aims to capture cross-task strategic structure and let adaptation happen in context at test time.","experiments":"The abstract claims transfer to entirely unseen tasks without additional gradient updates, but it does not provide model sizes, task counts, baselines, metrics, or gains. The safe summary is that the learned behavior appears to generalize beyond memorized task scripts; the most important details to inspect in the full paper would be zero-shot transfer quality, robustness to noisy feedback, and comparisons against supervised imitation and online RL.","authors_note":""},"tags":["agent","reinforcement-learning","exploration","fine-tuning"],"notable_authors":["J. Zico Kolter"]},{"id":"2403.03186","title":"Cradle: Empowering Foundation Agents towards General Computer Control","authors":["Weihao Tan","Wentao Zhang","Xinrun Xu","Haochong Xia","Ziluo Ding","Boyu Li","Bohan Zhou","Junpeng Yue","Jiechuan Jiang","Yewen Li","Ruyi An","Molei Qin","Chuqiao Zong","Longtao Zheng","Yujie Wu","Xiaoqiang Chai","Yifei Bi","Tianbao Xie","Pengjie Gu","Xiyun Li","Ceyao Zhang","Long Tian","Chaojie Wang","Xinrun Wang","Börje F. Karlsson","Bo An","Shuicheng Yan","Zongqing Lu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$10d","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.03186","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Tan0XXD0ZYJLAQZ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Tan0XXD0ZYJLAQZ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/tan25h.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文想解决的是 foundation agent 跨软件/跨虚拟环境泛化差的问题，核心症结在于每个环境都手工定义了不同 observation 和 action space，模型学到的是接口适配而不是通用计算机控制。过去很多 agent 在单平台上表现不错，但难迁移，所以作者把问题重新表述为统一的人机接口：看屏幕、用鼠标键盘。","importance":"它的价值主要是系统设定级和 agent 接口级。对 pretrain/post-train 的启示是，若想让模型形成更通用的交互能力，训练接口需要尽量统一，而不是依赖环境特制 API；这和多模态预训练里统一 token space 的思路一致，只不过这里统一的是操作层接口。","technical_approach":"作者提出 General Computer Control 设定，并在此上实现 Cradle，一个由 LMM 驱动的模块化框架。输入是截图，输出是可执行的低层鼠标键盘控制代码，中间经过高层规划，再由六个关键模块补足感知、记忆、规划和执行链路。这个设计的关键取舍是放弃环境专用结构化状态，换来更强的通用性；代价是感知和执行噪声更大，任务分解与闭环纠错就变得更重要。","experiments":"摘要说 Cradle 能跨多个虚拟场景完成一般计算机控制，但没有给出具体任务集、模型规模、成功率、baseline 或增益数字，因此不能复述量化结果。能确定的是，论文重点不是某个 benchmark 冲榜，而是证明统一 screenshot-to-action 接口的可行性；如果看全文，应重点关注跨环境迁移、长 horizon 任务稳定性，以及模块去除后的失败模式。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses poor cross-environment generalization in foundation agents. The underlying issue is that most prior systems rely on manually designed observation and action spaces for each environment, so they learn interface-specific behavior rather than general computer control. The authors therefore recast the problem around the most universal interface available: screenshots in, keyboard and mouse out.","importance":"This is mainly a systems and interface-setting contribution. The broader lesson for pretrain/post-train work is that general interactive capability likely requires a unified interaction interface, much like unified token spaces in multimodal pretraining; here the unification happens at the control layer rather than the representation layer.","technical_approach":"The paper introduces the General Computer Control setting and implements Cradle, a modular LMM-based framework under that setting. It takes screenshots as input, performs high-level planning, and emits executable low-level keyboard and mouse control code, supported by six modules for perception, memory, planning, and execution. The main design trade-off is to give up environment-specific structured states in exchange for broader generality, which makes perception noise and execution recovery much more important.","experiments":"The abstract claims that Cradle can handle various virtual scenarios under the unified screenshot-to-action interface, but it does not provide task counts, model sizes, success rates, baselines, or gains. The likely experimental point is feasibility and transfer rather than leaderboard performance; in the full paper, the most useful details would be cross-environment transfer, long-horizon reliability, and module ablations exposing where failures come from.","authors_note":""},"tags":["agent","computer-use","foundation-model","generalization"]},{"id":"2405.18881","title":"Inference-Time Alignment of Diffusion Models with Direct Noise Optimization","authors":["Zhiwei Tang","Jiangweizhi Peng","Jiasheng Tang","Mingyi Hong","Fan Wang","Tsung-Hui Chang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$10e","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.18881","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/TangPT00C25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/TangPT00C25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/tang25h.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是 diffusion model 如何在不重新训练模型的情况下，按连续 reward 在采样时对齐生成分布。过去常见做法要么训练额外 guidance / reward model，要么做模型级微调，成本高且目标切换不灵活；作者的目标是把对齐动作下沉到 inference-time。","importance":"它的重要性在于把‘对齐’从训练时优化改成采样时优化，属于方法级且有一定范式意味。对生成式预训练的启示是：如果 reward 可微或可估计，部分对齐需求未必需要改模型参数，直接优化采样轨迹就可能足够，这对 diffusion 家族尤其有吸引力，也和 test-time scaling 的大方向一致。","technical_approach":"作者提出 Direct Noise Optimization，核心思想是在 diffusion 采样过程中直接优化注入噪声，而不是更新模型权重。它是 inference-time、prompt-agnostic、online 的：给定目标 reward，在每次生成时调整噪声轨迹，让最终样本朝高奖励区域移动。这样设计有效，是因为在 diffusion 里噪声路径本身决定了生成结果的落点；如果能在每一步利用 reward 信号修正路径，就能在不破坏原模型分布的前提下实现有针对性的偏移。论文还讨论了理论性质和若干变体，说明作者不仅做了工程技巧，也在分析何时这种噪声优化稳定。","experiments":"摘要给出的下游目标包括图像更暗、更高审美等连续 reward，但没有列出具体模型、数据集、评价指标、基线方法和数值提升，因此不能可靠写出定量结果。可以确定的是，实验应围绕不同 reward 目标下的采样质量、对齐效果与泛化性展开，并与训练时对齐或标准 guidance 方法比较；若读正文，重点应看优化步数对质量/时延 trade-off、不同 reward 光滑度下的稳定性，以及是否出现 mode collapse 或视觉伪影。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks how to align a diffusion model to a continuous reward objective without retraining the model. Existing approaches often require extra guidance models or parameter updates, which are costly and inflexible when objectives change. The authors move the alignment step entirely to inference time.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution with broader implications for generative modeling. The key takeaway is that some alignment objectives may be handled by optimizing the sampling trajectory rather than the model parameters, which is especially appealing for diffusion models and fits the broader trend of test-time optimization.","technical_approach":"Direct Noise Optimization works by optimizing the injected noise during diffusion sampling instead of tuning model weights. It is inference-time, prompt-agnostic, and online: for a given reward, the method adjusts the noise trajectory so the final sample shifts toward higher-reward regions. This design makes sense because the denoising path determines where generation lands; if reward information can steer that path step by step, one can bias outputs without permanently altering the pretrained distribution. The paper also studies theoretical properties and proposes variants, suggesting attention to stability rather than a purely heuristic method.","experiments":"The abstract mentions continuous objectives such as increasing darkness or image aesthetics, but it does not provide model names, datasets, baselines, metrics, or gains. The likely evaluation compares alignment quality and sample quality against standard guidance or training-time alignment methods. In the full paper, the most important details would be latency versus reward gain, stability under different reward smoothness levels, and whether the method introduces artifacts or collapses diversity.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","alignment","inference-time","reward"]},{"id":"2409.15298","title":"Sorbet: A Neuromorphic Hardware-Compatible Transformer-Based Spiking Language Model","authors":["Kaiwen Tang","Zhanglu Yan","Weng-Fai Wong"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$10f","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.15298","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/TangYW25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/TangYW25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/tang25l.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是边缘设备上的语言模型如何兼顾可部署性和能效，尤其是在 neuromorphic hardware 上，Transformer 里的 softmax 和 LayerNorm 很难直接实现。以往一些 spiking Transformer 为了适配硬件会绕开这些操作，但代价是语言建模能力受损，因此作者尝试做一个更‘硬件友好’但仍保留 Transformer 主体的 SNN 语言模型。","importance":"它的重要性偏系统架构级，和主流大模型训练范式距离较远，但对小模型与新硬件共设计有参考价值。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：一旦部署约束足够强，模型结构里的‘默认组件’并不是不可替代的；softmax、归一化这类看似标准的部件可以被近似重写，关键是要控制表达损失和训练稳定性。","technical_approach":"作者提出 Sorbet，一个兼容 neuromorphic hardware 的 Transformer-based spiking language model。核心改动是用 shifting-based 的 PTsoftmax 代替标准 softmax，用 Bit Shifting PowerNorm 代替常规 LayerNorm，这两者都更容易在神经形态硬件上实现。方法不是完全抛弃 Transformer，而是保留其序列建模骨架，同时替换最难落硬件的算子。这样设计的逻辑很直接：注意力和归一化若不能高效实现，SNN 版本就难以真正部署；但替换这些组件的风险是概率校准和训练动态变差，所以最终效果取决于近似是否足够稳。","experiments":"摘要没有给出参数量、训练语料、对比模型、困惑度或能耗收益数字，因此无法给出定量总结。可以确认的实验重点应包含两部分：一是语言建模质量是否接近非脉冲或已有脉冲基线；二是硬件兼容性/能效是否有实质收益。若看全文，最值得检查的是 PTsoftmax 与 BSPN 各自的 ablation，以及它们对长序列稳定性的影响。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a deployment bottleneck for edge language models on neuromorphic hardware: standard Transformer components such as softmax and layer normalization are hard to realize efficiently in spiking neural networks. Earlier spiking Transformer variants often sidestepped these operations, but that typically came with modeling compromises. This work tries to retain the Transformer backbone while making the critical operators hardware-compatible.","importance":"This is mostly a systems and architecture co-design contribution rather than a mainstream large-scale pretraining advance. Still, it is useful as a reminder that under strong deployment constraints, supposedly standard components like softmax and normalization are negotiable if their replacements preserve enough learning stability and expressivity.","technical_approach":"Sorbet is a Transformer-based spiking language model designed for neuromorphic compatibility. The main changes are PTsoftmax, a shifting-based replacement for softmax, and Bit Shifting PowerNorm, a hardware-friendly substitute for LayerNorm. The design keeps the sequence-modeling structure of Transformers but swaps out the hardest operators to implement efficiently on neuromorphic hardware. The trade-off is straightforward: better deployability versus potential degradation in probability shaping and optimization stability.","experiments":"The abstract provides no parameter count, corpus size, baselines, perplexity, or energy numbers, so no quantitative summary is possible from the given text alone. The important experiments should cover both language modeling quality and hardware efficiency. In the full paper, the most informative sections would be ablations on PTsoftmax and BSPN, plus measurements of whether the approximations remain stable on longer sequences.","authors_note":""},"tags":["language-modeling","spiking","edge","transformer"]},{"id":"2503.05683","title":"WikiBigEdit: Understanding the Limits of Lifelong Knowledge Editing in LLMs","authors":["Lukas Thede","Karsten Roth","Matthias Bethge","Zeynep Akata","Thomas Hartvigsen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Keeping large language models factually up-to-date is crucial for deployment, yet costly retraining remains a challenge. Knowledge editing offers a promising alternative, but methods are only tested on small-scale or synthetic edit benchmarks. In this work, we aim to bridge research into lifelong knowledge editing to real-world edits at a practically relevant scale. We first introduce WikiBigEdit; a large-scale benchmark of real-world Wikidata edits, built to automatically extend lifelong for future-proof benchmarking. In its first instance, it includes over 500K question-answer pairs for knowledge editing alongside a comprehensive evaluation pipeline. Finally, we use WikiBigEdit to study existing knowledge editing techniques'ability to incorporate large volumes of real-world facts and contrast their capabilities to generic modification techniques such as retrieval augmentation and continual finetuning to acquire a complete picture of the practical extent of current lifelong knowledge editing.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.05683","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ThedeRBAH25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ThedeRBAH25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/thede25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是知识编辑研究长期存在的外部效度问题：很多方法只在小规模、合成、一次性编辑基准上看起来有效，但面对真实世界持续到来的大量事实更新时，效果和稳定性都不清楚。模型部署需要的是 lifelong knowledge editing，而不是实验室里的少量单点修改，因此作者先做了一个足够大的真实编辑基准来测上限和失效模式。","importance":"它的重要性主要在 benchmark/data 级，但对 pretrain↔post-train 接口非常关键。这个工作可能会直接改变大家对知识编辑的预期：如果现有方法在 50 万级真实 Wikidata 更新上明显失效，那说明‘用编辑替代再训练’的适用边界比社区此前默认的更窄，也会推动 continual pretraining、retrieval 和 editing 的混合方案。","technical_approach":"作者提出 WikiBigEdit，一个可自动扩展、面向未来持续评测的真实世界知识编辑 benchmark。首版包含超过 500K 个用于知识编辑的问答对，以及一整套评估流水线，不只是测 edit success，还应覆盖局部性、泛化、遗忘和随时间累积的稳定性。论文的技术重心不在新编辑算法，而在把评测从小样本人造设定提升到真实规模；这样做的意义是，知识编辑方法很多依赖局部线性近似或有限干预假设，小规模上看不出问题，大规模连续编辑时才会暴露容量和干扰瓶颈。","experiments":"摘要明确给出了数据规模：超过 500K 问答对，并用它系统研究现有知识编辑技术吸收大量真实事实和持续更新的能力及限制。除此之外，摘要没有列出具体被测方法、模型规模、成功率、保真率或退化幅度，因此不能写具体数字。可以合理判断，实验结论大概率强调现有方法在长期、多次、真实编辑条件下存在明显局限；若看全文，最值得看的是编辑次数增长曲线、知识冲突传播、局部性指标，以及与 continued pretraining 的成本效果比较。","authors_note":"已知作者包括 Matthias Bethge、Zeynep Akata、Thomas Hartvigsen。机构信息无法从给定内容完整确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a major external-validity gap in knowledge editing: many methods look effective on small, synthetic, one-shot edit benchmarks, but their behavior under large volumes of real, continual updates is largely unknown. Deployment requires lifelong knowledge editing, not isolated lab-style edits, so the authors first build a realistic benchmark to measure where current methods break.","importance":"This is primarily a benchmark and data contribution, but it is highly relevant to the pretrain-posttrain interface. If current editing methods fail at the scale of real Wikidata updates, then replacing retraining with editing is much less broadly applicable than the field has often assumed. That would push the community toward hybrid solutions involving continual pretraining, retrieval, and selective editing.","technical_approach":"The paper introduces WikiBigEdit, a large-scale benchmark of real-world Wikidata edits that can be extended automatically for future benchmarking. Its first release includes more than 500K question-answer pairs for knowledge editing together with a comprehensive evaluation pipeline. The technical contribution is not a new editing algorithm, but a more realistic evaluation regime. That matters because many editing methods rely on locality assumptions or limited interventions that may look fine on tiny benchmarks and fail only under sustained, large-scale updates.","experiments":"The abstract gives one concrete number: over 500K QA pairs. It also states that the benchmark is used to study how well existing editing techniques incorporate large volumes of real-world facts and continual changes. However, the provided text does not name the methods, model sizes, success metrics, or quantitative degradation. The likely high-level conclusion is that current methods have substantial limitations in realistic lifelong settings. In the full paper, the key plots would be performance versus number of edits, locality and interference metrics, propagation of conflicting updates, and cost-quality comparisons against continued pretraining.","authors_note":"Known authors include Matthias Bethge, Zeynep Akata, and Thomas Hartvigsen. Full institutional details cannot be confirmed from the provided information."},"tags":["knowledge-editing","continual-learning","llm-evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Matthias Bethge","Zeynep Akata","Thomas Hartvigsen"]},{"id":"2408.09121","title":"Selective Prompt Anchoring for Code Generation","authors":["Yuan Tian","Tianyi Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have transformed software development by automatically generating code from natural language. Yet challenges remain in generating fully correct code that aligns with user intent. Our study reveals that LLMs tend to pay less attention to user prompts as more code tokens are generated. We hypothesize that this attention dilution issue is an important reason for code generation errors. To mitigate this issue, we propose Selective Prompt Anchoring (SPA) to guide code LLMs to pay more attention to user intent when generating code. We evaluate SPA using six base LLMs across six benchmarks. Our results demonstrate that SPA enhances Pass@1 by up to 12.9%, consistently outperforming SOTA code generation methods in all settings. Our code is available at https://github.com/magic-YuanTian/Selective-Prompt-Anchoring.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.09121","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Tian025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Tian025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/tian25a.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["code-generation","attention-analysis","prompt-engineering"]},{"id":"2502.10424","title":"QuantSpec: Self-Speculative Decoding with Hierarchical Quantized KV Cache","authors":["Rishabh Tiwari","Haocheng Xi","Aditya Tomar","Coleman Richard Charles Hooper","Sehoon Kim","Maxwell Horton","Mahyar Najibi","Michael W. Mahoney","Kurt Keutzer","Amir Gholami"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$110","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.10424","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/TiwariXTH0HNMKG25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/TiwariXTH0HNMKG25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/tiwari25b.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["speculative-decoding","kv-cache","quantization","long-context"]},{"id":"2502.03044","title":"RepLoRA: Reparameterizing Low-rank Adaptation via the Perspective of Mixture of Experts","authors":["Tuan Truong","Chau Nguyen","Huy Nguyen","Minh Le","Trung Le","Nhat Ho"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$111","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.03044","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/TruongNNL0H25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/TruongNNL0H25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/truong25a.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["lora","moe","fine-tuning","theory"]},{"id":"2503.13335","title":"Reliable and Efficient Amortized Model-based Evaluation","authors":["Sang T. Truong","Yuheng Tu","Percy Liang","Bo Li","Sanmi Koyejo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$112","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.13335","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/TruongTL0K25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/TruongTL0K25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/truong25c.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["llm-evaluation","benchmark","amortized-inference"]},{"id":"UselisDO25","title":"Does Data Scaling Lead to Visual Compositional Generalization?","authors":["Arnas Uselis","Andrea Dittadi","Seong Joon Oh"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/UselisDO25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/UselisDO25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/uselis25a.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["compositionality","data-scaling","visual-generalization"]},{"id":"2506.06179","title":"A Theoretical Study of (Hyper) Self-Attention through the Lens of Interactions: Representation, Training, Generalization","authors":["Muhammed Ustaomeroglu","Guannan Qu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$113","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.06179","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/UstaomerogluQ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/UstaomerogluQ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/ustaomeroglu25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["self-attention","theory","generalization","interactions"]},{"id":"2407.07612","title":"Teaching Transformers Causal Reasoning through Axiomatic Training","authors":["Aniket Vashishtha","Abhinav Kumar","Atharva Pandey","Abbavaram Gowtham Reddy","Kabir Ahuja","Vineeth N. Balasubramanian","Amit Sharma"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$114","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.07612","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Vashishtha0PRAB25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Vashishtha0PRAB25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/vashishtha25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["causal-reasoning","transformer","training-data"]},{"id":"VelickovicPBP25","title":"Softmax is not Enough (for Sharp Size Generalisation)","authors":["Petar Velickovic","Christos Perivolaropoulos","Federico Barbero","Razvan Pascanu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/VelickovicPBP25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/VelickovicPBP25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/velickovic25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["softmax","generalization","size-generalization","transformer-theory"]},{"id":"WangLZSLG0025","title":"Differentiable Solver Search for Fast Diffusion Sampling","authors":["Shuai Wang","Zexian Li","Qipeng Zhang","Tianhui Song","Xubin Li","Tiezheng Ge","Bo Zheng","Limin Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangLZSLG0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangLZSLG0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wang25bh.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion","sampling","solver","efficiency"]},{"id":"WangM25","title":"Textural or Textual: How Vision-Language Models Read Text in Images","authors":["Hanzhang Wang","Qingyuan Ma"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangM25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangM25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wang25bw.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["vlm","ocr","evaluation","multimodal"]},{"id":"2506.08524","title":"Teaching Physical Awareness to LLMs through Sounds","authors":["Weiguo Wang","Andy Nie","Wenrui Zhou","Yi Kai","Chengchen Hu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$115","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.08524","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangNZKH25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangNZKH25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wang25ca.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题，是让 LLM 获得文本里很难学到的“物理感知”，尤其是通过声音体现出来的基础物理现象。过去多模态 LLM 更擅长语义对齐和描述性理解，但对多普勒效应、混响/多径、空间方位这类依赖真实物理传播机制的现象理解很弱，主要因为可控、成体系的训练数据非常稀缺。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要在于把“物理规律学习”明确做成了一个音频预训练/对齐问题，而不只是做音频问答数据集。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：如果目标是让模型学会世界规律，单靠互联网共现语料不够，必须把可控模拟器、物理先验和表示设计一起引入；这类思路对语音/音频 LM、具身多模态模型、以及统一世界模型训练都更有参考意义。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 ACORN：用物理仿真器生成带明确物理因素控制的音频问答数据，再把能处理幅度和相位的音频编码器接到现有 LLM 上。它不是简单把 waveform 或 log-mel 喂给模型，而是刻意保留相位信息，因为多普勒、空间定位和多径现象里，很多可判别线索就在传播延迟和相位结构中；如果只看幅度谱，模型更容易退化成表面模式匹配。相比常规音频-LLM 拼接方案，这个设计更强调“声音中的物理结构”而不是“声音的语义标签”。","experiments":"从摘要能确认的关键实验事实是：作者构建了 AQA-PHY 数据集，并围绕多普勒效应、多径效应和空间关系评估物理感知能力；同时比较了引入相位信息的音频编码器与常规做法的差异。摘要没有给出模型规模、数据条数、主 baseline 名称和具体提升数字，因此目前只能判断实验重点在证明模拟数据 + 相位敏感编码能显著提升物理相关问答，而无法严谨判断其相对现有音频 LLM 的量级优势。边界也很明显：这类结果首先证明的是受控物理现象上的可学习性，离开放环境真实声音分布还有泛化距离。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a clear gap: LLMs still lack physical awareness, and sound is a practical channel to teach it. Prior multimodal LLMs are good at semantic grounding, but they are weak on phenomena such as Doppler shift, multipath propagation, and spatial relations because those signals depend on real-world physics and are poorly covered by existing training data.","importance":"The main contribution is to frame physical awareness as a pretraining/alignment problem over audio, not just as another audio QA benchmark. The takeaway for pretraining is concrete: if the goal is to learn world regularities, internet-scale co-occurrence is not enough; controllable simulation, explicit physical factors, and the right representation all matter. That is relevant beyond this paper, especially for audio LMs, embodied multimodal models, and unified world modeling.","technical_approach":"The method, ACORN, combines a physics-based audio simulator with an audio QA pipeline and an audio encoder that uses both magnitude and phase. This is an important design choice rather than an implementation detail. For Doppler, spatial cues, and multipath effects, phase and propagation structure carry discriminative information; relying on magnitude-only features would push the model toward shallow pattern matching. Relative to standard audio-LLM interfaces, this setup is more about preserving physical structure than about improving generic audio semantics.","experiments":"From the abstract, the key experimental facts are that the authors build AQA-PHY and evaluate on physical phenomena including Doppler effect, multipath effect, and spatial relationships, while also testing an encoder that incorporates phase information. The abstract does not provide model size, dataset size, baselines, or exact gains, so the strongest safe conclusion is qualitative: simulated data plus phase-aware encoding improves physically grounded audio QA. The current boundary is also clear: this demonstrates learnability under controlled physical generation, but does not yet establish robustness on fully open-world acoustic distributions.","authors_note":""},"tags":["audio","physical-reasoning","multimodal","llm"]},{"id":"2505.23996","title":"Is Your Model Fairly Certain? Uncertainty-Aware Fairness Evaluation for LLMs","authors":["Yinong Oliver Wang","Nivedha Sivakumar","Falaah Arif Khan","Katherine Metcalf","Adam Golinski","Natalie Mackraz","Barry-John Theobald","Luca Zappella","Nicholas Apostoloff"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$116","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.23996","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangSKMGMTZA25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangSKMGMTZA25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wang25cp.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：现有 LLM 公平性评测只看离散正确率，忽略了模型对不同群体“不一样确定”的偏差，因此会漏掉真实的不公平。过去很多 fairness benchmark 在任务上等价地比较 accuracy，但如果模型对 A 群体总是更自信、对 B 群体总是更犹豫，即使表面准确率接近，这种内在偏置仍然会影响实际部署决策。","importance":"它的贡献更偏评测方法和数据质量，而不是训练算法，但对大模型训练依然有现实价值。原因是 fairness 如果只按 hard label 统计，训练侧会被错误指标牵着走；引入 uncertainty-aware 指标后，才能更细粒度地暴露 calibration 和群体偏差之间的耦合。这对预训练后评估、偏置诊断、以及后续数据重配或对齐优化都有直接意义。","technical_approach":"核心方法是提出 UCerF，一个把模型不确定性纳入公平性评价的指标，同时配套构建更大、更清晰的 gender-occupation 数据集。这个设计不是简单在 fairness 框架里加一个 confidence 平均值，而是强调：同等 accuracy 下，不同群体的置信度分布差异本身就是偏差证据。作者还指出现有数据集存在规模小、分布单一和描述不清的问题，因此新数据集的作用不仅是扩容，更是减少数据噪声把 fairness 信号淹没的情况。","experiments":"摘要中最明确的实验事实是：作者发布了一个 31,756 样本的 gender-occupation fairness 数据集，用于补足现有评测数据在规模、 diversity 和 clarity 上的不足；同时用 UCerF 评估时，可以揭示传统 fairness 指标看不到的隐式偏置。摘要没有给出所评测的具体 LLM 名单、任务类型、UCerF 与传统指标的相关性数字、以及哪些模型在该指标下排序发生逆转，因此目前更适合把它看作诊断工具论文，而不是带来确定训练改进幅度的方法论文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a concrete blind spot in LLM fairness evaluation: standard metrics focus on discrete correctness and ignore whether the model is systematically more certain for one group than another. That means fairness can look acceptable on accuracy while hidden confidence asymmetries still affect downstream decisions.","importance":"This is mainly an evaluation and dataset contribution, but it matters for training as well. If fairness is measured only through hard labels, optimization and model selection are driven by an incomplete signal. Adding uncertainty makes it possible to detect the coupling between calibration and group bias, which is directly useful for post-pretraining diagnosis and for deciding whether data reweighting or alignment changes are needed.","technical_approach":"The main proposal is UCerF, an uncertainty-aware fairness metric, together with a larger and cleaner gender-occupation benchmark. The key idea is not merely to append confidence to existing fairness metrics, but to treat confidence disparities under similar accuracy as evidence of internal bias. The dataset contribution serves the same goal: current benchmarks are too small, too narrow, or too noisy to support stable uncertainty-sensitive evaluation.","experiments":"The clearest factual result in the abstract is the release of a 31,756-example gender-occupation fairness dataset designed to improve size, diversity, and clarity over prior benchmarks. The paper also claims that UCerF exposes bias patterns missed by conventional fairness measures. The abstract does not report model lists, exact metric values, or ranking shifts across models, so this should be read as a diagnostic benchmark paper rather than a method paper with quantified training gains.","authors_note":""},"tags":["fairness","evaluation","uncertainty","alignment"]},{"id":"2506.07440","title":"Federated In-Context Learning: Iterative Refinement for Improved Answer Quality","authors":["Ruhan Wang","Zhiyong Wang","Chengkai Huang","Rui Wang","Tong Yu","Lina Yao","John C. S. Lui","Dongruo Zhou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$117","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.07440","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangWHW00LZ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangWHW00LZ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wang25db.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：ICL 依赖高质量 demonstration，但这些样例往往分散在各个客户端且不能直接共享，导致隐私约束下的 ICL 很难真正利用分布式数据。现有方案要么传模型参数、通信太重，要么只做很弱的示例聚合，没把本地数据价值用出来。","importance":"它更偏系统与推理时协作框架，而不是基座预训练方法，但对大模型应用链条有现实意义。重要性在于它把 federated learning 的思想迁移到 ICL：不改模型参数也能利用多客户端数据做迭代 refinement。这说明在一些隐私受限场景里，提升 LLM 质量不一定非得走 full fine-tuning 或 centralized retrieval，context-level collaboration 本身就是一条路。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Fed-ICL：让多个客户端围绕示例选择和答案 refinement 做迭代式协同，而不是交换模型权重。它的关键设计点在于把‘本地示例价值’转化为可共享的轻量信息，用若干轮交互不断提升上下文中 demonstration 的质量，从而改善最终回答。相比传统联邦微调，它舍弃了参数更新，所以通信和隐私压力更小；相比一次性拼接本地样例，它又加入了迭代改进，因此更能利用跨客户端互补信息。边界是，这类方法仍然受上下文长度、检索质量和客户端分布异质性限制。","experiments":"从摘要能确定的是，作者在问答任务上验证了 Fed-ICL 相比现有隐私受限 ICL/联邦方案能提高回答质量，同时避免传输模型参数。摘要没有给出所用 LLM、客户端数量、通信轮次、数据集名称、准确率/F1/EM 提升幅度，也没有说明在强分布偏移或极端 non-IID 下的退化情况，因此目前只能把结论停留在“框架有效”的层面。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical bottleneck in in-context learning: high-quality demonstrations are often distributed across private client devices and cannot be centralized. Existing solutions either communicate model parameters, which is expensive, or exploit local examples too weakly to matter.","importance":"This is more of a systems and inference-time collaboration paper than a core pretraining paper, but it is still relevant to the LLM stack. The important point is that it brings the federated learning idea into ICL: model quality can be improved through collaborative context construction without updating model weights. In privacy-constrained settings, that is a meaningful alternative to centralized retrieval or full fine-tuning.","technical_approach":"Fed-ICL is an iterative collaborative framework where clients contribute to demonstration selection and answer refinement without sharing model parameters. The key design choice is to convert the value of local examples into lightweight sharable signals and improve the prompt over multiple rounds. Relative to federated fine-tuning, this avoids parameter exchange and reduces communication/privacy burden. Relative to one-shot pooling of examples, the iterative refinement step is what lets the method exploit complementary local data more effectively. The boundary is straightforward: it still depends on prompt budget, retrieval quality, and cross-client heterogeneity.","experiments":"The abstract supports the conclusion that Fed-ICL improves answer quality for QA under privacy constraints while avoiding parameter transmission. It does not report the backbone model, number of clients, number of communication rounds, benchmark names, or exact gains, so the current evidence is framework-level rather than quantitatively specific.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","federated-learning","example-selection","qa"]},{"id":"WangWYCL025","title":"Demonstration Selection for In-Context Learning via Reinforcement Learning","authors":["Xubin Wang","Jianfei Wu","Yichen Yuan","Deyu Cai","Mingzhe Li","Weijia Jia"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangWYCL025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangWYCL025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wang25dp.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"从标题看，这篇论文关注 ICL 中一个很实际的问题：示例选得对不对，往往比 prompt 模板本身更决定效果，而现有 demonstration selection 多依赖启发式相似度或贪心策略。作者想解决的是如何直接以最终任务收益为目标，学习一个更有效的示例选择策略。","importance":"这类工作属于 ICL 推理优化，不是 pretrain 核心方法，但它对理解模型的 in-context 能力边界有价值。因为 demonstration selection 如果能被显式优化，说明 ICL 的很多波动并非模型能力随机，而是上下文构造这个外部控制面没有被学好；这对检索增强、测试时适配和数据选择研究都有启发。","technical_approach":"标题表明作者采用强化学习来做 demonstration selection。直觉上，这比基于 embedding 相似度的启发式更合理，因为示例价值是组合性的、任务依赖的，而且最终效果通常延迟到模型输出后才显现；RL 适合优化这种非可微、长反馈链路的问题。但没有摘要，无法确认状态、动作、奖励设计，也无法判断是否做了 budget 约束、去冗余或多样性控制。","experiments":"目前没有摘要，因此无法确认它在哪些任务、哪些模型上验证，提升多少，以及对比了哪些选择器 baseline。也无法判断 RL 带来的收益是否足以覆盖训练成本，或者是否只在小规模候选池上有效。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"From the title, the paper targets a practical weakness in ICL: performance often depends more on which demonstrations are selected than on the prompt template itself, yet most selection methods still rely on heuristics such as similarity search or greedy scoring. The likely goal is to learn a selection policy that optimizes end-task performance directly.","importance":"This is an inference-time optimization paper rather than a pretraining paper, but it is useful for understanding the controllable side of in-context learning. If demonstration choice can be learned effectively, then a meaningful fraction of ICL variance comes from prompt construction rather than from the underlying model alone. That has implications for retrieval-augmented prompting and test-time adaptation.","technical_approach":"The title indicates a reinforcement-learning approach to demonstration selection. That is a reasonable fit because demonstration utility is combinatorial, task-dependent, and only partially observed through downstream outputs. RL can in principle optimize this delayed, non-differentiable objective better than static similarity heuristics. Without the abstract, however, the actual state/action space, reward design, and budget or diversity controls cannot be confirmed.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so tasks, model backbones, baselines, and numerical gains cannot be verified. It is also unclear whether the RL overhead is justified by the resulting quality gains or whether the method only works with small candidate pools.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","reinforcement-learning","example-selection"]},{"id":"2505.19235","title":"CoreMatching: A Co-adaptive Sparse Inference Framework with Token and Neuron Pruning for Comprehensive Acceleration of Vision-Language Models","authors":["Qinsi Wang","Hancheng Ye","Ming-Yu Chung","Yudong Liu","Yueqian Lin","Martin Kuo","Mingyuan Ma","Jianyi Zhang","Yiran Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$118","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.19235","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangYCLLKMZ025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangYCLLKMZ025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wang25eb.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题很明确：VLM 推理太贵，而现有 token pruning 和 neuron pruning 各做各的，没有利用两者之间的耦合结构。过去主流假设是 token 稀疏和 neuron 稀疏彼此独立，因此分别优化；作者质疑这个前提，认为如果关键 token 和关键 neuron 存在匹配关系，就能做更彻底的联合加速。","importance":"这是一篇系统效率方向的工作，但对多模态预训练和 serving 都有启发。它的重要性不只是把 VLM 跑快一点，而是提出了一种更细的视角：token 选择和通道/神经元激活不是两套平行子问题，而可能共享一个任务相关的核心子结构。这个想法如果成立，会影响后续对稀疏训练、稀疏蒸馏和动态计算图设计的理解。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 CoreMatching，一个联合 token pruning 和 neuron pruning 的协同稀疏推理框架。它的关键观察是存在 Core Tokens 与 Core Neurons 的匹配机制，因此不能把‘删哪些视觉/文本 token’和‘保留哪些高维计算单元’分开决定；正确做法是让两种稀疏策略相互适配。相比仅做 token pruning 的方法，它能进一步减少 MLP/attention 中的高维计算；相比仅做 neuron pruning，它又避免在无关 token 上节省计算却损失关键局部信息。代价是路由/匹配机制本身会带来控制开销，而且不同任务上核心结构的稳定性可能不同。","experiments":"摘要明确表明作者做了针对两类稀疏性的首个系统性关系分析，并据此提出综合加速框架；实验主张应聚焦于时间和显存的双重下降，同时尽量保持 VLM 性能。摘要没有给出所用 VLM 名称、压缩率、吞吐提升、延迟下降、以及准确率损失的具体数字，也未说明是否在 caption、VQA、grounding 等不同任务上都稳定。因此目前能确认的是方法立意和机制新意较强，但量级收益还需要看正文数据。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a clear efficiency bottleneck in VLM inference: token pruning and neuron pruning are usually developed in isolation, even though they may be structurally coupled. The authors question that independence assumption and ask whether key tokens and key neurons actually co-vary in a way that can be exploited.","importance":"This is an efficiency paper, but it has broader implications for multimodal pretraining and serving. The important idea is not just faster inference. It is the claim that token-level and neuron-level sparsity may share a task-dependent core structure. If true, that changes how we think about sparse training, sparse distillation, and dynamic computation in VLMs.","technical_approach":"The method, CoreMatching, is a co-adaptive sparse inference framework that jointly prunes tokens and neurons. Its key observation is a matching mechanism between Core Tokens and Core Neurons, so the two pruning decisions should be coordinated rather than optimized separately. Compared with token-only sparsity, this can reduce more of the high-dimensional compute inside attention and MLP blocks. Compared with neuron-only sparsity, it avoids saving compute on irrelevant channels while still spending work on unimportant tokens. The trade-off is added routing/control complexity, and the stability of these core structures may vary across tasks.","experiments":"The abstract supports two main claims: the paper provides the first systematic analysis of the interaction between token and neuron sparsity, and it turns that analysis into a practical acceleration framework. The expected evaluation target is lower latency and memory cost with minimal performance loss, but the abstract does not provide model names, pruning ratios, throughput gains, latency reductions, or accuracy drops. So the novelty is clear at the mechanism level, while the practical payoff still depends on the full empirical section.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","token-pruning","neuron-pruning","inference"]},{"id":"WangZJRWYPB025","title":"Invariance Makes LLM Unlearning Resilient Even to Unanticipated Downstream Fine-Tuning","authors":["Changsheng Wang","Yihua Zhang","Jinghan Jia","Parikshit Ram","Dennis Wei","Yuguang Yao","Soumyadeep Pal","Nathalie Baracaldo","Sijia Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WangZJRWYPB025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WangZJRWYPB025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wang25en.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"从标题看，这篇论文关注一个比标准 unlearning 更难的问题：即便后续还有意料之外的下游微调，已经做过的遗忘能否保持有效。许多遗忘方法只在静态模型上成立，一旦再 fine-tune，被删掉的知识可能通过表示迁移或参数回填重新冒出来。","importance":"这类工作很重要，因为真实部署中模型 rarely 停在 unlearning 那一步，后续还会继续任务适配。标题里的结论如果成立，意味着通过构造某种 invariance，不仅能做当下的删除，还能提高对未来未知微调的鲁棒性。这对合规删除、模型编辑和 continual adaptation 都是关键能力。","technical_approach":"仅根据标题，作者的核心主张是利用 invariance 让 LLM unlearning 对未预见的 downstream fine-tuning 仍然 resilient。这个思路通常意味着不只在输出层面抹除知识，而是在表示或决策边界上建立某种稳定的不变性约束，使后续微调不容易把遗忘内容重新激活。没有摘要，无法确认 invariance 的具体形式，是群组不变、子空间投影、因果特征隔离，还是某种正则化目标。","experiments":"当前没有摘要，因此无法确认它是否评估了多种后续 fine-tuning 场景、恢复攻击、知识提取攻击，以及 retention 代价。也无法给出相对于现有 unlearning 方法的具体鲁棒性提升数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"From the title, the paper goes after a harder unlearning problem than usual: can forgetting remain effective even after unforeseen downstream fine-tuning? Many unlearning methods look successful on a frozen model but lose their guarantees once the model is adapted again.","importance":"This matters because deployed models rarely stop evolving after unlearning. If the title’s claim holds, invariance-based unlearning would offer a stronger notion of deletion that survives future task adaptation. That is highly relevant for compliance, controllable editing, and continual model updates.","technical_approach":"The title suggests an invariance-driven approach that makes LLM unlearning resilient to downstream fine-tuning not anticipated during training. The likely intuition is to enforce forgetting at the representation or decision-boundary level rather than only at the output level, so later fine-tuning cannot easily reactivate the removed knowledge. Without the abstract, the exact form of invariance cannot be confirmed.","experiments":"No abstract is available, so it is not possible to verify which downstream fine-tuning settings, attack protocols, or retention metrics were used, nor how large the robustness gains are over prior unlearning methods.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm-unlearning","fine-tuning","invariance"]},{"id":"2504.07165","title":"Perception in Reflection","authors":["Yana Wei","Liang Zhao","Kangheng Lin","En Yu","Yuang Peng","Runpei Dong","Jianjian Sun","Haoran Wei","Zheng Ge","Xiangyu Zhang","Vishal M. Patel"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$119","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.07165","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WeiZLYPDSWG0P25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WeiZLYPDSWG0P25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wei25r.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"当前大型视觉语言模型（LVLM）在视觉感知上经常出错且缺乏自我纠正能力。本文提出一种'反思式感知'范式，让模型通过迭代反思来逐步修正视觉感知结果，而非依赖一次性推理。","importance":"方法级贡献，属于VLM的posttrain/推理增强方向。对pretrain研究的间接启示在于：它表明当前VLM预训练得到的视觉感知能力存在系统性不足，需要通过反思机制来弥补。这种双模型（policy+critic）的反思框架也可能反哺预训练阶段的数据构造和训练目标设计。","technical_approach":"提出RePer（Reflective Perception），采用双模型反思机制：policy模型生成感知结果，critic模型评估并提供反馈，两者交替迭代。训练方面提出RPL（Reflective Perceptual Learning），通过构造视觉反思数据集和反思unlikelihood训练来强化模型的内在反思能力。关键设计是将反思能力内化到模型中，而非仅依赖外部反馈。","experiments":"摘要截断，完整数据不可得。报告了在图像理解、描述精度和幻觉减少方面的可量化改进。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Current LVLMs often fail at visual perception and lack self-correction ability. This work proposes a 'perception in reflection' paradigm that iteratively refines visual perception through systematic reflection rather than relying on single-pass inference.","importance":"A method-level contribution in VLM posttrain/inference enhancement. Indirectly relevant to pretrain: it reveals systematic gaps in VLM visual perception from pretraining, and the dual-model reflection framework may inform pretraining data construction and objective design.","technical_approach":"Proposes RePer (Reflective Perception) with a dual-model mechanism: a policy model generates perception outputs, a critic model evaluates and provides feedback, alternating iteratively. Training uses RPL (Reflective Perceptual Learning) with a constructed visual reflection dataset and reflective unlikelihood training to internalize reflection capability.","experiments":"Abstract truncated. Reports quantifiable improvements in image understanding, captioning precision, and hallucination reduction.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","reflection","visual-perception","iterative-refinement"]},{"id":"2503.01776","title":"Beyond Matryoshka: Revisiting Sparse Coding for Adaptive Representation","authors":["Tiansheng Wen","Yifei Wang","Zequn Zeng","Zhong Peng","Yudi Su","Xinyang Liu","Bo Chen","Hongwei Liu","Stefanie Jegelka","Chenyu You"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$11a","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.01776","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/WenWZPSL0LJY25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/WenWZPSL0LJY25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wen25e.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Matryoshka Representation Learning（MRL）是当前实现自适应嵌入长度的主流方案，但需要完整重训模型，且在短嵌入长度时性能下降明显。本文提出用稀疏编码作为替代方案，在不重训原模型的前提下实现自适应表示。","importance":"方法级贡献，对embedding/检索系统的工程实践有价值。对pretrain研究的启示在于：它表明预训练得到的dense embedding存在可被稀疏分解的结构，且稀疏表示在保持语义质量的同时能实现更灵活的维度自适应。这与理解pretrain表示空间的结构有关。","technical_approach":"提出CSR（Contrastive Sparse Representation）：对预训练好的embedding做稀疏编码，映射到高维但稀疏激活的特征空间。方法包含轻量自编码器和任务感知的对比学习目标。关键优势是：1）不需要重训原模型，只需训练轻量稀疏编码器；2）在短表示长度时比MRL保持更好的语义质量。与MRL的核心区别是后处理式而非嵌入式。","experiments":"摘要截断，完整实验数据不可得。预期在检索和搜索任务上与MRL对比，特别是在短嵌入长度下的性能保持方面有优势。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Matryoshka Representation Learning (MRL) enables adaptive embedding lengths but requires full model retraining and degrades noticeably at short lengths. This work proposes sparse coding as an alternative for adaptive representation without retraining the original model.","importance":"A method-level contribution for embedding/retrieval systems. For pretrain research, it suggests that pretrained dense embeddings have exploitable sparse structure, and sparse representations can achieve more flexible dimension adaptivity while preserving semantic quality.","technical_approach":"Proposes CSR (Contrastive Sparse Representation): sparsifies pretrained embeddings into a high-dimensional but selectively activated feature space using a lightweight autoencoder and task-aware contrastive objectives. Key advantage: no original model retraining needed, better semantic preservation at short lengths than MRL. Core distinction from MRL is post-hoc rather than built-in.","experiments":"Abstract truncated. Expected to compare against MRL on retrieval/search tasks, with advantages particularly at short embedding lengths.","authors_note":""},"tags":["sparse-coding","matryoshka","adaptive-embedding","representation"]},{"id":"Weng0B25","title":"TRACE Back from the Future: A Probabilistic Reasoning Approach to Controllable Language Generation","authors":["Gwen Yidou Weng","Benjie Wang","Guy Van den Broeck"],"institutions":["UCLA"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Weng0B25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Weng0B25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/weng25b.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"可控文本生成（满足特定约束的生成）在自回归LM中通常需要在解码时施加约束，但现有方法要么需要微调，要么在推理时引入高计算开销。本文提出基于概率推理的方法来实现可控生成。","importance":"方法级贡献，属于受控生成/推理时干预方向。对pretrain研究的间接价值在于：它从概率推理角度重新理解LM的生成过程，可能为理解和改进语言建模目标提供新视角。Guy Van den Broeck是概率推理领域的知名学者。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失，无法提供完整技术细节。从标题TRACE和'probabilistic reasoning'推断，核心思路是将可控生成建模为从未来约束回溯的概率推理问题，利用tractable probabilistic models来高效计算条件概率。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法提供实验细节。","authors_note":"Guy Van den Broeck是UCLA教授，概率推理和tractable models领域的代表性学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Controllable language generation under constraints typically requires either fine-tuning or expensive inference-time interventions. This work proposes a probabilistic reasoning approach to controllable generation.","importance":"A method-level contribution in controlled generation. Indirectly relevant to pretrain: it reframes LM generation through probabilistic reasoning, potentially offering new perspectives on language modeling objectives.","technical_approach":"Abstract unavailable for full details. From the title TRACE and 'probabilistic reasoning,' the approach likely models controllable generation as backward probabilistic inference from future constraints, using tractable probabilistic models for efficient conditional probability computation.","experiments":"Abstract unavailable; no experimental details can be provided.","authors_note":"Guy Van den Broeck is a professor at UCLA, a leading figure in probabilistic reasoning and tractable models."},"tags":["controllable-generation","probabilistic-reasoning","language-model"],"notable_authors":["Guy Van den Broeck"]},{"id":"XingCTWZ025","title":"Knowledge Swapping via Learning and Unlearning","authors":["Mingyu Xing","Lechao Cheng","Shengeng Tang","Yaxiong Wang","Zhun Zhong","Meng Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/XingCTWZ025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/XingCTWZ025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/xing25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["unlearning","knowledge-editing","model-editing"]},{"id":"2412.01271","title":"MuLan: Adapting Multilingual Diffusion Models for Hundreds of Languages with Negligible Cost","authors":["Sen Xing","Muyan Zhong","Zeqiang Lai","Liangchen Li","Jiawen Liu","Yaohui Wang","Jifeng Dai","Wenhai Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$11b","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.01271","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/XingZLLLWDW25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/XingZLLLWDW25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/xing25d.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion","multilingual","text-encoder","adaptation"]},{"id":"2506.15455","title":"RE-IMAGINE: Symbolic Benchmark Synthesis for Reasoning Evaluation","authors":["Xinnuo Xu","Rachel Lawrence","Kshitij Dubey","Atharva Pandey","Risa Ueno","Fabian Falck","Aditya V. Nori","Rahul Sharma","Amit Sharma","Javier González"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$11c","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.15455","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/XuLDPUFN00025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/XuLDPUFN00025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/xu25n.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["benchmark","reasoning","evaluation","synthetic-data"]},{"id":"2410.01405","title":"On Expressive Power of Looped Transformers: Theoretical Analysis and Enhancement via Timestep Encoding","authors":["Kevin Xu","Issei Sato"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Looped Transformers provide advantages in parameter efficiency, computational capabilities, and generalization for reasoning tasks. However, their expressive power regarding function approximation remains underexplored. In this paper, we establish the approximation rate of Looped Transformers by defining the modulus of continuity for sequence-to-sequence functions. This reveals a limitation specific to the looped architecture. That is, the analysis prompts the incorporation of scaling parameters for each loop, conditioned on timestep encoding. Experiments validate the theoretical results, showing that increasing the number of loops enhances performance, with further gains achieved through the timestep encoding.","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.01405","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/XuS25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/XuS25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/xu25x.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["transformer","reasoning","expressivity","architecture"]},{"id":"2505.03803","title":"RWKVQuant: Quantizing the RWKV Family with Proxy Guided Hybrid of Scalar and Vector Quantization","authors":["Chen Xu","Yuxuan Yue","Zukang Xu","Xing Hu","Jiangyong Yu","Zhixuan Chen","Sifan Zhou","Zhihang Yuan","Dawei Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$11d","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03803","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/XuYX0YCZYY25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/XuYX0YCZYY25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/xu25at.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 RWKV 在资源受限设备上的部署问题，具体是 Transformer 上常用的 PTQ 方案迁到 RWKV 时精度掉得明显、还带来额外算子开销。以前很多量化工作默认不同架构共享同一套经验，但 RWKV 的非线性和权重分布特性让这个假设失效了。","importance":"这是一个典型的架构特定系统优化工作，贡献不在提出新的语言建模方法，而在于说明 RWKV 这种 RNN-like 大模型不能直接套用 Transformer 量化 recipe。对 pretrain 社区的启示是：替代架构要真正进入训练-部署闭环，压缩和 serving 方案必须跟着重写，否则训练侧的架构优势无法转成实际可用性。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 RWKVQuant，一个 proxy-guided 的标量量化和向量量化混合 PTQ 框架。作者先识别两个约束：一是 RWKV 中非线性算子阻碍 smooth/rotation 类量化所依赖的参数融合，二是较多近似均匀分布权重使纯 cluster-based 量化不稳。对应地，方法上不是坚持单一量化粒度，而是用 proxy 指导不同参数子空间采用 scalar 或 vector quantization，以在计算开销和表达能力之间折中。它和现有 Transformer PTQ 的差别，不只是调超参，而是承认 RWKV 参数结构不适合统一处理。","experiments":"摘要没有提供 RWKV 版本、参数量、bit-width、评测数据集和具体精度/速度数字，因此无法判断它相对 GPTQ、AWQ 或其他 PTQ 基线的优势幅度。按摘要可确定的主张，RWKVQuant 在保持较低部署成本的同时，比直接套用现有 PTQ 方法更能保住 RWKV 性能。最关键的 ablation 应该是：纯 scalar、纯 vector、以及 proxy-guided hybrid 三者的对比；如果 hybrid 的收益主要来自少量敏感层，那么方法复杂度是否值得，是部署上需要看的边界。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles deployment of RWKV models under resource constraints, focusing on why standard post-training quantization recipes from Transformers degrade badly on RWKV and can introduce extra compute overhead. The main point is that architecture-specific properties of RWKV break the assumption that one PTQ recipe transfers cleanly across model families.","importance":"This is an architecture-specific systems paper. Its contribution is not a new language modeling objective, but a clear argument that alternative foundation-model architectures need their own compression path if they are to be practically viable. For pretraining researchers, the lesson is straightforward: architectural wins do not matter much if the training-serving loop cannot be closed efficiently.","technical_approach":"RWKVQuant is a proxy-guided hybrid PTQ framework combining scalar and vector quantization. The paper first identifies two constraints: RWKV's nonlinear operators hinder parameter fusion used by smooth or rotation-based quantization, and its more uniformly distributed weights make purely cluster-based schemes less accurate. The solution is therefore not a single quantization style, but a guided hybrid that allocates scalar or vector quantization where each is better suited. Compared with Transformer PTQ baselines, the difference is structural rather than cosmetic.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide RWKV model variants, parameter counts, bit widths, datasets, or quantitative quality-speed trade-offs, so the empirical strength cannot be measured precisely. The stated claim is that RWKVQuant preserves RWKV performance better than directly applying existing PTQ methods while keeping deployment efficient. The most informative ablation would compare pure scalar, pure vector, and proxy-guided hybrid schemes, and show whether the gain comes broadly across the network or only from a few sensitive components.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","rwkv","inference","compression"]},{"id":"YamasakiNCFM25","title":"Plausible Token Amplification for Improving Accuracy of Differentially Private In-Context Learning Based on Implicit Bayesian Inference","authors":["Yusuke Yamasaki","Kenta Niwa","Daiki Chijiwa","Takumi Fukami","Takayuki Miura"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YamasakiNCFM25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YamasakiNCFM25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/yamasaki25a.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"从标题看，这篇论文解决的是差分隐私约束下的 in-context learning 精度下降问题，并尝试用 plausible token amplification 改善隐式贝叶斯推断的效果。传统 DP 机制会扰动示例或统计量来保护隐私，但这通常直接削弱 ICL 依赖的上下文证据质量。","importance":"这是一个隐私与 ICL 的交叉方法，离基础 pretrain 较远，但对真实部署有价值。它的重要性在于：如果能在 DP 条件下恢复一部分 ICL 精度，就说明隐私保护不一定只能用大幅性能折损换取，尤其对企业检索、个性化上下文推断这类场景有现实意义。","technical_approach":"仅从标题可推断，方法核心是 plausible token amplification，即在隐式贝叶斯推断框架下放大高可信 token 的作用，以抵消差分隐私噪声带来的证据稀释。这个思路的合理性在于，ICL 常可被近似为基于上下文的后验更新；若 DP 噪声削弱后验集中度，就可以通过对“仍然可信的 token 证据”做重加权来恢复部分判别力。没有摘要，无法确认 amplification 是作用在 prompt 构造、token 采样分布、还是后验估计步骤上，也无法确认具体 DP 假设。","experiments":"没有摘要，因此没有任务、模型、隐私预算 epsilon、基线和数字。最关键的实验应该是不同 epsilon 下的精度-隐私权衡曲线，以及和标准 DP-ICL 或 DP few-shot 方法相比的提升幅度；同时还应检查 amplification 是否会引入偏置放大或校准变差。现有信息不足，不能进一步展开。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"From the title, the paper addresses the accuracy loss of in-context learning under differential privacy constraints, and proposes plausible token amplification to improve the implicit Bayesian inference view of ICL. The core issue is that privacy-preserving noise typically degrades the contextual evidence that ICL depends on.","importance":"This is a privacy-meets-ICL methods paper, not a direct pretraining contribution, but it is relevant for real deployment. Its importance lies in showing that privacy protection may not have to come with a severe ICL accuracy collapse, especially in retrieval-backed or personalized settings where context carries sensitive information.","technical_approach":"Based on the title alone, the method seems to amplify the contribution of plausible tokens within an implicit Bayesian inference formulation of ICL, compensating for the dilution caused by DP noise. The design rationale is sensible: if ICL behaves like posterior updating from contextual evidence, then privacy noise flattens that posterior, and reweighting still-reliable token evidence may recover some discrimination power. Without an abstract, it is unclear whether amplification is applied to prompt construction, token distributions, or posterior estimation, and what DP assumptions are used.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so there are no confirmed tasks, models, privacy budgets, baselines, or quantitative gains. The most important evidence would be accuracy-privacy trade-off curves across epsilon values, comparisons against standard DP-ICL baselines, and checks for calibration drift or bias amplification introduced by token amplification. Anything beyond that would be guesswork.","authors_note":""},"tags":["icl","differential-privacy","bayesian","tokenization"]},{"id":"2506.13406","title":"CALM: Consensus-Aware Localized Merging for Multi-Task Learning","authors":["Kunda Yan","Min Zhang","Sen Cui","Zikun Qu","Bo Jiang","Feng Liu","Changshui Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$11e","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.13406","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Yan0CQJLZ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Yan0CQJLZ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/yan25d.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是多任务模型合并中的老问题：全局方法容易参数互相干扰，局部方法虽然更细，但常常保不住真正有用的任务特征。过去 task arithmetic 一类方法默认不同任务增量可以线性叠加，但任务冲突和局部细节丢失使这个假设很脆弱。","importance":"这是一个模型合并方法工作，和 post-train、continual adaptation、低成本多任务部署直接相关。对 pretrain 的间接启示是：当我们越来越依赖后训练专家化分支时，合并策略本身会反过来影响基础模型该如何保留通用性与可塑性。它不是范式级贡献，但对多任务 checkpoint 生态很实用。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 CALM，思路是把局部参数信息和跨任务的全局共识结合起来，而不是二选一。它包含三部分：类平衡的熵最小化采样、基于共识的 localized merging，以及保证合并后局部信息仍有效的机制。设计上最关键的一点是，作者不接受“全局稳但粗糙”或“局部细但碎片化”的二元对立，而是先估计跨任务一致的方向，再只在与共识相容的局部区域保留任务细节。这比纯全局加权更少干扰，也比纯局部掩码更不容易把重要信息合并后做失效。","experiments":"摘要没有给出模型系列、任务数、数据集和具体提升数字，因此没法量化它对 TIES、task arithmetic 或其他 merging baseline 的优势。可以确认的是，实验应覆盖多任务合并后的整体性能与任务保持能力，并且会比较 global-aware 与 local-aware 方法。最值得关注的 ablation 应该是三部分组件的拆分，以及在任务相似度高/低时 CALM 是否都稳定；如果它只在任务高度相关时有效，那适用边界会比较明显。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a persistent issue in multi-task model merging: global methods suffer from parameter interference, while local methods preserve granularity but often fail to keep the task-specific details that still matter after merging. Task-arithmetic-style approaches assume task deltas can be combined fairly linearly, and that assumption often breaks under task conflict.","importance":"This is a practical model-merging paper relevant to post-training, continual adaptation, and low-cost multi-task deployment. Its indirect pretraining relevance is that, as we increasingly rely on specialized post-trained branches, merging strategies feed back into how much plasticity and shared structure the base model should retain. It is not a paradigm shift, but it is useful for the checkpoint ecosystem.","technical_approach":"CALM combines localized parameter information with global task consensus instead of choosing one over the other. The method includes class-balanced entropy-minimization sampling, consensus-aware localized merging, and a mechanism to preserve the effectiveness of local information after merging. The key design idea is that task-specific details should only be retained where they align with cross-task consensus. That reduces interference compared with purely global merging and avoids the brittleness of purely local masks.","experiments":"The abstract provides no model family, number of tasks, datasets, or quantitative gains, so it is not possible to measure the advantage over baselines such as task arithmetic or TIES. What can be inferred is that the experiments evaluate both overall merged-model performance and task retention, likely against global-aware and local-aware baselines. The most informative ablations would isolate each component and test whether CALM remains robust when tasks are less related, since that defines the method's boundary.","authors_note":""},"tags":["model-merging","multi-task","finetuning","alignment"]},{"id":"2505.02862","title":"Cannot See the Forest for the Trees: Invoking Heuristics and Biases to Elicit Irrational Choices of LLMs","authors":["Haoming Yang","Ke Ma","Xiaojun Jia","Yingfei Sun","Qianqian Xu","Qingming Huang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$11f","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.02862","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Yang0JS0H25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Yang0JS0H25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/yang25s.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是：现有 jailbreak 研究很多依赖人工技巧或暴力搜索，未必能覆盖真实世界里更自然、更隐蔽的攻击方式。作者关注的不是再堆一个 prompt attack，而是利用人类启发式与认知偏差来系统诱导 LLM 做出不理性选择，暴露安全防护中的认知型脆弱点。","importance":"这是一个安全评测与攻击方法工作，对 pretrain 的直接帮助有限，但对对齐和红队化很有价值。它的重要性在于把 jailbreak 从“token 优化问题”推进到“决策偏差触发问题”：如果模型会因为简单性偏好、相关性偏置而更容易越狱，那么纯靠表层拒答模板和常规安全 SFT 很难补住。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 ICRT。它借用两类人类认知偏差：一是 simplicity effect，通过 cognitive decomposition 降低恶意请求表面复杂度，让模型更容易逐步接受；二是 relevance bias，通过重组 prompt 提高语义相关性，诱导模型把局部无害片段拼接成整体有害输出。与 brute-force jailbreak 不同，这种方法强调可解释的攻击机制，而不是单纯搜索更强 prompt。作者还提出了 ranking-based harmfulness metric，替代简单的二元成功率，以更细粒度评估攻击强弱。","experiments":"摘要没有给出被攻击模型、攻击成功率和相对已有 jailbreak 方法的提升数字，因此无法判断它是小幅增强还是明显突破。可以确认的是，实验会比较 ICRT 与现有人工设计或优化式攻击，并用新的有害性排序指标做评估。若论文扎实，最有价值的结果应包括：不同偏差组件的独立贡献、在不同安全对齐强度模型上的迁移性，以及 ranking metric 与人工有害性判断的一致性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper argues that many jailbreak studies rely on brute-force optimization or handcrafted prompts and therefore miss more natural, realistic attack surfaces. Its target is not just another prompt attack, but a class of jailbreaks that exploit heuristic and bias-like vulnerabilities to push LLMs toward irrational harmful choices.","importance":"This is a safety evaluation and attack paper with limited direct relevance to pretraining, but clear value for alignment and red teaming. The key contribution is conceptual: it reframes jailbreaks from a token-search problem to a bias-triggering problem. If models are vulnerable to simplicity and relevance biases, then standard refusal tuning and surface-level safety filters are likely insufficient.","technical_approach":"The framework, ICRT, draws on two cognitive-bias-inspired mechanisms. First, it uses cognitive decomposition under a simplicity effect to make malicious intent easier for the model to process step by step. Second, it exploits relevance bias by reorganizing prompts so semantically aligned benign-looking pieces combine into harmful outputs. Unlike brute-force jailbreak methods, this approach emphasizes interpretable attack mechanisms. The paper also proposes a ranking-based harmfulness metric instead of a binary attack-success label, which should better capture attack severity.","experiments":"The abstract reports no target models, attack success rates, or quantitative improvements over prior jailbreak methods, so the empirical impact cannot be sized. What is clear is that ICRT is compared against existing manual or optimization-based attacks and evaluated with a more graded harmfulness metric. The most useful results would isolate the contribution of each bias component, test transfer across models with different alignment strength, and validate whether the ranking metric tracks human judgments of harm.","authors_note":""},"tags":["jailbreak","safety","alignment","evaluation"]},{"id":"Yang0PF25","title":"Preference Controllable Reinforcement Learning with Advanced Multi-Objective Optimization","authors":["Yucheng Yang","Tianyi Zhou","Mykola Pechenizkiy","Meng Fang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Yang0PF25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Yang0PF25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/yang25ax.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"从标题看，这篇论文要解决的是在强化学习里实现可控偏好，也就是在多个目标之间根据用户或系统指定偏好做可调节优化。传统多目标 RL 常常要么固定标量化权重，要么在偏好变化时重新训练，灵活性和样本效率都不理想。","importance":"这是多目标 RL 方法，和 LLM pretrain 关系不直接，但与对齐、可控生成和 reward design 有接口价值。它的潜在重要性在于：如果 advanced multi-objective optimization 能支持偏好可控的统一策略，就会影响到多奖励对齐、人格/风格控制以及部署期可配置行为。","technical_approach":"仅从标题可推断，方法核心是在多目标优化框架里显式引入 preference controllable 机制，让策略能随偏好向量变化而调整，而不是为每个偏好单独训练。设计意图应该是同时改善 Pareto 覆盖和控制精度。没有摘要，无法确认它使用条件策略、超网络、拉格朗日式目标还是 Pareto front approximation，也无法判断它是在线 RL 还是离线 RL 设置。","experiments":"没有摘要，因此没有环境、目标数、基线和结果数字。最关键的实验通常会看：偏好切换时是否能平滑控制行为、相对固定权重 baseline 的样本效率、以及 Pareto front 覆盖质量。没有这些信息，不能进一步评价。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"From the title, the paper appears to address preference-controllable reinforcement learning, where a policy should adapt to changing trade-offs among multiple objectives. Standard multi-objective RL often uses fixed scalarization weights or requires retraining when preferences change, which limits flexibility and efficiency.","importance":"This is a multi-objective RL methods paper with no direct pretraining contribution, but it is relevant to alignment, controllable generation, and reward design. Its potential significance is that a single preference-conditioned policy could support configurable behavior at deployment time instead of retraining for each target trade-off.","technical_approach":"The likely core idea is to combine preference conditioning with advanced multi-objective optimization so one policy can respond to different preference vectors while still covering the Pareto set effectively. The design goal is presumably to improve both controllability and Pareto efficiency. Without an abstract, it is not possible to say whether the method uses conditional policies, hypernetworks, Lagrangian objectives, or explicit Pareto-front approximation, nor whether it is online or offline RL.","experiments":"No abstract is available, so there are no confirmed environments, numbers of objectives, baselines, or quantitative results. The key evidence would normally test smooth behavioral control under preference changes, sample efficiency against fixed-weight baselines, and quality of Pareto-front coverage. Anything more specific would be unsupported.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reinforcement-learning","multi-objective","preference-learning"]},{"id":"2503.01874","title":"CABS: Conflict-Aware and Balanced Sparsification for Enhancing Model Merging","authors":["Zongzhen Yang","Binhang Qi","Hailong Sun","Wenrui Long","Ruobing Zhao","Xiang Gao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$120","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.01874","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YangQ0LZ025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YangQ0LZ025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/yang25x.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"基于 task vector 的模型合并（model merging）面临参数冲突问题，现有稀疏化方法存在高参数重叠和权重分布不均衡两个瓶颈，导致多任务合并后性能下降。","importance":"方法级贡献。模型合并是一种不需要重新训练就能整合多个微调模型的高效方式，对 pretrain→posttrain 流程有实际价值——比如合并不同能力的 SFT 模型。CABS 提供了一个简单有效的稀疏化框架来缓解冲突。","technical_approach":"CABS 包含两个组件：Conflict-Aware Sparsification (CA) 在顺序剪枝时施加 mask 减少不同 task vector 之间的参数重叠；Balanced Sparsification (BS) 解决权重分布不均衡问题。整体思路是在稀疏化阶段就显式处理冲突，而非合并后再修补。与 TIES-Merging 等方法的区别在于同时解决重叠和均衡两个问题。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体数字。框架定位为 simple yet effective，在已有 benchmark 上验证。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Task-vector-based model merging suffers from parameter conflicts; existing sparsification methods are limited by high parameter overlap and unbalanced weight distribution across task vectors.","importance":"Method-level contribution to model merging, which is practically relevant for combining multiple fine-tuned models without retraining. Useful in pretrain-to-posttrain workflows, e.g., merging SFT models with different capabilities.","technical_approach":"CABS has two components: Conflict-Aware Sparsification (CA) applies masks during sequential pruning to reduce parameter overlap between task vectors; Balanced Sparsification (BS) addresses uneven weight distribution. The key idea is handling conflicts at the sparsification stage rather than post-merge. Differs from TIES-Merging by jointly addressing overlap and balance.","experiments":"Specific numbers not provided in the abstract. Positioned as a simple yet effective framework validated on established benchmarks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["model-merging","task-vectors","sparsification"]},{"id":"YangVKWDB025","title":"Mixture of Experts Made Intrinsically Interpretable","authors":["Xingyi Yang","Constantin Venhoff","Ashkan Khakzar","Christian Schröder de Witt","Puneet K. Dokania","Adel Bibi","Philip Torr"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YangVKWDB025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YangVKWDB025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/yang25ag.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"MoE 模型虽然高效但缺乏可解释性——每个 expert 学到了什么、路由决策的依据是什么，目前基本是黑箱。本文探索让 MoE 具备内在可解释性。","importance":"分析/方法级贡献。MoE 是当前大模型 scaling 的主流架构选择（DeepSeek-V2/V3、Mixtral 等），理解 expert 的语义分工对 pretrain 中的 MoE 设计（expert 数量、粒度、路由策略）有直接指导意义。","technical_approach":"摘要未提供，无法给出具体方法。从标题推测可能通过约束或正则化使每个 expert 对应可解释的语义概念，或通过事后分析揭示 expert 的功能分化。","experiments":"摘要未提供，无法给出实验细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"MoE models are efficient but opaque—what each expert learns and how routing decisions are made is largely a black box. This work explores making MoE intrinsically interpretable.","importance":"Analysis/method-level contribution. MoE is the dominant scaling architecture (DeepSeek-V2/V3, Mixtral, etc.), and understanding expert specialization directly informs pretrain design choices around expert count, granularity, and routing.","technical_approach":"Abstract not available. Based on the title, the approach likely involves constraints or regularization to align experts with interpretable semantic concepts, or post-hoc analysis revealing functional specialization.","experiments":"Abstract not available; no experimental details can be reported.","authors_note":""},"tags":["moe","interpretability"]},{"id":"2505.11953","title":"Exploring Criteria of Loss Reweighting to Enhance LLM Unlearning","authors":["Puning Yang","Qizhou Wang","Zhuo Huang","Tongliang Liu","Chengqi Zhang","Bo Han"],"institutions":["University of Sydney"],"abstract":"$121","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.11953","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YangWHLZ025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YangWHLZ025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/yang25ak.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM unlearning 中 loss reweighting 被广泛使用但其机制不清楚——到底应该强调哪些数据、为什么有效、最优策略是什么，都是开放问题。","importance":"分析级贡献。Unlearning 与 pretrain 的关系在于：理解如何高效遗忘特定知识，反过来揭示了 pretrain 阶段知识是如何被编码和存储的。loss reweighting 的两个目标（Saturation 和 Importance）的分析框架对 pretrain 中的数据加权策略也有参考价值。","technical_approach":"识别出 loss reweighting 的两个不同目标：Saturation（强调优化不充分的数据）和 Importance（强调对 loss 最小化最有影响的关键数据）。为每个目标设计了专门的 reweighting 策略并分别评估其对 unlearning 的效果。这是一个分析驱动的工作，先理解机制再设计方法。","experiments":"在已有 unlearning benchmark 上做了大量实证分析，总结了若干实用发现。具体数字未在摘要中披露。","authors_note":"作者包括 Tongliang Liu（悉尼大学，噪声标签学习和鲁棒训练方向知名学者）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Loss reweighting is widely used in LLM unlearning but its mechanisms are unclear—which data to emphasize, why it works, and what the optimal strategy is remain open questions.","importance":"Analysis-level contribution. Understanding how to efficiently forget specific knowledge sheds light on how knowledge is encoded during pretraining. The two-goal framework (Saturation vs. Importance) for loss reweighting is also informative for data weighting strategies in pretraining.","technical_approach":"Identifies two distinct goals of loss reweighting: Saturation (emphasize under-optimized data) and Importance (emphasize data most influential for loss minimization). Designs specific reweighting strategies for each goal and evaluates their effects on unlearning separately. Analysis-driven: understand the mechanism first, then design methods.","experiments":"Extensive empirical analyses on established unlearning benchmarks with practical takeaways summarized. Specific numbers not provided in the abstract.","authors_note":"Authors include Tongliang Liu (University of Sydney, known for noisy label learning and robust training)."},"tags":["unlearning","loss-reweighting","llm-safety"],"notable_authors":["Tongliang Liu"]},{"id":"2501.18282","title":"Leveraging Sparsity for Sample-Efficient Preference Learning: A Theoretical Perspective","authors":["Yunzhen Yao","Lie He","Michael Gastpar"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$122","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.18282","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YaoHG25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YaoHG25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/yao25c.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"偏好学习（preference learning）的样本效率受限于特征空间维度——经典理论要求样本数线性于维度 d。在高维特征空间和标注成本高昂的场景下，这个线性依赖是瓶颈。","importance":"理论级贡献。对 RLHF/DPO 等偏好学习方法的样本复杂度给出了更紧的理论界。在 pretrain→posttrain 闭环中，理解偏好数据的样本效率直接影响对齐阶段的数据收集策略。稀疏性假设在实践中也有合理性——reward 函数可能只依赖少数关键特征。","technical_approach":"在 sparse random utility model 下（reward 函数参数是 k-sparse 的），证明 minimax 最优估计误差率可以从 Θ(d/n) 降到 Θ(k/n · log(d/k))。这意味着如果 reward 函数确实稀疏，所需样本量可以从线性于 d 降到近似线性于 k。理论工具是稀疏估计的经典框架，应用到偏好模型的特殊结构上。","experiments":"这是一篇理论工作，核心贡献是 sharp error rate 的建立。摘要未提及实验验证。","authors_note":"作者包括 Michael Gastpar（信息论领域知名学者）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Sample efficiency of preference learning is bottlenecked by linear dependence on feature dimension d in classical theory. With high-dimensional features and expensive human annotations, this is a practical limitation.","importance":"Theory-level contribution providing tighter sample complexity bounds for preference learning (RLHF/DPO). In the pretrain-to-posttrain loop, understanding data efficiency for alignment directly impacts annotation strategy. The sparsity assumption is practically reasonable—reward functions may depend on only a few key features.","technical_approach":"Under a sparse random utility model where the reward parameter is k-sparse, proves the minimax optimal rate improves from Θ(d/n) to Θ(k/n · log(d/k)). This means if the reward function is indeed sparse, required samples scale with k rather than d. Uses classical sparse estimation tools adapted to the preference model structure.","experiments":"Primarily a theory paper establishing sharp error rates. No experiments mentioned in the abstract.","authors_note":"Authors include Michael Gastpar (prominent information theory researcher)."},"tags":["preference-learning","sample-efficiency","sparsity","rlhf"],"notable_authors":["Michael Gastpar"]},{"id":"YeA0JVLTL25","title":"Reward-Guided Prompt Evolving in Reinforcement Learning for LLMs","authors":["Ziyu Ye","Rishabh Agarwal","Tianqi Liu","Rishabh Joshi","Sarmishta Velury","Quoc V. Le","Qijun Tan","Yuan Liu"],"institutions":["Google DeepMind"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YeA0JVLTL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YeA0JVLTL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/ye25a.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 的强化学习训练中，prompt 的质量和多样性直接影响 RL 的效果，但如何系统性地演化和优化 prompt 缺乏研究。本文提出用 reward 信号引导 prompt 的进化。","importance":"方法级贡献，属于 pretrain↔posttrain 接口的工作。RL 训练中 prompt 分布的质量是一个被低估的因素——好的 prompt 能让 RL 信号更有效，差的 prompt 浪费训练预算。这对 R1-Zero 等 RL-based 训练范式的数据策略有直接参考价值。","technical_approach":"摘要未提供，无法给出具体方法。从标题推测是利用 reward model 的反馈来指导 prompt 的选择、变异或生成，使 RL 训练过程中的 prompt 分布逐步优化。","experiments":"摘要未提供，无法给出实验细节。","authors_note":"作者包括 Rishabh Agarwal（Google DeepMind，offline RL 和 LLM RL 方向有多篇代表性工作，如 statistical precipice）和 Tianqi Liu。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In RL training for LLMs, prompt quality and diversity directly impact RL effectiveness, but systematic prompt evolution is understudied. This work proposes reward-guided prompt evolving.","importance":"Method-level contribution at the pretrain-posttrain interface. Prompt distribution quality in RL training is an underappreciated factor—good prompts make RL signals more effective. Directly relevant to data strategies for R1-Zero-style RL paradigms.","technical_approach":"Abstract not available. Based on the title, likely uses reward model feedback to guide prompt selection, mutation, or generation, progressively optimizing the prompt distribution during RL training.","experiments":"Abstract not available; no experimental details can be reported.","authors_note":"Authors include Rishabh Agarwal (Google DeepMind, known for statistical precipice and LLM RL work) and Tianqi Liu."},"tags":["rl","prompt-optimization","reward-guided"],"notable_authors":["Rishabh Agarwal"]},{"id":"YehWDPTI025","title":"Position: Challenges and Future Directions of Data-Centric AI Alignment","authors":["Min-Hsuan Yeh","Jeffrey Wang","Xuefeng Du","Seongheon Park","Leitian Tao","Shawn Im","Yixuan Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"position","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/YehWDPTI025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/YehWDPTI025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/yeh25b.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"数据中心的 AI 对齐（data-centric AI alignment）面临哪些挑战和未来方向？这是一篇 position paper，系统梳理从数据角度改进对齐的问题空间。","importance":"视角级贡献。对齐的数据质量问题直接关联 pretrain→posttrain 闭环——什么样的对齐数据最有效、数据偏差如何传播、如何系统性地改进数据管线。作为 position paper，价值在于问题框架而非具体方法。","technical_approach":"摘要未提供，无法给出具体内容。从标题判断是对 data-centric alignment 的挑战进行系统性分类和讨论，可能涵盖数据收集、标注质量、分布偏差、数据合成等方面。","experiments":"Position paper，预计无实验。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"What are the challenges and future directions for data-centric AI alignment? This is a position paper systematically mapping the problem space of improving alignment from a data perspective.","importance":"Perspective-level contribution. Data quality for alignment is directly tied to the pretrain-posttrain loop—what alignment data is most effective, how data biases propagate, and how to systematically improve data pipelines. Value lies in the problem framing rather than specific methods.","technical_approach":"Abstract not available. Based on the title, likely provides a systematic taxonomy of challenges in data-centric alignment, potentially covering data collection, annotation quality, distributional bias, and data synthesis.","experiments":"Position paper; likely no experiments.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-centric","alignment","position-paper"]},{"id":"2502.01235","title":"LoRA-One: One-Step Full Gradient Could Suffice for Fine-Tuning Large Language Models, Provably and Efficiently","authors":["Yuanhe Zhang","Fanghui Liu","Yudong Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$123","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.01235","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Zhang0025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Zhang0025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhang25ax.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["lora","fine-tuning","optimization","theory"]},{"id":"ZhangC025","title":"When do neural networks learn world models?","authors":["Tianren Zhang","Guanyu Chen","Feng Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhangC025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhangC025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhang25j.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["world-models","representation-learning","generalization","theory"]},{"id":"2501.06589","title":"Ladder-Residual: Parallelism-Aware Architecture for Accelerating Large Model Inference with Communication Overlapping","authors":["Muru Zhang","Mayank Mishra","Zhongzhu Zhou","William Brandon","Jue Wang","Yoon Kim","Jonathan Ragan-Kelley","Shuaiwen Leon Song","Ben Athiwaratkun","Tri Dao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$124","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.06589","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhangMZBWKRSAD25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhangMZBWKRSAD25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhang25bg.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["inference","parallelism","communication","systems"]},{"id":"2502.00264","title":"Beyond the Permutation Symmetry of Transformers: The Role of Rotation for Model Fusion","authors":["Binchi Zhang","Zaiyi Zheng","Zhengzhang Chen","Jundong Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$125","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.00264","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhangZCL25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhangZCL25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhang25dk.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：Transformer 的参数空间等价性不应只由 permutation symmetry 来刻画，连续的 rotation symmetry 也很关键，尤其对模型融合有帮助。过去模型融合常借助 MLP/神经元置换对齐，但 Transformer 的自注意力层结构更复杂，离散置换能利用的等价空间有限，所以融合效果常受限。","importance":"这更像架构几何与系统优化交叉处的工作，不直接改变 pretrain 目标，但对 checkpoint fusion、模型平均、continual pretrain 和低成本后训练都有潜在价值。重要性在于它把“参数对齐”从离散排列问题推广到连续变换问题，理论上能显著扩大可利用的等价解集合；如果实验扎实，这会让 Transformer 融合更稳定，也可能改善多阶段训练中的权重拼接与迁移。","technical_approach":"核心方法是提出 Transformer 中自注意力层的 rotation symmetry，并将其作为 permutation symmetry 的连续推广。直观上，作者认为某些参数矩阵可以在特定旋转变换下保持函数等价或近似等价，因此融合前不必只搜索离散 neuron/head 对齐，还可以在连续空间里做更细粒度校准。相比传统 permutation matching，这样设计的优势是搜索空间更丰富、表达能力更强；代价是连续优化更难、近似等价条件可能更脆弱，而且真正的函数保持往往依赖层间协同变换是否完整满足。","experiments":"摘要没有给出具体实验对象、模型规模、融合任务、以及相对 baselines 的数值提升，因此无法准确总结性能。能确认的是，作者声称 rotation symmetry 对 Transformer 模型融合有效，并强调它比离散 permutation 更具表达力。对这类工作，最关键的实验应该是：在 model soup、federated fusion、task arithmetic 或多 checkpoint merge 上，相对 permutation-only 方法提升多少；以及这种提升在同初始化/异初始化、同数据/异数据训练出的模型之间是否仍成立。现有信息不足以给数值结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper argues that permutation symmetry is not enough to characterize useful equivalence structure in transformers, and that a continuous rotation symmetry is important, especially for model fusion. Prior fusion methods often rely on neuron or head permutation alignment, which works better for MLP-like structure than for the richer geometry of self-attention layers.","importance":"This is best viewed as a parameter-geometry contribution with systems implications. It does not change the pretraining objective directly, but it could matter for checkpoint fusion, continual pretraining, model averaging, and other low-cost ways of combining training trajectories. The key reason it matters is that moving from discrete permutations to continuous rotations potentially enlarges the set of functionally aligned solutions available for merging.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to introduce a rotation symmetry for transformer self-attention layers, generalizing permutation symmetry from a discrete to a continuous transformation family. The intuition is that some parameter matrices can be rotated in coordinated ways while preserving, or approximately preserving, the represented function. This gives a richer alignment space before fusion than pure permutation matching. The benefit is greater flexibility and potentially better alignment quality; the trade-off is that continuous optimization is harder and the exact equivalence conditions may be more fragile if the necessary cross-layer transformations are only partially enforced.","experiments":"The abstract does not include the fused model types, scales, tasks, baselines, or quantitative gains, so there is no reliable metric summary to provide. What can be stated is that the authors claim rotation symmetry improves transformer model fusion and offers more expressive alignment than permutation-only methods. The critical evidence would be gains on checkpoint merge tasks such as model soups or multi-task fusion, plus robustness across models trained from the same versus different initializations or data distributions. Those details are missing from the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["model-fusion","symmetry","transformer","rotation"],"notable_authors":["Jundong Li"]},{"id":"2502.02384","title":"STAIR: Improving Safety Alignment with Introspective Reasoning","authors":["Yichi Zhang","Siyuan Zhang","Yao Huang","Zeyu Xia","Zhengwei Fang","Xiao Yang","Ranjie Duan","Dong Yan","Yinpeng Dong","Jun Zhu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$126","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.02384","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhangZHXFYDYD025","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhangZHXFYDYD025","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhang25cx.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：现有安全对齐过度依赖直接拒答，导致能力损失和 jailbreak 脆弱性并存。作者认为问题不只是安全数据不够，而是模型没有学会先分析风险、再决定如何回应；缺少这个中间推理层，就容易出现表面守规矩、实际可绕过的安全行为。","importance":"这是 post-train 工作，但对 pretrain/posttrain 接口有启发。它的重要性在于把安全对齐从“输出一个 refusal”转成“先形成安全感知推理再输出决策”，这比单纯加拒答样本更接近可泛化的行为约束。对基础模型训练者来说，这提示推理轨迹和中间判断可能是比最终标签更高质量的对齐信号。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 STAIR，把安全对齐和 introspective reasoning 结合起来。流程上，先让模型学会结构化、带安全意识的 step-by-step reasoning；然后用新构造的 step-level reasoning 数据做迭代式 preference optimization，持续提升模型对风险的识别和决策能力。和传统 safety SFT 或只对最终回答做偏好优化不同，STAIR 的关键选择是把优化目标下沉到推理步骤层面，因为很多 jailbreak 正是利用最终回答约束和中间推理脱节。这样做的潜在好处是更稳健，代价是依赖 reasoning data 质量，而且如果显式 CoT 暴露给用户，还会带来安全与可解释性的额外权衡。","experiments":"摘要没有给出底座模型、参数量、数据规模以及在安全基准上的具体分数，因此无法报告量化提升。可以确认的结论是：作者声称 STAIR 同时改善安全性与通用性能，并提升对 jailbreak 的鲁棒性；此外，训练是围绕 step-level reasoning data 迭代进行的。对这类论文最关键的实验通常是安全 benchmark、helpfulness benchmark、以及对多类 jailbreak 攻击的成功率变化，还有一步一步推理监督相对 outcome-only preference 的增益。摘要未给数字，需谨慎解读。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a common failure mode in safety alignment: systems that rely mostly on direct refusal often lose capability and still remain vulnerable to jailbreaks. The authors argue that the missing piece is not just more safety data, but an internal process that explicitly reasons about risk before deciding how to respond.","importance":"This is a post-training paper, but it is relevant to the pretrain-posttrain interface. Its main contribution is to shift safety alignment from outcome-only refusal behavior to safety-aware reasoning, which is more likely to generalize beyond seen attack patterns. For model builders, the broader lesson is that intermediate reasoning traces may provide a stronger alignment signal than final labels alone.","technical_approach":"STAIR combines safety alignment with introspective reasoning. The procedure first teaches the model a structured, safety-aware step-by-step reasoning process, and then improves it through iterative preference optimization on step-level reasoning data generated by the framework. The important design choice is to optimize over reasoning steps rather than only final answers, because many jailbreaks exploit a mismatch between constrained outputs and unconstrained internal reasoning. The expected gain is stronger robustness; the cost is dependence on the quality of reasoning data, plus the usual trade-off around exposing explicit chains of thought.","experiments":"The abstract does not report base models, parameter counts, dataset sizes, or exact benchmark scores, so there is no trustworthy numeric summary. What can be stated is that the authors claim gains in safety, robustness to jailbreak attacks, and preservation of general performance, with training centered on iterative step-level reasoning optimization. For this class of paper, the critical evidence would be safety benchmark improvements, helpfulness retention, jailbreak success-rate reductions, and ablations comparing step-level versus outcome-only preference optimization. Those numbers are not provided in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["safety-alignment","jailbreak","reasoning","sft"]},{"id":"Zhao0ZYT25","title":"Score as Action: Fine Tuning Diffusion Generative Models by Continuous-time Reinforcement Learning","authors":["Hanyang Zhao","Haoxian Chen","Ji Zhang","David D. Yao","Wenpin Tang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/Zhao0ZYT25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/Zhao0ZYT25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhao25f.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"从标题看，这篇论文要解决的是：如何用强化学习来微调 diffusion 生成模型，并且把连续时间 diffusion 中的 score 视作 action 来处理。这个问题值得做，因为 diffusion 模型的后训练一直弱于 AR 模型：AR 很容易接 RLHF / DPO 一类框架，而 diffusion 的生成是多步连续过程，信用分配和策略定义都更麻烦。","importance":"如果方法成立，这会是 diffusion post-training 方向的重要推进，而且和新型语言建模范式直接相关。它的意义在于把 RL 工具箱更自然地接到 diffusion 上，而不是硬把 diffusion 过程离散化后套用 AR 的做法。对离散/连续 diffusion LM、图像生成、甚至 AR+diffusion 联合模型都可能有启发，因为它触及的是 post-train 接口而不是某个特定模态。","technical_approach":"当前没有摘要，无法确认具体算法细节。但从标题可以合理推断，作者把 diffusion 模型在连续时间上的 score function 更新解释为一种动作选择，从而把微调问题写成 continuous-time RL。这样设计的潜在好处是：RL 目标可以直接作用于生成轨迹，而不必只在最终样本上做黑盒 reweighting；同时也更贴近 diffusion 的动力系统形式。关键难点则会是连续时间策略优化的稳定性、奖励方差、以及 score/action 映射是否带来可实现的梯度估计。","experiments":"没有摘要和实验数据，无法说明作者用了什么模型、什么任务，以及相对哪些 diffusion RL baseline 有多少提升。对这类论文，最值得看的实验通常包括：图像或离散生成任务上的 reward 提升、样本质量变化、训练稳定性，以及与 reward-weighted regression、policy gradient on denoising steps、DPO-style diffusion fine-tuning 的对比。当前信息不足，不能下数值结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Judging from the title, the paper studies how to fine-tune diffusion generators with reinforcement learning by treating the continuous-time score as the action. This is a meaningful problem because post-training for diffusion models still lags far behind autoregressive models: RLHF-style methods plug naturally into AR generation, but diffusion involves multi-step continuous dynamics with much trickier credit assignment.","importance":"If the formulation works, it would be an important step for diffusion post-training and is directly relevant to alternative language-modeling paradigms. The significance is that it tries to connect RL to diffusion in a native way rather than forcing diffusion into an autoregressive or discretized framework. That could matter not only for diffusion LMs, but also for image generation and hybrid AR-diffusion systems.","technical_approach":"There is no abstract, so the algorithmic details cannot be stated with confidence. The title does suggest the central move: interpret the score function in continuous-time diffusion as an action variable and cast fine-tuning as a continuous-time RL problem. The appeal of this view is that rewards can influence the whole generation trajectory instead of only the final sample. The hard part is likely optimization stability, reward variance, and whether the score-to-action mapping yields tractable gradient estimation.","experiments":"No abstract or quantitative results are available, so there is nothing reliable to say about model types, tasks, baselines, or gains. For a paper in this area, the key evidence would usually include reward improvement, sample-quality trade-offs, training stability, and comparisons against prior diffusion fine-tuning methods such as reward-weighted or denoising-step-based approaches. Those details are missing here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","rl-finetuning","continuous-time-rl"]},{"id":"ZhaoHCZLZ25","title":"RIFLEx: A Free Lunch for Length Extrapolation in Video Diffusion Transformers","authors":["Min Zhao","Guande He","Yixiao Chen","Hongzhou Zhu","Chongxuan Li","Jun Zhu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhaoHCZLZ25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhaoHCZLZ25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhao25m.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["video-diffusion","length-extrapolation","positional-encoding"]},{"id":"2506.15271","title":"Unlocking Post-hoc Dataset Inference with Synthetic Data","authors":["Bihe Zhao","Pratyush Maini","Franziska Boenisch","Adam Dziedzic"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$127","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.15271","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhaoMBD25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhaoMBD25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhao25q.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["dataset-inference","data-attribution","synthetic-data","training-data"]},{"id":"2506.05713","title":"Come Together, But Not Right Now: A Progressive Strategy to Boost Low-Rank Adaptation","authors":["Zhan Zhuang","Xiequn Wang","Wei Li","Yulong Zhang","Qiushi Huang","Shuhao Chen","Xuehao Wang","Yanbin Wei","Yuhe Nie","Kede Ma","Yu Zhang","Ying Wei"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$128","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.05713","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/icml/ZhuangWLZHCWWNM25","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/icml/ZhuangWLZHCWWNM25","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/zhuang25c.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["lora","peft","fine-tuning","adapter","optimization"]}]},"allConferences":[{"slug":"acl-2025","venue":"ACL","year":2025,"full_name":"Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics","total_relevant":641,"total_fetched":3380,"by_award":{"poster":626,"best_paper":3,"outstanding_paper":12},"by_track":{"long":367,"findings":231,"short":18,"industry":10,"srw":6,"demo":6,"main":3},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T00:45:57.823033+00:00"},{"slug":"acl-2024","venue":"ACL","year":2024,"full_name":"Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics","total_relevant":385,"total_fetched":2145,"by_award":{"poster":385},"by_track":{"long":185,"findings":173,"srw":5,"short":9,"main":13},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T22:50:37.051621+00:00"},{"slug":"acl-2023","venue":"ACL","year":2023,"full_name":"Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics","total_relevant":424,"total_fetched":2876,"by_award":{"poster":424},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T09:44:43.509860+00:00"},{"slug":"emnlp-2025","venue":"EMNLP","year":2025,"full_name":"Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing","total_relevant":915,"total_fetched":3499,"by_award":{"poster":915},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T07:35:55.574285+00:00"},{"slug":"emnlp-2024","venue":"EMNLP","year":2024,"full_name":"Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing","total_relevant":718,"total_fetched":2460,"by_award":{"poster":718},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T03:40:34.148010+00:00"},{"slug":"emnlp-2023","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"full_name":"Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing","total_relevant":472,"total_fetched":2310,"by_award":{"poster":472},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T08:32:10.890267+00:00"},{"slug":"iclr-2026","venue":"ICLR","year":2026,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","total_relevant":1053,"total_fetched":5470,"by_award":{"poster":1053},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T01:40:59.513393+00:00"},{"slug":"iclr-2025","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","total_relevant":1979,"total_fetched":3720,"by_award":{"spotlight":193,"poster":1665,"oral":121},"by_track":{"main":1979},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T18:27:18.207575+00:00"},{"slug":"iclr-2024","venue":"ICLR","year":2024,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","total_relevant":851,"total_fetched":2456,"by_award":{"poster":682,"spotlight":130,"oral":39},"by_track":{"main":851},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T17:50:03.172895+00:00"},{"slug":"iclr-2023","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","total_relevant":294,"total_fetched":1794,"by_award":{"poster":294},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T11:29:30.626329+00:00"},{"slug":"icml-2025","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"full_name":"International Conference on Machine Learning","total_relevant":516,"total_fetched":3332,"by_award":{"poster":462,"oral":18,"spotlight":36},"by_track":{"main":510,"position":6},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T20:04:14.360455+00:00"},{"slug":"icml-2024","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"full_name":"International Conference on Machine Learning","total_relevant":335,"total_fetched":3321,"by_award":{"poster":292,"spotlight":15,"oral":28},"by_track":{"main":335},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T18:50:07.833195+00:00"},{"slug":"icml-2023","venue":"ICML","year":2023,"full_name":"International Conference on Machine Learning","total_relevant":297,"total_fetched":2934,"by_award":{"poster":297},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T04:21:49.394726+00:00"},{"slug":"naacl-2025","venue":"NAACL","year":2025,"full_name":"North American Chapter of the ACL","total_relevant":385,"total_fetched":1376,"by_award":{"poster":385},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T04:50:05.821261+00:00"},{"slug":"naacl-2024","venue":"NAACL","year":2024,"full_name":"North American Chapter of the ACL","total_relevant":321,"total_fetched":1342,"by_award":{"poster":321},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T04:35:26.823821+00:00"},{"slug":"neurips-2025","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2025,"full_name":"Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems","total_relevant":1338,"total_fetched":5858,"by_award":{"poster":1338},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T05:45:45.290822+00:00"},{"slug":"neurips-2024","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"full_name":"Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems","total_relevant":576,"total_fetched":4561,"by_award":{"poster":505,"spotlight":59,"oral":12},"by_track":{"datasets_benchmarks":50,"main":526},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T21:58:15.480882+00:00"},{"slug":"neurips-2023","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"full_name":"Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems","total_relevant":523,"total_fetched":3582,"by_award":{"poster":523},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T04:06:29.627949+00:00"}]}]}],["$L129"],"$L12a"]}],"isPartial":false,"staleTime":300,"varyParams":null,"buildId":"CH7QW8TExBpH2R9CnsKlz"}
129:["$","script","script-0",{"src":"/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/03ne4hgh5k61l.js","async":true}]
12a:["$","$L12b",null,{"children":["$","$12c",null,{"name":"Next.MetadataOutlet","children":"$@12d"}]}]
12d:null
