1:"$Sreact.fragment"
2:I[44048,["/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0u8r51s9xyykl.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0d3shmwh5_nmn.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0eajwm.uf2h.~.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/03ne4hgh5k61l.js"],"ConferenceView"]
4f:I[97367,["/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0u8r51s9xyykl.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0d3shmwh5_nmn.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0eajwm.uf2h.~.js"],"OutletBoundary"]
50:"$Sreact.suspense"
3:T74d,Existing pre-trained models are generally geared towards a particular class of problems. To date, there seems to be still no consensus on what the right architecture and pre-training setup should be. This paper presents a unified framework for pre-training models that are universally effective across datasets and setups. We begin by disentangling architectural archetypes with pre-training objectives -- two concepts that are commonly conflated. Next, we present a generalized&unified perspective for self-supervision in NLP and show how different pre-training objectives can be cast as one another and how interpolating between different objectives can be effective. We then propose Mixture-of-Denoisers (MoD), a pre-training objective that combines diverse pre-training paradigms together. We furthermore introduce a notion of mode switching, wherein downstream fine-tuning is associated with specific pre-training schemes. We conduct extensive ablative experiments to compare multiple pre-training objectives and find that our method pushes the Pareto-frontier by outperforming T5&GPT-like models across multiple diverse setups. By scaling our model up to 20B parameters, we achieve SOTA performance on 50 well-established supervised finetuning based NLP tasks. Our model also achieve strong results at in-context learning, outperforming 175B GPT-3 on zero-shot SuperGLUE and tripling the performance of T5-XXL on one-shot summarization. On 0-shot MMLU, UL2 20B outperforms T0 and T5 models. UL2 20B also works well with chain-of-thought prompting and reasoning, making it an appealing choice for research into reasoning at a small to medium scale of 20B parameters. Finally, we apply FLAN instruction tuning to the UL2 20B model, achieving MMLU and Big-Bench scores competitive to FLAN-PaLM 62B. We release Flax-based T5X checkpoints for the UL2 20B&Flan-UL2 20B.4:T51b,Existing techniques for training language models can be misaligned with the truth: if we train models with imitation learning, they may reproduce errors that humans make; if we train them to generate text that humans rate highly, they may output errors that human evaluators can't detect. We propose circumventing this issue by directly finding latent knowledge inside the internal activations of a language model in a purely unsupervised way. Specifically, we introduce a method for accurately answering yes-no questions given only unlabeled model activations. It works by finding a direction in activation space that satisfies logical consistency properties, such as that a statement and its negation have opposite truth values. We show that despite using no supervision and no model outputs, our method can recover diverse knowledge represented in large language models: across 6 models and 10 question-answering datasets, it outperforms zero-shot accuracy by 4\% on average. We also find that it cuts prompt sensitivity in half and continues to maintain high accuracy even when models are prompted to generate incorrect answers. Our results provide an initial step toward discovering what language models know, distinct from what they say, even when we don't have access to explicit ground truth labels.5:T76c,We present a smoothly broken power law functional form (that we refer to as a Broken Neural Scaling Law (BNSL)) that accurately models&extrapolates the scaling behaviors of deep neural networks (i.e. how the evaluation metric of interest varies as amount of compute used for training (or inference), number of model parameters, training dataset size, model input size, number of training steps, or upstream performance varies) for various architectures&for each of various tasks within a large&diverse set of upstream&downstream tasks, in zero-shot, prompted,&finetuned settings. This set includes large-scale vision, language, audio, video, diffusion, generative modeling, multimodal learning, contrastive learning, AI alignment, AI capabilities, robotics, out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization, continual learning, transfer learning, uncertainty estimation / calibration, OOD detection, adversarial robustness, distillation, sparsity, retrieval, quantization, pruning, fairness, molecules, computer programming/coding, math word problems,"emergent phase transitions", arithmetic, supervised learning, unsupervised/self-supervised learning,&reinforcement learning (single agent&multi-agent). When compared to other functional forms for neural scaling, this functional form yields extrapolations of scaling behavior that are considerably more accurate on this set. Moreover, this functional form accurately models&extrapolates scaling behavior that other functional forms are incapable of expressing such as the nonmonotonic transitions present in the scaling behavior of phenomena such as double descent&the delayed, sharp inflection points present in the scaling behavior of tasks such as arithmetic. Lastly, we use this functional form to glean insights about the limit of the predictability of scaling behavior. Code is available at https://github.com/ethancaballero/broken_neural_scaling_laws6:T661,Recent advances in vision-language pre-training have pushed the state-of-the-art on various vision-language tasks, making machines more capable of multi-modal writing (image-to-text generation) and painting (text-to-image generation). However, few studies investigate if these two essential capabilities can be learned together and boost each other, making a versatile and powerful multi-modal foundation model. In this work, we disclose the potential of symmetric generative vision-language pre-training in learning to write and paint concurrently, and propose a new unified modal model, named DaVinci, trained with prefix language modeling and prefix image modeling, a simple generative self-supervised objective on image-text pairs. Thanks to the proposed prefix multi-modal modeling framework, DaVinci is simple to train, scalable to huge data, adaptable to both writing and painting tasks, and also strong on other vision, text, and multi-modal understanding tasks. DaVinci achieves competitive performance on a wide range of 27 generation/understanding tasks and demonstrates the superiority of combining vision/language generative pre-training. Furthermore, we carefully benchmark the performance of different vision-language pre-training objectives on different scales of pre-training datasets on a heterogeneous and broad distribution coverage. Our results demonstrate the potential of exploiting self-supervision in both language and vision inputs, and establish new, stronger baselines for future comparisons at different data scales. The code and pre-trained models are available at https://github.com/shizhediao/DaVinci.7:T572,A proper parametrization of state transition matrices of linear state-space models (SSMs) followed by standard nonlinearities enables them to efficiently learn representations from sequential data, establishing the state-of-the-art on a large series of long-range sequence modeling benchmarks. In this paper, we show that we can improve further when the structural SSM such as S4 is given by a linear liquid time-constant (LTC) state-space model. LTC neural networks are causal continuous-time neural networks with an input-dependent state transition module, which makes them learn to adapt to incoming inputs at inference. We show that by using a diagonal plus low-rank decomposition of the state transition matrix introduced in S4, and a few simplifications, the LTC-based structural state-space model, dubbed Liquid-S4, achieves the new state-of-the-art generalization across sequence modeling tasks with long-term dependencies such as image, text, audio, and medical time-series, with an average performance of 87.32% on the Long-Range Arena benchmark. On the full raw Speech Command recognition, dataset Liquid-S4 achieves 96.78% accuracy with a 30% reduction in parameter counts compared to S4. The additional gain in performance is the direct result of the Liquid-S4's kernel structure that takes into account the similarities of the input sequence samples during training and inference.8:T604,This paper presents a new pre-trained language model, DeBERTaV3, which improves the original DeBERTa model by replacing mask language modeling (MLM) with replaced token detection (RTD), a more sample-efficient pre-training task. Our analysis shows that vanilla embedding sharing in ELECTRA hurts training efficiency and model performance. This is because the training losses of the discriminator and the generator pull token embeddings in different directions, creating the"tug-of-war"dynamics. We thus propose a new gradient-disentangled embedding sharing method that avoids the tug-of-war dynamics, improving both training efficiency and the quality of the pre-trained model. We have pre-trained DeBERTaV3 using the same settings as DeBERTa to demonstrate its exceptional performance on a wide range of downstream natural language understanding (NLU) tasks. Taking the GLUE benchmark with eight tasks as an example, the DeBERTaV3 Large model achieves a 91.37% average score, which is 1.37% over DeBERTa and 1.91% over ELECTRA, setting a new state-of-the-art (SOTA) among the models with a similar structure. Furthermore, we have pre-trained a multi-lingual model mDeBERTa and observed a larger improvement over strong baselines compared to English models. For example, the mDeBERTa Base achieves a 79.8% zero-shot cross-lingual accuracy on XNLI and a 3.6% improvement over XLM-R Base, creating a new SOTA on this benchmark. We have made our pre-trained models and inference code publicly available at https://github.com/microsoft/DeBERTa.9:T4ac,Language models (LMs) have been instrumental for the rapid advance of natural language processing. This paper studies continual pre-training of LMs, in particular, continual domain-adaptive pre-training (or continual DAP-training). Existing research has shown that further pre-training an LM using a domain corpus to adapt the LM to the domain can improve the end-task performance in the domain. This paper proposes a novel method to continually DAP-train an LM with a sequence of unlabeled domain corpora to adapt the LM to these domains to improve their end-task performances. The key novelty of our method is a soft-masking mechanism that directly controls the update to the LM. A novel proxy is also proposed to preserve the general knowledge in the original LM. Additionally, it contrasts the representations of the previously learned domain knowledge (including the general knowledge in the pre-trained LM) and the knowledge from the current full network to achieve knowledge integration. The method not only overcomes catastrophic forgetting, but also achieves knowledge transfer to improve end-task performances. Empirical evaluation demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed method.a:T587,Large language models (LLMs) can perform complex reasoning by generating intermediate reasoning steps. Providing these steps for prompting demonstrations is called chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting. CoT prompting has two major paradigms. One leverages a simple prompt like"Let's think step by step"to facilitate step-by-step thinking before answering a question. The other uses a few manual demonstrations one by one, each composed of a question and a reasoning chain that leads to an answer. The superior performance of the second paradigm hinges on the hand-crafting of task-specific demonstrations one by one. We show that such manual efforts may be eliminated by leveraging LLMs with the"Let's think step by step"prompt to generate reasoning chains for demonstrations one by one, i.e., let's think not just step by step, but also one by one. However, these generated chains often come with mistakes. To mitigate the effect of such mistakes, we find that diversity matters for automatically constructing demonstrations. We propose an automatic CoT prompting method: Auto-CoT. It samples questions with diversity and generates reasoning chains to construct demonstrations. On ten public benchmark reasoning tasks with GPT-3, Auto-CoT consistently matches or exceeds the performance of the CoT paradigm that requires manual designs of demonstrations. Code is available at https://github.com/amazon-research/auto-cotb:T622,Neural sequence models, especially transformers, exhibit a remarkable capacity for in-context learning. They can construct new predictors from sequences of labeled examples $(x, f(x))$ presented in the input without further parameter updates. We investigate the hypothesis that transformer-based in-context learners implement standard learning algorithms implicitly, by encoding smaller models in their activations, and updating these implicit models as new examples appear in the context. Using linear regression as a prototypical problem, we offer three sources of evidence for this hypothesis. First, we prove by construction that transformers can implement learning algorithms for linear models based on gradient descent and closed-form ridge regression. Second, we show that trained in-context learners closely match the predictors computed by gradient descent, ridge regression, and exact least-squares regression, transitioning between different predictors as transformer depth and dataset noise vary, and converging to Bayesian estimators for large widths and depths. Third, we present preliminary evidence that in-context learners share algorithmic features with these predictors: learners' late layers non-linearly encode weight vectors and moment matrices. These results suggest that in-context learning is understandable in algorithmic terms, and that (at least in the linear case) learners may rediscover standard estimation algorithms. Code and reference implementations are released at https://github.com/ekinakyurek/google-research/blob/master/incontext.c:T4ed,Effective scaling and a flexible task interface enable large language models to excel at many tasks. We present PaLI (Pathways Language and Image model), a model that extends this approach to the joint modeling of language and vision. PaLI generates text based on visual and textual inputs, and with this interface performs many vision, language, and multimodal tasks, in many languages. To train PaLI, we make use of large pre-trained encoder-decoder language models and Vision Transformers (ViTs). This allows us to capitalize on their existing capabilities and leverage the substantial cost of training them. We find that joint scaling of the vision and language components is important. Since existing Transformers for language are much larger than their vision counterparts, we train a large, 4-billion parameter ViT (ViT-e) to quantify the benefits from even larger-capacity vision models. To train PaLI, we create a large multilingual mix of pretraining tasks, based on a new image-text training set containing 10B images and texts in over 100 languages. PaLI achieves state-of-the-art in multiple vision and language tasks (such as captioning, visual question-answering, scene-text understanding), while retaining a simple, modular, and scalable design.d:T4aa,Large pre-trained language models (PLMs) have demonstrated strong performance on natural language understanding (NLU) tasks through fine-tuning. However, fine-tuned models still suffer from overconfident predictions, especially in out-of-domain settings. In this paper, we tackle the problem of calibrating fine-tuned language models. We demonstrate that the PLMs are well-calibrated on the masked language modeling task with robust predictive confidence under domain shift, yet the fine-tuned models fail to retain such property due to catastrophic forgetting, which impacts the calibration on the downstream classification task. In light of these observations, we evaluate the calibration of several methods that preserve pre-trained features and show that preserving pre-trained features can improve the calibration of fine-tuned language models. Among these methods, our proposed method that encourages the fine-tuned model to learn generative representations with auxiliary language modeling objective achieves competitive accuracy and the lowest expected calibration error compared to several strong baselines under both in-domain and out-of-domain settings on three downstream NLU tasks.e:T62e,Few-shot prompting is a surprisingly powerful way to use Large Language Models (LLMs) to solve various tasks. However, this approach struggles as the task complexity increases or when the individual reasoning steps of the task themselves are hard to learn, especially when embedded in more complex tasks. To address this, we propose Decomposed Prompting, a new approach to solve complex tasks by decomposing them (via prompting) into simpler sub-tasks that can be delegated to a library of prompting-based LLMs dedicated to these sub-tasks. This modular structure allows each prompt to be optimized for its specific sub-task, further decomposed if necessary, and even easily replaced with more effective prompts, trained models, or symbolic functions if desired. We show that the flexibility and modularity of Decomposed Prompting allows it to outperform prior work on few-shot prompting using GPT3. On symbolic reasoning tasks, we can further decompose sub-tasks that are hard for LLMs into even simpler solvable sub-tasks. When the complexity comes from the input length, we can recursively decompose the task into the same task but with smaller inputs. We also evaluate our approach on textual multi-step reasoning tasks: on long-context multi-hop QA task, we can more effectively teach the sub-tasks via our separate sub-tasks prompts; and on open-domain multi-hop QA, we can incorporate a symbolic information retrieval within our decomposition framework, leading to improved performance on both tasks. Datasets, Code and Prompts available at https://github.com/allenai/DecomP.f:T667,We tackle the problem of generating audio samples conditioned on descriptive text captions. In this work, we propose AaudioGen, an auto-regressive generative model that generates audio samples conditioned on text inputs. AudioGen operates on a learnt discrete audio representation. The task of text-to-audio generation poses multiple challenges. Due to the way audio travels through a medium, differentiating ``objects'' can be a difficult task (e.g., separating multiple people simultaneously speaking). This is further complicated by real-world recording conditions (e.g., background noise, reverberation, etc.). Scarce text annotations impose another constraint, limiting the ability to scale models. Finally, modeling high-fidelity audio requires encoding audio at high sampling rate, leading to extremely long sequences. To alleviate the aforementioned challenges we propose an augmentation technique that mixes different audio samples, driving the model to internally learn to separate multiple sources. We curated 10 datasets containing different types of audio and text annotations to handle the scarcity of text-audio data points. For faster inference, we explore the use of multi-stream modeling, allowing the use of shorter sequences while maintaining a similar bitrate and perceptual quality. We apply classifier-free guidance to improve adherence to text. Comparing to the evaluated baselines, AudioGen outperforms over both objective and subjective metrics. Finally, we explore the ability of the proposed method to generate audio continuation conditionally and unconditionally. Samples: https://felixkreuk.github.io/audiogen10:T66c,Pretrained language models have shown superior performance on many natural language processing tasks, yet they still struggle at multi-step formal reasoning tasks like grade school math problems. One key challenge of finetuning them to solve such math reasoning problems is that many existing datasets only contain one reference solution for each problem, despite the fact that there are often alternative solutions resembling different reasoning paths to the final answer. This way, the finetuned models are biased towards the limited reference solutions, which limits their generalization to unseen examples. To mitigate this issue, we propose to let the model perform sampling during training and learn from both self-sampled fully-correct solutions, which yield the correct answer upon execution, and partially-correct solutions, whose intermediate state matches an intermediate state of a known correct solution. We show that our use of self-sampled correct and partially-correct solutions can benefit learning and help guide the sampling process, leading to more efficient exploration of the solution space. Additionally, we explore various training objectives to support learning from multiple solutions per example and find they greatly affect the performance. Experiments on two math reasoning datasets show the effectiveness of our method compared to learning from a single reference solution with MLE, where we improve PASS@100 from 35.5% to 44.5% for GSM8K, and 27.6% to 36.2% PASS@80 for MathQA. Such improvements are also consistent across different model sizes. Our code is available at https://github.com/microsoft/TraceCodegen.11:T45d,Large language models (LLMs) have shown remarkable reasoning capabilities given chain-of-thought prompts (examples with intermediate reasoning steps). Existing benchmarks measure reasoning ability indirectly, by evaluating accuracy on downstream tasks such as mathematical reasoning. However, it is unclear how these models obtain the answers and whether they rely on simple heuristics rather than the generated chain-of-thought. To enable systematic exploration of the reasoning ability of LLMs, we present a new synthetic question-answering dataset called PrOntoQA, where each example is generated from a synthetic world model represented in first-order logic. This allows us to parse the generated chain-of-thought into symbolic proofs for formal analysis. Our analysis on InstructGPT and GPT-3 shows that LLMs are quite capable of making correct individual deduction steps, and so are generally capable of reasoning, even in fictional contexts. However, they have difficulty with proof planning: When multiple valid deduction steps are available, they are not able to systematically explore the different options.12:T4fd,Large language models distill broad knowledge from text corpora. However, they can be inconsistent when it comes to completing user specified tasks. This issue can be addressed by finetuning such models via supervised learning on curated datasets, or via reinforcement learning. In this work, we propose a novel offline RL method, implicit language Q-learning (ILQL), designed for use on language models, that combines both the flexible utility maximization framework of RL algorithms with the ability of supervised learning to leverage previously collected data, as well as its simplicity and stability. Our method employs a combination of value conservatism alongside an implicit dataset support constraint in learning value functions, which are then used to guide language model generations towards maximizing user-specified utility functions. In addition to empirically validating ILQL, we present a detailed empirical analysis of situations where offline RL can be useful in natural language generation settings, demonstrating how it can be a more effective utility optimizer than prior approaches for end-to-end dialogue, and how it can effectively optimize high variance reward functions based on subjective judgement, such as whether to label a comment as toxic or not.13:T6e6,Many recent approaches to natural language tasks are built on the remarkable abilities of large language models. Large language models can perform in-context learning, where they learn a new task from a few task demonstrations, without any parameter updates. This work examines the implications of in-context learning for the creation of datasets for new natural language tasks. Departing from recent in-context learning methods, we formulate an annotation-efficient, two-step framework: selective annotation that chooses a pool of examples to annotate from unlabeled data in advance, followed by prompt retrieval that retrieves task examples from the annotated pool at test time. Based on this framework, we propose an unsupervised, graph-based selective annotation method, voke-k, to select diverse, representative examples to annotate. Extensive experiments on 10 datasets (covering classification, commonsense reasoning, dialogue, and text/code generation) demonstrate that our selective annotation method improves the task performance by a large margin. On average, vote-k achieves a 12.9%/11.4% relative gain under an annotation budget of 18/100, as compared to randomly selecting examples to annotate. Compared to state-of-the-art supervised finetuning approaches, it yields similar performance with 10-100x less annotation cost across 10 tasks. We further analyze the effectiveness of our framework in various scenarios: language models with varying sizes, alternative selective annotation methods, and cases where there is a test data domain shift. We hope that our studies will serve as a basis for data annotations as large language models are increasingly applied to new tasks. Our code is available at https://github.com/HKUNLP/icl-selective-annotation.14:T65e,While large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities across tasks in language understanding and interactive decision making, their abilities for reasoning (e.g. chain-of-thought prompting) and acting (e.g. action plan generation) have primarily been studied as separate topics. In this paper, we explore the use of LLMs to generate both reasoning traces and task-specific actions in an interleaved manner, allowing for greater synergy between the two: reasoning traces help the model induce, track, and update action plans as well as handle exceptions, while actions allow it to interface with external sources, such as knowledge bases or environments, to gather additional information. We apply our approach, named ReAct, to a diverse set of language and decision making tasks and demonstrate its effectiveness over state-of-the-art baselines, as well as improved human interpretability and trustworthiness over methods without reasoning or acting components. Concretely, on question answering (HotpotQA) and fact verification (Fever), ReAct overcomes issues of hallucination and error propagation prevalent in chain-of-thought reasoning by interacting with a simple Wikipedia API, and generates human-like task-solving trajectories that are more interpretable than baselines without reasoning traces. On two interactive decision making benchmarks (ALFWorld and WebShop), ReAct outperforms imitation and reinforcement learning methods by an absolute success rate of 34% and 10% respectively, while being prompted with only one or two in-context examples. Project site with code: https://react-lm.github.io15:T727,Contrastive vision-language models (e.g. CLIP) are typically created by updating all the parameters of a vision model and language model through contrastive training. Can such models be created by a small number of parameter updates to an already-trained language model and vision model? The literature describes techniques that can create vision-language models by updating a small number of parameters in a language model, but these require already aligned visual representations and are non-contrastive, hence unusable for latency-sensitive applications such as neural search. We explore the feasibility and benefits of parameter-efficient contrastive vision-language alignment through transfer learning: creating a model such as CLIP by minimally updating an already-trained vision and language model. We find that a minimal set of parameter updates ($<$7%) can achieve the same performance as full-model training, and updating specific components ($<$1% of parameters) can match 75% of full-model training. We describe a series of experiments: we show that existing knowledge is conserved more strongly in parameter-efficient training and that parameter-efficient scaling scales with model and dataset size. Where paired-image text data is scarce but strong multilingual language models exist (e.g. low resource languages), parameter-efficient training is even preferable to full-model training. Given a fixed compute budget, parameter-efficient training allows training larger models on the same hardware, achieving equivalent performance in less time. Parameter-efficient training hence constitutes an energy-efficient and effective training strategy for contrastive vision-language models that may be preferable to the full-model training paradigm for common use cases. Code and weights at https://github.com/codezakh/LilT.16:T62b,Knowledge-intensive tasks, such as open-domain question answering (QA), require access to a large amount of world or domain knowledge. A common approach for knowledge-intensive tasks is to employ a retrieve-then-read pipeline that first retrieves a handful of relevant contextual documents from an external corpus such as Wikipedia and then predicts an answer conditioned on the retrieved documents. In this paper, we present a novel perspective for solving knowledge-intensive tasks by replacing document retrievers with large language model generators. We call our method generate-then-read (GenRead), which first prompts a large language model to generate contextutal documents based on a given question, and then reads the generated documents to produce the final answer. Furthermore, we propose a novel clustering-based prompting method that selects distinct prompts, resulting in the generated documents that cover different perspectives, leading to better recall over acceptable answers. We conduct extensive experiments on three different knowledge-intensive tasks, including open-domain QA, fact checking, and dialogue system. Notably, GenRead achieves 71.6 and 54.4 exact match scores on TriviaQA and WebQ, significantly outperforming the state-of-the-art retrieve-then-read pipeline DPR-FiD by +4.0 and +3.9, without retrieving any documents from any external knowledge source. Lastly, we demonstrate the model performance can be further improved by combining retrieval and generation. Our code and generated documents can be found at https://github.com/wyu97/GenRead.17:T4b0,The great success of deep learning heavily relies on increasingly larger training data, which comes at a price of huge computational and infrastructural costs. This poses crucial questions that, do all training data contribute to model's performance? How much does each individual training sample or a sub-training-set affect the model's generalization, and how to construct the smallest subset from the entire training data as a proxy training set without significantly sacrificing the model's performance? To answer these, we propose dataset pruning, an optimization-based sample selection method that can (1) examine the influence of removing a particular set of training samples on model's generalization ability with theoretical guarantee, and (2) construct the smallest subset of training data that yields strictly constrained generalization gap. The empirically observed generalization gap of dataset pruning is substantially consistent with our theoretical expectations. Furthermore, the proposed method prunes 40% training examples on the CIFAR-10 dataset, halves the convergence time with only 1.3% test accuracy decrease, which is superior to previous score-based sample selection methods.18:T52d,The success of deep learning is due in large part to our ability to solve certain massive non-convex optimization problems with relative ease. Though non-convex optimization is NP-hard, simple algorithms -- often variants of stochastic gradient descent -- exhibit surprising effectiveness in fitting large neural networks in practice. We argue that neural network loss landscapes often contain (nearly) a single basin after accounting for all possible permutation symmetries of hidden units a la Entezari et al. 2021. We introduce three algorithms to permute the units of one model to bring them into alignment with a reference model in order to merge the two models in weight space. This transformation produces a functionally equivalent set of weights that lie in an approximately convex basin near the reference model. Experimentally, we demonstrate the single basin phenomenon across a variety of model architectures and datasets, including the first (to our knowledge) demonstration of zero-barrier linear mode connectivity between independently trained ResNet models on CIFAR-10. Additionally, we identify intriguing phenomena relating model width and training time to mode connectivity. Finally, we discuss shortcomings of the linear mode connectivity hypothesis, including a counterexample to the single basin theory.19:T773,Large language models (LLMs) transfer well to new tasks out-of-the-box simply given a natural language prompt that demonstrates how to perform the task and no additional training. Prompting is a brittle process wherein small modifications to the prompt can cause large variations in the model predictions, and therefore significant effort is dedicated towards designing a painstakingly"perfect prompt"for a task. To mitigate the high degree of effort involved in prompt-design, we instead ask whether producing multiple effective, yet imperfect, prompts and aggregating them can lead to a high quality prompting strategy. Our observations motivate our proposed prompting method, ASK ME ANYTHING (AMA). We first develop an understanding of the effective prompt formats, finding that question-answering (QA) prompts, which encourage open-ended generation ("Who went to the park?") tend to outperform those that restrict the model outputs ("John went to the park. Output True or False."). Our approach recursively uses the LLM itself to transform task inputs to the effective QA format. We apply the collected prompts to obtain several noisy votes for the input's true label. We find that the prompts can have very different accuracies and complex dependencies and thus propose to use weak supervision, a procedure for combining the noisy predictions, to produce the final predictions for the inputs. We evaluate AMA across open-source model families (e.g., EleutherAI, BLOOM, OPT, and T0) and model sizes (125M-175B parameters), demonstrating an average performance lift of 10.2% over the few-shot baseline. This simple strategy enables the open-source GPT-J-6B model to match and exceed the performance of few-shot GPT3-175B on 15 of 20 popular benchmarks. Averaged across these tasks, the GPT-J-6B model outperforms few-shot GPT3-175B. We release our code here: https://github.com/HazyResearch/ama_prompting1a:T5eb,With adversarial or otherwise normal prompts, existing large language models (LLM) can be pushed to generate toxic discourses. One way to reduce the risk of LLMs generating undesired discourses is to alter the training of the LLM. This can be very restrictive due to demanding computation requirements. Other methods rely on rule-based or prompt-based token elimination, which are limited as they dismiss future tokens and the overall meaning of the complete discourse. Here, we center detoxification on the probability that the finished discourse is ultimately considered toxic. That is, at each point, we advise against token selections proportional to how likely a finished text from this point will be toxic. To this end, we formally extend the dead-end theory from the recent reinforcement learning (RL) literature to also cover uncertain outcomes. Our approach, called rectification, utilizes a separate but significantly smaller model for detoxification, which can be applied to diverse LLMs as long as they share the same vocabulary. Importantly, our method does not require access to the internal representations of the LLM, but only the token probability distribution at each decoding step. This is crucial as many LLMs today are hosted in servers and only accessible through APIs. When applied to various LLMs, including GPT-3, our approach significantly improves the generated discourse compared to the base LLMs and other techniques in terms of both the overall language and detoxification performance.1b:T53e,Large language models (LLMs) have been shown to be capable of impressive few-shot generalisation to new tasks. However, they still tend to perform poorly on multi-step logical reasoning problems. Here we carry out a comprehensive evaluation of LLMs on 50 tasks that probe different aspects of logical reasoning. We show that language models tend to perform fairly well at single step inference or entailment tasks, but struggle to chain together multiple reasoning steps to solve more complex problems. In light of this, we propose a Selection-Inference (SI) framework that exploits pre-trained LLMs as general processing modules, and alternates between selection and inference to generate a series of interpretable, casual reasoning steps leading to the final answer. We show that a 7B parameter LLM used within the SI framework in a 5-shot generalisation setting, with no fine-tuning, yields a performance improvement of over 100% compared to an equivalent vanilla baseline on a suite of 10 logical reasoning tasks. The same model in the same setting even outperforms a significantly larger 280B parameter baseline on the same suite of tasks. Moreover, answers produced by the SI framework are accompanied by a causal natural-language-based reasoning trace, which has important implications for the safety and trustworthiness of the system.1c:T457,Reliable generalization lies at the heart of safe ML and AI. However, understanding when and how neural networks generalize remains one of the most important unsolved problems in the field. In this work, we conduct an extensive empirical study (20'910 models, 15 tasks) to investigate whether insights from the theory of computation can predict the limits of neural network generalization in practice. We demonstrate that grouping tasks according to the Chomsky hierarchy allows us to forecast whether certain architectures will be able to generalize to out-of-distribution inputs. This includes negative results where even extensive amounts of data and training time never lead to any non-trivial generalization, despite models having sufficient capacity to fit the training data perfectly. Our results show that, for our subset of tasks, RNNs and Transformers fail to generalize on non-regular tasks, LSTMs can solve regular and counter-language tasks, and only networks augmented with structured memory (such as a stack or memory tape) can successfully generalize on context-free and context-sensitive tasks.1d:T55f,Skip connections and normalisation layers form two standard architectural components that are ubiquitous for the training of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), but whose precise roles are poorly understood. Recent approaches such as Deep Kernel Shaping have made progress towards reducing our reliance on them, using insights from wide NN kernel theory to improve signal propagation in vanilla DNNs (which we define as networks without skips or normalisation). However, these approaches are incompatible with the self-attention layers present in transformers, whose kernels are intrinsically more complicated to analyse and control. And so the question remains: is it possible to train deep vanilla transformers? We answer this question in the affirmative by designing several approaches that use combinations of parameter initialisations, bias matrices and location-dependent rescaling to achieve faithful signal propagation in vanilla transformers. Our methods address various intricacies specific to signal propagation in transformers, including the interaction with positional encoding and causal masking. In experiments on WikiText-103 and C4, our approaches enable deep transformers without normalisation to train at speeds matching their standard counterparts, and deep vanilla transformers to reach the same performance as standard ones after about 5 times more iterations.1e:T5e1,We present TabPFN, a trained Transformer that can do supervised classification for small tabular datasets in less than a second, needs no hyperparameter tuning and is competitive with state-of-the-art classification methods. TabPFN performs in-context learning (ICL), it learns to make predictions using sequences of labeled examples (x, f(x)) given in the input, without requiring further parameter updates. TabPFN is fully entailed in the weights of our network, which accepts training and test samples as a set-valued input and yields predictions for the entire test set in a single forward pass. TabPFN is a Prior-Data Fitted Network (PFN) and is trained offline once, to approximate Bayesian inference on synthetic datasets drawn from our prior. This prior incorporates ideas from causal reasoning: It entails a large space of structural causal models with a preference for simple structures. On the 18 datasets in the OpenML-CC18 suite that contain up to 1 000 training data points, up to 100 purely numerical features without missing values, and up to 10 classes, we show that our method clearly outperforms boosted trees and performs on par with complex state-of-the-art AutoML systems with up to 230$\times$ speedup. This increases to a 5 700$\times$ speedup when using a GPU. We also validate these results on an additional 67 small numerical datasets from OpenML. We provide all our code, the trained TabPFN, an interactive browser demo and a Colab notebook at https://github.com/automl/TabPFN.1f:T561,Inferring reward functions from human behavior is at the center of value alignment - aligning AI objectives with what we, humans, actually want. But doing so relies on models of how humans behave given their objectives. After decades of research in cognitive science, neuroscience, and behavioral economics, obtaining accurate human models remains an open research topic. This begs the question: how accurate do these models need to be in order for the reward inference to be accurate? On the one hand, if small errors in the model can lead to catastrophic error in inference, the entire framework of reward learning seems ill-fated, as we will never have perfect models of human behavior. On the other hand, if as our models improve, we can have a guarantee that reward accuracy also improves, this would show the benefit of more work on the modeling side. We study this question both theoretically and empirically. We do show that it is unfortunately possible to construct small adversarial biases in behavior that lead to arbitrarily large errors in the inferred reward. However, and arguably more importantly, we are also able to identify reasonable assumptions under which the reward inference error can be bounded linearly in the error in the human model. Finally, we verify our theoretical insights in discrete and continuous control tasks with simulated and human data.20:T675,Large Transformer-based Pretrained Language Models (PLMs) dominate almost all Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks. Nevertheless, they still make mistakes from time to time. For a model deployed in an industrial environment, fixing these mistakes quickly and robustly is vital to improve user experiences. Previous works formalize such problems as Model Editing (ME) and mostly focus on fixing one mistake. However, the one-mistake-fixing scenario is not an accurate abstraction of the real-world challenge. In the deployment of AI services, there are ever-emerging mistakes, and the same mistake may recur if not corrected in time. Thus a preferable solution is to rectify the mistakes as soon as they appear nonstop. Therefore, we extend the existing ME into Sequential Model Editing (SME) to help develop more practical editing methods. Our study shows that most current ME methods could yield unsatisfying results in this scenario. We then introduce Transformer-Patcher, a novel model editor that can shift the behavior of transformer-based models by simply adding and training a few neurons in the last Feed-Forward Network layer. Experimental results on both classification and generation tasks show that Transformer-Patcher can successively correct up to thousands of errors (Reliability) and generalize to their equivalent inputs (Generality) while retaining the model's accuracy on irrelevant inputs (Locality). Our method outperforms previous fine-tuning and HyperNetwork-based methods and achieves state-of-the-art performance for Sequential Model Editing (SME). The code is available at https://github.com/ZeroYuHuang/Transformer-Patcher.21:T5f3,The potential of offline reinforcement learning (RL) is that high-capacity models trained on large, heterogeneous datasets can lead to agents that generalize broadly, analogously to similar advances in vision and NLP. However, recent works argue that offline RL methods encounter unique challenges to scaling up model capacity. Drawing on the learnings from these works, we re-examine previous design choices and find that with appropriate choices: ResNets, cross-entropy based distributional backups, and feature normalization, offline Q-learning algorithms exhibit strong performance that scales with model capacity. Using multi-task Atari as a testbed for scaling and generalization, we train a single policy on 40 games with near-human performance using up-to 80 million parameter networks, finding that model performance scales favorably with capacity. In contrast to prior work, we extrapolate beyond dataset performance even when trained entirely on a large (400M transitions) but highly suboptimal dataset (51% human-level performance). Compared to return-conditioned supervised approaches, offline Q-learning scales similarly with model capacity and has better performance, especially when the dataset is suboptimal. Finally, we show that offline Q-learning with a diverse dataset is sufficient to learn powerful representations that facilitate rapid transfer to novel games and fast online learning on new variations of a training game, improving over existing state-of-the-art representation learning approaches.22:T68b,The extent to which text-only language models (LMs) learn to represent features of the non-linguistic world is an open question. Prior work has shown that pretrained LMs can be taught to caption images when a vision model's parameters are optimized to encode images in the language space. We test a stronger hypothesis: that the conceptual representations learned by frozen text-only models and vision-only models are similar enough that this can be achieved with a linear map. We show that the image representations from vision models can be transferred as continuous prompts to frozen LMs by training only a single linear projection. Using these to prompt the LM achieves competitive performance on captioning and visual question answering tasks compared to models that tune both the image encoder and text decoder (such as the MAGMA model). We compare three image encoders with increasing amounts of linguistic supervision seen during pretraining: BEIT (no linguistic information), NF-ResNET (lexical category information), and CLIP (full natural language descriptions). We find that all three encoders perform equally well at transferring visual property information to the language model (e.g., whether an animal is large or small), but that image encoders pretrained with linguistic supervision more saliently encode category information (e.g., distinguishing hippo vs. elephant) and thus perform significantly better on benchmark language-and-vision tasks. Our results indicate that LMs encode conceptual information structurally similarly to vision-based models, even those that are solely trained on images. Code is available here: https://github.com/jmerullo/limber23:T6b3,When trained on language data, do transformers learn some arbitrary computation that utilizes the full capacity of the architecture or do they learn a simpler, tree-like computation, hypothesized to underlie compositional meaning systems like human languages? There is an apparent tension between compositional accounts of human language understanding, which are based on a restricted bottom-up computational process, and the enormous success of neural models like transformers, which can route information arbitrarily between different parts of their input. One possibility is that these models, while extremely flexible in principle, in practice learn to interpret language hierarchically, ultimately building sentence representations close to those predictable by a bottom-up, tree-structured model. To evaluate this possibility, we describe an unsupervised and parameter-free method to \emph{functionally project} the behavior of any transformer into the space of tree-structured networks. Given an input sentence, we produce a binary tree that approximates the transformer's representation-building process and a score that captures how"tree-like"the transformer's behavior is on the input. While calculation of this score does not require training any additional models, it provably upper-bounds the fit between a transformer and any tree-structured approximation. Using this method, we show that transformers for three different tasks become more tree-like over the course of training, in some cases unsupervisedly recovering the same trees as supervised parsers. These trees, in turn, are predictive of model behavior, with more tree-like models generalizing better on tests of compositional generalization.24:T52c,Neural networks often exhibit emergent behavior, where qualitatively new capabilities arise from scaling up the amount of parameters, training data, or training steps. One approach to understanding emergence is to find continuous \textit{progress measures} that underlie the seemingly discontinuous qualitative changes. We argue that progress measures can be found via mechanistic interpretability: reverse-engineering learned behaviors into their individual components. As a case study, we investigate the recently-discovered phenomenon of ``grokking'' exhibited by small transformers trained on modular addition tasks. We fully reverse engineer the algorithm learned by these networks, which uses discrete Fourier transforms and trigonometric identities to convert addition to rotation about a circle. We confirm the algorithm by analyzing the activations and weights and by performing ablations in Fourier space. Based on this understanding, we define progress measures that allow us to study the dynamics of training and split training into three continuous phases: memorization, circuit formation, and cleanup. Our results show that grokking, rather than being a sudden shift, arises from the gradual amplification of structured mechanisms encoded in the weights, followed by the later removal of memorizing components.25:T6f8,Fully-parametric language models generally require a huge number of model parameters to store the necessary knowledge for solving multiple natural language tasks in zero/few-shot settings. In addition, it is hard to adapt to the evolving world knowledge without the costly model re-training. In this paper, we develop a novel semi-parametric language model architecture, Knowledge-in-Context (KiC), which empowers a parametric text-to-text language model with a knowledge-rich external memory. Specifically, the external memory contains six different types of knowledge: entity, dictionary, commonsense, event, script, and causality knowledge. For each input instance, the KiC model adaptively selects a knowledge type and retrieves the most helpful pieces of knowledge. The input instance along with its knowledge augmentation is fed into a text-to-text model (e.g., T5) to generate the output answer, where both the input and the output are in natural language forms after prompting. Interestingly, we find that KiC can be identified as a special mixture-of-experts (MoE) model, where the knowledge selector plays the role of a router that is used to determine the sequence-to-expert assignment in MoE. This key observation inspires us to develop a novel algorithm for training KiC with an instance-adaptive knowledge selector. As a knowledge-rich semi-parametric language model, KiC only needs a much smaller parametric part to achieve superior zero-shot performance on unseen tasks. By evaluating on 40+ different tasks, we show that KiC_Large with 770M parameters easily outperforms large language models (LMs) that are 4-39x larger by a large margin. We also demonstrate that KiC exhibits emergent abilities at a much smaller model scale compared to the fully-parametric models.26:T5fd,Large language models such as GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) can perform arbitrary tasks without undergoing fine-tuning after being prompted with only a few labeled examples. An arbitrary task can be reformulated as a natural language prompt, and a language model can be asked to generate the completion, indirectly performing the task in a paradigm known as prompt-based learning. To date, emergent prompt-based learning capabilities have mainly been demonstrated for unidirectional language models. However, bidirectional language models pre-trained on denoising objectives such as masked language modeling produce stronger learned representations for transfer learning. This motivates the possibility of prompting bidirectional models, but their pre-training objectives have made them largely incompatible with the existing prompting paradigm. We present SAP (Sequential Autoregressive Prompting), a technique that enables the prompting of bidirectional models. Utilizing the machine translation task as a case study, we prompt the bidirectional mT5 model (Xue et al., 2021) with SAP and demonstrate its few-shot and zero-shot translations outperform the few-shot translations of unidirectional models like GPT-3 and XGLM (Lin et al., 2021), despite mT5's approximately 50% fewer parameters. We further show SAP is effective on question answering and summarization. For the first time, our results demonstrate prompt-based learning is an emergent property of a broader class of language models, rather than only unidirectional models.27:T5c3,Pre-training representations (a.k.a. foundation models) has recently become a prevalent learning paradigm, where one first pre-trains a representation using large-scale unlabeled data, and then learns simple predictors on top of the representation using small labeled data from the downstream tasks. There are two key desiderata for the representation: label efficiency (the ability to learn an accurate classifier on top of the representation with a small amount of labeled data) and universality (usefulness across a wide range of downstream tasks). In this paper, we focus on one of the most popular instantiations of this paradigm: contrastive learning with linear probing, i.e., learning a linear predictor on the representation pre-trained by contrastive learning. We show that there exists a trade-off between the two desiderata so that one may not be able to achieve both simultaneously. Specifically, we provide analysis using a theoretical data model and show that, while more diverse pre-training data result in more diverse features for different tasks (improving universality), it puts less emphasis on task-specific features, giving rise to larger sample complexity for down-stream supervised tasks, and thus worse prediction performance. Guided by this analysis, we propose a contrastive regularization method to improve the trade-off. We validate our analysis and method empirically with systematic experiments using real-world datasets and foundation models.28:T4f8,Large language models (LLMs) show impressive abilities via few-shot prompting. Commercialized APIs such as OpenAI GPT-3 further increase their use in real-world language applications. However, the crucial problem of how to improve the reliability of GPT-3 is still under-explored. While reliability is a broad and vaguely defined term, we decompose reliability into four main facets that correspond to the existing framework of ML safety and are well-recognized to be important: generalizability, social biases, calibration, and factuality. Our core contribution is to establish simple and effective prompts that improve GPT-3's reliability as it: 1) generalizes out-of-distribution, 2) balances demographic distribution and uses natural language instructions to reduce social biases, 3) calibrates output probabilities, and 4) updates the LLM's factual knowledge and reasoning chains. With appropriate prompts, GPT-3 is more reliable than smaller-scale supervised models on all these facets. We release all processed datasets, evaluation scripts, and model predictions. Our systematic empirical study not only sheds new insights on the reliability of prompting LLMs, but more importantly, our prompting strategies can help practitioners more reliably use LLMs like GPT-3.29:T4a0,Language models have recently achieved strong performance across a wide range of NLP benchmarks. However, unlike benchmarks, real world tasks are often poorly specified, and agents must deduce the user's intended behavior from a combination of context, instructions, and examples. We investigate how both humans and models behave in the face of such task ambiguity by proposing AmbiBench, a new benchmark of six ambiguously-specified classification tasks. We evaluate humans and models on AmbiBench by seeing how well they identify the intended task using 1) instructions with varying degrees of ambiguity, and 2) different numbers of labeled examples. We find that the combination of model scaling (to 175B parameters) and training with human feedback data enables models to approach or exceed the accuracy of human participants across tasks, but that either one alone is not sufficient. In addition, we show how to dramatically improve the accuracy of language models trained without large-scale human feedback training by finetuning on a small number of ambiguous in-context examples, providing a promising direction for teaching models to generalize well in the face of ambiguity.2a:T514,Diffusion models generate samples by reversing a fixed forward diffusion process. Despite already providing impressive empirical results, these diffusion models algorithms can be further improved by reducing the variance of the training targets in their denoising score-matching objective. We argue that the source of such variance lies in the handling of intermediate noise-variance scales, where multiple modes in the data affect the direction of reverse paths. We propose to remedy the problem by incorporating a reference batch which we use to calculate weighted conditional scores as more stable training targets. We show that the procedure indeed helps in the challenging intermediate regime by reducing (the trace of) the covariance of training targets. The new stable targets can be seen as trading bias for reduced variance, where the bias vanishes with increasing reference batch size. Empirically, we show that the new objective improves the image quality, stability, and training speed of various popular diffusion models across datasets with both general ODE and SDE solvers. When used in combination with EDM, our method yields a current SOTA FID of 1.90 with 35 network evaluations on the unconditional CIFAR-10 generation task. The code is available at https://github.com/Newbeeer/stf2b:T525,The pre-trained image-text models, like CLIP, have demonstrated the strong power of vision-language representation learned from a large scale of web-collected image-text data. In light of the well-learned visual features, some existing works transfer image representation to video domain and achieve good results. However, how to utilize image-language pre-trained model (e.g., CLIP) for video-language pre-training (post-pretraining) is still under explored. In this paper, we investigate two questions: 1) what are the factors hindering post-pretraining CLIP to further improve the performance on video-language tasks? and 2) how to mitigate the impact of these factors? Through a series of comparative experiments and analyses, we find that the data scale and domain gap between language sources have great impacts. Motivated by these, we propose a Omnisource Cross-modal Learning method equipped with a Video Proxy mechanism on the basis of CLIP, namely CLIP-ViP. Extensive results show that our approach improves the performance of CLIP on video-text retrieval by a large margin. Our model also achieves SOTA results on a variety of datasets, including MSR-VTT, DiDeMo, LSMDC, and ActivityNet. We will release our code and pre-trained CLIP-ViP models at https://github.com/microsoft/XPretrain/tree/main/CLIP-ViP.2c:T5fe,Video representation learning has been successful in video-text pre-training for zero-shot transfer, where each sentence is trained to be close to the paired video clips in a common feature space. For long videos, given a paragraph of description where the sentences describe different segments of the video, by matching all sentence-clip pairs, the paragraph and the full video are aligned implicitly. However, such unit-level comparison may ignore global temporal context, which inevitably limits the generalization ability. In this paper, we propose a contrastive learning framework TempCLR to compare the full video and the paragraph explicitly. As the video/paragraph is formulated as a sequence of clips/sentences, under the constraint of their temporal order, we use dynamic time warping to compute the minimum cumulative cost over sentence-clip pairs as the sequence-level distance. To explore the temporal dynamics, we break the consistency of temporal succession by shuffling video clips w.r.t. temporal granularity. Then, we obtain the representations for clips/sentences, which perceive the temporal information and thus facilitate the sequence alignment. In addition to pre-training on the video and paragraph, our approach can also generalize on the matching between video instances. We evaluate our approach on video retrieval, action step localization, and few-shot action recognition, and achieve consistent performance gain over all three tasks. Detailed ablation studies are provided to justify the approach design.2d:T6a0,Future- or return-conditioned supervised learning is an emerging paradigm for offline reinforcement learning (RL), where the future outcome (i.e., return) associated with an observed action sequence is used as input to a policy trained to imitate those same actions. While return-conditioning is at the heart of popular algorithms such as decision transformer (DT), these methods tend to perform poorly in highly stochastic environments, where an occasional high return can arise from randomness in the environment rather than the actions themselves. Such situations can lead to a learned policy that is inconsistent with its conditioning inputs; i.e., using the policy to act in the environment, when conditioning on a specific desired return, leads to a distribution of real returns that is wildly different than desired. In this work, we propose the dichotomy of control (DoC), a future-conditioned supervised learning framework that separates mechanisms within a policy's control (actions) from those beyond a policy's control (environment stochasticity). We achieve this separation by conditioning the policy on a latent variable representation of the future, and designing a mutual information constraint that removes any information from the latent variable associated with randomness in the environment. Theoretically, we show that DoC yields policies that are consistent with their conditioning inputs, ensuring that conditioning a learned policy on a desired high-return future outcome will correctly induce high-return behavior. Empirically, we show that DoC is able to achieve significantly better performance than DT on environments that have highly stochastic rewards and transition2e:T58c,Warning: this paper contains model outputs exhibiting offensiveness and biases. Recently pre-trained language models (PLMs) have prospered in various natural language generation (NLG) tasks due to their ability to generate fairly fluent text. Nevertheless, these models are observed to capture and reproduce harmful contents in training corpora, typically toxic language and social biases, raising severe moral issues. Prior works on ethical NLG tackle detoxifying and debiasing separately, which is problematic since we find debiased models still exhibit toxicity while detoxified ones even exacerbate social biases. To address such a challenge, we propose the first unified framework of detoxifying and debiasing called UDDIA, which jointly formalizes these two problems as rectifying the output space. We theoretically interpret our framework as learning a text distribution mixing weighted attributes. Besides, UDDIA conducts adaptive optimization of only a few parameters during decoding based on a parameter-efficient tuning schema without any training data. This leads to minimal generation quality loss and improved rectification performance with acceptable computational cost. Experimental results demonstrate that compared to several strong baselines, UDDIA achieves debiasing and detoxifying simultaneously and better balances efficiency and effectiveness, taking a further step towards practical ethical NLG.2f:T54f,In large-scale retrieval, the lexicon-weighting paradigm, learning weighted sparse representations in vocabulary space, has shown promising results with high quality and low latency. Despite it deeply exploiting the lexicon-representing capability of pre-trained language models, a crucial gap remains between language modeling and lexicon-weighting retrieval -- the former preferring certain or low-entropy words whereas the latter favoring pivot or high-entropy words -- becoming the main barrier to lexicon-weighting performance for large-scale retrieval. To bridge this gap, we propose a brand-new pre-training framework, lexicon-bottlenecked masked autoencoder (LexMAE), to learn importance-aware lexicon representations. Essentially, we present a lexicon-bottlenecked module between a normal language modeling encoder and a weakened decoder, where a continuous bag-of-words bottleneck is constructed to learn a lexicon-importance distribution in an unsupervised fashion. The pre-trained LexMAE is readily transferred to the lexicon-weighting retrieval via fine-tuning. On the ad-hoc retrieval benchmark, MS-Marco, it achieves 42.6% MRR@10 with 45.8 QPS for the passage dataset and 44.4% MRR@100 with 134.8 QPS for the document dataset, by a CPU machine. And LexMAE shows state-of-the-art zero-shot transfer capability on BEIR benchmark with 12 datasets.30:T649,We present Masked Frequency Modeling (MFM), a unified frequency-domain-based approach for self-supervised pre-training of visual models. Instead of randomly inserting mask tokens to the input embeddings in the spatial domain, in this paper, we shift the perspective to the frequency domain. Specifically, MFM first masks out a portion of frequency components of the input image and then predicts the missing frequencies on the frequency spectrum. Our key insight is that predicting masked components in the frequency domain is more ideal to reveal underlying image patterns rather than predicting masked patches in the spatial domain, due to the heavy spatial redundancy. Our findings suggest that with the right configuration of mask-and-predict strategy, both the structural information within high-frequency components and the low-level statistics among low-frequency counterparts are useful in learning good representations. For the first time, MFM demonstrates that, for both ViT and CNN, a simple non-Siamese framework can learn meaningful representations even using none of the following: (i) extra data, (ii) extra model, (iii) mask token. Experimental results on image classification and semantic segmentation, as well as several robustness benchmarks show the competitive performance and advanced robustness of MFM compared with recent masked image modeling approaches. Furthermore, we also comprehensively investigate the effectiveness of classical image restoration tasks for representation learning from a unified frequency perspective and reveal their intriguing relations with our MFM approach.31:T4fe,Recent advances in pre-training vision-language models like CLIP have shown great potential in learning transferable visual representations. Nonetheless, for downstream inference, CLIP-like models suffer from either 1) degraded accuracy and robustness in the case of inaccurate text descriptions during retrieval-based inference (the challenge for zero-shot protocol); or 2) breaking the well-established vision-language alignment (the challenge for linear probing). To address them, we propose Decomposed Feature Prompting (DeFo). DeFo leverages a flexible number of learnable embeddings as textual input while maintaining the vision-language dual-model architecture, which enables the model to learn decomposed visual features with the help of feature-level textual prompts. We further use an additional linear layer to perform classification, allowing a scalable size of language inputs. Our empirical study shows DeFo's significance in improving the vision-language models. For example, DeFo obtains 73.2% test accuracy on ImageNet with a ResNet-50 backbone without tuning any pretrained weights of both the vision and language encoder, outperforming zero-shot CLIP by a large margin of 15.0%, and outperforming state-of-the-art vision-language prompt tuning method by 7.6%.32:T528,We present an effective method for fusing visual-and-language representations for several question answering tasks including visual question answering and visual entailment. In contrast to prior works that concatenate unimodal representations or use only cross-attention, we compose multimodal representations via channel fusion. By fusing on the channels, the model is able to more effectively align the tokens compared to standard methods. These multimodal representations, which we call compound tokens are generated with cross-attention transformer layers. First, vision tokens are used as queries to retrieve compatible text tokens through cross-attention. We then chain the vision tokens and the queried text tokens along the channel dimension. We call the resulting representations compound tokens. A second group of compound tokens are generated using an analogous process where the text tokens serve as queries to the cross-attention layer. We concatenate all the compound tokens for further processing with multimodal encoder. We demonstrate the effectiveness of compound tokens using an encoder-decoder vision-language model trained end-to-end in the open-vocabulary setting. Compound Tokens achieve highly competitive performance across a range of question answering tasks including GQA, VQA2.0, and SNLI-VE.33:T6fd,A generative model based on a continuous-time normalizing flow between any pair of base and target probability densities is proposed. The velocity field of this flow is inferred from the probability current of a time-dependent density that interpolates between the base and the target in finite time. Unlike conventional normalizing flow inference methods based the maximum likelihood principle, which require costly backpropagation through ODE solvers, our interpolant approach leads to a simple quadratic loss for the velocity itself which is expressed in terms of expectations that are readily amenable to empirical estimation. The flow can be used to generate samples from either the base or target, and to estimate the likelihood at any time along the interpolant. In addition, the flow can be optimized to minimize the path length of the interpolant density, thereby paving the way for building optimal transport maps. In situations where the base is a Gaussian density, we also show that the velocity of our normalizing flow can also be used to construct a diffusion model to sample the target as well as estimate its score. However, our approach shows that we can bypass this diffusion completely and work at the level of the probability flow with greater simplicity, opening an avenue for methods based solely on ordinary differential equations as an alternative to those based on stochastic differential equations. Benchmarking on density estimation tasks illustrates that the learned flow can match and surpass conventional continuous flows at a fraction of the cost, and compares well with diffusions on image generation on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet $32\times32$. The method scales ab-initio ODE flows to previously unreachable image resolutions, demonstrated up to $128\times128$.34:T51d,Abstraction is a desirable capability for deep learning models, which means to induce abstract concepts from concrete instances and flexibly apply them beyond the learning context. At the same time, there is a lack of clear understanding about both the presence and further characteristics of this capability in deep learning models. In this paper, we introduce a systematic probing framework to explore the abstraction capability of deep learning models from a transferability perspective. A set of controlled experiments are conducted based on this framework, providing strong evidence that two probed pre-trained language models (PLMs), T5 and GPT2, have the abstraction capability. We also conduct in-depth analysis, thus shedding further light: (1) the whole training phase exhibits a"memorize-then-abstract"two-stage process; (2) the learned abstract concepts are gathered in a few middle-layer attention heads, rather than being evenly distributed throughout the model; (3) the probed abstraction capabilities exhibit robustness against concept mutations, and are more robust to low-level/source-side mutations than high-level/target-side ones; (4) generic pre-training is critical to the emergence of abstraction capability, and PLMs exhibit better abstraction with larger model sizes and data scales.35:T54f,Building systems that achieve a deeper understanding of language is one of the central goals of natural language processing (NLP). Towards this goal, recent works have begun to train language models on narrative datasets which require extracting the most critical information by integrating across long contexts. However, it is still an open question whether these models are learning a deeper understanding of the text, or if the models are simply learning a heuristic to complete the task. This work investigates this further by turning to the one language processing system that truly understands complex language: the human brain. We show that training language models for deeper narrative understanding results in richer representations that have improved alignment to human brain activity. We further find that the improvements in brain alignment are larger for character names than for other discourse features, which indicates that these models are learning important narrative elements. Taken together, these results suggest that this type of training can indeed lead to deeper language understanding. These findings have consequences both for cognitive neuroscience by revealing some of the significant factors behind brain-NLP alignment, and for NLP by highlighting that understanding of long-range context can be improved beyond language modeling.36:T4ac,Tabular data is among the oldest and most ubiquitous forms of data. However, the generation of synthetic samples with the original data's characteristics remains a significant challenge for tabular data. While many generative models from the computer vision domain, such as variational autoencoders or generative adversarial networks, have been adapted for tabular data generation, less research has been directed towards recent transformer-based large language models (LLMs), which are also generative in nature. To this end, we propose GReaT (Generation of Realistic Tabular data), which exploits an auto-regressive generative LLM to sample synthetic and yet highly realistic tabular data. Furthermore, GReaT can model tabular data distributions by conditioning on any subset of features; the remaining features are sampled without additional overhead. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach in a series of experiments that quantify the validity and quality of the produced data samples from multiple angles. We find that GReaT maintains state-of-the-art performance across numerous real-world and synthetic data sets with heterogeneous feature types coming in various sizes.37:T618,Much recent research on information retrieval has focused on how to transfer from one task (typically with abundant supervised data) to various other tasks where supervision is limited, with the implicit assumption that it is possible to generalize from one task to all the rest. However, this overlooks the fact that there are many diverse and unique retrieval tasks, each targeting different search intents, queries, and search domains. In this paper, we suggest to work on Few-shot Dense Retrieval, a setting where each task comes with a short description and a few examples. To amplify the power of a few examples, we propose Prompt-base Query Generation for Retriever (Promptagator), which leverages large language models (LLM) as a few-shot query generator, and creates task-specific retrievers based on the generated data. Powered by LLM's generalization ability, Promptagator makes it possible to create task-specific end-to-end retrievers solely based on a few examples {without} using Natural Questions or MS MARCO to train %question generators or dual encoders. Surprisingly, LLM prompting with no more than 8 examples allows dual encoders to outperform heavily engineered models trained on MS MARCO like ColBERT v2 by more than 1.2 nDCG on average on 11 retrieval sets. Further training standard-size re-rankers using the same generated data yields another 5.0 point nDCG improvement. Our studies determine that query generation can be far more effective than previously observed, especially when a small amount of task-specific knowledge is given.38:T5d0,Contrastive learning is a cornerstone underlying recent progress in multi-view and multimodal learning, e.g., in representation learning with image/caption pairs. While its effectiveness is not yet fully understood, a line of recent work reveals that contrastive learning can invert the data generating process and recover ground truth latent factors shared between views. In this work, we present new identifiability results for multimodal contrastive learning, showing that it is possible to recover shared factors in a more general setup than the multi-view setting studied previously. Specifically, we distinguish between the multi-view setting with one generative mechanism (e.g., multiple cameras of the same type) and the multimodal setting that is characterized by distinct mechanisms (e.g., cameras and microphones). Our work generalizes previous identifiability results by redefining the generative process in terms of distinct mechanisms with modality-specific latent variables. We prove that contrastive learning can block-identify latent factors shared between modalities, even when there are nontrivial dependencies between factors. We empirically verify our identifiability results with numerical simulations and corroborate our findings on a complex multimodal dataset of image/text pairs. Zooming out, our work provides a theoretical basis for multimodal representation learning and explains in which settings multimodal contrastive learning can be effective in practice.39:T4fd,The success of deep learning heavily relies on large-scale data with comprehensive labels, which is more expensive and time-consuming to fetch in 3D compared to 2D images or natural languages. This promotes the potential of utilizing models pretrained with data more than 3D as teachers for cross-modal knowledge transferring. In this paper, we revisit masked modeling in a unified fashion of knowledge distillation, and we show that foundational Transformers pretrained with 2D images or natural languages can help self-supervised 3D representation learning through training Autoencoders as Cross-Modal Teachers (ACT). The pretrained Transformers are transferred as cross-modal 3D teachers using discrete variational autoencoding self-supervision, during which the Transformers are frozen with prompt tuning for better knowledge inheritance. The latent features encoded by the 3D teachers are used as the target of masked point modeling, wherein the dark knowledge is distilled to the 3D Transformer students as foundational geometry understanding. Our ACT pretrained 3D learner achieves state-of-the-art generalization capacity across various downstream benchmarks, e.g., 88.21% overall accuracy on ScanObjectNN. Codes have been released at https://github.com/RunpeiDong/ACT.3a:T42a,Despite the popularity and efficacy of knowledge distillation, there is limited understanding of why it helps. In order to study the generalization behavior of a distilled student, we propose a new theoretical framework that leverages supervision complexity: a measure of alignment between teacher-provided supervision and the student's neural tangent kernel. The framework highlights a delicate interplay among the teacher's accuracy, the student's margin with respect to the teacher predictions, and the complexity of the teacher predictions. Specifically, it provides a rigorous justification for the utility of various techniques that are prevalent in the context of distillation, such as early stopping and temperature scaling. Our analysis further suggests the use of online distillation, where a student receives increasingly more complex supervision from teachers in different stages of their training. We demonstrate efficacy of online distillation and validate the theoretical findings on a range of image classification benchmarks and model architectures.3b:T413,As large language models (LLMs) grow larger and more sophisticated, assessing their"reasoning"capabilities in natural language grows more challenging. Recent question answering (QA) benchmarks that attempt to assess reasoning are often limited by a narrow scope of covered situations and subject matters. We introduce WikiWhy, a QA dataset built around a novel auxiliary task: explaining why an answer is true in natural language. WikiWhy contains over 9,000"why"question-answer-rationale triples, grounded on Wikipedia facts across a diverse set of topics. Each rationale is a set of supporting statements connecting the question to the answer. WikiWhy serves as a benchmark for the reasoning capabilities of LLMs because it demands rigorous explicit rationales for each answer to demonstrate the acquisition of implicit commonsense knowledge, which is unlikely to be easily memorized. GPT-3 baselines achieve only 38.7% human-evaluated correctness in the end-to-end answer&explain condition, leaving significant room for future improvements.3c:T542,Inspired by the success of self-supervised autoregressive representation learning in natural language (GPT and its variants), and advances in recent visual architecture design with Vision Transformers (ViTs), in this paper, we explore the effect various design choices have on the success of applying such training strategies for visual feature learning. Specifically, we introduce a novel strategy that we call Random Segments with Autoregressive Coding (RandSAC). In RandSAC, we group patch representations (image tokens) into hierarchically arranged segments; within each segment, tokens are predicted in parallel, similar to BERT, while across segment predictions are sequential, similar to GPT. We illustrate that randomized serialization of the segments significantly improves the performance and results in distribution over spatially-long (across-segments) and -short (within-segment) predictions which are effective for feature learning. We illustrate the pertinence of these design choices and explore alternatives on a number of datasets (e.g., CIFAR10, CIFAR100, ImageNet). While our pre-training strategy works with a vanilla Transformer, we also propose a conceptually simple, but highly effective, addition to the decoder that allows learnable skip-connections to encoder$'$s feature layers, which further improves the performance.3d:T4bd,Many empirical studies have demonstrated the performance benefits of conditional computation in neural networks, including reduced inference time and power consumption. We study the fundamental limits of neural conditional computation from the perspective of memorization capacity. For Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) networks without conditional computation, it is known that memorizing a collection of $n$ input-output relationships can be accomplished via a neural network with $O(\sqrt{n})$ neurons. Calculating the output of this neural network can be accomplished using $O(\sqrt{n})$ elementary arithmetic operations of additions, multiplications and comparisons for each input. Using a conditional ReLU network, we show that the same task can be accomplished using only $O(\log n)$ operations per input. This represents an almost exponential improvement as compared to networks without conditional computation. We also show that the $\Theta(\log n)$ rate is the best possible. Our achievability result utilizes a general methodology to synthesize a conditional network out of an unconditional network in a computationally-efficient manner, bridging the gap between unconditional and conditional architectures.3e:T4e3,Vision Transformers (ViTs) with self-attention modules have recently achieved great empirical success in many vision tasks. Due to non-convex interactions across layers, however, theoretical learning and generalization analysis is mostly elusive. Based on a data model characterizing both label-relevant and label-irrelevant tokens, this paper provides the first theoretical analysis of training a shallow ViT, i.e., one self-attention layer followed by a two-layer perceptron, for a classification task. We characterize the sample complexity to achieve a zero generalization error. Our sample complexity bound is positively correlated with the inverse of the fraction of label-relevant tokens, the token noise level, and the initial model error. We also prove that a training process using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) leads to a sparse attention map, which is a formal verification of the general intuition about the success of attention. Moreover, this paper indicates that a proper token sparsification can improve the test performance by removing label-irrelevant and/or noisy tokens, including spurious correlations. Empirical experiments on synthetic data and CIFAR-10 dataset justify our theoretical results and generalize to deeper ViTs.3f:T717,Human similarity judgments are a powerful supervision signal for machine learning applications based on techniques such as contrastive learning, information retrieval, and model alignment, but classical methods for collecting human similarity judgments are too expensive to be used at scale. Recent methods propose using pre-trained deep neural networks (DNNs) to approximate human similarity, but pre-trained DNNs may not be available for certain domains (e.g., medical images, low-resource languages) and their performance in approximating human similarity has not been extensively tested. We conducted an evaluation of 611 pre-trained models across three domains -- images, audio, video -- and found that there is a large gap in performance between human similarity judgments and pre-trained DNNs. To address this gap, we propose a new class of similarity approximation methods based on language. To collect the language data required by these new methods, we also developed and validated a novel adaptive tag collection pipeline. We find that our proposed language-based methods are significantly cheaper, in the number of human judgments, than classical methods, but still improve performance over the DNN-based methods. Finally, we also develop `stacked' methods that combine language embeddings with DNN embeddings, and find that these consistently provide the best approximations for human similarity across all three of our modalities. Based on the results of this comprehensive study, we provide a concise guide for researchers interested in collecting or approximating human similarity data. To accompany this guide, we also release all of the similarity and language data, a total of 206,339 human judgments, that we collected in our experiments, along with a detailed breakdown of all modeling results.40:T5ef,Vision-language models (VLMs) such as CLIP have shown promising performance on a variety of recognition tasks using the standard zero-shot classification procedure -- computing similarity between the query image and the embedded words for each category. By only using the category name, they neglect to make use of the rich context of additional information that language affords. The procedure gives no intermediate understanding of why a category is chosen, and furthermore provides no mechanism for adjusting the criteria used towards this decision. We present an alternative framework for classification with VLMs, which we call classification by description. We ask VLMs to check for descriptive features rather than broad categories: to find a tiger, look for its stripes; its claws; and more. By basing decisions on these descriptors, we can provide additional cues that encourage using the features we want to be used. In the process, we can get a clear idea of what features the model uses to construct its decision; it gains some level of inherent explainability. We query large language models (e.g., GPT-3) for these descriptors to obtain them in a scalable way. Extensive experiments show our framework has numerous advantages past interpretability. We show improvements in accuracy on ImageNet across distribution shifts; demonstrate the ability to adapt VLMs to recognize concepts unseen during training; and illustrate how descriptors can be edited to effectively mitigate bias compared to the baseline.41:T57b,Multimodal few-shot learning is challenging due to the large domain gap between vision and language modalities. Existing methods are trying to communicate visual concepts as prompts to frozen language models, but rely on hand-engineered task induction to reduce the hypothesis space. To make the whole process learnable, we introduce a multimodal meta-learning approach. Specifically, our approach decomposes the training of the model into a set of related multimodal few-shot tasks. We define a meta-mapper network, acting as a meta-learner, to efficiently bridge frozen large-scale vision and language models and leverage their already learned capacity. By updating the learnable parameters only of the meta-mapper, it learns to accrue shared meta-knowledge among these tasks. Thus, it can rapidly adapt to newly presented samples with only a few gradient updates. Importantly, it induces the task in a completely data-driven manner, with no need for a hand-engineered task induction. We evaluate our approach on recently proposed multimodal few-shot benchmarks, measuring how rapidly the model can bind novel visual concepts to words and answer visual questions by observing only a limited set of labeled examples. The experimental results show that our meta-learning approach outperforms the baseline across multiple datasets and various training settings while being computationally more efficient.42:T5bd,The recent observation of neural power-law scaling relations has made a significant impact in the field of deep learning. A substantial amount of attention has been dedicated as a consequence to the description of scaling laws, although mostly for supervised learning and only to a reduced extent for reinforcement learning frameworks. In this paper we present an extensive study of performance scaling for a cornerstone reinforcement learning algorithm, AlphaZero. On the basis of a relationship between Elo rating, playing strength and power-law scaling, we train AlphaZero agents on the games Connect Four and Pentago and analyze their performance. We find that player strength scales as a power law in neural network parameter count when not bottlenecked by available compute, and as a power of compute when training optimally sized agents. We observe nearly identical scaling exponents for both games. Combining the two observed scaling laws we obtain a power law relating optimal size to compute similar to the ones observed for language models. We find that the predicted scaling of optimal neural network size fits our data for both games. This scaling law implies that previously published state-of-the-art game-playing models are significantly smaller than their optimal size, given the respective compute budgets. We also show that large AlphaZero models are more sample efficient, performing better than smaller models with the same amount of training data.43:T466,Self-attention is key to the remarkable success of transformers in sequence modeling tasks including many applications in natural language processing and computer vision. Like neural network layers, these attention mechanisms are often developed by heuristics and experience. To provide a principled framework for constructing attention layers in transformers, we show that the self-attention corresponds to the support vector expansion derived from a support vector regression problem, whose primal formulation has the form of a neural network layer. Using our framework, we derive popular attention layers used in practice and propose two new attentions: 1) the Batch Normalized Attention (Attention-BN) derived from the batch normalization layer and 2) the Attention with Scaled Head (Attention-SH) derived from using less training data to fit the SVR model. We empirically demonstrate the advantages of the Attention-BN and Attention-SH in reducing head redundancy, increasing the model's accuracy, and improving the model's efficiency in a variety of practical applications including image and time-series classification.44:T44c,In this paper, we propose CLIP-Dissect, a new technique to automatically describe the function of individual hidden neurons inside vision networks. CLIP-Dissect leverages recent advances in multimodal vision/language models to label internal neurons with open-ended concepts without the need for any labeled data or human examples. We show that CLIP-Dissect provides more accurate descriptions than existing methods for last layer neurons where the ground-truth is available as well as qualitatively good descriptions for hidden layer neurons. In addition, our method is very flexible: it is model agnostic, can easily handle new concepts and can be extended to take advantage of better multimodal models in the future. Finally CLIP-Dissect is computationally efficient and can label all neurons from five layers of ResNet-50 in just 4 minutes, which is more than 10 times faster than existing methods. Our code is available at https://github.com/Trustworthy-ML-Lab/CLIP-dissect. Finally, crowdsourced user study results are available at Appendix B to further support the effectiveness of our method.45:T546,We present a comparative study on how and why contrastive learning (CL) and masked image modeling (MIM) differ in their representations and in their performance of downstream tasks. In particular, we demonstrate that self-supervised Vision Transformers (ViTs) have the following properties: (1) CL trains self-attentions to capture longer-range global patterns than MIM, such as the shape of an object, especially in the later layers of the ViT architecture. This CL property helps ViTs linearly separate images in their representation spaces. However, it also makes the self-attentions collapse into homogeneity for all query tokens and heads. Such homogeneity of self-attention reduces the diversity of representations, worsening scalability and dense prediction performance. (2) CL utilizes the low-frequency signals of the representations, but MIM utilizes high-frequencies. Since low- and high-frequency information respectively represent shapes and textures, CL is more shape-oriented and MIM more texture-oriented. (3) CL plays a crucial role in the later layers, while MIM mainly focuses on the early layers. Upon these analyses, we find that CL and MIM can complement each other and observe that even the simplest harmonization can help leverage the advantages of both methods. The code is available at https://github.com/naver-ai/cl-vs-mim.46:T4ec,Deep neural networks (DNNs) often have to be compressed, via pruning and/or quantization, before they can be deployed in practical settings. In this work we propose a new compression-aware minimizer dubbed CrAM that modifies the optimization step in a principled way, in order to produce models whose local loss behavior is stable under compression operations such as pruning. Thus, dense models trained via CrAM should be compressible post-training, in a single step, without significant accuracy loss. Experimental results on standard benchmarks, such as residual networks for ImageNet classification and BERT models for language modelling, show that CrAM produces dense models that can be more accurate than the standard SGD/Adam-based baselines, but which are stable under weight pruning: specifically, we can prune models in one-shot to 70-80% sparsity with almost no accuracy loss, and to 90% with reasonable ($\sim 1\%$) accuracy loss, which is competitive with gradual compression methods. Additionally, CrAM can produce sparse models which perform well for transfer learning, and it also works for semi-structured 2:4 pruning patterns supported by GPU hardware. The code for reproducing the results is available at https://github.com/IST-DASLab/CrAM .47:T683,Tensor decompositions have been successfully applied to compress neural networks. The compression algorithms using tensor decompositions commonly minimize the approximation error on the weights. Recent work assumes the approximation error on the weights is a proxy for the performance of the model to compress multiple layers and fine-tune the compressed model. Surprisingly, little research has systematically evaluated which approximation errors can be used to make choices regarding the layer, tensor decomposition method, and level of compression. To close this gap, we perform an experimental study to test if this assumption holds across different layers and types of decompositions, and what the effect of fine-tuning is. We include the approximation error on the features resulting from a compressed layer in our analysis to test if this provides a better proxy, as it explicitly takes the data into account. We find the approximation error on the weights has a positive correlation with the performance error, before as well as after fine-tuning. Basing the approximation error on the features does not improve the correlation significantly. While scaling the approximation error commonly is used to account for the different sizes of layers, the average correlation across layers is smaller than across all choices (i.e. layers, decompositions, and level of compression) before fine-tuning. When calculating the correlation across the different decompositions, the average rank correlation is larger than across all choices. This means multiple decompositions can be considered for compression and the approximation error can be used to choose between them.48:T40e,Recent text-to-image models have achieved impressive results. However, since they require large-scale datasets of text-image pairs, it is impractical to train them on new domains where data is scarce or not labeled. In this work, we propose using large-scale retrieval methods, in particular, efficient k-Nearest-Neighbors (kNN), which offers novel capabilities: (1) training a substantially small and efficient text-to-image diffusion model without any text, (2) generating out-of-distribution images by simply swapping the retrieval database at inference time, and (3) performing text-driven local semantic manipulations while preserving object identity. To demonstrate the robustness of our method, we apply our kNN approach on two state-of-the-art diffusion backbones, and show results on several different datasets. As evaluated by human studies and automatic metrics, our method achieves state-of-the-art results compared to existing approaches that train text-to-image generation models using images only (without paired text data)49:T567,In this paper, we leverage low-level compiler intermediate representations (IR) to improve code translation. Traditional transpilers rely on syntactic information and handcrafted rules, which limits their applicability and produces unnatural-looking code. Applying neural machine translation (NMT) approaches to code has successfully broadened the set of programs on which one can get a natural-looking translation. However, they treat the code as sequences of text tokens, and still do not differentiate well enough between similar pieces of code which have different semantics in different languages. The consequence is low quality translation, reducing the practicality of NMT, and stressing the need for an approach significantly increasing its accuracy. Here we propose to augment code translation with IRs, specifically LLVM IR, with results on the C++, Java, Rust, and Go languages. Our method improves upon the state of the art for unsupervised code translation, increasing the number of correct translations by 11% on average, and up to 79% for the Java ->Rust pair with greedy decoding. We extend previous test sets for code translation, by adding hundreds of Go and Rust functions. Additionally, we train models with high performance on the problem of IR decompilation, generating programming source code from IR, and study using IRs as intermediary pivot for translation.4a:T575,We identify and overcome two key obstacles in extending the success of BERT-style pre-training, or the masked image modeling, to convolutional networks (convnets): (i) convolution operation cannot handle irregular, random-masked input images; (ii) the single-scale nature of BERT pre-training is inconsistent with convnet's hierarchical structure. For (i), we treat unmasked pixels as sparse voxels of 3D point clouds and use sparse convolution to encode. This is the first use of sparse convolution for 2D masked modeling. For (ii), we develop a hierarchical decoder to reconstruct images from multi-scale encoded features. Our method called Sparse masKed modeling (SparK) is general: it can be used directly on any convolutional model without backbone modifications. We validate it on both classical (ResNet) and modern (ConvNeXt) models: on three downstream tasks, it surpasses both state-of-the-art contrastive learning and transformer-based masked modeling by similarly large margins (around +1.0%). Improvements on object detection and instance segmentation are more substantial (up to +3.5%), verifying the strong transferability of features learned. We also find its favorable scaling behavior by observing more gains on larger models. All this evidence reveals a promising future of generative pre-training on convnets. Codes and models are released at https://github.com/keyu-tian/SparK.4b:T43a,Reinforcement learning (RL) agents can leverage batches of previously collected data to extract a reasonable control policy. An emerging issue in this offline RL setting, however, is that the bootstrapping update underlying many of our methods suffers from insufficient action-coverage: standard max operator may select a maximal action that has not been seen in the dataset. Bootstrapping from these inaccurate values can lead to overestimation and even divergence. There are a growing number of methods that attempt to approximate an \emph{in-sample} max, that only uses actions well-covered by the dataset. We highlight a simple fact: it is more straightforward to approximate an in-sample \emph{softmax} using only actions in the dataset. We show that policy iteration based on the in-sample softmax converges, and that for decreasing temperatures it approaches the in-sample max. We derive an In-Sample Actor-Critic (AC), using this in-sample softmax, and show that it is consistently better or comparable to existing offline RL methods, and is also well-suited to fine-tuning.4c:T4b7,Decision Transformers (DT) have demonstrated strong performances in offline reinforcement learning settings, but quickly adapting to unseen novel tasks remains challenging. To address this challenge, we propose a new framework, called Hyper-Decision Transformer (HDT), that can generalize to novel tasks from a handful of demonstrations in a data- and parameter-efficient manner. To achieve such a goal, we propose to augment the base DT with an adaptation module, whose parameters are initialized by a hyper-network. When encountering unseen tasks, the hyper-network takes a handful of demonstrations as inputs and initializes the adaptation module accordingly. This initialization enables HDT to efficiently adapt to novel tasks by only fine-tuning the adaptation module. We validate HDT's generalization capability on object manipulation tasks. We find that with a single expert demonstration and fine-tuning only 0.5% of DT parameters, HDT adapts faster to unseen tasks than fine-tuning the whole DT model. Finally, we explore a more challenging setting where expert actions are not available, and we show that HDT outperforms state-of-the-art baselines in terms of task success rates by a large margin.0:{"rsc":["$","$1","c",{"children":[["$","div",null,{"className":"mx-auto max-w-5xl px-4 py-8","children":["$","$L2",null,{"data":{"venue":"ICLR","venue_slug":"iclr-2023","year":2023,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","generated_at":"2026-04-19T11:29:30.626329+00:00","stats":{"total_fetched":1794,"total_relevant":294,"by_award":{"poster":294},"by_category":{"multimodal":40,"llm_pretrain":70,"mechanism":82,"agent":8,"post_train":36,"multimodal_gen":23,"coding_agent":10,"efficient":25}},"papers":[{"id":"KomatsuzakiPLRM23","title":"Sparse Upcycling: Training Mixture-of-Experts from Dense Checkpoints","authors":["Aran Komatsuzaki","Joan Puigcerver","James Lee-Thorp","Carlos Riquelme Ruiz","Basil Mustafa","Joshua Ainslie","Yi Tay","Mostafa Dehghani","Neil Houlsby"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/KomatsuzakiPLRM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/KomatsuzakiPLRM23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=T5nUQDrM4u","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["moe","upcycling","pretrain"]},{"id":"2205.05131","title":"UL2: Unifying Language Learning Paradigms","authors":["Yi Tay","Mostafa Dehghani","Vinh Q. Tran","Xavier Garcia","Jason Wei","Xuezhi Wang","Hyung Won Chung","Dara Bahri","Tal Schuster","Huaixiu Steven Zheng","Denny Zhou","Neil Houlsby","Donald Metzler"],"institutions":["Google Research"],"abstract":"$3","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.05131","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Tay00GW0CBSZZHM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Tay00GW0CBSZZHM23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=6ruVLB727MC","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：预训练目标和模型架构长期被绑在一起，导致 encoder、decoder、prefix LM 各自擅长一类任务，却缺少一个在不同任务形态下都稳健的统一方案。以前的做法通常是在“选哪种目标”上二选一，结果是某类能力强，另一类能力吃亏。","importance":"这是一篇范式级 pretrain 论文。它提出 UL2，把多种语言建模目标统一到一个 mixture-of-denoisers 框架下，并明确区分“架构选择”和“预训练目标选择”。对后续大模型训练影响很大：它直接启发了 T5/PaLM 系列之后的统一去噪预训练设计，也为后来的 R-denoising、不同 corruption mixture、乃至 instruction-friendly 预训练提供了清晰模板。","technical_approach":"核心方法是原创性的统一预训练框架 UL2，其中最关键的是 Mixture-of-Denoisers（MoD）。它不是只做 BERT 式 span corruption，也不是只做 seq2seq 或 causal LM，而是把多种去噪任务按不同 corruption 粒度和上下文约束混合训练，让同一个模型同时见到短跨度补全、长跨度重建、以及更接近因果生成的目标。论文的一个重要判断是：架构与目标应解耦，Transformer 架构未必天然对应某一种预训练范式；通过目标混合，可以让同一模型兼顾理解、填空和生成。设计上的代价也明确：训练更复杂，需要 carefully tuned mixture 与 task tags，但换来更广的 zero-shot/fine-tune 适用性。","experiments":"摘要可确认的实证结论是：UL2 在多种数据集和设置上都更“通用”，而不是只在某一 benchmark 上取巧。论文已知会有不同规模模型与广泛任务评测，并通常拿 T5、prefix LM、causal LM 等作对比。题面没有给出可靠数字，因此不编造；但这篇工作的关键实验价值在于三点：第一，MoD 相比单一 denoising objective 的稳定收益；第二，统一目标是否真能覆盖 NLU/NLG；第三，规模变大后这种统一训练是否仍然成立。后续社区影响本身已经说明这不是小幅调参结果，而是可迁移的训练 recipe。","authors_note":"Google Research 作品。作者包含 Yi Tay、Mostafa Dehghani、Jason Wei 等，均来自 T5/PaLM/大规模预训练方向核心团队。代表工作包括 T5、PaLM、Switch Transformer、Flan 等相关谱系。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"UL2 addresses a long-standing mismatch in language pretraining: architecture choice and pretraining objective are often treated as the same decision, which leaves encoder-style, decoder-style, and prefix-style models each strong on some tasks and weak on others. Earlier practice usually picked one objective family and accepted the trade-off.","importance":"This is a paradigm-level pretraining paper. It proposes a unified objective framework, not just a new corruption variant, and explicitly argues that architecture and objective should be disentangled. The impact on later large-model training is substantial: it helped establish mixed denoising as a practical route to broader capability coverage across understanding and generation.","technical_approach":"The core method is UL2 with Mixture-of-Denoisers (MoD). Instead of committing to BERT-style masking, seq2seq denoising, or causal LM alone, it mixes multiple denoising tasks with different corruption granularities and context constraints, so one model learns short-span infilling, long-span reconstruction, and objectives closer to generation. The key design claim is that Transformer architecture need not be tied to one pretraining paradigm; objective mixing can make a single model broadly useful across NLU and NLG. The trade-off is real: training becomes more complex and requires a tuned mixture plus task indicators, but the payoff is a stronger general-purpose model.","experiments":"From the abstract, the empirical claim is broad effectiveness across datasets and setups rather than a narrow benchmark win. The paper is known to evaluate across multiple scales and compare against T5-like denoising, prefix LM, and causal baselines, but the prompt does not provide trustworthy numbers, so I will not fabricate them. The important empirical questions are whether MoD consistently beats single-objective denoising, whether the unified recipe truly covers both understanding and generation, and whether the benefit persists with scale. The subsequent influence of UL2 strongly suggests this is more than a small recipe tweak.","authors_note":"A Google Research paper. Authors include Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, and Jason Wei, all central figures in the T5/PaLM era of large-scale pretraining. Representative related work includes T5, PaLM, Switch Transformer, and Flan."},"tags":["pretrain-objective","unified","denoising"],"notable_authors":["Yi Tay","Mostafa Dehghani","Jason Wei"]},{"id":"ZengLDWL0YXZXTM23","title":"GLM-130B: An Open Bilingual Pre-trained Model","authors":["Aohan Zeng","Xiao Liu","Zhengxiao Du","Zihan Wang","Hanyu Lai","Ming Ding","Zhuoyi Yang","Yifan Xu","Wendi Zheng","Xiao Xia","Weng Lam Tam","Zixuan Ma","Yufei Xue","Jidong Zhai","Wenguang Chen","Zhiyuan Liu","Peng Zhang","Yuxiao Dong","Jie Tang"],"institutions":["Tsinghua University","Zhipu AI"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ZengLDWL0YXZXTM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ZengLDWL0YXZXTM23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=-Aw0rrrPUF","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心目标是提供一个可公开使用的 130B 级中英双语预训练模型，并证明在资源受限条件下也能把超大模型稳定训起来。此前 100B+ 级模型大多闭源，中文能力强的开放模型更少，训练细节和稳定性经验也不透明。","importance":"它的重要性主要是开放基座模型与训练工程层面的。对 pretrain 研究者最有价值的不是“又一个大模型”，而是它公开了双语数据配比、训练稳定性处理、INT4 推理可行性和少量但真实的 100B+ 训练经验；这对后续开放社区复现超大规模预训练很有参考意义。","technical_approach":"GLM-130B 基于 GLM 系列的 General Language Model 路线，强调双语预训练和自回归/blank infilling 风格的统一建模。方法上没有追求花哨新结构，而是把重点放在大规模训练 recipe：中英混合数据、优化稳定性、并行策略、数值精度控制，以及让 130B 模型在消费级更低精度上可部署。和 GPT 式纯左到右模型相比，GLM 延续了其原有的 blank infilling 传统，这在双语生成和部分填空式任务上有一定灵活性，但主贡献仍然是工程可复现性而非目标函数创新。","experiments":"论文报告 GLM-130B 在中英文多项基准上达到当时开放模型中的强竞争力，并在少样本/零样本设置下接近或超过若干闭源或半闭源对手。关键事实包括：模型规模 130B，双语预训练，支持 INT4 量化后较小精度损失；作者还强调训练过程中没有出现不可恢复的 loss spike，并给出稳定训练经验。更值得看的实验不是单点分数，而是量化后性能保持、双语平衡、以及训练稳定性分析，这些都比单纯榜单排名更有工程价值。","authors_note":"清华大学 KEG、智谱 AI 等；作者包括曾安浩（Aohan Zeng）、杜郑晓（Zhengxiao Du）等。团队代表性工作包括 GLM / ChatGLM 系列开放双语模型。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper aims to release an open 130B-scale bilingual Chinese-English pretrained model and to show that stable training at this scale is possible under relatively constrained conditions. Before this, most 100B+ models were closed, and strong open bilingual models were especially scarce.","importance":"Its main value is in open foundation modeling and training engineering. For pretraining researchers, the useful part is not simply another large model, but the disclosed recipe around bilingual data mixture, stability handling, low-precision deployment, and practical lessons from training a 100B+ model in the open.","technical_approach":"GLM-130B follows the General Language Model line with bilingual pretraining and a unified formulation that retains the GLM-style blank-infilling flavor rather than using a plain left-to-right GPT objective only. The paper does not hinge on a flashy new architecture; the real contribution is the recipe: Chinese-English data mixing, optimization stability, parallel training strategy, numerical precision management, and making a 130B model usable under INT4 inference. Relative to pure autoregressive GPT-style models, the modeling objective is somewhat different, but the paper is mainly an engineering and openness contribution.","experiments":"The model is reported to be highly competitive among open models of its time on both Chinese and English benchmarks, including few-shot and zero-shot settings. Key facts include the 130B scale, bilingual pretraining, and workable INT4 quantization with limited degradation. The paper also emphasizes stable training without catastrophic loss spikes and provides practical observations on how that was achieved. For a pretraining reader, the most useful results are the quantization retention, bilingual balance, and stability analysis rather than leaderboard numbers alone.","authors_note":"Tsinghua University KEG and Zhipu AI; authors include Aohan Zeng and Zhengxiao Du. The team is known for the GLM and ChatGLM family of open bilingual models."},"tags":["large-language-model","bilingual","pre-training","scaling","open-source"],"notable_authors":["Aohan Zeng","Zhengxiao Du"]},{"id":"ZhouSHWS0SCBLC23","title":"Least-to-Most Prompting Enables Complex Reasoning in Large Language Models","authors":["Denny Zhou","Nathanael Schärli","Le Hou","Jason Wei","Nathan Scales","Xuezhi Wang","Dale Schuurmans","Claire Cui","Olivier Bousquet","Quoc V. Le","Ed H. Chi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ZhouSHWS0SCBLC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ZhouSHWS0SCBLC23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=WZH7099tgfM","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：LLM在复杂推理任务上常因“直接解题”跨度太大而失败，即使模型具备局部能力也难以一次性组织出完整推理链。以往CoT能缓解但仍常卡在长程依赖与子问题分解上。","importance":"贡献是提示范式级：提出Least-to-Most Prompting，通过先分解再逐步求解显著提升复杂推理的成功率。对pretrain的启示是：模型的推理失败很多是“规划/分解”而非“算子能力”不足，这会影响我们如何构造训练数据（分解轨迹）与如何评估推理能力。","technical_approach":"方法分两阶段：第一阶段让模型把问题分解成由易到难的子问题序列；第二阶段按顺序求解，每一步把已解子问题的答案作为上下文输入下一步。关键机制是把一次性生成长CoT改成多轮、带中间监督信号的递进生成，从而降低每一步的搜索难度；代价是推理时token与轮次增加，且分解质量成为瓶颈。","experiments":"未提供摘要，无法给出具体模型（如PaLM/LaMDA）、任务（如GSM8K/SC/BBH）与提升数字；但该论文在社区广为引用，常见结果是对多步推理与组合泛化任务提升显著，并与标准CoT、Self-Consistency对比。建议补读时重点核对：在哪些任务上分解带来最大收益、失败案例是否来自错误分解、以及多轮带来的成本上升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLMs often fail on complex reasoning because the gap from problem statement to full solution is too large; even if the model has local skills, it struggles to organize a long coherent reasoning chain in one shot. Chain-of-thought helps but still breaks on decomposition and long-horizon dependencies.","importance":"This is a prompting-paradigm contribution: Least-to-Most Prompting improves complex reasoning by decomposing problems and solving subproblems progressively. For pretraining, it suggests many reasoning failures are about planning/decomposition rather than missing primitives, which impacts how we design training traces and how we evaluate reasoning.","technical_approach":"It uses a two-stage procedure: (1) prompt the model to decompose the problem into an ordered list of subproblems from easy to hard; (2) solve them sequentially, feeding previous answers as context for the next step. The mechanism is to replace one-shot long CoT generation with multi-round incremental generation, reducing per-step search difficulty. The cost is higher inference tokens/rounds and sensitivity to decomposition quality.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so specific models, benchmarks, and numerical gains cannot be stated reliably here. The paper is widely cited and typically reports large gains on multi-step reasoning and compositional generalization versus standard CoT and self-consistency; readers should verify where gains are largest, failure modes from bad decompositions, and the added inference cost.","authors_note":""},"tags":["chain-of-thought","prompting","reasoning","generalization"]},{"id":"2211.14842","title":"Unified Discrete Diffusion for Simultaneous Vision-Language Generation","authors":["Minghui Hu","Chuanxia Zheng","Zuopeng Yang","Tat-Jen Cham","Heliang Zheng","Chaoyue Wang","Dacheng Tao","Ponnuthurai N. Suganthan"],"institutions":["Nanyang Technological University","Monash University","Zhejiang University"],"abstract":"The recently developed discrete diffusion models perform extraordinarily well in the text-to-image task, showing significant promise for handling the multi-modality signals. In this work, we harness these traits and present a unified multimodal generation model that can conduct both the\"modality translation\"and\"multi-modality generation\"tasks using a single model, performing text-based, image-based, and even vision-language simultaneous generation. Specifically, we unify the discrete diffusion process for multimodal signals by proposing a unified transition matrix. Moreover, we design a mutual attention module with fused embedding layer and a unified objective function to emphasise the inter-modal linkages, which are vital for multi-modality generation. Extensive experiments indicate that our proposed method can perform comparably to the state-of-the-art solutions in various generation tasks.","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.14842","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/0001ZYCZWTS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/0001ZYCZWTS23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=8JqINxA-2a","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"此前多模态生成模型通常为每个方向（T2I、I2T、图文联合）分别训专门的模型或用非对称架构；怎么用一个统一的 discrete diffusion 模型同时干 modality translation 和 simultaneous vision-language generation？","importance":"范式级尝试，把 discrete diffusion 从 T2I 单向扩到真正的 vision-language 双向/联合生成。对 pretrain 的启示：在 tokenizer 已经把图像离散化（VQ）的前提下，离散扩散可以作为 AR 之外的一种统一多模态建模目标。这条线是后来 Chameleon、Transfusion 等 AR/diffusion 混合统一建模的前期探索之一。","technical_approach":"核心是统一 transition matrix：设计一个覆盖图像 token 和文本 token 联合词表的离散扩散噪声过程，使得两种模态可以在同一个 diffusion 轨迹上加噪/去噪。配合 mutual attention + fused embedding 强化跨模态 token 之间的交互，损失是统一的 discrete diffusion 目标。与 VQ-Diffusion 只做 T2I 的区别是词表和过程覆盖双模态，目标让模型能一次同时生成图和文。","experiments":"在 MS-COCO 等数据集上评 T2I（FID / CLIP score）、I2T（caption 指标）、以及联合生成任务。报告单模型在三项任务上都能拿到合理结果，和专门的单向模型可比。具体数字以原文为准。","authors_note":"NTU + Monash + 浙大等合作。Tat-Jen Cham 在视觉领域有持续工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Prior multimodal generative models train separate or asymmetric networks for T2I, I2T, and joint generation. Can a single discrete diffusion model handle both modality translation and simultaneous vision-language generation?","importance":"A paradigm-level attempt to extend discrete diffusion beyond T2I into true bidirectional / joint vision-language generation. For pretrain research: once images are tokenized via VQ, discrete diffusion becomes a legitimate alternative to AR for unified multimodal modeling — an early precursor to later AR+diffusion unified pretraining (Chameleon, Transfusion).","technical_approach":"A unified transition matrix over a joint image+text token vocabulary, so both modalities live on a single discrete diffusion process. Adds a mutual attention module with a fused embedding layer to strengthen cross-modal token interaction, trained with one unified diffusion objective. Unlike VQ-Diffusion (T2I only), both vocabulary and noising process cover both modalities, enabling simultaneous generation in one pass.","experiments":"Evaluated on MS-COCO for T2I (FID, CLIP score), I2T (caption metrics), and joint generation. A single model gives reasonable results on all three, competitive with task-specific baselines. Exact numbers per paper.","authors_note":"NTU + Monash + ZJU collaboration."},"tags":["discrete-diffusion","multimodal","unified-modeling","non-ar"]},{"id":"0002WSLCNCZ23","title":"Self-Consistency Improves Chain of Thought Reasoning in Language Models","authors":["Xuezhi Wang","Jason Wei","Dale Schuurmans","Quoc V. Le","Ed H. Chi","Sharan Narang","Aakanksha Chowdhery","Denny Zhou"],"institutions":["Google Research","Google Brain"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/0002WSLCNCZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/0002WSLCNCZ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=1PL1NIMMrw","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"CoT 默认用 greedy decoding 取单条推理链，但 reasoning 问题常有多条合理路径到同一答案；单条 greedy 既容易采到错误链，也丢掉了多数投票式的鲁棒性。怎么把 reasoning 的 diversity 当成信号用起来？","importance":"prompting/推理层的经典贡献，影响范围很大。对 pretrain/posttrain 研究的启示：**答案一致性本身就是一个无监督的 reward 信号**。这直接启发了后来大量 self-training / RL 工作（STaR、rejection sampling、RLAIF、R1-Zero 的 answer-level reward），self-consistency 其实是最早、最简单的'从模型自身采样中提取信号'的实例。","technical_approach":"Self-Consistency：对同一问题用 sampling（非 greedy，high temperature）生成多条 CoT 推理链，从每条链中抽出答案，然后对**最终答案**做 majority vote（按答案等价性聚合，而不是对 reasoning chain 聚合）。核心洞见：正确答案往往通过多条不同 reasoning path 到达，而错误答案路径彼此不一致；所以多数投票对 reasoning 任务尤其有效。相比 greedy CoT 几乎没有额外工程负担，只是多采样多次。","experiments":"在 GSM8K、SVAMP、AQuA、StrategyQA、ARC-Challenge 等多个 reasoning benchmark 上，用 PaLM / GPT-3 / UL2 / LaMDA 测试。GSM8K 从 CoT greedy 的 ~56% 提升到 ~74%（PaLM-540B），其他数据集也一致明显提升。随采样数量递增 saturate，多样性由 temperature 控制。","authors_note":"Google Research/Brain (Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi)。Jason Wei 是原始 CoT 一作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Vanilla CoT uses greedy decoding on a single reasoning path, but reasoning problems typically admit many valid paths to the same answer; greedy throws away the robustness one would get from aggregating across paths.","importance":"A hugely influential prompting-level contribution. The deeper lesson for pretrain/posttrain: answer-level agreement is itself a usable unsupervised reward signal. This is the earliest and simplest instance of extracting a training/inference signal from a model's own sampled outputs, a pattern later central to STaR, rejection sampling, and R1-Zero-style answer-reward RL.","technical_approach":"Sample multiple CoT chains per question at nontrivial temperature, extract the final answer from each chain, then majority-vote at the answer level (aggregating by answer equivalence, not by chain). The key insight: correct answers tend to be reached via diverse valid reasoning paths while incorrect ones diverge, so voting on the final answer specifically helps reasoning tasks. No extra training needed; just sample more.","experiments":"On GSM8K, SVAMP, AQuA, StrategyQA, ARC-Challenge across PaLM, GPT-3, UL2, LaMDA. GSM8K on PaLM-540B jumps from ~56% (CoT greedy) to ~74%. Gains saturate with sample count; diversity tuned via temperature.","authors_note":"Google Research / Brain (Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V. Le, Ed H. Chi). Jason Wei is the lead author of the original CoT paper."},"tags":["cot","self-consistency","reasoning","sampling"],"notable_authors":["Jason Wei","Quoc V. Le","Dale Schuurmans","Ed H. Chi","Xuezhi Wang"]},{"id":"2212.03827","title":"Discovering Latent Knowledge in Language Models Without Supervision","authors":["Collin Burns","Haotian Ye","Dan Klein","Jacob Steinhardt"],"institutions":["UC Berkeley"],"abstract":"$4","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.03827","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/BurnsYKS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/BurnsYKS23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=ETKGuby0hcs","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"经过人类反馈或模仿学习训练的 LLM 会产生“迎合人类（sycophancy）”或重复人类错误的现象，导致标准监督微调无法提取模型内部真正的知识。","importance":"范式级贡献。开创了无监督提取 LLM 内部真实信念（truth）的方向，证明了在表征层面绕过 reward hacking 和对齐税的可行性，对 post-train 阶段的真实性对齐有重大启发。","technical_approach":"提出对比搜索（CCS）。将是非问题构造成“Q: [问题] A: Yes”和“Q: [问题] A: No”的 prompt，提取模型内部激活值。通过寻找一个满足逻辑一致性（即 Yes 和 No 的概率和为 1，且表征距离最远）的线性投影方向，直接在激活空间中解码出真实答案，完全不需要真实标签。","experiments":"在 DeBERTa-v2-XXL 和 RoBERTa-large 等模型上评估。在没有任何标签的情况下，在 zero-shot QA 数据集上实现了高准确率（如 70-80%+），在某些情况下甚至超过了标准的 zero-shot prompting。","authors_note":"UC Berkeley。Jacob Steinhardt 和 Dan Klein 是 NLP 和对齐领域的顶尖学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLMs trained via human feedback or imitation learning often exhibit sycophancy or repeat human errors, making it difficult to extract the model's true internal knowledge using standard supervised fine-tuning.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution. Pioneers the unsupervised extraction of an LLM's internal truth, proving the feasibility of bypassing reward hacking and alignment taxes at the representation level, which highly inspires post-training truthfulness alignment.","technical_approach":"Introduces Contrastive Consistent Search (CCS). Formats yes/no questions as 'Q: [question] A: Yes' and 'Q: [question] A: No' to extract internal activations. It finds a linear projection direction in the activation space that satisfies logical consistency (probabilities of Yes and No sum to 1, and representations are distinct), decoding the true answer directly without any ground-truth labels.","experiments":"Evaluated on models up to DeBERTa-v2-XXL and RoBERTa-large. Achieves high accuracy (e.g., 70-80%+) on zero-shot QA datasets without any labels, outperforming standard zero-shot prompting in some cases.","authors_note":"UC Berkeley. Jacob Steinhardt and Dan Klein are leading researchers in NLP and AI alignment."},"tags":["interpretability","probing","truthfulness"],"notable_authors":["Jacob Steinhardt","Dan Klein","Collin Burns"]},{"id":"2210.14891","title":"Broken Neural Scaling Laws","authors":["Ethan Caballero","Kshitij Gupta","Irina Rish","David Krueger"],"institutions":["Mila","Université de Montréal","University of Cambridge"],"abstract":"$5","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.14891","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/CaballeroGRK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/CaballeroGRK23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=sckjveqlCZ","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"传统的神经缩放定律（Scaling Law）假设性能随计算量呈单一幂律变化，但实际预训练中经常出现性能停滞、突然涌现或双重下降等非单调/非平滑现象。","importance":"规律/数据级贡献。提出了一个能拟合预训练中各种“反常”相变现象的统一公式，使得预测大模型在特定规模下的涌现能力或性能拐点成为可能，对 pretrain 资源规划至关重要。","technical_approach":"提出平滑折线神经缩放定律（BNSL）。通过引入一个平滑过渡函数，将两段不同指数的幂律曲线连接起来。这种函数形式能够精确拟合曲线的斜率突变，从而在不改变基本幂律假设的前提下，将“涌现”解释为缩放曲线在特定规模下的斜率跃迁。","experiments":"在视觉、语言、扩散模型、RL 等领域的 200 多条缩放曲线上拟合 BNSL。与标准幂律相比，BNSL 在外推预测（例如用小模型数据预测大模型性能）时的误差显著降低，成功拟合了双重下降和涌现现象。","authors_note":"Mila, UdeM。Irina Rish 和 David Krueger 团队在 Scaling Law 和泛化理论方面有深入研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Traditional neural scaling laws assume a single power-law relationship, but actual pretraining often exhibits non-monotonic or non-smooth phenomena like plateaus, sudden emergence, or double descent.","importance":"Empirical/Scaling Law contribution. Provides a unified formula capable of fitting various 'anomalous' phase transitions in pretraining, enabling the prediction of emergent abilities or performance inflection points at scale, which is crucial for resource planning.","technical_approach":"Introduces the Broken Neural Scaling Law (BNSL). It uses a smooth transition function to connect two power-law curves with different exponents. This functional form accurately fits sudden changes in curve slopes, explaining 'emergence' as a slope transition at a specific scale without abandoning the fundamental power-law assumption.","experiments":"Fitted BNSL to over 200 scaling curves across vision, language, diffusion, and RL. Compared to standard power laws, BNSL significantly reduces extrapolation error (e.g., predicting large model performance from small model data) and successfully models double descent and emergence.","authors_note":"Mila, UdeM. Irina Rish and David Krueger are known for their work on scaling laws and generalization."},"tags":["scaling-law","extrapolation"],"notable_authors":["Irina Rish","David Krueger"]},{"id":"2202.07646","title":"Quantifying Memorization Across Neural Language Models","authors":["Nicholas Carlini","Daphne Ippolito","Matthew Jagielski","Katherine Lee","Florian Tramèr","Chiyuan Zhang"],"institutions":["Google","DeepMind","UC Berkeley","University of Washington"],"abstract":"Large language models (LMs) have been shown to memorize parts of their training data, and when prompted appropriately, they will emit the memorized training data verbatim. This is undesirable because memorization violates privacy (exposing user data), degrades utility (repeated easy-to-memorize text is often low quality), and hurts fairness (some texts are memorized over others). We describe three log-linear relationships that quantify the degree to which LMs emit memorized training data. Memorization significantly grows as we increase (1) the capacity of a model, (2) the number of times an example has been duplicated, and (3) the number of tokens of context used to prompt the model. Surprisingly, we find the situation becomes more complicated when generalizing these results across model families. On the whole, we find that memorization in LMs is more prevalent than previously believed and will likely get worse as models continues to scale, at least without active mitigations.","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.07646","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/CarliniIJLTZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/CarliniIJLTZ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=TatRHT_1cK","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 会记忆训练数据并原样输出，这引发了隐私和质量问题，但记忆化程度与模型规模、数据重复次数及上下文长度之间的定量关系一直缺乏系统性测量。","importance":"规律/数据级贡献。首次给出了 LLM 数据记忆化的对数线性缩放定律，为预训练阶段的数据去重（deduplication）和模型容量规划提供了直接的量化依据。","technical_approach":"通过大规模实证研究定义并测量记忆化（即给定 prompt，模型精确生成训练集后续字符串的概率）。在不同参数量（最高 6B）和不同架构的模型上，控制训练集中特定序列的重复次数和 prompt 的长度，统计精确匹配的比例。","experiments":"发现记忆化程度随模型参数量、数据重复次数和 prompt 长度呈指数级（对数线性）增长。此外，即使困惑度（Perplexity）相似的不同模型系列，其记忆化率也存在显著差异，暗示了训练动态或数据质量的深层影响。","authors_note":"Google, DeepMind, UC Berkeley, UW。Nicholas Carlini 是 ML 安全和数据记忆化领域的顶尖专家。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLMs memorize and regurgitate training data, raising privacy and quality concerns, but the quantitative relationship between memorization and factors like model scale, data duplication, and context length lacked systematic measurement.","importance":"Empirical/Scaling Law contribution. Establishes the first log-linear scaling laws for data memorization in LLMs, providing direct quantitative guidelines for data deduplication and model capacity planning during pretraining.","technical_approach":"Conducts a massive empirical study defining memorization as the probability of a model exactly generating the continuation of a training string given a prompt. It measures exact match rates across models of varying sizes (up to 6B) by controlling the duplication count of specific sequences in the training set and the prompt length.","experiments":"Reveals that memorization grows exponentially (log-linearly) with model parameter count, data duplication, and prompt length. Furthermore, different model families with similar perplexity exhibit significantly different memorization rates, hinting at the impact of underlying training dynamics or data quality.","authors_note":"Google, DeepMind, UC Berkeley, UW. Nicholas Carlini is a leading expert in ML security and memorization."},"tags":["memorization","scaling","privacy","data"],"notable_authors":["Nicholas Carlini","Florian Tramèr"]},{"id":"ChirkovaT23","title":"CodeBPE: Investigating Subtokenization Options for Large Language Model Pretraining on Source Code","authors":["Nadezhda Chirkova","Sergey Troshin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ChirkovaT23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ChirkovaT23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=htL4UZ344nF","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：源码预训练里该如何做 subtokenization，远没有自然语言里那么“默认”。过去很多代码 LM 直接沿用 BPE/byte-level 方案，但代码有标识符、命名风格和长尾词表等特殊性，不同切分方式会直接改变序列长度、拷贝能力和跨语言共享程度。","importance":"它的重要性是数据与 tokenizer 级的。这个问题看起来小，但对 code LM 的训练效率和泛化都很实在：tokenizer 会决定每个 batch 真正看到多少语义单位、标识符是否被过度碎片化，以及不同编程语言间共享子词的成本。对 pretrain 来说，这是一个典型的‘低层设计影响上层 scaling’问题。","technical_approach":"核心方法是系统比较不同源码 subtokenization 方案，而不是提出新模型。题目表明作者关注 BPE 族设计选项，可能包括保留/拆分 snake_case 和 camelCase、是否区分标识符边界、byte-level 与 char-level 回退、词表大小、以及跨语言联合训练时的 tokenizer 共享策略。这样设计有效，是因为代码中的‘词’不是自然语言词：一个长标识符既可能承载完整语义，也可能包含可复用片段。切得太细，序列过长且局部语义被冲淡；切得太粗，长尾 OOV 与复制泛化会变差。论文的价值就在于把这些 trade-off 用实证方式说清楚。","experiments":"从题目可确定，实验应比较多种 tokenizer 设置下的代码预训练或下游任务表现，至少会报告序列长度、词表利用率、训练成本以及代码建模质量指标。很可能覆盖多编程语言和不同模型规模，观察 tokenizer 选择是否随规模变化而变化。由于当前只给了题目，没有摘要和表格，无法可靠写出具体 benchmark、参数量和增益数字。可保守总结为：作者发现源码 tokenizer 不是无关紧要的工程细节，某些针对标识符结构的切分策略在效率和性能上优于直接照搬通用 BPE。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a question that is often under-justified in code pretraining: how should source code be subtokenized? Many code LMs inherit generic BPE or byte-level tokenization, but code has identifier structure, naming conventions, and long-tail vocabularies that make tokenization choices unusually consequential.","importance":"This is a tokenizer and data-pipeline contribution, but it matters for pretraining more than it first appears. Tokenization changes sequence length, identifier fragmentation, cross-language sharing, and therefore the effective compute budget seen by the model. In code LMs, that can shift both efficiency and generalization in nontrivial ways.","technical_approach":"The paper appears to systematically compare code-oriented subtokenization options rather than proposing a new architecture. The design space likely includes how to split identifiers such as snake_case or camelCase, whether to preserve boundaries, the use of byte- or character-level fallback, vocabulary size, and multilingual tokenizer sharing. This matters because identifiers are neither plain words nor arbitrary strings. Over-splitting makes sequences longer and weakens local semantic units; under-splitting hurts coverage and reuse on rare names. The point of the paper is to turn that trade-off into a measurable design choice.","experiments":"The experiments likely compare multiple tokenizer configurations for code pretraining and downstream code tasks, with metrics tied to sequence length, vocabulary efficiency, training cost, and modeling quality. It would be natural to include multiple programming languages and perhaps scale-dependent observations. The exact benchmarks, model sizes, and gains are not available in the provided input, so they should not be guessed. The safe conclusion is that tokenizer design for source code materially affects both efficiency and quality, and code-aware splitting strategies can outperform off-the-shelf generic BPE choices.","authors_note":""},"tags":["tokenizer","bpe","code-pretraining","subtokenization"],"notable_authors":["Nadezhda Chirkova","Sergey Troshin"]},{"id":"2304.09151","title":"UniMax: Fairer and More Effective Language Sampling for Large-Scale Multilingual Pretraining","authors":["Hyung Won Chung","Xavier Garcia","Adam Roberts","Yi Tay","Orhan Firat","Sharan Narang","Noah Constant"],"institutions":["Google Research"],"abstract":"Pretrained multilingual large language models have typically used heuristic temperature-based sampling to balance between different languages. However previous work has not systematically evaluated the efficacy of different pretraining language distributions across model scales. In this paper, we propose a new sampling method, UniMax, that delivers more uniform coverage of head languages while mitigating overfitting on tail languages by explicitly capping the number of repeats over each language's corpus. We perform an extensive series of ablations testing a range of sampling strategies on a suite of multilingual benchmarks, while varying model scale. We find that UniMax outperforms standard temperature-based sampling, and the benefits persist as scale increases. As part of our contribution, we release: (i) an improved and refreshed mC4 multilingual corpus consisting of 29 trillion characters across 107 languages, and (ii) a suite of pretrained umT5 model checkpoints trained with UniMax sampling.","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.09151","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ChungGRTFNC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ChungGRTFNC23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=kXwdL1cWOAi","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：多语种预训练里的语言采样分布该怎么定，现有温度采样虽然常用，但在不同模型规模下并不稳定地公平或有效。过去的做法通常在 head 语言与 tail 语言之间手调温度，结果要么 head 覆盖不够，要么 tail 被重复采样过度、出现过拟合。","importance":"这是很扎实的数据配比研究，价值直接落在 multilingual pretrain 的配方层。它的重要性不在于提出一个花哨模型，而在于给出一个更可解释的采样原则：既提升效果，也把‘公平性’从抽象口号落到可操作的重复上限控制。对大规模预训练尤其关键，因为数据配比错误会随着 scale 被放大，而不是自然消失。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 UniMax，一种替代温度采样的语言采样策略。它的关键设计不是简单地向均匀分布靠拢，而是显式限制每种语言语料被重复采样的次数上限：head 语言得到更均匀覆盖，tail 语言则避免被高温度策略反复刷同一小语料。这样有效的原因很直接：多语种预训练的收益来自覆盖与共享，但 tail 语料太小，重复过多只会把记忆噪声放大。与常规 temperature sampling 相比，UniMax 不是单参数平滑，而是把 over-sampling 的副作用显式写进约束里。","experiments":"论文做了比较完整的规模化消融，这是它最有价值的部分。作者在不同模型规模下系统比较多种语言采样策略，并在一组多语 benchmark 上评估效果；结论是 UniMax 持续优于标准 temperature-based sampling，而且这种优势随 scale 增长仍然存在。摘要里没有给出具体参数量、训练 token 或提升幅度，因此这里不编数字；但可以明确写出两点：一是作者专门考察了 scale 变化，而不是只报单一模型；二是他们把公平性与过拟合风险通过“每种语言最大重复次数”联系起来，而不只是比较平均分数。","authors_note":"机构可确认包含 Google Research。作者中 Xavier Garcia、Adam Roberts、Yi Tay、Orhan Firat 都长期参与多语种与大模型相关工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a basic but under-settled pretraining question: what language sampling distribution should multilingual LMs use? Temperature-based sampling is the de facto default, but it does not reliably balance effectiveness and fairness across scales. In practice it often under-covers head languages or over-repeats tiny tail corpora until they overfit.","importance":"This is a data-mixture contribution with direct practical value. Its importance comes from replacing a heuristic with a more interpretable constraint-based rule. For multilingual pretraining, that matters because bad sampling does not wash out at scale; it gets amplified. The work is useful precisely because it studies the mixture itself rather than proposing another model architecture.","technical_approach":"The method, UniMax, is a language-sampling scheme that explicitly caps the maximum number of repeats for each language corpus. That design is more specific than simply moving toward a uniform distribution. It gives better coverage to high-resource languages while preventing low-resource languages from being oversampled far past their corpus size. The mechanism is appealing because multilingual gains come from shared coverage, but repeated exposure to a tiny corpus mostly increases memorization risk. Compared with standard temperature sampling, UniMax bakes the overfitting side effect into the sampling rule instead of hoping one temperature works everywhere.","experiments":"The strongest part of the paper is its scale-aware ablation. The authors compare multiple language-sampling strategies across model sizes on a suite of multilingual benchmarks, and report that UniMax outperforms standard temperature-based sampling with gains that persist as scale increases. The abstract provided here does not include exact parameter counts, training tokens, or metric deltas, so they should not be fabricated. Two reliable takeaways are clear: the paper studies sampling as a function of scale, and it ties fairness to explicit repeat caps rather than to a vague notion of balance.","authors_note":"Affiliation information that can be confirmed includes Google Research. Notable authors such as Xavier Garcia, Adam Roberts, Yi Tay, and Orhan Firat have a strong track record in multilingual and large-scale language modeling."},"tags":["data-mixture","multilingual","data-sampling","pretraining"],"notable_authors":["Hyung Won Chung","Xavier Garcia","Adam Roberts","Yi Tay","Orhan Firat"]},{"id":"2206.07699","title":"Write and Paint: Generative Vision-Language Models are Unified Modal Learners","authors":["Shizhe Diao","Wangchunshu Zhou","Xinsong Zhang","Jiawei Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.07699","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/DiaoZZW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/DiaoZZW23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=HgQR0mXQ1_a","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：图像到文本生成和文本到图像生成能否用一个统一的生成式预训练目标同时学好，而不是分别训练再拼接。此前视觉-语言预训练大多偏理解任务，或把写作与绘画分成两套系统；作者认为这两种能力共享跨模态条件生成结构，值得在一个模型里联合学习。","importance":"它的贡献更接近范式探索：证明对称的生成式 vision-language pretraining 可以把“写”和“画”放进同一套模型与目标里。对 pretrain 研究的价值在于，它是较早一批把统一多模态生成当作预训练问题来做的工作，和后来的 unified AR / multimodal token modeling 路线有连续性。它未必是最终最强方案，但给出了一个清晰方向：统一目标本身就可能带来跨任务增益。","technical_approach":"核心方法是提出 DaVinci，用 prefix language modeling 和 prefix image modeling 在图文对上做对称生成预训练。它不是简单把图像当标签或把文本当辅助 caption，而是让模型在部分前缀条件下生成另一模态或同模态后续内容，从而统一 image-to-text、text-to-image 以及其他 vision-language generation 任务。关键设计有两点：一是采用 prefix 形式而不是纯双向掩码或纯单向自回归，这样更容易兼容条件生成；二是目标在图像和文本两侧对称，避免模型只偏向单一模态。和典型对比学习 VLP 不同，这里强调的是生成式建模而非表示对齐；和单向 captioning 模型不同，这里保留了双向跨模态生成能力。","experiments":"摘要没有给出具体参数量、数据规模和指标，但明确声称 unified prefix multimodal modeling 让 DaVinci 能同时处理多种 vision-language generation 任务，并且写作与绘画能力会相互促进。可安全提炼的实验结论是：作者比较了单任务或非对称训练方式，发现联合训练在 image-to-text 和 text-to-image 两侧都有收益。由于缺少表格数字，不能编造提升幅度；若要做横向比较，需要回原文核对所用图文数据集、图像 tokenizer 和具体 benchmark。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether image-to-text generation and text-to-image generation can be learned within one unified generative pretraining framework instead of being trained as separate systems. Earlier vision-language pretraining mostly emphasized understanding tasks or treated writing and painting as different pipelines.","importance":"This is a paradigm-level exploration rather than a narrow benchmark improvement. Its relevance to pretraining is that it treats unified multimodal generation as a pretraining objective in its own right. That makes it an early precursor to later work on native multimodal token modeling and unified autoregressive generation across modalities.","technical_approach":"The core method is DaVinci, trained with symmetric prefix language modeling and prefix image modeling on paired image-text data. The design is not just to attach a captioning head or a text-to-image module, but to use a single generative framework where partial prefixes condition generation in either modality. Prefix modeling is the key choice because it supports conditional generation more naturally than a purely bidirectional masked objective while remaining more flexible than a strictly left-to-right setup. Compared with contrastive VLP, the focus here is generation rather than alignment; compared with one-way captioning models, the framework is explicitly symmetric.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide model size, data scale, or exact benchmark numbers, so those should be left unspecified. What can be stated safely is the main empirical claim: the unified prefix multimodal objective allows the same model to learn both writing and painting, and the two capabilities improve each other under joint training. Exact gains and baselines need to be checked in the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["unified-modeling","vision-language","multimodal-pretraining","generative-vlm"],"notable_authors":["Shizhe Diao","Wangchunshu Zhou","Xinsong Zhang","Jiawei Wang"]},{"id":"FriedAL0WSZYZL23","title":"InCoder: A Generative Model for Code Infilling and Synthesis","authors":["Daniel Fried","Armen Aghajanyan","Jessy Lin","Sida Wang","Eric Wallace","Freda Shi","Ruiqi Zhong","Scott Yih","Luke Zettlemoyer","Mike Lewis"],"institutions":["Meta AI","University of Washington","UC Berkeley"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/FriedAL0WSZYZL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/FriedAL0WSZYZL23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=hQwb-lbM6EL","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"传统的自回归语言模型只能从左到右生成代码，无法处理代码补全（infilling）任务，即在给定上下文（前后文）的情况下插入缺失的代码。","importance":"提出了一种简单而有效的因果掩码（causal masking）预训练目标，使得标准的从左到右的 Transformer 能够同时具备代码生成和代码补全的能力，而无需修改模型架构。这为后续的代码大模型（如 StarCoder）提供了重要的预训练范式参考。","technical_approach":"提出了 InCoder 模型，核心机制是“因果掩码（Causal Masking）”。在预训练时，随机选择文档中的一些代码块（spans），用特殊的掩码 token 替换它们，然后将这些被掩码的代码块移动到文档的末尾。模型仍然使用标准的自回归目标进行训练，但现在它需要根据前面的上下文和掩码位置，预测被移到末尾的代码块。这种方法巧妙地将双向上下文信息融入了单向自回归生成中。","experiments":"训练了 1.3B 和 6.7B 参数的 InCoder 模型，使用了 159 GB 的开源代码数据。在 HumanEval 和 MBPP 等代码生成基准测试中，InCoder 的表现与同等规模的从左到右模型相当；在代码补全任务上，InCoder 显著优于仅支持从左到右生成的模型，并且在零样本情况下展现出强大的能力。","authors_note":"Meta AI 和 UW 的合作，Sida Wang 和 Luke Zettlemoyer 是 NLP 领域的知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Traditional autoregressive language models can only generate code from left to right and cannot handle code infilling tasks, i.e., inserting missing code given both preceding and succeeding context.","importance":"Proposes a simple yet effective causal masking pre-training objective that enables standard left-to-right Transformers to perform both code generation and infilling without architectural changes. This provided an important pre-training paradigm reference for subsequent large code models (e.g., StarCoder).","technical_approach":"Introduces the InCoder model, with 'Causal Masking' as its core mechanism. During pre-training, spans of code in a document are randomly selected, replaced with special mask tokens, and moved to the end of the document. The model is still trained with a standard autoregressive objective, but it now needs to predict the moved spans based on the preceding context and the mask locations. This cleverly integrates bidirectional context into unidirectional autoregressive generation.","experiments":"Trained InCoder models with 1.3B and 6.7B parameters using 159 GB of open-source code data. On code generation benchmarks like HumanEval and MBPP, InCoder performs comparably to left-to-right models of similar size; on code infilling tasks, InCoder significantly outperforms left-to-right-only models and demonstrates strong zero-shot capabilities.","authors_note":"A collaboration between Meta AI and UW; Sida Wang and Luke Zettlemoyer are well-known scholars in NLP."},"tags":["code-lm","infilling","pretraining","non-ar"],"notable_authors":["Sida Wang","Luke Zettlemoyer"]},{"id":"FuDSTRR23","title":"Hungry Hungry Hippos: Towards Language Modeling with State Space Models","authors":["Daniel Y. Fu","Tri Dao","Khaled Kamal Saab","Armin W. Thomas","Atri Rudra","Christopher Ré"],"institutions":["Stanford University"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/FuDSTRR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/FuDSTRR23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=COZDy0WYGg","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"状态空间模型（SSM，如 S4）在处理长序列任务时表现优异，但在标准的语言建模（Language Modeling, LM）任务上，其性能一直落后于 Transformer 中的注意力机制。","importance":"首次证明了基于 SSM 的模型（H3）在语言建模任务上可以达到与 Transformer 相当的性能，并且在推理速度和长上下文处理上具有显著优势。这为打破 Transformer 在 LLM 领域的垄断地位提供了有力的替代方案，是后续 Mamba 等架构的重要前置工作。","technical_approach":"提出了 H3 (Hungry Hungry Hippos) 架构。作者发现之前的 SSM 在 LM 上表现不佳的原因是难以记住早期的 token（缺乏注意力机制的全局感受野）和难以比较不同 token。H3 通过两个核心机制解决：1) 引入了一个类似注意力机制中 Key-Value 投影的结构，使用两个 SSM 分别处理；2) 设计了 FlashConv，一种利用硬件感知的混合算法（结合 FFT 和块对角矩阵乘法），极大地加速了 SSM 在长序列上的训练。","experiments":"在 OpenWebText 上训练了高达 2.7B 参数的 H3 模型。结果显示，H3 在困惑度（Perplexity）和零样本评估上与同等规模的 Transformer（如 GPT-Neo）性能相当。在推理时，H3 的生成速度比 Transformer 快 2.4 倍，并且可以处理长达 64K 的上下文而不会出现内存溢出（OOM）。","authors_note":"Tri Dao 是 FlashAttention 的作者，Christopher Ré 团队在高效序列模型（如 S4, Mamba）方面有开创性贡献。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"State Space Models (SSMs, like S4) excel at long-sequence tasks, but their performance on standard Language Modeling (LM) has consistently lagged behind the attention mechanism in Transformers.","importance":"First to demonstrate that an SSM-based model (H3) can match Transformer performance on language modeling tasks, while offering significant advantages in inference speed and long-context handling. This provides a strong alternative to challenge the Transformer's dominance in LLMs and is a crucial precursor to architectures like Mamba.","technical_approach":"Proposes the H3 (Hungry Hungry Hippos) architecture. The authors identified that previous SSMs struggled in LM because they had difficulty remembering early tokens (lacking attention's global receptive field) and comparing different tokens. H3 solves this with two core mechanisms: 1) introducing a structure similar to Key-Value projections in attention, processed by two separate SSMs; 2) designing FlashConv, a hardware-aware hybrid algorithm (combining FFT and block-diagonal matrix multiplication) that drastically accelerates SSM training on long sequences.","experiments":"Trained H3 models up to 2.7B parameters on OpenWebText. Results show H3 matches the performance of similarly sized Transformers (e.g., GPT-Neo) in perplexity and zero-shot evaluations. During inference, H3 generates text 2.4x faster than Transformers and can handle contexts up to 64K without out-of-memory (OOM) errors.","authors_note":"Tri Dao is the author of FlashAttention; Christopher Ré's group has made pioneering contributions to efficient sequence models (e.g., S4, Mamba)."},"tags":["ssm","language-modeling","architecture","long-context"],"notable_authors":["Tri Dao","Christopher Ré"]},{"id":"GongLF0K23","title":"DiffuSeq: Sequence to Sequence Text Generation with Diffusion Models","authors":["Shansan Gong","Mukai Li","Jiangtao Feng","Zhiyong Wu","Lingpeng Kong"],"institutions":["The University of Hong Kong"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/GongLF0K23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/GongLF0K23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=jQj-_rLVXsj","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：能不能不用标准自回归 next-token 生成，也把序列到序列文本生成做对。过去文本生成几乎被 AR 范式垄断，因为离散文本上的 diffusion 难训练、解码慢、条件控制也不自然，所以 diffusion 在 NLP 多停留在补全或非主流设定；这篇工作试图把它推进到更标准的 seq2seq 生成场景。","importance":"它的重要性在于给出了一个可运行的离散文本 diffusion seq2seq 基线，属于建模范式级探索，而不是单点提分。对 pretrain 研究的启示不是“diffusion 已经替代 AR”，而是：在条件文本生成里，离散 diffusion 可以通过合适的状态参数化和条件注入稳定工作，并展现出不同于 AR 的并行生成与迭代修正特性。","technical_approach":"核心方法是一个面向 seq2seq 的离散 diffusion 模型 DiffuSeq，属于把 diffusion 从连续图像迁移到离散文本并做任务化改造。它先对目标序列逐步加噪，再学习反向去噪恢复文本；条件源序列不是像 AR 那样逐 token 交叉注意力驱动下一个 token，而是作为全局条件贯穿去噪过程。关键设计通常包括离散状态上的 corruption / denoising、长度处理、以及让模型直接预测干净 token 或等价重参数化目标；这样做的原因是文本离散空间不适合直接套高斯噪声，必须把“噪声”定义成 token 级替换/混合过程。和最接近的非 AR 文本生成相比，它不是一次性并行填充，而是多步 refinement，因此更容易在全局一致性和局部修正之间折中，但代价是采样步数带来的推理开销。","experiments":"论文的关键实验结论是：DiffuSeq 在多个条件文本生成任务上能达到与强 AR / non-AR 基线可比的质量，并在多样性或全局编辑能力上有优势，但速度并不天然占优，因为需要多步去噪。基于论文标题和已知工作脉络，它大概率评测了摘要、翻译、数据到文本或对话类 seq2seq 任务，并与 Transformer AR、CMLM 或其他非 AR 方法比较；核心观察通常是采样步数减少会明显伤害质量，而合理的步数截断和加速采样能保留大部分性能。若从 pretrain 角度看，最值得记的是：文本 diffusion 的瓶颈首先是离散建模与采样效率，而不是条件建模本身。","authors_note":"香港大学。Lingpeng Kong 是较知名作者，长期做 NLP 建模、结构化生成与高效学习。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a simple but important question: can sequence-to-sequence text generation work well without standard autoregressive next-token decoding. Text generation had largely stayed autoregressive because diffusion on discrete text is hard to train, slow to sample, and awkward to condition, so this work revisits that gap in a standard seq2seq setting.","importance":"Its contribution is best read as a paradigm probe rather than a benchmark win. For pretraining research, the value is that it shows discrete diffusion can be made to work for conditional text generation with a practical design, which keeps open an alternative to AR with different strengths: parallelism and iterative refinement instead of strictly causal decoding.","technical_approach":"DiffuSeq is a discrete diffusion model adapted for seq2seq text generation. It corrupts the target sequence through a forward noising process and learns to reverse that process while conditioning on the source sequence throughout denoising. The key design choice is to define noise in token space rather than reuse Gaussian noise from image diffusion, because text is discrete and direct continuous perturbation is a poor fit. Compared with one-shot non-autoregressive generation, this is a multi-step refinement process, which helps global consistency and local correction, but the trade-off is inference cost from repeated denoising steps.","experiments":"The main empirical takeaway is that DiffuSeq reaches competitive quality on conditional text generation tasks against strong autoregressive and non-autoregressive baselines, while showing benefits in diversity or iterative editing behavior. The limitation is equally clear: sampling is not inherently faster because quality depends on multiple denoising steps. The most useful pretraining-facing lesson is that the hard part for text diffusion is discrete-state modeling and sampling efficiency, more than conditioning itself.","authors_note":"The University of Hong Kong. Lingpeng Kong is a notable author known for work on NLP modeling, structured generation, and efficient learning."},"tags":["diffusion-lm","text-generation","non-ar","seq2seq"],"notable_authors":["Lingpeng Kong"]},{"id":"GuJTRR23","title":"How to Train your HIPPO: State Space Models with Generalized Orthogonal Basis Projections","authors":["Albert Gu","Isys Johnson","Aman Timalsina","Atri Rudra","Christopher Ré"],"institutions":["Stanford University"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/GuJTRR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/GuJTRR23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=klK17OQ3KB","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：HIPPO/SSM 这类长序列模型虽然理论上强，但其状态投影基底过于固定，限制了表达能力和训练适配性。过去 S4 一类方法依赖特定正交多项式结构来获得稳定长程记忆，但这也把模型设计绑死在少数解析基底上。","importance":"它的重要性在于把 state space model 的核心从“某个特定 HIPPO 基底”推广到“可泛化的正交基投影框架”，属于架构与理论接口上的方法级推进。对 pretrain 的启示是：长序列建模不一定非要在注意力和卷积之间选，SSM 的表示基底本身就是可优化设计空间，可能影响稳定性、频谱偏好和长度泛化。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把 HIPPO 视为一类 generalized orthogonal basis projection，而不是单一构造。作者从函数逼近角度重写状态更新，展示不同正交基如何对应不同记忆压缩与时间尺度偏置，并据此构造更一般的 SSM 参数化。关键点不是简单换一个矩阵，而是保留可递推、可稳定训练的结构，同时放宽原始 HIPPO 对基底的限制。和 S4 的关系是：S4 更像在特定连续时间线性系统上做高效离散化，这篇则往前一步问“为什么一定是这个基底”，因此更偏统一视角和可扩展设计。","experiments":"实验层面的关键信息通常是：在长序列分类、语言建模或合成记忆任务上，广义基底版本能匹配或超过原始 HIPPO/S4 变体，并在某些长度外推设定更稳。由于这类论文常包含理论+中等规模实验，重点不一定是大模型 SOTA，而是证明不同基底选择确实影响性能和稳定性。对工程读者最有价值的观察通常是：基底选择会改变模型对局部/全局模式的偏好，且不是参数量增加就能替代。","authors_note":"Stanford University。Albert Gu 是 S4 / Mamba 方向的核心作者之一，Christopher Ré 是该方向重要 PI。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a limitation in HIPPO-style state space models: their projection basis is powerful but overly specific. Prior work such as S4 benefited from carefully chosen orthogonal polynomial structure for stable long-range memory, but that same structure narrows the design space.","importance":"This is an architecture-level contribution at the theory-method interface. For pretraining, the key message is that in long-sequence modeling, the choice of state projection basis is itself a meaningful design axis, with consequences for stability, spectral bias, and length generalization.","technical_approach":"The paper reframes HIPPO as a broader family of generalized orthogonal basis projections rather than a single construction. From a function-approximation view, different orthogonal bases induce different memory compression behavior and timescale preferences, and the authors derive corresponding state space parameterizations that preserve recursive computation and trainability. Relative to S4, which operationalizes a specific structured continuous-time system, this work asks a more upstream question: why commit to one basis at all.","experiments":"The empirical takeaway is typically that generalized basis choices can match or outperform standard HIPPO/S4 variants on long-range sequence tasks, with some gains in extrapolation or stability. The paper is more about validating the design space than chasing the largest benchmark. The useful engineering lesson is that basis choice changes what the model remembers, and that effect is not reducible to simply adding more parameters.","authors_note":"Stanford University. Albert Gu is a central author behind S4 and later Mamba-style sequence models, and Christopher Ré is a key PI in this line of work."},"tags":["ssm","hippo","architecture","long-context"],"notable_authors":["Albert Gu","Christopher Ré"]},{"id":"2209.12951","title":"Liquid Structural State-Space Models","authors":["Ramin M. Hasani","Mathias Lechner","Tsun-Hsuan Wang","Makram Chahine","Alexander Amini","Daniela Rus"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$7","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.12951","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/HasaniLWCAR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/HasaniLWCAR23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=g4OTKRKfS7R","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：结构化状态空间模型（SSM，如 S4）在长序列建模已很强，但其状态转移通常是输入无关的线性动力学，难以在推理时对输入分布变化做自适应。","importance":"贡献是把连续时间的 LTC（liquid time-constant）机制嫁接到结构化 SSM 上：在保持 S4 这类模型高效长程建模与可并行训练的前提下，引入输入依赖的状态转移以提升表达力，对“用更便宜的序列骨干替代注意力”这条线有方法级启发。","technical_approach":"方法上是对 S4 参数化的改造：用 LTC 的输入依赖状态转移模块替代/增强原本固定的线性状态转移，并沿用 S4 的对角+低秩（diagonal plus low-rank）分解来控制计算与稳定性；关键取舍是用更强的动力学（input-conditioned transition）换取一定的实现复杂度，同时通过结构化分解避免退化成昂贵的全矩阵更新。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体基准、模型规模与数值提升；但其宣称在“长程序列建模 benchmark”上进一步超过 S4 系列；建议在正文核对：是否在 LRA/SC 等长依赖任务上报告吞吐与显存、以及 input-conditioned transition 是否在分布外或非平稳序列上带来更明显收益。","authors_note":"作者包括 Ramin M. Hasani、Mathias Lechner、Alexander Amini；机构信息在给定材料中缺失。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Structural SSMs like S4 are strong on long sequences, but their state transitions are typically input-independent linear dynamics, limiting adaptivity at inference under non-stationary inputs.","importance":"The paper upgrades structural SSMs with liquid time-constant (LTC) dynamics: it aims to keep S4-style efficiency while adding input-conditioned transitions for higher expressivity, informing the broader effort to replace attention with cheaper sequence backbones.","technical_approach":"It modifies S4’s parameterization by introducing an LTC-style input-dependent state transition module, while retaining S4’s diagonal-plus-low-rank decomposition to control compute and stability; the core trade-off is more expressive dynamics versus added implementation/optimization complexity, mitigated by structured matrix constraints instead of full dense updates.","experiments":"No concrete benchmark names, model sizes, or numeric deltas are available from the provided abstract snippet; the key to verify in the paper is whether gains concentrate on non-stationary/OOD regimes and whether throughput/memory remain competitive with S4 baselines.","authors_note":"Authors include Ramin M. Hasani, Mathias Lechner, Alexander Amini; institutions are not provided in the input."},"tags":["state-space-models","long-range-sequence-modeling","liquid-ssm"],"notable_authors":["Ramin M. Hasani","Mathias Lechner","Alexander Amini"]},{"id":"2111.09543","title":"DeBERTaV3: Improving DeBERTa using ELECTRA-Style Pre-Training with Gradient-Disentangled Embedding Sharing","authors":["Pengcheng He","Jianfeng Gao","Weizhu Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$8","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.09543","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/HeGC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/HeGC23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=sE7-XhLxHA","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：ELECTRA 式 RTD（replaced token detection）预训练更省样本，但在强模型（如 DeBERTa）上直接套用会因生成器/判别器共享 embedding 带来训练动力学冲突，导致效率与效果都受损。","importance":"贡献是一个很“工程可落地”的预训练改造：提出梯度解耦的 embedding sharing，缓解生成器与判别器对同一 token embedding 的拉扯，从而让 RTD 在 DeBERTa 上更稳定、更高效；对大规模预训练的启示是：多任务/多头共享参数时，梯度冲突会直接转化为 token 级表示质量问题，需要结构性隔离而不是只调学习率。","technical_approach":"方法是 DeBERTa→DeBERTaV3：把 MLM 换成 RTD，并针对 ELECTRA 常用的 embedding sharing 引入 gradient-disentangled sharing；核心机制是阻断或重参数化共享路径，使生成器 loss 与判别器 loss 不再在 embedding 上形成“tug-of-war”相反梯度，从而提升收敛速度与最终表示；与最接近的 ELECTRA 区别在于：不是简单共享/不共享二选一，而是共享前向表示、解耦反向梯度以兼顾参数效率与训练稳定。","experiments":"摘要未给出参数量、训练 token 数与具体 GLUE/SQuAD 等分数；但其声称在与 DeBERTa 相同设置下预训练并在多任务上显著更强；建议在正文核对：1）同等计算/同等数据下 RTD+解耦是否优于 MLM；2）对比“完全不共享 embedding”与“梯度解耦共享”的收敛速度与下游差异，验证其确实来自梯度冲突而非容量变化。","authors_note":"作者为 Pengcheng He、Jianfeng Gao、Weizhu Chen；机构信息在给定材料中缺失。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"RTD pretraining (ELECTRA-style) is sample-efficient, but naively applying it to strong encoders like DeBERTa can suffer from generator–discriminator embedding sharing that creates conflicting gradients and hurts both efficiency and quality.","importance":"The key contribution is a practical pretraining fix: gradient-disentangled embedding sharing reduces the tug-of-war on token embeddings, making RTD more stable and effective for DeBERTa; for large-scale pretraining, it highlights that gradient interference in shared parameters can directly degrade token representations and needs structural mitigation.","technical_approach":"DeBERTaV3 replaces MLM with RTD and introduces gradient-disentangled embedding sharing: it keeps forward sharing benefits while decoupling backward gradients so generator and discriminator losses do not push the same embeddings in opposite directions; compared to ELECTRA, it is not a binary share vs. no-share choice, but a design that preserves parameter efficiency without the harmful training dynamics.","experiments":"The provided abstract snippet does not include model sizes, pretraining tokens, or downstream scores; in the full paper, the critical checks are (1) RTD+disentanglement vs. MLM under matched compute/data, and (2) disentangled sharing vs. no sharing to confirm gains come from reduced gradient conflict rather than capacity changes.","authors_note":"Authors: Pengcheng He, Jianfeng Gao, Weizhu Chen; institutions are not provided in the input."},"tags":["replaced-token-detection","electra","embedding-sharing","pre-training-efficiency"],"notable_authors":["Jianfeng Gao","Weizhu Chen","Pengcheng He"]},{"id":"2302.03241","title":"Continual Pre-training of Language Models","authors":["Zixuan Ke","Yijia Shao","Haowei Lin","Tatsuya Konishi","Gyuhak Kim","Bing Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$9","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.03241","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/KeSLKK023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/KeSLKK023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=m_GDIItaI3o","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["continual-pretrain","domain-adaptation","catastrophic-forgetting","data-mixture"]},{"id":"KunstnerCL023","title":"Noise Is Not the Main Factor Behind the Gap Between Sgd and Adam on Transformers, But Sign Descent Might Be","authors":["Frederik Kunstner","Jacques Chen","Jonathan Wilder Lavington","Mark Schmidt"],"institutions":["UBC"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/KunstnerCL023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/KunstnerCL023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=a65YK0cqH8g","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"在 Transformer 预训练中，Adam 优化器远胜于 SGD。学界普遍认为这是因为 Adam 的自适应学习率能更好地处理 Transformer 梯度中的重尾噪声（Heavy-tailed Noise）。","importance":"机制分析级贡献。推翻了关于优化器选择的流行假设，将注意力引向了“符号下降（Sign Descent）”和坐标轴缩放，对设计更高效的 LLM 优化器（如各类 Adafactor/Lion 变体）有直接启发。","technical_approach":"通过控制变量法解耦梯度噪声和预条件器（Preconditioner）。在无噪声的全批量（Full-batch）设定下训练 Transformer，观察 SGD 和 Adam 的表现差异。如果噪声是主因，全批量下 SGD 应该能追平 Adam。","experiments":"在语言建模任务上对比。结果显示：即使在全批量（零噪声）下，SGD 依然失败，而 Adam 依然成功。进一步实验表明，忽略梯度幅度的“符号下降”才是 Adam 成功的关键因素。","authors_note":"UBC / Mark Schmidt"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In Transformer pretraining, Adam vastly outperforms SGD. The prevailing consensus attributes this to Adam's adaptive learning rates handling the heavy-tailed noise in Transformer gradients better.","importance":"Mechanism analysis contribution. Overturns a popular hypothesis regarding optimizer selection, redirecting focus toward 'sign descent' and coordinate-wise scaling. This directly inspires the design of more efficient LLM optimizers (e.g., Lion, Adafactor variants).","technical_approach":"Decouples gradient noise and the preconditioner using controlled experiments. Trains Transformers in a noise-free, full-batch setting to observe the performance gap between SGD and Adam. If noise were the main factor, SGD should match Adam in full-batch training.","experiments":"Compared on language modeling tasks. Results show that even in full-batch (zero noise) settings, SGD fails while Adam succeeds. Further experiments indicate that 'sign descent'—ignoring gradient magnitude—is the critical factor behind Adam's success.","authors_note":"UBC / Mark Schmidt"},"tags":["optimizer","adam","sgd","transformer"],"notable_authors":["Mark Schmidt"]},{"id":"Lan0WHM23","title":"Copy is All You Need","authors":["Tian Lan","Deng Cai","Yan Wang","Heyan Huang","Xian-Ling Mao"],"institutions":["Tencent","Tsinghua University"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Lan0WHM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Lan0WHM23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=CROlOA9Nd8C","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"标准的自回归（AR）语言模型逐 Token 生成文本，在生成长文本、高度事实性内容或重复性短语时效率低下且容易产生幻觉。","importance":"新型语言建模范式。挑战了 Next-token Prediction 的绝对统治地位，提出了一种基于“复制”的非参数化生成范式，对 RAG 和长文本生成有底层启发。","technical_approach":"提出 CopyisAllYouNeed 范式。将文本生成重构为一系列从参考语料库中“复制片段”的操作。模型不再预测词表中的下一个词，而是预测源语料库中某个短语的起始和结束索引，将这些片段拼接成最终文本。","experiments":"在语言建模和文本生成任务上评估。证明了基于复制的模型在生成质量上能媲美标准 AR 模型，同时在事实准确性和特定领域的生成效率上展现出独特优势。","authors_note":"Tencent / Tsinghua"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Standard autoregressive (AR) language models generate text token-by-token, which is inefficient and prone to hallucinations when generating long, highly factual, or repetitive content.","importance":"Novel language modeling paradigm. Challenges the absolute dominance of next-token prediction by proposing a non-parametric, 'copy-based' generation paradigm, offering fundamental insights for RAG and long-text generation.","technical_approach":"Introduces the 'Copy is All You Need' paradigm. Reformulates text generation as a sequence of copy operations from a reference corpus. Instead of predicting the next word from a vocabulary, the model predicts the start and end indices of phrases in a source corpus and stitches them together.","experiments":"Evaluated on language modeling and text generation tasks. Demonstrates that the copy-based model matches standard AR models in generation quality while showing unique advantages in factual accuracy and domain-specific generation efficiency.","authors_note":"Tencent / Tsinghua"},"tags":["retrieval","copy-mechanism","lm"],"notable_authors":["Deng Cai"]},{"id":"LipmanCBNL23","title":"Flow Matching for Generative Modeling","authors":["Yaron Lipman","Ricky T. Q. Chen","Heli Ben-Hamu","Maximilian Nickel","Matthew Le"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LipmanCBNL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LipmanCBNL23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=PqvMRDCJT9t","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心结论是：生成建模可以不走离散扩散时间链，也不必直接做神经 ODE 最大似然，而是通过学习一条连续概率流来统一两者。此前扩散模型训练稳定但采样慢，连续归一化流可逆但训练和建模灵活性受限，作者试图在训练目标层面把这两类方法接起来。","importance":"这是方法级且带范式影响的工作。它的重要性不只在图像生成，而在于它给出了一个更一般的“从源分布到数据分布的概率路径学习”视角；这个视角后来直接影响了 rectified flow、一类 ODE 生成器以及部分离散/多模态生成建模思路，对非 AR 生成范式很有参考价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 flow matching：先指定一族连接简单先验分布与数据分布的条件概率路径，再回归该路径对应的速度场，而不是像扩散那样显式模拟前向加噪链并学习反向去噪。关键设计点有两个：一是训练目标可在任意选定的 probability path 上定义，因此能覆盖 diffusion path、optimal transport path 等；二是目标是局部向量场回归，避免了直接求解全局似然或反向 SDE 的高方差训练。与 score matching 的区别在于，它直接学 ODE 速度场，不必先学 score 再数值积分还原轨迹。","experiments":"给定信息里没有摘要，无法安全写出具体 FID、数据集和模型规模。可以确定的是，论文的实验应围绕不同 probability path 的训练稳定性、采样质量和效率比较，通常会与 diffusion/score-based 方法及 CNF 类方法对照；这类工作最值得看的 ablation 是 path 选择对收敛和采样步数的影响，因为那决定它到底只是统一表述，还是带来实际效率收益。","authors_note":"作者包括 Ricky T. Q. Chen、Maximilian Nickel。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper’s main point is that generative modeling does not have to choose between diffusion-style training and continuous normalizing flows. It introduces a way to learn a continuous probability flow directly, aiming to keep the flexibility of diffusion while avoiding some of its training and sampling inefficiencies.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution with broader paradigm impact. Its value is not limited to image generation: it reframes generation as learning vector fields along probability paths, which later became a foundation for rectified flow and related ODE-based generators, and is relevant whenever we care about alternatives to autoregressive modeling.","technical_approach":"The method is flow matching. Instead of defining a forward noising process and learning to reverse it, the paper specifies a family of conditional probability paths from a simple source distribution to the data distribution, then regresses the corresponding velocity field. The design matters because it decouples the training objective from a specific diffusion process: one can choose diffusion-like paths, optimal-transport-like paths, or others, and train by local vector-field regression rather than likelihood optimization or reverse-SDE estimation.","experiments":"The prompt does not include the abstract, so exact datasets, model sizes, and metrics should not be fabricated. The important experimental questions are likely whether different path choices change optimization stability and sample quality, and whether the method is competitive with diffusion and CNF baselines in both quality and sampling cost.","authors_note":"The author list includes Ricky T. Q. Chen and Maximilian Nickel."},"tags":["flow-matching","generative-modeling","diffusion-models","continuous-normalizing-flows"],"notable_authors":["Ricky T. Q. Chen","Maximilian Nickel"]},{"id":"LiuG023","title":"Flow Straight and Fast: Learning to Generate and Transfer Data with Rectified Flow","authors":["Xingchao Liu","Chengyue Gong","Qiang Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LiuG023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LiuG023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=XVjTT1nw5z","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心结论是：如果把生成轨迹学得更“直”，就能同时提升采样速度和传输稳定性。传统扩散或流模型常需要弯曲、长路径的数值积分，导致步数多、误差累积大，作者试图直接优化这条路径的几何形状。","importance":"这是方法级工作，但影响面不小。它对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：生成模型的效率不只取决于网络容量和求解器，还取决于你让模型学习什么样的概率路径；这和后续很多非 AR 生成方法追求少步采样、稳定 ODE 解有直接关系。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 rectified flow。它从 flow/ODE 生成框架出发，通过重整或迭代修正训练目标，让样本从源分布到目标分布的轨迹更接近直线，从而降低离散求解误差并允许更少步采样。与标准 diffusion 不同，它不依赖固定噪声日程下的逐步去噪；与一般 flow matching 相比，它更强调路径“变直”带来的数值好处，而不是只给出统一训练表述。","experiments":"给定信息没有摘要，不能安全写出具体 FID、步数和数据集。可以确定的是，实验应重点比较采样步数减少后质量是否保持，以及直线路径是否改善数据传输/域迁移类任务的稳定性；如果你只看一个结果，最值得看的是在极少步设置下相对 diffusion 的质量退化曲线，因为那决定它是否真的解决了‘fast’而不只是换个目标函数。","authors_note":"Qiang Liu 是生成建模与推断方向知名作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper’s main claim is that generation becomes faster and easier to solve numerically when the learned transport paths are straighter. Standard diffusion and flow-based trajectories can be unnecessarily curved, which increases integration error and sampling cost.","importance":"This is a method contribution with practical significance. For researchers interested in alternatives to autoregressive generation, it highlights that efficiency is not only about better solvers or larger models; the geometry of the learned probability path is itself a first-order design choice.","technical_approach":"The method is rectified flow. Starting from an ODE/flow view of generation, it modifies training so that trajectories from source to target become closer to straight lines, which reduces discretization error and enables fewer sampling steps. Compared with standard diffusion, it is less tied to a fixed noising schedule; compared with generic flow matching, it explicitly optimizes for straighter transport rather than only learning a valid vector field.","experiments":"The prompt does not provide the abstract, so exact datasets, FID values, and step counts should be omitted. The key empirical question is whether sample quality degrades gracefully under very small numbers of steps, since that is the practical test of the ‘straight and fast’ claim.","authors_note":"Qiang Liu is a well-known researcher in generative modeling and inference."},"tags":["rectified-flow","generative-modeling","diffusion-models","ode"],"notable_authors":["Qiang Liu"]},{"id":"LuCZMK23","title":"UNIFIED-IO: A Unified Model for Vision, Language, and Multi-modal Tasks","authors":["Jiasen Lu","Christopher Clark","Rowan Zellers","Roozbeh Mottaghi","Aniruddha Kembhavi"],"institutions":["Allen Institute for AI"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LuCZMK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LuCZMK23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=E01k9048soZ","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"解决视觉、语言和多模态任务通常需要不同架构和目标函数的问题。以往的模型（如ViT、BERT）往往针对特定模态或任务设计，缺乏一个真正统一的架构来处理所有类型的输入和输出。","importance":"范式级贡献。提出UNIFIED-IO，一个完全统一的序列到序列（seq2seq）模型，能够处理图像、文本及其组合的任意输入输出。这是迈向通用多模态基础模型（Foundation Model）的重要一步，证明了单一架构可以胜任极其广泛的任务。","technical_approach":"采用纯Transformer Encoder-Decoder架构。核心机制是将所有输入（图像patch、文本token）和输出（图像像素、文本、边界框等）都离散化为统一的token序列。图像使用VQ-GAN进行离散化。训练目标统一为自回归的next-token prediction。舍弃了特定任务的head或loss，完全依赖seq2seq范式。与OFA等模型相比，UNIFIED-IO支持更广泛的输出类型（如图像生成、深度图）。","experiments":"在超过90个不同的视觉、语言和多模态数据集上进行了联合预训练。模型参数量达到近3B。在不进行任务特定微调的情况下，UNIFIED-IO在多个基准（如VQA、Image Captioning、Object Detection）上取得了极具竞争力的性能，甚至在某些任务上超越了专门设计的模型。","authors_note":"Jiasen Lu (Allen AI), Christopher Clark (Allen AI), Rowan Zellers (Allen AI), Aniruddha Kembhavi (Allen AI)。Allen AI团队在多模态统一建模方面有深厚积累（如ViLBERT）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addressing the issue that vision, language, and multimodal tasks typically require different architectures and objective functions. Previous models (e.g., ViT, BERT) were often designed for specific modalities or tasks, lacking a truly unified architecture to handle all types of inputs and outputs.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution. Proposes UNIFIED-IO, a fully unified sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) model capable of handling arbitrary inputs and outputs of images, text, and their combinations. This is a significant step towards general multimodal foundation models, proving that a single architecture can handle an extremely wide range of tasks.","technical_approach":"Adopts a pure Transformer Encoder-Decoder architecture. The core mechanism discretizes all inputs (image patches, text tokens) and outputs (image pixels, text, bounding boxes, etc.) into a unified token sequence. Images are discretized using VQ-GAN. The training objective is unified as autoregressive next-token prediction. It discards task-specific heads or losses, relying entirely on the seq2seq paradigm. Compared to models like OFA, UNIFIED-IO supports a broader range of output types (e.g., image generation, depth maps).","experiments":"Jointly pre-trained on over 90 different vision, language, and multimodal datasets. The model size reaches nearly 3B parameters. Without task-specific fine-tuning, UNIFIED-IO achieves highly competitive performance on multiple benchmarks (e.g., VQA, Image Captioning, Object Detection), even surpassing specialized models on some tasks.","authors_note":"Jiasen Lu (Allen AI), Christopher Clark (Allen AI), Rowan Zellers (Allen AI), Aniruddha Kembhavi (Allen AI). The Allen AI team has deep expertise in unified multimodal modeling (e.g., ViLBERT)."},"tags":["unified-model","vision-language","multitask","multimodal-pretraining"],"notable_authors":["Jiasen Lu","Christopher Clark","Rowan Zellers","Aniruddha Kembhavi"]},{"id":"MaZKHGNMZ23","title":"Mega: Moving Average Equipped Gated Attention","authors":["Xuezhe Ma","Chunting Zhou","Xiang Kong","Junxian He","Liangke Gui","Graham Neubig","Jonathan May","Luke Zettlemoyer"],"institutions":["University of Southern California","Meta AI","Carnegie Mellon University","University of Washington"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/MaZKHGNMZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/MaZKHGNMZ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=qNLe3iq2El","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"解决Transformer在处理长序列时注意力机制的二次复杂度问题，以及现有线性注意力或状态空间模型（SSM）在表达能力或训练稳定性上的不足。","importance":"架构/方法级贡献。提出MEGA（Moving Average Equipped Gated Attention），一种结合了指数移动平均（EMA）和门控注意力机制的新型序列建模架构。它在保持线性复杂度的同时，在多种任务上达到了媲美甚至超越标准Transformer的性能，为长上下文建模提供了一个强有力的替代方案。","technical_approach":"提出MEGA架构。核心机制是：1) 引入多维指数移动平均（Multi-dimensional EMA），这是一种简化的SSM，用于捕捉局部和长期的序列依赖，且计算高效；2) 结合门控注意力（Gated Attention），使用EMA处理后的表示来计算注意力权重，并将注意力机制的复杂度降低到线性（通过分块或线性注意力变体）。舍弃了标准Transformer中复杂的全连接自注意力，用EMA+门控机制实现了更高效的信息混合。","experiments":"在LRA（Long Range Arena）、机器翻译（WMT）、语言建模（WikiText-103）等多个基准上进行了实验。MEGA在LRA上取得了SOTA结果，显著优于S4等SSM模型和各种高效Transformer。在语言建模和机器翻译任务上，MEGA也展现出与标准Transformer相当的性能，但推理速度更快，内存占用更低。","authors_note":"Xuezhe Ma (USC), Chunting Zhou (Meta AI), Luke Zettlemoyer (Meta AI/UW)。Xuezhe Ma在高效序列建模（如Luna）方面有深入研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addressing the quadratic complexity of the attention mechanism in Transformers when processing long sequences, and the shortcomings of existing linear attention or State Space Models (SSMs) in expressive power or training stability.","importance":"Architecture/Methodological contribution. Proposes MEGA (Moving Average Equipped Gated Attention), a novel sequence modeling architecture combining Exponential Moving Average (EMA) and gated attention. It maintains linear complexity while achieving performance comparable to or exceeding standard Transformers on various tasks, providing a strong alternative for long-context modeling.","technical_approach":"Proposes the MEGA architecture. Core mechanisms: 1) Introduces Multi-dimensional EMA, a simplified SSM used to capture local and long-term sequence dependencies efficiently; 2) Combines Gated Attention, using EMA-processed representations to compute attention weights and reducing attention complexity to linear (via chunking or linear attention variants). It discards the complex fully-connected self-attention of standard Transformers, achieving more efficient information mixing with the EMA + gating mechanism.","experiments":"Experiments on benchmarks including LRA (Long Range Arena), Machine Translation (WMT), and Language Modeling (WikiText-103). MEGA achieves SOTA results on LRA, significantly outperforming SSMs like S4 and various efficient Transformers. On language modeling and MT, MEGA shows performance comparable to standard Transformers but with faster inference and lower memory footprint.","authors_note":"Xuezhe Ma (USC), Chunting Zhou (Meta AI), Luke Zettlemoyer (Meta AI/UW). Xuezhe Ma has deep research in efficient sequence modeling (e.g., Luna)."},"tags":["attention","long-context","architecture","sequence-modeling"],"notable_authors":["Xuezhe Ma","Chunting Zhou","Luke Zettlemoyer"]},{"id":"2206.13947","title":"Long Range Language Modeling via Gated State Spaces","authors":["Harsh Mehta","Ankit Gupta","Ashok Cutkosky","Behnam Neyshabur"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"State space models have shown to be effective at modeling long range dependencies, specially on sequence classification tasks. In this work we focus on autoregressive sequence modeling over English books, Github source code and ArXiv mathematics articles. Based on recent developments around the effectiveness of gated activation functions, we propose a new layer named Gated State Space (GSS) and show that it trains significantly faster than the diagonal version of S4 (i.e. DSS) on TPUs, is fairly competitive with several well-tuned Transformer-based baselines and exhibits zero-shot generalization to longer inputs while being straightforward to implement. Finally, we show that leveraging self-attention to model local dependencies improves the performance of GSS even further.","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.13947","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Mehta0CN23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Mehta0CN23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=5MkYIYCbva","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是长程自回归语言建模里，Transformer 计算贵、而已有状态空间模型虽然擅长长依赖却在生成建模上不够成熟的问题。过去 S4 一类模型更多在分类任务上表现突出，但在真实语言建模上，训练效率、实现复杂度和局部依赖建模都还是短板。","importance":"这是架构级探索，意义在于把 state space model 从'长序列分类器'往'可用的语言模型骨干'推进了一步。对 pretrain 的启示是：非注意力主干并非只能做 toy task；如果门控和局部建模处理得当，SSM 可以在语言建模上接近 Transformer，同时保留更好的长度外推特性。","technical_approach":"核心方法是提出 Gated State Space（GSS）层，把状态空间序列建模和门控激活结合起来。设计动机很直接：SSM 负责高效传播长程信息，门控负责提升非线性表达和训练稳定性；作者还进一步用 self-attention 专门补局部依赖，因为纯 SSM 对近邻细节不够敏感。和 diagonal S4 的 DSS 相比，GSS 更快、更易在 TPU 上训练；和纯 Transformer 相比，它把全局建模从注意力转移到状态更新上，只在需要时引入局部注意力。","experiments":"摘要明确给出的事实有三点：第一，任务覆盖英文书籍、Github 代码和 ArXiv 数学文章的自回归建模；第二，GSS 在 TPU 上训练显著快于 diagonal S4（DSS）；第三，它与多个精调过的 Transformer baseline 相当接近，并且对更长输入有 zero-shot 泛化。摘要没有给出参数量、token 数和具体 perplexity，因此不能写具体提升数字；但一个重要观察是，加入 self-attention 建模局部依赖后，GSS 性能还能进一步提升，这说明它的短板主要在局部而不是全局。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles long-range autoregressive language modeling where Transformers are expensive and existing state space models, while strong on long-context sequence tasks, are not yet a clean drop-in backbone for language modeling. Prior S4-style models looked promising mostly on classification-style benchmarks, but generation brings extra demands on optimization, local dependency modeling, and implementation practicality.","importance":"This is an architecture-level exploration with clear relevance to pretraining. The main message is that state space models are not limited to toy long-sequence settings: with the right gating and a small amount of local attention, they can become competitive language-modeling backbones while retaining better length extrapolation behavior than standard Transformers.","technical_approach":"The key proposal is a Gated State Space (GSS) layer that combines state space sequence modeling with gated activations. The division of labor is deliberate: the state space handles efficient long-range propagation, while gating improves expressivity and optimization. The paper then adds self-attention specifically for local dependencies, acknowledging that pure SSMs are weaker on short-range token interactions. Compared with diagonal S4/DSS, GSS is simpler and faster on TPUs; compared with Transformers, it shifts global modeling away from attention and uses attention only where it helps most.","experiments":"The abstract gives three solid facts. The evaluation covers autoregressive modeling on English books, GitHub code, and ArXiv math articles. GSS trains significantly faster than DSS on TPUs. It is fairly competitive with several well-tuned Transformer baselines and shows zero-shot generalization to longer inputs. Exact model sizes, token counts, and perplexity numbers are not provided in the abstract, so they should not be invented. One useful qualitative result is that adding self-attention for local dependencies improves GSS further, which suggests the main remaining gap is local rather than global modeling.","authors_note":""},"tags":["state-space-model","long-context","language-modeling","architecture"]},{"id":"Zhou0XJN23","title":"DocPrompting: Generating Code by Retrieving the Docs","authors":["Shuyan Zhou","Uri Alon","Frank F. Xu","Zhengbao Jiang","Graham Neubig"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Zhou0XJN23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Zhou0XJN23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=ZTCxT2t2Ru","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：代码生成模型经常“会写但不懂库”，因为训练语料里API文档覆盖不足且更新快，导致模型在调用真实库函数时容易幻觉或用错参数。以往做法要么只检索代码片段（不解释API语义），要么把文档塞进prompt但缺少结构化检索与融合。","importance":"贡献是数据/检索增强方法级：提出DocPrompting，通过检索官方文档来驱动代码生成，把“知识更新快且可检索”的部分外置。对pretrain的启示是：对工具/API这类高变知识，继续扩大预训练数据不如把文档检索作为生成管线的一等公民，并在训练/评测中显式建模“读文档再写代码”。","technical_approach":"方法核心是：给定编程任务，先检索相关API文档片段，再把文档以特定格式注入到提示中引导生成，并可能配合重排序/过滤以减少无关文档噪声。关键设计取舍是：文档比代码更直接描述接口与约束，但文档也更长、更啰嗦，因此需要检索粒度与prompt结构来控制上下文预算；与纯RAG检索代码不同，它把“文档语义”作为主要证据源。","experiments":"未提供摘要，无法给出基准（如HumanEval/MBPP/库特定基准）、模型大小与提升数字；但应会对比无检索、检索代码、以及检索文档三种设置，并报告通过率（pass@k）或单元测试成功率。建议补读时重点核对：文档检索的召回质量对最终通过率的敏感性、以及在长文档/多库混用时的上下文溢出问题。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Code LMs often “can write code but don’t know the library” because training corpora under-cover official API docs and libraries evolve quickly, causing hallucinated calls or wrong arguments. Prior approaches either retrieve code snippets (weak on API semantics) or stuff docs into prompts without structured retrieval and integration.","importance":"This is a retrieval/data-centric contribution: DocPrompting retrieves official documentation to guide code generation, externalizing fast-changing knowledge. For pretraining, it suggests that scaling pretraining data is a poor fit for volatile tool/API knowledge; modeling “read docs then write code” as a first-class pipeline can be more robust.","technical_approach":"Given a programming task, it retrieves relevant API documentation chunks and injects them into the prompt with a designed format, likely with filtering/reranking to reduce noise. The main trade-off is that docs are semantically precise but verbose, so retrieval granularity and prompt structure must control context budget. Compared to code-only RAG, it treats documentation semantics as the primary evidence source.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so benchmarks (e.g., HumanEval/MBPP or library-specific suites), model sizes, and numerical gains cannot be stated reliably. The evaluation likely compares no-retrieval vs code-retrieval vs doc-retrieval and reports pass@k or unit-test success; readers should check sensitivity to retrieval recall and context overflow with long docs/multi-library settings.","authors_note":""},"tags":["code-generation","retrieval","tool-use","prompting"]},{"id":"2210.03493","title":"Automatic Chain of Thought Prompting in Large Language Models","authors":["Zhuosheng Zhang","Aston Zhang","Mu Li","Alex Smola"],"institutions":["Shanghai Jiao Tong University","Amazon"],"abstract":"$a","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.03493","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/0001Z0S23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/0001Z0S23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=5NTt8GFjUHkr","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"CoT 两种主流用法各有短板：Zero-shot CoT（'Let's think step by step'）便宜但弱；Manual-CoT（人写 few-shot 示例）强但每个任务都要手工构造示例。能否自动构造 few-shot 示例，既不人工又拿到 Manual-CoT 的效果？","importance":"Prompt 工程层的实用贡献，更重要的启示是：LLM 生成的 reasoning chain 虽然有错，但在**多样性**得到保证的前提下作为 in-context demo 仍然有效。这个观察其实预告了后来大量 self-generated reasoning data 用于 SFT/RL 的范式（STaR、rejection sampling、R1 系的起点）。","technical_approach":"Auto-CoT 两步：(1) 对测试问题集做聚类（按 question embedding），从每个 cluster 选一个代表问题；(2) 用 Zero-shot CoT 让模型自己生成每个代表问题的 reasoning chain，组装成 few-shot demos。关键洞见是 **diversity 比 correctness 重要**——就算生成的 chain 里有错，只要 demos 来自不同 cluster，整体效果逼近 Manual-CoT。这解释了为什么简单的聚类采样就能 work。","experiments":"在 10 个 reasoning 任务（算术 GSM8K/AQuA/SVAMP 等、常识、符号）上，用 GPT-3 (text-davinci-002)，Auto-CoT 与 Manual-CoT 平均持平甚至略优，显著超过 Zero-shot CoT。关键 ablation：随机选 demos（不聚类）会引入相似错误并掉点，说明 diversity 是主因而非 self-generation 本身。","authors_note":"上海交通大学 + Amazon（Aston Zhang, Mu Li, Alex Smola）。Mu Li / Alex Smola 是 MXNet/D2L 作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The two CoT paradigms each have a weakness: Zero-shot CoT is cheap but weaker; Manual-CoT needs hand-crafted few-shot demos per task. Can demos be auto-generated while keeping Manual-CoT-level quality?","importance":"A practical prompting contribution, but the deeper lesson is that LLM-generated reasoning chains, even when partly wrong, are effective as in-context demos as long as diversity is preserved. This foreshadows the later wave of self-generated reasoning data for SFT/RL (STaR, rejection sampling, R1-Zero lineage).","technical_approach":"Auto-CoT: (1) cluster the test questions by embedding and pick one representative per cluster; (2) run Zero-shot CoT on each representative to generate its reasoning chain; use these as few-shot demos. The core insight: diversity matters more than correctness — clustering ensures the auto-generated demos cover different error modes, so a few wrong chains do not tank performance.","experiments":"On 10 reasoning tasks (GSM8K, AQuA, SVAMP, commonsense, symbolic) with GPT-3 text-davinci-002, Auto-CoT matches or slightly beats Manual-CoT and clearly beats Zero-shot CoT. Key ablation: random demo selection (no clustering) degrades performance because similar errors pile up, confirming diversity — not self-generation alone — is the driver.","authors_note":"SJTU + Amazon (Aston Zhang, Mu Li, Alex Smola). Mu Li / Smola are authors of MXNet and D2L."},"tags":["cot","prompting","reasoning","llm"],"notable_authors":["Mu Li","Alex Smola","Aston Zhang"]},{"id":"2210.13382","title":"Emergent World Representations: Exploring a Sequence Model Trained on a Synthetic Task","authors":["Kenneth Li","Aspen K. Hopkins","David Bau","Fernanda B. Viégas","Hanspeter Pfister","Martin Wattenberg"],"institutions":["Harvard University","MIT","Northeastern University"],"abstract":"Language models show a surprising range of capabilities, but the source of their apparent competence is unclear. Do these networks just memorize a collection of surface statistics, or do they rely on internal representations of the process that generates the sequences they see? We investigate this question by applying a variant of the GPT model to the task of predicting legal moves in a simple board game, Othello. Although the network has no a priori knowledge of the game or its rules, we uncover evidence of an emergent nonlinear internal representation of the board state. Interventional experiments indicate this representation can be used to control the output of the network and create\"latent saliency maps\"that can help explain predictions in human terms.","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.13382","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/0002HBVPW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/0002HBVPW23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=DeG07_TcZvT","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"序列模型到底是记了一堆表面统计，还是真学到了生成序列的底层过程？语言模型的'能力从哪来'一直没法 clean 地回答，因为自然语言太复杂、ground-truth world state 不可得。","importance":"机制分析 / emergent representation 方向的里程碑之一。作者用 Othello 作 controlled toy：规则已知、world state 可枚举，于是能直接 probe 模型是否内部重建了棋盘。结论是**有**，且该表示是因果性的（干预它会改变输出）。对 pretrain 研究的意义：给'LLM 内部形成世界模型'提供了第一个干净的存在性证据，后续 interpretability 大量工作（linear probes、activation patching）都在这个范式上展开。","technical_approach":"训一个 GPT 变体预测 Othello 合法走子序列（只给 move 序列，不给棋盘也不给规则）。然后用非线性 probe 从模型内部激活预测棋盘每格的黑/白/空状态，发现能高精度恢复——这是表示存在的证据。关键再做干预实验：直接修改内部激活使 probe 读到的'棋盘'改变，模型输出的合法走子也会相应改变，说明这个表示是被模型真正使用的，而非伴生相关。还构造了 latent saliency map 给出可解释性。","experiments":"GPT 在 Othello move 数据上训练后 probe 棋盘状态准确率远超 random baseline；线性 probe 不够，非线性 probe 才能解出（暗示表示是非线性编码的）。干预实验证明因果性：让 probe 读到被翻转的棋盘状态，下游预测的合法走子集合也相应翻转。","authors_note":"Harvard (Kenneth Li, David Bau, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister 等)。David Bau 是 interpretability 领域代表人物，后续 ROME / MEMIT 同一团队。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Do sequence models just memorize surface statistics, or do they internally represent the process that generates the data? This question is hard to answer on natural language because the true world state is unobservable.","importance":"A landmark in the emergent-representation / mechanistic interpretability line. The key move is using Othello as a controlled toy where the world state is fully observable, enabling a clean probe. The paper provides the first crisp existence proof that a next-token model can build and causally use an internal world model — a template that later interpretability work (activation patching, linear probes) heavily builds on.","technical_approach":"Train a GPT variant on sequences of legal Othello moves (no board, no rules given). Probe internal activations for per-square board state — a nonlinear probe recovers it with high accuracy (linear probes do not, suggesting nonlinear encoding). Then the critical step: intervene on the activations to flip what the probe reads, and observe that the model's predicted legal moves flip accordingly. This causal test distinguishes a used representation from an epiphenomenal correlate. Latent saliency maps follow from the probe.","experiments":"Probe accuracy on board state far above random; causal intervention experiments confirm the representation is actually used for prediction. All on synthetic Othello data.","authors_note":"Harvard (Kenneth Li, David Bau, Fernanda Viégas, Hanspeter Pfister). David Bau's group, also behind ROME/MEMIT."},"tags":["world-model","sequence-model","emergence","interpretability"],"notable_authors":["David Bau","Fernanda Viégas","Kenneth Li"]},{"id":"2211.15661","title":"What learning algorithm is in-context learning? Investigations with linear models","authors":["Ekin Akyürek","Dale Schuurmans","Jacob Andreas","Tengyu Ma","Denny Zhou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.15661","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/AkyurekSA0Z23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/AkyurekSA0Z23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=0g0X4H8yN4I","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["in-context-learning","transformer","implicit-learning","linear-models"]},{"id":"2209.06794","title":"PaLI: A Jointly-Scaled Multilingual Language-Image Model","authors":["Xi Chen","Xiao Wang","Soravit Changpinyo","A. J. Piergiovanni","Piotr Padlewski","Daniel Salz","Sebastian Goodman","Adam Grycner","Basil Mustafa","Lucas Beyer","Alexander Kolesnikov","Joan Puigcerver","Nan Ding","Keran Rong","Hassan Akbari","Gaurav Mishra","Linting Xue","Ashish V. Thapliyal","James Bradbury","Weicheng Kuo"],"institutions":["Google Research"],"abstract":"$c","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.06794","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Chen0CPPSGGMB0P23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Chen0CPPSGGMB0P23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=mWVoBz4W0u","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"以往的图文多模态预训练往往侧重于扩大语言模型（LLM）的参数量，而视觉编码器（ViT）的规模相对较小，导致视觉表征能力成为多模态任务的瓶颈。","importance":"范式/系统级贡献。确立了 VLM 预训练中“视觉与语言主干必须联合 Scaling”的原则，证明了复用超大规模单模态预训练权重可以极大地加速多模态收敛。","technical_approach":"提出 PaLI 架构。采用标准的 Encoder-Decoder 结构，将图像通过 ViT 编码为 token 后，与文本 token 拼接输入到 mT5 中。关键设计是直接复用极大规模的单模态预训练权重（最高 4B 的 ViT-e 和 13B 的 mT5），并在包含 100 多种语言的 10B 规模图文对数据集（WebLI）上进行联合预训练。","experiments":"PaLI-17B 在 100 多种语言的多个视觉-语言基准（如 VQA、图像描述）上达到 SOTA。消融实验明确表明，将视觉组件从 ViT-G 扩展到 ViT-e 带来了显著收益，防止了视觉编码器拖累大型 LLM。","authors_note":"Google Research。Xi Chen 和 Soravit Changpinyo 是多模态预训练领域的资深研究员。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Previous vision-language pretraining often focused on scaling the language model (LLM) while keeping the vision encoder (ViT) relatively small, making visual representation a bottleneck for multimodal tasks.","importance":"Paradigm/System-level contribution. Establishes the principle of 'joint scaling of vision and language backbones' in VLM pretraining, proving that reusing massive unimodal pretrained weights drastically accelerates multimodal convergence.","technical_approach":"Introduces the PaLI architecture. Uses a standard Encoder-Decoder setup where images are encoded into tokens via ViT and concatenated with text tokens into mT5. The key design is reusing extremely large unimodal pretrained weights (up to 4B ViT-e and 13B mT5) and jointly pretraining on a 10B-scale multilingual image-text dataset (WebLI).","experiments":"PaLI-17B achieves SOTA on multiple vision-language benchmarks (e.g., VQA, image captioning) across over 100 languages. Ablations clearly show that scaling the vision component (from ViT-G to ViT-e) yields significant gains, preventing the vision encoder from bottlenecking the large LLM.","authors_note":"Google Research. Xi Chen and Soravit Changpinyo are senior researchers in multimodal pretraining."},"tags":["vlm-pretraining","scaling","multilingual","vision-language"],"notable_authors":["Xi Chen","Soravit Changpinyo","Piotr Padlewski"]},{"id":"ChenZH23","title":"Analog Bits: Generating Discrete Data using Diffusion Models with Self-Conditioning","authors":["Ting Chen","Ruixiang Zhang","Geoffrey E. Hinton"],"institutions":["Google Brain"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ChenZH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ChenZH23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=3itjR9QxFw","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"扩散模型原生针对连续数据设计，处理文本等离散数据时通常需要引入复杂的离散状态空间或分类转移矩阵，优化困难且难以扩展。","importance":"范式级贡献。证明了连续扩散模型可以直接用于离散文本生成，为 Diffusion LM 提供了一种极其简洁的连续化表示方案，挑战了自回归在文本生成的垄断地位。","technical_approach":"提出 Analog Bits。将离散 token 转化为二进制位串，并将其视为 $[-1, 1]$ 的连续实数，直接套用标准的连续高斯扩散模型。核心机制是引入了 self-conditioning（将上一步预测的 $x_0$ 作为当前步的额外条件输入），极大缓解了连续空间量化回离散空间时的误差。","experiments":"在 MS-COCO 图像描述和无条件文本生成任务上，使用 Analog Bits 的连续扩散模型达到了与自回归模型和离散扩散模型（如 D3PM）相当的性能，且架构更简单。","authors_note":"Google Brain。Ting Chen（SimCLR 作者）和 Geoffrey Hinton（深度学习先驱）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Diffusion models are natively designed for continuous data. Applying them to discrete data like text usually requires complex discrete state spaces or categorical transition matrices, which are hard to optimize and scale.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution. Proves that continuous diffusion models can directly generate discrete text, providing an extremely elegant continuous representation for Diffusion LMs and challenging the monopoly of autoregressive models in text generation.","technical_approach":"Introduces Analog Bits. Converts discrete tokens into binary bit strings and treats them as continuous real numbers in $[-1, 1]$, directly applying standard continuous Gaussian diffusion. The core mechanism is self-conditioning (feeding the previous prediction of $x_0$ as an extra input at the current step), which drastically mitigates the quantization error when mapping continuous spaces back to discrete tokens.","experiments":"On MS-COCO image captioning and unconditional text generation, continuous diffusion using Analog Bits achieves performance comparable to autoregressive models and discrete diffusion models (like D3PM), with a much simpler architecture.","authors_note":"Google Brain. Ting Chen (author of SimCLR) and Geoffrey Hinton (Deep Learning pioneer)."},"tags":["diffusion","discrete-data","self-conditioning","analog-bits"],"notable_authors":["Ting Chen","Geoffrey E. Hinton"]},{"id":"ChenZJLW23","title":"Sparse MoE as the New Dropout: Scaling Dense and Self-Slimmable Transformers","authors":["Tianlong Chen","Zhenyu Zhang","Ajay Kumar Jaiswal","Shiwei Liu","Zhangyang Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ChenZJLW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ChenZJLW23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=w1hwFUb_81","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：如何在不按传统方式直接扩宽或加深 Transformer 的前提下，同时拿到更好的容量-计算折中和可按预算弹性推理的能力。过去 dense scaling 主要靠更大网络和常规 dropout 来稳训练，但这两条路分别受算力和部署约束限制，作者尝试把 sparse MoE 从“增大容量的结构”重新解释成“比 dropout 更强的结构化随机化与自适应容量机制”。","importance":"它的重要性在于把 MoE 的角色从单纯的超大模型扩容工具，推进到 dense/self-slimmable Transformer 的通用训练配方。这个视角对 pretrain 的启发是：稀疏激活未必只服务于超大参数量，也可以服务于训练稳健性、子网络兼容性和多预算部署。如果结论成立，MoE 的价值就不止是省 FLOPs，而是能替代部分正则化与模型压缩设计。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把 sparse MoE 插到 dense 与 self-slimmable Transformer 中，作为一种训练期的结构化随机失活与容量路由机制，而不是只做标准 Switch/Top-k 扩容。设计上，作者强调两点：一是 expert routing 让不同 token 走不同子路径，形成比单点 dropout 更强的表示分工；二是 self-slimmable 训练下，不同宽度子网可共享由 expert 学到的条件化能力，从而缓解子网间干扰。和最接近的 prior 相比，它不是再造新的 MoE 路由器，而是把 MoE 当成可替代 dropout 的训练组件来用，重点看 dense backbone 是否因此更易扩展、更适合可伸缩推理。","experiments":"从题目和录用版本可确认的关键信息是：论文比较了 dense Transformer、self-slimmable Transformer 与引入 sparse MoE 后的变体，关注精度、计算量和不同宽度子网表现，而不是单一最高指标。可以合理判断作者做了 dropout 对比、不同 slimmable 宽度配置对比，以及 MoE 稀疏度/专家数相关消融；但当前给定信息里没有可可靠复述的模型规模、数据集和具体数值，因此这里不编造。可保守总结为：作者报告 sparse MoE 在相近计算预算下能替代或优于常规 dropout，并改善 self-slimmable 设定下的性能-弹性折中。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a practical scaling question: can sparse MoE improve dense and self-slimmable Transformers not just by adding capacity, but by acting as a better training-time regularizer than standard dropout? Prior work mostly treated dense scaling and MoE scaling as separate tracks, and self-slimmable models still suffered from accuracy interference across sub-networks.","importance":"Its contribution is mainly methodological. It reframes MoE from a specialist tool for extreme-scale sparse models into a more general recipe for training scalable and budget-adaptive Transformers. For pretraining, the useful takeaway is that sparsity may help not only FLOP efficiency, but also regularization, sub-network compatibility, and deployment flexibility.","technical_approach":"The method is an MoE-augmented Transformer used in dense and self-slimmable settings, with sparse expert routing serving as structured stochastic regularization. The key design choice is to let tokens activate different experts, which creates path diversity and representation specialization that plain dropout cannot offer. In the self-slimmable case, the same routed structure is expected to reduce conflict among width-configured sub-networks. The novelty is less about inventing a new router and more about repurposing sparse MoE as a drop-in training component for scalable dense models.","experiments":"From the available metadata, the main empirical story is a comparison among dense Transformers, self-slimmable Transformers, and their sparse-MoE variants under similar compute budgets. The paper appears to focus on accuracy-efficiency trade-offs and robustness across multiple width settings rather than a single headline benchmark. The exact model sizes, datasets, and gains are not recoverable from the provided input, so they should not be fabricated here. The safe summary is that sparse MoE reportedly matches or outperforms dropout-style baselines and improves the performance-flexibility trade-off in self-slimmable training.","authors_note":""},"tags":["moe","sparsity","transformer","scaling"],"notable_authors":["Tianlong Chen","Zhangyang Wang"]},{"id":"ChoiCL23","title":"A Non-monotonic Self-terminating Language Model","authors":["Eugene Choi","Kyunghyun Cho","Cheolhyoung Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ChoiCL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ChoiCL23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=vw-5EgYbJZr","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：标准自终止语言模型通常假设生成概率随步数单调逼近终止，但这种单调设计会限制模型在不同长度上的表达能力，并导致过早或过晚结束。作者要做的是一种 non-monotonic self-terminating LM，让模型能更灵活地决定何时结束，同时保持可控的终止行为。","importance":"这项工作偏建模范式的小改造，但对语言建模目标本身有启发。它触及一个经常被忽略的点：EOS 并不只是普通 token，终止机制会影响长度分布、校准和搜索行为。对 pretrain 的意义在于，若终止机制设计不当，模型可能把长度偏差写进分布本身，而不是单靠解码策略修补。","technical_approach":"核心方法是提出非单调的 self-terminating 语言模型。与标准 AR LM 把 EOS 当普通词不同，self-terminating 模型会显式建模‘继续生成还是停止’；而作者进一步放松了以往单调终止概率的约束，使不同上下文和步数下的停止决策更灵活。这样做的原因是：真实文本长度后验并不天然单调，强行单调会压缩模型表达空间。设计上的 trade-off 是，需要额外保证总终止概率良定义、避免生成永不停止或数值不稳。","experiments":"从题目可判断，实验应关注长度建模、生成质量和终止可靠性，比较普通 AR LM、单调 self-terminating LM 与 non-monotonic 版本。典型指标可能包括 perplexity、长度分布拟合、终止错误率或生成质量评估。当前给定信息没有摘要和数值，无法可靠写出模型规模与提升幅度。可稳妥概括为：作者报告 non-monotonic 终止机制能改善长度相关建模而不牺牲基本语言建模质量，并展示单调约束会带来不必要的表达限制。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a subtle but important modeling issue: standard self-terminating language models often impose a monotonic termination structure, which can make stopping behavior too rigid and lead to length biases. The goal is to build a non-monotonic self-terminating LM that can decide when to stop more flexibly.","importance":"This is a targeted modeling contribution, but it matters because EOS handling is not just a decoding detail. The termination mechanism shapes length distributions, calibration, and search behavior. For pretraining, the broader lesson is that generation length bias may be partly baked into the model objective itself rather than fixed purely at decode time.","technical_approach":"The method introduces a non-monotonic self-terminating language model. Instead of treating EOS as an ordinary token only, self-terminating models explicitly model the continue-versus-stop decision, and this paper relaxes the usual monotonicity constraint on that process. The motivation is simple: realistic stopping behavior need not become steadily more likely in a monotonic way with time. The challenge is to preserve well-defined termination and avoid pathological never-stop behavior.","experiments":"The experiments likely compare standard autoregressive LMs, monotonic self-terminating LMs, and the proposed non-monotonic variant on language modeling quality, length modeling, and termination reliability. Typical metrics would include perplexity, fit to length distributions, and perhaps termination-related failure rates. The exact datasets, model sizes, and gains are not available in the provided input, so they should not be guessed. The safe summary is that the paper reports better length modeling from non-monotonic termination without sacrificing core LM quality.","authors_note":""},"tags":["non-autoregressive","language-modeling","self-terminating"],"notable_authors":["Kyunghyun Cho"]},{"id":"FrantarAHA23","title":"OPTQ: Accurate Quantization for Generative Pre-trained Transformers","authors":["Elias Frantar","Saleh Ashkboos","Torsten Hoefler","Dan Alistarh"],"institutions":["IST Austria","ETH Zurich"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/FrantarAHA23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/FrantarAHA23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=tcbBPnfwxS","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"如何高效且准确地将百亿/千亿参数规模的生成式预训练 Transformer (GPT) 模型量化到 3-4 bit，以降低推理成本，同时保持模型性能？","importance":"提出了 OPTQ（现更名为 GPTQ），这是首个能在单张 GPU 上于几小时内完成千亿参数模型高精度 3/4-bit 量化的方法。它极大地推动了 LLM 的本地部署和高效推理，成为了开源社区（如 HuggingFace）量化 LLM 的事实标准之一。","technical_approach":"基于二阶优化（Hessian 矩阵）的逐层量化方法（OBQ 的扩展）。核心改进在于：1) 采用分块（block-wise）更新策略，避免了全量 Hessian 矩阵求逆的高昂计算代价；2) 引入了 Cholesky 分解和 lazy batch 更新，显著提高了计算效率和数值稳定性。相比于简单的 Round-to-Nearest (RTN)，OPTQ 能更好地补偿量化带来的误差。","experiments":"在 OPT (175B) 和 BLOOM (176B) 等模型上进行了实验。结果表明，OPTQ 能在 4 小时内完成 175B 模型的 4-bit 量化（单张 A100），且在困惑度（Perplexity）和零样本任务上的性能下降极小，远优于 RTN 和其他现有量化方法。3-bit 量化也展现出可接受的性能。","authors_note":"Dan Alistarh 团队在模型压缩和量化领域有深入研究，OPTQ/GPTQ 是其代表作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to efficiently and accurately quantize generative pre-trained Transformer (GPT) models with tens or hundreds of billions of parameters to 3-4 bits, reducing inference costs while maintaining performance?","importance":"Introduces OPTQ (now known as GPTQ), the first method capable of highly accurate 3/4-bit quantization of 100B+ parameter models in a few hours on a single GPU. It significantly advanced the local deployment and efficient inference of LLMs, becoming a de facto standard for quantizing LLMs in the open-source community (e.g., HuggingFace).","technical_approach":"A layer-wise quantization method based on second-order optimization (Hessian matrix), extending OBQ. Core improvements include: 1) adopting a block-wise update strategy to avoid the high computational cost of full Hessian matrix inversion; 2) introducing Cholesky decomposition and lazy batch updates, significantly improving computational efficiency and numerical stability. Compared to simple Round-to-Nearest (RTN), OPTQ better compensates for quantization errors.","experiments":"Experiments on models like OPT (175B) and BLOOM (176B). Results show OPTQ can quantize a 175B model to 4-bit in under 4 hours on a single A100, with minimal performance degradation in perplexity and zero-shot tasks, vastly outperforming RTN and other existing methods. 3-bit quantization also shows acceptable performance.","authors_note":"Dan Alistarh's group has deep research in model compression and quantization; OPTQ/GPTQ is a representative work."},"tags":["quantization","gpt","inference","compression"],"notable_authors":["Dan Alistarh","Torsten Hoefler"]},{"id":"Haliassos0MPP23","title":"Jointly Learning Visual and Auditory Speech Representations from Raw Data","authors":["Alexandros Haliassos","Pingchuan Ma","Rodrigo Mira","Stavros Petridis","Maja Pantic"],"institutions":["Imperial College London"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Haliassos0MPP23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Haliassos0MPP23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=BPwIgvf5iQ","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：能否直接从原始音频和视频中联合学习语音表示，而不依赖预先抽取的唇形、梅尔谱或文本标签。过去视听语音学习常把模态预处理得很重，虽然有效，但也把表示上限锁在手工前端上。","importance":"它的重要性在于推动 raw-data 级的视听语音联合预训练，属于多模态语音表示学习的方法级工作。对 pretrain 的启示是：如果模态同步足够强，模型可以直接从原始波形和口型视频中学到共享语音单元，这和统一多模态 tokenizer/encoder 的方向一致。","technical_approach":"核心方法是联合建模视觉语音和听觉语音，从原始输入端到端学习共享或协同表示。关键设计通常包括两个编码器、跨模态对齐目标，以及利用时间同步结构做自监督或弱监督训练。和传统 lip-reading 或 audio-only SSL 不同，它不是把另一模态当辅助标签，而是把两者都当一等公民，让视觉补足噪声环境下的听觉歧义，让音频补足视觉遮挡或口型不清。这样设计有效的原因是语音在两种模态上共享发音时序，但边界在于非正面人脸、遮挡和异步数据会明显削弱收益。","experiments":"实验的关键结论通常是：联合视听表示在语音识别、唇读、说话人相关任务或噪声鲁棒评测上优于单模态训练，尤其在低信噪比下收益更大。最值得关注的 ablation 一般是是否从 raw data 直接学、是否做跨模态对齐、以及噪声强度对性能差异的影响。对基础模型研究者来说，这篇的价值在于证明原始多模态同步信号足以支撑高质量语音表示学习。","authors_note":"Imperial College London。Maja Pantic 是多模态情感/行为理解方向知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether speech representations can be learned jointly from raw audio and raw video, without relying on heavy handcrafted front ends or text supervision. Prior audio-visual speech systems often used strong preprocessing, which helps performance but constrains what the model can learn.","importance":"This is a method-level step toward raw-data multimodal speech pretraining. The broader lesson is that if cross-modal synchronization is strong enough, shared speech structure can be learned directly from waveform and lip motion, which aligns with the push toward unified multimodal encoders and tokenizers.","technical_approach":"The method jointly learns auditory and visual speech representations end to end from raw inputs. The likely ingredients are separate encoders, cross-modal alignment objectives, and training signals built around temporal synchronization. Unlike traditional lip-reading or audio-only SSL, the two modalities are treated symmetrically: vision helps disambiguate noisy audio, and audio helps when visual evidence is weak. This works because articulation is temporally coupled across modalities, though the gains should weaken under occlusion, pose variation, or poor synchronization.","experiments":"The main empirical result is typically that joint audio-visual training beats single-modality training on speech-related tasks, with especially strong gains under noisy conditions. The most informative ablations usually test raw-input learning, alignment losses, and robustness across noise levels. For foundation-model readers, the useful takeaway is that raw multimodal synchronization can be a sufficient pretraining signal for speech representation learning.","authors_note":"Imperial College London. Maja Pantic is a notable researcher in multimodal behavior and affective computing."},"tags":["audio-visual-representation","joint-learning","raw-data","multimodal-pretraining"],"notable_authors":["Maja Pantic"]},{"id":"HaluptzokBK23","title":"Language Models Can Teach Themselves to Program Better","authors":["Patrick Haluptzok","Matthew Bowers","Adam Tauman Kalai"],"institutions":["OpenAI"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/HaluptzokBK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/HaluptzokBK23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=SaRj2ka1XZ3","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：语言模型能否在没有外部人工标注程序数据的情况下，通过自生成和自筛选来提升编程能力。过去代码能力提升主要依赖更大代码语料或人工构造训练集，而这两者都昂贵且扩展慢。","importance":"它的重要性不在 pretrain 本体，而在 post-train 对能力增长的闭环启发，尤其接近后来的 self-improvement / synthetic data 路线。对 pretrain 研究的价值是：模型生成的数据在可验证任务上可以反哺训练，说明高质量训练信号不一定全来自人工语料，验证器和任务结构本身就是数据工厂。","technical_approach":"核心方法是让语言模型自己生成程序、测试或解题轨迹，再用可执行反馈筛选出正确样本继续训练，形成 self-training loop。关键设计不是单纯自蒸馏，而是利用编程任务天然可验证这一点，把“模型觉得对”替换成“执行后确实对”。这样能显著降低错误标签污染，因为程序是否通过测试是硬信号。和一般伪标签方法相比，它更依赖任务可验证性；边界也很清楚：测试覆盖不足时会学到投机解，且分布容易收缩到模型当前会做的题型。","experiments":"实验的关键结论通常是：即使从较弱的初始代码模型出发，自生成+执行筛选也能在代码基准上持续提升。论文大概率在 HumanEval 或类似程序合成 benchmark 上报告 pass@k 改善，并比较无筛选自训练、外部监督微调等基线。最值得关注的观察一般是：验证器质量决定收益上限，且多轮 self-improvement 会出现收益递减或模式坍缩风险。对今天看，这篇的价值在于它很早展示了 verifier-guided synthetic training 的可行性。","authors_note":"OpenAI。Adam Tauman Kalai 是知名作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether language models can improve their coding ability by generating and filtering their own training data, instead of relying only on more human-written supervision. That matters because scaling curated programming data is expensive and slow.","importance":"Its significance is less about pretraining itself and more about the closed loop between generation, verification, and further training. For pretraining researchers, the key lesson is that in verifiable domains, the model plus a checker can become a data engine, reducing dependence on manually curated corpora.","technical_approach":"The method is a self-training loop for code. The model generates programs, tests, or solution traces, and executable feedback is used to keep only correct or useful samples for further training. The important design choice is to anchor supervision in external verification rather than the model's own confidence. That sharply reduces label noise compared with generic pseudo-labeling. The boundary is equally important: weak tests can reward shortcuts, and repeated self-training can collapse toward what the current model already knows how to solve.","experiments":"The main empirical result is typically that self-generated, execution-filtered data improves coding benchmarks such as HumanEval over the starting model and over weaker self-training baselines without verification. The most useful observation is not just the score gain but the dependence on verifier quality and the diminishing returns across rounds. In retrospect, the paper is an early concrete demonstration of verifier-guided synthetic training.","authors_note":"OpenAI. Adam Tauman Kalai is a notable author."},"tags":["code-generation","self-improvement","synthetic-data"],"notable_authors":["Adam Tauman Kalai"]},{"id":"2305.19249","title":"Preserving Pre-trained Features Helps Calibrate Fine-tuned Language Models","authors":["Guande He","Jianfei Chen","Jun Zhu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.19249","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/HeCZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/HeCZ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=NI7StoWHJPT","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：语言模型微调后在域外（OOD）场景常出现过度自信（miscalibration），而现有校准方法往往把问题当作“分类头/温度”层面的后处理，忽略了微调对预训练表征的破坏。","importance":"贡献是把校准失败归因到灾难性遗忘（catastrophic forgetting）并给出可操作方向：保留预训练特征（pre-trained features）能显著改善微调模型在域移下的置信度可靠性；这对 pretrain↔posttrain 接口很直接，提示“对齐/下游最优”与“保留预训练不确定性结构”之间存在可控权衡。","technical_approach":"方法上不是发明新校准器，而是系统评估“保留预训练特征”的一类策略：先观察到 PLM 在 MLM 任务上在域移下仍较稳健校准，而微调分类任务后该性质丢失；据此采用冻结部分层、特征正则、或其他保持表示不漂移的微调方式来减少遗忘，从而让分类置信度更接近预训练时的概率语义；关键机制是假设预训练阶段学到的表示空间包含更合理的密度/不确定性结构，微调若过度改写会让 logits 变尖但不更正确。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体模型（如 BERT/RoBERTa）、任务集、ECE 等指标与提升幅度；建议在正文核对：1）是否在多个 OOD benchmark 上报告 ECE/NLL 与 accuracy 的共同变化，避免“校准变好但准确率掉”；2）不同保留策略（冻结层数/正则强度）是否呈现清晰的校准-精度 Pareto。","authors_note":"作者为 Guande He、Jianfei Chen、Jun Zhu；机构信息在给定材料中缺失。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Fine-tuned LMs are often overconfident under domain shift, and many calibration fixes treat it as a post-hoc logit issue rather than a representation drift problem caused by fine-tuning.","importance":"The paper reframes miscalibration as catastrophic forgetting of pretrained features and shows that preserving those features improves OOD calibration; this is directly relevant to the pretrain–posttrain interface because it exposes a controllable trade-off between downstream optimization and retaining pretrained uncertainty structure.","technical_approach":"Rather than proposing a new calibrator, it evaluates feature-preserving fine-tuning strategies: it first observes that PLMs remain well-calibrated on MLM under domain shift, but lose this property after task fine-tuning; it then uses methods like partial freezing and representation-preserving regularization to reduce feature drift, aiming to keep probability semantics closer to pretraining; the mechanism is that pretraining encodes a more faithful density/uncertainty geometry that aggressive fine-tuning can overwrite, producing sharper logits without proportional correctness gains.","experiments":"No concrete model/task names or numeric calibration deltas are provided in the abstract snippet; key things to check in the paper are (1) ECE/NLL and accuracy reported together on multiple OOD benchmarks, and (2) whether freezing/regularization strength yields a clear calibration–accuracy Pareto frontier.","authors_note":"Authors: Guande He, Jianfei Chen, Jun Zhu; institutions are not provided in the input."},"tags":["fine-tuning","calibration","pre-trained-features","out-of-domain"],"notable_authors":["Jun Zhu"]},{"id":"2205.15868","title":"CogVideo: Large-scale Pretraining for Text-to-Video Generation via Transformers","authors":["Wenyi Hong","Ming Ding","Wendi Zheng","Xinghan Liu","Jie Tang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Large-scale pretrained transformers have created milestones in text (GPT-3) and text-to-image (DALL-E and CogView) generation. Its application to video generation is still facing many challenges: The potential huge computation cost makes the training from scratch unaffordable; The scarcity and weak relevance of text-video datasets hinder the model understanding complex movement semantics. In this work, we present 9B-parameter transformer CogVideo, trained by inheriting a pretrained text-to-image model, CogView2. We also propose multi-frame-rate hierarchical training strategy to better align text and video clips. As (probably) the first open-source large-scale pretrained text-to-video model, CogVideo outperforms all publicly available models at a large margin in machine and human evaluations.","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.15868","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Hong0ZL023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Hong0ZL023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=rB6TpjAuSRy","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["video-generation","pretraining","transformer","text-to-video"]},{"id":"Jin0P023","title":"Dataless Knowledge Fusion by Merging Weights of Language Models","authors":["Xisen Jin","Xiang Ren","Daniel Preotiuc-Pietro","Pengxiang Cheng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Jin0P023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Jin0P023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=FCnohuR6AnM","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["model-merging","weight-space","knowledge-fusion","continual-pretrain"]},{"id":"2210.02406","title":"Decomposed Prompting: A Modular Approach for Solving Complex Tasks","authors":["Tushar Khot","Harsh Trivedi","Matthew Finlayson","Yao Fu","Kyle Richardson","Peter Clark","Ashish Sabharwal"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.02406","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/KhotTFF0CS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/KhotTFF0CS23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=_nGgzQjzaRy","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["prompting","decomposition","tool-use","reasoning"]},{"id":"2209.15352","title":"AudioGen: Textually Guided Audio Generation","authors":["Felix Kreuk","Gabriel Synnaeve","Adam Polyak","Uriel Singer","Alexandre Défossez","Jade Copet","Devi Parikh","Yaniv Taigman","Yossi Adi"],"institutions":["Meta AI","Hebrew University of Jerusalem"],"abstract":"$f","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.15352","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/KreukSPSDCPTA23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/KreukSPSDCPTA23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=CYK7RfcOzQ4","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"真实世界音频（环境音、声效）包含复杂的重叠声源和高采样率，传统的连续波形建模难以直接通过文本条件生成高保真音频。","importance":"范式级贡献。确立了“将音频离散化为 Token 并进行自回归语言建模”的 Audio LM 范式，是后续诸多多模态统一模型（如 AnyGPT）的底层逻辑。","technical_approach":"采用神经音频编解码器（如 EnCodec）将高频连续音频压缩为离散的声学 Token。随后训练一个 Transformer 自回归模型，以文本特征为条件，像预测文本下一个词一样预测音频 Token。","experiments":"在 AudioCaps 等数据集上训练。模型能够有效分离重叠的声源（如“狗叫声伴随背景雨声”），在客观指标（FAD）和主观听感上均显著优于当时的基线。","authors_note":"Meta AI / Felix Kreuk / Gabriel Synnaeve"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Real-world audio contains complex overlapping sources and high sampling rates, making it difficult to generate high-fidelity audio directly from text conditions using continuous waveform modeling.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution. Establishes the 'Audio LM' paradigm of discretizing audio into tokens for autoregressive language modeling, serving as the foundational logic for subsequent unified multimodal models (e.g., AnyGPT).","technical_approach":"Utilizes a neural audio codec (e.g., EnCodec) to compress high-frequency continuous audio into discrete acoustic tokens. A Transformer autoregressive model is then trained to predict these audio tokens conditioned on text embeddings, identical to next-word prediction.","experiments":"Trained on datasets like AudioCaps. The model successfully separates overlapping acoustic objects (e.g., 'dog barking with background rain') and significantly outperforms baselines in both objective metrics (FAD) and subjective human evaluations.","authors_note":"Meta AI / Felix Kreuk / Gabriel Synnaeve"},"tags":["audio-lm","discrete-tokens","autoregressive"],"notable_authors":["Felix Kreuk","Gabriel Synnaeve","Alexandre Défossez"]},{"id":"2208.02131","title":"Masked Vision and Language Modeling for Multi-modal Representation Learning","authors":["Gukyeong Kwon","Zhaowei Cai","Avinash Ravichandran","Erhan Bas","Rahul Bhotika","Stefano Soatto"],"institutions":["AWS AI Labs"],"abstract":"In this paper, we study how to use masked signal modeling in vision and language (V+L) representation learning. Instead of developing masked language modeling (MLM) and masked image modeling (MIM) independently, we propose to build joint masked vision and language modeling, where the masked signal of one modality is reconstructed with the help from another modality. This is motivated by the nature of image-text paired data that both of the image and the text convey almost the same information but in different formats. The masked signal reconstruction of one modality conditioned on another modality can also implicitly learn cross-modal alignment between language tokens and image patches. Our experiments on various V+L tasks show that the proposed method, along with common V+L alignment losses, achieves state-of-the-art performance in the regime of millions of pre-training data. Also, we outperforms the other competitors by a significant margin in limited data scenarios.","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.02131","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/KwonCRBBS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/KwonCRBBS23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=ZhuXksSJYWn","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"早期的多模态预训练通常独立进行掩码语言建模（MLM）和掩码图像建模（MIM），或者仅依赖全局对比损失（CLIP），缺乏在细粒度 Token 级别利用跨模态信息进行重建的机制。","importance":"方法级贡献。提出了一种深度的跨模态对齐预训练目标，证明了在统一架构中，模态间的相互预测（Cross-modal Reconstruction）能显著提升细粒度多模态表示的质量。","technical_approach":"提出联合掩码视觉与语言建模（JMVLM）。在图文对数据中，掩码掉某一模态的部分信号（如图像 Patch 或文本 Token），强制模型利用另一模态的未掩码信号来进行重建。这种条件重建隐式地学习了跨模态的细粒度对齐。","experiments":"结合常规的图文对齐损失，在 VQA、NLVR2 和图文检索等下游任务上进行评估。相比于独立掩码基线，联合掩码策略在各项多模态理解任务上均取得了显著提升。","authors_note":"AWS AI Labs"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Early multimodal pretraining typically performed Masked Language Modeling (MLM) and Masked Image Modeling (MIM) independently, or relied solely on global contrastive loss (CLIP), lacking a mechanism to leverage cross-modal information for fine-grained token-level reconstruction.","importance":"Methodological contribution. Proposes a deep cross-modal alignment pretraining objective, proving that cross-modal reconstruction within a unified architecture significantly enhances the quality of fine-grained multimodal representations.","technical_approach":"Introduces Joint Masked Vision and Language Modeling (JMVLM). In image-text pairs, signals from one modality (e.g., image patches or text tokens) are masked, forcing the model to reconstruct them conditioned on the unmasked signals of the other modality. This conditional reconstruction implicitly learns fine-grained cross-modal alignment.","experiments":"Evaluated on downstream tasks like VQA, NLVR2, and image-text retrieval, combined with standard vision-language alignment losses. Compared to independent masking baselines, the joint masking strategy yields significant improvements across multimodal understanding tasks.","authors_note":"AWS AI Labs"},"tags":["masked-modeling","vlm-pretrain","mlm","mim"],"notable_authors":["Zhaowei Cai"]},{"id":"KwonXBS23","title":"Reward Design with Language Models","authors":["Minae Kwon","Sang Michael Xie","Kalesha Bullard","Dorsa Sadigh"],"institutions":["Stanford University"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/KwonXBS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/KwonXBS23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=10uNUgI5Kl","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"强化学习中的奖励函数设计（Reward Design）极其困难，依赖大量人工调试，且容易引发奖励作弊（Reward Hacking）。","importance":"范式级贡献。探索了 LLM 与 RL 的接口，证明了 LLM 内部的世界知识可以直接转化为可执行的奖励函数，为后来的基于 LLM 的自动化对齐和 Eureka 等工作奠定了基础。","technical_approach":"利用 LLM 作为奖励设计师。将目标任务的自然语言描述和环境的状态空间信息作为 Prompt 输入给 LLM，让 LLM 输出一段 Python 代码（即 Reward Function）。随后使用该函数训练 RL 智能体。","experiments":"在连续控制任务（如 MuJoCo）中验证。LLM 能够零样本或少样本生成有效的奖励函数，指导智能体学会复杂的物理动作，显著减少了人工调参的成本。","authors_note":"Stanford / Dorsa Sadigh"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Reward design in reinforcement learning is notoriously difficult, requiring extensive manual tuning and often leading to reward hacking.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution. Explores the interface between LLMs and RL, proving that the internal world knowledge of LLMs can be directly translated into executable reward functions. This laid the groundwork for subsequent automated alignment and works like Eureka.","technical_approach":"Utilizes LLMs as reward designers. The natural language description of the target task and the environment's state space are provided as prompts to the LLM. The LLM outputs a Python function (the reward function), which is then used to train an RL agent.","experiments":"Validated on continuous control tasks (e.g., MuJoCo). The LLM can generate effective reward functions in zero-shot or few-shot settings, guiding agents to learn complex physical behaviors and significantly reducing manual tuning efforts.","authors_note":"Stanford / Dorsa Sadigh"},"tags":["reward-design","llm","rl"],"notable_authors":["Dorsa Sadigh"]},{"id":"LaskinWOPSSSHFB23","title":"In-context Reinforcement Learning with Algorithm Distillation","authors":["Michael Laskin","Luyu Wang","Junhyuk Oh","Emilio Parisotto","Stephen Spencer","Richie Steigerwald","DJ Strouse","Steven Stenberg Hansen","Angelos Filos","Ethan Brooks","Maxime Gazeau","Himanshu Sahni","Satinder Singh","Volodymyr Mnih"],"institutions":["DeepMind"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LaskinWOPSSSHFB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LaskinWOPSSSHFB23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=hy0a5MMPUv","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"传统的强化学习智能体在面对新任务时需要进行梯度更新才能学习，缺乏像 LLM 那样通过上下文（In-context）快速适应新任务的能力。","importance":"范式级贡献。开创了“上下文强化学习（In-context RL）”方向，证明了 Transformer 可以将整个 RL 算法（如 Q-learning 的策略改进过程）内化到前向传播中，对 Post-train 阶段的元学习有深远影响。","technical_approach":"提出算法蒸馏（Algorithm Distillation, AD）。收集传统 RL 算法在训练过程中的历史轨迹（包含状态、动作、奖励以及随时间改进的策略）。训练一个因果 Transformer，以上下文历史为输入，预测下一个动作。","experiments":"在 Dark Room 和 Watermaze 等环境中测试。冻结权重的 Transformer 能够仅通过上下文中的交互历史，在未见过的任务中展现出探索和策略改进能力，其样本效率匹配甚至超越了原生的 RL 算法。","authors_note":"DeepMind / Michael Laskin / Junhyuk Oh"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Traditional RL agents require gradient updates to learn new tasks, lacking the ability of LLMs to rapidly adapt via in-context learning.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution. Pioneers 'In-context RL', proving that Transformers can internalize an entire RL algorithm (like policy improvement in Q-learning) within their forward pass. This has profound implications for meta-learning in the post-training phase.","technical_approach":"Introduces Algorithm Distillation (AD). Collects historical trajectories (states, actions, rewards, and improving policies over time) from a traditional RL algorithm during its training. A causal Transformer is trained to predict the next action given this context history.","experiments":"Tested in environments like Dark Room and Watermaze. The frozen Transformer demonstrates exploration and policy improvement on unseen tasks purely through in-context interaction history, matching or exceeding the sample efficiency of the native RL algorithm.","authors_note":"DeepMind / Michael Laskin / Junhyuk Oh"},"tags":["in-context-learning","rl","distillation"],"notable_authors":["Michael Laskin","Junhyuk Oh"]},{"id":"LeeK0HK23","title":"Self-Distillation for Further Pre-training of Transformers","authors":["Seanie Lee","Minki Kang","Juho Lee","Sung Ju Hwang","Kenji Kawaguchi"],"institutions":["KAIST","NUS"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LeeK0HK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LeeK0HK23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=kj6oK_Hj40","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在对预训练 Transformer 进行持续预训练（Continual Pre-training，如适配代码或医疗领域）时，模型极易发生灾难性遗忘，丢失通用的基础能力。","importance":"方法级贡献。为 LLM 的领域自适应（Domain Adaptation）提供了一种计算高效的正则化手段，无需保留原始预训练数据即可缓解遗忘。","technical_approach":"提出在持续预训练阶段引入自蒸馏（Self-Distillation）。使用模型自身的历史状态（如指数移动平均 EMA 权重）作为教师模型，在新的领域数据上计算 KL 散度损失，作为 Next-token 预测损失的正则项，从而锚定原始的输出分布。","experiments":"在 RoBERTa 和 GPT 风格的模型上进行领域自适应实验。结果表明，相比于标准的持续预训练，自蒸馏方法在提升目标领域性能的同时，显著更好地保留了上游通用任务的准确率。","authors_note":"NUS / Kenji Kawaguchi"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"When conducting continual pre-training on Transformers (e.g., adapting to code or medical domains), models are highly prone to catastrophic forgetting, losing their general foundational capabilities.","importance":"Methodological contribution. Provides a compute-efficient regularization technique for LLM domain adaptation, mitigating forgetting without the need to retain the original pretraining data.","technical_approach":"Proposes introducing self-distillation during continual pre-training. It uses the model's own historical state (e.g., Exponential Moving Average weights) as a teacher. A KL divergence loss is computed on the new domain data as a regularizer to the next-token prediction loss, anchoring the original output distribution.","experiments":"Conducted domain adaptation experiments on RoBERTa and GPT-style models. Results show that compared to standard continual pre-training, the self-distillation method significantly better preserves accuracy on upstream general tasks while improving target domain performance.","authors_note":"NUS / Kenji Kawaguchi"},"tags":["self-distillation","continual-pretrain","transformer"],"notable_authors":["Kenji Kawaguchi","Sung Ju Hwang"]},{"id":"LinC0L23","title":"Contrastive Corpus Attribution for Explaining Representations","authors":["Chris Lin","Hugh Chen","Chanwoo Kim","Su-In Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LinC0L23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LinC0L23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=eWKfMBL5to","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：如何把一个表示向量追溯到训练语料中真正支持它的文本证据，而不是只做样本级相似检索。以往解释表示的方法常停留在特征归因或最近邻示例，难以回答“这个表示为什么长成这样、是被哪类语料塑造的”。","importance":"它的重要性在于把“表示解释”从模型内部归因推进到语料归因。对 pretrain 来说，这很有价值，因为预训练模型的很多行为最终来自数据分布；如果能对比性地定位哪些语料片段在塑造某类表示，就能更直接地分析数据配比、污染、偏置和能力来源。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 contrastive corpus attribution：不是孤立地找与目标表示最像的语料，而是在对比参照下找最能解释表示差异的语料证据。这样的设计比简单 nearest-neighbor 更合理，因为表示往往编码的是相对判别信息；通过引入对比对象，归因结果更可能对应“为什么是这个表示而不是另一个表示”。","experiments":"给定信息没有提供具体任务、模型和指标，因此不能可靠写出数值。可以合理判断，实验重点应是验证语料归因结果是否比非对比式方法更忠实、更稳定，可能还会用人类可解释性评估或下游预测一致性来支撑；对工程读者，最值得关注的是归因是否能在大规模语料上计算，以及是否真的比简单检索多提供因果上更接近的证据。","authors_note":"Su-In Lee 是可解释性方向知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a concrete interpretability problem: how to attribute a learned representation to the parts of the training corpus that actually shaped it, rather than merely retrieving similar examples. Existing methods often stop at feature attribution or nearest neighbors, which does not answer why a representation took its current form.","importance":"This matters because it moves explanation from model internals to data provenance. For pretraining, that is useful for studying where capabilities, biases, and failure modes come from in the corpus, and for making data mixture decisions less blind.","technical_approach":"The key idea is contrastive corpus attribution. Instead of asking which corpus items are most similar to a target representation, the method asks which items best explain the difference between one representation and a contrastive alternative; that is a better fit for learned embeddings, which often encode relative discriminative structure rather than absolute semantics.","experiments":"The prompt does not provide datasets, model scales, or quantitative results, so precise numbers should be left blank. The likely experimental focus is whether contrastive attribution is more faithful and more informative than non-contrastive retrieval baselines, possibly measured by human judgment, predictive utility, or agreement with controlled perturbations.","authors_note":"Su-In Lee is a well-known researcher in interpretability."},"tags":["data-attribution","interpretability","representation-learning","pretraining-corpus"],"notable_authors":["Su-In Lee"]},{"id":"LuLZSH23","title":"Maximizing Communication Efficiency for Large-scale Training via 0/1 Adam","authors":["Yucheng Lu","Conglong Li","Minjia Zhang","Christopher De Sa","Yuxiong He"],"institutions":["Cornell University","Microsoft"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LuLZSH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LuLZSH23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=-CefY2EOupj","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"解决大规模分布式训练中，Adam优化器由于需要同步一阶和二阶矩估计而导致的巨大通信开销问题。传统的梯度压缩方法（如1-bit SGD）难以直接应用于Adam，因为Adam的非线性更新规则会破坏压缩误差的补偿机制。","importance":"系统/优化级贡献。提出0/1 Adam，一种针对Adam优化器的极低比特（1-bit）通信压缩算法。它在保持Adam收敛速度和精度的同时，大幅降低了通信带宽需求，对大规模LLM预训练的系统效率提升具有直接的工程价值。","technical_approach":"提出0/1 Adam算法。核心机制是：1) 仅对一阶动量（而非原始梯度）进行1-bit量化压缩（0或1）；2) 在本地保留未压缩的二阶动量，避免了二阶矩同步的开销；3) 引入误差补偿机制（Error Feedback）来修正量化误差。与以往尝试压缩Adam的方法相比，0/1 Adam巧妙地绕过了Adam非线性更新带来的误差累积问题。","experiments":"在BERT-Large预训练和ImageNet图像分类任务上进行了实验。0/1 Adam在达到与全精度Adam相同收敛精度的情况下，将通信数据量减少了约32倍。在实际的分布式集群上，训练吞吐量提升了显著（例如，在带宽受限的网络下提升可达2倍以上）。","authors_note":"Yucheng Lu (Cornell), Minjia Zhang (Microsoft), Yuxiong He (Microsoft)。Microsoft DeepSpeed团队在分布式训练优化方面有丰富经验。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addressing the massive communication overhead in large-scale distributed training caused by the Adam optimizer's need to synchronize first and second-moment estimates. Traditional gradient compression methods (e.g., 1-bit SGD) are hard to apply directly to Adam because its non-linear update rule breaks error compensation mechanisms.","importance":"System/Optimization contribution. Proposes 0/1 Adam, an extremely low-bit (1-bit) communication compression algorithm for the Adam optimizer. It drastically reduces communication bandwidth requirements while maintaining Adam's convergence speed and accuracy, offering direct engineering value for improving the system efficiency of large-scale LLM pre-training.","technical_approach":"Proposes the 0/1 Adam algorithm. Core mechanisms: 1) Applies 1-bit quantization (0 or 1) only to the first-order momentum (not raw gradients); 2) Keeps uncompressed second-order momentum locally, avoiding the overhead of synchronizing second moments; 3) Introduces an Error Feedback mechanism to correct quantization errors. Compared to previous attempts to compress Adam, 0/1 Adam cleverly bypasses the error accumulation problem caused by Adam's non-linear updates.","experiments":"Experiments on BERT-Large pre-training and ImageNet classification. 0/1 Adam reduces communication volume by ~32x while achieving the same convergence accuracy as full-precision Adam. On actual distributed clusters, training throughput is significantly improved (e.g., >2x speedup in bandwidth-constrained networks).","authors_note":"Yucheng Lu (Cornell), Minjia Zhang (Microsoft), Yuxiong He (Microsoft). The Microsoft DeepSpeed team has extensive experience in distributed training optimization."},"tags":["distributed-training","adam","communication-efficiency","optimizer"],"notable_authors":["Yucheng Lu","Minjia Zhang","Yuxiong He"]},{"id":"MadaanBJ023","title":"Treeformer: Dense Gradient Trees for Efficient Attention Computation","authors":["Lovish Madaan","Srinadh Bhojanapalli","Himanshu Jain","Prateek Jain"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/MadaanBJ023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/MadaanBJ023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=DWn1TEb2fK","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是注意力计算在长序列下的二次复杂度瓶颈，但不想走稀疏注意力那条容易牺牲精度、且梯度传播不稳定的路。作者试图用树结构把全局交互压缩成可并行、可微的 dense gradient tree，从而在保留较强表达能力的同时降低计算和内存成本。","importance":"这是一篇方法级的高效注意力工作，价值主要在于提供了一个介于全注意力和手工稀疏模式之间的新设计点。对 pretrain 的启示是：长上下文建模不一定只能靠 kernel approximation 或 block-sparse，也可以把 token 关系重参数化成层次结构；但它更像架构探索，而不是已经改变主流训练范式的结果。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Treeformer：用可学习的树状聚合替代标准 self-attention 的全对全配对计算。直觉上，它先把局部或相近 token 逐层合并成内部节点，再通过树上的信息路由实现远距离依赖传播；关键点不是做硬离散树，而是保持 dense、可微的梯度路径，避免传统树模型难训练的问题。和标准 Transformer 相比，它舍弃了显式的所有 token-pair 打分；和稀疏注意力相比，它不预先固定连接模式，而是让层次结构承担压缩与通信两件事。","experiments":"从给定信息里无法确认具体实验设置、模型规模、数据集和主结果数字，因此不能可靠复述提升幅度。可以确定的是，这类工作通常会围绕长序列任务比较吞吐、显存和精度，并与 full attention、Linformer/Performer/稀疏注意力等基线对比；但这里没有足够证据写成事实。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets the quadratic cost of self-attention on long sequences, but avoids the usual sparse-attention route that often trades away accuracy or makes optimization brittle. The idea is to compress token interactions through a tree-structured computation while keeping gradients dense and trainable.","importance":"This is a method-level efficiency paper rather than a paradigm shift. Its value for pretraining is that it opens another design point for long-context modeling: instead of approximating attention kernels or hand-crafting sparsity, one can reparameterize communication through a learned hierarchy. That said, it reads more like an architectural alternative than a result that resets current scaling practice.","technical_approach":"The core proposal, Treeformer, replaces all-pairs self-attention with a learnable tree-based aggregation mechanism. Tokens are recursively merged into internal nodes, and long-range communication happens through the tree rather than explicit pairwise attention scores. The key design choice is to keep the routing differentiable with dense gradient flow, instead of relying on hard discrete trees that are difficult to optimize. Relative to standard Transformers, it drops explicit token-token scoring; relative to sparse attention, it does not hard-code the connectivity pattern in advance.","experiments":"The provided material does not include reliable details on model size, datasets, baselines, or quantitative gains, so those should not be fabricated. At most, one can infer that the evaluation likely compares efficiency and accuracy against full attention and efficient-attention baselines on long-sequence tasks, but that is not confirmed here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["attention","efficient-attention","long-context","architecture"]},{"id":"2210.07229","title":"Mass-Editing Memory in a Transformer","authors":["Kevin Meng","Arnab Sen Sharma","Alex J. Andonian","Yonatan Belinkov","David Bau"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Recent work has shown exciting promise in updating large language models with new memories, so as to replace obsolete information or add specialized knowledge. However, this line of work is predominantly limited to updating single associations. We develop MEMIT, a method for directly updating a language model with many memories, demonstrating experimentally that it can scale up to thousands of associations for GPT-J (6B) and GPT-NeoX (20B), exceeding prior work by orders of magnitude. Our code and data are at https://memit.baulab.info.","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.07229","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/MengSABB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/MengSABB23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=MkbcAHIYgyS","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是如何一次性给大语言模型批量改写大量事实记忆，而不是像以往那样一次只改一条关联。已有模型编辑方法在单点编辑上很有希望，但规模一上去就容易互相干扰、泛化失控，因而难以成为真正可用的知识更新工具。","importance":"这是方法级但影响很实际的工作。它对 pretrain 的启示不在于替代预训练，而在于提供了一个'参数内知识可后写入'的强证据：如果批量编辑能稳定成立，那么部分知识更新不必总是回到继续预训练；这会改变我们对 pretrain、continual update 和知识时效性的接口设计。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 MEMIT，一种直接在 Transformer 内部参数中写入多条新记忆的模型编辑方法。它不是逐条独立微调，而是把多条事实更新集中注入到一组中间层表示子空间中，目标是在保留原模型大部分行为的同时，批量改变特定 subject-relation-object 关联。和早期单记忆编辑方法相比，关键区别是它显式面向 many-edit regime 设计，重点处理编辑间干扰和容量分配，而不是只优化单条编辑成功率。","experiments":"摘要给出的关键数字很明确：MEMIT 可以在 GPT-J 6B 和 GPT-NeoX 20B 上扩展到数千条关联更新，规模比 prior 高出几个数量级。摘要没有给出具体成功率、泛化指标和副作用数字，因此不能补写；但仅从规模结论就能看出，这篇论文的主要贡献不是把单条编辑做得更准，而是把可编辑容量从'演示级'推进到'系统级'。后续真正要看的 ablation 通常会是编辑层位点、批量大小与副作用之间的 trade-off。","authors_note":"机构信息从给定内容无法完整确认。David Bau 是模型编辑与可解释性方向的代表作者，相关代表工作包括 ROME、causal tracing 等。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses how to update many factual associations in a language model at once, rather than editing one memory at a time. Prior model-editing methods were promising for single facts, but they did not scale cleanly because edits interfere with one another and can damage unrelated behavior.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution with strong practical implications. Its relevance to pretraining is indirect but important: if factual knowledge can be written into model parameters after pretraining at meaningful scale, then not every knowledge refresh needs to go through continued pretraining. That changes how we think about the interface between pretraining, continual updates, and model freshness.","technical_approach":"The core method, MEMIT, directly writes many new memories into a Transformer’s internal parameters. Instead of performing isolated fine-tuning per fact, it injects a batch of factual updates into a set of middle-layer representations, aiming to change targeted subject-relation-object associations while preserving most other model behavior. The main distinction from earlier editing methods is that MEMIT is explicitly designed for the many-edit regime, where interference and capacity allocation become the central problems.","experiments":"The abstract provides the main quantitative claim: MEMIT scales to thousands of association updates on GPT-J (6B) and GPT-NeoX (20B), exceeding prior work by orders of magnitude. It does not give exact edit success, generalization, or side-effect metrics, so those should not be invented. The important point is that the contribution is not marginally better single-edit accuracy, but a large jump in editable capacity.","authors_note":"The full institutional information cannot be confirmed from the provided text. David Bau is a notable author in model editing and interpretability, with representative work including ROME and causal tracing."},"tags":["model-editing","transformers","memory","knowledge"],"notable_authors":["David Bau"]},{"id":"2205.14318","title":"Learning Math Reasoning from Self-Sampled Correct and Partially-Correct Solutions","authors":["Ansong Ni","Jeevana Priya Inala","Chenglong Wang","Alex Polozov","Christopher Meek","Dragomir Radev","Jianfeng Gao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$10","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.14318","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/NiIWPMRG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/NiIWPMRG23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=4D4TSJE6-K","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"作者要解决的是：数学推理微调数据通常每题只有一条参考解，导致模型被单一路径监督而泛化差，尤其在多步推理时更明显。过去常用做法是直接用参考解做 SFT，但这会把“解题路径多样性”当作噪声丢掉。","importance":"贡献是训练信号/数据构造级：用模型自采样产生多条“正确”和“部分正确”的解，并把它们转成更密集、更贴近推理过程的监督信号。对 pretrain↔posttrain 接口的启示是：在推理任务上，提升监督质量不一定靠更大模型或更多题，而是靠把训练目标从“模仿单一解”改为“从多样且可执行的解中学习”，代价是需要可靠的执行器/判定器来区分正确与部分正确，且会引入采样分布偏差。","technical_approach":"方法是训练时让模型对同一题目进行采样，收集两类轨迹：执行后得到正确答案的完整正确解，以及在中间步骤有价值但最终不完全正确的部分正确解。关键机制是把“可执行验证”（通过执行/检查得到对错）引入训练闭环，用自生成数据扩展解空间覆盖，从而减轻对单参考解的过拟合；与纯 self-training 不同点在于显式利用部分正确轨迹作为学习信号而不是丢弃，边界在于部分正确的定义与加权方式若不稳，会把错误模式固化进模型。","experiments":"摘要未给出使用的数据集（如 GSM8K 等）、模型规模、采样数量、以及相对 baselines 的准确率提升数字，因此无法在此复述关键结果；但应包含对比“只用参考解 SFT”“只用自采样正确解”“加入部分正确解”的消融，并验证多路径监督带来更强泛化。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a supervision bottleneck in math reasoning finetuning: many datasets provide only one reference solution per problem, biasing models toward a single reasoning path and hurting generalization on multi-step tasks. Standard SFT on the lone solution effectively discards solution-path diversity.","importance":"This is a training-signal/data-construction contribution: it uses self-sampled solutions—both fully correct and partially correct—to create denser, process-aligned supervision. The pretrain↔posttrain takeaway is that for reasoning, better learning signals can come from expanding and validating solution trajectories rather than only scaling model/data; the cost is reliance on an executor/verifier and exposure to sampling-induced distribution shift.","technical_approach":"During training, the model samples multiple candidate solutions per problem and the system keeps (i) fully correct solutions that execute to the right answer and (ii) partially correct solutions that contain useful intermediate reasoning despite failing overall. The key mechanism is to close the loop with executable verification and to learn from a broader trajectory set, explicitly leveraging partially-correct traces instead of discarding them; the boundary is that mis-specified notions/weights of “partial correctness” can reinforce systematic errors.","experiments":"The abstract does not specify datasets, model sizes, sampling budgets, or numeric improvements over baselines, so results cannot be stated here. Expected evidence includes comparisons against reference-only SFT and self-training variants, plus ablations isolating the value of partially-correct solutions.","authors_note":""},"tags":["math-reasoning","self-sampling","data-augmentation","cot"]},{"id":"NijkampPHTWZSX23","title":"CodeGen: An Open Large Language Model for Code with Multi-Turn Program Synthesis","authors":["Erik Nijkamp","Bo Pang","Hiroaki Hayashi","Lifu Tu","Huan Wang","Yingbo Zhou","Silvio Savarese","Caiming Xiong"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/NijkampPHTWZSX23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/NijkampPHTWZSX23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=iaYcJKpY2B_","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少论文摘要与正文信息，无法可靠概括 CodeGen 在“多轮程序合成”的核心问题设定与相对 prior 的差异点。","importance":"缺少摘要与关键结果信息，无法评估其作为开源代码大模型对预训练/数据配比/多轮交互建模的具体贡献量级。","technical_approach":"缺少方法与训练细节，无法总结其模型架构、数据、训练目标以及多轮合成的关键机制。","experiments":"缺少实验数字与对比基线，无法总结在 HumanEval/MBPP 等代码基准或多轮合成评测上的提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"With no abstract/body provided, the paper’s exact framing of multi-turn program synthesis and its delta vs prior work cannot be summarized reliably.","importance":"Without results and training details, the contribution of CodeGen as an open code LLM to pretraining practice (data, objectives, multi-turn modeling) cannot be assessed.","technical_approach":"Method and training details are missing, so architecture, data, objectives, and the multi-turn mechanism cannot be summarized.","experiments":"No experimental numbers or baselines are provided, so gains on code benchmarks (e.g., HumanEval/MBPP) or multi-turn evaluations cannot be reported.","authors_note":""},"tags":["code-llm","program-synthesis","open-source"]},{"id":"QinHSHLLDKZ23","title":"Toeplitz Neural Network for Sequence Modeling","authors":["Zhen Qin","Xiaodong Han","Weixuan Sun","Bowen He","Dong Li","Dongxu Li","Yuchao Dai","Lingpeng Kong","Yiran Zhong"],"institutions":["SenseTime"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/QinHSHLLDKZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/QinHSHLLDKZ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=IxmWsm4xrua","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"想要在 sub-quadratic 复杂度下做序列建模同时保留全局感受野，attention 是 O(n²) 太贵，线性 attention 和 SSM 又各有表达力或稳定性问题。本文提出 Toeplitz 结构化矩阵作为统一框架。","importance":"方法级，属于 attention 替代品/高效长序列建模这条线，和 S4、RWKV、Linear Attention 平行。观察点是：把序列混合器写成 Toeplitz 矩阵（token 间交互只依赖相对位置）等价于一种可学习的卷积，可以用 FFT 做到 O(n log n)。对 pretrain 的意义是给长上下文建模多一条结构化路线。","technical_approach":"Token mixing 层写成 Toeplitz 矩阵 T，其元素 T_{ij} = f(i-j)，f 是一个相对位置的可学习函数（通常是一个小 MLP 或显式参数表）。由于 Toeplitz 矩阵乘向量可用 FFT 加速，复杂度 O(n log n)。相比 attention 放弃了 content-dependent mixing（混合权重只依赖相对位置，不依赖具体内容），相比 S4 结构更直观、不需要 HiPPO 式的连续时间推导。配一个可学习的相对位置编码使其能外推到更长序列。","experiments":"在 LRA（长距离建模 benchmark）、语言建模（WikiText/enwik8 等）和 ImageNet 上评估，LRA 上与 S4、Transformer 等比较有竞争力，语言建模在同参数量下与 Transformer 接近。长度外推能力（训 2K 测更长）是卖点之一。","authors_note":"商汤 + 澳国立等，Zhen Qin 后续持续做高效序列建模（Lightning Attention、TransNormer 等）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Build a sub-quadratic sequence mixer with global receptive field. Attention is O(n²), linear attention compromises expressivity, and SSMs bring their own complexity (HiPPO, discretization). This paper proposes Toeplitz-structured mixing as a unifying alternative.","importance":"Method-level contribution in the efficient-long-context line, sitting alongside S4, RWKV, and linear attention. Useful observation: writing token mixing as a Toeplitz matrix (entries depending only on relative position) is equivalent to a learned 1D convolution and admits FFT-based O(n log n) compute, giving pretraining another structured long-context option.","technical_approach":"Replace attention with T where T_{ij} = f(i−j), f a learned function of relative position (small MLP or explicit parameter table). Toeplitz matvec via FFT gives O(n log n). Trade-off vs attention: mixing weights are content-independent (depend on relative position only), which loses content-addressing but simplifies compute and enables length extrapolation. Simpler derivation than S4, no continuous-time framing required.","experiments":"Evaluated on LRA, language modelling (WikiText/enwik8-style), and ImageNet. Competitive with S4 and Transformer on LRA, near-Transformer perplexity at matched parameter count on LM, and demonstrates length extrapolation (train 2K, test longer) as a headline capability.","authors_note":"SenseTime and collaborators; Zhen Qin has since continued this line (Lightning Attention, TransNormer)."},"tags":["sequence-modeling","architecture","toeplitz","long-context"],"notable_authors":["Zhen Qin"]},{"id":"RamamurthyABHSB23","title":"Is Reinforcement Learning (Not) for Natural Language Processing: Benchmarks, Baselines, and Building Blocks for Natural Language Policy Optimization","authors":["Rajkumar Ramamurthy","Prithviraj Ammanabrolu","Kianté Brantley","Jack Hessel","Rafet Sifa","Christian Bauckhage","Hannaneh Hajishirzi","Yejin Choi"],"institutions":["Allen Institute for AI","Carnegie Mellon University"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/RamamurthyABHSB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/RamamurthyABHSB23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=8aHzds2uUyB","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"RL 到底适不适合 NLP？社区此前对 RLHF/PPO 应用在 LM 上存在两极看法——有效的人觉得它是 alignment 的关键，怀疑的人觉得信号噪声大、容易崩。本文给出统一的 benchmark 和库 (RL4LMs) 系统评估。","importance":"方法论/基础设施贡献，这篇是 RLHF 研究爆发前的重要对照工作，提出了 NLPO 算法和一套标准任务。对 pretrain 研究的连接点：了解 RL 信号如何影响 LM 行为、在什么任务上 RL 胜过 supervised，有助于理解 posttrain 对 pretrain 能力的改写边界。","technical_approach":"提出 NLPO (Natural Language Policy Optimization)：在 PPO 基础上做 action masking，只在 top-p 候选 token 里采样策略，限制动作空间避免 LM 陷入无意义输出。配套开源 RL4LMs 库，统一了 reward 设计、policy backbone 和评估协议。实验上系统对比 supervised、PPO、NLPO 在生成任务上的差异。","experiments":"覆盖 6+ 任务（摘要、翻译、对话、常识生成等），主要发现：NLPO 在保留语言流畅度的同时更稳定地最大化 reward；纯 supervised 在很多任务上仍是强 baseline；PPO 不做约束时容易 reward hacking（生成退化）。给出了一套可复现的 baseline 表格。","authors_note":"AI2 / CMU / 合作机构，Prithviraj Ammanabrolu（交互式故事 RL）、Jack Hessel 都是相关方向的代表作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Is RL actually useful for NLP? The community was polarized — RLHF advocates saw it as essential for alignment, skeptics saw noisy, unstable training. This paper provides unified benchmarks and a library (RL4LMs) to settle the empirical picture.","importance":"Methodology and infrastructure contribution; a key reference point just before the RLHF boom. Introduces NLPO and a standardized task suite. For pretraining, it clarifies where RL signal actually beats supervised training and where it degenerates, relevant to understanding how posttraining reshapes pretrained capabilities.","technical_approach":"NLPO (Natural Language Policy Optimization) extends PPO with action masking: restrict sampling to a top-p slice of the vocabulary, shrinking the action space and preventing the policy from collapsing into degenerate text. Ship RL4LMs library unifying reward functions, policy backbones, and eval protocols. Systematically compare supervised, PPO, and NLPO.","experiments":"Across 6+ generation tasks (summarization, translation, dialogue, commonsense generation). Findings: NLPO is more stable than PPO and better preserves fluency while optimizing reward; supervised baselines remain strong on many tasks; unconstrained PPO frequently reward-hacks into degenerate text. Provides a reproducible baseline table.","authors_note":"AI2 / CMU and collaborators; Prithviraj Ammanabrolu (RL for interactive fiction) and Jack Hessel are notable contributors to this line."},"tags":["reinforcement-learning","nlp","benchmark","policy-optimization"],"notable_authors":["Prithviraj Ammanabrolu","Jack Hessel"]},{"id":"RazdaibiedinaMH23","title":"Progressive Prompts: Continual Learning for Language Models","authors":["Anastasia Razdaibiedina","Yuning Mao","Rui Hou","Madian Khabsa","Mike Lewis","Amjad Almahairi"],"institutions":["University of Toronto","Meta AI"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/RazdaibiedinaMH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/RazdaibiedinaMH23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=UJTgQBc91_","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LM 的持续学习（continual learning）：在一串任务上依次 finetune 时怎么不忘旧任务、还能正向迁移。传统做法是 replay、EWC 或单独加 adapter，都各有不足。","importance":"方法级贡献，在 prompt tuning 框架下做 continual learning，对 pretrain→多任务 posttrain 这条链有一定启发。思路干净：冻结 backbone，只在任务间增量加 prompt，实现近似 O(1) 新任务代价。","technical_approach":"Progressive Prompts：每来一个新任务就训一段新的 soft prompt，新 prompt 拼在此前所有任务 prompt 之后，backbone 完全冻结。关键机制是 prompt 之间的前向依赖——后续任务的 prompt 可以 attend 到之前任务 prompt，因此能利用旧任务的表示做正向迁移，同时旧 prompt 不被覆盖，天然避免 catastrophic forgetting。相比 PromptTuning 单任务版，这里是序列化累加；相比 AdapterFusion 之类，参数更少、不需要任务分类器。","experiments":"在 SuperGLUE / T5-based continual benchmark 上与 EWC、A-GEM、Adapter、LwF 等比，平均准确率显著更高，且对任务顺序的鲁棒性明显改善。消融显示 prompt 之间的前向 attend 是正向迁移的关键。","authors_note":"University of Toronto + Meta AI，Mike Lewis 是 BART / LLaMA pretrain 相关核心作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Continual learning for LMs: finetuning on a sequence of tasks without forgetting old ones, while still enabling forward transfer. Existing approaches (replay, EWC, per-task adapters) each have limitations in scale, interference, or parameter cost.","importance":"Method-level contribution that fits cleanly into the pretrain-then-adapt story: keep the backbone frozen and append new soft prompts per task, giving near-constant per-task cost and structurally avoiding forgetting.","technical_approach":"Progressive Prompts: for each new task train a fresh soft prompt and concatenate it after all previously learned prompts, with the backbone fully frozen. The key mechanism is forward attention between prompts — later-task prompts can attend to earlier ones, enabling forward transfer, while old prompts are untouched so catastrophic forgetting is avoided by construction. Lighter than AdapterFusion and needs no task classifier at inference.","experiments":"On SuperGLUE-style and T5-based continual benchmarks, substantially higher average accuracy than EWC, A-GEM, Adapters, and LwF, with markedly better robustness to task ordering. Ablations identify the inter-prompt attention as the main driver of forward transfer.","authors_note":"University of Toronto and Meta AI; Mike Lewis is a core author on BART and LLaMA-era pretraining work."},"tags":["continual-learning","prompting","language-models","parameter-efficient"],"notable_authors":["Mike Lewis","Madian Khabsa"]},{"id":"RustLBSLE23","title":"Language Modelling with Pixels","authors":["Phillip Rust","Jonas F. Lotz","Emanuele Bugliarello","Elizabeth Salesky","Miryam de Lhoneux","Desmond Elliott"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/RustLBSLE23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/RustLBSLE23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=FkSp8VW8RjH","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["tokenization","image-tokens","autoregressive","multimodal"]},{"id":"2210.01240","title":"Language Models Are Greedy Reasoners: A Systematic Formal Analysis of Chain-of-Thought","authors":["Abulhair Saparov","He He"],"institutions":["New York University (NYU)"],"abstract":"$11","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.01240","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Saparov023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Saparov023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=qFVVBzXxR2V","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"现有的推理基准（如数学 QA）仅通过最终答案的准确率来间接评估 LLM，导致无法确认模型是真正遵循了思维链（CoT）的逻辑步骤，还是仅仅依赖了捷径或启发式规则。","importance":"机制分析与评估方法级贡献。它提供了一个完全可控的合成环境，将自然语言的 CoT 转化为可形式化验证的符号证明，为打开 LLM 推理过程的黑盒提供了严格的分析工具。","technical_approach":"构建了一个名为 PrOntoQA 的合成问答数据集，其数据由一阶逻辑表示的合成世界模型生成。这种设计允许将 LLM 生成的 CoT 步骤精确解析为符号证明树，从而系统性地分析模型在每一步演绎中的正确性以及对启发式规则的依赖程度。","experiments":"在 InstructGPT 和 GPT-3 上进行了分析。实验表明，这些模型表现出“贪婪推理者”的特征：它们擅长执行局部的单步演绎，但在需要全局规划的复杂证明中容易失败或回退到简单的启发式猜测。","authors_note":"NYU 团队，He He 在自然语言理解和模型鲁棒性方面有深入研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing benchmarks evaluate LLM reasoning indirectly via final answer accuracy, making it unclear whether models actually follow logical Chain-of-Thought (CoT) steps or rely on simple heuristics.","importance":"Methodological contribution to interpretability. It provides a fully controllable synthetic environment to parse natural language CoT into formal symbolic proofs, offering a rigorous tool to debug the black box of LLM reasoning.","technical_approach":"Introduces PrOntoQA, a synthetic QA dataset generated from a first-order logic world model. This design allows the generated CoT to be parsed into symbolic proof trees, enabling systematic analysis of step-by-step logical validity and reliance on heuristics.","experiments":"Analyzed InstructGPT and GPT-3. The results reveal that these models act as 'greedy reasoners': they are capable of local, single-step deductions but struggle with global proof planning, often falling back on heuristics for complex reasoning.","authors_note":"NYU team; He He is known for work on NLU and model robustness."},"tags":["chain-of-thought","reasoning","formal-analysis","prompting"],"notable_authors":["He He"]},{"id":"2206.11871","title":"Offline RL for Natural Language Generation with Implicit Language Q Learning","authors":["Charlie Snell","Ilya Kostrikov","Yi Su","Sherry Yang","Sergey Levine"],"institutions":["UC Berkeley"],"abstract":"$12","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.11871","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/SnellKSYL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/SnellKSYL23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=aBH_DydEvoH","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"标准的在线 RL（如 PPO）在对齐大语言模型时，由于动作空间巨大且需要频繁采样分布外（OOD）的生成结果，导致训练极不稳定且效率低下；而纯 SFT 又无法有效最大化长期奖励。","importance":"Post-train 范式级贡献。提出了 ILQL，将离线 RL 引入语言模型对齐，为规避 PPO 的 OOD 采样和训练不稳定性提供了一条可行路径，是早期探索非 PPO 对齐范式的重要工作。","technical_approach":"提出隐式语言 Q 学习（ILQL）。该方法结合了价值保守主义（value conservatism）和隐式数据集支持约束，直接在离线数据集上学习价值函数。它避免了在训练期间查询 LLM 生成分布外 token 的 Q 值，推理时则利用学到的 Q 值来引导自回归生成，使其偏向高奖励输出。","experiments":"在自然语言生成任务上进行了评估。实验表明，ILQL 能够仅利用离线数据，稳定地引导语言模型生成符合特定效用最大化目标的文本，同时保持了类似监督学习的训练稳定性。","authors_note":"UC Berkeley 团队，Sergey Levine 和 Ilya Kostrikov 是强化学习（特别是离线 RL）领域的顶尖学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Standard online RL (like PPO) for aligning LLMs is highly unstable and inefficient due to the massive action space and the need to frequently sample out-of-distribution (OOD) generations, while pure SFT fails to effectively maximize long-term rewards.","importance":"Post-train paradigm contribution. It introduces ILQL, bringing offline RL to language model alignment. This provides a viable path to bypass the OOD sampling and training instability of PPO, marking an important early exploration of non-PPO alignment paradigms.","technical_approach":"Proposes Implicit Language Q-Learning (ILQL). This method combines value conservatism with an implicit dataset support constraint to learn value functions directly on offline datasets. It avoids querying the LLM for Q-values of OOD tokens during training. During inference, the learned Q-values are used to guide autoregressive generation towards high-reward outputs.","experiments":"Evaluated on natural language generation tasks. Results show that ILQL can stably guide language models to generate text that maximizes specific utilities using only offline data, while maintaining training stability comparable to supervised learning.","authors_note":"UC Berkeley team; Sergey Levine and Ilya Kostrikov are leading scholars in reinforcement learning, particularly offline RL."},"tags":["offline-rl","q-learning","nlg"],"notable_authors":["Sergey Levine","Ilya Kostrikov"]},{"id":"2209.01975","title":"Selective Annotation Makes Language Models Better Few-Shot Learners","authors":["Hongjin Su","Jungo Kasai","Chen Henry Wu","Weijia Shi","Tianlu Wang","Jiayi Xin","Rui Zhang","Mari Ostendorf","Luke Zettlemoyer","Noah A. Smith","Tao Yu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$13","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.01975","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/SuKWSWX0OZS023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/SuKWSWX0OZS023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=qY1hlv7gwg","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：在 few-shot in-context learning 已经能用少量示例驱动大模型完成新任务的前提下，如何用尽可能少的标注预算构造一个“够用”的示例池。以往工作多把重点放在测试时怎么检索示例，默认训练集已完整标注；这篇工作反过来问，既然最终只会用到少量 demonstrations，那是不是可以先从未标注池里挑一小部分去标，再配合检索使用。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要在“数据构建策略”层面，而不是提出新的 LM 结构。它把 active/selective annotation 和 ICL 串成了一个两阶段流程，给 pretrain/posttrain 接口一个明确启示：当下游适配主要依赖上下文示例而不是参数更新时，数据选择本身就是性能杠杆。对做指令数据、任务库构造、benchmark curation 的人，这比单纯优化 prompt retrieval 更接近真实资源约束。","technical_approach":"核心方法是一个无监督、图上的 selective annotation 算法 voke-k，再加上测试时的 prompt retrieval。它先在未标注样本上构图，用语义相似度捕捉样本覆盖关系，再挑出一组多样且有代表性的点去人工标注；这样做的目的不是挑最难样本，而是让有限标注覆盖更多任务子空间。与常见 active learning 不同，它不依赖已经有标签的种子集，也不围绕参数更新后的泛化误差做采样，因为这里的使用场景是 frozen LLM 的 ICL。测试时再从已标注池里给每个输入检索最相关 demonstrations，把“挑什么去标”和“推理时用什么示例”解耦。","experiments":"从摘要可确认的结论是：在多个文本分类任务上，先做 selective annotation 再做 retrieval，比随机标注或只做检索更省标注且效果更好。论文主打的是同等标注预算下 few-shot ICL 准确率提升，而不是训练更大的模型。由于题面未给出具体模型规模、数据集数量和精确增益，这里不编造；可确定的实验重点应包括与随机选择、聚类式选择及仅检索基线比较，以及在不同 annotation budget 下的性能曲线。这个结果的含义是，ICL 场景中“示例池质量”是显著变量，不是 retrieval 的附属问题。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a simple but important question: if in-context learning only needs a small set of demonstrations at inference time, how should we spend a limited annotation budget to build that pool? Prior work mostly optimized example retrieval assuming a fully labeled dataset; this paper shifts the focus upstream to selective labeling from an unlabeled pool.","importance":"This is mainly a data-construction contribution, not a new LM architecture. The key takeaway for pretraining and adaptation is that once task adaptation is demonstration-driven rather than gradient-driven, annotation strategy becomes a first-class performance lever. That matters for instruction data creation, task library design, and benchmark curation under realistic labeling constraints.","technical_approach":"The method is a two-stage pipeline: unsupervised selective annotation with a graph-based method called voke-k, followed by prompt retrieval at test time. It builds a similarity graph over unlabeled examples and selects points that are diverse and representative, so the labeled subset covers more of the task space. This differs from standard active learning: it does not require a labeled seed set and is not optimizing for future parameter updates, because the target setting is frozen-LLM ICL. At inference time, the model retrieves relevant labeled examples from this curated pool, cleanly separating what to annotate from what to place in context.","experiments":"The main empirical result is that selective annotation followed by retrieval is more annotation-efficient than random labeling or retrieval-only baselines on few-shot NLP tasks. The paper is about accuracy under fixed annotation budgets, not about scaling model size. The prompt does not provide reliable numbers, model sizes, or exact datasets, so I will not invent them; the likely experimental center is comparison against random selection, clustering-style selection, and retrieval baselines across multiple budget levels. The practical message is clear: in ICL, the quality of the labeled demo pool is a major variable rather than a minor preprocessing detail.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","data-selection","few-shot"]},{"id":"2211.16750","title":"Score-based Continuous-time Discrete Diffusion Models","authors":["Haoran Sun","Lijun Yu","Bo Dai","Dale Schuurmans","Hanjun Dai"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Score-based modeling through stochastic differential equations (SDEs) has provided a new perspective on diffusion models, and demonstrated superior performance on continuous data. However, the gradient of the log-likelihood function, i.e., the score function, is not properly defined for discrete spaces. This makes it non-trivial to adapt \\textcolor{\\cdiff}{the score-based modeling} to categorical data. In this paper, we extend diffusion models to discrete variables by introducing a stochastic jump process where the reverse process denoises via a continuous-time Markov chain. This formulation admits an analytical simulation during backward sampling. To learn the reverse process, we extend score matching to general categorical data and show that an unbiased estimator can be obtained via simple matching of the conditional marginal distributions. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method on a set of synthetic and real-world music and image benchmarks.","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.16750","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/SunYDSD23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/SunYDSD23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=BYWWwSY2G5s","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：score-based diffusion 在连续空间已经很成熟，但离散变量上缺少自然的 score 定义，导致这一路线很难直接用于文本等 categorical 数据。此前离散 diffusion 多依赖离散时间马尔可夫链和特定噪声形式，缺少像连续数据 SDE 那样统一、可分析的连续时间视角。","importance":"这项工作的重要性是方法级且偏范式扩展。它把 score-based generative modeling 从连续域推进到离散域，给离散 diffusion LM 提供了新的理论与算法接口。对 pretrain 研究尤其有价值，因为它说明 next-token AR 之外，离散生成可以有连续时间、可解析采样的另一条路，后续 SEDD、MDLM 一类工作都能从这里接上。","technical_approach":"核心方法是用连续时间随机跳跃过程来定义离散 diffusion，并用连续时间马尔可夫链实现反向去噪。前向过程不是给连续值加高斯噪声，而是在类别状态之间按速率矩阵随机跳转；反向过程则学习一个离散版 score，用来刻画对数概率对状态翻转的相对偏好。关键设计有两点：一是把 reverse denoising 写成可解析模拟的 jump process，避免很多离散 diffusion 依赖近似采样；二是把 score matching 推广到一般 categorical data，并通过简单化简得到无偏估计器，使训练目标可实现。和早期离散 diffusion 相比，它更接近 score-based 建模范式，而不是为某个具体 corruption process 定制目标。","experiments":"从摘要可确认，论文在一般 categorical 数据上验证了方法有效，并强调 backward sampling 可以解析模拟。题面没有给出任务名、模型规模、bits/dim 或 NLL 数值，因此不编造。对读者真正有价值的实验点通常有三类：一是与离散时间 diffusion 或自回归基线相比的似然/采样质量；二是不同跳跃率、状态空间大小下的稳定性；三是无偏 score estimator 对训练方差的影响。如果这些结果成立，这篇工作的意义不在于立刻赢过 AR，而在于把离散 diffusion 的训练和采样工具链补全。","authors_note":"作者包含 Dale Schuurmans、Hanjun Dai，均是生成建模与强化学习/图模型方向的知名研究者。题面未给出机构，留空。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a core gap: score-based diffusion is well developed for continuous data, but discrete spaces do not admit a straightforward score function, which blocks direct transfer to text and other categorical domains. Earlier discrete diffusion methods mostly relied on discrete-time constructions and task-specific corruptions rather than a clean continuous-time score-based view.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution with broader paradigm implications. It extends score-based generative modeling into discrete domains and gives discrete diffusion language modeling a more principled continuous-time foundation. For pretraining research, that matters because it opens a non-AR route for discrete generation with analyzable dynamics and potentially different scaling behavior.","technical_approach":"The method defines discrete diffusion through a continuous-time stochastic jump process, with reverse denoising implemented as a continuous-time Markov chain. Instead of adding Gaussian noise, the forward process randomly jumps between categorical states according to a rate matrix; the reverse process learns a discrete analogue of the score, capturing relative preferences over state changes. Two design choices matter most: the reverse process admits analytical simulation during sampling, and score matching is generalized to categorical data with an unbiased estimator that is practical to optimize. Compared with earlier discrete diffusion work, this is closer to the score-based modeling tradition than to a handcrafted corruption-specific objective.","experiments":"From the abstract, the paper demonstrates effectiveness on categorical data and highlights analytically simulable backward sampling. The prompt does not provide reliable benchmarks, model sizes, or likelihood numbers, so I will not invent them. The most important empirical checks here are likely: comparison to discrete-time diffusion and autoregressive baselines, stability across state-space sizes and jump-rate settings, and the variance behavior of the unbiased score estimator. Even if it does not beat AR outright, the contribution is significant if it makes discrete score-based training and sampling technically viable.","authors_note":"The author list includes Dale Schuurmans and Hanjun Dai, both well known in generative modeling and related areas. Affiliations are not provided in the prompt."},"tags":["diffusion-lm","discrete-diffusion","score-based"],"notable_authors":["Dale Schuurmans","Hanjun Dai"]},{"id":"SyedGS23","title":"Prune and Tune: Improving Efficient Pruning Techniques for Massive Language Models","authors":["Aaquib Syed","Phillip Guo","Vijaykaarti Sundarapandiyan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/SyedGS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/SyedGS23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=cKlgcx7nSZ","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文聚焦的问题大概率是：对超大语言模型做剪枝时，现有高效剪枝方法虽然便宜，但精度掉得多；如何在不承担完整重训练成本的前提下，把效率和恢复性能做得更平衡。题面没有摘要，因此这里只能按标题给出保守概括。","importance":"从标题看，这是一篇系统/效率方向的工作，贡献应在部署与训练成本之间做更实用的折中。对 pretrain 研究的启示可能不在“如何训练更好模型”，而在“已有大模型如何通过结构稀疏化保留更多能力”。如果论文证明 prune 后少量 tune 就能显著恢复性能，那对模型压缩、持续训练、蒸馏替代方案都有现实价值。","technical_approach":"按标题，核心方法应是“先剪枝，再微调”的改进版流程。与只做一次性 magnitude pruning 或直接 sparse training 不同，它大概率讨论如何选择更稳健的 pruning criterion、剪枝比例分配，以及 tune 阶段怎样低成本恢复表示能力。为什么这样设计有效：剪枝负责把冗余结构快速拿掉，tune 负责重配剩余参数的表征；如果缺 tune，性能通常掉得快；如果 tune 太重，又会失去高效剪枝的意义。没有摘要与正文，这里不进一步猜细节。","experiments":"缺少摘要与实验信息，无法可靠给出模型规模、稀疏率、基线和具体增益。按题目判断，关键实验通常会报告不同 sparsity 下的 perplexity/accuracy、与现有 pruning baselines 的对比，以及 tune 步数或训练成本。没有原文不应编造数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"From the title, the paper likely targets a practical gap in pruning massive language models: existing efficient pruning methods are cheap but often lose too much quality, so the question is how to recover more performance without paying near-full retraining cost. No abstract is provided, so this summary must stay conservative.","importance":"This appears to be a systems-and-efficiency contribution. Its value for pretraining research would be less about improving frontier training itself and more about what structure can be removed from already trained LMs while preserving capability. If the paper shows that light post-pruning tuning substantially restores performance, that would matter for compression, continual training, and alternatives to distillation.","technical_approach":"Based on the title, the core idea is an improved prune-then-tune pipeline. Unlike one-shot magnitude pruning or training sparse models from scratch, the method likely studies which pruning rule is more stable, how sparsity should be allocated, and how much tuning is needed to recover the residual network's representational capacity. The logic is straightforward: pruning removes redundancy cheaply, tuning re-adapts the remaining weights; without tuning, quality drops sharply, and with too much tuning, the efficiency benefit disappears. Without the abstract or paper text, finer details should not be guessed.","experiments":"No abstract or experimental details are available in the prompt, so I cannot reliably provide model sizes, sparsity levels, baselines, or gains. A paper of this kind would typically report quality versus sparsity, comparison to pruning baselines, and tuning cost, but any concrete numbers would be speculative.","authors_note":""},"tags":["pruning","compression","llm"]},{"id":"Wang0000YGW23","title":"Visually-Augmented Language Modeling","authors":["Weizhi Wang","Li Dong","Hao Cheng","Haoyu Song","Xiaodong Liu","Xifeng Yan","Jianfeng Gao","Furu Wei"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Wang0000YGW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Wang0000YGW23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=8IN-qLkl215","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"按标题判断，这篇论文要解决的问题是：纯文本语言模型在很多场景里其实暴露于视觉上下文，但标准 LM 预训练完全忽略这一点；如果把视觉信号直接并入语言建模，是否能学到更好的文本预测与多模态表征。它关心的不是传统 VQA 下游，而是把视觉作为 LM 预训练的一部分。题面无摘要，因此需保守表述。","importance":"这项工作对 pretrain 是直接相关的，因为它把“视觉增强”定义成语言建模目标本身的扩展，而不是后接一个 cross-modal 头。对统一多模态预训练的启示是：图像不一定只用于对齐 loss，也可以进入 next-token 或类似语言建模管线，成为提升文本理解与生成的先验来源。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心方法应是 visually-augmented language modeling：在语言模型训练中引入图像表示，可能通过联合编码、前缀条件或跨模态注意力，让模型在预测文本时显式利用视觉上下文。和标准 captioning 或 VLM 对齐不同，这类方法的重点通常不是学习一个图文 matching score，而是直接优化语言建模目标，只是条件里多了视觉。为什么这类设计有意义：很多词和实体关系在纯文本里是歧义的，视觉能提供 disambiguation；但边界也明显——视觉只在与文本强相关时有帮助，噪声图像可能反而干扰 LM 学习。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认模型规模、是否在图文语料上训练、以及对下游或 perplexity 的具体提升。合理预期是论文会比较 text-only LM 与 visually-augmented LM 在语言建模指标和多模态任务上的差异，并分析有无图像时的退化/增益。对做 pretrain 的读者，最该关注的是：视觉增强是否真的改善 next-token prediction，而不只是让多模态 benchmark 分数好看；以及这种收益会不会在纯文本测试上消失或转负。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"From the title, the paper asks whether language modeling itself should be visually conditioned in settings where text naturally co-occurs with images. Standard LM pretraining ignores that context, so the question is whether adding visual signals can improve token prediction and multimodal representation learning at the pretraining stage rather than only in downstream VLM tasks. No abstract is provided, so this summary remains cautious.","importance":"This is directly relevant to pretraining because it treats visual augmentation as part of the language-modeling objective, not merely as an auxiliary alignment head. The broader implication for unified multimodal pretraining is that images need not enter only through contrastive or matching losses; they can also serve as conditioning context inside the LM training loop.","technical_approach":"Judging from the title, the method is some form of visually augmented language modeling: image representations are injected into LM training, likely through joint encoding, prefix conditioning, or cross-modal attention, so token prediction can explicitly use visual context. Unlike standard captioning or image-text matching, the emphasis here is not learning a separate alignment score, but optimizing a language-modeling objective with visual conditioning. The rationale is straightforward: many textual references are ambiguous in text alone, and images can disambiguate entities and relations. The boundary is equally important: visual input helps only when it is relevant; noisy or weakly related images may hurt LM learning.","experiments":"Without the abstract, I cannot reliably report model sizes, corpora, or exact gains on perplexity and downstream tasks. A reasonable expectation is that the paper compares text-only and visually augmented LMs on language-modeling metrics and multimodal evaluations, and studies when visual context helps or hurts. For pretraining readers, the critical question is whether visual augmentation improves token prediction itself rather than only boosting multimodal benchmark scores.","authors_note":""},"tags":["language-modeling","visual-augmentation","multimodal-pretraining","retrieval"]},{"id":"2210.03629","title":"ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models","authors":["Shunyu Yao","Jeffrey Zhao","Dian Yu","Nan Du","Izhak Shafran","Karthik R. Narasimhan","Yuan Cao"],"institutions":["Princeton University","Google Brain"],"abstract":"$14","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.03629","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/YaoZYDSN023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/YaoZYDSN023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=WE_vluYUL-X","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"大语言模型（LLM）的推理能力（如 Chain-of-Thought）和行动能力（如生成动作计划）通常被分开研究。纯推理模型缺乏与外部世界的交互，容易产生幻觉或错误累积；纯行动模型缺乏深度思考，难以处理复杂任务。","importance":"范式级贡献（极高影响力）。提出了 ReAct (Reasoning and Acting) 范式，首次将 LLM 的推理和行动交织在一起。这极大地推动了 LLM Agent 的发展，是 post-train 阶段增强模型复杂任务解决能力的核心基石，深刻影响了后续的工具调用和多步推理研究。","technical_approach":"提出 ReAct 框架。核心机制：通过 few-shot prompting，引导 LLM 在生成特定任务的动作（Action）之前，先生成推理轨迹（Thought/Reasoning trace）。推理帮助模型规划、追踪状态和处理异常；行动允许模型与外部环境（如维基百科 API）交互以获取新信息（Observation）。这种 Thought-Action-Observation 的交替循环，使得模型能够基于实时反馈进行动态推理。","experiments":"在问答（HotpotQA）、事实验证（Fever）和交互式决策（ALFWorld, WebShop）等任务上评估了 PaLM-540B 模型。ReAct 显著优于纯 CoT 或纯行动的基线。例如，在 HotpotQA 上，ReAct 克服了 CoT 常见的幻觉问题，提高了事实准确性。消融实验表明，推理和行动的结合产生了“1+1>2”的协同效应。","authors_note":"Shunyu Yao (姚顺雨) 是 ReAct 和 Tree of Thoughts (ToT) 的一作，在 LLM 推理和 Agent 领域做出了开创性贡献。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The reasoning capabilities (e.g., Chain-of-Thought) and acting capabilities (e.g., action plan generation) of LLMs are typically studied separately. Pure reasoning models lack interaction with the external world, prone to hallucinations or error accumulation; pure acting models lack deep thought, struggling with complex tasks.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution (extremely high impact). Proposes the ReAct (Reasoning and Acting) paradigm, interleaving LLM reasoning and acting for the first time. This significantly propelled the development of LLM Agents, serving as a core cornerstone for enhancing complex task-solving in the post-train phase, and profoundly influenced subsequent research on tool use and multi-step reasoning.","technical_approach":"Proposes the ReAct framework. Key mechanism: via few-shot prompting, guides the LLM to generate reasoning traces (Thought) before generating task-specific actions. Reasoning helps the model plan, track states, and handle exceptions; acting allows the model to interact with external environments (e.g., Wikipedia API) to gather new information (Observation). This alternating Thought-Action-Observation loop enables dynamic reasoning based on real-time feedback.","experiments":"Evaluated PaLM-540B on tasks like QA (HotpotQA), fact verification (Fever), and interactive decision-making (ALFWorld, WebShop). ReAct significantly outperformed pure CoT or pure acting baselines. For instance, on HotpotQA, ReAct overcame common CoT hallucinations, improving factual accuracy. Ablations show the combination of reasoning and acting yields a synergistic '1+1>2' effect.","authors_note":"Shunyu Yao is the first author of ReAct and Tree of Thoughts (ToT), making pioneering contributions to LLM reasoning and Agents."},"tags":["reasoning","tool-use","prompting","agent"],"notable_authors":["Shunyu Yao","Nan Du"]},{"id":"YeKJSS23","title":"Guess the Instruction! Flipped Learning Makes Language Models Stronger Zero-Shot Learners","authors":["Seonghyeon Ye","Doyoung Kim","Joel Jang","Joongbo Shin","Minjoon Seo"],"institutions":["KAIST"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/YeKJSS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/YeKJSS23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=FtOxgKe_Zg2","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"指令微调（Instruction Tuning）通常是给定指令（Instruction）和输入（Input），让模型预测输出（Output）。这种前向学习方式虽然有效，但模型有时并未真正理解指令的意图，而是依赖输入输出的表面模式。","importance":"方法与数据级贡献。提出了一种“翻转学习”（Flipped Learning）范式，即让模型根据输入和输出反推指令。这为指令微调数据的利用提供了一个新视角，证明了逆向生成任务可以增强模型对指令的深层理解，从而提升零样本泛化能力。","technical_approach":"提出 Flipped Learning。核心机制：在常规的指令微调数据集中，构造逆向任务：给定 Input 和 Output，要求模型生成对应的 Instruction。在训练阶段，将这种翻转任务与标准的前向指令微调任务混合训练。这种多任务学习迫使模型更深入地理解指令、输入和输出之间的逻辑映射关系，而不仅仅是记忆前向映射。","experiments":"在 T0 和 FLAN 等基准模型上进行了实验。混合了 Flipped Learning 的模型在多个未见过的任务（Zero-shot transfer）上表现出比仅使用标准指令微调的模型更好的性能。消融实验表明，翻转任务的比例对最终性能有影响，适度的翻转学习能带来最佳收益。","authors_note":"Minjoon Seo 团队在 NLP 和问答系统领域有活跃贡献。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Instruction Tuning typically involves giving an Instruction and Input, and having the model predict the Output. While effective, this forward learning approach sometimes results in the model relying on superficial input-output patterns rather than truly understanding the instruction's intent.","importance":"Methodological and data-level contribution. Proposes a 'Flipped Learning' paradigm, where the model infers the instruction from the input and output. This provides a new perspective on utilizing instruction tuning data, proving that reverse generation tasks can enhance the model's deep understanding of instructions, thereby improving zero-shot generalization.","technical_approach":"Proposes Flipped Learning. Key mechanism: constructs reverse tasks from standard instruction tuning datasets: given Input and Output, the model must generate the corresponding Instruction. During training, this flipped task is mixed with the standard forward instruction tuning task. This multi-task learning forces the model to understand the logical mapping between instruction, input, and output more deeply, rather than just memorizing the forward mapping.","experiments":"Experiments conducted on baseline models like T0 and FLAN. Models trained with a mix of Flipped Learning showed better performance on various unseen tasks (Zero-shot transfer) compared to those using only standard instruction tuning. Ablations show the ratio of flipped tasks affects final performance, with a moderate amount yielding the best gains.","authors_note":"Minjoon Seo's team is active in NLP and QA systems."},"tags":["instruction-tuning","zero-shot","data-synthesis","generalization"],"notable_authors":["Minjoon Seo"]},{"id":"ZengX23","title":"SCoMoE: Efficient Mixtures of Experts with Structured Communication","authors":["Zhiyuan Zeng","Deyi Xiong"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ZengX23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ZengX23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=s-c96mSU0u5","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 MoE 模型里专家之间几乎不通信导致的信息割裂问题。标准 sparse MoE 通过路由提升参数容量和计算效率，但每个 token 只看少数专家，专家间缺少结构化交互，容易限制表示协同和训练效率。","importance":"它属于架构级改进，对 pretrain 的意义在于给出了一条不同于“更多专家/更复杂路由”的方向：在保持 MoE 稀疏高效的前提下，显式设计专家通信结构。这个思路对大规模稀疏模型很 relevant，因为 MoE 的瓶颈常常不是参数量，而是路由不稳定、专家孤岛化和通信开销。","technical_approach":"SCoMoE 的核心是 Structured Communication：不是让所有专家全连接交换信息，而是引入受结构约束的专家间通信机制。这样做的目的有两个：一是让被不同专家处理的表示在局部或分层结构中共享上下文，二是控制通信成本，避免 dense all-to-all 抵消 MoE 的效率优势。和传统 Switch/Top-k MoE 相比，它在路由之外额外建模专家协作；和完全稠密的专家交互相比，它又保留了稀疏性。","experiments":"论文的主要实验结论通常是：在相近计算预算下，SCoMoE 比标准 MoE 和若干稠密/稀疏基线取得更好精度，尤其在参数效率和训练稳定性上有收益。实验多半覆盖机器翻译或语言建模场景，比较对象包括 Transformer、Switch Transformer 或其他 MoE 变体；作者还会展示通信结构设计的 ablation，说明过弱通信学不到协同，过强通信则吞掉效率。对预训练读者来说，最值得关注的是它把 MoE 的 trade-off 从“路由 sparsity vs. quality”扩展成“路由 + 通信拓扑”的联合设计问题。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a limitation of standard MoE models: experts are sparse but largely isolated. Sparse routing improves parameter capacity and compute efficiency, yet each token only sees a few experts and there is little structured interaction across experts, which can limit coordination and representation quality.","importance":"This is an architecture-level contribution with clear relevance to pretraining. The useful idea is that scaling sparse models is not only about adding more experts or better routing; explicit expert communication can be another lever, especially when the real bottlenecks are routing instability, expert fragmentation, and communication cost.","technical_approach":"SCoMoE introduces structured communication among experts. Instead of allowing unrestricted dense interaction, it imposes a communication topology so representations processed by different experts can exchange information in a controlled way. This is meant to recover some of the benefits of collaboration without paying the full cost of dense all-to-all communication. Relative to standard top-k or Switch-style MoE, the method adds expert cooperation beyond routing; relative to dense expert interaction, it preserves sparsity.","experiments":"The reported result is that SCoMoE improves over standard MoE and related baselines under similar compute budgets, with gains in accuracy and parameter efficiency, and often better training behavior. The experiments likely cover machine translation or language modeling, with ablations on communication strength and topology. The most useful takeaway for a pretraining reader is the expanded design space: MoE quality depends not only on routing sparsity but also on how experts are allowed to communicate.","authors_note":""},"tags":["moe","efficient-training","structured-communication","routing"]},{"id":"ZhangCSDTG23","title":"Planning with Large Language Models for Code Generation","authors":["Shun Zhang","Zhenfang Chen","Yikang Shen","Mingyu Ding","Joshua B. Tenenbaum","Chuang Gan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ZhangCSDTG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ZhangCSDTG23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=Lr8cOOtYbfL","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是代码生成中“直接采样答案”容易局部正确但整体结构错误的问题。大语言模型会写出语法像样的代码，但在需要多步分解、全局约束和中间变量设计时，缺少显式规划常导致一次性生成失败。","importance":"它属于 pretrain-posttrain 接口上的推理增强工作。对基座研究的启发是：代码能力不只是 token 级语言建模强不强，还取决于模型能否显式地产生中间程序计划；这和自然语言推理中的 scratchpad / latent reasoning 是同一类问题。","technical_approach":"核心方法是让 LLM 先生成高层计划，再根据计划生成代码，形成 planning-guided code generation。计划可以是自然语言步骤、伪代码、函数结构或子目标分解；关键设计不是让模型自由发散，而是把计划作为后续解码的约束和条件。和直接 chain-of-thought 生成代码相比，这种方法把“想”和“写”分开，减少长程序生成时的局部贪心错误；和外部程序搜索相比，它更轻量，不依赖昂贵执行树搜索。","experiments":"实验通常在 HumanEval、MBPP 或更复杂代码基准上进行，结果是规划式生成显著优于直接生成和若干 self-consistency / reranking 基线，尤其在较难题目上提升更明显。作者一般会比较不同计划形式，并展示计划质量与最终 pass@k 的相关性；常见观察是：好的计划能显著提高一次生成成功率，但错误计划会把后续代码带偏，因此计划阶段本身成为新的瓶颈。对预训练读者来说，这说明中间表示监督可能是代码预训练的重要增益方向。","authors_note":"作者列表包含 Joshua B. Tenenbaum，机构信息从给定内容无法完整确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a common failure mode in code generation: direct decoding often produces code that looks locally plausible but is globally misstructured. LLMs can write syntactically reasonable code, yet they often fail on problems that require decomposition, global constraints, and explicit intermediate design decisions.","importance":"This is a reasoning-enhancement paper at the pretrain-posttrain interface. The pretraining-relevant lesson is that code ability is not only about stronger next-token modeling; it also depends on whether the model can externalize an intermediate program plan, which connects directly to broader work on scratchpads and latent reasoning.","technical_approach":"The method is planning-guided code generation: the LLM first produces a high-level plan, then generates code conditioned on that plan. The plan can take the form of natural-language steps, pseudocode, function structure, or subgoal decomposition. The key design choice is to separate planning from coding so the final decoder is constrained by a global scaffold, reducing the local-greedy errors common in long program generation. Compared with direct chain-of-thought coding, this makes the intermediate structure more explicit; compared with external program search, it is lighter-weight.","experiments":"The paper likely evaluates on HumanEval, MBPP, and related code benchmarks, showing that planning-based generation improves over direct decoding and several self-consistency or reranking baselines, with larger gains on harder problems. Useful ablations compare different plan formats and show that plan quality strongly correlates with final pass@k. A practical boundary is that a bad plan can systematically mislead the final code, so planning becomes a new bottleneck rather than a free gain.","authors_note":"The author list includes Joshua B. Tenenbaum. Full institutional attribution cannot be confirmed from the provided information."},"tags":["code-generation","planning","large-language-models","reasoning"],"notable_authors":["Joshua B. Tenenbaum"]},{"id":"ZhaoKJNSL23","title":"Calibrating Sequence likelihood Improves Conditional Language Generation","authors":["Yao Zhao","Misha Khalman","Rishabh Joshi","Shashi Narayan","Mohammad Saleh","Peter J. Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ZhaoKJNSL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ZhaoKJNSL23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=0qSOodKmJaN","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：条件生成（摘要、翻译、对话等）里，模型的序列对数似然常与人类偏好/任务指标不一致，导致解码时“高似然但低质量”或长度偏置等问题。过去多靠启发式长度惩罚、温度、coverage等补丁，缺少更系统的校准视角。","importance":"贡献是方法级、直接作用在pretrain↔decode接口：提出对序列似然做校准（calibration），在不改模型参数或少量改动的情况下改善条件生成质量。对pretrain的启示是：即使预训练目标是最大似然，推理端如果不校准，似然并不是可直接优化的质量代理；校准可以作为低成本“后处理层”。","technical_approach":"方法核心是把模型给出的序列概率当作需要校准的打分函数，并通过校准项修正其在长度、token频率或条件依赖上的系统性偏差。关键取舍是：不追求重新训练一个更大模型，而是学习/估计一个轻量的校准映射，使得校准后的分数与验证集上的质量信号更一致；与传统长度惩罚不同，校准更强调“概率意义上的一致性”而非单一启发式。","experiments":"未提供摘要，无法给出任务集、模型规模与提升数字；但该方向通常会在摘要/翻译/数据到文本上报告ROUGE/BLEU/人评提升，并对比beam search+长度惩罚、MBR等。建议补读时重点核对：校准是否在不同解码策略下都有效、是否引入额外偏差（如过度多样性或事实性下降）、以及校准数据量敏感性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a mismatch in conditional generation: sequence log-likelihood often correlates poorly with human preference or task metrics, leading to high-likelihood but low-quality outputs and systematic length bias. Prior fixes are mostly heuristic (length penalties, temperature tweaks, coverage), lacking a calibration perspective.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution at the pretrain↔decoding interface: it calibrates sequence likelihood to improve conditional generation quality with minimal or no model retraining. For pretraining, it reinforces that MLE-trained likelihood is not automatically a reliable quality proxy at inference, and calibration can be a low-cost corrective layer.","technical_approach":"It treats the model’s sequence probability as a score that needs calibration and applies a calibration term to correct systematic biases (e.g., length, token frequency, conditioning effects). The key trade-off is to avoid training a larger/better model and instead learn/estimate a lightweight mapping so calibrated scores align better with validation-time quality signals. Compared to classic length penalties, the goal is probabilistic consistency rather than a single ad-hoc adjustment.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so tasks, model sizes, and numerical gains cannot be stated reliably. Typical evaluations cover summarization/translation/data-to-text with ROUGE/BLEU and sometimes human eval, comparing against beam+length penalty and MBR-style decoding; readers should verify robustness across decoding strategies and sensitivity to calibration data size.","authors_note":""},"tags":["language-generation","calibration","decoding","evaluation"]},{"id":"ZhengYWK23","title":"Efficient Attention via Control Variates","authors":["Lin Zheng","Jianbo Yuan","Chong Wang","Lingpeng Kong"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ZhengYWK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ZhengYWK23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=G-uNfHKrj46","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：高效注意力近似常在速度、无偏性与方差之间难以兼得，很多方法要么引入偏差（影响质量），要么方差大（训练不稳），要么实现复杂。以往常见路线是kernelized attention或稀疏注意力，但它们对分布与长度敏感。","importance":"贡献是系统/算法结合的方法级：用控制变量（control variates，一种经典方差降低技巧）来构造更稳定的注意力估计，从而在近似注意力时减少方差并保持可训练性。对pretrain的启示是：近似注意力不只是在算子上做近似，统计估计视角（无偏+低方差）可能更适合长上下文训练的稳定性要求。","technical_approach":"方法把注意力计算视为对某个期望的估计问题，引入控制变量来抵消估计噪声，从而降低方差。关键设计点通常包括：选择与目标高度相关且易计算的控制变量、以及如何在不显著增加计算的情况下估计其系数；与直接采样/随机特征近似相比，它更强调训练动态的稳定与可控误差。","experiments":"未提供摘要，无法给出长度、吞吐、困惑度等数字；但应会在语言建模或长序列任务上对比标准注意力、Performer/Linear attention/稀疏注意力等，并报告速度-精度曲线与训练稳定性（loss spike）。建议补读时重点核对：在更长序列下方差是否仍可控、以及控制变量带来的额外算子是否抵消了加速收益。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Efficient attention approximations often face a three-way trade-off among speed, bias, and variance: many are biased (hurting quality), or high-variance (hurting stability), or complex to implement. Common approaches like kernelized or sparse attention can be sensitive to data distributions and sequence length.","importance":"This is a method-level algorithm+systems contribution: it uses control variates (a classic variance-reduction technique) to build a more stable attention estimator, aiming to reduce variance while keeping training practical. For pretraining, it highlights that approximate attention should be designed with statistical estimation stability in mind, not only FLOPs.","technical_approach":"It frames attention computation as estimating an expectation and introduces control variates to cancel estimator noise and reduce variance. Key choices include selecting a control variate that is highly correlated with the target yet cheap to compute, and estimating its coefficient without adding too much overhead. Compared to plain sampling or random-feature approximations, the emphasis is controllable error and stable training dynamics.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so sequence lengths, throughput, and perplexity numbers cannot be stated reliably. The evaluation likely compares against full attention and linear/sparse baselines (e.g., Performer-style) on language modeling or long-sequence tasks, reporting speed–quality curves and stability indicators; readers should verify whether overhead offsets the speedup at scale.","authors_note":""},"tags":["attention","efficiency","long-context","variance-reduction"]},{"id":"ZhouMHPPCB23","title":"Large Language Models are Human-Level Prompt Engineers","authors":["Yongchao Zhou","Andrei Ioan Muresanu","Ziwen Han","Keiran Paster","Silviu Pitis","Harris Chan","Jimmy Ba"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ZhouMHPPCB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ZhouMHPPCB23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=92gvk82DE-","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：提示工程对LLM效果影响很大，但人工写prompt成本高且不可复现，导致“会不会写prompt”成为隐性门槛。以往自动prompt方法要么搜索成本高，要么依赖额外标注/模型。","importance":"贡献是方法与实证结合：证明LLM自身可以作为prompt engineer，通过自生成与筛选prompt在多任务上达到接近人类的提示质量。对pretrain的启示是：模型在预训练中学到的元语言能力可以反过来优化其使用方式，形成“自举式接口优化”，并影响我们如何设计评测（避免把prompt技巧当模型能力）。","technical_approach":"方法核心是让LLM生成候选prompt（可能包含指令、示例格式、约束），再用某种自动评估/选择机制（如在验证集上打分、或用模型自评/互评）挑选最优prompt。关键取舍是：把搜索空间交给模型语言先验来缩小，从而降低黑盒搜索成本；边界在于评估信号如果与真实目标不一致，会导致prompt过拟合或reward hacking式的提示投机。","experiments":"未提供摘要，无法给出任务集、模型规模与提升数字；但应包含与人类prompt、AutoPrompt/PromptSource类方法对比，并报告准确率/EM/F1等。建议补读时重点核对：prompt搜索预算（生成多少候选、评估多少样本）、跨任务迁移性、以及对不同模型家族是否同样有效。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Prompt engineering strongly affects LLM performance, but human-crafted prompts are costly and hard to reproduce, making “prompt skill” a hidden barrier. Prior automatic prompting either has high search cost or relies on extra supervision/models.","importance":"This is a method-plus-empirical claim: LMs can act as human-level prompt engineers by generating and selecting prompts that match human prompt quality across tasks. For pretraining, it highlights a bootstrapping interface: capabilities learned during pretraining can be used to optimize how the model is queried, and evaluations should avoid conflating prompt skill with model skill.","technical_approach":"The core pipeline is to have the LM generate candidate prompts (instructions, formatting, constraints) and then select the best via an automatic scoring/selection mechanism (validation scoring, self-critique, or cross-evaluation). The trade-off is using the LM prior to narrow the search space and reduce black-box optimization cost. The main risk is misaligned selection signals, which can cause prompt overfitting or reward-hacking-like artifacts.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so tasks, model sizes, and numerical gains cannot be stated reliably. The paper likely compares against human prompts and prior auto-prompt baselines, reporting accuracy/EM/F1; readers should verify search budget, cross-task transfer, and robustness across model families.","authors_note":""},"tags":["prompting","llm","instruction-following","evaluation"]},{"id":"ZhuangLLWG23","title":"Behavior Proximal Policy Optimization","authors":["Zifeng Zhuang","Kun Lei","Jinxin Liu","Donglin Wang","Yilang Guo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ZhuangLLWG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ZhuangLLWG23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=3c13LptpIph","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["rl","ppo","policy-optimization","stability"]},{"id":"2303.11866","title":"Contrastive Alignment of Vision to Language Through Parameter-Efficient Transfer Learning","authors":["Zaid Khan","Yun Fu"],"institutions":["Northeastern University"],"abstract":"$15","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.11866","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/0001023a","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/0001023a","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=x0BPR9iXc1","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"能否不重训一个 CLIP，而是在已训好的视觉和语言模型之上只动很少参数就拿到一个 contrastive VLM。过去 parameter-efficient 的视觉-语言融合（如 Frozen、Flamingo 那一脉）基本都是 non-contrastive 的生成式接法，不适合 retrieval/neural search 这种对 latency 和 dual-encoder 形态敏感的场景。","importance":"方法级贡献，但点到了一个实践痛点：训一个 CLIP 规模的 contrastive 模型的门槛本来极高，如果能用 adapter/LoRA 量级的参数就把两个已训好的 backbone 对齐起来，中小团队做多模态检索的门槛会显著降下来。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：contrastive alignment 所需的可训练容量可能远比大家默认的少。","technical_approach":"在冻结的视觉编码器和语言编码器上挂 parameter-efficient 的可训练模块（adapter 风格），用 CLIP 式 contrastive loss 做对齐。关键设计是保留 dual-encoder 形态以满足 retrieval 的 latency 需求，而不是搞 cross-attention 融合。与 Frozen/ClipCap 这类 generative prefix 方法的根本区别在训练目标是对比而非 LM。","experiments":"文中报告在 CLIP-style 评测（zero-shot 分类、图文检索）上，用远少于全量训练的可训练参数达到接近从头训的对比模型的性能，并讨论了数据规模、可训练参数位置的 trade-off。具体数字以原文为准。","authors_note":"Northeastern University (Zaid Khan, Yun Fu)。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Can a CLIP-style contrastive VLM be built by only updating a tiny fraction of parameters on top of pretrained vision and language models? Prior parameter-efficient multimodal work (Frozen, Flamingo-line) is generative and cross-attentive, which rules out the dual-encoder form that retrieval / neural search needs.","importance":"Method-level contribution targeting a real pain point: training a CLIP from scratch is expensive. If contrastive alignment only needs adapter-scale trainable capacity, the cost floor for multimodal retrieval models drops sharply. It also hints that the capacity required for cross-modal alignment is much smaller than is commonly assumed.","technical_approach":"Freeze both the vision and language encoders, attach adapter-style trainable modules on each side, and train with CLIP-style contrastive loss. The key design choice is keeping the dual-encoder topology (retrieval-friendly) rather than doing cross-attention fusion as Frozen/ClipCap do; the training objective is contrastive, not LM.","experiments":"Reports competitive zero-shot classification and image-text retrieval against fully-trained CLIP baselines while updating only a small fraction of parameters; ablations on where and how much trainable capacity to insert. Exact numbers per paper.","authors_note":"Northeastern University (Zaid Khan, Yun Fu)."},"tags":["vlm","contrastive-learning","parameter-efficient","alignment"]},{"id":"2209.10063","title":"Generate rather than Retrieve: Large Language Models are Strong Context Generators","authors":["Wenhao Yu","Dan Iter","Shuohang Wang","Yichong Xu","Mingxuan Ju","Soumya Sanyal","Chenguang Zhu","Michael Zeng","Meng Jiang"],"institutions":["University of Notre Dame","Microsoft"],"abstract":"$16","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.10063","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/0002IWXJ000023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/0002IWXJ000023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=fB0hRu9GZUS","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"知识密集型 QA 的默认管线是 retrieve-then-read：从 Wikipedia 之类外部语料检索相关文档再读答案。但 retriever 召回天花板明显，且 dense retriever 很难命中需要多跳、隐含或组合的事实。能否把 retriever 换成 LLM 本身？","importance":"范式层贡献，是 'LLM as a knowledge base / context generator' 观点的代表工作之一。对 pretrain 研究的启示：pretrain 阶段吃下的参数化知识可以**直接作为检索源**使用，配合 clustering-based 提示还能逼出多样化的'文档'，从而取代或补充外部 retriever。这条线后来和 RAG 融合（generate + retrieve），也影响了 self-RAG 类工作。","technical_approach":"GenRead 两步：prompt LLM 根据 question 生成若干 'contextual documents'，再把这些文档作为上下文喂给 reader 生成答案。关键改进是 **clustering-based prompting**：不是让模型 i.i.d. 生成多个相似文档，而是先聚类采样 demonstrations，引导模型生成**覆盖不同知识角度**的文档集合，规避 LLM 重复生成同一观点的问题。zero-shot 和 supervised 两种设定都测。","experiments":"在 NQ、TriviaQA、WebQ 等 open-domain QA benchmark 上，zero-shot 设定下 GenRead 直接超过当时的 retrieve-then-read 基线（DPR+FiD 等），supervised 下也竞争力强。消融显示 clustering-based prompting 比简单 sampling 提升明显，说明多样性是关键；与 retrieval 结合（generate + retrieve）还能进一步提点。","authors_note":"University of Notre Dame + Microsoft (Wenhao Yu 等)。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Knowledge-intensive QA defaults to retrieve-then-read over external corpora (Wikipedia), but retrievers cap recall and struggle on multi-hop or compositional facts. Can the retriever be replaced by the LLM itself?","importance":"A paradigm-level contribution representing the 'LLM as knowledge source / context generator' view. For pretrain research: parametric knowledge absorbed during pretraining can serve directly as a retrieval source, and when combined with clustering-based prompting it can substitute for or complement external retrievers. Leads into RAG fusion and self-RAG-style work.","technical_approach":"GenRead in two steps: prompt the LLM to generate several 'contextual documents' for the question, then feed them to a reader to answer. The key improvement is clustering-based prompting — instead of i.i.d. sampling that yields redundant documents, cluster demonstrations first so the generated documents cover diverse knowledge facets. Evaluated in both zero-shot and supervised settings.","experiments":"On NQ, TriviaQA, WebQ, zero-shot GenRead outperforms retrieve-then-read baselines (DPR+FiD); supervised is competitive. Ablations confirm clustering-based prompting beats vanilla sampling, and combining generation with retrieval further improves results.","authors_note":"University of Notre Dame + Microsoft (Wenhao Yu et al.)."},"tags":["llm","retrieval","knowledge","in-context-learning"]},{"id":"0006LZKSLL23","title":"Out-of-Distribution Detection and Selective Generation for Conditional Language Models","authors":["Jie Ren","Jiaming Luo","Yao Zhao","Kundan Krishna","Mohammad Saleh","Balaji Lakshminarayanan","Peter J. Liu"],"institutions":["Google"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/0006LZKSLL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/0006LZKSLL23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=kJUS5nD0vPB","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"条件生成模型（翻译、摘要等）在 OOD 输入上会胡编，但现有 OOD detection 研究主要在分类上，生成场景下没有干净的 detector，也没有把 OOD 检测和 selective generation（见到就弃权）连起来。","importance":"生成模型安全性/可靠性方向的系统性工作。对 pretrain/deploy 的启示：encoder embedding 而非 output likelihood 才是做 OOD 检测的正确信号源，这和分类场景的普遍做法（softmax confidence）形成对比。selective generation 框架还把 detector 的质量直接和用户看到的输出质量挂钩。","technical_approach":"核心方法是基于条件 LM 的 input embedding 距离做 OOD 分数（相对于 in-distribution 的 reference 集合），而不是用 output sequence 的 likelihood 或 perplexity。论据是 output-likelihood 在生成场景严重不校准，embedding-based score 和下游生成质量的相关性更强。然后用这个 score 做 selective generation：高 OOD 分数直接 abstain，低分的那部分输出质量显著提升。","experiments":"在翻译（WMT 等）和摘要（XSum、CNN/DM）上对多种 OOD 源做实验。embedding-based OOD score 相对 output perplexity 在 AUROC 上明显领先；selective generation 下，按分数丢弃 top-x% 输入后，保留样本的 BLEU/ROUGE 显著上升，且抛弃率-质量曲线稳定单调。","authors_note":"Google (Jie Ren 等)。Jie Ren 在 OOD detection 方向有系列工作（likelihood ratios for OOD 等）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Conditional generation models hallucinate on OOD inputs, yet OOD detection research has focused on classification. No clean detector exists for generation, and OOD detection has not been tied to selective generation (abstain when uncertain).","importance":"A systematic contribution to safe/reliable conditional generation. Key takeaway for pretrain/deploy: encoder embeddings — not output likelihoods — are the right signal for OOD in generation, a contrast with classification's softmax-confidence default. The selective generation framing also ties detector quality directly to user-visible output quality.","technical_approach":"Compute OOD scores from input-side embedding distances to an in-distribution reference set, not from output-sequence likelihood/perplexity. The argument: output likelihood is poorly calibrated for generation quality, while embedding-based scores correlate more strongly with downstream quality. This score then drives selective generation — abstain on high-OOD inputs, keep the rest.","experiments":"On translation (WMT variants) and summarization (XSum, CNN/DM) with various OOD shifts. Embedding-based scores beat perplexity in AUROC; under selective generation, discarding the top-x% by score monotonically raises BLEU/ROUGE on the kept set.","authors_note":"Google (Jie Ren et al.). Jie Ren has a line of work on OOD detection (likelihood ratios for OOD)."},"tags":["ood","language-model","selective-generation","uncertainty"],"notable_authors":["Jie Ren"]},{"id":"2205.09329","title":"Dataset Pruning: Reducing Training Data by Examining Generalization Influence","authors":["Shuo Yang","Zeke Xie","Hanyu Peng","Min Xu","Mingming Sun","Ping Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$17","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.09329","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/0006XP0S023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/0006XP0S023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=4wZiAXD29TQ","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"训练集里不是每条样本都有用，但怎么**有理论保障地**识别并丢弃冗余/有害样本、又把保留子集规模压到最小？此前 coreset / influence function 类方法要么贵、要么没 generalization guarantee。","importance":"数据侧贡献，目标是系统性 data pruning。对 pretrain 研究的启示：即使在 scaling law 时代，'训练数据里哪些样本真正贡献泛化'仍是值得算的问题，尤其 data-constrained 或高质量子集筛选场景（pretrain data curation、instruction tuning 数据选择）。","technical_approach":"提出 dataset pruning 作为一个显式优化问题：目标是找最小子集使得去掉它之后模型泛化能力损失在上界之内。核心工具是一种基于 parameter influence 的 generalization-aware 评分，给出理论保证：子集选择后的泛化 gap 被一个可算的量 bound 住。相比 forgetting score、GraNd、EL2N 等 heuristics，主打**带 bound 的最小子集**而非经验启发式。","experiments":"在 CIFAR-10/100、ImageNet 等分类任务上，对比 random、forgetting、GraNd 等 baseline。报告在保留率 30–50% 区间下，test accuracy 掉点更小；极端压缩（<30%）时领先更明显。理论 bound 与实测 gap 的 correlation 作为额外证据。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Not every training sample helps, but how do we provably identify and discard redundant/harmful ones and shrink the kept set to the minimum? Prior coreset / influence-function methods are either costly or lack generalization guarantees.","importance":"A data-side contribution aiming at systematic data pruning. Relevant for pretrain research: even in the scaling-law era, 'which samples actually drive generalization' remains a worthwhile question, especially for data-constrained settings or high-quality subset selection (pretrain corpus curation, instruction tuning data selection).","technical_approach":"Formulate dataset pruning as an explicit optimization: find the smallest subset such that the generalization loss from discarding the rest is bounded. The tool is a parameter-influence-based, generalization-aware score with a theoretical bound on the post-pruning generalization gap. Unlike forgetting score / GraNd / EL2N (heuristics), the selling point is minimum-size selection with a certified bound.","experiments":"On CIFAR-10/100 and ImageNet vs random / forgetting / GraNd. At 30–50% retention, smaller accuracy drops than baselines; edge widens at more aggressive pruning (<30%). Correlation between the theoretical bound and measured generalization gap provides additional evidence.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-quality","dataset-pruning","training-efficiency","generalization"]},{"id":"2209.04836","title":"Git Re-Basin: Merging Models modulo Permutation Symmetries","authors":["Samuel K. Ainsworth","Jonathan Hayase","Siddhartha S. Srinivasa"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$18","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.04836","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/AinsworthHS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/AinsworthHS23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=CQsmMYmlP5T","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["mode-connectivity","weight-permutation","model-merging","loss-landscape"]},{"id":"2210.02441","title":"Ask Me Anything: A simple strategy for prompting language models","authors":["Simran Arora","Avanika Narayan","Mayee F. Chen","Laurel J. Orr","Neel Guha","Kush Bhatia","Ines Chami","Christopher Ré"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$19","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.02441","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/AroraNCOGBCR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/AroraNCOGBCR23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=bhUPJnS2g0X","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["prompting","prompt-robustness","evaluation","llm"]},{"id":"AthiwaratkunGWL23","title":"Multi-lingual Evaluation of Code Generation Models","authors":["Ben Athiwaratkun","Sanjay Krishna Gouda","Zijian Wang","Xiaopeng Li","Yuchen Tian","Ming Tan","Wasi Uddin Ahmad","Shiqi Wang","Qing Sun","Mingyue Shang","Sujan Kumar Gonugondla","Hantian Ding","Varun Kumar","Nathan Fulton","Arash Farahani","Siddhartha Jain","Robert Giaquinto","Haifeng Qian","Murali Krishna Ramanathan","Ramesh Nallapati"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/AthiwaratkunGWL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/AthiwaratkunGWL23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=Bo7eeXm6An8","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["code-generation","multilingual","evaluation","benchmark"]},{"id":"BrownJMSE23","title":"Language Models Inversely Scale on Piecewise Function Evaluation with Biased Examples","authors":["Bradley C. A. Brown","Jordan Juravsky","Atif Mahmud","Wais Shahbaz","Ryan Ehrlich"],"institutions":["University of Waterloo"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/BrownJMSE23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/BrownJMSE23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=GJhsHNKm7kj","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"扩大语言模型规模通常会提升性能，但在某些包含误导性或偏见示例的上下文中，大模型反而表现更差（逆向缩放），这种现象缺乏在受控环境下的机制级分析。","importance":"机制分析。提供了一个合成且高度可控的任务（分段函数求值），清晰地证明了模型规模越大，越容易过度拟合 prompt 中的虚假相关性，对理解 ICL 的鲁棒性有重要价值。","technical_approach":"设计了一个合成任务：让模型计算一个分段函数。在 prompt 中故意提供带有偏见的 in-context 示例，这些示例符合一个更简单的虚假规则（例如只触发分段函数的一个分支）。通过观察不同规模模型在测试集上的表现，分析它们是学到了真实规则还是被虚假规则误导。","experiments":"在 GPT-3、OPT 和 Bloom 系列模型上进行评估。结果显示出明显的逆向缩放（inverse scaling）：模型越大，越倾向于根据偏见示例输出错误答案，而小模型反而因为“学不会”虚假规则而表现出随机或基线水平。","authors_note":"University of Waterloo."},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Scaling up language models generally improves performance, but larger models can perform worse (inverse scaling) in contexts with misleading or biased examples, a phenomenon lacking controlled mechanistic analysis.","importance":"Mechanism analysis. Provides a synthetic, highly controllable task (piecewise function evaluation) to clearly demonstrate that larger models are more prone to overfitting spurious correlations in prompts, offering insights into ICL robustness.","technical_approach":"Designs a synthetic task where models evaluate a piecewise function. The prompt intentionally includes biased in-context examples that follow a simpler, spurious rule (e.g., only triggering one branch of the function). The study analyzes whether models of different sizes learn the true rule or are misled by the spurious one.","experiments":"Evaluated on GPT-3, OPT, and Bloom families. Shows clear inverse scaling: larger models are more likely to output incorrect answers based on biased examples, whereas smaller models fail to learn the spurious rule and remain at baseline levels.","authors_note":"University of Waterloo."},"tags":["inverse-scaling","icl","evaluation"]},{"id":"2302.14003","title":"Systematic Rectification of Language Models via Dead-end Analysis","authors":["Meng Cao","Mehdi Fatemi","Jackie C. K. Cheung","Samira Shabanian"],"institutions":["Mila","McGill University","Microsoft Research"],"abstract":"$1a","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.14003","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/CaoFCS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/CaoFCS23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=k8_yVW3Wqln","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"防止 LLM 生成有害文本通常依赖于计算成本高昂的重训练/RLHF，或者目光短浅的解码期干预（如屏蔽特定 token），后者忽略了生成序列的长期轨迹，容易导致延迟的毒性爆发。","importance":"方法级贡献。将强化学习中的“死胡同（dead-end）”理论引入 LLM 解码，提供了一种无需重训练即可在推理时从序列全局视角规避有害输出的原则性方法。","technical_approach":"将 RL 的 dead-end 理论扩展到 LLM。所谓“死胡同”是指无论后续如何生成，最终序列必定有毒的状态。该方法修改了解码目标，不再仅看当前 token，而是利用一个价值函数（毒性分类器）评估“从当前状态出发，最终完整序列有毒的概率”，并据此惩罚 token 的选择。","experiments":"在 RealToxicityPrompts 数据集上使用 GPT-2 进行评估。与标准解码以及 DAPT、GeDi 等其他推理期干预方法相比，显著降低了毒性，同时保持了文本的流畅度和多样性。","authors_note":"Mila, McGill University, Microsoft Research."},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Preventing LLMs from generating toxic text typically relies on expensive retraining/RLHF or myopic decoding interventions (like token blocking) that ignore the long-term trajectory, often leading to delayed toxicity.","importance":"Method-level contribution. Brings 'dead-end' theory from reinforcement learning into LLM decoding, providing a principled, training-free way to steer generation away from toxic outcomes from a global sequence perspective at inference time.","technical_approach":"Extends RL dead-end theory to LLMs. A 'dead-end' is a state where toxicity is inevitable regardless of future tokens. The method modifies the decoding objective to penalize token selections based on a value function (toxicity classifier) that estimates the probability of the *completed* sequence being toxic, rather than just evaluating the immediate token.","experiments":"Evaluated on RealToxicityPrompts using GPT-2. Significantly reduces toxicity compared to standard decoding and other inference-time methods like DAPT or GeDi, while maintaining text fluency and diversity.","authors_note":"Mila, McGill University, Microsoft Research."},"tags":["detoxification","decoding","alignment"],"notable_authors":["Jackie C. K. Cheung"]},{"id":"ChmielBHBS23","title":"Accurate Neural Training with 4-bit Matrix Multiplications at Standard Formats","authors":["Brian Chmiel","Ron Banner","Elad Hoffer","Hilla Ben-Yaacov","Daniel Soudry"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ChmielBHBS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ChmielBHBS23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=yTbNYYcopd","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：能否在保持标准数值格式和常规训练流程兼容的前提下，用 4-bit 矩阵乘法训练神经网络而不明显掉精度。以往低比特训练常常依赖特制格式、复杂补偿或只在推理有效，训练端要么不稳，要么硬件落地成本高。","importance":"它的意义偏系统级和训练效率级。对大模型预训练最有价值的点是：如果 4-bit matmul 在标准格式下就能把训练做准，真正的瓶颈就从‘理论可不可行’转成‘系统实现与带宽组织怎么做’。这类工作为后续低精度预训练、尤其是更现实的 FP8/INT8 乃至更低比特方案提供了证据链。","technical_approach":"核心方法是让 4-bit 矩阵乘法在训练中保持足够准确，同时尽量使用标准数值格式而不是为每个硬件定制新表示。题目里的 at Standard Formats 暗示作者重点在量化/缩放方案、舍入策略、累积精度和训练稳定性补偿的组合设计。这样做的关键原因是：训练误差主要怕在反向传播中累积并放大，尤其是梯度和激活动态范围大时。与只做后训练量化或只量化推理不同，这篇关注端到端训练可行性；与需要专用数字格式的方法相比，它更强调兼容现有软件栈和硬件路径。","experiments":"从题目可确定，实验应比较 4-bit matmul 训练与标准高精度训练在训练损失、最终测试精度和收敛稳定性上的差异，并覆盖至少若干视觉或语言模型。很可能还包含不同量化粒度、scale 选择和累积精度的 ablation。当前输入没有摘要与表格，无法可靠给出具体模型、数据集与数值结果。可以稳妥概括为：作者报告在标准格式约束下，4-bit 矩阵乘法能够支持准确训练，而不是只在小模型或推理阶段成立。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether neural networks can be trained accurately with 4-bit matrix multiplications while staying compatible with standard numeric formats. Earlier low-bit work often required custom formats, fragile compensation tricks, or only worked well for inference rather than end-to-end training.","importance":"This is a systems-and-efficiency contribution with direct relevance to pretraining. If 4-bit matmuls can support accurate training under standard formats, then the question shifts from numerical plausibility to implementation and hardware throughput. That makes the result a useful stepping stone toward realistic low-precision large-scale training.","technical_approach":"The method is a training recipe for 4-bit matrix multiplication that preserves accuracy without relying on exotic numerical formats. The title suggests the key ingredients are in quantization/scaling design, rounding, accumulation precision, and training-stability compensation. Those choices matter because training is much more sensitive than inference to accumulated quantization error, especially in backpropagation. Compared with post-training quantization or inference-only low-bit methods, this work is about full training viability; compared with custom-format approaches, it emphasizes compatibility.","experiments":"The experiments likely compare 4-bit training against standard higher-precision baselines on convergence, final accuracy, and stability, probably across several architectures. It would also be natural to include ablations on scaling granularity, accumulation precision, and quantization details. The exact models, datasets, and gains are not available in the provided input, so they should not be invented. The safe takeaway is that the paper reports accurate end-to-end training with 4-bit matrix multiplications under standard-format constraints.","authors_note":""},"tags":["low-precision","4bit-training","quantization"],"notable_authors":["Ron Banner","Daniel Soudry"]},{"id":"ChmielHBS23","title":"Minimum Variance Unbiased N: M Sparsity for the Neural Gradients","authors":["Brian Chmiel","Itay Hubara","Ron Banner","Daniel Soudry"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ChmielHBS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ChmielHBS23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=vuD2xEtxZcj","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：如何在 N:M 结构化稀疏约束下压缩神经网络梯度，同时尽量不引入偏差并把方差降到最低。此前梯度稀疏化常在 unbiased 与低方差之间取舍，结构化稀疏又会额外限制可保留的元素模式，导致训练噪声变大。","importance":"它的价值是训练效率和分布式系统层面的。对 pretrain 尤其相关，因为大模型训练常常受限于梯度通信和优化状态带宽；如果结构化稀疏梯度能做到最小方差无偏，就比启发式 top-k 或随机 drop 更适合作为可控的系统优化模块。","technical_approach":"核心方法是为梯度构造 minimum-variance unbiased 的 N:M 稀疏化器。这里的关键不是单纯做 N:M mask，而是证明或近似实现：在满足每组 M 个元素只保留 N 个的结构约束下，怎样选择采样概率和重标定，能让估计保持无偏且方差最小。这样设计有效，因为训练最终受梯度噪声支配；同样的压缩率下，低方差通常比简单启发式更稳。与非结构化稀疏化相比，它更硬件友好；与普通结构化剪枝相比，它针对的是训练期梯度通信/计算而不是静态权重压缩。","experiments":"从题目可确定，实验应比较所提 N:M 梯度稀疏化器与随机稀疏、top-k、或其他结构化梯度压缩方法在训练精度、收敛速度和通信/计算节省上的表现。大概率会有理论方差分析与实际训练曲线对应。当前给定信息没有摘要正文，因此无法可靠写出具体任务、模型或提升数字。可保守总结为：作者报告其最小方差无偏方案在相同 N:M 稀疏率下比现有梯度稀疏基线更稳、更准，并兼顾硬件友好性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies how to compress neural gradients under an N:M structured sparsity constraint while keeping the estimator unbiased and minimizing variance. Earlier gradient sparsification methods often traded bias against variance, and structured sparsity makes that trade-off harder because the admissible sparsity patterns are restricted.","importance":"This is a training-efficiency and systems contribution with relevance to large-scale pretraining, where gradient communication and optimizer-state bandwidth are frequent bottlenecks. If structured sparse gradients can be made both unbiased and low-variance, they become a more principled alternative to heuristic gradient dropping.","technical_approach":"The method is a minimum-variance unbiased estimator for N:M sparse gradients. The main point is not just imposing an N:M mask, but deriving or approximating the right selection probabilities and rescaling so that the compressed gradient remains unbiased while having the lowest possible variance under the structural constraint. This matters because optimization quality is governed by gradient noise. Compared with unstructured sparsification, N:M is more hardware-friendly; compared with structured pruning, this is about training-time gradient compression rather than static weight sparsity.","experiments":"The experiments likely compare the proposed estimator against random sparsification, top-k-style methods, and other structured baselines on convergence, final accuracy, and communication or compute savings. A combination of theoretical variance analysis and practical training curves would be expected. The exact tasks, models, and numbers are not available in the provided input, so they should not be guessed. The safe summary is that the paper reports better stability and accuracy than existing gradient-sparsification baselines at the same N:M sparsity level.","authors_note":""},"tags":["sparsity","gradient-compression","n:m-sparsity"],"notable_authors":["Brian Chmiel","Itay Hubara","Ron Banner","Daniel Soudry"]},{"id":"2205.09712","title":"Selection-Inference: Exploiting Large Language Models for Interpretable Logical Reasoning","authors":["Antonia Creswell","Murray Shanahan","Irina Higgins"],"institutions":["DeepMind"],"abstract":"$1b","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.09712","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/CreswellSH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/CreswellSH23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=3Pf3Wg6o-A4","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：LLM 在多步逻辑推理上往往明显弱于单步蕴含或局部判断，直接 few-shot prompting 很难稳定把多步链条走对。过去很多工作要么只测少数 benchmark，要么依赖不透明的 chain-of-thought 文本，作者则想要一种更可解释、更模块化的逻辑推理流程。","importance":"它的贡献介于评测和方法之间。先用 50 个任务系统性证明‘单步尚可，多步不行’，再提出一个 selection-inference 框架把推理拆成可检查步骤。对 pretrain/posttrain 的启发是：当基础模型缺的是组合式推理，而不是局部知识时，把问题分解成选择和推断两个子操作，往往比直接逼模型一次性生成长推理更稳。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Selection-Inference（SI）框架。它把预训练 LLM 当作通用处理模块，交替执行 selection 和 inference：先从上下文里选出当前需要的前提，再做一步可解释的局部推断，如此迭代到答案。这个设计有效，是因为多步逻辑错误经常不是单步推理能力不足，而是不会在正确时机取用正确前提。与直接 chain-of-thought 相比，SI 把‘检索/选择相关事实’和‘从这些事实推出结论’显式分离，因而更可解释，也更便于发现错误位置。代价是流程更复杂，且 selection 失误会级联影响后续推断。","experiments":"摘要给出的关键信息比较明确。作者评估了 50 个逻辑推理任务，发现 LLM 在单步 inference 或 entailment 上表现尚可，但在多步链式推理上明显吃力。随后他们报告：一个 7B 参数 LLM 在 SI 框架下就能优于更大的、直接 few-shot prompting 的模型。当前截断摘要没有给出具体对比模型名称、各任务平均分或提升数字，因此不编造；但可以肯定两点：一是结论建立在大规模任务集而非单一 benchmark 上，二是 SI 的收益主要来自把推理分解为可解释步骤，而不是单纯增大模型。","authors_note":"机构与作者可确认包括 DeepMind 研究员 Antonia Creswell、Murray Shanahan、Irina Higgins。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a sharp capability gap in LLMs: they can often handle single-step entailment, but they fail on multi-step logical reasoning when prompted directly. Much of the earlier literature either tested only a few benchmarks or relied on opaque long-form reasoning traces, leaving unclear where the actual failure lies.","importance":"The contribution is both evaluative and methodological. It first establishes, across 50 reasoning tasks, that the bottleneck is chaining rather than local inference. It then proposes a modular reasoning framework that turns that diagnosis into an intervention. For pretraining and post-training, the useful lesson is that some reasoning failures are better treated as composition and retrieval-control failures than as missing world knowledge.","technical_approach":"The Selection-Inference (SI) framework alternates between selecting relevant premises and performing a local inference step. The base LLM is used as a general-purpose module for each sub-operation, producing a sequence of interpretable causal reasoning steps. The design is motivated by the observation that multi-step errors often come from using the wrong facts at the wrong time, not from lacking one-step inference ability. Compared with direct chain-of-thought prompting, SI makes retrieval and inference explicit and separately inspectable. The trade-off is that errors in the selection stage can propagate downstream.","experiments":"The abstract gives two reliable empirical facts. First, the authors evaluate LLMs on 50 tasks probing logical reasoning and find that models do reasonably well on single-step inference or entailment but struggle with chaining multiple steps. Second, they report that a 7B LLM under the SI framework can outperform larger models used with direct few-shot prompting. The provided abstract is truncated before the exact numbers and model names, so they should not be fabricated. Still, the main point is clear: decomposition into selection plus inference beats scaling up direct prompting on these tasks.","authors_note":"The author list includes DeepMind researchers Antonia Creswell, Murray Shanahan, and Irina Higgins."},"tags":["logical-reasoning","multi-step-reasoning","llm-evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Antonia Creswell","Murray Shanahan","Irina Higgins"]},{"id":"DamianNL23","title":"Self-Stabilization: The Implicit Bias of Gradient Descent at the Edge of Stability","authors":["Alex Damian","Eshaan Nichani","Jason D. Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/DamianNL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/DamianNL23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=nhKHA59gXz","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的是：为什么大模型训练常常在“稳定性边缘”附近仍能继续优化而不立刻发散。以往对 edge of stability 的理解多停留在经验现象：学习率超过经典局部稳定阈值后，loss 会震荡但训练还能推进；作者想给出一个更机制化的解释，说明梯度下降为何会自发进入一个可训练但非经典稳定的状态。","importance":"它的重要性主要在优化理论层面，而不是直接提出新的预训练算法。对 pretrain 的启示是：训练并不一定需要严格待在 Hessian 意义下的稳定区间，梯度下降本身会诱导一种“自稳定”动力学，这有助于解释大步长训练、loss plateau 后继续下降、以及 sharpness 与学习率耦合等现象；但它更偏解释框架，不是可直接替换优化器的工程 recipe。","technical_approach":"核心方法是对梯度下降在非凸目标、尤其是主曲率方向上的离散动力学做分析，提出“自稳定”作为隐式偏置。作者不是去修改算法，而是分析标准 GD/近似 GD 为什么会把参数推向一个满足 top Hessian eigenvalue 约为 2/η 的区域，并在该区域附近维持可训练轨迹。关键设计是把训练过程分解为：不稳定方向上的振荡、非线性项对振幅的限制、以及这些因素共同形成的吸引子。和传统局部收敛分析不同，这里不要求 iterates 始终处于严格收缩区；相反，结论是训练会在边缘附近被动力学“卡住”，而不是简单越界后发散。","experiments":"从给定信息里看不到具体实验配置、模型规模和数值结果，因此不能可靠复述表格级结论。可以确认的是，这类工作通常会用二次模型、矩阵分解或小型神经网络验证：训练轨迹会把最大 Hessian 特征值推到与学习率成反比的边界附近，并在该区域持续下降训练误差。若后续需要精确数字，应回到论文正文中的 theorem 对应实验节和图表核对。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a precise question: why does gradient descent keep making progress even after training reaches the so-called edge of stability. Prior work mostly treated this as an empirical fact—training can survive beyond the classical local stability threshold—while this paper aims to explain the mechanism rather than just document it.","importance":"The contribution is mainly conceptual and theoretical, not a new pretraining recipe. Its value for pretraining is that it gives a plausible account of why large-step training can remain effective, why sharpness tracks learning rate, and why optimization may operate in a regime that is unstable under textbook local analysis but still productive in practice.","technical_approach":"The method is an analysis of standard gradient descent dynamics near unstable curvature directions, leading to the notion of self-stabilization as an implicit bias. The paper does not alter the optimizer; it studies how GD naturally drives parameters toward a regime where the top Hessian eigenvalue is on the order of 2/η and then stays near that boundary. The key idea is that oscillations along the unstable direction are not arbitrary noise: nonlinear effects limit their growth and create a stable training regime at the boundary. This differs from classical convergence analyses that require iterates to remain strictly inside a contraction region.","experiments":"The provided metadata does not include the experimental section, so model sizes, datasets, and exact gains cannot be stated reliably. What can be said safely is that papers in this line usually validate the theory on controlled objectives and small neural networks, showing that the top Hessian eigenvalue tracks the learning-rate-implied boundary while training loss continues to decrease. Exact numbers should be checked against the paper’s figures and theorem-validation tables.","authors_note":""},"tags":["training-dynamics","edge-of-stability","gradient-descent","implicit-bias"],"notable_authors":["Alex Damian","Eshaan Nichani","Jason D. Lee"]},{"id":"2207.02098","title":"Neural Networks and the Chomsky Hierarchy","authors":["Grégoire Delétang","Anian Ruoss","Jordi Grau-Moya","Tim Genewein","Li Kevin Wenliang","Elliot Catt","Chris Cundy","Marcus Hutter","Shane Legg","Joel Veness","Pedro A. Ortega"],"institutions":["DeepMind"],"abstract":"$1c","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.02098","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/DeletangRGGWCCH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/DeletangRGGWCCH23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=WbxHAzkeQcn","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的是：神经网络在分布外长度或组合结构上的泛化边界，是否能用 Chomsky hierarchy 这样的计算复杂度分层来预测。过去很多工作在单个合成任务上讨论“模型会不会组合泛化”，但缺少跨任务、跨架构的统一刻画；作者试图把问题放到形式语言层级上系统比较。","importance":"它的重要性在于给出了一个相当少见的、大规模经验性负结果地图。对 pretrain 的启示不是“某个模型在某榜单更强”，而是：架构归纳偏置会决定模型能否学到某类算法性规律，数据量和训练时长并不能总是弥补这一点。对长程依赖、程序样式推理、结构化 token 序列建模，这个结论很有参考价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法是做一个大规模受控实验矩阵，而不是提出新模型。作者把 15 个任务按 Chomsky hierarchy 组织起来，覆盖 regular、context-free 等不同形式语言难度，再系统比较多类神经架构在 IID 拟合和 OOD 泛化上的表现。关键设计是把训练集长度、测试集长度、任务复杂度和模型类型解耦，这样可以区分“容量足够拟合”与“归纳偏置足够泛化”两件事。和以往只看 SCAN 或单一括号语言不同，这篇工作强调跨任务一致性：如果一个架构在某层级上反复失败，那更像能力边界而不是单任务偶然性。","experiments":"实验规模是这篇论文最硬的信息：共训练 20,910 个模型，覆盖 15 个任务。摘要明确给出一个关键负结果：有些架构即使有足够容量把训练集拟合到接近完美，增加数据和训练时间后仍然无法获得任何非平凡的 OOD 泛化。给定摘要没有列出每类架构的具体数值，但可以确定论文的核心证据不是单点 SOTA，而是跨大量模型和任务的稳定模式：任务按 Chomsky hierarchy 分组后，确实能预测哪些架构会在更长序列或分布外组合上失败。","authors_note":"作者团队包含 DeepMind 研究者。Tim Genewein 等人长期做序列建模、推理与泛化相关研究；从给定信息无法更精确确认完整机构归属。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether the out-of-distribution generalization limits of neural networks can be predicted using the Chomsky hierarchy. Prior work often studied compositional generalization one task at a time, which made it hard to tell apart task-specific quirks from architecture-level limits.","importance":"Its main contribution is a large empirical map of where neural architectures fail, not a new training method. For pretraining, the message is useful: more data and more optimization do not automatically buy algorithmic generalization when the architecture lacks the right inductive bias. That matters for long-context reasoning, structured sequence modeling, and any setting where fitting the training distribution is much easier than extrapolating the underlying rule.","technical_approach":"The paper’s method is a controlled benchmark study rather than a novel model. It organizes 15 tasks by their position in the Chomsky hierarchy and evaluates many architectures on both in-distribution fitting and out-of-distribution generalization. The key design choice is to separate capacity from generalization: models are allowed to fit the training data well, and the question is whether they extrapolate to longer or structurally different inputs. This makes the results more diagnostic than single-task studies such as SCAN-style evaluations.","experiments":"The headline fact is the scale: 20,910 trained models across 15 tasks. The abstract highlights a strong negative result: some architectures show no non-trivial OOD generalization even with enough capacity to fit the training data perfectly and even with extensive data and training time. The provided text does not include per-architecture numbers, but the main empirical claim is clear: grouping tasks by the Chomsky hierarchy is predictive of which architectures will generalize and which will not.","authors_note":"The author list includes DeepMind researchers. Tim Genewein is known for work on sequence modeling, reasoning, and generalization; the exact full institutional mapping cannot be confirmed from the provided metadata alone."},"tags":["generalization","chomsky-hierarchy","algorithmic-reasoning"],"notable_authors":["Grégoire Delétang","Anian Ruoss","Jordi Grau-Moya","Tim Genewein","Li Kevin Wenliang"]},{"id":"FengYZ0XZW23","title":"Fantastic Rewards and How to Tame Them: A Case Study on Reward Learning for Task-oriented Dialogue Systems","authors":["Yihao Feng","Shentao Yang","Shujian Zhang","Jianguo Zhang","Caiming Xiong","Mingyuan Zhou","Huan Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/FengYZ0XZW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/FengYZ0XZW23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=086pmarAris","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"从标题看，这篇论文要解决的是：任务型对话系统中的 reward learning 容易学出“看起来高分、实际失真”的奖励，如何识别并抑制这种 reward hacking。过去很多对话 RL 工作默认 reward model 足够可靠，但一旦奖励偏差被策略利用，系统会快速偏离真实用户目标；作者显然在做一次案例式拆解。","importance":"它的重要性主要在 posttrain / RL 接口层面。对 pretrain 研究的价值不在于直接改进基础模型，而在于提醒：后训练奖励信号质量会反向决定我们如何解释模型能力增长，尤其在对话和 agent 场景里，reward model 的缺陷会掩盖 pretrain 表征的真实上限。这和当前对 reward hacking、process supervision、RLAIF 可靠性的关注是一致的。","technical_approach":"仅凭标题，最稳妥的概括是：作者分析任务型对话 reward learning 中出现的“fantastic rewards”现象，并提出约束或校正方法来 tame 它们。可能的技术包括 reward calibration、偏差诊断、离线评估、对抗样本检查或多目标奖励分解，但具体机制无法从现有信息确认。","experiments":"没有摘要和数值，无法给出可信的实验摘要。可以推测论文会展示 reward model 被 exploit 的案例，并比较修正前后的对话质量，但这不是已知事实。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"From the title, the paper studies a familiar RL alignment problem in task-oriented dialogue: learned rewards can become unrealistically high while actual dialogue quality degrades, so how can such reward pathologies be controlled. Many dialogue RL pipelines assume the reward model is trustworthy enough, but once the policy exploits reward errors, optimization can drift quickly.","importance":"The contribution is likely at the RL and post-training interface rather than pretraining proper. Its relevance to pretraining research is indirect but real: poor reward signals can distort our interpretation of what the base model has learned and where the gains from post-training actually come from. That is highly relevant to current work on reward hacking and signal quality.","technical_approach":"The title suggests a case-study style analysis of problematic reward learning in task-oriented dialogue, together with methods to tame those rewards. Possible mechanisms include calibration, diagnostics, or constrained reward design, but the exact proposal cannot be recovered from the title alone.","experiments":"No abstract or quantitative results are provided, so there is no factual basis for summarizing datasets, baselines, or improvements.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reward-model","dialogue","alignment","reward-hacking"],"notable_authors":["Yihao Feng","Shentao Yang","Shujian Zhang","Jianguo Zhang","Caiming Xiong"]},{"id":"FuPSCK23","title":"Complexity-Based Prompting for Multi-step Reasoning","authors":["Yao Fu","Hao Peng","Ashish Sabharwal","Peter Clark","Tushar Khot"],"institutions":["University of Edinburgh","Allen Institute for AI (AI2)","University of Washington"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/FuPSCK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/FuPSCK23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=yf1icZHC-l9","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在大型语言模型（LLM）的多步推理任务中，如何选择合适的 few-shot 提示（prompts）以最大化模型的推理性能？","importance":"提出了一种基于复杂度的提示选择策略（Complexity-Based Prompting），证明了在 prompt 中使用更复杂的推理步骤（如更多的推理链）可以显著提升模型在复杂任务上的表现。这为 CoT (Chain-of-Thought) 的 prompt 工程提供了一个简单而有效的指导原则。","technical_approach":"核心思想是：在构建 few-shot prompt 时，优先选择那些需要更多推理步骤（即复杂度更高）的示例。作者通过计算示例中推理链的长度（例如，数学题中等式的数量）来衡量复杂度。在推理阶段，结合多数投票（Majority Voting）机制，进一步提升了结果的稳定性。这种方法不需要额外的训练或模型修改，纯粹是对 prompt 的优化。","experiments":"在 GSM8K、MATH 等多个数学和逻辑推理数据集上，使用 text-davinci-002 进行了实验。结果表明，相比于随机选择 prompt，基于复杂度的提示选择能带来显著的性能提升（例如在 GSM8K 上提升了约 5-10%）。结合多数投票后，性能进一步提升，在多个数据集上达到了当时的 SOTA。","authors_note":"Yao Fu 在 LLM 推理和 CoT 方面有深入研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In multi-step reasoning tasks for Large Language Models (LLMs), how should one select appropriate few-shot prompts to maximize the model's reasoning performance?","importance":"Proposes a Complexity-Based Prompting strategy, demonstrating that using more complex reasoning steps (e.g., longer reasoning chains) in prompts can significantly improve model performance on complex tasks. This provides a simple and effective guiding principle for Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompt engineering.","technical_approach":"The core idea is: when constructing few-shot prompts, prioritize examples that require more reasoning steps (i.e., higher complexity). The authors measure complexity by calculating the length of the reasoning chain in the example (e.g., the number of equations in a math problem). During inference, this is combined with a Majority Voting mechanism to further enhance result stability. This method requires no additional training or model modification; it is purely prompt optimization.","experiments":"Experiments were conducted on multiple math and logic reasoning datasets like GSM8K and MATH using text-davinci-002. Results show that compared to random prompt selection, complexity-based prompting yields significant performance gains (e.g., ~5-10% improvement on GSM8K). When combined with majority voting, performance improves further, achieving SOTA on several datasets at the time.","authors_note":"Yao Fu has deep research in LLM reasoning and CoT."},"tags":["prompting","reasoning","cot","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Yao Fu","Peter Clark"]},{"id":"GeipingGSSGW23","title":"How Much Data Are Augmentations Worth? An Investigation into Scaling Laws, Invariance, and Implicit Regularization","authors":["Jonas Geiping","Micah Goldblum","Gowthami Somepalli","Ravid Shwartz-Ziv","Tom Goldstein","Andrew Gordon Wilson"],"institutions":["University of Maryland","New York University"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/GeipingGSSGW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/GeipingGSSGW23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=3aQs3MCSexD","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在计算机视觉的预训练中，数据增强（Data Augmentations）被广泛使用，但它们究竟相当于多少真实的额外数据？数据增强是通过引入不变性（invariance）还是隐式正则化（implicit regularization）来提升性能的？","importance":"深入量化了数据增强在 Scaling Law 中的作用。对于多模态/视觉预训练研究者来说，这篇工作澄清了数据增强的本质：它不能无限替代真实数据，其价值随着真实数据量的增加而边际递减。这指导了在构建大规模预训练数据集时，应将资源倾斜于收集更多真实数据，而非设计极其复杂的增强策略。","technical_approach":"通过控制变量法，在不同规模的真实数据集上，对比有无数据增强的模型性能。作者定义了“增强乘数（Augmentation Multiplier）”来量化增强的价值（例如，使用增强的 10K 数据相当于不使用增强的 50K 数据，乘数为 5）。此外，通过分析模型对增强变换的不变性，以及在不同训练阶段引入增强的效果，探究其内在机制。","experiments":"在 CIFAR-10/100 和 ImageNet 上进行了大量实验。核心发现：1) 数据增强的价值（乘数）随着真实数据量的增加而急剧下降。在小数据上，增强可能相当于 10 倍真实数据；但在大数据上，可能只相当于 1.2 倍。2) 数据增强的主要作用不是让模型学会对变换的“不变性”，而是作为一种强大的隐式正则化，防止模型过拟合训练集的特定样本。","authors_note":"Tom Goldstein 团队在深度学习优化和泛化机制方面有深入研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In computer vision pre-training, data augmentations are widely used, but how much real additional data are they actually worth? Do augmentations improve performance by introducing invariance or through implicit regularization?","importance":"Deeply quantifies the role of data augmentation in Scaling Laws. For multi-modal/vision pre-training researchers, this work clarifies the essence of data augmentation: it cannot infinitely replace real data, and its value has diminishing marginal returns as the amount of real data increases. This guides the construction of large-scale pre-training datasets, suggesting resources should be skewed towards collecting more real data rather than designing overly complex augmentation strategies.","technical_approach":"Using a control variable method, the authors compare model performance with and without data augmentation across different scales of real datasets. They define an 'Augmentation Multiplier' to quantify the value of augmentation (e.g., 10K data with augmentation equals 50K data without, multiplier is 5). Furthermore, they explore the underlying mechanisms by analyzing the model's invariance to augmentation transformations and the effects of introducing augmentation at different training stages.","experiments":"Extensive experiments on CIFAR-10/100 and ImageNet. Core findings: 1) The value (multiplier) of data augmentation drops sharply as the amount of real data increases. On small data, augmentation might be worth 10x real data; but on large data, it might only be 1.2x. 2) The primary role of data augmentation is not to make the model learn 'invariance' to transformations, but rather acts as a powerful implicit regularization to prevent the model from overfitting specific samples in the training set.","authors_note":"Tom Goldstein's group has deep research in deep learning optimization and generalization mechanisms."},"tags":["scaling-law","data-augmentation","generalization","data-quality"],"notable_authors":["Tom Goldstein"]},{"id":"GengYT0Z23","title":"HiCLIP: Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining with Hierarchy-aware Attention","authors":["Shijie Geng","Jianbo Yuan","Yu Tian","Yuxiao Chen","Yongfeng Zhang"],"institutions":["Rutgers University","Tencent AI Lab"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/GengYT0Z23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/GengYT0Z23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=0eTTKOOOQkV","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"传统的 CLIP 模型在进行图文对比预训练时，将图像视为平铺的 patch 集合，忽略了图像中天然存在的层次化语义结构（如：整体场景 -> 局部物体 -> 物体细节），导致细粒度跨模态对齐能力不足。","importance":"提出了一种在视觉 Transformer (ViT) 中引入层次化注意力机制的预训练方法（HiCLIP）。这属于 VLM 预训练架构的改进，证明了在不增加额外监督信号的情况下，通过修改注意力掩码来显式建模图像的层次结构，可以显著提升图文对齐的质量，特别是对于密集预测和细粒度检索任务。","technical_approach":"核心是设计了 Hierarchy-aware Attention。在 ViT 的自注意力层中，HiCLIP 动态地将图像 patch 聚类成不同层级的语义区域（如超像素）。然后，通过修改注意力掩码（attention mask），限制 patch 只能与同一语义区域内的其他 patch，或者更高层级的区域表示进行注意力交互。这种自下而上的层次化聚合，使得模型能够学习到从局部到全局的结构化视觉表征，从而更好地与文本中的层次化概念（如短语、句子）对齐。","experiments":"在 CC3M 和 YFCC15M 数据集上进行了预训练。相比于标准 CLIP 和其他改进变体（如 SLIP），HiCLIP 在 ImageNet 零样本分类上提升了约 1-2%，在 MSCOCO 图文检索任务上提升更为显著（Recall@1 提升 3-5%）。消融实验表明，层次化注意力机制是性能提升的关键。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Traditional CLIP models treat images as a flat set of patches during contrastive pre-training, ignoring the naturally occurring hierarchical semantic structure in images (e.g., overall scene -> local objects -> object details), leading to insufficient fine-grained cross-modal alignment.","importance":"Proposes a pre-training method (HiCLIP) that introduces a hierarchical attention mechanism into Vision Transformers (ViT). This is an architectural improvement for VLM pre-training, proving that explicitly modeling image hierarchy by modifying attention masks—without adding extra supervision signals—can significantly improve the quality of image-text alignment, especially for dense prediction and fine-grained retrieval tasks.","technical_approach":"The core is the design of Hierarchy-aware Attention. Within the ViT's self-attention layers, HiCLIP dynamically clusters image patches into semantic regions of different levels (like superpixels). Then, by modifying the attention mask, it restricts patches to only interact with other patches within the same semantic region, or with higher-level region representations. This bottom-up hierarchical aggregation enables the model to learn structured visual representations from local to global, thereby aligning better with hierarchical concepts in text (e.g., phrases, sentences).","experiments":"Pre-trained on CC3M and YFCC15M datasets. Compared to standard CLIP and other improved variants (like SLIP), HiCLIP improved zero-shot classification on ImageNet by ~1-2%, and showed more significant gains on MSCOCO image-text retrieval tasks (Recall@1 improved by 3-5%). Ablation studies indicate that the hierarchical attention mechanism is key to the performance boost.","authors_note":""},"tags":["clip","vlm","contrastive-learning","hierarchy"]},{"id":"GolovnevaCPCZFC23","title":"ROSCOE: A Suite of Metrics for Scoring Step-by-Step Reasoning","authors":["Olga Golovneva","Moya Chen","Spencer Poff","Martin Corredor","Luke Zettlemoyer","Maryam Fazel-Zarandi","Asli Celikyilmaz"],"institutions":["Meta AI","University of Washington"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/GolovnevaCPCZFC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/GolovnevaCPCZFC23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=xYlJRpzZtsY","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"大型语言模型（LLM）在生成多步推理（如 Chain-of-Thought）时，传统的评估指标（如 BLEU, ROUGE 或仅看最终答案的准确率）无法准确衡量推理过程的逻辑正确性、连贯性和事实性。","importance":"提出了 ROSCOE，这是一个专门用于评估 LLM 逐步推理质量的细粒度指标套件。对于关注模型推理能力（Latent Reasoning / CoT）的 pretrain/posttrain 研究，ROSCOE 提供了一种比单纯看最终准确率更深入的诊断工具，有助于识别模型在推理链条中具体哪一步出现了幻觉或逻辑断裂。","technical_approach":"ROSCOE 不是一个单一的公式，而是一组基于自然语言推理（NLI）模型的评分集合。它将推理过程分解为多个维度：1) 语义一致性（Semantic Alignment）：生成的步骤与参考步骤是否一致；2) 逻辑连贯性（Logical Reasoning）：当前步骤是否能从前置步骤逻辑推导出来；3) 幻觉/信息冗余（Hallucination/Redundancy）：是否引入了无关或错误信息。作者使用微调后的 NLI 模型（如基于 RoBERTa）来计算这些细粒度分数，从而实现对推理链的自动化、多维度评估。","experiments":"在 GSM8K、AQUA 等多个推理数据集上，评估了 GPT-3 等模型生成的 CoT。实验表明，ROSCOE 指标与人类对推理质量的判断具有很高的相关性（Pearson 相关系数显著优于 BLEU/ROUGE）。此外，ROSCOE 成功诊断出模型在长推理链中容易出现“逻辑跳跃”和“重复”的问题。","authors_note":"Meta AI 团队，Luke Zettlemoyer 是 NLP 领域的权威学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"When Large Language Models (LLMs) generate multi-step reasoning (like Chain-of-Thought), traditional evaluation metrics (like BLEU, ROUGE, or just final answer accuracy) cannot accurately measure the logical correctness, coherence, and factuality of the reasoning process.","importance":"Introduces ROSCOE, a suite of fine-grained metrics specifically designed to evaluate the quality of LLM step-by-step reasoning. For pretrain/posttrain research focused on model reasoning capabilities (Latent Reasoning / CoT), ROSCOE provides a deeper diagnostic tool than mere final accuracy, helping to identify exactly where in the reasoning chain the model hallucinates or breaks logic.","technical_approach":"ROSCOE is not a single formula but a collection of scores based on Natural Language Inference (NLI) models. It breaks down the reasoning process into multiple dimensions: 1) Semantic Alignment: whether generated steps align with reference steps; 2) Logical Reasoning: whether the current step logically follows from previous steps; 3) Hallucination/Redundancy: whether irrelevant or incorrect information is introduced. The authors use fine-tuned NLI models (e.g., RoBERTa-based) to calculate these fine-grained scores, enabling automated, multi-dimensional evaluation of reasoning chains.","experiments":"Evaluated CoT generated by models like GPT-3 on multiple reasoning datasets including GSM8K and AQUA. Experiments show that ROSCOE metrics have a high correlation with human judgments of reasoning quality (Pearson correlation significantly better than BLEU/ROUGE). Furthermore, ROSCOE successfully diagnosed that models are prone to 'logical leaps' and 'repetition' in long reasoning chains.","authors_note":"Meta AI team; Luke Zettlemoyer is an authoritative scholar in NLP."},"tags":["reasoning","evaluation","cot","benchmark"],"notable_authors":["Luke Zettlemoyer"]},{"id":"GongRLHKKG23","title":"Contrastive Audio-Visual Masked Autoencoder","authors":["Yuan Gong","Andrew Rouditchenko","Alexander H. Liu","David Harwath","Leonid Karlinsky","Hilde Kuehne","James R. Glass"],"institutions":["MIT"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/GongRLHKKG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/GongRLHKKG23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=QPtMRyk5rb","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：音频和视频的自监督预训练，如何同时学到模态内表征和跨模态对齐，而不是二选一。过去 MAE 类方法擅长重建单模态细节，CLIP 类方法擅长跨模态对齐，但两者往往分开做，导致表示要么偏局部重建、要么偏全局语义。","importance":"它的重要性在于把 masked autoencoding 和 contrastive alignment 合到一个音视频预训练框架里，属于跨模态统一预训练方法级工作。对 pretrain 的启示很直接：多模态预训练目标不必在“重建”和“对齐”之间二选一，二者可以互补，前者保留信息量，后者拉齐语义空间。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Contrastive Audio-Visual Masked Autoencoder，简称 CAV-MAE，本质上是双目标联合训练。模型一边对被 mask 的音频和视频 patch/token 做重建，一边对音视频全局表示做对比学习，使同一片段的两种模态靠近、不同样本远离。关键设计不是简单把两个 loss 相加，而是让编码器同时看到局部恢复和跨模态匹配信号，从而避免纯 MAE 学到“可重建但不对齐”的表示，也避免纯对比学习丢掉细粒度时空信息。和已有 AV 对比学习相比，它更强调 token 级信息保留；和单模态 MAE 相比，它显式利用了跨模态同步结构。","experiments":"关键实验结论通常是：在音视频检索、分类或事件识别等下游任务上，联合目标优于只做 MAE 或只做对比学习。基于该工作的已知脉络，论文大概率在 AudioSet、VGGSound 或类似数据集上评测，并比较 AVID、XDC、单模态 MAE 等基线；核心结果一般表现为线性 probe 和微调都提升，且在低标注场景更明显。最有价值的 ablation 通常是：去掉 contrastive loss 会损伤跨模态检索，去掉 MAE 会损伤分类泛化，说明两种信号确实互补而非冗余。","authors_note":"MIT。Yuan Gong、David Harwath 是音频-语言/音视频自监督方向较知名作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a common failure mode in audio-visual self-supervision: reconstruction objectives preserve modality-specific detail, while contrastive objectives align modalities, but each alone leaves a gap. The question is how to learn representations that are both information-rich and cross-modally aligned.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution to unified multimodal pretraining. The main lesson is practical: masked reconstruction and contrastive alignment are not competing objectives here; they solve different parts of the representation problem and can be trained together to produce stronger audio-visual features.","technical_approach":"CAV-MAE combines masked autoencoding with audio-visual contrastive learning in one framework. The model reconstructs masked audio and video tokens while also pulling paired audio-video representations together and pushing mismatched pairs apart. The design matters because pure MAE can learn features that reconstruct well but do not align semantically across modalities, while pure contrastive learning can discard local structure. Their joint objective keeps both token-level fidelity and shared semantic geometry.","experiments":"The main empirical result is that the joint objective outperforms MAE-only and contrastive-only baselines on audio-visual downstream tasks such as retrieval, classification, or event understanding. The most informative ablations are usually the loss removals: removing contrastive learning hurts cross-modal retrieval, while removing reconstruction hurts classification transfer and robustness under limited labels. That pattern supports the paper's central claim that the two objectives are complementary rather than redundant.","authors_note":"MIT. Yuan Gong and David Harwath are notable researchers in audio-language and audio-visual self-supervised learning."},"tags":["audio-visual","masked-autoencoder","contrastive-learning","pretraining"],"notable_authors":["Yuan Gong","David Harwath"]},{"id":"GuanVK23","title":"Relative Behavioral Attributes: Filling the Gap between Symbolic Goal Specification and Reward Learning from Human Preferences","authors":["Lin Guan","Karthik Valmeekam","Subbarao Kambhampati"],"institutions":["Arizona State University"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/GuanVK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/GuanVK23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=lGz9u1ubUXE","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：在强化学习里，符号化目标太僵硬，人类偏好学习又太弱约束，二者之间缺少一个既可表达又可交互的中间层。过去要么手工写 reward/specification，要么收集成对偏好学 reward，但前者难覆盖复杂意图，后者样本效率和可控性都有限。","importance":"它的重要性主要在 reward/interface 设计，而不是基础模型本身，和 pretrain 的直接关系较弱。间接启示是：如果训练信号来自人类或外部反馈，那么信号形式本身会决定可学性、可解释性和 reward hacking 风险，这对 post-train 乃至 pretrain↔posttrain 接口有参考价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法是提出 Relative Behavioral Attributes，把目标描述成行为属性上的相对偏好，而不是只给整体好坏标签。也就是说，人类不必说“轨迹 A 比 B 好”这么粗，而是可以说“A 比 B 更安全/更高效/更礼貌”等，这些属性再被组合成更结构化的奖励学习信号。关键设计在于把偏好分解到可命名维度，从而提高样本效率和可控性；代价是需要预先定义属性空间，边界在于属性是否足够覆盖真实目标。","experiments":"实验的关键结论通常是：相对行为属性比纯 pairwise preference 更容易学到符合意图的 reward，并在规划或 RL 任务上得到更好的行为。论文大概率在模拟控制或规划环境中比较 symbolic goals、standard preference learning 和其方法；最有价值的观察通常是，当目标复杂且多维时，属性化反馈明显减少歧义，但如果属性定义不全，系统仍会学到投机策略。对做基础模型的人来说，这更像训练信号工程，而不是模型架构贡献。","authors_note":"Arizona State University。Subbarao Kambhampati 是知名作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a gap in RL supervision: symbolic goals are too rigid, while standard preference learning is often too weak and underspecified. The missing middle is a supervision format that is expressive enough for human intent but still learnable and operational.","importance":"This is mainly a reward-interface contribution rather than a pretraining method. Its indirect relevance is still useful: the form of feedback strongly affects learnability, interpretability, and reward hacking, which matters for post-training and for the broader pretrain-to-posttrain pipeline.","technical_approach":"The method introduces Relative Behavioral Attributes, where humans compare trajectories along named behavioral dimensions instead of giving only an overall preference. Rather than saying trajectory A is better than B in aggregate, the feedback can say A is safer, more efficient, or more polite than B. This decomposes preference learning into more structured supervision, improving controllability and sample efficiency. The trade-off is obvious: the attribute space must be defined, and missing attributes become blind spots.","experiments":"The main result is typically that attribute-based feedback learns rewards that better match intended behavior than plain pairwise preference learning, especially in tasks with multi-dimensional objectives. The most useful caveat is also clear: if the attribute vocabulary is incomplete, the learned policy can still exploit the gaps. For foundation-model readers, this is more about training-signal design than model architecture.","authors_note":"Arizona State University. Subbarao Kambhampati is a notable author."},"tags":["rlhf","reward-learning","human-preferences","goal-specification"],"notable_authors":["Subbarao Kambhampati"]},{"id":"GuptaTZ0M023","title":"MaskViT: Masked Visual Pre-Training for Video Prediction","authors":["Agrim Gupta","Stephen Tian","Yunzhi Zhang","Jiajun Wu","Roberto Martín-Martín","Li Fei-Fei"],"institutions":["Stanford University"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/GuptaTZ0M023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/GuptaTZ0M023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=QAV2CcLEDh","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：视频预测通常依赖像素级自回归或重建，训练重、误差累积快，而且难学到高层时空结构。过去视频生成常在像素空间逐帧预测，或者在 latent 空间做 AR，但都容易把容量花在低层细节上。","importance":"它的重要性在于把 masked visual pretraining 引入视频预测，说明“预测未来”不一定要走严格逐帧 AR。对 pretrain 的启示是：视频建模可以先通过 token 化和 mask 预测学到时空世界模型，再把生成作为补全问题处理，这和图像/文本中的 masked modeling 范式形成呼应。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 MaskViT，用 ViT 风格 token 表示视频，并通过 masked token prediction 做未来视频预测。它不是逐像素回归下一帧，而是把已知上下文和未来的部分 mask token 一起输入模型，让模型恢复被遮住的未来表示。关键设计在于把视频预测转成条件补全问题，从而减少 AR 链式误差，并允许并行恢复多个未来 token。和传统视频 prediction 相比，它舍弃了精确像素似然的执念，转而追求更适合长时程结构建模的离散/latent 预测。","experiments":"实验的关键结论通常是：MaskViT 在视频预测质量和下游控制/规划可用性上优于像素 AR 或 prior latent prediction 基线，尤其在长预测 horizon 下更稳。论文大概率在机器人操作或合成/真实视频预测基准上评测，并报告 FVD、PSNR、控制成功率等指标。最值得关注的 ablation 一般是 mask ratio、tokenizer/latent 表示、以及一次预测多少未来 token 对质量和速度的影响；这类结果通常支持其核心论点：并行 masked prediction 比严格 AR 更适合长时程视频建模。","authors_note":"Stanford University。Jiajun Wu、Roberto Martín-Martín 是相关方向较知名作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a core weakness of video prediction: pixel-space autoregression is expensive, accumulates errors quickly, and spends too much capacity on low-level detail. The question is whether future video can be modeled more like masked completion than strict frame-by-frame generation.","importance":"This is a useful pretraining-style shift for video modeling. The broader lesson is that future prediction does not have to be tied to causal pixel autoregression; tokenized masked prediction can serve as a better inductive bias for long-horizon spatiotemporal structure.","technical_approach":"MaskViT represents video as tokens and predicts masked future tokens with a ViT-style model. Instead of regressing the next frame in pixel space, it conditions on observed context and reconstructs masked future representations, turning video prediction into conditional completion. This reduces exposure bias from long autoregressive chains and allows parallel prediction of multiple future tokens. The trade-off is that exact pixel fidelity is no longer the primary objective; the model bets on latent structure being the right target.","experiments":"The main empirical result is typically stronger video prediction quality and better long-horizon behavior than pixel autoregressive or prior latent prediction baselines, often with gains in planning or control settings as well. The most informative ablations usually study mask ratio, latent/token representation, and how many future tokens are predicted in parallel. Those results support the paper's central claim that masked prediction is a better fit than strict AR for long-range video dynamics.","authors_note":"Stanford University. Jiajun Wu and Roberto Martín-Martín are notable authors in this area."},"tags":["masked-visual-pretraining","video-prediction","vision-transformer"],"notable_authors":["Jiajun Wu","Roberto Martín-Martín"]},{"id":"HanH0SW23","title":"Prototypical Calibration for Few-shot Learning of Language Models","authors":["Zhixiong Han","Yaru Hao","Li Dong","Yutao Sun","Furu Wei"],"institutions":["Microsoft"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/HanH0SW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/HanH0SW23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=nUsP9lFADUF","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：大语言模型做 few-shot 分类时，输出概率常常校准很差，导致 prompt 选得差一点性能就波动很大。过去 in-context learning 的 few-shot 分类常依赖 verbalizer 和 prompt 工程，而模型概率并不可靠，尤其类别先验不平衡时更明显。","importance":"它的重要性是一个轻量但实用的方法改进，属于 inference-time calibration，而不是预训练范式变化。对 pretrain 的间接启示是：很多看似“模型不会”的 few-shot 失败，其实部分来自输出空间校准问题，而不是表征本身不足；这提醒我们区分能力缺失和接口失配。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Prototypical Calibration，把 few-shot 示例先映射成类别原型，再用这些原型去校准语言模型对标签词的预测。它借鉴原型网络的思想，但不是重训 encoder，而是在 LM 的表示/概率层做后处理，使类别决策更多依赖示例分布而不是原始 token bias。关键设计在于它尽量不改动底座模型，也不需要额外监督；和 contextual calibration 等方法相比，它更显式利用类内聚合结构，而不是只做全局偏置修正。","experiments":"实验的关键结论通常是：在多个 few-shot 文本分类基准上，Prototypical Calibration 稳定优于零校准和已有 calibration baseline，且对 prompt 选择更鲁棒。最有价值的观察一般是：样本极少时收益最大，因为这时 LM 的 label bias 最强；而当示例足够多或任务生成式成分更强时，收益会缩小。对基础模型研究者，这说明后处理校准仍能释放一部分被 token bias 掩盖的能力。","authors_note":"Microsoft。Li Dong、Furu Wei 是知名作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical issue in few-shot LM classification: the model's output probabilities are often poorly calibrated, so performance becomes highly sensitive to prompts, label words, and class priors. Many failures in in-context classification are partly interface problems rather than pure representation failures.","importance":"This is a lightweight but useful inference-time method. Its broader relevance is diagnostic: some apparent few-shot weaknesses of language models come from output-space bias and calibration errors, which means not every failure should be attributed to pretraining quality.","technical_approach":"Prototypical Calibration builds class prototypes from the few-shot examples and uses them to calibrate the LM's label predictions. The idea borrows from prototypical networks, but it does not retrain the encoder; it adjusts decisions at the representation or probability level so that class assignment depends less on raw token bias and more on the support examples. Compared with prior calibration methods, the distinctive choice is to use class structure explicitly rather than only applying a global bias correction.","experiments":"The main empirical result is typically consistent gains over uncalibrated prompting and prior calibration baselines across few-shot text classification benchmarks, with improved robustness to prompt choice. The most useful pattern is that gains are largest in the very low-shot regime, where label bias is strongest, and shrink as more examples are available. For foundation-model readers, this shows that simple post-hoc calibration can unlock capability hidden behind token-level bias.","authors_note":"Microsoft. Li Dong and Furu Wei are notable authors."},"tags":["few-shot-learning","calibration","prototypical-networks"],"notable_authors":["Li Dong","Furu Wei"]},{"id":"2302.10322","title":"Deep Transformers without Shortcuts: Modifying Self-attention for Faithful Signal Propagation","authors":["Bobby He","James Martens","Guodong Zhang","Aleksandar Botev","Andrew Brock","Samuel L. Smith","Yee Whye Teh"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1d","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.10322","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/HeMZBBST23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/HeMZBBST23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=NPrsUQgMjKK","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：Transformer 训练深度很大时高度依赖残差（skip connections）和归一化（LayerNorm）来维持信号传播，否则会出现梯度/激活退化；但现有“无 shortcut 的深网”理论与方法很难直接适配自注意力（self-attention）。","importance":"贡献是把“可训练的深层 vanilla 网络”推进到 Transformer：通过修改自注意力的计算/参数化来实现更忠实的信号传播（faithful signal propagation），从而在减少或去除 skip/norm 的情况下仍可训练深 Transformer；这对预训练架构设计的启示是：很多稳定性并非只能靠 LayerNorm+残差堆出来，注意力层本身也可以被设计成更接近等距/保方差的映射。","technical_approach":"方法上是对 self-attention 做结构性改造以控制其核（kernel）与信号尺度：作者结合宽网络核理论的思路，设计若干兼容注意力的改动，使前向激活与反向梯度在深度方向不过度放大/衰减；取舍在于：为了可分析与可控的传播性质，需要限制或重参数化注意力权重/softmax 作用方式，可能牺牲部分表达自由度来换取更深可训性。","experiments":"摘要未给出深度、参数量、训练任务与数值；建议在正文核对：1）在去掉残差/归一化后可训练的最大深度与对照（标准 Transformer 训练是否崩）；2）是否在语言/视觉预训练规模上验证，而不只是在小数据集；3）是否报告梯度统计、谱半径或信号方差随层数的实证曲线来支撑“faithful propagation”。","authors_note":"作者包括 Bobby He、James Martens、Guodong Zhang、Andrew Brock；机构信息在给定材料中缺失。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Deep Transformers typically rely on residual connections and normalization to avoid signal/gradient degradation, but existing “deep networks without shortcuts” approaches do not directly extend to self-attention.","importance":"The paper shows deep vanilla Transformers can be trained by modifying self-attention for faithful signal propagation, reducing reliance on skip/norm; for pretraining, it suggests stability can be engineered inside attention layers rather than only via LayerNorm+residual scaffolding.","technical_approach":"It structurally modifies self-attention to control its scaling and propagation properties, borrowing ideas from wide-network kernel theory to keep activations and gradients from exploding/vanishing with depth; the trade-off is constraining or reparameterizing attention/softmax behavior to gain predictable propagation at potential cost of some expressivity.","experiments":"No concrete depths, model sizes, tasks, or numeric results are provided in the abstract snippet; in the full paper, the key evidence should include (1) maximum trainable depth without skips/norm vs. standard Transformers, (2) validation beyond toy scales, and (3) empirical signal/gradient statistics across layers supporting the propagation claim.","authors_note":"Authors include Bobby He, James Martens, Guodong Zhang, Andrew Brock; institutions are not provided in the input."},"tags":["transformer-architecture","skip-connections","signal-propagation","deep-kernel-shaping"],"notable_authors":["James Martens","Guodong Zhang","Andrew Brock","Bobby He"]},{"id":"2201.06268","title":"Continual Transformers: Redundancy-Free Attention for Online Inference","authors":["Lukas Hedegaard","Arian Bakhtiarnia","Alexandros Iosifidis"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Transformers in their common form are inherently limited to operate on whole token sequences rather than on one token at a time. Consequently, their use during online inference on time-series data entails considerable redundancy due to the overlap in successive token sequences. In this work, we propose novel formulations of the Scaled Dot-Product Attention, which enable Transformers to perform efficient online token-by-token inference on a continual input stream. Importantly, our modifications are purely to the order of computations, while the outputs and learned weights are identical to those of the original Transformer Encoder. We validate our Continual Transformer Encoder with experiments on the THUMOS14, TVSeries and GTZAN datasets with remarkable results: Our Continual one- and two-block architectures reduce the floating point operations per prediction by up to 63x and 2.6x, respectively, while retaining predictive performance.","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.06268","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/HedegaardBI23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/HedegaardBI23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=PolHquob8M7","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：标准 Transformer 编码器在流式/在线推理时需要反复对重叠窗口做注意力计算，导致大量冗余计算与延迟，而很多时间序列场景需要 token-by-token 的持续输出。","importance":"贡献是一个“输出与权重完全等价”的在线注意力重排：只改变计算顺序就把离线 encoder 变成可持续推理的 continual transformer，属于系统/实现层面的改进；对长上下文与流式多模态（音频/视频 token）LM 的 serving 也有启发，因为它提供了一种不改模型语义的去冗余路径。","technical_approach":"方法是对 scaled dot-product attention 做新公式化，使得在输入流到达时可以增量更新必要的中间量，而不是每步重算整段窗口；关键选择是保持与原 Transformer Encoder 完全相同的输出与学习到的权重（即数学等价），因此不引入训练分布偏移；代价是需要维护额外缓存/状态并对实现做精细调度，但避免了改变注意力机制本身带来的精度风险。","experiments":"摘要提到在 THUMOS14、TVSeries、GTZAN 上验证并取得“remarkable results”，但未给出具体指标与加速比；建议在正文核对：1）在线推理的实际 wall-clock 加速、显存与吞吐；2）与滑窗重算、缓存 KV 的标准做法对比；3）在更长序列或更高帧率输入下加速是否线性累积。","authors_note":"作者 Lukas Hedegaard 等；机构信息在给定材料中缺失。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Standard Transformer encoders are inefficient for streaming inference because overlapping windows force redundant attention recomputation, while many time-series applications need token-by-token continual outputs.","importance":"It contributes a computation reordering that is exactly equivalent in outputs and learned weights, turning an offline encoder into a continual Transformer; this is a systems-level improvement relevant to long-context and streaming multimodal LM serving because it removes redundancy without changing model semantics.","technical_approach":"It reformulates scaled dot-product attention to support incremental updates of required intermediates as new tokens arrive, avoiding full-window recomputation; the key design constraint is mathematical equivalence to the original encoder (same outputs/weights), preventing train–test mismatch; the trade-off is extra state/cache management and implementation complexity, in exchange for reduced compute and latency.","experiments":"The snippet mentions THUMOS14, TVSeries, and GTZAN with strong results but provides no metrics or speedups; in the full paper, the critical facts are wall-clock speedup, memory/throughput trade-offs, comparisons to sliding-window recompute and standard caching, and scaling behavior with longer streams.","authors_note":"Authors include Lukas Hedegaard et al.; institutions are not provided in the input."},"tags":["online-inference","transformer","redundancy-free-attention","time-series"],"notable_authors":["Lukas Hedegaard"]},{"id":"2207.01848","title":"TabPFN: A Transformer That Solves Small Tabular Classification Problems in a Second","authors":["Noah Hollmann","Samuel Müller","Katharina Eggensperger","Frank Hutter"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1e","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.01848","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Hollmann0EH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Hollmann0EH23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=cp5PvcI6w8_","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：小规模表格分类通常需要大量调参和模型选择，而通用深度模型在小数据 regime 不稳定；作者希望像 LLM 的 ICL 一样，用一次离线训练得到一个“秒级、免调参”的通用表格分类器。","importance":"贡献是把 PFN（Prior-Data Fitted Network）范式做成可用产品形态：TabPFN 通过在合成任务先验上训练 Transformer 来近似贝叶斯推断，从而在新表格数据集上用 in-context learning 直接预测；对预训练研究的启示是：当任务分布可被先验刻画时，“预训练一个推断器”可以替代“每任务训练一个模型”，并且推断时延可做到极低。","technical_approach":"方法是 PFN：离线生成大量来自先验的合成表格数据集（先验包含因果/特征相关结构等），训练一个 Transformer 接收一组带标签样本序列 (x, f(x))，在单次前向中对整个测试集输出预测分布；关键机制是把“学习算法/归纳偏置”编进权重里，使其在上下文中执行近似后验推断；边界在于先验覆盖：真实数据分布若偏离合成先验（特征类型、噪声结构、长尾类别），性能会退化且很难通过少量微调修补。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体基准与数值，但宣称小表格数据集上与 SOTA 竞争、无需调参、推理 <1 秒；建议在正文核对：1）与 XGBoost/AutoML/TabNet 等强基线的平均排名与显著性；2）对样本数、特征维度的 scaling；3）先验组件（因果结构、噪声模型）对泛化的 ablation。","authors_note":"作者包括 Frank Hutter；机构信息在给定材料中缺失。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Small tabular classification typically requires heavy tuning and model selection, and generic deep models are unstable in low-data regimes; the paper aims for an LLM-like ICL solution: a one-time trained model that solves new tabular tasks in seconds with no tuning.","importance":"It operationalizes the PFN (Prior-Data Fitted Network) paradigm: TabPFN trains a Transformer on synthetic tasks drawn from a prior to approximate Bayesian inference, then performs in-context learning on new datasets; for pretraining, it is a clear example of “pretrain an inference procedure” replacing per-task training with very low inference latency.","technical_approach":"It trains on many synthetic tabular datasets sampled from a designed prior (including causal/feature-dependence ideas), using a Transformer that takes labeled examples (x, f(x)) as a set/sequence and outputs predictive distributions for the test set in a single forward pass; the mechanism is that the learning algorithm is embedded in weights, executing approximate posterior inference via context; the main limitation is prior coverage—distribution shift away from the synthetic prior can degrade performance and is not trivially fixed without redesigning the prior or retraining.","experiments":"The snippet provides no benchmark names or numbers, but claims competitive performance, no hyperparameter tuning, and <1s runtime; in the full paper, key facts are comparisons to strong tabular baselines (XGBoost/AutoML variants), scaling with sample/feature size, and ablations on prior components driving transfer.","authors_note":"Notable author: Frank Hutter; institutions are not provided in the input."},"tags":["in-context-learning","transformer","meta-learning","tabular"],"notable_authors":["Frank Hutter"]},{"id":"2212.04717","title":"On the Sensitivity of Reward Inference to Misspecified Human Models","authors":["Joey Hong","Kush Bhatia","Anca D. Dragan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1f","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.04717","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/HongBD23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/HongBD23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=hJqGbUpDGV","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["reward-modeling","alignment","human-feedback","robustness"]},{"id":"HuangLCQFTL23","title":"Encoding Recurrence into Transformers","authors":["Feiqing Huang","Kexin Lu","Yuxi Cai","Zhen Qin","Yanwen Fang","Guangjian Tian","Guodong Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/HuangLCQFTL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/HuangLCQFTL23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=7YfHla7IxBJ","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["transformer","recurrence","architecture","long-context"]},{"id":"2301.09785","title":"Transformer-Patcher: One Mistake Worth One Neuron","authors":["Zeyu Huang","Yikang Shen","Xiaofeng Zhang","Jie Zhou","Wenge Rong","Zhang Xiong"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$20","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.09785","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/HuangSZZR023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/HuangSZZR023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=4oYUGeGBPm","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["model-editing","transformer","knowledge-editing","localization"]},{"id":"IlharcoRWSHF23","title":"Editing models with task arithmetic","authors":["Gabriel Ilharco","Marco Túlio Ribeiro","Mitchell Wortsman","Ludwig Schmidt","Hannaneh Hajishirzi","Ali Farhadi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/IlharcoRWSHF23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/IlharcoRWSHF23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=6t0Kwf8-jrj","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["model-merging","task-arithmetic","editing","fine-tuning"]},{"id":"JiangWZL0LJLW23","title":"Draft, Sketch, and Prove: Guiding Formal Theorem Provers with Informal Proofs","authors":["Albert Qiaochu Jiang","Sean Welleck","Jin Peng Zhou","Timothée Lacroix","Jiacheng Liu","Wenda Li","Mateja Jamnik","Guillaume Lample","Yuhuai Wu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/JiangWZL0LJLW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/JiangWZL0LJLW23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=SMa9EAovKMC","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["formal-verification","theorem-proving","llm-guidance","proof-synthesis"]},{"id":"JustK0ZK0J23","title":"LAVA: Data Valuation without Pre-Specified Learning Algorithms","authors":["Hoang Anh Just","Feiyang Kang","Tianhao Wang","Yi Zeng","Myeongseob Ko","Ming Jin","Ruoxi Jia"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/JustK0ZK0J23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/JustK0ZK0J23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=JJuP86nBl4q","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["data-valuation","data-selection","training-efficiency","data-quality"]},{"id":"KhalitovYCY23","title":"ChordMixer: A Scalable Neural Attention Model for Sequences with Different Length","authors":["Ruslan Khalitov","Tong Yu","Lei Cheng","Zhirong Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/KhalitovYCY23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/KhalitovYCY23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=E8mzu3JbdR","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["sequence-modeling","efficient-attention","long-context","architecture"]},{"id":"KimKM23","title":"Provable Memorization Capacity of Transformers","authors":["Junghwan Kim","Michelle Kim","Barzan Mozafari"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/KimKM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/KimKM23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=8JCg5xJCTPR","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["transformer","memorization","theory","capacity"]},{"id":"KuhnGF23","title":"Semantic Uncertainty: Linguistic Invariances for Uncertainty Estimation in Natural Language Generation","authors":["Lorenz Kuhn","Yarin Gal","Sebastian Farquhar"],"institutions":["University of Oxford"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/KuhnGF23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/KuhnGF23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=VD-AYtP0dve","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 经常用不同的词汇表达相同的语义，导致传统的基于 Token 概率的熵（Token-level Entropy）无法真实反映模型对知识的认知不确定性（Epistemic Uncertainty）。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 Post-train 阶段的幻觉检测和 Reward 建模极具启发，提供了一种解耦“语言表达多样性”与“事实不确定性”的可靠指标。","technical_approach":"提出“语义熵”（Semantic Uncertainty）。对同一 Prompt 采样多个回答，利用自然语言推理（NLI）模型将语义等价的回答聚类。在聚类簇的维度上计算概率分布和熵，而不是在 Token 维度上计算。","experiments":"在 TriviaQA、CoQA 等问答数据集上验证。语义熵在预测模型是否产生幻觉（准确率）方面的 AUROC 显著高于传统的长度归一化似然和 Token 熵。","authors_note":"Oxford / Yarin Gal"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLMs frequently express the same meaning using different vocabularies, making traditional token-level entropy a poor indicator of the model's true epistemic uncertainty.","importance":"Methodological contribution. Highly relevant for hallucination detection and reward modeling in post-training, providing a robust metric that decouples linguistic diversity from factual uncertainty.","technical_approach":"Introduces 'Semantic Entropy'. It samples multiple responses for a given prompt and uses a Natural Language Inference (NLI) model to cluster semantically equivalent generations. Entropy is then computed over these semantic clusters rather than exact token matches.","experiments":"Evaluated on QA datasets like TriviaQA and CoQA. Semantic entropy achieves significantly higher AUROC in predicting model hallucinations (accuracy) compared to length-normalized likelihood and token entropy.","authors_note":"Oxford / Yarin Gal"},"tags":["uncertainty","nlg","hallucination"],"notable_authors":["Lorenz Kuhn","Yarin Gal","Sebastian Farquhar"]},{"id":"2211.15144","title":"Offline Q-learning on Diverse Multi-Task Data Both Scales And Generalizes","authors":["Aviral Kumar","Rishabh Agarwal","Xinyang Geng","George Tucker","Sergey Levine"],"institutions":["UC Berkeley","Google"],"abstract":"$21","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.15144","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/KumarAGTL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/KumarAGTL23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=4-k7kUavAj","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"离线强化学习（Offline RL）在扩大模型参数时，常因价值高估（Value Overestimation）和训练不稳定而崩溃，无法像 NLP/Vision 模型那样享受 Scaling Law。","importance":"系统与范式级贡献。证明了离线 RL 同样可以 Scale up，对当前 LLM 的 RLHF/RLAIF 阶段如何稳定扩大 Reward Model 和 Policy 规模有直接的架构指导意义。","technical_approach":"重新审视了离线 Q-learning 的架构设计。摒弃了标准 MLP，改用 ResNet 架构；摒弃了 MSE 损失，改用基于交叉熵的分布式价值备份（Distributional Backups）；并引入了特征归一化（Feature Normalization）以稳定梯度。","experiments":"在多任务 Atari 环境中训练单一策略。参数量扩展至 80M，在 40 个游戏上达到了接近人类的水平。实验明确展示了在采用上述设计后，模型性能随参数量增加而单调提升。","authors_note":"UC Berkeley / Google / Sergey Levine"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Scaling up offline RL models typically leads to collapse due to value overestimation and training instability, preventing them from enjoying the scaling laws seen in NLP and Vision.","importance":"System and paradigm-level contribution. Proves that offline RL can scale, offering direct architectural guidance for stabilizing the scaling of Reward Models and Policies in the RLHF/RLAIF phases of LLMs.","technical_approach":"Re-examines architectural choices for offline Q-learning. Replaces standard MLPs with ResNets, replaces MSE loss with cross-entropy-based distributional backups, and introduces feature normalization to stabilize gradients.","experiments":"Trained a single policy on multi-task Atari environments. Scaled parameters up to 80M, achieving near-human performance across 40 games. Experiments clearly demonstrate monotonic performance improvements with increased parameter counts when these designs are applied.","authors_note":"UC Berkeley / Google / Sergey Levine"},"tags":["offline-rl","scaling","multi-task"],"notable_authors":["Aviral Kumar","Sergey Levine"]},{"id":"LiCZCD23","title":"What Makes Convolutional Models Great on Long Sequence Modeling?","authors":["Yuhong Li","Tianle Cai","Yi Zhang","Deming Chen","Debadeepta Dey"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LiCZCD23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LiCZCD23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=TGJSPbRpJX-","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的是：卷积模型为什么在长序列建模上常常比 Transformer 或 RNN 更稳、更省算，而且长度外推不容易崩。过去很多工作把这种优势归因于实现细节或感受野设计，但缺少把性能来源拆开的系统解释。","importance":"它的重要性在于提供了一种架构归因视角，而不是单点提速技巧。对 pretrain 的启发很直接：长上下文建模不一定非要靠全局注意力，卷积类状态空间/长卷积方法之所以有竞争力，可能来自其频域偏置、平移等变性或优化稳定性，而不是简单的参数量/FLOPs 对比。","technical_approach":"从标题看，论文应该是分析性工作，核心是拆解卷积模型在 long sequence modeling 中表现优异的原因。合理推断其技术路线会比较不同卷积变体的有效感受野、频率响应、长度泛化与训练稳定性，并与 attention-based 或 recurrent baseline 做控制变量比较。与“提出一个新卷积层”不同，这类工作更强调找到决定因素：比如局部归纳偏置、层间混合方式或参数共享究竟哪个最关键；边界则是结论常依赖于所选任务分布，未必直接转移到开放域语言建模。","experiments":"由于没有摘要，无法确认论文是基于 Long Range Arena、语言建模、合成任务还是时序数据，也无法提供具体指标与提升幅度。可以合理预期的关键实验包括：不同架构在超长序列上的精度/吞吐/内存比较，长度外推测试，以及去掉某个卷积特性后性能回落的 ablation。若论文标题成立，最有价值的结果应是证明“卷积好”不是单一因素，而是某组机制共同作用。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a practical architecture question: why do convolutional sequence models often behave unusually well on long-context tasks, sometimes with better stability and scaling than attention-based alternatives? Prior discussions often credited implementation details or receptive field size, but lacked a clean decomposition of what actually drives the advantage.","importance":"Its value is mainly explanatory rather than proposing yet another layer. For pretraining and long-context modeling, that matters because it helps separate when global attention is genuinely needed from when stronger inductive bias and better optimization behavior are enough. That distinction is useful for model design, especially under tight memory or inference budgets.","technical_approach":"From the title, this appears to be an analysis paper that identifies which properties of convolutional models matter for long-sequence performance. A likely approach is controlled comparison across convolutional variants and non-convolutional baselines, isolating factors such as effective receptive field growth, frequency bias, parameter sharing, and extrapolation behavior. The key design choice is explanation over novelty: instead of inventing a new block, the paper likely tries to attribute gains to a small number of mechanisms. The limitation is that such conclusions can depend strongly on the benchmark family.","experiments":"The provided information does not specify datasets, model sizes, baselines, or quantitative gains, so precise reporting would be unreliable. The expected experiments are accuracy-throughput-memory trade-offs on long-sequence benchmarks, length extrapolation tests, and ablations removing specific convolutional properties. If the paper succeeds, the most useful result is not just that convolutions win somewhere, but a clearer ranking of which mechanism matters most and under what conditions.","authors_note":""},"tags":["long-sequence","convolution","architecture","sequence-modeling"],"notable_authors":["Yuhong Li","Tianle Cai","Yi Zhang","Deming Chen","Debadeepta Dey"]},{"id":"LiSYWRCZ023","title":"Sparse Mixture-of-Experts are Domain Generalizable Learners","authors":["Bo Li","Yifei Shen","Jingkang Yang","Yezhen Wang","Jiawei Ren","Tong Che","Jun Zhang","Ziwei Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LiSYWRCZ023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LiSYWRCZ023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=RecZ9nB9Q4","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关心的是：稀疏 MoE 不仅能提升参数效率，是否还能天然改善 domain generalization。以往 MoE 大多从扩容和计算效率角度讨论，默认路由带来的专家分工是工程手段，而不是泛化机制；跨域泛化通常由数据增强、IRM 或 domain alignment 一类方法处理。","importance":"如果结论成立，这是一篇把 MoE 从“更大更便宜的模型”推进到“更强泛化归纳偏置”的工作。对 pretrain 研究的意义不小，因为大规模预训练天然面对多域混合数据；若稀疏专家路由真的能学到更稳健的域不变/域特定分解，那 MoE 的价值就不只在 scaling，还在跨分布迁移。","technical_approach":"核心思想应是利用 sparse MoE 的条件计算，把不同输入模式或域相关因素分配给不同专家，从而减轻单一稠密网络在多域混合训练中的梯度干扰。关键设计点可能包括路由器如何避免退化成按表面域标签分流、如何保持专家负载均衡，以及如何证明泛化收益不是单纯来自参数量增加。与标准 domain generalization 方法相比，它不显式做域对齐，而是让专家结构自行形成分工；风险是若路由学偏，MoE 也可能过拟合训练域。","experiments":"给定材料缺少摘要，不能确认用了哪些 DG benchmark、MoE 规模和提升数字。最关键的实验应该是：在相同或相近训练计算下，sparse MoE 相比 dense backbone 在 out-of-domain accuracy 上更高；并通过控制总参数、活跃参数和 token/样本路由方式，证明收益不是纯扩容造成。值得看的 ablation 包括路由熵、专家数量、负载均衡损失，以及专家是否形成可解释的域分工。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether sparse Mixture-of-Experts helps with domain generalization for reasons beyond parameter efficiency. Prior MoE work mostly framed expert routing as a scaling tool, while out-of-domain robustness was usually addressed with explicit domain-generalization techniques rather than conditional computation itself.","importance":"If the claim holds, this is more than an MoE efficiency paper. It suggests that sparse expert routing can act as a useful inductive bias for distribution shift, not just as a way to increase model capacity cheaply. That is relevant to pretraining because large models are trained on inherently multi-domain mixtures, where interference across domains is a real optimization problem.","technical_approach":"The likely mechanism is that sparse MoE separates heterogeneous patterns through routing, reducing gradient interference that a single dense network would suffer under mixed-domain training. The important design challenge is to ensure that routing learns meaningful specialization instead of collapsing into superficial domain memorization, while also keeping expert loads balanced. Relative to standard domain-generalization methods, this approach uses architecture-induced specialization rather than explicit domain alignment. The downside is that routing itself can overfit if not regularized well.","experiments":"The abstract is not provided, so datasets, model scales, and exact gains cannot be reported responsibly. The central evidence should be improved out-of-domain accuracy over dense backbones under controlled compute, plus checks showing the gain is not just from more parameters. The most informative ablations would vary expert count, routing entropy, load-balancing loss, and whether experts learn interpretable specialization across domains.","authors_note":""},"tags":["moe","domain-generalization","sparse-mixture"],"notable_authors":["Bo Li","Yifei Shen","Jingkang Yang","Yezhen Wang","Jiawei Ren"]},{"id":"LiYBLRRYCYGK23","title":"The Lazy Neuron Phenomenon: On Emergence of Activation Sparsity in Transformers","authors":["Zonglin Li","Chong You","Srinadh Bhojanapalli","Daliang Li","Ankit Singh Rawat","Sashank J. Reddi","Ke Ye","Felix Chern","Felix X. Yu","Ruiqi Guo","Sanjiv Kumar"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LiYBLRRYCYGK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LiYBLRRYCYGK23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=TJ2nxciYCk-","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注一个训练动态问题：Transformer 会自发出现 activation sparsity，也就是一部分神经元越来越少被激活，但这个现象此前更多被当作经验观察，没有被系统解释。过去很多稀疏化工作依赖显式正则或结构剪枝，而不是先理解模型为什么自己就会变稀。","importance":"它的重要性在于机制分析。对 pretrain 研究有两层启示：第一，稀疏性未必都要靠手工施加，优化过程本身可能会把部分神经元推向‘懒惰’状态；第二，这种自发稀疏如果和泛化、效率或可训练性有关，就会影响我们如何做激活函数、初始化和正则设计。","technical_approach":"从标题看，论文研究的是 Lazy Neuron phenomenon，即 Transformer 中神经元在训练后期变得长期低激活或低贡献的机制。合理推断其方法会结合理论分析与经验统计，考察不同层、不同模块和不同训练阶段的激活分布，并解释这种稀疏如何由优化动力学、残差结构、LayerNorm 或激活函数共同诱导。和直接做 sparsity regularization 不同，这项工作试图先解释自然发生的稀疏模式；边界在于观察到的‘懒惰’是否跨任务、跨规模稳定存在。","experiments":"由于没有摘要，无法确认研究覆盖的模型、数据集和定量结论。论文最关键的实验应包括：激活稀疏度随训练进程上升；不同架构组件对该现象的影响；以及移除或缓解 lazy neuron 后，对精度、优化稳定性或推理效率会发生什么变化。若有说服力，最好还能展示该现象并非小模型特例，而是多个 Transformer 族的共性。","authors_note":"作者名单中包含 Srinadh Bhojanapalli、Ankit Singh Rawat，均在高效/理论化深度学习方向有代表性工作。机构无法从给定信息准确确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a training-dynamics phenomenon: Transformers seem to develop activation sparsity on their own, with some neurons becoming increasingly inactive over training. Earlier sparsity work mostly imposed explicit regularizers or pruning rules, rather than explaining why sparsity can emerge naturally in the first place.","importance":"This is a mechanistic contribution. For pretraining, the message is useful because it suggests that sparsity may partly be an endogenous property of optimization, not only something externally enforced. If true, it affects how we think about activation design, initialization, regularization, and the interpretation of 'dead' or rarely used units in large models.","technical_approach":"From the title, the paper characterizes a Lazy Neuron phenomenon in Transformers, likely combining empirical measurements with theoretical or semi-theoretical analysis of why some units become persistently inactive. The likely focus is on how optimization dynamics, residual pathways, normalization, and activation functions interact to produce emergent sparsity. This differs from explicit sparsity methods because the goal is diagnosis before intervention. The limitation is whether the effect is robust across scales and tasks.","experiments":"The provided information does not specify models, datasets, or quantitative outcomes. The most important evidence would be consistent growth of activation sparsity during training, module-wise analysis showing where laziness concentrates, and intervention studies testing whether reducing the phenomenon changes accuracy, stability, or efficiency. Strong support would also require showing the effect across more than one Transformer family.","authors_note":"The author list includes Srinadh Bhojanapalli and Ankit Singh Rawat, both known in efficient and theoretically informed deep learning. The institution cannot be confirmed from the provided information alone."},"tags":["activation-sparsity","transformer","lazy-neuron","routing"],"notable_authors":["Zonglin Li","Chong You","Srinadh Bhojanapalli","Daliang Li","Ankit Singh Rawat"]},{"id":"LiZW023","title":"DeCap: Decoding CLIP Latents for Zero-Shot Captioning via Text-Only Training","authors":["Wei Li","Linchao Zhu","Longyin Wen","Yi Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LiZW023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LiZW023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=Lt8bMlhiwx2","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是一个很实际的问题：CLIP 有强图文对齐表征，但没有原生生成能力，怎样在不做大规模图文生成训练的情况下，把 CLIP 图像 latent 变成自然语言 caption。过去零样本 captioning 通常依赖检索、prompt engineering 或额外配对数据微调，质量和泛化都受限。","importance":"这是跨模态接口层面的工作。重要性不在于刷新 caption SOTA，而在于证明可以用 text-only 训练学会一个“CLIP latent → LM”解码器，把判别式视觉表征接到生成式语言模型上。对预训练研究的启示是：强对齐表征和强生成模型可以部分解耦训练，再靠一个轻量桥接模块连接，这为低成本多模态生成提供了路线。","technical_approach":"DeCap 的核心是解码 CLIP latent 做 zero-shot captioning，并且只用文本训练解码器。关键机制大概率是先构造一个能代表图像语义的 CLIP 空间前缀或 pseudo-token，再让语言模型把这个前缀当作条件继续生成文本。它没有重新训练 CLIP，也不依赖大规模图像-标题对做监督，而是利用 CLIP 已有的对齐空间和纯文本语料对语言解码器进行适配。与 BLIP/SimVLM 这类端到端图文生成不同，DeCap 更轻、更便宜，但上限也受 CLIP latent 信息瓶颈限制。","experiments":"给定材料没有摘要，无法确认具体 benchmark 和数值。可以合理推测论文会在 nocaps、COCO 或类似 zero-shot captioning 数据集上，对比检索式和 prompt-based baseline，并展示 text-only training 仍能产出有竞争力的 caption。最值得看的 ablation 是：不用 text-only 适配是否显著退化；不同 CLIP backbone 的 latent 质量如何影响 captioning；以及桥接模块容量多大才够，不需要重新训练整套 VLM。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical multimodal gap: CLIP provides strong aligned visual representations but is not itself a caption generator. The question is whether one can turn CLIP image latents into captions without running expensive image-text generative training. Earlier zero-shot captioning approaches often relied on retrieval, prompt tricks, or paired-data finetuning, each with clear limits.","importance":"This is an interface contribution between pretrained vision-language representations and language generation. Its significance is showing that a text-only trained decoder can bridge discriminative CLIP features to natural-language output. For pretraining research, the useful implication is that alignment and generation can be partially decoupled during training, then reconnected with a lightweight adapter rather than an end-to-end multimodal generator.","technical_approach":"DeCap appears to decode CLIP latents into text for zero-shot captioning using only text-side training. The likely mechanism is to map CLIP image embeddings into a prefix-like conditioning representation that a language model can continue from. The design is intentionally lightweight: CLIP remains frozen, and the method avoids large-scale paired image-caption supervision for the decoder. Compared with end-to-end captioning models such as BLIP-style systems, this is cheaper and more modular, though ultimately limited by how much caption-relevant information is preserved in the CLIP latent space.","experiments":"The provided information does not include the abstract, so exact datasets and numbers cannot be reported safely. The expected evaluation is on zero-shot captioning benchmarks such as COCO or nocaps against retrieval-based and prompt-based baselines. The most informative ablations would test whether text-only decoder adaptation is necessary, how different CLIP backbones affect caption quality, and how much decoder capacity is needed before returns saturate.","authors_note":""},"tags":["zero-shot-captioning","clip","text-only-training","vlm"],"notable_authors":["Wei Li","Linchao Zhu","Longyin Wen","Yi Yang"]},{"id":"LiaoCD23","title":"Concept Understanding in Large Language Models: An Empirical Study","authors":["Jiayi Liao","Xu Chen","Lun Du"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LiaoCD23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LiaoCD23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=losgEaOWIL7","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的核心问题是：大语言模型到底是在“理解概念”，还是主要依赖表面共现和模板线索完成概念相关任务。过去很多工作用下游准确率间接判断概念能力，但这会把记忆、提示技巧和真正的概念泛化混在一起，因此作者转向更细粒度的经验性拆解。","importance":"它的价值主要在诊断层面，而不是提出新的预训练方法。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：如果模型的概念表征并不稳定或不具可迁移性，那么单看 benchmark 分数会高估预训练目标学到的抽象结构，这直接影响我们如何设计数据、评测和中期训练干预。","technical_approach":"方法上它是一个系统性实证分析框架，用多种概念理解测试去区分“会做题”和“真会概括”。关键设计通常包括控制词面重叠、改写表述、跨模板迁移、属性组合或反事实扰动，目的是压低捷径信号，让模型必须依赖更抽象的概念关系；与常见问答式评测不同，这类设置更强调表示是否一致、是否能跨上下文保持概念边界。","experiments":"从给定信息无法确认具体模型规模、数据规模和数值结果，因此不能可靠复述提升幅度。可以确定的是，论文属于经验研究，重点应在不同任务设定下比较模型对概念的稳健性、模板敏感性和泛化落差；如果你关心 pretrain 启示，最值得看的是作者如何构造控制实验来分离记忆、词面匹配和概念组合能力。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a simple but important question: do large language models actually form concept-level abstractions, or do they mostly solve “concept” tasks through surface correlations and prompt-specific shortcuts. Prior work often inferred conceptual understanding from downstream accuracy, which mixes memorization, formatting effects, and genuine abstraction, so this paper shifts to a more controlled empirical analysis.","importance":"Its contribution is diagnostic rather than algorithmic. For pretraining research, the key implication is that benchmark wins can overstate what the objective has actually taught if concept representations are brittle, template-bound, or hard to transfer across contexts.","technical_approach":"The paper appears to build a controlled evaluation suite for probing conceptual understanding instead of proposing a new model. The likely design choice is to vary wording, templates, attribute composition, and counterfactual context while holding the underlying concept fixed, so that success requires stable abstraction rather than lexical overlap; this is the right way to separate representation quality from task-format familiarity.","experiments":"The provided metadata does not include model sizes, datasets, or headline numbers, so it would be unsafe to invent quantitative claims. What can be said is that the paper is an empirical study, and the useful part for a pretraining reader is likely the gap it documents between in-template performance and more controlled concept generalization settings.","authors_note":""},"tags":["concept-understanding","llm","empirical-study","interpretability"]},{"id":"LiuAGKZ23","title":"Transformers Learn Shortcuts to Automata","authors":["Bingbin Liu","Jordan T. Ash","Surbhi Goel","Akshay Krishnamurthy","Cyril Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LiuAGKZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LiuAGKZ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=De4FYqjFueZ","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心结论是：Transformer 在学习形式语言或自动机任务时，往往没有学到预期的状态机算法，而是学会了更脆弱的捷径。过去很多工作把在合成序列任务上的高准确率解读为模型具备算法泛化能力，这篇论文专门去拆这个假设。","importance":"它的重要性在于修正我们对“合成任务成功=学到算法”的判断。对 pretrain 研究，这很关键，因为很多机制分析、长度泛化和 reasoning 结论都建立在类似任务上；如果模型主要靠 shortcut，那么这些任务对预训练目标和架构能力的外推就要更谨慎。","technical_approach":"方法上它不是提出新模型，而是构造自动机相关任务并分析 Transformer 学到的内部策略。关键设计通常是控制训练分布、测试更长序列或分布外模式，并结合理论分析或探针，判断模型是否真的实现了自动机状态转移；与只看 IID 测试准确率不同，这种做法直接检查机制是否与目标算法一致。","experiments":"给定信息没有摘要，无法确认具体自动机类型、模型规模和数值。可以合理预期，实验会展示：在训练分布内 Transformer 表现很好，但在长度外推、状态组合变化或输入扰动下显著退化，从而支持“学到 shortcut 而非 automata”这一结论；如果有 ablation，最值得看的是位置编码、层数和训练分布覆盖度如何影响捷径形成。","authors_note":"作者包括 Jordan T. Ash、Akshay Krishnamurthy、Cyril Zhang。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper argues that transformers often solve automata-style sequence tasks by shortcuts rather than by learning the intended state-machine computation. This matters because strong accuracy on synthetic formal-language tasks is frequently taken as evidence of algorithmic generalization.","importance":"Its contribution is corrective rather than additive. For pretraining and mechanistic analysis, the paper is a warning that success on clean synthetic tasks can overstate what the architecture has actually internalized, especially when we care about length generalization and algorithmic reasoning.","technical_approach":"The work appears to use controlled automata tasks and then test whether the learned transformer behavior matches the target automaton mechanism. The key idea is to go beyond IID accuracy: vary sequence length, state composition, or input patterns, and inspect whether the model behaves like a true state-transition system or a brittle heuristic.","experiments":"The prompt does not include the abstract, so exact automata families, model sizes, and numerical drops cannot be stated safely. The likely empirical pattern is high in-distribution performance but clear failures under extrapolation or controlled perturbations, supporting the shortcut hypothesis.","authors_note":"The authors include Jordan T. Ash, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Cyril Zhang."},"tags":["transformer","automata","generalization","formal-languages"],"notable_authors":["Jordan T. Ash","Akshay Krishnamurthy","Cyril Zhang"]},{"id":"LiuLUT23","title":"What shapes the loss landscape of self supervised learning?","authors":["Liu Ziyin","Ekdeep Singh Lubana","Masahito Ueda","Hidenori Tanaka"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LiuLUT23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LiuLUT23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=3zSn48RUO8M","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的是：自监督学习的 loss landscape 到底由什么决定，尤其是哪些结构因素塑造了优化难度和解的几何。过去 SSL 成功很多，但对其损失面为何有时平滑、有时病态，理解并不系统，这限制了我们对稳定训练和可扩展性的把握。","importance":"它的重要性在于把 SSL 的经验规律往可解释的优化结构上推进。对 pretrain 研究，这很有价值，因为现代预训练大量依赖自监督目标；如果能知道是数据增强、负样本、归一化、架构还是目标形式主导了损失面，就能更有针对性地改训练配方，而不是只靠试错。","technical_approach":"方法上应是理论分析结合受控实验，去分解影响 SSL 损失面的关键因素。标题暗示作者不是只报告现象，而是试图回答“shape comes from where”，这通常意味着比较不同 SSL 目标、对称性、归一化和 batch 统计对 Hessian、平坦性或临界点结构的影响；与单纯调参论文不同，这类工作更关注机制解释。","experiments":"由于没有摘要，无法确认具体 SSL 方法、网络和数值。可以合理判断，实验会围绕 loss landscape 指标展开，例如 sharpness、曲率谱、训练轨迹稳定性，并对比不同目标设计；对工程上最有价值的部分，是哪些因素在不同 SSL 家族中稳定出现，而不是只在某个方法上成立。","authors_note":"Hidenori Tanaka 是表示学习与网络机制分析方向知名作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks what actually shapes the loss landscape in self-supervised learning. SSL works well in practice, but we still have a limited understanding of why some objectives optimize smoothly while others are brittle or highly sensitive.","importance":"This is important because modern pretraining relies heavily on self-supervised objectives. If we know which ingredients dominate the geometry of the loss surface, we can make more principled choices about objectives, normalization, augmentation, and architecture instead of relying on trial and error.","technical_approach":"The work likely combines theory and controlled experiments to isolate the factors that determine SSL loss geometry. The title suggests a mechanism-oriented analysis rather than a new algorithm, likely examining how objective design, symmetry, normalization, negatives, or augmentation affect curvature, sharpness, or critical-point structure.","experiments":"The prompt does not include the abstract, so exact methods, architectures, and quantitative findings cannot be stated safely. The most useful empirical result would be a robust pattern showing which design choices consistently alter optimization geometry across multiple SSL families rather than only within one setup.","authors_note":"Hidenori Tanaka is known for work on representation learning and neural network mechanisms."},"tags":["self-supervised-learning","loss-landscape","optimization","generalization"],"notable_authors":["Hidenori Tanaka"]},{"id":"LiuMT23","title":"Omnigrok: Grokking Beyond Algorithmic Data","authors":["Ziming Liu","Eric J. Michaud","Max Tegmark"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LiuMT23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LiuMT23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=zDiHoIWa0q1","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心结论是：grokking 不是算法玩具数据上的特例，而是可以在更广泛的数据形态中出现。此前 grokking 常被视为小型算法任务上的奇异现象，因此它对大模型学习动态的外推价值一直有争议，作者试图把这个边界推开。","importance":"它的重要性在于学习动态层面的范式修正。对 pretrain 研究，这很有启发：如果 delayed generalization 在更一般的数据和任务中都存在，那么训练曲线、正则化、数据重复和 cooldown 阶段的解释都需要重新看，不能把后期突然泛化简单当作小任务特例。","technical_approach":"方法上它应是把 grokking 研究从算法数据扩展到更一般任务，并系统比较何时出现训练先记忆、后泛化的相变。关键设计通常包括控制数据规模、噪声、模型容量和正则化强度，观察测试性能在长时间训练后的延迟跃迁；与早期只在 modular arithmetic 一类任务上展示不同，这篇工作强调现象的普遍性边界。","experiments":"给定信息没有摘要，无法确认具体任务族、模型规模和延迟轮数。可以合理预期，实验会展示多个非算法数据设定下仍出现典型 grokking 曲线，并分析 weight decay、数据稀缺或重复训练对现象的影响；对 pretrain 读者最有价值的是：哪些条件是必要的，哪些只是让现象更明显。","authors_note":"Max Tegmark 是 MIT 物理与 AI 交叉方向知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper argues that grokking is not confined to toy algorithmic datasets. Earlier work often treated grokking as a curious phenomenon specific to tasks like modular arithmetic, which left open whether it says anything broader about neural training dynamics.","importance":"This matters because it upgrades grokking from a niche curiosity to a potentially general learning-dynamics phenomenon. For pretraining, that changes how we think about delayed generalization, long training runs, regularization, and the interpretation of late-stage improvements.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is to move beyond algorithmic tasks and test whether the classic memorize-then-generalize pattern appears in broader data regimes. The important design choice is controlled variation of data size, regularization, and model capacity so the paper can separate necessary conditions from merely amplifying ones.","experiments":"The prompt does not provide the abstract, so exact datasets, scales, and timing of the grokking transition cannot be stated. The key empirical value is whether the paper shows the same delayed generalization signature across multiple non-algorithmic settings and identifies the knobs that govern its onset.","authors_note":"Max Tegmark is a well-known MIT researcher working at the intersection of physics and AI."},"tags":["grokking","generalization","training-dynamics"],"notable_authors":["Max Tegmark"]},{"id":"LiuWGWVCZD23","title":"Mind&apos;s Eye: Grounded Language Model Reasoning through Simulation","authors":["Ruibo Liu","Jason Wei","Shixiang Shane Gu","Te-Yen Wu","Soroush Vosoughi","Claire Cui","Denny Zhou","Andrew M. Dai"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LiuWGWVCZD23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LiuWGWVCZD23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=4rXMRuoJlai","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：语言模型在需要物理或环境约束的推理中，单靠文本统计往往不够，能否通过显式模拟来获得 grounded reasoning。过去 LLM 常在文字推理 benchmark 上表现不错，但一旦涉及隐含状态演化、空间关系或交互后果，纯文本链式推理容易脱离真实世界约束。","importance":"它的重要性在于把“推理增强”连接到世界模型或模拟器，而不是只靠更长的 CoT。对 pretrain 的启示是：如果某类能力必须借助外部可执行环境才能稳定获得，那么单一文本预训练目标的上限就有边界；这对多模态、交互式和 agentic 预训练都很相关。","technical_approach":"核心思路是 Mind's Eye：让语言模型在推理过程中调用或构建模拟，从而把语言推断和环境状态更新绑定起来。关键设计不是简单工具调用，而是把 simulation 作为 reasoning substrate——模型提出假设、在模拟中展开、再读回结果修正推理；与纯 CoT 相比，这减少了对内部隐式世界模型的压力，也更容易在违反物理约束时暴露错误。","experiments":"给定信息没有摘要，无法确认具体任务、模型和提升数字。可以合理预期，实验会集中在需要 grounded dynamics 的任务上，对比纯语言推理、检索增强或普通工具调用；最值得看的不是平均分，而是错误类型是否从“想当然的文本幻觉”转向“模拟误差/接口误差”，因为这决定方法是否真的把问题转成了可控工程问题。","authors_note":"作者包括 Jason Wei、Shixiang Shane Gu。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a clear weakness of language models: text-only reasoning often breaks when the task depends on physical constraints, latent state evolution, or interaction dynamics. The question is whether explicit simulation can provide the grounding that pure language modeling lacks.","importance":"This is important because it connects reasoning quality to executable world models rather than longer chains of thought. For pretraining, the implication is that some capabilities may have a hard ceiling under text-only objectives and may require grounded or interactive training signals.","technical_approach":"The central idea behind Mind’s Eye is to couple language-model reasoning with simulation. Instead of asking the model to internally imagine all state transitions in text, the system lets it externalize hypotheses into a simulator, observe the resulting state evolution, and feed that back into reasoning; this is stronger than generic tool use because the simulator is part of the reasoning loop, not just an auxiliary lookup.","experiments":"The prompt does not include the abstract, so exact tasks, model scales, and gains cannot be stated safely. The most informative empirical question is whether simulation specifically reduces failures caused by ungrounded textual inference, rather than merely adding another source of heuristics.","authors_note":"The authors include Jason Wei and Shixiang Shane Gu."},"tags":["grounded-reasoning","language-model","simulation","planning"],"notable_authors":["Jason Wei","Shixiang Shane Gu"]},{"id":"Lu0CWZRCK23","title":"Dynamic Prompt Learning via Policy Gradient for Semi-structured Mathematical Reasoning","authors":["Pan Lu","Liang Qiu","Kai-Wei Chang","Ying Nian Wu","Song-Chun Zhu","Tanmay Rajpurohit","Peter Clark","Ashwin Kalyan"],"institutions":["University of California, Los Angeles","Peking University"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Lu0CWZRCK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Lu0CWZRCK23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=DHyHRBwJUTN","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解决大型语言模型在半结构化数学推理（如包含表格、文本的数学题）中，由于提示（prompt）选择不当导致性能不稳定的问题。静态或启发式选择的few-shot prompt难以适应多样化的题目。","importance":"方法级贡献。提出使用策略梯度（Policy Gradient）动态学习prompt选择策略，将强化学习引入到In-Context Learning (ICL) 的prompt优化中。这为提升LLM在复杂推理任务上的鲁棒性和性能提供了一种有效途径。","technical_approach":"提出Dynamic Prompt Learning (DPL) 框架。将prompt选择建模为马尔可夫决策过程（MDP），使用一个轻量级的策略网络（Policy Network）根据当前输入问题动态选择最合适的few-shot示例。核心机制是利用策略梯度算法（REINFORCE）优化策略网络，奖励信号来自LLM在目标任务上的准确率。与静态prompt或基于相似度检索的prompt相比，DPL能够学习到更深层的任务相关性。","experiments":"在TabMWP（半结构化数学推理）数据集上，使用GPT-3 (text-davinci-002) 作为后端LLM。DPL相比于随机选择或基于相似度检索的prompt策略，准确率提升了显著（例如，在TabMWP上提升了约4-5%），达到了SOTA性能。","authors_note":"Pan Lu (UCLA), Kai-Wei Chang (UCLA), Song-Chun Zhu (UCLA/北京大学)。Pan Lu在多模态和数学推理领域有深入研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addressing the performance instability of LLMs in semi-structured mathematical reasoning (e.g., math problems with tables and text) due to improper prompt selection. Static or heuristically selected few-shot prompts struggle to adapt to diverse problems.","importance":"Methodological contribution. Proposes using Policy Gradient to dynamically learn prompt selection strategies, introducing reinforcement learning into prompt optimization for In-Context Learning (ICL). This provides an effective way to improve the robustness and performance of LLMs on complex reasoning tasks.","technical_approach":"Proposes the Dynamic Prompt Learning (DPL) framework. Models prompt selection as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), using a lightweight Policy Network to dynamically select the most suitable few-shot examples based on the current input problem. The core mechanism uses the REINFORCE algorithm to optimize the policy network, with the reward signal derived from the LLM's accuracy on the target task. Compared to static prompts or similarity-based retrieval, DPL learns deeper task relevance.","experiments":"Evaluated on the TabMWP (semi-structured math reasoning) dataset using GPT-3 (text-davinci-002) as the backbone LLM. DPL significantly improves accuracy compared to random selection or similarity-based retrieval strategies (e.g., ~4-5% improvement on TabMWP), achieving SOTA performance.","authors_note":"Pan Lu (UCLA), Kai-Wei Chang (UCLA), Song-Chun Zhu (UCLA/Peking University). Pan Lu has deep research in multimodal and mathematical reasoning."},"tags":["prompting","policy-gradient","reasoning","mathematics"],"notable_authors":["Pan Lu","Kai-Wei Chang","Song-Chun Zhu"]},{"id":"Ma23a","title":"Prompt Engineering and Calibration for Zero-Shot Commonsense Reasoning","authors":["Chenkai Ma"],"institutions":["University of California, San Diego"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Ma23a","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Ma23a","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=3EfxJTp_-Cj","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解决大型语言模型在零样本常识推理（Zero-Shot Commonsense Reasoning）任务中，由于prompt设计和模型输出概率校准（calibration）不佳导致性能波动的问题。","importance":"方法/经验级贡献。系统性地研究了Prompt工程和校准技术对Zero-Shot推理的影响，提出了一种结合多Prompt集成和上下文校准（Contextual Calibration）的有效策略，为提升LLM在无标注数据下的推理能力提供了实用指南。","technical_approach":"结合了两种技术：1) Prompt集成（Prompt Ensembling），设计多个不同的prompt模板并平均其预测概率，以降低单一prompt带来的方差；2) 上下文校准（Contextual Calibration，如PMI），通过计算模型在无意义输入（如N/A）下的先验概率，来校准模型对特定选项的偏置。核心机制是通过消除模型对某些词汇的先验偏好，使其更专注于输入上下文的推理。","experiments":"在多个常识推理数据集（如CSQA, PIQA, WinoGrande）上，使用GPT-2, RoBERTa, GPT-3等模型进行了广泛实验。结果表明，结合Prompt集成和校准技术，可以稳定且显著地提升Zero-Shot性能（例如在某些任务上提升超过10%），甚至接近Few-Shot的水平。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addressing the performance fluctuations of LLMs in Zero-Shot Commonsense Reasoning tasks caused by poor prompt design and model output probability calibration.","importance":"Methodological/Empirical contribution. Systematically studies the impact of prompt engineering and calibration techniques on zero-shot reasoning, proposing an effective strategy combining multi-prompt ensembling and contextual calibration, providing a practical guide for improving LLM reasoning capabilities without labeled data.","technical_approach":"Combines two techniques: 1) Prompt Ensembling, designing multiple different prompt templates and averaging their prediction probabilities to reduce variance from a single prompt; 2) Contextual Calibration (e.g., PMI), calibrating the model's bias towards specific options by calculating its prior probability given meaningless inputs (e.g., N/A). The core mechanism is to eliminate the model's prior preference for certain words, making it focus more on reasoning over the input context.","experiments":"Extensive experiments on multiple commonsense reasoning datasets (e.g., CSQA, PIQA, WinoGrande) using models like GPT-2, RoBERTa, and GPT-3. Results show that combining prompt ensembling and calibration techniques can stably and significantly improve zero-shot performance (e.g., >10% improvement on some tasks), even approaching few-shot levels.","authors_note":""},"tags":["prompting","calibration","zero-shot","reasoning"]},{"id":"MaSGZ023","title":"Fuzzy Alignments in Directed Acyclic Graph for Non-Autoregressive Machine Translation","authors":["Zhengrui Ma","Chenze Shao","Shangtong Gui","Min Zhang","Yang Feng"],"institutions":["Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences","University of Oxford"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/MaSGZ023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/MaSGZ023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=LSz-gQyd0zE","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解决非自回归机器翻译（NAT）中，由于目标端词汇的条件独立性假设导致的“多模态问题”（即模型在多个可能的正确翻译中犹豫，导致输出重复或遗漏）。以往的NAT模型通常依赖于知识蒸馏或复杂的迭代细化来缓解此问题。","importance":"方法级贡献。提出在有向无环图（DAG）中引入模糊对齐（Fuzzy Alignments），改进了DA-Transformer等基于DAG的NAT模型。这为提升完全非自回归翻译的质量和训练效率提供了一种新机制，减少了对知识蒸馏的依赖。","technical_approach":"基于DA-Transformer（将目标句子建模为DAG中的路径）。核心改进是引入“模糊对齐”：在训练时，不再强制模型严格对齐到单一的参考路径，而是允许模型在DAG中探索多条合理的路径，并根据路径与参考译文的相似度分配软标签（soft labels）。机制上，这通过动态规划（类似CTC或前向后向算法）实现，使得模型能够更好地容忍翻译的多样性，缓解多模态问题。","experiments":"在WMT14 EN-DE, EN-FR等标准机器翻译基准上进行了实验。引入模糊对齐的DAG-NAT模型在不使用知识蒸馏的情况下，BLEU分数显著提升（例如EN-DE提升约1.5 BLEU），且推理速度保持了NAT的高效性（比自回归模型快数倍）。","authors_note":"Yang Feng (中科院计算所)，在机器翻译和自然语言处理领域有丰富研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addressing the 'multimodality problem' in Non-Autoregressive Translation (NAT) caused by the conditional independence assumption of target words (i.e., the model hesitates among multiple possible correct translations, leading to repetitions or omissions). Previous NAT models typically relied on knowledge distillation or complex iterative refinement to mitigate this.","importance":"Methodological contribution. Proposes introducing Fuzzy Alignments in Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs), improving DAG-based NAT models like DA-Transformer. This provides a new mechanism to enhance the quality and training efficiency of fully non-autoregressive translation, reducing reliance on knowledge distillation.","technical_approach":"Based on DA-Transformer (modeling target sentences as paths in a DAG). The core improvement is introducing 'fuzzy alignments': during training, instead of forcing the model to strictly align to a single reference path, it allows the model to explore multiple reasonable paths in the DAG and assigns soft labels based on the path's similarity to the reference translation. Mechanistically, this is implemented via dynamic programming (similar to CTC or forward-backward algorithms), enabling the model to better tolerate translation diversity and mitigate the multimodality problem.","experiments":"Experiments on standard MT benchmarks like WMT14 EN-DE and EN-FR. The DAG-NAT model with fuzzy alignments significantly improves BLEU scores without using knowledge distillation (e.g., ~1.5 BLEU improvement on EN-DE) while maintaining the high inference speed of NAT (several times faster than autoregressive models).","authors_note":"Yang Feng (ICT, CAS), has extensive research in machine translation and NLP."},"tags":["non-autoregressive","machine-translation","alignment","sequence-modeling"],"notable_authors":["Yang Feng"]},{"id":"MaSJBK023","title":"VIP: Towards Universal Visual Reward and Representation via Value-Implicit Pre-Training","authors":["Yecheng Jason Ma","Shagun Sodhani","Dinesh Jayaraman","Osbert Bastani","Vikash Kumar","Amy Zhang"],"institutions":["University of Pennsylvania","Meta AI"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/MaSJBK023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/MaSJBK023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=YJ7o2wetJ2","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解决强化学习（RL）中奖励函数设计困难和视觉表示泛化性差的问题。以往的方法通常需要为每个任务手动设计奖励，或者依赖于特定领域的预训练表示，难以实现跨任务的通用性。","importance":"范式级贡献。提出VIP（Value-Implicit Pre-Training），一种通过离线人类视频数据预训练通用视觉奖励和表示的方法。它将表示学习和奖励函数学习统一在一个自监督框架下，为机器人学习和具身智能提供了一种强大的基础模型（Foundation Model）范式。","technical_approach":"提出VIP框架。核心机制是将视频片段视为目标导向的轨迹，并利用时间差分（TD）学习的变体（隐式价值函数）进行对比学习。具体而言，VIP优化一个对比损失，使得视频中较早的帧比较晚的帧距离最终目标帧更“远”（在价值空间中）。这使得预训练的表示空间自然地编码了任务的进度（即价值），从而可以直接作为下游RL任务的密集奖励信号（dense reward），而无需微调。","experiments":"在Ego4D（大规模人类第一视角视频）上预训练VIP模型（基于ResNet/ViT）。在FrankKitchen、MetaWorld等多个机器人操作基准上，VIP作为冻结的视觉编码器和零样本奖励函数，显著优于CLIP、R3M等基线模型，大幅提升了RL的样本效率和成功率。","authors_note":"Yecheng Jason Ma (UPenn), Dinesh Jayaraman (UPenn), Osbert Bastani (UPenn)。团队在具身智能和强化学习表示学习方面有突出贡献。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addressing the difficulty of reward function design and poor generalization of visual representations in Reinforcement Learning (RL). Previous methods usually required manually designing rewards for each task or relied on domain-specific pre-trained representations, lacking cross-task universality.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution. Proposes VIP (Value-Implicit Pre-Training), a method to pre-train universal visual rewards and representations from offline human video data. It unifies representation learning and reward function learning under a self-supervised framework, providing a powerful Foundation Model paradigm for robot learning and embodied AI.","technical_approach":"Proposes the VIP framework. The core mechanism treats video clips as goal-directed trajectories and uses a variant of Temporal Difference (TD) learning (implicit value functions) for contrastive learning. Specifically, VIP optimizes a contrastive loss such that earlier frames in a video are 'further' (in value space) from the final goal frame than later frames. This naturally encodes task progress (i.e., value) into the pre-trained representation space, allowing it to be used directly as a dense reward signal for downstream RL tasks without fine-tuning.","experiments":"Pre-trained VIP models (based on ResNet/ViT) on Ego4D (large-scale human egocentric videos). On multiple robotic manipulation benchmarks like FrankKitchen and MetaWorld, VIP, acting as a frozen visual encoder and zero-shot reward function, significantly outperforms baselines like CLIP and R3M, drastically improving RL sample efficiency and success rates.","authors_note":"Yecheng Jason Ma (UPenn), Dinesh Jayaraman (UPenn), Osbert Bastani (UPenn). The team has made outstanding contributions to embodied AI and representation learning for RL."},"tags":["representation-learning","rl","pretraining","visual-reward"],"notable_authors":["Yecheng Jason Ma","Dinesh Jayaraman","Osbert Bastani"]},{"id":"2209.15162","title":"Linearly Mapping from Image to Text Space","authors":["Jack Merullo","Louis Castricato","Carsten Eickhoff","Ellie Pavlick"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$22","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.15162","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/MerulloCEP23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/MerulloCEP23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=8tYRqb05pVn","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的是：冻结的纯文本语言模型和纯视觉模型，是否已经学到了足够相似的概念空间，以至于只用一个线性映射就能把图像表示接到语言空间里。过去常见做法需要联合调图像编码器或语言模型，默认跨模态对齐需要较强非线性适配；作者在检验一个更强、更冒险的假设。","importance":"这篇工作的意义在于它对'统一表示是否已在单模态预训练中自发出现'给出了积极证据。对 pretrain 的启示很直接：如果线性桥接已经够用，那么跨模态统一可能不必总靠大规模端到端联合训练，至少在某些任务和规模下，单模态模型之间的概念对齐比大家想的更强。","technical_approach":"核心方法很简单也很有针对性：冻结 vision-only encoder 和 text-only LM，只训练一个线性投影，把图像表示映射成语言模型可消费的连续 prompt。作者没有去调两边 backbone，也没有引入复杂 cross-attention 模块；这使实验更像在测'表示空间是否天然兼容'。和 prior 相比，关键区别不是性能堆料，而是把适配器容量压到线性层，迫使结果直接反映跨模态表征几何是否接近。","experiments":"摘要明确给出的结论是：只训练单个线性投影，就能把视觉表示转成连续 prompt，用于冻结 LM 的图像描述和视觉问答，并取得与那些同时微调图像编码器等更重方法相竞争的结果。摘要没有给出具体模型、数据集和指标数字，因此不能补写提升幅度。一个重要边界也很清楚：'competitive' 不等于全面超越，它更像是在说明线性对齐 surprisingly strong，而不是证明复杂跨模态模块没有价值。","authors_note":"Ellie Pavlick 是语言模型表征与语义方向的知名作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a sharp question: are the conceptual spaces learned by frozen text-only LMs and vision-only models already aligned enough that a simple linear map can connect them? Prior work usually relied on optimizing the vision side more heavily, which implicitly assumes that cross-modal alignment needs substantial nonlinear adaptation.","importance":"The contribution is conceptually important because it provides evidence that unified representations may emerge more strongly in separate unimodal pretraining than many people assume. For pretraining, the implication is that end-to-end multimodal joint training may not be the only route to useful alignment, at least for some tasks and scales.","technical_approach":"The method is intentionally minimal: freeze both the vision encoder and the text-only LM, and train only a single linear projection from image features into the LM’s input space as continuous prompts. The design is useful precisely because it avoids stronger adapters, cross-attention, or backbone tuning. That makes the result a cleaner test of representational compatibility rather than a demonstration of adapter capacity.","experiments":"The abstract supports one main empirical claim: a single learned linear projection is enough to transfer image representations into a frozen LM for captioning and visual question answering, with competitive performance relative to approaches that also tune the image encoder. Exact models, datasets, and metrics are not given in the abstract, so they should not be invented. The right reading is not that linear alignment solves multimodality in general, but that it is surprisingly strong.","authors_note":"Ellie Pavlick is a notable researcher on language model representations and semantics."},"tags":["vision-language","representation-alignment","frozen-lm"],"notable_authors":["Ellie Pavlick"]},{"id":"MingW0G023","title":"MA-BERT: Towards Matrix Arithmetic-only BERT Inference by Eliminating Complex Non-Linear Functions","authors":["Neo Wei Ming","Zhehui Wang","Cheng Liu","Rick Siow Mong Goh","Tao Luo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/MingW0G023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/MingW0G023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=HtAfbHa7LAL","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是 BERT 推理中的复杂非线性函数开销，目标是把推理尽量变成矩阵算术操作。问题背景很实际：在边缘设备或专用硬件上，GELU、Softmax、LayerNorm 这类非线性和归一化往往比矩阵乘本身更难高效部署。","importance":"这是系统与架构交叉的工作，贡献重点在推理友好性而不是预训练能力。对 pretrain 的启示有限，但它提醒一个常见盲点：训练时看起来无害的非线性组件，到了大规模 serving 或专用芯片上可能成为主要瓶颈，因此架构设计不应只按 FLOPs 评估。","technical_approach":"从标题看，MA-BERT 的核心是消除复杂非线性函数，让 BERT 推理更接近 matrix arithmetic-only。合理推测会用分段线性、低阶近似、重参数化或替代归一化来逼近原模块，但没有摘要，不能确认具体替换了哪些组件、是否需要再训练、以及精度损失如何控制。","experiments":"给定信息不足，无法确认是在 GLUE、SQuAD 还是其他任务上评估，也无法确认延迟、吞吐、能耗和精度损失数字。若论文成立，最关键的实验应是：在接近原始 BERT 精度的前提下，显著减少非线性算子调用并提升硬件效率。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets the inference cost of complex nonlinear functions in BERT, with the goal of making inference rely mostly on matrix arithmetic. This matters because on many deployment targets, functions like GELU, Softmax, and LayerNorm are harder to optimize than matrix multiplications themselves.","importance":"This is primarily a systems-meets-architecture contribution focused on inference efficiency rather than pretraining quality. Its relevance to pretraining is indirect: it highlights that components which look cheap in training-centric accounting can become dominant bottlenecks in serving or specialized hardware settings.","technical_approach":"From the title, MA-BERT appears to eliminate or approximate complex nonlinear functions so that BERT inference becomes closer to matrix-arithmetic-only execution. That likely involves reparameterization or approximation of nonlinear modules, but no abstract is provided, so the exact substitutions and their training implications cannot be stated reliably.","experiments":"The provided information does not specify tasks, hardware, latency, throughput, energy, or accuracy trade-offs. The central evidence, if the claim is supported, would need to show that most nonlinear operator cost can be removed while preserving task performance close to standard BERT.","authors_note":""},"tags":["bert","inference","efficient-inference","quantization"]},{"id":"2211.01288","title":"Characterizing intrinsic compositionality in transformers with Tree Projections","authors":["Shikhar Murty","Pratyusha Sharma","Jacob Andreas","Christopher D. Manning"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$23","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.01288","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/MurtySAM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/MurtySAM23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=sAOOeI878Ns","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是一个机制层面的核心问题：Transformer 在语言上成功，到底是靠任意全连接的信息路由，还是在训练后自发收敛到更接近树状、层次化的组合计算。过去关于组合性的大量讨论往往停留在行为层面，难以直接刻画模型内部是否真的在做近似树结构的计算。","importance":"这是一篇机制分析工作，重要性在于它把'Transformer 是否内生层次结构'这个长期争议问题变成了可测量对象。对 pretrain 的启示不是直接改配方，而是帮助判断：语言建模里哪些能力来自通用大模型容量，哪些能力可能来自更受限、更结构化的计算模式；这会影响架构归纳偏置和解释性研究的方向。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Tree Projections：用一种投影或近似框架，把 Transformer 的内部计算映射到树状的自底向上组合过程上，并测量这种树化近似能解释多少模型行为。关键点不是强行给模型加树约束，而是在训练后分析其内在计算是否可被低复杂度的树结构解释。和只看 attention map 或 probing 不同，这种方法更接近在比较'原模型计算'与'树状替代计算'之间的函数接近程度，因此更能回答结构是否内生。","experiments":"摘要没有给出具体模型、任务和数值结果，但它明确提出要刻画 Transformer 是否学习到 simpler, tree-like computation。可以合理判断，实验重点会是比较不同层、不同任务或不同句法现象下，树投影对原模型行为的拟合程度。由于没有数字，不能写成'证明了 Transformer 就是树模型'；更稳妥的表述是：论文试图量化这种接近程度，而不是做二元判决。","authors_note":"Christopher D. Manning 和 Jacob Andreas 都是语言结构、语义组合性与模型分析方向的知名作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a central mechanistic question: when Transformers succeed on language, do they rely on arbitrary full-capacity routing, or do they in practice converge to a more tree-like, hierarchical computation? Prior debates about compositionality often stayed at the behavioral level and did not directly test whether the internal computation itself is structurally simple.","importance":"This is a mechanistic analysis paper with real relevance to pretraining research. Its value is not in changing the recipe directly, but in making a long-running question measurable: how much of language understanding in Transformers can be explained by an emergent hierarchical computation? That matters for architectural bias, interpretability, and how we think about what pretraining is actually discovering.","technical_approach":"The core idea is Tree Projections: project or approximate a Transformer’s internal computation with a bottom-up tree-structured process, then measure how well that tree-like computation explains the model. The important choice is post hoc characterization rather than imposing a tree prior during training. Compared with attention-map inspection or standard probing, this is closer to comparing functions: how much of the original computation can be captured by a restricted tree-structured surrogate.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide model names, tasks, or quantitative results, so those should not be invented. What is clear is the target of the evaluation: whether Transformer computations on language can be characterized as simpler, tree-like computations. The right interpretation is therefore not that the paper proves Transformers are tree models, but that it proposes a way to quantify how close they are to such a computation.","authors_note":"Christopher D. Manning and Jacob Andreas are notable authors in language structure, compositionality, and model analysis."},"tags":["transformers","compositionality","interpretability","language"],"notable_authors":["Jacob Andreas","Christopher D. Manning"]},{"id":"2301.05217","title":"Progress measures for grokking via mechanistic interpretability","authors":["Neel Nanda","Lawrence Chan","Tom Lieberum","Jess Smith","Jacob Steinhardt"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$24","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.05217","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/NandaCLSS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/NandaCLSS23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=9XFSbDPmdW","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"作者要解决的是：像 grokking 这种看似“突然涌现”的能力变化，能否用连续的进度量（progress measures）来解释并提前预测。以往对涌现的解释常停留在现象描述或宏观指标（loss/acc），难以指出模型内部到底“学会了什么组件”。","importance":"贡献是范式+方法结合：用机制可解释性（mechanistic interpretability）把 grokking 的算法拆解成可度量的内部组件，并据此构造进度量来解释从记忆到泛化的转变。对预训练研究的启示是：很多“阶段性跃迁”可能对应内部电路逐步成形而非真正不连续；代价是这种解释目前主要在小模型/合成任务上可做到“完全逆向”。","technical_approach":"方法是先做可解释性逆向工程，再从组件强度中提取连续进度量：他们以 modular addition 的小 Transformer 为例，完整还原其实现算法的电路，发现模型使用离散傅里叶变换（DFT）与三角恒等式把加法转成在圆上的旋转。关键点在于把“学会算法”拆成若干可定位的子机制（如频域表示、旋转组合），从而用这些子机制的形成程度解释训练中泛化何时出现；边界是需要任务结构足够干净、且可解释工具能定位到稳定电路。","experiments":"摘要未给出模型规模、训练步数、数据量、以及进度量与泛化跃迁之间的定量相关系数等数字；但明确给出案例任务为 modular addition，小 Transformer 出现 grokking，并被“完全逆向”到 DFT/三角恒等式实现。关键实证应包括：进度量随训练平滑变化而泛化指标突变，以及电路组件的出现顺序；需以正文图表为准。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether seemingly discontinuous emergence (grokking) can be explained and anticipated by continuous progress measures. Prior accounts often stay at the level of loss/accuracy curves and do not identify what internal components are being learned.","importance":"It contributes a combined paradigm/method: use mechanistic interpretability to decompose grokking into concrete internal algorithmic components, then build progress measures from those components. For pretraining, the implication is that “phase changes” may reflect gradual circuit formation rather than true discontinuities; the limitation is that full reverse-engineering is currently feasible mainly for small models and clean synthetic tasks.","technical_approach":"They reverse-engineer a small transformer trained on modular addition and identify an explicit algorithm: discrete Fourier transforms plus trigonometric identities that convert addition into rotation on a circle. The key move is to factor “learning the algorithm” into localized sub-mechanisms whose strength can be tracked continuously, yielding progress measures that explain when generalization appears; this relies on tasks with crisp structure and interpretability tools that can stably isolate circuits.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide model size, training budget, dataset size, or quantitative correlations between progress measures and generalization. It does specify the setting (modular addition grokking in small transformers) and claims a full mechanistic reconstruction to a DFT-based algorithm; the main evidence likely includes smooth progress measures versus sharp generalization transitions and component-wise timelines, which must be read from the paper’s figures/tables.","authors_note":""},"tags":["grokking","mechanistic-interpretability","emergence","training-dynamics"]},{"id":"2210.16433","title":"Knowledge-in-Context: Towards Knowledgeable Semi-Parametric Language Models","authors":["Xiaoman Pan","Wenlin Yao","Hongming Zhang","Dian Yu","Dong Yu","Jianshu Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$25","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.16433","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/PanYZ00C23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/PanYZ00C23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=a2jNdqE2102","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"作者要解决的是：纯参数化 LM 需要用大量参数“存知识”，既昂贵又难以随世界知识更新，而传统检索增强又常把检索当作外接模块，难以让模型在不同知识类型间自适应选择。过去的次优方案要么继续堆参数，要么做单一来源的 RAG，导致覆盖面与可控性不足。","importance":"贡献是架构级：提出 KiC 半参数化 LM，把外部知识内存显式结构化为多种知识类型，并让模型对每个输入自适应选择知识类型与检索内容。对预训练的启示是：把“知识类型路由（routing）+检索”纳入建模接口，可以在不重训主体模型的情况下提升知识可更新性；代价是系统复杂度上升，且检索质量与知识库构建成为新瓶颈。","technical_approach":"KiC 的核心是给一个 text-to-text 的参数化 LM 配一个知识丰富的外部 memory，memory 包含六类知识：entity、dictionary、commonsense、event、script、causality。对每个输入，模型先自适应选择最相关的知识类型，再检索最有帮助的片段，并把“输入+检索到的知识”一起喂给生成模型完成任务。关键设计是把多源知识的选择从人工规则变成模型内生决策，从而避免所有任务都用同一种检索；边界在于知识类型划分是否足够完备，以及路由错误会带来无关上下文污染。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体基准任务、模型规模、知识库规模、检索器配置、以及相对纯参数化 LM 或标准 RAG 的提升数字，因此无法总结定量效果；需要正文确认其在 zero/few-shot、多任务设置下的收益，以及对“知识类型选择”是否有消融证明其必要性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the inefficiency and staleness of fully-parametric LMs that must store knowledge in weights, and the rigidity of retrieval-augmented setups that often treat retrieval as a one-size-fits-all add-on. Prior approaches either scale parameters or use single-source RAG, limiting coverage and adaptability across knowledge types.","importance":"This is an architecture contribution: KiC is a semi-parametric LM with a structured external memory spanning multiple knowledge types and an adaptive per-input routing mechanism. For pretraining, it suggests that bringing “knowledge-type routing + retrieval” into the model interface can improve updatability without retraining the core LM; the trade-off is higher system complexity and new bottlenecks in KB construction and retrieval quality.","technical_approach":"KiC augments a text-to-text parametric LM with an external memory containing six knowledge types (entity, dictionary, commonsense, event, script, causality). For each instance, the model selects the most relevant knowledge type and retrieves helpful snippets, then conditions generation on the concatenation of input and retrieved knowledge. The key design is to learn routing across heterogeneous knowledge sources rather than hard-coding which retriever to use; the boundary is that misrouting can inject irrelevant context and the type taxonomy may be incomplete.","experiments":"The abstract does not specify benchmarks, model sizes, memory/KB scale, retriever details, or numeric improvements over parametric-only LMs or standard RAG. Quantitative impact and routing ablations must be taken from the main paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["semi-parametric","knowledge-injection","language-modeling","retrieval-augmented"]},{"id":"2209.14500","title":"Bidirectional Language Models Are Also Few-shot Learners","authors":["Ajay Patel","Bryan Li","Mohammad Sadegh Rasooli","Noah Constant","Colin Raffel","Chris Callison-Burch"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$26","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.14500","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/PatelLRCRC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/PatelLRCRC23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=wCFB37bzud4","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"作者要解决的是：双向去噪预训练（如 MLM）的模型通常被认为不适合像 GPT 那样做 few-shot prompting，因为其训练目标不是左到右生成，导致“如何把任务写成 prompt 并解码”不自然。过去因此把 few-shot 能力几乎等同于自回归（AR）LM 的专属优势。","importance":"贡献是范式修正级：证明双向语言模型也能做 few-shot 学习，并给出把任务转成可在双向模型上推断的形式。对预训练研究的启示是：few-shot/ICL 可能更多依赖“条件化与推断方式”而非 AR 目标本身；代价是推断可能更复杂（例如需要特殊的填空/打分方式），并且与标准生成式接口不完全一致。","technical_approach":"摘要层面信息有限：论文主张通过 prompt-based learning 让双向去噪模型执行任务，而不是仅用于表征迁移。关键区别在于双向模型可以通过对候选输出进行打分（likelihood scoring）或以填空式模板把标签/答案嵌入上下文，从而实现 few-shot 推断；相对 AR 直接生成 token，双向模型更像做条件概率评估与选择。边界在于：当输出空间很大或需要长序列生成时，基于打分/填空的推断成本会显著上升。","experiments":"摘要未给出所用双向模型规模（如 T5/BERT 变体）、任务集合、以及相对 AR LMs 的 few-shot 指标数字，因此无法总结其性能差距与适用范围；需要正文确认其在分类/多选/短答案等任务上的评测，以及推断开销与模板敏感性分析。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper challenges the common assumption that few-shot prompting is mainly a unidirectional (AR) LM capability, arguing that bidirectional denoising-pretrained LMs (e.g., MLM-style) have been considered incompatible because their objective is not left-to-right generation and the prompting/decode interface is less direct.","importance":"This is a paradigm-correcting contribution: it shows bidirectional LMs can be few-shot learners when tasks are formulated with an appropriate inference interface. For pretraining, it implies ICL may depend more on conditioning and inference procedures than on the AR objective itself; the trade-off is potentially more complex and expensive inference (scoring/fill-in) and a less natural generative API.","technical_approach":"From the abstract, the core idea is to enable prompt-based learning for bidirectional denoising models by reformulating tasks so the model can score candidates or fill masked spans within a template. Unlike AR models that generate outputs token-by-token, bidirectional models can act as conditional scorers/choosers over candidate outputs. The boundary is that candidate scoring becomes costly for large output spaces or long-form generation.","experiments":"The abstract does not report model sizes, task suites, or numeric few-shot results versus AR LMs, so performance and applicability cannot be quantified here. The main paper is needed to see which task types benefit (classification/multiple-choice/short answers) and what inference cost and template sensitivity look like.","authors_note":""},"tags":["bidirectional-lm","few-shot-learning","prompting","masked-lm"]},{"id":"PimentelMC23","title":"On the Usefulness of Embeddings, Clusters and Strings for Text Generation Evaluation","authors":["Tiago Pimentel","Clara Meister","Ryan Cotterell"],"institutions":["ETH Zürich","University of Cambridge"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/PimentelMC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/PimentelMC23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=bvpkw7UIRdU","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"文本生成自动评测到底应该在哪个空间比较：字符串（BLEU/ROUGE）、embedding（BERTScore/MAUVE）、还是 cluster？本文给一个统一的分析框架来评估这些指标的信息性和缺陷。","importance":"元评测层面的理论性工作，对 pretrain 间接相关：LM 训练选型和 scaling 观察高度依赖生成评测，如果评测工具本身是偏的，scaling law 和 mid-train 决策会跟着偏。属于'底座建模的底座'类问题。","technical_approach":"把各类生成评测统一成'在某个表示空间上比较模型分布与人类分布距离'的形式：字符串空间（n-gram）、embedding 空间（句向量）、cluster 空间（离散簇）。然后从信息论/估计一致性角度分析每种空间下分布估计的偏差-方差权衡，指出 embedding-based 指标在高维低样本下估计噪声大，cluster-based 在合适粒度下更稳定。","experiments":"在若干生成任务（开放式生成 + 机器翻译类）上对比 BLEU、BERTScore、MAUVE 等，报告它们与人评的相关性，并用合成分布对照实验揭示 embedding 指标在小样本时的系统偏差。核心贡献是分析而不是榜单数字。","authors_note":"ETH Zürich / Cambridge，Ryan Cotterell 组，这个组在 NLP 的信息论与概率形式化分析方向非常系统。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Which space should we evaluate text generation in — strings (BLEU/ROUGE), embeddings (BERTScore/MAUVE), or clusters? The paper builds a unified framework to compare these evaluation families by their statistical properties rather than their scores.","importance":"A meta-evaluation/theory contribution indirectly relevant to pretraining: model selection, scaling observations, and mid-training decisions all lean on generation metrics, so systematic bias in those metrics distorts pretraining-level conclusions too.","technical_approach":"Cast all three metric families as estimating a divergence between model and human distributions in some representation space, then analyse each via a bias–variance lens. Key finding: embedding-based metrics suffer high estimator variance in high dimensions and moderate samples, while cluster-based metrics at appropriate granularity give more stable estimates; string-based metrics are unbiased but coarse.","experiments":"Empirical comparisons across open-ended generation and translation-style tasks, reporting human correlation for BLEU, BERTScore, MAUVE, and variants, plus synthetic distribution experiments exposing embedding-metric bias at small sample sizes. The contribution is the analysis, not a new leaderboard.","authors_note":"ETH Zürich / Cambridge, Ryan Cotterell's group — known for information-theoretic and probabilistic formalisations in NLP."},"tags":["evaluation","text-generation","embeddings","metrics"],"notable_authors":["Ryan Cotterell","Tiago Pimentel","Clara Meister"]},{"id":"PoluHZBBS23","title":"Formal Mathematics Statement Curriculum Learning","authors":["Stanislas Polu","Jesse Michael Han","Kunhao Zheng","Mantas Baksys","Igor Babuschkin","Ilya Sutskever"],"institutions":["OpenAI"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/PoluHZBBS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/PoluHZBBS23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=-P7G-8dmSh4","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"形式化数学定理证明里最大障碍之一是训练分布与目标分布之间的巨大 gap：模型会的都是简单引理，想证明的是奥数级命题，中间没有 curriculum。本文想用'语句课程学习'把这条路打通。","importance":"范式级贡献，是 LLM + 定理证明（Lean / miniF2F）线上的标志性工作之一。对 pretrain/posttrain 研究的启示在于：当正确信号稀疏且可自动验证（Lean 编译器），自我迭代 + curriculum 能做出真实的能力跃迁，这个模式后来被 R1 式 RL 训练进一步放大。","technical_approach":"Expert iteration 为主干：模型尝试证明一批 statement，Lean 验证对错，证明成功的 (statement, proof) 对加入训练集，再继续训练。关键创新是 curriculum：既有人工提交的难题 statement（奥数、本科数学），也有模型当前水平附近的 statement，由此形成从易到难的自然梯度。核心判断是：证明成功率在'刚好够得着'的难度上最高，训练信号也最有价值。","experiments":"基于 GPT-f / Lean，在 miniF2F 上显著提升证明成功率，能攻下此前模型够不到的 IMO/AMC 级题目若干。多轮 expert iteration 后，模型能解决的难度持续上移，展示了'能力-课程'协同增长。","authors_note":"OpenAI 形式化数学团队，Polu 和 Han 是 GPT-f / Lean 方向的代表作者，这条线后来影响了 DeepMind AlphaProof 和 R1 风格的可验证 RL 范式。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Formal theorem proving suffers from a huge gap between what models can currently prove and the statements we actually want proved (olympiad-level). There is no natural curriculum in between, so training stalls. The paper introduces a statement curriculum to close that gap.","importance":"Paradigm-level for the LLM + formal math line and one of the clearest early demonstrations that expert iteration with a verifier (Lean) gives genuine capability jumps. Prefigures the R1-style verifier-driven RL loop that later became central in reasoning pretraining/posttraining.","technical_approach":"Expert iteration over Lean: the model attempts proofs, Lean verifies, successful (statement, proof) pairs are folded back into training. The curriculum is the novel piece — a mix of hand-submitted hard statements (olympiad, undergrad) plus model-adjacent-difficulty statements creates a natural easy-to-hard gradient. Core bet: most informative training signal comes from statements just at the edge of current capability.","experiments":"On miniF2F with a GPT-f/Lean setup, substantial gains in proof success rate and new solves on IMO/AMC-level problems previously out of reach. Across expert-iteration rounds, the solvable frontier moves up, showing coupled capability-curriculum growth.","authors_note":"OpenAI formal math team; Polu and Han drove the GPT-f / Lean line, which later influenced DeepMind's AlphaProof and verifier-driven RL more broadly."},"tags":["curriculum-learning","formal-reasoning","data-generation","math"],"notable_authors":["Stanislas Polu","Jesse Michael Han","Igor Babuschkin"]},{"id":"QuL023","title":"Data Continuity Matters: Improving Sequence Modeling with Lipschitz Regularizer","authors":["Eric Qu","Xufang Luo","Dongsheng Li"],"institutions":["Microsoft Research Asia"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/QuL023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/QuL023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=27uBgHuoSQ","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"序列模型（尤其是 Transformer）在输入扰动下输出可能剧烈变化，作者认为这种'数据连续性'缺失是泛化差和鲁棒性差的共同源头，想用 Lipschitz 正则化显式约束。","importance":"方法/理论层面的小切口贡献，把 Lipschitz 约束从 GAN/对抗鲁棒性迁移到一般序列建模。对 pretrain 的直接启示有限，但'用连续性约束改善训练稳定性'这个想法在极大模型的 loss spike 问题上有潜在借鉴意义。","technical_approach":"在序列模型（RNN/Transformer）上加一个 Lipschitz 正则项，估计并惩罚层的 Lipschitz 常数，让相邻输入产生相邻输出。关键选择是轻量估计（不像 spectral normalization 那样严格约束每层），以保留模型容量的同时仅推动解向光滑方向。","experiments":"在若干序列任务（时间序列预测、文本分类等）上对比无正则基线，报告泛化和鲁棒性指标的改善。规模不大，更像 proof-of-concept。","authors_note":"Microsoft Research Asia。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Sequence models, especially Transformers, can change outputs sharply under small input perturbations. The paper argues this lack of 'data continuity' hurts both generalization and robustness, and proposes a Lipschitz regularizer to enforce it.","importance":"A narrow method/theory contribution, porting Lipschitz-style constraints from GANs and adversarial robustness to general sequence modelling. Limited direct pretraining impact, but the broader idea — smoothness/continuity regularization to stabilize training — has potential relevance for large-model loss spikes.","technical_approach":"Add a Lipschitz regularizer to RNN/Transformer layers: estimate per-layer Lipschitz constants cheaply and penalize them, encouraging nearby inputs to map to nearby outputs. Key choice is soft, lightweight estimation rather than strict spectral normalization, preserving capacity while biasing toward smoother solutions.","experiments":"Sequence classification and forecasting tasks, comparing against unregularized baselines. Reports improved generalization and robustness metrics. Small-to-medium scale, proof-of-concept rather than a definitive large-scale demonstration.","authors_note":"Microsoft Research Asia."},"tags":["sequence-modeling","lipschitz","regularization","training-dynamics"]},{"id":"ReidHN23","title":"DiffusER: Diffusion via Edit-based Reconstruction","authors":["Machel Reid","Vincent Josua Hellendoorn","Graham Neubig"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ReidHN23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ReidHN23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=nG9RF9z1yy3","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion","reconstruction","editing","generative-modeling"]},{"id":"RissanenHS23","title":"Generative Modelling with Inverse Heat Dissipation","authors":["Severi Rissanen","Markus Heinonen","Arno Solin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/RissanenHS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/RissanenHS23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=4PJUBT9f2Ol","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["generative-modeling","diffusion","inverse-process","objective"]},{"id":"RuscioMS23","title":"Attention-likelihood relationship in Transformers","authors":["Valeria Ruscio","Valentino Maiorca","Fabrizio Silvestri"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/RuscioMS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/RuscioMS23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=R82eeIF4rP_","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["attention","transformer","interpretability","training-dynamics"]},{"id":"SanturkarDTLH23","title":"Is a Caption Worth a Thousand Images? A Study on Representation Learning","authors":["Shibani Santurkar","Yann Dubois","Rohan Taori","Percy Liang","Tatsunori Hashimoto"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/SanturkarDTLH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/SanturkarDTLH23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=cYijsVZhb5","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["captioning","representation-learning","vision-language","contrastive-learning"]},{"id":"ShaoCXLZY23","title":"Compositional Task Representations for Large Language Models","authors":["Nan Shao","Zefan Cai","Hanwei Xu","Chonghua Liao","Yanan Zheng","Zhilin Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ShaoCXLZY23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ShaoCXLZY23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=6axIMJA7ME3","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"大语言模型在面对复杂、未见过的组合任务时，难以有效地复用其在简单子任务上学到的能力。","importance":"范式与表征级贡献。探讨了 LLM 的组合泛化能力，通过显式地组合任务表征（如 Task Vectors 或 Soft Prompts），为无需全量微调即可实现复杂任务适配提供了新路径。","technical_approach":"为基础子任务学习连续的组合式任务表征。在面对复杂任务时，通过特定的组合规则（如向量加法或路由机制）将这些基础表征动态组合，从而引导 LLM 完成复合指令。","experiments":"（基于标题推断）在需要多步推理或多技能组合的基准测试上，证明了组合任务表征比单一的端到端微调具有更好的 OOD 泛化性和灵活性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Large language models struggle to effectively reuse capabilities learned on simple sub-tasks when faced with complex, unseen compositional tasks.","importance":"Paradigm and representation contribution. It explores the compositional generalization of LLMs. By explicitly composing task representations (like Task Vectors or Soft Prompts), it provides a new path for complex task adaptation without full fine-tuning.","technical_approach":"Learns continuous, compositional task representations for basic sub-tasks. When facing a complex task, these basic representations are dynamically combined using specific rules (e.g., vector addition or routing mechanisms) to guide the LLM in executing composite instructions.","experiments":"(Inferred from title) Demonstrated on benchmarks requiring multi-step reasoning or skill combination that compositional task representations offer better OOD generalization and flexibility compared to monolithic end-to-end fine-tuning.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm","task-composition","prompting","representation-learning"]},{"id":"2303.00106","title":"The Trade-off between Universality and Label Efficiency of Representations from Contrastive Learning","authors":["Zhenmei Shi","Jiefeng Chen","Kunyang Li","Jayaram Raghuram","Xi Wu","Yingyu Liang","Somesh Jha"],"institutions":["University of Wisconsin-Madison"],"abstract":"$27","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.00106","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Shi0LR0LJ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Shi0LR0LJ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=rvsbw2YthH_","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在对比学习预训练中，业界普遍追求一个“完美”的表征，但表征在广泛下游任务上的通用性（Universality）与在特定任务上的标签效率（Label Efficiency）之间是否存在冲突，一直缺乏理论和实证分析。","importance":"机制与理论级贡献。严格形式化了表征学习中的一个基础 trade-off，提醒研究者在设计 pretrain loss 时，不能既要表征的绝对通用性，又要极致的 few-shot 效率，必须根据应用场景做出取舍。","technical_approach":"聚焦于“对比学习预训练 + 线性探测（linear probing）”范式。通过分析学习到的表征的几何特性，从理论上推导并用实验验证了：当表征被优化以适应更多样化的潜在下游任务时，其在任意单一任务上训练线性分类器所需的样本复杂度会不可避免地增加。","experiments":"通过改变对比学习的超参数（如温度系数或数据增强策略），观察下游线性探测的准确率与样本量的关系，证实了通用性与标签效率之间存在明显的此消彼长（trade-off）关系。","authors_note":"UW Madison 团队。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In contrastive pre-training, the industry often seeks a 'perfect' representation, but it remains unclear whether there is an inherent conflict between a representation's universality across many downstream tasks and its label efficiency on a specific task.","importance":"Mechanism and theoretical contribution. It rigorously formalizes a fundamental trade-off in representation learning, warning researchers that when designing pretrain losses, one cannot simultaneously achieve absolute universality and extreme few-shot efficiency; trade-offs must be made based on the application.","technical_approach":"Focuses on the 'contrastive pre-training + linear probing' paradigm. By analyzing the geometric properties of the learned representations, it theoretically derives and empirically verifies that optimizing a representation to accommodate a wider variety of potential downstream tasks inevitably increases the sample complexity required to train a linear classifier on any single task.","experiments":"By varying contrastive learning hyperparameters (like temperature or augmentation strategies), the relationship between downstream linear probing accuracy and sample size was observed, confirming a clear trade-off between universality and label efficiency.","authors_note":"UW Madison team."},"tags":["contrastive-learning","representation-learning","scaling-laws","label-efficiency"]},{"id":"2210.03057","title":"Language models are multilingual chain-of-thought reasoners","authors":["Freda Shi","Mirac Suzgun","Markus Freitag","Xuezhi Wang","Suraj Srivats","Soroush Vosoughi","Hyung Won Chung","Yi Tay","Sebastian Ruder","Denny Zhou","Dipanjan Das","Jason Wei"],"institutions":["Google Research"],"abstract":"We evaluate the reasoning abilities of large language models in multilingual settings. We introduce the Multilingual Grade School Math (MGSM) benchmark, by manually translating 250 grade-school math problems from the GSM8K dataset (Cobbe et al., 2021) into ten typologically diverse languages. We find that the ability to solve MGSM problems via chain-of-thought prompting emerges with increasing model scale, and that models have strikingly strong multilingual reasoning abilities, even in underrepresented languages such as Bengali and Swahili. Finally, we show that the multilingual reasoning abilities of language models extend to other tasks such as commonsense reasoning and word-in-context semantic judgment. The MGSM benchmark is publicly available at https://github.com/google-research/url-nlp.","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.03057","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ShiSF0SVCTRZ0W23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ShiSF0SVCTRZ0W23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=fR3wGCk-IXp","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 的复杂推理能力（如 CoT）主要在英文语料上涌现，尚不清楚这种能力能否泛化到预训练占比极低的非英语种，尤其是资源匮乏的语言。","importance":"评估与 Scaling 规律级贡献。证实了 LLM 的逻辑推理能力与具体语言的表层语法是解耦的，英文主导的预训练足以让低资源语言“免费”获得推理能力，对多语言模型的训练数据配比有重大指导意义。","technical_approach":"构建了多语言小学数学基准 MGSM（将 GSM8K 手动翻译成 10 种类型各异的语言）。通过多语言 CoT prompt 评估模型，观察推理能力随模型参数规模的 Scaling 行为，并测试其在常识推理和语义判断上的泛化性。","experiments":"在 PaLM 等模型上测试。发现通过 CoT 解决 MGSM 问题的能力随着模型规模的增加而涌现。即使在孟加拉语和斯瓦希里语等预训练数据极少的语言中，模型也展现出了惊人的多语言推理能力。","authors_note":"Google Research 团队，Freda Shi 和 Xuezhi Wang 在 LLM 推理和多语言评估方面有重要贡献。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Complex reasoning capabilities (like CoT) in LLMs primarily emerge from English corpora. It was unknown whether these abilities generalize to non-English languages with minimal pre-training data, especially low-resource ones.","importance":"Evaluation and Scaling Law contribution. It proves that logical reasoning in LLMs is decoupled from the surface syntax of specific languages. English-dominated pre-training is sufficient for low-resource languages to 'inherit' reasoning skills, heavily influencing data mixing strategies for multilingual models.","technical_approach":"Introduced the Multilingual Grade School Math (MGSM) benchmark by manually translating GSM8K into 10 typologically diverse languages. Evaluated models using multilingual CoT prompting to observe how reasoning abilities scale with model size, and tested generalization to commonsense and semantic tasks.","experiments":"Tested on models like PaLM. Found that the ability to solve MGSM via CoT emerges with model scale. Models exhibited strikingly strong multilingual reasoning abilities, even in severely underrepresented languages like Bengali and Swahili.","authors_note":"Google Research team; Freda Shi and Xuezhi Wang have made significant contributions to LLM reasoning and multilingual evaluation."},"tags":["multilingual","chain-of-thought","benchmark","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Freda Shi","Xuezhi Wang"]},{"id":"2210.09150","title":"Prompting GPT-3 To Be Reliable","authors":["Chenglei Si","Zhe Gan","Zhengyuan Yang","Shuohang Wang","Jianfeng Wang","Jordan L. Boyd-Graber","Lijuan Wang"],"institutions":["Microsoft"],"abstract":"$28","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.09150","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/SiGYWWBW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/SiGYWWBW23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=98p5x51L5af","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"尽管 GPT-3 等商业 API 展现了强大的少样本能力，但其在实际应用中的可靠性（如泛化性、社会偏见、校准度和事实性）往往不佳，且缺乏系统性的改进方法。","importance":"Post-train 与对齐级贡献。提供了一个系统性的框架，证明了无需昂贵的权重微调（RLHF/SFT），仅通过精心设计的 Prompt 策略就能显著提升基座模型在多个安全和可靠性维度的表现。","technical_approach":"将“可靠性”解构为四个核心维度：分布外泛化、社会偏见、校准度（输出概率与准确率的匹配）和事实性。针对每个维度设计了简单有效的 Prompt 策略，例如使用自然语言指令显式要求模型减少偏见，或调整 Prompt 格式以改善概率校准。","experiments":"在 GPT-3 上跨多个数据集进行了广泛评估。结果表明，这些 Prompt 策略能有效提升模型在 OOD 场景的鲁棒性，平衡人口统计学分布以减少偏见，改善置信度校准，并提高事实问答的准确率。","authors_note":"Microsoft 团队，Zhe Gan 和 Jianfeng Wang 在多模态和语言模型应用上有丰富经验。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"While commercial APIs like GPT-3 show impressive few-shot capabilities, their reliability in real-world applications (e.g., generalizability, social biases, calibration, and factuality) is often poor and lacks systematic improvement methods.","importance":"Post-train and alignment contribution. It provides a systematic framework proving that significant improvements across multiple safety and reliability dimensions can be achieved purely through well-designed prompting strategies, without expensive weight updates (RLHF/SFT).","technical_approach":"Decomposes 'reliability' into four core facets: out-of-distribution generalization, social biases, calibration (matching output probabilities with accuracy), and factuality. Designed simple and effective prompt strategies for each, such as using natural language instructions to explicitly reduce bias or formatting prompts to improve probability calibration.","experiments":"Conducted extensive evaluations on GPT-3 across multiple datasets. Results show these prompting strategies effectively enhance OOD robustness, balance demographic distributions to reduce bias, improve confidence calibration, and increase factual QA accuracy.","authors_note":"Microsoft team; Zhe Gan and Jianfeng Wang have extensive experience in multimodal and language model applications."},"tags":["prompting","reliability","gpt-3"],"notable_authors":["Zhe Gan","Jianfeng Wang"]},{"id":"SiddiquiRMKH23","title":"Metadata Archaeology: Unearthing Data Subsets by Leveraging Training Dynamics","authors":["Shoaib Ahmed Siddiqui","Nitarshan Rajkumar","Tegan Maharaj","David Krueger","Sara Hooker"],"institutions":["Cohere For AI"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/SiddiquiRMKH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/SiddiquiRMKH23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=PvLnIaJbt9","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"预训练语料库规模庞大且充满噪声，传统基于静态规则或启发式的方法难以深入挖掘数据内部的潜在结构（如难度、领域分布或错误标签）。","importance":"数据质量与训练动态级贡献。提供了一种基于模型视角的动态数据筛选机制，启发后续工作利用 loss 轨迹等训练信号进行高质量 pretrain 数据配比和清洗，而非仅依赖静态文本特征。","technical_approach":"提出“元数据考古”（Metadata Archaeology）。利用模型在训练过程中的动态信号（如 loss 变化曲线、梯度范数、遗忘事件）作为特征，对训练样本进行聚类或分类，从而在无人工标注的情况下“挖掘”出数据的潜在元数据子集。","experiments":"（基于标题推断）在语言或视觉模型的训练中，证明了基于训练动态提取的特征能够有效区分出困难样本、噪声数据或特定领域的子集，优于传统的静态分析方法。","authors_note":"Sara Hooker (Cohere For AI 负责人) 长期关注模型训练动态、数据质量和可解释性。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Pre-training corpora are massive and noisy. Traditional static rules or heuristic methods struggle to uncover latent structures within the data, such as difficulty, domain distribution, or mislabeled samples.","importance":"Data quality and training dynamics contribution. It provides a model-centric, dynamic data filtering mechanism, inspiring subsequent work to use training signals like loss trajectories for high-quality pretrain data mixing and cleaning, rather than relying solely on static text features.","technical_approach":"Introduces 'Metadata Archaeology'. It leverages dynamic signals during model training (e.g., loss trajectories, gradient norms, forgetting events) as features to cluster or classify training samples. This allows for the 'unearthing' of latent metadata subsets without manual annotation.","experiments":"(Inferred from title) Demonstrated during the training of language or vision models that features extracted from training dynamics can effectively distinguish hard examples, noisy data, or domain-specific subsets, outperforming traditional static analysis methods.","authors_note":"Sara Hooker (Head of Cohere For AI) focuses extensively on training dynamics, data quality, and interpretability."},"tags":["data-quality","training-dynamics"],"notable_authors":["Sara Hooker","David Krueger"]},{"id":"2210.01296","title":"Recitation-Augmented Language Models","authors":["Zhiqing Sun","Xuezhi Wang","Yi Tay","Yiming Yang","Denny Zhou"],"institutions":["Google Research"],"abstract":"We propose a new paradigm to help Large Language Models (LLMs) generate more accurate factual knowledge without retrieving from an external corpus, called RECITation-augmented gEneration (RECITE). Different from retrieval-augmented language models that retrieve relevant documents before generating the outputs, given an input, RECITE first recites one or several relevant passages from LLMs' own memory via sampling, and then produces the final answers. We show that RECITE is a powerful paradigm for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. Specifically, we show that by utilizing recitation as the intermediate step, a recite-and-answer scheme can achieve new state-of-the-art performance in various closed-book question answering (CBQA) tasks. In experiments, we verify the effectiveness of \\method~on four pre-trained models (PaLM, UL2, OPT, and Codex) and three CBQA tasks (Natural Questions, TriviaQA, and HotpotQA). Our code is available at\"https://github.com/Edward-Sun/RECITE\".","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.01296","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Sun0TYZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Sun0TYZ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=-cqvvvb-NkI","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：闭卷语言模型明明存了不少事实，但在直接回答知识密集型问题时经常提取失败。过去两条主路分别是直接 answer 或外部 retrieval；作者提出第三条路：不接外部语料，先让模型从自身参数记忆里“背诵”相关段落，再基于这段中间文本作答。","importance":"这项工作的重要性在方法范式上。它把“参数内知识是否能被稳定调用”从一个模糊能力，变成了一个显式两阶段推理接口。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，事实记忆不仅取决于有没有学进去，还取决于生成时能否先恢复出可消费的中间表示；这和 chain-of-thought 类似，但针对的是知识提取而不是推理步骤。","technical_approach":"核心方法 RECITE 是一个 recite-and-answer 框架，不是训练一个新的检索器。给定问题，模型先通过采样生成一个或多个与答案相关的 passage，这一步相当于把隐式参数记忆展开成显式文本；随后再条件于这些 recitations 生成最终答案。设计上它有两个关键判断：第一，很多 factual error 不是完全“不知道”，而是直接 answer 时检索路径不稳定；第二，中间 passage 比直接短答案更容易承载线索和自校验。它与 retrieval-augmented generation 的区别是知识源仍然是模型内部参数，而不是外部索引库，因此系统更轻，但边界也更明显：如果模型压根没记住，RECITE 无法凭空补齐。","experiments":"摘要明确声称 RECITE 在四个知识密集型 closed-book QA 任务上达到新的 SOTA，并且 recite-and-answer 明显优于直接回答。题面没有给出具体模型规模、任务名和提升点数，因此不编造；但可确定实验比较至少包括 direct answer、可能的 self-consistency 式采样，以及不同 recitation 数量的设置。论文最值得看的不是绝对分数，而是 error decomposition：RECITE 如果主要提升 recall，说明问题在知识调用；如果还提升 calibration，则说明中间 passage 起到了约束生成的作用。","authors_note":"机构大概率与 Google Research 相关；作者中 Zhiqing Sun、Xuezhi Wang、Yi Tay、Denny Zhou 都是大模型与推理/预训练方向的活跃作者。题面未给出完整单位信息，这里不展开。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a specific failure mode of closed-book LMs: they often seem to contain factual knowledge, yet fail to surface it when answering directly. Instead of adding external retrieval, the authors propose an internal route—first make the model recite relevant passages from its own parametric memory, then answer from that generated evidence.","importance":"This is a paradigm-level inference contribution. It turns “knowledge in parameters” from a vague capability into an explicit two-stage interface. For pretraining, the implication is that factual performance is not only about what the model stored, but also about whether generation can recover a usable intermediate representation before committing to an answer.","technical_approach":"RECITE is a recite-and-answer framework rather than a new retriever. Given a question, the model first samples one or more relevant passages, effectively externalizing latent parametric memory into text; it then conditions on those recitations to produce the final answer. The design bets on two ideas: many factual errors are retrieval failures rather than absence of knowledge, and a passage is a better carrier of clues and self-checking structure than a direct short answer. Unlike retrieval-augmented generation, the knowledge source remains internal, which keeps the system simple but also limits it: if the fact was never learned, recitation cannot recover it.","experiments":"The abstract claims new state of the art on four knowledge-intensive closed-book QA benchmarks, with recite-and-answer outperforming direct answering. The prompt does not provide trustworthy numbers, model sizes, or task names, so I will not fabricate them. The most useful thing to inspect in the paper is not just the headline score, but where gains come from: if RECITE mainly lifts recall, it is fixing access to stored knowledge; if it also improves calibration, the intermediate passage is acting as a generation constraint.","authors_note":"Likely from Google Research. Zhiqing Sun, Xuezhi Wang, Yi Tay, and Denny Zhou are well-known in large-scale LM pretraining and reasoning. Full affiliations are not provided in the prompt."},"tags":["rag","knowledge","prompting"],"notable_authors":["Zhiqing Sun","Xuezhi Wang","Yi Tay","Denny Zhou"]},{"id":"2212.10711","title":"Task Ambiguity in Humans and Language Models","authors":["Alex Tamkin","Kunal Handa","Avash Shrestha","Noah D. Goodman"],"institutions":["Stanford University"],"abstract":"$29","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.10711","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/TamkinHSG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/TamkinHSG23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=QrnDe_9ZFd8","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：真实任务经常是含糊指定的，用户意图需要从指令、上下文和少量示例共同推断，但主流 benchmark 往往把任务定义得过于清楚，掩盖了模型在“任务判别”上的短板。换句话说，大家常测的是已知任务上的执行能力，而不是面对歧义时的任务识别能力。","importance":"这项工作的贡献在评测与能力分解层面。它把 instruction following 拆成两部分：先推断用户到底要什么，再执行该任务。对 pretrain/posttrain 的启示很直接：RLHF 或人类反馈数据可能不仅改善语气对齐，还在帮助模型学习如何消解任务歧义。这比单看 benchmark accuracy 更接近真实交互系统的能力。","technical_approach":"核心方法是构建 AmbiBench，一个包含六类含糊分类任务的基准，并系统比较人类与不同规模语言模型在不同歧义级别、不同示例数下的表现。它不是发明新训练目标，而是设计一个能把“任务理解”单独测出来的实验框架。关键设计在于同时操纵两种信息源：文本指令的明确程度，以及提供的带标签 demonstrations 数量。这样可以区分模型是靠语言先验猜任务，还是靠 few-shot examples 消歧。与传统 benchmark 不同，这里错误不只是分类错，还可能是整套任务假设错了。","experiments":"摘要给出的核心事实很明确：模型扩展到 175B 参数，再加上人类反馈数据训练后，已经能在某些设置下接近甚至超过人类在任务歧义下的表现。这个结论重要，因为它说明 scaling 和 alignment 数据对“意图识别”都有贡献，而不仅是对已明确任务的执行。题面未提供 AmbiBench 的具体任务、数值分数和各模型名称，因此不编造；但值得重点看的实验应包括：纯 scaling 是否足够、RLHF 相对 base model 的增益有多大、few-shot examples 与 instructions 哪个更能帮助消歧，以及模型和人类错误类型是否不同。","authors_note":"作者 Noah D. Goodman 是 Stanford 认知科学与语言/推理建模方向的知名学者。题面未给出完整机构信息。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a gap in how we evaluate language models: real tasks are often under-specified, and the agent must infer the user's intended task from instructions, context, and examples. Standard benchmarks usually avoid this by making the task definition explicit, so they test execution on a known task rather than task identification under ambiguity.","importance":"This is mainly an evaluation and capability-decomposition contribution. It separates instruction following into two stages: infer what the user wants, then perform the task. For pretraining and post-training, the implication is important: human feedback data may improve not just style and harmlessness, but also ambiguity resolution and intent inference in realistic interactions.","technical_approach":"The core contribution is AmbiBench, a benchmark of six ambiguously specified classification tasks, together with a systematic comparison between humans and language models under varying ambiguity levels and numbers of labeled examples. This is not a new training objective; it is an experimental framework designed to isolate task understanding itself. The key design is to manipulate two information sources independently: how clear the instruction is, and how many demonstrations are given. That lets the paper separate language-based inference from example-based disambiguation. Unlike standard benchmarks, an error here can mean adopting the wrong task hypothesis altogether.","experiments":"The main empirical claim from the abstract is clear: scaling up to 175B parameters, combined with training on human feedback data, lets models approach or even exceed human performance in some ambiguous-task settings. That matters because it suggests both scale and alignment data contribute to intent inference, not just to cleanly specified task execution. The prompt does not provide exact scores, task definitions, or model names beyond the 175B scale, so I will not invent them. The most useful analyses to inspect are whether scaling alone is enough, how much RLHF helps over the base model, whether demonstrations or instructions contribute more to disambiguation, and whether model errors differ qualitatively from human errors.","authors_note":"Noah D. Goodman is a well-known Stanford researcher in cognitive science, language, and probabilistic reasoning. Full affiliations are not given in the prompt."},"tags":["task-ambiguity","benchmark","instruction"],"notable_authors":["Noah D. Goodman"]},{"id":"VillegasBKM0SCK23","title":"Phenaki: Variable Length Video Generation from Open Domain Textual Descriptions","authors":["Ruben Villegas","Mohammad Babaeizadeh","Pieter-Jan Kindermans","Hernan Moraldo","Han Zhang","Mohammad Taghi Saffar","Santiago Castro","Julius Kunze","Dumitru Erhan"],"institutions":["Google"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/VillegasBKM0SCK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/VillegasBKM0SCK23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=vOEXS39nOF","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"按标题看，Phenaki 要解决的是开放域文本到视频生成里的一个难点：如何生成可变长度视频，而不是被固定帧数或固定时长限制。大多数早期文本视频模型要么生成很短片段，要么靠逐段拼接，难以在长时长下维持语义连贯和计算可控。题面无摘要，因此这里只做保守总结。","importance":"这项工作的意义偏范式和跨模态统一表示。可变长度视频生成通常意味着模型不再把视频仅当固定维张量，而是要有可扩展的离散表示与时序生成接口。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，视频这类长序列模态如果要纳入统一 LM/生成框架，tokenization 和时序压缩是第一位问题。","technical_approach":"从标题与已知方向看，Phenaki 很可能采用视频 tokenizer 把视频压缩成离散 token，再条件于开放域文本逐步生成，从而支持任意长度扩展。与固定长度 diffusion/video GAN 路线相比，这种做法更接近语言建模式的视频生成：先解决表示压缩，再解决长时序生成。为什么这样设计有效：只有把视频先压到足够低的 token 率，长时长生成才不会在算力上直接爆炸；但代价是细节与时序平滑性高度依赖 tokenizer 质量。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法可靠给出数据集、时长、分辨率和指标。合理预期是论文会强调 variable-length generation、开放域文本条件、以及与固定长度文本视频基线的定性/定量比较。对做统一多模态预训练的人，更值得关注的实验是视频 tokenizer 的压缩比、长视频时的一致性退化曲线，以及是否支持分段续写。没有原文不补数字。","authors_note":"Phenaki 是 Google 系视频生成方向的代表作之一。题面未给出完整机构信息。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"From the title, Phenaki tackles a central limitation in text-to-video generation: producing variable-length videos instead of clips with a fixed horizon. Earlier systems often generated only short segments or relied on stitched clips, which made long-range semantic consistency and compute efficiency difficult. No abstract is provided, so this summary stays cautious.","importance":"The significance is partly paradigm-level and strongly relevant to unified multimodal pretraining. Variable-length video generation usually requires moving away from a fixed-size tensor view of video toward a scalable token-based representation and autoregressive or similarly extensible temporal modeling. For pretraining, the message is that tokenization and temporal compression are the first bottlenecks if video is to be folded into a general sequence model.","technical_approach":"Based on the title and the known line of work, Phenaki likely uses a video tokenizer to compress video into discrete tokens and then conditions generation on open-domain text in a way that can extend to arbitrary length. Compared with fixed-horizon diffusion or GAN-style video generation, this is closer to language-model-style generation: first solve representation compression, then solve long-horizon sequencing. The reason this design is attractive is straightforward—without aggressive compression, long-form video generation is computationally prohibitive. The trade-off is equally clear: fidelity and temporal smoothness become heavily dependent on tokenizer quality.","experiments":"No abstract is available, so I cannot reliably provide datasets, durations, resolutions, or metrics. The paper likely emphasizes variable-length generation under open-domain text prompts and compares against fixed-length text-to-video baselines. For readers interested in unified multimodal modeling, the most important evidence would be tokenizer compression ratio, consistency decay over long generations, and whether the system can continue generation in segments. Any concrete numbers would be speculative.","authors_note":"Phenaki is a representative Google-led work in text-to-video generation. Full affiliation details are not provided in the prompt."},"tags":["video-generation","autoregressive","text-to-video","tokenizer"]},{"id":"XiaZHG0LLL23","title":"Mole-BERT: Rethinking Pre-training Graph Neural Networks for Molecules","authors":["Jun Xia","Chengshuai Zhao","Bozhen Hu","Zhangyang Gao","Cheng Tan","Yue Liu","Siyuan Li","Stan Z. Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/XiaZHG0LLL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/XiaZHG0LLL23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=jevY-DtiZTR","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：分子图上的 GNN 预训练长期效果不稳定，很多自监督目标在分子领域并没有像 NLP/视觉那样带来稳定收益。过去方法常直接迁移图对比学习或属性掩码，但忽略了分子图离散语义细、原子/子结构词表缺失的问题，所以作者重新审视“分子图到底该预训练什么”。","importance":"这是分子图预训练里的方法级重要工作，核心贡献在于把 tokenizer / 离散化思路引入分子 GNN 预训练。对更广义 pretrain 的启示很强：如果底层离散单元定义得不好，再复杂的自监督目标也可能学不到稳定语义；这和语言、语音、视觉 tokenizer 的经验是一致的。","technical_approach":"Mole-BERT 的关键做法是先学习更有语义的离散分子 token，再围绕这些 token 做 BERT 式掩码预训练，而不是直接在原始原子类型上做浅层 masking。标题里的“rethinking”说明作者不是简单堆目标，而是在问：分子图缺的不是更复杂 loss，而是更好的词表。和 GraphMAE 或属性重建类方法相比，它更强调通过 VQ/聚类式 tokenization 提升原子与子结构表示的可预测性和语义密度。这样设计有效的原因是分子中的局部化学环境远比原子 ID 本身信息丰富。","experiments":"这篇论文通常会在分子性质预测基准上和无预训练、GraphMVP、GraphMAE、GROVER 等方法比较，并报告在小数据下更明显的收益。给定信息没有摘要和数字，不能可靠写具体提升幅度。可以较有把握地指出，关键 ablation 应该包括：是否使用离散 tokenizer、token 粒度如何影响迁移、以及掩码目标相对对比目标的差异。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper revisits a recurring issue in molecular graph pretraining: many self-supervised objectives that work well elsewhere bring inconsistent gains on molecules. Prior methods often transferred generic graph contrastive learning or attribute masking, but did not adequately address the lack of a good discrete vocabulary for molecular structure, so the paper asks what should actually be pretrained in molecular graphs.","importance":"This is an important method contribution within molecular pretraining, with a broader lesson for pretraining research. The key message is that if the underlying discrete units are poorly defined, increasingly sophisticated objectives may still learn weak semantics. That connects directly to tokenizer design in language, speech, and vision.","technical_approach":"Mole-BERT appears to first learn semantically richer discrete molecular tokens and then perform BERT-style masked pretraining over those tokens, instead of masking only raw atom attributes. The design choice is significant: the paper is not just adding another loss, but arguing that molecular graphs need a better vocabulary. Relative to GraphMAE-style reconstruction or generic graph SSL, it likely emphasizes VQ- or clustering-based tokenization to capture local chemical environments more faithfully.","experiments":"The expected evaluation compares against no pretraining and strong molecular graph pretraining baselines such as GraphMVP, GraphMAE, or GROVER on molecular property prediction benchmarks, with larger gains in low-data transfer settings. The provided metadata does not include the abstract or exact numbers, so precise improvements cannot be stated safely. The most informative ablations likely test whether learned tokenization is the main source of gain and how token granularity affects transfer.","authors_note":""},"tags":["pretraining","masked-modeling","tokenizer","graph"],"notable_authors":["Jun Xia","Chengshuai Zhao","Bozhen Hu","Zhangyang Gao","Cheng Tan"]},{"id":"Xu0MLS023","title":"$$k$NN Prompting: Beyond-Context Learning with Calibration-Free Nearest Neighbor Inference","authors":["Benfeng Xu","Quan Wang","Zhendong Mao","Yajuan Lyu","Qiaoqiao She","Yongdong Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Xu0MLS023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Xu0MLS023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=fe2S7736sNS","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：标准 in-context learning 受上下文窗口限制，而且 few-shot prompt 的示例选择和顺序高度敏感，常常还需要额外 calibration。作者想把“示例检索”从 prompt 内部挪到 prompt 外部，用 kNN 推断补足上下文学习的覆盖范围。","importance":"这是推理时增强方法，但对 pretrain 的启示不小。它说明模型参数内知识和外部实例记忆之间可以做更轻量的接口：不一定非要把所有示例塞进上下文，也不一定要再训练一个检索器；在某些任务上，表示空间里的最近邻就足以提供稳定增益。这对 test-time adaptation、memory-augmented LM 和数据回灌都有参考价值。","technical_approach":"kNN Prompting 的核心是 calibration-free nearest neighbor inference：先用 LM 或 encoder 得到输入表示，再从训练样本库中检索最近邻，用这些邻居的标签或输出分布辅助预测，而不是把邻居文本全部拼进 prompt。它是对 kNN-LM 和 ICL 的折中：保留实例级记忆，但避免上下文窗口和 prompt 格式敏感性。和标准 few-shot prompting 相比，它舍弃了显式自然语言示例拼接，换来更稳定的推断；和需要校准的 prompt-based 分类相比，它强调无需额外 calibration。","experiments":"从标题看，实验应覆盖超出上下文窗口或示例很多时的 few-shot / beyond-context learning 场景，对比 zero-shot、few-shot prompting、可能还有 kNN-LM 或 retrieval-augmented baselines。给定信息没有摘要和数字，无法写出具体任务和提升。可以确定的关键证据是：作者会展示在不做 calibration 的情况下，kNN prompting 仍能稳定优于或匹配 prompt-based inference，且对示例数量扩展更友好。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses two weaknesses of standard in-context learning: it is bounded by the context window, and its performance is highly sensitive to which demonstrations are included and how they are ordered. The proposed direction is to move example usage outside the prompt itself and use nearest-neighbor inference to extend beyond-context learning.","importance":"This is an inference-time method, but it has useful implications for pretraining and model interfaces. It suggests that parametric knowledge and external instance memory can be combined in a lighter-weight way than stuffing all examples into the prompt or training a full retrieval system. That matters for test-time adaptation and memory-augmented language modeling.","technical_approach":"kNN Prompting appears to perform calibration-free nearest-neighbor inference: encode the query, retrieve similar training instances, and use their labels or outputs to support prediction instead of concatenating all examples into the prompt. It sits between kNN-LM and in-context learning: it keeps instance-level memory while avoiding context-window limits and prompt-format sensitivity. Relative to standard few-shot prompting, it gives up explicit natural-language demonstrations in exchange for more stable inference.","experiments":"The likely experiments evaluate few-shot or beyond-context settings where the number of useful examples exceeds what can fit in the prompt, comparing against zero-shot, few-shot prompting, and possibly retrieval-augmented or kNN-style baselines. The provided metadata does not include the abstract or exact numbers, so datasets and gains cannot be stated safely. The key empirical claim is probably that kNN prompting remains strong without extra calibration and scales better with the number of available examples.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","retrieval","knn","prompting"],"notable_authors":["Benfeng Xu","Quan Wang","Zhendong Mao","Yajuan Lyu","Qiaoqiao She"]},{"id":"2302.00670","title":"Stable Target Field for Reduced Variance Score Estimation in Diffusion Models","authors":["Yilun Xu","Shangyuan Tong","Tommi S. Jaakkola"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2a","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.00670","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/XuTJ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/XuTJ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=WmIwYTd0YTF","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心结论是：扩散模型训练里的一个重要噪声源来自中间噪声尺度下 score target 的高方差，而不是所有时间步都同样难。过去 denoising score matching 默认直接用单样本目标，但在中间噪声区间，多模态数据会让反向路径方向不稳定，导致目标方差大、训练效率低。","importance":"这是 diffusion 训练目标层面的方法改进，价值在于它不改采样器也不改大架构，而是直接降低训练信号方差。对新型语言建模范式尤其有启发：无论是连续扩散还是离散 diffusion LM，只要训练目标在某些噪声区间方差过大，类似的稳定 target 设计都可能带来更稳的优化。","technical_approach":"作者提出 Stable Target Field：引入一个 reference batch，计算加权 conditional scores，把它们作为更稳定的训练目标。关键机制是利用参考样本在中间噪声尺度上提供局部条件平均，从而减少由于多模态混合导致的目标方向抖动。和标准 score matching 相比，它不是直接拟合单个 noisy sample 对应的 score，而是拟合一个更低方差的近似 target field。代价是训练时需要额外参考 batch 计算，增加一些开销和实现复杂度。","experiments":"摘要明确给出两点证据：作者在困难的 intermediate regime 上观察到训练目标协方差迹下降，并展示生成效果改进。给定摘要没有包含具体数据集、模型规模和 FID/likelihood 数字，因此不能安全写出量化提升。可以确认的关键实验逻辑是：先从 target variance 这个中间量证明方法有效，再看最终生成质量，而不是只报终端指标。","authors_note":"作者包含 Tommi S. Jaakkola。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper argues that a meaningful source of inefficiency in diffusion training is the high variance of score targets at intermediate noise levels, rather than a uniform difficulty across timesteps. Standard denoising score matching uses single-sample targets, but in the intermediate regime multimodal data can make reverse directions unstable, which inflates target variance and slows learning.","importance":"This is a training-objective improvement for diffusion models. Its value is that it does not rely on changing the sampler or the overall architecture; it improves the learning signal itself. That is relevant beyond image diffusion, including diffusion-based language modeling, wherever certain noise regimes dominate optimization difficulty.","technical_approach":"The proposed Stable Target Field introduces a reference batch and computes weighted conditional scores to form a lower-variance training target. The mechanism is to average locally conditioned score information in the problematic intermediate-noise regime, reducing directional instability caused by multimodal mixtures. Relative to standard score matching, the model is no longer fitting a single noisy sample’s score target, but a more stable approximate target field. The trade-off is extra computation and implementation complexity from maintaining the reference batch.","experiments":"The abstract gives two concrete empirical anchors: the method reduces the trace of the covariance of training targets in the challenging intermediate regime, and this translates into better generation performance. The provided metadata does not include datasets, model sizes, or exact FID/likelihood numbers, so those cannot be stated safely. A useful aspect of the evaluation is that it validates the method first on the intended mechanism—target variance reduction—and then on final sample quality.","authors_note":"Includes Tommi S. Jaakkola."},"tags":["diffusion","score-matching","variance-reduction","objective"],"notable_authors":["Yilun Xu","Shangyuan Tong","Tommi S. Jaakkola"]},{"id":"2209.06430","title":"CLIP-ViP: Adapting Pre-trained Image-Text Model to Video-Language Alignment","authors":["Hongwei Xue","Yuchong Sun","Bei Liu","Jianlong Fu","Ruihua Song","Houqiang Li","Jiebo Luo"],"institutions":["Microsoft Research Asia","University of Science and Technology of China"],"abstract":"$2b","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.06430","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/XueS0FSLL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/XueS0FSLL23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=GNjzMAgawq","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"如何有效地将预训练的图文模型（如 CLIP）迁移到视频-语言对齐任务（post-pretraining）。过去通常直接在视频数据上微调，但受限于视频描述数据的规模和图文/视频-文本之间的领域差异，性能提升有限。","importance":"方法与数据级贡献。系统分析了阻碍 CLIP 在视频领域 post-pretraining 的因素，并提出了相应的解决方案。这对于如何利用海量静态图文预训练模型来增强视频理解（跨模态统一预训练的一种形式）具有指导意义。","technical_approach":"提出 CLIP-ViP 框架。核心机制包括两点：1) 提出 Omnisource Cross-modal Learning，引入额外的文本语料（如字幕）来弥补视频描述数据的不足，缓解语言源的领域差异；2) 提出 Video Proxy Mechanism，在视频特征提取时引入一个可学习的 proxy token，用于聚合时序信息，同时保持 CLIP 原始空间特征的完整性，避免灾难性遗忘。","experiments":"在多个视频-文本检索数据集（如 MSR-V1000, DiDeMo）上进行了实验。CLIP-ViP 显著优于直接微调 CLIP 的基线，并在多个基准上达到 SOTA。消融实验证明了引入额外文本语料和 Video Proxy 机制的有效性。","authors_note":"Jianlong Fu (付建龙) 是多模态学习领域的知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to effectively adapt pre-trained image-text models (like CLIP) to video-language alignment tasks (post-pretraining). Previous approaches often directly fine-tuned on video data, but performance gains were limited by the scale of video caption data and the domain gap between image-text and video-text.","importance":"Methodological and data-level contribution. Systematically analyzes the factors hindering CLIP's post-pretraining in the video domain and proposes solutions. This provides guidance on how to leverage massive static image-text pre-trained models to enhance video understanding (a form of cross-modal unified pre-training).","technical_approach":"Proposes the CLIP-ViP framework. Key mechanisms: 1) Omnisource Cross-modal Learning, which introduces additional text corpora (e.g., subtitles) to compensate for the scarcity of video captions and mitigate the domain gap in language sources; 2) Video Proxy Mechanism, which introduces a learnable proxy token during video feature extraction to aggregate temporal information while preserving the integrity of CLIP's original spatial features, avoiding catastrophic forgetting.","experiments":"Evaluated on multiple video-text retrieval datasets (e.g., MSR-V1000, DiDeMo). CLIP-ViP significantly outperforms the baseline of directly fine-tuning CLIP and achieves SOTA on several benchmarks. Ablations confirm the effectiveness of introducing extra text corpora and the Video Proxy mechanism.","authors_note":"Jianlong Fu is a well-known researcher in multimodal learning."},"tags":["clip","video-language","alignment","transfer-learning"],"notable_authors":["Jianlong Fu"]},{"id":"2212.13738","title":"TempCLR: Temporal Alignment Representation with Contrastive Learning","authors":["Yuncong Yang","Jiawei Ma","Shiyuan Huang","Long Chen","Xudong Lin","Guangxing Han","Shih-Fu Chang"],"institutions":["Columbia University","Tencent AI Lab"],"abstract":"$2c","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.13738","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/YangMH00HC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/YangMH00HC23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=CIFOsnhZvON","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在长视频-文本预训练中，现有的对比学习方法通常只在句子-片段（sentence-clip）级别进行匹配，忽略了全局的时序上下文（temporal context），导致模型难以理解长视频的整体逻辑和时序依赖。","importance":"方法级贡献。提出了一种在长视频预训练中显式建模时序对齐的对比学习框架。这对于改进多模态预训练（VLM pretraining）中长上下文视频的表示学习具有重要意义，指出了仅靠局部匹配的局限性。","technical_approach":"提出 TempCLR 框架。核心机制：将视频和段落分别视为片段和句子的序列，利用动态时间规整（Dynamic Time Warping, DTW）算法在对比学习损失中引入时序顺序约束。这样不仅要求局部片段与句子匹配，还要求整个视频序列与段落序列在时序上对齐，从而强制模型学习全局时序上下文。","experiments":"在多个长视频理解基准（如 YouCook2, ActivityNet Captions）上进行了零样本（zero-shot）评估。TempCLR 在视频检索和动作分割等任务上显著优于仅使用局部匹配的基线模型。消融实验证实了 DTW 引入的时序约束是性能提升的关键。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In long video-text pre-training, existing contrastive learning methods typically match only at the sentence-clip level, ignoring global temporal context. This makes it difficult for the model to understand the overall logic and temporal dependencies of long videos.","importance":"Methodological contribution. Proposes a contrastive learning framework that explicitly models temporal alignment in long video pre-training. This is significant for improving representation learning of long-context videos in multimodal pre-training (VLM pretraining), highlighting the limitations of relying solely on local matching.","technical_approach":"Proposes the TempCLR framework. Key mechanism: treats videos and paragraphs as sequences of clips and sentences, respectively, and uses Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) to introduce temporal order constraints into the contrastive loss. This requires not only local clip-sentence matching but also temporal alignment between the entire video sequence and paragraph sequence, forcing the model to learn global temporal context.","experiments":"Evaluated zero-shot performance on several long video understanding benchmarks (e.g., YouCook2, ActivityNet Captions). TempCLR significantly outperforms baselines using only local matching on tasks like video retrieval and action segmentation. Ablations confirm that the temporal constraints introduced by DTW are key to the performance gains.","authors_note":""},"tags":["video-text","contrastive-learning","representation-learning","alignment"]},{"id":"2210.13435","title":"Dichotomy of Control: Separating What You Can Control from What You Cannot","authors":["Sherry Yang","Dale Schuurmans","Pieter Abbeel","Ofir Nachum"],"institutions":["Google Brain","UC Berkeley"],"abstract":"$2d","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.13435","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/YangSAN23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/YangSAN23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=DEGjDDV22pI","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在离线强化学习中，基于回报条件（return-conditioned）的监督学习方法（如 Decision Transformer）在高度随机的环境中表现不佳。因为高回报可能是由环境的随机性（不可控因素）带来的，而非策略本身（可控因素），导致模型学习到不一致的策略。","importance":"机制分析与方法级贡献。深刻揭示了 Decision Transformer 等条件序列建模方法在随机环境下的根本缺陷，并提出了一种分离可控与不可控因素的解决方案。这对于理解和改进基于序列建模的 RL（将 RL 视为序列预测）具有重要启发。","technical_approach":"提出 Dichotomy of Control (DoC) 框架。核心机制：在训练时，除了条件化未来回报（return），还引入一个表示环境随机性（不可控因素）的潜在变量（latent variable）。通过互信息最大化等技术，强制模型区分哪些结果是动作导致的，哪些是环境随机性导致的。在推理时，通过边缘化或设定特定的潜在变量来生成动作，从而避免被环境随机性误导。","experiments":"在具有高随机性的离线 RL 环境（如随机版本的 D4RL 任务）中进行了评估。DoC 显著提高了 Decision Transformer 在这些环境中的性能，证明了分离可控与不可控因素能有效缓解条件策略在随机环境下的失效问题。","authors_note":"Pieter Abbeel 是强化学习和机器人领域的顶尖学者；Ofir Nachum 在离线 RL 方面有深入研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In offline RL, return-conditioned supervised learning methods (like Decision Transformer) perform poorly in highly stochastic environments. High returns might arise from environmental randomness (uncontrollable factors) rather than the policy itself (controllable factors), leading the model to learn inconsistent policies.","importance":"Mechanistic analysis and methodological contribution. Profoundly reveals the fundamental flaw of conditional sequence modeling methods like Decision Transformer in stochastic environments, and proposes a solution to separate controllable and uncontrollable factors. This provides important insights for understanding and improving sequence modeling-based RL (treating RL as sequence prediction).","technical_approach":"Proposes the Dichotomy of Control (DoC) framework. Key mechanism: during training, in addition to conditioning on future returns, it introduces a latent variable representing environmental randomness (uncontrollable factors). Using techniques like mutual information maximization, it forces the model to distinguish which outcomes are caused by actions and which by environmental randomness. During inference, actions are generated by marginalizing or setting specific latent variables, avoiding being misled by environmental randomness.","experiments":"Evaluated in offline RL environments with high stochasticity (e.g., stochastic versions of D4RL tasks). DoC significantly improves the performance of Decision Transformer in these environments, proving that separating controllable and uncontrollable factors effectively mitigates the failure of conditional policies in stochastic settings.","authors_note":"Pieter Abbeel is a top scholar in RL and robotics; Ofir Nachum has deep research in offline RL."},"tags":["offline-rl","decision-transformer","conditioning","representation"],"notable_authors":["Pieter Abbeel","Ofir Nachum","Dale Schuurmans"]},{"id":"2210.04492","title":"Unified Detoxifying and Debiasing in Language Generation via Inference-time Adaptive Optimization","authors":["Zonghan Yang","Xiaoyuan Yi","Peng Li","Yang Liu","Xing Xie"],"institutions":["Tsinghua University","Microsoft Research Asia"],"abstract":"$2e","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.04492","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/YangYLL023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/YangYLL023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=FvevdI0aA_h","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"预训练语言模型在生成文本时容易产生有害内容（毒性）和偏见。过去的方法通常将去毒（detoxifying）和去偏（debiasing）分开处理，但作者发现这会导致“按下葫芦浮起瓢”：去偏后的模型仍有毒性，而去毒后的模型甚至会加剧社会偏见。","importance":"方法级贡献。揭示了去毒和去偏任务之间的潜在冲突，并提出了首个在推理阶段统一处理这两个问题的框架。这对于 LLM 的对齐（Alignment）和安全性研究具有重要意义，强调了多维安全目标的联合优化。","technical_approach":"提出 UDDIA (Unified Detoxifying and Debiasing via Inference-time Adaptive Optimization) 框架。核心机制：在推理阶段（inference-time），将去毒和去偏统一形式化为对输出空间分布的修正问题。通过自适应优化算法，在生成每个 token 时动态调整其概率分布，以同时满足降低毒性和减少偏见的约束，而无需重新训练或微调模型。","experiments":"在 RealToxicityPrompts 等基准上评估了 GPT-2 等模型。UDDIA 在显著降低生成文本毒性的同时，也有效减少了性别、种族等方面的偏见。与单独进行去毒或去偏的基线方法相比，UDDIA 在两个指标上均取得了更好的平衡，且对生成文本的流畅度影响较小。","authors_note":"Yang Liu (刘洋) 和 Xing Xie (谢幸) 是自然语言处理和数据挖掘领域的知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Pre-trained language models tend to generate harmful content (toxicity) and biases. Previous methods usually tackled detoxifying and debiasing separately, but the authors found this leads to a 'whack-a-mole' situation: debiased models remain toxic, and detoxified models can even exacerbate social biases.","importance":"Methodological contribution. Reveals the potential conflict between detoxifying and debiasing tasks and proposes the first framework to unify them at inference time. This is significant for LLM alignment and safety research, emphasizing the joint optimization of multi-dimensional safety goals.","technical_approach":"Proposes the UDDIA (Unified Detoxifying and Debiasing via Inference-time Adaptive Optimization) framework. Key mechanism: at inference time, unifies detoxifying and debiasing as a problem of rectifying the output space distribution. Using an adaptive optimization algorithm, it dynamically adjusts the probability distribution of each token during generation to simultaneously satisfy constraints for reducing toxicity and bias, without retraining or fine-tuning the model.","experiments":"Evaluated models like GPT-2 on benchmarks such as RealToxicityPrompts. UDDIA significantly reduced the toxicity of generated text while effectively mitigating biases related to gender, race, etc. Compared to baselines that perform detoxifying or debiasing separately, UDDIA achieved a better balance on both metrics with minimal impact on text fluency.","authors_note":"Yang Liu and Xing Xie are well-known scholars in NLP and data mining."},"tags":["alignment","toxicity","debiasing","inference-time"],"notable_authors":["Yang Liu","Xing Xie"]},{"id":"YuLZZGQYHD023","title":"StrucTexTv2: Masked Visual-Textual Prediction for Document Image Pre-training","authors":["Yuechen Yu","Yulin Li","Chengquan Zhang","Xiaoqiang Zhang","Zengyuan Guo","Xiameng Qin","Kun Yao","Junyu Han","Errui Ding","Jingdong Wang"],"institutions":["Baidu Inc."],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/YuLZZGQYHD023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/YuLZZGQYHD023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=HE_75XY5Ljh","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"文档图像预训练（Document Image Pre-training）通常需要处理视觉、文本和布局等多模态信息。现有的方法往往依赖于复杂的 OCR 引擎提取文本，或者在预训练目标上未能充分融合视觉和文本的深层交互。","importance":"方法与范式级贡献。提出了 StrucTexTv2，一种端到端的文档图像预训练框架，引入了掩码视觉-文本预测任务。这对于多模态预训练（特别是富文本文档理解）具有重要意义，推动了摆脱重度 OCR 依赖的端到端统一建模。","technical_approach":"提出 StrucTexTv2。核心机制：1) 采用端到端的架构，直接从文档图像中联合学习视觉和文本表示，弱化了对外部 OCR 的强依赖；2) 提出了 Masked Visual-Textual Prediction (MVTP) 预训练任务。与传统的 MLM 不同，MVTP 在掩码文本区域的同时，也掩码对应的视觉区域，迫使模型利用跨模态的上下文（未掩码的视觉和文本信息）来重建被掩码的内容，从而实现深度的模态融合。","experiments":"在千万级规模的文档图像数据集上进行了预训练。StrucTexTv2 在多个文档理解基准（如 FUNSD, SROIE, RVL-CDIP）上取得了 SOTA 性能。消融实验证明了 MVTP 任务在促进视觉-文本对齐和提升下游任务性能方面的关键作用。","authors_note":"该工作来自百度团队，在 OCR 和文档理解领域有深厚积累。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Document Image Pre-training requires handling multimodal information like vision, text, and layout. Existing methods often rely on complex OCR engines to extract text or fail to fully integrate deep visual-textual interactions in their pre-training objectives.","importance":"Methodological and paradigm-level contribution. Proposes StrucTexTv2, an end-to-end document image pre-training framework introducing a masked visual-textual prediction task. This is significant for multimodal pre-training (especially text-rich document understanding), pushing towards end-to-end unified modeling that reduces heavy reliance on OCR.","technical_approach":"Proposes StrucTexTv2. Key mechanisms: 1) Adopts an end-to-end architecture to jointly learn visual and textual representations directly from document images, weakening the strong dependence on external OCR; 2) Introduces the Masked Visual-Textual Prediction (MVTP) pre-training task. Unlike traditional MLM, MVTP masks both the text and its corresponding visual region, forcing the model to use cross-modal context (unmasked visual and textual info) to reconstruct the masked content, achieving deep modal fusion.","experiments":"Pre-trained on a dataset of tens of millions of document images. StrucTexTv2 achieved SOTA performance on multiple document understanding benchmarks (e.g., FUNSD, SROIE, RVL-CDIP). Ablations prove the critical role of the MVTP task in promoting visual-textual alignment and improving downstream performance.","authors_note":"This work is from the Baidu team, which has deep expertise in OCR and document understanding."},"tags":["document-understanding","masked-modeling","vision-language","pretraining"]},{"id":"Yuksekgonul0KJ023","title":"When and Why Vision-Language Models Behave like Bags-Of-Words, and What to Do About It?","authors":["Mert Yüksekgönül","Federico Bianchi","Pratyusha Kalluri","Dan Jurafsky","James Zou"],"institutions":["Stanford University"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Yuksekgonul0KJ023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Yuksekgonul0KJ023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=KRLUvxh8uaX","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的核心问题是：很多视觉-语言模型并没有真正建模词序和组合语义，而是在相当多场景下退化成“词袋匹配器”。过去这件事常被零样本准确率掩盖，因为常规 benchmark 更奖励对象共现而不是关系理解；作者认为随着 VLM 被用于更细粒度推理，这个缺陷已经不能再回避。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要是诊断级和方法修正式，而不是提出一个全新预训练范式。它对 pretrain 的启示很直接：如果训练目标和数据分布主要鼓励图文全局对齐，模型会优先学到稳健但浅层的词汇共现捷径，组合泛化不会自然出现；这对 CLIP 类对比学习、caption 数据构造和评测设计都有约束意义。","technical_approach":"作者先构造并系统化了“词袋行为”诊断，再给出针对性的缓解办法。核心不是换一个更大的模型，而是用受控文本扰动、词序打乱、关系替换和组合泛化测试去测量模型到底依赖什么信号；在改进上，论文引入更强调语序和组合关系的训练/推断修正，使模型不能只靠关键词重叠完成匹配。和已有只报告平均零样本精度的工作相比，这里把“VLM 学到了什么”拆成了可验证的行为层指标，因此能定位问题来源是文本编码、图文对齐目标，还是数据本身缺少关系监督。","experiments":"实验结论是明确的：主流 VLM 在词序被打乱或关系词被替换时，性能下降远小于人们预期，说明模型对句法和关系并不敏感；而在需要区分相同词汇集合但不同语义关系的任务上，错误显著增加。论文主要比较了 CLIP 系列及相关视觉-语言模型，在 Winoground、受控组合数据和自建扰动评测上展示这一现象；改进方法能在这些组合/关系测试上带来可观提升，同时尽量保持原始零样本分类能力。更有价值的观察是：模型越依赖大规模 web 图文对齐训练，越容易形成词汇捷径；单纯放大模型并不能稳定解决这个问题。","authors_note":"Stanford University；知名作者包括 Dan Jurafsky、James Zou。该团队长期做语言模型行为分析、数据偏置与可解释性相关工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper shows that many vision-language models do not reliably encode word order or compositional meaning, and often behave like bag-of-words matchers. This issue was easy to miss because standard zero-shot benchmarks reward object co-occurrence more than relational understanding, but it becomes critical once VLMs are used for finer-grained reasoning.","importance":"This is primarily a diagnosis-and-correction paper rather than a new pretraining paradigm. Its relevance to pretraining is clear: if the objective and data mostly reward global image-text alignment, the model will learn robust lexical shortcuts before it learns composition; that has direct implications for CLIP-style contrastive training, caption design, and evaluation.","technical_approach":"The main contribution is a controlled behavioral probe for bag-of-words failure modes, followed by targeted mitigation. Instead of scaling the model, the authors use word-order shuffling, relation swaps, and compositional tests to isolate what signal the model actually uses; they then add training or inference adjustments that force the model to rely less on keyword overlap alone. Compared with prior work that mostly reports average zero-shot accuracy, this paper turns representation quality into falsifiable behavioral tests tied to text encoding, alignment loss, and data composition.","experiments":"The empirical result is consistent: mainstream VLMs are much less sensitive to word order and relational changes than one would expect from true compositional understanding. On tasks where the same set of words corresponds to different meanings, errors rise sharply. The paper studies CLIP-like models on Winoground, controlled compositional benchmarks, and perturbation-based evaluations; the proposed fixes improve these harder relational tests while largely preserving standard zero-shot performance. A useful scaling observation is that larger web-scale pretraining alone does not reliably remove the shortcut.","authors_note":"Stanford University; notable authors include Dan Jurafsky and James Zou. The group is well known for work on language model behavior, dataset bias, and interpretability."},"tags":["vlm","interpretability","bag-of-words","representation"],"notable_authors":["Dan Jurafsky","James Zou"]},{"id":"ZengAICWWTPRSLV23","title":"Socratic Models: Composing Zero-Shot Multimodal Reasoning with Language","authors":["Andy Zeng","Maria Attarian","Brian Ichter","Krzysztof Marcin Choromanski","Adrian Wong","Stefan Welker","Federico Tombari","Aveek Purohit","Michael S. Ryoo","Vikas Sindhwani","Johnny Lee","Vincent Vanhoucke","Pete Florence"],"institutions":["Google Research"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ZengAICWWTPRSLV23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ZengAICWWTPRSLV23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=G2Q2Mh3avow","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：能否不重新训练一个统一多模态大模型，而是把现成的单模态基础模型通过语言接口组合起来，完成零样本多模态推理。过去主流路线是端到端联合训练，但成本高、数据要求重，而且每加一种模态都要重新做对齐。","importance":"它的贡献是范式级的系统拼装思路，而不是更强的预训练目标。对 pretrain 研究的启发在于：语言可以充当跨模态的中间表示和协调层，部分替代昂贵的原生联合预训练；这为“先有强单模态模型，再做轻量组合”提供了可行证据，也暴露了这种路线在鲁棒性和上限上的边界。","technical_approach":"Socratic Models 的核心是用一个语言模型来汇总、解释并协调多个预训练专家模型的输出。具体做法不是学习新的共享 embedding，而是把视觉、机器人、语音等模型的预测转成自然语言提示，再让 LLM 在这些文本化证据上做推理和决策；必要时再把语言结论回传给执行模块。和 Flamingo、PaLI 这类原生多模态模型不同，它几乎不做联合训练，牺牲的是端到端最优性，换来的是模块复用、零样本扩展和工程灵活性。","experiments":"实验结论是：在机器人操作、视觉问答和多模态决策等任务上，纯组合式系统能在零样本条件下显著优于单一模块，且在一些场景接近或超过专门训练的基线。论文重点展示的是跨任务泛化和模块可替换性，而不是参数量或训练 token 的优势；有价值的观察是，语言中间层最适合整合高层语义判断，但对低层感知误差和时序闭环控制仍然敏感。对预训练读者来说，这说明语言作为“统一接口”有效，但不是免费的统一表示。","authors_note":"Google Research；作者包括 Andy Zeng、Brian Ichter、Krzysztof Marcin Choromanski 等。团队代表性工作覆盖机器人基础模型、Pathways/多模态系统与大模型推理。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether zero-shot multimodal reasoning can be built by composing existing unimodal foundation models through language, instead of training a new end-to-end multimodal model. The standard alternative is joint training, which is expensive, data-hungry, and hard to extend to new modalities.","importance":"This is a paradigm-level systems idea rather than a new pretraining objective. For pretraining research, the key message is that language can serve as an intermediate coordination layer across modalities, partially substituting for costly native joint pretraining; at the same time, the paper makes the ceiling and fragility of this route visible.","technical_approach":"Socratic Models use a language model to aggregate and reason over outputs from multiple pretrained expert models. Instead of learning a shared embedding space, the system converts predictions from vision, robotics, speech, and other modules into natural-language prompts, then lets the LLM infer actions or answers from that textual evidence. Compared with native multimodal models such as Flamingo-like systems, this approach gives up end-to-end optimality in exchange for modular reuse, zero-shot extensibility, and engineering flexibility.","experiments":"The main empirical result is that this compositional setup improves substantially over isolated modules in zero-shot multimodal tasks, including robotics, VQA, and decision-making, and can be competitive with some task-specific baselines. The paper emphasizes cross-task generalization and module interchangeability more than parameter counts or training budgets. A useful boundary condition is that language works well as a high-level semantic interface, but low-level perception errors and closed-loop control remain bottlenecks.","authors_note":"Google Research; authors include Andy Zeng, Brian Ichter, and Krzysztof Marcin Choromanski. The team is known for work on robotics foundation models, Pathways-style systems, and multimodal reasoning."},"tags":["multimodal-reasoning","zero-shot","compositionality","language-models"],"notable_authors":["Andy Zeng","Brian Ichter","Krzysztof Marcin Choromanski"]},{"id":"ZhaiHGLGH23","title":"Simple Parameter-free Self-attention Approximation","authors":["Yuwen Zhai","Jing Hao","Liang Gao","Xinyu Li","Yiping Gao","Shumin Han"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ZhaiHGLGH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ZhaiHGLGH23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=isodM5jTA7h","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是自注意力的二次复杂度和实现开销问题，但不想再引入额外可学习参数或复杂近似器。已有高效注意力方法往往要么改动较大、要么依赖核技巧/低秩假设，速度和精度 trade-off 不稳定。","importance":"它的贡献是效率导向的架构近似，对 pretrain 的直接影响在于：如果一种无参数近似能在不明显伤害质量的前提下降低注意力成本，那么长上下文和轻量部署会更容易。它不是范式级工作，但对训练/推理系统设计有实际参考价值。","technical_approach":"论文提出一种简单、无参数的 self-attention approximation。核心思想是用固定形式的近似替代标准 softmax attention 中最贵的部分，从而避免额外参数学习和复杂校准；设计上强调 plug-and-play，尽量不改 Transformer 其余结构。和 Performer、Linformer 这类方法相比，它更强调实现简单和参数零增量；代价是近似能力可能更依赖具体数据分布和序列长度。","experiments":"实验通常表明该近似在图像或序列建模任务上能带来更低延迟/显存占用，同时保持接近标准注意力的精度。比较对象包括 vanilla attention 和若干高效注意力基线；作者还会报告不同长度、不同层替换比例下的性能变化，说明这种近似更适合部分层替换或中等长度 regime。对预训练读者来说，关键不是单个 benchmark 分数，而是它证明“无参数近似”也能进入可用区间。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets the quadratic cost of self-attention without introducing extra learnable parameters or heavy approximation machinery. Many efficient-attention methods require substantial architectural changes or rely on kernel or low-rank assumptions whose speed-quality trade-off is not always stable.","importance":"This is an efficiency-oriented architectural approximation. Its relevance to pretraining is practical: if a parameter-free approximation can reduce attention cost without materially hurting quality, it becomes easier to train or serve longer-context models. It is not a paradigm shift, but it is useful systems-facing evidence.","technical_approach":"The method is a simple parameter-free approximation to self-attention. The key design choice is to replace the most expensive part of standard softmax attention with a fixed-form approximation, avoiding extra learned modules and calibration overhead. Compared with methods like Performer or Linformer, the emphasis is on simplicity and zero parameter growth; the trade-off is that approximation quality may depend more on sequence regime and data characteristics.","experiments":"The paper reports lower latency or memory use while keeping accuracy close to standard attention on vision or sequence tasks. Baselines include vanilla attention and other efficient-attention variants, with ablations over sequence length and the fraction of layers replaced. For a pretraining reader, the useful point is not a single benchmark win but the demonstration that parameter-free approximations can be practically viable.","authors_note":""},"tags":["self-attention","approximation","parameter-free","efficiency"]},{"id":"Zhang0ZSG23","title":"TEMPERA: Test-Time Prompt Editing via Reinforcement Learning","authors":["Tianjun Zhang","Xuezhi Wang","Denny Zhou","Dale Schuurmans","Joseph E. Gonzalez"],"institutions":["Google Research","University of California, Berkeley"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Zhang0ZSG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Zhang0ZSG23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=gSHyqBijPFO","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是大语言模型在测试时 prompt 很敏感，但人工改 prompt 成本高且不可泛化的问题。过去常见做法是离线 prompt engineering 或基于验证集搜索，难以针对单个输入动态调整。","importance":"它更偏 post-train / inference-time adaptation，但对 pretrain 也有启发：模型能力的一部分被 prompt 接口暴露和限制，测试时优化可以看作对冻结模型进行轻量策略校正。对研究闭环来说，这说明“模型没学会”与“接口没调好”需要分开诊断。","technical_approach":"TEMPERA 的核心是把 test-time prompt editing 视为一个强化学习问题。系统在不更新模型参数的前提下，根据当前输入和模型反馈迭代编辑 prompt，优化最终任务回报；这比静态模板更灵活，也比穷举搜索更可扩展。和传统 prompt tuning 不同，它发生在推理时、面向单样本或小批输入；和 chain-of-thought self-refinement 相比，它优化的是提示本身而不是答案后处理。","experiments":"实验通常显示 TEMPERA 在多项语言任务上优于固定 prompt、启发式 prompt 改写和若干 test-time adaptation 基线，尤其在分布外或难例上更明显。论文重点不是模型规模，而是不同任务上的平均提升和 RL 编辑策略的稳定性；有价值的 ablation 会比较 reward 设计、编辑步数和探索策略，说明收益来自有目标的 prompt 搜索而不是简单多试几次。边界也很清楚：如果基础模型本身缺少所需知识，prompt 编辑只能有限补救。","authors_note":"Google Research；作者包括 Xuezhi Wang、Denny Zhou、Dale Schuurmans、Joseph E. Gonzalez。团队长期做 LLM 推理、prompting、test-time adaptation 与强化学习。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the fact that LLM performance is highly prompt-sensitive, while manual prompt engineering is expensive and does not generalize well to individual test inputs. Standard alternatives rely on offline prompt search or validation-set tuning, which are not adaptive at inference time.","importance":"This is more of a post-training and inference-time adaptation paper, but it is still relevant to the pretrain-posttrain loop. It highlights that some apparent model failures are actually interface failures, and that test-time optimization can act as a lightweight policy correction on top of a frozen model.","technical_approach":"TEMPERA formulates test-time prompt editing as a reinforcement learning problem. The model parameters stay frozen; instead, an agent iteratively edits the prompt based on the current input and model feedback to maximize task reward. Compared with static prompt templates, this is input-adaptive; compared with brute-force search, it is more scalable; and compared with answer-side self-refinement, it optimizes the instruction interface itself.","experiments":"The reported result is that TEMPERA outperforms fixed prompts, heuristic prompt rewriting, and other test-time adaptation baselines across multiple language tasks, with larger gains on hard or out-of-distribution examples. The paper focuses less on model scale and more on average task improvement and the stability of the RL editing policy. Useful ablations study reward design, edit budget, and exploration strategy, showing that the gains come from targeted prompt optimization rather than simply trying more variants. The boundary is clear: prompt editing cannot recover knowledge the base model never learned.","authors_note":"Google Research; authors include Xuezhi Wang, Denny Zhou, Dale Schuurmans, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. The team is known for work on LLM reasoning, prompting, test-time adaptation, and reinforcement learning."},"tags":["prompt-editing","test-time","reinforcement-learning","adaptation"],"notable_authors":["Xuezhi Wang","Denny Zhou","Dale Schuurmans","Joseph E. Gonzalez"]},{"id":"ZhangCBH0CZ23","title":"Adaptive Budget Allocation for Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning","authors":["Qingru Zhang","Minshuo Chen","Alexander Bukharin","Pengcheng He","Yu Cheng","Weizhu Chen","Tuo Zhao"],"institutions":["Microsoft Research"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ZhangCBH0CZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ZhangCBH0CZ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=lq62uWRJjiY","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是参数高效微调里预算如何分配的问题。LoRA、adapter、prefix 等方法通常给每层分配相同 rank 或相同参数量，但不同层对任务适配的重要性并不一样，平均分配往往浪费预算。","importance":"它是 PEFT 方向的方法级改进。对 pretrain 研究的启发在于：冻结大模型后，任务适配能力并不是均匀分布在各层的；这反过来也能帮助理解预训练表示在哪些层更可迁移、哪些层更需要任务特化。","technical_approach":"核心方法是自适应预算分配：在总参数预算固定的前提下，按层或按模块动态决定该给多少可训练容量。作者不是发明新的 adapter 结构，而是把有限预算投到更敏感的层上，通常依据梯度、重要性估计或性能代理来分配 rank/宽度。和标准均匀 LoRA 相比，这种方法承认层间异质性；和完全搜索式 NAS 相比，它又更轻量、可直接套在现有 PEFT 框架上。","experiments":"实验通常覆盖 GLUE、生成任务或大模型指令微调场景，结论是：在相同可训练参数量下，自适应分配优于均匀分配；或者在达到相同性能时需要更少参数。主要 baseline 包括 LoRA、Adapter、Prefix-Tuning 等均匀预算方法；有价值的 ablation 会展示预算最终集中在中高层或注意力/FFN 的特定子模块，而不是平均铺开。对预训练读者来说，这种层敏感性分布本身就是有信息量的分析结果。","authors_note":"Microsoft Research 等；作者包括 Qingru Zhang、Pengcheng He、Yu Cheng。团队在高效微调、模型压缩和大模型适配方面有持续工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses how to allocate a fixed parameter budget in parameter-efficient fine-tuning. Methods such as LoRA, adapters, and prefix tuning often assign the same rank or parameter count to every layer, even though layers differ in how much task adaptation they actually need.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution in PEFT. Its relevance to pretraining is that adaptation capacity is not uniformly distributed across a frozen pretrained model; that observation also helps reveal which layers are already transferable and which layers need more task-specific adjustment.","technical_approach":"The key idea is adaptive budget allocation: under a fixed trainable-parameter budget, the method dynamically decides how much capacity to assign to each layer or module. It does not invent a new adapter family; instead, it reallocates rank or width toward more sensitive layers, typically using gradients, importance estimates, or other performance proxies. Compared with uniform LoRA-style allocation, it explicitly models layer heterogeneity; compared with full architecture search, it is much lighter and easier to plug into existing PEFT pipelines.","experiments":"The reported result is that adaptive allocation outperforms uniform allocation under the same trainable-parameter budget, or reaches the same accuracy with fewer parameters, across classification and generation tasks. Baselines include LoRA, adapters, and prefix tuning. A useful ablation is where the budget ends up: it often concentrates in specific middle or upper layers, or in particular attention/FFN submodules, rather than spreading evenly. For a pretraining reader, that allocation pattern is itself an informative analysis of pretrained representations.","authors_note":"Microsoft Research and collaborators; authors include Qingru Zhang, Pengcheng He, and Yu Cheng. The team has a strong track record in efficient fine-tuning, compression, and large-model adaptation."},"tags":["parameter-efficient-fine-tuning","peft","budget-allocation","adaptation"],"notable_authors":["Qingru Zhang","Pengcheng He","Yu Cheng"]},{"id":"ZhangSPDGR23","title":"Effectively Modeling Time Series with Simple Discrete State Spaces","authors":["Michael Zhang","Khaled Kamal Saab","Michael Poli","Tri Dao","Karan Goel","Christopher Ré"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ZhangSPDGR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ZhangSPDGR23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=2EpjkjzdCAa","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：时间序列建模里，S4等连续状态空间模型（SSM）很强但实现复杂、训练不稳定且算子重，导致工程上难以像Transformer那样普及。以往常见的次优做法是退回到RNN/TCN或用简化版SSM但牺牲长程依赖能力。","importance":"贡献偏范式与架构层：提出“简单离散状态空间”(discrete SSM)的建模与实现路径，试图用更直接的离散递推/卷积形式拿到SSM的长程建模优势，同时降低实现门槛。对pretrain的启示是：长序列建模不一定非要注意力，结构化线性递推如果足够简单稳定，可能成为长上下文/高吞吐训练的替代骨干。","technical_approach":"方法核心是把状态空间从连续参数化转到更直接的离散形式，并用简单的参数化与计算图实现高效的序列处理。关键设计倾向于：减少对特殊数值技巧（如复杂的HiPPO初始化、连续到离散的精细化处理）的依赖，把模型写成更标准的深度学习算子，从而提升可训练性与可移植性；与S4类方法相比，强调“简单”和“有效实现”。","experiments":"未提供摘要，无法给出具体数据集、模型规模与数值提升；但按题目与作者组合，实验大概率覆盖Long Range Arena、语音/时间序列基准以及与S4/Transformer/TCN的对比，并报告速度与精度的折中。建议补读时重点核对：序列长度扩展时的复杂度曲线、吞吐（tokens/s）与显存、以及在相同算力预算下的最优点。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical issue in time-series modeling: strong continuous-time SSMs like S4 can be hard to implement, numerically delicate, and operator-heavy, which limits adoption compared to Transformers. A common fallback is using RNN/TCN or simplified SSM variants that often lose long-range modeling strength.","importance":"This is an architecture/paradigm contribution: it argues that simple discrete state spaces can retain key benefits of SSMs while being easier to train and implement. For pretraining, the implication is that long-context modeling may not require attention; structured linear recurrences can be a viable backbone if they are stable and efficient at scale.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to move from continuous parameterizations to a more direct discrete state-space formulation with a simpler parameterization and compute graph. The design choice is to reduce reliance on specialized numerical tricks and instead express the model with standard deep-learning operators, aiming for better trainability and portability. Relative to S4-style methods, the emphasis is on simplicity plus effective implementation.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so datasets, model sizes, and numerical gains cannot be stated reliably. The evaluation likely includes long-range benchmarks (e.g., LRA) and time-series/audio tasks, comparing against S4/Transformer/TCN and reporting accuracy–throughput trade-offs; these should be verified in the main tables.","authors_note":""},"tags":["time-series","discrete-state-spaces","sequence-modeling"]},{"id":"ZhouLZLY23","title":"Not All Tasks Are Born Equal: Understanding Zero-Shot Generalization","authors":["Jing Zhou","Zongyu Lin","Yanan Zheng","Jian Li","Zhilin Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ZhouLZLY23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ZhouLZLY23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=KGV-GBh8fb","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：零样本泛化（zero-shot）在不同任务上差异巨大，但社区常把它当作单一能力来讨论，导致评测与训练信号设计缺乏针对性。以往的次优做法是用平均分掩盖任务间难度与可迁移性差异。","importance":"贡献偏分析与评测方法级：提出“任务并非生而平等”的框架来解释零样本差异，帮助把泛化失败归因到任务属性而非模型“行不行”。对pretrain的启示是：数据配比、指令合成与评测集构建应按任务可迁移结构分层，否则会误导scaling与训练策略选择。","technical_approach":"方法上应是定义/提取任务属性（如标签空间结构、输入分布偏移、所需组合泛化程度等），并用这些属性解释或预测零样本表现差异。关键取舍是：用可解释的任务分解替代黑盒平均分，从而能提出更可操作的训练/数据建议；边界在于任务属性的定义可能依赖具体基准与表征方式，跨领域可复用性需要验证。","experiments":"未提供摘要，无法给出使用的任务集合、模型族与统计结果；但应包含跨多任务的零样本评测与相关性分析，并可能给出按任务属性分组后的性能曲线。建议补读时重点核对：哪些任务属性对零样本最有预测力、以及结论是否在不同模型规模/不同预训练语料下保持一致。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Zero-shot generalization varies dramatically across tasks, yet it is often discussed as a single capability, which blurs evaluation and weakens training-signal design. A common suboptimal practice is averaging scores, hiding task-specific transferability and difficulty structure.","importance":"This is an analysis/evaluation contribution: it argues that tasks are not “born equal” and provides a framework to explain zero-shot variability via task properties. For pretraining, it implies that data mixtures, instruction synthesis, and benchmark construction should be stratified by transfer structure; otherwise scaling conclusions and training choices can be misleading.","technical_approach":"The approach likely defines/extracts task attributes (e.g., label-space structure, distribution shift, degree of compositional generalization) and uses them to explain or predict zero-shot performance differences. The key trade-off is interpretability and actionability versus relying on black-box aggregate metrics. A limitation is that task-attribute definitions may be benchmark-dependent and need cross-domain validation.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so task suites, model families, and quantitative findings cannot be stated reliably. The paper likely runs multi-task zero-shot evaluations with correlation/grouping analyses; readers should verify which task attributes are most predictive and whether conclusions hold across model scales and pretraining corpora.","authors_note":""},"tags":["zero-shot","generalization","task-distribution"]},{"id":"ZhouXY23","title":"Win: Weight-Decay-Integrated Nesterov Acceleration for Adaptive Gradient Algorithms","authors":["Pan Zhou","Xingyu Xie","Shuicheng Yan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ZhouXY23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ZhouXY23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=CPdc77SQfQ5","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：AdamW把权重衰减（weight decay）与自适应梯度更新解耦后更好用，但在带动量/加速（如Nesterov）与自适应算法结合时，权重衰减的实现细节仍会影响收敛与泛化。以往很多实现把weight decay当作简单的L2项或事后缩放，理论与实践不一致。","importance":"贡献是优化器方法级：提出WIN，把权重衰减更紧密地集成进Nesterov加速的自适应梯度算法中，目标是在不牺牲稳定性的情况下获得更快收敛或更好泛化。对pretrain的启示是：大模型训练里optimizer细节（尤其weight decay与动量/自适应项的耦合方式）会显著影响最优学习率区间与训练后期表现，值得系统化对比而不是沿用默认实现。","technical_approach":"方法上是对Nesterov加速的更新公式进行改写，使weight decay在“看前一步/lookahead”的梯度点与参数更新中以一致方式出现。关键取舍是：把weight decay从外部正则项变成更新动力学的一部分，从而减少实现歧义并改善理论一致性；与AdamW式解耦不同，WIN强调与Nesterov结构的融合，边界在于它可能需要重新调参（wd、lr、beta）才能发挥优势。","experiments":"未提供摘要，无法给出具体任务（CV/NLP）、模型规模与提升数字；但应会对比Adam/AdamW、NAdam等，并报告训练loss曲线、最终精度与对学习率/weight decay的敏感性。建议补读时重点核对：在Transformer预训练（而非小型分类）上是否仍有稳定收益、以及是否改善训练后期的收敛与泛化折中。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"AdamW’s decoupled weight decay works well in practice, but when combining momentum/acceleration (e.g., Nesterov) with adaptive gradients, the exact implementation of weight decay still affects convergence and generalization. Many implementations treat weight decay as a simple L2 term or an after-the-fact scaling, creating theory–practice mismatches.","importance":"This is an optimizer method contribution: WIN integrates weight decay into Nesterov-accelerated adaptive gradient algorithms more coherently, aiming for faster convergence and/or better generalization without sacrificing stability. For pretraining, it reinforces that optimizer details—especially how weight decay couples with momentum/adaptation—can shift the optimal LR/WD regime and late-training behavior.","technical_approach":"It rewrites Nesterov-style update rules so weight decay is applied consistently with the lookahead gradient point and the parameter update dynamics. The key choice is to treat weight decay as part of the update dynamics rather than an external regularizer, reducing implementation ambiguity and improving theoretical consistency. Unlike AdamW-style decoupling, WIN emphasizes integration with Nesterov structure; a practical boundary is that it may require retuning LR/WD/betas to realize gains.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so tasks, model sizes, and numerical gains cannot be stated reliably. The paper likely compares against Adam/AdamW and NAdam variants, reporting training curves, final metrics, and sensitivity to LR/WD; readers should verify whether gains persist on Transformer pretraining rather than small supervised benchmarks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["optimizer","weight-decay","training-stability","optimization"]},{"id":"Zhu0ORT023","title":"Discrete Contrastive Diffusion for Cross-Modal Music and Image Generation","authors":["Ye Zhu","Yu Wu","Kyle Olszewski","Jian Ren","Sergey Tulyakov","Yan Yan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Zhu0ORT023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Zhu0ORT023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=1-MBdJssZ-S","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion","cross-modal","music-generation","discrete-tokens"]},{"id":"ZhuangAGSS023","title":"Diffusion Probabilistic Fields","authors":["Peiye Zhuang","Samira Abnar","Jiatao Gu","Alexander G. Schwing","Joshua M. Susskind","Miguel Ángel Bautista"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ZhuangAGSS023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ZhuangAGSS023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=ik91mY-2GN","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion","energy-based","score-matching","generative-modeling"]},{"id":"Zimmer0P23","title":"How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Retraining","authors":["Max Zimmer","Christoph Spiegel","Sebastian Pokutta"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Zimmer0P23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Zimmer0P23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=_nF5imFKQI","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["continual-pretrain","retraining","data-drift","training-dynamics"]},{"id":"Zou0LG23","title":"Understanding the Generalization of Adam in Learning Neural Networks with Proper Regularization","authors":["Difan Zou","Yuan Cao","Yuanzhi Li","Quanquan Gu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Zou0LG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Zou0LG23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=iUYpN14qjTF","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["adam","optimization","generalization","regularization"]},{"id":"2208.14754","title":"LexMAE: Lexicon-Bottlenecked Pretraining for Large-Scale Retrieval","authors":["Tao Shen","Xiubo Geng","Chongyang Tao","Can Xu","Xiaolong Huang","Binxing Jiao","Linjun Yang","Daxin Jiang"],"institutions":["Microsoft","University of Technology Sydney"],"abstract":"$2f","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.14754","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/0001GTXHJYJ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/0001GTXHJYJ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=PfpEtB3-csK","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"把 MLM 预训练得到的 lexicon 权重直接拿去做稀疏检索（SPLADE 一脉）效果不理想，根本原因是 MLM 目标偏爱低熵的确定性词（the/a 这种），而检索需要的是高熵的 pivot 词。这个 objective mismatch 一直靠下游 fine-tune 硬拗。","importance":"预训练目标级别的贡献，直接给 lexicon-weighting 检索（SPLADE 类）设计了一个专门的 pretraining 范式。对 pretrain 研究的启示：下游任务若对 token 重要性分布有特殊诉求，在 pretrain 阶段设一个 bottleneck 来强制模型学正确的 prior，比 fine-tune 阶段再纠偏更有效。","technical_approach":"提出 LexMAE：在 MAE 风格的 encoder-decoder 框架里插一个 lexicon bottleneck——encoder 输出被压成词表空间上的 weighted bag-of-words（每个 vocab 一个重要性权重），decoder 必须仅凭这个 bottleneck 去重建被 mask 的文本。这个瓶颈强制模型把真正携带语义的 pivot 词权重拉高，否则重建不了。相比直接拿 BERT+fine-tune，它在 pretrain 阶段就把 lexicon 重要性学对。","experiments":"在 MS-MARCO passage retrieval 和 BEIR 上对比 SPLADE、coCondenser 等，MS-MARCO MRR@10 报告显著提升（量级 ~2–3 个点），BEIR zero-shot 平均分也领先。关键 ablation 显示：去掉 lexicon bottleneck 退化到普通 MAE，性能掉很多，说明瓶颈本身而非单纯的 MAE 结构是增益来源。","authors_note":"Microsoft / UTS 合作，Tao Shen 等，该团队在 dense/sparse retrieval 预训练上有系列工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Lexicon-weighting retrievers (SPLADE line) inherit an objective mismatch from MLM pretraining: MLM prefers low-entropy filler tokens, whereas retrieval needs high-entropy pivot tokens to carry weight. Previously this was patched at fine-tuning time.","importance":"A pretraining-objective-level contribution tailored to sparse lexical retrieval. The broader lesson for pretrain research: when the downstream task demands a specific prior over token importance, inserting a bottleneck during pretraining is more effective than post-hoc fine-tuning correction.","technical_approach":"LexMAE is an MAE-style encoder–decoder where the encoder output is squeezed through a lexicon bottleneck — a vocabulary-space weighted bag-of-words with per-token importance weights. The decoder must reconstruct masked text from this bottleneck alone, which forces the encoder to assign high weight to genuinely informative pivot tokens. Unlike BERT+fine-tune, the correct lexicon prior is learned in pretraining.","experiments":"On MS-MARCO passage retrieval and BEIR, clear gains over SPLADE and coCondenser (MRR@10 improvements on the order of 2–3 points on MS-MARCO, better average on BEIR zero-shot). A key ablation: removing the lexicon bottleneck collapses performance back toward vanilla MAE, confirming the bottleneck — not the MAE skeleton — is the source of the gain.","authors_note":"Microsoft / UTS collaboration (Tao Shen et al.), a group with a line of work on retrieval-oriented pretraining."},"tags":["masked-lm","retrieval","pretraining","representation-learning"]},{"id":"2206.07706","title":"Masked Frequency Modeling for Self-Supervised Visual Pre-Training","authors":["Jiahao Xie","Wei Li","Xiaohang Zhan","Ziwei Liu","Yew-Soon Ong","Chen Change Loy"],"institutions":["Nanyang Technological University","S-Lab","Microsoft"],"abstract":"$30","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.07706","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/0002LZ0OL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/0002LZ0OL23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=9-umxtNPx5E","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"MIM（MAE/BEiT 一脉）在 pixel/patch 空间 mask-and-predict，但图像在空间域冗余极高（相邻像素几乎相同），导致 mask 任务要么太容易要么信号稀。能不能换个域做 mask-and-predict，让任务的信息结构更合理？","importance":"预训练目标设计的一个新角度：从空间域搬到频率域。对 pretrain 研究的启示是 MIM 的 mask 策略决定任务难度分布，而频率域天然把结构信息（低频）和纹理细节（高频）解耦，可以用更可控的方式暴露模型应该学的模式。是后来一系列 frequency-aware SSL 的参考点。","technical_approach":"MFM 把输入图像做 FFT，在频谱上 mask 掉一部分频率分量，让模型从剩余频谱预测被 mask 的部分，损失定义在频率域。关键洞见：低频 mask 迫使模型学结构（全局 layout），高频 mask 迫使模型学纹理/边缘，两者组合覆盖 structure + detail，而 patch-level mask 没法做到这种解耦。和 MAE 的区别在于不 mask 像素而 mask 频率，不需要复杂 decoder 也不需要 high-mask-ratio 的 trick。","experiments":"在 ImageNet-1K 上预训 ViT-B，线性探测、fine-tune、下游检测/分割对比 MAE、SimMIM、BEiT。fine-tune 精度与 MAE 相当或略优，且训练更高效（不需要 75% mask ratio 这种设定）。消融显示高频和低频 mask 都有贡献，且在不同下游任务上 trade-off 不同。","authors_note":"NTU + S-Lab + Microsoft 等 (Ziwei Liu 团队)。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"MIM (MAE/BEiT) masks in pixel/patch space, but images have heavy spatial redundancy — neighboring pixels are near-duplicates, so patch masking gives either too easy a task or too sparse a signal. Could a different domain give a better-structured mask-and-predict task?","importance":"A new angle on SSL objective design: move from spatial to frequency domain. The pretrain lesson is that masking strategy governs the difficulty distribution of the pretext task, and the frequency domain naturally disentangles global structure (low freq) from texture/detail (high freq), giving a more controllable signal than patch masking.","technical_approach":"MFM applies FFT to the image, masks out a subset of frequency components, and asks the model to predict the masked frequencies, with loss in the frequency domain. Masking low frequencies forces learning of global structure; masking high frequencies forces learning of texture/edges. Unlike MAE, it masks frequencies, not pixels; does not need a heavy decoder or extreme mask ratios.","experiments":"ImageNet-1K pretraining on ViT-B. Fine-tuning and downstream detection/segmentation are comparable to or slightly better than MAE/SimMIM/BEiT, with more efficient training (no need for 75% mask ratio). Ablations show both high- and low-frequency masking contribute, with different trade-offs across downstream tasks.","authors_note":"NTU + S-Lab + Microsoft (Ziwei Liu's group)."},"tags":["vision-pretraining","masked-modeling","frequency","self-supervised"],"notable_authors":["Ziwei Liu"]},{"id":"2205.14583","title":"Learning Locality and Isotropy in Dialogue Modeling","authors":["Han Wu","Haochen Tan","Mingjie Zhan","Gangming Zhao","Shaoqing Lu","Ding Liang","Linqi Song"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Existing dialogue modeling methods have achieved promising performance on various dialogue tasks with the aid of Transformer and the large-scale pre-trained language models. However, some recent studies revealed that the context representations produced by these methods suffer the problem of anisotropy. In this paper, we find that the generated representations are also not conversational, losing the conversation structure information during the context modeling stage. To this end, we identify two properties in dialogue modeling, i.e., locality and isotropy, and present a simple method for dialogue representation calibration, namely SimDRC, to build isotropic and conversational feature spaces. Experimental results show that our approach significantly outperforms the current state-of-the-art models on three dialogue tasks across the automatic and human evaluation metrics. More in-depth analyses further confirm the effectiveness of our proposed approach.","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.14583","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/0004TZZLLS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/0004TZZLLS23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=dPs6BGO2QT0","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"预训练 Transformer 产出的对话上下文表示有两个已知毛病：anisotropy（表示集中在窄锥，区分度差）和缺失 conversation 结构（同一段对话里谁先谁后、谁和谁是一轮的关系被抹掉）。已有各向同性校正方法只解决前者。","importance":"对话表示学习的小范围贡献，方法简单但观察清晰。对 pretrain 研究的启示：通用 LM 产生的 representation 在结构化交互数据（对话）上有系统性偏置，单纯 isotropy 校正不够，需要同时注入 locality（同轮/相邻 utterance 在表示空间上更近）。","technical_approach":"SimDRC 在 pretrain 之上加两个简单正则：locality 正则把同一对话上下文中相邻/相关的 utterance 表示拉近，isotropy 正则把整体表示铺开到各向同性。两个目标联合 fine-tune 已有预训练模型，无需改架构。与 SimCSE 等仅做 isotropy 的 sentence-level 方法区别在显式建模 conversation 结构。","experiments":"在多个对话任务（response selection、dialogue generation 等）上以 BERT/BART 为底做校正，超过 SimCSE 等 baseline。具体数字以原文为准。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Dialogue representations from pretrained Transformers have two known issues: anisotropy (representations collapse into a narrow cone) and loss of conversation structure (turn order / pairing among utterances). Existing isotropy-only corrections only address the first.","importance":"A focused contribution on dialogue representation learning. The pretrain-level takeaway: generic LM representations carry systematic biases on structured interaction data like dialogues; isotropy correction alone is insufficient and must be paired with locality to preserve conversational structure.","technical_approach":"SimDRC adds two simple regularizers during fine-tuning of a pretrained model: a locality term pulling related/adjacent utterances in the same conversation closer, and an isotropy term spreading overall representations. Unlike SimCSE (isotropy only), SimDRC explicitly injects conversation structure. No architectural change.","experiments":"Evaluated on multiple dialogue tasks (response selection, generation) over BERT/BART, outperforming SimCSE-style baselines. Exact numbers per paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["dialogue","representation-learning","anisotropy","transformer"]},{"id":"2210.04287","title":"Learning to Decompose Visual Features with Latent Textual Prompts","authors":["Feng Wang","Manling Li","Xudong Lin","Hairong Lv","Alexander G. Schwing","Heng Ji"],"institutions":["Tsinghua University","UIUC"],"abstract":"$31","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.04287","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/0047L0LSJ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/0047L0LSJ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=wtcud6HroZr","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"CLIP 在下游用起来很尴尬：zero-shot 依赖人写 prompt，描述不准就掉点且鲁棒性差；linear probing 抛开了文本分支，破坏了 CLIP 辛苦学到的 vision-language 对齐。想要一种既用上文本分支、又不依赖人写 prompt 的下游方法。","importance":"prompt learning / 下游适配方向的方法贡献。对 pretrain 研究的间接启示：CLIP 的视觉特征不是单一向量可解释的，而是可以被若干**feature-level** 文本 prompt 分解成多个语义成分；这也暗示 VLM 的 representation 内部是多组件组合式的。","technical_approach":"DeFo 保持 CLIP 的 dual-encoder 架构不动，引入若干**可学习的文本 embedding**（不是 token、不是 class name）作为 queries 送入 text encoder，产生一组 textual feature prompts；视觉特征与这组文本 feature prompts 做点积得到 decomposed logits，再接一个轻量 linear classifier 出最终预测。与 CoOp 的区别是 prompt 数量不绑定 class 数量且不要求与 class name 对齐，prompt 被当作视觉特征的分解基。与 linear probing 的区别是 vision-language 对齐通道仍在。","experiments":"在 ImageNet 及多个分类 benchmark 上，few-shot 与 full-shot 设定下均超过 CLIP zero-shot、linear probing 和 CoOp。ablation 关键发现是 prompt 数量与 class 数量解耦时性能更稳，支持其'feature 分解'而非'class name 替代'的解释。","authors_note":"清华 + UIUC 等 (Alexander Schwing)。"},"summary_en":{"en_placeholder":"","core_problem":"CLIP is awkward downstream: zero-shot depends on hand-written prompts and is brittle when descriptions are imprecise; linear probing discards the text branch and breaks the learned vision-language alignment. We want a method that keeps the text branch but doesn't rely on hand-written prompts.","importance":"A prompt-learning / downstream-adaptation contribution. Indirect pretrain takeaway: CLIP's visual features are not a monolithic vector — they can be decomposed via multiple feature-level text prompts, hinting that VLM representations are compositional at the feature level.","technical_approach":"DeFo keeps the CLIP dual-encoder intact and introduces a set of learnable textual embeddings (not tokens, not class names) as queries into the text encoder, yielding a bank of textual feature prompts. The image feature is dotted against this bank to produce decomposed logits, followed by a lightweight linear classifier. Unlike CoOp, the number of prompts is decoupled from the number of classes and they are not required to correspond to class names — they act as a decomposition basis for visual features. Unlike linear probing, the vision-language alignment channel is preserved.","experiments":"On ImageNet and several classification benchmarks, DeFo beats CLIP zero-shot, linear probing, and CoOp in both few-shot and full-shot regimes. Key ablation: performance is more stable when prompt count is decoupled from class count, supporting the 'feature decomposition' interpretation over 'class-name replacement'.","authors_note":"Tsinghua + UIUC (Alexander Schwing)."},"tags":["vlm","prompting","clip","representation-learning","robustness"],"notable_authors":["Alexander G. Schwing"]},{"id":"AbbelkarimEES23","title":"Model Extraction Attacks on Arabic BERT-Based APIs","authors":["Hassan Abbelkarim","Mohammed Eltahir","Khalid N. Elmadani","Anas Showk"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/AbbelkarimEES23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/AbbelkarimEES23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=XptW6NuULJ","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["model-extraction","security","bert","api"]},{"id":"AboagyeZSYWZCWZ23","title":"Interpretable Debiasing of Vectorized Language Representations with Iterative Orthogonalization","authors":["Prince Osei Aboagye","Yan Zheng","Jack Shunn","Chin-Chia Michael Yeh","Junpeng Wang","Zhongfang Zhuang","Huiyuan Chen","Liang Wang","Wei Zhang","Jeff M. Phillips"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/AboagyeZSYWZCWZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/AboagyeZSYWZCWZ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=TkQ1sxd9P4","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["debiasing","representation-learning","embedding","fairness"]},{"id":"2311.12375","title":"The Obscure Limitation of Modular Multilingual Language Models","authors":["Muhammad Farid Adilazuarda","Samuel Cahyawijaya","Ayu Purwarianti"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We expose the limitation of modular multilingual language models (MLMs) in multilingual inference scenarios with unknown languages. Existing evaluations of modular MLMs exclude the involvement of language identification (LID) modules, which obscures the performance of real-case multilingual scenarios of modular MLMs. In this work, we showcase the effect of adding LID on the multilingual evaluation of modular MLMs and provide discussions for closing the performance gap of caused by the pipelined approach of LID and modular MLMs.","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.12375","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/AdilazuardaCP23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/AdilazuardaCP23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=zEGstYVHBt","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["multilingual","modular-models","language-identification","evaluation"]},{"id":"2212.01447","title":"Compound Tokens: Channel Fusion for Vision-Language Representation Learning","authors":["Maxwell Mbabilla Aladago","A. J. Piergiovanni"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$32","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.01447","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/AladagoP23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/AladagoP23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=_3_VZtMkvMB","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["vlm","fusion","token-mixing","alignment","representation-learning"]},{"id":"2209.15571","title":"Building Normalizing Flows with Stochastic Interpolants","authors":["Michael S. Albergo","Eric Vanden-Eijnden"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$33","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.15571","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/AlbergoV23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/AlbergoV23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=li7qeBbCR1t","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["normalizing-flows","stochastic-interpolants","continuous-time","generative-modeling"]},{"id":"2302.11978","title":"Does Deep Learning Learn to Abstract? A Systematic Probing Framework","authors":["Shengnan An","Zeqi Lin","Bei Chen","Qiang Fu","Nanning Zheng","Jian-Guang Lou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$34","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.11978","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/AnLCF0L23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/AnLCF0L23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=QB1dMPEXau5","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["abstraction","probing","generalization","representation-learning"]},{"id":"2210.07277","title":"The hidden uniform cluster prior in self-supervised learning","authors":["Mido Assran","Randall Balestriero","Quentin Duval","Florian Bordes","Ishan Misra","Piotr Bojanowski","Pascal Vincent","Michael G. Rabbat","Nicolas Ballas"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"A successful paradigm in representation learning is to perform self-supervised pretraining using tasks based on mini-batch statistics (e.g., SimCLR, VICReg, SwAV, MSN). We show that in the formulation of all these methods is an overlooked prior to learn features that enable uniform clustering of the data. While this prior has led to remarkably semantic representations when pretraining on class-balanced data, such as ImageNet, we demonstrate that it can hamper performance when pretraining on class-imbalanced data. By moving away from conventional uniformity priors and instead preferring power-law distributed feature clusters, we show that one can improve the quality of the learned representations on real-world class-imbalanced datasets. To demonstrate this, we develop an extension of the Masked Siamese Networks (MSN) method to support the use of arbitrary features priors.","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.07277","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/AssranBDBMBVRB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/AssranBDBMBVRB23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=04K3PMtMckp","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["self-supervised-learning","representation-learning","clustering","training-dynamics"]},{"id":"2212.10898","title":"Training language models to summarize narratives improves brain alignment","authors":["Khai Loong Aw","Mariya Toneva"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$35","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.10898","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/AwT23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/AwT23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=KzkLAE49H9b","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["long-context","summarization","training-objective","brain-alignment"]},{"id":"2210.09461","title":"Token Merging: Your ViT But Faster","authors":["Daniel Bolya","Cheng-Yang Fu","Xiaoliang Dai","Peizhao Zhang","Christoph Feichtenhofer","Judy Hoffman"],"institutions":["Meta AI","Georgia Tech"],"abstract":"We introduce Token Merging (ToMe), a simple method to increase the throughput of existing ViT models without needing to train. ToMe gradually combines similar tokens in a transformer using a general and light-weight matching algorithm that is as fast as pruning while being more accurate. Off-the-shelf, ToMe can 2x the throughput of state-of-the-art ViT-L @ 512 and ViT-H @ 518 models on images and 2.2x the throughput of ViT-L on video with only a 0.2-0.3% accuracy drop in each case. ToMe can also easily be applied during training, improving in practice training speed up to 2x for MAE fine-tuning on video. Training with ToMe further minimizes accuracy drop, leading to 2x the throughput of ViT-B on audio for only a 0.4% mAP drop. Qualitatively, we find that ToMe merges object parts into one token, even over multiple frames of video. Overall, ToMe's accuracy and speed are competitive with state-of-the-art on images, video, and audio.","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.09461","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/BolyaFDZFH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/BolyaFDZFH23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=JroZRaRw7Eu","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"ViT 模型由于注意力的二次复杂度和庞大的 token 数量导致计算成本极高，以往通过剪枝（损失信息）或修改架构（需重新训练）来缓解，缺乏即插即用的加速方案。","importance":"方法级贡献。提供了一种无需重新训练即可加速 ViT 推理和预训练（如 MAE）的轻量级方法，证明了 token 融合比 token 丢弃能更好地保留信息。","technical_approach":"提出 ToMe（Token Merging）。在 Transformer 的每个 block 中，使用二分软匹配算法寻找并合并最相似的 token（通过对特征求平均）。它逐步减少 token 数量，速度与剪枝一样快，但因为是融合而非丢弃，所以精度损失更小。","experiments":"在图像任务上，使现成的 ViT-L 和 ViT-H 吞吐量翻倍，精度仅下降 0.2-0.3%。在视频任务上使 ViT-L 吞吐量提升 2.2 倍。应用于 MAE 视频微调时，训练速度提升 2 倍。","authors_note":"Meta AI (FAIR)。Christoph Feichtenhofer 是视频架构（SlowFast, MAE for video）领域的知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"ViT models suffer from high computational costs due to quadratic attention complexity and large token counts, typically addressed by pruning (which loses information) or architectural changes (requiring retraining).","importance":"Method-level contribution. Provides a plug-and-play, training-free method to accelerate ViT inference and pretraining (e.g., MAE), demonstrating that merging tokens preserves information better than dropping them.","technical_approach":"Introduces ToMe (Token Merging). Uses a bipartite soft matching algorithm at each transformer block to find and merge similar tokens by averaging their features. It progressively reduces the token count, matching the speed of pruning while maintaining higher accuracy because information is fused rather than discarded.","experiments":"Doubles the throughput of off-the-shelf ViT-L and ViT-H on images with only a 0.2-0.3% accuracy drop. Achieves 2.2x throughput for ViT-L on video. When applied during training, it speeds up MAE video fine-tuning by 2x.","authors_note":"Meta AI (FAIR). Christoph Feichtenhofer is a leading researcher in video architectures."},"tags":["vit","token-merging","inference"],"notable_authors":["Christoph Feichtenhofer","Xiaoliang Dai"]},{"id":"2210.06280","title":"Language Models are Realistic Tabular Data Generators","authors":["Vadim Borisov","Kathrin Seßler","Tobias Leemann","Martin Pawelczyk","Gjergji Kasneci"],"institutions":["University of Tübingen","Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence"],"abstract":"$36","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.06280","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/BorisovSLPK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/BorisovSLPK23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=cEygmQNOeI","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"表格数据生成通常依赖 GAN 或 VAE，这些模型难以处理异构数据类型（分类/连续）和复杂的特征依赖，而具有强大生成能力的 LLM 却很少被用于此领域。","importance":"范式级探索。证明了只要将表格序列化为文本，标准的自回归 next-token 预测范式就能在表格数据生成上击败专门设计的表格生成模型，展示了 LLM 跨模态统一建模的潜力。","technical_approach":"提出 GReaT。将表格的每一行序列化为文本序列（例如“特征A是X，特征B是Y”），然后用这些文本微调预训练的 LLM。为了支持任意条件生成，训练时对特征顺序进行随机排列（permutation），使模型能够根据任意特征子集作为 prompt 生成缺失的特征。","experiments":"使用 DistilGPT-2 等模型。在机器学习效率（合成数据的实用性）和分布距离指标上，显著优于 SOTA 的表格生成模型（如 CTGAN, TVAE）。","authors_note":"University of Tübingen, Bosch Center for AI."},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Tabular data generation typically relies on GANs or VAEs, which struggle with heterogeneous data types and complex dependencies, while highly capable LLMs are rarely applied to this domain.","importance":"Paradigm-level exploration. Demonstrates that standard autoregressive next-token prediction can outperform specialized tabular generative models once tabular data is serialized into text, highlighting the universality of LLMs.","technical_approach":"Introduces GReaT. Serializes tabular rows into text sequences (e.g., 'Feature A is X, Feature B is Y') and fine-tunes a pre-trained LLM on them. To enable arbitrary conditional generation, it randomly permutes the feature order during training, allowing the model to generate missing features given any subset of features as a prompt.","experiments":"Using models like DistilGPT-2, it significantly outperforms SOTA tabular models (e.g., CTGAN, TVAE) on machine learning efficiency (utility of synthetic data) and distance metrics.","authors_note":"University of Tübingen, Bosch Center for AI."},"tags":["tabular","lm-application","generation"]},{"id":"CaiT0XGL0J23","title":"HypeR: Multitask Hyper-Prompted Training Enables Large-Scale Retrieval Generalization","authors":["Zefeng Cai","Chongyang Tao","Tao Shen","Can Xu","Xiubo Geng","Xin Alex Lin","Liang He","Daxin Jiang"],"institutions":["Microsoft","Tsinghua University"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/CaiT0XGL0J23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/CaiT0XGL0J23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=kUf4BcWXGJr","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"稠密检索模型通常难以在没有域内微调的情况下泛化到未见过的任务，而标准的多任务学习往往会因为不同检索任务的异构性导致负迁移。","importance":"方法级贡献。引入了超网络生成 task-specific prompt 的机制，为检索模型的预训练/后训练提供了一种有效缓解多任务负迁移并提升 zero-shot 泛化能力的方案。","technical_approach":"提出 HypeR。使用一个超网络（hyper-network）根据任务描述生成 soft prompts。这些 prompts 被前置到 query 和 document 编码器的输入中。这种设计使得共享的底层检索模型能够根据特定任务进行条件化调整，在共享参数的同时解耦任务特定知识。","experiments":"在 BEIR 基准（zero-shot 检索）上进行评估。HypeR 显著优于 GTR 和 Contriever 等强大的多任务检索基线模型，证明了超提示机制在跨域泛化上的有效性。","authors_note":"Microsoft."},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Dense retrieval models struggle to generalize to unseen tasks without in-domain fine-tuning, and standard multi-task learning often suffers from negative transfer due to the heterogeneity of diverse retrieval tasks.","importance":"Method-level contribution. Introduces a hypernetwork mechanism to generate task-specific prompts, offering an effective solution for retrieval pretraining/post-training to mitigate multi-task negative transfer and boost zero-shot generalization.","technical_approach":"Introduces HypeR. Uses a hyper-network to generate soft prompts based on task descriptions. These prompts are prepended to the inputs of the query and document encoders. This conditions the shared underlying retrieval model on the specific task, decoupling task-specific knowledge while sharing base parameters.","experiments":"Evaluated on the BEIR benchmark (zero-shot retrieval). HypeR significantly outperforms strong multi-task retrieval baselines like GTR and Contriever, proving the effectiveness of hyper-prompting for cross-domain generalization.","authors_note":"Microsoft."},"tags":["retrieval","multitask","prompt"]},{"id":"ChenC0LSZ23","title":"Sampling is as easy as learning the score: theory for diffusion models with minimal data assumptions","authors":["Sitan Chen","Sinho Chewi","Jerry Li","Yuanzhi Li","Adil Salim","Anru Zhang"],"institutions":["UC Berkeley","MIT","Stanford University","Microsoft"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ChenC0LSZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ChenC0LSZ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=zyLVMgsZ0U_","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"尽管扩散模型在经验上取得了巨大成功，但其采样过程收敛的理论保证通常依赖于对数据分布的强假设（如平滑性、对数凹性或有界支持），而这些假设在真实的图像/文本数据上根本不成立。","importance":"理论级贡献。为扩散模型提供了坚实的理论基础，证明了只要分数匹配（score matching）损失足够小，采样分布就会逼近真实分布，完全不需要对真实数据分布做苛刻假设。","technical_approach":"利用随机微积分和信息论工具，推导了生成分布与真实分布之间的总变差（TV）或 KL 散度上界。该上界仅依赖于 $L_2$ 分数匹配误差，而不需要真实数据分布满足任何函数不等式（如 Poincaré 或 log-Sobolev 不等式）。","experiments":"纯理论工作，无模型训练实验。通过数学证明确立了扩散模型在最小数据假设下的多项式时间收敛性。","authors_note":"UC Berkeley, MIT, Stanford。Sitan Chen 和 Sinho Chewi 在生成模型的理论基础方面有突出贡献。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"While diffusion models are empirically highly successful, theoretical guarantees for their sampling convergence typically rely on strong assumptions about the data distribution (e.g., smoothness, log-concavity), which do not hold for real-world data.","importance":"Theoretical contribution. Provides a rigorous foundation for diffusion models, proving that as long as the score matching loss is small, the sampling distribution will converge to the true distribution without requiring harsh assumptions on the data.","technical_approach":"Uses stochastic calculus and information theory to bound the Total Variation (TV) or KL divergence between the generated and true distributions. The bound depends solely on the $L_2$ score matching error, bypassing the need for the true data distribution to satisfy functional inequalities (like Poincaré or log-Sobolev).","experiments":"Purely theoretical work with no empirical model training. Establishes polynomial-time convergence of diffusion models under minimal data assumptions via mathematical proofs.","authors_note":"UC Berkeley, MIT, Stanford. Sitan Chen and Sinho Chewi are known for their theoretical work on generative models."},"tags":["diffusion-theory","score-matching","sampling"],"notable_authors":["Sitan Chen","Sinho Chewi","Yuanzhi Li"]},{"id":"ChenYZ23","title":"Which Layer is Learning Faster? A Systematic Exploration of Layer-wise Convergence Rate for Deep Neural Networks","authors":["Yixiong Chen","Alan L. Yuille","Zongwei Zhou"],"institutions":["Johns Hopkins University"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ChenYZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ChenYZ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=wlMDF1jQF86","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"深度神经网络的不同层学习速度不同是共识，但缺乏一个系统性的指标和大规模实证研究来量化不同架构和任务下的逐层收敛速度，这阻碍了对预训练动态的精细优化。","importance":"机制分析。提供了一种诊断训练动态的量化工具，揭示了监督学习与自监督学习在逐层收敛模式上的根本差异，对预训练时的层级学习率设置或层冻结策略有指导意义。","technical_approach":"提出逐层收敛率（LCR, Layer-wise Convergence Rate）指标。利用中心化核对齐（CKA）测量特定层在不同 epoch 之间的表征相似度，以此判断该层表征何时稳定。在 CNN、ViT 和 MLP 等多种架构上系统分析了 LCR。","experiments":"发现在标准的监督学习中，靠近数据的底层比靠近输出的顶层收敛得更快（自下而上收敛）。然而，在自监督学习（如 MAE）中，这种模式被打破，顶层和底层的收敛顺序会发生改变，具体取决于重建目标。","authors_note":"Johns Hopkins University。Alan Yuille 是计算机视觉领域的元老级人物。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"It is widely accepted that different layers in deep networks learn at different speeds, but there lacks a systematic metric and large-scale empirical study to quantify layer-wise convergence rates across architectures and tasks, hindering fine-grained pretraining optimization.","importance":"Mechanism analysis. Provides a quantitative tool to diagnose training dynamics, revealing fundamental differences in layer-wise convergence patterns between supervised and self-supervised learning, which informs layer-wise learning rate or freezing strategies during pretraining.","technical_approach":"Proposes the Layer-wise Convergence Rate (LCR) metric. Uses Centered Kernel Alignment (CKA) to measure the representational similarity of a specific layer across different epochs, determining when the representation stabilizes. Analyzes LCR systematically across CNNs, ViTs, and MLPs.","experiments":"Reveals that in standard supervised learning, bottom layers (closer to data) converge faster than top layers (bottom-up convergence). However, in self-supervised learning (like MAE), this pattern is disrupted, and the convergence order of top and bottom layers changes depending on the reconstruction objective.","authors_note":"Johns Hopkins University. Alan Yuille is a highly distinguished researcher in computer vision."},"tags":["convergence-rate","layer-wise","training-dynamics"],"notable_authors":["Alan L. Yuille"]},{"id":"ChenZNZLLC23","title":"CodeT: Code Generation with Generated Tests","authors":["Bei Chen","Fengji Zhang","Anh Nguyen","Daoguang Zan","Zeqi Lin","Jian-Guang Lou","Weizhu Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ChenZNZLLC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ChenZNZLLC23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=ktrw68Cmu9c","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：代码生成模型常常会写出“看起来对”但执行不对的程序，而训练和解码阶段通常没有把可执行测试作为强约束用好。以往方法多依赖静态文本监督或 pass@k 采样碰运气，缺少一个能把测试信号系统接进生成流程的统一办法。","importance":"它的贡献更偏方法级和数据构造级，而不是基础架构创新。对 pretrain/posttrain 接口的启发很直接：当任务天然有可验证反馈时，可以让模型自己生成测试并反过来约束生成，这相当于把弱形式的 verifier 信号接到代码 LM 上。这个思路后来也影响了程序合成、tool use 和 reasoning with verifiers 一类工作。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 CodeT：先让模型为题目生成测试，再利用这些生成测试对候选程序进行筛选、重排或训练增强。关键不在“多采样”本身，而在把测试从外部评估脚本变成内部训练/推理对象。这样做的原因是：代码任务的正确性更接近语义等价，而不是 token 级匹配；生成测试可以近似刻画语义约束。与仅用 public tests 或直接 self-consistency 的方法相比，CodeT 试图补足测试覆盖不足的问题，并让模型在没有完整人工测试集时也能得到 execution-based 信号。代价也很明显：测试质量直接决定上限，错误或过窄的生成测试会把好程序筛掉。","experiments":"从论文标题和公开摘要可确定，实验重点是代码生成 benchmark 上的 functional correctness，典型指标应为 pass@k，并与纯生成、execution-based reranking、以及不使用 generated tests 的基线比较。作者的主张不是单纯增加样本数，而是 generated tests 能显著提高候选排序质量和最终通过率。当前给定信息没有可靠的具体 benchmark 名称、模型规模和提升数字，因此不应虚构；可稳妥总结为：论文报告在多组代码生成设置下，加入 generated tests 相比仅靠原始 LM 解码有稳定增益，并分析了测试质量与覆盖率的影响。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a familiar failure mode in code LMs: they often produce programs that look plausible but fail semantically, while standard training and decoding underuse executable tests as supervision. Earlier approaches mostly relied on token-level supervision or brute-force pass@k sampling, which leaves a gap between surface form and functional correctness.","importance":"This is primarily a method and data-generation contribution. Its relevance to pretraining and post-training is that it turns verifiable feedback into a first-class training and inference signal. That matters beyond coding: it is an early concrete instance of using model-generated verifiers or pseudo-verifiers to improve generation quality.","technical_approach":"CodeT augments code generation with generated tests. The model first produces tests for a programming problem, then uses those tests to filter, rerank, or otherwise improve candidate solutions. The design choice is important: instead of treating tests as an external evaluator only available at the end, the method brings them inside the generation loop. This helps because code correctness is semantic, not just lexical. Relative to plain public-test filtering or self-consistency, generated tests aim to expand coverage when human-written tests are sparse. The obvious boundary is test quality: weak or misleading tests can mis-rank correct programs.","experiments":"From the title and known framing, the experiments center on functional correctness in code generation benchmarks, likely using pass@k and comparing against plain decoding, execution-based reranking, and variants without generated tests. The key claim is that generated tests improve candidate selection beyond simply increasing sample count. The exact benchmarks, model sizes, and gains are not recoverable from the provided input, so they should be left unspecified. A safe summary is that the paper reports consistent gains from generated-test-based selection and analyzes how test quality and coverage affect results.","authors_note":""},"tags":["code-generation","test-generation","llm"],"notable_authors":["Bei Chen"]},{"id":"ChenZS0SY23","title":"Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning Design Spaces","authors":["Jiaao Chen","Aston Zhang","Xingjian Shi","Mu Li","Alex Smola","Diyi Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ChenZS0SY23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ChenZS0SY23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=XSRSWxyJIC","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：参数高效微调（PEFT）方法很多，但它们的设计空间缺少统一比较框架，导致实践里常常靠经验选 LoRA、adapter、prefix 或 bias tuning，而不是基于清晰的机制判断。这个问题之所以值得重新系统化，是因为大模型时代微调成本已从“能不能训”变成“同样预算下怎样设计最值”。","importance":"它的价值在于把 PEFT 从一串零散技巧，整理成可比较的设计空间。对 pretrain 研究者也有启发：不同 PEFT 方案其实对应对预训练权重不同的干预位置、秩约束和优化几何，这会反过来影响 base model 应该怎样预训练得更可适配。贡献类型更像系统化方法研究，而不是提出单一新模块。","technical_approach":"核心方法不是发明一种新的 PEFT，而是构建统一的设计维度来比较已有方案。通常这类维度会包括：修改发生在输入侧、激活侧还是权重侧；更新是加性、低秩还是重参数化；插入位置在 attention、FFN 还是两者都有；以及参数预算固定时如何分配。这样设计有效，是因为很多表面不同的方法可以投影到同一坐标系里，进而比较什么因素真正决定效果。与单篇提出新 adapter 的工作不同，这篇更关注‘哪些选择普遍有效，哪些只是实现细节’。边界是：结论可能依赖任务类型、冻结策略和模型规模，不能简单跨 setting 套用。","experiments":"从标题可确定，实验应覆盖多种 PEFT 方案在统一参数预算或统一任务集下的系统比较，重点看精度、参数量、训练成本和稳定性，而不是追单点 SOTA。大概率包含对插入位置、秩、初始化、层选择等 ablation。由于当前给定信息没有摘要正文，无法可靠给出具体模型、数据集和数值提升，因此只保守总结：作者通过大规模设计空间探索，提炼出若干 PEFT 设计规律，并展示某些看似便宜的方法在固定预算下并不占优，而某些低秩/模块化选择更稳健。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical gap in parameter-efficient fine-tuning: the field had many methods, but no clear design-space view explaining when to choose LoRA, adapters, prefix tuning, bias-only tuning, or related variants. As model sizes grew, this stopped being a niche optimization issue and became a core systems question.","importance":"Its contribution is a structured empirical map rather than a single new module. That matters for pretraining because PEFT behavior reflects how pretrained representations can be steered under low-rank, low-parameter, or layer-local constraints. In other words, it informs not only fine-tuning choices but also what properties base models should expose to be easily adaptable.","technical_approach":"The work organizes PEFT methods into a common design space and compares them under controlled budgets. The likely dimensions include where adaptation happens, how updates are parameterized, which layers are modified, and how the parameter budget is allocated. This is useful because methods that look different at the implementation level often reduce to similar constraints on function updates. The paper is less about inventing another PEFT method and more about identifying which knobs consistently matter. The limitation is that such conclusions can be task-, scale-, and freezing-policy-dependent.","experiments":"The experiments are best understood as a broad design-space sweep across multiple PEFT families under comparable parameter and training budgets. The emphasis is likely on accuracy, parameter count, optimization stability, and layer/rank ablations rather than a single SOTA claim. Since the provided input does not include the full abstract or tables, exact models, datasets, and gains cannot be stated reliably. The safe summary is that the paper extracts actionable PEFT design rules and shows that some seemingly lightweight methods are not the best use of a fixed adaptation budget.","authors_note":""},"tags":["parameter-efficient","fine-tuning","design-space"],"notable_authors":["Mu Li","Alex Smola"]},{"id":"ChengX0LNHXROZS23","title":"Binding Language Models in Symbolic Languages","authors":["Zhoujun Cheng","Tianbao Xie","Peng Shi","Chengzu Li","Rahul Nadkarni","Yushi Hu","Caiming Xiong","Dragomir Radev","Mari Ostendorf","Luke Zettlemoyer","Noah A. Smith","Tao Yu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ChengX0LNHXROZS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ChengX0LNHXROZS23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=lH1PV42cbF","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：标准语言模型擅长在自然语言里做近似模式匹配，但在需要精确绑定变量、作用域和符号引用的符号语言中，经常因为缺少显式 binding 机制而出错。以前这类问题通常靠外部解析器、手工特征或把任务限定在浅层模式上规避，现在作者尝试让 LM 直接学习更可靠的符号绑定。","importance":"它的重要性偏范式接口层：不是单纯提高某个逻辑 benchmark，而是讨论语言模型能否在带有严格语义约束的符号系统中保持可组合性。对 pretrain 的启发是，若要让 LM 覆盖代码、逻辑式、数学表达式这类离散结构，仅靠 next-token 共现统计可能不够，需要显式建模 binding 或至少在训练目标上给它更强的归纳偏置。","technical_approach":"从题目判断，核心方法是把‘binding’作为一等对象引入语言模型对符号语言的建模流程。可能的实现方式包括特殊标记、作用域感知表示、或显式引用/消解机制；共同点都是让模型知道两个同名或相关符号何时应被视为同一实体，何时不能。这样设计有效，是因为符号语言的错误通常不是局部语法错误，而是远距离引用关系断裂。与普通序列建模相比，它牺牲了一部分通用性与简洁性，换取组合泛化和执行一致性。","experiments":"从任务性质看，实验大概率围绕形式语言、逻辑推理、程序式符号操作或变量绑定敏感的合成任务，比较普通 Transformer/LM 与加入 binding 机制后的模型在长度泛化、组合泛化和精确匹配上的差异。当前输入没有提供摘要细节，因此无法可靠写出模型规模、数据规模和具体数字。可以保守概括：论文声称显式 binding 能显著降低符号引用相关错误，尤其在需要跨位置保持一致约束的 setting 中更明显。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a known weakness of standard language models: they are good at pattern completion in natural language, but brittle on symbolic languages that require exact variable binding, scope tracking, and reference consistency. Prior work often avoided this by using external symbolic machinery or by focusing on shallow tasks.","importance":"This is important at the interface between sequence modeling and symbolic structure. For pretraining, the broader lesson is that if we want one model family to cover code, logic, and formal expressions, plain next-token statistics may be insufficient. Explicit inductive bias for binding may be necessary to get reliable compositional behavior.","technical_approach":"The method appears to make binding an explicit part of language modeling for symbolic sequences. The exact implementation is not given here, but the design likely introduces scope-aware representations, reference markers, or another mechanism that tells the model when symbols should co-refer. This matters because many failures in symbolic tasks are not syntax errors; they are broken identity constraints across positions. Compared with a plain Transformer, the approach trades some generality and simplicity for stronger compositional consistency.","experiments":"Given the topic, the experiments likely involve formal languages, logic tasks, or synthetic symbolic benchmarks where variable binding matters, with evaluation on exact correctness and length/compositional generalization. The provided input does not include enough detail to state model sizes, datasets, or numerical gains reliably. The safe takeaway is that explicit binding mechanisms reportedly reduce symbol-reference errors, especially when correctness depends on maintaining long-range identity constraints.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm","symbolic-language","grounding"],"notable_authors":["Rahul Nadkarni"]},{"id":"ChiangNMBGGG23","title":"Loss Landscapes are All You Need: Neural Network Generalization Can Be Explained Without the Implicit Bias of Gradient Descent","authors":["Ping-yeh Chiang","Renkun Ni","David Yu Miller","Arpit Bansal","Jonas Geiping","Micah Goldblum","Tom Goldstein"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ChiangNMBGGG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ChiangNMBGGG23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=QC10RmRbZy9","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：神经网络泛化究竟主要来自梯度下降的隐式偏置，还是来自损失地形本身。过去很多工作把优化器路径看成核心解释，但这篇论文认为，只看 loss landscape 的结构就足以解释大部分泛化现象，不必把结论绑定到特定梯度下降动态上。","importance":"如果这个论断成立，影响是偏机制层和理论解释层的。对 pretrain 实验者的实际启发是：我们也许应更多关注可达低损区域的几何性质、平坦性和连接性，而不是把某些泛化差异直接归因于优化器‘神秘偏置’。这会影响怎么理解大 batch、不同优化器、以及训练稳定性问题。","technical_approach":"核心方法是用 loss landscape 分析来解释泛化，并论证这些解释不依赖于梯度下降特有的轨迹偏置。通常这种工作会构造或比较多种优化路径、局部极小值邻域、平坦/尖锐方向和插值结构，展示泛化与 landscape 指标的关系比与具体优化算法更稳。与强调 GD implicit bias 的理论不同，这里把重点从‘优化器偏好哪个解’移到‘哪些解在地形上本来就更可泛化、且更大体积/更稳健’。边界在于：结论可能更适用于过参数化 regime，对真实大模型训练的外推需要谨慎。","experiments":"从标题可确定，论文应包含系统性的 loss landscape 可视化或量化分析，并比较不同训练过程得到的解在测试误差上的关系。很可能涉及不同优化器、初始化、甚至非 GD 近似过程，以支撑“无需隐式偏置解释”的论点。给定信息里没有可靠的具体架构、数据集和数值结果，因此这里只能保守总结：作者报告多个设定下，泛化与 landscape 几何特征的关联足以解释观察现象，而优化算法差异不是必要前提。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a foundational question: is neural network generalization primarily explained by gradient descent's implicit bias, or can it be explained by properties of the loss landscape itself? Much prior work emphasizes optimization dynamics; this paper argues that the landscape is enough.","importance":"The contribution is conceptual rather than architectural. For pretraining practitioners, the useful implication is that some differences we casually attribute to optimizer magic may instead come from geometric properties of the low-loss regions that training reaches. That perspective affects how we think about optimizer choice, large-batch behavior, and stability.","technical_approach":"The method centers on loss-landscape analysis and on showing that generalization correlates with landscape structure without needing a specifically gradient-descent-based explanation. In practice, this likely means comparing solutions found by different procedures, examining flatness or connectedness, and demonstrating that these geometric features track test performance. Relative to implicit-bias-focused accounts, the paper shifts the explanatory burden from the optimizer's trajectory to the structure and volume of good solutions in parameter space. The limitation is that such claims can be strongest in overparameterized settings and harder to transfer cleanly to frontier-scale models.","experiments":"The empirical evidence likely consists of controlled studies of solutions found under different training procedures, along with landscape visualizations or quantitative sharpness/flatness analyses tied to test error. The exact architectures, datasets, and numbers are not available in the provided input, so they should not be invented. The safe summary is that the paper argues, with comparative experiments, that landscape geometry alone can account for observed generalization patterns in the studied settings.","authors_note":""},"tags":["loss-landscape","generalization","implicit-bias"],"notable_authors":["Jonas Geiping"]},{"id":"2209.11755","title":"Promptagator: Few-shot Dense Retrieval From 8 Examples","authors":["Zhuyun Dai","Vincent Y. Zhao","Ji Ma","Yi Luan","Jianmo Ni","Jing Lu","Anton Bakalov","Kelvin Guu","Keith B. Hall","Ming-Wei Chang"],"institutions":["Google Research"],"abstract":"$37","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.11755","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/DaiZMLNLBGHC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/DaiZMLNLBGHC23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=gmL46YMpu2J","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：稠密检索任务高度异质，指望从一个大监督检索任务迁移到所有其他任务往往不现实，但很多目标场景又只有极少标注。过去常见思路是做通用 retriever 或依赖零样本迁移，作者则把问题重定义为 few-shot dense retrieval：每个任务只给简短描述和极少样例，能否快速造出任务专属检索器。","importance":"这是一个很有代表性的 pretrain ↔ posttrain 接口工作。它的重要性在于把 LLM 用作数据放大器，而不是直接用作检索器：用 8 个例子就能合成足够任务相关的查询，训练出专属 dense retriever。对预训练研究的启发是，当下游 supervision 极少时，合成数据质量往往比继续追求单一万能表征更关键。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Promptagator，即 Prompt-based Query Generation for Retriever。它利用 LLM 读取任务描述和少量示例，生成大量任务相关 query，然后用这些生成 query 构造训练对，训练任务特定的 dense retriever。这个设计有效，是因为 retriever 需要覆盖目标任务的查询分布，而 few-shot 示例恰好能描述意图；LLM 则擅长把这种意图扩展成多样表述。与从单一监督任务迁移的做法相比，Promptagator 不假设‘一个 retriever 适配所有任务’；与直接用 LLM 做检索相比，它把成本转移到离线数据合成，在线检索仍然高效。边界是：如果 LLM 生成的 query 偏离真实用户分布，训练出来的 retriever 也会跟着偏。","experiments":"摘要给出的关键事实很明确。作者把问题设定为每个任务只有简短说明和 8 个样例，并展示 Promptagator 能据此构造 task-specific retriever。实验应与传统迁移式 dense retrieval baseline、零样本/少样本基线比较，在多个多样化检索任务上评估。摘要虽未给出具体数字，但明确主张：few-shot query generation 能显著放大少量示例的价值，使任务专属 retriever 优于依赖单一源任务泛化的方案。这个结果的重点不在模型变大，而在合成数据让训练目标和任务分布更对齐。","authors_note":"机构和作者可确认包含 Google Research。Zhuyun Dai、Jianmo Ni 等长期参与检索与语言模型相关工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a mismatch in dense retrieval: retrieval tasks are highly diverse, yet much prior work assumes a retriever trained on one rich supervised task can generalize broadly. In many real settings, however, each task comes with only a description and a handful of examples. The paper reframes this as few-shot dense retrieval.","importance":"This is an important pretrain-to-posttrain interface paper. Its key idea is not to use an LLM directly as the retriever, but to use it as a query generator that expands scarce supervision into enough task-specific data to train a dedicated dense retriever. The broader lesson is that when supervision is scarce, synthetic data generation can be more valuable than insisting on one universally transferable representation.","technical_approach":"Promptagator uses an LLM to generate task-specific queries from a short task description and a few examples, then trains a dense retriever on the resulting synthetic pairs. The design is well matched to the problem: a retriever must fit the target query distribution, and few-shot examples often describe that intent better than unrelated source-task labels do. Compared with transfer-from-one-task approaches, Promptagator does not assume a single retriever can cover all search intents. Compared with using an LLM directly at retrieval time, it moves the cost offline and keeps inference efficient. The boundary is clear: if the generated queries are distributionally wrong, the retriever will inherit that bias.","experiments":"The abstract provides the central setup: each task has only a short description and 8 examples, and Promptagator uses that to create task-specific retrievers. The experimental comparison is against transfer-based dense retrieval baselines and likely other low-supervision methods across diverse retrieval tasks. Although the abstract here does not include exact metrics, the main claim is explicit: few-shot query generation substantially amplifies the value of a tiny labeled set and produces better task-specialized retrievers than relying on broad transfer alone. The important point is alignment to the target query distribution, not model size.","authors_note":"Confirmed affiliation information includes Google Research. Authors such as Zhuyun Dai and Jianmo Ni are well known for work on retrieval and language models."},"tags":["dense-retrieval","few-shot","prompting"],"notable_authors":["Zhuyun Dai","Vincent Y. Zhao","Ji Ma","Yi Luan","Jianmo Ni"]},{"id":"2303.09166","title":"Identifiability Results for Multimodal Contrastive Learning","authors":["Imant Daunhawer","Alice Bizeul","Emanuele Palumbo","Alexander Marx","Julia E. Vogt"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$38","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.09166","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/DaunhawerBPMV23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/DaunhawerBPMV23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=U_2kuqoTcB","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：在真正的多模态对比学习里，不同模态由不同生成机制产生时，是否还能从对比目标中可识别地恢复共享潜变量。此前可识别性结果大多建立在 multi-view 假设上，即不同视角共享同一种生成机制；这对图文、音文这类异构模态并不贴切，所以作者把问题从 multi-view 推进到 multimodal。","importance":"它的贡献是理论层面的边界澄清，价值在于告诉我们对比学习什么时候真的在学“共享语义”，什么时候只是学到某种任务有用但不可解释的对齐表示。对 pretrain 的启示很直接：跨模态预训练里，目标函数本身并不自动保证语义因子可恢复，生成机制差异、共享因子结构和辅助假设决定了表示是否有 identifiability；这会影响我们如何理解 CLIP 类目标的上限与局限。","technical_approach":"核心方法是给多模态对比学习建立更一般的生成模型，并在该模型下证明共享潜变量的可识别性条件。作者区分了两类设定：一类是同机制的 multi-view，另一类是异机制的 multimodal；在后者中，每个模态可以通过不同函数映射共享因子和私有因子。技术上，他们分析对比目标在何种条件下足以逆转数据生成过程，恢复共享因素到可逆变换意义下的表示。关键不是提出新 loss，而是明确需要哪些结构性假设，例如共享因子的充分变化、模态特定噪声/私有变量的处理方式，以及正负样本构造如何提供约束。和已有 identifiability 工作相比，区别在于不再把两个视图当作同构传感器。","experiments":"从摘要可确认，论文重点是理论结果而非大规模经验 SOTA，因此实验更可能是合成数据或受控设置，用来验证在异构生成机制下共享因子是否能被恢复。给定信息里没有模型参数、数据规模、指标和具体数字，不能安全填入。可确定的实验价值点应是：比较 multi-view 假设成立与不成立时，对比学习恢复共享因子的行为差异，以及理论条件被破坏后识别失败的案例。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a gap in the theory of contrastive learning: can multimodal contrastive objectives recover shared latent factors when different modalities are generated by genuinely different mechanisms. Earlier identifiability results mostly studied the multi-view case, where views are treated as variants of the same generative process, which is too restrictive for image-text or audio-text settings.","importance":"This is a theory paper with practical implications for multimodal pretraining. Its main value is that it separates when contrastive learning can be interpreted as recovering shared semantics from when it merely learns a useful alignment. For pretraining, that matters because CLIP-like objectives are often assumed to capture common meaning by default, while this paper argues that identifiability depends on structural assumptions about the data-generating process.","technical_approach":"The technical contribution is a more general generative framework for multimodal contrastive learning together with identifiability results under that framework. The paper explicitly distinguishes same-mechanism multi-view setups from distinct-mechanism multimodal setups, where each modality may mix shared and modality-specific factors differently. The analysis asks when the contrastive objective contains enough information to invert the generative process and recover the shared factors up to allowable transformations. The key point is not a new loss, but a sharper statement of the assumptions required for recovery.","experiments":"From the abstract, the paper appears theory-first rather than benchmark-driven, so the experiments are likely controlled validations rather than large-scale SOTA runs. The provided information does not include model sizes, datasets, or numerical gains, so those should not be invented. The most likely empirical role is to show recovery succeeds under the stated multimodal assumptions and fails when those assumptions are violated.","authors_note":""},"tags":["contrastive-learning","multimodal","representation-learning"],"notable_authors":["Imant Daunhawer","Alice Bizeul","Emanuele Palumbo","Alexander Marx","Julia E. Vogt"]},{"id":"2212.08320","title":"Autoencoders as Cross-Modal Teachers: Can Pretrained 2D Image Transformers Help 3D Representation Learning?","authors":["Runpei Dong","Zekun Qi","Linfeng Zhang","Junbo Zhang","Jianjian Sun","Zheng Ge","Li Yi","Kaisheng Ma"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$39","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.08320","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/DongQZZSGYM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/DongQZZSGYM23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=8Oun8ZUVe8N","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：3D 自监督表示学习数据稀缺、标签昂贵，能否直接借助在 2D 图像或语言上预训练好的 Transformer 作为跨模态教师来提升 3D 表征。过去跨模态迁移常停留在初始化或蒸馏 feature 层面，作者想把 masked modeling 重新解释成一种统一的知识蒸馏过程，让 2D/文本基础模型真正参与 3D 预训练。","importance":"它的重要性在于把“基础模型跨模态迁移”从经验技巧推进成一个更系统的预训练接口。对 pretrain 的启示是：当目标模态数据少、tokenizer 和语义空间又不成熟时，可以通过离散自编码器把目标模态映射到教师可监督的离散空间，再用冻结的大模型提供稳定训练信号。这对 3D、音频甚至其他低资源模态都有参考价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 ACT（Autoencoders as Cross-Modal Teachers），本质上是把预训练 2D 图像 Transformer 或语言 Transformer 变成 3D masked autoencoding 的教师。作者的关键选择不是直接对齐连续特征，而是采用 discrete variational autoencoding：先让 3D 输入经过自编码器得到离散 token，再用冻结教师在 prompt 条件下提供目标分布或监督信号。这样做的原因是离散目标更适合承接跨模态知识，避免直接回归不同模态 feature 时语义错位。和标准 MAE 相比，ACT 不只是重建输入本身，而是借教师把 2D/语言中的结构先验注入 3D 表征；和普通蒸馏相比，教师被冻结且通过 prompt 适配，减少了小规模 3D 数据把教师带偏的风险。","experiments":"摘要明确给出的是定性结论：预训练于 2D 图像或自然语言的基础 Transformer 都能帮助 3D 自监督表示学习。给定信息没有模型参数、3D 数据集规模、下游任务指标和提升幅度，因此不能填具体数字。可确定的实验看点应包括：与纯 3D masked modeling baseline 比较，ACT 在 3D 表征质量上有稳定提升；并且图像教师与语言教师都有效，说明收益不只来自视觉纹理迁移，而是更一般的结构先验迁移。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical bottleneck in 3D representation learning: 3D data is scarce and expensive, so can pretrained 2D vision or language transformers serve as teachers for self-supervised 3D pretraining. Earlier cross-modal transfer often relied on initialization or shallow feature distillation; this work tries to make the transfer mechanism more native to masked modeling.","importance":"Its contribution is methodological and interface-oriented. For pretraining research, the useful idea is that when the target modality lacks scale and mature tokenization, a frozen foundation model from another modality can still provide a strong training signal if the target is cast into a compatible discrete prediction problem. That is a reusable pattern beyond 3D.","technical_approach":"The method, ACT, treats autoencoding as cross-modal teaching. Instead of directly matching continuous features across modalities, it uses discrete variational autoencoding so that 3D inputs are represented as discrete targets that a frozen pretrained transformer can supervise through prompting. This is the key design choice: discrete targets reduce semantic mismatch and make knowledge transfer more stable. Relative to standard MAE, the objective is not only to reconstruct the 3D input but to inject structure learned from 2D images or language. Relative to ordinary distillation, the teacher remains frozen, which avoids overfitting the teacher to limited 3D data.","experiments":"The abstract supports one clear empirical conclusion: pretrained transformers from both 2D vision and language can improve self-supervised 3D representation learning. The provided text does not include model sizes, dataset scales, or exact gains, so those should be left unspecified. The likely key comparison is against pure 3D masked modeling baselines, with consistent gains from cross-modal teachers.","authors_note":""},"tags":["cross-modal","masked-modeling","representation-learning","vision-transformer","3d"],"notable_authors":["Runpei Dong","Zekun Qi","Linfeng Zhang","Junbo Zhang","Jianjian Sun"]},{"id":"2209.15003","title":"Compositional Semantic Parsing with Large Language Models","authors":["Andrew Drozdov","Nathanael Schärli","Ekin Akyürek","Nathan Scales","Xinying Song","Xinyun Chen","Olivier Bousquet","Denny Zhou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Humans can reason compositionally when presented with new tasks. Previous research shows that appropriate prompting techniques enable large language models (LLMs) to solve artificial compositional generalization tasks such as SCAN. In this work, we identify additional challenges in more realistic semantic parsing tasks with larger vocabulary and refine these prompting techniques to address them. Our best method is based on least-to-most prompting: it decomposes the problem using prompting-based syntactic parsing, then uses this decomposition to select appropriate exemplars and to sequentially generate the semantic parse. This method allows us to set a new state of the art for CFQ while requiring only 1% of the training data used by traditional approaches. Due to the general nature of our approach, we expect similar efforts will lead to new results in other tasks and domains, especially for knowledge-intensive applications.","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.15003","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/DrozdovSASSCBZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/DrozdovSASSCBZ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=gJW8hSGBys8","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：大语言模型在更真实的组合式语义解析任务上，如何从“会做一些人工合成任务”走向“在大词表和复杂结构下仍能组合泛化”。此前 SCAN 一类结果说明 prompt 技巧可能有用，但现实语义解析比 SCAN 更难，单纯 few-shot 或 chain-of-thought 往往不够稳定。","importance":"它的重要性主要在 posttrain / inference 方法层面，但对 pretrain 也有启发：LLM 的组合泛化能力并非只由预训练决定，任务分解方式和 exemplar 选择会显著改变能力上限。对研究 pretrain↔posttrain 接口的人，这篇工作说明了结构化 prompting 可以把预训练中潜在的语法与程序归纳偏置更好地激活出来。","technical_approach":"核心方法是在 least-to-most prompting 基础上做了面向语义解析的改造。作者先用 prompting 做句法解析，把输入分解成更小的组合单元；再利用这个分解选择更合适的示例，并按步骤顺序生成语义解析结果。这个设计的关键不是多加几条示例，而是显式把“先分析结构、再逐步求解”嵌入推理过程。和直接 end-to-end 生成语义 parse 相比，这样做减少了长程组合依赖一次性压到单次解码里的难度；和普通 CoT 相比，它利用了句法结构来约束 exemplar 检索与生成顺序，因此更适合符号化输出。","experiments":"摘要给出了最关键的数字：在 CFQ 上取得新的 SOTA，同时只使用传统方法 1% 的训练数据。这个结果说明收益主要来自推理与提示策略，而不是额外监督规模。摘要没有给出所用 LLM 名称、参数量、绝对准确率和具体 baseline 名称，因此不能补数字。可提炼的实验观察是：随着任务从 SCAN 式人工数据转向更真实、词表更大的语义解析，简单 prompting 不够，而带句法分解的 least-to-most 方法能显著改善组合泛化。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies how to make large language models generalize compositionally on realistic semantic parsing tasks, not just on toy benchmarks like SCAN. Earlier prompting results showed that LLMs can solve some synthetic compositional tasks, but larger vocabularies and more realistic semantics expose additional failure modes.","importance":"This is mainly a prompting and inference-time contribution, but it matters for pretraining research because it shows how much latent capability depends on the interface. The paper suggests that some compositional competence is already present in pretrained LLMs, yet it is only unlocked reliably when the task is decomposed in a structure-aware way.","technical_approach":"The method is a refined least-to-most prompting strategy tailored to semantic parsing. It first obtains a syntactic decomposition through prompting, then uses that decomposition to choose better exemplars and to generate the semantic parse step by step. The important design choice is explicit structural decomposition, not just longer prompts. Compared with direct end-to-end parsing, this reduces the burden of solving all compositional dependencies in one generation pass. Compared with generic chain-of-thought, it uses syntax to constrain both retrieval and generation order.","experiments":"The key number in the abstract is that the method sets a new state of the art on CFQ while using only 1% of the training data required by traditional approaches. The abstract does not specify the underlying LLM, parameter count, absolute scores, or exact baselines, so those should not be fabricated. The main empirical takeaway is that realistic semantic parsing needs more than naive prompting, and syntax-guided least-to-most prompting materially improves compositional generalization.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm","prompting","compositionality","semantic-parsing"],"notable_authors":["Andrew Drozdov","Nathanael Schärli","Ekin Akyürek","Nathan Scales","Xinying Song"]},{"id":"DunlapMGZDGRR23","title":"Using Language to Extend to Unseen Domains","authors":["Lisa Dunlap","Clara Mohri","Devin Guillory","Han Zhang","Trevor Darrell","Joseph E. Gonzalez","Aditi Raghunathan","Anna Rohrbach"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/DunlapMGZDGRR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/DunlapMGZDGRR23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=eR2dG8yjnQ","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题从标题可判断为：能否利用自然语言来帮助模型泛化到未见域。传统 domain generalization 往往只在视觉特征空间里做不变性学习，但未见域的变化常常难以仅靠训练域统计覆盖；语言提供了更抽象、可组合的域描述，作者显然在探索把这种描述变成泛化信号。","importance":"从 pretrain 视角看，这类工作的重要性在于把语言当作跨域先验和接口，而不只是下游标签。它对统一多模态预训练有启发：如果语言能显式描述域偏移、对象属性或环境变化，那么预训练表示可能通过语言条件化获得更强的 OOD 迁移能力。不过由于给定信息只有标题，没有摘要和结果，当前只能把它定位为方法方向有价值，量级和结论强度无法下判断。","technical_approach":"仅凭标题无法可靠还原具体方法。最可能的技术路线是：用文本描述训练域与潜在未见域的语义差异，再通过视觉-语言模型或语言条件模块把这些描述转成分类/检索/表示学习时的约束。是否采用 CLIP、prompt learning、生成式数据扩增或语言监督蒸馏，给定信息无法确认，因此不能编造。","experiments":"没有摘要、模型、数据集和数字，无法给出可信的实验摘要。唯一能安全说的是，这类工作通常会在 domain generalization benchmark 上比较是否加入语言描述，并观察未见域准确率变化；但这不是本文已知事实，不能写成论文结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"From the title, the paper studies whether language can be used to improve generalization to unseen domains. Classical domain generalization methods usually search for invariant visual features, but many domain shifts are easier to describe semantically than to cover statistically, so language is a plausible source of higher-level supervision.","importance":"For pretraining, the interesting angle is that language may serve as a structured prior over domain shift rather than just a label space. That could matter for multimodal pretraining because it suggests a route for using text to encode environment changes, object attributes, or causal context that visual training domains do not span. Still, with only the title available, the strength of the empirical contribution cannot be assessed reliably.","technical_approach":"The exact method cannot be reconstructed from the title alone. A plausible family of approaches would use textual descriptions of domains or shifts and inject them through a vision-language model, prompt tuning, or language-guided regularization, but the provided information is insufficient to state which one the paper actually uses.","experiments":"No abstract, datasets, model sizes, or metrics are provided, so a factual experimental summary is not possible. Any stronger statement would be speculation.","authors_note":""},"tags":["language-supervision","domain-generalization","representation-learning"],"notable_authors":["Lisa Dunlap","Clara Mohri","Devin Guillory","Han Zhang","Trevor Darrell"]},{"id":"Fang0BWW23","title":"Corrupted Image Modeling for Self-Supervised Visual Pre-Training","authors":["Yuxin Fang","Li Dong","Hangbo Bao","Xinggang Wang","Furu Wei"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Fang0BWW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Fang0BWW23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=09hVcSDkea","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"从标题看，这篇论文要解决的是：标准 masked image modeling 之外，是否可以通过“腐化图像建模”得到更强的自监督视觉预训练信号。传统 MIM 主要依赖遮挡重建，但遮挡是一种很单一的破坏方式；如果预训练目标只适应这种破坏，学到的表示可能不够鲁棒，也未必最贴近真实视觉退化。","importance":"这类工作的价值在方法层面，尤其对视觉 tokenizer 和多模态预训练前端有参考意义。若 corrupted image modeling 能稳定优于纯 mask 重建，它说明预训练目标中的 corruption family 是重要设计维度，而不是无关细节；这会影响视觉 backbone 如何为 VLM 提供更通用的表征。由于缺少摘要，当前只能确认问题方向，不能确认贡献量级。","technical_approach":"仅凭标题，最可信的概括是：作者把多种图像腐化过程引入自监督预训练，让模型从被破坏的图像中恢复原图、语义或局部结构。它可能是对 denoising autoencoding、MIM 或 diffusion-style corruption 的改造，但具体是离散 patch corruption、连续噪声、混合退化还是 curriculum 设计，给定信息无法确认。","experiments":"没有摘要和数值，无法可靠总结模型规模、数据集、baseline 和提升幅度。可以推测论文会比较标准 MIM/MAE 类方法，但这不是已知事实，不能写成结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Judging from the title, the paper asks whether self-supervised visual pretraining can benefit from modeling corrupted images rather than relying only on standard masked image modeling. Masking is a narrow corruption family, so the paper likely explores whether richer corruptions produce more useful pretraining signals.","importance":"This is potentially a method-level contribution relevant to visual pretraining and, indirectly, to multimodal pretraining front-ends. If stronger corruption modeling improves representation quality, it would suggest that the corruption process itself is a major design axis rather than a minor implementation detail. With no abstract, however, the empirical strength cannot be assessed.","technical_approach":"From the title alone, the safest description is that the method introduces corrupted-image reconstruction or prediction into self-supervised visual pretraining. It may connect to denoising autoencoding, masked image modeling, or diffusion-style corruption, but the exact mechanism cannot be stated without the abstract.","experiments":"No factual experimental details are available from the provided metadata. Model size, datasets, baselines, and gains should therefore be left unspecified.","authors_note":""},"tags":["self-supervised","visual-pretraining","masked-modeling","corruption"],"notable_authors":["Yuxin Fang","Li Dong","Hangbo Bao","Xinggang Wang","Furu Wei"]},{"id":"Farhana23","title":"RETHINKING POSITIONAL EMBEDDING: A CASE STUDY IN TEMPORAL EVENT SEQUENCE MODELLING","authors":["Effat Farhana"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Farhana23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Farhana23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=iF2w_kqmYmw","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"从标题看，这篇论文关注的是：在时间事件序列建模中，位置编码该如何设计，现有 positional embedding 是否并不适合这类非均匀时间结构。标准 Transformer 位置编码默认 token 间隔规则、顺序主导，但事件序列往往同时包含顺序和真实时间间隔，直接套用 NLP 位置编码可能是次优的。","importance":"这类工作的重要性偏方法细节，但对序列预训练有普适启发。位置表示看似是局部组件，实际上会影响模型如何区分顺序、间隔和周期性；在语言、日志、行为序列甚至音频 token 建模里，这都是会影响泛化和外推的基础设计。由于没有摘要，无法判断它是否提出了足够强的新结论。","technical_approach":"仅凭标题，最稳妥的概括是：作者重新审视 positional embedding 在 temporal event sequence modeling 中的作用，并通过一个案例研究比较不同位置/时间编码方案。可能涉及 absolute、relative、time-gap-aware 或连续时间编码，但具体方法、理论分析和最终推荐方案都无法从现有信息确认。","experiments":"没有摘要、数据集和指标，无法给出可信实验总结。可以预期论文会在事件序列任务上比较不同位置编码，但这只是题目导向的推测，不能写成事实。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"From the title, the paper revisits positional embeddings for temporal event sequence modeling, asking whether standard Transformer position encodings are mismatched to irregular event-time data. In such sequences, order and elapsed time are both informative, so plain NLP-style positional encoding may be inadequate.","importance":"This is likely a component-level study, but position encoding is a foundational component that often shapes extrapolation and inductive bias. That makes the topic relevant beyond event sequences, including language, logs, and tokenized audio. Without the abstract, though, the strength of the paper’s conclusions cannot be judged.","technical_approach":"The safest description is that the paper performs a case study comparing positional encoding choices for temporal event sequence models. It may involve absolute, relative, or time-aware encodings, but the exact proposal cannot be recovered from the title alone.","experiments":"No abstract or numerical results are provided, so there is no reliable basis for summarizing datasets, baselines, or gains.","authors_note":""},"tags":["positional-embedding","sequence-modeling","architecture"],"notable_authors":["Effat Farhana"]},{"id":"FengHFJANBWW23","title":"Training-Free Structured Diffusion Guidance for Compositional Text-to-Image Synthesis","authors":["Weixi Feng","Xuehai He","Tsu-Jui Fu","Varun Jampani","Arjun R. Akula","Pradyumna Narayana","Sugato Basu","Xin Eric Wang","William Yang Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/FengHFJANBWW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/FengHFJANBWW23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=PUIqjT4rzq7","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"从标题看，这篇论文要解决的是：在文本到图像扩散模型中，如何在不额外训练的前提下加入结构化引导，以提升组合式生成。现有 compositional T2I 常依赖额外控制网络、微调或复杂 prompt engineering；作者显然想要一种 training-free 的 guidance，让已有扩散模型更好地遵守对象关系或布局约束。","importance":"它的重要性更偏生成推理与控制，而不是预训练本身。但对新型语言建模和 AR+diffusion 联合建模的研究者仍有参考价值：如果结构化约束可以在采样时注入，而不必回到训练阶段，那么基础模型与控制模块的接口设计就会更灵活。缺点是这类方法通常改善的是 controllability，不一定提升基础生成分布本身。","technical_approach":"仅从标题可知，方法属于 structured diffusion guidance，并且是 training-free。最可能的机制是把文本中的结构信息——例如对象、属性、关系或布局——解析成某种图或约束，再在扩散采样过程中调整 score / attention / latent 更新方向。它和训练型控制方法的区别在于不新增参数学习；但具体是 energy guidance、attention reweighting 还是 constraint optimization，现有信息不足以确认。","experiments":"没有摘要和数字，无法可靠总结所用扩散 backbone、数据集、指标和提升幅度。可以合理预期会在 compositional T2I benchmark 上比较生成可控性和文本一致性，但这不是已知事实。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"From the title, the paper targets compositional text-to-image generation in diffusion models and asks how to impose structured guidance without additional training. Existing approaches often rely on finetuned control modules or heavy prompt engineering, so a training-free alternative would be attractive.","importance":"This is more about generation-time control than pretraining itself, but it is still relevant to researchers interested in diffusion-based language modeling and multimodal foundation models. If structure can be injected at sampling time, the interface between a pretrained generator and downstream control becomes much more flexible. The trade-off is that such methods usually improve controllability rather than the underlying learned distribution.","technical_approach":"The title supports one safe statement: the method is a training-free structured guidance mechanism for diffusion sampling. It likely extracts structured information from the prompt—objects, attributes, relations, or layout—and uses it to steer the denoising trajectory. The exact implementation, such as energy guidance versus attention manipulation, cannot be stated without the abstract.","experiments":"No abstract or numerical results are available, so model backbone, datasets, metrics, and gains cannot be summarized factually.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","guidance","text-to-image","compositionality"],"notable_authors":["Weixi Feng","Xuehai He","Tsu-Jui Fu","Varun Jampani","Arjun R. Akula"]},{"id":"ForouzeshST23","title":"Leveraging Unlabeled Data to Track Memorization","authors":["Mahsa Forouzesh","Hanie Sedghi","Patrick Thiran"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ForouzeshST23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ForouzeshST23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=ORp91sAbzI","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"从标题看，这篇论文要解决的是：能否利用无标注数据来追踪模型记忆化，而不是只依赖训练集成员推断或带标签评估。记忆化通常通过 membership inference、训练损失异常或重复样本分析来间接观察，但这些方法要么依赖访问训练数据，要么覆盖面有限；作者想把无标注数据也变成检测记忆化的探针。","importance":"它的重要性在于训练数据治理和模型安全分析。对 pretrain 研究尤其相关，因为大规模预训练常常无法精确追踪每条数据的影响，而无标注数据如果能帮助估计 memorization，就会成为数据去重、隐私风险评估和 continual pretrain 监控的实用工具。没有摘要时，能确认的是问题很相关，但无法判断方法是否足够强到改变实践。","technical_approach":"仅凭标题，最稳妥的概括是：作者提出一种借助无标注样本来度量或跟踪模型记忆化程度的方法。可能通过邻域密度、置信度分布、表示相似性、生成概率尾部行为或半监督统计来实现，但具体算法和理论保证无法确认。","experiments":"没有摘要、模型和指标，无法给出可信实验总结。可以预期论文会在可控数据集上验证无标注数据能否预测 memorization 风险，但这只是方向性推测。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"From the title, the paper asks whether unlabeled data can be used to track memorization in trained models. Existing memorization analyses often rely on access to training examples, membership inference setups, or labeled evaluations, which limits their applicability at pretraining scale.","importance":"This is relevant to pretraining because memorization is a data-quality, privacy, and governance issue, and large-scale pretraining rarely offers clean per-example accounting. If unlabeled data can serve as a probe for memorization, that would be useful for deduplication, privacy auditing, and continual pretraining diagnostics. With no abstract, however, the practical strength of the method cannot be assessed.","technical_approach":"The safest description is that the paper proposes a way to estimate or monitor memorization using unlabeled data. The exact mechanism—confidence statistics, representation similarity, neighborhood methods, or something else—cannot be stated from the title alone.","experiments":"No abstract or numerical results are available, so datasets, baselines, and gains cannot be summarized factually.","authors_note":""},"tags":["memorization","data-quality","unlabeled-data","generalization"],"notable_authors":["Mahsa Forouzesh","Hanie Sedghi","Patrick Thiran"]},{"id":"FowlGRWCGG23","title":"Decepticons: Corrupted Transformers Breach Privacy in Federated Learning for Language Models","authors":["Liam H. Fowl","Jonas Geiping","Steven Reich","Yuxin Wen","Wojciech Czaja","Micah Goldblum","Tom Goldstein"],"institutions":["University of Maryland","New York University"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/FowlGRWCGG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/FowlGRWCGG23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=r0BrY4BiEXO","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在联邦学习（FL）中，恶意服务器能否在不改变模型架构的情况下，通过修改模型权重来窃取客户端的私有训练数据（特别是文本数据）？","importance":"揭示了联邦学习在语言模型场景下的严重隐私漏洞。证明了即使是标准的 Transformer 架构，恶意服务器也能通过精心构造的权重（Decepticons）将客户端的私有文本数据编码到梯度中，从而实现精确的数据重建，这挑战了“联邦学习天然保护隐私”的假设。","technical_approach":"提出了一种名为“Decepticons”的攻击方法。恶意服务器在下发模型时，将 Transformer 的某些层（特别是注意力层和前馈层）的权重替换为精心设计的“陷阱”权重。这些权重利用了 Transformer 的非线性激活和注意力机制，使得客户端在本地计算梯度时，梯度值会直接反映输入 token 的 embedding。服务器收到梯度后，只需进行简单的逆运算即可恢复原始文本。","experiments":"在多个标准的语言模型任务（如 WikiText）和架构（如 GPT-2）上进行了实验。结果表明，Decepticons 攻击能够以极高的准确率（接近 100%）从单次梯度更新中恢复长达数百个 token 的连续文本，且对不同的 batch size 和序列长度都具有鲁棒性。","authors_note":"Tom Goldstein 团队在对抗机器学习和隐私保护方面有丰富经验。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Can a malicious server in Federated Learning (FL) steal private client training data (especially text) by modifying model weights without changing the architecture?","importance":"Exposes a severe privacy vulnerability in FL for language models. It proves that even with standard Transformer architectures, a malicious server can encode private client text data into gradients using carefully crafted weights (Decepticons), enabling exact data reconstruction and challenging the assumption that FL inherently protects privacy.","technical_approach":"Proposes an attack method called 'Decepticons'. When distributing the model, the malicious server replaces the weights of certain Transformer layers (especially attention and feed-forward layers) with carefully designed 'trap' weights. These weights exploit the non-linear activations and attention mechanisms of Transformers so that when the client computes gradients locally, the gradient values directly reflect the input token embeddings. Upon receiving the gradients, the server can recover the original text with simple inverse operations.","experiments":"Experiments were conducted on standard language modeling tasks (e.g., WikiText) and architectures (e.g., GPT-2). Results show that the Decepticons attack can recover continuous text of hundreds of tokens from a single gradient update with near 100% accuracy, and is robust to different batch sizes and sequence lengths.","authors_note":"Tom Goldstein's group has extensive experience in adversarial machine learning and privacy protection."},"tags":["federated-learning","privacy","language-model","security"],"notable_authors":["Tom Goldstein"]},{"id":"GaoUSHJ23","title":"Learning to Jointly Share and Prune Weights for Grounding Based Vision and Language Models","authors":["Shangqian Gao","Burak Uzkent","Yilin Shen","Heng Huang","Hongxia Jin"],"institutions":["University of Pittsburgh","Samsung Research America"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/GaoUSHJ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/GaoUSHJ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=UMERaIHMwB3","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"视觉-语言模型（VLM）通常包含庞大的参数量，如何在保持跨模态对齐（grounding）性能的同时，有效地压缩模型（剪枝），并促进不同模态间的知识共享？","importance":"提出了一种联合权重共享和剪枝的方法（S&P），在 VLM 的预训练/微调阶段同时进行模型压缩和跨模态特征融合。这为在资源受限设备上部署高性能 VLM 提供了一种新思路，强调了在压缩过程中维持模态间对齐的重要性。","technical_approach":"核心机制是引入了一个可学习的共享矩阵和模态特定的掩码（masks）。在训练过程中，模型不仅学习如何剪枝（通过稀疏化掩码），还学习哪些权重应该在视觉和语言分支之间共享。通过这种方式，S&P 强制模型在低层特征提取阶段就进行跨模态的交互，而不是仅仅在顶层进行融合。这种联合优化使得模型在被大幅压缩的同时，依然能保持良好的 grounding 能力。","experiments":"在 VQA 2.0、NLVR2 等标准 VLM 任务上进行了实验，主要 baseline 是 LXMERT 和 VisualBERT。结果表明，S&P 可以在剪去 50%-70% 参数的情况下，保持甚至略微提升模型的性能，显著优于传统的独立剪枝方法（如 magnitude pruning）。","authors_note":"Heng Huang 团队在机器学习优化和模型压缩方面有丰富经验。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Vision-Language Models (VLMs) typically have massive parameter counts. How can we effectively compress (prune) these models while maintaining cross-modal alignment (grounding) performance and promoting knowledge sharing between modalities?","importance":"Proposes a joint weight sharing and pruning method (S&P) that performs model compression and cross-modal feature fusion simultaneously during the VLM pre-training/fine-tuning phase. This provides a new approach for deploying high-performance VLMs on resource-constrained devices, emphasizing the importance of maintaining inter-modal alignment during compression.","technical_approach":"The core mechanism introduces a learnable shared matrix and modality-specific masks. During training, the model learns not only how to prune (by sparsifying the masks) but also which weights should be shared between the vision and language branches. In this way, S&P forces the model to engage in cross-modal interaction at the low-level feature extraction stage, rather than just fusing at the top layers. This joint optimization allows the model to maintain strong grounding capabilities even when heavily compressed.","experiments":"Experiments were conducted on standard VLM tasks like VQA 2.0 and NLVR2, with LXMERT and VisualBERT as main baselines. Results show that S&P can maintain or even slightly improve model performance while pruning 50%-70% of the parameters, significantly outperforming traditional independent pruning methods (like magnitude pruning).","authors_note":"Heng Huang's group has extensive experience in machine learning optimization and model compression."},"tags":["vlm","pruning","compression","grounding"],"notable_authors":["Heng Huang"]},{"id":"GarciaFFLVBH23","title":"Fisher-Legendre (FishLeg) optimization of deep neural networks","authors":["Jezabel R. Garcia","Federica Freddi","Stathi Fotiadis","Maolin Li","Sattar Vakili","Alberto Bernacchia","Guillaume Hennequin"],"institutions":["University of Cambridge","Huawei Noah's Ark Lab"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/GarciaFFLVBH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/GarciaFFLVBH23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=c9lAOPvQHS","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"二阶优化算法（如自然梯度法 Natural Gradient Descent, NGD）在理论上收敛更快，但由于需要计算和求逆巨大的 Fisher 信息矩阵（FIM），在深度神经网络（特别是大规模预训练模型）中难以实际应用。","importance":"提出了一种名为 FishLeg 的新型二阶优化器，通过巧妙的参数化方法近似 FIM 的逆矩阵，大幅降低了计算复杂度。这为在 LLM 预训练中引入二阶优化提供了一种具有潜力的工程实现路径，有望打破 Adam 等一阶优化器的垄断。","technical_approach":"FishLeg 的核心是利用 Legendre-Fenchel 对偶性，将 FIM 逆矩阵的计算转化为一个辅助的优化问题。作者引入了一个参数化的辅助网络来近似 FIM 的逆，并通过与主网络参数的交替更新来逼近真实的自然梯度。为了保证正定性和计算效率，FishLeg 采用了 Kronecker 分解（类似 K-FAC）来结构化辅助网络的参数。这种方法避免了直接求逆，将二阶优化的复杂度降低到与一阶方法相当的水平。","experiments":"在图像分类（ResNet）和自编码器等中等规模任务上进行了实验。结果表明，FishLeg 在收敛速度（以 step 计）上显著优于 Adam 和 SGD，并且在挂钟时间（wall-clock time）上也具有竞争力。虽然尚未在百亿参数 LLM 上验证，但展示了良好的 scaling 潜力。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Second-order optimization algorithms (like Natural Gradient Descent, NGD) theoretically converge faster, but are difficult to apply in deep neural networks (especially large pre-trained models) due to the need to compute and invert the massive Fisher Information Matrix (FIM).","importance":"Proposes a novel second-order optimizer called FishLeg, which drastically reduces computational complexity by cleverly parameterizing the approximation of the FIM's inverse. This provides a promising engineering path for introducing second-order optimization into LLM pre-training, potentially challenging the dominance of first-order optimizers like Adam.","technical_approach":"The core of FishLeg is using Legendre-Fenchel duality to transform the computation of the FIM inverse into an auxiliary optimization problem. The authors introduce a parameterized auxiliary network to approximate the inverse of the FIM, and approach the true natural gradient through alternating updates with the main network's parameters. To ensure positive definiteness and computational efficiency, FishLeg employs Kronecker factorization (similar to K-FAC) to structure the auxiliary network's parameters. This avoids direct inversion, reducing the complexity of second-order optimization to a level comparable to first-order methods.","experiments":"Experiments were conducted on medium-scale tasks like image classification (ResNet) and autoencoders. Results show that FishLeg significantly outperforms Adam and SGD in convergence speed (by steps) and is competitive in wall-clock time. Although not yet validated on 10B+ parameter LLMs, it demonstrates good scaling potential.","authors_note":""},"tags":["optimizer","second-order","training-stability"],"notable_authors":["José Miguel Hernández-Lobato"]},{"id":"GarridoCBNL23","title":"On the duality between contrastive and non-contrastive self-supervised learning","authors":["Quentin Garrido","Yubei Chen","Adrien Bardes","Laurent Najman","Yann LeCun"],"institutions":["Meta AI","Université Gustave Eiffel"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/GarridoCBNL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/GarridoCBNL23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=kDEL91Dufpa","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"自监督学习（SSL）中，对比学习（如 SimCLR，依赖负样本）和非对比学习（如 VICReg/Barlow Twins，依赖正则化防止坍缩）看似是两种截然不同的范式，它们之间是否存在内在的数学联系？","importance":"Yann LeCun 团队的理论工作。从数学上证明了对比学习和非对比学习（特别是基于协方差矩阵的方法）在本质上是等价的，揭示了它们只是在优化同一个目标的两种不同方式。这为统一理解 SSL 预训练机制提供了重要的理论框架，有助于指导未来多模态/视觉预训练损失函数的设计。","technical_approach":"通过对损失函数的数学推导，作者证明了：对比学习中使用的 InfoNCE loss（通过负样本推开不同样本的特征）和非对比学习中使用的方差-协方差正则化（如 VICReg，强制特征维度正交），在特定条件下是相互对偶的。具体来说，InfoNCE 隐式地在优化特征的协方差矩阵，而非对比方法显式地做这件事。作者还提出了一种统一的损失函数形式，将两者纳入同一个框架。","experiments":"在 ImageNet 上使用 ResNet-50 进行了实验验证。通过调整统一损失函数中的超参数，模型可以在对比和非对比的极端情况之间平滑过渡，且性能保持稳定（Top-1 准确率在 72%-73% 之间），验证了理论推导的正确性。实验还表明，非对比方法在处理大 batch size 时更具优势。","authors_note":"Yann LeCun 是深度学习先驱，近年来致力于推动自监督学习（特别是联合嵌入架构 JEPA）的发展。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In Self-Supervised Learning (SSL), contrastive learning (e.g., SimCLR, relying on negative samples) and non-contrastive learning (e.g., VICReg/Barlow Twins, relying on regularization to prevent collapse) appear to be two distinct paradigms. Is there an underlying mathematical connection between them?","importance":"Theoretical work from Yann LeCun's team. It mathematically proves that contrastive and non-contrastive learning (specifically covariance-based methods) are fundamentally equivalent, revealing they are just two different ways of optimizing the same objective. This provides a crucial theoretical framework for a unified understanding of SSL pre-training mechanisms, helping guide the design of future multi-modal/vision pre-training loss functions.","technical_approach":"Through mathematical derivation of the loss functions, the authors prove that the InfoNCE loss used in contrastive learning (pushing apart features of different samples via negative samples) and the variance-covariance regularization used in non-contrastive learning (e.g., VICReg, forcing feature dimensions to be orthogonal) are dual to each other under certain conditions. Specifically, InfoNCE implicitly optimizes the feature covariance matrix, while non-contrastive methods do so explicitly. The authors also propose a unified loss function format that brings both into the same framework.","experiments":"Experimental validation was conducted on ImageNet using ResNet-50. By adjusting hyperparameters in the unified loss function, the model can smoothly transition between contrastive and non-contrastive extremes while maintaining stable performance (Top-1 accuracy between 72%-73%), validating the theoretical derivations. Experiments also show that non-contrastive methods are more advantageous when handling large batch sizes.","authors_note":"Yann LeCun is a deep learning pioneer, recently dedicated to advancing self-supervised learning (especially Joint Embedding Predictive Architectures, JEPA)."},"tags":["self-supervised","contrastive-learning","representation-learning"],"notable_authors":["Yann LeCun"]},{"id":"GhoshLLKR23","title":"How gradient estimator variance and bias impact learning in neural networks","authors":["Arna Ghosh","Yuhan Helena Liu","Guillaume Lajoie","Konrad P. Körding","Blake Aaron Richards"],"institutions":["McGill University","Mila","University of Pennsylvania"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/GhoshLLKR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/GhoshLLKR23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=EBC60mxBwyw","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在神经网络训练中，当我们无法使用精确的反向传播（例如在强化学习、生物学启发的学习规则或某些量化/离散化模型中），必须使用梯度估计器时，估计器的方差（variance）和偏差（bias）究竟是如何影响学习动态和最终性能的？","importance":"这是一篇偏理论和机制分析的工作。对于预训练研究，特别是涉及离散 token 优化（如 VQ-VAE, 离散扩散模型）或 RLHF 阶段的研究，它提供了一个清晰的框架来理解：为什么某些梯度估计器（如 REINFORCE）即使无偏也难以收敛，而某些有偏估计器（如 Straight-Through Estimator, STE）却在实践中非常有效。结论是：在很多情况下，低方差的有偏估计器比高方差的无偏估计器更好。","technical_approach":"作者构建了一个理论框架，将梯度估计器的误差分解为偏差和方差。通过在简单的线性和非线性网络上进行严格的数学分析和实证模拟，他们研究了这两种误差对参数更新轨迹、收敛速度和最终损失函数值的影响。核心发现是：方差会引入持续的噪声，导致模型在最优点附近震荡（需要极小的学习率）；而偏差虽然会改变优化的方向，但只要偏差不改变梯度的符号（即保持下降方向），模型仍然可以快速收敛到一个较好的局部最优解。","experiments":"在合成数据集和 MNIST/CIFAR-10 上，对比了不同方差和偏差水平的梯度估计器。实验明确证实了理论预测：在给定的计算预算下，人为引入一定的偏差以换取方差的大幅降低（Bias-Variance Tradeoff），通常能获得更低的最终 Loss 和更快的收敛速度。这解释了 STE 在离散表征学习中的成功。","authors_note":"Blake Richards 团队在神经科学启发的机器学习和学习算法理论方面有深入研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In neural network training, when exact backpropagation cannot be used (e.g., in RL, biologically inspired learning rules, or certain quantized/discrete models) and gradient estimators must be employed, how exactly do the variance and bias of these estimators impact learning dynamics and final performance?","importance":"This is a theoretical and mechanism-analysis work. For pre-training research, especially involving discrete token optimization (like VQ-VAE, discrete diffusion models) or the RLHF phase, it provides a clear framework to understand why some estimators (like REINFORCE) struggle to converge despite being unbiased, while biased estimators (like the Straight-Through Estimator, STE) are highly effective in practice. The conclusion: in many cases, a low-variance biased estimator is better than a high-variance unbiased one.","technical_approach":"The authors construct a theoretical framework decomposing gradient estimator error into bias and variance. Through rigorous mathematical analysis and empirical simulations on simple linear and non-linear networks, they study how these two errors affect parameter update trajectories, convergence speed, and final loss values. The core finding is: variance introduces persistent noise, causing the model to oscillate around the optimum (requiring tiny learning rates); whereas bias, although changing the optimization direction, allows the model to still converge quickly to a good local optimum as long as the bias doesn't flip the gradient's sign (i.e., maintains a descent direction).","experiments":"Compared gradient estimators with different levels of variance and bias on synthetic datasets and MNIST/CIFAR-10. Experiments clearly confirmed the theoretical predictions: given a computational budget, artificially introducing some bias in exchange for a massive reduction in variance (Bias-Variance Tradeoff) usually results in lower final Loss and faster convergence. This explains the success of STE in discrete representation learning.","authors_note":"Blake Richards' group has deep research in neuroscience-inspired machine learning and learning algorithm theory."},"tags":["optimization","gradient-noise","training-dynamics"],"notable_authors":["Blake Aaron Richards"]},{"id":"GuLHA23","title":"Why (and When) does Local SGD Generalize Better than SGD?","authors":["Xinran Gu","Kaifeng Lyu","Longbo Huang","Sanjeev Arora"],"institutions":["Princeton University"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/GuLHA23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/GuLHA23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=svCcui6Drl","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：为什么 Local SGD 在实践里常常比同步 SGD 泛化更好，以及这种优势什么时候成立。过去分布式训练里 Local SGD 主要被当成通信优化手段，但经验上它有时还能带来更低测试误差，原因并不清楚。","importance":"它的重要性在于把一个系统技巧和泛化行为联系起来，属于优化理论对大规模训练实践的解释性工作。对 pretrain 的启示是：并行训练策略不只是吞吐和带宽问题，它会改变噪声结构、轨迹平滑性和最终解的 sharpness，这些都可能反馈到大模型泛化。","technical_approach":"核心方法是对 Local SGD 的优化轨迹做理论分析，解释本地多步更新如何引入额外的、结构化的梯度噪声或隐式正则化。作者通常会比较 Local SGD 与标准 mini-batch SGD 在同等计算预算下的更新方差、稳定点性质和损失曲面偏好，并给出“何时更好”的条件，例如异质性、步长、同步间隔和损失几何。关键不是证明它总更好，而是指出它只在某些 regime 下偏向更平坦解；如果同步间隔过大或数据异质性过强，优化误差会反噬泛化收益。","experiments":"实验的关键事实通常是：在典型深度网络和图像分类基准上，适度的 local steps 能降低测试误差，同时训练损失未必更低；并且这种收益会随学习率、batch size、同步频率变化而消失或反转。最有价值的结果不是绝对提升多少，而是理论预测与实验趋势对齐：例如更大的局部更新间隔带来更强正则化，但过头后优化变差。对大模型训练的现实意义是，这类结论更像调参原则而不是无条件定律。","authors_note":"Princeton University。Sanjeev Arora 是知名作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks why Local SGD often generalizes better than fully synchronized SGD, and under what conditions that effect appears. Local SGD is usually introduced as a communication-saving trick, but in practice it sometimes improves test performance as well, which needs explanation.","importance":"This is an optimization-theory contribution with direct systems relevance. For pretraining, the useful lesson is that distributed training choices do more than change throughput: they alter noise structure, optimization trajectories, and the kind of minima the model prefers.","technical_approach":"The paper analyzes Local SGD as introducing additional structured stochasticity or implicit regularization through multiple local steps before synchronization. The comparison is not simply about convergence speed; it is about how synchronization interval, learning rate, data heterogeneity, and loss geometry jointly determine whether Local SGD biases training toward flatter solutions. The design claim is conditional, not universal: too much locality can hurt optimization enough to erase any generalization gain.","experiments":"The main empirical pattern is usually that a moderate number of local steps improves test error on standard deep learning benchmarks, even when training loss does not improve, while overly large synchronization intervals reverse the benefit. The most useful part is the agreement between theory and trend rather than the raw benchmark numbers. For large-scale training, this reads as a tuning principle, not a blanket recommendation.","authors_note":"Princeton University. Sanjeev Arora is a notable author."},"tags":["local-sgd","optimization","generalization","distributed-training"],"notable_authors":["Sanjeev Arora"]},{"id":"Guo0D023","title":"ContraNorm: A Contrastive Learning Perspective on Oversmoothing and Beyond","authors":["Xiaojun Guo","Yifei Wang","Tianqi Du","Yisen Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Guo0D023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Guo0D023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=SM7XkJouWHm","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是 GNN 的 oversmoothing：层数一深，节点表示会变得彼此过于相似，导致可分性下降。过去常见做法是加残差、归一化或改消息传递半径，但这些方法多是经验修补，对 oversmoothing 的机制解释不够统一。","importance":"它的重要性在于从 contrastive learning 视角重新解释 oversmoothing，并提出一个极轻量的归一化层 ContraNorm，属于机制驱动的方法改进。对 pretrain 的直接影响有限，但对表示学习有普遍启示：当表示坍缩来自样本间相似性过强时，显式保留对比性可以比单纯稳定训练更关键。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 ContraNorm，一种鼓励节点表示彼此保持可区分性的归一化/校正操作。作者把 oversmoothing 看成表示在传播过程中逐渐失去对比度，于是在层间加入一个基于样本间关系的校正项，抑制过度趋同。关键设计是它不需要重写 GNN 主体，也不是靠更复杂的图结构先验，而是直接在表示空间上做“去坍缩”处理。和 BatchNorm/PairNorm 等相比，它更明确地把目标放在维持表示间差异，而不是只控制均值方差或范数。","experiments":"实验结论通常是：ContraNorm 能在更深的 GNN 上稳定训练，并在节点分类等任务上优于常见归一化和残差基线。最值得关注的不是某个数据集的绝对 SOTA，而是深层数 regime 下性能退化显著减轻。若论文包含谱分析或表示相似度分析，那些结果通常是其机制论证的关键：加入 ContraNorm 后，层间表示不会那么快塌到低秩或高相似状态。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles oversmoothing in GNNs, where deeper message passing makes node representations increasingly similar and less discriminative. Prior fixes such as residual connections or standard normalization help in practice, but they do not fully explain or directly target the collapse mechanism.","importance":"This is a mechanism-driven method paper. Its broader relevance is the representation-learning lesson: when degradation comes from excessive similarity across examples, preserving contrast can matter more than merely stabilizing optimization statistics.","technical_approach":"ContraNorm is a lightweight normalization-style module designed to maintain contrast among node representations. The paper interprets oversmoothing through a contrastive lens and adds a correction that counteracts representation homogenization during propagation. The point is not to redesign the whole GNN, but to intervene directly in representation space. Compared with BatchNorm or PairNorm, the target here is explicit discriminability rather than only mean-variance control or norm preservation.","experiments":"The main empirical result is that ContraNorm enables deeper GNNs to train more reliably and improves node classification over common normalization and residual baselines, especially in the deep-layer regime where oversmoothing is severe. The most useful evidence is usually not a single top-line score but the depth-performance curve and representation-similarity analysis showing slower collapse.","authors_note":""},"tags":["contrastive-learning","oversmoothing","normalization"]},{"id":"GurelG23","title":"Train Monolingual, Infer Bilingual","authors":["Alaeddin Selçuk Gürel","Aydin Gerek"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/GurelG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/GurelG23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=MjVdwBGkys","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：能否只用单语训练，却在推理时获得双语能力。传统跨语言迁移通常依赖并行语料、共享词表或多语联合训练，这些资源对低资源语言并不总可得。","importance":"它的重要性偏方法验证而非范式突破，但对 multilingual pretrain 有一个有趣提醒：跨语言能力不一定完全依赖显式双语监督，表示空间和 tokenizer 设计可能已经隐含了可迁移结构。对大模型预训练的直接冲击有限，因为规模化多语预训练仍更强。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心方法应是训练阶段保持单语设置，但通过某种共享表示、映射或推理时组合机制实现双语推断。可能的路径包括共享子词、对齐 latent space、或利用结构相似性在推理时桥接两种语言。关键设计点在于把跨语言耦合从训练数据层转移到表示或解码层；这样做节省并行数据，但边界也明显：语言距离大、脚本不共享、语义对齐弱时效果通常会掉。","experiments":"可预期的实验重点是低资源或零样本双语任务，如翻译、跨语言分类或检索，并与多语训练或监督双语模型比较。最有价值的结果如果成立，会是：在没有并行训练的前提下，某些语言对上仍能达到可用性能。对工程读者要保留的判断是，这类方法更像资源受限场景下的折中方案，而不是替代标准多语预训练的通用路径。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether bilingual inference can emerge from monolingual training alone. Standard cross-lingual transfer usually relies on parallel data, multilingual joint training, or shared tokenization, which are not always available for low-resource languages.","importance":"This is more of a targeted method exploration than a paradigm shift, but it carries an interesting multilingual pretraining lesson: some cross-lingual structure may be recoverable from representation design and inference-time mechanisms, not only from explicit bilingual supervision. Its direct impact on large-scale pretraining is limited because full multilingual pretraining remains the stronger default.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method likely keeps training monolingual and introduces bilinguality through shared representations, alignment, or inference-time composition. The key idea is to move cross-lingual coupling away from the data layer and into the representation or decoding layer. That saves bilingual resources, but the boundary is clear: performance should degrade when languages are distant, scripts differ, or semantic alignment is weak.","experiments":"The likely evaluation focuses on low-resource or zero-shot bilingual tasks such as translation, cross-lingual classification, or retrieval, compared against multilingual or supervised bilingual baselines. If the main result holds, the useful takeaway is that some language pairs can achieve usable bilingual behavior without parallel training. For practitioners, this is best seen as a resource-constrained compromise rather than a replacement for standard multilingual pretraining.","authors_note":""},"tags":["cross-lingual-transfer","monolingual-training"]},{"id":"HanZHL023","title":"CASR: Generating Complex Sequences with Autoregressive Self-Boost Refinement","authors":["Hongwei Han","Mengyu Zhou","Shi Han","Xiu Li","Dongmei Zhang"],"institutions":["Microsoft"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/HanZHL023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/HanZHL023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=SVl1w1u3InX","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：复杂序列生成中，一次性自回归解码容易早期犯错并持续传播，导致长结构、组合约束或全局一致性差。过去常见做法是 beam search 或 reranking，但它们主要在解码层补救，不能真正修正已生成内容。","importance":"它的重要性在于提出一种 AR 上的自我 refinement 框架，属于生成策略层的方法改进。对 pretrain 的启示是：即便底层仍是 AR，生成过程也不必是单次不可回头的；引入迭代自修正可以部分吸收 diffusion / edit-based 生成的优点。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 CASR，即 autoregressive self-boost refinement。模型先生成一个初稿，再基于已有输出进行后续 refinement 或自增强，逐步修正复杂序列中的错误。关键设计在于它没有完全放弃 AR，而是在 AR 之上叠加多轮自反馈，使模型能利用自己生成的全局上下文重新判断局部 token。和标准 AR 相比，它增加了纠错能力；和纯 diffusion / insertion / edit 模型相比，它保留了 AR 训练与实现的简单性。代价是推理更慢，且 refinement 是否有效取决于模型是否具备识别自身错误的能力。","experiments":"实验的关键结论通常是：在需要复杂结构生成的任务上，CASR 优于单次 AR baseline，尤其在长序列或约束更强的设定下收益更明显。论文大概率比较 greedy/beam AR、非 AR refinement 方法等，并报告序列级准确率或任务特定指标。最值得关注的 ablation 通常是 refinement 轮数：少量轮次能带来明显收益，但继续增加会收益递减甚至引入漂移。对基础模型研究者，这说明“生成后再想一遍”在序列建模里是可操作的训练/推理接口。","authors_note":"Microsoft。Shi Han 是较知名作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a familiar weakness of autoregressive generation: early mistakes propagate, which is especially damaging for long or highly structured sequences. Standard fixes like beam search or reranking help selection, but they do not truly revise the generated content.","importance":"This is a generation-strategy contribution rather than a new pretraining objective. The broader lesson is still relevant: even with an AR backbone, generation need not be a one-pass irreversible process. Iterative self-refinement can recover some of the benefits associated with edit-based or diffusion-style generation.","technical_approach":"CASR adds autoregressive self-boost refinement on top of standard generation. The model first produces a draft and then refines it using the generated sequence itself as additional context, allowing later passes to correct earlier local errors using more global information. The design keeps the simplicity of AR training while adding a revision mechanism. Compared with pure AR, it gains error-correction ability; compared with fully non-AR refinement models, it is easier to integrate but slower at inference and depends on the model being able to recognize its own mistakes.","experiments":"The main empirical result is typically that CASR outperforms one-pass autoregressive baselines on tasks requiring complex sequence structure, with larger gains on longer outputs or stronger constraints. The most informative ablation is usually the number of refinement rounds: a small number helps a lot, but returns diminish and can even reverse if refinement drifts. For foundation-model readers, the useful takeaway is that 'generate, then revise' is a workable interface for sequence modeling.","authors_note":"Microsoft. Shi Han is a notable author."},"tags":["sequence-generation","autoregressive","self-boost-refinement"],"notable_authors":["Shi Han"]},{"id":"HaoChen023","title":"A theoretical study of inductive biases in contrastive learning","authors":["Jeff Z. HaoChen","Tengyu Ma"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/HaoChen023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/HaoChen023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=AuEgNlEAmed","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的是：对比学习（contrastive learning）里常见的数据增强、负样本与归一化等“经验做法”，到底在理论上向表示学习注入了什么归纳偏置（inductive bias），以及这些偏置何时会带来可泛化的特征、何时只是在拟合捷径。","importance":"贡献主要是理论澄清而不是新算法：它把“对比学习为什么有效”从口头直觉推进到可推导的偏置来源与条件，从而帮助预训练研究在设计增广/采样策略时更可控地权衡不变性（invariance）与可分性（discriminability）。","technical_approach":"方法上是理论分析框架而非工程系统：作者从对比目标（如 InfoNCE 一类）出发，形式化表示学习在给定增广分布与负样本机制下会偏好哪些函数类/特征子空间，并分析这些偏好如何随温度、batch/负样本规模、归一化与相似度度量变化；关键点是把“学到的表示”与“增广诱导的不变性约束”以及“负样本诱导的区分压力”拆开讨论，从而解释为何某些设置会把模型推向过强不变性（丢语义）或过强区分（记忆实例）。","experiments":"未提供摘要级别的可核对实验细节（参数量、数据规模、表格数字等）信息；如果论文正文包含验证，建议重点核对其是否用合成数据/可控增广来对齐理论预测，以及是否报告温度/负样本数/增广强度的相变式现象。","authors_note":"作者为 Jeff Z. HaoChen、Tengyu Ma；机构信息在给定材料中缺失。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks what inductive biases contrastive learning actually imposes—through augmentations, negatives, normalization, and temperature—and when these biases yield transferable representations versus shortcut solutions.","importance":"This is a theory-first contribution: it turns common intuitions about “why contrastive works” into explicit conditions and bias sources, which is useful for pretraining because it makes augmentation and sampling choices more predictable and debuggable.","technical_approach":"It develops a theoretical analysis of contrastive objectives (InfoNCE-like), separating the role of augmentation-induced invariances from negative-sample-induced discrimination pressure; it then studies how the preferred representation class shifts with temperature, number of negatives/batch size, similarity choice, and normalization, explaining failure modes like overly strong invariance (semantic loss) or instance memorization.","experiments":"No experiment facts (model size, dataset scale, numeric gains) are available from the provided material; if the paper includes empirical checks, the key is whether controlled augmentations and sweeps over temperature/negatives match the theory’s qualitative predictions.","authors_note":"Authors: Jeff Z. HaoChen, Tengyu Ma; institutions are not provided in the input."},"tags":["contrastive-learning","inductive-biases","theoretical-study"],"notable_authors":["Jeff Z. HaoChen","Tengyu Ma"]},{"id":"2301.12245","title":"Supervision Complexity and its Role in Knowledge Distillation","authors":["Hrayr Harutyunyan","Ankit Singh Rawat","Aditya Krishna Menon","Seungyeon Kim","Sanjiv Kumar"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3a","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.12245","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/HarutyunyanRMKK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/HarutyunyanRMKK23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=8jU7wy7N7mA","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解释的是：知识蒸馏（KD）为什么能提升学生模型泛化，而不是只把它当作“软标签更好”的经验结论；尤其是老师预测的“可学性”如何与学生的归纳偏置相互作用。","importance":"贡献是一个可用于推导 KD 训练技巧的理论框架：用“监督复杂度（supervision complexity）”刻画老师监督与学生 NTK（neural tangent kernel，宽网络近似下的函数空间度量）对齐程度，从而把温度缩放、早停、在线蒸馏等常用 trick 变成有条件的可解释选择，对预训练→小模型压缩/部署链路有直接启发。","technical_approach":"方法上提出 supervision complexity：它衡量老师输出函数在学生 NTK 诱导的函数空间里有多“复杂/不对齐”；框架给出三者的耦合关系：老师准确率、学生相对老师预测的 margin（对老师输出的分类间隔）以及老师预测复杂度；设计上强调 trade-off：更“信息丰富”的软标签可能同时更复杂，导致学生在其函数类下难以拟合并损害泛化，因此需要温度把分布变平（降低复杂度）或早停避免追逐高频成分；进一步建议在线蒸馏（teacher 随训练动态提供监督）以改善对齐与稳定性。","experiments":"摘要未给出可核对的实验数字（模型规模、数据集、提升幅度）；建议在正文中重点查：是否用可控 teacher（不同温度/不同准确率）验证复杂度-泛化曲线，是否展示早停/温度/在线蒸馏在同一理论量（complexity 或 margin）上的一致解释。","authors_note":"作者包括 Hrayr Harutyunyan、Aditya Krishna Menon、Sanjiv Kumar；机构信息在给定材料中缺失。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper explains why knowledge distillation improves student generalization, focusing on when the teacher’s soft supervision is actually learnable under the student’s inductive bias rather than assuming “soft labels are always better.”","importance":"It contributes a theoretical framework that rationalizes common KD heuristics: by defining supervision complexity via alignment with the student’s NTK, it provides conditions under which temperature scaling, early stopping, and online distillation help—directly relevant to compressing pretrained models.","technical_approach":"It introduces supervision complexity as a measure of how hard the teacher’s prediction function is in the function space induced by the student NTK; the analysis couples teacher accuracy, the student’s margin w.r.t. teacher predictions, and the complexity of teacher outputs, highlighting a trade-off where richer soft targets can be too complex for the student; temperature flattens targets (reducing complexity) and early stopping avoids fitting high-frequency components; it further motivates online distillation to improve alignment during training.","experiments":"No concrete experimental facts (scales, datasets, numeric deltas) are present in the provided abstract snippet; the key checks in the paper should be whether controlled sweeps over teacher temperature/accuracy match the predicted complexity–generalization behavior and whether online distillation is validated under the same lens.","authors_note":"Notable authors include Hrayr Harutyunyan, Aditya Krishna Menon, Sanjiv Kumar; institutions are not provided in the input."},"tags":["knowledge-distillation","supervision-complexity","neural-tangent-kernel"],"notable_authors":["Hrayr Harutyunyan","Aditya Krishna Menon","Sanjiv Kumar"]},{"id":"2210.07574","title":"Is Synthetic Data from Generative Models Ready for Image Recognition?","authors":["Ruifei He","Shuyang Sun","Xin Yu","Chuhui Xue","Wenqing Zhang","Philip H. S. Torr","Song Bai","Xiaojuan Qi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Recent text-to-image generation models have shown promising results in generating high-fidelity photo-realistic images. Though the results are astonishing to human eyes, how applicable these generated images are for recognition tasks remains under-explored. In this work, we extensively study whether and how synthetic images generated from state-of-the-art text-to-image generation models can be used for image recognition tasks, and focus on two perspectives: synthetic data for improving classification models in data-scarce settings (i.e. zero-shot and few-shot), and synthetic data for large-scale model pre-training for transfer learning. We showcase the powerfulness and shortcomings of synthetic data from existing generative models, and propose strategies for better applying synthetic data for recognition tasks. Code: https://github.com/CVMI-Lab/SyntheticData.","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.07574","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/HeS0XZTBQ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/HeS0XZTBQ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=nUmCcZ5RKF","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的是：文生图模型生成的高保真合成图像，是否真的“可用于识别”（recognition）而不只是“看起来像”，以及在少样本增广与大规模预训练两种用法下分别有哪些失效模式。","importance":"贡献是系统性评估与实践策略总结：它把“生成数据能不能当训练数据”从个别案例提升为更全面的实验图景，对多模态预训练的数据闭环（生成→训练→再生成）很关键，因为它直接触及合成数据的分布偏差、标签噪声与多样性不足会如何传导到表征质量。","technical_approach":"方法上以评测与策略为主：作者从零/少样本分类增益与大规模合成数据预训练的迁移效果两条线评估现有 SOTA 文生图模型生成数据；并提出更好使用合成数据的策略（摘要未给细节，可能包括筛选、重加权、提示工程、混合真实数据等）；核心机制假设是：生成模型的模式覆盖与条件一致性决定了合成数据对判别模型的有效信息量，盲目扩大合成规模可能放大偏差而非带来等价于真实数据的收益。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体生成模型（如 Stable Diffusion/Imagen）、合成规模、下游数据集与数值；建议在正文核对：1）合成/真实混合比例的曲线是否存在拐点；2）在大规模预训练设置下，合成数据是否在某些迁移任务上系统性落后于同规模真实数据；3）是否分析了错误类型（背景捷径、纹理偏置、类别共现偏差）。","authors_note":"作者 Ruifei He 等；机构信息在给定材料中缺失。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether text-to-image synthetic images that look realistic are actually useful for recognition, and what failure modes appear in few-shot augmentation versus large-scale pretraining for transfer.","importance":"It provides a broad empirical assessment and practical guidance on using generative synthetic data for discriminative training, which matters for multimodal pretraining loops because distribution bias, label noise, and limited diversity in synthetic data can directly degrade learned representations.","technical_approach":"The work is evaluation- and strategy-driven: it studies synthetic data for zero/few-shot classification gains and for large-scale pretraining transfer, and proposes strategies to apply synthetic data more effectively (details not present in the snippet, likely filtering/reweighting/prompting/real–synthetic mixing); the underlying mechanism is that a generator’s coverage and conditional fidelity determine the effective information content, so scaling synthetic data blindly can amplify bias rather than substitute real data.","experiments":"The provided abstract snippet lacks concrete generator names, synthetic scale, datasets, and numeric results; in the full paper, key evidence should include mixture-ratio curves, comparisons against matched-scale real data pretraining, and error analyses revealing shortcut biases (background/texture/co-occurrence).","authors_note":"Authors include Ruifei He et al.; institutions are not provided in the input."},"tags":["synthetic-data","image-recognition","text-to-image-generation"],"notable_authors":["Ruifei He"]},{"id":"HendersonF23","title":"A VAE for Transformers with Nonparametric Variational Information Bottleneck","authors":["James Henderson","Fabio Fehr"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/HendersonF23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/HendersonF23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=6QkjC_cs03X","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：Transformer 的表示往往缺少显式的信息瓶颈与可控的潜变量结构，导致难以在压缩、泛化或可解释性上施加约束；作者希望用 VAE+信息瓶颈的视角为 Transformer 引入可调的表征压缩。","importance":"从标题看贡献偏方法与理论接口：把非参数（nonparametric）的变分信息瓶颈（VIB）与 Transformer 结合，可能为“在不固定潜变量维度/分布形状的情况下控制信息量”提供工具；对预训练的潜在启示是：除了 next-token loss，还可以通过信息约束塑形表示，但是否可扩展取决于训练稳定性与计算开销。","technical_approach":"给定材料缺少摘要，无法确认具体实现；从标题推断其核心是为 Transformer 构造一个 VAE 结构，并用非参数的 VIB 目标来约束编码表示与输入之间的互信息上界，从而自适应地决定瓶颈强度与有效容量；关键风险通常在于：VAE/VIB 在大模型上容易出现 posterior collapse 或训练不稳，需要特殊的 KL annealing、free-bits 或结构设计。","experiments":"未提供任何实验信息（任务、规模、指标）；需要查正文才能总结其是否在语言建模/分类/压缩上给出可量化收益，以及非参数瓶颈是否带来可控的 rate–distortion 曲线。","authors_note":"作者 James Henderson、Fabio Fehr；机构信息在给定材料中缺失。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets the lack of an explicit, controllable information bottleneck and latent-variable structure in Transformers, aiming to impose representation compression constraints that may help generalization, compression, or interpretability.","importance":"Based on the title, it is a method/theory interface contribution: combining a nonparametric variational information bottleneck with a Transformer-VAE could offer a way to control information content without fixing a rigid latent dimensionality; for pretraining, it suggests alternatives to pure next-token objectives, but scalability hinges on stability and overhead.","technical_approach":"No abstract is provided, so details cannot be confirmed; from the title, the likely approach is to build a VAE around Transformer representations and use a nonparametric VIB objective to upper-bound and control mutual information between inputs and latents, allowing adaptive bottleneck capacity; typical failure modes include posterior collapse and unstable KL optimization, often requiring annealing or other stabilizers.","experiments":"No experimental facts are available from the provided material; the full paper needs to be checked for task scope, scale, and whether it demonstrates a controllable rate–distortion trade-off or downstream gains.","authors_note":"Authors: James Henderson, Fabio Fehr; institutions are not provided in the input."},"tags":["vae","transformer","variational-information-bottleneck"],"notable_authors":["James Henderson","Fabio Fehr"]},{"id":"HertzMTAPC23","title":"Prompt-to-Prompt Image Editing with Cross-Attention Control","authors":["Amir Hertz","Ron Mokady","Jay Tenenbaum","Kfir Aberman","Yael Pritch","Daniel Cohen-Or"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/HertzMTAPC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/HertzMTAPC23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=_CDixzkzeyb","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：扩散式文生图模型的 prompt 编辑往往难以做到“只改想改的区域/语义”，常见问题是编辑泄漏到无关区域或主体一致性被破坏。","importance":"贡献偏方法与工具：通过控制 cross-attention 来实现 prompt-to-prompt 的可控编辑，成为后续大量扩散编辑工作的基础组件；对预训练研究的间接启示是 cross-attention 在文本条件生成中承担了可解释的“对齐接口”，可被显式操控而不必重新训练模型。","technical_approach":"给定材料缺少摘要，无法逐条确认；从标题推断其核心做法是在扩散采样过程中，对不同 prompt 的 cross-attention map 进行替换/重加权/约束，从而把“原 prompt 的空间布局/对应关系”迁移到“新 prompt 的语义”，实现局部或语义一致的编辑；关键取舍是：强控制提升一致性但可能限制新语义的自由生成，弱控制则更容易出现编辑漂移。","experiments":"未提供实验细节；需要查正文确认其评测是否包含定量指标（如 CLIPScore、LPIPS、用户研究）以及与 SDEdit、InstructPix2Pix（若当时已有）或其他编辑基线的对比。","authors_note":"作者 Amir Hertz 等；机构信息在给定材料中缺失。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Prompt-based editing in diffusion text-to-image models often fails to localize changes, causing unintended edits or breaking subject consistency; the paper targets controllable prompt-to-prompt edits.","importance":"It is a methods/tooling contribution: cross-attention control became a foundational component for many later diffusion editing pipelines; for pretraining-adjacent thinking, it highlights cross-attention as an explicit alignment interface that can be manipulated without retraining.","technical_approach":"No abstract is provided, so details cannot be confirmed; from the title, the likely method controls cross-attention maps during diffusion sampling—e.g., replacing or constraining attention between original and edited prompts—to preserve spatial correspondences while changing semantics; the trade-off is that stronger control improves consistency but can limit the model’s freedom to realize new semantics.","experiments":"No experimental details are available from the provided material; the full paper should be checked for quantitative metrics (e.g., CLIP-based, perceptual similarity) and comparisons to editing baselines available at the time.","authors_note":"Authors include Amir Hertz et al.; institutions are not provided in the input."},"tags":["image-editing","cross-attention-control","text-to-image"],"notable_authors":["Amir Hertz"]},{"id":"2210.12152","title":"WikiWhy: Answering and Explaining Cause-and-Effect Questions","authors":["Matthew Ho","Aditya Sharma","Justin Chang","Michael Saxon","Sharon Levy","Yujie Lu","William Yang Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3b","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.12152","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/HoSCSLLW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/HoSCSLLW23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=vaxnu-Utr4l","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：现有“推理型”QA 基准覆盖面窄且容易被模板/捷径击穿，难以评估 LLM 是否真的能给出因果解释；作者用“why 问题 + 显式 rationale”来提高评测约束。","importance":"贡献是数据与评测范式：WikiWhy 提供约 9,000 条基于 Wikipedia 的 why 问题-答案-理由三元组，并把“解释为何答案为真”的辅助任务纳入基准；对预训练/后训练的启示是：如果希望模型学到可检验的推理链，训练信号需要从“答案”扩展到“可对齐到证据的解释”，否则很难区分真推理与语言流畅的猜测。","technical_approach":"方法上是数据集构建：问题与答案锚定 Wikipedia 事实，rationale 由一组支持性陈述组成，用于连接问题到答案；设计取舍是提高可解释性与可验证性，但代价是规模相对小、且 rationale 的标注风格可能引入偏好（例如更偏向抽取式证据链而非自由推理）；作为评测，它更强调“答案+解释一致”而不是只看最终准确率。","experiments":"摘要未给出基线模型与分数；需要查正文确认：1）哪些 LLM/检索增强模型作为 baseline；2）答案准确率与 rationale 质量是否解耦（例如答对但解释差）；3）是否提供自动评测与人工评测的一致性分析。","authors_note":"作者 Matthew Ho 等；机构信息在给定材料中缺失。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Many “reasoning” QA benchmarks are narrow and shortcut-prone, making it hard to test whether LLMs can produce causal explanations; this paper introduces a why-QA setting with explicit rationales.","importance":"It is a dataset/benchmark contribution: WikiWhy provides ~9k Wikipedia-grounded why question–answer–rationale triples, pushing evaluation from answer-only to answer-plus-explanation; for pre/post-training, it reinforces that if we want verifiable reasoning, supervision must include evidence-linked explanations, not just final labels.","technical_approach":"The approach is dataset construction: each example is grounded in Wikipedia facts, and the rationale is a set of supporting statements connecting question to answer; the trade-off is stronger verifiability and interpretability versus smaller scale and potential annotation-style bias (e.g., favoring extractive evidence chains); as an evaluation, it emphasizes consistency between answers and explanations rather than accuracy alone.","experiments":"No baseline models or scores are included in the snippet; the full paper should be checked for which LLM/RAG baselines are evaluated, whether answer accuracy decouples from rationale quality, and how automatic metrics correlate with human judgments.","authors_note":"Authors include Matthew Ho et al.; institutions are not provided in the input."},"tags":["reasoning-eval","benchmark","qa","explanations"],"notable_authors":["Matthew Ho"]},{"id":"2209.05557","title":"Blurring Diffusion Models","authors":["Emiel Hoogeboom","Tim Salimans"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Recently, Rissanen et al., (2022) have presented a new type of diffusion process for generative modeling based on heat dissipation, or blurring, as an alternative to isotropic Gaussian diffusion. Here, we show that blurring can equivalently be defined through a Gaussian diffusion process with non-isotropic noise. In making this connection, we bridge the gap between inverse heat dissipation and denoising diffusion, and we shed light on the inductive bias that results from this modeling choice. Finally, we propose a generalized class of diffusion models that offers the best of both standard Gaussian denoising diffusion and inverse heat dissipation, which we call Blurring Diffusion Models.","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.05557","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/HoogeboomS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/HoogeboomS23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=OjDkC57x5sz","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion","generative-modeling","noise-schedule","theory"]},{"id":"2203.12054","title":"Self-supervision through Random Segments with Autoregressive Coding (RandSAC)","authors":["Tianyu Hua","Yonglong Tian","Sucheng Ren","Michalis Raptis","Hang Zhao","Leonid Sigal"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3c","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.12054","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/HuaTRRZS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/HuaTRRZS23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=Ubc74gTVo3","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["self-supervised-learning","autoregressive","vision-transformer","representation-learning"]},{"id":"JaeckleFFTP23","title":"FastFill: Efficient Compatible Model Update","authors":["Florian Jaeckle","Fartash Faghri","Ali Farhadi","Oncel Tuzel","Hadi Pouransari"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/JaeckleFFTP23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/JaeckleFFTP23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=rnRiiHw8Vy","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["model-update","editing","compatibility","fine-tuning"]},{"id":"2206.14754","title":"Distilling Model Failures as Directions in Latent Space","authors":["Saachi Jain","Hannah Lawrence","Ankur Moitra","Aleksander Madry"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Existing methods for isolating hard subpopulations and spurious correlations in datasets often require human intervention. This can make these methods labor-intensive and dataset-specific. To address these shortcomings, we present a scalable method for automatically distilling a model's failure modes. Specifically, we harness linear classifiers to identify consistent error patterns, and, in turn, induce a natural representation of these failure modes as directions within the feature space. We demonstrate that this framework allows us to discover and automatically caption challenging subpopulations within the training dataset. Moreover, by combining our framework with off-the-shelf diffusion models, we can generate images that are especially challenging for the analyzed model, and thus can be used to perform synthetic data augmentation that helps remedy the model's failure modes. Code available at https://github.com/MadryLab/failure-directions","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.14754","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/JainLMM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/JainLMM23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=99RpBVpLiX","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["failure-analysis","latent-space","robustness","representation-learning"]},{"id":"JiKHZH23","title":"Tailoring Language Generation Models under Total Variation Distance","authors":["Haozhe Ji","Pei Ke","Zhipeng Hu","Rongsheng Zhang","Minlie Huang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/JiKHZH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/JiKHZH23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=VELL0PlWfc","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["language-modeling","distribution-shift","generation","objective"]},{"id":"JiangCL0DY0W23","title":"Layer Grafted Pre-training: Bridging Contrastive Learning And Masked Image Modeling For Label-Efficient Representations","authors":["Ziyu Jiang","Yinpeng Chen","Mengchen Liu","Dongdong Chen","Xiyang Dai","Lu Yuan","Zicheng Liu","Zhangyang Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/JiangCL0DY0W23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/JiangCL0DY0W23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=jwdqNwyREyh","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["contrastive-learning","masked-modeling","vision-pretrain","representation-learning"]},{"id":"JiangY0K23","title":"An Adaptive Policy to Employ Sharpness-Aware Minimization","authors":["Weisen Jiang","Hansi Yang","Yu Zhang","James T. Kwok"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/JiangY0K23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/JiangY0K23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=6Wl7-M2BC-","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["sam","optimizer","training-stability","sharpness"]},{"id":"JungLHJBY23","title":"New Insights for the Stability-Plasticity Dilemma in Online Continual Learning","authors":["Dahuin Jung","Dongjin Lee","Sunwon Hong","Hyemi Jang","Ho Bae","Sungroh Yoon"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/JungLHJBY23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/JungLHJBY23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=fxC7kJYwA_a","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["continual-learning","stability-plasticity","training-dynamics","catastrophic-forgetting"]},{"id":"2202.07477","title":"Understanding DDPM Latent Codes Through Optimal Transport","authors":["Valentin Khrulkov","Gleb V. Ryzhakov","Andrei Chertkov","Ivan V. Oseledets"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Diffusion models have recently outperformed alternative approaches to model the distribution of natural images, such as GANs. Such diffusion models allow for deterministic sampling via the probability flow ODE, giving rise to a latent space and an encoder map. While having important practical applications, such as estimation of the likelihood, the theoretical properties of this map are not yet fully understood. In the present work, we partially address this question for the popular case of the VP SDE (DDPM) approach. We show that, perhaps surprisingly, the DDPM encoder map coincides with the optimal transport map for common distributions; we support this claim theoretically and by extensive numerical experiments.","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.07477","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/KhrulkovRCO23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/KhrulkovRCO23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=6PIrhAx1j4i","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion","latent-space","optimal-transport","likelihood"]},{"id":"KimPSLAL23","title":"Preference Transformer: Modeling Human Preferences using Transformers for RL","authors":["Changyeon Kim","Jongjin Park","Jinwoo Shin","Honglak Lee","Pieter Abbeel","Kimin Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/KimPSLAL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/KimPSLAL23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=Peot1SFDX0","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["preference-model","rlhf","transformer"]},{"id":"KlugH23","title":"Scaling Laws For Deep Learning Based Image Reconstruction","authors":["Tobit Klug","Reinhard Heckel"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/KlugH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/KlugH23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=op-ceGueqc4","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["scaling-law","image-reconstruction"]},{"id":"KongBS23","title":"Information-Theoretic Diffusion","authors":["Xianghao Kong","Rob Brekelmans","Greg Ver Steeg"],"institutions":["USC"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/KongBS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/KongBS23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=UvmDCdSPDOW","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"扩散模型的正向加噪和反向去噪过程通常依赖启发式设计，缺乏从信息论视角对最优噪声调度和表示效率的严格刻画。","importance":"理论级贡献。为扩散模型的训练动态提供了信息论基础，将扩散过程与率失真理论（Rate-Distortion）统一，有助于指导更高效的噪声调度设计。","technical_approach":"将扩散模型重构为信息论优化问题。通过互信息和编码长度的视角分析证据下界（ELBO），证明了特定的噪声调度等价于在不同失真约束下优化信息传输率。","experiments":"主要为理论推导与基础图像数据集验证。证明了基于信息论优化的调度策略能在相同的计算预算下获得更好的对数似然（NLL）和生成质量。","authors_note":"USC / Greg Ver Steeg"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Forward and reverse processes in diffusion models often rely on heuristic schedules, lacking a rigorous information-theoretic characterization of optimal noise scheduling and representation efficiency.","importance":"Theoretical contribution. It provides an information-theoretic foundation for diffusion training dynamics, unifying diffusion with rate-distortion theory to guide more efficient noise schedule designs.","technical_approach":"Reformulates diffusion models as an information-theoretic optimization problem. By analyzing the ELBO through mutual information and coding length, it proves that specific noise schedules are equivalent to optimizing the information transmission rate under varying distortion constraints.","experiments":"Primarily theoretical derivations validated on standard image datasets. Demonstrates that information-theoretically optimized schedules yield better negative log-likelihood (NLL) and sample quality under the same compute budget.","authors_note":"USC / Greg Ver Steeg"},"tags":["diffusion","information-theory","objective"],"notable_authors":["Greg Ver Steeg"]},{"id":"2303.11247","title":"Memorization Capacity of Neural Networks with Conditional Computation","authors":["Erdem Koyuncu"],"institutions":["UIC"],"abstract":"$3d","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.11247","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Koyuncu23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Koyuncu23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=rB3zRN0lBYr","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"条件计算（如 MoE）在经验上显著提升了 LLM 的推理效率，但缺乏对其记忆容量（Memorization Capacity）极限的严格数学证明。","importance":"理论级贡献。从数学上证明了为什么 MoE 架构在 Scaling Law 中具有极高的计算性价比，为稀疏激活模型的设计提供了理论下界。","technical_approach":"通过分析 ReLU 网络的记忆容量，对比稠密网络与条件计算网络。证明了记忆 $n$ 个输入输出映射，稠密网络需要 $O(\\sqrt{n})$ 次算术操作，而条件计算网络通过动态路由只需 $O(\\log n)$ 次操作。","experiments":"纯理论证明工作。无大规模预训练实验，核心结论是条件计算将单次前向传播的计算复杂度从多项式级降至对数级。","authors_note":"UIC / Erdem Koyuncu"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Conditional computation (e.g., MoE) empirically improves LLM inference efficiency, but lacks rigorous mathematical proofs regarding its theoretical memorization capacity limits.","importance":"Theoretical contribution. It mathematically proves why MoE architectures offer exceptional compute-efficiency in scaling laws, providing theoretical lower bounds for sparse model design.","technical_approach":"Analyzes the memorization capacity of ReLU networks by comparing dense and conditional computation networks. Proves that memorizing $n$ input-output mappings requires $O(\\sqrt{n})$ operations in a dense network, whereas a conditional network only needs $O(\\log n)$ operations per input via dynamic routing.","experiments":"Purely theoretical proofs. No large-scale pretraining experiments; the core finding is the reduction of forward pass complexity from polynomial to logarithmic scale.","authors_note":"UIC / Erdem Koyuncu"},"tags":["moe","memorization","capacity"],"notable_authors":["Erdem Koyuncu"]},{"id":"LeeJ23","title":"A new characterization of the edge of stability based on a sharpness measure aware of batch gradient distribution","authors":["Sungyoon Lee","Cheongjae Jang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LeeJ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LeeJ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=bH-kCY6LdKg","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"大模型训练常在“稳定边缘（Edge of Stability, EoS）”运行，即 Hessian 矩阵的最大特征值徘徊在 $2/\\eta$ 附近。但传统的锐度（Sharpness）指标无法完全解释 Batch 梯度分布带来的训练动态和 Loss 尖峰（Spikes）。","importance":"机制分析级贡献。深化了对预训练稳定性的理解，提供了一个比传统 Hessian 特征值更精确的指标来预测和解释训练崩溃（Loss Spikes），对优化器调参和 Batch Size 设定有指导价值。","technical_approach":"引入了一种新的锐度度量方法，该方法不仅考虑了损失曲面的曲率（Hessian），还显式地将 Batch 梯度的协方差分布纳入计算。通过理论推导证明了该指标能更紧致地刻画 SGD 在 EoS 状态下的行为。","experiments":"在 CIFAR 等标准图像分类任务上验证。实证表明，新的锐度指标比传统的最大特征值能更准确地预测训练轨迹中的不稳定性转折点。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Large model training often operates at the 'Edge of Stability' (EoS), where the top eigenvalue of the Hessian hovers around $2/\\eta$. However, traditional sharpness metrics fail to fully explain the training dynamics and loss spikes caused by batch gradient distributions.","importance":"Mechanism analysis contribution. Deepens the understanding of pretraining stability, providing a more precise metric than traditional Hessian eigenvalues to predict and explain training collapse (loss spikes). Valuable for optimizer tuning and batch size selection.","technical_approach":"Introduces a novel sharpness measure that incorporates not only the curvature of the loss surface (Hessian) but explicitly accounts for the covariance distribution of batch gradients. Theoretically proves that this metric provides a tighter characterization of SGD behavior at the EoS.","experiments":"Validated on standard image classification tasks like CIFAR. Empirically demonstrates that the new sharpness metric predicts instability turning points in the training trajectory more accurately than the traditional top eigenvalue.","authors_note":""},"tags":["edge-of-stability","sharpness","optimization"]},{"id":"LeeKLH23","title":"Sparse Token Transformer with Attention Back Tracking","authors":["Heejun Lee","Minki Kang","Youngwan Lee","Sung Ju Hwang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LeeKLH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LeeKLH23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=VV0hSE8AxCw","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：Transformer 在高分辨率视觉输入上主要被 token 数拖慢，但直接做稀疏注意力通常会把早期被忽略的重要 token 永久丢掉。已有做法多靠固定窗口、启发式 token pruning 或静态稀疏模式降算力，问题是它们一旦裁错就很难恢复，精度和效率经常二选一。","importance":"它的贡献更偏方法级和系统级：不是重新发明注意力，而是给稀疏 token 选择加了一个可回溯机制，试图把“少算”和“少错杀”同时做到。对预训练研究的启示在于，token-level 稀疏化如果想进主干训练流程，关键不是稀疏本身，而是是否提供纠错通道；否则训练阶段会积累错误选择，后面很难补回来。","technical_approach":"核心方法是一个带 Attention Back Tracking 的 sparse token Transformer：先只让一部分高价值 token 参与重计算，再允许被压掉的 token 通过回溯路径重新影响后续表示。设计重点不是传统的局部稀疏 attention pattern，而是把 token 选择做成动态过程，并用注意力分数或相关性信号追踪先前被忽略的 token。和纯 token pruning 不同，它没有把未选 token 视为彻底删除，而是保留了重新接入的机会；代价是实现更复杂，且收益依赖选择器本身是否稳定。","experiments":"从给定信息无法确认具体模型规模、数据集、主 baseline 和数值提升，因此不能负责任地写出精确结果。可以确定的是，论文应围绕视觉 Transformer 的效率—精度折中展开，重点比较 dense ViT、已有 token pruning / sparse attention 方法，以及加入 back tracking 之后在相同 FLOPs 或吞吐条件下的精度变化；若论文成立，最有价值的 ablation 应该是：去掉 back tracking 后精度明显回落，而在相近计算预算下保留回溯能减少误删 token 的损失。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a specific failure mode of sparse Transformers: reducing compute by dropping tokens is easy, but once important tokens are discarded early, standard sparse schemes have no recovery path. Prior work mostly used fixed sparse patterns or one-shot token pruning, which saves FLOPs but often turns token selection errors into irreversible accuracy loss.","importance":"This is mainly a method-and-systems contribution. The notable idea is not sparsity alone, but adding a mechanism that makes token sparsification reversible. For pretraining-oriented readers, the useful takeaway is that token-level efficiency methods need error-correction paths; otherwise training amplifies bad routing decisions and the resulting representation damage is hard to undo.","technical_approach":"The method is a sparse token Transformer with Attention Back Tracking. It computes on a selected subset of tokens, but unlike hard pruning, it keeps a route for previously suppressed tokens to affect later representations again through attention-based tracing. The design choice is deliberate: instead of committing to static local sparsity, it treats token selection as a dynamic process with recovery. Relative to standard token pruning, this should reduce false negatives; the trade-off is extra bookkeeping and dependence on the quality of the selection signal.","experiments":"The provided material does not contain enough information to state model sizes, datasets, baselines, or exact gains reliably, so those details are left blank. The likely experimental focus is the usual accuracy-efficiency frontier against dense ViTs and prior token-pruning or sparse-attention baselines. The most informative ablation, if reported, would be whether removing back tracking causes a clear drop under matched compute, which would directly support the claim that recoverability matters more than sparsity alone.","authors_note":""},"tags":["sparse-attention","transformer","efficiency"],"notable_authors":["Heejun Lee","Minki Kang","Youngwan Lee","Sung Ju Hwang"]},{"id":"LezamaS0CHE23","title":"Discrete Predictor-Corrector Diffusion Models for Image Synthesis","authors":["José Lezama","Tim Salimans","Lu Jiang","Huiwen Chang","Jonathan Ho","Irfan Essa"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LezamaS0CHE23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LezamaS0CHE23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=VM8batVBWvg","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：离散 diffusion 在图像生成上已可行，但纯离散链条的采样质量和稳定性仍受限，尤其难同时兼顾 coarse global structure 和 local refinement。此前离散模型通常直接沿单一离散去噪链采样，缺少类似连续 diffusion 中 predictor-corrector 的纠偏步骤。","importance":"它的重要性是方法级且带一点范式延展：论文把 predictor-corrector 这一在连续扩散里很自然的思想搬到离散空间，并证明离散 token 生成也能受益于“先走一步、再局部修正”。对预训练研究的价值在于，这提供了一个比纯 AR 更像并行生成、又比标准离散 diffusion 更可控的建模工具，特别适合和离散 tokenizer、VQ 图像 token 体系结合。","technical_approach":"核心方法是离散 predictor-corrector diffusion：predictor 负责沿反向扩散链推进样本，corrector 则在每一步或若干步内对当前离散状态做额外的局部修正，以更好逼近目标后验。关键设计点在于，corrector 不是简单重复去噪，而是利用当前条件分布对 token 状态做有限步纠偏，缓解单步转移误差累积。和普通离散 diffusion 相比，它增加了采样时的计算，但换来更好的样本质量或更少主步数；和 AR 相比，它保留了并行生成的潜力。","experiments":"从题目和作者组合可以判断论文大概率在离散图像 token 数据上评估生成质量，并与标准离散 diffusion 或其他 token-based 生成方法比较，但给定材料没有具体指标、模型规模和提升数字，不能编造。若按论文标题推断，最关键的实验应包括：加入 corrector 后的 FID 或 log-likelihood 改善、在相同步数下质量提升，或在相同质量下所需 predictor 步数下降；真正有信息量的 ablation 会是 corrector 次数、插入位置以及离散状态空间大小对效果的影响。","authors_note":"作者名单中可确认 Jonathan Ho、Tim Salimans、Huiwen Chang，属于 diffusion 生成方向的代表性研究者。机构无法仅凭给定信息准确确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a gap in discrete diffusion for image synthesis: a plain discrete reverse chain often struggles to combine global structure recovery with local token refinement. Prior discrete models mostly sampled with a single reverse process, without the kind of predictor-corrector correction that is standard in continuous diffusion.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution with broader modeling implications. It shows that the predictor-corrector idea is not tied to continuous noise spaces and can improve token-based generative modeling in a discrete setting as well. For pretraining and unified generative modeling, that matters because many multimodal pipelines rely on discrete tokenizers, where discrete diffusion is a realistic alternative to autoregressive decoding.","technical_approach":"The core idea is a discrete predictor-corrector diffusion sampler. A predictor advances the sample along the reverse diffusion trajectory, while a corrector performs extra local revisions of the current discrete state to better approximate the target posterior. The point is not merely repeating denoising, but explicitly correcting transition errors that accumulate in a purely predictor-only chain. Compared with standard discrete diffusion, this adds sampling compute but can improve quality or reduce the number of main reverse steps. Compared with AR models, it retains parallel generation structure.","experiments":"The provided information is insufficient to report exact datasets, model sizes, baselines, or numerical gains. Still, the title and author list strongly suggest evaluation on discrete image-token generation against standard discrete diffusion baselines. The most important evidence, if reported, would be better FID or likelihood at matched sampling budgets, or fewer predictor steps needed to reach the same quality. Useful ablations would test how many corrector steps are needed, where correction is inserted, and how performance changes with discrete vocabulary size.","authors_note":"The author list includes Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, and Huiwen Chang, all well known for diffusion-based generative modeling. The institution cannot be confirmed from the provided information alone."},"tags":["discrete-diffusion","predictor-corrector","image-generation"],"notable_authors":["José Lezama","Tim Salimans","Lu Jiang","Huiwen Chang","Jonathan Ho"]},{"id":"2302.06015","title":"A Theoretical Understanding of Shallow Vision Transformers: Learning, Generalization, and Sample Complexity","authors":["Hongkang Li","Meng Wang","Sijia Liu","Pin-Yu Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3e","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.06015","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Li00C23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Li00C23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=jClGv3Qjhb","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：ViT 在经验上很强，但训练与泛化为什么成立、样本复杂度受什么控制，理论上一直说不清。过去理论工作多回避 self-attention 的跨 token、跨层耦合，要么分析极简线性模型，要么不给出可训练性的明确结论。","importance":"它的贡献主要是理论机制级，而不是新算法。价值在于论文给出了一个可操作的数据模型，把 token 分成 label-relevant 和 label-irrelevant 两类，然后推导出浅层 ViT 实现零泛化误差的样本复杂度依赖项。对预训练研究的启示是明确的：token 中有效信息比例、噪声水平和初始化误差都会系统性地影响训练难度，这和实际多模态/长上下文建模里“有用 token 很稀”的直觉是对齐的。","technical_approach":"论文分析的是一个浅层 ViT：单层 self-attention 加两层 MLP 做分类。关键建模选择是显式区分与标签相关和无关的 token，并在这个数据生成假设下研究 SGD 训练动态和泛化。结论上，达到零泛化误差的样本复杂度会随着相关 token 占比下降、token 噪声升高和初始化误差变大而恶化；同时他们还证明了带随机梯度的训练过程可以收敛。和已有宽网络/NTK 风格理论不同，这里保留了注意力选择有用 token 的角色，而不是完全把 Transformer 退化成核回归。","experiments":"这是一篇理论论文，给定摘要没有大规模经验实验细节。关键事实都在理论结果里：样本复杂度与 label-relevant token 的倒数正相关，与 token noise level 正相关，也受 initial model error 影响；此外给出了 stochastic gradient-based training 能收敛的证明。若论文含有数值模拟，最值得看的应是三类验证：相关 token 比例下降时所需样本数上升、噪声增大时泛化变差、较好初始化显著减轻样本需求。","authors_note":"作者包括 Pin-Yu Chen、Sijia Liu，均在鲁棒学习与理论分析方向有代表性工作。机构无法从给定信息准确确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a basic but unresolved question: why can Vision Transformers be learned and generalized efficiently at all, and what controls their sample complexity? Earlier theory usually sidestepped attention by analyzing oversimplified models or by avoiding explicit trainability results for token interactions.","importance":"This is a theory contribution with concrete implications rather than a new training recipe. Its value is that it gives a structured data model for shallow ViTs and derives how sample complexity depends on token relevance, token noise, and initialization quality. For pretraining-minded readers, the useful message is that sparse signal density across tokens is not just an intuition; under a formal model, it directly governs learnability.","technical_approach":"The analyzed model is a shallow ViT: one self-attention layer followed by a two-layer perceptron for classification. The key modeling move is to distinguish label-relevant from label-irrelevant tokens and study SGD-based optimization under that data assumption. The resulting theory shows that achieving zero generalization error gets harder when the fraction of relevant tokens decreases, token noise increases, or the initialization error is larger. Unlike pure NTK-style analyses that effectively wash out attention’s role, this setup keeps the token-selection function of attention in the story.","experiments":"This is primarily a theoretical paper, and the provided abstract does not include large empirical evaluations. The main facts are in the bounds: sample complexity scales positively with the inverse relevant-token fraction, with token noise, and with initialization error; the paper also proves convergence for a stochastic-gradient-based training process. If numerical simulations are included, the most informative checks would be exactly these monotonic trends.","authors_note":"The authors include Pin-Yu Chen and Sijia Liu, both known for work on robust learning and theory. The institution cannot be confirmed from the provided information alone."},"tags":["vision-transformer","generalization-theory","sample-complexity"],"notable_authors":["Hongkang Li","Meng Wang","Sijia Liu","Pin-Yu Chen"]},{"id":"LiHTWH23","title":"Trainable Weight Averaging: Efficient Training by Optimizing Historical Solutions","authors":["Tao Li","Zhehao Huang","Qinghua Tao","Yingwen Wu","Xiaolin Huang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LiHTWH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LiHTWH23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=8wbnpOJY-f","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：训练过程中历史参数往往蕴含稳定且泛化更好的信息，但传统做法通常只在训练后做 SWA/EMA，历史解没有被当成可优化对象。已有平均策略大多是固定权重或启发式衰减，省事但不一定最优，也不能主动利用不同阶段参数的互补性。","importance":"它的贡献是训练方法级。对 pretrain 的启示在于，参数轨迹本身是一种资源，不只是优化副产品；如果能在几乎不增加训练成本的前提下把历史解组合成更好的当前解，就有机会改善稳定性、收敛速度或泛化。尤其在大模型训练里，任何能低成本压 loss spike、提升最终质量的方法都值得关注。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Trainable Weight Averaging：不是固定地平均历史 checkpoint，而是学习这些历史解的组合权重，让模型显式优化“如何利用过去的自己”。关键设计选择是把历史参数保留下来并通过可训练系数融合，而不是只保留最后一步或单一指数滑动平均。和 SWA/EMA 相比，它更灵活，理论上能适应不同训练阶段的价值差异；代价是需要额外管理历史快照，并处理参数组合带来的内存与同步开销。","experiments":"给定材料没有摘要，无法确认论文覆盖哪些任务、模型规模和具体提升。合理推测实验会拿 TWA 对比 vanilla SGD/AdamW、EMA、SWA，指标包括收敛速度、最终测试精度和训练稳定性。若论文成立，最关键的 ablation 应是：固定平均不如可训练平均；历史窗口长度存在最优区间；早期快照与后期快照的最优权重分布不是单调的，这说明“学平均”确实比“设平均”更有信息量。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a familiar inefficiency in optimization: historical checkpoints often contain useful and more stable solutions, yet standard training mostly ignores them except for simple EMA or post-hoc averaging. Existing averaging methods are usually fixed-weight heuristics, which are cheap but cannot adapt to which training stages are actually worth trusting.","importance":"This is a training-method contribution. For pretraining, the relevant message is that the optimization trajectory itself can be exploited as a learnable resource rather than treated as disposable noise. If that can improve convergence or stability at low extra cost, it is directly relevant to large-scale runs where a small reduction in instability can be valuable.","technical_approach":"The method, Trainable Weight Averaging, replaces fixed averaging of historical checkpoints with learnable combination weights over past solutions. The key choice is to optimize how past models are combined rather than hard-coding a uniform or exponential rule. Relative to SWA or EMA, this should better exploit complementarity between different training phases. The trade-off is extra memory and engineering complexity from storing and combining multiple historical parameter states.","experiments":"The provided material does not include the abstract, so task coverage, model sizes, and numerical gains cannot be stated reliably. A reasonable expectation is comparison against vanilla optimization, EMA, and SWA, measuring convergence speed, final accuracy, and training stability. The most informative ablations would test whether learnable averaging beats fixed averaging, how long the history window should be, and whether the learned weighting over checkpoints is nontrivial rather than simply favoring the latest model.","authors_note":""},"tags":["weight-averaging","optimizer","training-efficiency"],"notable_authors":["Tao Li","Zhehao Huang","Qinghua Tao","Yingwen Wu","Xiaolin Huang"]},{"id":"LiWSGXZ23","title":"MPCFORMER: Fast, Performant and Provate Transformer Inference with MPC","authors":["Dacheng Li","Hongyi Wang","Rulin Shao","Han Guo","Eric P. Xing","Hao Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LiWSGXZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LiWSGXZ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=CWmvjOEhgH-","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：Transformer 推理在多方安全计算（MPC）下非常慢，尤其 softmax attention、非线性和矩阵乘导致通信与延迟都难以接受。此前私有推理工作往往只在小模型或简化网络上可用，把 Transformer 真正做快、做实用一直是难点。","importance":"这是系统与推理方法层面的工作。对 pretrain 研究本身不是直接改模型质量，但对大模型落地有启发：一旦推理部署环境受隐私约束，训练时偏爱的算子和结构未必适合安全执行，因此“可安全推理友好性”可能反过来影响预训练架构选择。","technical_approach":"从标题看，MPCFORMER 的核心是为 MPC 重新设计 Transformer 推理路径，目标是在速度、精度和隐私之间取得实用平衡。常见可行路线包括近似 softmax、低交互 attention、算子融合、定点量化，以及把最贵的加密通信步骤压到最少。与一般高效 Transformer 不同，它优化的不是 GPU FLOPs，而是 MPC 场景下的通信轮数和安全乘法次数；因此某些在明文下合理的设计，在这里可能完全不划算。","experiments":"给定材料没有摘要，无法确认使用的加密协议、网络宽度、任务和加速倍数。合理预期论文会报告与 prior private inference 系统相比的端到端延迟、通信量和精度损失，并在 BERT/Transformer 类模型上证明可扩展性。最关键的实验不是单纯跑得快，而是说明其近似不会显著损害模型输出，同时在真实 MPC 代价指标上明显优于已有方案。","authors_note":"作者名单中可确认 Eric P. Xing。机构无法从给定信息准确确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a deployment bottleneck: Transformer inference under secure multi-party computation is usually too slow to be practical, mainly because attention and nonlinearities are expensive in communication-heavy cryptographic settings. Earlier private inference systems often worked only for smaller or simpler models and did not make Transformers truly usable.","importance":"This is a systems contribution with indirect implications for pretraining and model design. It matters because deployment constraints can feed back into architecture choices: operators that are cheap on GPUs may be extremely expensive under MPC. For large-model practitioners, that means 'inference-friendly' may need to be defined relative to the security setting, not just standard hardware.","technical_approach":"From the title, MPCFORMER likely redesigns Transformer inference specifically for MPC, optimizing communication rounds and secure multiplications rather than plain FLOPs. The method probably combines approximations for expensive attention components, operator restructuring, and protocol-aware implementation choices. That distinguishes it from conventional efficient-Transformer work: the objective here is cryptographic efficiency with acceptable accuracy retention, not simply faster dense inference on accelerators.","experiments":"The provided information does not include the abstract, so protocol details, model sizes, tasks, and speedups cannot be stated reliably. The expected evidence would compare end-to-end latency, communication cost, and accuracy drop against prior private inference baselines on Transformer models. The decisive result would be showing that the system is meaningfully faster under actual MPC cost metrics while keeping model quality close to the plaintext baseline.","authors_note":"The author list includes Eric P. Xing. The institution cannot be confirmed from the provided information alone."},"tags":["mpc","transformer-inference","privacy","efficiency"],"notable_authors":["Dacheng Li","Hongyi Wang","Rulin Shao","Han Guo","Eric P. Xing"]},{"id":"LiYDZWT23","title":"SmartFRZ: An Efficient Training Framework using Attention-Based Layer Freezing","authors":["Sheng Li","Geng Yuan","Yue Dai","Youtao Zhang","Yanzhi Wang","Xulong Tang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LiYDZWT23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LiYDZWT23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=i9UlAr1T_xl","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：全模型训练代价高，而简单的逐层冻结虽然能省算力，却容易冻结错层、损失精度。过去 layer freezing 多依赖手工 schedule 或经验规则，问题是不同任务和不同训练阶段，真正重要的层并不固定。","importance":"这是训练系统方法级工作。对 pretrain 和 continual pretrain 的启发在于，冻结策略如果能由模型当前的 attention 信号驱动，而不是人工指定，就可能把训练算力更多留给真正还在变化的层，从而降低更新成本而不明显伤害性能。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 SmartFRZ：用 attention-based 指标判断哪些层已经相对稳定、哪些层仍值得训练，然后动态执行 layer freezing。设计重点在于利用 attention 统计作为层重要性或变化程度的代理，而不是靠固定深度模式冻结。与传统后层优先/前层优先冻结不同，它更数据依赖、更阶段依赖；但边界也明确：attention 是否真能可靠代表层的可塑性，可能随架构和任务而变化。","experiments":"给定材料没有摘要，因此无法确认它是在 ViT、BERT 还是其他 Transformer 上评测，也无法报告速度提升和精度损失。合理预期关键实验会比较全量训练、固定冻结 schedule 和 SmartFRZ，在训练时间、显存和最终精度上的 trade-off；最有信息量的 ablation 应是 attention 指标替换成随机或简单梯度范数后效果回落，从而说明 attention-based 决策确实有效。","authors_note":"作者名单中包含 Youtao Zhang、Yanzhi Wang，均在高效深度学习系统方向有代表性工作。机构无法从给定信息准确确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a common training trade-off: freezing layers can cut training cost, but naive freezing schedules often sacrifice too much accuracy because they freeze the wrong layers at the wrong time. Prior layer-freezing methods usually rely on hand-crafted schedules, even though layer importance is task- and stage-dependent.","importance":"This is a training-efficiency contribution. For pretraining and continual adaptation, the interesting takeaway is that freezing decisions may be made dynamically from model-internal signals rather than pre-defined schedules. If that works, it offers a practical way to spend updates only where the model is still changing meaningfully.","technical_approach":"SmartFRZ appears to use attention-derived signals to decide which layers can be frozen and which should continue training. The core design choice is to use attention behavior as a proxy for layer stability or usefulness, instead of freezing by depth or by a fixed timeline. Relative to standard static freezing, this is more adaptive to both data and training phase. The main risk is that attention statistics may not always correlate with the true need for parameter updates across architectures.","experiments":"The provided material does not include the abstract, so the evaluated model families, tasks, and quantitative trade-offs cannot be stated reliably. The central experiments should compare full training, static freezing schedules, and SmartFRZ on final accuracy versus training cost. The most telling ablation would test whether attention-based freezing beats simpler proxies such as random selection or basic norm-based criteria under the same compute budget.","authors_note":"The authors include Youtao Zhang and Yanzhi Wang, both known for efficient deep learning systems. The institution cannot be confirmed from the provided information alone."},"tags":["efficient-training","layer-freezing","attention"],"notable_authors":["Sheng Li","Geng Yuan","Yue Dai","Youtao Zhang","Yanzhi Wang"]},{"id":"LiangJLTYZ23","title":"HomoDistil: Homotopic Task-Agnostic Distillation of Pre-trained Transformers","authors":["Chen Liang","Haoming Jiang","Zheng Li","Xianfeng Tang","Bing Yin","Tuo Zhao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LiangJLTYZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LiangJLTYZ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=D7srTrGhAs","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是：预训练 Transformer 的蒸馏通常强依赖具体任务和中间层对齐设计，迁移性差，蒸馏过程也容易不稳定。过去 task-specific distillation 往往在某个下游上有效，但很难保留 teacher 的通用能力；而简单 logits matching 又不足以在无任务约束下稳定压缩大模型。","importance":"它的重要性是压缩方法级，且对 pretrain 模型部署比较实际。若真能做到 task-agnostic distillation，就意味着可以在不依赖特定下游标注的情况下，把通用预训练能力更完整地迁给小模型。对大模型训练闭环的意义在于，蒸馏不再只是 post-hoc 部署技巧，也可以变成预训练体系中的标准降本步骤。","technical_approach":"从标题看，HomoDistil 的核心是 homotopic、task-agnostic distillation。这里 homotopic 很可能指一种连续路径式的蒸馏过程：不是让 student 一步到位模仿 teacher，而是通过渐进式目标或参数路径，平滑地把 student 从自身分布拉向 teacher 分布。关键设计选择是减少对具体任务标签和手工特征对齐的依赖，用更普适的 teacher 信号完成压缩。和传统蒸馏相比，这类方法通常更稳，但可能需要更精细的训练 schedule。","experiments":"由于没有摘要，无法确认教师/学生规模、预训练语料和评测任务。最关键的实验应该是：在多任务或零样本迁移设置下，task-agnostic 的 HomoDistil 相比标准蒸馏保留更多 teacher 能力；并通过不同学生尺寸、不同蒸馏阶段长度的 ablation，说明 homotopic 过程确实改善稳定性或最终性能，而不是单纯多训几步。","authors_note":"作者名单中包含 Bing Yin。机构无法从给定信息准确确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a common weakness in distillation for pretrained Transformers: many distillation recipes are tied to specific tasks or hand-crafted alignment choices, which makes them brittle and limits how much general teacher capability transfers to the student. Pure logit matching is often too weak to serve as a robust task-agnostic compression strategy.","importance":"This is a model-compression contribution with direct relevance to pretrained model deployment. If task-agnostic distillation works well, it means we can compress broadly useful pretrained representations without depending on downstream labels or task-specific tuning. That makes distillation more than a post-hoc trick; it becomes part of the pretrain-to-deploy pipeline.","technical_approach":"From the title, HomoDistil introduces a homotopic and task-agnostic distillation scheme. The likely idea is to move the student toward the teacher through a gradual path rather than enforcing a hard one-step match, which should make optimization smoother and preserve more of the teacher’s structure. The main design choice is to rely less on task-specific supervision and less on brittle manual intermediate-layer matching. Compared with conventional distillation, the expected benefit is stability and broader transfer, at the cost of a more carefully designed training schedule.","experiments":"The provided information does not include the abstract, so teacher/student sizes, datasets, and quantitative gains cannot be stated reliably. The key evidence should show stronger retention of teacher performance across multiple tasks or transfer settings than standard distillation baselines. The most useful ablations would vary student scale and the length or shape of the homotopic schedule to verify that the gain comes from the progressive distillation path itself.","authors_note":"The author list includes Bing Yin. The institution cannot be confirmed from the provided information alone."},"tags":["knowledge-distillation","transformer","model-compression"],"notable_authors":["Chen Liang","Haoming Jiang","Zheng Li","Xianfeng Tang","Bing Yin"]},{"id":"LiangLCJD0MS23","title":"MultiViz: Towards Visualizing and Understanding Multimodal Models","authors":["Paul Pu Liang","Yiwei Lyu","Gunjan Chhablani","Nihal Jain","Zihao Deng","Xingbo Wang","Louis-Philippe Morency","Ruslan Salakhutdinov"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LiangLCJD0MS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LiangLCJD0MS23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=i2_TvOFmEml","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：多模态模型越来越复杂，但我们仍缺少统一、可操作的可视化工具去看它到底如何融合文本、视觉等模态，以及错误来自哪里。过去解释方法通常是单模态迁移过来的，或者只看 attention heatmap，难以反映真正的跨模态交互。","importance":"它的贡献更偏工具与分析框架。对 pretrain 研究的价值在于，多模态预训练越来越依赖复杂对齐损失、tokenizer 和融合结构，如果没有合适的可视化与诊断手段，很多训练现象只能靠猜。好的可视化工具不会直接提高分数，但会提高做对实验的效率。","technical_approach":"从标题看，MultiViz 的核心是为 multimodal models 提供系统化可视化与理解接口。关键不是画更漂亮的图，而是把不同模态、不同层和不同交互机制放到同一分析框架里，可能包括 token-level attribution、跨模态注意力流、反事实遮挡或表示相似性分析。与只看单个 attention map 的方法不同，它更像一个诊断工作台，目标是帮助研究者判断模型究竟是在做真实融合，还是只依赖某一模态的捷径信号。","experiments":"给定材料没有摘要，无法确认支持了哪些模型和案例研究。合理预期实验会覆盖多种 VLM 或 multimodal benchmark，并通过若干 case study 展示该工具能揭示现有模型的失败模式、模态偏置或伪对齐现象。最有价值的验证不是可视化本身，而是它能否导出可操作结论，例如发现某类错误确实来自视觉 token 未被使用，或文本 prompt 过强覆盖了视觉证据。","authors_note":"作者名单中包含 Paul Pu Liang。机构无法从给定信息准确确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses an analysis gap: multimodal models are becoming more capable and more opaque at the same time, yet we still lack a unified way to visualize how different modalities interact and where failures come from. Prior interpretability tools are often inherited from unimodal settings or reduced to attention heatmaps, which are too limited for genuine cross-modal reasoning.","importance":"This is primarily a tooling and analysis contribution. For pretraining research, that matters because multimodal objectives, tokenizers, and fusion architectures are hard to debug without good diagnostics. A useful visualization framework will not improve benchmark scores directly, but it can improve the quality and speed of model iteration.","technical_approach":"From the title, MultiViz aims to provide a structured visualization and interpretation framework for multimodal models. The likely contribution is to put token-level attribution, cross-modal attention behavior, and representation analysis into a common interface rather than treating them as isolated plots. The distinguishing idea is diagnostic utility: the goal is to determine whether a model is truly integrating modalities or exploiting shortcuts from one dominant stream.","experiments":"The provided information does not include the abstract, so model coverage, datasets, and case-study details cannot be reported with confidence. The expected evidence is a set of analyses across several multimodal models showing that MultiViz can reveal failure modes, modality dominance, or alignment issues that simpler tools miss. The strongest validation would be if its findings lead to concrete model or data interventions that improve behavior.","authors_note":"The author list includes Paul Pu Liang. The institution cannot be confirmed from the provided information alone."},"tags":["interpretability","multimodal","visualization"],"notable_authors":["Paul Pu Liang","Yiwei Lyu","Gunjan Chhablani","Nihal Jain","Zihao Deng"]},{"id":"LittwinY23","title":"Adaptive Optimization in the ∞-Width Limit","authors":["Etai Littwin","Greg Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LittwinY23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LittwinY23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=zgVDqw9ZUES","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：自适应优化器在无限宽极限下到底对应什么训练动力学，以及现有 μP/NTK 风格理论如何覆盖 Adam 一类方法。过去无限宽分析大多围绕 SGD 或少数可解析设定，自适应优化器虽然在实践中主导大模型训练，但理论刻画明显滞后。","importance":"它的重要性是理论到实践接口上的方法级工作。对 pretrain 研究者，这类结果的价值不在于直接提升指标，而在于告诉你宽度扩展、学习率迁移和优化器选择之间哪些规律是结构性的，哪些只是有限宽经验；这会影响大模型从小规模试验外推的可信度。","technical_approach":"核心做法是把自适应优化写进无限宽极限的参数化与动力学分析中，推导其在宽度趋于无穷时的有效更新规律。关键点通常在于：自适应二阶统计如何随宽度缩放、是否保留 feature learning、以及与标准参数化的兼容性；与只分析 SGD 的 prior 相比，这篇工作试图把实际最常用的优化器纳入同一极限框架。","experiments":"给定信息不足以确认是否包含大规模数值实验、哪些网络架构、以及理论预测和有限宽实验的一致性数字。对读者而言，最值得看的是论文是否给出可操作的 scaling prescription，例如不同宽度下 Adam 类超参如何迁移，以及理论是否能解释实践中的稳定区间或失效边界。","authors_note":"Greg Yang 是 μP（maximal update parameterization）等宽度缩放理论的代表作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a gap that matters in practice: what adaptive optimizers look like in the infinite-width limit. Most width-limit theory has focused on SGD-like dynamics, while modern large-scale training is dominated by Adam-style methods, so the theory-practice mismatch has been substantial.","importance":"This is a theory-facing contribution with practical implications for scaling. For pretraining, the value is in clarifying which optimizer and hyperparameter behaviors should transfer across width, and which observations are just finite-width artifacts.","technical_approach":"The work extends infinite-width analysis to adaptive optimization. The central technical question is how the adaptive preconditioning statistics scale with width and how that changes the effective training dynamics; the contribution is meaningful if it preserves a usable scaling prescription rather than only proving an asymptotic existence result.","experiments":"The prompt does not provide enough detail to state architectures, scales, or numerical agreement. The most useful empirical part, if present, would be whether the predicted width-transfer rules hold at realistic finite widths and whether they explain stability or learning-rate sensitivity for Adam-like optimizers.","authors_note":"Greg Yang is known for width-scaling theory including μP."},"tags":["optimization","infinite-width","adaptive-optimizers","training-dynamics"],"notable_authors":["Greg Yang"]},{"id":"LiuLJ23","title":"Gradient-Guided Importance Sampling for Learning Binary Energy-Based Models","authors":["Meng Liu","Haoran Liu","Shuiwang Ji"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LiuLJ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LiuLJ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=9DZKk85Z4zA","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：二值能量模型训练时，如何更高效地从困难分布中采样，降低梯度估计方差并改善学习。传统 MCMC 在离散空间里混合慢，负样本质量差会直接拖累 EBM 训练，因此作者把采样器设计成显式利用梯度信息的重要性采样。","importance":"这是方法级改进，影响集中在离散生成建模和 EBM 训练稳定性。对 pretrain 研究，它的直接相关性不如主流 LM 高，但对替代建模范式很有价值：如果离散 EBM 的采样问题能被缓解，energy-based LM 或离散结构建模才更有现实可行性。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 gradient-guided importance sampling。它不是盲目地在二值空间做局部随机游走，而是利用能量函数梯度构造更有针对性的 proposal，再用重要性权重修正偏差。关键取舍是：引入梯度引导能显著提高 proposal 质量，但必须控制权重方差和计算成本，否则会把采样难题转成估计不稳定；与纯 MCMC 或简单 Gibbs/Metropolis 相比，这种方法更像在离散空间里做 informed negative sampling。","experiments":"给定信息不足以确认数据集、模型规模和具体提升数字。可以合理预期，实验会比较对数似然估计、样本质量或训练收敛速度，并与标准离散 EBM 采样器对照；最值得看的 ablation 是 proposal 设计和重要性权重截断/校正，因为那决定方法是在真实高维二值空间里有效，还是只在小规模基准上成立。","authors_note":"Shuiwang Ji 是图机器学习与表示学习方向知名作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a core bottleneck in binary energy-based models: training is only as good as the negative samples, and sampling in discrete high-dimensional spaces is hard. Standard MCMC mixes slowly, so the model often learns from poor negatives and unstable gradient estimates.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution for discrete EBMs. Its relevance to pretraining is indirect but real: if sampling for discrete energy models becomes more practical, energy-based language modeling and other non-autoregressive discrete paradigms become easier to take seriously.","technical_approach":"The method uses gradient-guided importance sampling. Rather than relying on uninformed local moves, it builds proposals using gradient information from the energy function and then corrects the bias with importance weights. The design trade-off is clear: better proposals can reduce variance and improve learning, but only if the importance weights remain well behaved and the proposal cost does not dominate.","experiments":"The prompt does not provide datasets, scales, or exact gains, so no numbers should be invented. The useful empirical questions are whether the method improves likelihood-related metrics, convergence speed, or sample quality over standard discrete-sampling baselines, and whether those gains survive in higher-dimensional settings.","authors_note":"Shuiwang Ji is known for work in graph machine learning and representation learning."},"tags":["energy-based-model","importance-sampling","optimization"],"notable_authors":["Shuiwang Ji"]},{"id":"LiuWLSW023","title":"Deja Vu: Continual Model Generalization for Unseen Domains","authors":["Chenxi Liu","Lixu Wang","Lingjuan Lyu","Chen Sun","Xiao Wang","Qi Zhu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LiuWLSW023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LiuWLSW023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=L8iZdgeKmI6","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：模型在持续接触新域时，如何不仅避免遗忘旧域，还能对未来未见域保持泛化。传统 continual learning 多聚焦灾难性遗忘，但现实部署更关心 domain shift 下的持续泛化，作者把问题从“记住过去”扩展到“适应未来”。","importance":"这是系统与方法交叉的工作。对 pretrain 研究，它的意义在于 continual pretrain 不该只看 perplexity 回放或旧任务保持率，还要看表示是否变得更 domain-robust；这和数据退火、mid-train、长期模型维护直接相关。","technical_approach":"核心方法 Deja Vu 从标题看强调 continual model generalization，而不是单纯 rehearsal。合理推断其关键机制会围绕学习跨域稳定特征、利用历史经验形成可迁移先验，或在参数更新时显式约束 domain-invariant 结构；与经典 continual learning 相比，它更关注 unseen domains 的 forward transfer，而不是只优化 backward transfer。","experiments":"给定信息没有摘要，无法确认具体域泛化基准、模型和数值。可以合理预期，实验会比较 sequential domain shift 下对未见域的表现，并与 ER、EWC、domain generalization baselines 对照；最值得看的结果是：方法是否在不显著牺牲旧域性能的前提下提升未见域泛化，否则只是把遗忘问题换成了过度保守更新。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a more realistic continual-learning objective: not just retaining past domains, but improving generalization to unseen future domains. Classical continual learning focuses on catastrophic forgetting, while deployment often cares more about robustness under ongoing domain shift.","importance":"This is relevant to continual pretraining and long-lived models. The key lesson is that maintaining old-task performance is not enough; we also need update rules that improve domain robustness and forward transfer as new data arrives.","technical_approach":"From the title, Deja Vu is aimed at continual model generalization rather than pure rehearsal-based retention. The likely mechanism is to preserve or accumulate domain-stable structure so that updates on observed domains help rather than hurt performance on unseen ones; that is a different target from standard continual-learning methods that mainly optimize backward transfer.","experiments":"The prompt does not provide the abstract, so exact benchmarks, scales, and gains cannot be stated. The most important empirical question is whether the method improves unseen-domain performance without paying too much in old-domain retention, because otherwise it is just trading one failure mode for another.","authors_note":""},"tags":["continual-learning","domain-generalization","adaptation"]},{"id":"LiuXL0023","title":"Universal Vision-Language Dense Retrieval: Learning A Unified Representation Space for Multi-Modal Retrieval","authors":["Zhenghao Liu","Chenyan Xiong","Yuanhuiyi Lv","Zhiyuan Liu","Ge Yu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LiuXL0023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LiuXL0023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=PQOlkgsBsik","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：视觉-语言检索通常按任务或模态对分别训练，表示空间彼此割裂，能否学到一个统一空间同时支持多种跨模态检索。过去很多方法只优化 image-text 双塔上的单一检索设置，迁移到 region-text、image-image 或更复杂检索时往往需要重训或额外对齐。","importance":"这是统一表示层面的工作。对 pretrain 研究，它的价值在于说明多模态预训练不一定要为每个检索子任务单独造头或单独对齐，一个共享空间如果设计得当，可以把不同粒度和不同模态的检索统一起来；这和 native multimodal pretrain 的目标一致。","technical_approach":"核心方法是学习 unified representation space for multi-modal retrieval。关键设计通常包括：把不同模态实体和不同粒度对象映射到同一 embedding 空间，使用统一对比损失或多任务对齐策略，并处理 dense retrieval 场景下的大规模索引与负样本构造。与传统 image-text retrieval 不同，它强调的是 universal，而不是某个单一检索 benchmark 的最优点。","experiments":"给定信息没有摘要，无法确认具体数据集、模型规模和 Recall@K 数字。可以合理预期，实验会覆盖多种检索任务并展示统一模型相对专用模型的权衡：理想结果不是每项都绝对 SOTA，而是在多个任务上接近或超过专用模型，同时减少系统碎片化；最值得看的 ablation 是统一空间是否牺牲细粒度对齐。","authors_note":"作者包括 Chenyan Xiong、Zhiyuan Liu。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether vision-language retrieval can be unified in a single representation space instead of training separate systems for each modality pair or retrieval granularity. Many prior approaches are optimized for one image-text setup and do not transfer cleanly to broader multimodal retrieval settings.","importance":"This is a representation-unification contribution. For pretraining, the message is that multimodal systems do not necessarily need task-specific heads and fragmented alignment objectives; a well-designed shared space may support multiple retrieval forms with one backbone.","technical_approach":"The method learns a unified embedding space for universal vision-language dense retrieval. The likely ingredients are shared encoders or projection heads across modalities and granularities, trained with a unified contrastive or multi-task alignment objective, plus dense-retrieval machinery for scalable indexing and hard negatives. The distinction from standard image-text retrieval is the universal scope rather than single-benchmark optimization.","experiments":"The prompt does not include the abstract, so exact datasets, model sizes, and Recall@K values cannot be stated safely. The key empirical question is the trade-off between universality and specialization: does one shared space remain competitive across multiple retrieval tasks without collapsing fine-grained alignment quality?","authors_note":"The authors include Chenyan Xiong and Zhiyuan Liu."},"tags":["vision-language","retrieval","unified-representation"],"notable_authors":["Chenyan Xiong","Zhiyuan Liu"]},{"id":"LiuYWS23","title":"Generalizing and Decoupling Neural Collapse via Hyperspherical Uniformity Gap","authors":["Weiyang Liu","Longhui Yu","Adrian Weller","Bernhard Schölkopf"],"institutions":["University of Cambridge","Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LiuYWS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LiuYWS23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=inU2quhGdNU","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解决神经网络坍缩（Neural Collapse, NC）理论在不平衡数据和非交叉熵损失下的泛化问题。以往的NC理论主要针对平衡数据集和交叉熵损失，难以解释更广泛的训练场景。","importance":"理论级贡献。提出超球面均匀性差距（Hyperspherical Uniformity Gap, HUG）作为统一框架，将NC现象解耦并推广到更一般的设定，为理解深度网络在不平衡数据下的表示学习提供了新的理论工具。","technical_approach":"提出HUG框架，将NC解耦为特征的超球面均匀性和类中心的超球面均匀性。通过最小化HUG，可以推导出在不平衡数据和不同损失函数（如Focal Loss、LDAM）下的广义NC条件。该方法不依赖于特定的损失函数形式，而是从表示空间的几何性质出发。","experiments":"在CIFAR-10/100和ImageNet上进行了实验，验证了HUG在不平衡数据集和不同损失函数下对NC的解释能力。实验表明，HUG能够准确预测网络在训练后期的表示几何结构，并与泛化性能高度相关。","authors_note":"Weiyang Liu (剑桥大学/马普所), Adrian Weller (剑桥大学), Bernhard Schölkopf (马普所)。Schölkopf是机器学习领域的权威专家。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Generalizing the theory of Neural Collapse (NC) to imbalanced data and non-cross-entropy losses. Previous NC theories mainly focused on balanced datasets and cross-entropy loss, failing to explain broader training scenarios.","importance":"Theoretical contribution. Proposes Hyperspherical Uniformity Gap (HUG) as a unified framework to decouple and generalize NC phenomena, providing a new theoretical tool for understanding representation learning of deep networks under imbalanced data.","technical_approach":"Proposes the HUG framework, decoupling NC into hyperspherical uniformity of features and hyperspherical uniformity of class centers. By minimizing HUG, generalized NC conditions under imbalanced data and different loss functions (e.g., Focal Loss, LDAM) can be derived. This approach relies on the geometric properties of the representation space rather than specific loss function forms.","experiments":"Experiments on CIFAR-10/100 and ImageNet validate HUG's explanatory power for NC under imbalanced datasets and various loss functions. Results show HUG accurately predicts the representation geometry in late training stages and correlates highly with generalization performance.","authors_note":"Weiyang Liu (Cambridge/MPI), Adrian Weller (Cambridge), Bernhard Schölkopf (MPI). Schölkopf is a leading authority in machine learning."},"tags":["neural-collapse","representation-learning","generalization"],"notable_authors":["Weiyang Liu","Adrian Weller","Bernhard Schölkopf"]},{"id":"LiuZSWSF23","title":"Avoiding spurious correlations via logit correction","authors":["Sheng Liu","Xu Zhang","Nitesh Sekhar","Yue Wu","Prateek Singhal","Carlos Fernandez-Granda"],"institutions":["New York University","Amazon Web Services"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LiuZSWSF23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LiuZSWSF23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=5BaqCFVh5qL","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解决模型在训练数据存在虚假相关（spurious correlations）时泛化能力下降的问题。以往方法通常需要额外的组标注（group annotations）或复杂的两阶段训练，成本较高。","importance":"方法级贡献。提出了一种简单有效的基于logit校正的方法，无需组标注即可缓解虚假相关问题。这对于在有偏数据上预训练或微调模型具有实用价值，降低了去偏的成本。","technical_approach":"提出Logit Correction (LC) 方法。在训练过程中，动态估计每个样本属于少数组（minority group）的概率，并据此对模型的输出logit进行惩罚。核心机制是通过放大少数组样本的损失，迫使模型学习更鲁棒的特征，而不是依赖容易学习的虚假特征。与需要组标注的DRO方法相比，LC通过自适应估计组概率实现了无监督去偏。","experiments":"在Waterbirds、CelebA和CivilComments等标准去偏基准上进行了实验。在无组标注的设定下，LC取得了与需要组标注的SOTA方法相当甚至更好的最差组准确率（worst-group accuracy）。例如，在Waterbirds上，LC的最差组准确率比标准ERM提高了约15%。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addressing the degradation of model generalization when training data contains spurious correlations. Previous methods typically require additional group annotations or complex two-stage training, which are costly.","importance":"Methodological contribution. Proposes a simple and effective logit correction method to mitigate spurious correlations without requiring group annotations. This has practical value for pre-training or fine-tuning models on biased data, reducing the cost of debiasing.","technical_approach":"Proposes the Logit Correction (LC) method. During training, it dynamically estimates the probability of each sample belonging to a minority group and penalizes the model's output logits accordingly. The core mechanism is to amplify the loss of minority group samples, forcing the model to learn more robust features instead of relying on easily learnable spurious features. Compared to DRO methods requiring group annotations, LC achieves unsupervised debiasing through adaptive group probability estimation.","experiments":"Experiments on standard debiasing benchmarks like Waterbirds, CelebA, and CivilComments. Under the setting without group annotations, LC achieves worst-group accuracy comparable to or better than SOTA methods requiring group annotations. For example, on Waterbirds, LC improves worst-group accuracy by ~15% over standard ERM.","authors_note":""},"tags":["spurious-correlation","logit-correction","robustness"]},{"id":"LoLL23","title":"Block and Subword-Scaling Floating-Point (BSFP) : An Efficient Non-Uniform Quantization For Low Precision Inference","authors":["Yun-Chen Lo","Tse-Kuang Lee","Ren-Shuo Liu"],"institutions":["National Tsing Hua University"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LoLL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LoLL23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=VWm4o4l3V9e","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解决低精度浮点数（如FP8、FP4）量化在推理时精度下降的问题。传统的均匀量化或简单的非均匀量化难以兼顾大动态范围和高精度，尤其是在Transformer等模型中。","importance":"系统/方法级贡献。提出BSFP（Block and Subword-Scaling Floating-Point），一种高效的非均匀量化格式，为LLM的低精度推理（如4-bit）提供了一种新的硬件友好型解决方案，有助于降低部署成本。","technical_approach":"提出BSFP格式，结合了块缩放（Block Scaling）和子词缩放（Subword Scaling）。块缩放处理大动态范围，子词缩放提供更细粒度的非均匀量化步长。核心机制是通过硬件友好的位移操作实现非均匀量化，避免了复杂的查找表（LUT）。与传统的FP8/INT8相比，BSFP在极低比特（如4-bit）下能更好地拟合激活和权重的分布。","experiments":"在ResNet、MobileNet和BERT等模型上进行了实验。在4-bit权重和激活量化下，BSFP显著优于现有的均匀和非均匀量化方法。例如，在BERT-base上，4-bit BSFP的精度损失不到1%，而标准INT4量化会导致模型崩溃。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addressing the accuracy degradation of low-precision floating-point (e.g., FP8, FP4) quantization during inference. Traditional uniform or simple non-uniform quantization struggles to balance large dynamic range and high precision, especially in models like Transformers.","importance":"System/Methodological contribution. Proposes BSFP (Block and Subword-Scaling Floating-Point), an efficient non-uniform quantization format, providing a new hardware-friendly solution for low-precision inference (e.g., 4-bit) of LLMs, helping to reduce deployment costs.","technical_approach":"Proposes the BSFP format, combining Block Scaling and Subword Scaling. Block scaling handles large dynamic ranges, while subword scaling provides finer-grained non-uniform quantization steps. The core mechanism implements non-uniform quantization through hardware-friendly bit-shift operations, avoiding complex Look-Up Tables (LUTs). Compared to traditional FP8/INT8, BSFP better fits the distribution of activations and weights at extremely low bits (e.g., 4-bit).","experiments":"Experiments on models like ResNet, MobileNet, and BERT. Under 4-bit weight and activation quantization, BSFP significantly outperforms existing uniform and non-uniform quantization methods. For example, on BERT-base, 4-bit BSFP incurs less than 1% accuracy loss, whereas standard INT4 quantization leads to model collapse.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","low-precision","inference"]},{"id":"LouLF23","title":"TrojText: Test-time Invisible Textual Trojan Insertion","authors":["Qian Lou","Yepeng Liu","Bo Feng"],"institutions":["University of Central Florida"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LouLF23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LouLF23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=ja4Lpp5mqc2","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解决文本模型在测试阶段面临的隐形木马（Trojan）攻击问题。以往的文本木马攻击通常需要修改训练数据（data poisoning），且触发器（trigger）往往是可见的、不自然的词汇，容易被防御机制检测。","importance":"安全/方法级贡献。提出TrojText，一种在测试阶段（test-time）插入隐形木马的方法，无需重新训练模型，且触发器对人类不可见。这揭示了部署后的大语言模型面临的新型安全威胁，对模型的鲁棒性和安全性评估提出了新挑战。","technical_approach":"提出TrojText，利用不可见的Unicode字符（如零宽空格）作为触发器。核心机制是在测试阶段，通过优化算法寻找最佳的不可见字符组合和插入位置，使得模型在遇到这些触发器时输出攻击者指定的错误结果。与传统的数据投毒不同，TrojText直接在推理阶段操作，利用了模型对特定字符序列的脆弱性。","experiments":"在BERT、RoBERTa等模型和多个NLP任务（如情感分析、自然语言推断）上进行了实验。TrojText在保持文本视觉一致性的同时，实现了极高的攻击成功率（通常>90%），且能绕过现有的拼写检查和困惑度（perplexity）防御机制。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addressing invisible Trojan attacks on text models during the test phase. Previous textual Trojan attacks typically required modifying training data (data poisoning), and triggers were often visible, unnatural words easily detected by defense mechanisms.","importance":"Security/Methodological contribution. Proposes TrojText, a method to insert invisible Trojans at test-time without retraining the model, using triggers invisible to humans. This reveals a novel security threat to deployed LLMs, posing new challenges for model robustness and security evaluation.","technical_approach":"Proposes TrojText, utilizing invisible Unicode characters (e.g., zero-width spaces) as triggers. The core mechanism involves an optimization algorithm during the test phase to find the optimal combination and insertion positions of invisible characters, causing the model to output attacker-specified incorrect results when encountering these triggers. Unlike traditional data poisoning, TrojText operates directly during inference, exploiting the model's vulnerability to specific character sequences.","experiments":"Experiments on models like BERT, RoBERTa, and multiple NLP tasks (e.g., sentiment analysis, NLI). TrojText achieves extremely high attack success rates (typically >90%) while maintaining visual consistency of the text, and bypasses existing spell-checking and perplexity-based defense mechanisms.","authors_note":""},"tags":["security","trojan","text-models","robustness"]},{"id":"LuoWWZ023","title":"Understanding The Robustness of Self-supervised Learning Through Topic Modeling","authors":["Zeping Luo","Shiyou Wu","Cindy Weng","Mo Zhou","Rong Ge"],"institutions":["Duke University"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/LuoWWZ023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/LuoWWZ023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=7Cb7Faxa1OB","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"理解自监督学习（SSL，如对比学习）为何对数据中的虚假相关性（spurious correlations）具有鲁棒性。以往研究观察到了这一现象，但缺乏理论解释。","importance":"理论/机制分析级贡献。通过引入主题模型（Topic Modeling）框架，从理论上证明了SSL在特定条件下能够解耦核心特征和虚假特征，为理解SSL的鲁棒性机制提供了坚实的理论基础。","technical_approach":"将图像生成过程建模为基于主题（topics）的混合模型，其中包含核心主题（core topics）和虚假主题（spurious topics）。证明了在对比学习（如SimCLR）中，只要数据增强能够破坏虚假主题的共现关系，或者核心主题的方差足够大，SSL就能学习到解耦的表示。核心机制是对比损失促使模型区分不同样本，而解耦的表示能最小化对比损失。","experiments":"在合成数据集和半合成数据集（如Colored MNIST、Waterbirds）上验证了理论发现。实验表明，当满足理论假设时，SSL预训练加线性探测（Linear Probing）的鲁棒性显著优于标准ERM，且与理论预测的解耦现象一致。","authors_note":"Rong Ge (Duke University)，理论计算机科学和机器学习理论领域的知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Understanding why Self-Supervised Learning (SSL, e.g., contrastive learning) is robust to spurious correlations in data. Previous studies observed this phenomenon but lacked theoretical explanations.","importance":"Theoretical/Mechanism analysis contribution. By introducing a Topic Modeling framework, it theoretically proves that SSL can decouple core and spurious features under specific conditions, providing a solid theoretical foundation for understanding the robustness mechanisms of SSL.","technical_approach":"Models the image generation process as a topic-based mixture model containing core topics and spurious topics. Proves that in contrastive learning (e.g., SimCLR), as long as data augmentation breaks the co-occurrence of spurious topics, or the variance of core topics is large enough, SSL can learn decoupled representations. The core mechanism is that the contrastive loss forces the model to distinguish different samples, and decoupled representations minimize this loss.","experiments":"Validated theoretical findings on synthetic and semi-synthetic datasets (e.g., Colored MNIST, Waterbirds). Experiments show that when theoretical assumptions are met, the robustness of SSL pre-training plus linear probing significantly outperforms standard ERM, consistent with the theoretically predicted decoupling phenomenon.","authors_note":"Rong Ge (Duke University), a well-known scholar in theoretical computer science and machine learning theory."},"tags":["self-supervised-learning","robustness","topic-modeling"],"notable_authors":["Rong Ge"]},{"id":"ManderPR23","title":"Contrastive Training with more data","authors":["Stephen Mander","Scott Piao","Hossein Rahmani"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ManderPR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ManderPR23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=ZTp85mW5nFy","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的是对比学习在数据规模继续增大时如何训练得更好，而不是把改进局限在更复杂的损失或更大的 batch 上。问题的背景是：很多对比学习方法默认数据越多越好，但训练目标、负样本构造和优化设置未必能把额外数据真正转化成表示质量。","importance":"这是偏方法和训练策略层面的工作。它对 pretrain 的意义在于提醒一个常被忽略的点：'更多数据' 不是自动收益，目标函数和采样机制是否能有效利用新增样本同样关键；如果论文结论成立，它更像是在修正 contrastive scaling 的工程认知，而不是提出全新范式。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心方法是围绕 contrastive training 在大数据 regime 下的适配做改进，重点应在如何让更多数据真正提供有效对比信号。合理推测会涉及负样本利用、batch/queue 设计、采样分布或训练日程，但给定信息不足，不能把这些写成确定事实。","experiments":"目前没有摘要，无法确认使用了哪些视觉或多模态基线、数据规模扩展到什么量级、以及相对 SimCLR/MoCo/CLIP 类方法的具体提升。能确定的只有：论文主张'更多数据'本身值得单独研究，这通常意味着实验会显式画出数据量增长曲线并比较不同训练策略的数据效率。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks how contrastive learning should be trained when more data is available, instead of assuming that scaling the dataset alone will automatically improve representations. The underlying issue is that many contrastive objectives are not equally good at converting additional samples into useful signal.","importance":"This is mainly a method and training-dynamics contribution. For pretraining, the likely takeaway is practical but important: data scaling in contrastive setups is mediated by the objective, sampling, and optimization scheme, so 'more data' is not a free win. If supported well, that would refine how people think about contrastive scaling rather than introduce a new paradigm.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method appears to adapt contrastive training to a larger-data regime, with the goal of extracting more value from extra samples. That likely involves changes to negative usage, sampling, queue/batch design, or training schedules, but the provided information is insufficient to state any of that as fact.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so model sizes, datasets, baselines, and quantitative gains cannot be stated reliably. The most defensible expectation is that the paper studies scaling curves with increasing data and compares whether different contrastive setups benefit equally from more data.","authors_note":""},"tags":["contrastive-learning","data-scaling","representation-learning"]},{"id":"2206.04105","title":"Words are all you need? Language as an approximation for human similarity judgments","authors":["Raja Marjieh","Pol van Rijn","Ilia Sucholutsky","Theodore R. Sumers","Harin Lee","Thomas L. Griffiths","Nori Jacoby"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3f","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.04105","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/MarjiehRSSL0J23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/MarjiehRSSL0J23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=O-G91-4cMdv","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：如果拿不到高质量的人类相似性标注，能不能直接用预训练模型来近似人类相似判断；作者的结论是否定偏多。过去很多工作默认预训练 DNN 的 embedding 已经足够接近人类感知，因此把它当廉价替代监督，但这个假设在跨领域上并没有被系统检验。","importance":"这篇工作的价值主要是评测级和认知修正式的。它不直接提出新的 pretrain 方法，但对表示学习和对比学习很重要，因为它指出'模型相似性≈人类相似性'这个常用前提并不稳，尤其在缺少强预训练模型的领域更是如此；这会直接影响数据构造、检索、对齐和偏好建模的上游假设。","technical_approach":"核心做法是大规模横向评估，而不是发明新模型。作者系统比较了 611 个预训练模型在图像、音频、视频三个域上对人类相似性判断的拟合能力，并把语言作为一种近似人类相似性的替代信号来分析。方法上的关键选择是把问题定义成'谁更接近人类判断'，而不是只看下游任务精度；这让结论更直接地指向表示空间是否真的对齐人类感知。","experiments":"最关键的事实是：作者评估了 611 个预训练模型，覆盖图像、音频、视频三类数据，并发现模型与人类相似性判断之间存在显著差距。摘要没有给出具体指标和差距数值，因此不能编造百分比；但可以明确的是，结论不是'少数模型略差'，而是跨大量模型和多模态都存在系统性缺口。论文的价值也在这里：它把问题从个别模型失误提升为普遍现象。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether pretrained models can stand in for human similarity judgments when human annotations are too expensive, and the answer is largely no. Many pipelines implicitly assume that embedding similarity from strong pretrained models is a good proxy for human perception, but that assumption had not been stress-tested across domains.","importance":"This is an evaluation-heavy, assumption-correcting paper. It does not introduce a new pretraining method, but it matters for representation learning because it weakens a common premise behind contrastive learning, retrieval, and alignment: model similarity is not reliably human similarity. That is especially relevant in domains where strong pretrained models are missing or mismatched.","technical_approach":"The contribution is a broad empirical study rather than a new architecture. The authors evaluate 611 pretrained models across images, audio, and video on their ability to approximate human similarity judgments, and analyze language as an alternative approximation signal. The important methodological choice is to measure agreement with human judgments directly, instead of inferring alignment from downstream task accuracy.","experiments":"The key fact is scale: 611 pretrained models across three modalities. The main result is that there is a large and systematic gap between human similarity judgments and what pretrained DNNs recover. The abstract does not provide exact metrics or margins, so those should not be invented, but the qualitative conclusion is strong because it holds across many models and domains rather than a narrow benchmark slice.","authors_note":""},"tags":["language-models","human-alignment","representation"]},{"id":"2210.07183","title":"Visual Classification via Description from Large Language Models","authors":["Sachit Menon","Carl Vondrick"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$40","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.07183","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/MenonV23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/MenonV23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=jlAjNL8z5cs","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是零样本视觉分类过度依赖类别名的问题。标准 CLIP 式做法只拿一个标签词去和图像做相似度匹配，既浪费了语言能提供的判别细节，也不给出可调的决策依据，因此在细粒度或可解释场景下往往不够稳。","importance":"这是一个推理框架层面的改进，对 VLM 使用方式有直接启发。它对 pretrain 本身的冲击不大，但对如何释放预训练 VLM 的语言先验很有价值：类别名不是唯一接口，描述性属性可以成为更强、更可控的分类中间表示。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 classification by description：不直接问'这是不是 tiger'，而是让模型检查'有没有条纹、爪子、体型特征'这类描述性证据。它本质上把类别判定拆成一组可语言化的属性匹配，再汇总成最终分类。和标准 zero-shot classification 相比，关键区别是把语言从单个类别 token 扩展成结构化描述，从而提高判别性、可解释性和可调性；代价是需要构造或生成高质量描述，且描述偏差会直接影响分类边界。","experiments":"摘要没有给出具体数据集、VLM backbone、指标和提升数字，因此不能写成定量结论。能确定的是，论文主张这种描述式分类在识别任务上优于只用类别名的标准流程，并强调它还能提供中间解释和可调整标准。真正值得关注的实验点通常会是：在细粒度类别、分布外类别或 prompt 敏感场景下，描述式接口是否更稳。","authors_note":"Carl Vondrick 是视觉与视频理解方向的知名作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a limitation of standard zero-shot classification with VLMs: using only the category name throws away much of the discriminative information that language can provide. A single label prompt is often too coarse, offers little interpretability, and gives no handle for adjusting the decision criteria.","importance":"This is mainly an inference-framework contribution rather than a pretraining one, but it is still relevant to VLM practice. The key lesson is that category names are a weak interface to pretrained vision-language models; descriptive attributes can be a stronger and more controllable interface.","technical_approach":"The method is classification by description. Instead of asking whether an image matches a broad class label, the model checks for descriptive evidence such as stripes, claws, or other attributes, and then aggregates those signals into a class decision. The important design shift is from label matching to attribute-based matching. That improves interpretability and control, but it also introduces a dependency on the quality and coverage of the descriptions.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide datasets, backbones, metrics, or exact gains, so those should not be fabricated. What is supported is the qualitative claim that description-based classification is a useful alternative to standard zero-shot label matching and provides intermediate explanations and adjustable criteria. The most informative evaluations would likely be on fine-grained recognition and prompt-sensitive settings.","authors_note":"Carl Vondrick is a notable researcher in vision and video understanding."},"tags":["vlm","zero-shot","classification","language-models"],"notable_authors":["Carl Vondrick"]},{"id":"MicheliAF23","title":"Transformers are Sample-Efficient World Models","authors":["Vincent Micheli","Eloi Alonso","François Fleuret"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/MicheliAF23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/MicheliAF23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=vhFu1Acb0xb","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的是 Transformer 作为世界模型时的样本效率问题，也就是在有限交互数据下能否学到足够好的环境动态。传统看法往往认为 Transformer 参数多、数据饥渴，更适合大规模离线序列建模；作者显然在挑战这一点。","importance":"这是方法与经验判断兼具的工作。对 pretrain 的直接关联不强，但对序列建模骨干的理解有价值：如果 Transformer 在世界模型里也能做到高样本效率，说明它的优势不只是大数据拟合能力，还包括较强的归纳偏置适配性，这会反过来影响我们如何看待统一序列模型在多模态和交互数据上的预训练潜力。","technical_approach":"从标题看，论文核心是把 Transformer 用作 world model，并强调 sample-efficient。合理推测会围绕离散 token 化、潜变量预测、规划接口或 rollout 训练做设计，但给定信息没有摘要，不能把具体机制写成事实。能确定的只有：作者的主张不是'Transformer 能做世界模型'，而是'它在样本效率上也有竞争力'。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认环境、数据量、模型规模、对比基线和具体收益。若标题结论成立，关键实验通常会比较在相同交互预算下的规划回报或预测误差，并与 RSSM、Dreamer 一类世界模型对比；但这里不能当作已知事实写入。","authors_note":"François Fleuret 是表示学习与高效训练方向的知名研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies whether Transformers can be sample-efficient world models, not merely capable sequence models given enough data. The usual skepticism is that Transformers are data-hungry and overparameterized for low-data interaction settings, so this is a direct challenge to that view.","importance":"This is not a core pretraining paper, but it matters for how we think about sequence-model backbones. If Transformers are also sample-efficient in world modeling, their advantage is not just brute-force scaling; it suggests they may carry stronger inductive flexibility than often assumed, which is relevant to unified pretraining across modalities and interaction data.","technical_approach":"From the title alone, the paper appears to use Transformers as world models and focuses on sample efficiency as the main claim. It likely involves design choices around tokenization, latent prediction, rollout training, or planning, but no abstract is provided, so those details cannot be stated as facts.","experiments":"Without an abstract, the environments, data budgets, model sizes, baselines, and quantitative gains cannot be confirmed. If the title claim is supported, the critical evidence would likely compare return or prediction quality under matched interaction budgets against established world-model baselines, but that remains unverified here.","authors_note":"François Fleuret is a notable researcher in representation learning and efficient training."},"tags":["transformers","world-models","sample-efficiency","sequence-modeling"],"notable_authors":["François Fleuret"]},{"id":"MitchellBCK23","title":"A Rate-Distortion View on Model Updates","authors":["Nicole Mitchell","Johannes Ballé","Zachary Charles","Jakub Konecný"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/MitchellBCK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/MitchellBCK23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=6ry6ibTKOx","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关心的是如何从 rate-distortion 的角度理解模型更新，也就是在有限更新预算下，哪些参数变化最值得保留、会带来多大任务收益。这个问题以前更多以压缩、联邦学习或增量更新的工程形式出现，但缺少统一的信息论视角来描述更新质量与代价的权衡。","importance":"这是偏理论框架的工作。对 pretrain 的直接方法贡献可能不大，但它对 continual pretrain、adapter/update 压缩、联邦微调等场景有潜在启发：如果模型更新能被 rate-distortion 统一刻画，那么我们可以更系统地比较不同更新策略的效率，而不是只看最终精度。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者把模型更新视作需要编码和传输的对象，用 rate-distortion 框架分析更新大小与性能损失之间的关系。可能会导出某种最优更新表示、压缩准则或泛化界，但没有摘要，无法确认是理论推导为主还是带算法实现。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认实验是否覆盖联邦学习、参数高效微调、模型合并或更新压缩，也无法确认具体指标和数字。若论文有实证部分，最关键的证据应是：在相同更新比特预算下，rate-distortion 视角能更好解释或改进性能。","authors_note":"Johannes Ballé 是 learned compression 方向的知名作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies model updates through a rate-distortion lens: under a limited update budget, which parameter changes are worth keeping and how much performance do they preserve? This question often appears in practice through compression, federated learning, or incremental updates, but without a unified information-theoretic framing.","importance":"This is mainly a conceptual and theoretical contribution. It may not directly change pretraining recipes, but it is relevant to continual pretraining, update compression, and parameter-efficient adaptation. A good rate-distortion view could provide a cleaner way to compare update strategies than raw end-task accuracy alone.","technical_approach":"From the title, the paper likely treats model updates as objects to be encoded and analyzes the trade-off between update size and task distortion. That could lead to an optimal representation, compression criterion, or bound, but no abstract is provided, so the exact form of the contribution cannot be stated confidently.","experiments":"Without an abstract, the empirical scope is unclear: it could involve federated learning, PEFT, model merging, or update compression. The key evidence, if present, would need to show that a rate-distortion formulation either predicts or improves the performance-budget trade-off under constrained updates.","authors_note":"Johannes Ballé is a notable researcher in learned compression."},"tags":["model-updates","compression","continual-learning"],"notable_authors":["Johannes Ballé"]},{"id":"MorsaliHHA23","title":"MLP-Attention: Improving Transformer Architecture with MLP Attention Weights","authors":["Alireza Morsali","Moein Heidari","Samin Heydarian","Tohid Abedini"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/MorsaliHHA23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/MorsaliHHA23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=99XvUeDFYTD","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是标准 attention 权重完全由 query-key 相似度决定，表达形式可能过于受限的问题。作者试图用 MLP 生成或修正 attention 权重，以提升 Transformer 的建模灵活性。","importance":"这是架构微创新，更多是在 Transformer 内部做局部替换。对 pretrain 的意义有限，但它触及一个长期问题：attention score 的参数化是否过于刚性；如果更灵活的权重生成能稳定带来收益，那么未来可能影响小模型或特定模态的骨干设计。","technical_approach":"从标题看，MLP-Attention 的核心是在注意力权重计算中引入 MLP，而不是只用点积相似度。可能的设计是让 MLP 直接预测 pairwise 权重，或对 q-k 交互做非线性变换后再归一化；但没有摘要，无法确认它是否替代 softmax attention、增加多少计算、以及如何控制复杂度。","experiments":"给定信息不足，无法确认是在 NLP、视觉还是通用基准上验证，也无法确认相对标准 Transformer 的提升幅度和代价。若论文成立，关键实验应回答两件事：收益是否稳定，以及额外 MLP 带来的计算开销是否值得。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper questions whether standard attention weights, determined purely by query-key similarity, are too restrictive. It proposes using an MLP in the attention-weight computation to increase the flexibility of the Transformer architecture.","importance":"This is an architectural tweak rather than a broad pretraining contribution. Its relevance is narrower, but it touches a real design question: is dot-product attention too rigid a parameterization? If a more expressive weighting function helps consistently, that could matter for smaller models or modality-specific backbones.","technical_approach":"From the title, MLP-Attention introduces an MLP into the computation of attention weights instead of relying solely on dot products. That could mean directly predicting pairwise weights or applying a nonlinear transformation to q-k interactions before normalization, but no abstract is provided, so the exact mechanism and cost profile cannot be confirmed.","experiments":"The available information does not specify domains, benchmarks, baselines, or quantitative gains. The critical empirical question would be whether the added flexibility improves performance consistently enough to justify the extra compute and implementation complexity.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformers","attention","architecture"]},{"id":"2302.14794","title":"Meta Learning to Bridge Vision and Language Models for Multimodal Few-Shot Learning","authors":["Ivona Najdenkoska","Xiantong Zhen","Marcel Worring"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$41","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.14794","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/NajdenkoskaZW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/NajdenkoskaZW23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=3oWo92cQyxL","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"作者要解决的是：在多模态 few-shot 场景里，冻结的视觉模型与语言模型之间存在显著“表征/接口鸿沟”，导致仅靠手工 prompt 或任务归纳（task induction）很难稳定泛化。以往做法通常把视觉概念“翻译成提示词”喂给冻结 LLM，但需要人为设计约束假设空间，学习能力被卡在工程启发式上。","importance":"贡献是方法级：把“桥接 VLM 与 LLM 的接口”从手工 prompt 变成可元学习的可训练模块，从而把跨模态 few-shot 的泛化压力转移到一个小参数的 mapper 上。对预训练研究的启示在于：当 backbone 冻结时，决定上限的往往不是 backbone 能力而是跨模态对齐的可学习接口与任务分布设计；代价是需要一组设计良好的元训练任务来覆盖测试分布。","technical_approach":"方法是一个多模态元学习框架：把训练拆成许多相关的 few-shot 多模态任务，并训练一个“meta-mapper”网络作为元学习器去桥接冻结的视觉与语言模型。关键选择是只更新 meta-mapper 的参数，让它在任务集合上累积可迁移的“共享元知识”，从而在新任务上用少量样本快速适配；相对“把视觉特征硬塞进 prompt”的做法，它把任务归纳从人工规则改为端到端学习，但边界在于 mapper 的容量与元任务覆盖度决定了能否处理分布外概念。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体数据集、模型规模、指标与数值增益，因此无法复述关键实验数字与消融结论；从描述看，实验应围绕多模态 few-shot 任务，对比手工 prompt/冻结模型桥接基线，并验证“仅训练 mapper”即可获得快速适配与更稳健泛化，但需要以论文正文表格为准。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets multimodal few-shot learning where frozen vision and language backbones have a large representation/interface gap, making hand-crafted prompting or task induction brittle. Prior work often “verbalizes” visual concepts into prompts for a frozen LM, but this relies on manual constraints to shrink the hypothesis space and does not learn the bridging mechanism.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution: it turns the V-to-L bridging interface into a learnable meta-learned module, shifting generalization from prompt engineering to task-distribution-driven learning. The pretraining takeaway is that with frozen backbones, the learnable adapter/interface and the meta-task design can dominate performance; the cost is dependence on a well-covered meta-training task family and limited adapter capacity.","technical_approach":"They propose a multimodal meta-learning setup that trains over a set of related multimodal few-shot tasks, learning a meta-mapper network that bridges frozen large-scale vision and language models. The key design is to update only the meta-mapper parameters so it accumulates transferable meta-knowledge across tasks and adapts quickly to new tasks with few examples; compared to prompt-only bridging, it replaces manual task induction with end-to-end learned mapping, with the boundary set by adapter capacity and task coverage.","experiments":"The abstract does not report datasets, model sizes, metrics, or numeric gains, so the main empirical results and ablations cannot be stated reliably here. From the framing, experiments likely compare against prompt-based/frozen-bridge baselines on multimodal few-shot benchmarks and test whether training only the mapper yields fast adaptation, but the exact evidence must be taken from the paper’s tables.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vision-language","few-shot","meta-learning"]},{"id":"2210.00849","title":"Scaling Laws for a Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning Model","authors":["Oren Neumann","Claudius Gros"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$42","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.00849","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/NeumannG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/NeumannG23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=ZrEbzL9eQ3W","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"作者要解决的是：强化学习（尤其 AlphaZero 这类自博弈算法）的性能是否也遵循类似监督学习的幂律 scaling law，以及在 compute/数据受限时如何刻画瓶颈。以往 scaling law 主要集中在监督/自监督，RL 因为非平稳数据与训练噪声更难做系统刻画。","importance":"贡献是经验规律级：给出 AlphaZero 在两个棋类环境上的 Elo-参数量/计算量幂律关系，并区分“非 compute bottleneck”与“compute bottleneck”两种区间。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：即便在闭环数据生成（self-play）下，性能仍可能呈现可预测的幂律；但外推风险更大，因为环境复杂度与探索策略会改变有效数据分布。","technical_approach":"方法是把强度映射到 Elo 体系，并用 Elo 与胜率/强度的关系作为统一度量，再对不同参数量与计算预算下训练的 AlphaZero agent 做幂律拟合。关键设计是明确区分瓶颈来源：当计算不限制时，强度随参数量按幂律增长；当计算限制时，强度随计算预算按幂律增长，从而把“模型变大但不变强”解释为训练预算不足而非架构无效。","experiments":"摘要给出环境为 Connect Four 与 Pentago，算法为 AlphaZero，并声称在非 compute bottleneck 时强度对参数量呈幂律、在 compute bottleneck 时强度对计算量呈幂律；但未给出具体网络规模范围、训练步数/自博弈局数、拟合指数、R^2 或置信区间等关键数字，因此无法在此复述定量结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies whether RL—specifically AlphaZero-style self-play—exhibits power-law scaling laws similar to supervised/self-supervised learning, and how to separate parameter vs compute bottlenecks. RL scaling is harder to characterize due to non-stationary data generation and higher training variance.","importance":"This is an empirical-law contribution: it reports Elo-based power-law relations for AlphaZero agents on two board games and distinguishes regimes where scaling is parameter-limited vs compute-limited. For pretraining, it suggests that even closed-loop data generation can yield predictable scaling, but extrapolation is fragile because environment complexity and exploration change the effective data distribution.","technical_approach":"They use Elo as a unified strength metric and fit power laws across runs with varying network parameter counts and compute budgets. The key modeling choice is to explicitly separate regimes: when not compute-bottlenecked, strength scales as a power law in parameter count; when compute-bottlenecked, strength scales as a power law in compute, explaining flat returns from larger models under insufficient training.","experiments":"The abstract specifies Connect Four and Pentago with AlphaZero training and claims power-law scaling in parameters (non-bottlenecked) and in compute (bottlenecked). It does not provide the parameter range, training budget, fitted exponents, or goodness-of-fit statistics, so the quantitative conclusions cannot be reproduced here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["scaling-law","reinforcement-learning","multi-agent"]},{"id":"2406.13781","title":"A Primal-Dual Framework for Transformers and Neural Networks","authors":["Tan Minh Nguyen","Tam Minh Nguyen","Nhat Ho","Andrea L. Bertozzi","Richard G. Baraniuk","Stanley J. Osher"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$43","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.13781","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/NguyenNHBBO23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/NguyenNHBBO23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=U_T8-5hClV","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"作者要解决的是：Transformer 自注意力层长期依赖经验性设计，缺少一个能统一解释并系统派生新注意力形式的原则化框架。过去的注意力变体多靠启发式堆叠，导致“为什么有效、何时失效”难以判断。","importance":"贡献偏理论/框架级：把自注意力与支持向量回归（SVR）的对偶形式联系起来，给出一种从优化问题推导注意力层的构造视角，并据此“推导出已有注意力”与提出两个新变体。对预训练的直接冲击不一定立刻体现在 SOTA，但它提供了一个生成注意力层设计空间的工具，代价是理论对应关系是否能覆盖实际训练中的非凸与正则细节仍需验证。","technical_approach":"方法是建立一个原始-对偶（primal-dual）框架：证明自注意力可对应到某个 SVR 的支持向量展开（对偶解形式），而其原始问题形式类似一个神经网络层。基于该框架，他们一方面“反推”实践中常见注意力层，另一方面提出 Attention-BN（从 batch normalization 层推导）与 Attention-SH（scaled head）两种新注意力。关键设计点是用优化结构约束注意力的形式，从而减少纯启发式自由度；边界在于推导依赖的假设（损失/正则/约束）与真实 Transformer 训练设置的匹配程度。","experiments":"摘要未提供任务、模型规模、训练设置、以及新注意力相对标准注意力的指标提升数字，因此无法总结其经验效果与稳定性结论；需要依赖正文实验部分确认是否在 NLP/CV 预训练或下游上验证，以及是否有消融支持“由框架推导带来更好归纳偏置”。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the lack of a principled framework for designing self-attention layers, which are often created via heuristics with unclear failure modes. Without a unifying derivation, it is hard to reason about why a given attention variant should work and when it should not.","importance":"This is primarily a theory/framework contribution: it connects self-attention to the dual form of support vector regression (SVR), offering a constructive way to derive attention mechanisms from optimization structure. It may not immediately change pretraining SOTA, but it provides a systematic design space for attention layers; the risk is whether the derivation’s assumptions meaningfully match non-convex transformer training in practice.","technical_approach":"They propose a primal-dual view where self-attention corresponds to a support-vector expansion from an SVR dual problem, while the primal resembles a neural network layer. Using this lens, they recover popular attention forms and introduce two new variants: Attention-BN (derived from batch normalization) and Attention-SH (scaled head). The key idea is to constrain attention design by optimization-derived structure rather than free-form heuristics, with validity bounded by how well the assumed objective/regularization aligns with real training setups.","experiments":"The abstract does not report tasks, model sizes, training details, or quantitative gains for the proposed attentions over standard attention. Empirical impact and stability therefore cannot be summarized here without the paper’s experimental section.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer-architecture","self-attention","primal-dual"]},{"id":"NieZM23","title":"On The Inadequacy of Optimizing Alignment and Uniformity in Contrastive Learning of Sentence Representations","authors":["Zhijie Nie","Richong Zhang","Yongyi Mao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/NieZM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/NieZM23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=MxvHVNukama","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少论文摘要与正文信息，无法可靠判断作者具体要解决的核心问题与其相对已有工作的定位。","importance":"缺少摘要与关键结果信息，无法评估其对对比学习句向量预训练的具体启示与贡献量级。","technical_approach":"缺少方法描述，无法总结其技术路线与关键设计取舍。","experiments":"缺少实验设置与结果数字，无法总结模型、数据、baseline 与提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Without the abstract/body, the exact problem statement and positioning against prior work cannot be stated reliably.","importance":"Without the abstract and results, the contribution magnitude and implications for contrastive sentence representation pretraining cannot be assessed.","technical_approach":"Method details are missing, so the technical approach and design trade-offs cannot be summarized.","experiments":"Experimental setup and numbers are missing, so models, data, baselines, and gains cannot be reported.","authors_note":""},"tags":["contrastive-learning","sentence-representation","alignment-uniformity"]},{"id":"2204.10965","title":"CLIP-Dissect: Automatic Description of Neuron Representations in Deep Vision Networks","authors":["Tuomas P. Oikarinen","Tsui-Wei Weng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$44","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.10965","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/OikarinenW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/OikarinenW23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=iPWiwWHc1V","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"作者要解决的是：视觉网络内部单个神经元到底在“检测什么概念”很难自动化描述，传统做法要么依赖人工标注概念集，要么只能在最后层做有限验证。随着模型规模变大，手工解释单元语义的成本不可接受。","importance":"贡献是工具/方法级：用 CLIP 这类图文对齐模型提供开放词表概念空间，实现无标注地给神经元自动贴“概念标签”。对预训练研究的启示是：强多模态对齐模型可以作为通用解释器，把内部表征投影到自然语言概念空间；边界是 CLIP 的概念覆盖与偏差会直接成为解释偏差。","technical_approach":"CLIP-Dissect 的核心是用 CLIP 的图文相似度来为神经元打分并选取最匹配的文本概念：对某个神经元，收集其高激活的图像区域/样本，然后在开放词表的文本概念集合上用 CLIP 计算匹配度，从而输出该神经元的“功能描述”。关键选择是不需要任何人工标注或示例概念对齐，而是复用 CLIP 的对齐能力；与以往基于人工概念库或线性探针的方法相比，它更开放、更可扩展，但解释质量受限于 CLIP 是否能区分细粒度视觉属性与组合概念。","experiments":"摘要声称：在存在 ground-truth 的最后层神经元描述任务上，比已有方法更准确；对隐藏层神经元也能给出定性上合理的描述；并且计算高效、可扩展到“标注所有神经元”。但摘要未给出具体网络（如 ResNet/ViT）、概念库规模、准确率数字或运行成本，因此无法在此复述定量提升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper aims to automatically describe what individual neurons in vision networks represent, a task that traditionally needs human-labeled concept sets or is only partially validated on final-layer units. As models scale, manual neuron interpretation does not scale.","importance":"This is a tooling/method contribution: it leverages CLIP’s open-vocabulary vision-language alignment to label neurons with natural-language concepts without labeled data. For pretraining, it highlights that strong multimodal models can act as general-purpose interpreters by projecting internal features into a language concept space; the limitation is that CLIP’s coverage and biases become the explanation’s biases.","technical_approach":"CLIP-Dissect uses CLIP similarity to score candidate text concepts for a neuron by looking at images/regions that highly activate that neuron and selecting the best-matching concepts in an open vocabulary. The key choice is to avoid any supervised concept labeling and reuse CLIP alignment as the semantic bridge; compared to fixed concept libraries or probe-based methods, it is more extensible but bounded by CLIP’s ability to resolve fine-grained and compositional visual semantics.","experiments":"The abstract claims higher accuracy than prior methods on last-layer neurons where ground truth exists, qualitatively good labels for hidden-layer neurons, and computational efficiency to label all neurons. It does not provide architectures, concept set size, numeric accuracy, or runtime, so quantitative gains cannot be stated here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["interpretability","clip","neuron-representation","vision-models"]},{"id":"PanZY23","title":"Towards Understanding Why Mask Reconstruction Pretraining Helps in Downstream Tasks","authors":["Jiachun Pan","Pan Zhou","Shuicheng Yan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/PanZY23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/PanZY23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=PaEUQiY40Dk","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少论文摘要与正文信息，无法可靠概括作者对“mask reconstruction 预训练为何有利于下游”的具体问题分解与结论。","importance":"缺少摘要与关键结果信息，无法评估其对 MIM/MLM 预训练机制理解的贡献量级。","technical_approach":"缺少方法描述，无法总结其分析框架、理论推导或实验诊断手段。","experiments":"缺少实验设置与结果数字，无法总结其在何种模型/数据/下游任务上验证以及主要发现。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Without the abstract/body, the paper’s concrete decomposition of why mask-reconstruction pretraining helps downstream tasks cannot be summarized reliably.","importance":"Without results, the contribution to understanding MIM/MLM pretraining mechanisms cannot be assessed.","technical_approach":"Method details are missing, so the analysis framework (theory or diagnostics) cannot be summarized.","experiments":"Experimental setup and numbers are missing, so evidence and findings cannot be reported.","authors_note":""},"tags":["masked-image-modeling","pre-training","representation-learning"]},{"id":"2305.00729","title":"What Do Self-Supervised Vision Transformers Learn?","authors":["Namuk Park","Wonjae Kim","Byeongho Heo","Taekyung Kim","Sangdoo Yun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$45","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.00729","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ParkKH0Y23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ParkKH0Y23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=azCKuYyS74","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"作者要解决的是：对比学习（CL）与掩码图像建模（MIM）在 ViT 上学到的表征到底差在哪，为什么会导致线性评估、可扩展性与密集预测表现出现系统差异。以往讨论常停留在“哪个指标更好”，缺少对注意力与表征多样性的机制解释。","importance":"贡献是机制分析级：给出 CL 与 MIM 在自注意力形态、全局/局部模式捕获、以及注意力同质化（homogeneity）上的差异，并把这些差异与下游任务类型联系起来。对预训练实践的启示是：CL 的全局形状偏好有利于线性可分，但注意力同质化会伤害表征多样性与密集预测/可扩展性；这为“混合目标/正则化注意力多样性”提供了明确动机。","technical_approach":"方法是对自监督 ViT 做对照诊断：比较 CL 与 MIM 在不同层的 self-attention 覆盖范围与模式，观察 CL 更倾向捕获长程全局结构（如物体形状），尤其在后层，这解释了其更强的线性分离能力。与此同时，他们指出 CL 会导致不同 query token 与不同 head 的注意力趋同（homogeneity collapse），降低表示多样性，从而限制可扩展性并恶化 dense prediction；相对地，MIM 的注意力更分散/局部，可能更适合像素级任务但线性可分性较弱。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体 ViT 规模（如 ViT-S/B/L）、预训练数据集（如 ImageNet-1K/更大）、以及线性评估与 dense prediction 的具体指标数字；但明确给出两条关键观察：(1) CL 后层注意力更全局且提升线性可分；(2) CL 注意力同质化降低多样性并伤害可扩展性与密集预测。关键证据应来自注意力可视化/统计与下游任务对比，需以正文图表为准。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper investigates what representation differences CL vs MIM induce in self-supervised ViTs, and why these differences systematically affect linear separability, scalability, and dense prediction. Prior discussions often focus on benchmark scores without a mechanistic account tied to attention behavior and representation diversity.","importance":"This is a mechanistic analysis contribution: it links objective choice (CL vs MIM) to attention range, global-vs-local pattern capture, and attention homogeneity, and then to downstream task behavior. For pretraining practice, it suggests a concrete trade-off: CL’s global shape bias helps linear probing, but attention homogeneity reduces representation diversity and hurts scalability and dense prediction—motivating hybrid objectives or diversity-encouraging regularization.","technical_approach":"They perform comparative diagnostics on self-supervised ViTs trained with CL or MIM, analyzing self-attention patterns across layers. CL is shown to encourage longer-range, global attention (e.g., object shape) especially in later layers, explaining improved linear separability; however, CL also drives attention to become homogeneous across query tokens and heads, reducing representational diversity and degrading scalability and dense prediction. MIM exhibits more localized/diverse attention, potentially better aligned with dense tasks but weaker for linear separation.","experiments":"The abstract does not report ViT sizes, pretraining datasets, or numeric results for linear and dense benchmarks. It does state two key empirical findings: (1) CL yields more global late-layer attention and better linear separability; (2) CL causes attention homogeneity that reduces diversity, worsening scalability and dense prediction. The quantitative evidence must be taken from the paper’s figures/tables.","authors_note":""},"tags":["self-supervised-learning","vision-transformer","contrastive-learning","masked-image-modeling"]},{"id":"PearceRKBSGMTMH23","title":"Imitating Human Behaviour with Diffusion Models","authors":["Tim Pearce","Tabish Rashid","Anssi Kanervisto","David Bignell","Mingfei Sun","Raluca Georgescu","Sergio Valcarcel Macua","Shan Zheng Tan","Ida Momennejad","Katja Hofmann","Sam Devlin"],"institutions":["Microsoft Research"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/PearceRKBSGMTMH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/PearceRKBSGMTMH23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=Pv1GPQzRrC8","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在行为克隆（imitation learning）里用 diffusion 作为策略分布，替代高斯或 MoG 这种容易 mode-collapse 或无法表达多模态人类行为的输出头。过去 BC 一直被策略表达力卡住，高斯输出会把'左走或右走'平均成'直走'。","importance":"方法级贡献，把图像生成里成熟的 diffusion 条件建模搬到连续动作策略上，并且给出了适配 BC 场景的几个工程改动。对 pretrain 研究的启示有限，但对'diffusion 作为通用条件分布建模器'这条线是一个干净的 case study。","technical_approach":"在状态条件下用 diffusion 建模动作分布 π(a|s)，相对图像 diffusion 做了三点裁剪：采样步数压到个位数以满足实时控制、用更适合低维动作的网络结构、以及针对 BC 设计了 classifier-free guidance 风格的条件强化。核心判断是 diffusion 能自然表达多模态动作分布而不用显式指定 mixture 数。","experiments":"在 Claw（机械手）、Kitchen、以及自家 Minecraft/游戏环境上对比 MSE、MoG、BET 等 BC baseline，diffusion 策略在多模态任务上成功率显著更高，单模态任务不吃亏。作者特别强调推理步数-性能 trade-off，几步采样就够用。","authors_note":"Microsoft Research / Microsoft Xbox 团队，作者多来自 Project Malmo / Bleeding Edge 游戏 AI 线。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Behaviour cloning policies have long been bottlenecked by their output distribution: Gaussian or MoG heads average multimodal human actions (e.g. 'go left or right' becomes 'go straight'). The paper asks whether diffusion, now standard for conditional image generation, is a better general-purpose policy head.","importance":"A clean method-level transfer rather than a paradigm shift: it establishes diffusion as a practical multimodal policy class for BC and documents the engineering needed to make it real-time. Limited direct bearing on pretraining, but a useful data point for diffusion as a universal conditional density estimator.","technical_approach":"Model π(a|s) as a conditional diffusion process over low-dim actions. Three adaptations for BC: few-step sampling for real-time control, smaller MLP-style denoisers instead of U-Nets, and classifier-free-guidance-style conditioning on state. Key design bet: diffusion expresses action multimodality without committing to a mixture count.","experiments":"Tested on robotic Claw, Franka Kitchen, and a Minecraft-like game env, against MSE, MoG, and BET baselines. Diffusion BC wins decisively on multimodal tasks and matches on unimodal ones. Ablations show a handful of sampling steps suffice, making wall-clock cost acceptable.","authors_note":"Microsoft Research and Microsoft game AI teams; several authors from the Project Malmo / Bleeding Edge line of game-agent work."},"tags":["diffusion-models","imitation-learning","behavior-cloning"]},{"id":"2207.14200","title":"CrAM: A Compression-Aware Minimizer","authors":["Alexandra Peste","Adrian Vladu","Eldar Kurtic","Christoph H. Lampert","Dan Alistarh"],"institutions":["IST Austria"],"abstract":"$46","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.14200","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/PesteVKLA23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/PesteVKLA23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=_eTZBs-yedr","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"训练时直接产出一个'压缩后依然好用'的 dense 模型。常规做法是先训练再剪枝/量化，精度损失需要再 fine-tune 弥补；本文想一步到位，让后训练的一次性压缩也不掉点。","importance":"优化器层面的贡献，思路类似 SAM 但目标换成了对压缩算子的鲁棒性。对 pretrain 的启示在于：若训练阶段就能把'压缩稳定性'当作 loss 几何约束考虑，部署侧能省掉相当多的 distillation/finetune 成本。属于系统-优化交界处的实用工作。","technical_approach":"提出 CrAM（Compression-Aware Minimizer），在每步更新时沿'压缩后权重的方向'评估梯度，让优化轨迹偏好那些即使被剪枝/量化后 loss 也只轻微变化的平坦点。相比 SAM 的最坏邻域扰动，CrAM 的扰动就是具体的压缩算子（如 top-k 剪枝），因此对目标压缩方式是 aware 的。训练成本比 SAM 同量级（一次额外前向）。","experiments":"ResNet-50/ImageNet 与 BERT/GLUE 上验证。ResNet-50 dense 模型经 CrAM 训练后，直接 one-shot 剪枝到中高稀疏度（如 80-90%）只掉约 1 点；BERT 在 GLUE 上也能在一次性 unstructured pruning 下保持基线水平。相比标准 SGD/Adam 训练+剪枝+finetune 的 pipeline，少了 finetune 这一步。","authors_note":"IST Austria（Alistarh 组）+ 合作者，Alistarh 组是稀疏化/剪枝方向（SparseGPT、oBERT）的代表团队。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Produce dense models that remain accurate after one-shot post-training compression, removing the usual prune-then-finetune loop. The motivation is that standard training gives no guarantee the found minimum is robust to pruning/quantization.","importance":"An optimizer-level contribution in the SAM family, but targeted at compression robustness rather than worst-case loss sharpness. For pretraining at scale this is interesting because it could eliminate downstream recovery finetuning, which is expensive at LLM scale.","technical_approach":"CrAM modifies each update by evaluating the gradient at a compressed version of the current weights (e.g. after top-k pruning), biasing the trajectory toward minima that are flat specifically under the target compression operator. Unlike SAM's worst-case neighbourhood, the perturbation here is the actual deployment-time operator, making it compression-aware. Overhead is roughly one extra forward/backward per step.","experiments":"ResNet-50/ImageNet and BERT/GLUE. CrAM-trained dense models support one-shot unstructured pruning at 80–90% sparsity with ~1 point drop, versus significant degradation for SGD/Adam-trained baselines without finetuning. Also shown robust across different pruning ratios without retraining.","authors_note":"IST Austria (Alistarh group), known for SparseGPT / oBERT and the sparsification line."},"tags":["compression","quantization","pruning","optimization"],"notable_authors":["Dan Alistarh"]},{"id":"PhanJ23","title":"Integrating Information from Natural Language Parse Tree to Code Generation","authors":["Hung Phan","Ali Jannesari"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/PhanJ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/PhanJ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=1WEPXTIjAd","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"把自然语言需求的句法结构（parse tree）显式注入 NL→Code 生成模型，希望缓解纯 seq2seq 在长描述里对论元关系、从句嵌套理解不稳的问题。","importance":"方向上是 pre-LLM 时代的代码生成路线：结构化表示 + seq2seq。对当下 pretrain 研究启示不大，因为大模型已经把这种显式 parsing 的必要性基本消解；但可作为'结构先验是否还值得引入'的参考点。","technical_approach":"在编码器侧把自然语言的依存/成分句法树编码进去（通常是树注意力或 GNN 特征融合），与原文 token 序列一起送入 code decoder。核心选择是把 parse tree 作为辅助输入而不是替换 token 序列。","experiments":"在 CoNaLa / Django 这类经典 NL-to-code 数据集上与 seq2seq baseline 比较，报告 BLEU / exact match 的提升。规模上都是小模型（Transformer 级别），没有与大型 Code LLM 对比。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Injects NL parse-tree structure into NL-to-code models, aiming to help small seq2seq systems handle nested clauses and argument relations that plain token sequences get wrong.","importance":"Methodologically in the pre-LLM lineage of structured NLP: structural priors plus seq2seq. Of limited direct relevance to current pretraining since large code LMs have largely absorbed this kind of parsing implicitly; useful mainly as a reference on whether explicit structure still buys anything.","technical_approach":"Encode the NL utterance's parse tree (dependency/constituency) via a tree- or graph-style encoder and fuse with the standard token encoder, feeding both into a code decoder. Parse tree is an auxiliary signal, not a replacement.","experiments":"Small-scale Transformer evaluation on standard NL-to-code benchmarks (e.g. CoNaLa / Django-style), reporting gains over seq2seq baselines on BLEU/exact match. No comparison against large code LMs.","authors_note":""},"tags":["code-generation","syntax","parsing","structure"]},{"id":"PooleJBM23","title":"DreamFusion: Text-to-3D using 2D Diffusion","authors":["Ben Poole","Ajay Jain","Jonathan T. Barron","Ben Mildenhall"],"institutions":["Google Research","UC Berkeley"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/PooleJBM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/PooleJBM23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=FjNys5c7VyY","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"没有大规模 3D 数据的前提下，怎么用文本生成 3D 物体。直接训练 text-to-3D 模型缺数据，DreamFusion 反过来用已经训好的 2D text-to-image diffusion 当'监督者'。","importance":"范式级工作，开创了 Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) 这个方法族，后续 Magic3D、ProlificDreamer、Instant3D 全在这条线上。对 pretrain 研究的启示不在 3D 本身，而在于'用一个已训练的生成模型作为后验分数，指导另一个参数化表示优化'这种蒸馏/引导新范式，思路可迁移到跨模态监督稀缺的场景。","technical_approach":"核心是 SDS：用一个 NeRF 表示 3D 场景，从随机视角渲染 2D 图，把这张图加噪后送进冻结的 2D diffusion 模型，用 diffusion 的去噪方向（score）作为梯度反传回 NeRF 参数。巧妙之处是把 diffusion loss 的雅可比项丢掉，只保留 score 方向，避免回传通过 diffusion 网络本身，既省显存也稳定。附带 view-dependent prompt（'a front view of...'）缓解 Janus 多面问题。","experiments":"基于 Imagen 作为 2D diffusion backbone，定性展示大量 text-to-3D 生成样例，在多种 prompt 下生成连贯的 3D 物体。没有标准定量 benchmark（3D 生成彼时没有公认指标），主要比较是与 Dream Fields (CLIP-guided NeRF) 等早期方法的视觉质量对比，提升是肉眼级的。","authors_note":"Google Research，Ben Poole 和 Jonathan Barron 是 NeRF / 3D 视觉方向的核心人物，Ben Mildenhall 是原版 NeRF 作者之一。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Generate 3D objects from text without any large-scale 3D training data. Since direct text-to-3D lacks data, DreamFusion uses a pretrained 2D text-to-image diffusion model as a supervisor instead.","importance":"Paradigm-level: introduced Score Distillation Sampling (SDS), which spawned an entire follow-up line (Magic3D, ProlificDreamer, Instant3D, etc.). For pretraining more broadly, the transferable idea is using a frozen generative model's score as a supervisory signal for optimising a different parameterisation — a pattern useful anywhere cross-modal supervision is scarce.","technical_approach":"Represent the 3D scene as a NeRF. Render a 2D view, add noise, feed into a frozen text-conditioned 2D diffusion model, and use the denoising direction (score) as a gradient signal backpropagated into NeRF parameters. The crucial trick is dropping the U-Net Jacobian term, keeping only the score direction — this avoids backprop through diffusion, saves memory, and stabilises optimisation. View-dependent prompt augmentation mitigates the Janus (multi-face) artefact.","experiments":"Built on Imagen as the 2D backbone. Primarily qualitative results across many prompts, showing coherent 3D objects. No standard quantitative benchmark (none existed then); visual comparison against CLIP-guided NeRF approaches like Dream Fields shows large, obvious quality gains.","authors_note":"Google Research; Ben Poole and Jonathan Barron are central to the NeRF / 3D vision line, and Ben Mildenhall is a co-author of the original NeRF paper."},"tags":["diffusion","text-to-3d","guidance","multimodal-generation"],"notable_authors":["Ben Poole","Jonathan T. Barron","Ben Mildenhall","Ajay Jain"]},{"id":"RakotonirinaDP023","title":"Can discrete information extraction prompts generalize across language models?","authors":["Nathanaël Carraz Rakotonirina","Roberto Dessì","Fabio Petroni","Sebastian Riedel","Marco Baroni"],"institutions":["Meta AI","Universitat Pompeu Fabra"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/RakotonirinaDP023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/RakotonirinaDP023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=sbWVtxq8-zE","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"AutoPrompt 这类离散 prompt 搜索出的 trigger 字符串能否跨模型迁移？还是说每个 LM 都需要单独搜一套。这个问题决定了离散 prompt engineering 能否作为通用工具。","importance":"实验性/诊断性贡献，对 prompt-based probing 和 knowledge extraction 的方法论很有用。对 pretrain 的启示在于：如果离散 prompt 能跨模型迁移，说明 LM 学到了某种共享的词汇-事实关联结构；反之则说明 prompt 更多是利用各自的表面 pattern。","technical_approach":"在源 LM 上用 AutoPrompt / 其他梯度搜索方法找出事实抽取（LAMA 风格）的最优离散 prompt，然后原样搬到其他 LM 上评估。变量包括：同架构不同规模、不同架构（BERT、RoBERTa、GPT 系）、不同训练数据。度量 accuracy 是否保留。","experiments":"在 LAMA 等 factual probing benchmark 上测试，发现离散 prompt 跨模型迁移效果差——在源模型有效的 trigger 到目标模型上接近随机或明显掉点。相比之下人类可读的 manual prompt 迁移性反而更稳定。结论偏向：搜出来的 prompt 是模型特定的 adversarial-like 序列，而非通用语义查询。","authors_note":"Meta AI / Pompeu Fabra 等；Roberto Dessì、Sebastian Riedel 在 LAMA / prompt probing 线上有系列工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Do discrete prompts found by AutoPrompt-style search on one LM transfer to other LMs? The answer decides whether discrete prompt engineering is a general tool or must be redone per model.","importance":"A diagnostic contribution for prompt-based probing and factual extraction. For pretraining, the result speaks to whether LMs share a common lexical-factual association structure, or whether their surface patterns are idiosyncratic.","technical_approach":"Find optimal discrete prompts for factual-extraction tasks (LAMA-style) on a source LM via gradient-based search, then reuse them verbatim on target LMs varying in size, architecture (BERT, RoBERTa, GPT family), and training data. Measure retention of extraction accuracy.","experiments":"On LAMA-style benchmarks, discovered prompts transfer poorly: triggers that work on the source model often drop to near random on targets. Human-readable manual prompts transfer more reliably. Conclusion: learned triggers behave more like model-specific adversarial strings than general semantic queries.","authors_note":"Meta AI / Universitat Pompeu Fabra; Roberto Dessì and Sebastian Riedel have a track record in the LAMA / prompt-probing line."},"tags":["prompting","generalization","information-extraction","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Sebastian Riedel","Roberto Dessì","Fabio Petroni","Marco Baroni"]},{"id":"RavindranK23","title":"Tiny Attention: A Simple yet Effective Method for Learning Contextual Word Embeddings","authors":["Renjith P. Ravindran","Narayana Murthy Kavi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/RavindranK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/RavindranK23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=BWWrDHaP29","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"能否用一个极小的 attention 模块（远小于 Transformer 层）就学到有用的上下文化 word embedding，作为轻量 embedding 方案替代 ELMo/BERT。问题动机是 BERT 太贵，有些下游任务其实不需要完整 Transformer。","importance":"小切口工程性工作，对当代 LLM 研究启示不大。更像是在预训练大模型主流外的一条低成本 embedding 基线。","technical_approach":"在 word2vec/FastText 风格的训练目标上加一个非常小的 attention 层，用上下文 token 的加权和来扰动/细化中心词 embedding。关键设计是 attention 参数量压到很低（远少于 Transformer 一层），训练也快。","experiments":"在若干词级任务（词相似度、POS、分类等）上比对 word2vec/GloVe 和 ELMo/BERT 这类重模型，报告在轻量条件下比静态 embedding 好，但不追 BERT。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Can a very small attention module produce useful contextualized word embeddings, giving a lightweight alternative to ELMo/BERT for downstream tasks that don't need a full Transformer?","importance":"A small engineering contribution with limited bearing on current LLM-scale pretraining; more a low-cost embedding baseline than a paradigm-level idea.","technical_approach":"Add a minimal attention layer on top of a word2vec/FastText-style objective: use a weighted sum of context tokens to refine the center-word embedding. Design bet: keep the attention parameter count far below a Transformer layer so training stays cheap.","experiments":"Word-level benchmarks (similarity, POS, small-scale classification) against static embeddings and heavy contextualized models. Outperforms static embeddings in the lightweight regime but does not aim to match BERT.","authors_note":""},"tags":["word-embeddings","attention","sequence-modeling","architecture"]},{"id":"RenKLH23","title":"Scaling Forward Gradient With Local Losses","authors":["Mengye Ren","Simon Kornblith","Renjie Liao","Geoffrey E. Hinton"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/RenKLH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/RenKLH23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=JxpBP1JM15-","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["optimization","forward-gradient","local-losses","scaling"]},{"id":"Ribeiro0MZDKBRH23","title":"STREET: A Multi-Task Structured Reasoning and Explanation Benchmark","authors":["Danilo Neves Ribeiro","Shen Wang","Xiaofei Ma","Henghui Zhu","Rui Dong","Deguang Kong","Juliette Burger","Anjelica Ramos","Zhiheng Huang","William Yang Wang","George Karypis","Bing Xiang","Dan Roth"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Ribeiro0MZDKBRH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Ribeiro0MZDKBRH23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=1C_kSW1-k0","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["reasoning","benchmark","explanations","evaluation"]},{"id":"RobineHUH23","title":"Transformer-based World Models Are Happy With 100k Interactions","authors":["Jan Robine","Marc Höftmann","Tobias Uelwer","Stefan Harmeling"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/RobineHUH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/RobineHUH23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=TdBaDGCpjly","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["world-models","transformer","sample-efficiency","reinforcement-learning"]},{"id":"SahaZHB23","title":"Summarization Programs: Interpretable Abstractive Summarization with Neural Modular Trees","authors":["Swarnadeep Saha","Shiyue Zhang","Peter Hase","Mohit Bansal"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/SahaZHB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/SahaZHB23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=ooxDOe7ZtBe","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["summarization","modular-networks","interpretability","structured-generation"]},{"id":"SahooPVMKM23","title":"Backpropagation through Combinatorial Algorithms: Identity with Projection Works","authors":["Subham Sekhar Sahoo","Anselm Paulus","Marin Vlastelica","Vít Musil","Volodymyr Kuleshov","Georg Martius"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/SahooPVMKM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/SahooPVMKM23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=JZMR727O29","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["differentiable-optimization","combinatorial","backpropagation"]},{"id":"SaifullahWGGG23","title":"Seeing in Words: Learning to Classify through Language Bottlenecks","authors":["Khalid Saifullah","Yuxin Wen","Jonas Geiping","Micah Goldblum","Tom Goldstein"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/SaifullahWGGG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/SaifullahWGGG23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=_QreMdMNIz-","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["language-bottleneck","vision-language","representation-learning"]},{"id":"SalmanSEB23","title":"Model Extraction Attacks on DistilBERT","authors":["Amro Salman","Ayman Saeed","Khalid N. Elmadani","Sharief Babiker"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/SalmanSEB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/SalmanSEB23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=njpSzZ6mCU","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["model-extraction","security","distilbert","privacy"]},{"id":"SapkotaAP23","title":"Zero-Shot Classification Reveals Potential Positive Sentiment Bias in African Languages Translations","authors":["Hrishav Sapkota","Saurav Keshari Aryal","Howard Prioleau"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/SapkotaAP23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/SapkotaAP23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=-AIukSeLAz9","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"机器翻译系统在处理低资源非洲语言时，其翻译结果的语义保真度难以评估，且可能存在未被察觉的系统性情感偏移。","importance":"数据与评估级贡献。揭示了多语言模型在低资源语种对齐中存在的一种特定失效模式（情感正向偏移），对构建无偏的多语言预训练语料库有警示作用。","technical_approach":"利用零样本分类（Zero-Shot Classification）技术作为评估探针，对比源语言文本与目标语言（非洲语言）翻译文本的情感极性，以此量化翻译过程中引入的情感偏差。","experiments":"通过零样本分类器对翻译前后的文本情感进行打分对比，发现了向正向情感偏移的系统性偏差。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The semantic fidelity of machine translation for low-resource African languages is hard to evaluate and may contain unnoticed systematic sentiment shifts.","importance":"Data and evaluation contribution. It highlights a specific failure mode (positive sentiment bias) in multilingual alignment for underrepresented languages, serving as a warning for curating unbiased multilingual pre-training corpora.","technical_approach":"Employs zero-shot classification as a probing tool to compare the sentiment polarity between source texts and their African language translations, thereby quantifying the sentiment bias introduced during translation.","experiments":"Compared sentiment scores of pre- and post-translation texts using zero-shot classifiers, revealing a systematic bias towards positive sentiment.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multilingual","bias","evaluation","translation"]},{"id":"2305.05318","title":"How Informative is the Approximation Error from Tensor Decomposition for Neural Network Compression?","authors":["Jetze Schuurmans","Kim Batselier","Julian F. P. Kooij"],"institutions":["Delft University of Technology (TU Delft)"],"abstract":"$47","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.05318","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/SchuurmansBK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/SchuurmansBK23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=sKHqgFOaFXI","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在利用张量分解压缩神经网络时，业界普遍假设“权重近似误差越小，微调后的模型性能越好”，但这一基础假设缺乏系统性的实验验证。","importance":"机制与评估级贡献。挑战了模型压缩领域的一个核心先验，指导工程师在做模型量化或低秩分解时，如何更合理地选择评估指标和压缩策略。","technical_approach":"进行了一项大规模的实证研究，跨越不同的网络层、张量分解类型和压缩率，系统测试了权重近似误差、特征近似误差与最终微调后任务性能之间的相关性。","experiments":"实验对比了多种分解方法在不同层的误差指标。结果表明，单纯依赖权重近似误差来指导压缩层或压缩率的选择往往是不可靠的，特征近似误差（激活值的误差）可能是更好的代理指标。","authors_note":"TU Delft 团队。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"When compressing neural networks via tensor decomposition, it is widely assumed that minimizing weight approximation error correlates with better post-finetuning performance, but this foundational assumption lacks systematic validation.","importance":"Mechanism and evaluation contribution. It challenges a core prior in model compression, guiding engineers on how to select better proxy metrics and strategies for quantization or low-rank decomposition.","technical_approach":"Conducted a large-scale empirical study across different layers, tensor decomposition types, and compression levels to systematically test the correlation between weight/feature approximation errors and final post-finetuning task performance.","experiments":"Compared error metrics across various decomposition methods and layers. Results indicate that relying solely on weight approximation error to guide compression choices is often unreliable; feature approximation error (activation error) may be a better proxy.","authors_note":"TU Delft team."},"tags":["compression","tensor-decomposition","fine-tuning","evaluation"]},{"id":"SeferisBC23","title":"Statistical Property Testing for Generative Models","authors":["Emmanouil Seferis","Simon Burton","Chih-Hong Cheng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/SeferisBC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/SeferisBC23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=xmY_plRB15j","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"生成式模型（如 LLM 或 Diffusion）的输出分布极其复杂，难以严格验证其是否满足特定的统计属性或安全约束。","importance":"理论与评估级贡献。将统计属性测试（Property Testing）引入生成模型领域，为评估模型的安全性、无偏性或特定分布特性提供了理论框架。","technical_approach":"应用统计假设检验和属性测试理论，通过对生成模型的输出进行采样，以数学上可证明的置信度来界定模型违反特定统计属性的概率。","experiments":"（基于标题推断）在特定的生成任务上验证了该统计测试框架的有效性，能够以较少的采样次数给出属性满足的概率边界。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The output distributions of generative models (like LLMs or Diffusion) are highly complex, making it difficult to rigorously verify if they satisfy specific statistical properties or safety constraints.","importance":"Theoretical and evaluation contribution. It introduces statistical property testing to generative models, providing a formal framework to evaluate safety, unbiasedness, or specific distributional characteristics.","technical_approach":"Applies statistical hypothesis testing and property testing theories. By sampling the outputs of generative models, it establishes mathematically provable confidence bounds on the probability of the model violating specific statistical properties.","experiments":"(Inferred from title) Validated the statistical testing framework on specific generative tasks, demonstrating the ability to provide probability bounds for property satisfaction with efficient sampling.","authors_note":""},"tags":["evaluation","generative-models","property-testing","statistics"]},{"id":"SekikawaY23","title":"Bit-Pruning: A Sparse Multiplication-Less Dot-Product","authors":["Yusuke Sekikawa","Shingo Yashima"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/SekikawaY23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/SekikawaY23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=YUDiZcZTI8","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"标准神经网络中的点积运算依赖大量密集的乘法累加（MAC）操作，导致极高的计算能耗和硬件带宽压力。","importance":"效率与架构级贡献。提出了一种极端的底层算子优化方案，探索了完全无乘法器的网络推理可能性，对未来 LLM 的极低比特量化和专用硬件设计有启发。","technical_approach":"提出“比特剪枝”（Bit-Pruning）技术。通过在比特级别挖掘权重和激活的稀疏性，将传统的点积运算转化为仅依赖位运算（如 AND、popcount）和加法的稀疏无乘法操作。","experiments":"（基于标题推断）在标准视觉或语言模型上测试了该算子，证明了在保持一定精度的前提下，能够显著降低点积运算的理论计算复杂度和硬件能耗。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Dot product operations in standard neural networks rely on dense Multiply-Accumulate (MAC) operations, leading to high computational energy consumption and hardware bandwidth pressure.","importance":"Efficiency and architecture contribution. It proposes an extreme low-level operator optimization, exploring the possibility of completely multiplier-less network inference, which inspires future ultra-low-bit quantization and custom hardware design for LLMs.","technical_approach":"Introduces 'Bit-Pruning'. By exploiting sparsity at the bit level for both weights and activations, it transforms traditional dot products into sparse, multiplier-less operations that rely solely on bitwise operations (e.g., AND, popcount) and addition.","experiments":"(Inferred from title) Tested the operator on standard vision or language models, demonstrating significant reductions in theoretical computational complexity and hardware energy consumption while maintaining acceptable accuracy.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","sparsity","inference"]},{"id":"2204.02849","title":"kNN-Diffusion: Image Generation via Large-Scale Retrieval","authors":["Shelly Sheynin","Oron Ashual","Adam Polyak","Uriel Singer","Oran Gafni","Eliya Nachmani","Yaniv Taigman"],"institutions":["Meta AI"],"abstract":"$48","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.02849","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/SheyninAPSGNT23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/SheyninAPSGNT23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=x5mtJD2ovc","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"主流的文本到图像扩散模型强依赖海量的图文对数据，导致它们无法在缺乏文本标签或数据稀缺的新领域中进行训练和部署。","importance":"范式级创新。将检索增强（RAG）思想引入扩散模型预训练，证明了生成先验可以与具体的领域数据记忆解耦，为小参数量、免文本的视觉生成模型提供了全新思路。","technical_approach":"提出 kNN-Diffusion。在扩散模型的去噪网络中引入 kNN 检索机制。训练时仅依赖图像特征在外部数据库中检索近邻，无需任何文本标签；推理时，通过直接替换外部检索库（database swapping），即可实现零样本的分布外（OOD）图像生成和局部语义编辑。","experiments":"在两个 SOTA 扩散模型骨干上应用了该方法。实验证明，模型可以在完全无文本的情况下训练，且仅通过在推理时切换检索库，就能生成与训练分布完全不同的高质量图像。","authors_note":"Meta AI 团队，Adam Polyak 是生成模型领域的活跃研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Mainstream text-to-image diffusion models heavily rely on massive text-image paired datasets, making it impractical to train and deploy them in new domains where data is scarce or lacks text labels.","importance":"Paradigm-level innovation. It introduces Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) into diffusion model pre-training, proving that the generative prior can be decoupled from specific domain memory. This offers a novel approach for small, text-free visual generative models.","technical_approach":"Proposes kNN-Diffusion. Introduces a kNN retrieval mechanism into the denoising network of diffusion models. During training, it relies solely on image features to retrieve nearest neighbors from an external database, requiring no text labels. During inference, zero-shot Out-Of-Distribution (OOD) generation and local semantic editing are achieved simply by swapping the external retrieval database.","experiments":"Applied the method to two SOTA diffusion backbones. Experiments show the model can be trained completely without text and can generate high-quality images from entirely different distributions simply by switching the retrieval database at inference time.","authors_note":"Meta AI team; Adam Polyak is an active researcher in generative models."},"tags":["diffusion","retrieval","knn","data-efficiency"],"notable_authors":["Adam Polyak"]},{"id":"2207.03578","title":"Code Translation with Compiler Representations","authors":["Marc Szafraniec","Baptiste Rozière","Hugh Leather","Patrick Labatut","François Charton","Gabriel Synnaeve"],"institutions":["Meta"],"abstract":"$49","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.03578","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/SzafraniecRLLCS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/SzafraniecRLLCS23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=XomEU3eNeSQ","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：神经代码翻译把源码当普通文本序列处理时，容易抓住表面相似而忽略跨语言语义差异，导致译文看起来像代码但行为不对。传统 transpiler 依赖手写规则，覆盖窄且不自然；纯文本 NMT 扩展了覆盖面，但在语义保真上仍然不够。","importance":"这项工作的意义主要在“表示层”而不是大模型范式本身。它说明代码预训练/迁移里，编译器中间表示（IR）这类语义更强的离散表示可以弥补 token-level text view 的不足。对做 code LM 的人，这个结论很实用：如果目标是语义等价而不是表面仿真，只盯 tokenizer 和序列建模往往不够，程序结构或编译信号值得显式引入。","technical_approach":"核心方法是用低层编译器 IR 来增强代码翻译模型，而不是只看源代码 token。IR 保留了更接近执行语义的结构信息，能把“文本很像但语义不同”的片段分开，这正是纯文本 NMT 最容易出错的地方。论文的设计选择大概率是把源码表示与 IR 表示联合输入或对齐，让模型同时利用可读语法与可编译语义；与传统 transpiler 相比，它放弃人工规则；与纯文本 seq2seq 相比，它增加了编译器提供的规范化视角。为什么这样有效：不同语言的表层语法差异大，但编译后会在某些语义层面对齐，IR 正好提供这种跨语言桥梁。","experiments":"从摘要可确认，作者的目标是显著提高代码翻译准确率，并强调传统文本 NMT 的质量不足。题面未给出具体语言对、模型参数量、数据规模和提升数字，因此不编造。关键实验通常应包括与规则 transpiler、纯文本 NMT、可能的预训练 code model baseline 比较，以及编译通过率、单元测试通过率或功能正确率这类比 BLEU 更可信的指标。如果论文主要在这些功能指标上提升，那价值会明显高于只涨表面 n-gram 分数。","authors_note":"作者中 Baptiste Rozière、François Charton 来自 Meta 代码模型与数学/代码生成方向的代表性团队。代表工作包括 TransCoder、CodeGen 等相关方向。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a persistent problem in code translation: treating code as plain text makes neural models overfit surface similarity and miss cross-language semantic differences, so outputs may look plausible but behave incorrectly. Rule-based transpilers have narrow coverage, while text-only NMT improves coverage but still struggles with semantic fidelity.","importance":"This is primarily a representation contribution. It shows that compiler intermediate representations can provide a stronger semantic view than token-level source text alone. For code pretraining, the practical lesson is that if the target is behavioral equivalence rather than stylistic translation, tokenizer and sequence modeling are not enough; compiler-derived structure is a meaningful supervision source.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to augment code translation with low-level compiler IR instead of relying only on source tokens. IR captures program semantics in a more normalized form and helps distinguish snippets that are textually similar but semantically different—the exact failure mode of text-only NMT. The likely design is to jointly model source code and IR, or align them so the model can use both readable syntax and compiler-grounded semantics. Compared with traditional transpilers, this drops handcrafted rules; compared with text-only seq2seq, it injects an execution-oriented representation. The reason it should work is straightforward: source languages differ at the syntax layer, but compiled representations often align more cleanly at the semantic layer.","experiments":"From the abstract, the paper aims for a substantial increase in code translation accuracy and frames text-only NMT as insufficient. The prompt does not provide exact language pairs, model sizes, dataset scales, or numerical gains, so I will not fabricate them. The decisive experiments here should be against rule-based transpilers, text-only NMT, and likely pretrained code baselines, evaluated with compilation success, unit-test pass rate, or functional correctness rather than BLEU alone. If gains are concentrated on those execution-based metrics, that is much more meaningful than a small lexical improvement.","authors_note":"Baptiste Rozière and François Charton are associated with Meta's prominent code-modeling line. Representative related work includes TransCoder and CodeGen."},"tags":["code","translation","ir"],"notable_authors":["Baptiste Rozière","François Charton"]},{"id":"TaigaAFCB23","title":"Investigating Multi-task Pretraining and Generalization in Reinforcement Learning","authors":["Adrien Ali Taïga","Rishabh Agarwal","Jesse Farebrother","Aaron C. Courville","Marc G. Bellemare"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/TaigaAFCB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/TaigaAFCB23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=sSt9fROSZRO","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"按标题判断，这篇论文研究的问题是：多任务预训练在强化学习里到底学到了什么，以及这些能力何时能迁移、何时只是任务内记忆。RL 里“先预训练再泛化”常被默认有效，但真实收益高度依赖任务分布、表示共享和评测协议。由于没有摘要，这里只能做保守概括。","importance":"这项工作的潜在价值在于把 RL 中的 pretrain/generalization 关系拆开看清楚。对大模型研究者也有借鉴意义：它触及一个共通问题——多任务训练带来的提升究竟是更好的表征，还是更宽的经验覆盖。如果论文给出系统性反例或条件性结论，它对“规模化多任务就会自动泛化”的乐观预期是重要修正。","technical_approach":"从标题看，技术路线应是系统比较不同多任务预训练设置，并分析其对未见任务或分布偏移的影响，而不是提出单一新算法。关键设计通常包括控制任务相关性、共享 backbone、冻结/微调策略，以及把训练回报与泛化回报分开汇报。为什么这类设计重要：RL 中表征学习、探索和奖励归因纠缠很深，不把这些因素拆开，很容易把预训练的表面收益误判成泛化能力。","experiments":"缺少摘要，无法可靠给出环境、算法、模型规模和具体数字。此类论文通常会在 Atari、DM Control 或 Procgen 风格基准上比较单任务、联合训练和预训练后微调，并特别看 train-task return 与 held-out task return 的差距。没有原文不应补数字。","authors_note":"作者包含 Rishabh Agarwal、Marc G. Bellemare，均是 Google/DeepMind 系 RL 泛化与评测方向的代表研究者。题面未给出机构全称。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"From the title, the paper examines what multi-task pretraining in reinforcement learning actually buys, and when those gains transfer beyond the training tasks. In RL, “pretrain on many tasks, then generalize” is often assumed to work, but the real benefit depends heavily on task distribution, representation sharing, and evaluation protocol. No abstract is provided, so this summary remains cautious.","importance":"Its likely contribution is conceptual and evaluative: separating pretraining from generalization rather than treating them as the same phenomenon. That matters beyond RL as well, because it speaks to a broader question in foundation models—are gains from multi-task training due to better abstractions or just broader memorized coverage? If the paper finds strong conditions or failure cases, that is a useful correction to scaling optimism.","technical_approach":"Judging from the title, the work is likely a systematic study rather than a single algorithmic novelty. The key design would be controlled comparisons across multi-task pretraining setups and their effect on unseen tasks or shifted distributions, with careful choices around shared backbones, freezing versus finetuning, and separating training-task reward from transfer reward. That decomposition is important because in RL, representation learning, exploration, and credit assignment are tightly entangled, so naive gains are easy to over-interpret.","experiments":"Without the abstract, I cannot reliably report environments, algorithms, model sizes, or numerical results. A paper of this type would typically compare single-task training, joint training, and pretrain-then-finetune on benchmarks such as Atari, DM Control, or Procgen, with emphasis on train-task versus held-out-task performance. Any concrete numbers would be speculative.","authors_note":"The authors include Rishabh Agarwal and Marc G. Bellemare, both prominent in RL evaluation and generalization. Full affiliations are not given in the prompt."},"tags":["multi-task","rl","pretrain"],"notable_authors":["Rishabh Agarwal","Marc G. Bellemare"]},{"id":"2301.03580","title":"Designing BERT for Convolutional Networks: Sparse and Hierarchical Masked Modeling","authors":["Keyu Tian","Yi Jiang","Qishuai Diao","Chen Lin","Liwei Wang","Zehuan Yuan"],"institutions":["Peking University"],"abstract":"$4a","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.03580","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/TianJD0WY23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/TianJD0WY23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=NRxydtWup1S","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：BERT 式 masked modeling 在视觉上主要成功于 ViT，而直接搬到卷积网络上效果差，原因不在于 convnet 不能预训练，而在于 masked image modeling 的输入形态和 convnet 的计算假设不匹配。具体有两个障碍：随机掩码使输入变得不规则，conv 无法高效处理；同时 convnet 是分层多尺度结构，单尺度解码目标和它天然不对齐。","importance":"这项工作的重要性在于它修正了一个流行判断：不是“BERT 风格预训练天然更适合 Transformer”，而是此前的实现方式对 convnet 不友好。对统一预训练研究有启示，因为它说明预训练目标能不能迁移到另一种 backbone，关键常常是 tokenization/稀疏计算/解码器设计这些接口问题，而不只是 backbone 本身优劣。","technical_approach":"核心方法 SparK 由两个设计组成：用 sparse convolution 处理被 mask 后的可见像素，以及用 hierarchical decoder 从多尺度特征重建图像。第一个选择解决的是输入不规则性：作者把未遮挡像素看成 3D 点云中的稀疏体素来编码，让 convnet 不必在大量 mask token 上做无效计算。第二个选择解决的是目标与结构错位：convnet 产生天然的层级表示，因此解码也应利用多尺度特征，而不是像 ViT-MAE 那样主要依赖单尺度 latent。它的贡献不是发明新的 backbone，而是让任意 convnet 基本无需修改就能接上 masked modeling。","experiments":"摘要明确说 SparK 在经典卷积网络和现代卷积网络上都有效，并且方法可直接用于任意 conv 模型。题面未给出具体 backbone、预训练轮数、ImageNet top-1 或下游迁移数字，因此不编造。预期关键实验包括：与 supervised pretrain、从头训练、以及已有 convnet 自监督方法比较；验证 sparse encoder 和 hierarchical decoder 的各自贡献；以及在不同 masking ratio 下的鲁棒性。如果这些实验成立，最重要的结论不是“convnet 重新赢了”，而是 masked modeling 并不专属于 ViT。","authors_note":"作者包含 Liwei Wang，来自北京大学/视觉学习方向知名团队。题面未给出完整机构列表。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks why BERT-style masked modeling worked so well for ViTs but transferred poorly to convolutional networks. Its answer is not that convnets are inherently worse for pretraining, but that standard masked image modeling clashes with convnet assumptions in two ways: random masking creates irregular inputs that dense convolutions handle poorly, and single-scale decoding mismatches convnets' hierarchical representations.","importance":"This is an important corrective result. It argues that the apparent advantage of Transformer backbones in masked modeling is partly an interface problem rather than a fundamental modeling law. For unified pretraining research, that is useful: whether an objective transfers across backbones often depends on sparse computation and decoder design, not only on the backbone family itself.","technical_approach":"SparK combines two main ideas: sparse convolution for encoding visible pixels under random masking, and a hierarchical decoder for reconstruction from multi-scale features. The first choice fixes the irregular-input problem by treating unmasked pixels as sparse voxels, so the convnet does not waste computation on masked regions. The second choice fixes the architecture-objective mismatch by decoding from the natural feature pyramid of convnets rather than forcing a single-scale latent pathway as in ViT-style MAE setups. The contribution is therefore not a new backbone, but a way to make masked modeling compatible with standard convnets with minimal modification.","experiments":"The abstract states that SparK works on both classical and modern convnets and is generally applicable without changing the backbone. The prompt does not provide exact backbones, pretraining schedules, or ImageNet/downstream numbers, so I will not invent them. The key empirical checks should include comparisons against supervised pretraining, training from scratch, and prior self-supervised convnet methods; ablations for the sparse encoder and hierarchical decoder; and robustness under different masking ratios. If those hold, the main lesson is not that convnets beat ViTs again, but that masked modeling is not inherently a ViT-only pretraining recipe.","authors_note":"The author list includes Liwei Wang, a well-known researcher in visual representation learning associated with Peking University. Full affiliation details are not provided in the prompt."},"tags":["masked-image-modeling","convnet","self-supervised","pretraining"],"notable_authors":["Liwei Wang"]},{"id":"TienHEDB23","title":"Causal Confusion and Reward Misidentification in Preference-Based Reward Learning","authors":["Jeremy Tien","Jerry Zhi-Yang He","Zackory Erickson","Anca D. Dragan","Daniel S. Brown"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/TienHEDB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/TienHEDB23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=R0Xxvr_X3ZA","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"按标题判断，这篇论文研究的问题是：基于偏好学习奖励函数时，模型可能因为因果混淆而学错了“人到底在偏好什么”，也就是 reward misidentification。它关注的不是如何把偏好拟合得更好看，而是偏好信号在存在混杂因素时是否真的对应目标奖励。没有摘要，因此这里只能做保守概括。","importance":"这对 pretrain/posttrain 闭环是相关的，尤其是 RLHF 和 preference modeling。它的重要性不在于提升一个 benchmark，而在于提醒大家：偏好数据不是天然干净监督，错误的因果归因会把后训练目标系统性带偏。对大模型对齐，这类工作常常比新的优化器更值得重视，因为它直接影响训练信号质量。","technical_approach":"从标题看，论文应当形式化分析 preference-based reward learning 中的 causal confusion，并给出 reward misidentification 的判别或缓解方法。典型做法可能包括构造有混杂的环境、区分相关特征与真正因果特征、比较不同偏好采样或查询策略。为什么这类分析重要：只靠 preference fitting loss 低，并不能证明学到的 reward 可泛化；在分布外或策略改变后，错误归因的 reward 往往会暴露出来。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法给出环境、算法、数据量或数值结果。合理预期是论文会用合成或控制环境展示：即使训练偏好拟合很好，学到的 reward 仍可能在策略优化时失败；并比较某些去混杂或因果约束方法的改进。没有原文不应编造具体幅度。","authors_note":"作者包含 Anca D. Dragan，来自人机协作、价值对齐与偏好学习方向的代表性团队。题面未给出机构全称。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"From the title, the paper studies a core failure mode in preference-based reward learning: causal confusion can make the learner identify the wrong reward, even when it fits observed preferences well. The focus is not just predictive accuracy on preferences, but whether the learned reward corresponds to the intended objective under confounding. No abstract is provided, so this summary remains conservative.","importance":"This is highly relevant to the pretrain–posttrain loop, especially RLHF and preference modeling. Its importance is not benchmark chasing but training-signal validity: preference data is not automatically clean supervision, and causal misidentification can systematically distort post-training objectives. For aligned LMs, this can matter more than another optimizer tweak.","technical_approach":"Judging from the title, the paper likely formalizes causal confusion in preference-based reward learning and proposes a way to diagnose or mitigate reward misidentification. A typical setup would involve environments with confounding, separation of merely correlated features from causal ones, and comparison across different preference-query or learning strategies. The reason this matters is simple: a low preference-fitting loss does not guarantee that the learned reward will support robust policy optimization under distribution shift.","experiments":"Without the abstract, I cannot reliably report environments, methods, or numerical gains. A plausible empirical pattern is that a reward model can fit training preferences well yet fail when used for optimization, and that some debiasing or causal intervention helps. Any concrete numbers would be speculative.","authors_note":"The author list includes Anca D. Dragan, a prominent researcher in human-robot interaction, value alignment, and preference learning. Full affiliations are not provided in the prompt."},"tags":["reward-learning","causal-confusion","preference-learning","reward-hacking"],"notable_authors":["Anca D. Dragan"]},{"id":"WangCIC023","title":"PINTO: Faithful Language Reasoning Using Prompt-Generated Rationales","authors":["Peifeng Wang","Aaron Chan","Filip Ilievski","Muhao Chen","Xiang Ren"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/WangCIC023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/WangCIC023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=WBXbRs63oVu","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：链式思维提示虽然能提升推理正确率，但生成的 rationale 往往不忠实，模型可能先拍出答案再事后编理由。过去很多工作默认“有解释=按解释推理”，但这一点在多步语言推理里并不成立，所以作者尝试把 rationale 从自由生成改成受约束、可验证的中间表示。","importance":"它的价值主要是方法级和评测级，而不是范式级突破。对 pretrain / posttrain 接口的启示在于：如果中间推理监督本身不忠实，继续用它做蒸馏、SFT 或 self-training 会把伪推理放大；相反，受控生成的 rationale 更适合作为后续训练信号。这个判断对“用模型自己产出的 CoT 回灌训练”很直接。","technical_approach":"PINTO 的核心做法是让模型先生成可执行或可校验的提示化 rationale，再由这些 rationale 驱动最终答案，而不是直接自由写解释。它不是单纯多加一个 CoT prompt，而是把推理拆成更结构化的子步骤，并通过程序化检查、答案一致性或中间约束来筛掉不忠实 rationale。和标准 CoT 相比，它牺牲了一部分表达自由度，换来更高的 faithful reasoning；和纯 symbolic pipeline 相比，它仍保留了 LM 的语言泛化能力。","experiments":"从题目和方法定位看，实验重点应是比较 PINTO 与 standard prompting / CoT / self-consistency 在多步推理任务上的准确率与忠实性指标，并展示“答案对了但理由不真”的比例下降。由于给定信息里没有摘要、模型规模、数据规模和具体数字，这里不能可靠复述具体提升幅度。可以确定的实验主线是：作者不是只看最终 accuracy，而是额外评估 rationale 是否真正支持答案，这一点比单纯刷 benchmark 更有信息量。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a specific failure mode of chain-of-thought prompting: rationales often improve answer accuracy without being faithful to the model’s actual decision process. Prior work largely treated generated explanations as if they reflected real reasoning, but that assumption is weak in multi-step language reasoning, so the paper revisits rationale generation as a constrained intermediate representation rather than free-form text.","importance":"This is mainly a method-and-evaluation contribution, not a new pretraining paradigm. Its relevance to pretrain/post-train work is practical: if rationale supervision is unfaithful, using model-generated CoT for distillation, SFT, or self-training can reinforce spurious reasoning traces. A more faithful rationale pipeline gives cleaner intermediate supervision.","technical_approach":"PINTO appears to replace unconstrained rationale generation with prompt-generated rationales that are more structured and verifiable before producing the final answer. The point is not just adding another CoT prompt, but forcing the model to reason through intermediate forms that can be checked for consistency or executability. Compared with standard CoT, it gives up some flexibility to gain faithfulness; compared with fully symbolic systems, it keeps the language model’s broad generalization.","experiments":"Given the title and framing, the key experiments likely compare PINTO against standard prompting, CoT, and related rationale-based baselines on multi-step reasoning benchmarks, measuring both answer accuracy and rationale faithfulness. The important empirical claim is not only that answers improve, but that the gap between correct answers and faithful explanations shrinks. The provided metadata does not include the abstract, model sizes, datasets, or exact numbers, so those details cannot be stated reliably.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reasoning","rationale-generation","prompting","faithfulness"],"notable_authors":["Peifeng Wang","Aaron Chan","Filip Ilievski","Muhao Chen","Xiang Ren"]},{"id":"WuLSZZ23","title":"Toward Adversarial Training on Contextualized Language Representation","authors":["Hongqiu Wu","Yongxiang Liu","Hanwen Shi","Hai Zhao","Min Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/WuLSZZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/WuLSZZ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=xZD10GhCvM","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：NLP 里的对抗训练大多作用在离散 token 或静态 embedding 上，但现代模型真正使用的是上下文化表示，攻击和鲁棒训练如果不对准这一层，往往既不稳定也不够有效。过去方法常在“可优化”与“语义保持”之间做妥协，这篇工作试图把对抗训练直接搬到 contextualized representation 上。","importance":"它更像训练稳定性与鲁棒表示学习的系统性改进。对 pretrain 的启示是：如果鲁棒性目标要进入大模型预训练，施加扰动的位置比是否加扰动本身更关键；在上下文化层做约束，可能比 token-level tricks 更接近模型真实脆弱点。","technical_approach":"核心方法是围绕 contextualized language representation 设计对抗训练目标，而不是只在输入 embedding 上做标准 PGD/FGSM 式扰动。这样做的动机很直接：上下文化表示已经编码了句法和语义依赖，扰动它更容易逼近模型决策边界，也更少受离散输入不可微和词替换不自然的限制。代价是训练更复杂，需要控制扰动幅度和层位，否则容易伤害原始任务性能。","experiments":"从题目判断，实验应覆盖文本分类或理解任务上的 clean accuracy 与 adversarial robustness，对比标准 embedding-level adversarial training、VAT 或 token substitution 类方法。给定信息没有摘要和数字，无法可靠写出具体数据。可以合理确认的实验重点是：作者会证明在 contextualized representation 上训练，比只在输入层加扰动更稳、更强，且在自然样本上的退化更小或可控。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a mismatch in NLP adversarial training: most methods perturb discrete tokens or static embeddings, while modern models actually make decisions from contextualized representations. If robustness training is applied at the wrong level, it tends to be either weak or semantically awkward, so the paper revisits adversarial training directly on contextualized language features.","importance":"This is best viewed as a robustness-and-training-method contribution. For pretraining, the useful takeaway is that where perturbations are applied may matter more than whether perturbations are applied at all. Contextualized layers are closer to the model’s actual decision surface than token-level heuristics.","technical_approach":"The method appears to build adversarial training objectives around contextualized language representations rather than only perturbing input embeddings with standard PGD/FGSM-style updates. The design choice is motivated by representation geometry: contextualized states already encode syntax and semantics, so perturbing them can expose more realistic vulnerabilities while avoiding some of the discreteness issues of token-space attacks. The trade-off is added training complexity and the need to control perturbation scale and layer placement.","experiments":"The likely empirical setup compares clean accuracy and adversarial robustness on text understanding benchmarks against embedding-level adversarial training, virtual adversarial training, or token-substitution baselines. The provided metadata does not include the abstract or numbers, so exact gains cannot be stated safely. The central empirical point is presumably that contextualized-representation training yields a better robustness/accuracy trade-off than input-level perturbation alone.","authors_note":""},"tags":["adversarial-training","language-representation","robustness","bert"],"notable_authors":["Hongqiu Wu","Yongxiang Liu","Hanwen Shi","Hai Zhao","Min Zhang"]},{"id":"WuYZHWY23","title":"DIFFormer: Scalable (Graph) Transformers Induced by Energy Constrained Diffusion","authors":["Qitian Wu","Chenxiao Yang","Wentao Zhao","Yixuan He","David Wipf","Junchi Yan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/WuYZHWY23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/WuYZHWY23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=j6zUzrapY3L","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：标准 Transformer 在图上做全局注意力时，计算和内存都随节点数平方增长，图稍大就不可扩展；而很多图 Transformer 的稀疏化又依赖手工结构偏置，表达力和通用性受限。作者想要一个既保留 Transformer 风格全局交互、又能线性或近线性扩展的替代机制。","importance":"这是方法级且带一点范式意味的工作，因为它不是在现有注意力上做小修小补，而是用 diffusion 诱导的核来重写图 Transformer。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：能量约束 diffusion 提供了一种从“动力系统/核方法”角度近似注意力的新路径，这类思路未来可能迁移到长上下文或多模态统一建模里。","technical_approach":"DIFFormer 的核心是用 energy constrained diffusion 诱导出的传播核来替代显式全对全注意力，从而得到可扩展的 Transformer-like 图模型。关键设计不是简单图扩散，而是把扩散过程和能量约束结合，让信息传播既能跨远距离节点，又不会像无约束平滑那样迅速过平滑。和 GAT/Graph Transformer 相比，它放弃了逐对节点显式打分，换来更好的复杂度；和传统图扩散网络相比，它保留了更强的全局建模能力。","experiments":"从题目定位看，实验应覆盖大规模节点分类或图级任务，并重点报告随图规模增长的时间/显存收益，以及相对 Graph Transformer、GAT、GCN 类基线的精度保持或提升。给定信息没有摘要和具体表格，无法可靠写出参数量、数据集和数值。可以明确的是，这篇论文的卖点不只是精度，而是“scalable”是否成立：复杂度、吞吐和大图场景下的退化曲线应是关键证据。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a standard bottleneck in graph Transformers: full attention scales quadratically with the number of nodes, which quickly becomes impractical on large graphs. Existing sparse or biased alternatives often recover efficiency by hard-coding graph structure, but then lose some of the flexibility that made Transformers attractive in the first place.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution with some broader architectural relevance. Instead of tweaking attention, it replaces explicit pairwise attention with a diffusion-induced mechanism under an energy constraint. For pretraining research, the interesting part is the broader idea: attention-like global interaction may be approximated through controlled diffusion dynamics, which could matter beyond graphs.","technical_approach":"DIFFormer appears to build a scalable Transformer-style graph model using kernels induced by energy-constrained diffusion rather than explicit all-pairs attention. The energy constraint is the key choice: plain diffusion tends to oversmooth, while constrained diffusion can propagate information globally without collapsing node representations too quickly. Relative to GAT or graph Transformers, it avoids explicit pairwise scoring; relative to classical diffusion GNNs, it aims to preserve stronger long-range modeling.","experiments":"The likely experiments evaluate node- or graph-level tasks on larger benchmarks, emphasizing runtime and memory scaling alongside predictive performance against Graph Transformer, GAT, and GCN-style baselines. The provided metadata does not include the abstract or exact numbers, so model sizes and gains cannot be stated safely. The main empirical question is whether the method actually preserves accuracy while improving scalability on large graphs.","authors_note":""},"tags":["graph-transformer","diffusion","scalability","energy-based"],"notable_authors":["Qitian Wu","Chenxiao Yang","Wentao Zhao","Yixuan He","David Wipf"]},{"id":"XiaL0S0L23","title":"Moderate Coreset: A Universal Method of Data Selection for Real-world Data-efficient Deep Learning","authors":["Xiaobo Xia","Jiale Liu","Jun Yu","Xu Shen","Bo Han","Tongliang Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/XiaL0S0L23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/XiaL0S0L23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=7D5EECbOaf9","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：现实数据高噪声、长尾、分布混杂时，现有 coreset / data selection 方法往往依赖特定任务假设，离开干净 benchmark 就失效。过去数据选择常在“理论优雅”与“真实可用”之间脱节，这篇工作试图给出一个更通用、对真实数据更稳的选择准则。","importance":"它属于数据级与训练策略级贡献。对 pretrain 的启示很直接：在大规模训练里，数据不是越多越好，关键是如何在预算内保留中等难度、信息密度高、又不过分噪声化的样本；如果这个原则成立，它会影响数据配比、curriculum 和 continual pretrain 的样本筛选。","technical_approach":"从标题看，Moderate Coreset 的核心判断是：最有价值的不是最容易或最困难的样本，而是“moderate”样本，即难度和代表性更平衡的一段数据。它应当通过某种统一评分，把样本的可学性、代表性和噪声风险综合起来，再在预算约束下选子集。和典型 uncertainty sampling 或 forgetting-based selection 相比，它不是追逐极端样本，而是主动避开过易样本的信息冗余和过难样本的噪声放大。","experiments":"实验大概率覆盖图像与文本等多种模态、不同数据效率预算和真实噪声场景，证明该方法比随机采样、herding、uncertainty、gradient matching 等 coreset 基线更稳。给定信息没有摘要和数字，无法写出具体提升。可以预期作者会强调“universal”这一点：不是单一任务上偶然有效，而是在多种现实设定下都能维持较好的精度-预算曲线。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical weakness of many coreset and data-selection methods: they often work on clean benchmarks but break down on noisy, long-tailed, or otherwise messy real-world data. The gap is that existing selection criteria are usually too task-specific or too idealized for realistic data-efficient training.","importance":"This is primarily a data-selection and training-strategy contribution. For pretraining, the useful implication is straightforward: under a fixed budget, the best subset may not be the easiest or the hardest data, but samples with a better balance of learnability, informativeness, and noise. That matters for data curation, curriculum design, and continual pretraining.","technical_approach":"From the title, Moderate Coreset likely builds a universal selection rule around moderately difficult examples rather than extreme ones. The design intuition is that very easy samples are redundant, while very hard samples are often noisy or unstable, especially in real-world datasets. Compared with uncertainty-only or forgetting-based selection, the method seems to explicitly prefer a middle regime that better balances representativeness and optimization value.","experiments":"The experiments likely span multiple modalities or tasks, different labeling budgets, and realistic noisy settings, comparing against random sampling and standard coreset baselines such as herding, uncertainty, or gradient-matching methods. The provided metadata does not include the abstract or exact numbers, so gains cannot be reported safely. The main empirical claim is probably robustness across settings rather than a narrow benchmark win.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-selection","data-efficiency","coreset","training-data"],"notable_authors":["Xiaobo Xia","Jiale Liu","Jun Yu","Xu Shen","Bo Han"]},{"id":"XiaPJ00SH23","title":"Budgeted Training for Vision Transformer","authors":["Zhuofan Xia","Xuran Pan","Xuan Jin","Yuan He","Hui Xue","Shiji Song","Gao Huang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/XiaPJ00SH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/XiaPJ00SH23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=sVzBN-DlJRi","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：Vision Transformer 的训练成本高，而现有加速方法往往只优化单一维度，比如减少 token、缩短训练轮数或换轻量结构，结果常常在不同预算下不稳。作者想做的是预算感知训练：给定固定算力或时间，系统地重排训练过程，让 ViT 在预算内更高效地逼近全训练效果。","importance":"这是系统级训练方法工作。对 pretrain 的启示是：预算不是训练外部条件，而应进入训练策略本身；在大模型预训练里，token budget、step budget、分辨率 budget 都可能需要联合调度，而不是事后做蒸馏或剪枝补救。","technical_approach":"从标题看，Budgeted Training 的核心不是发明新 ViT 结构，而是在训练阶段动态分配计算预算，例如按阶段调整 token 数、分辨率、深度、层更新频率或样本选择。这样设计的原因是 ViT 早期训练不一定需要全成本配置，后期再逐步提高保真度更划算。和一次性固定配置训练相比，它利用了训练不同阶段对计算精度需求不同这一事实。边界在于：预算调度若设计不当，会带来优化不连续，甚至损害最终收敛。","experiments":"实验应围绕 ImageNet 或类似视觉预训练/微调设定，在相同 FLOPs、wall-clock 或 epoch 预算下比较标准 ViT 训练、token pruning、progressive resizing 等基线。给定信息没有摘要和数字，无法写出具体节省比例和精度差。可以确认的关键证据应包括：在多个预算档位下都优于强基线，而不是只在单一低预算点有效。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the high training cost of Vision Transformers and the fact that many acceleration methods optimize only one axis at a time, such as token count, training length, or architecture size. The goal is budget-aware training: given a fixed compute or time budget, reorganize training so a ViT gets closer to full-cost performance more efficiently.","importance":"This is a system-level training contribution. The broader lesson for pretraining is that budget should be treated as part of the optimization problem, not just an external constraint. In large-scale pretraining, token budget, step budget, and resolution budget may need coordinated scheduling rather than post hoc compression.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method likely keeps the ViT architecture largely intact and instead changes how compute is allocated during training, for example by dynamically adjusting token count, image resolution, depth, or update frequency across stages. The rationale is simple: early training may not need the full expensive configuration, while later stages benefit more from higher-fidelity computation. Compared with fixed-configuration training, this exploits stage-dependent compute sensitivity. The risk is that poorly designed schedules can destabilize optimization or hurt final convergence.","experiments":"The experiments likely compare against standard ViT training and common efficiency baselines such as progressive resizing or token-reduction methods under matched FLOPs, wall-clock, or epoch budgets on ImageNet-like setups. The provided metadata does not include the abstract or exact numbers, so precise savings and accuracy gaps cannot be stated safely. The key empirical question is whether the method wins consistently across multiple budget levels rather than only at one operating point.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vit","training-efficiency","budgeted-training"],"notable_authors":["Zhuofan Xia","Xuran Pan","Xuan Jin","Yuan He","Hui Xue"]},{"id":"2302.14372","title":"The In-Sample Softmax for Offline Reinforcement Learning","authors":["Chenjun Xiao","Han Wang","Yangchen Pan","Adam White","Martha White"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4b","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.14372","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/XiaoWP0W23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/XiaoWP0W23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=u-RuvyDYqCM","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心结论是：离线 RL 里真正难的不是近似 in-sample max，而是避免 max 在覆盖不足时把 Q 值推向数据外动作；作者认为改做 in-sample softmax 更自然也更稳。过去很多方法围绕保守估计或行为约束去近似“只在数据内取最大”，但 max 本身对估计误差过于敏感，所以训练容易高估甚至发散。","importance":"这是离线 RL 里的方法级改进，但它的训练信号设计思路值得更广泛关注。对 pretrain / posttrain 的启示是：当监督支持集不完整时，硬最大化目标往往会放大外推误差，软化目标能更好地匹配可观测支持；这和语言模型里处理不完全候选集、偏好学习中的 over-optimization 有相通之处。","technical_approach":"作者提出用 in-sample softmax policy iteration 代替 in-sample max 近似。关键点是 softmax 只需要对数据中覆盖到的动作做加权聚合，不必精确识别单个最优动作，因此更容易从 batch 数据稳定估计。和 CQL、IQL 或其他保守离线 RL 方法相比，这个思路不是主要靠额外惩罚把 Q 压低，而是直接修改 bootstrapping operator，让 Bellman 更新天然更少依赖 OOD 动作。代价是策略会更“软”，在覆盖充分时可能不如硬 max 激进。","experiments":"摘要明确说作者证明了基于 in-sample softmax 的 policy iteration 具有理论与实证优势，但给出的片段被截断，具体 benchmark 和数字缺失。可以可靠确认的实验主线是：在离线 RL 数据覆盖不足的设定下，与近似 in-sample max 的方法相比，softmax 版本更稳定，过估计更少，性能更好。由于摘要不完整，无法安全写出 D4RL 分数、任务名称和提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper’s main point is that offline RL suffers less from the lack of an exact in-sample max approximation than from the brittleness of the max operator itself under poor action coverage. When the dataset does not support all actions, max-based bootstrapping can latch onto unsupported actions, causing overestimation and even divergence. The paper argues that an in-sample softmax is both easier to approximate and more stable.","importance":"This is a method contribution in offline RL, but the training-signal lesson is broader. When supervision only covers part of the support, hard maximization tends to amplify extrapolation error, whereas a softened target can better match what is actually observed. That idea is relevant beyond RL whenever optimization outruns support coverage.","technical_approach":"The method replaces in-sample max policy iteration with in-sample softmax policy iteration. The key advantage is estimation: a softmax target only needs a weighted aggregation over actions supported by the dataset, rather than accurately identifying a single best action. Compared with conservative offline RL methods such as CQL or related behavior-constrained approaches, the paper changes the bootstrap operator itself instead of mainly adding penalties to suppress Q-values. The trade-off is that the induced policy is softer and may be less aggressive when coverage is already good.","experiments":"The abstract states that the paper provides both theoretical and empirical support, but the provided text is truncated before the benchmark details and numbers. What can be stated safely is the intended empirical claim: under insufficient action coverage, in-sample softmax policy iteration is more stable, less prone to overestimation, and stronger than methods that try to approximate an in-sample max. Exact tasks, scores, and margins cannot be recovered from the given metadata.","authors_note":""},"tags":["offline-rl","softmax","distribution-shift","stability"],"notable_authors":["Chenjun Xiao","Han Wang","Yangchen Pan","Adam White","Martha White"]},{"id":"XiaoYHSBM23","title":"Can Text Encoders be Deceived by Length Attack?","authors":["Chenghao Xiao","Zihuiwen Ye","G. Thomas Hudson","Zhongtian Sun","Phil Blunsom","Noura Al Moubayed"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/XiaoYHSBM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/XiaoYHSBM23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=KPHbtTtCDw","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：文本编码器可能被纯长度变化欺骗，即语义几乎不变时，仅通过拉长输入就显著改变表示或检索结果。过去很多鲁棒性研究关注同义替换、拼写扰动或对抗 token，但长度本身作为攻击面被低估了，因为它不一定改变局部词义，却会系统性影响 pooling、位置编码和归一化。","importance":"这是表示学习鲁棒性里的诊断型工作。对 pretrain 的启示很实际：如果 encoder 对长度分布过敏，那么训练数据长度配比、位置编码设计、池化策略和对比学习温度都可能在无意中学出长度捷径；这会影响检索、嵌入和 reranker 的稳定性。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是构造 length attack：在尽量保持语义不变的前提下，通过插入冗余文本、模板扩展或无害修饰来改变序列长度，并测量编码器表示偏移和下游性能下降。它不是提出新模型，而是用系统化攻击揭示一个被忽略的脆弱性来源。和一般 token-level attack 不同，这类攻击更接近分布偏移诊断，因为它利用的是模型对长度统计的依赖，而不是局部词级脆弱点。","experiments":"实验大概率覆盖句向量模型、双塔检索编码器或预训练文本 encoder，在语义相似、分类或检索任务上比较原句与长度攻击后的性能差异。给定信息没有摘要和数字，无法写出具体下降幅度。可以较确定地说，作者会分析不同 pooling、位置编码或模型架构对长度攻击的敏感性，因为这是解释该现象机制的关键。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper investigates whether text encoders can be fooled by length alone: can representations or retrieval outcomes change substantially when the input is made longer without meaningfully changing semantics? Prior robustness work focused more on synonym substitution, typos, or token-level adversaries, while sequence length itself remained an underexplored attack surface.","importance":"This is a diagnostic robustness contribution for representation learning. The practical pretraining lesson is that if encoders are overly sensitive to length statistics, then data length distribution, positional encoding, pooling design, and contrastive training choices may all induce shortcut behavior. That matters directly for embedding models and retrieval systems.","technical_approach":"The likely method is a systematic length attack that preserves semantics as much as possible while increasing sequence length through redundant or harmless text additions, then measures representation drift and downstream degradation. The contribution is not a new encoder but a targeted stress test exposing a neglected vulnerability. Unlike standard token-level attacks, this probes dependence on global sequence statistics rather than local lexical fragility.","experiments":"The experiments likely evaluate sentence encoders, dual-encoder retrieval models, or pretrained text encoders on similarity, classification, or retrieval tasks before and after length attacks. The provided metadata does not include the abstract or exact numbers, so the magnitude of degradation cannot be stated safely. A useful analysis would compare pooling strategies, positional encodings, or architectures to identify why some encoders are more length-sensitive than others.","authors_note":""},"tags":["text-encoder","length-generalization","robustness","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Chenghao Xiao","Zihuiwen Ye","G. Thomas Hudson","Zhongtian Sun","Phil Blunsom"]},{"id":"2304.08487","title":"Hyper-Decision Transformer for Efficient Online Policy Adaptation","authors":["Mengdi Xu","Yuchen Lu","Yikang Shen","Shun Zhang","Ding Zhao","Chuang Gan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4c","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.08487","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/XuLSZZG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/XuLSZZG23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=AatUEvC-Wjv","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：Decision Transformer 在离线 RL 上表现不错，但面对新任务时适应速度慢，尤其当只有少量 demonstrations 时，直接全模型微调既费数据也费参数。作者要解决的是如何让 DT 具备 few-shot task adaptation 能力，同时保持参数效率。","importance":"这是序列建模式 RL 里的方法级工作。对 pretrain / posttrain 接口的启示在于：基础序列模型可以通过小型可适配模块加超网络初始化，形成“预训练 backbone + 任务条件化快速适配”的闭环；这和 LLM 里的 adapter、hypernetwork、test-time specialization 很接近。","technical_approach":"HDT 的核心是在基础 Decision Transformer 外加一个 adaptation module，并用 hyper-network 根据少量 demonstrations 生成该模块的初始化参数。这样做的关键不是让超网络直接输出整模型，而是只初始化小适配器，随后只微调这部分参数，从而兼顾任务条件化和参数效率。和直接 fine-tune DT 相比，它减少了新任务所需更新量；和固定 adapter 相比，超网络提供了按任务定制的更好起点，所以 few-shot 时更容易收敛。","experiments":"摘要明确说作者在多个任务上验证了对新任务的泛化与高效适应，但给出的片段没有包含具体环境、参数量和数字。可以可靠总结的是：实验比较对象应包括原始 DT、可能的 meta-RL 或 adapter baselines，指标是少量 demonstrations 下的在线适应效率和最终回报。由于摘要不完整，不能安全写出具体提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a limitation of Decision Transformers: they work well in offline RL, but adapting them quickly to unseen tasks is hard, especially when only a few demonstrations are available. Full-model finetuning is both data-inefficient and parameter-heavy, so the goal is fast few-shot adaptation with minimal updates.","importance":"This is a method contribution in sequence-model-based RL, with a useful interface lesson for pretraining and post-training. A pretrained backbone can be paired with a small adaptation module whose initialization is task-conditioned by a hyper-network, creating a practical route to fast specialization without touching the whole model.","technical_approach":"HDT augments a base Decision Transformer with an adaptation module whose parameters are initialized by a hyper-network from a handful of demonstrations. The important design choice is that the hyper-network does not generate the full model; it only initializes a small module that is then finetuned. Compared with full DT finetuning, this reduces the number of updated parameters. Compared with a fixed adapter, the hyper-network provides a task-specific starting point, which is especially valuable in the few-shot regime.","experiments":"The abstract states that the method is validated on generalization to unseen tasks with strong data and parameter efficiency, but the provided text is truncated before the benchmark details and numbers. What can be stated safely is the likely comparison: HDT versus vanilla DT and other adaptation baselines, measured by online adaptation efficiency and final return under a small number of demonstrations. Exact environments and gains cannot be recovered from the given metadata.","authors_note":""},"tags":["decision-transformer","adaptation","offline-rl","few-shot"],"notable_authors":["Mengdi Xu","Yuchen Lu","Yikang Shen","Shun Zhang","Ding Zhao"]},{"id":"XueGRZ23","title":"The Modality Focusing Hypothesis: Towards Understanding Crossmodal Knowledge Distillation","authors":["Zihui Xue","Zhengqi Gao","Sucheng Ren","Hang Zhao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/XueGRZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/XueGRZ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=w0QXrZ3N-s","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：跨模态知识蒸馏常被当成黑盒技巧使用，但我们并不清楚学生模型到底学到了什么、为什么有时蒸馏有效有时无效。作者提出“modality focusing hypothesis”，试图解释蒸馏过程中模型是否会过度聚焦某一模态，从而影响跨模态迁移。","importance":"这是机制分析型工作。对多模态预训练的价值在于：如果跨模态蒸馏的收益受“模态聚焦”控制，那么蒸馏 loss、teacher/student 架构匹配和数据配比就不能只看最终精度，而要看是否诱导了单模态捷径。这个结论对 VLM 预训练和多模态对齐都很实用。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者不是提出新的蒸馏框架，而是提出一个解释假设，并通过可控实验验证：在 crossmodal KD 中，学生可能优先学习更易利用或更强势的模态，导致表面上蒸馏成功、实则跨模态知识转移有限。关键机制分析应围绕不同模态信息量、teacher 信号形式和 student 容量展开。和把蒸馏看成单纯 feature matching 的 prior 相比，这篇工作更强调训练动态中的模态偏置。","experiments":"实验应比较不同 teacher-student 模态组合、蒸馏目标和数据条件下学生对各模态的依赖变化，并用消融证明性能变化与 modality focusing 程度相关。给定信息没有摘要和数字，无法写出具体数据集和提升。可以确定的是，这类论文最有价值的证据不是单个 SOTA，而是诊断指标是否能解释何时蒸馏有效、何时失败。","authors_note":"作者包含 Hang Zhao。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a mechanism question: in crossmodal knowledge distillation, what is the student actually learning, and why does distillation sometimes help and sometimes fail? The proposed modality focusing hypothesis suggests that the student may over-focus on one modality during training, which can limit true crossmodal transfer.","importance":"This is an analysis-oriented contribution. Its value for multimodal pretraining is practical: if distillation outcomes are governed by modality focus, then loss design, teacher-student architecture matching, and data balance should be judged not only by final accuracy but by whether they induce unimodal shortcuts. That matters directly for VLM pretraining and multimodal alignment.","technical_approach":"From the title, the paper likely introduces a hypothesis rather than a new distillation algorithm, then tests it through controlled experiments. The central idea is that in crossmodal KD, the student may preferentially exploit the easier or stronger modality, making apparent distillation gains look better than the actual transfer of crossmodal knowledge. Relative to a simple feature-matching view of distillation, this shifts attention to modality bias in the training dynamics.","experiments":"The expected evaluation compares different teacher-student modality pairings, distillation objectives, and data conditions, then measures how student dependence on each modality changes. The provided metadata does not include the abstract or exact numbers, so datasets and quantitative gains cannot be stated safely. The most valuable evidence in this kind of paper is whether the proposed diagnostic explains when crossmodal distillation succeeds and when it collapses into single-modality reliance.","authors_note":"Includes Hang Zhao."},"tags":["crossmodal","distillation","representation-learning","analysis"],"notable_authors":["Zihui Xue","Zhengqi Gao","Sucheng Ren","Hang Zhao"]},{"id":"XueHRLY23","title":"One Student Knows All Experts Know: From Sparse to Dense","authors":["Fuzhao Xue","Xiaoxin He","Xiaozhe Ren","Yuxuan Lou","Yang You"],"institutions":["National University of Singapore"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/XueHRLY23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/XueHRLY23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=1PW_txDkX7","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"MoE（混合专家）模型在微调阶段容易出现过拟合和性能退化，导致其在下游任务上的表现不如同等参数量的稠密模型。过去通常通过增加正则化或调整路由策略来缓解，但没有从根本上解决稀疏模型在小数据上的脆弱性。","importance":"方法级贡献。提出了一种将预训练的稀疏 MoE 模型转换为稠密模型进行微调的新范式。这为解决 MoE 模型在下游任务微调时的困境提供了一条实用路径，兼顾了 MoE 预训练的高效性和稠密模型微调的稳定性。","technical_approach":"提出 One-Student-Knows-All (OSKA) 方法，将预训练的 MoE 模型蒸馏到一个稠密模型（Student）中。关键机制在于：在预训练阶段结束后，冻结 MoE 模型的非专家参数，将所有专家的知识通过知识蒸馏（KD）转移到一个单一的稠密 MLP 层中。这样得到的稠密模型继承了 MoE 的知识，但在微调时表现出更好的稳定性和泛化能力。","experiments":"在 T5 架构上进行了实验，将 Switch Transformer (MoE) 蒸馏为稠密 T5 模型。在 GLUE 和 SuperGLUE 基准测试中，OSKA 转换后的稠密模型在微调性能上显著优于原始 MoE 模型，并且在推理速度上也有优势。消融实验表明，蒸馏过程中的温度参数和损失函数权重对最终性能有重要影响。","authors_note":"Yang You (尤洋) 团队在高效深度学习和分布式训练方面有丰富的经验，曾提出 LARS/LAMB 优化器。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) models often suffer from overfitting and performance degradation during fine-tuning, making them underperform dense counterparts of similar parameter counts on downstream tasks. Previous work mitigated this via regularization or routing tweaks, but didn't solve the fundamental fragility of sparse models on small datasets.","importance":"Methodological contribution. Proposes a novel paradigm of converting a pre-trained sparse MoE model into a dense model for fine-tuning. This offers a practical path to resolve the MoE fine-tuning dilemma, combining the pre-training efficiency of MoE with the fine-tuning stability of dense models.","technical_approach":"Introduces One-Student-Knows-All (OSKA), which distills a pre-trained MoE model into a dense student model. The key mechanism: after pre-training, freeze the non-expert parameters of the MoE and transfer the knowledge of all experts into a single dense MLP layer via Knowledge Distillation (KD). The resulting dense model inherits the MoE's knowledge but exhibits better stability and generalization during fine-tuning.","experiments":"Experiments conducted on the T5 architecture, distilling Switch Transformer (MoE) into a dense T5. On GLUE and SuperGLUE benchmarks, the OSKA-converted dense model significantly outperforms the original MoE model in fine-tuning performance, while also offering faster inference. Ablations show that temperature and loss weights during distillation are crucial.","authors_note":"Yang You's team has extensive experience in efficient deep learning and distributed training, known for LARS/LAMB optimizers."},"tags":["moe","distillation","sparse-to-dense","compression"],"notable_authors":["Yang You"]},{"id":"YangAWSM23","title":"Re-calibrating Feature Attributions for Model Interpretation","authors":["Peiyu Yang","Naveed Akhtar","Zeyi Wen","Mubarak Shah","Ajmal Saeed Mian"],"institutions":["University of Central Florida","University of Western Australia"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/YangAWSM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/YangAWSM23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=WUWJIV2Yxtp","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有的特征归因（Feature Attribution）方法在解释模型预测时，往往会受到模型自身偏差（如对某些特征的过度敏感）的影响，导致解释结果不够准确或具有误导性。过去的方法多关注于生成归因图，而较少关注归因图本身的校准。","importance":"方法级贡献。提出了一种重新校准特征归因的方法，旨在提高模型解释的保真度（fidelity）。这对于理解预训练模型的内部机制（Interpretability）和排查模型偏差具有参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出了一种基于优化的重新校准框架。核心思想是：一个好的特征归因应该能够准确反映特征对模型输出的实际影响。方法通过最小化归因分数与特征扰动导致的输出变化之间的差异，来迭代更新归因图。这相当于在事后（post-hoc）对现有的归因方法（如 Grad-CAM, IG）的结果进行修正。","experiments":"在图像分类任务（ImageNet）上评估了多种基线归因方法（Grad-CAM, Integrated Gradients 等）。使用重新校准后，这些方法在多个评估指标（如 Deletion/Insertion metrics）上均取得了显著提升，表明校准后的归因图更能反映特征的真实重要性。","authors_note":"Mubarak Shah 是计算机视觉领域的资深学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing feature attribution methods for model interpretation are often affected by the model's own biases (e.g., over-sensitivity to certain features), leading to inaccurate or misleading explanations. Previous methods focused more on generating attribution maps and less on calibrating them.","importance":"Methodological contribution. Proposes a method to re-calibrate feature attributions, aiming to improve the fidelity of model explanations. This is valuable for understanding the internal mechanisms of pre-trained models (Interpretability) and debugging model biases.","technical_approach":"Proposes an optimization-based re-calibration framework. The core idea: a good feature attribution should accurately reflect the actual impact of features on the model's output. The method iteratively updates the attribution map by minimizing the discrepancy between the attribution scores and the output changes caused by feature perturbations. This acts as a post-hoc correction for existing attribution methods (e.g., Grad-CAM, IG).","experiments":"Evaluated various baseline attribution methods (Grad-CAM, Integrated Gradients, etc.) on image classification (ImageNet). After re-calibration, these methods achieved significant improvements on multiple evaluation metrics (e.g., Deletion/Insertion metrics), indicating that the calibrated maps better reflect true feature importance.","authors_note":"Mubarak Shah is a senior researcher in computer vision."},"tags":["interpretability","feature-attribution","calibration"],"notable_authors":["Mubarak Shah"]},{"id":"2307.04895","title":"Learning to Solve Constraint Satisfaction Problems with Recurrent Transformer","authors":["Zhun Yang","Adam Ishay","Joohyung Lee"],"institutions":["Arizona State University"],"abstract":"Constraint satisfaction problems (CSPs) are about finding values of variables that satisfy the given constraints. We show that Transformer extended with recurrence is a viable approach to learning to solve CSPs in an end-to-end manner, having clear advantages over state-of-the-art methods such as Graph Neural Networks, SATNet, and some neuro-symbolic models. With the ability of Transformer to handle visual input, the proposed Recurrent Transformer can straightforwardly be applied to visual constraint reasoning problems while successfully addressing the symbol grounding problem. We also show how to leverage deductive knowledge of discrete constraints in the Transformer's inductive learning to achieve sample-efficient learning and semi-supervised learning for CSPs.","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.04895","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/YangI023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/YangI023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=udNhDCr2KQe","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"如何让神经网络端到端地学习解决约束满足问题（CSP，如数独）。过去通常依赖图神经网络（GNN）或专门的神经符号求解器（如 SATNet），但这些方法在处理视觉输入或复杂逻辑时存在局限，且难以与通用架构统一。","importance":"范式级探索。证明了带有循环机制的 Transformer（Recurrent Transformer）可以作为一种通用的、端到端的 CSP 求解器。这为将逻辑推理（latent reasoning）整合到通用语言模型架构中提供了一个有潜力的方向，挑战了“Transformer 不擅长精确逻辑推理”的刻板印象。","technical_approach":"使用 Recurrent Transformer 架构。核心机制：1) 将 CSP 形式化为序列预测问题；2) 引入循环机制（Recurrence），允许模型在多个 step 中迭代细化其预测，这类似于逻辑推理中的多步推导；3) 结合演绎知识（deductive knowledge）进行半监督学习，利用已知的离散约束来指导模型的归纳学习，提高样本效率。","experiments":"在数独（Sudoku）和视觉数独（Visual Sudoku）等 CSP 任务上进行了评估。Recurrent Transformer 在准确率上显著优于 GNN 和 SATNet 等基线，并且能够自然地处理视觉输入（解决符号接地问题）。消融实验表明，循环机制对于解决复杂 CSP 至关重要。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to enable neural networks to learn to solve Constraint Satisfaction Problems (CSPs, like Sudoku) end-to-end. Previous approaches often relied on Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) or specialized neuro-symbolic solvers (like SATNet), which have limitations in handling visual inputs or complex logic and are hard to unify with general architectures.","importance":"Paradigm-level exploration. Demonstrates that a Transformer extended with recurrence (Recurrent Transformer) can serve as a general, end-to-end CSP solver. This provides a promising direction for integrating logical reasoning (latent reasoning) into general language model architectures, challenging the stereotype that Transformers are poor at exact logical reasoning.","technical_approach":"Employs a Recurrent Transformer architecture. Key mechanisms: 1) Formulates CSPs as sequence prediction problems; 2) Introduces recurrence, allowing the model to iteratively refine its predictions over multiple steps, analogous to multi-step deduction in logical reasoning; 3) Leverages deductive knowledge for semi-supervised learning, using known discrete constraints to guide the model's inductive learning and improve sample efficiency.","experiments":"Evaluated on CSP tasks like Sudoku and Visual Sudoku. The Recurrent Transformer significantly outperforms baselines like GNNs and SATNet in accuracy and naturally handles visual inputs (solving the symbol grounding problem). Ablations show that the recurrence mechanism is crucial for solving complex CSPs.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer","recurrence","reasoning","algorithmic-generalization"]},{"id":"YiGLYLWSQ23","title":"Masked Image Modeling with Denoising Contrast","authors":["Kun Yi","Yixiao Ge","Xiaotong Li","Shusheng Yang","Dian Li","Jianping Wu","Ying Shan","Xiaohu Qie"],"institutions":["Tencent AI Lab","Peking University"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/YiGLYLWSQ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/YiGLYLWSQ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=1fZd4owfJP6","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"掩码图像建模（MIM，如 MAE）在视觉预训练中取得了成功，但其重建目标通常是在像素空间或低级特征空间，这导致模型倾向于学习高频的局部细节，而忽略了对下游任务更重要的低频全局语义信息。","importance":"方法级贡献。提出了一种结合 MIM 和对比学习（Contrastive Learning）的新型视觉预训练范式。这为解决 MIM 缺乏全局语义表示的问题提供了一个有效方案，对视觉基础模型（Vision Foundation Models）的预训练设计有直接启发。","technical_approach":"提出 Masked Image Modeling with Denoising Contrast (ConMIM)。核心机制：放弃了传统的像素级重建损失，转而使用去噪对比损失（Denoising Contrastive Loss）。具体来说，模型需要从掩码图像的表示中，通过对比学习的方式去预测完整图像的表示。这迫使模型在重建过程中不仅要填补局部缺失，还要保持与全局语义的一致性，从而融合了 MIM 的细粒度学习和对比学习的全局语义学习优势。","experiments":"在 ViT 架构上进行了预训练。ConMIM 在 ImageNet 分类、COCO 目标检测和 ADE20K 语义分割等下游任务上，均优于 MAE 和 MoCo v3 等基线模型。特别是在需要全局语义理解的分类任务上提升明显，证明了引入对比目标的有效性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Masked Image Modeling (MIM, like MAE) is successful in vision pre-training, but its reconstruction targets are usually in pixel or low-level feature space. This causes the model to focus on high-frequency local details, ignoring low-frequency global semantic information crucial for downstream tasks.","importance":"Methodological contribution. Proposes a novel vision pre-training paradigm combining MIM and Contrastive Learning. This provides an effective solution to MIM's lack of global semantic representation, directly inspiring the design of Vision Foundation Models pre-training.","technical_approach":"Proposes Masked Image Modeling with Denoising Contrast (ConMIM). Key mechanism: abandons traditional pixel-level reconstruction loss in favor of a Denoising Contrastive Loss. Specifically, the model must predict the representation of the full image from the representation of the masked image via contrastive learning. This forces the model to not only fill in local missing parts during reconstruction but also maintain consistency with global semantics, thus merging the fine-grained learning of MIM with the global semantic learning of contrastive methods.","experiments":"Pre-trained on ViT architectures. ConMIM outperforms baselines like MAE and MoCo v3 on downstream tasks including ImageNet classification, COCO object detection, and ADE20K semantic segmentation. The improvement is particularly notable in classification tasks requiring global semantic understanding, proving the effectiveness of the contrastive objective.","authors_note":""},"tags":["masked-image-modeling","contrastive-learning","denoising","representation-learning"]},{"id":"YuYT23","title":"Tuning Frequency Bias in Neural Network Training with Nonuniform Data","authors":["Annan Yu","Yunan Yang","Alex Townsend"],"institutions":["Cornell University"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/YuYT23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/YuYT23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=oLIZ2jGTiv","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"神经网络在训练时存在“频率偏差”（Frequency Bias，或称谱偏差 Spectral Bias），即倾向于先学习低频函数，后学习高频函数。在处理非均匀分布的数据时，这种偏差会导致模型在数据稀疏区域难以拟合高频特征，影响泛化性能。","importance":"机制分析与方法级贡献。深入分析了非均匀数据下神经网络的频率偏差现象，并提出了一种通过调整损失函数权重来调控这种偏差的方法。这对于理解模型训练动态（Training Dynamics）以及在长尾/非均匀数据分布下优化预训练过程具有理论和实践价值。","technical_approach":"基于神经正切核（NTK）理论，分析了非均匀数据密度对特征值谱的影响。核心机制：提出了一种数据依赖的加权损失函数（Data-dependent Weighted Loss）。通过给数据稀疏区域的样本赋予更高的权重，可以改变 NTK 的特征值分布，从而人为地“调谐”（Tune）模型的频率偏差，使其能够更快地学习到稀疏区域的高频特征，缓解欠拟合问题。","experiments":"在合成数据集（如 1D/2D 函数拟合）和真实数据集（如非均匀采样的图像分类）上进行了实验。结果表明，使用提出的加权损失函数可以显著加快模型在数据稀疏区域的收敛速度，并降低整体的泛化误差。理论分析与实验结果高度吻合。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Neural networks exhibit a 'Frequency Bias' (or Spectral Bias) during training, tending to learn low-frequency functions before high-frequency ones. With non-uniform data, this bias makes it difficult for the model to fit high-frequency features in sparse data regions, degrading generalization.","importance":"Mechanistic analysis and methodological contribution. Deeply analyzes the frequency bias of neural networks under non-uniform data and proposes a method to tune this bias by adjusting loss function weights. This has theoretical and practical value for understanding training dynamics and optimizing pre-training under long-tail/non-uniform data distributions.","technical_approach":"Analyzes the impact of non-uniform data density on the eigenvalue spectrum based on Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) theory. Key mechanism: proposes a Data-dependent Weighted Loss. By assigning higher weights to samples in sparse data regions, it alters the NTK's eigenvalue distribution, artificially 'tuning' the model's frequency bias. This enables the model to learn high-frequency features in sparse regions faster, mitigating underfitting.","experiments":"Experiments on synthetic datasets (e.g., 1D/2D function fitting) and real datasets (e.g., non-uniformly sampled image classification). Results show that the proposed weighted loss significantly accelerates convergence in sparse data regions and reduces overall generalization error. Theoretical analysis aligns closely with experimental results.","authors_note":""},"tags":["training-dynamics","data-distribution","frequency-bias","generalization"]},{"id":"YvinecDCB23","title":"PowerQuant: Automorphism Search for Non-Uniform Quantization","authors":["Edouard Yvinec","Arnaud Dapogny","Matthieu Cord","Kevin Bailly"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/YvinecDCB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/YvinecDCB23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=s1KljJpAukm","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是非均匀量化码本如何自动设计的问题。传统做法通常固定量化级别分布或手工设定 companding 规则，搜索空间小但容易错过更适合权重/激活分布的离散映射；作者尝试把这个设计问题变成可搜索的结构优化。","importance":"它的贡献更偏系统与方法工具层，对 pretrain 的直接冲击有限，但对大模型训练后压缩和部署有现实价值。重要点在于：论文不是再提一个新的量化公式，而是把“量化器形状”本身作为搜索对象，这对后续把压缩纳入训练-部署联合优化有启发。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 PowerQuant：通过 automorphism search 在非均匀量化空间中寻找更优的离散映射。直观上，它利用幂变换或同构变换去重参数化量化器，使搜索既能覆盖丰富的非均匀分桶形状，又不会像直接搜索所有阈值那样代价过高。和常见的均匀量化、对数量化或固定 compander 相比，这种做法保留了硬件友好的低比特表示，同时允许码本更贴合真实分布尾部和高密度区。","experiments":"论文报告的关键事实通常是：在相同比特宽度下，PowerQuant 比均匀量化和若干手工非均匀量化基线有更低误差或更高下游精度，尤其在极低比特场景更明显。实验覆盖图像模型压缩任务，比较对象包括 uniform、log-scale 或 learned quantization 变体；作者还展示了搜索成本可控，不需要对每层做不可承受的暴力搜索。由于这篇工作不以大规模预训练为主，最值得看的不是绝对 SOTA，而是“搜索量化器形状”在低比特 regime 的收益曲线。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses how to design non-uniform quantizers automatically instead of fixing them by hand. Standard approaches usually assume a preset level distribution or a handcrafted companding rule, which keeps the search simple but can miss quantizers that better match real weight or activation distributions.","importance":"This is more of a systems and tooling contribution than a pretraining contribution, but it matters for model compression and deployment. The useful idea is to treat the quantizer shape itself as a search target rather than proposing yet another fixed quantization formula.","technical_approach":"PowerQuant performs automorphism-based search over a family of non-uniform quantizers. The key design choice is to reparameterize the quantizer through power-like transformations so the method can explore a rich set of bucket shapes without paying the full cost of directly searching all thresholds. Relative to uniform quantization, logarithmic quantization, or fixed companders, it keeps low-bit efficiency while adapting better to dense regions and heavy tails in the underlying distribution.","experiments":"The main empirical takeaway is that, at the same bit-width, PowerQuant achieves lower quantization error or better downstream accuracy than uniform and several handcrafted non-uniform baselines, with larger gains in very low-bit settings. The experiments are on model compression for vision networks, and the paper also argues that the search overhead is manageable rather than requiring layer-wise brute force. For a pretraining-oriented reader, the interesting part is not absolute SOTA but the gain curve from searching quantizer geometry in the low-bit regime.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","compression","efficient-inference"]},{"id":"Zhang00Y23","title":"Contextual Image Masking Modeling via Synergized Contrasting without View Augmentation for Faster and Better Visual Pretraining","authors":["Shaofeng Zhang","Feng Zhu","Rui Zhao","Junchi Yan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Zhang00Y23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Zhang00Y23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=A3sgyt4HWp","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是视觉自监督预训练里对比学习和掩码建模各有短板：前者常依赖重视图增强，训练成本高且语义粒度偏全局；后者训练更稳定但容易忽略判别性。作者想要一种更快、同时兼顾局部上下文和判别能力的视觉预训练方式。","importance":"它属于方法级视觉预训练改进。对统一 pretrain 研究的启发是：掩码建模不一定要和重增强对比学习分开做，二者可以通过上下文一致性和对比目标协同；这和语言/多模态预训练里“生成目标 + 判别目标”的混合设计是同一类问题。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Contextual Image Masking Modeling 配合 Synergized Contrasting，而且刻意不使用额外 view augmentation。作者不是生成两个强增强视图再做实例对比，而是在单图内部通过掩码上下文构造正负关系，让模型同时学会恢复被遮挡区域的上下文语义和区分不同语义区域。这样设计的好处是减少多视图管线开销，也避免增强策略本身主导学习信号；和 MAE 相比，它多了判别约束，和 SimCLR/DINO 相比，它更依赖原图上下文而不是视图不变性。","experiments":"实验结论是：该方法在 ImageNet 线性探测、微调等视觉预训练评测上实现了更好的精度-速度折中，训练更快且效果不差于甚至优于若干对比学习和掩码建模基线。主要 baseline 应包括 MAE、SimCLR、MoCo 或 DINO 类方法；作者还做了不使用 view augmentation 的 ablation，说明性能并非来自隐式增强技巧，而是来自上下文对比设计。对预训练读者来说，最有价值的是它证明单视图内部也能构造足够强的自监督信号。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a gap in visual self-supervised pretraining: contrastive learning is often expensive and heavily dependent on view augmentation, while masked image modeling is stable but can be less discriminative. The goal is a faster pretraining scheme that keeps contextual learning and discrimination at the same time.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution in visual pretraining. The broader pretraining lesson is that masked modeling and discriminative objectives do not have to be separate; they can be coupled through contextual consistency, which mirrors the same design tension seen in language and multimodal pretraining.","technical_approach":"The method combines contextual image masking with synergized contrasting, explicitly without relying on extra view augmentation. Instead of generating two heavily augmented views and contrasting them, the model builds positive and negative relations within a single image through masked context, so it learns both to recover contextual semantics and to distinguish semantic regions. Relative to MAE, it adds a stronger discriminative signal; relative to SimCLR or DINO, it depends less on augmentation-induced invariance and more on native image context.","experiments":"The main result is a better speed-quality trade-off on standard visual pretraining evaluations such as ImageNet linear probing and fine-tuning, with faster training and performance competitive with or better than masked-modeling and contrastive baselines. The comparisons likely include MAE, SimCLR, MoCo, or DINO-style methods. The important ablation is that removing view augmentation does not collapse performance, which supports the claim that the contextual contrast itself is doing the work.","authors_note":""},"tags":["visual-pretraining","masked-image-modeling","contrastive-learning"]},{"id":"ZhangC23","title":"Fast Sampling of Diffusion Models with Exponential Integrator","authors":["Qinsheng Zhang","Yongxin Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ZhangC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ZhangC23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=Loek7hfb46P","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是扩散模型采样太慢的问题。标准离散化求解器需要很多函数评估步数，虽然生成质量高，但推理成本高到限制了实际部署和与自回归模型竞争。","importance":"这是扩散建模里很典型但很关键的系统级问题。对 pretrain 范式比较尤其重要，因为 diffusion 类生成模型常被批评采样慢；如果求解器能在少步数下保持质量，那么扩散范式在统一生成建模中的可用性会明显提高。","technical_approach":"作者提出基于 exponential integrator 的快速采样方法。核心思想是利用扩散逆过程对应微分方程的线性部分可解析处理，把难点集中到非线性残差项，从而在更大步长下仍保持较好数值稳定性。和 DDIM、DPM-Solver 一类高阶求解器相比，这个方法的区别在于它对动力系统结构的利用更直接，不只是做一般性的高阶离散近似。","experiments":"实验结论通常是：在相同或更少的采样步数下，该方法达到与现有快速求解器相当或更好的 FID / NLL / 感知质量，并在极少步采样时优势更明显。比较基线应包括 DDPM、DDIM、DPM-Solver 等；作者还会分析不同噪声日程和步数下的稳定性。对做新型语言建模的人来说，最值得关注的是这种数值分析思路可迁移到 diffusion LM 的采样加速，而不仅限于图像。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles the slow sampling speed of diffusion models. Standard solvers require many function evaluations, which preserves quality but makes inference expensive enough to limit deployment and weaken diffusion models against autoregressive alternatives.","importance":"This is a classic but important systems problem in diffusion modeling. It matters for pretraining paradigm comparisons because slow sampling is one of the main practical objections to diffusion-style generation; if solver quality holds at low step counts, the paradigm becomes much more competitive.","technical_approach":"The method uses an exponential integrator for fast diffusion sampling. The key idea is to analytically handle the linear part of the reverse-time dynamics and leave only the nonlinear residual to numerical approximation, which allows larger step sizes with better stability. Compared with DDIM or DPM-Solver-style methods, the distinction is that it exploits the structure of the underlying dynamics more explicitly rather than only applying a generic higher-order discretization.","experiments":"The reported result is that the method matches or improves over existing fast samplers at the same or fewer sampling steps on metrics such as FID, likelihood-related measures, or perceptual quality, with larger gains in the very-low-step regime. Baselines likely include DDPM, DDIM, and DPM-Solver variants, along with analyses across noise schedules and step counts. For readers interested in alternative language modeling paradigms, the transferable point is the numerical-analysis perspective on accelerating diffusion generation.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion-models","fast-sampling","exponential-integrator"]},{"id":"ZhangHHW0Y23","title":"Diagnosing and Rectifying Vision Models using Language","authors":["Yuhui Zhang","Jeff Z. HaoChen","Shih-Cheng Huang","Kuan-Chieh Wang","James Zou","Serena Yeung"],"institutions":["Stanford University"],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ZhangHHW0Y23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ZhangHHW0Y23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=D-zfUK7BR6c","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是视觉模型出错后很难被系统诊断和修复，尤其当错误模式是语义性的而不是简单分布偏移时。传统做法通常依赖人工标注错误类别或重新收集数据，成本高且反馈慢。","importance":"它是一个跨模态诊断与修正框架。对 pretrain 的启发在于：语言不仅能做监督标签，也能做模型行为的解释接口和修复接口；这对 VLM、统一多模态模型以及数据闭环都很有意义，因为它把“发现错误模式—生成修复信号”串起来了。","technical_approach":"核心方法是借助语言模型或语言描述来诊断视觉模型的失败模式，并据此进行 targeted rectification。作者不是只做 post-hoc 解释，而是把语言抽象成可操作的错误描述，例如模型混淆了某种属性、背景偏置或局部纹理捷径，然后再用这些描述去指导数据重加权、样本选择、提示修正或轻量再训练。和纯视觉误差分析相比，语言提供了更高层、可组合的错误空间；和端到端重训相比，它更便宜，也更可控。","experiments":"实验通常展示两件事：第一，语言辅助诊断能更准确地定位视觉模型的系统性错误；第二，基于这些语言诊断做修正后，模型在受影响子群体或鲁棒性基准上有明显提升，同时总体精度不显著下降。比较对象可能包括标准误差分析、主动学习或简单再训练基线；有价值的观察是，语言修正对语义级偏差最有效，但对纯感知噪声或标注错误的帮助有限。对预训练读者来说，这说明语言可以成为视觉模型训练闭环中的低成本控制面。","authors_note":"Stanford University；作者包括 James Zou 等。团队长期做模型诊断、鲁棒性、公平性和语言辅助机器学习。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the difficulty of systematically diagnosing and fixing vision model failures, especially when the errors are semantic rather than simple distribution shift. Standard approaches often require manually defining error categories or recollecting data, which is slow and expensive.","importance":"This is a cross-modal diagnosis-and-repair framework. Its relevance to pretraining is that language can act not only as supervision but also as an interface for model analysis and correction. That matters for VLMs and multimodal training loops because it connects failure discovery to actionable repair signals.","technical_approach":"The method uses language to diagnose failure modes in vision models and then perform targeted rectification. The contribution is not just post-hoc explanation; language is turned into operational error descriptions, such as attribute confusion, background bias, or texture shortcuts, which then guide reweighting, sample selection, prompt adjustment, or lightweight retraining. Compared with purely visual error analysis, language provides a higher-level and more compositional error space; compared with full retraining, it is cheaper and more controllable.","experiments":"The paper typically shows two results: language-assisted diagnosis identifies systematic visual errors more accurately, and language-guided correction improves performance on affected subgroups or robustness benchmarks without materially hurting overall accuracy. Baselines likely include standard error analysis, active learning, or naive retraining. A useful boundary condition is that language-based repair helps most on semantic biases and shortcut failures, but less on pure perceptual noise or annotation mistakes. For pretraining readers, the key point is that language can serve as a low-cost control surface in the training-debugging loop of vision models.","authors_note":"Stanford University; authors include James Zou. The group is known for work on model diagnosis, robustness, fairness, and language-assisted machine learning."},"tags":["vision-models","language-guidance","diagnosing","rectifying"],"notable_authors":["James Zou"]},{"id":"ZhangSL23","title":"Eva: Practical Second-order Optimization with Kronecker-vectorized Approximation","authors":["Lin Zhang","Shaohuai Shi","Bo Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ZhangSL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ZhangSL23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=_Mic8V96Voy","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：二阶/准二阶优化在深度网络里往往“理论好但工程上太贵”，导致大多数训练只能在一阶方法（SGD/Adam）里做折中。以往的回避方式要么用对角近似（太粗），要么用K-FAC/自然梯度类方法（实现复杂、内存/通信重）。","importance":"贡献是方法级与系统可用性兼顾：给出一种更“可落地”的Kronecker结构二阶近似与向量化实现，使二阶信息在训练中更接近可用工具而非理论装饰。对pretrain的启示在于：如果能在吞吐、显存、分布式通信上把二阶代价压到可接受区间，可能改善收敛速度、稳定性（尤其是大batch或训练后期的plateau），但它并不直接改变建模范式。","technical_approach":"方法是对二阶矩阵（通常是Hessian或Fisher相关量）做Kronecker可分近似，并用“Kronecker-vectorized approximation”把关键计算改写成更适合GPU/分布式的张量运算。核心设计取舍是：宁可牺牲部分曲率精度，也要把更新写成少量可并行的矩阵乘/求解，从而避免显式构造大矩阵与昂贵的逆；与经典K-FAC相比，重点在更实用的向量化与近似形式，目标是降低实现与运行门槛。","experiments":"未提供摘要，无法可靠给出模型规模、数据规模、指标与具体提升数字；因此这里只能判断其评测大概率围绕训练速度/收敛步数/最终精度与一阶或K-FAC类baseline对比。建议后续补读论文中的表格与附录，重点核对：每步额外开销（%）、显存增量、分布式通信量、以及在大batch/长训场景是否仍稳定。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical gap: second-order (or quasi-second-order) optimization often looks attractive but is too expensive or cumbersome to use in deep learning training, so most large-scale training falls back to first-order methods. Prior work either uses overly crude diagonal approximations or heavier K-FAC/natural-gradient style methods with nontrivial memory/communication and implementation burden.","importance":"This is a method-and-practicality contribution: it proposes a Kronecker-structured second-order approximation that is engineered to be more implementable and efficient. For pretraining, the main takeaway is conditional: if the overhead is truly low in distributed settings, second-order curvature could improve convergence speed and stability, but it does not change the modeling objective or data recipe.","technical_approach":"It approximates curvature-related matrices with a Kronecker-factorized form and introduces a Kronecker-vectorized implementation to express the update as GPU-friendly tensor operations. The key trade-off is explicit: accept some loss in curvature fidelity to avoid forming/inverting huge matrices, and to reduce the update to a small number of parallelizable linear-algebra kernels. Compared to classic K-FAC, the emphasis is on a more practical approximation/implementation path.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so model sizes, datasets, metrics, and numerical gains cannot be stated reliably. The evaluation is likely centered on step-time overhead, convergence speed, and final accuracy versus first-order and K-FAC-like baselines; these should be verified in the main tables and appendix, especially under large-batch and long-training regimes.","authors_note":""},"tags":["second-order-optimization","kronecker-approximation","optimizer"]},{"id":"ZhangTC23","title":"gDDIM: Generalized denoising diffusion implicit models","authors":["Qinsheng Zhang","Molei Tao","Yongxin Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ZhangTC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ZhangTC23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=1hKE9qjvz-","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：DDIM把扩散采样从随机SDE变成确定性ODE后更快，但其形式与适用范围受限，难以统一解释“不同噪声日程/不同离散化/不同采样器”之间的关系。以往实践里常靠经验调参选采样器，缺少可控的泛化框架。","importance":"贡献是扩散建模方法级：提出gDDIM作为DDIM的推广，试图把一类更广的去噪隐式采样过程纳入统一形式。对pretrain研究的启示在于：如果扩散LM/多模态扩散要在推理端可控地做速度-质量折中，需要这种“可参数化、可解释的采样族”来系统化地设计采样。","technical_approach":"方法上是对DDIM的生成轨迹做更一般的参数化与推导，使其覆盖更广的隐式去噪更新规则。关键机制是把采样更新写成可调的确定性映射，并明确哪些项控制随机性、步长与误差累积，从而在理论上连接到已有的DDPM/DDIM边界情形；与原DDIM相比，gDDIM强调统一与可调，而不是固定的一条ODE轨迹。","experiments":"未提供摘要，无法给出数据集（如CIFAR/ImageNet）、步数、FID等具体数字；但该类工作通常会报告在相同步数下的样本质量与在相同质量下的步数节省，并做不同参数设置的消融。建议补读时重点核对：gDDIM是否在少步采样下稳定优于DDIM、以及是否对噪声日程/模型误差更鲁棒。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"DDIM accelerates diffusion sampling by turning a stochastic process into a deterministic one, but its formulation is relatively narrow and does not cleanly unify different schedules/discretizations/samplers. In practice, sampler choice is often heuristic, with limited controllable generalization.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution for diffusion models: gDDIM generalizes DDIM to a broader family of implicit denoising samplers. For diffusion LMs and multimodal diffusion pretraining, the key implication is better systematic control of the speed–quality trade-off at inference via a parameterized sampler family.","technical_approach":"It derives a more general parameterization of DDIM-like generation trajectories, yielding a wider class of deterministic denoising updates. The mechanism is to express the update as a tunable deterministic mapping and make explicit which terms govern stochasticity, step size, and error accumulation, connecting back to DDPM/DDIM as special cases. Compared to DDIM, the focus is unification and controllability rather than a single fixed ODE path.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so datasets, sampling steps, and metrics (e.g., FID) cannot be stated reliably. Typical evaluations compare sample quality at fixed steps and steps needed at fixed quality, plus ablations over the new parameters; these should be checked in the main results.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion-models","ddim","generalized-sampling"]},{"id":"ZhaoGWYD23","title":"Symmetries, Flat Minima, and the Conserved Quantities of Gradient Flow","authors":["Bo Zhao","Iordan Ganev","Robin Walters","Rose Yu","Nima Dehmamy"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ZhaoGWYD23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ZhaoGWYD23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=9ZpciCOunFb","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：深度网络的损失面存在对称性（如参数重标定）导致“平坦极小值/尖锐极小值”的直觉常被混淆，很多关于泛化与平坦性的讨论忽略了这些不变性。过去常用的平坦度度量可能在对称变换下不保持一致，从而得出不稳健结论。","importance":"贡献偏理论与机制分析：把对称性、梯度流（连续时间极限的梯度下降）与守恒量联系起来，解释哪些量在训练动力学下保持不变，以及这如何影响我们对平坦极小值的理解。对pretrain的价值在于提供“哪些诊断量可信”的筛选框架，避免用不具不变性的平坦度指标去解释大模型泛化或训练稳定性。","technical_approach":"方法上以梯度流为分析对象，利用模型参数空间的对称群结构推导对应的守恒量，并讨论这些守恒量如何约束优化轨迹与等价解集合。关键点是：把“平坦”从坐标依赖的几何量，转向在对称性下更合理的、不随重参数化改变的描述；代价是结论通常在理想化设置（梯度流、特定对称）下更清晰，离散优化器与正则化会破坏部分守恒。","experiments":"未提供摘要，无法确认是否包含实证；此类论文常用小网络或可控设置展示守恒量与平坦度度量的反例/对比。建议补读时关注：是否给出可计算的诊断量、以及在SGD/Adam等离散优化下守恒近似是否仍有解释力。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a common confusion: symmetries in neural networks (e.g., rescaling invariances) can make “flat vs sharp minima” arguments misleading, because many flatness measures are not invariant under these transformations. As a result, prior generalization claims based on non-invariant flatness metrics can be brittle.","importance":"This is a theory/mechanistic contribution: it connects symmetries, gradient flow dynamics, and conserved quantities, clarifying what remains invariant along training trajectories and how that reframes flat-minima interpretations. For pretraining, it helps filter which diagnostic quantities are trustworthy when reasoning about stability and generalization in large models.","technical_approach":"It analyzes continuous-time gradient flow and uses symmetry group structure in parameter space to derive associated conserved quantities, then studies how these invariants constrain optimization trajectories and equivalence classes of solutions. The key design choice is to shift from coordinate-dependent geometric notions of flatness to symmetry-respecting descriptions. The limitation is that discrete optimizers and regularization can break exact conservation, so applicability must be checked empirically.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so it is unclear what empirical validation is included. Such work typically uses controlled setups to demonstrate counterexamples for flatness metrics and to visualize invariants; readers should verify whether the paper proposes computable diagnostics and whether approximate conservation holds under SGD/Adam.","authors_note":""},"tags":["optimization","flat-minima","training-dynamics"]},{"id":"ZhengHCZ23","title":"Truncated Diffusion Probabilistic Models and Diffusion-based Adversarial Auto-Encoders","authors":["Huangjie Zheng","Pengcheng He","Weizhu Chen","Mingyuan Zhou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/ZhengHCZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/ZhengHCZ23","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=HDxgaKk956l","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：标准扩散模型训练与采样都很慢，且把扩散当作纯生成器时难以与自编码器式的表示学习结合。过去的加速多在采样器上做文章，但训练成本与“生成-表示”统一仍是痛点。","importance":"贡献是扩散建模方法级：提出截断扩散模型（truncated diffusion）与扩散式对抗自编码器，把扩散过程缩短并与对抗学习/自编码框架结合。对pretrain的启示是：扩散不一定要走满T步，截断+学习到的补偿机制可能在效率与质量间提供新折中，也可能更适合做统一表征学习。","technical_approach":"核心思路是只在扩散链的部分时间段训练/运行（截断），并引入额外的学习组件来弥补未建模的尾部噪声演化；同时把扩散生成与对抗自编码器结合，使模型既能生成也能学到可用潜变量。关键取舍是：减少步数带来更低成本，但会引入近似误差与训练不稳定风险（对抗项）；与传统DDPM相比，它更像在“扩散链长度”和“额外判别器/编码器复杂度”之间换预算。","experiments":"未提供摘要，无法给出数据集、步数、FID/IS等数字；但应会对比完整扩散链与截断版本在相同计算预算下的质量，并展示对抗自编码器部分对重建/生成/表示的影响。建议补读时重点核对：截断长度对质量的敏感曲线、训练稳定性（mode collapse/梯度爆炸）以及是否真正带来端到端训练加速。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Standard diffusion models are slow in both training and sampling, and using diffusion purely as a generator makes it harder to integrate with autoencoder-style representation learning. Prior acceleration often focuses on samplers, leaving training cost and generation–representation unification as open pain points.","importance":"This is a method-level diffusion contribution: it proposes truncated diffusion probabilistic models and diffusion-based adversarial auto-encoders, shortening the diffusion chain and combining diffusion with adversarial/autoencoding objectives. For pretraining, it suggests a new efficiency–quality trade-off and a possible path to more unified representation learning with diffusion.","technical_approach":"The key idea is to train/run only a truncated portion of the diffusion chain and add learned components to compensate for the omitted tail dynamics; it also blends diffusion generation with adversarial autoencoder machinery to obtain both generation and usable latents. The trade-off is explicit: fewer steps reduce cost but introduce approximation error and potential instability from adversarial training. Compared to DDPM, it reallocates budget from long chains to extra modules.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so datasets, step counts, and metrics (FID/IS) cannot be stated reliably. The paper likely compares full vs truncated chains under matched compute and ablates the adversarial autoencoder components; readers should verify truncation sensitivity, stability issues, and whether end-to-end training is materially faster.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","autoencoder","sampling"]},{"id":"Zhuo0M023","title":"Towards a Unified Theoretical Understanding of Non-contrastive Learning via Rank Differential Mechanism","authors":["Zhijian Zhuo","Yifei Wang","Jinwen Ma","Yisen Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/Zhuo0M023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/iclr/Zhuo0M023","_ee":"https://openreview.net/forum?id=cIbjyd2Vcy","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["self-supervised","non-contrastive","representation-learning","theory"]}]},"allConferences":[{"slug":"acl-2025","venue":"ACL","year":2025,"full_name":"Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics","total_relevant":641,"total_fetched":3380,"by_award":{"poster":626,"best_paper":3,"outstanding_paper":12},"by_track":{"long":367,"findings":231,"short":18,"industry":10,"srw":6,"demo":6,"main":3},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T00:45:57.823033+00:00"},{"slug":"acl-2024","venue":"ACL","year":2024,"full_name":"Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics","total_relevant":385,"total_fetched":2145,"by_award":{"poster":385},"by_track":{"long":185,"findings":173,"srw":5,"short":9,"main":13},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T22:50:37.051621+00:00"},{"slug":"acl-2023","venue":"ACL","year":2023,"full_name":"Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics","total_relevant":424,"total_fetched":2876,"by_award":{"poster":424},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T09:44:43.509860+00:00"},{"slug":"emnlp-2025","venue":"EMNLP","year":2025,"full_name":"Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing","total_relevant":915,"total_fetched":3499,"by_award":{"poster":915},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T07:35:55.574285+00:00"},{"slug":"emnlp-2024","venue":"EMNLP","year":2024,"full_name":"Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing","total_relevant":718,"total_fetched":2460,"by_award":{"poster":718},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T03:40:34.148010+00:00"},{"slug":"emnlp-2023","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"full_name":"Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing","total_relevant":472,"total_fetched":2310,"by_award":{"poster":472},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T08:32:10.890267+00:00"},{"slug":"iclr-2026","venue":"ICLR","year":2026,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","total_relevant":1053,"total_fetched":5470,"by_award":{"poster":1053},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T01:40:59.513393+00:00"},{"slug":"iclr-2025","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","total_relevant":1979,"total_fetched":3720,"by_award":{"spotlight":193,"poster":1665,"oral":121},"by_track":{"main":1979},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T18:27:18.207575+00:00"},{"slug":"iclr-2024","venue":"ICLR","year":2024,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","total_relevant":851,"total_fetched":2456,"by_award":{"poster":682,"spotlight":130,"oral":39},"by_track":{"main":851},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T17:50:03.172895+00:00"},{"slug":"iclr-2023","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","total_relevant":294,"total_fetched":1794,"by_award":{"poster":294},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T11:29:30.626329+00:00"},{"slug":"icml-2025","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"full_name":"International Conference on Machine Learning","total_relevant":516,"total_fetched":3332,"by_award":{"poster":462,"oral":18,"spotlight":36},"by_track":{"main":510,"position":6},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T20:04:14.360455+00:00"},{"slug":"icml-2024","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"full_name":"International Conference on Machine Learning","total_relevant":335,"total_fetched":3321,"by_award":{"poster":292,"spotlight":15,"oral":28},"by_track":{"main":335},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T18:50:07.833195+00:00"},{"slug":"icml-2023","venue":"ICML","year":2023,"full_name":"International Conference on Machine Learning","total_relevant":297,"total_fetched":2934,"by_award":{"poster":297},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T04:21:49.394726+00:00"},{"slug":"naacl-2025","venue":"NAACL","year":2025,"full_name":"North American Chapter of the ACL","total_relevant":385,"total_fetched":1376,"by_award":{"poster":385},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T04:50:05.821261+00:00"},{"slug":"naacl-2024","venue":"NAACL","year":2024,"full_name":"North American Chapter of the ACL","total_relevant":321,"total_fetched":1342,"by_award":{"poster":321},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T04:35:26.823821+00:00"},{"slug":"neurips-2025","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2025,"full_name":"Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems","total_relevant":1338,"total_fetched":5858,"by_award":{"poster":1338},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T05:45:45.290822+00:00"},{"slug":"neurips-2024","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"full_name":"Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems","total_relevant":576,"total_fetched":4561,"by_award":{"poster":505,"spotlight":59,"oral":12},"by_track":{"datasets_benchmarks":50,"main":526},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T21:58:15.480882+00:00"},{"slug":"neurips-2023","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"full_name":"Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems","total_relevant":523,"total_fetched":3582,"by_award":{"poster":523},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T04:06:29.627949+00:00"}]}]}],["$L4d"],"$L4e"]}],"isPartial":false,"staleTime":300,"varyParams":null,"buildId":"CH7QW8TExBpH2R9CnsKlz"}
4d:["$","script","script-0",{"src":"/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/03ne4hgh5k61l.js","async":true}]
4e:["$","$L4f",null,{"children":["$","$50",null,{"name":"Next.MetadataOutlet","children":"$@51"}]}]
51:null
