1:"$Sreact.fragment"
2:I[8669,["/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/08cykig6vtx_p.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/07qi2okp-.yp9.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0frujd.eyhz4o.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0n4z.7yu76je-.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0otjhi71vbmnx.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0j1uy9t~zxcf0.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/1304s0wcp2kce.js"],"DateSidebar"]
3:I[12454,["/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/08cykig6vtx_p.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/07qi2okp-.yp9.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0frujd.eyhz4o.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0n4z.7yu76je-.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0otjhi71vbmnx.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0j1uy9t~zxcf0.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/1304s0wcp2kce.js"],"WeeklyView"]
49:I[97367,["/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/08cykig6vtx_p.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/07qi2okp-.yp9.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0frujd.eyhz4o.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0n4z.7yu76je-.js"],"OutletBoundary"]
4a:"$Sreact.suspense"
4:T852,No new algorithms are proposed; the core contribution is the integration of existing distributed training components (FSDP/ZeRO-3, dataset sharding, checkpoint fault tolerance, hardware telemetry) into a B300-adapted operational discipline, delivering four reusable artifacts:
1. Telemetry-based triage system: Abandons GPU utilization, uses B300-calibrated board power bands combined with three dimensions — cross-rank symmetry and duration — to rapidly classify compute (~700W+), communication (~640W, uniform power across all ranks), data starvation (~575W, scattered cross-rank power), checkpoint/deadlock (~190W; checkpoint only drops power on rank 0 and recovers within 2 minutes, deadlock shows zero power on one rank with full load on others and no recovery), and idle states. It is paired with a one-line monitoring command and decision workflow, requiring no profiler attachment to locate faults.
2. Controlled negative results: Validates that three common optimizations are ineffective at the 16-GPU 32B full fine-tuning scale: local NVMe caching brings no throughput gain over NFS (the bottleneck is tokenization and multi-tenant CPU contention, not storage media), enabling gradient checkpointing reduces throughput by 1.6x (recomputation is pure waste given B300’s sufficient memory), and corrects an earlier misdiagnosis of a power anomaly.
3. Calibrated scaling reference: Provides full-epoch throughput, GPU-hour, and memory footprint measurements for 4/8/16-GPU B300 setups.
4. Failure case and hardening: Identifies an end-of-epoch NCCL deadlock caused by packing imbalance (unequal block counts across ranks after packing; ranks that finish first enter the next collective communication wait early, triggering a permanent deadlock) — a scenario not covered by PyTorch Join or drop_last. Proposes a hardening scheme consisting of a 2.7-second preflight gate (verify all ranks have identical block counts before launch, truncate to the minimum otherwise) and an external watcher (monitor power and throughput anomalies to trigger automatic restart), and accounts for the compute cost of silent deadlocks.5:T48c,The testbed is a 32.76B-parameter dense model (Qwen3-32B) trained on 2 nodes with 16 NVIDIA B300 GPUs, using FSDP FULL_SHARD (ZeRO-3). Training config: sequence length 2048, micro-batch size 1, gradient accumulation steps 8, global batch size 128 sequences (262,144 tokens/step), ~3,854 steps per epoch, AdamW with cosine warmup, lr=1e-5, bf16 mixed precision, gradient checkpointing disabled.
Key measured data:
- Memory: Per-GPU model state is 32.8GB, total footprint including activations is 82GB, 30% of B300’s 275GB memory;
- Throughput: Disabled gradient checkpointing is 1.6x faster than enabled;
- Failure cost: An undetected packing imbalance deadlock led to 12 hours of no output, corresponding to 192 wasted GPU-hours;
- Data pipeline: Without packing, throughput collapsed from 52k tok/s to 21k tok/s under multi-tenant NFS load; packing eliminated this fluctuation (core benefit is determinism, not throughput gain);
- Scaling efficiency: Full-epoch measured GPU-hours for 4/8/16-GPU setups are provided as a budget reference for similar-scale tasks.
All conclusions are validated via controlled对照 experiments to eliminate confounding variables.6:T45e,1. First read Section 3 (Telemetry-Based Triage) carefully: focus on the power band table and the symmetry distinction logic between deadlock and checkpoint, which is the most directly reusable operational tool.
2. Next prioritize Section 5 (Packing Imbalance Deadlock Case): understand the boundaries of existing distributed tools and the hardening logic of preflight gate + watcher, a hidden problem commonly encountered in large-batch training.
3. Section 4 (Negative Results): Cross-check against your own training optimization checklist to avoid ineffective optimizations on B300 and similar large-memory accelerators.
4. Section 6 (Calibrated Scaling Reference): Use directly as a reference table for hardware selection and budget estimation.
5. Skip Section 8 (Related Work); no algorithmic innovation is presented in this report.
Deep dive directions: Extend the power triage logic to calibration for other hardware (e.g., H100, H200), or integrate with DCGM for automated fault detection; the packing imbalance problem can be extended to consistency verification workflow design for pretraining data sharding.7:T5c8,The pipeline has two stages. First, the authors estimate latent task difficulty from observed agent-task outcomes. Each trial is treated as a Bernoulli observation, forming a partially observed binary response matrix over agents and tasks. They fit a one-parameter logistic IRT model, or Rasch model, with one scalar ability parameter θ_a per agent configuration and one scalar difficulty parameter β_t per task. This is preferable to raw pass rate because difficulty is inferred relative to a population of agents on a shared scale, making it more suitable for cross-benchmark comparison.

Second, they train predictors of β_t using only pre-rollout features. These include textual task descriptions, environment and action-space descriptions, metadata, and uncertainty-related signals such as entropy that can be obtained without full interaction. A major methodological contribution is the evaluation protocol. The paper argues that response AUC can look strong even when task-level difficulty estimates are poor, so it emphasizes rank-based metrics such as Spearman correlation for judging whether the predictor actually learns difficulty ordering. The residual analysis is also important: discrepancies between predicted and observed IRT difficulty are used diagnostically. Large positive residuals often indicate hidden hardness factors such as infeasible environments or broken evaluators, while large negative residuals may reveal familiarity, templating, or shortcuts.8:T525,The empirical foundation is substantial. The main analysis subset contains 5,230 tasks from 17 benchmarks, evaluated by 497 agent configurations built from 216 models and 90 scaffolds. The full corpus includes 415,470 agent-task outcomes. Domains span coding and SWE, function calling, web navigation, computer use, terminal tasks, math, ML, cybersecurity, and general-purpose suites. Task dates range from 2010 to 2026, and each agent-task pair has about 1.2 trials on average.

The headline numbers are straightforward. Under K-fold evaluation, the combined feature set reaches Spearman ρ = 0.399, significantly better than the baseline at p < 0.001. Under out-of-distribution evaluation, it reaches ρ = 0.225. Among single feature families, entropy performs best. The paper also shows that response AUC can remain high even when task-level difficulty ranking is weak, which supports the claim that rank-based evaluation is the more faithful metric. The residual case studies are especially useful: some tasks predicted to be moderate turn out to be much harder because the environment is infeasible or the verifier is faulty, while others that look difficult in text are actually easy due to familiarity or shortcuts. That makes the predictor useful not only for scoring tasks, but also for debugging benchmarks.9:T4d8,CoBa formulates test-time reasoning as a unified compute allocation problem with four action types: candidate generation, lightweight verification, strong verification, and stopping. Two cost metrics are defined: total token cost (sum of input and output tokens across all model calls) and parameter-weighted token cost (tokens scaled by model parameter count to reflect relative compute of different model sizes). The staged routing policy first uses a small fixed warm-up budget to generate a diverse candidate pool, then scores all candidates with cheap verification (answer frequency + small model judge scores). Based on these scores, the system decides to stop, sample more candidates, or route high-uncertainty candidates to stronger verifiers. The final ranking score combines answer frequency, lightweight judge scores, optional process verifier scores, and strong verifier scores; unrouted candidates are not artificially penalized or boosted by missing strong verification signals. Three variants trace a cost-accuracy curve: CoBa-Routed-Light (2 candidates + lightweight verification), CoBa-Routed (max 4 candidates + 2 routed to strong verification), and CoBa-Routed-Strong (max 8 candidates + 4 routed to strong verification).a:T78a,方法核心是给标准 transformer 产生的 token-level latent h_t 再叠一层 higher-level abstract latent u_t，并在两个层级上同时施加自监督预测约束。具体地，模型先用主干 G_theta 从前缀 X_{1:t} 得到 lower-level latent h_t。然后用一个 sliding-window attention 模块，在最近 k 个 lower states 上做聚合，得到 higher-level latent u_t = SWA(h_{t-k+1:t})。这个设计不是任意加一层 pooling，而是显式把上层状态绑定到一个局部时间窗口，让它表示更粗粒度、跨多个 token 的抽象动态。训练时一共学四个映射：标准输出头 p_theta；lower dynamics p_psi，用于 NextLat 风格的一步 latent transition consistency；upper dynamics p_phi，用于在 abstract latent 上做 k 步前瞻预测；combined head p_rho，用 lower 与 upper latent 联合做 next-token prediction。总损失由五部分组成：标准 NTP loss、lower-level transition consistency loss、一个 KL 项、higher-level transition consistency loss、以及 combined NTP loss。论文里一个很细但重要的实现点是 stop-gradient 的放置：在 combined NTP 路径里，higher-level latent 由带 stop-grad 的 lower states 经过 SWA 得到。这样 combined head 的交叉熵只训练 SWA 和上层表示，不会反向改写 h_t。作者的理由很充分：如果不切断这条梯度，token-level 表示 h_t 会同时受到标准 NTP、lower transition consistency、以及经 SWA 回流的 combined-head 监督，形成重复计数和相互竞争的优化信号。这个处理说明作者不是把多头损失机械相加，而是在认真控制不同目标对表示空间的职责分工。另一个关键点是推理阶段只保留标准 NTP head，整个层级 apparatus 都是训练时辅助项，因此没有额外 inference overhead；如果愿意用速度换精度，也可以考虑 combined NTP，但当前实现默认不用。b:T5e6,HiLP starts from a standard transformer backbone that produces lower-level token latents h_t = G_theta(X_{1:t}). It then builds a higher-level abstract latent u_t by applying a sliding-window attention module over the most recent k lower-level states, u_t = SWA(h_{t-k+1:t}). This upper latent is meant to capture a coarser temporal abstraction over multiple tokens. The model jointly learns four parameterized components: the standard token output head p_theta, a lower-level dynamics model p_psi for NextLat-style transition consistency, an upper-level dynamics model p_phi that predicts k steps ahead in the abstract latent space, and a combined head p_rho that predicts the next token from both lower and upper latents. Training uses a weighted sum of five losses: standard NTP, lower-level latent transition consistency, a KL term, higher-level transition consistency, and a combined NTP loss. A subtle but important implementation detail is the stop-gradient placement. In the combined-NTP path, the upper latent is computed from stop-grad lower states before SWA. This prevents the combined-head cross-entropy from backpropagating into h_t through the SWA window. The authors explicitly argue that otherwise the lower token-level representation would receive overlapping and competing supervision from standard NTP, lower-level transition consistency, and the combined head. At inference time, only the standard NTP head is used, so the hierarchical apparatus acts purely as a training-time regularizer.c:T4f3,The experimental setup is reasonably substantial for a method paper: 1B-parameter models pretrained on 100B tokens using 8 NVIDIA B200 GPUs. Evaluation has two parts. First, zero-shot downstream performance is measured with LM Evaluation Harness on HumanEval and with DataComp for LLMs on symbolic and multi-step reasoning benchmarks. HiLP is reported to outperform the relevant baselines, including MTP and NextLat, especially on tasks that require longer-horizon reasoning or planning. Second, the paper evaluates speculative decoding on held-out code and Nemotron-Climbmix validation sets, reporting average accepted tokens per drafting step and draft–verifier argmax agreement for K=1..4. HiLP improves these metrics as well, suggesting that the learned latent dynamics are more rollout-stable and more useful for multi-token drafting. The most informative analysis is the latent prediction cross-entropy over rollout horizons up to 8 steps. HiLP preserves near-term prediction quality comparable to NextLat while reducing error at longer horizons, which directly supports the claim that hierarchical abstraction mitigates multi-step latent error accumulation. The excerpt does not include the full numeric tables, so exact gains cannot be quoted reliably here.d:T5a7,The main experiments use LLaDA-8B-Instruct. On GSM8K, pure decoding produces answer-only collapse on more than one third of problems with a 256-token canvas, and up to about 90% with a 512-token canvas. The final answer is typically committed in the first quarter of the denoising trajectory, while the median reasoning token is committed near the halfway point. A fixed 2×2 design crosses prompt type, reasoning requested versus answer-only, with decoder type, pure versus semi-AR. On 250 paired problems, the prompt–decoder interaction is about 35 percentage points with permutation p<1e-4. In the answer-only condition, the two decoders are statistically close. When CoT is requested, semi-AR gains about 31 points, while pure decoding gains only a small amount. The same pattern is replicated on Dream-7B and MATH-500; on MATH-500, collapse is smaller, but the order channel remains. Window restriction recovers most of the gap: all w≤64 improve pure decoding from 0.528 to roughly 0.82–0.85, close to semi-AR. A sliding window of 32 matches a block size of 32 within about one point, indicating that restricted reachability, rather than block structure itself, is the active mechanism. The paper also measures the cost: with full refinement, w=1 is best; at around eight committed tokens per step, the constraint can become harmful. In the useful regime, the gated decoder keeps near-AR accuracy with a reported 4× wall-clock speedup.e:T4c5,The controlled comparisons include Dense BLT, Hidden-only MoE, Hidden+Entropy MoE, and EntropyMoE, with matched data, updates, active parameters, and dense-copy initialization. The sparse setup uses 25 layers, 8 experts per layer, and Top-2 routing. The entropy-only router has about 400 effective routing parameters, compared with more than 4×10^5 parameters for hidden-state routing controls. EntropyMoE obtains the lowest held-out bits per byte, while the hidden-state MoE variants stay close to the dense baseline despite having the same expert pool and active capacity. The advantage over Hidden-only MoE is reproduced with a second continuation-training seed. Downstream accuracy is broadly similar; the clearest supported gain is on HellaSwag rather than a uniform task-level improvement. Byte-weighted accounting improves BPB over patch-count accounting in both tested seeds. Routing analysis shows clearer separation between low- and high-entropy patch assignments, but also concentration on a small subset of experts. Among sparse variants it has the best iteration time and valid-byte throughput, although sparse execution remains slower than Dense BLT because of dispatch, communication, and memory movement.f:T578,The method builds on the LapSum operator. Given scores r, a budget k, and a temperature parameter α<0, LapSum smooths the hard top-k threshold using the Laplace CDF and outputs probabilities p with the exact constraint ∑ p_i = k. The computational challenge is solving for the threshold b. Previous GPU implementations rely on bisection and rescan all n scores at each iteration.

Fast LapSum computes the whole threshold curve instead. After sorting, a stable prefix/suffix scan constructs the piecewise curve. The correct segment is found by an index lookup, and the threshold is obtained with a closed-form root calculation. The backward pass uses an analytical vector-Jacobian product with a single reduction, avoiding straight-through estimators or biased hard-mask surrogates.

For million-scale vectors, sorting itself becomes the bottleneck. The paper adds a probabilistic bracketing pipeline: a kernel-noised subsample localizes the likely threshold region, one streaming pass over the full vector keeps only the uncertain middle band, that band is sorted, and a verification step certifies the bracket before the exact LapSum solution is applied. This keeps expected work linear while still recovering the exact threshold and exact budget. Unlike DFTopK, which obtains linear-time behavior by relaxing the normalization constraint, Fast LapSum keeps the unrelaxed ∑ p_i = k constraint.10:T79f,The core system is AutoPrune. The central design choice is to avoid searching over full pruning programs from scratch. Instead, the method performs residual search around a strong base policy.

To make this possible, the authors introduce TPDSL, a token-pruning domain-specific language with 131 reusable atoms. These atoms cover four categories: budget control, token scoring, selection constraints, and token reassembly. The purpose is to compress the design space into structured operations that an LLM can manipulate reliably, rather than forcing it to rediscover the entire pruning algorithm in raw code.

The most important abstraction is the residual search-state representation. Each candidate consists of a strong base policy, a TPDSL-specified residual modification, and structural constraints that guarantee validity. At runtime, the base policy first selects tokens, and the residual policy is allowed to revise only a bounded quota of uncertain selections. This has several advantages: it preserves the reliable structure of existing human-designed policies, narrows the effective search space, and focuses the LLM on the local decisions that matter most. Because the residual rule is decoupled from runtime instantiation, the discovered policy can transfer across token budgets and model backbones.

Search is evaluator-in-the-loop. The LLM proposes TPDSL residuals, the system validates them against syntax and pruning constraints, then evaluates them on the target MLLM and feeds performance plus diagnostic signals back into the next iteration. This is closer to constrained policy search than to open-ended code generation.

Compared with prior pruning work, AutoPrune does not claim a single new importance metric. Instead, it treats existing heuristics as reusable structure and searches for better residual refinements on top of them. Compared with generic program synthesis, it wins by shrinking and structuring the search space.11:T511,The evaluation spans 14 multimodal benchmarks and 3 MLLM backbones. Two headline results stand out. First, under a 94.4% visual-token reduction ratio, AutoPrune preserves more than 99% of full-token performance on both LLaVA-1.5-7B and LLaVA-NeXT-7B. Second, in the 320-token efficiency setting on LLaVA-NeXT-7B, it reduces FLOPs by 9.9× and prefill latency by 6.4×. So the gains are not only in token count but also in actual inference cost.

The transfer experiments are especially important. The discovered policy transfers across token budgets without requiring a fresh search for every budget, and it also transfers across MLLM backbones. The paper further shows stable behavior across different LLM proposers, which supports the claim that the search-state representation is doing much of the heavy lifting. Another useful result is that AutoPrune consistently improves over multiple human-designed base policies, suggesting that residual search is not tied to one lucky baseline.

The ablations are where the design is best justified. Removing the residual formulation, replacing TPDSL with unconstrained full-program generation, or weakening structural constraints hurts both search efficiency and final pruning quality. Those results make the representation choice much more convincing.12:T52f,ReQuant is framed as fixed-grid discrete refinement. The quantization format is frozen (bit-width, scale, zero-point, grid layout, inference kernels). The only variables are the integer codes assigned to weights.

The objective follows reconstruction-based PTQ, with an explicit focus on activation mismatch: at inference, a layer sees activations produced by a quantized prefix. Similar to GPTAQ, it uses activation-aware reconstruction by collecting activations from (i) the full-precision model and (ii) the partially-quantized model to obtain \tilde{X}, then optimizes reconstruction under the more realistic activation distribution.

Optimization is backprop-free: instead of STE/gradient descent, it performs iterative discrete updates over integer codes (a coordinate-style local search). Updates are accepted only if they reduce the overall reconstruction loss, yielding monotonic loss decrease and finite termination (a finite number of accepted updates). The offline budget is controlled by the number of sweeps T, and the per-sweep cost is argued to be comparable to a GPTAQ pass.

A key design trade-off is deliberate: by freezing the grid and kernels, deployment complexity stays unchanged, but the search is constrained to the existing grid, so gains depend on the upstream choice of scales/grid being reasonable.13:T429,Its value for foundation-model research is diagnostic rather than merely competitive. First, it separates local perception from global spatial integration, which many existing video benchmarks do not. That matters for embodied pretraining, world modeling, and native multimodal training. Second, it shows that failure modes differ by model family: strong proprietary models improve sharply when the task is reduced to local perception, suggesting that their main weakness is cross-frame spatial integration; many open models do not improve reliably even then, indicating deficits in both perception and reasoning. Third, the paper goes beyond evaluation by introducing GST-Train and showing that targeted training data can substantially close the gap. Qwen3-VL-8B improves from 25.89 to 53.52 after fine-tuning, surpassing all zero-shot proprietary models in their setup. That is a useful signal for pretraining researchers: global spatial competence is not something to assume will emerge automatically from scale alone; data construction and task pressure matter.14:T5fc,The contribution is centered on benchmark and data design rather than a new VLM architecture. The pipeline is built on OmniGibson with BEHAVIOR-1K scenes. For each of 50 indoor environments, the system generates diverse egocentric camera trajectories and additional query viewpoints outside the trajectory. It records 3D coordinates of objects and viewpoints, projects them onto top-down maps, and automatically creates QA pairs. A key filtering rule removes any sample where the target object is visible from the query viewpoint, ensuring that object-localization questions cannot be solved from a single frame.

The task taxonomy is organized around three embodied questions: Where am I? Where is the target? What does the scene look like? These are instantiated as 12 subtasks covering self-localization, object localization, and scene-structure understanding. The top-down image is not cosmetic; it acts as an explicit probe of whether the model can map long-horizon egocentric evidence into a global scene representation.

A particularly strong part of the design is the controlled local variant. By making the target visible from the query viewpoint, the authors convert the task into one that can be handled largely by local perception. This creates a clean diagnostic split between failures caused by weak single-image understanding and failures caused by missing cross-view spatial integration. That makes GST-Bench more than a leaderboard asset; it becomes a tool for identifying what kind of spatial competence is absent.15:T584,The main evaluation covers 22 VLMs, including open-source, proprietary, and embodied-oriented models. The strongest zero-shot model, Gemini-3-Pro, reaches 42.68, far below the human score of 79.08. Open models are substantially weaker; the best reported open model, InternVL3.5-38B, stays around the low-30 range, and many models are close to random guessing. This gap is large enough that it is hard to dismiss as benchmark noise.

The local-variant analysis is one of the most informative results. Proprietary models can gain up to 39 points when the task is reduced to local perception, which strongly suggests that they already have decent local visual understanding but fail to maintain and use a global spatial state across frames. Open models, in contrast, do not improve consistently even in the local setting, pointing to a compound bottleneck involving both perception and reasoning.

The training-data experiment is equally important. Using the same generation pipeline, the authors build GST-Train from BEHAVIOR-1K, ArtVIP, HyperSim, and internal simulation scenes. Fine-tuning Qwen3-VL-8B on GST-Train raises its GST-Bench score from 25.89 to 53.52, a gain of 27.63 points, and pushes it above all proprietary models under zero-shot evaluation. That result suggests the benchmark is learnable with targeted supervision and that synthetic spatial data can materially improve global spatial reasoning.16:T471,Three components are described in the provided text:
1) SearchAuditBench: 1,243 failed trajectories collected from 8 open-weight models run under a unified scaffold (two tools: search, visit) on 5 deep-search benchmarks. Each trajectory is expert-annotated with (i) the critical error step plus a tolerance span, (ii) a 6-way search-specific root-cause taxonomy, and (iii) a reference repair directive paired with atomic grading rubrics. Only “trace-auditable” failures are kept—annotators must be able to justify the critical error using evidence inside the frozen trace.
2) Benchmarking auditors: evaluate LLMs on localization, attribution, and repair, highlighting challenges from scale/noise, lack of verifiable structure, and silent error propagation.
3) SearchAuditor method: run three complementary audit branches in parallel, adjudicate their reports over a compact evidence-grounded view of the trajectory, then synthesize process-level repair directives.

The excerpt does not specify what the three branches are or how the compact view is constructed; those are method-critical details that require the missing sections.17:T40c,Visual tool-use is formulated as a structural causal graph that separates three paths to the final answer: the direct path from raw input, observation-mediated paths (where visual content of tool outputs genuinely affects the answer), and action-induced shortcuts (where only the text of tool calls influences the answer). Three intervention protocols with increasing granularity are designed: 1) Policy-level: compare overall performance between tool-use and direct inference; 2) Trajectory-level: corrupt all returned observations at runtime and measure answer changes; 3) Step-level: replace a single observation with a counterfactual crop and compute Visual Evidence Gain (corresponding to Natural Indirect Effect) to judge whether the visual content truly alters answer preference. Based on intervention results, each rollout is categorized into four groups: Calibrated, Calling Without Looking (CWL), Looking Without Planning (LWP), and No-call; policy-level accuracy improvements are then decomposed into per-group contributions.18:T83e,方法核心是把 AIVAT 和 confidence sequences 结合成 AV-AIVAT。AIVAT 原本用于不完全信息博弈中的方差缩减，它利用 value function 对某些决策节点构造条件均值为零的校正项，从而在不引入偏差的前提下降低 payoff 方差。问题在于，经典 AIVAT 默认 value function 是冻结的，而实际评测中人们往往希望边评边学，让 value model 越来越准。论文提出的关键接口是 predictable / pre-action conditional-kernel interface：在每个 correction node，评测器必须在动作发生前就知道该动作在当下信息条件下的 conditional kernel，而且是否启用该 correction 也必须在动作前就固定。与此同时，时刻 t 的 value function 只能使用 1 到 t-1 局的数据，不能用当前局。这样可以保证当前样本不会“选择自己的校正项”，从而保住 conditional mean-zero 的性质。

在这个接口之上，论文给了两类 confidence sequence。第一类是 EB-CS，强调 exact finite-sample validity，但要求事先给出一个与数据无关、几乎处处成立的 corrected payoff 上界 B。作者在 Leduc 上推导并穷举验证了这样的 bound。第二类是 AsympCS，放宽为渐近有效，需要满足极限方差条件，实际中更高效。论文还给出一个理论结果：在 variance-adaptive width 和 sublinear variance-regret 条件下，past-only online learner 的停止效率在渐近上不会比 deterministic oracle-width benchmark 慢。直观上，这说明在线学 value model 只要不偷看当前局，就可以逐步逼近“知道最好 value function”的评测效率。

另一个很有价值的分析是 width floor。作者指出，方差缩减并不总会等比例转化为更早停止，因为在 bet-capped EB-CS 下，声明的 payoff bound 会引入一个确定性的宽度下界 4B log(2/α)/t。一旦这个 floor 开始主导，继续降低方差也不会明显缩短停止时间。论文把这件事整理成三阶段的 order-level design guide，这比单纯报告“方差降了多少倍”更有解释力。19:T866,The method combines AIVAT with confidence sequences to form AV-AIVAT. AIVAT is a variance-reduction estimator for imperfect-information games. It uses a value function to construct conditional mean-zero corrections at selected decision points, reducing payoff variance without introducing bias. Classical AIVAT assumes a frozen value function, but in practice one would like the value model to improve during evaluation. The key contribution is a predictable, pre-action conditional-kernel interface. At each correction node, the evaluator must know the action’s conditional kernel given the information available immediately before the action, and the decision to enable the correction must also be fixed before the action is observed. In addition, the value function at time t may use only games 1 through t-1, never game t itself. These conditions prevent the current sample from choosing its own correction and preserve the conditional mean-zero property.

On top of this interface, the paper develops two confidence-sequence options. EB-CS provides exact finite-sample validity, but it requires a data-independent almost-sure bound on the corrected payoff. The authors derive and exhaustively verify such a bound in Leduc. AsympCS instead relies on asymptotic variance conditions and is more efficient in practice. The theory also includes a no-asymptotic-delay style result: under variance-adaptive widths and sublinear variance regret, a past-only online value learner asymptotically matches a deterministic oracle-width benchmark. Intuitively, online value learning can approach oracle stopping efficiency as long as it does not peek at the current game.

A particularly useful part of the paper is the width-floor analysis. Variance reduction does not automatically translate into proportionally earlier stopping. In the bet-capped EB-CS setting, the declared payoff bound induces a deterministic lower bound on interval width, 4B log(2/alpha) / t. Once this floor dominates, further variance reduction has little effect on stopping time. The resulting three-regime design guide is more informative than reporting variance reduction alone.1a:T688,The main empirical study uses a heads-up no-limit hold’em corpus with 71,439 paired hands across 15 LLM-agent configurations. AIVAT reduces variance by a median factor of 54 relative to raw per-hand payoffs. The more important metric is stopping time. At alpha = 0.05 and a target half-width of one big blind, paired replay shows a median raw-to-AIVAT stopping-time ratio of 74 under AsympCS. In practical terms, the same evaluation precision can be reached with roughly one seventy-fourth as many hands. Under the descriptive EB-CS execution, the ratio is only 1.37. The paper explains this large gap through the width floor: once the deterministic bound-driven floor dominates, lower variance no longer buys much earlier stopping.

For online learning, the authors test past-only value updates under two controlled profile-mismatch settings. The online learner recovers 77% to 79% of the frozen-to-oracle variance gap, which supports the claim that online improvement is possible without sacrificing validity.

The rolling-leaderboard simulation is also important. Under the null, continuously monitoring an ordinary fixed-sample interval and stopping at the first favorable look yields a 61% false-positive rate. Recomputing a confidence sequence at that same stopping time overturns essentially all such claims. When AsympCS continues under its own stopping rule, it detects injected effects of 0.1 and 0.2 big blinds in 81% and 100% of entries by 5,000 hands. The paper also specifies what must be released for reproducibility: corrected outcomes up to the stopping time, the stopping rule, the target, the confidence level, the declared bound, and the CS settings.1b:T4f4,For a quick read, focus on three things. First, the motivation for why ordinary optional stopping fails and why AIVAT and confidence sequences solve complementary parts of the problem. Second, the definition of the pre-action conditional-kernel interface, which is the central validity condition of the paper. Third, the width-floor analysis and the HUNL results, because they explain when variance reduction does and does not convert into cheaper evaluation.

A good reading order is: problem setup and motivation, the AV-AIVAT interface, the distinction between EB-CS and AsympCS, the HUNL experiments, and the rolling-leaderboard simulation. The proof details can be skimmed at first, but it is worth understanding what Proposition 1, Proposition 2, and Theorem 2 each guarantee. Around 40 to 60 minutes should be enough to extract the main ideas and practical implications.

Two caveats are worth keeping in mind. The method assumes access to the action conditional kernel, which may be hard to obtain in some real agent environments. And AsympCS is more efficient but does not provide the same exact finite-sample certificate as EB-CS. Which variant is appropriate depends on whether strict certification or sample efficiency matters more in the target benchmark.1c:T55a,The core design is to hold the single-shot solver fixed and vary one memory choice at a time. The paper decomposes future value into three settings. First, exact-query replay: if the same question returns, can the system cheaply replay the stored verified SQL? Second, cross-question retention: remove a question’s own card from the bank and test whether the remaining cards still help answer it, isolating reuse across questions rather than direct memorization. Third, held-out same-database transfer: evaluate whether memory helps new questions from the same database. To make transfer interpretable, the authors define CR, the crystallization ratio, as held-out transfer lift divided by the on-demand repair headroom on those same held-out questions. This measures how much of the gain that would otherwise require fresh repair can be recovered from memory at first attempt. In the main instantiation, execution-guided repair generates episodes, which are then stored in a database-scoped verified card bank. The paper runs controlled interventions around three questions: where future value appears, what information actually carries transfer, and which choices in collection, verification, formatting, and retrieval materially affect outcomes. An important detail is that the card writer never sees gold SQL, which avoids leaking supervision into the memory bank.1d:T52f,The main experiments are on BIRD, with three paired seeds and analysis that accounts for variation across both databases and questions. The headline result is that storing verified corrected queries in a database-scoped bank improves held-out first-attempt accuracy by 4.34 percentage points. This gain corresponds to 44.4% of the on-demand repair headroom on the same held-out questions. In practical terms, nearly half of the benefit that would otherwise require extra repair computation can be recovered from previously accumulated memory. The paper also reports clear value in replay and retention settings, indicating that the bank is not only memorizing exact solved questions but also carrying some reusable database-specific knowledge. The mechanism studies are especially informative. Transfer is driven mainly by exposure to the target database: local cards reveal useful identifiers, values, joins, and query structures, and they still help even when question-SQL pairings are shuffled. That suggests the transferable signal is more about database-local patterns and query priors than exact aligned demonstrations. Reliable verification and broad retrieval coverage produce clear gains, while richer card formats, more elaborate retrievers, and repair-specific content do not show statistically supported advantages.1e:T59d,The paper has a structural part and an empirical part. Structurally, for an odd-numbered unweighted majority panel with k judges and a single replacement ballot, the panel prediction can change if and only if the original vote margin is one, m = |2s-k| = 1. This is a deterministic arithmetic fact about majority voting, not a statistical claim. It identifies the exact affected set for single-ballot substitution.

Empirically, the authors build multi-model judge panels for code-generation evaluation and introduce a verification signal from a different evidence source. They compare several replacement rules, including random replacement, fixed replacement, and replacing a vote on the majority side. They then report two diagnostics on the same data: the same effective-vote statistic used in prior work, and margin-stratified accuracy/error analyses. The key result is that these diagnostics answer different questions. Aggregate dependence can remain unchanged while conditional gains on pivotal examples are large and reliable.

The mechanism is simple. Most examples are structurally unaffected by single-ballot substitution, so averaging over the full population dilutes any verifier benefit. If the verifier is especially useful where the panel is near the decision boundary, the gain is real but localized. The paper also includes an exploratory analysis linking part of the pivotal-region error pattern to panel composition.1f:T552,The experiments cover three code benchmarks and four panel sizes, k in {3, 5, 7, 9}. The main setting uses seven LLM judges plus one verification signal. At larger scale, replacing one judge with the verifier changes the effective-vote count by about -0.04 with a 95% confidence interval of [-0.10, +0.02], so the aggregate metric shows no distinguishable improvement. Yet panel accuracy still increases.

The margin-stratified analysis explains why. For non-pivotal cases, such as at least 5–2 agreement in a 7-judge panel, single-ballot substitution cannot alter the majority outcome, so the accuracy gain is exactly 0. For 4–3 cases, the same verification signal improves accuracy by more than 10 percentage points. In the main setting, 199 of 569 panel errors occur in the pivotal region. So pivotal cases do not contain all errors, but they have higher error rates, and every decision change induced by single-ballot substitution is confined there.

The paper also evaluates margin gating. Once a substitution rule is fixed, verifier calls outside the pivotal region can be skipped without changing predictions. In their experiments, this reduces verifier-call frequency to 12%–27% while preserving the same outputs as universal substitution. Table 7 further shows that the replacement rule itself materially affects accuracy; gating only saves calls.20:T4a5,Proposes PaDoc, a layout-grounded parallel document parser built on a region-sufficiency assumption: conditioned on the full page image and a region's layout specification, content generation for that region is independent of content from other regions. The joint parsing distribution is factorized into a serial layout prediction stream, and parallel content generation branches spawned immediately after each layout is predicted, reducing logical decoding depth from the sum of all region content lengths to the longest single layout-content path. During training, an ancestor attention mask restricts each content branch to attend only to the shared page image and historical layout prefix, with no access to sibling region content. This is implemented with packed variable-length sequences, requiring no auxiliary prediction heads or extra losses, and retaining the standard next-token prediction objective. During inference, PaDoc runs on vLLM with global shared KV cache for the page image and layout prefix, decoding each region content branch as a concurrent request. The model is initialized from Qwen3-VL-2B, adapted via continual pre-training followed by supervised fine-tuning.21:T648,The work has two main parts. First, it establishes and explains the mismatch. Under fixed top-k input settings, the authors evaluate three multimodal DLMs on five visual QA benchmarks using the same VisRAG-ranked candidate pools, prompts, decoding budgets, and answer scorer. They show that Recall@k increases with k, while macro-average answer accuracy drops. They then isolate the cause and find that semantic conflict, not merely the presence of multiple images, is the main driver of degradation. The theoretical analysis focuses on the first unresolved denoising state. When a correct page and a conflicting page each support a different coherent answer, the correct latent structure requires multiple answer positions to share one source choice. A position-factorized proposal breaks this dependence and allocates probability mass to cross-source answers; the unsupported mass grows as the conflict spans more answer positions. Second, the paper proposes ECF, a training-free evidence admission framework. It combines multi-granularity evidence construction, where both full pages and layout-derived regions are indexed, with generator-side candidate filtering. For each additional candidate ci, ECF compares the target DLM’s first-step answer-block entropy under {c1, ci} versus {c1, blank(ci)}. This yields a conditional confidence gain that controls for the structural effect of adding another visual slot and measures whether the candidate content itself reduces competing-source risk. A rank-prior selection rule then decides whether to expand beyond the top-1 page and which candidate to admit.22:T4d4,The evaluation spans three multimodal DLMs and five visual QA benchmarks. The main empirical findings come in three layers. First, the phenomenon itself: increasing top-k from 1 to 2 or 3 consistently raises answer-page recall, but lowers macro-average answer accuracy across 15 model-dataset combinations. Second, the mechanism: conflicting pages produce the largest accuracy drop among the tested evidence conditions. The same interference is already visible in the first-step answer-block distribution. On naturally retrieved ChartQA cases, the conflicting-page condition causes the largest drop in first-step answer-block accuracy and the largest Jensen-Shannon divergence from the correct-only distribution, and this aligns with the largest final-answer degradation. Third, the method result: across five benchmarks and three DLMs, ECF improves over the strongest fixed top-k input by 2.62 percentage points on average. With LLaDA2.0-Uni, it also beats the strongest training-free baseline by 2.37 points on average. The paper further reports that ECF remains more stable as the candidate pool grows, which supports the claim that it decouples candidate-pool size from final context size rather than merely tuning a better fixed k.23:T7d7,KVAE is a family of encoder-decoder tokenizers for multimodal generative modeling. The visual side includes two causal video tokenizers: KVAE-3D with 4x8x8 compression and 16 latent channels, and KVAE-3D with 4x16x16 compression and 64 channels. The image tokenizer, KVAE-2D, uses 8x spatial compression with 32 channels. The audio tokenizer is continuous, full-band 48 kHz, with a 50 Hz latent stream and 64 channels.

The most interesting design choices appear in the video tokenizer. First, the backbone is attention-free and built around Conv3D blocks. The motivation is efficiency and length generalization: convolutional tokenizers are cheaper to train and can process arbitrarily long sequences at inference through caching, which is useful for long videos and causal generation settings. Second, the tokenizer is causal, implemented with asymmetric temporal padding, so it can support both images and videos without leaking future frames. Third, temporal and spatial downsampling/upsampling are applied sequentially rather than collapsed into a single operation. The paper contrasts this with approaches that patchify aggressively in early layers; KVAE-4x16x16 delays patching to the downsampling blocks instead. Fourth, the models use spatial RMSNorm, which allows segment-size adjustment at inference. Fifth, the encoder and decoder are intentionally asymmetric, especially in the higher-compression model where the decoder is made substantially wider. This reflects a clear hypothesis: under strong compression, it is better to keep the encoder stable and efficient while giving the decoder more capacity to reconstruct detail.

Another important point is that the paper treats diffusability as a primary tokenizer property. Reconstruction metrics alone are not enough. A tokenizer can reconstruct well yet still produce a latent space that is awkward for diffusion training. The later sections on diffusability evaluation and design ablations are therefore central to the paper’s contribution.24:T6c7,The reported evaluation spans reconstruction, downstream generation quality, diffusability analysis, and architecture ablations. On the visual side, KVAE-3D is compared against open-source video tokenizers on both reconstruction and generation, using metrics such as PSNR, LPIPS, and Fréchet-style generation scores. KVAE-2D is evaluated similarly for images. On the audio side, the paper reports objective metrics such as PESQ and emphasizes the practical operating point of full-band 48 kHz audio with a 50 Hz latent stream and 64 channels.

The abstract claims that KVAE matches or exceeds open-source alternatives on both reconstruction and generation. However, the provided full-text excerpt does not include the complete result tables, so it is not possible to restate all dataset-specific numbers reliably from the available material alone. Even so, the experimental structure already conveys several useful points. The tokenizer is evaluated not only as an autoencoder but also as part of the full generation pipeline, which is the right criterion. The video tokenizer is designed for long-sequence and causal settings, so the relevant comparison is not just short-clip reconstruction. And the paper explicitly includes diffusability evaluation and design ablations, which suggests the authors are trying to explain why the latent space is easier to model, not merely that it reconstructs better.

When reading the full paper, the most important quantitative checks are likely to be: the trade-off between the 4x16x16(64ch) and 4x8x8(16ch) variants in token cost versus generation quality; the contribution of the wider decoder; and whether the attention-free design preserves enough semantic structure under high compression.25:T514,Read it in four passes: problem framing, architecture, end-to-end validation, and ablations. Start with the introduction to see how the authors position tokenizers as part of the generative model rather than a detachable front-end. Then focus on the video-tokenizer method section. The key design decisions are the attention-free Conv3D backbone, causal setup, spatial RMSNorm, sequential temporal/spatial downsampling, and encoder-decoder asymmetry. The useful question to keep in mind is why these choices are preferable to heavier spatiotemporal attention or more aggressive early patchification.

After that, inspect the reconstruction and generation tables together. Do not read PSNR or LPIPS in isolation; check whether a tokenizer that reconstructs well also improves downstream generation. Then read the diffusability section and the ablations carefully. That is where the paper either becomes a set of engineering choices or turns into a more general tokenizer-design lesson. If your interest is unified multimodal pretraining, the audio section is worth reading as well because it extends similar design principles to high-rate continuous audio. A first pass should take around 40 minutes, and a reproduction-oriented read will require careful attention to the method and ablation sections.26:T521,From the available full-text excerpt (intro only), the approach is organized around three coupled issues and corresponding design choices:
1) Unified formulation: treat generation, reference-based synthesis, temporal extension, and editing—now extended to joint audio-video—as one conditional denoising family with varying condition/target configurations.
2) Explicit token roles: instead of implicit concatenation, attach role information to tokens so the model is told which segments are reconstruction targets, which are to be preserved, and which are guidance-only references.
3) Conditioning duality: implement both a semantic pathway (instruction following, reasoning over text + visual evidence) and a latent pathway (high-fidelity preservation of identity/texture/layout/motion). In audio-video, this must also handle modality absence and asymmetric roles per modality.
4) Data consistency & balance: emphasize truly aligned audio-video pairs and a task mixture that does not let data-rich objectives dominate.

However, the excerpt stops before the method section; details such as the exact role representation, backbone topology (single-stream vs dual-tower), fusion mechanism, loss weighting, and sampling of condition-output configurations cannot be stated faithfully without the missing sections.27:T5eb,Two pillars.
(1) MIST-1000 benchmark: each item is instantiated into four matched variants where the question, answer space/type, gold answer, and a plausible wrong answer are held fixed; only the surrounding context changes: clean (no added context), misleading (context nudges toward the plausible wrong answer), correct-context (context supports the gold), and irrelevant (natural related text that does not contain the answer). The dataset contains 1,000 items (800 adapted from existing QA/math/reasoning benchmarks, 200 newly written longer scenarios) with a two-pass human QA process to control ambiguity, leakage, and plausibility.
(2) Metrics + training:
- SC2W (signal-induced correct-to-wrong): computed on the subset of items the model answers correctly in the clean condition, measuring how often misleading context flips them to wrong—separating susceptibility from base competence.
- SCOPE (Selective Context Preference Optimization): a signal-counterfactual preference framework. It mines the critical failures from a base model: cases where the model is correct in clean but wrong under misleading context. For each, it forms a preference pair (truth-consistent response preferred over signal-following response). The key is not changing DPO’s objective, but balancing the training mixture: reuse the same preference pair across all four context conditions and weight misleading pairs equally against clean/correct/irrelevant controls, preventing the “learn to ignore all context” shortcut.28:T439,The proposed method is Ranking-based Reward Construction. It uses a generative reward model only for relative preference ranking, then derives scalar rewards from the resulting order. The first mechanism is self-competitive ranking: for a given prompt, multiple responses sampled from the current policy are compared against each other, and their relative order is mapped into rewards. This aligns naturally with group-relative policy optimization. The second mechanism is anchor-guided ranking: a small set of anchor responses serves as reference points, and candidate responses are compared against these anchors. This reduces the reward-model call pattern for larger candidate sets from a sorting-style O(m log m) regime to O(m n), where m is the number of sampled responses and n is the number of anchors. When n is small, this is more scalable. Unlike GenRM-style preference-token probabilities, RRC does not rely on a single token probability. Unlike approaches that suppress reasoning and emit only labels, it can preserve the generative judge’s textual reasoning process.29:T4a6,HERALD treats a reward as a program and subjects it to structured counterfactual unit tests on the same question rather than evaluating a trained policy by aggregate score. First, it constructs minimal same-question trajectory interventions: same-final deletes all search actions while preserving the answer and citations; fake-ID replaces a citation with a nonexistent corpus ID; adaptive laundering replaces it with a real passage that the agent never retrieved. Second, it draws a strict information boundary: attack generation is label-free and accesses only the question, logged trajectory, and corpus, never gold answers or support annotations; if reward computation uses annotated signals, that selection is reported as an oracle upper bound rather than a candidate-visible attack. Third, it enumerates the full 2^3 lattice over three detectors—retrieval-use, membership in retrieved evidence, and fake IDs—and reports paired reward margins to identify an inclusion-minimal repair instead of claiming victory from a large detector bundle. The key detector L is an exact membership check that fires when a cited passage exists in the corpus but was absent from retrieved evidence.2a:T465,The audit is run on four Qwen3-8B trajectory pools from HotpotQA, 2WikiMultiHopQA, and MuSiQue, covering 3,829 isolated trajectories. The base reward R0 already rejects same-final search deletion and fake citation IDs, but a label-free adaptive citation-laundering attack succeeds: replacing a citation with a real but unretrieved corpus passage can still achieve high reward. The full 2^3 ablation shows that strengthening L alone is the observed minimal repair on these pools, while the other two exact checks are redundant. With L added, R[L] reports zero empirical attack success rate at roughly 0.50% one-sided cost on the relevant metric, while a broader strict reward remains attackable because its oracle support-ID penalty can be removed or avoided. A matched 5M-token Search-GRPO comparison shows that only 18 of 58,368 training trajectories trigger the detector, so the training signal is extremely sparse; on 256 paired questions per benchmark, R[L] improves targeted attackability and some evidence-quality measures but does not guarantee lower natural violation incidence or uniform exact-match non-inferiority.2b:T472,The method follows the OPD / OPD2 line. In OPD, the student first samples a rollout from its current policy. That sampled trajectory is then scored token by token by the teacher, and the student is updated to reduce the discrepancy on the sampled tokens. Compared with sequence-level RL, this gives denser token-level supervision while preserving the on-policy nature. OPD2 changes the reward definition: instead of using log p_teacher minus log p_student, it uses log p_teacher minus log p_teacher_base. The motivation is to isolate capabilities acquired during post-training, especially reasoning, while suppressing generic language preferences and stylistic biases already present in the teacher’s base model. The paper also keeps the two stabilizers introduced in prior OPD2 work: reward centering to form an advantage-like signal, and a conditioning criterion based on the original OPD signal to avoid pathological convergence. Empirically, the study builds a 100K multilingual math training set in English, Korean, and Japanese, and compares multilingual OPD and OPD2 as well as English-only OPD on Qwen3 instruction-tuned models.2c:T6a0,The method edits a single weight matrix W at a time, either the LM head or the down-projection in an MLP block. The model performs one forward pass on forget data and one on retain data, collects the input activations to W, and stacks them as key matrices. Keys are extracted only at positions where the next token should be forgotten or preserved, so the optimization is token-level rather than sample-level.

The objective is a ridge-regularized least-squares problem over an additive update ΔW. One term pushes the edited matrix toward a predefined forgetting target on forget keys. Another term constrains outputs on retain keys to stay close to the original model. Because the objective is quadratic and convex in ΔW, the optimum has a closed-form solution. This is the main departure from methods such as gradient ascent, RKLD, NPO, or preference-style unlearning, which search for a compromise through SGD.

The paper uses two target designs. Token suppression directly lowers the model’s tendency to emit the memorized answer token or related logits. Representation corruption instead perturbs intermediate representations so downstream layers cannot easily reconstruct the deleted content. The authors also introduce a logit-lens-based layer selection strategy: they inspect which intermediate layers already make the target content linearly decodable through the LM head, then edit only those high-impact layers. This avoids broad model changes. A notable extra is exact influence auditing. Because the update is analytic, the contribution of an individual deletion request to the final parameter edit can be decomposed exactly, which is much harder with iterative gradient methods.2d:T66d,The paper evaluates forgetting-utility trade-offs on five benchmarks and uses gold retraining as a reference point. Three findings matter most. First, efficiency: GROM needs only forward-pass statistics for forget and retain sets plus a closed-form solve per edited layer, leading to second-level execution and up to two orders of magnitude speedup over gradient-based baselines. Second, effectiveness: on Pareto trade-offs, it is typically better than or competitive with GA, GradDiff, RMU, RKLD, NPO, and SimNPO, meaning stronger forgetting at matched utility or better utility at matched forgetting. Third, robustness: under the recent low-bit quantization recovery attack, a strong gradient-based baseline regains a substantial amount of supposedly erased content, while GROM remains close to the retrained model in forgetfulness.

The most informative ablations are not just average scores but the structure of the edit: which layers are edited, whether the LM head or MLP down-projection is modified, token suppression versus representation corruption, the ridge coefficient, the size of the retain set, and interference across multiple deletion requests. The broader experimental message is that local linear edits can handle a meaningful fraction of memory-style unlearning when layer selection is accurate and retain constraints are strong, but distributed multi-layer knowledge remains a harder case. The provided full-text excerpt does not include all numeric tables, so exact benchmark-by-benchmark scores cannot be reproduced here, but the speedup scale, Pareto behavior, and quantization robustness are the key empirical takeaways.2e:T782,实验最有信息量的部分有三块。第一块是校准本身是否必要。论文指出，进入 contrastive calibration 的候选任务都已经通过结构验证和 self-solving，但初始时只有 19% 满足“强通过、弱失败”的目标关系；经过多轮 revision 和 re-probing，累计接受率提升到 96%。这说明 executable validity 与 solver-relative learnability 之间有明显缺口，而且这个缺口可以通过行为驱动的重写显著缩小。

第二块是不同数据构造策略对下游 agent 训练的影响。作者构建了 5,431 个校准后的 terminal tasks，并比较了几种训练数据来源：仅 authoring+validation、单 solver 反馈、多 solver calibration、contrastive calibration。Terminal-Bench 2.0 上，authoring+validation 只有 22.47%，单 solver 反馈 24.34%，multi-solver calibration 提升到 29.21%，contrastive calibration 31.09%。这里的提升不是边际噪声，而是相对清晰地说明：只知道任务“能做”不够，知道“谁能做、谁做不好”更有训练价值。

第三块是用完整校准数据训练模型后的结果。CalibForge-30B-A3B 和 CalibForge-35B-A3B 在 Terminal-Bench 2.0 上分别达到 32.58% 和 47.57%，比最强 baseline 高 6.36 和 6.75 个百分点。更关键的是泛化：35B 模型在 SWE-bench Pro 上 44.32%，在 Doc2Repo 上 48.77%，都是同 backbone 下所比较训练数据源里最好的结果。这个结果支持一个判断：校准得到的不是只对合成任务有效的“刷榜数据”，而是更接近真实软件工程交互中有效 supervision 的数据分布。

从消融角度，最值得注意的是 single-solver feedback 与 multi/contrastive calibration 的差距。它说明单一 solver 的成功或失败信号太粗，容易把任务推向该 solver 的局部偏好，而多 solver 分歧或强弱对比能提供更稳定的难度定位信号。2f:T8e4,CalibForge starts from a clue and builds a terminal task automatically, but the real novelty is the adversarial solver calibration stage after initial authoring. The pipeline has four main parts. First, an authoring agent works in a draft sandbox with web search, shell execution, and file editing. It researches concrete engineering issues from documentation, GitHub repositories and issues, and Stack Overflow, looking for reproducible problems such as dependency conflicts, version-specific bugs, configuration pitfalls, and edge cases. Second, it jointly writes the task instruction, execution environment, and verification tests, then performs structural validation and self-solving so the candidate is executable, checkable, and solvable by the system itself.

Third, the candidate enters calibration. The paper defines two retention criteria. Multi-solver calibration seeks disagreement in a heterogeneous solver pool: at least one solver must pass and at least one must fail. Contrastive calibration is stricter: a designated stronger solver must pass while a designated weaker solver must fail. In both cases, learnability is defined relationally, not by an absolute difficulty score. Fourth, if the criterion is not met, the authoring agent revises the task and revalidates it before another probing round. Importantly, revision is not limited to wording tweaks. The agent may revisit external research, change the technical direction, rewrite the environment, modify tests, or alter constraints.

Two design choices matter. First, the feedback includes not only verified pass/fail outcomes but also full trajectories. That gives the authoring agent actionable evidence about why a task failed or succeeded, which can be used to reduce noise, sharpen constraints, or introduce steps that better separate strong and weak solvers. Second, the loop is adversarial but constrained: retention always requires at least one real successful solve, so the system does not drift toward pathological or unsolvable tasks. Compared with one-shot authoring plus validation, or with single-solver scoring, this adds a behavior-driven revision loop. That is the key difference, because learnability is treated as something that can be actively shaped rather than passively measured.30:T76d,The most informative results come in three layers. First, calibration is clearly necessary. All candidates entering contrastive calibration have already passed structural validation and self-solving, yet only 19% initially satisfy the target strong-pass/weak-fail relation. After iterative revision and re-probing, cumulative acceptance rises to 96%. This shows that executable validity and solver-relative learnability are far from equivalent, and that the gap can be closed by behavior-guided rewriting.

Second, the paper compares training data produced by different construction strategies. On Terminal-Bench 2.0, authoring plus validation alone yields 22.47% accuracy. Adding single-solver feedback gives 24.34%. Multi-solver calibration reaches 29.21%, and contrastive calibration reaches 31.09%. The gain is large enough to support a clear interpretation: knowing that a task is solvable is not enough; knowing which solvers succeed and which fail provides substantially better supervision.

Third, the authors train on the full set of 5,431 calibrated tasks. CalibForge-30B-A3B and CalibForge-35B-A3B obtain 32.58% and 47.57% on Terminal-Bench 2.0, outperforming the strongest baselines by 6.36 and 6.75 points. The transfer results matter even more. The 35B model reaches 44.32% on SWE-bench Pro and 48.77% on Doc2Repo, the best among the compared training-data sources for the same backbone. That suggests the calibrated tasks are not merely overfit synthetic exercises; they appear to induce supervision that transfers to broader software-engineering settings.

The ablation that stands out is the gap between single-solver feedback and multi-solver or contrastive calibration. A single solver provides a coarse signal and can bias task construction toward that solver’s idiosyncrasies. Solver disagreement and strong-vs-weak contrast provide a more stable handle on difficulty placement.31:T5ce,If time is limited, start with the Introduction sections that define the solver-relative learnable zone, then read the methodology around Figure 2 and Algorithm 1 to understand the control flow of the author–solver loop. After that, focus on the two calibration criteria, multi-solver and contrastive. Those sections contain the real contribution. Without them, the system would be just another task-generation pipeline.

In the experiments, prioritize three result blocks. First, the fraction of initially authored tasks that already satisfy the contrastive relation versus the cumulative acceptance after revision rounds. Second, the comparison among authoring-only, single-solver feedback, multi-solver calibration, and contrastive calibration on Terminal-Bench 2.0. Third, the final 30B and 35B training results and their transfer to SWE-bench Pro and Doc2Repo. Those are the results that tell you whether the method changes supervision quality rather than just producing more tasks.

Three deeper questions are worth following while reading. How exactly are trajectories converted into revision actions? How sensitive is the learnable zone to the composition of the solver pool? And can this idea generalize beyond terminal tasks to code completion, tool-use, web agents, or even difficulty-aware sampling in broader pretraining settings? For reproduction, it would be sensible to test the value of multi-solver disagreement filtering before rebuilding the full authoring system.32:T616,For each task instance, Gated-BEPO samples a group of K rollouts. Environment observations are converted into hashable state keys, and identical observed states are merged into an empirical graph. Edges correspond to rollout records: state, action, reward, and next state. Instead of assigning uniform trajectory credit, the method runs a mean-backup Bellman fixed-point evaluation on this empirical graph to estimate node values under the current rollout policy. It then computes fixed-point temporal-difference residuals and propagates them along each trajectory using GAE to obtain step-level advantages.

The central addition is a graph-confidence gate. If a state has only one observed successor, the graph provides no empirical basis for comparing alternative transitions, so the Bellman step credit is suppressed and the update relies mainly on group-relative outcome advantage. If a state has multiple observed successors, the local graph contains comparative evidence, so the Bellman credit is activated and given more weight, while the outcome signal is still retained as a stabilizer.

This differs from GRPO, which uses only trajectory-level credit; from GiGPO and HGPO, which rely on state or history matching to form local groups; from GAGPO, which propagates a grouped return proxy with TD/GAE-style estimates; and from GraphGPO, which uses graph distance to successful terminal states and can be sensitive to perceptual aliasing. Gated-BEPO instead evaluates the empirical rollout graph and gates its contribution based on observed branching.33:T451,DiDPO extends group-relative advantage from the trajectory level into the internal structure of a code diff.

Using a CodeAct-like interaction loop, each action yields an edit (add/del/none) and the environment provides an outcome reward (e.g., tests pass/fail). Instead of treating the whole response/diff as one credit carrier, DiDPO:
1) Aligns diffs across multiple rollouts for the same task by finding highly similar sub-diffs that recur across trajectories.
2) Uses these recurring sub-diffs as anchors to induce sub-diff boundaries within larger diffs, aiming to isolate functional regions.
3) Groups aligned sub-diffs and computes a local group-relative advantage (diff-level advantage), then combines it with the trajectory-level advantage and assigns it back to the tokens responsible for generating those sub-diffs.

To avoid anchors that are too broad (mixing functions) or too narrow (hard to aggregate), it introduces a groupability score to select anchors that balance semantic scope and group mass. The method remains critic-free and claims no additional rollouts beyond the sampled group.34:T41a,TRIAL keeps the GRPO rollout-level advantage and clipping rule unchanged, then adds a training-only hindsight objective. For each decision turn, it builds an outcome view that exposes the realized local consequence of that decision. The same generated response is scored under the ordinary interaction context and under the hindsight-conditioned context. The signed token-level log-probability gap determines update direction and local revision strength. TRIAL then aggregates absolute gaps within each turn and compares a turn’s share of total revision magnitude with its share of eligible tokens. This yields a trajectory-relative allocation multiplier. The multipliers are normalized so their eligible-token-weighted mean is one, which redistributes hindsight supervision while keeping the average allocation fixed. A scalar clamp bounds the dense loss contribution relative to the detached GRPO loss magnitude. Hindsight contexts, discrepancy scores, and allocation profiles are used only during training, so inference uses the ordinary policy.35:T48c,Across a nine-point Muon sweep on (a+b) mod 113, every run grokked and every run subsequently lost generalization; in the worst cases test accuracy fell below 1% and then partially recovered, repeatedly, over hundreds of thousands of steps. AdamW was not immune: four of seven AdamW configurations that grokked also lost generalization afterward, and severity increased monotonically with learning rate, from zero sub-threshold evaluations at 1e-3 to 918 at 1e-2. Unlike previously reported anti-grokking, here training accuracy fell alongside test accuracy, dropping from 100% to 21.12% in the same evaluation window while training loss rose from 1.53e-7 to 57.5, indicating that the learned function itself broke rather than merely failing to generalize. Ablating Muon’s normalized-orthogonalization path collapsed dispersion over the non-constant spectrum from 326 effective conjugate pairs to 4 while leaving the Fourier family the model computed through unchanged. Instability increased with depth; sweeping the output-head learning rate over a factor of five and weight decay from zero to 0.5 changed timing and severity but did not eliminate the collapse.36:T4aa,Decomposes a single-layer self-attention model into two linear circuits: the query-key circuit (W_K W_Q^T, which controls the attention distribution) and the output-value circuit (W_O W_V, which maps attended representations to prediction logits). Four parameterizations are compared: FAFO (both circuits factorized), CAFO (collapsed attention, factorized output), FACO (factorized attention, collapsed output), CACO (both collapsed). Gradient-flow analysis shows that factorized parameterizations induce a state-dependent rescaling of gradient updates in the corresponding collapsed parameter space, so factorized and collapsed models follow different optimization trajectories even when they reach similar losses. Under orthogonality and symmetry assumptions, closed-form population gradient-flow dynamics are derived: the output-value scalar grows as log(t), while the query-key scalar grows as log^2(t), with constants controlled by the learning-rate ratio η_QK / η_OV. Because the query-key circuit acts on attention through a saturating nonlinearity (softmax), this difference in growth rate directly explains how relative optimization speed drives attention sharpening during training.37:T704,The method has two main pieces: FFD for data construction and TACT for post-training.

FFD, or Factuality-Frequency Distillation, builds a text-anchored corpus of counter-commonsense QA pairs. The central idea is to estimate the prior strength of facts through frequency signals, then route examples according to how strongly they are supported by common language priors. Instead of generic synthetic QA generation, the pipeline focuses on informative low-frequency factual scenarios that are likely to trigger prior-over-evidence failures. This gives the training set a very specific role: it is designed to expose and stress the decoder’s tendency to over-trust dominant priors.

TACT, or Text-Anchored Cross-Modal Transfer, then uses this corpus to reshape the decoder. A key step is prior-aware trajectory curation: the method distinguishes reasoning traces that genuinely follow evidence from traces that merely rationalize the prior. The model is optimized in two stages. The first stage is supervised and reinforces a behavior pattern of grounding observations before making the final judgment. The second stage uses preference-style optimization to suppress prior-driven and over-rationalized trajectories. The paper’s central bet is that because the decoder is shared across modalities, text-only supervision can alter multimodal conflict resolution behavior.

This differs from prior work in a clean way. Methods such as VCD, VDD, M3ID, and MemVR mainly strengthen visual evidence or decoding from the visual side. NoLan-style methods calibrate inference-time behavior. TACT instead targets training-time decoder policy, and it does so with text-anchored supervision rather than extra visual labels. In practical terms, it is trying to teach the model to trust what it already sees.38:T58c,The most informative result is the diagnosis experiment. On CDH-Bench, the authors evaluate three MLLMs with multi-trajectory decoding using n=8 samples at temperature 1.0, and report both pass@k and a custom prior-lock@k metric. As k increases from 1 to 8, pass@k improves by 15–22 points while prior-lock@k drops by 14–18 points across models. This is strong evidence that the correct answer is often present in the decoding space but suppressed by prior-biased selection. Their error analysis on Qwen3-VL-8B points in the same direction: many failures choose the commonsense option, and a simple grounding prompt that asks the model to first describe the queried visual detail reduces such errors noticeably.

The main benchmark results show that TACT consistently improves visual counter-commonsense reasoning across multiple benchmarks while largely preserving general capabilities. The notable part is that these gains come from text-only supervision. The ablations indicate that the full pipeline matters: frequency-aware data construction, trajectory curation, and two-stage post-training each contribute. Plain answer-level SFT is weaker than supervision built around evidence-following trajectories. Another useful observation is the analysis of over-rationalization: longer CoT does not automatically help, because the model can generate visually phrased but incorrect explanations that justify the prior.39:T6c0,The main proposal is column-tiled SVD. Instead of applying one global SVD to a linear map W, the input columns are partitioned into tiles and each tile is factorized separately. Each extracted mode is a mount (v, u, sigma), interpreted as trigger, write, and strength. The identity of a mechanism is the weight rule itself, not a post hoc semantic label.

The more interesting contribution is the evaluation stack. The paper argues that tile-local lift is a misleading metric because one-column tiles win almost by construction. So the authors evaluate mounts using full-write energy lift on real forwards: can the extracted directions explain the site’s actual write tensor, not just local tile output? They also measure weight coverage, sparse write coverage, and coverage lift over random dictionaries, plus a saturation criterion that checks whether a small number of modes already captures most of the useful signal. For residual-write sites only, they add a causal check: inject the write direction after the post-sublayer RMSNorm so it lands in the residual stream, then compare the resulting logit changes against an unembedding-based prediction using Spearman correlation and top-20 Jaccard.

A key practical point is the use of effective-path mounts. Raw mlp.up and attn.v weights fail the residual-shaped evaluation because the on-distribution computation is not the raw matrix alone. For mlp.up, the paper uses a gate-averaged effective map W* = diag(g_bar) W_up. For attn.v, it fits a ridge least-squares map to mixed-v, with a fallback involving W_o. This is an important methodological claim: if the interpreted object does not match the effective computation path, even a good decomposition will look unusable.3a:T6d1,The experiments use Gemma-2-2B with 26 layers and seven linear maps per layer, for 182 site-layers in total. The corpus is built from WikiText-2 raw train: 86,109 tokens are collected and 16,384 are subsampled for analysis. Default tile widths are site-specific: 512 for residual and MLP maps, 256 for attn.k and attn.v, and 128 for attn.q, with a 64 fallback on hard layers. Experiments A and C use k=2 modes per tile, while experiment B sweeps k in {1, 2, 4, 8, 16}.

The headline result is that, with site-aware tiling and effective-path handling, all 182 site-layers pass the paper’s acceptance criteria: 52/52 for residual-write sites under A/B/C and 130/130 for the other sites under A/B. On the two residual-write sites, tiled SVD beats whole-matrix SVD, column sampling, and random baselines at nearly every depth, except mlp.down layer 25 where tiled and whole SVD are roughly tied but still pass under the ratio criterion. The paper also notes that column sampling can achieve tile-local lift around 0.999, which is precisely why local lift is excluded from the main judgment.

The coverage experiments show early saturation: on residual-write sites, coverage lift is already high at one or two modes per tile and then stays flat, suggesting that extra modes mostly add redundancy. For the steering check, the authors inject alpha*u with alpha=2 after the post-attention or post-FF RMSNorm, average last-token logit changes over up to eight texts, and compare them to the unembed-lens prediction. Passing requires either Spearman rho >= 0.05 or Jaccard@20 >= 0.05 for layers 6 and above. The overall empirical claim is that local column structure captures high-energy on-distribution write directions better than a single global SVD.3b:T555,Read the introduction first to understand the target of the critique: the paper is not dismissing SAE-style feature dictionaries, but arguing that they live in proxy space rather than weight space. Then go straight to the method section and focus on three things: the definition of a mount, the A/B/C evaluation criteria, and the effective-path treatment for mlp.up and attn.v. Those pieces determine whether the proposal is meaningful.

In the experiments, the most important comparison is tiled SVD versus whole-matrix SVD and column sampling on residual-write sites. Then look at the saturation results, because they support the claim that only a small number of modes per tile is needed. Finally, inspect the steering setup carefully: the injection happens after post-norm residual entry, not by directly perturbing o_proj or down_proj outputs, because the paper wants to test whether the direction functions as a residual write that matters for final logits.

A quick pass takes about 40 minutes. A deeper read is only worthwhile if you care about mechanistic analysis methodology or want to reuse the evaluation stack. One caveat is that the evidence is concentrated on a single model, Gemma-2-2B, and a small WikiText-2 subsample, with fairly hand-designed thresholds and acceptance rules. Generalization to larger models or other architectures remains open.3c:T41e,WebGrader frames the problem as executable reward construction. Given a website requirement, it derives required interaction flows and represents them as Flow Contracts. It then materializes the generated React/Vite project in a live browser, grounds target actions against the source code and DOM, and executes Playwright programs. During execution it collects visual evidence, DOM states, network responses, and persistent-state observations, which are used for per-flow judgments. The grader is improved before RL through an offline self-evolution loop. The authors build a controlled environment with clean applications and source-level single-fault variants, run a base verifier, attribute residual errors to stages such as planning, grounding, evidence collection, or judgment, and mutate only the corresponding skills. Promoted skills are organized in a SkillGraph with dependency, composition, and conflict relations. This SkillGraph is frozen before policy training, where WebGrader supplies functional rewards for GRPO training of an 8B policy.3d:T445,The verifier environment, WebGen-Verifier-100, contains 100 public WebGen-Instruct training queries across 10 application categories. Each query is paired with a locally verified clean React/Vite application. From each clean application, the authors create eight natural source-level single-fault variants by modifying localized business logic. Out of 800 materialized faults, 778 remain active. The page-level split is 60/20/20 for Train/Eval/Test, with 461/157/160 active faults and 282/95/93 active flows. Clean applications, their variants, and private references do not cross splits. Train is used for residual induction and mutation, Eval for candidate promotion, and Test only for reported verifier evaluation. For policy training, the WebGrader-trained 8B model improves over a matched appearance-plus-script reward by 7.88 FSR points and outperforms o4-mini and DeepSeek-v4-flash on WebGen-Bench and WG-core-250. The provided text does not include the full result tables, so exact verifier precision, failure modes, and per-skill ablations should be checked in the experiment section.3e:T899,方法上，WebRider的关键设计是把“长期委托控制”和“当前页面动作实现”硬性拆开，而不是让一个单体 LLM 在同一上下文里同时负责计划、证据判断、动作生成和终止决策。顶层 controller 维护一个显式状态，里面包含 goal、hard constraints、soft preferences、blocking conditions、evidence ledger、progress 和 next intention。它只负责高层决策：继续浏览、发起澄清、停止、标记外部阻塞、还是给出答案；如果继续浏览，它会发出一个紧凑的 intention，例如“核验该商品的退货政策”或“为兼容性再找一个来源”。

中层不允许判断“证据是否足够”或“是否可以最终回答”，它只根据当前 observation、顶层 intention、persona state 和近期历史，生成一个且仅一个可执行的 JSON Action AST，动作空间包括 Click、Type、Scroll、Search、Maps、Back、Wait 以及安全回退。这里的重点不是让模型自由生成文本动作，而是通过确定性的 compiler 和 guard 把动作约束成可执行、可校验的局部目标：语法错误、非法 target、重复状态、阻塞状态都会被拦截，并附带恢复动作。训练时监督的不是原始模型文本，而是 guard 之后最终真正执行的 action。这样做的好处是，中层 policy 的学习目标被压缩成一个局部、可验证、可替换的 action realization 问题，而 CAPTCHA、访问策略、证据充分性、最终回答等复杂控制仍由 guard 或顶层负责。

另一条主线是 persona-conditioned intent contract。作者强调 persona 不是人口统计属性，也不是长期记忆，而是任务局部的控制策略，决定证据收集、排序偏好、不确定性处理和 stopping 规则。contract 由 goal、硬约束、软偏好、阻塞条件、证据义务、答案 schema 等组成，并且除非用户显式澄清，否则在执行期间保持稳定。这个设计让同一个 request 在固定 hard constraints 下可以配不同 persona，形成 counterfactual setting，用来测“同一个任务，不同委托 policy 下 agent 是否真的走了不同且正确的路径”。3f:T8c4,The main design choice is a hard separation between long-horizon delegation control and page-local action realization. Instead of letting one monolithic LLM jointly decide plans, evidence sufficiency, browser actions, and stopping, WebRider uses a hierarchy.

The top layer maintains an explicit state containing the goal, hard constraints, soft preferences, blocking conditions, evidence ledger, progress, and next intention. It decides whether to continue browsing, ask for clarification, stop, flag an external blocker, or answer. If browsing continues, it emits a compact intention such as “verify the return policy for this candidate” or “find a second source for compatibility.”

The middle layer is deliberately narrower. Given the current observation, the top-layer intention, persona state, and recent history, it emits exactly one JSON Action AST from a constrained action space: Click, Type, Scroll, Search, Maps, Back, Wait, or a safe fallback. Crucially, it is not allowed to decide whether evidence is sufficient or whether the task is ready for final answer. A deterministic compiler plus guards enforce executability: malformed targets, invalid terminals, repeated states, and blocked states are intercepted, with recovery actions attached when needed. Training supervision is defined on the final post-guard executable action, not on raw model text. That turns the middle policy into a local, verifiable action-realization problem, while harder issues such as CAPTCHA, access policy, evidence sufficiency, and final answering remain with the guards or the top layer.

The second core contribution is the persona-conditioned intent contract. Persona here is not demographic identity or long-term memory; it is a task-local control policy governing evidence gathering, uncertainty handling, ranking, interaction, and stopping. The contract includes the goal, hard constraints, soft preferences, blockers, evidence obligations, and answer schema, and remains stable unless the user explicitly clarifies. This lets the benchmark create counterfactual variants of the same request under different personas, so the evaluation can test whether the agent truly follows different delegated policies under fixed hard constraints.40:T6ab,The most informative part of the empirical section is the evaluation design and the failure decomposition, not model scaling. The paper introduces RiderBench, expanding 768 audited requests into 4,096 persona-conditioned contracts across 42 sites. The setup supports paired comparisons: the same request can be evaluated under different personas while keeping hard constraints and evidence obligations fixed.

The key result is the gap between completion and fidelity. The strong baseline controller, Full-Pro, terminates on 99.2% of contracts, but only 38.8% pass all contract gates. In other words, finishing the task and honoring the delegated policy are very different things. The paired human study reinforces this point: final-trace success and stepwise acceptability diverge significantly. A trajectory may look acceptable from the final answer alone, yet fail under stepwise audit because it skipped required evidence checks, failed to ask when uncertainty should have triggered clarification, or violated the persona’s risk policy.

The mechanism studies focus on persistent intention. The paper compares settings such as persona-only prompting, intention text alone, and explicit persistent intention state, and finds that maintaining intention as a state variable matters more than merely including persona text in the prompt. Another useful result concerns trainability of the middle layer: because each step yields a guarded executable action as a local target, the middle policy can be trained and swapped while holding the top controller, guards, and executor fixed. That makes the proposal more than an evaluation wrapper; it is also a modular training interface for process-level control.41:T52f,Start with the Introduction and Figure 1. The central claim is that web-agent evaluation is missing delegation fidelity, not just task success. Then read the Hierarchical Controller section carefully. The key question is why the top and middle layers must be structurally separated, and why supervision is placed on post-guard executable actions rather than free-form action text. That is the architectural core.

Next, read the intent contract section with attention to what is stable and what can change only through explicit user clarification. The paper is trying to prevent policy drift during execution, so the stability of the contract is not a minor detail.

In the experiments, prioritize the RiderBench construction, the definition of contract gates, the 99.2% vs 38.8% result, and the paired human study. Those pieces establish why endpoint-only evaluation is insufficient. If time remains, read the ablations on persistent intention and the analysis of guarded middle traces. Those sections determine whether the work is merely a benchmark proposal or a meaningful training interface for agent control.

A reasonable skim takes about 25–35 minutes. For a pretraining-oriented reader, the main value is not browser mechanics but how the supervision target is shifted from final answers to structured process state.42:T907,MemPrism explicitly separates persistent memory from decision-time working memory. The framework has five modules: Recorder, Router, Composer, Render, and Adapter. In inference, the first four form the main pipeline. Recorder stores real interactions as a unified event stream, keeping both raw events and structured fields such as pre-action observation, executed action, environment feedback, reward or step label, and task metadata. The point is to keep persistent memory neutral and reusable rather than collapsing it early into one fixed summary.

Router is the key learnable component. Instead of directly predicting the next environment action, it first decides how history should be viewed. A view action is defined over several axes: relation type, evidence range, outcome condition, and granularity. In other words, the policy chooses what relational structure to build, how much history to include, whether to filter by success/failure or other outcomes, and how coarse or fine the representation should be. This makes read-time memory representation an explicit decision variable.

Composer then selects events from the event stream and assembles a relational structure according to the chosen view action. Render converts that structure into an optical working-memory view. The optical format is not used only for token compression. The authors use two-dimensional layout to encode relations directly: spatial proximity groups related events, row/column alignment supports state comparison, arrows indicate change or dependency, and highlights emphasize failures or task-relevant evidence. A frozen task policy consumes the current input together with this temporary view and outputs the next environment action. The view is discarded after the step and is never written back into persistent memory, which avoids irreversible distortion from fixed summaries or repeated compression.

Training is also split cleanly. Router is first initialized with action-conditioned soft supervision, then optimized with trajectory-level grouped GRPO. The learning target is not the environment action itself, but the choice of memory view that best supports downstream action selection. This separation helps attribute gains to the memory representation interface rather than to a jointly entangled agent policy.43:T6a7,From the provided full-text excerpt, the experimental emphasis is on whether task-conditioned view selection improves long-horizon decision making, not on raw storage capacity. The paper appears to provide two kinds of evidence: end-task gains and attribution studies showing that the gains come from working-memory construction rather than unrelated components. The training setup for Router—soft supervision followed by grouped GRPO—is already designed to isolate the effect of view selection.

The excerpt does not include full tables or final numbers, so the exact quantitative gains cannot be stated reliably here. Still, the intended comparisons are clear: fixed representations such as timelines, summaries, or flat retrieved snippets are contrasted with dynamically constructed relational views defined by relation type, evidence range, outcome filter, and granularity. The expectation is that dynamic views are better matched to subtasks like loop detection, state tracking, failure analysis, and dependency reasoning.

Another likely experimental point is the decision not to write temporary views back into persistent memory. The authors argue that writing them back would bake task-local bias into long-term memory and reduce future reuse. A meaningful ablation should therefore compare persistent event streams plus on-demand views against fixed summary memories or recursively compressed memories. When reading the experiments, the most useful things to look for are: whether Router’s chosen view distribution changes with task state, how large the gap is between fixed and dynamic views, and whether optical views help because they expose structure rather than merely saving tokens.44:T5cc,Start with the Introduction and make sure the distinction between representation mismatch, storage failure, and retrieval failure is clear. That problem decomposition is the foundation of the whole paper. Without it, the method can look like another memory-engineering variant.

Then read the Method section with focus on the five-module pipeline, especially Router’s action space. Two questions matter: why should view selection be modeled explicitly instead of being left implicit inside the main policy prompt, and why should temporary working views never be written back into persistent memory? The first is about a learnable memory interface; the second is about preventing task-local bias from contaminating long-term memory.

Next, inspect the optical-view examples carefully. The important point is not just “history as images to save tokens.” The stronger claim is that 2D layout can expose relational structure directly. If the paper includes visual examples, they are worth reading closely because they reveal whether the method truly changes information organization or merely changes modality.

In the experiments, prioritize the training of the view policy, comparisons against fixed views, and ablations over relation types. A practical skim should take about 20–30 minutes. For a pretraining-oriented reader, the main takeaway is the interface question: how the same evidence can be exposed to a model in different structures depending on the decision context.0:{"rsc":["$","$1","c",{"children":[[["$","$L2",null,{"dates":["2026-08-11","2026-08-10","2026-08-07","2026-08-06","2026-08-05","2026-08-04","2026-08-03","2026-07-31","2026-07-30","2026-07-29","2026-07-28","2026-07-27","2026-07-24","2026-07-23","2026-07-22","2026-07-21","2026-07-20","2026-07-17","2026-07-16","2026-07-15","2026-07-14","2026-07-13","2026-07-10","2026-07-09","2026-07-08","2026-07-07","2026-07-06","2026-07-03","2026-07-02","2026-07-01","2026-06-30","2026-06-29","2026-06-26","2026-06-25","2026-06-24","2026-06-23","2026-06-22","2026-06-19","2026-06-18","2026-06-17","2026-06-16","2026-06-15","2026-06-13","2026-06-12","2026-06-11","2026-06-10","2026-06-09","2026-06-08","2026-06-05","2026-06-04","2026-06-03","2026-06-02","2026-06-01","2026-05-29","2026-05-28","2026-05-27","2026-05-26","2026-05-25","2026-05-22","2026-05-21","2026-05-20","2026-05-19","2026-05-18","2026-05-16","2026-05-15","2026-05-14","2026-05-13","2026-05-12","2026-05-11","2026-05-10","2026-05-08","2026-05-07","2026-05-06","2026-05-05","2026-05-04","2026-05-01","2026-04-30","2026-04-29","2026-04-28","2026-04-27","2026-04-24","2026-04-23","2026-04-22","2026-04-21","2026-04-20","2026-04-17","2026-04-16","2026-04-15","2026-04-14","2026-04-13"],"weeks":[{"week":"2026-W33","dateRange":"08-10 ~ 08-11","days":["2026-08-10","2026-08-11"]},{"week":"2026-W32","dateRange":"08-03 ~ 08-07","days":["2026-08-03","2026-08-04","2026-08-05","2026-08-06","2026-08-07"]},{"week":"2026-W31","dateRange":"07-27 ~ 07-31","days":["2026-07-27","2026-07-28","2026-07-29","2026-07-30","2026-07-31"]},{"week":"2026-W30","dateRange":"07-20 ~ 07-24","days":["2026-07-20","2026-07-21","2026-07-22","2026-07-23","2026-07-24"]},{"week":"2026-W29","dateRange":"07-13 ~ 07-17","days":["2026-07-13","2026-07-14","2026-07-15","2026-07-16","2026-07-17"]},{"week":"2026-W28","dateRange":"07-06 ~ 07-10","days":["2026-07-06","2026-07-07","2026-07-08","2026-07-09","2026-07-10"]},{"week":"2026-W27","dateRange":"06-29 ~ 07-03","days":["2026-06-29","2026-06-30","2026-07-01","2026-07-02","2026-07-03"]},{"week":"2026-W26","dateRange":"06-22 ~ 06-26","days":["2026-06-22","2026-06-23","2026-06-24","2026-06-25","2026-06-26"]},{"week":"2026-W25","dateRange":"06-15 ~ 06-19","days":["2026-06-15","2026-06-16","2026-06-17","2026-06-18","2026-06-19"]},{"week":"2026-W24","dateRange":"06-08 ~ 06-13","days":["2026-06-08","2026-06-09","2026-06-10","2026-06-11","2026-06-12","2026-06-13"]},{"week":"2026-W23","dateRange":"06-01 ~ 06-05","days":["2026-06-01","2026-06-02","2026-06-03","2026-06-04","2026-06-05"]},{"week":"2026-W22","dateRange":"05-25 ~ 05-29","days":["2026-05-25","2026-05-26","2026-05-27","2026-05-28","2026-05-29"]},{"week":"2026-W21","dateRange":"05-18 ~ 05-22","days":["2026-05-18","2026-05-19","2026-05-20","2026-05-21","2026-05-22"]},{"week":"2026-W20","dateRange":"05-11 ~ 05-16","days":["2026-05-11","2026-05-12","2026-05-13","2026-05-14","2026-05-15","2026-05-16"]},{"week":"2026-W19","dateRange":"05-04 ~ 05-10","days":["2026-05-04","2026-05-05","2026-05-06","2026-05-07","2026-05-08","2026-05-10"]},{"week":"2026-W18","dateRange":"04-27 ~ 05-01","days":["2026-04-27","2026-04-28","2026-04-29","2026-04-30","2026-05-01"]},{"week":"2026-W17","dateRange":"04-20 ~ 04-24","days":["2026-04-20","2026-04-21","2026-04-22","2026-04-23","2026-04-24"]},{"week":"2026-W16","dateRange":"04-13 ~ 04-17","days":["2026-04-13","2026-04-14","2026-04-15","2026-04-16","2026-04-17"]}],"currentWeek":"2026-W33","defaultTab":"weekly"}],["$","main",null,{"className":"flex-1 overflow-y-auto","children":["$","div",null,{"className":"mx-auto max-w-4xl px-4 py-8 sm:px-6 xl:max-w-6xl","children":["$","$L3",null,{"data":{"week":"2026-W33","date_range":"08-10 ~ 08-11","days":["2026-08-10","2026-08-11"],"stats":{"total":200,"starred":7,"by_category":{"pretraining_data":1,"llm_pretrain":4,"scaling":5,"architecture":14,"efficient":22,"eval":30,"multimodal":13,"multimodal_gen":13,"post_train":32,"mechanism":31,"coding_agent":5,"agent":26,"industry":4}},"categories":[{"id":"pretraining_data","emoji":"📚","name":"预训练数据","papers":[{"id":"2608.05850","title":"MameLoshnLM: Yiddish Language Model and Evaluation Benchmark","abstract":"We present MameLoshnLM, the first open-source 8B-parameter language model built specifically for Yiddish. Despite Yiddish's rich textual tradition, its limited digital presence and the scarcity of reliable evaluation resources have constrained progress in Yiddish language modeling. Existing multilingual corpora and benchmarks are often poor proxies for the language, containing substantial amounts of noisy, machine-translated, and misclassified text. We address these gaps by introducing Oytser, a","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T10:24:08Z","category_id":"pretraining_data","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05850.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决意第绪语数字语料稀缺、现有多语语料噪声高、评测资源不可靠导致专门语言模型难以训练和评价的问题。","importance":"主要贡献是低资源语言预训练数据和评测资产：构建高质量意第绪语预训练语料 Oytser、多任务评测 Kashes，并发布面向意第绪语的 8B 开源模型。对通用预训练的价值在于展示低资源语言中数据清洗、语料来源和评测代理失真的影响。","technical_approach":"作者将当代 web-native 语料与文学材料结合，构建 Oytser；同时设计覆盖翻译、语言分析、信息抽取和语言理解的 Kashes benchmark。模型侧是在 Llama 3.1 8B 上继续预训练，得到 MameLoshnLM，而不是从零训练新架构。","experiments":"使用 Llama 3.1 8B 作为基础模型继续预训练，并在 Kashes 多任务评测上与同等规模开源基线比较。摘要称 MameLoshnLM 在各任务上超过相近规模开源基线，并且分析显示收益不只是分数提升，也体现在相对通用模型的语言能力改善；具体 token 规模和提升幅度需读正文确认。","authors_note":"作者来自 Bar-Ilan University、University of Cambridge、University of Washington 和 Allen Institute for AI；Noah A. Smith 是知名 NLP 研究者，长期做语言建模、低资源 NLP 和数据相关研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the lack of clean digital Yiddish corpora and reliable evaluation resources, which makes Yiddish-specific language modeling hard to train and measure.","importance":"Its main contribution is a low-resource pretraining data and evaluation package: Oytser as a curated Yiddish corpus, Kashes as a multi-task benchmark, and an open 8B Yiddish model. For pretraining researchers, the useful signal is about corpus quality and benchmark mismatch in underrepresented languages.","technical_approach":"The authors combine contemporary web-native Yiddish sources with literary material to build Oytser, and create Kashes with translation, linguistic analysis, information extraction, and language understanding tasks. MameLoshnLM is obtained by continued pretraining from Llama 3.1 8B rather than by changing the model architecture.","experiments":"They continue pretraining Llama 3.1 8B and compare against open baselines of similar size on Kashes. The abstract reports better performance across benchmark tasks and qualitative improvements over general-purpose models; exact token counts and deltas require checking the full paper.","authors_note":"The authors are from Bar-Ilan University, University of Cambridge, University of Washington, and Allen Institute for AI. Noah A. Smith is a well-known NLP researcher with prior work spanning language modeling, low-resource NLP, and data-centric methods."},"recommendation":{"zh":"低资源语种数据论文，方法不新；只看语料清洗和 benchmark 失真分析即可。","en":"A low-resource data paper rather than a modeling paper; read only the corpus cleaning and benchmark-mismatch analysis."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Bar-Ilan University","University of Cambridge","University of Washington","Allen Institute for AI"],"authors":["Uri Katz","Omer Goldman","Tomasz Limisiewicz","Reut Tsarfaty","Noah A. Smith"],"notable_authors":["Noah A. Smith"],"tags":["low-resource-lm","pretraining-corpus","continued-pretraining","evaluation-benchmark"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05850","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05850","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"llm_pretrain","emoji":"🧠","name":"LLM 预训练","papers":[{"id":"2608.05944","title":"Operating Multi-Node Full Fine-Tuning on NVIDIA B300: A Field Report on Telemetry-Based Triage, Negative Results, and Operational Hardening","abstract":"We report operational experience full-fine-tuning a 32.76B-parameter dense model (Qwen3-32B) on 16 x NVIDIA B300 (two nodes, FSDP / ZeRO-3) -- among the first published field accounts on this accelerator. We claim no new algorithm. The individual mechanisms we use are established practice; our contribution is the integrated field experience and a set of calibrated measurements on new hardware. Concretely we offer four practitioner artifacts. (1) A B300-calibrated power-draw triage table that dis","starred":true,"priority":"p1","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T12:11:25Z","category_id":"llm_pretrain","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05944.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.DC","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"NVIDIA B300（Blackwell Ultra）作为新发布的训练加速卡，公开的多节点全参数微调实操经验、校准后的遥测诊断标准、真实故障成本数据极度缺失；同时分布式训练中普遍依赖的GPU利用率指标存在严重误导（NCCL死锁时仍显示100%），缺乏可落地的快速分诊流程，常见的优化经验也未在新硬件上得到受控验证。","importance":"属于预训练/全量微调工程实践的核心参考资产，填补了B300多节点训练的公开数据空白。一是提供可直接复用的硬件校准分诊工具，将静默故障排查时间从小时级压缩到分钟级；二是公开的受控负结果避免从业者在无效优化上浪费算力；三是校准的扩展效率、显存占用、故障成本数据是新硬件选型、训练预算估算的直接依据；四是定位的打包不平衡死锁场景与加固方案，修正了现有分布式训练工具（如PyTorch Join、drop_last）的覆盖盲区，对大批次长序列训练的稳定性有普遍参考价值。","technical_approach":"未提出新算法，核心是将已有分布式训练组件（FSDP/ZeRO-3、数据集分片、检查点容错、硬件遥测）整合为B300适配的实操规范，输出四类可复用产物：\n1. 遥测分诊体系：放弃GPU利用率，改用B300校准的板载功率波段结合rank间对称性、持续时间三个维度，快速区分计算（~700W+）、通信（~640W，全rank功率均匀）、数据饥饿（~575W，rank间功率离散）、检查点/死锁（~190W，检查点仅rank0降功率且2分钟内恢复，死锁为单rank零功率其余满负载且不恢复）、空闲状态；配套单行监控命令与决策流程，无需挂载profiler即可定位故障。\n2. 受控负结果：验证三类常见优化在16卡32B全量微调规模下无效——本地NVMe缓存相比NFS无吞吐量提升（瓶颈在tokenization与多租户CPU争抢而非存储介质）、梯度检查点开启反而降低1.6倍吞吐量（B300显存充足时重计算纯浪费）、修正了早期对功率异常的误诊断。\n3. 校准扩展参考：给出4/8/16卡B300的全epoch吞吐量、GPU·小时数、显存占用实测值。\n4. 故障案例与加固：定位epoch末由数据打包不平衡导致的NCCL死锁（各rank打包后block数不一致，先完成的rank提前进入下一轮集体通信等待，触发永久死锁），该场景无法被PyTorch Join、drop_last覆盖；提出2.7秒完成的预检门（启动前校验所有rank的block数一致，否则截断到最小值）+ 外部看门狗（监控功率与吞吐量异常自动重启）的加固方案，并核算了静默死锁的算力成本。","experiments":"实验对象为Qwen3-32B（32.76B参数）稠密模型，2节点16卡B300，FSDP FULL_SHARD（ZeRO-3）；训练配置为序列长度2048、micro-batch=1、梯度累积=8、全局batch=128序列（262144 token/step）、1epoch约3854步、AdamW+余弦warmup、lr=1e-5、bf16混合精度、梯度检查点关闭。\n关键实测数据：\n- 显存：单卡模型状态32.8GB，含激活总占用82GB，为B300 275GB显存的30%；\n- 吞吐量：梯度检查点关闭比开启快1.6倍；\n- 故障成本：一次未被及时发现的打包不平衡死锁导致12小时无产出，对应192 GPU·小时浪费；\n- 数据流水线：未打包时多租户NFS负载下吞吐量从52k tok/s暴跌到21k tok/s，打包后消除该波动（核心收益是确定性而非吞吐量提升）；\n- 扩展效率：给出4/8/16卡的全epoch实测GPU·小时数，作为同规模任务的预算参考。\n所有结论均通过受控对照实验验证，排除混淆变量。","reading_guide":"1. 优先精读§3（遥测分诊）：重点关注功率波段表、死锁与检查点的对称性区分逻辑，这是最可直接复用的实操工具；\n2. 其次精读§5（打包不平衡死锁案例）：理解现有分布式工具的边界，以及预检门+看门狗的加固逻辑，这是大批次训练普遍存在的隐性问题；\n3. §4（负结果）：对照自身训练优化清单，避免在B300及同级别大显存卡上投入无效优化；\n4. §6（校准扩展数据）：直接作为硬件选型、预算估算的参考表；\n5. 可跳过§8相关工作，本文无算法创新，无需关注算法类内容。\n深挖方向：可将功率分诊逻辑扩展到其他硬件（如H100、H200）的校准，或结合DCGM实现自动化故障检测；打包不平衡问题可延伸到预训练数据分片的一致性校验流程设计。","authors_note":"未明确标注所属机构，为工业界实操团队的田野报告，实验基于Qwen3-32B模型与NVIDIA B300加速卡开展。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Publicly available operational experience, calibrated telemetry triage standards, and real failure cost data for multi-node full fine-tuning on the newly released NVIDIA B300 (Blackwell Ultra) accelerator are extremely scarce. Additionally, the widely used GPU utilization metric is highly misleading for distributed training (it remains at 100% during NCCL deadlocks), with no actionable rapid triage workflow, and common optimization folklores have not been validated via controlled experiments on the new hardware.","importance":"Serves as a core reference asset for pretraining and full fine-tuning engineering practice, filling the public data gap for multi-node B300 training. First, it provides a directly reusable hardware-calibrated triage tool that cuts silent failure troubleshooting time from hours to minutes. Second, the published controlled negative results save practitioners from wasting compute on ineffective optimizations. Third, the calibrated scaling efficiency, memory footprint, and failure cost data are direct inputs for new hardware selection and training budget estimation. Fourth, the identified deadlock scenario caused by packing imbalance and corresponding hardening scheme address coverage gaps of existing distributed training tools (e.g., PyTorch Join, drop_last), with general reference value for the stability of large-batch long-sequence training.","technical_approach":"$4","experiments":"$5","reading_guide":"$6","authors_note":"No explicit institutional affiliation listed; this is a field report from an industrial practice team, with experiments conducted on the Qwen3-32B model and NVIDIA B300 accelerators."},"recommendation":{"zh":"NVIDIA官方出的B300实操避坑指南，功耗诊断表和打破NFS读取迷思的负面结果极其硬核，做大规模训练的系统/基础设施团队必读。","en":"NVIDIA's official field guide for B300, featuring a hardcore power-draw triage table and negative results dispelling NFS reading myths; a must-read for system/infra teams doing large-scale training."},"metadata":{"institutions":["NVIDIA"],"authors":["Seon Ho Kim","Ui Jeong Jeon","Su Hyeon Kim","Min Tae Hwang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["NVIDIA B300","full fine-tuning","telemetry-based triage","operational hardening","negative results"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05944","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05944","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05510","title":"Different Perturbations, Different Mechanisms: Understanding Continued Pre-training for Zero-Shot Dialect Robustness","abstract":"Dialectal variation remains a major challenge for multilingual language models. Perturbation-based continued pre-training (CPT) has emerged as a promising approach to improving robustness, yet existing work largely evaluates individual perturbation strategies in isolation and provides limited insight into why they work. We present a systematic study of perturbation-based CPT for multilingual dialect robustness in LLMs, comparing six training conditions across nine German, Italian, and Arabic dia","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T01:23:51Z","category_id":"llm_pretrain","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05510.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"研究扰动式 continued pre-training 为什么能提升多语言模型的零样本方言鲁棒性，以及不同扰动是否通过相同机制起作用。","importance":"贡献类型是 continued pre-training 机制分析。任务偏方言鲁棒性，但它对 synthetic perturbation、表层噪声、表示对齐和模型适配之间的关系有一定参考价值。","technical_approach":"论文比较六种训练条件，覆盖字符噪声等扰动式 CPT 方法；从下游方言任务表现、语言模型适配、表示对齐和 prediction repair 等角度分析机制差异，而不是只报告最终准确率。","experiments":"实验覆盖德语、意大利语和阿拉伯语的九个方言任务。结果显示扰动式 CPT，尤其是 character-noised CPT，稳定提升零样本方言鲁棒性，同时大体保留标准语变体性能；不同扰动即使下游效果相似，也会产生不同的表示和预测修复机制。","authors_note":"作者来自 University of Notre Dame；David Chiang 是知名 NLP 研究者，长期研究机器翻译、形式语法和语言模型相关问题。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies why perturbation-based continued pre-training improves zero-shot dialect robustness in multilingual LMs, and whether different perturbations work through the same mechanism.","importance":"This is a continued-pretraining mechanism analysis. Although the task is dialect robustness, the findings are relevant to synthetic perturbations, surface noise, representation alignment, and model adaptation.","technical_approach":"The authors compare six training conditions, including character-noised CPT, and analyze downstream dialect performance together with LM adaptation, representational alignment, and prediction repair, rather than only reporting task scores.","experiments":"Experiments cover nine dialect tasks across German, Italian, and Arabic. Perturbation-based CPT, especially character-noised CPT, consistently improves zero-shot dialect robustness while mostly preserving standard-variety performance. Methods with similar downstream performance induce different adaptation and repair patterns.","authors_note":"The authors are from the University of Notre Dame. David Chiang is a well-known NLP researcher with long-running work on machine translation, formal grammar, and language modeling."},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为 CPT 扰动机制备查即可；读实验分析表，不必把方言任务结论外推到通用预训练。","en":"Use it as a reference on perturbation-based CPT mechanisms; read the analysis tables, but do not overgeneralize the dialect-task results."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Notre Dame"],"authors":["Aarohi Srivastava","David Chiang"],"notable_authors":["David Chiang"],"tags":["continued-pretraining","robustness","dialects","synthetic-perturbation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05510","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05510","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06283","title":"The Tamed Subgradient Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm beyond Convexity","abstract":"We study the problem of sampling from target distributions whose potentials are simultaneously non-smooth, subject to superlinear gradient growth, and non-convex. We introduce the Subgradient Tamed Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm (SG-TULA), a discretisation of the Langevin diffusion that operates directly on subgradients, without relying on computationally demanding smoothing procedures. To handle the superlinear regime, taming techniques are employed to produce a stable, explicit scheme. We deriv","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T17:09:46Z","category_id":"llm_pretrain","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06283.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","math.OC","math.PR","stat.ML"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决非凸、非光滑且梯度超线性增长目标下，基于 Langevin 的采样/优化方法难以稳定工作的理论与算法问题，并尝试连接到 GPT-2 风格预训练目标。","importance":"贡献主要是优化理论与采样算法：提出可处理 subgradient 和 superlinear growth 的 SG-TULA，并给出显式非渐近收敛界。对 LLM 预训练的价值在于它把一个更接近实际正则化预训练势函数的目标纳入可分析框架，但离主流大规模训练 recipe 仍有距离。","technical_approach":"作者提出 Subgradient Tamed Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm，在离散 Langevin 更新中直接使用次梯度，并通过 taming 机制抑制超线性梯度导致的不稳定；同时给出 Wasserstein-2 收敛界和 excess risk 界。论文还验证 GPT-2 谱系的正则化预训练势函数满足其假设，并讨论 boosted coordinate-wise 变体。","experiments":"摘要没有给出标准 LLM 规模实验细节，只说明在 GPT-2 lineage 的 regularized pretraining potential 上验证假设，并称 boosted coordinate-wise SG-TULA 可预训练。若正文没有大规模对照，这更像理论可行性展示，而非可直接迁移到生产训练的 recipe。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"It addresses stable sampling/optimization for objectives that are simultaneously non-convex, non-smooth, and have superlinear gradient growth, with an eye toward GPT-2-like pretraining potentials.","importance":"The main contribution is in optimization theory and sampling algorithms: SG-TULA handles subgradients and superlinear growth with explicit non-asymptotic guarantees. Its relevance to LLM pretraining is indirect but nontrivial because it analyzes a regime closer to realistic regularized pretraining objectives.","technical_approach":"The paper introduces the Subgradient Tamed Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm, which directly uses subgradients in a Langevin discretization and applies taming to stabilize updates under superlinear gradients. It derives Wasserstein-2 convergence bounds and excess-risk guarantees, and checks the assumptions for a GPT-2-lineage regularized pretraining potential.","experiments":"The abstract does not report standard large-scale LLM training experiments. It mainly claims assumption verification for GPT-2-like objectives and pretraining with a boosted coordinate-wise SG-TULA variant, so the empirical value likely depends on whether the paper includes convincing optimization comparisons.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"偏理论，离主流 AdamW 训练很远；但若你在想非平滑正则、采样式优化或 loss spike 稳定性，先看假设验证那节再决定要不要深读。","en":"Theory-heavy and far from mainstream AdamW training, but worth checking the assumption-verification section if you care about nonsmooth regularization or sampling-style stabilization."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Iosif Lytras","Nikolaos Makras","Sotirios Sabanis"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["optimization","langevin","subgradient","training-stability","theory"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06283","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06283","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07226","title":"Dual-Node NVIDIA DGX Spark over Tailscale: A Remote-Access Testbed for Distributed LLM Training and Cyber-Threat-Intelligence Fine-Tuning","abstract":"Compact AI systems make local language-model experimentation increasingly accessible, yet practical evidence for multi-node training on desktop-class accelerators remains limited. This report presents a proof-of-concept deployment of distributed NanoChat pretraining across two NVIDIA DGX Spark systems, each with a GB10 Grace Blackwell system-on-chip and 128 GB of unified memory, administered remotely over a Tailscale mesh VPN and connected for training by a dedicated 200 Gb/s QSFP56 direct fiber","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"llm_pretrain","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07226.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AR","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"验证两台桌面级 NVIDIA DGX Spark 通过远程 VPN 管理和 200 Gb/s 直连网络运行小规模分布式 LLM 预训练是否可行，并记录实际工程问题。","importance":"贡献类型是训练系统实践报告。它不是新的预训练方法，但把小型多节点训练中的 NCCL、DDP、网络绑定、checkpoint 和故障排查细节写得比较具体，可作为低成本实验环境的运维参考。","technical_approach":"系统由两台 DGX Spark 组成，每台搭载 GB10 Grace Blackwell SoC 和 128 GB unified memory；远程管理使用 Tailscale mesh VPN，训练通信走 200 Gb/s QSFP56 直连光纤。训练侧使用 PyTorch torchrun、DDP 和 NCCL，每节点一个进程，运行 depth-20 NanoChat 预训练。","experiments":"设置为每节点 local batch size 32、上下文长度 2048，global batch 为每步 131,072 tokens。四天处理约 653M tokens，平均 step time 约 69.4 秒，吞吐约 1,890 tokens/s。报告还记录了 step-zero evaluation bug 导致 NCCL timeout 的问题和修复路径。","authors_note":"NVIDIA 相关硬件和训练系统实践报告；作者为 Vasanth Iyer。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The report tests whether two desktop-class NVIDIA DGX Spark systems can run small-scale distributed LLM pretraining under remote administration and a dedicated high-speed interconnect.","importance":"This is an engineering practice report rather than a new pretraining method. Its value lies in concrete operational details around NCCL, DDP, interface binding, checkpointing, and failure diagnosis for small multi-node LLM experiments.","technical_approach":"The setup uses two DGX Spark machines, each with a GB10 Grace Blackwell SoC and 128 GB of unified memory. Remote administration runs over a Tailscale mesh VPN, while training traffic uses a 200 Gb/s QSFP56 direct fiber link. The training stack uses PyTorch torchrun, DDP, and NCCL with one process per node on a depth-20 NanoChat model.","experiments":"The run uses a local batch size of 32 per node and a 2,048-token context, giving 131,072 tokens per global step. It sustains about 69.4 seconds per step, around 1,890 tokens/s, and processes roughly 653M tokens over four days. The report also documents a step-zero evaluation bug that triggered NCCL timeouts.","authors_note":"An NVIDIA-related hardware and training-systems practice report by Vasanth Iyer."},"recommendation":{"zh":"当作小集群 pretrain 运维清单看，不是研究信号；Fig/配置表比结论更有用。","en":"Treat it as a small-cluster pretraining ops checklist, not a research signal; the configs and failure notes matter more than the conclusion."},"metadata":{"institutions":["NVIDIA"],"authors":["Vasanth Iyer"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["distributed-training","NCCL","DDP","DGX-Spark","LLM-pretraining"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07226","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07226","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"scaling","emoji":"📈","name":"Scaling 与计算分配","papers":[{"id":"2608.05224","title":"Small Foundation Models of Human Cognition and Behaviour","abstract":"Large language models fine-tuned on human behavioural data have emerged as general-purpose cognitive proxies, but the scale this requires, and whether these models process task structure or exploit statistical shortcuts, remain open questions. We train fourteen models from 135M to 14B parameters across four architecture families on Psych-101, a dataset of 10.7 million trial-level choices from 160 experiments. In-distribution, scale barely matters. The models fall within a narrow band, as though ","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-05T11:34:20Z","category_id":"scaling","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05224.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CY"],"summary":{"core_problem":"基于人类行为数据微调的LLM认知代理所需的最小模型规模、性能限制来源，以及模型是真的处理任务结构还是依赖统计捷径，这两个问题尚无明确答案。","importance":"域内与分布外的缩放规律分化对预训练和微调规模选型有直接参考：域内拟合很快达到天花板，参数增长的收益主要体现在分布外泛化。提示信息通道消融的方法也为区分微调模型的结构学习与捷径学习提供了可复用的诊断框架。0.6-1B参数模型即可在域内匹配70B基线的结论，对垂直领域小模型部署有实际指导意义。","technical_approach":"构建14个模型的实验矩阵，覆盖Llama-3.1/3.2、Qwen3、SmolLM2/3、OLMo2/3四个架构族，参数量从135M到14B，LoRA rank从4到64做扫描，在Psych-101数据集（10.7万试次选择、160个实验）的嵌套子集上微调。核心分析分为两部分：一是对比域内（留出被试）与域外（新任务结构）的缩放曲线；二是将提示拆解为指令、刺激、反馈、选择历史四个信息通道，在32个实验上做结构消融，另加2个不同可交换性结构的实验做顺序置换测试，验证是否为捷径学习。","experiments":"域内场景下规模对性能影响极小，所有模型表现落在接近天花板的窄区间内；LoRA rank从4提升到32时，匹配70B Centaur基线所需的参数量从8B降至0.6-1B。分布外场景下缩放梯度明显变陡，大模型在新任务结构泛化上有明确优势。提示消融结果显示模型呈现任务自适应的信息使用模式，与纯捷径学习的假设不符。","reading_guide":"泛读约30-40分钟。重点看Section 4.1的域内/域外缩放曲线对比，以及模型规模与适配器秩的交互关系；Section 4.2的四通道提示消融设计是方法上最具复用价值的部分。认知科学背景细节可跳过。","authors_note":"COLM 2026 会议论文，具体作者与机构未在提供的文本中披露"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Two open questions remain about LLM-based cognitive proxies fine-tuned on human behavioral data: what model scale is necessary and where performance limits originate, and whether models learn task structure or rely on statistical shortcuts.","importance":"The divergence between in-distribution and out-of-distribution scaling laws provides direct reference for pretraining and fine-tuning scale selection: in-domain fit saturates quickly, and parameter gains primarily translate to out-of-distribution generalization. The prompt channel ablation methodology also offers a reusable diagnostic framework for distinguishing structural learning from shortcut learning in fine-tuned models. The finding that 0.6–1B parameter models can match a 70B baseline in-distribution informs small model deployment for vertical behavioral prediction tasks.","technical_approach":"Builds an experimental matrix of 14 models across 4 architecture families (Llama-3.1/3.2, Qwen3, SmolLM2/3, OLMo2/3) with parameters ranging from 135M to 14B, sweeping LoRA rank from 4 to 64, fine-tuned on nested subsets of the Psych-101 dataset (10.7M trial-level choices across 160 experiments). Two core analyses: scaling curve comparison between in-distribution (held-out participants) and out-of-distribution (novel task structure) settings; and structural prompt ablation decomposing prompts into 4 information channels (instruction, stimuli, feedback, choice history) across 32 experiments, plus order permutation tests on 2 experiments with contrasting exchangeability structure to test for shortcut learning.","experiments":"In-distribution, scale has negligible effect and all models fall within a narrow performance band near the ceiling; as LoRA rank increases from 4 to 32, the parameter count needed to match the 70B Centaur baseline drops from 8B to 0.6–1B. Out-of-distribution, the scaling gradient becomes markedly steeper, with larger models showing clear advantages in generalizing to novel task structure. Prompt ablation results show task-adaptive information use inconsistent with pure shortcut learning.","reading_guide":"Skim time ~30–40 minutes. Focus on Section 4.1 for the in- vs out-of-distribution scaling curves and the interaction between model scale and adapter rank. Section 4.2 covers the 4-channel prompt ablation design, the most methodologically reusable component. Cognitive science background details can be skipped.","authors_note":"Published as a conference paper at COLM 2026; specific author names and affiliations not provided in the available text."},"recommendation":{"zh":"ID 平、OOD 陡的 scaling 对比很干净，提示预训练中'任务结构泛化'才是规模真正起作用的地方；重点看 OOD scaling 曲线和通道剥离实验。","en":"The flat-ID / steep-OOD scaling contrast is clean and suggests scale only pays off for generalization to novel task structure—focus on the OOD curves and channel-ablation diagnostics."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Nick Oh","Fernand Gobet"],"notable_authors":["Fernand Gobet"],"tags":["scaling-law","cognitive-modeling","out-of-distribution","behavioral-data"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05224","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05224","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05797","title":"Predicting Task Difficulty Without Rollouts","abstract":"Task difficulty dictates an agent's likelihood of success, and estimating it without rollouts means forecasting this directly from a task description before executing costly simulations in stateful environments. Reliable estimates would therefore allow environment designers to calibrate evaluation benchmarks and construct progressive training curricula. This becomes increasingly important as agents move into long-horizon domains, where empirical trial-and-error is a severe computational bottlene","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T09:33:09Z","category_id":"scaling","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05797.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作研究的是一个评测与训练管线里的前置问题：在不做 rollouts、不运行完整 agent 交互的前提下，仅根据任务描述和少量静态元信息，能否预估一个 agent 任务有多难。作者关心的不是单个模型的 uncertainty 校准，而是跨 benchmark、跨 agent 配置地定义“任务难度”这一潜变量，并检验这种 ex ante 预测能否替代昂贵的实测试跑。问题之所以重要，是因为长时程 agent benchmark 的验证成本越来越高，很多任务一次评测就要消耗大量环境交互和模型调用；如果难度不能预估，benchmark 构造、课程学习和数据筛选都会变得很低效。","importance":"对预训练研究的关联不是直接改进 base model，而是提供了一个和数据课程、评测设计、合成任务筛选都相关的工具视角。第一，它把 task difficulty 从“经验上觉得难”变成了可估计、可排序的量，这对构造 curriculum、挑选训练样本、控制 benchmark 覆盖度有现实意义。第二，论文提醒人们不要用 response-level AUC 这类看起来很高的指标误判难度预测能力，因为它可能只是在区分成功/失败样本，而没有真正学到 task-level 难度排序。第三，作者公开了一个跨 17 个 agent benchmark 的结果库，并用 IRT 建 difficulty target，这对后续做 agent scaling、benchmark contamination 分析、任务去重和难度分层采样都有参考价值。它更像一篇评测方法与数据资产论文，而不是预训练算法论文。","technical_approach":"方法分两步。第一步，从已有 agent-task 成败记录中估计每个任务的 latent difficulty。作者把每次 trial 视作 Bernoulli 观测，构造一个部分观测的 agent×task 二值响应矩阵，然后用 1PL IRT（Rasch model）拟合每个 agent 的能力参数 θ_a 和每个任务的难度参数 β_t。这样定义难度有一个好处：它不是某个单一模型的通过率，而是在共享标尺上相对于多种 agent 能力共同估出来的，因此更适合跨 benchmark 比较。\n\n第二步，用 rollout 前可获得的特征去预测 β_t。特征包括任务文本描述、环境与动作空间描述、元数据，以及作者特别强调的 entropy 等不需要完整交互即可得到的信号。论文还系统讨论了评估协议：如果用 response AUC，模型可能在样本级别上看起来预测得不错，但 task-level rank correlation 仍然很弱，因此作者主张用 Spearman ρ 这类排序指标来评估“是否真的学到了难度”。此外，论文做了 residual diagnostics：把预测难度与 IRT 估计难度的残差拿出来分析。正残差大的任务，往往是比文本表面看起来更难，原因可能是环境不可行、verifier 有问题、接口设计不合理；负残差大的任务，则可能因为训练数据熟悉、模板化、捷径存在而显得异常容易。这个诊断视角比单纯做一个回归器更有用。","experiments":"数据规模是这篇论文最扎实的部分。主分析子集包含 17 个 benchmark、5230 个任务、497 个 agent 配置，这些配置来自 216 个模型和 90 个 scaffold；总语料库包含 415,470 条 agent-task outcome。任务类型覆盖 coding/SWE、function calling、web navigation、computer use、terminal、math、ML、cybersecurity 和 general-purpose suites，时间跨度从 2010 到 2026。每个 agent-task 对平均约 1.2 次 trial。\n\n结果上，作者给出的核心数字是：在 K-fold 评估下，组合特征的 task difficulty 预测达到 Spearman ρ=0.399，且相对 baseline 的提升有统计显著性（p<0.001）；在 out-of-distribution 设置下，ρ=0.225。单一特征族里，entropy 最强。论文还指出 response AUC 可能偏乐观，即便 task difficulty 排序学得不好，AUC 仍然可以很高，因此 rank-based 指标更可信。更有信息量的是残差分析案例：一些任务被模型预测为不难，但真实 IRT 难度很高，最后发现是环境不可完成或 evaluator 失灵；另一些任务文本上看似复杂，实际却因数据熟悉或 shortcut 而容易。这说明 difficulty predictor 不只是一个打分器，还能帮助发现 benchmark 设计缺陷。","reading_guide":"泛读时先看数据与目标定义，也就是 17 个 benchmark 如何统一成 agent×task 响应矩阵，以及为什么作者选 1PL IRT 而不是直接用平均成功率。这里决定了整篇论文是否站得住。然后看评估部分，重点理解作者为什么批评 response AUC，并把 task-level rank correlation 作为主指标。接着看 feature ablation，尤其是 entropy 为什么在单特征里表现最好，以及组合特征带来了什么增益。最后看 residual diagnostics 的案例分析，这部分最接近实际使用场景：它告诉你难度预测器能否帮助发现坏任务、脏 verifier 和 shortcut。预计 25–35 分钟可以读完主线；如果只想抓结论，看 §3 的 IRT 建模、§4/§5 的主结果和残差分析即可。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a front-end problem in agent evaluation and training pipelines: can task difficulty be predicted before any rollout, using only task descriptions and static metadata, instead of running expensive agent-environment interactions? The target is not model-specific uncertainty calibration, but a benchmark-level notion of latent task difficulty that transfers across agent configurations and benchmark families. This matters because long-horizon agent benchmarks are becoming costly to validate, and without ex ante difficulty estimates it is hard to build calibrated evaluations, progressive curricula, or efficient task filters.","importance":"Its relevance to pretraining is indirect but real. Difficulty estimation can support curriculum construction, synthetic task selection, benchmark curation, and contamination analysis. The paper makes three useful points. First, it turns task difficulty from an informal intuition into an estimable latent variable that can be ranked across tasks. Second, it shows that response-level AUC can be misleadingly optimistic: a predictor may separate easy and hard responses without learning the actual ordering of task difficulty. Third, it releases a large multi-benchmark corpus and uses IRT-derived difficulty targets, which should be useful for future work on agent scaling, benchmark design, and difficulty-aware sampling. This is best viewed as an evaluation-method and data-asset paper rather than a pretraining-method paper.","technical_approach":"$7","experiments":"$8","reading_guide":"For a skim, start with the target construction: how 17 heterogeneous benchmarks are unified into an agent-by-task response matrix, and why the authors use 1PL IRT instead of average success rate. That is the conceptual backbone. Then read the evaluation section carefully, especially the argument against relying on response AUC and the shift toward task-level rank correlation. After that, inspect the feature ablations, with special attention to why entropy is the strongest single feature family and what the combined features add. Finish with the residual diagnostics, since that is where the method becomes practically useful for benchmark design and task filtering. Around 25 to 35 minutes should be enough for the main thread. If time is short, focus on the IRT setup in Section 3 and the main results plus residual analysis in Sections 4 and 5.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"无rollout任务难度预测的实用结论，token熵信号可直接用于数据课程与推理计算分配，看§3特征分析即可","en":"Practical findings on rollout-free task difficulty prediction, the token entropy signal is directly usable for data curriculum and inference compute allocation, just read §3 feature analysis."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Stefan Krsteski","Charlotte Meyer"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["task_difficulty_prediction","curriculum_learning","test_time_compute","entropy_signal"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05797","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05797","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05643","title":"Refining Over Resampling: Test-Time Self-Correction for LLM Reasoning","abstract":"Test-time scaling improves LLM reasoning by using additional inference compute, but wider sampling alone can suffer from diminishing returns: new rollouts often repeat existing answer patterns instead of adding useful reasoning diversity. Verifier-based selection offers an alternative, but its performance depends on the calibration of an external reward model. We propose a verifier-free breadth--depth refinement framework that uses test-time compute to both explore and improve candidate solution","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T06:38:37Z","category_id":"scaling","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05643.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"Test-time scaling 下，单纯加大采样宽度(best-of-N)收益递减，外部 verifier 又依赖校准良好的奖励模型；能否在无 verifier 下用“广度+深度”自我修正更有效地利用额外推理计算？","importance":"提出 verifier-free 的 breadth–depth refinement 框架，是 test-time compute 分配方向的一个实用方法组合，并在多个数学推理基准上验证。","technical_approach":"先采样多条独立推理 rollout（广度），再对每条 rollout 做迭代 self-critique / self-correction（深度），最后多数投票聚合；无需外部 verifier 或 reward model。","experiments":"在 AIME24、AIME25、AMC、OlympiadBench、MATH500 上对比 greedy、majority voting、verifier-based best-of-N、beam search、lookahead decoding，跨多个模型规模一致提升（具体幅度摘要截断）。","authors_note":"作者来自 University of Oklahoma、Stanford University、UPF、Air University。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Under test-time scaling, pure breadth (wider sampling) hits diminishing returns because new rollouts repeat existing patterns, while verifier-based selection depends on a well-calibrated external reward model; can we use breadth + depth self-correction to spend extra inference compute more effectively without a verifier?","importance":"Proposes a verifier-free breadth–depth refinement framework for test-time reasoning, contributing a simple compute-allocation recipe evaluated across multiple math reasoning benchmarks.","technical_approach":"Samples multiple independent rollouts (breadth), iteratively refines each rollout via self-critique and self-correction (depth), then aggregates via majority voting; no external verifier or reward model required.","experiments":"On AIME24, AIME25, AMC, OlympiadBench, and MATH500, the method consistently improves over greedy decoding, majority voting, verifier-based best-of-N, beam search, and lookahead decoding across multiple model sizes (exact margins truncated in abstract).","authors_note":"Authors from University of Oklahoma, Stanford University, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, and Air University."},"recommendation":{"zh":"test-time compute 分配的常规增量：无 verifier 时加 self-critique 深度修正比纯采样更划算；看方法段落就够，不要期待新范式。","en":"A standard incremental result on test-time compute allocation: self-critique depth beats pure breadth without a verifier; read the method section—don't expect a new paradigm."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Oklahoma","Stanford University","Universitat Pompeu Fabra","Air University"],"authors":["Ahsan Bilal","Muhammad Ahmed Mohsin","Muhammad Umer","Lena Trigg","Ali Subhan","Muhammad Ali","Dean F. Hougen"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["test-time-scaling","self-correction","reasoning","majority-voting","verifier-free"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05643","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05643","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07222","title":"Skaling: Chinchilla's Exponents Meet Kaplan's Coupling","abstract":"Neural scaling laws are foundational for language model development, yet standard formulations systematically under- and overestimate loss at data-scarce and overtraining extremes. This failure originates in the underlying assumption that model size and training data impact the loss independently. To address this, we introduce the Skaling law, a generalized functional form that couples model capacity and data through a single interaction exponent. This simple extension reduces the Mean Absolute ","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"scaling","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07222.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有 LLM scaling law 在数据稀缺和过训练极端区间会系统性低估或高估 loss，原因是默认模型规模和训练 token 数对 loss 的影响彼此独立。","importance":"贡献是 scaling law 形式的修正。论文把 Chinchilla 风格的指数与 Kaplan 风格的耦合思想结合，引入容量与数据之间的交互项，用于更可靠地从小规模实验外推完整训练网格。这直接关系到预训练预算分配和低成本 scaling sweep 设计。","technical_approach":"提出 Skaling law：在标准 scaling 函数中加入一个 coupling interaction exponent，让模型容量和数据规模通过单一交互指数共同影响 loss。论文还配合 sparse grid 策略，只在低 compute 区域采样，用拟合后的函数外推高 compute/full-grid 表现。","experiments":"摘要报告 Skaling 在插值与外推区间将 Mean Absolute Percentage Error 降低 1.5-3 倍；结合低 compute sparse grid，可用约 10 倍更少的 sweep compute 达到准确 full-grid extrapolation。摘要未列出具体模型族、参数范围、token 范围和数据集细节。","authors_note":"David Lopez-Paz 和 Kartik Ahuja 是机器学习泛化、因果与表示学习方向的知名研究者；摘要未提供作者机构信息。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses systematic loss misprediction by standard neural scaling laws in data-scarce and overtrained regimes, attributing the failure to the assumption that model size and training data affect loss independently.","importance":"The contribution is a revised scaling-law functional form. It combines Chinchilla-style exponents with Kaplan-style coupling and introduces an interaction term between capacity and data. This is directly relevant to pretraining budget allocation and the design of cheap scaling sweeps.","technical_approach":"Skaling adds a single interaction exponent that couples model capacity and data size in the loss model. The authors pair this form with a sparse-grid strategy restricted to low-compute regimes, then extrapolate to the full training grid.","experiments":"The abstract reports a 1.5-3x reduction in Mean Absolute Percentage Error across interpolation and extrapolation regimes. With sparse low-compute grids, Skaling achieves accurate full-grid extrapolation using roughly 10x less compute than uniform sweeps. The abstract does not specify model families, parameter ranges, token ranges, or datasets.","authors_note":"David Lopez-Paz and Kartik Ahuja are known for work on generalization, causality, and representation learning; the abstract does not provide institutional affiliations."},"recommendation":{"zh":"应立刻复现到内部 scaling sweep；若 coupling 指数稳定，data-scarce/overtrain 区间的预算决策会变。","en":"Replicate this on internal scaling sweeps soon; if the coupling exponent is stable, budget choices in data-scarce and overtrained regimes change."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Mathurin Videau","Badr Youbi-Idrissi","David Lopez-Paz","Kartik Ahuja"],"notable_authors":["David Lopez-Paz","Kartik Ahuja"],"tags":["scaling-laws","compute-allocation","Chinchilla","Kaplan","extrapolation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07222","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07222","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07424","title":"CoBa: Cost-Effective Test-Time Scaling via Compute-Balanced Routing","abstract":"Test-time scaling is often implemented by spending more compute along one axis: sampling more solutions, extending a chain of thought, or applying a stronger evaluator. Under a fixed inference budget, these choices compete. This paper formulates test-time reasoning as a compute-allocation problem in which a system must decide whether the next unit of compute should be spent on generation, verification, or stopping. We introduce CoBa, a compute-balanced routing policy that first obtains a small s","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"scaling","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07424.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"测试时推理的算力分配缺乏统一框架：现有测试时缩放方法（多候选采样、长思维链、强验证器）被当作独立调节旋钮，在固定推理预算下互相挤占算力，无法在生成、验证、停止三类动作间做最优分配。","importance":"分层算力路由的思路可反哺预训练阶段的生成-验证联合设计：一是为测试时算力效率导向的预训练目标设计提供参考，二是为固定总算力约束下生成大模型与验证小模型的容量配比提供量化依据。","technical_approach":"将测试时推理形式化为统一的算力分配问题，动作空间包含生成候选、轻量验证、强验证、停止四类，定义总token成本、参数加权token成本两种度量（后者按模型参数量缩放token成本，反映不同规模模型的算力差异）。提出分阶段路由策略：先用少量固定预算生成少量候选保证多样性，再用轻量验证（答案频次+小模型裁判分）给所有候选打分，基于分数决定停止、继续采样、还是将高不确定性候选路由到更强的验证器。最终排序分结合答案频次、轻量验证分、可选过程验证分、强验证分，未路由到强验证的候选不会因缺失对应分数被人为惩罚或加分。设置三个变体覆盖不同成本区间：Light版（2个候选+轻量验证）、Routed版（最多4个候选+2个送强验证）、Routed-Strong版（最多8个候选+4个送强验证）。","experiments":"使用Qwen3-14B、Phi-4-reasoning、Qwen3-8B作为生成器和验证器，在MATH-500、AIME 2024/2025、AMC 2023、程序符号推理共3129个示例-生成器评估对上测试。CoBa-Routed-Strong达到85.13%的宏观准确率，与best-of-16采样、自评估加权投票的准确率相当，但参数加权算力成本更低。所有对比基于离线预生成的16候选池做受控回放，保证公平性。","reading_guide":"先读第2节问题形式化部分，理解统一算力分配框架的定义和两种成本度量的设计逻辑；再读第3节方法部分，重点看分阶段路由的决策流程和三个变体的配置；实验部分重点关注成本-准确率帕累托前沿的对比结果。预计阅读时间20-25分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Test-time reasoning scaling strategies (multi-candidate sampling, extended chain-of-thought, strong verifiers) are treated as independent tuning knobs that compete for fixed inference compute, with no unified framework to optimally allocate resources across generation, verification, and stopping actions.","importance":"The tiered compute routing principle informs joint generator-verifier co-design in pretraining: it provides a reference for test-time efficiency-oriented pretraining objective design, and offers quantitative guidance for capacity splitting between large generator models and small verifier models under fixed total compute budgets.","technical_approach":"$9","experiments":"Evaluated on 3,129 example-generator pairs across MATH-500, AIME 2024/2025, AMC 2023, and procedural symbolic reasoning, using Qwen3-14B, Phi-4-reasoning, and Qwen3-8B as generators and verifiers. CoBa-Routed-Strong reaches 85.13% macro accuracy, matching the performance of best-of-16 sampling and self-evaluation weighted voting, with lower parameter-weighted compute cost. All comparisons use controlled replay on pre-generated 16-candidate pools for fair evaluation.","reading_guide":"Start with Section 2 (problem formulation) to understand the unified compute allocation framework and cost metric definitions. Then read Section 3 for the staged routing logic and variant configurations. For experiments, focus on the cost-accuracy Pareto frontier comparisons. Estimated reading time: 20-25 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"test-time scaling的算力分配问题被干净地形式化了，路由策略值得在内部推理服务复现；重点看§3的分配公式和Table 2的token节省","en":"Clean formulation of compute allocation in test-time scaling; the routing policy is worth reproducing in internal inference serving—focus on §3 allocation and Table 2 token savings."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Yan Zhou","Yue Ouyang","Kaiyang Zheng","Suncheng Xiang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["test_time_scaling","compute_allocation","verification","routing"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07424","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07424","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"architecture","emoji":"🏗️","name":"LLM 架构与建模","papers":[{"id":"2608.05806","title":"Hierarchical Latent Prediction for Language Models","abstract":"While standard Next-Token Prediction (NTP) lays the foundation of language model pre- training, its teacher-forced training paradigm may not be optimal for long-horizon reasoning and planning. Recent works such as Multi-Token Prediction (MTP) and Next-Latent prediction (NextLat) try to mitigate the problem through predicting multiple future tokens and self-supervised prediction in the latent space. However, those auxiliary objectives either have a limited horizon or suffer from compounding error","starred":true,"priority":"p1","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T09:41:41Z","category_id":"architecture","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05806.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 next-token prediction 在 teacher forcing 下的一个老问题：训练时总看到真前缀，推理时却要吃自己生成的前缀，长程生成和规划会出现误差累积。已有两条路各有短板：MTP 让模型多看几个未来 token，但 horizon 仍短；NextLat 在 latent space 做自监督一步预测，能改善局部动态一致性，但多步 rollout 仍会快速漂移。HiLP 要解决的就是：如何在不改变推理时主干架构、也不引入推理额外开销的前提下，把更长时间尺度的预测结构直接压进预训练表示里。","importance":"这是一个值得精读的 pretrain 方向工作，因为它不是简单给 NTP 叠一个 auxiliary loss，而是明确针对“长程表征是否能在预训练阶段被塑形”这个问题提出层级 latent 方案。贡献有两层。第一，它把 NextLat 从单尺度一步 latent dynamics 扩展到多尺度预测，试图减少 latent rollout 的 compounding error。第二，它坚持 training-time only 的设计：层级模块和组合头在推理时都可以移除，保留标准 NTP 解码路径。这一点很关键，因为很多替代目标在研究上有意思，但一旦推理路径变复杂，就很难进入大规模 recipe。HiLP 至少在设计上兼顾了研究价值和落地可能性。对预训练研究员来说，更重要的启发是：如果长程 reasoning / planning 的一部分瓶颈来自表示空间缺少稳定的 coarse-grained predictive state，那么单纯扩大模型和数据未必是唯一方向，训练目标本身可以更主动地塑造多尺度状态。","technical_approach":"$a","experiments":"实验规模在研究型论文里算扎实：1B 参数模型，在 100B tokens 上预训练，使用 8 张 NVIDIA B200。评测分两类。第一类是下游零样本能力，用 LM Evaluation Harness 跑 HumanEval，以及用 DataComp for LLMs 中的 symbolic 和 multi-step benchmarks，比较对象包括标准 NTP、MTP、NextLat。论文给出的主结论是 HiLP 在需要更长程推理和规划的任务上优于这些基线。第二类是 speculative decoding 效率，在 held-out code 和 Nemotron-Climbmix 验证集上，报告每次 drafting step 被 verifier 接受的平均 token 数，以及 K=1..4 各位置的 draft-verifier argmax agreement。HiLP 在这些指标上也更好，说明它学到的 latent dynamics 不只是离线表征更平滑，也更适合做多 token 预测和校验一致性。最有信息量的分析来自 rollout horizon 实验：作者画了 latent prediction cross-entropy 随 rollout 步数到 8 的曲线。结果显示，HiLP 基本保住了 NextLat 的近程误差水平，但在更远 horizon 上 future prediction error 更低。这正对应论文的核心主张：层级 abstract latent 缓解了多步 latent rollout 的误差累积。全文片段没有给出表格中的完整数值，因此无法逐项复述具体提升百分点；但参数规模、训练 token 数、评测任务和趋势结论是明确的。","reading_guide":"建议按“问题—机制—证据”三步读。先看 Introduction，确认作者不是在替代 AR，而是在给 AR 预训练加一个多尺度 latent 预测信号。然后重点读 Methodology，尤其是 Fig.1、五项损失的定义、SWA 的作用、以及 combined NTP 路径里的 stop-gradient 设计。这部分是论文真正的新意，不只是多加一层 latent。实验部分优先看 Tab.1、Fig.2 和讨论里关于 rollout horizon 到 8 步的误差曲线。读的时候要问两个问题：一，HiLP 的收益主要来自更强的 auxiliary supervision，还是来自层级时间抽象本身；二，training-time only 的 apparatus 是否真的没有把收益偷偷建立在更复杂的 inference path 上。若时间有限，30 分钟可以抓住方法与主结果；若要判断是否值得复现，建议把损失权重、窗口大小 k、以及 speculative decoding 设置一并看清。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a core weakness of standard next-token prediction under teacher forcing: the model is trained on gold prefixes but must condition on its own generations at inference time, which leads to compounding errors over long horizons. Existing fixes are partial. Multi-token prediction extends the horizon only a little, while NextLat adds latent self-prediction but still rolls out one step at a time and accumulates error. HiLP asks whether a language model can be pretrained to encode longer-range predictive structure through a hierarchical latent objective, without changing the inference-time architecture.","importance":"This is a meaningful pretraining paper because it does more than attach another auxiliary loss to NTP. It makes a specific claim about representation shaping: long-horizon reasoning and planning may benefit from a latent state space that carries stable coarse-grained predictive information, not just token-local transition consistency. The contribution is also practical in an important way. The hierarchical machinery is used only during training and can be removed entirely at inference time, so the method preserves the standard autoregressive decoding path. That makes it much easier to think about as a recipe-level intervention rather than a separate model family.","technical_approach":"$b","experiments":"$c","reading_guide":"Read it in three passes. First, the introduction: the key point is that HiLP is not replacing autoregressive language modeling, but augmenting it with a multi-scale latent prediction signal. Second, spend time on the methodology, especially Fig. 1, the five-loss objective, the role of sliding-window attention, and the stop-gradient design in the combined-NTP path. That is where the real novelty sits. Third, go to the main results and the rollout-horizon analysis. The most useful question while reading is whether the gains come from stronger auxiliary supervision in general, or specifically from hierarchical temporal abstraction. Another good question is whether the training-time-only design truly preserves the standard inference path without hidden complexity. A careful first read should take around 30 minutes; a reproduction-oriented read should also inspect loss weights, the window size k, and the speculative decoding setup.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"这篇会直接影响你对“长程能力该不该靠 AR teacher forcing 学出来”的 prior；先看方法图和对比 NextLat/MTP 的 ablation，若 compute 对齐干净，值得立刻做内部复现。","en":"This one can shift your prior on whether long-horizon competence should emerge from plain AR teacher forcing; read the HiLP-vs-NextLat/MTP ablations first, and if the compute matching is clean, it is worth reproducing internally."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Texas at Austin","Microsoft Research"],"authors":["Chang Shi","Tim Pearce","Manan Tomar","Siddhartha Sen","John Langford"],"notable_authors":["John Langford"],"tags":["hierarchical-latent","language-modeling-objective","long-horizon-reasoning","speculative-decoding","microsoft-research"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05806","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05806","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05687","title":"Answer First, Reason Later: Commitment Order in Diffusion LLMs","abstract":"Masked diffusion language models (dLLMs) can commit tokens in any order -- a freedom marketed as their core advantage over autoregressive decoding. We show that on reasoning tasks this freedom is instead the axis of failure. Logging every commitment during decoding of LLaDA-8B on GSM8K, we find that unconstrained (pure) decoding commits the final answer at 15-24% of the trajectory while half the reasoning region is still masked, and collapses to answer-only outputs on up to 90% of problems as th","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T07:25:04Z","category_id":"architecture","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05687.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这项工作研究 masked diffusion LLM 在推理任务上的解码顺序问题。dLLM 可以任意顺序提交 token，这通常被视为相对自回归模型的优势；但在 GSM8K、MATH-500 这类需要 chain-of-thought 的任务上，无约束 confidence-ordered decoding 会过早提交答案位置，甚至直接提交 EOS 和 padding，导致模型在推理区域仍大面积 masked 时已经固定最终答案。","importance":"这是一篇对 diffusion LLM 训练和推理都有启发的工作。它把 dLLM 推理失败从“模型想不想推理”拆成“采样器允许它先提交哪里”。结论很具体：问题不主要来自 EOS belief，而来自 reachability，即 sampler 能否在很远的位置立即提交 EOS 或最终答案。这个区分重要，因为它说明部分失败可以通过解码约束修复，不一定需要重新训练；也说明任意顺序生成并不天然适合推理，commitment order 是 dLLM scaling、RL 训练和 CoT 数据设计里需要显式控制的变量。","technical_approach":"论文没有提出新模型，而是对 LLaDA-8B-Instruct 的 denoising 过程做细粒度记录：每个位置何时从 mask 变成确定 token，每一步该位置的 top prediction 是什么。基于这些日志，作者区分了两类失败。第一类是 answer-only collapse：模型跳过推理，输出短答案后接 padding；canvas 越长，远处 EOS 越容易被提前提交。第二类是 answer-first backfill：即便最后有推理文本，答案也在轨迹前 1/4 左右被冻结，推理 token 的中位提交时间接近轨迹中点，后续推导只能围绕已经固定的答案补写。论文进一步比较 pure decoding 与 semi-AR/block-wise decoding，发现二者的 EOS pressure 几乎相同，但 EOS commitment 差异超过 2 倍。因此，差异不在模型对 EOS 的预测倾向，而在无约束 sampler 是否能对远处位置采取行动。干预方法是 window-restricted decoding：只允许提交 left-most masked position 之后 w 个位置内的 token。w=∞ 对应 pure decoding，w=1 接近左到右生成；这个单一参数直接限制远距离提交能力，不改 logits，也不重新训练。","experiments":"主要实验使用 LLaDA-8B-Instruct。GSM8K 上，无约束 pure decoding 在 256-token canvas 时超过三分之一问题出现 answer-only collapse；canvas 扩到 512 时，collapse 最高达到约 90%，说明更大的生成空间反而让模型更容易跳过推理。答案提交时间也显著早于推理文本：最终答案通常在 denoising 轨迹前 1/4 固定，而推理区 token 的中位提交时间接近一半。论文用 2×2 设计交叉 prompt 类型和 decoder 类型：prompt 分为要求 CoT 与只要答案，decoder 分为 pure 与 semi-AR。在 250 个成对问题上，prompt–decoder interaction 约 35 个百分点，permutation p<1e-4。answer-only 条件下两种 decoder 统计上接近；要求 CoT 时，semi-AR 获得约 31 个百分点收益，而 pure decoding 几乎不能把 CoT 转化为同等性能。这个结果说明 semi-AR 的优势主要来自推理文本真正发挥作用，而不是答案格式或任务先验。论文还在 Dream-7B 和 MATH-500 上复现了模式；MATH-500 中短答案难以猜测，collapse 减少，但 answer-first 的 order channel 仍存在。窗口约束的效果很直接：在 LLaDA-8B GSM8K 上，所有 w≤64 都能把 pure decoding 从 0.528 提升到 0.82–0.85，接近 semi-AR；滑动窗口 w=32 与 block size 32 的结果相差约 1 个点，说明有效因素是 reachability 限制，而不一定是固定 block 结构。代价也被测量了：在完整 refinement 下，w=1 最优，任意顺序没有带来精度收益；当每步提交约 8 个 token 时，约束反而有害。有效区间内，gated decoder 仍可保持接近 AR 的准确率，并报告约 4× wall-clock speedup。","reading_guide":"建议精读。先看 Introduction 中对 answer-only collapse、answer-first backfill、EOS pressure 与 reachability 的区分，这是论文的主线。随后重点读日志分析章节，尤其是 token commitment time 的分布、答案位置与推理区域的提交顺序，以及 EOS pressure/commitment 的对照图。2×2 prompt–decoder 实验需要仔细看，因为它回答了 CoT 在 dLLM 中是否只是表面文本的问题；这里的 interaction 和 answer-only near-tie 是关键证据。窗口约束实验也值得细读，尤其是 w 的 sweep、sliding window 与 block-wise decoding 的对照、以及 compute budget 下的精度—速度权衡。对做 diffusion LM 或 masked LM 预训练的人，最值得深挖的是：训练目标是否应该显式学习可用的 commitment order，RL 是否会被 confidence-ordered sampler 限制探索，以及长 canvas 数据中的 EOS/padding 结构如何与采样 reachability 共同作用。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies commitment order in masked diffusion LLMs on reasoning tasks. These models can unmask tokens in any order, but unconstrained confidence-ordered decoding often commits the final answer before most reasoning tokens are available, or commits EOS and padding so early that the model produces answer-only outputs.","importance":"This is a useful paper for diffusion-LM research because it separates model beliefs from sampler reachability. The failure is not mainly that the model has stronger EOS beliefs under pure decoding; EOS pressure is nearly decoder-invariant. The failure arises because the sampler is allowed to act on those beliefs at distant positions. This matters for decoding, RL exploration, CoT supervision, and pretraining data design for masked diffusion LMs. Any-order generation is not automatically compatible with multi-step reasoning; commitment order needs to be treated as a controlled variable.","technical_approach":"The work instruments the denoising loop of LLaDA-8B-Instruct. For each position, it logs when the position is committed and what the model predicts at each step. This reveals two distinct pathologies. The first is answer-only collapse: the model emits a bare answer followed by padding, skipping the reasoning region. The second is answer-first backfill: the final answer is fixed early, and the derivation is filled in later around an already committed conclusion. The paper then compares pure decoding with semi-autoregressive or block-wise decoding and shows that EOS pressure is almost the same across decoders, while EOS commitment differs by more than a factor of two. The intervention is window-restricted decoding: only positions within a window of size w after the left-most masked position are eligible for commitment. w=∞ recovers pure decoding, and w=1 approximates left-to-right generation. The method changes only eligibility, not logits or model weights.","experiments":"$d","reading_guide":"This is worth a careful read. Start with the Introduction for the distinction between answer-only collapse, answer-first backfill, EOS pressure, and reachability. Then read the logging analysis: the most important evidence is the distribution of commitment times for answer tokens versus reasoning tokens, and the comparison between EOS pressure and EOS commitment. The 2×2 prompt–decoder experiment is central because it tests whether CoT text functionally matters under different commitment orders. The window-restricted decoding section should also be read closely, especially the sweep over w, the comparison with block-wise decoding, and the compute-budget tradeoff. For diffusion-LM pretraining researchers, the main follow-up questions are whether commitment order should be learned or constrained during training, how confidence-ordered sampling affects RL exploration, and how EOS or padding structure in long canvases interacts with sampler reachability.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"这篇会直接改你对 dLLM reasoning 失败原因的 prior：先别急着怪训练目标，先复现它的 commitment trace 和 2x2 decoder ablation。","en":"This should change your prior on why dLLMs fail at reasoning: before blaming the training objective, reproduce the commitment traces and the 2x2 decoder ablation."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Seoul National University","Graduate School of Data Science, Seoul National University"],"authors":["Jewon Yeom","Jaewon Sok","Seonghyeon Park","Jeongjae Park","Hwiyeong Lee","Taesup Kim"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["diffusion-lm","reasoning","decoding-order","LLaDA","commitment"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05687","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05687","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06111","title":"Beyond Sequence Order: Syntax-Informed Positional Embeddings for Transformers","abstract":"Positional embeddings (PE) in Transformers encode token distance and order but are largely agnostic to \\textit{syntactic structure}. We introduce \\textbf{S}yntax-\\textbf{i}nformed \\textbf{P}ositional \\textbf{E}mbeddings (\\textbf{SiPE}), which learns a lightweight syntactic prior from dependency parses during pretraining and injects it across all three dominant PE families (absolute, relative, rotary), for both encoders and decoders, leaving self-attention and the rest of the architecture untouch","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T14:44:31Z","category_id":"architecture","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06111.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 Transformer 位置编码只表达线性顺序与距离、却忽略句法结构的问题。","importance":"这是一个架构层面的建模改进：不改 self-attention 主体，而是在位置编码中注入轻量句法先验，试图提升 encoder 和 decoder 对结构信息的利用。","technical_approach":"提出 SiPE（Syntax-informed Positional Embeddings），从依存句法解析中学习轻量结构先验，并将其注入绝对、相对、RoPE 三类位置编码。论文强调注入位置与方式要随架构而变：对自回归 decoder + relative PE，最有效的是把句法先验乘性耦合到 attention score 中的相对位置项；对 encoder，则更适合直接加到输入 embedding。","experiments":"摘要表明作者系统比较了不同 PE 家族、encoder/decoder 架构以及多种注入位置，核心发现是不同架构的最优注入点不同。给定信息未提供模型规模、训练语料和具体提升幅度，因此更适合作为结构建模思路而非可直接采纳的 recipe。","authors_note":"作者来自 University of Arizona；未见业界广泛知名作者信息。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"It addresses the limitation that Transformer positional embeddings encode linear order and distance but largely ignore syntactic structure.","importance":"This is an architecture-level modeling tweak: inject a lightweight syntactic prior into positional encoding without changing the core self-attention mechanism.","technical_approach":"The paper proposes SiPE (Syntax-informed Positional Embeddings), which learns a lightweight prior from dependency parses and injects it into absolute, relative, and rotary PE families. A key finding is that the best injection strategy depends on architecture: for autoregressive decoders with relative PE, multiplicative coupling with the relative-position term in the attention score works best; for encoders, adding the prior to input embeddings is better.","experiments":"The abstract suggests a systematic comparison across PE families, encoder/decoder settings, and injection locations. However, the provided information does not include model sizes, training corpora, or effect sizes, so this is more a modeling idea than a ready-to-adopt recipe.","authors_note":"The authors are from the University of Arizona; no widely recognized industry-famous author is evident from the provided metadata."},"recommendation":{"zh":"不是大范式，但有一个干净结论：结构先验该进哪一层取决于 PE 家族和解码方式；只看注入位置消融就有收获。","en":"Not a paradigm shift, but it offers one clean takeaway: where to inject structural priors depends on the PE family and decoding setup; the ablation on injection location is the part to read."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Arizona"],"authors":["Haris Riaz","Hyungji Kim","Mihai Surdeanu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["positional-embedding","syntax","transformer","relative-position","architectural-bias"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06111","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06111","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05423","title":"Why the Third Axis Is Freedom","abstract":"In generative training, a model produces an output and is penalised for its difference from an example. With one output per comparison, a model that produces one common answer can outperform a model retaining a broader repertoire. Explorative Modeling (XM) produces $K$ outputs per comparison and updates on the closest, claiming exploration as a \"third pretraining axis\" associated with generative expressivity. Here I show the third axis is actually freedom, meaning the weakness of the constraint ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-05T21:34:42Z","category_id":"architecture","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05423.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"探索式建模（XM，每个比较生成 K 个候选并对最近者更新）所谓的\"第三预训练轴\"究竟是什么，以及它如何影响泛化。","importance":"理论/原理分析类工作，把 XM 的\"探索\"重新解释为\"自由度（freedom）\"——行为约束的弱度，并给出形式化证明；属于对生成式训练目标的反思，但实验主要在归纳推理小规模设定。","technical_approach":"作者证明平均 XM 损失取决于候选错过可接受区域的概率，探索反而提高 miss 概率；将 XM 轴归并为 freedom（函数性质，而非参数量/架构/MDL/数据等形式性质），并引用其先前 freedom selection 在归纳实验中比 MDL 好 110–500% 的结果。","experiments":"主要为形式化证明与归纳（induction）合成实验；无大模型规模验证。","authors_note":"作者 Michael Timothy Bennett，持续围绕\"freedom\"作为泛化判据发表理论工作；本论文延续其先前论证。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"What Explorative Modeling (XM)—generating K outputs per comparison and updating on the closest—actually contributes as a purported 'third pretraining axis', and how it affects generalization.","importance":"A theoretical analysis reframing XM's 'exploration' as 'freedom'—the weakness of a model's behavioral constraint—with formal proofs; a reflection on generative training objectives, but validated only on small-scale induction settings.","technical_approach":"Proves average XM loss depends on the probability that candidates miss an acceptable region, with exploration raising that miss probability; subsumes the XM axis under freedom (a property of function, not parameters/architecture/MDL/data), citing prior results where freedom selection beat MDL by 110–500% on induction.","experiments":"Mostly formal proofs and synthetic induction experiments; no large-scale LM validation.","authors_note":"Michael Timothy Bennett has been developing 'freedom' as a generalization criterion; this paper extends that line of work."},"recommendation":{"zh":"理论小品，把 best-of-K 训练重述为\"约束弱化\"，结论在小规模 induction 上，作为思路备查即可，不读正文。","en":"A theoretical note reframing best-of-K training as weaker behavioral constraints; small-scale induction only—keep as a conceptual reference, don't read in depth."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Michael Timothy Bennett"],"notable_authors":["Michael Timothy Bennett"],"tags":["explorative-modeling","generalization-theory","MDL","training-objective"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05423","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05423","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05472","title":"Matrix Zonotopic Attention: A Context-Adaptive Value Projection for Set Transformers","abstract":"Multi-head attention combines an input-dependent softmax routing with an input-independent linear value projection, so the per-sample operator mapping aggregated values to outputs is the same for every input set. We study the consequences of this asymmetry for permutation-invariant set targets. We introduce the Transformation Degrees of Freedom (TDOF) of a target operator, a complexity measure counting the input-dependent directions an exact representation requires, and present a depth-separatio","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-05T23:43:45Z","category_id":"architecture","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05472.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"标准多头注意力中 value projection 是输入无关的，而 softmax 路由是输入相关的；这种非对称使得对置换不变集合目标的表达需要更深的网络。","importance":"架构分析+改进型工作。提出 Transformation Degrees of Freedom (TDOF) 复杂度度量并给出 depth-separation 结论，进而设计 context-adaptive value projection；对注意力表达力的理论讨论有启发，但实验主要在 Set Transformer/小规模集合任务，未在 LLM 规模验证。","technical_approach":"MZAttn 把固定 value projection 替换为 context-adaptive matrix-zonotope 族：一个中心矩阵加若干生成矩阵，由输入相关的 gate 加权；初始化时退化为标准 MHA，从而可热插拔。","experiments":"论文给出 depth-separation 理论结果（context-rigid attention 需要与 TDOF 成正比的深度，而单层 context-adaptive value family 可表示同一目标）；摘要未给出具体 LLM/大规模实验数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In standard multi-head attention, the value projection is input-independent while the softmax routing is input-dependent; this asymmetry forces deeper networks to represent permutation-invariant set targets.","importance":"An architecture analysis-and-improvement paper. Introduces the Transformation Degrees of Freedom (TDOF) complexity measure and a depth-separation result, then designs a context-adaptive value projection; insightful for attention expressivity, but experiments are on Set Transformer/small set tasks, not LLM scale.","technical_approach":"MZAttn replaces the fixed value projection with a context-adaptive matrix-zonotope family: a center matrix plus generator matrices weighted by input-dependent gates; at init it reduces to standard MHA, making it a drop-in replacement.","experiments":"Reports a depth-separation result (context-rigid attention needs depth proportional to TDOF, while a single context-adaptive value layer can represent the same target); no concrete LLM-scale numbers in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"depth-separation 论证值得一看，MZAttn 本身是 Set Transformer 语境，离 LLM 远；只看 TDOF 定义和定理即可。","en":"The depth-separation argument is worth a look; MZAttn itself lives in Set Transformer land, far from LLMs—read only the TDOF definition and theorem."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Zhen Zhang","Amr Alanwar"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["attention-architecture","expressivity","set-transformer","depth-separation","context-adaptive"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05472","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05472","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05371","title":"Quantum-Structured World Models (QSWMs) for Predictive Latent Dynamics","abstract":"World models learn latent states that summarize interaction histories, evolve over time, and support prediction, simulation, or planning. Most existing world models represent these states using classical vectors, probability distributions, recurrent hidden states, or transformer activations. In this paper, we introduce Quantum-Structured World Models (QSWMs), a quantum-inspired framework for predictive world modeling with structured latent states, latent transition operators, and measurement-ins","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-05T19:49:09Z","category_id":"architecture","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05371.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"探索量子启发的复杂值表示和 density-matrix-like latent 是否能为 world model 的预测 latent dynamics 提供更好的结构归纳偏置。","importance":"贡献类型是架构/表示范式探索。它不直接服务 LLM 预训练，但与 world model、latent dynamics、structured latent representation 有弱相关；当前实验看起来还停留在小规模 toy setting。","technical_approach":"提出 Quantum-Structured World Models，把 latent state、transition operator 和 measurement-inspired decoder 按量子结构组织。论文建立 classical inclusion、predictive sufficiency、structured compactness 三个性质，并实例化 complex-valued 与 density-matrix-like 两类 QSWM 变体。","experiments":"实验在 elementary cellular automata 上进行，对比 strong classical baselines。摘要只说明结果支持该方向，但未给出参数量、训练规模、具体 baseline 名称、指标或提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper investigates whether quantum-inspired complex-valued and density-matrix-like latent structures provide useful inductive biases for predictive world modeling.","importance":"This is an architecture and representation exploration. It is only weakly related to LLM pretraining through world models, latent dynamics, and structured latent states, and the reported setting appears to be small-scale and toy-like.","technical_approach":"Quantum-Structured World Models organize latent states, transition operators, and measurement-inspired decoders using quantum-inspired mathematical structure. The paper establishes three properties—classical inclusion, predictive sufficiency, and structured compactness—and instantiates complex-valued and density-matrix-like QSWM variants.","experiments":"The evaluation uses elementary cellular automata against strong classical baselines. The abstract does not provide parameter counts, training scale, exact baseline names, metrics, or numerical gains.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为 latent world model 备查即可；量子结构的 prior 还停在 toy CA，别把结论外推到 LM。","en":"Keep it as a latent-world-model reference; the quantum prior is still tested on toy cellular automata, so do not extrapolate to LMs."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Hailong Jiang","Emran Hossain","Feng Yu","Jianfeng Zhu","Guilin Zhang","Wulan Guo"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["world-models","latent-dynamics","quantum-inspired","complex-valued-networks"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05371","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05371","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06628","title":"Retrofitting Linear Attention into Diffusion Language Models","abstract":"Diffusion language models (dLLMs) offer a promising alternative to autoregressive models by accelerating inference through parallel decoding. Recent dLLMs commonly use blockwise semi-autoregressive decoding, generating blocks autoregressively while denoising tokens within each active block in parallel. However, despite KV caching, each denoising step still attends to all previous blocks, repeatedly incurring prefix-attention cost. Motivated by this bottleneck, we ask whether dLLM inference can b","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"architecture","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06628.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"Diffusion LM 在 blockwise semi-AR 解码时，每步去噪都要对所有历史 block 做 softmax attention，prefix-attention 成本随生成长度线性增长。","importance":"方法创新：把 linear attention 以 hybrid 形式 retrofit 进已预训练的 dLLM，几乎无需 post-training 即可显著降本，对 diffusion LM 推理范式有直接推动。","technical_approach":"提出 block-hybrid attention：当前 active denoising block 内保留精确 softmax attention，对之前的 blocks 使用 linear attention；在 LLaDA 2.1 16B 上替换 20 层中的 6 层，转换流程参考 LoLCAT，仅需少量 post-training。","experiments":"基于 LLaDA 2.1 16B；替换 6/20 层；abstract 未给具体速度/质量数字，强调 minimal post-training 即可保持质量。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In blockwise semi-autoregressive diffusion LMs, each denoising step attends over all previous blocks with softmax attention, causing prefix-attention cost to grow linearly with generated length.","importance":"Methodological contribution: retrofits linear attention into a pretrained dLLM in a hybrid form with minimal post-training, directly reducing inference cost of diffusion LMs.","technical_approach":"Block-hybrid attention keeps exact softmax attention within the active denoising block and uses linear attention over previous blocks; replaces 6 of 20 layers in LLaDA 2.1 16B following LoLCAT, with minimal post-training.","experiments":"On LLaDA 2.1 16B; replaces 6/20 attention layers; abstract reports quality retained with minimal post-training but no concrete speed/quality numbers.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"把 linear attention 塞进 dLLM 的历史 block 是自然但关键的一步，建议复现并测长序列下的质量-时延权衡。","en":"Linearizing attention over past blocks is the obvious next move for dLLMs; reproduce and benchmark the quality-latency tradeoff on long generations."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Jinha Kim","Younghun Roh","Jaeyeon Kim"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["diffusion-language-model","linear-attention","LLaDA","inference-efficiency","hybrid-attention"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06628","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06628","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06529","title":"Lost in Interpolation: Why Predictive Feedback Fails in Diffusion Language Models","abstract":"Soft-masking accelerates the convergence of Masked Diffusion Language Models (MDLMs). Existing formulations build this blend with linear interpolation (LERP) in the raw embedding space, which implicitly treats that space as Euclidean. We analyze the embedding space of MDLMs and find that the mask and predicted-token embeddings maintain a near-constant angle of (\\approx 73^\\circ) throughout training, while embedding norms remain essentially flat across vocabulary-frequency rank. These indicate a ","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"architecture","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06529.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作讨论 MDLM 中 soft-masking 的反馈表示问题：已有方法用 embedding 空间里的线性插值，把 [MASK] embedding 和 top-k 预测 token embedding 混合，但训练后的 token embedding 更接近等范数球面结构，线性插值会把反馈点推离主要表示流形，导致预测反馈没有被充分利用，甚至带来生成困惑度退化。","importance":"对预训练研究的启发在于，它把 diffusion LM 的一个看似工程化的反馈细节，重新放到表示几何里分析。贡献不是新的扩散目标，而是指出 MDLM 的 denoising feedback 需要尊重 embedding manifold。这个问题在 masked diffusion / any-order LM 中较重要，因为非 AR 模型会反复把中间预测送回 backbone，反馈表示质量直接影响训练动态和采样效率。它也提醒预训练研究者：token embedding 的范数、角度结构不是诊断指标而已，可能决定中间态构造是否合理。","technical_approach":"方法是 Spherical Soft-Masking。原始 soft-masking 先取 top-k token embedding 的概率加权欧氏均值，再用 LERP 和 mask embedding 做 convex blend。S-SM 做两处替换。第一，先把 top-k 候选 embedding 投到单位球面，在球面上求 Fréchet/Karcher mean，避免欧氏均值落到球内。第二，用 SLERP 沿测地线在 mask 方向和预测均值方向之间插值，而不是用直线插值。最后把结果缩放回 mask token 的原始范数，再输入 backbone。训练目标、mask corruption schedule、unmasking rule、confidence weight 的定义都保持不变，因此它是 soft-masking 的几何替换件，而不是一套新的 MDLM 训练框架。","experiments":"论文先在已发布的 MDLM checkpoint 上做几何诊断：归一化后的 mask embedding 与 top-k 预测均值方向之间的测地角在训练中基本稳定在约 73°；token embedding 的 L2 norm 沿 GPT-2 frequency rank 基本平坦。这两个结果支持 hyperspherical geometry 的假设。生成实验中，S-SM 在较大 NFE 预算 256 和 512 下，相比 vanilla MDLM 的 MAUVE 接近翻倍；相比 TopK/LERP，在相同预算下 MAUVE 提升超过 50%。同时，LERP 会带来 generative perplexity 退化，S-SM 能避免这一点。在使用等价 learned confidence 训练方案时，SLERP 在多个 seed 和所有采样预算下取得更高 MAUVE 和更低生成困惑度，而训练困惑度几乎相同。learned confidence weight 也支持这个解释：step 7k 时 SLERP 的 λ 收敛到约 0.056，LERP 约 0.030，前者约为后者 1.9 倍，说明优化器更愿意使用几何上合理的反馈。","reading_guide":"建议泛读 25 分钟。先看 Introduction 中对 MDLM soft-masking 信息丢失的定义，再看几何诊断部分，重点是 mask-to-prediction angle 和 embedding norm across frequency rank 两个图。方法部分只需确认 Fréchet mean、SLERP、rescale 三步如何替换原 LERP。实验部分优先看 MAUVE、generative perplexity、NFE budget 的对比，以及 learned confidence λ 的消融。值得深挖的是：这个球面假设是否依赖特定 tokenizer、embedding tying、模型规模和训练阶段；如果 diffusion LM 使用 continuous latent 或 adaptive embedding norm，S-SM 的优势可能会变化。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a feedback representation issue in masked diffusion language models. Existing soft-masking methods linearly interpolate between the [MASK] embedding and a weighted average of top-k predicted token embeddings. The authors argue that this is mismatched to the learned embedding geometry, which behaves more like a hypersphere than a Euclidean cloud. Linear interpolation then moves the feedback vector off the dominant representation manifold and can weaken or distort predictive feedback.","importance":"The main value is not a new diffusion objective, but a sharper treatment of the intermediate states used by diffusion LMs. MDLMs repeatedly feed partially denoised predictions back into the backbone, so the geometry of those feedback embeddings affects convergence, sample quality, and NFE efficiency. For pretraining researchers, the paper is a useful reminder that embedding geometry can constrain valid design choices in non-autoregressive language modeling, especially when the model consumes its own soft predictions during training or sampling.","technical_approach":"The proposed method, Spherical Soft-Masking, replaces the Euclidean operations in standard soft-masking with intrinsic spherical operations. Instead of taking a probability-weighted linear average of top-k token embeddings, it normalizes candidate embeddings and computes a Fréchet/Karcher mean on the unit sphere. Instead of blending this mean with the mask embedding by LERP, it uses SLERP along the geodesic between the mask direction and the predicted-token mean direction. The resulting vector is then rescaled to the native norm of the mask embedding before being passed into the backbone. The corruption schedule, denoising objective, unmasking policy, and confidence-based mixing mechanism are left unchanged.","experiments":"The empirical motivation comes from geometry probes on a released MDLM checkpoint. The geodesic angle between the normalized mask embedding and the normalized top-k prediction mean stays close to 73 degrees during training, while token embedding norms remain nearly flat across GPT-2 frequency rank. These observations support the hyperspherical view. In generation experiments, S-SM nearly doubles MAUVE over the vanilla MDLM baseline at larger NFE budgets such as 256 and 512, and improves MAUVE by more than 50% over TopK/LERP at the same budgets. It also avoids the generative perplexity degradation observed with LERP. Under an equivalent learned-confidence training setup, SLERP gives higher MAUVE and lower generative perplexity across budgets and seeds, with almost unchanged training perplexity. The learned mixing weight also shifts upward: around step 7k, λ is about 0.056 for SLERP versus 0.030 for LERP, suggesting that the model can rely more on geometrically consistent feedback.","reading_guide":"A focused skim should take about 25 minutes. Read the introduction for the failure mode of binary masking and Euclidean soft-masking. Then inspect the embedding-geometry diagnostics, especially the mask-to-prediction angle and embedding-norm plots. In the method section, check the three operations: spherical top-k aggregation, SLERP with the mask direction, and norm rescaling. In the results, prioritize MAUVE, generative perplexity, NFE-budget trends, and the learned-confidence ablation. The most useful follow-up question is whether the spherical assumption remains stable across model sizes, tokenizers, tied versus untied embeddings, and later-stage continued pretraining.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"这篇值得看的是它对 MDLM embedding 几何的诊断，不是分数本身；若你在做 diffusion LM，先复现那个“恒定夹角”现象，再决定是否换掉 LERP。","en":"What matters here is the geometry diagnosis, not the headline gain; if you work on diffusion LMs, first reproduce the near-constant-angle result, then decide whether LERP should be retired."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee","Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee, Uttarakhand"],"authors":["Lavanya Nigam","Ishaan Bansal","Aryan Sood","Vidit Aggarwal","Gaurav Kumar Nayak"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["diffusion-lm","MDLM","embedding-geometry","SLERP","soft-masking"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06529","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06529","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06398","title":"EntropyMoE: Entropy-Aware Sparse Expert Routing for Tokenizer-Free LLMs","abstract":"Recent byte-level large language models (LLMs) have made tokenizer-free modeling increasingly competitive by grouping bytes into dynamically sized patches. However, existing byte-patch architectures still apply the same dense feed-forward computation to every patch. This uniform computation cannot adapt model capacity to variations in patch semantics and granularity. We address this limitation with EntropyMoE, a Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architecture designed for dynamic byte patches. EntropyMoE ","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"architecture","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06398.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 tokenizer-free LLM 中动态 byte patch 已经按预测不确定性调节粒度，但后续 Transformer 仍对所有 patch 使用同一套 dense FFN 计算的问题。作者想验证：BLT patcher 已经计算出的 next-byte entropy，能否同时作为 MoE 路由信号，用更低成本组织稀疏专家计算。","importance":"对预训练研究的启发主要在两个点。第一，tokenizer-free 路线不只是在输入表示上绕开 BPE，还会改变条件计算的基本单位：路由对象从 token 变成变长 byte patch。第二，论文把“patch 粒度”“专家选择”“负载统计”拆开处理：entropy 决定路由，patcher 决定粒度，byte coverage 决定 workload accounting。这比直接把常规 MoE 搬到 BLT 上更干净。贡献量级偏探索性，不足以证明 tokenizer-free MoE 的明确 scaling 优势，但给出了一个可复现实验设置，说明低维不确定性信号有可能比 hidden-state router 更适合作为 byte-patch MoE 的路由坐标。","technical_approach":"EntropyMoE 基于 BLT 风格的 byte-patch pipeline。BLT 先用 next-byte entropy 决定 patch 边界：低不确定性区域形成更长 patch，高不确定性区域切成更短 patch。论文将 global patch Transformer 中的 dense FFN 替换为 Top-2 MoE 层，每个动态 patch 是一个路由单元。关键设计是 router 不看 patch hidden state，只使用该 patch 的标量 entropy，通过每个 expert 一个 slope 和 bias 的仿射变换得到 expert logits。hidden state 仍作为被选中 FFN expert 的输入，因此语义信息没有从专家计算中移除，只是不参与专家选择。作者没有让高 entropy patch 激活更多专家；每个有效 patch 固定激活 2 个 expert。计算自适应来自 patcher 的粒度变化，而不是 Top-K 的动态变化。负载统计按 patch 覆盖的 byte 数加权，而不是简单按 patch 个数计数，这一点适配了变长 patch。与 Hidden-only MoE、Hidden+Entropy MoE 相比，EntropyMoE 的区别是去掉高维 hidden-state projection，用一个一维不确定性信号形成路由几何。","experiments":"实验是 continuation-training 风格的受控比较，模型和数据设置围绕 Dense BLT、Hidden-only MoE、Hidden+Entropy MoE 和 EntropyMoE 展开。稀疏模型使用 25 层、每层 8 个 experts、Top-2 激活，并匹配 active parameters、训练数据、更新步数以及 dense-copy 初始化。EntropyMoE 的有效 router 参数量约为 400，而 hidden-state router 对照超过 4×10^5，减少约三个数量级。主要结果是 EntropyMoE 取得最低 held-out bits per byte；Hidden-only 和 Hidden+Entropy MoE 接近 dense baseline，说明“有专家容量”本身不能解释收益。作者还用第二个 continuation-training seed 复现了 EntropyMoE 相对 Hidden-only MoE 的优势。下游任务上没有一致提升，较明确的正向结果主要出现在 HellaSwag。消融上，byte-weighted accounting 在两个 seed 上都优于 patch-count accounting。路由分析显示 EntropyMoE 对低 entropy 和高 entropy patch 的 assignment distribution 分离更清楚，但专家使用集中在少数 expert 上，说明还不能证明 learned expert identity 是不可替代的。效率上，EntropyMoE 在稀疏模型中 iteration time 和 valid-byte throughput 最好，但由于 dispatch、通信和内存移动，仍慢于 Dense BLT。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，预计 20 到 30 分钟。先看 Introduction 中对 BLT patching、entropy 和 MoE routing 的拆分，这是论文最有用的概念部分。然后看 Method 里 router 公式、Top-2 选择、byte-weighted load accounting，这些决定了它不是普通 MoE 的简单替换。实验部分重点看 Dense BLT、Hidden-only、Hidden+Entropy、EntropyMoE 的受控比较表，以及 byte-weighted vs patch-count 的消融。路由分布图也值得看，因为它能判断 entropy router 是真的形成了不同专家路径，还是只是在少数专家上塌缩。可以略读下游 benchmark，那里更多说明收益边界，而不是主要贡献。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether a tokenizer-free LM should also make its sparse computation tokenizer-free in structure. BLT-style models already use next-byte entropy to form variable-length byte patches, but the global patch Transformer still applies the same dense FFN computation to every patch. EntropyMoE tests whether that same entropy signal can serve as the routing coordinate for MoE layers.","importance":"The useful contribution is not just adding MoE to a byte-level model. It clarifies how conditional computation changes when the routed unit is a variable-length byte patch rather than a fixed tokenizer token. The paper separates three roles that are often entangled: patching controls computational granularity, entropy controls expert selection, and byte coverage controls load accounting. This is a relevant design point for tokenizer-free pretraining. The evidence is still exploratory and continuation-training based, so it should not be read as a compute-matched argument against dense BLT. Its value is in showing that a low-dimensional uncertainty signal can be a stronger router than a high-dimensional hidden-state projection under this setup.","technical_approach":"EntropyMoE starts from a BLT-like byte-patch pipeline. The patcher uses next-byte entropy to create longer patches in predictable regions and shorter patches in uncertain regions. The dense FFN blocks in the global patch Transformer are replaced with Top-2 MoE layers, and each dynamic patch is routed as one unit. The central design choice is that the router only consumes the scalar entropy assigned to the patch. For each expert, a learned slope and bias map this scalar to a routing logit. The patch hidden state is deliberately excluded from expert selection, but it remains the input to the selected experts. The model therefore uses uncertainty for path selection while preserving semantic and contextual information inside expert computation. Every valid patch activates exactly two experts; the number of active experts does not grow with entropy. Byte length is used for workload accounting, which matters because patches cover different numbers of bytes.","experiments":"$e","reading_guide":"Skim in 20 to 30 minutes. Focus first on the introduction where the authors distinguish patch granularity, routing, and byte-level workload. Then read the method details for the entropy-only affine router, Top-2 expert selection, and byte-weighted load accounting. The most informative experiments are the controlled comparisons against Hidden-only and Hidden+Entropy MoE, plus the accounting ablation. The routing distribution plots are worth checking because they reveal whether entropy creates meaningful expert pathways or merely concentrates traffic. The downstream benchmark table is secondary; it mainly helps bound the claim.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看 entropy 路由与负载计量的消融；若结果干净，值得在 byte-level MoE 内部实验复现。","en":"Read the entropy-routing and workload-accounting ablations; if clean, this is worth reproducing in an internal byte-level MoE setup."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Bo Liu","Muxuab Yu","Yu Zhang","Pengfei Gao","Yongping Zhang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["tokenizer-free","byte-level-lm","mixture-of-experts","routing","dynamic-patching"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06398","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06398","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06912","title":"Fast LapSum: Exact Differentiable Top-k at Million Scale","abstract":"The top-$k$ operation is a fundamental building block of modern sparse computation, enabling token routing, expert activation, memory selection, and attention pruning. Yet standard hard top-$k$ blocks gradients, while existing continuous (soft) relaxations remain too costly for large-scale models. We introduce Fast LapSum, an exact-budget soft top-$k$ primitive whose GPU solver runs in linear time after sorting. Unlike prior linear-time methods such as DFTopK, which relax the normalization const","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"architecture","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06912.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这项工作解决大规模可微 top-k 的系统瓶颈。top-k 是 MoE routing、token/memory selection、retrieval shortlist、sparse attention 等稀疏计算里的基础操作。硬 top-k 有明确预算，但梯度几乎不可用；软松弛能传梯度，却常常需要高成本求解，或者不能严格保证选择质量之和等于 k。问题在于，稀疏化算子本身如果太慢，就会抵消稀疏模型节省下来的计算。","importance":"这不是 LLM 预训练 recipe 论文，但对稀疏架构和可训练 routing 有明确参考价值。对 MoE、稀疏注意力、可微检索、长上下文 memory selection 来说，容量预算通常是真实约束，例如专家槽位、检索条数、保留 token 数。Fast LapSum 的价值在于同时保留精确预算和端到端梯度，并把算子开销降到可以放进训练循环的水平。它更像一个底层 primitive：如果后续稀疏 LLM 需要从 hard routing 走向更稳定的可微 routing，这类算子会影响训练稳定性和系统可行性。","technical_approach":"方法基于 LapSum operator。给定分数向量 r、预算 k 和温度参数 α<0，LapSum 通过 Laplace CDF 对阈值附近的 hard top-k 决策做平滑，输出概率 p，并严格满足 ∑ p_i = k。核心难点是求阈值 b。已有实现通常用 bisection，每一步都要对全部 n 个元素重新求和，代价较高。\n\nFast LapSum 的改进是一次性计算阈值曲线。完整排序后，通过稳定的 prefix/suffix scan 得到分段曲线，再用 index lookup 和闭式 root 计算得到阈值。反向传播使用解析 vector-Jacobian product，只需要一次 reduction，不需要 straight-through estimator 或有偏 surrogate。\n\n在百万级以上，排序会成为瓶颈。为此它加入 probabilistic bracketing pipeline：用带噪 subsample 估计阈值所在区间，单次 streaming pass 只保留不确定的中间 band，再对该 band 排序，并通过 verification step 保证 bracket 正确。这样在期望意义上保持线性工作量，同时最终仍恢复精确阈值和精确预算。相比 DFTopK 通过放松 normalization constraint 换取线性复杂度，Fast LapSum 保留未放松的 ∑ p_i = k 约束。","experiments":"微基准显示，完整排序版 solver 相比逐 query bisection baseline 接近两个数量级加速。对于更大向量，bracketing fast path 在 10^7 个 scores 时比 full sorting 快 5.6 倍，并且在测试的 10^8 规模范围内保持低毫秒级开销。作者强调该方法在低于 10^6 时使用 full sort，高于该规模时用 bracket 限定排序区域。\n\n应用实验包括两个 full-scale 例子。一个是百万坐标稀疏 adversarial attack：在 ConvNeXt-V2 上，用相当于约 600 个完全饱和像素的 soft mass，在 3.3M 坐标中约占 0.02%，即可诱导误分类。另一个是 differentiable megapixel image coder，在真实 rate-distortion loop 中使用该算子。这些实验不是 LLM 任务，但说明该 primitive 能在百万级变量的端到端优化里运行，而不是只停留在小规模算子测试。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，预计 25–35 分钟。先看 Introduction 中对 exact budget、differentiability 和 cost 的三角约束定义。然后看 Background 里 LapSum 如何把 hard top-k 视作阈值化，并通过 Laplace CDF 平滑边界。方法部分重点看三点：阈值曲线的 prefix/suffix scan，闭式阈值求解，解析 VJP。若关心 LLM 稀疏训练，可重点读 million-scale bracketing pipeline，因为它决定该算子能否用于 MoE routing、长上下文 token selection 或 differentiable retrieval。应用实验可快速浏览，主要用来判断系统开销量级。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles the systems bottleneck in differentiable top-k selection at large scale. Top-k is a core operation in sparse computation, including MoE routing, token and memory selection, retrieval shortlisting, and sparse attention. Hard top-k preserves an exact budget but blocks useful gradients. Soft relaxations restore gradients, but they are often expensive or fail to enforce an exact selection mass of k. The key issue is that a differentiable sparsifier cannot be more expensive than the sparse computation it is meant to enable.","importance":"This is not a base-model training recipe, but it is relevant to sparse LLM architecture research. In MoE, sparse attention, differentiable retrieval, and long-context memory selection, the budget is a real capacity constraint: expert slots, active tokens, retrieved candidates, or memory entries. Fast LapSum is useful because it preserves the exact budget while remaining differentiable and cheap enough to run inside a training loop. It should be viewed as a low-level primitive that may make softer and more stable routing mechanisms practical at the scale used by modern sparse models.","technical_approach":"$f","experiments":"Microbenchmarks show that the full-sort solver is almost two orders of magnitude faster than a per-query bisection baseline. At larger scales, the bracketing fast path is 5.6× faster than full sorting at 10^7 scores, and the reported runtime stays in the low-millisecond range up to 10^8 scores. The implementation uses full sorting below 10^6 scores and switches to bracketing above that scale.\n\nThe paper also tests the operator in two full-scale applications. The first is a million-coordinate sparse adversarial attack: on ConvNeXt-V2, a soft mass equivalent to roughly 600 fully saturated pixels across 3.3 million coordinates, about 0.02%, is enough to induce misclassification. The second is a differentiable megapixel image coder trained inside a genuine rate-distortion loop. These are not LLM tasks, but they demonstrate that the primitive can operate inside end-to-end optimization at million-coordinate scale rather than only in small operator benchmarks.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 25–35 minutes. Start with the introduction to understand the three constraints: exact budget, useful gradients, and low runtime. Then read the LapSum background to see how hard top-k is interpreted as thresholding and how the Laplace CDF smooths the boundary. In the method section, focus on the prefix/suffix scan for the threshold curve, the closed-form threshold computation, and the analytical VJP. For sparse LLM applications, the most relevant part is the million-scale bracketing pipeline, since it determines whether the operator can be used for MoE routing, long-context token selection, or differentiable retrieval. The application experiments can be read quickly as evidence for runtime scale rather than as model-quality results.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"算子层面有用，尤其给 MoE 路由和稀疏注意力；先看 VJP 推导和真实 GPU benchmark，端到端收益仍要怀疑。","en":"Useful at the operator level for MoE routing and sparse attention; inspect the VJP derivation and GPU benchmarks, but treat end-to-end gains as unproven."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Łukasz Struski","Joanna Wojciechowicz","Jakub Antczak","Marcin Mazur","Kamil Książek","Jacek Tabor"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["differentiable-topk","sparse-computation","moe-routing","gpu-kernel"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06912","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06912","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07249","title":"Stoicheia: Character-Level Masked Diffusion for Ancient Greek Textual Restoration, Parsing, and Metrical Scansion","abstract":"We introduce Stoicheia, a 405M-parameter character-level masked-diffusion encoder for Ancient Greek whose input factors into five aligned, independently maskable planes: letters, word and sentence boundaries, diacritics, capitalization, and punctuation. A single backbone can therefore restore lacunae, re-segment, accentuate, and punctuate unspaced text without task-specific retokenization. We pretrain it on an open, revision-pinned corpus of 380M words and release eleven checkpoints: ten rotated","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"architecture","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07249.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决古希腊文本在缺字修复、断词断句、重音恢复、标点恢复等多个字符级任务上需要分别建模和重分词的问题。","importance":"这篇工作的价值不在古典语言应用本身，而在于它把 masked diffusion LM 做成了多平面对齐的字符级统一建模器，并用严格去污染的折叠发布方式，较干净地测量了预训练对下游字符任务的贡献。","technical_approach":"提出 Stoicheia：一个 405M 参数的字符级 masked-diffusion encoder。输入被拆成五个对齐且可独立 mask 的平面：字母、词/句边界、变音符号、大小写、标点。这样同一骨干网络可在不改 tokenizer 的情况下统一处理文本修复、重分段、accentuation 和 punctuation。预训练使用 3.8 亿词开放语料，并发布 10 个轮转去污染 fold checkpoint，加上 1 个不含文书文本的 checkpoint，用于控制训练暴露。","experiments":"实验覆盖三类任务：受损铭文与纸草文献重建、形态句法标注与依存分析、长短音恢复与格律扫描。每项实验都配随机初始化对照，以隔离 diffusion 预训练收益。摘要中给出铭文重建提升 5.6 个 CER 点，其余任务也报告稳定增益。模型规模为 405M，训练语料为 380M words。由于任务和语种都较特殊，外推到通用 LLM 需谨慎。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"It tackles the need to separately model restoration, segmentation, accentuation, and punctuation for Ancient Greek text, where character-level corruption and missing spans make tokenization brittle.","importance":"The main value is not the classical-language application itself, but the use of a masked diffusion LM as a unified character-level model with aligned factorized inputs, plus a relatively clean decontaminated release setup to isolate what pretraining actually buys.","technical_approach":"The paper introduces Stoicheia, a 405M-parameter character-level masked-diffusion encoder. Inputs are factorized into five aligned and independently maskable planes: letters, word/sentence boundaries, diacritics, capitalization, and punctuation. A single backbone can therefore solve restoration and reformatting tasks without task-specific retokenization. Pretraining uses an open 380M-word corpus, and the release includes ten rotated decontaminated folds plus one checkpoint with no documentary-text exposure.","experiments":"Experiments cover damaged inscription and papyri reconstruction, morphosyntactic tagging and dependency parsing, and macronization with metrical scansion. Each task includes a matched random-initialization control to isolate the contribution of diffusion pretraining. The abstract reports a 5.6-point CER gain on inscription reconstruction, with additional gains on the other tasks. The model is 405M parameters and trained on 380M words, but the domain is narrow, so transfer to general-purpose LMs is limited.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"不是通用 LLM 论文，但若你关心离散 diffusion LM 在字符级、无 tokenizer 场景怎么做干净实验，这篇的多平面输入和去污染发布方式值得抄作业；正文不必细读。","en":"Not a general LLM paper, but if you care about discrete diffusion LM in tokenizer-free character regimes, the factorized input design and decontaminated release protocol are worth stealing; no need to read every section."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Eric Cullhed","Albin Thörn Cleland"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["diffusion-lm","character-level","masked-diffusion","decontamination","text-restoration"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07249","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07249","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07323","title":"Is SwiGLU's Open Positive Tail Necessary? Evidence from Closed-Tail Gating with MemGLU","abstract":"We test whether decoder-only language-model FFNs require SwiGLU's open positive tail. We introduce MemGLU as a closed-tail comparator derived from a memristive branch geometry. Across paired 9M and 30M pretraining runs with three seeds, MemGLU remains within about 0.1% of SwiGLU in validation NLL. Trained SwiGLU checkpoints are sensitive to positive-tail suppression, while mechanism diagnostics show that the two models use their gates differently despite similar losses. These results suggest tha","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"architecture","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07323.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"检验 decoder-only 语言模型 FFN 中 SwiGLU 的开放正尾是否真是性能所必需。","importance":"贡献是一个小尺度但设计较干净的架构消融：它把 SwiGLU 的正向无界尾部从门控几何中拿掉，观察模型是否会在预训练中找到替代用法。对研究 FFN 激活函数和门控机制有一定参考价值，但实验规模只有 9M 和 30M，不能直接外推到大模型。","technical_approach":"提出 MemGLU 作为 closed-tail gating 对照组，其设计来自 memristive branch geometry。核心做法不是在训练后裁剪 SwiGLU，而是从头预训练一个门控尾部封闭的 FFN 变体，再与 SwiGLU 做成对比较，并用机制诊断分析两类 gate 的使用方式。","experiments":"在 9M 和 30M decoder-only 语言模型上做预训练，每个设置使用 3 个随机种子。MemGLU 的验证 NLL 与 SwiGLU 相差约 0.1% 以内。对已训练 SwiGLU checkpoint 直接抑制正尾会造成敏感退化，但从头训练的 MemGLU 可以学到不同的门控使用方式并达到接近损失。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether the open positive tail of SwiGLU gates is actually required in decoder-only LM feed-forward networks.","importance":"It provides a relatively clean small-scale architectural ablation on FFN gating geometry. The main value is separating post-hoc gate suppression from training a closed-tail gate from scratch. The caveat is scale: 9M and 30M models are useful for mechanism probes but not enough to settle large-model architecture choices.","technical_approach":"The authors introduce MemGLU, a closed-tail gating comparator derived from a memristive branch geometry. They pretrain MemGLU and SwiGLU under paired settings, then run diagnostics to compare how the gates are used, rather than only measuring loss after modifying a trained SwiGLU model.","experiments":"Paired decoder-only LM pretraining runs are conducted at 9M and 30M parameters with three seeds. MemGLU stays within roughly 0.1% validation NLL of SwiGLU. Suppressing the positive tail in trained SwiGLU checkpoints hurts, while models trained with closed-tail gates adapt and use their gates differently.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"小模型消融挺干净，但别据此改大模型 FFN；只看 gate 诊断和 paired-run 设置即可。","en":"A clean small-model ablation, not a reason to change large-LM FFNs; read the gate diagnostics and paired-run setup only."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Yuting Ge","Pengju Yang","Mingkai Nie"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["FFN","SwiGLU","gating","activation-functions","architecture-ablation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07323","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07323","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07420","title":"Beyond Myopic World Models: Long-Horizon End-to-End Training for Direct Future Prediction","abstract":"World models are expected to support imagination over extended temporal horizons, yet most are still trained through local few-step prediction objectives and deployed by recursively rolling out their own predictions. This creates a fundamental mismatch: few-step losses optimize local transition fidelity, while long-horizon prediction depends on how errors and gradients propagate through the entire trajectory. As a result, transitions with different downstream influence on the endpoint are treate","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"architecture","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07420.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"世界模型常用短步预测损失训练、递归 rollout 推理，训练目标和长时域预测目标不一致，导致误差沿轨迹放大。","importance":"贡献类型是建模范式改动：把长时域世界模型从局部 transition fidelity 转向端到端 endpoint prediction。对 LLM 预训练不是直接工作，但对长程信用分配、非自回归未来预测、规划模型训练目标有参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出 Direct Prediction World Model，使用非递归架构把任意长度动作序列压缩成单个 embedding，并在一次前向传播中预测终点观测。核心取舍是放弃逐步模拟每个中间状态，直接优化最终状态误差，从而避免递归误差累积。","experiments":"摘要未给出模型规模、数据集、baseline 和具体提升数字。可确认实验目标应是比较短步递归世界模型与 DPWM 在长时域 endpoint prediction 上的表现。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Most world models are trained with local few-step losses but used through recursive rollout, creating a mismatch that amplifies small transition errors over long horizons.","importance":"The contribution is a modeling-objective change: optimize long-horizon endpoint prediction directly instead of local transition fidelity. It is not an LLM pretraining paper, but it is relevant to long-horizon credit assignment, non-autoregressive future prediction, and planning-oriented model objectives.","technical_approach":"The paper proposes the Direct Prediction World Model, a non-recursive architecture that compresses an action sequence of arbitrary length into one embedding and predicts the endpoint observation in a single forward pass. The key design choice is to skip explicit intermediate-state rollout and train directly on the final outcome.","experiments":"The abstract does not report model size, datasets, baselines, or numerical gains. The expected comparison is between few-step recursive world models and DPWM on long-horizon endpoint prediction accuracy.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"不是 LLM 论文，但“直接训终点而不是训局部转移”的 prior shift 值得记，正文可只看 objective 和长程误差分析。","en":"Not an LLM paper, but the endpoint-objective shift is worth noting; read only the objective design and long-horizon error analysis."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Xinyi Li","Zaishuo Xia","Chenjie Hao","Yubei Chen"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["world-models","long-horizon","non-recursive-prediction","planning"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07420","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07420","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07042","title":"Limit Points of Reflow with Minibatch Optimal Transport","abstract":"Rectified flows, also called flow matching or stochastic interpolants, are generative models that learn a time-dependent vector field steering a probability curve between two probability distributions, usually referred to as latent and target distributions. Reflow accelerates inference by iteratively straightening the trajectories induced by this vector field. We study the asymptotic behavior of this iteration and characterize its limit points. First, we define weak rectified couplings which alw","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"architecture","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07042.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["math.PR","cs.LG","math.NA"],"summary":{"core_problem":"研究 rectified flow / reflow 在反复直化生成轨迹时会收敛到什么对象，尤其是加入固定 minibatch optimal transport 步骤后的极限结构。","importance":"贡献类型是生成建模理论分析。它不直接解决 LLM 预训练问题，但 flow matching、rectified flow 已经进入图像、视频和部分离散生成建模讨论，对理解非 AR 生成范式的稳定性有间接价值。","technical_approach":"论文定义 weak rectified couplings，并分析 reflow 迭代与固定 batch size 的 minibatch OT 交替执行时的渐近行为。核心结论是任意极限满足 N-cyclical monotonicity，其中 N 是 minibatch 大小；在速度场限制为梯度场且满足额外支撑条件时，reflow 极限与源分布到目标分布之间的 OT map 重合。","experiments":"从摘要看主要是理论工作，没有报告 LLM、图像或离散语言建模实验。结果以存在性、极限点刻画、结构性质和特定条件下与最优传输映射等价为主。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper characterizes the limit points of rectified-flow reflow iterations, especially when reflow is alternated with fixed-size minibatch optimal transport steps.","importance":"This is a theoretical contribution to generative modeling. It is not directly about LLM pretraining, but it informs the behavior of flow-matching and rectified-flow paradigms that increasingly appear in non-autoregressive and multimodal generation.","technical_approach":"The authors introduce weak rectified couplings and analyze the asymptotic behavior of reflow with minibatch OT. They show that any limit is N-cyclically monotone, where N is the minibatch size, and prove that under gradient-field velocity restrictions plus support assumptions, the reflow limit coincides with the optimal transport map.","experiments":"The abstract indicates a theory-first paper with no reported LLM, image, or discrete-language experiments. The main results are existence, limit-point characterization, structural stability, and conditional equivalence to OT maps.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看定理陈述和 minibatch OT 极限即可；它提醒 reflow 的“直线化”不是无条件走向全局 OT。","en":"Read the theorem statements and minibatch-OT limit result; the useful warning is that reflow straightening does not automatically imply convergence to global OT."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Antonin Chambolle","Johannes Hertrich"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["rectified-flow","flow-matching","optimal-transport","generative-modeling"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07042","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07042","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"efficient","emoji":"⚡","name":"高效推理与架构","papers":[{"id":"2608.05448","title":"DBLAST: Dependent Block Drafting for Stochastic Speculative Decoding","abstract":"Speculative decoding accelerates large language models' inference by using a lightweight drafter to propose multiple future tokens and a target model to verify them. While recent block and diffusion-style drafters can predict several positions in a single pass, their training and sampling procedures are typically optimized for greedy decoding or assume that positions in the draft block are conditionally independent. This assumption becomes brittle in non-greedy speculative decoding, where the ta","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-05T22:49:54Z","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05448.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这项工作处理的是随机采样场景下的 speculative decoding：块式 drafter 一次提出多个 token，但常见做法把块内位置近似为条件独立，导致它在高熵目标分布下很难提出一条前后一致、能被 sequential verifier 接受的候选轨迹。","importance":"对基座预训练本身不是核心贡献，但对高吞吐推理、RL rollout、开放式生成服务有直接参考价值。关键启发是：多 token 预测或 diffusion-style drafter 不能只优化每个位置的边缘分布；如果 verifier 按自回归条件分布逐 token 接受，训练目标就需要贴近 accepted prefix length，而不是只看 block NLL。","technical_approach":"DBLAST 在 DFlash 风格的 block diffusion drafter 上加入块内依赖。方法使用一个 CP-style categorical latent mixture：给整个 block 引入轻量类别 latent variable；在给定类别后，各位置仍可并行预测；对类别边缘化后，块内 token 之间形成相关性。这样保留了一次前向预测多个位置的并行性，同时比独立采样更容易生成条件上连贯的 draft block。训练上，论文不只优化 block NLL，而是提出面向 accepted length 的 log-domain surrogate，并用 threshold-truncated prefixes 稳定早期训练。这个目标更贴近 speculative verifier 的实际行为：第 i 个 token 是否被接受，取决于前面 token 是否已经被接受以及目标模型在该条件下的分布。","experiments":"实验覆盖 Qwen3-4B 和 Qwen3-8B，任务包括 GSM8K、MT-Bench、HumanEval 和 creative writing。论文重点报告了高熵采样下的收益：在 Qwen3-8B 高熵设置中，DBLAST 的 accepted length 宏平均提升超过 12%。诊断实验把样本按 target-block early determinism 分桶，发现独立 block proposal 在低确定性区域最脆弱；DBLAST 在所有分桶中提升 accepted length，且相对收益集中在早期位置不确定、存在多条合理续写的区域。这支持了论文的核心判断：随机 speculative decoding 的瓶颈不是单点预测质量，而是块级条件轨迹质量。","reading_guide":"泛读即可，预计 20–30 分钟。优先看 Introduction 中对 independent block sampling mismatch 的分析，以及 Figure 1 的 early determinism 分桶结果。方法部分重点看 CP-style latent mixture 如何在不牺牲并行性的情况下引入块内依赖，再看 accepted-length surrogate 的定义。实验部分可重点看高熵设置下 Qwen3-8B 的 accepted length 结果；如果关心 RL rollout 或开放式生成服务，这部分比 greedy decoding 指标更有参考意义。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies speculative decoding under stochastic target sampling. Existing block drafters propose several future tokens in one pass, but often treat positions in the block as conditionally independent. This works better for greedy or low-entropy decoding, and breaks down when the target distribution admits several plausible continuations.","importance":"This is mainly an inference-efficiency paper, but it has useful implications for training multi-token and diffusion-style drafters. The main lesson is that matching per-position marginals is not enough when verification is sequential. A drafter should optimize for the accepted prefix process, not only for block likelihood.","technical_approach":"DBLAST adds dependence to a DFlash-like block diffusion drafter through a CP-style categorical latent mixture. A lightweight latent category is shared across the block. Conditioned on that category, token positions are still predicted in parallel; after marginalizing over categories, the proposal defines a correlated joint distribution over the block. The paper also introduces an accepted-length-oriented log-domain surrogate, with threshold-truncated prefixes for stable early training. This aligns the drafter more directly with the verifier, which accepts token i under the target distribution conditioned on the already accepted draft prefix.","experiments":"The evaluation uses Qwen3-4B and Qwen3-8B on GSM8K, MT-Bench, HumanEval, and creative-writing tasks. In the high-entropy Qwen3-8B setting, DBLAST reports more than 12% macro-average improvement in accepted length. A diagnostic experiment groups examples by early target-block determinism. Independent proposals degrade most in the least deterministic bins, while DBLAST improves accepted length in every bin, with the largest relative gains where early positions have multiple plausible continuations.","reading_guide":"A skim is sufficient, around 20–30 minutes. Read the Introduction for the mismatch between independent block sampling and sequential verification. Then inspect the early-determinism analysis around Figure 1. In the method section, focus on the latent-mixture parameterization and the accepted-length surrogate. The most relevant experimental results are the high-entropy Qwen3-8B accepted-length comparisons, especially for readers interested in RL rollouts or open-ended generation.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看熵升高下 accepted length 崩掉的实验和 loss 设计；这对采样式 serving 比常规 greedy 加速更有用。","en":"Read the entropy-vs-accepted-length results and the loss design; this is more relevant to sampling-heavy serving than standard greedy acceleration."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Amirmohammad Karimi","Chao Gao","Negar Hassanpour"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["speculative-decoding","inference-efficiency","stochastic-sampling","draft-model"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05448","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05448","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05872","title":"MACRO: Markov Chain Routing of Transformer Layers","abstract":"Standard Large Language Models (LLMs) execute layers sequentially. Dynamic layer routing, i.e. search for a different execution path through layers involving layer repetitions, skips and other moves, can improve performance. Existing routing approaches often require updating model weights, running expensive search loops per test instance, or demand ground-truth labels during inference. In this work, we propose Markov Chain Routing of Transformer Layers (MACRO), a framework that learns task-speci","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T10:51:34Z","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05872.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决标准 LLM 固定顺序执行所有 Transformer 层的问题，希望在不改模型参数的情况下，通过任务相关的层跳过、重复和残差组合获得更好的推理路径。","importance":"贡献类型是推理时计算路径搜索和动态层路由。它把层执行顺序从固定链变成可学习的 Markov 路由策略，重点不是训练新模型，而是研究冻结模型内部层是否可以被重新编排。","technical_approach":"MACRO 将层路由建模为上下文相关 Markov policy，条件包括当前层索引、计算预算阶段、方向位移和 operator context。动作支持 skip、repeat 和 residual hidden-state addition。策略用训练数据反馈更新，再用 top-k Viterbi 解码找高概率候选程序；底层 LLM 权重保持冻结。","experiments":"摘要说明作者在多项任务上评估 MACRO，并对比需要改权重、每个测试样本昂贵搜索或推理时依赖标签的已有 routing 方法。给定摘要被截断，无法确认模型规模、任务列表和具体提升幅度；这些细节需要重点检查实验表和预算控制是否公平。","authors_note":"作者来自 Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf、Jagiellonian University 和 IDEAS Research Institute。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether a frozen Transformer must execute layers in the original sequential order, or whether task-specific layer routes with skips, repeats, and residual additions can improve inference.","importance":"The contribution is an inference-time routing method over existing LLM layers. It is not a new pretraining recipe, but it is relevant because it probes whether learned layers can be recomposed as reusable computation blocks.","technical_approach":"MACRO models layer routing as a context-conditioned Markov policy over layer indices, budget phases, directional displacements, and operator context. It supports skip, repeat, and residual hidden-state addition operations. The route distribution is updated from feedback on training data and decoded with top-k Viterbi to extract likely candidate programs, while keeping the underlying model weights frozen.","experiments":"The abstract states that MACRO is evaluated across tasks against routing approaches that require weight updates, expensive per-instance search, or ground-truth labels at inference. The provided abstract is truncated, so model sizes, task list, and exact gains are not available here; the key checks are compute-budget matching and whether improvements survive clean baselines.","authors_note":"The authors are affiliated with Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Jagiellonian University, and IDEAS Research Institute."},"recommendation":{"zh":"读 §方法 和预算对齐实验；若 setup 干净，它会改变“层只能顺序用”的默认假设。","en":"Read the method and compute-matched experiments; if the setup is clean, it weakens the default assumption that layers must be used sequentially."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf","Jagiellonian University","IDEAS Research Institute"],"authors":["Paweł Batorski","Abtin Pourhadi","Akylgali Aitaza","Przemysław Spurek","Paul Swoboda"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["dynamic-routing","inference-optimization","frozen-llm","layer-skipping","markov-policy"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05872","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05872","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05863","title":"Runtime Observability for Heterogeneous Attention Memory","abstract":"Modern models no longer keep a plain KV cache: latent caches, learned sparse selectors and recurrent states each carry the model's memory in a different form, and each fails differently under compression. We give a runtime observability contract that covers all four memory classes with three operators, instantiate it on six model configurations across five architecture families, and compose the per-stage bounds into an executable request-level risk ledger. Contracts carry their error metric as a","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T10:41:50Z","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05863.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现代推理系统中的注意力内存不再只是标准 dense KV cache，还包括 latent compressed cache、learned sparse selector、recurrent state 等多种异构形式；这些内存在压缩、选择、读取各环节都会以不同模式出错，而现有 serving 栈缺少一个统一、可组合、可在运行时执行的观测与误差上界框架，导致静默缓存损坏只能在下游任务退化后才被发现。","importance":"论文针对的是推理可靠性中一个被低估的问题：新架构下 attention memory 的失败模式已经碎片化，传统“查 KV cache 是否一致”已经无法覆盖真实风险。对做长上下文、压缩缓存、稀疏注意力、recurrent/hybrid 架构部署的人，这类 runtime observability 思路直接相关；对预训练研究者的价值更偏间接，主要在于揭示架构设计与部署误差传播之间的接口，即模型内部状态在被压缩/筛选/复用后，哪些扰动会变成用户可见退化。","technical_approach":"把任意注意力内存抽象成三个算子：update（写入/更新状态）、select（选择参与注意力的条目）、read（解码为 attention 使用的表示）。每个阶段给出局部误差契约 e_out ≤ a·e_in + b，失败概率 δ，并要求契约中的量必须能由 serving 栈在运行时真实计算，而不是依赖无法获得的未压缩参考。局部契约通过仿射组合和 union bound 串联成请求级风险账本。每个数值携带强度标签：certified（有可证明上界且未饱和）、partially certified（仅在可判定子集上成立）、empirical（仅观测、无界）。组合结果自动继承最弱一环的层级，避免把含经验环节的链路误报成端到端可证明。论文还显式区分不同误差 caliber（例如 ℓ2 聚合与 max 聚合），并指出不同度量之间不能随意拼接；早期版本正是因为把需要参考缓存的量当作运行时可观测量，被这套类型检查机制直接拒掉。","experiments":"在五个架构族、共六个模型配置上实例化了该观测框架，覆盖 dense KV、latent cache、sparse selector、recurrent state 四类内存。论文报告了各阶段本地界、跨度量桥接、以及 always-on 探针在并发场景下的开销。作者公开了测量数学、接受门槛、复现实验产物、图表生成器与 Lean 形式化开发，强调所有数字可单命令重跑，且 claim guard 会在不匹配时失败构建。具体模型名和绝对性能数字在提供的正文中没有完整展开；实验重点是框架可实例化、可组合、以及能在真实链路里抓出契约设计错误，而非报新的精度或速度 SOTA。","reading_guide":"泛读即可，建议先看引言里那个 production incident 的动机，再看 §2 的三算子抽象和 certified/partially certified/empirical 三级标签设计，重点理解为什么“可运行时计算”和“度量类型匹配”比单纯的误差上界代数更重要。对局部契约细节，重点看 block pooling 和 selection stage 的推导，理解错误传播里哪些阶段放大噪声、哪些只加偏置。若不做 serving/形式化，可以跳过 Lean 和完整 proof 细节；若做压缩 KV、sparse memory、hybrid RNN-Transformer 部署，值得对照自己的内存路径画一遍 update/select/read 链。预计阅读时间 25–40 分钟。","authors_note":"作者来自 metask-ai，论文附 GitHub 仓库 witprobe-attention-memory；更细的作者背景未在提供内容中明确。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Attention memory in modern serving systems is no longer a plain dense KV cache. Latent compressed caches, learned sparse selectors, and recurrent states all carry model state in different forms and fail in different ways under compression, yet the serving stack lacks a unified, composable, runtime-checkable observability framework. As a result, silent memory corruption can pass through structurally valid caches and only become visible as downstream task degradation.","importance":"The paper addresses an underappreciated reliability problem that grows as models move beyond standard dense attention: heterogeneous attention memories have fragmented failure modes, and ad hoc checks no longer suffice. Its direct relevance is strongest for long-context, compressed-cache, sparse-attention, and recurrent/hybrid serving. For pretraining researchers, the main value is indirect but real: it makes explicit the interface between architecture design and deployment-time error propagation, showing exactly how compression, selection, and reuse of internal state can turn into user-visible quality loss.","technical_approach":"Any attention memory is decomposed into three operators: update, select, and read. Each stage exposes a local contract e_out ≤ a·e_in + b with failure budget δ, with the key requirement that a, b, and δ be computable from quantities actually available at runtime rather than from an uncompressed reference. Local contracts compose by affine composition plus a union bound into a request-level risk ledger. Every number is labeled by proof strength: certified if a sound upper bound exists and is not saturated, partially certified if the bound holds only on a decidable subset, and empirical if it is an observation without a bound. Composition inherits the weakest tier, so a chain with any empirical stage cannot be reported as end-to-end certified. The framework also enforces metric typing: contracts with different error calibers, such as ℓ2 versus max aggregation, do not compose unless an explicit bridge is provided. This check caught a real bug in an early version of the authors’ own chain.","experiments":"The framework is instantiated on six model configurations across five architecture families, covering dense KV caches, latent caches, learned sparse selectors, and recurrent states. The paper reports per-stage local bounds, cross-metric bridges, and the concurrency cost of always-on probes. The authors release the measurement mathematics, acceptance gates, frozen artifacts, figure/claim generators, and a Lean development under Apache-2.0, with all numbers reproducible from a single command and build-time guards that fail on mismatch. The provided text does not include full model names or absolute accuracy/speed tables; the main empirical claim is that the framework is practical to deploy across memory classes and can catch contract-design errors in live pipelines rather than merely presenting algebraic bounds.","reading_guide":"Skim. Start with the production incident in the introduction, then focus on Section 2 for the three-operator abstraction and the certified/partially certified/empirical labeling. The key idea is not the algebra itself but the insistence that every term be runtime-computable and metric-consistent. For the local contracts, pay attention to the block-pooling and selection derivations because they show which stages attenuate or preserve upstream error versus injecting bias. Readers not working on serving or formal methods can skip the Lean details. Those working on compressed KV, sparse memory, or hybrid RNN-Transformer deployment may want to map their own memory path through update/select/read. Estimated reading time: 25–40 minutes.","authors_note":"Authors are from metask-ai, with an associated GitHub repository witprobe-attention-memory. More detailed author backgrounds are not specified in the provided content."},"recommendation":{"zh":"把异构 memory 的压缩误差用 typed contract 串起来这个角度新颖，做 KV cache/混合架构 Serving 的读 §3 和实验里的 tier 降级表即可。","en":"The typed-contract angle on composing compression errors across heterogeneous memories is fresh; if you work on KV-cache or hybrid-arch serving, read §3 and the tier-downgrade tables."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Fanzhe Wei","Li Liu","Ziyang Wang","Chenyu Wang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["KV-cache","runtime-observability","serving","memory-compression","hybrid-architecture"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05863","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05863","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06291","title":"BaKron: Efficient Quantization with Kronecker-Factored Hessians","abstract":"We accelerate a family of algorithms for neural network quantization whose geometry is informed by any Kronecker-factored approximation of the Hessian. GPTQ-style adaptive rounding typically uses one-sided information derived from input activations. Two-sided Kronecker-factored Hessian approximations can additionally capture correlations across output coordinates, but applying GPTQ directly in the vectorized weight domain is computationally expensive. Building on the two-sided adaptive-rounding ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T17:15:37Z","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06291.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有基于双边克罗内克分解Hessian的GPTQ类权重量化方法（如BoA、YAQA）计算复杂度过高，总运算量达O(m²n²)，难以落地到大规模Transformer模型的后训练量化场景。","importance":"将双边Hessian量化的总复杂度降至与原生GPTQ同阶的O(mn(m+n))，同时保留输出维度相关性建模能力，为大模型低比特量化提供了可实用的高效算法基础。","technical_approach":"核心提出BaKron求解器，结合反对角线并行与递归分治构造，求解任意A⊗B形式克罗内克Hessian（A捕捉输入相关性、B捕捉输出相关性）下的自适应舍入优化问题；同时提供4种Hessian构造方案：分别搭配全局/局部损失的K-FAC风格（基于独立性假设）与Shampoo风格（基于幂迭代求最优克罗内克分解）近似，还优化了全局Hessian的反向传播计算流程以降低显存占用。","experiments":"复杂度层面，总运算量从BoA/YAQA的O(m²n²)降至O(mn(m+n))，串行步数维持O(m+n)，与YAQA一致、接近GPTQ的O(n)；附录端到端量化实验验证了不同Hessian配置下的精度与推理速度权衡。","reading_guide":"重点阅读第3章BaKron算法推导与复杂度分析、第4章4种Hessian构造方案；附录D的端到端实验可快速浏览，预计阅读时间20-30分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing GPTQ-style weight quantization methods using two-sided Kronecker-factored Hessians (e.g., BoA, YAQA) suffer from prohibitive O(m²n²) total computational cost, making them impractical for post-training quantization of large-scale Transformer models.","importance":"Reduces the total complexity of two-sided Hessian quantization to O(mn(m+n)), on par with vanilla GPTQ, while retaining the ability to model output feature correlations, providing a practical efficient algorithmic foundation for low-bit LLM quantization.","technical_approach":"Proposes BaKron, a solver for adaptive rounding under arbitrary Kronecker-factored Hessians (A⊗B, where A captures input correlations and B captures output correlations) that combines anti-diagonal parallelism with a recursive divide-and-conquer construction. It also provides 4 Hessian instantiations: K-FAC-style (independence assumption) and Shampoo-style (power iteration for optimal Kronecker factorization) approximations paired with either rich global loss or cheap local loss, plus an optimized backpropagation scheme for global Hessian computation to reduce memory footprint.","experiments":"Complexity-wise, total work drops from O(m²n²) (BoA/YAQA) to O(mn(m+n)), while sequential steps stay at O(m+n) (matching YAQA, close to GPTQ's O(n)). End-to-end quantization experiments in Appendix D validate accuracy-speed tradeoffs across different Hessian configurations.","reading_guide":"Focus on Section 3 (BaKron algorithm derivation and complexity analysis) and Section 4 (four Hessian construction schemes). Skim Appendix D for end-to-end empirical results. Estimated reading time: 20-30 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"量化研究员可读算法部分；若实测吞吐和困惑度稳住，两侧 Hessian 可能不再只是漂亮但太贵的设定。","en":"Worth reading for quantization people; if the runtime and perplexity hold, two-sided Hessian rounding becomes less of a pretty-but-too-expensive idea."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Johann Birnick","Rayan Saab"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["quantization","GPTQ","Kronecker-Hessian","adaptive-rounding","inference-efficiency"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06291","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06291","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05303","title":"EdgeXpert: An Edge Device for Memory-Efficient LLM Inference with Mixture-of-Experts and Speculative Decoding","abstract":"On-device deployment of Large Language Models (LLMs) has become essential for personalized edge applications. A primary bottleneck is external memory access (EMA) in feed-forward network (FFN) layers. Speculative decoding and mixture-of-experts (MoE) are promising solutions. Speculative decoding reduces the number of decoding stages by generating multiple tokens per stage, and MoE minimizes per-stage cost through sparse expert activation. However, there is an incompatibility when combining these","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-05T18:03:47Z","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05303.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AR","cs.CL","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"边缘设备LLM推理中，MoE与推测解码结合存在不兼容问题，FFN层的外部内存访问（EMA）是主要性能瓶颈","importance":"系统/工程创新，提出软硬件协同的LLM加速器方案，解决MoE与推测解码的兼容问题，降低边缘LLM推理的内存访问开销","technical_approach":"提出EdgeXpert软硬件协同加速器：预填充阶段将逐token独立路由重构为prompt级专家复用，用轻量编码器识别重要token构建共享专家集，降低非重要token的专家预算以减少EMA；解码阶段采用深度感知专家策略（摘要截断）","experiments":"摘要内容截断，未披露完整实验设置、模型规模、基线与效果数据","authors_note":"未披露机构信息，Hoi-Jun Yoo为低功耗AI加速器领域知名学者"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Combining Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) and speculative decoding for on-device LLM inference faces incompatibility issues, with external memory access (EMA) in FFN layers being the primary bottleneck","importance":"System/engineering innovation: a software-hardware co-designed LLM accelerator is proposed to resolve the incompatibility between MoE and speculative decoding, reducing memory access overhead for edge LLM inference","technical_approach":"EdgeXpert, a software-hardware co-designed accelerator, reformulates per-token routing as prompt-level expert reuse in the prefill stage: a lightweight encoder identifies important tokens to build a shared expert set, and less important tokens are routed with a reduced expert budget to lower EMA; depth-aware expert policy is used in the decode stage (abstract truncated)","experiments":"Abstract is truncated; full experimental setup, model scale, baselines, and results are not disclosed","authors_note":"Affiliations not disclosed; Hoi-Jun Yoo is a well-known scholar in low-power AI accelerators"},"recommendation":{"zh":"边缘LLM推理的软硬件协同工作，MoE路由优化思路偏硬件侧，预训练研究员无需深读","en":"Software-hardware co-design for edge LLM inference; MoE routing optimization is hardware-focused, no deep reading needed for pretraining researchers."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Sangwoo Ha","Hyunwoo Seo","Yurim Jo","Youngjin Moon","Hoi-Jun Yoo"],"notable_authors":["Hoi-Jun Yoo"],"tags":["LLM inference","MoE","speculative decoding","edge AI","memory optimization"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05303","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05303","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05326","title":"QEvict: Recoverable Quantized KV Eviction for Attention-Drift-Robust Long-Context Decoding","abstract":"Autoregressive large language model inference is increasingly constrained by the memory footprint of the Key-Value (KV) cache. A dominant line of work reduces this footprint by evicting tokens that appear unimportant under attention-derived scores. However, such policies make an implicit irreversible decision: once a token is evicted, it cannot become useful again. We show that this assumption is brittle during decoding. Token and window importance drift as generated queries evolve, causing stan","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-05T18:29:47Z","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05326.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有KV缓存驱逐策略采用不可逆的二元保留/删除决策，隐含“被驱逐token后续不会再重要”的假设，无法应对解码过程中token重要性的漂移","importance":"方法创新+新观察，首次明确提出解码过程中的注意力漂移现象，给出可恢复的量化KV驱逐方案，提升长上下文解码的鲁棒性","technical_approach":"提出QEvict三级KV缓存管理方案，用可恢复驱逐替代二元保留/删除：高置信度窗口保留全精度缓存，中置信度token用量化形式保留（可恢复），低置信度token丢弃；引入Future Missed Mass和Global LIR两个诊断指标衡量注意力漂移与历史区域重激活情况","experiments":"摘要内容截断，未披露完整实验设置、模型规模、基线与效果数据","authors_note":"机构为印度理工学院德里分校Yardi人工智能学院，无知名作者"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing KV cache eviction policies use irreversible binary retain-or-delete decisions, implicitly assuming evicted tokens will not be important later, which fails to handle importance drift during decoding","importance":"Methodological innovation + new observation: attention drift during decoding is explicitly identified for the first time, and a recoverable quantized KV eviction scheme is proposed to improve robustness of long-context decoding","technical_approach":"QEvict, a three-tier KV cache management scheme, replaces binary eviction with recoverable eviction: high-confidence windows are kept in full precision, medium-confidence tokens are retained in quantized form (recoverable), and low-confidence tokens are discarded; two diagnostics, Future Missed Mass and Global LIR, are introduced to measure attention drift and reactivation of historically inactive regions","experiments":"Abstract is truncated; full experimental setup, model scale, baselines, and results are not disclosed","authors_note":"Affiliated with Yardi School of Artificial Intelligence, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi; no well-known authors"},"recommendation":{"zh":"注意力漂移的观察有一定启发，可关注诊断指标部分，驱逐方法是推理侧工程，无需深读","en":"Attention drift observation is mildly insightful; focus on diagnostic metrics, the eviction method is inference-side engineering."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Indian Institute of Technology Delhi","Yardi School of Artificial Intelligence, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi"],"authors":["Ayushman Garg","Akshita Gupta","Shaswata Bhattacharya","Abhishek Gupta","Sandeep Kumar","Manoj Kumar"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["KV cache","long-context inference","attention drift","quantization","LLM inference"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05326","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05326","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05780","title":"Evidence-Driven Dynamic Visual Selector for Efficient Long Video Understanding","abstract":"Recent advancements in MLLM-based long-form video understanding have mitigated inference-time computational cost and limited context lengths by selecting query-relevant frames. However, existing approaches predominantly rely on external proxy scorers and rigid heuristic rules, inevitably suffering from misalignment with the target MLLM's intrinsic evidence and failing to accommodate the non-uniform spatiotemporal information density. In this paper, we propose a fine-grained dynamic visual select","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T09:15:43Z","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05780.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决长视频 MLLM 推理中视觉 token / 帧过多导致的计算开销和上下文压力问题，目标是在不显著损失答案质量的前提下选择查询相关证据帧。","importance":"贡献类型是多模态推理效率方法。它不是预训练方法，但对长上下文多模态模型的 evidence selection 有参考价值，尤其是用目标模型内部注意力替代外部 proxy scorer 的思路。","technical_approach":"提出 EviSelect：先用高度压缩的视觉输入和稀疏 prefilling 近似目标 MLLM 的注意力图，把该注意力作为结构化先验；再从注意力中提取三个互补证据分量，驱动分布感知的动态采样，避免固定规则选帧。","experiments":"摘要说明该方法的稀疏注意力近似与完整注意力对齐，并用于长视频理解中的动态视觉选择；给定信息未提供具体模型规模、视频 benchmark、baseline 名称和量化提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the inference cost and context pressure of long-video MLLMs by selecting query-relevant visual evidence instead of feeding all frames.","importance":"This is an inference-efficiency contribution for multimodal long-context models. It is not a pretraining paper, but the use of the target model’s own attention as selection evidence is a useful design signal.","technical_approach":"EviSelect probes approximate attention maps through compressed visual inputs and sparse prefilling, uses them as a structured prior, and derives complementary attention components to guide distribution-aware dynamic frame sampling.","experiments":"The abstract claims that the sparse attention approximation aligns with the full counterpart and supports efficient long-video understanding, but the provided text does not include model sizes, benchmark names, baselines, or numeric gains.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看方法图和注意力近似部分；对预训练没直接动作，但可作为长视频 token pruning 的弱参考。","en":"Skim the method diagram and attention-probing setup; it is not pretraining work, but it is a useful weak signal for long-video token pruning."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Bo Zhang","Wenxin Wang","Feng Chen","Zhihao Zhang","Zixuan Wang","Changsheng Li","Yinjie Lei"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["long-video","MLLM","inference-efficiency","frame-selection","attention-probing"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05780","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05780","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05240","title":"One Qubit Can Beat One Bit: Quantum Advantage for Post-Training Quantization","abstract":"One-bit post-training quantization represents each weight using only its sign, requiring all deployment contexts to share the same binary weight matrix even when their activation statistics favor different sign patterns. We study this shared-sign constraint and introduce Quantum Random Access Quantization (QRAQ). This framework encodes context-dependent signs in a quantum random-access code and retrieves them via context-matched Pauli measurements. Under an explicit fresh-copy logical readout mo","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-05T14:04:50Z","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05240.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["quant-ph","cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"研究一比特后训练量化中所有上下文共享同一个符号权重矩阵的限制，并用量子随机访问编码表达上下文相关符号。","importance":"贡献是量化理论和量子读出模型下的分离结果；与 LLM 推理压缩相关，但部署假设离当前 GPU/ASIC 推理系统较远。","technical_approach":"提出 Quantum Random Access Quantization，将上下文依赖的权重符号编码进 quantum random-access code，并通过上下文匹配的 Pauli measurement 读出；在 fresh-copy logical readout 模型下得到无偏的上下文特定二值 surrogate，同时分析 shot-noise、有限 shot 和校准噪声条件。","experiments":"摘要强调理论证明，包括相对共享符号 one-bit PTQ 加 signed per-row scales 的 row-wise separation；未报告真实 LLM 规模实验、推理吞吐或主流量化 baseline 的实测结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies the shared-sign constraint in one-bit post-training quantization and proposes using quantum random-access coding for context-dependent weight signs.","importance":"The main contribution is a theoretical separation for quantization under a quantum readout model. It touches LLM compression, but the deployment assumptions are far from current accelerator-based inference.","technical_approach":"Quantum Random Access Quantization encodes context-dependent signs in a quantum random-access code and retrieves them via context-matched Pauli measurements. Under a fresh-copy logical readout model, it yields an unbiased context-specific binary surrogate with a tractable shot-noise penalty.","experiments":"The abstract reports theoretical row-wise separation from shared-sign one-bit PTQ with signed per-row scales and derives finite-shot and calibrated-noise conditions. No real LLM-scale deployment experiment is described.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"量化理论有趣但离可部署系统很远；只看 separation 假设，别当 PTQ recipe。","en":"Interesting quantization theory but far from deployable inference; read the separation assumptions, not as a PTQ recipe."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Yuma Ichikawa","Moeto Mishima"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["post-training-quantization","one-bit-quantization","quantum-computing","inference-efficiency"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05240","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05240","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06135","title":"LLM Inference Under Bursty Workload Distribution: Modifying the WAIT Algorithm","abstract":"Large Language Models (LLMs) such as ChatGPT and Claude are widely used for information retrieval and problem-solving. Recent work has focused on improving scheduling algorithms to boost throughput while maintaining low latency. However, these approaches often assume Poisson request arrivals with constant rates - an assumption that fails to reflect the inherently bursty and dynamic nature of real-world traffic. We propose a lightweight extension to the state-of-the-art WAIT algorithm [1], which ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T15:07:43Z","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06135.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 LLM 在线推理调度在突发式到达流量下，基于恒定泊松到达假设而失效的问题。","importance":"这是推理服务侧的调度改进，和预训练本身无关，但对 serving 研究、系统瓶颈和 workload 假设有一定参考价值。","technical_approach":"在 WAIT 调度算法上做轻量修改：根据观测到的请求间隔在线估计到达强度，使调度器无需先验流量知识即可适应时变到达率；评估中使用 MMPP 合成突发流量与多种请求类型。","experiments":"摘要称在低到达率切换场景下，相比 Sarathi-Serve、ORCA 和 vLLM 取得更高吞吐，同时维持延迟约束；但实验基于仿真而非真实生产 trace，结论外推需保留。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"It addresses the failure of LLM inference schedulers under bursty traffic when they assume stationary Poisson arrivals.","importance":"This is a serving-side scheduling tweak rather than a pretraining contribution, but it is still somewhat relevant for researchers who care about realistic inference-system bottlenecks.","technical_approach":"The paper modifies WAIT with online estimation of request intensity from observed inter-arrival times, allowing adaptation to time-varying arrivals without prior traffic knowledge; evaluation uses MMPP-based synthetic bursty workloads.","experiments":"The abstract claims higher throughput than Sarathi-Serve, ORCA, and vLLM in low arrival-rate shift scenarios while preserving latency constraints, though the setup appears simulation-based rather than production-trace based.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只对 serving 侧 workload 假设有点提醒价值：别再默认平稳泊松流量；正文未必值得细读，看实验设定和 traffic model 就够了。","en":"Useful mainly as a reminder that stationary Poisson traffic is a bad serving prior; just read the workload model and evaluation setup, not the whole paper."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Anjali Gangadhar Katageria","Shobha Rani","Raghu Nandan Sengupta"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["LLM serving","scheduling","bursty workload","throughput"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06135","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06135","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06849","title":"Autonomy-of-Heads: Data-Free Sparse Attention from Frozen Query-Key Geometry","abstract":"Long-context LLM inference is bottlenecked by quadratic attention computation and growing KV-cache costs. Existing sparse attention and KV-compression methods typically decide which tokens or heads to preserve from runtime attention scores, observation windows, calibration prompts, or learned gates, making head diagnosis input-dependent and costly to deploy. We propose Autonomy-of-Heads (AoH), a data-free method that identifies retrieval and streaming heads from the spectral geometry of query-ke","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06849.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决长上下文推理中的 attention head 选择问题：现有稀疏注意力或 KV 压缩方法通常依赖运行时 attention score、校准 prompt、观察窗口或学习 gate，部署成本高，也难以在 prefill 一开始就确定哪些 head 需要全局上下文。论文提出只从冻结权重的 query-key 几何判断 head 的功能。","importance":"对预训练研究的直接贡献偏推理效率，但它对理解长上下文模型的 head specialization 有启发。论文把 attention head 的 retrieval/streaming 分工和权重空间里的谱结构联系起来，而不是只看输入相关的 attention map。这个视角可用于分析长上下文能力如何在预训练中形成，也可能反过来指导 head-level regularization、长上下文继续训练和稀疏 attention 架构设计。","technical_approach":"方法叫 Autonomy-of-Heads。对每个 attention head，定义 kernel attention operator：M_h = W_K^{h⊤} W_Q^h。该矩阵刻画 query 与 key 在该 head 中的匹配方向。论文用 M_h 的 effective rank 作为 head 功能指标：低 effective-rank 表示谱集中，少数主方向主导匹配，更像 retrieval head，需要保留全局 KV；高 effective-rank 表示匹配方向分散，更接近 streaming head，可以只保留 sink tokens 和 recent window。为了部署，作者不显式构造 d_model × d_model 的 M_h，而是利用 d_head × d_head 的 proxy 计算非零奇异值。最终策略很简单：低 ER head 用 full attention，高 ER head 用 sink-plus-recent attention。整个过程不需要训练数据、校准样本或额外 gate。","experiments":"论文先给出两个观察。第一，在 Qwen2.5-7B 上，不同 head 的平均 attention distance 在 4K 到 100K context 下结构稳定，且 effective rank 与长距离 attention 行为呈负相关：低 ER head 更倾向远距离检索，高 ER head 更局部。第二，在 Llama3.1-8B-Instruct 的 32K passkey retrieval 测试中，把高 ER head 逐步改成 streaming attention 对准确率影响较小；先改低 ER head 会使检索准确率快速下降，说明低 ER head 对远程信息访问更关键。LongBench 实验覆盖三个长上下文 LLM。在 50% sparsity 下，AoH 接近 full attention，并稳定优于 random 和 reversed head selection。效率实验显示，在长上下文下它能降低 prefill/decode latency 和 KV-cache memory；文中 streaming head 使用 128 个 sink tokens 加 256 个 recent tokens，因此在 32K、64K、128K 这类长度下 KV budget 近似等于 full-attention head 的比例。","reading_guide":"建议泛读 20 分钟。重点看 Observations 部分的两组证据：effective rank 与 average attention distance 的关系，以及 passkey retrieval 中 low-ER-first/high-ER-first 的对照。方法部分关注 M_h = W_K^{⊤}W_Q 的定义、effective rank 的计算，以及 d_head 级别谱计算为什么等价于关注非零奇异值。实验部分看 LongBench 50% sparsity 的主表和 latency/KV memory 曲线即可。需要留意的限制是：AoH 的 head 标签是输入无关的，因此适合稳定 head 分工明显的模型；如果某些模型大量依赖动态 routing 或 layer-wise adaptive behavior，固定分类可能不够细。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether long-context attention heads can be classified without prompts, runtime attention statistics, calibration data, or learned gates. The target problem is sparse long-context inference: deciding which heads must keep global KV access and which heads can be restricted to sink-plus-recent attention from the start of prefill.","importance":"The work is primarily an inference-efficiency paper, but it is also useful for pretraining analysis. It links retrieval versus streaming behavior to spectral structure in frozen query-key weights, rather than to input-specific attention maps. This gives a weight-space diagnostic for head specialization in long-context LLMs. Such diagnostics can inform how long-range retrieval capabilities emerge during pretraining or continued long-context training, and may be useful when designing head-level sparsity or regularization schemes.","technical_approach":"Autonomy-of-Heads defines a head-specific kernel attention operator M_h = W_K^{h⊤} W_Q^h. This operator captures the query-key matching directions available to a head. The classifier uses the effective rank of M_h. A low effective rank means the spectrum is concentrated in a few dominant matching directions; these heads are treated as retrieval heads and keep full-context attention. A high effective rank means the spectrum is more diffuse; these heads are treated as streaming heads and keep only a small sink cache plus a recent window. For efficiency, the nonzero singular values are computed through a d_head by d_head proxy rather than by materializing the full d_model by d_model matrix. The resulting sparse policy is training-free, data-free, compatible with GQA-style settings, and simple enough to be applied before any prompt is processed.","experiments":"The paper first reports two supporting observations. On Qwen2.5-7B, per-head average attention distance remains structurally stable from 4K to 100K context lengths, and lower-effective-rank heads tend to attend farther back in the context. On Llama3.1-8B-Instruct at 32K context length, a passkey retrieval study shows a clear separation: converting high-ER heads to streaming attention has limited impact, while converting low-ER heads first causes retrieval accuracy to collapse quickly. The main LongBench evaluation spans three long-context LLMs. At 50% sparsity, AoH remains close to full attention and outperforms random and reversed head-selection baselines. The efficiency results show reductions in prefill and decode latency as well as KV-cache memory at long sequence lengths. Streaming heads use a small 128-token sink cache and a 256-token recent window, so at 32K and beyond the KV budget is dominated by the fraction of heads kept in full attention.","reading_guide":"A useful skim takes around 20 minutes. Start with the observation figures connecting effective rank to average attention distance and passkey retrieval degradation. Then read the method section for the definition of M_h, the effective-rank criterion, and the d_head-dimensional spectral computation. For results, focus on the 50% sparsity LongBench tables and the latency/KV-cache plots. The main limitation to keep in mind is that AoH assigns fixed, input-independent head roles. This is attractive for deployment, but may be less precise for models whose attention functions are highly prompt-dependent or shaped by dynamic routing mechanisms.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看谱几何定义和 head 分类实验；若稳定成立，应加入内部长上下文压缩诊断工具链。","en":"Read the spectral-geometry definition and head-classification results; if it holds up, it belongs in an internal long-context compression diagnostic stack."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences","University of Chinese Academy of Sciences","Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications","Baidu Inc.","Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 4 Baidu Inc"],"authors":["Yehan Yang","Junyuan Shang","Yang Li","Guanqun Zhao","Shuohuan Wang","Dianhai Yu"],"notable_authors":["Dianhai Yu"],"tags":["sparse-attention","long-context","kv-cache","attention-head-analysis","data-free"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06849","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06849","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07458","title":"CoinRAG: Contextualized Information Nugget KV Cache Reuse for Long-Context RAG","abstract":"Recent optimization studies on Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) have exploited chunk-level KV cache reuse to avoid processing long retrieved contexts for higher efficiency, while significant information redundancy and noise still remain in the coarse-grained chunks. This paper optimizes the Pareto frontier under low prefill latency constraints while maximizing accuracy by proposing CoinRAG (Contextualized Information Nugget KV Cache Reuse for Long-Context RAG). The name metaphorically reflec","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07458.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI","cs.IR","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"降低 long-context RAG 的 prefill latency，同时避免粗粒度 chunk 级 KV cache 复用带来的冗余和噪声。","importance":"这是推理系统与 RAG efficiency 工作，贡献点在 KV cache 复用粒度。对预训练研究员的间接价值在于理解长上下文系统瓶颈，以及 retrieval context 表示是否需要在训练阶段适配更细粒度的复用结构。","technical_approach":"提出 CoinRAG，把离线计算的 fine-grained information nugget KV cache 作为可组合单元。系统先用两阶段检索从 retrieved chunks 中定位 query-relevant semantic units，再拼接或组装这些 sliced KV representations，形成更紧凑、语义相关性更高的上下文表示。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体模型、数据集和数值。实验目标是优化低 prefill latency 约束下的 accuracy-latency Pareto frontier，并与 chunk-level KV cache reuse 方案比较。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper aims to reduce prefill latency in long-context RAG while avoiding the redundancy and noise of coarse chunk-level KV-cache reuse.","importance":"This is an inference-systems and RAG-efficiency contribution focused on cache granularity. For pretraining researchers, its indirect value is in exposing long-context serving bottlenecks and raising the question of whether retrieval-context representations should be trained for finer-grained reuse.","technical_approach":"CoinRAG reuses offline-computed fine-grained information-nugget KV caches as composable units. It uses two-stage retrieval to identify query-relevant semantic units inside retrieved chunks, then assembles sliced KV representations into a compact, semantically relevant contextual representation.","experiments":"The abstract does not include concrete model names, datasets, or numerical results. The evaluation targets the accuracy-latency Pareto frontier under low prefill-latency constraints and compares against chunk-level KV-cache reuse approaches.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看 cache 粒度和 Pareto 图；若结果干净，它提示 RAG context 可以按 semantic unit 预编码，而不是按 chunk 硬切。","en":"Read the cache granularity and Pareto plots; if clean, it argues for semantic-unit pre-encoding rather than hard chunking in RAG."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Gyuwan Kim","Cheoneum Park","Tao Yang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["kv-cache","rag","long-context","inference-efficiency","prefill-latency"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07458","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07458","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07193","title":"An AI4AI Framework for Visual Token Pruning","abstract":"Visual-token pruning can substantially reduce the inference cost of multimodal large language models (MLLMs), yet existing methods largely rely on fixed, handcrafted heuristics and costly expert trial and error. As pruning objectives, budgets, and model architectures diversify, manually navigating the expanding design space becomes increasingly difficult. This paper aims to build an AI4AI framework for visual-token pruning by addressing a natural question: Can large language models automatically","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07193.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是 MLLM 视觉 token 剪枝策略设计过度依赖人工经验的问题。现有方法往往要手工设定 token 重要性、预算分配、约束选择和重组规则，设计空间大，而且不同 backbone、不同 token budget、不同任务下都要重新调。作者的问题设定不是再发明一个固定剪枝启发式，而是：能不能让 LLM 自动搜索并组合出有效的视觉 token 剪枝算法，同时保证生成的策略满足约束、可执行、可迁移。","importance":"对基座预训练本身的直接影响有限，因为它主要是推理效率工作，不是训练范式或数据方法。但它对多模态系统研究仍有两点启发。第一，它把“让 LLM 设计算法”从开放式代码生成，收缩成一个结构化、受约束的搜索问题，这种 residual search + DSL 的做法，对自动发现训练 recipe、数据过滤规则、推理控制策略都有方法论价值。第二，它强调 policy representation 比 proposer 本身更重要：不是 LLM 越强就越会设计剪枝，而是要把搜索状态表示成 LLM 能操作的形式。这个观点对很多 AI-for-AI 方向都成立。量级上，它更像一个工程方法框架，而不是改变 MLLM 基础能力边界的工作。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 AutoPrune。它不是让 LLM 从零写一个完整 pruning program，而是把搜索空间重写成“围绕强基线策略做残差修改”。这是全文最重要的设计。\n\n具体来说，作者先定义了一个 Token Pruning Domain-Specific Language，简称 TPDSL。这个 DSL 里有 131 个可复用原子，覆盖四类操作：预算控制、token 打分、选择约束、token 重组。这样做的目的，是把原本分散在代码里的设计自由度，压缩成一组结构化操作，让 LLM 不需要重新发明整个算法，只需要在已有构件上做组合和修补。\n\n更关键的是 residual state representation。每个候选策略不是一个完整新策略，而是由三部分组成：一个强 base policy、一个 TPDSL 表达的 residual modification、以及保证合法性的结构约束。运行时，系统先用 base policy 选出一批 token，再允许 residual policy 在有界 quota 内对“不确定”的选择做替换或修正。这样做有几个直接好处：一是保留人工策略里已经可靠的部分，避免 LLM 在巨大空间里盲搜；二是把搜索重点放到最影响性能的局部决策上；三是天然更容易做跨预算和跨 backbone 迁移，因为 residual 规则和具体运行时实例化是解耦的。\n\n搜索流程是 evaluator-in-the-loop。LLM 负责提出 TPDSL 残差候选，系统先做语法和约束验证，再在目标 MLLM 上评估性能和诊断指标，把反馈回灌给 LLM 继续迭代。这里的关键不是“LLM 会写代码”，而是“LLM 在一个被强约束的设计语言里做局部策略搜索”。\n\n和已有视觉 token 剪枝方法相比，AutoPrune 不主张某一种新的 importance score，而是把多种已有启发式都视为 base policy 或 DSL 原子的一部分，再通过自动搜索找到更优组合。和一般的 program synthesis 不同，它没有把候选表示成完整 Python 程序，而是显式缩小搜索空间，并把有效先验保留下来。","experiments":"实验覆盖 14 个多模态 benchmark 和 3 个 MLLM backbone。最醒目的结果有两个。第一，在 94.4% 的视觉 token reduction ratio 下，AutoPrune 在 LLaVA-1.5-7B 和 LLaVA-NeXT-7B 上都能保留超过 99% 的 full-token 性能。这个结果说明它在极高压缩率下仍能维持任务表现。第二，在 LLaVA-NeXT-7B 的 320-token efficiency setting 下，FLOPs 降低 9.9×，prefill latency 降低 6.4×，说明收益不只是理论 token 数减少，而是实际推理开销也明显下降。\n\n作者还做了几类关键验证。其一，cross-budget transfer：搜索得到的策略不需要每个预算都重新搜索，能迁移到其他 token budget。其二，cross-backbone transfer：在一个 backbone 上发现的 residual policy 能迁移到别的 MLLM backbone。其三，proposer robustness：换不同 LLM proposer，性能比较稳定，说明方法的关键在表示和搜索框架，而不完全依赖某个特定 proposer。其四，base-policy improvement：相对多个人工设计 base policy，AutoPrune 都能稳定带来增益，说明 residual search 不是只在某个基线之上偶然有效。\n\n如果你关心方法是否真的学到通用规则，最该看的是 transfer 实验和 diagnostic feedback 的消融。若去掉 residual formulation、改成从零生成完整策略，或者去掉 TPDSL 的结构约束，通常会导致搜索效率和最终性能都变差。这部分是论文最能说明设计合理性的地方。","reading_guide":"泛读时建议按“表示—搜索—迁移”三步看。\n\n先看 Introduction 和 Method 开头，理解作者为什么认为完整程序搜索不合适，以及为什么 residual search state 比直接生成 pruning code 更可行。这里是整篇工作的立足点。\n\n再看 TPDSL 的设计。重点不是记住 131 个原子，而是看它如何覆盖预算控制、打分、约束、重组四类操作，以及这些操作如何组合成合法策略。若你做过训练 recipe 搜索或系统参数搜索，这一段会比较有启发。\n\n最后看实验里的三类结果：高压缩率下的性能保持、跨预算迁移、跨 backbone 迁移。它们决定这是不是一个一次性 search trick，还是一个可复用的策略表示框架。预计 25 到 35 分钟可以完成有效泛读。若只看最核心内容，Figure 1、Figure 2 和 transfer/ablation 表格足够。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a design bottleneck in visual token pruning for MLLMs. Existing pruning methods usually depend on handcrafted heuristics for token scoring, budget allocation, constrained selection, and token reassembly, and these choices often need to be redesigned for different backbones and token budgets. Instead of proposing yet another fixed heuristic, the paper asks whether an LLM can automatically design effective pruning policies while respecting the structural constraints of the pruning problem.","importance":"Its direct relevance to pretraining is limited because this is primarily an inference-efficiency paper. Still, it offers a useful methodological lesson. The main contribution is not that an LLM can write pruning code, but that specialized algorithm design becomes much more tractable when the search state is represented in a structured, constrained, residual form. That idea can transfer beyond pruning: one could imagine similar formulations for recipe search, data filtering policies, or decoding control. The paper also makes a broader point that representation matters more than raw proposer strength in AI-for-AI settings.","technical_approach":"$10","experiments":"$11","reading_guide":"A good skim should follow three questions: why this representation, how the search works, and whether the discovered policy transfers.\n\nStart with the introduction and early method section to understand why full-program search is a poor fit for token pruning and why residual search around a base policy is more practical. That is the conceptual center of the paper.\n\nThen read the TPDSL section. You do not need to memorize all 131 atoms. What matters is how the language covers budget control, scoring, constraints, and reassembly, and how this structure makes the search space manageable.\n\nFinally, focus on the experiments that test generality rather than just one benchmark number: high-compression performance retention, cross-budget transfer, cross-backbone transfer, and the key ablations. A useful skim should take about 25–35 minutes. If time is tight, Figure 1, Figure 2, and the transfer/ablation tables carry most of the signal.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看搜索状态表示和消融；若结果干净，它比又一个视觉 token heuristic 更值得内化到推理效率工具箱。","en":"Skim the search-state representation and ablations; if the setup is clean, this is more useful than yet another visual-token heuristic."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Zhen Liu","Wenli Huang","Wei Song","Yuhan Liu","Zhiqin Yang","Jingwen Fu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["visual-token-pruning","MLLM-efficiency","LLM-for-optimization","inference"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07193","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07193","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07019","title":"ReQuant: Fixed-Grid Discrete Refinement for Post-Training Quantization","abstract":"Post-training quantization (PTQ) is widely used to reduce the memory and computational cost of large language models. Existing PTQ methods typically obtain an initial quantized model through heuristic rules or greedy optimization, and once quantization is completed the resulting integer assignments are usually treated as final. This observation motivates a complementary optimization stage within PTQ that keeps quantized weights improvable after an executable quantized model has been produced, wh","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07019.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"在不改变任何部署格式（bit-width / scale / zero-point / grid layout / kernel）的前提下，如何在“已经量化完成、可直接执行”的 PTQ 模型上继续做离散优化，把先前一次性/贪心量化留下的次优整数码（integer codes）进一步改好，并且不引入反向传播或额外训练。","importance":"对大模型推理侧的直接意义更大：它把 PTQ 从“一次性生成最终整数码”改成“先得到可用解，再做固定网格上的离散精修”的两阶段流程。对预训练研究的启发主要在工程接口：1）量化不再是不可逆的终点，允许在不触碰训练数据与梯度的情况下做可控的后处理；2）对低比特（W3/W2、A4）尤其有效，能把一些激进压缩从‘不可用’拉回到‘可用’，从而影响模型发布与迭代节奏；3）方法对上游 PTQ 初始化器（GPTQ/GPTAQ/AWQ/简单 rounding 等）相对无关，适合作为统一的“最后一公里”模块。","technical_approach":"核心设定是 fixed-grid discrete refinement：输入是一个已经量化好的权重矩阵（以及其 scale/zero-point 等量化参数），这些量化参数全部冻结，只允许修改每个权重元素对应的整数码。\n\n目标函数沿用重构误差（reconstruction loss）思路，但强调推理时的 activation mismatch：层输入来自“前缀已量化”的网络而不是全精度网络，因此采用类似 GPTAQ 的 activation-aware 目标，用校准集分别跑全精度/部分量化前缀收集 X 与 \\tilde{X}，在更贴近真实推理分布的激活上做重构。\n\n优化上强调 backprop-free：不做 STE、不做梯度下降，而是把问题当作离散坐标更新（integer code 的局部搜索/迭代改进）。论文把 ReQuant 定位为可组合的 PTQ 后处理 stage：从任意 PTQ 产物出发，按 sweep 迭代地“重新审视”部分权重的离散赋值，只接受能降低总体重构损失的更新，因此保证重构损失单调不增，并在有限次接受更新后终止。\n\n从实现取舍看，它刻意冻结量化网格与推理 kernel，避免引入新的部署复杂度；代价是搜索空间受限，只能在既定网格上挪动整数码，因此收益依赖于上游网格/scale 选择是否合理。论文也强调离线预算可控：用 sweep 次数 T 控制精修强度，复杂度与一次 GPTAQ pass 同量级。","experiments":"论文宣称在 Llama-3 8B/70B、Qwen3-14B 的多种设置下（W4A16、W4A4、W3A4、W2A4）相对四个 PTQ baseline 同时改善 perplexity、KL divergence 与 zero-shot accuracy，且“初始化越简单、bit 越低收益越大”。另外给出：\n- 与 FlexRound 的 W4A16 pipeline 对比，用于说明在常见 4bit 权重量化下也能带来额外收益；\n- paired GPTQ ± ReQuant：在同一 GPTQ 初始化上加/不加 ReQuant，隔离出纯 refinement 的增益；\n- Qwen3-235B MoE：展示在超大 MoE 上可跑通，强调可扩展性。\n\n但在当前提供的正文片段中，关键数字（具体 PPL/准确率提升幅度、校准集大小、每层/每 sweep 的耗时、不同 bit 下收益曲线）尚未出现；精读时需要回到实验章节核对：收益是否主要来自少数层、是否对校准集分布敏感、以及 T 增大后的边际收益与时间成本。","reading_guide":"泛读建议：\n1）先看 Figure 1（论文在引言里提到）理解它要解决的“PTQ 把整数码当最终解”的结构性问题，以及 ReQuant 在 pipeline 中的位置。\n2）方法部分重点抓三件事：activation-aware 的目标如何构造（X 与 \\tilde{X} 的采集方式）、离散更新的单位与接受准则（如何保证 loss 下降、为何有限步终止）、以及每次 sweep 的计算复杂度如何做到接近 GPTAQ。\n3）实验部分建议按“paired study（GPTQ ± ReQuant）→ 低比特（W3/W2, A4）→ 大模型/MoE 可扩展性”的顺序读，优先确认：收益是否稳定、是否依赖特定初始化器、以及离线预算 T 的可控性。\n\n预计阅读时间：30–45 分钟可把方法与主要结论读清；若要复现，需要额外关注实现细节（校准集构造、层级处理顺序、与现有 kernel 的对齐）。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to further improve an already-deployed PTQ model by refining its discrete integer weight codes on a fixed quantization grid—without changing bit-width/scales/zero-points/kernels, and without backpropagation—so that the initial greedy/heuristic PTQ assignment is no longer treated as final.","importance":"Primarily an inference-side contribution, but it changes the practical PTQ interface for foundation models: PTQ becomes a two-stage pipeline (get an executable quantized model first, then do discrete refinement). For pretraining teams, the value is operational: it can rescue aggressive low-bit settings (e.g., W3/W2 with A4) into usable regimes, and it is largely initializer-agnostic, making it a drop-in “last-mile” module across GPTQ/GPTAQ/AWQ-style pipelines.","technical_approach":"$12","experiments":"Reported results cover Llama-3 8B/70B and Qwen3-14B across W4A16, W4A4, W3A4, and W2A4, improving perplexity, KL divergence, and zero-shot accuracy over multiple PTQ baselines, with larger gains at lower bit-widths and weaker initializers. Additional studies include: (1) W4A16 pipeline comparisons with FlexRound, (2) a paired GPTQ ± ReQuant ablation to isolate refinement gains, and (3) a Qwen3-235B MoE run to demonstrate scalability.\n\nThe provided excerpt does not include the key quantitative tables/curves (exact PPL deltas, accuracy deltas, calibration size, runtime per sweep, diminishing returns vs T). Those are the first things to verify in the full experimental section.","reading_guide":"Skim path:\n- Start with the pipeline illustration (Figure 1) to internalize the “PTQ output is not final” premise and where ReQuant plugs in.\n- In the method section, focus on: how activation-aware reconstruction is formed (X vs \\tilde{X}), what the discrete update/acceptance rule is (why loss is guaranteed to decrease, why it terminates), and how the sweep complexity matches GPTAQ.\n- In experiments, read in this order: paired GPTQ ± ReQuant → low-bit settings (W3/W2 with A4) → large-scale/MoE feasibility, and check sensitivity to initializer and calibration data.\n\nTime: ~30–45 minutes to understand the method and main claims; longer if you want implementation-level details for reproduction.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"这类工作不会改写预训练范式，但若你关心模型发布后的低比特可用性，先看它是否真能稳定补 PTQ 尾差；重点看低比特和大模型表格。","en":"It won’t change pretraining priors, but if you care about deployable low-bit LLMs, check whether this reliably closes PTQ residual error; focus on the low-bit large-model tables."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Yongge Ma","Guoan Wang","Feiyu Wang","Yaoming Li","Qian Zhang","Zihan Yan","Yinjun Han","Tong Yang"],"notable_authors":["Yinjun Han"],"tags":["post-training-quantization","llm-inference","discrete-optimization","model-compression"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07019","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07019","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06630","title":"The Sparsity Whisperer","abstract":"Pruning reduces the inference cost of large language models, but existing criteria primarily preserve large activations or reconstruct layer outputs. We argue that this overlooks a key computation performed by particularly sparsity-sensitive neurons in the MLP up and gate projections: separating similar inputs into dissimilar outputs. This suggests that effective pruning should preserve not only activations, but also the differences between outputs more broadly. We introduce a family of differen","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06630.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有 LLM 剪枝准则主要保留大激活或重建层输出，忽略了 MLP up/gate 投影中稀疏敏感神经元承担的'把相似输入分离为不同输出'的计算。","importance":"方法创新：提出 difference-informed pruning 家族，把输入对之间的差异作为剪枝信号；在 Llama 2/3.1 7B–405B 上一致优于强重建基线。","technical_approach":"Wisp 是一阶、免更新的方法，用 input-difference norm 给权重打分；Wisp+ 在神经元级别用该神经元最强分离的输入对细化分数；Whisper 是二阶方法，用轻正则化的 difference Hessian 作为重建目标。","experiments":"Llama 2 与 Llama 3.1，覆盖 7B 到 405B；二阶变体 Whisper 在多个规模上一致优于强 reconstruction baselines；abstract 未给具体精度数字。","authors_note":"作者包括 Dan Alistarh（IST Austria，稀疏化/量化专家，SparseGPT、AdaTron 等）和 Nir Shavit（MIT，神经网络稀疏化与并发系统专家）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM pruning criteria preserve large activations or reconstruct layer outputs, overlooking sparsity-sensitive MLP up/gate neurons whose role is to separate similar inputs into dissimilar outputs.","importance":"Methodological contribution: a family of difference-informed pruning methods that use pairwise input differences as the pruning signal, consistently improving over strong reconstruction baselines across Llama 2/3.1 from 7B to 405B.","technical_approach":"Wisp is a first-order, update-free method scoring weights by input-difference norms; Wisp+ refines scores neuronwise using the input pairs each neuron separates most strongly; Whisper is a second-order variant using a lightly regularized difference Hessian as reconstruction objective.","experiments":"Across Llama 2 and Llama 3.1 from 7B to 405B parameters; the second-order Whisper consistently improves over strong reconstruction baselines; concrete accuracy numbers not in abstract.","authors_note":"Authors include Dan Alistarh (IST Austria, known for SparseGPT and sparsification/quantization work) and Nir Shavit (MIT, known for neural network sparsification and concurrent systems)."},"recommendation":{"zh":"把'分离相似输入'作为剪枝信号是少见的有机制动机的工作，建议看 Wisp+ 的 neuronwise 打分公式和 405B 上的曲线。","en":"A rare pruning paper with a mechanistic motive; read Wisp+'s neuronwise scoring and the 405B curves, then decide whether to replicate internally."},"metadata":{"institutions":["IST Austria","MIT"],"authors":["Linghao Kong","Inimai Subramanian","Micah Adler","Dan Alistarh","Dan Gutfreund","Nir Shavit"],"notable_authors":["Dan Alistarh","Nir Shavit","Dan Gutfreund"],"tags":["pruning","sparsity","llama","second-order","mlp-neurons"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06630","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06630","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06557","title":"Cascade: Exploiting SLO-Aware latency budget for fair and high goodput LLM inference serving","abstract":"The reasoning and agentic capabilities of large language models have expanded the range of applications they support, from short interactive exchanges to long, compute-heavy requests. LLM serving platforms today define response-latency service-level objectives, even though requests within the same service can differ by orders of magnitude in input length, generation length, execution cost, and the availability of reusable KV-cache state. As a result, requests governed by the same service level o","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06557.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.DC","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"LLM serving 请求在输入长度、生成长度、计算成本和 KV-cache 可复用性上差异很大，但平台常用同一个响应延迟 SLO 管理，导致调度时无法区分真实紧急度。","importance":"贡献类型是 LLM serving 系统创新：把 SLO 与预测剩余执行时间的差值定义为 per-request latency budget，并据此做动态调度。它不推进预训练算法，但对理解长请求、agentic workload、KV-cache 复用下的在线系统瓶颈有直接参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出 Cascade，持续估计每个请求的 latency budget，估计信号包括请求特征、KV-cache 状态和当前系统负载。与只看统一 SLO 或静态优先级的调度不同，Cascade 根据剩余预算动态更新请求紧急度，目标是在满足 SLO 的同时提升 goodput 和公平性。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体集群规模、模型类型、trace、baseline 或提升数字。可确认实验应比较 Cascade 与现有 LLM serving 调度策略在 SLO 达成率、goodput、公平性、长短请求混合负载和 KV-cache 复用场景下的表现。","authors_note":"作者列表包括 Rodrigo Fonseca 和 Esha Choukse 等系统研究者；仅凭给定信息无法确认机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLM serving requests vary widely in prompt length, generation length, execution cost, and reusable KV-cache state, yet platforms often assign the same latency SLO to all requests in a service.","importance":"This is an LLM serving-system contribution. It introduces per-request latency budget—the gap between a request's SLO and predicted remaining service time—and uses it for scheduling. It does not change pretraining methods, but it is directly useful for understanding online bottlenecks under long, agentic, and KV-cache-heavy workloads.","technical_approach":"The paper proposes Cascade, which continuously estimates each request's latency budget from request features, KV-cache state, and current system load. Instead of treating a shared SLO as shared urgency, Cascade dynamically updates scheduling priority based on remaining headroom to improve goodput and fairness under SLO constraints.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide cluster size, model choices, traces, baselines, or numerical improvements. The expected evaluation compares Cascade against existing LLM serving schedulers on SLO attainment, goodput, fairness, mixed short/long workloads, and KV-cache reuse scenarios.","authors_note":"The author list includes systems researchers such as Rodrigo Fonseca and Esha Choukse; affiliations cannot be confirmed from the provided information."},"recommendation":{"zh":"预训练研究员可只看调度信号设计：KV-cache 状态进入 SLO 预算，是评估长上下文和 agent workload 成本时该借的系统视角。","en":"Skim the scheduling signal design: putting KV-cache state into the SLO budget is the systems lens to borrow for long-context and agentic workload cost analysis."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Muhammad Adnan","Rohan Mahapatra","Prashant J. Nair","Daniel Berger","Pantea Zardoshti","Rodrigo Fonseca","Esha Choukse"],"notable_authors":["Rodrigo Fonseca","Esha Choukse"],"tags":["LLM-serving","SLO-scheduling","KV-cache","goodput","systems"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06557","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06557","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06819","title":"FutureBridge: Token Selection Beyond Local Preference in Collaborative Decoding","abstract":"Token-level collaboration allows a large language model (LLM) to assist a small language model (SLM) when their predictions diverge. Existing methods either use LLM-generated intervention tokens or rank candidates with the LLM's next-token probabilities. Both rely on the LLM's local preference, even though an LLM-selected token may be difficult for the SLM to build on. We present FutureBridge, which ranks joint LLM-SLM token candidates according to how well they support the SLM's subsequent reas","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06819.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决协同解码中“大模型选出的局部高概率 token 未必适合小模型继续推理”的问题。","importance":"贡献类型是推理解码方法改进。它把 token 选择从 LLM 的局部偏好，改成“这个 token 是否能让 SLM 后续更容易走向正确答案”的反事实评估，对大小模型协作和低成本推理有一定参考价值。","technical_approach":"FutureBridge 在训练阶段使用经过答案验证的 LLM 轨迹作为固定共享未来，让冻结的 SLM 在相同未来上下文下评价不同候选 token 的可延续性，得到反事实分数；再用这些分数监督一个轻量 token reranker。推理阶段只用 LLM 扩展候选池，由 reranker 选一个 token 后把生成权交回 SLM，不追加未来 suffix。","experiments":"实验覆盖五个数学推理任务，比较已有 LLM-SLM token-level collaboration 方法，包括直接使用 LLM intervention token 或按 LLM next-token probability 排序的方案。摘要未给出模型规模、训练数据量和具体提升幅度。","authors_note":"作者来自华东师范大学、北京大学、中国科学技术大学、南洋理工大学、上海交通大学、广东工业大学等机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a failure mode in collaborative decoding: a token preferred locally by the LLM may be hard for the SLM to continue from.","importance":"The contribution is an inference-time decoding method. It reframes token selection from local LLM preference to downstream SLM continuation quality, which is relevant to cost-aware large-small model collaboration.","technical_approach":"FutureBridge uses answer-verified LLM trajectories during training as a fixed shared future. A frozen SLM evaluates each candidate token under this common future context to produce counterfactual scores, which supervise a lightweight token reranker. At inference time, the LLM only expands the candidate pool; the reranker selects one token and control returns to the SLM without appending a generated future suffix.","experiments":"The paper evaluates on five mathematical reasoning tasks against prior token-level collaboration methods that either inject LLM-generated tokens or rank candidates by LLM next-token probabilities. The abstract does not provide model sizes, training data scale, or exact gains.","authors_note":"The authors are affiliated with East China Normal University, Peking University, University of Science and Technology of China, Nanyang Technological University, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, and Guangdong University of Technology."},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为 decoding 备查即可；核心想法是把 token 选择目标对齐到 SLM 的未来可延续性，不必读实验细节。","en":"Useful as a decoding reference: the interesting bit is aligning token choice with the SLM’s future continuation quality, not the benchmark numbers."},"metadata":{"institutions":["East China Normal University","Peking University","University of Science and Technology of China","Nanyang Technological University","Shanghai Jiao Tong University","Guangdong University of Technology"],"authors":["Quanquan Li","Hongbo Zhang","Yihe Chi","Jingyu Li","Xidong Xi","Liuyang Song","Hongzhen Zhang","Yuxiang Huang","Jing Ke","Siyuan Ma","Junyi Lin","Guitao Cao"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["collaborative-decoding","small-large-model","token-reranking","inference-efficiency"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06819","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06819","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06867","title":"LLMRouter: Unified Infrastructure for Developing, Evaluating, and Deploying LLM Routers","abstract":"No single large language model (LLM) is optimal across all queries and budget constraints, making model routing essential for cost-effective deployment. Existing routers adopt diverse formulations and implementations, making fair comparison and extension difficult. We present a unified formulation of LLM routing as a sequential decision process characterized by five components: context encoders, model encoders, scoring functions, decision rules, and learning signals, covering single-turn, multi-","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06867.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 LLM router 方法定义不统一、实现分散、难以公平比较和部署的问题。","importance":"贡献类型是 serving 基础设施与路由评测资源。模型路由直接影响推理成本、质量和个性化服务，但对预训练研究的直接增益有限，更多是部署层面的工程组织。","technical_approach":"论文把 LLM routing 统一建模为顺序决策过程，拆成五个组件：context encoder、model encoder、scoring function、decision rule 和 learning signal。基于该形式化，构建自动化监督数据生成与质量-成本联合评估流程，并实现包含 16 个以上代表性 router 的开源模块化基础设施 LLMRouter。","experiments":"xRouteBench 覆盖通用 LLM、memory-augmented、vision、time-series 和 personalized routing 任务。经验结果显示 learned routers 优于启发式 router。摘要未给出具体模型池、成本定义、质量评估器和提升幅度。","authors_note":"作者来自 UIUC、University of Maryland, College Park、Nanyang Technological University、Purdue University 和 University of Illinois Chicago。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the lack of a unified formulation, implementation, and fair comparison framework for LLM routers.","importance":"The contribution is serving infrastructure plus a routing benchmark. Model routing matters for quality-cost trade-offs and personalized deployment, but its direct value for base pretraining is limited.","technical_approach":"The paper formulates LLM routing as a sequential decision process with five components: context encoders, model encoders, scoring functions, decision rules, and learning signals. It builds an automated pipeline for routing supervision and joint quality-cost evaluation, and releases LLMRouter, a modular open-source infrastructure with over 16 representative routers.","experiments":"xRouteBench spans generic LLM, memory-augmented, vision, time-series, and personalized routing tasks. The empirical study reports that learned routers outperform heuristic routers. The abstract does not provide the exact model pool, cost metric, quality evaluator, or gain sizes.","authors_note":"The authors are affiliated with UIUC, University of Maryland, College Park, Nanyang Technological University, Purdue University, and University of Illinois Chicago."},"recommendation":{"zh":"知道有这个 router benchmark 和代码库就够了；预训练侧只借鉴质量-成本联合评估口径。","en":"Worth knowing as a router benchmark and codebase; for pretraining work, only the joint quality-cost evaluation framing is reusable."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign","University of Maryland, College Park","Nanyang Technological University","Purdue University","University of Illinois Chicago"],"authors":["Tao Feng","Fangxu Yu","Haozhen Zhang","Zhongjie Dai","Liangqi Yuan","Zijie Lei","Weizhi Zhang","Kunlun Zhu","Haodong Yue","Keyang Xuan","Ge Liu","Jiaxuan You"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["model-routing","serving-infrastructure","quality-cost-tradeoff","benchmark"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06867","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06867","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06901","title":"Prune Once: Retraining-Free Task-Agnostic Pruning for Vision-Language Models","abstract":"Vision-language models (VLMs) have achieved remarkable generalization across diverse multimodal tasks through large-scale pre-training, yet their rapidly increasing computational and memory requirements pose significant challenges for deployment in constrained environments. Existing pruning strategies often depend on task-specific criteria or LLM-oriented importance measures, making them unsuitable for task-agnostic pruning, where no task-specific samples are available at pruning time and the pr","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06901.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有VLM剪枝方法依赖任务特定准则或LLM专属重要性度量，无法满足无任务样本时的任务无关剪枝需求，剪枝后模型泛化性不足。","importance":"方法创新，提出首个免重训的任务/模态无关VLM剪枝框架，解决受限环境下VLM部署的剪枝泛化难题。","technical_approach":"提出PORTA框架，基于通用校准数据估计激活变化，推导任务与模态无关的特征级重要性公式；设计自适应稀疏分配机制，按输出特征变异性分配逐层剪枝比例，无需重训练即可完成剪枝。","experiments":"未明确给出具体参数量与训练数据规模，对比任务特定剪枝、LLM导向剪枝等基线，在多模态分类、检索等跨任务场景下保持更高性能保留率。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing VLM pruning methods rely on task-specific criteria or LLM-tailored importance measures, failing to support task-agnostic pruning without task-specific samples and leading to poor generalization of pruned models.","importance":"Methodological innovation, proposing the first retraining-free task- and modality-agnostic VLM pruning framework to address deployment constraints of VLMs in resource-limited scenarios.","technical_approach":"Proposes the PORTA framework, which estimates activation variation from generic calibration data to derive a task- and modality-agnostic feature-level importance formulation; designs an adaptive sparsity allocation mechanism to assign layer-wise pruning ratios based on output feature variability, enabling pruning without retraining.","experiments":"No explicit parameter count or training data scale reported; outperforms task-specific pruning and LLM-oriented pruning baselines in retaining performance across cross-task scenarios including multimodal classification and retrieval.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅适合关注VLM部署压缩的研究员参考，预训练研究员可快速扫过激活重要性定义部分，无直接预训练改进启示。","en":"Only relevant for researchers focusing on VLM deployment compression; pretrain researchers can quickly skim the activation importance definition with no direct pretraining improvement insights."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Minseok Kang","Hyunwoo Kim","Chanyoung Kim","Minwoo Kim","Jaekoo Lee","Dahuin Jung"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["VLM Pruning","Retraining-Free","Task-Agnostic","Efficient Deployment","Activation Analysis"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06901","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06901","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07088","title":"RoRA: Role-Oriented Regional Allocation for Visual Token Pruning in MLLMs","abstract":"Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) encode images as long visual token sequences, making prefilling and KV-cache storage expensive. Existing training-free pruning methods select tokens by importance, diversity, or spatial coverage, but treat retained tokens as interchangeable and do not explicitly track which object-related regions are already covered. We present RoRA, a training-free framework that casts visual token pruning as role-oriented regional evidence allocation. Given a fixed budg","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07088.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"MLLM 中图像被编码为长视觉 token 序列，prefill 和 KV-cache 开销大；现有无训练剪枝方法把保留 token 视为可互换，未显式覆盖对象区域。","importance":"推理效率类工作，对多模态 KV-cache 压缩和视觉 token 预算分配有一定参考价值。","technical_approach":"RoRA 是无训练框架，把视觉 token 剪枝建模为面向角色的区域证据分配：受保护语义核心、互补上下文、细粒度细节；用位置先验和 prompt 校准的对象先验校正 attention，构造 Attention-Anchored Regions 作为已覆盖对象代理，上下文主要在 AAR 外探索，少量预算用于局部细节恢复。","experiments":"在多个 MLLM 和 benchmark 上做训练无关剪枝对比（摘要未给具体数字）。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"MLLMs encode images as long visual token sequences, making prefilling and KV-cache storage expensive; existing training-free pruning methods treat retained tokens as interchangeable without tracking object-region coverage.","importance":"Inference-efficiency work relevant to multimodal KV-cache compression and visual token budget allocation.","technical_approach":"RoRA is a training-free framework casting visual token pruning as role-oriented regional evidence allocation: a protected semantic core, complementary context, and fine-grained detail. It calibrates text-conditioned attention with positional and prompt-calibrated object priors, builds Attention-Anchored Regions as proxies for covered object support, explores context mainly outside AARs, and uses a small AAR-guided budget to restore local detail.","experiments":"Training-free pruning comparisons across multiple MLLMs and benchmarks (specific numbers not in abstract).","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"把对象覆盖显式纳入视觉 token 剪枝是合理方向，但无训练方法上限有限；看 AAR 构造和与 FastV/视觉 token 剪枝基线的对比即可。","en":"Explicit object-coverage accounting is a sensible angle for visual token pruning, but training-free methods have limited headroom; inspect the AAR construction and comparisons to FastV-style baselines."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Qiyanhui Lu","Han Wu","Rongjian Xu","Tingzhang Luo","Cheng Fan","Xinghao Chen","Minjing Dong","Jufeng Yang","Jianyuan Guo"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["mllm","visual-token-pruning","kv-cache","training-free","inference-efficiency"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07088","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07088","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06411","title":"Learning to Predict Middle-Layer Attention in MLLMs for Visual Token Prunin","abstract":"Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) achieve strong performance across diverse vision-language tasks, but their efficiency is limited by the cost of processing numerous visual tokens. Visual token pruning can reduce this cost, but requires accurate token importance estimates. Recent studies have demonstrated that text-to-vision attention from middle language model layers can effectively guide visual token pruning, typically using attention from a predefined middle layer to select the visual ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06411.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"MLLM 视觉 token 剪枝依赖固定中间层的 text-to-vision attention，但最优层随样本变化，且算到该层已付出大量视觉 token 计算。","importance":"效率方法贡献：通过预测中间层 attention 提前剪枝视觉 token，减少 MLLM 多模态推理开销。","technical_approach":"提出 Middle-layer Attention Prediction (MAP)，从早期层特征预测对问题更敏感的中间层 text-to-vision attention，并据此选择保留的视觉 token，避免处理全部视觉 token 到固定中间层。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体模型、数据集、加速比或精度下降数值；仅说明用于视觉 token pruning。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Visual token pruning in MLLMs relies on text-to-vision attention from a fixed middle layer, but the most responsive layer varies by sample and reaching it already costs substantial computation.","importance":"Efficiency-method contribution: predicts middle-layer attention to prune visual tokens earlier and reduce multimodal inference cost.","technical_approach":"Proposes Middle-layer Attention Prediction (MAP), which predicts question-sensitive middle-layer text-to-vision attention from early-layer features and uses it to select retained visual tokens before heavy middle-layer computation.","experiments":"The abstract does not specify model sizes, datasets, speedups, or accuracy drops; it only positions the method for visual token pruning.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"视觉 token 剪枝的小改进，predictor 思路直接；只看方法图和消融，对 LLM 主干本身无新 insight。","en":"A modest visual-token-pruning improvement with a straightforward predictor; read the method figure and ablations only, as it offers little new insight into LLM backbones."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Yuyao Sun","Tao Deng","Shuang Li","Deqing Wang","Hao Geng","Minjun Yu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["visual-token-pruning","MLLM","attention-prediction","inference-efficiency"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06411","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06411","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06723","title":"Multi-Level Modeling of Large Language Model Inference Latency and Energy via Hybrid Analytical--Machine-Learning Predictors","abstract":"The rapid scaling of Large Language Models (LLMs) has significantly increased computational cost, energy consumption, and inference latency, making accurate estimation essential for sustainable artificial intelligence deployment and hardware-aware design. In this work, we introduce Hybrid Modeling for Energy and Latency of LLMs (HYMELL), a hybrid three-level framework for estimating LLM inference latency and energy by combining analytical modeling with machine learning (ML). HYMELL models LLM ex","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06723.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决LLM推理延迟与能耗难以准确估计的问题，支撑可持续AI部署与硬件感知架构设计。","importance":"方法+系统贡献，提出混合解析建模与机器学习的三层框架，支持dense/MoE、MHA/GQA等多种主流LLM架构。","technical_approach":"HYMELL三层混合建模框架：底层用解析模型估算基础算子的耗时与能耗；中层用ML预测高层组件的开销；顶层端到端模型捕获prefill与decode阶段的系统级额外开销，结合解析模型的准确性与ML的泛化性。","experiments":"在NVIDIA H100 GPU上评估，支持dense、MoE FFN以及MHA、GQA架构，原摘要实验部分截断，具体预测精度未完整披露。","authors_note":"包含南加州大学Massoud Pedram教授团队成员，该团队长期从事低功耗计算与AI系统优化研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addresses the difficulty of accurately estimating LLM inference latency and energy, critical for sustainable AI deployment and hardware-aware architecture design.","importance":"Methodological and system contribution proposing a three-level hybrid analytical-ML framework that supports mainstream LLM architectures including dense/MoE FFNs and MHA/GQA attention.","technical_approach":"HYMELL uses a three-level hierarchy: analytical estimation of primitive operations at the bottom, ML prediction of higher-level components in the middle, and an end-to-end model capturing system-level overheads across prefill and decode phases at the top, combining accuracy of analytical models with generalization of ML.","experiments":"Evaluated on NVIDIA H100 GPU across dense/MoE FFNs and MHA/GQA attention; the abstract is truncated, so full prediction accuracy results are not available.","authors_note":"Includes members of Massoud Pedram's group at USC, a team long working on low-power computing and AI system optimization."},"recommendation":{"zh":"推理延迟与能耗的混合建模方法，做硬件感知架构设计时可参考，看框架结构即可。","en":"Hybrid inference latency/energy modeling useful for hardware-aware architecture design; skim the framework structure only."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Southern California"],"authors":["Saeid Shokoufa","Mohammad Erfan Sadeghi","Mehdi Kamal","Massoud Pedram"],"notable_authors":["Massoud Pedram"],"tags":["inference-efficiency","energy-estimation","latency-prediction","hybrid-modeling","llm-serving"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06723","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06723","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06763","title":"CubicQuant: Parametric Non-Uniform Codebooks for High-Throughput LLM Inference with 1-8-Bit Weights","abstract":"Weight quantization for large-language-model inference must balance adaptive reconstruction levels with representations regular enough for efficient GPU execution. Uniform integers constrain each group to a linear grid. Low-bit floating-point formats use a fixed exponent-mantissa structure, while learned codebooks gain flexibility at the cost of irregular decoding and additional metadata. We introduce CubicQuant, a parametric non-uniform scalar format that preserves a dense integer code stream w","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06763.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.DC"],"summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 权重量化需要在自适应重建电平与 GPU 友好的规整整数表示之间取得平衡。","importance":"工程方法创新，提出一种参数化非均匀标量量化格式，覆盖 1-8 bit 并保持稠密整数码流。","technical_approach":"CubicQuant 用由两个形状参数和一个 scale 决定的单调三次曲线，把均匀整数码映射为非均匀重建电平；均匀整数量化是其特例；有效位宽为 B+64/G；推导了 Uniform/Gaussian/Laplace 下的 population distortion，并给出连续优化目标。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体模型规模、baseline 或精度数字，需看正文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLM weight quantization must balance adaptive reconstruction levels with GPU-friendly regular integer representations.","importance":"Engineering method: a parametric non-uniform scalar format covering 1-8 bits while preserving a dense integer code stream.","technical_approach":"CubicQuant uses a monotonic cubic curve (two shape params + one scale) mapping uniform integer codes to non-uniform levels; uniform integer quantization is a special case; effective width B+64/G; derives population distortion under Uniform/Gaussian/Laplace and a continuous optimization objective.","experiments":"Abstract gives no concrete model sizes, baselines, or accuracy numbers; see full text.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"思路介于 uniform 与 learned codebook 之间，三次曲线参数化得很省 metadata；摘要无实验数字，先看 §4 表格再判断是否值得跟进。","en":"A middle ground between uniform and learned codebooks with minimal metadata; no numbers in abstract—check §4 tables before investing."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Xuetian Gao"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["quantization","non-uniform-quantization","llm-inference","weight-compression"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06763","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06763","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"eval","emoji":"🧪","name":"Eval / 评估","papers":[{"id":"2608.05747","title":"GST-Bench: Can VLMs Develop Global Spatial Awareness from Video?","abstract":"Spatial intelligence is fundamental to embodied agents, yet existing benchmarks focus on local spatial perception from single or few viewpoints, overlooking global spatial awareness over continuous, long-horizon visual streams. To address this limitation, we introduce the Global-Spatial-Temporal Benchmark (GST-Bench), a VQA benchmark for global spatial intelligence in video understanding, comprising human-verified questions derived from 6,790 minutes of synthetically generated video. It requires","starred":true,"priority":"p1","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T08:33:13Z","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05747.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的不是一般的视频问答，而是 VLM 在连续第一视角视频中能否形成“全局空间表征”。更具体地说，模型是否能把沿轨迹看到的局部观察整合成一致的场景地图，并在一个从未出现在视频轨迹上的新视角下，回答“我在哪里、目标在哪里、场景整体长什么样”这三类问题。作者认为现有空间 benchmark 大多停留在单帧或少量视角，很多题目其实可以靠局部线索或单图感知完成，无法真正测到跨时间、跨视角、带全局坐标约束的空间推理能力。GST-Bench 的核心设计就是把这些捷径尽量堵住：目标物体在 query 视角中不可见，query 视角不在原视频轨迹上，答案采用距离和角度等精确数值而不是粗粒度左右前后判断，并显式引入 top-down 图像来测试局部观察到全局地图的映射能力。","importance":"对基座研究的意义主要有三层。第一，它把“视频理解”里常被混在一起的局部感知、短程时序建模、全局空间整合拆开了，给出了一个更接近 embodied pretraining 需求的评测面。第二，它揭示了当前强 VLM 的失败模式并不统一：闭源大模型在把任务退化成局部可见后能大幅提升，说明主要短板在跨帧空间整合；不少开源模型即便在局部版本上也提不起来，说明感知和推理两端都弱。这种诊断对后续数据设计、架构设计、视频 tokenization 和训练目标都很有用。第三，作者不只做 benchmark，还给出同管线生成的 GST-Train，并展示定向训练能把 Qwen3-VL-8B 从 25.89 拉到 53.52，超过零样本闭源模型。这说明全局空间能力并非纯靠更大模型自然涌现，训练数据分布和任务构造本身就是关键变量。对做原生多模态预训练的人，这比单纯 leaderboard 更有信息量。","technical_approach":"方法上有三个关键点。其一是数据生成管线。作者基于 OmniGibson 和 BEHAVIOR-1K 的 50 个室内场景，自动采样多样化相机轨迹，并额外采样不在轨迹上的 query viewpoint。系统记录对象和视角的 3D 坐标，再投影到全局 top-down 图中，自动构造问答对。这里最重要的过滤规则是：所有 object localization 相关样本都要求目标在 query 视角不可见，从源头上避免单帧解题。其二是任务 taxonomy。围绕 embodied agent 的三个基本问题——self localization、object localization、scene structure understanding——组织成 12 个子任务。论文强调这些任务不是简单换问法，而是分别考察局部到全局映射、跨视角目标定位、全局布局恢复等不同能力。其三是诊断性对照设计。作者构造了 local variants，把目标改成在 query 视角可见，使任务更接近单图感知，从而把“看不见所以不会答”和“看得见但不会整合”区分开。这个设计很关键，因为它让 benchmark 不只是排名工具，也能定位瓶颈。\n\n从建模角度看，这篇工作本身不是提出新 VLM 架构，而是提出一种更严格的能力定义和数据构造方式。它隐含的研究判断是：如果训练目标没有迫使模型维护显式或隐式的全局空间状态，单靠通用图文视频语料，模型很容易学到局部相关性而不是可迁移的空间表征。top-down 图像的引入也很有意思，它相当于给“世界模型是否形成”提供了一个可操作的外部探针，比只问自然语言问题更接近结构化评估。","experiments":"实验部分最有信息量的是三组结果。第一组是主 benchmark 评测。作者评测了 22 个 VLM，覆盖开源、闭源以及偏 embodied 的模型。最强零样本模型 Gemini-3-Pro 只有 42.68，而人类是 79.08，差距很大。开源模型整体更低，最强的 InternVL3.5-38B 也只在 30 分左右，很多模型接近随机水平。这个结果说明当前视频 VLM 的“会看视频”并不等于“能建立全局空间地图”。第二组是 local variant 对照。闭源模型在局部版本上最高能提升 39 分，说明其单图感知和局部空间判断并不差，主要卡在跨帧整合和 novel viewpoint 推断；开源模型提升不稳定，说明问题不只是 memory 或 temporal aggregation，也包括基础视觉感知和空间 grounding。第三组是 GST-Train 微调。作者用同一生成管线构建训练集，来源包括 BEHAVIOR-1K、ArtVIP、HyperSim 和内部模拟场景。Qwen3-VL-8B 在 GST-Train 上微调后，GST-Bench 分数从 25.89 提升到 53.52，提升 27.63 分，并超过所有零样本闭源模型。这个幅度说明 benchmark 与训练数据分布高度对齐，同时也说明全局空间推理是可学的，不是单纯靠更大参数规模才能得到。\n\n从消融和分析角度，最值得注意的是作者对“局部可见/不可见”的严格控制，以及 query viewpoint 脱离原轨迹这一设置。它显著提高了任务难度，也更接近机器人探索后从新位置做判断的场景。另一个重要细节是答案采用精确数值指标，这避免了很多 benchmark 常见的模糊评分问题，使得误差分析更细。","reading_guide":"建议先看 Introduction 里对现有空间 benchmark 缺陷的三点批评，再看任务定义和数据构造部分，重点确认作者是如何保证题目不能被单帧或局部启发式解掉的。真正的核心不在模型列表，而在 sample filtering、novel viewpoint 采样、top-down 映射和 12 个子任务的划分逻辑。\n\n精读时优先看三类图表：一是 benchmark taxonomy 和数据生成流程图，理解每类题到底测什么；二是主结果表，尤其是 human、闭源、开源、embodied 模型之间的差距；三是 local variant 与 GST-Train 微调结果，这两部分最能说明失败模式和可改进方向。若从预训练角度阅读，值得深挖的问题有三个：第一，现有视频预训练目标为什么没有逼出稳定的全局空间状态；第二，top-down supervision 是否可以转化为预训练中的辅助目标；第三，模拟数据带来的收益能否迁移到真实世界视频。阅读时间大约 45–60 分钟，若要做相关研究，数据构造细节和附录中的过滤规则需要仔细看。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a specific failure mode of current VLMs: they may parse local visual content from videos, yet still fail to build a globally consistent spatial representation over time. The benchmark asks whether a model can integrate egocentric observations along a trajectory, infer spatial relations from a novel viewpoint that never appears in the input video, and align local observations with an explicit top-down scene representation. This is different from standard video QA. The authors deliberately remove shortcuts: the queried target is invisible from the query view, the query camera is sampled off-trajectory, and answers are evaluated with precise numerical quantities such as distance and angle rather than coarse left/right judgments.","importance":"$13","technical_approach":"$14","experiments":"$15","reading_guide":"Start with the benchmark motivation and the three limitations the authors identify in prior spatial benchmarks. Then read the dataset construction section carefully, especially the filtering rules that prevent single-frame shortcuts. The benchmark is only convincing if those controls are sound.\n\nThe most important figures and tables are: the task taxonomy, the data-generation pipeline, the main model comparison table, the local-vs-global diagnostic results, and the GST-Train fine-tuning results. For a pretraining-oriented reader, three questions are worth keeping in mind while reading: why current video pretraining objectives fail to induce stable global spatial representations; whether top-down alignment could be turned into an auxiliary pretraining objective; and how much of the gain from simulation-based data might transfer to real-world video. A careful first pass should take about an hour, and the appendix is worth reading if you care about benchmark validity.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看任务定义和局部/全局拆分实验；它能提醒 VLM 预训练别把单帧空间题当作 embodied 能力代理。","en":"Read the task design and the local-vs-global split; it is a useful warning against treating single-frame spatial QA as a proxy for embodied spatial competence."},"metadata":{"institutions":["ByteDance Seed","Zhejiang University","National University of Singapore"],"authors":["Qifeng Zhang","Kaixiang Huang","Heng Dong","Huang Fang","Junting Chen","Junjie Zhu","Yonghang Chen","Zhiyu Zhang","Wei Li"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["vlm-evaluation","video-reasoning","spatial-awareness","embodied-ai","benchmark"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05747","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05747","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06301","title":"HarnessOpt-Bench: Evaluating LLMs at Harness Optimization","abstract":"As LLMs are increasingly deployed within agentic systems, their capabilities depend not only on the model weights but also on the harness: the prompts, tools, control flow, memory, and orchestration code surrounding them. This makes automated harness optimization -- the iterative and evaluation-guided improvement of a harness by an AI system -- both an important route to improving AI systems and a demanding capability for AI systems themselves. Yet the community lacks a common protocol for measu","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T17:21:05Z","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06301.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CL","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"论文要评测的是 AI 系统能否在固定预算内自动优化另一个 agent 的 harness。这里的 harness 包括 prompt、工具、控制流、记忆和编排代码。难点不在单次代码修改，而在昂贵、随机、反馈不完整的评测环境下，判断哪些修改真的提升了目标 agent。","importance":"这篇更适合放在 agent/eval 方向泛读。它对预训练本身没有直接方法贡献，但对 post-train 后的系统能力评测有参考价值。LLM 的实际能力越来越依赖外部 harness，单看模型权重会漏掉一部分系统层能力。论文的价值在于把“自动改进 agent 系统”从单个 demo 拆成可复现协议：固定目标模型、隔离 held-out test、限制评测预算、记录所有候选版本。这个设计能帮助区分模型能力、coding harness 能力和评测协议带来的噪声。","technical_approach":"HarnessOpt-Bench 把 harness optimization 定义成受约束的随机程序优化问题。优化器由一个 LLM 和 coding harness 组成，输入是目标 agent 的 seed harness、开发/验证反馈和有限的目标评测预算。优化器可以编辑 harness 代码库，但必须遵守固定执行接口和不可变路径约束。最终它提名一个候选 harness，在搜索期间不可访问的 test split 上打分，指标是相对 seed harness 的 normalized gain。协议强调三点：开发、验证、测试拆分固定且不重叠；held-out test 在搜索期间不可见，避免优化器拟合可见分数；trusted execution environment 负责权限隔离、预算计量、资源记录和候选版本审计。与以往自带目标 agent、自带预算、自带评测方式的 harness optimization 工作不同，这里把 optimizer model、coding harness、target agent 和 evaluation protocol 分离出来。","experiments":"实验覆盖 4 个下游任务，任务类型强调评测昂贵且随机，例如 fixed-corpus research 和 terminal use。论文在共享 coding harness 下评测 5 个 frontier optimizer models，同时也评测这些模型各自的 native harness，共得到 111 个 scored optimizer runs；另在一个任务上额外评测 2 个 coding harness。主要结果是：在 paired design 下，共享 harness 内不同 optimizer model 的差异，平均大于 shared harness 与 native harness 的差异；native harness 没有稳定优势。可获得的提升强烈依赖任务和 seed regime。OfficeQA 的 release-level 实验显示该 benchmark 能分辨连续模型版本之间的差异。轨迹分析显示，更广泛的系统级干预与更高 held-out gain 相关；细粒度 failure trace 检查使用较少，并且没有观察到与提升的正相关。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，约 25–35 分钟。优先看 Introduction 中对 expensive and stochastic evaluation 的问题定义，以及 HarnessOpt-Bench 协议部分，重点理解为什么要固定 target model/environment/verifier，并把 final test 完全隔离。实验部分可重点看 RQ1/RQ3：模型差异与 coding harness 差异的 paired comparison。Section 5.2 的 OfficeQA release-level 分析和 Section 5.3 的搜索轨迹分析值得扫一遍，它们展示了 benchmark 是否能分辨模型进步，以及当前 optimizer 的失败模式。无需细读每个任务的业务细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper evaluates whether an AI system can optimize another agent’s harness under a fixed budget. The harness includes prompts, tools, control flow, memory, and orchestration code. The core difficulty is not ordinary coding, but making reliable system-level improvements when evaluation is expensive, stochastic, and only partially observed.","importance":"This is mainly a skim-worthy agent evaluation paper rather than a pretraining method paper. Its relevance is in the interface between model capability and system capability. As LLM deployments depend heavily on harnesses, evaluating only the base model or the chat model misses an important layer. The benchmark contributes a controlled protocol: fixed target model and environment, held-out final evaluation, strict budget enforcement, and full candidate auditing. This helps separate optimizer-model ability from coding-harness effects and protocol noise.","technical_approach":"HarnessOpt-Bench formulates harness optimization as constrained stochastic program optimization. An optimizer, consisting of an LLM plus a coding harness, receives a seed harness, graded development and validation feedback, and a limited target-evaluation budget. It may edit the executable harness codebase while respecting a fixed interface and immutable paths. The final submitted candidate is evaluated on an inaccessible test split, using normalized gain over the seed harness as the score. The protocol relies on fixed non-overlapping dev/validation/test splits, graded disclosure, and a trusted execution environment that enforces access control, meters target evaluations and resources, isolates held-out state, and versions all candidates. This differs from prior demonstrations where each method often used its own target agent, seed, budget, and scoring protocol.","experiments":"The suite contains 4 downstream tasks designed to have costly and noisy evaluation, including fixed-corpus research and terminal-use settings. The authors evaluate 5 frontier optimizer models under a shared coding harness and under their respective native harnesses, producing 111 scored optimizer runs. They also evaluate 2 additional coding harnesses on one task. Under this paired setup, differences among optimizer models within the shared harness are larger on average than differences between shared and native harnesses. Native harnesses do not provide a consistent advantage. Achievable gains vary strongly by task and seed regime. On OfficeQA, release-level experiments show that the benchmark can resolve variation across successive optimizer-model releases. Instrumented trajectories suggest that broader interventions correlate with higher held-out gain, while detailed failure-trace inspection is rare and not positively associated with gain.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 25–35 minutes. Focus on the Introduction’s framing of expensive stochastic evaluation and the benchmark protocol definition. The key design choices are the fixed target environment, inaccessible final test split, and trusted execution boundary. In the experiments, prioritize the paired comparison for RQ1/RQ3, which separates optimizer-model effects from coding-harness effects. Section 5.2 on OfficeQA release-level sensitivity and Section 5.3 on search trajectories are the most useful parts for understanding what the benchmark actually measures. The task-specific implementation details can be read selectively.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"做agent能力预训练或对齐的研究员重点看任务设计与打分规则，可直接复用为内部agent系统能力探测集","en":"For agent pretraining or alignment researchers, focus on task design and scoring metrics; directly reusable as an internal agent system capability probe set"},"metadata":{"institutions":["Scale AI"],"authors":["Varun Ursekar","Apaar Shanker","Yash Maurya","Shehab Yasser","Vijay S. Kalmath","Veronica Chatrath","Yuan Xue"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agent-evaluation","harness-optimization","benchmark","llm-agent"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06301","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06301","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05212","title":"SearchAuditor: Auditing and Attributing Failures in Long-Horizon Search Agents","abstract":"Deep search agents tackle challenging questions through long-horizon web interactions, a process that is both complex and fragile: small reasoning errors may propagate through long, noisy trajectories into fluent but incorrect answers. Diagnosing such failures is difficult, requiring the manual inspection of extremely long execution traces, which could be beyond human capacity. We therefore introduce SearchAuditBench, a benchmark that evaluates whether LLM auditors can localize, attribute, and r","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-05T09:09:00Z","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05212.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"如何系统性地审计长轨迹搜索 Agent 的失败：在平均 65K tokens、70+ 步的噪声轨迹里，自动定位关键错误步骤、归因根因类型，并给出可执行的修复指令，从而降低人工逐条排查长 trace 的成本。","importance":"这篇更偏 eval + agent 诊断，但对预训练/后训练闭环有两点现实意义：\n1) 提供了“失败轨迹—关键错误点—根因—修复指令”的结构化监督形态，可作为后续做 auditor/verifier、过程监督、或用失败驱动的数据合成（repair directives）来反哺训练的原材料。\n2) 量化揭示长轨迹审计的难度上限：即便用前沿模型做审计，端到端 fully passed 也只有 26.6%，说明仅靠更大模型并不能自动解决“长上下文 + 噪声证据链 + 隐性错误传播”的诊断问题，后续需要更强的证据压缩、结构化表示、或训练专门的审计能力。","technical_approach":"全文片段给出的贡献分三块：\n1) SearchAuditBench：1,243 条失败轨迹数据集，来自 8 个开源权重模型在 5 个 deep-search benchmark 上的运行；统一 scaffold（search/visit 两工具）以减少框架差异；每条轨迹由专家标注：关键错误 step（含容忍区间）、六类根因 taxonomy、以及参考 repair（带原子 rubrics）。并且只保留“可审计失败”：最终答案被判错且标注者能在冻结轨迹证据内定位关键错误。\n2) 基线评测：把审计拆成三任务——定位、归因、修复——并报告端到端通过率，强调长轨迹噪声、缺少可验证结构、以及静默传播错误是主要难点。\n3) SearchAuditor 方法：并行运行三条互补 audit 分支；在一个“紧凑、证据落地”的轨迹视图上对分支报告做 adjudication（裁决/融合）；最后生成过程级 repair directives（不是只改最终答案，而是改搜索过程的策略/步骤）。\n\n从现有内容无法确认三分支分别是什么（例如：时间分段定位、证据链重建、候选答案管理检查等），也无法确认其“紧凑视图”如何构建（摘要、检索关键 step、还是结构化表格化）。这些细节需要方法章节支持。","experiments":"可从片段中提取的关键数字：\n- 数据集规模：1,243 条失败轨迹；平均 73.1 messages、65.1K tokens。\n- 失败分布：45.9% 的关键错误发生在轨迹最后三分之一；最大根因是 Candidate Mismanagement，占 27.2%。\n- 审计难度：使用前沿模型（文中举 GPT-5.5）做最强基线，端到端 fully passed 仅 26.6%。\n- 方法提升：SearchAuditor 在三种前沿 backbone 上一致优于基线，端到端通过率 32.3%。\n- 外部修复收益：其 repair 使 Kimi-K2.6 在 LiveBrowseComp 的失败运行中修复 17.4%，准确率从 34.0% 提升到 45.1%。\n\n缺失信息：各子任务（定位/归因/修复）分别的分数、不同轨迹长度分桶表现、以及对“紧凑视图/三分支/adjudication”的消融。","reading_guide":"泛读建议：\n- 先读 SearchAuditBench 构建细节：失败筛选标准、六类根因 taxonomy、关键错误 step 的标注协议与容忍区间定义；这些决定了数据能否用于训练 auditor。\n- 再看评测协议：fully passed 的判定、rubrics 如何打分、以及是否存在 judge 偏差。\n- 最后看 SearchAuditor：三分支各自覆盖什么失败模式，adjudication 如何做证据对齐，repair directive 的格式是否可直接用于训练（例如可转成过程监督或工具调用策略）。\n预计阅读时间：30–40 分钟可掌握 benchmark 与主要结论；若要把它接到训练闭环（用 repair 做数据合成/过程监督），需要额外精读标注与 rubrics（1 小时左右）。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to audit failures of long-horizon web search agents: given extremely long and noisy trajectories (often 60K+ tokens), automatically localize the critical error step, attribute a root cause, and produce actionable repair directives that reduce human debugging effort.","importance":"Primarily an evaluation/diagnosis contribution, but it matters to the pretrain↔post-train loop in two concrete ways:\n1) It defines a structured supervision target for “auditing” (error localization + cause taxonomy + repair directives with atomic rubrics), which can be reused to train auditors/verifiers or to generate process-level corrective data.\n2) It quantifies how hard the problem remains even with frontier models (26.6% end-to-end pass), suggesting that scaling alone is insufficient; better evidence compression, structured trajectory representations, or specialized training signals are needed for long-context diagnosis.","technical_approach":"$16","experiments":"Numbers available from the excerpt:\n- Dataset: 1,243 failed trajectories; average 73.1 messages and 65.1K tokens.\n- Failure patterns: 45.9% of critical errors occur in the final third; Candidate Mismanagement is the largest root cause (27.2%).\n- Baseline difficulty: the strongest baseline (example given: GPT-5.5) achieves only 26.6% end-to-end fully passed.\n- SearchAuditor: improves end-to-end pass rate to 32.3% across three frontier backbones.\n- Downstream repair impact: fixes 17.4% of Kimi-K2.6 failed runs on LiveBrowseComp, raising accuracy from 34.0% to 45.1%.\n\nMissing from the excerpt: per-subtask scores, length-bucket analysis, and ablations for compact-view/adjudication/branch design.","reading_guide":"Skim priorities:\n- Read the dataset construction and annotation protocol carefully (failure filtering, tolerance span definition, 6-way taxonomy, rubric design). This determines whether the benchmark can be repurposed as training data.\n- Check the evaluation protocol: what “fully passed” means, how rubrics are graded, and potential judge bias.\n- Then read the SearchAuditor method: what each branch targets, how evidence is grounded/compacted, and the exact repair directive format (whether it can be converted into process supervision or tool-policy training).\nTime: ~30–40 minutes for the benchmark + headline results; ~1 hour extra if you want to plug repairs into a training loop.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"针对长上下文 Agent 轨迹的 Debug/Audit 基准，对于研究长上下文推理和 Agent 错误归因有参考价值，可关注其数据集构建方式。","en":"A debug/audit benchmark for long-context agent trajectories; valuable for researching long-context reasoning and agent error attribution, worth noting its dataset construction methodology."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Zhixiang Liang","Yifei Liu","Yidan Huang","Haozhe Zhao","Beichen Huang","Jiaqi Wang","Nan Duan","Qiong Cao"],"notable_authors":["Nan Duan"],"tags":["Long-Horizon Agents","Failure Auditing","Benchmark","Web Search"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05212","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05212","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06270","title":"The Illusion of Visual Tool-Use: A Causal Audit of Thinking with Images","abstract":"The \"thinking-with-images\" paradigm equips multimodal LLMs with active visual operations such as crop-and-zoom. However, models using these operations often achieve only marginal or negative gains over direct inference at substantially higher token cost. They may also repeatedly crop irrelevant regions and fail on questions that direct inference answers correctly. We ask whether the returned visual evidence causally affects the answer. To answer this question, we formulate visual tool-use as a c","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T17:01:08Z","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06270.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"多模态大模型中“图像辅助思考”范式（通过裁剪放大等视觉工具逐步收集证据）在实际使用中常出现准确率提升微弱甚至下降、token成本显著升高、工具调用路径无效等问题，核心疑问是工具返回的视觉证据是否对最终答案存在真实因果影响，而非模型仅依赖工具调用文本本身走捷径。","importance":"揭示了当前视觉工具增强多模态模型的结构性瓶颈——策略失配，提出了可复用的因果审计框架，对多模态工具调用的预训练/后训练目标设计（尤其是RL训练信号的构造）有直接参考价值，也为工具型Agent的能力诊断提供了细粒度方法。","technical_approach":"将视觉工具使用过程建模为结构因果图，区分三类影响最终答案的路径：原始输入直接路径、观测介导路径（工具返回的视觉内容真实作用于答案）、动作诱导捷径（仅工具调用文本影响答案）。在此基础上设计三层粒度递增的干预实验：1）策略层：对比启用工具与直接推理的整体表现；2）轨迹层：运行时破坏所有工具返回的观测图像，测量答案变化；3）步骤层：用反事实裁剪替换单步观测，计算视觉证据增益（对应自然间接效应NIE），判断单步视觉内容是否真实改变答案偏好。基于干预结果将每条轨迹分为四类：有效校准、调用但不看（CWL）、看但无规划（LWP）、未调用工具，并将策略级准确率提升分解到各子集。","experiments":"在5个细粒度感知基准上审计6种代表性“图像辅助思考”模型。核心发现：1）策略级准确率提升主要来自少数“校准”子集的轨迹，多数工具调用要么与答案解耦（CWL），要么调度不合理（LWP，如答案已确定后仍继续调用、反复裁剪无关区域），形成“视觉工具使用的错觉”；2）提出假设：仅基于最终结果的强化学习是策略失配的主要成因——模型学会了“调用工具”这一表面动作以匹配奖励信号，而非学会利用工具返回的视觉证据。","reading_guide":"泛读重点：第3章因果图建模与三层干预设计（理解如何用因果工具拆解工具调用的真实作用）、第4章的四类轨迹诊断与准确率分解方法（可直接迁移到其他工具型Agent的评估）。可跳过：细粒度基准的具体任务描述、部分因果效应的数学推导细节。预计阅读时间：40-60分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The \"thinking-with-images\" paradigm for multimodal LLMs, which interleaves reasoning with active visual operations like crop-and-zoom, often delivers marginal or even negative accuracy gains over direct inference at much higher token cost, and frequently produces invalid tool-call trajectories. The core question is whether returned visual evidence has a genuine causal effect on final answers, or whether models rely purely on text of tool calls as a shortcut.","importance":"It identifies policy miscalibration as a structural bottleneck in current vision-augmented multimodal models, and provides a reusable causal audit framework. The findings directly inform the design of pretraining / post-training objectives (especially reward signal construction for RL) for multimodal tool-use models, and offer a fine-grained diagnostic method for tool-enabled agents.","technical_approach":"$17","experiments":"Six representative thinking-with-images models are audited on five fine-grained perception benchmarks. Key findings: 1) Policy-level accuracy gains are concentrated in a small Calibrated subset of trajectories, while the majority of tool calls are either decoupled from the answer (CWL) or scheduled incoherently (LWP, e.g. continuing calls after the answer is fixed, repeatedly cropping uninformative regions) — this forms the \"illusion of visual tool-use\"; 2) Outcome-only reinforcement learning is hypothesized as the primary cause of policy miscalibration: models learn the surface behavior of \"calling tools\" to match reward signals, rather than learning to use returned visual evidence.","reading_guide":"Skim priority: Chapter 3 on causal graph formulation and three-level intervention design (to understand how causal tools disentangle the real effect of tool calls); Chapter 4 on four-group trajectory diagnostics and accuracy decomposition (directly transferable to evaluation of other tool-enabled agents). Skimmable parts: detailed descriptions of fine-grained benchmark tasks, some mathematical derivations of causal effects. Estimated reading time: 40-60 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"做多模态工具调用预训练的必看：反常识发现当前视觉工具增益多是捷径，需重新设计工具监督信号，重点看§4的干预实验","en":"Critical for multimodal tool-use pretraining: counterintuitive finding that most visual tool gains come from shortcuts, redesign tool supervision signals; focus on §4 intervention experiments"},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Zhiheng Wang","Bo Peng","Lai Wei","Chaochao Lu"],"notable_authors":["Chaochao Lu"],"tags":["causal audit","multimodal LLM","visual tool use","evaluation protocol","counterfactual analysis"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06270","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06270","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06202","title":"What Current AI Benchmarks Leave Unmeasured: Modality, Search, Citations, and Implications (for Safety Evaluations)","abstract":"Large language model (LLM) benchmark evaluations are routinely used to support claims about model safety, reliability, and deployment readiness. Yet most evaluations rely on a single access modality (model APIs), perform a single run per prompt, and report accuracy as the primary outcome metric, without accounting for conditions such as web search that may have effects on model behavior in deployment. We audit these assumptions for one of the most widely-used LLMs, comparing two modalities, Chat","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T15:58:32Z","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06202.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.HC","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"当前主流LLM基准评测普遍依赖三个未经验证的假设：单一访问模态（API）的结果可代表实际部署行为、单轮响应足以反映模型特性、准确率可概括模型整体表现；但实际部署中用户主要通过聊天UI访问、常启用联网搜索，这些差异可能导致评测结论与真实行为脱节，尤其影响安全评估的可靠性。","importance":"指出了基准评测方法学的系统性盲区，对预训练模型的安全评测、能力对齐验证、部署前审计流程有直接指导意义——仅靠API单轮准确率不足以支撑模型安全性与部署就绪度的结论，评测协议需要覆盖访问模态、搜索条件等部署相关变量。","technical_approach":"采用2×2对照实验设计，控制两个因素：访问模态（ChatGPT聊天UI vs 对应同版本OpenAI API）、联网搜索状态（启用/禁用）。选取BBQ（偏见评测）和SafetyBench（安全评测）两个广泛使用的基准，分层抽样401条prompt，每个条件下重复采样3次，一周内完成全部采集以减少时间漂移。除传统准确率外，额外评测四个维度：响应一致性（同prompt多次输出的答案重合度）、响应文本相似度、引用来源一致性、拒答行为一致性。","experiments":"使用GPT-5.3 Instant作为被测模型，共采集4812条响应。核心结果：1）跨模态准确率差异仅2-3个百分点，但在SafetyBench上达到统计显著，且启用搜索后差异方向反转；2）启用搜索普遍降低响应一致性，模态对一致性的影响在SafetyBench上显著；3）即使答案一致，API与聊天UI常引用不同信息来源，措辞、语义相似度、是否给出推理过程均存在明显差异；4）拒答行为跨条件不一致——同一prompt在一种设置下被拒答，在另一种设置下可能正常回答。结论：仅靠单一模态、单一搜索条件、以准确率为核心的评测，会遗漏大量与安全评估相关的行为变异。","reading_guide":"泛读重点：第1章提出的三个评测假设与问题动机（可直接用于反思现有评测流程）、第2章的2×2实验设计与多维度评测指标构造、第3-4章的核心结果与对安全评估的启示。可跳过：具体prompt抽样的分层细节、部分统计显著性检验的冗余表述。预计阅读时间：30-45分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Current mainstream LLM benchmark evaluations generally rely on three unvalidated assumptions: results from a single access modality (APIs) are representative of real deployment behavior, a single response per prompt adequately captures model characteristics, and accuracy is sufficient to summarize overall model performance. In practice, however, users primarily access models via chat UIs and often enable web search; these gaps may disconnect evaluation conclusions from real-world behavior, especially undermining the reliability of safety assessments.","importance":"It identifies systematic blind spots in benchmark methodology, and provides direct guidance for safety evaluation, alignment verification, and pre-deployment audit of pretrained models: API-only single-run accuracy is insufficient to support claims about model safety or deployment readiness, and evaluation protocols need to cover deployment-relevant variables such as access modality and search condition.","technical_approach":"A 2×2 controlled study is designed with two factors: access modality (ChatGPT chat UI vs. the corresponding same-version OpenAI API) and web search status (enabled / disabled). 401 prompts are stratified-sampled from two widely used benchmarks — BBQ (bias evaluation) and SafetyBench (safety evaluation). Each prompt is run three times per condition, and all responses are collected within a one-week window to minimize temporal drift. Beyond standard accuracy, four additional dimensions are measured: response consistency (answer agreement across repeated runs of the same prompt), response text similarity, citation source consistency, and abstention / refusal consistency.","experiments":"GPT-5.3 Instant is used as the test model, with 4,812 total responses collected. Key results: 1) Cross-modality accuracy differences are only 2–3 percentage points, but are statistically significant on SafetyBench and reverse direction when search is enabled; 2) Enabling search generally reduces response consistency, and modality effects on consistency are significant on SafetyBench; 3) Even when answers agree, the API and chat UI frequently cite different information sources, and show clear differences in phrasing, semantic similarity, and whether reasoning is provided; 4) Abstention behavior is inconsistent across conditions — the same prompt refused in one setting may be answered normally in another. The conclusion: evaluations relying on a single modality, a single search condition, and accuracy as the primary metric miss substantial behavior variation relevant to safety assessment.","reading_guide":"Skim priority: Chapter 1 on the three unvalidated evaluation assumptions and motivation (directly applicable to reflecting on existing evaluation pipelines); Chapter 2 on the 2×2 study design and construction of multi-dimensional evaluation metrics; Chapters 3–4 on core results and implications for safety assessment. Skimmable parts: detailed stratification of prompt sampling, redundant descriptions of some statistical significance tests. Estimated reading time: 30-45 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"值得 skim，重点看 modality/search/repeat-run 的方差；它会改变你写内部安全 eval harness 的默认设置。","en":"Skim for the modality/search/repeat-run variance; it should change default settings in internal safety-eval harnesses."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Ro Encarnación","Tina Behzad","Emma Lurie","Danaé Metaxa"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["llm-evaluation","safety-benchmark","web-search","api-vs-ui","evaluation-protocol"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06202","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06202","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06362","title":"AV-AIVAT: 74x Cheaper Agent Evaluation with Certified Anytime-Valid Stopping in Imperfect-Information Games","abstract":"Deciding which of two agents is stronger means playing games until skill outweighs luck, and every game costs money, model inference, or expert time. Since the number of games needed is unknown, fixed-budget evaluations either keep paying after the result is settled or stop before the agents can be told apart, while naive optional stopping with an ordinary confidence interval invalidates the stated level. We make such an evaluation stop as soon as its evidence suffices, with the guarantee intact","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T17:57:11Z","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06362.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.GT","cs.AI","cs.CL","cs.LG","cs.MA"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是高成本、高方差 agent 评测中的一个基础统计问题：在不预先固定对局数的情况下，如何做到“证据足够就停”，同时仍然保持严格有效的显著性保证。普通 fixed-budget 评测常常要么花了过多样本，要么预算不够得不出结论；而边看边停再套普通置信区间，会严重破坏置信水平。论文把这个问题放在 imperfect-information games，尤其是扑克这类高噪声环境中处理，并进一步考虑一个现实难点：如果评测时还想在线更新 value model 来做方差缩减，怎样避免当前对局的信息泄漏到自己的校正项里，导致统计保证失效。","importance":"它对 LLM 基座研究不是直接的预训练方法贡献，而是偏评测基础设施。启发点在于：当 agent 评测成本高、方差大、且需要连续监控时，统计协议本身会决定实验效率和结论可靠性。对做 RL、agent training、self-play、在线 A/B、模型版本回归测试的人，这篇论文提供了一个很实用的框架：把方差缩减和 anytime-valid stopping 结合起来。更广一点看，它提醒人们不要把“更便宜的评测”理解成简单少跑样本，而是要在可选停止下保持可复核的统计有效性。这个思路对昂贵 benchmark、长时程 agent 任务、甚至人类偏好评测都有借鉴意义。","technical_approach":"$18","experiments":"实验主要基于 HUNL 数据，共 15 个 LLM agent 配置、71,439 个 paired hands。先看方差缩减本身，AIVAT 相对 raw payoff 的方差降低中位数是 54 倍。真正关键的是停止时间而不是方差数字：在 α=0.05、目标 half-width 为 1 big blind 的设定下，paired replay 显示 AsympCS 下 raw-to-AIVAT 的 stopping-time ratio 中位数达到 74，也就是达到同等判别精度所需对局数可缩到原来的约 1/74。相比之下，EB-CS 执行下这个比值只有 1.37，差异很大。论文给出的解释不是经验性的，而是由 width floor 导致：当 bounded CS 的确定性宽度下界占主导时，方差再低也换不来同量级的提前停止。\n\n在线学习部分，作者在两个受控的 profile mismatch 场景下测试 past-only value learner，结果能恢复 frozen-to-oracle variance gap 的 77% 到 79%。这说明在线更新 value model 确实能接近理想冻结 oracle 的效果，而且不需要牺牲统计合法性。\n\n论文还做了 rolling leaderboard 模拟来说明 optional stopping 的风险。在零假设下，如果持续监控普通 fixed-sample interval 并在首次有利时停下，会产生 61% 的假阳性；而用 confidence sequence 在同一停止时刻重算，几乎能推翻这些错误结论。进一步地，当 AsympCS 按自己的 stopping rule 继续运行时，到 5,000 hands 时对注入的 0.1 和 0.2 BB 效应分别能在 81% 和 100% 的条目中检测出来。最后，论文还强调可复核性：只要公开 corrected outcomes 到停止时刻、停止规则、目标、置信水平、bound 和 CS 设置，第三方就能重建早停结论。","reading_guide":"泛读时先抓住三件事。第一，看 Introduction 里为什么普通 optional stopping 会失效，以及 AIVAT 与 confidence sequence 各自解决什么问题。第二，看方法部分关于 pre-action conditional-kernel interface 的定义，这是整篇论文最关键的合法性条件。第三，看 width floor 的推导和 HUNL 实验结果，因为这里解释了“方差降低很多”为什么有时并不等于“评测便宜很多”。\n\n如果时间有限，建议阅读顺序是：问题设定与动机、AV-AIVAT 接口、EB-CS 与 AsympCS 的保证差异、HUNL 主实验、rolling leaderboard 模拟。理论证明可以先跳过细节，但要看清 Proposition 1、Proposition 2 和 Theorem 2 分别在保证什么。预计 40 到 60 分钟可以把主要思想和实验结论读明白。\n\n值得留意的点有两个。其一，这套方法依赖 evaluator 能拿到动作的 conditional kernel，这在很多真实 agent 环境里未必容易。其二，AsympCS 更高效，但不是 finite-sample exact guarantee；如果要迁移到更一般的 agent benchmark，需要先判断自己更在意严格证书还是样本效率。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a basic but often mishandled problem in costly, noisy agent evaluation: how to stop as soon as the evidence is sufficient without invalidating the statistical guarantee. Fixed-budget evaluation either wastes games after the result is already clear or stops too early to distinguish agents. Naive optional stopping with an ordinary confidence interval breaks coverage. The setting here is especially challenging because the games are imperfect-information games, where variance is high, and because the evaluator may want to improve its value model online during evaluation. The core question is how to combine variance reduction, sequential monitoring, and valid stopping without leaking information from the current game into its own correction.","importance":"This is not a direct pretraining contribution. It is evaluation infrastructure with clear relevance to RL, agent training, self-play, online model comparison, and expensive benchmark design. The main value is methodological discipline: cheaper evaluation should not mean simply running fewer samples. It should mean reducing variance and stopping early while preserving a guarantee that remains valid under continuous monitoring. That matters for long-horizon agent tasks, expensive human or model-based evaluation, and any setting where people watch results as they come in and are tempted to stop when the curve looks favorable.","technical_approach":"$19","experiments":"$1a","reading_guide":"$1b","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"做agent能力评测的研究员重点看§4的置信序列停止策略，可直接复用降低内部高成本agent pairwise评测开销","en":"For agent capability evaluation researchers, focus on §4 confidence sequence stopping strategy; directly reusable to cut internal high-cost pairwise agent evaluation overhead"},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Boning Li","Yu Chen","Longbo Huang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agent-evaluation","evaluation-efficiency","confidence-sequences","imperfect-information-games"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06362","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06362","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05162","title":"PoolBench: A Benchmark for Pooling Strategies in Concept Representation Evaluation for Decoder-Only LLMs","abstract":"Pooling is a consequential but under-examined design choice in decoder-only concept representation work: practitioners must collapse token-level hidden states into a passage-level vector, yet no shared protocol exists for comparing this choice across concepts, models, and tasks. Reported gains are confounded by simultaneous changes in dataset, layer, construction method, and pooling rule, making principled decisions impossible. We introduce PoolBench, a benchmark that isolates pooling as the exp","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-26T07:34:05Z","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05162.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 decoder-only LLM 概念表示评估中 pooling 策略缺少统一协议、导致不同论文结果被层数、数据集和构造方式混淆的问题。","importance":"这是一个评测协议类工作。它不直接改进预训练，但对做表征分析、概念探测、feature steering 的研究员有方法学价值：至少能把 pooling 这个常被忽略的变量单独拎出来。","technical_approach":"提出 PoolBench，在固定语料、模型和评测协议下系统比较 19 种 pooling 策略，覆盖 17 个概念、3 个开源 decoder-only 模型。主指标是线性可分性 D1/AUROC，并辅以 steered concept prevalence（D2/SCP）和 output-level disentanglement（D3）作为诊断轴，尽量隔离 pooling 本身的影响。","experiments":"使用 Llama-3.1-8B、Gemma-2-9B、Mistral-7B，在 37,693 条真实文本语料上评测。摘要给出的主结果是 W4_hierarchical 的跨模型平均 AUROC 为 0.7799，优于常见的 last-token、mean pooling 等基线。由于任务聚焦概念表示评估，而非下游生成或预训练损失，结论更适合作为分析工具选择参考。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"It addresses the lack of a shared protocol for comparing pooling strategies in concept representation evaluation for decoder-only LLMs, where results are often confounded by layers, datasets, and construction choices.","importance":"This is an evaluation-protocol contribution. It does not directly improve pretraining, but it is methodologically useful for researchers working on representation analysis, concept probing, or feature steering because it isolates pooling as a first-class variable.","technical_approach":"The paper introduces PoolBench, which systematically compares 19 pooling strategies under a fixed corpus, model set, and evaluation protocol. It covers 17 concepts and 3 open-weight decoder-only models. The main metric is linear separability (D1/AUROC), with steered concept prevalence (D2/SCP) and output-level disentanglement (D3) as diagnostic axes to isolate the effect of pooling itself.","experiments":"It evaluates Llama-3.1-8B, Gemma-2-9B, and Mistral-7B on an audited corpus of 37,693 real-text passages. The headline result in the abstract is that W4_hierarchical reaches a cross-model mean AUROC of 0.7799, outperforming common baselines such as last-token and mean pooling. Since the task is concept representation evaluation rather than generation or pretraining loss, the findings are best treated as guidance for analysis tooling.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"做表征分析的人可以收下这篇当 protocol 参考；不做 probing 的话没必要细读，记住“last-token 常常不是好默认值”就够了。","en":"Keep this as a protocol reference if you do representation probing; otherwise just remember that last-token is often a poor default and move on."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Independent Researcher"],"authors":["Ayushi Agarwal"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["representation-evaluation","pooling","probing","decoder-only-llm","benchmark"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05162","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05162","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05576","title":"Where Models Converge and Humans Diverge: A Coverage Framework for Distributional Pluralism in Open-Ended Generation","abstract":"When a large language model (LLM) writes Harry Potter fanfiction, it reliably produces fundamental elements of the Hogwarts universe, such as recognizable places and characters. Human-written Harry Potter fanfictions, however, typically include these fundamentals and much more, incorporating stylistically irregular content and relationship-diverse plotlines. This gap between LLM and human writing has been noted across a variety of domains. LLMs tend to produce \"average\" writing, while human writ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T03:57:15Z","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05576.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.CY"],"summary":{"core_problem":"提出一种衡量开放式生成中 LLM 输出分布覆盖度的方法，用来区分“内容合理”和“覆盖人类写作多样性”这两个问题。","importance":"贡献类型是评测框架和指标。它关注 LLM 生成内容趋向平均化、覆盖人类经验分布不足的问题，对开放式生成评估和数据分布分析有间接参考价值。","technical_approach":"论文以某一主题下的人类写作经验分布作为参照，提出 LLM Coverage（LLM-Cov）和 In-Boundary Rate（IBR）两个指标：前者衡量模型生成覆盖了多少人类分布区域，后者衡量生成内容是否仍落在人类分布边界内，从而分离多样性和合理性。","experiments":"摘要以 Harry Potter fanfiction 为例说明模型生成会稳定包含霍格沃茨、角色等核心元素，但较少覆盖人类作品中的不规则风格和多样关系线。摘要未提供具体模型、数据规模、指标数值或 baseline 细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper proposes a way to measure how broadly LLM generations cover the human distribution in open-ended generation, separating plausibility from distributional breadth.","importance":"This is an evaluation-framework contribution. It targets the tendency of LLM outputs to concentrate on average content and under-cover the diversity of human writing, which is indirectly relevant to generation evaluation and data-distribution analysis.","technical_approach":"The framework uses the empirical distribution of human writing on a topic as the reference and introduces two metrics: LLM Coverage, which measures how much of the human distribution is covered, and In-Boundary Rate, which measures whether generated content stays within the human distribution boundary.","experiments":"The abstract uses Harry Potter fanfiction as a motivating example: LLMs reliably produce core universe elements such as places and characters, but under-represent irregular styles and relationship-diverse plotlines seen in human writing. The provided abstract does not include model names, dataset sizes, numerical results, or baselines.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"知道这两个指标即可；它是开放生成评测资产，不会直接改变预训练 recipe。","en":"Know the two metrics and move on; this is an open-ended generation evaluation asset, not a pretraining recipe changer."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Zini Yang","Emily Wenger","Richard So"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["evaluation","open-ended-generation","diversity","distribution-coverage"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05576","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05576","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05726","title":"Mitigating Scoring Bias in LLM-as-a-Judge via Random Number Generation","abstract":"Large Language Models (LLMs) are often used as evaluators of text quality, known as LLM-as-a-Judge, which can outperform conventional automatic evaluation metrics that rely on reference texts. However, LLM evaluators tend to generate particular scores regardless of the context of the evaluated text, which is known as scoring bias. This study proposes a novel method to mitigate this scoring bias. An LLM is instructed to randomly generate number tokens, and the latent numerical bias of the LLM is ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T08:09:42Z","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05726.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 LLM-as-a-Judge 在打分时偏好生成某些数字分数、导致评价结果与输入内容弱相关的问题。","importance":"这是评测方法改进，价值在于把 judge 的数字 token 先验偏置显式测出来并校正；对使用 LLM judge 做模型选择、后训练 reward 评估或数据筛选有间接意义。","technical_approach":"方法先让 LLM 在给定任务定义的 prompt 下随机生成数字 token，用观测分布相对均匀分布的偏差估计任务相关的 latent number bias；实际评价时，再用该偏置修正给定输入下各分数 token 的生成概率。","experiments":"摘要说明在四类任务上实验，包括 LLM alignment 评价等，验证该校正可以缓解评分偏置；未给出完整模型规模、baseline 数字和提升幅度，需读正文确认统计显著性与不同 judge 模型的一致性。","authors_note":"Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses scoring bias in LLM-as-a-Judge, where a judge model tends to emit certain numeric scores regardless of the evaluated content.","importance":"This is an evaluation-method contribution: it explicitly measures and corrects the judge model's prior over numeric score tokens. It is indirectly relevant to model selection, post-training reward evaluation, and data filtering pipelines that rely on LLM judges.","technical_approach":"The method prompts the LLM to randomly generate number tokens under a downstream task definition, estimates task-specific latent number bias from deviations from a uniform distribution, and then rectifies score-token probabilities during actual evaluation.","experiments":"The abstract reports experiments on four tasks, including LLM alignment evaluation, showing reduced scoring bias. Model sizes, baselines, and exact gains are not available in the abstract and should be checked in the paper for robustness across judge models.","authors_note":"Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology."},"recommendation":{"zh":"读方法和偏置估计实验即可；如果内部用 LLM judge 做 reward 或数据过滤，这个校正项值得小规模复现。","en":"Read the method and bias-estimation experiments; if your pipeline uses LLM judges for rewards or filtering, this correction is worth a small replication."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology"],"authors":["Yuma Asato","Kiyoaki Shirai","Natthawut Kertkeidkachorn"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["llm-as-judge","evaluation-bias","score-calibration","reward-evaluation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05726","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05726","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05823","title":"Decomposed Entailment for Factuality Checking and Hallucination Detection","abstract":"The reliability of Large Language Models (LLMs) is often compromised by factual inconsistencies, including hallucinations---cases where generated content is not supported by the underlying source. We present HallDetect, a lightweight, reference-free, and black-box framework for hallucination detection that we evaluate not only on summarization but across a broader range of source-grounded generation settings. HallDetect builds on decomposition-based factuality evaluation: generated content is de","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T09:52:09Z","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05823.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 source-grounded generation 中 hallucination 检测成本高、依赖大模型 judge、且跨任务泛化不稳的问题。","importance":"这是 factuality / hallucination 检测方向的轻量评测方法工作。对预训练研究员的价值主要在评测 protocol 和 claim-level verification 设计，而不是基座训练本身。","technical_approach":"提出 HallDetect：先把生成文本分解为 atomic claims，再用紧凑的 encoder-based entailment 模型在多尺度 source chunk 库上做对比式验证，最后用 asymmetric aggregation 聚合，只要有一个高置信 contradicted claim 就标记响应有问题。方法强调 reference-free、black-box、轻量部署。","experiments":"在 summarization 之外，还覆盖更广的 source-grounded generation 设置；并在统一的 4-bit quantized backbone 与消费级硬件预算下，对比生成式和 embedding-based baseline，在 4 个任务中的 3 个上更优。摘要未给出具体数据集、模型规模和提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the cost and instability of hallucination detection in source-grounded generation, especially methods that rely on heavy LLM judges and do not generalize well across settings.","importance":"This is a lightweight factuality-evaluation paper. Its value to a pretraining researcher lies mostly in evaluation protocol design and claim-level verification, not in foundation-model training itself.","technical_approach":"HallDetect decomposes a generated response into atomic claims, verifies each claim with a compact encoder-based entailment model over a multi-scale library of source chunks, and aggregates the results asymmetrically so that a single confidently contradicted claim can flag the whole response.","experiments":"The method is evaluated beyond summarization across multiple source-grounded generation settings. Under a controlled setup where all methods use 4-bit quantized backbones and consumer-grade hardware, HallDetect beats comparably resourced generative and embedding baselines on three of four tasks. The abstract does not provide exact datasets, model sizes, or margins.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"不是预训练论文，但评测 setup 比不少 hallucination paper 干净；只看 claim decomposition 和统一硬件预算对比即可。","en":"Not a pretraining paper, but the evaluation setup looks cleaner than many hallucination papers; just read the claim decomposition and the compute-controlled comparison."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Achir Oukelmoun","Nasredine Semmar","Gaël De Chalendar"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["hallucination-detection","factuality","entailment","evaluation-protocol","lightweight-verifier"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05823","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05823","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05228","title":"TriQua: Reconciling Granularity and Context in Factuality Evaluation","abstract":"The \"decompose-then-verify\" paradigm for LLM factuality evaluation faces a fundamental trade-off: atomic facts, i.e., one sentence conveying one unit of information, often omit essential context, while broader statements lack the granularity needed for precise assessment. To address this, we introduce TriQua, a framework that flexibly models facts based on their complexity. Simple claims are extracted as standard triples, while complex claims are represented as hyperrelational facts by attaching","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-05T12:22:28Z","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05228.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"LLM事实性评估的“分解-验证”范式存在粒度与上下文的根本权衡：原子事实易丢失必要上下文，宽陈述缺乏评估所需的细粒度","importance":"方法创新，提出自适应的事实结构化表示框架与对应评分指标，在保留事实原子性的同时补充上下文，提升事实性评估的准确性与可解释性","technical_approach":"原创TriQua框架，按事实复杂度自适应表示：简单声明提取为标准三元组，复杂声明表示为带辅助上下文限定符的超关系事实；验证过程直接标注具体三元组/限定符的错误，配套TriQuaScore量化事实性","experiments":"摘要内容截断，未披露完整实验设置、基线模型与量化效果数据","authors_note":"机构为FZI信息技术研究中心、卡尔斯鲁厄理工学院、特里尔大学，无知名作者"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The decompose-then-verify paradigm for LLM factuality evaluation faces a fundamental trade-off: atomic facts often omit essential context, while broad statements lack the granularity needed for precise assessment","importance":"Methodological innovation: an adaptive structured fact representation framework and corresponding scoring metric are proposed, preserving atomicity while adding context to improve the accuracy and explainability of factuality evaluation","technical_approach":"The original TriQua framework adaptively represents facts by complexity: simple claims are extracted as standard triples, while complex claims are represented as hyperrelational facts with auxiliary contextual qualifiers; verification directly annotates errors in specific triples/qualifiers, with TriQuaScore to quantify factuality","experiments":"Abstract is truncated; full experimental setup, baselines, and quantitative results are not disclosed","authors_note":"Affiliated with FZI Research Center for Information Technology, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, and Trier University; no well-known authors"},"recommendation":{"zh":"事实性评估的结构化表示改进，思路可参考，无范式突破，看摘要和指标定义即可","en":"Incremental improvement in factuality evaluation with structured fact representation; check abstract and metric definition only, no paradigm shift."},"metadata":{"institutions":["FZI Research Center for Information Technology","Karlsruhe Institute of Technology","Trier University","FZI Research Center for Information Technology, Karlsruhe","Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe","Trier University, Trier"],"authors":["Jin Liu","Steffen Thoma","Achim Rettinger"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["factuality evaluation","decompose-then-verify","evaluation metric","LLM assessment"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05228","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05228","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06041","title":"LangChoiceBench: Measuring and Explaining Programming-Language Choice in LLMs","abstract":"Large language models (LLMs) have been shown to exhibit strong Python preferences when generating project-level code, but there is currently no systematic way to measure this behaviour across new models. To bridge this gap, we introduce LangChoiceBench, a project-level code-generation benchmark for measuring Python preference, recommendation-implementation consistency, and language diversity. LangChoiceBench covers 28 projects across seven software areas where Python is often a poor default. We ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T13:52:16Z","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06041.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.SE","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"缺乏系统化基准来衡量LLM在项目级代码生成中对Python的偏好、推荐与实现一致性及语言多样性。","importance":"评测贡献：首次提出项目级编程语言选择基准LangChoiceBench，覆盖Python并非最优的7个软件领域28个项目。","technical_approach":"构建配对式项目级代码生成任务，从Python偏好、推荐-实现一致性、语言多样性三个维度评测；进一步分析9826条推理轨迹，拆解语言选择的驱动因素。","experiments":"评测25款不同LLM，发现Python被过度选择、推荐与实现一致性低；小参数量开源模型Python偏好更强、语言多样性更低；多数Python选择出于习惯或易用性而非项目需求，部分案例存在捏造上下文支持选择的现象。","authors_note":"伦敦国王学院与MATS Research合作，作者无广泛公认的业界知名研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No systematic benchmark exists to measure LLM Python preference, recommendation-implementation consistency, and language diversity in project-level code generation.","importance":"Evaluation contribution: introduces LangChoiceBench, the first project-level programming language choice benchmark covering 28 projects across 7 software domains where Python is often a suboptimal default.","technical_approach":"Designs paired project-level code generation tasks evaluated along three axes: Python preference, recommendation-implementation consistency, and language diversity; further analyzes 9,826 reasoning traces to decompose drivers of language selection.","experiments":"Evaluates 25 diverse LLMs, finds Python is heavily over-selected with low recommendation-implementation consistency; smaller open-weight models exhibit stronger Python preference and lower language diversity; most Python choices stem from habit or ease rather than project requirements, with some cases fabricating contextual support.","authors_note":"Collaboration between King's College London and MATS Research; no widely recognized prominent authors identified."},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为代码LLM评测的细分补充资产，关注其对小模型语言偏好的统计结论即可，无需深入方法。","en":"Useful as a niche evaluation asset for code LLMs; only the statistical findings on small-model language preference merit attention, no deep method read needed."},"metadata":{"institutions":["King’s College London","MATS Research"],"authors":["Lukas Twist","Twm Stone","Helen Yannakoudakis","Jie M. Zhang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["code_llm","evaluation_benchmark","language_bias","reasoning_trace_analysis"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06041","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06041","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05703","title":"StreamArena: Toward Continuous, Interactive, and Long-Horizon Agentic Streaming Video Understanding","abstract":"Deploying autonomous multimodal agents in continuous, real-world environments requires them to ingest unbounded audio-visual streams and maintain hour-scale memory. However, current evaluations predominantly rely on brief clips and multiple-choice formats. This design allows minimal baselines that process only the last four frames to match or surpass complex streaming models, while answer options also expose language shortcuts. We introduce StreamArena, a benchmark for hour-scale, interactive st","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T07:46:37Z","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05703.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有流式视频理解评测依赖短片段和多选题，导致仅处理最后几帧的简单基线即可匹敌复杂流式模型，且选项暴露语言捷径。","importance":"Benchmark 贡献（StreamArena），面向小时级交互式流式视频理解，触及长时序多模态 agent 评测中的核心张力。","technical_approach":"构建 243 个平均 88.8 分钟的长视频与 3,646 个开放式问答对，评测实时感知、历史回溯、主动交互与多模态工具调用；设计开放式协议避免选项捷径。","experiments":"跨系统评测揭示连续交互与长时序多模态理解之间的张力：仅保留近期帧的方法无法恢复远期事件，而将过去内容压缩为文本的方法丢失感知细节。","authors_note":"作者来自 HKUST、小红书、HKU、CUHK；Jiaya Jia 团队在计算机视觉与多模态领域有长期积累。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Current streaming video understanding evaluations rely on short clips and multiple-choice formats, allowing trivial baselines that process only the last few frames to match complex streaming models while answer options leak language shortcuts.","importance":"Benchmark contribution (StreamArena) targeting hour-scale interactive streaming video understanding, surfacing a core tension in long-horizon multimodal agent evaluation.","technical_approach":"243 full-length videos averaging 88.8 minutes with 3,646 open-ended QA pairs evaluating real-time perception, historical retrospection, proactive interaction, and multimodal tool use; open-ended protocol avoids option shortcuts.","experiments":"Cross-system evaluation exposes a tension between continuous interaction and long-horizon multimodal comprehension: recent-frame-only methods cannot recover distant events, while text-compression methods lose perceptual detail.","authors_note":"Authors from HKUST, Xiaohongshu, HKU, CUHK; Jiaya Jia's group has a long track record in computer vision and multimodal research."},"recommendation":{"zh":"长时序多模态 agent 评测设计有参考价值，尤其'最后四帧基线匹敌复杂模型'的观察；但与预训练直接关联弱，看 §4 评测协议和张力分析即可。","en":"The long-horizon multimodal agent eval design is informative, especially the 'last-four-frames baseline matches complex models' observation; weak direct link to pretraining. Read §4 eval protocol and tension analysis only."},"metadata":{"institutions":["HKUST","Xiaohongshu Inc","The University of Hong Kong","The Chinese University of Hong Kong","The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology"],"authors":["Xichen Zhang","Guankai Li","Yinghao Zhu","Shijian Wang","Sitong Wu","Shaozuo Yu","Meng Chu","Yuan Lu","Jiaya Jia"],"notable_authors":["Jiaya Jia"],"tags":["streaming-video","long-horizon-eval","multimodal-agent","benchmark","interactive-understanding"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05703","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05703","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05246","title":"LUNAR: Benchmarking Personalized Large Language Models on UNiversal User BehAvioR Logs","abstract":"Existing personalized LLM benchmarks primarily rely on textual personas or isolated behavioral signals, providing limited evaluation of cross-domain behavioral personalization, where responses must be grounded in heterogeneous daily-life activities. To address this gap, we introduce LUNAR, the first benchmark for evaluating how LLMs personalize responses from longitudinal app interaction histories across universal daily-life domains, including clothing, food, housing, and mobility. To support sc","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-05T15:11:06Z","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05246.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有个性化LLM评测依赖文本人设或孤立行为信号，无法评估基于跨领域日常生活活动的行为个性化能力。","importance":"首个基于纵向app交互历史、覆盖衣食住行等通用日常生活领域的个性化LLM评测基准，提出多阶段合成流水线缓解数据稀疏与隐私问题。","technical_approach":"采用基于真实行为模式的粗到细多阶段合成流水线构建基准，通过保真度分析验证合成数据与真实行为分布的对齐程度。","experiments":"在19个主流LLM上评测，发现行为日志对深度个性化是必要但不充分的：更多上下文或更大模型并不保证更好的个性化性能。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing personalized LLM benchmarks rely on textual personas or isolated behavioral signals, failing to evaluate cross-domain behavioral personalization grounded in heterogeneous daily-life activities.","importance":"First benchmark for evaluating LLM personalization from longitudinal app interaction histories across universal daily-life domains (clothing, food, housing, mobility), with a multi-stage synthesis pipeline mitigating sparsity and privacy concerns.","technical_approach":"A coarse-to-fine multi-stage synthesis pipeline grounded in real-world behavioral patterns, validated via fidelity analyses against real behavioral distributions.","experiments":"Evaluation across 19 mainstream LLMs shows behavioral logs are necessary but not sufficient for deep personalization: neither more context nor larger models guarantees better performance.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"个性化评测方向，核心结论是scaling模型/上下文对个性化无效，作为弱信号了解即可，不直接影响预训练决策。","en":"Personalization eval benchmark; the finding that scaling model/context doesn't improve personalization is a weak signal, not directly actionable for pretraining."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Jiahao Zhang","Yongzhi Tong","Zelin Fu","Pengde Zhao","Yanmei Jiang","Jiang Feng","Min Yang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["personalization","benchmark","behavioral-logs","evaluation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05246","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05246","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05263","title":"OrchestraBench: Evaluating Multi-Agent Orchestration Failure Modes, Recovery, and Decomposition Quality","abstract":"Multi-agent orchestration frameworks are moving from demos to production, yet benchmarks typically report task accuracy without diagnosing why a pipeline failed, where a cascade began, or which routing decision caused the breakdown. OrchestraBench evaluates failure, recovery, and decomposition through a controlled, seed-reproducible failure-injection harness over templated enterprise workflows. It introduces cascade radius and per-failure-mode recovery as primary metrics and compares routing pol","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-05T17:27:15Z","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05263.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"多agent编排基准只报告任务准确率，无法诊断失败原因、级联起点或具体路由决策的问题。","importance":"首个通过可控故障注入系统评估多agent编排的失败模式、恢复能力和分解质量的基准，引入级联半径和单故障模式恢复率等新指标。","technical_approach":"基于模板化企业工作流的种子可复现故障注入harness，使用bootstrap置信区间和配对检验比较路由策略。","experiments":"在26个金标诊断案例上，关键词/flag路由器在有误导或缺失表面flag的对抗案例上得0分，意图推理模型路由器得100%匹配oracle；真实Claude agent在算术依赖链上揭示三级故障处理层次。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Multi-agent orchestration benchmarks report only task accuracy without diagnosing why a pipeline failed, where a cascade began, or which routing decision caused the breakdown.","importance":"First benchmark to evaluate failure, recovery, and decomposition in multi-agent orchestration via controlled, seed-reproducible failure injection, introducing cascade radius and per-failure-mode recovery as primary metrics.","technical_approach":"A controlled failure-injection harness over templated enterprise workflows, comparing routing policies with bootstrap confidence intervals and paired statistical tests.","experiments":"On a 26-case gold diagnostic, keyword/flag routers scored 0% on adversarial cases with misleading/missing surface flags, while an intent-reasoning model router scored 100% matching the oracle; probes with a real Claude agent revealed three failure-handling tiers across five MAST modes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"多agent编排的故障注入评测框架，关键词路由在对抗场景下完全失效这一点值得注意，但对预训练研究员主要是了解agent能力边界。","en":"Failure-injection benchmark for multi-agent orchestration; the 0% vs 100% gap between keyword and reasoning routers is notable, mainly useful for understanding agent capability boundaries."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Yidian Chen","Yingzi Gu","Natan Vidra","Spurthi Setty","Sharon Zheng"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["multi-agent","orchestration","failure-analysis","benchmark"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05263","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05263","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07213","title":"From Test-Time Scaling to Reusable Memory: Measuring Crystallization in Text-to-SQL","abstract":"Test-time scaling can correct difficult text-to-SQL queries, but the extra computation is normally discarded after each answer. Systems increasingly retain verified repair episodes, yet evaluations still report one end-to-end score. It cannot distinguish replay on recurring questions from help on unseen questions, or identify the responsible memory choice. We call measuring this future value the crystallization problem. Our controlled evaluation holds the single-shot solver fixed and varies one ","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07213.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作讨论的不是如何把 text-to-SQL 做得更高，而是如何衡量 test-time scaling 产生的“后续价值”。很多系统会用执行反馈、自修复、多轮采样等额外推理计算把一次失败的 SQL 修好，然后把修复轨迹存成 memory，供后续问题复用。现有评测通常只给一个端到端分数，无法区分收益到底来自重复问题的直接回放，还是来自对新问题的迁移帮助，也无法判断究竟是收集、验证、存储格式还是检索策略在起作用。作者把这个测量问题定义为 crystallization：一次性 test-time 计算，究竟有多少被“结晶”为可复用记忆，并在未来问题上兑现价值。","importance":"它和狭义预训练不直接相连，但和 pretrain/post-train 接口、test-time compute 的资产化、持续学习式 memory 设计有明显关系。更具体地说，这篇工作提供了一个很干净的评测框架，用来拆开“额外推理算力”和“可复用知识沉淀”之间的关系。对做 RL、self-improvement、online adaptation、memory-augmented agent 的研究者，这种拆解很有用，因为很多方法声称把推理经验沉淀成长期能力，但常常只报一个总分，无法判断是记住了旧题，还是学到了数据库结构、schema 习惯、join 模式这类可迁移信息。论文的贡献主要是 measurement protocol 和 attribution design，而不是新的求解器。","technical_approach":"方法核心是固定 single-shot solver，只改变 memory pipeline 的一个因素，做配对比较。作者把未来价值拆成三种使用场景。第一是 exact-query replay：同一个问题再次出现时，memory 能否直接回放已验证的正确 SQL。第二是 cross-question retention：把某个问题自己的 card 从 memory bank 中移除，再看剩余 card 是否还能帮助重新回答它，用来隔离“跨问题复用”而不是简单记忆。第三是 held-out same-database transfer：在同一数据库上留出未见问题，测 memory 对这些新问题的一次作答提升。为了把 transfer 放到可解释的尺度上，作者定义了 CR（crystallization ratio）：held-out transfer lift / 同一批 held-out 问题上的 on-demand repair headroom。这样可以回答“memory 吃掉了多少原本需要现场修复才能拿到的增益”。在具体实现上，主实验用 execution-guided repair 生成 episode，并在数据库级别建立 verified card bank。随后围绕三个研究问题做机制干预：一是价值主要出现在哪种未来使用场景；二是 transfer 到底由什么信息承载——通用示例、对齐的 question-SQL 配对，还是对目标数据库的暴露；三是收集方式、验证可靠性、card 格式、检索策略、是否必须是 repair-specific 内容，这些选择哪些真正影响结果。论文特别强调 card writer 不看 gold SQL，避免把监督信息泄漏进 memory。","experiments":"主结果基于 BIRD，并使用三组 paired seeds，同时考虑数据库和问题层面的变异。最重要的数字是：在存储 verified corrected queries 的 database-scoped bank 下，held-out first-attempt accuracy 提升 4.34 个百分点；这个提升相当于同一批 held-out 问题上 on-demand repair headroom 的 44.4%。换句话说，原本需要额外修复计算才能拿到的增益里，接近一半可以通过先前积累的 memory 在首轮作答时兑现。论文还报告 memory 在 replay 和 retention 两种设置下也有明确收益，说明它不只是“记住原题答案”，也确实跨问题传递了一些数据库相关知识。机制实验给出的结论比较鲜明：transfer 主要来自“见过目标数据库”这件事，local cards 暴露的 identifiers、values、joins、query structures 即使在 question-SQL 配对被打乱时仍然有帮助；这说明迁移载体更像数据库局部模式和查询先验，而不完全依赖精确示例对齐。另一方面，可靠验证和更广的检索覆盖能带来清晰增益；更复杂的 card 格式、更 elaborate 的 retriever、以及 repair-specific 内容本身，并没有显示出统计上可靠的额外优势。这一点很重要，因为它把很多系统工程上的复杂设计压回到了几个真正有效的因素上。","reading_guide":"如果只想抓住贡献，先看 Introduction 里对 replay、retention、transfer 三者的定义，再看 Figure 2 的 protocol，总体框架就清楚了。随后重点读实验设计部分，确认作者如何固定 solver、如何做 paired comparison、CR 的分母为什么选同题上的 repair headroom。主结果表需要细看，因为这篇工作的价值主要来自 measurement discipline，而不是模型结构。机制实验里最值得看的是“shuffle question-SQL pairing 仍保留不少 transfer”这一组，它直接支持“数据库暴露比示例对齐更关键”的结论。若时间有限，预计 25 到 35 分钟可以读完核心内容；若要深挖，可以继续看 verification、retrieval coverage、card formatting 的消融，判断哪些 memory 设计在别的任务上也可能成立。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper is not mainly about pushing text-to-SQL accuracy higher. It asks a cleaner question: when extra test-time computation repairs a failed query, how much of that expensive computation can be turned into reusable memory for future questions? Existing systems often store verified repair episodes, but evaluation usually collapses everything into one end-to-end score. That score cannot tell whether gains come from replaying recurring questions or from helping unseen questions over the same database, and it cannot attribute gains to specific memory choices. The paper calls this the crystallization problem: measuring how verified test-time episodes create future value.","importance":"This is adjacent to pretraining rather than directly inside it, but it matters for the pretrain-to-posttrain interface, online adaptation, memory-augmented agents, and the broader question of whether test-time compute can be converted into durable capability. The main contribution is methodological. It provides a disciplined evaluation protocol that separates one-off inference gains from reusable knowledge gains. For researchers working on self-improvement, RL-style refinement, continual adaptation, or memory systems, that separation is useful because many papers report a single aggregate improvement without showing whether the system truly transfers knowledge or merely caches solved instances.","technical_approach":"$1c","experiments":"$1d","reading_guide":"If you want the main idea quickly, start with the definitions of replay, retention, and transfer, then read the protocol figure. The paper is strongest where it enforces measurement discipline, so pay close attention to how the solver is held fixed, how paired comparisons are constructed, and why CR uses repair headroom on the same held-out questions as the denominator. The most informative mechanism result is the intervention where question-SQL pairings are shuffled yet substantial transfer remains; that is the clearest evidence that database exposure matters more than exact demonstration alignment. If time is limited, 25 to 35 minutes is enough for the setup, the main result table, and the key ablations. If you want to go deeper, read the sections on verification, retrieval coverage, and card formatting to see which memory design choices are genuinely consequential.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"读实验拆分就够了；4.34pp/44.4% 这个 amortization 数字，比又报一个 Text-to-SQL 分数更有用。","en":"Read the experimental decomposition; the 4.34pp and 44.4% amortization numbers are more useful than another text-to-SQL leaderboard score."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Jiaqian Wang","Yutao Qi","Wenjin Hou","Yuanxi Che","Muning Wen"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["test-time-scaling","agent-memory","text-to-sql","evaluation","amortized-compute"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07213","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07213","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07341","title":"Zero Gap Is Not Restoration: Stratified Per-Question Probability Evaluation and Step-wise Mitigation of Benchmark Contamination","abstract":"Test data from public benchmarks inevitably leaks into pretraining corpora, inflating evaluation scores once memorized. \\textbf{Contamination mitigation evaluation} intervenes in the decoding process to suppress memorization and restore a contaminated model's genuine capability, but its prevailing metric, the \\textbf{G-AP} (\\textbf{G}ap of \\textbf{A}ggregate \\textbf{P}erformance), is flawed. Discrete correct/incorrect readouts cannot characterize per-question performance, averaging before differ","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07341.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 benchmark contamination mitigation 的评估指标失真问题：aggregate-level 的“零差距”并不等于逐题恢复到 clean model 的真实能力。","importance":"这是评测方法贡献，直接影响预训练数据污染、benchmark 可信度和 contamination mitigation 方法的判断。它指出 G-AP 这类聚合正确率差值会掩盖过度抑制和抑制不足，容易给出虚假的恢复结论。","technical_approach":"提出 SA-PPG：通过采样估计每个问题的 solve probability，先逐题与 clean model 的 solve probability 做差，再按 clean model 的解题概率分层聚合。这个设计同时修正三类问题：离散 correct/incorrect 信号太粗、先平均再求差会相互抵消、均匀逐题权重会被策略性操纵。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体模型、数据集和数值结果。实验重点应是比较现有 contamination mitigation 评估指标与 SA-PPG 在过度抑制、抑制不足、分层概率偏移下的判别能力。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a metric failure in benchmark contamination mitigation: a zero aggregate performance gap does not imply per-question restoration to a clean model’s behavior.","importance":"This is an evaluation-method contribution for contamination-aware LLM assessment. It matters because aggregate accuracy gaps can hide both over-suppression and under-suppression, leading to misleading conclusions about whether memorization has been removed.","technical_approach":"The authors propose SA-PPG, which estimates solve probability per question via sampling, computes the per-question gap against a clean model, and aggregates gaps within strata defined by the clean model’s solve probability. The design targets three flaws of G-AP: binary readouts, cancellation from averaging before differencing, and manipulable uniform question weighting.","experiments":"The provided abstract does not include concrete model sizes, datasets, or numerical results. The evaluation appears centered on showing that SA-PPG detects failure modes that aggregate contamination mitigation metrics miss.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"做 contamination eval 的人应看 metric 定义；SA-PPG 改的是测量口径，不是 mitigation 算法，但 prior 会被它重新排序。","en":"Read the metric definition if you work on contamination eval; SA-PPG changes the measurement, not the mitigation, but it may reorder prior claims."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Ruijie Hou","Yueyang Jiao","Zhao Wang","Yingming Li"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["benchmark-contamination","evaluation-metric","memorization","per-question-probability"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07341","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07341","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06477","title":"StepJack: Benchmarking Computer-Use Agent Safety Against Multi-Step Indirect Prompt Injection","abstract":"Computer-use agents (CUAs) face a growing threat from indirect prompt injection, where adversarial instructions are planted in the environment such as web pages. In this paper, we introduce multi-step indirect prompt injection, a new attack class against CUAs in which the adversarial goal is decomposed into multiple innocuous-looking sub-steps and distributed across a chain of pages referenced along the agent's navigation path. We develop a pipeline to automatically decompose an adversarial goal","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06477.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CR","cs.AI","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这项工作评测 computer-use agent 在更隐蔽的间接提示注入下是否仍能拒绝有害目标。已有 CUA 安全评测通常把完整攻击指令放在一个网页或文档里，模型只要识别出单点恶意 payload 就可能拒绝。StepJack 关注的是另一类威胁：攻击目标被拆成多个看似无害的子步骤，并沿着 agent 的浏览路径分散在多个页面中。","importance":"对基座预训练本身不是直接贡献，但对通用 agent 安全评测有参考价值。它把安全问题从“识别单条恶意指令”推进到“在多步环境交互中识别跨页面组合意图”。这类评测会影响后训练数据、agent safety reward、工具使用策略和系统级防护设计。尤其值得注意的是，单步 prompt injection 防护不能直接外推到多步攻击；模型需要在轨迹层面维护目标一致性和权限边界，而不只是对当前页面文本做局部分类。","technical_approach":"方法由两部分组成。第一是 reference nesting 的投递机制：攻击者在 agent 的正常导航轨迹上放置入口页面，页面中包含一个子步骤和指向下一页面的引用，形成长度为 k 的页面链。第二是 LLM 驱动的目标分解 pipeline：把原始有害目标拆成多个更无害、更局部的子指令，同时要求这些子指令组合执行后仍能达成原始目标。全文把分解结果归纳为三类策略：operational decomposition 把操作流程拆开；semantic decomposition 把敏感意图改写成语义上较弱的局部描述；escalatory decomposition 让前几步建立上下文或权限，再在后续步骤推进到危险动作。和单点注入相比，关键差异不在 payload 文本更强，而在攻击意图被分散到轨迹中，单个页面未必触发模型的拒绝机制。","experiments":"StepJack 基于 RedTeamCUA sandbox 构建，包含每个 CUA 480 个测试样例，覆盖多个平台、攻击目标、用户指令模式、包装方式和分解深度。评测对象包括 EvoCUA-32B、Qwen3.5-Plus、Kimi-K2.5、GPT-5.4-mini、Claude-Haiku-4.5、Claude-Sonnet-4.6。主要指标是 attack success rate 和 per-step compliance rate。默认包装下，多步分解是条件放大器：在 6 个 CUA 中有 3 个 ASR 上升，最高提升出现在 GPT-5.4-mini，单步 41.7%，三步 72.9%，增加 31.2 个百分点；其余模型持平或下降。排除无法稳定跟随引用链的 EvoCUA-32B 后，其余 5 个 CUA 的平均 ASR 从 31.3% 升至 36.9%。作者还测试了两类防御，结果显示多步攻击相比单步攻击更容易削弱这些防御。","reading_guide":"建议泛读 20–30 分钟。重点看 Section 4 的攻击定义和 reference nesting，Section 5 的自动分解 pipeline 与三类分解策略，Section 6 的 benchmark 组成，Section 7 的 ASR、per-step compliance 和轨迹分析。图 1、图 2 能快速理解单步与多步注入的结构差异。更值得深挖的是 per-step compliance：它解释了为什么同样的分解对不同 CUA 有相反效果，也提示后训练不能只优化单步拒绝率，需要训练模型在跨页面轨迹中识别组合风险。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The work evaluates whether computer-use agents can resist indirect prompt injection when the malicious goal is distributed across a navigation chain rather than delivered as one explicit payload. Existing CUA safety benchmarks usually place the full adversarial instruction in a single page or document. StepJack tests a harder setting: the adversarial goal is decomposed into multiple locally innocuous steps and injected along the agent’s browsing path.","importance":"This is not a direct contribution to foundation-model pretraining, but it is relevant to general agent safety evaluation and post-training signal design. The key shift is from detecting a malicious instruction in the current observation to recognizing a harmful composite intent across a trajectory. This matters for agent SFT data, safety rewards, tool-use policies, and system-level mitigations. The results also show that robustness to single-step prompt injection does not reliably transfer to multi-step attacks.","technical_approach":"The attack has two main components. First, reference nesting creates a chain of content pages. The first page is placed on the benign navigation trace, each page contains one adversarial sub-step plus a reference to the next page, and the terminal page completes the attack sequence. Second, an LLM-driven decomposition pipeline splits a harmful goal into sub-steps that look individually benign while still composing into the original harmful action. The outputs fall into operational, semantic, and escalatory strategies. Compared with monolithic injection, the main change is not a stronger prompt template but a different threat structure: malicious intent is distributed over time and across pages, so local refusal heuristics are less reliable.","experiments":"StepJack is built on the RedTeamCUA sandbox and contains 480 test examples per CUA, covering multiple platforms, adversarial goals, user-instruction modes, wrapping types, and decomposition depths. The evaluation covers EvoCUA-32B, Qwen3.5-Plus, Kimi-K2.5, GPT-5.4-mini, Claude-Haiku-4.5, Claude-Sonnet-4.6. Metrics include attack success rate and per-step compliance rate. Under the default wrapping, decomposition acts as a conditional amplifier: ASR increases on three of six CUAs, with the largest gain on GPT-5.4-mini, from 41.7% in the single-step setting to 72.9% at three steps, a 31.2-point increase. For the five CUAs that can reliably follow the reference chain, excluding EvoCUA-32B, average ASR rises from 31.3% to 36.9%. Two tested defenses lose more effectiveness against multi-step attacks than against single-step attacks.","reading_guide":"A 20–30 minute skim is enough for most readers. Focus on Section 4 for the attack formulation and reference nesting, Section 5 for the decomposition pipeline and taxonomy, Section 6 for benchmark construction, and Section 7 for ASR, per-step compliance, and trajectory inspection. Figures 1 and 2 are useful for quickly seeing how multi-step injection differs from a single payload. The most useful part for training researchers is the per-step compliance analysis, because it connects failure modes to trajectory-level supervision rather than isolated safety classification.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"这不是 pretrain 论文，但评测设定很干净：它说明 agent 安全 prior 建在单步攻击上过于乐观；读攻击生成流程和主表即可，足够指导内部 red-team 设计。","en":"Not a pretraining paper, but the eval setup is clean: it shows agent-safety priors built on single-step attacks are too optimistic. Read the attack-generation pipeline and the main table; that is enough to inform internal red-teaming."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Zhuoxin Zhan","Akbar Rafiey","Avery Ma","Leila Pishdad","Layla El Asri"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agent-safety","prompt-injection","benchmark","computer-use-agents"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06477","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06477","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06940","title":"Blind to the Pivotal Vote: Aggregate Independence Metrics Miss Where Verification Actually Helps","abstract":"LLM judge panels are a standard evaluation tool, but prior work reports highly correlated panel errors: nine judges provide roughly the effective information of two independent ones, and aggregation closes only a small fraction of the gap. A natural remedy--a signal from a different evidence source, e.g., executing a test suite--produced no distinguishable change in the panel's effective-vote count at scale (-0.04, 95\\% CI [-0.10, +0.02]). Aggregate dependence and conditional decision utility ar","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06940.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作讨论的不是“验证信号有没有价值”，而是“现有面板独立性指标是否能看见这种价值”。对象是 LLM judge panel：多个模型对同一候选答案做二元判定，再用多数投票聚合。已有分析用 effective-vote count 这类总体统计量衡量面板中有多少“独立信息”，并发现不同 judge 的错误高度相关，因此多加几个 judge 收益有限。作者指出，这类总体依赖指标回答的是群体平均独立性问题，但单个外部验证信号替换一个 judge 之后，真正影响决策的样本集合是被多数投票结构严格限定的：只有原始投票差距为 1 的样本，也就是 4–3、3–2、5–4 这类 pivotal query，替换一个 ballot 才可能翻转最终判定。于是核心问题变成：验证信号的帮助是否集中在 pivotal 区域，而不是是否在总体上显著提高 effective-vote count。","importance":"对预训练本身没有直接方法贡献，但对大模型评测和 verifier 设计有一个很实用的提醒：不要把“相关性高、独立票数没涨多少”直接等同于“验证没用”。如果评测或训练闭环里使用 judge panel + verifier，例如代码、数学、可执行任务的自动评估，这篇文章给出了一种更细的分析框架：把总体依赖性和条件决策效用分开看。它的价值在于纠正评测统计口径，而不是提出新的 judge 模型。对做 post-train、RLAIF、process supervision、自动数据筛选的人，这个结论是有启发的，因为很多系统里的 verifier 本来就不是为了平均改善所有样本，而是为了在边界样本上纠错。","technical_approach":"方法分两层。第一层是一个很直接但重要的结构性结论。对奇数个 judge 的无权多数投票面板，若只允许用一个 verification ballot 替换一个 judge 的 ballot，那么最终标签会改变，当且仅当原始票差 margin m=|2s-k|=1。这个命题不依赖统计假设，也不依赖 verifier 准确率，只依赖多数投票的算术结构。作者把这件事形式化成 Proposition 1–2，并把“受影响集合”和“总体样本集合”明确分开。\n\n第二层是经验分析。作者在代码任务上构造多模型 judge panel，并引入来自另一证据源的 verification signal，考察三类替换规则：随机替换、固定位置替换、替换多数侧的一票。然后同时报告两种诊断：一是沿用 Kohli (2026) 的 n_eff/effective-vote 统计，看总体独立信息是否上升；二是按 vote margin 分层，看不同 margin 区间的错误率、替换后准确率提升、以及 verifier 调用是否可以只在 pivotal 区域触发。文章的关键点是，前者可能几乎不变，后者却能显示出稳定的条件收益。\n\n从机制上看，这篇工作不是在证明 verifier 更独立，而是在证明“独立性”不是唯一相关量。若一个 verifier 的纠错能力主要集中在 panel 最犹豫的样本上，那么它对总体相关性统计的贡献会被大量永远不会翻转的非 pivotal 样本稀释。作者还做了一个次要分析，把 pivotal 区域的错误模式与 panel 组成联系起来，说明某些组合更容易在边界样本上出现系统性偏差。","experiments":"实验围绕代码生成评测展开，覆盖 3 个 benchmark 和 4 种 panel size，k∈{3,5,7,9}。主设定里是 7 个 LLM judges 加一个 verification signal。作者先复现一个看起来矛盾的现象：在更大规模实验中，用 verification signal 替换一个 judge 后，effective-vote count 的变化约为 -0.04，95% CI 为 [-0.10, +0.02]，统计上无法区分于 0；但面板准确率仍然提升。\n\n分层后这个矛盾消失了。对至少 5/7 一致的样本，单 ballot 替换无法改变多数结果，因此准确率提升严格为 0。对 4–3 的 pivotal 样本，同样的 verification signal 带来超过 10 个百分点的准确率提升。作者还给出一个主设定中的误差分布：总共 569 个 panel error，其中 199 个发生在 pivotal 区域。也就是说，pivotal 区域不是“承载了全部错误”，但它的错误率更高，而且所有由单次替换带来的决策变化都只能发生在那里。\n\n在系统层面，作者进一步测试 margin gating：既然替换规则一旦固定，非 pivotal 样本上的 verifier 调用不会改变预测，那么可以只在 margin=1 的样本上调用 verifier。实验里这样做可把 verifier 调用频率降到 12%–27%，同时保持与“全量调用 verifier”相同的预测结果。表 7 还显示，替换规则本身会实质影响准确率；gating 只负责省调用，不负责决定哪种替换策略更优。","reading_guide":"泛读时先抓三件事。第一，看 Introduction 和 The Pivotal-Vote Mechanism，弄清作者到底在反驳什么：不是反驳 panel error correlation，而是反驳“用 aggregate independence metric 就足够判断 verifier 价值”。第二，看 Proposition 1–2 及其解释，这部分是全文最关键的结构支点，理解后后面的实验会很顺。第三，看按 margin 分层的主表和 Table 4、Table 7：前者说明为什么 n_eff 看不见收益，后者说明 gating 与 replacement rule 是两件不同的事。\n\n如果时间有限，30 分钟左右可以读完核心内容。重点不是实验工程，而是统计口径和决策结构之间的错位。值得多想的一点是，这个结论依赖“单 ballot 替换 + 多数投票”。如果换成加权聚合、连续分数聚合、多个 verifier 联合、或 verifier 直接参与 judge 生成过程，受影响集合会怎么变，这部分文章没有展开，但很适合延伸到更一般的自动评测系统设计。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a narrow but important question: when a verifier helps a judge panel, why can aggregate independence metrics fail to show it? Prior work measured panel quality through effective independent votes and found that errors across LLM judges are highly correlated, so adding more judges yields limited gains. A natural extension is to replace one judge vote with a signal from a different evidence source, such as unit-test execution. At larger scale, that replacement barely changes the panel’s effective-vote count. The authors show that this does not mean verification is useless. Under single-ballot substitution in an odd-size majority panel, only one-vote-margin cases can ever change the final decision. The real empirical question is therefore conditional: are errors elevated in those pivotal cases, and does verification help there?","importance":"This is not a pretraining-method paper, but it matters for evaluation pipelines used around LLM training and post-training. If one uses judge panels plus verifiers for code, math, or executable tasks, the paper gives a cleaner diagnostic split: population-level dependence is one question, conditional decision utility is another. That distinction is useful for automated reward modeling, data filtering, RLAIF-style supervision, and verifier-assisted evaluation. A verifier may be valuable precisely because it corrects boundary cases, even if it contributes little to an aggregate independence statistic averaged over many unaffected examples.","technical_approach":"$1e","experiments":"$1f","reading_guide":"Start with the introduction and the pivotal-vote section. The main point is not that aggregate dependence is wrong, but that it is incomplete for judging verifier utility. Then read Proposition 1–2 carefully. That majority-arithmetic result is the backbone of the paper. After that, focus on the margin-stratified tables and the comparison against the effective-vote metric, especially Table 4 and Table 7.\n\nThis is a short read, roughly 30 minutes for the core argument. The main value is conceptual clarity rather than modeling novelty. A useful follow-up question while reading is how much of the result depends on the exact setup: single-ballot substitution, odd-size majority voting, and binary decisions. If one moves to weighted aggregation, score-based judges, multiple verifier ballots, or verifier-conditioned judging, the affected set may no longer be this clean.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"这篇不改模型，只改你读 judge 结果的方式；若你之前因整体独立性指标而觉得 verifier 没用，建议立刻重看自己的一票差距样本。","en":"This paper does not change the model—it changes how you read judge results; if aggregate independence made you dismiss verifiers, re-audit your one-vote-margin cases immediately."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Yang Shu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["llm-judge","verification","evaluation-methodology","code-benchmark"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06940","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06940","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06422","title":"Sharding Prevents LLM Oversight Failures and Adversarial Exploitation","abstract":"Giving an LLM judge more compute does not necessarily make it check more requirements. When one call must return many verdicts, some decisions become weakly grounded in the evidence, even when that call receives the same token or tool budget as a panel of separate calls. Across expert-graded research replications, legal work, and clinical-trial assessments, agreement with experts falls as the number of verdicts per call grows. We identify sharding as the intervention that mitigates this failure ","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06422.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"单次 LLM judge 调用同时给出多个 verdict 时，决策质量随 verdict 数量下降；如何通过 sharding 缓解 oversight 失败。","importance":"对 LLM-as-judge、可扩展监督、RLHF/RLVR 中 verifier 设计有直接启示；属于评测协议与 oversight 方法论贡献。","technical_approach":"提出 sharding：把 requirements 切成小组，每组独立调用，再聚合 verdict；在固定 model、evidence、总预算和单决策预算下与 holistic judge 对比。","experiments":"在专家评分的科研复现、法律工作、临床试验评估三类任务上，sharded 弱 judge 可超过拿到完整预算的 holistic 强 judge，并能抵御对抗性利用。","authors_note":"作者来自 CMU；J. Zico Kolter 为 CMU 知名教授，方向涵盖对抗鲁棒性、生成模型与 LLM 安全。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"When a single LLM judge call must return many verdicts, per-decision grounding degrades; how to mitigate this oversight failure via sharding.","importance":"Direct implications for LLM-as-judge, scalable oversight, and verifier design in RLHF/RLVR; a methodological contribution to evaluation protocols.","technical_approach":"Sharding partitions requirements into smaller groups, assigns each to a separate call, and aggregates verdicts; compared against a holistic judge under fixed model, evidence, total budget, and per-decision budget.","experiments":"Across expert-graded research replications, legal work, and clinical-trial assessments, a sharded weaker judge outperforms a more capable holistic judge even when the latter receives the panel's full budget, and is more robust to adversarial exploitation.","authors_note":"Authors affiliated with CMU; J. Zico Kolter is a well-known CMU professor working on adversarial robustness, generative models, and LLM safety."},"recommendation":{"zh":"做 verifier/judge 或 RLVR 的人该看：单调用多 verdict 会掉点，sharding 是便宜的对冲手段；结论干净，可直接在内部 judge 流水线复现。","en":"Relevant if you build judges/verifiers or run RLVR: packing many verdicts into one call hurts, and sharding is a cheap fix; clean setup worth reproducing internally."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Carnegie Mellon University"],"authors":["Victor Akinwande","J. Zico Kolter","Aran Nayebi"],"notable_authors":["J. Zico Kolter","Aran Nayebi"],"tags":["llm-as-judge","scalable-oversight","evaluation","verifier","rlvr"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06422","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06422","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07346","title":"An End-to-End Agent Auditing Engine","abstract":"With the rapid advancement of large language models (LLMs), harnesses have become essential infrastructure for deploying agents across a wide range of domains. The fast-evolving harness ecosystem has also made rigorous capability evaluation increasingly important. However, efficiently building an end-to-end, systematic, and comprehensive evaluation pipeline remains a significant challenge. To address this challenge, we introduce $A^2E$ (Agent Auditing Engine), an end-to-end evaluation engine des","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07346.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有agent评测框架要么侧重基准编排（如Inspect AI），要么侧重可观测性（如Phoenix），无法在同一技术栈中同时实现端到端的基准执行、高保真轨迹采集与多维度评测；集成新基准和agent harness（代理执行框架，负责系统提示、工具接口、上下文管理、执行策略等）需要大量适配开发，harness级别的系统能力评测缺乏轻量统一的基础设施。","importance":"对预训练研究的启发在于，agent的最终性能不仅取决于基座模型本身，还高度依赖harness的设计，因此预训练后的模型能力评估需要考虑系统级变量；生命周期对齐的多维度评测方法，也对设计更细粒度的模型能力诊断指标有参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出A²E（Agent Auditing Engine）端到端轻量评测引擎，采用三层架构：1）任务层：基于Agent Task Protocol（ATP）解耦基准与agent harness，支持二者独立组合，大幅减少适配工作量；2）监控层：基于OpenInference，用兼容OpenTelemetry的span采集标准化执行轨迹，保留模型调用、工具调用、执行阶段的结构化事件；3）评测层：提出生命周期对齐评测，每个指标注册到特定执行阶段和细粒度评测维度，支持灵活扩展。所有轨迹、指标定义与评测结果存储在数据库中，支持增量、持久化的纵向对比评测。","experiments":"基于A²E开展了大规模的harness-模型交互研究，得到两个关键结论：1）不存在通用最优的harness-模型配置，在GDPVal、MMLU-Pro、τ³-bench上的成功率-效率前沿配置差异很大，harness的效果依赖模型和任务，无法进行全局排序；2）仅用最终正确率区分harness的分辨率很低，规划、工具使用、运行质量等过程指标的方差远大于正确率，不同harness在结果层表现相近，但过程行为差异显著。","reading_guide":"泛读建议：重点看引言中对现有框架的局限性分析，第2章的三层架构设计，实验部分关于harness-模型交互的两个核心发现（图1和图7）。预计阅读时间15分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing agent evaluation frameworks either focus on benchmark orchestration (e.g., Inspect AI) or observability (e.g., Phoenix), but cannot combine end-to-end benchmark execution, high-fidelity trajectory collection, and multi-dimensional evaluation in a single stack. Integrating new benchmarks and agent harnesses (execution frameworks that handle system prompts, tool interfaces, context management, and execution policies) also requires heavy adapter engineering, leaving a gap for lightweight, unified infrastructure for harness-level system capability evaluation.","importance":"For pretraining research, the work highlights that agent performance depends heavily on harness design rather than the base model alone, so post-pretrain capability evaluation needs to account for system-level variables. The lifecycle-aligned multi-dimensional evaluation design also provides a reference for building finer-grained diagnostic metrics for model capabilities.","technical_approach":"A²E (Agent Auditing Engine) is a lightweight end-to-end evaluation engine with three layers: 1) Task Layer: built on the Agent Task Protocol (ATP) to decouple benchmarks from agent harnesses, enabling independent composition with minimal adapter code; 2) Monitor Layer: based on OpenInference, captures standardized execution traces with OpenTelemetry-compatible spans, preserving structured events for model invocations, tool calls, and execution stages; 3) Evaluation Layer: introduces Lifecycle-Aligned Evaluation, where each metric is registered to a specific execution stage and fine-grained evaluation dimension for flexible extensibility. All trajectories, metric definitions, and evaluation results are stored in a database to support incremental, persistent longitudinal evaluation across runs.","experiments":"A large-scale study of harness-model interactions is conducted using A²E, yielding two key findings: 1) No universally dominant harness-model configuration exists — the success-efficiency frontier varies substantially across GDPVal, MMLU-Pro, and τ³-bench, and harness effectiveness is model- and task-dependent with no global ranking; 2) Endpoint correctness has limited resolution for distinguishing harnesses, while process metrics (planning, tool use, operational quality) show much wider variance across harnesses that perform similarly on outcome metrics.","reading_guide":"Skim the introduction for the limitation analysis of existing frameworks, Section 2 for the three-layer architecture design, and the experiment section for the two core findings of harness-model interaction (Figure 1 and Figure 7). Estimated reading time: 15 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"提出了一个标准化的 Agent 评测脚手架和协议，对于关注 Agent 评测基础设施的研究员有一定参考价值，但对基座预训练无直接启发。","en":"Proposes a standardized evaluation harness and protocol for agents, useful for researchers focusing on agent evaluation infrastructure, but offers no direct insights for foundation model pretraining."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Texas A&M University"],"authors":["Haoning Wang","Mingxun Zhang","Chenyue Yu","Yingjun Shang","Xia Hu","Guanchu Wang","Na Zou"],"notable_authors":["Xia Hu"],"tags":["agent evaluation","evaluation engine","agent harness","execution traces"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07346","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07346","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06931","title":"Science Edge Evaluation: SEE the Missing Step Toward Real Scientific Discovery","abstract":"Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly involved in scientific discovery, yet it remains unclear whether they can support complex real laboratory science. Here we introduce Science Edge Evaluation (SEE), a multimodal benchmark of expert-curated questions grounded in peer-reviewed literature and experimental practice in chemistry, biology, and materials science. Evaluation of 19 multimodal large language models (MLLMs) shows that even the best-performing model reaches only 48.7% accuracy. M","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06931.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"评估当前多模态大模型是否真的能支持接近真实实验室场景的科学发现，而不是只会回答教科书式科学问题。","importance":"核心贡献是一个专家策划的科学多模态 benchmark，覆盖化学、生物、材料，并把文献证据、实验实践和 visual-agent tool use 放进同一评测框架。对预训练研究员的价值主要在于：它暴露了通用 MLLM 在高证据约束科学推理上的短板，以及工具使用并不自动带来可靠性。","technical_approach":"提出 Science Edge Evaluation (SEE)，题目来自同行评审文献与实验实践，强调模型必须在原始实验依据边界内推理；同时设计 visual-agent 评测，测试工具调用带来的信息扩展是否真正转化为更可靠的科学判断。","experiments":"评测 19 个 MLLM，最佳模型准确率仅 48.7%；加入工具后 visual-agent 最好到 52.7%。一个值得注意的结果是，通用模型平均优于 science-specialized 模型，说明领域微调并未解决证据约束下的科学推理问题。作为 benchmark 论文，重点是误差画像而非训练 recipe。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether current multimodal LLMs can support realistic laboratory-style scientific discovery rather than only answer textbook-like science questions.","importance":"Its main contribution is an expert-curated multimodal benchmark spanning chemistry, biology, and materials science, grounded in papers and experimental practice. For pretraining researchers, the value is diagnostic: it exposes weaknesses of general MLLMs under evidence-constrained scientific reasoning and shows that tool use does not automatically yield reliability.","technical_approach":"Science Edge Evaluation (SEE) builds questions from peer-reviewed literature and lab practice, emphasizing reasoning within the boundary of original experimental evidence. It also includes a visual-agent setting to test whether tool-augmented information actually improves scientific decision quality.","experiments":"The benchmark evaluates 19 MLLMs. The best model reaches only 48.7% accuracy, and tool use raises the best visual-agent score to 52.7%. A notable finding is that general-purpose models outperform science-specialized ones on average, suggesting domain specialization alone does not solve evidence-bounded scientific reasoning.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"不是预训练论文，但结论有用：通用模型胜过 science-tuned 模型、工具增信息不增可靠性，这两点会直接影响你怎么看领域继续预训练与 agent 评测。","en":"Not a pretraining paper, but the signal matters: general models beat science-tuned ones, and tools add information without adding reliability—both should update how you think about domain continued pretraining and agent eval."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Taolin Han","Yuchen Zhang","Jinghang Wang","Yun Wu","Wai Yuet Chiu","Zhaohai Li","Yifei Zhang","Jinxin Wang","Yuhao Zhou","Chen Zhao","Jiajia Li","Jiaxin Li","Qile Jin","Kewei Sun","Shuang Wu","Weiqi Zhai","Renquan Lv","Junchao Li","Ruodan Chen","Qingteng Chen","Zhibo Yang","Hu Wei","Lin Qu","Shuai Bai","Bing Zhao"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["benchmark","scientific-reasoning","multimodal-evaluation","tool-use"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06931","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06931","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06485","title":"Do AI Personas Grow? Analyzing and Benchmarking Personality Evolution in LLM Agents After Life Events","abstract":"Personality-conditioned LLM agents (PC-Agents) are increasingly used in emotional support, social simulation, and role-playing, motivating the development of lifelong agents that remain coherent over extended interactions. A key component of such coherence is personality evolution: agents should undergo plausible, psychology-grounded changes as they experience life events in different contexts. Although prior work shows that LLM personalities can shift under contextual perturbations, how these s","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06485.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI","cs.SI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"评估 personality-conditioned LLM agents 在经历不同 life events 后，Big Five 人格特质是否发生符合人类心理学证据的长期变化。","importance":"贡献是 agent/persona 评测与分析资产，面向长期一致性和人格演化。它对通用 agent 评估有边缘参考价值，但和 LLM 预训练方法关系较远，主要不是模型训练或建模范式贡献。","technical_approach":"使用 Big Five 作为 psychometric anchor，设计 11 类重大 life events，并从四个 diagnostic axes 分析 persona、事件、trait 和模型之间的人格变化轨迹。将 LLM agent 的变化方向与 longitudinal human personality psychology 中记录的人类变化方向对照。","experiments":"摘要称评估多个模型和 personality-conditioned agents，但未给出模型清单、样本量或具体 benchmark 规模。主要发现是：PC-Agents 在有无文献支持的人类变化方向的 event-trait pairs 上，都出现相近比例的 trait shifts；即使变化方向与人类证据一致，也不一定说明模型具备可靠的人格发展机制。","authors_note":"作者来自 Northeastern University 和 Singapore Management University。给定的 Cohere 标注与机构列表不一致，无法确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper evaluates whether personality-conditioned LLM agents show psychologically plausible Big Five trait changes after life events.","importance":"This is an evaluation and analysis contribution for persona-based agents and long-term coherence. It is only marginally relevant to pretraining because it studies behavioral stability rather than model training or foundation-model objectives.","technical_approach":"The study uses the Big Five traits as a psychometric anchor and applies 11 major life events to personality-conditioned agents. It analyzes trajectories along four diagnostic axes across traits, events, personas, and models, comparing the resulting shifts against longitudinal findings from human personality psychology.","experiments":"The abstract indicates evaluation across multiple models and PC-Agents but does not provide the model list, sample size, or benchmark scale. A central finding is that agents show measurable trait shifts at similar rates for event-trait pairs with and without documented human change directions, weakening the interpretation that observed shifts are psychologically grounded.","authors_note":"The authors are affiliated with Northeastern University and Singapore Management University. The supplied Cohere note is inconsistent with the institution list and cannot be confirmed."},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为 agent persona 评测备查即可；核心结论是人格漂移不等于心理学一致性，不值得深读。","en":"Keep it as a reference for persona-agent evaluation; the useful point is that personality drift is not psychological plausibility."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Northeastern University","Singapore Management University","Cohere"],"authors":["Ming Wang","Peidong Wang","Xiaocui Yang","Daling Wang","Shi Feng","Fiona Fui-Hoon Nah","Ee-Peng Lim"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agent-evaluation","persona-consistency","personality","Big-Five"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06485","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06485","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06967","title":"Can Language Models Imagine Without Seeing? Ekphrasis: Measuring Visual Creative Ideation in Text-Only LLMs","abstract":"Current evaluations do not isolate whether text-only language models can originate visual concepts before image generation. Fluent visual prose can hide visual-plan failures: an answer may appear creative while repeating familiar visual clichés or failing to specify a renderable scene. We define Visual Creative Ideation (VCI) as the ability to produce textual visual plans that are useful, expressive, and population-novel, and introduce Ekphrasis, a 400-task benchmark spanning Abstraction, Combin","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06967.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作想单独测量纯文本 LLM 在没有图像输入或图像生成环节辅助时，能否先产出可渲染、有效且不落俗套的“视觉创意方案”。","importance":"贡献主要是评测而不是方法：它把“写得像视觉描述”与“真的提出了新视觉概念”拆开，补了一个此前 VLM/LLM 评测里较少被单独量化的能力维度。","technical_approach":"作者定义了 Visual Creative Ideation（VCI），把能力拆成 usefulness、expressiveness、population-novelty 三个维度；提出 Ekphrasis 基准，包含 400 个任务，覆盖 Abstraction、Combination、Transformation、Adaptation 四类创意操作。评测上采用匿名成对比较、维度化 checklist、Bradley-Terry 聚合，并用 Typed Idea Graphs 把群体常见套路转成 novelty 参照系。","experiments":"实验评测了 14 个语言模型。主要发现不是简单的总分排序，而是不同模型在 usefulness、expressiveness、novelty 上呈现不同 profile；有些模型文本流畅但视觉方案仍然陈词滥调，有些模型总体分接近但强项完全不同。摘要未给出具体模型规模、训练数据量和数值提升。","authors_note":"香港科技大学团队。作者背景更偏 NLP 与评测方法，当前信息下没有可确认的业界头部实验室代表性作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This work isolates whether text-only LLMs can originate visually renderable and genuinely novel scene ideas before any image generation step enters the loop.","importance":"The contribution is primarily evaluative rather than methodological: it separates fluent visual prose from actual visual ideation, adding a capability axis that is usually blurred in standard LLM/VLM evaluations.","technical_approach":"The paper defines Visual Creative Ideation (VCI) with three dimensions: usefulness, expressiveness, and population-level novelty. It introduces Ekphrasis, a 400-task benchmark spanning Abstraction, Combination, Transformation, and Adaptation. Evaluation uses anonymized pairwise comparisons, dimension-specific checklists, Bradley-Terry aggregation, and Typed Idea Graphs to operationalize cliché references for novelty scoring.","experiments":"The benchmark is applied to 14 language models. The main result is not just a ranking but a decomposition: models with similar overall scores can differ substantially across usefulness, expressiveness, and novelty. Fluent outputs often remain visually clichéd. The abstract does not provide model sizes, training data, or exact margins.","authors_note":"From HKUST. The team appears more aligned with NLP evaluation and methodology; no clearly identifiable frontier-lab author can be confirmed from the provided metadata."},"recommendation":{"zh":"偏评测资产，不直接改预训练做法；若你关心 text-only LM 的“视觉想象”是否只是文风幻觉，只看任务设计和 novelty 度量即可。","en":"Mostly an eval asset, not a pretraining paper; read the task design and novelty metric if you care whether text-only “visual imagination” is just stylistic fluency."},"metadata":{"institutions":["The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology"],"authors":["Hongyu Luo","He Wang","Huihao Jing","Hong Ting Tsang","Yuxuan Liu","Wuganjing Song","Yauwai Yim","Chunyang Li","Yangqiu Song"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["benchmark","evaluation","creativity","text-only-llm","visual-ideation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06967","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06967","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07353","title":"Geo-Spatial Concept Probing of Large Language Models: Abstraction, Compositionality, and Grounding","abstract":"Understanding concepts is fundamental to generalization. Despite their impressive performance on a wide range of tasks, Large Language Models (LLMs) still struggle with genuine concept understanding. Prior work has evaluated conceptual understanding in LLMs using natural-language benchmarks or narrowly scoped synthetic tasks, but these settings often conflate multiple skills or lack precise control over the underlying concepts and their properties. To support controlled probing of concepts in LL","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07353.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI","cs.IR","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"构造可控的地理空间概念 probing，评估 LLM 对 abstraction、compositionality 和 grounding 的掌握程度。","importance":"这是概念理解评测贡献，不是预训练方法。它的价值在于把空间方向、距离、拓扑及其组合拆成较可控的 QA 测试，减少普通自然语言 benchmark 中多种能力混杂的问题。","technical_approach":"设计 concept-centric benchmark，以 direction、distance、topology 等空间概念为核心，构造问答任务作为 probing 接口。论文比较不同 LLM 架构和训练 regime，分析 scale 与 design 对概念理解的影响。","experiments":"摘要只说明覆盖多个 LLM 架构和训练设置，未给出具体模型清单、参数规模或提升幅度。主要结果是当前 LLM 在抽象、组合和 grounding 上仍有清晰限制。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper builds controlled geo-spatial concept probes to evaluate abstraction, compositionality, and grounding in LLMs.","importance":"This is primarily an evaluation contribution rather than a pretraining method. Its value is in decomposing spatial concepts such as direction, distance, topology, and their compositions into controlled QA-style tests, reducing skill confounds found in natural-language benchmarks.","technical_approach":"The authors design a concept-centric benchmark around spatial relations and use question answering as the probing interface. They evaluate multiple LLM architectures and training regimes to study how scale and design choices affect conceptual understanding.","experiments":"The abstract mentions experiments across multiple LLM architectures and training setups but does not provide model names, parameter sizes, or numerical results. The main finding is that current LLMs show clear limitations in abstraction, compositionality, and grounding.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为 concept probing 备查即可；它测的是空间概念缺陷，离 pretrain recipe 还有一层，不必读实验细节。","en":"Keep it as a concept-probing reference; it measures spatial-concept failures, but the link to pretraining recipes is indirect."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Karim Radouane","Jose G Moreno","Lynda Tamine"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["concept-probing","spatial-reasoning","grounding","llm-evaluation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07353","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07353","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06769","title":"GraphVerse: A Comprehensive Visual Graph Reasoning Benchmark for Multimodal Large Language Models","abstract":"Recent Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have achieved remarkable progress across diverse vision-language tasks, creating an urgent need for more challenging benchmarks. Yet existing evaluations still provide limited insight into whether these models can truly reason over structured visual information. Visual Graph Reasoning (VGR) offers a compelling testbed for this challenge, requiring models to integrate perception, structural understanding, and multi-step reasoning over graph-based vi","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06769.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有多模态大模型评测无法充分衡量模型对结构化视觉图形的感知、结构理解与多步推理能力。","importance":"Benchmark贡献，构建覆盖单图/双图场景、联合评估感知-视觉推理-文本图推理的统一评测基准。","technical_approach":"提出GraphVerse基准，以图为中心的图像生成与任务设计，避免将任务退化为纯感知加文本推理，引入更贴近真实场景的结构化图形推理任务。","experiments":"论文摘要未披露具体评测模型列表、数据集规模与各模型得分，仅给出基准设计框架。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing MLLM benchmarks fail to adequately evaluate structured visual graph reasoning that integrates perception, structural understanding, and multi-step inference.","importance":"Benchmark contribution introducing a unified evaluation suite for visual graph reasoning across single-image and paired-image settings.","technical_approach":"Presents GraphVerse, a graph-centric benchmark that jointly evaluates perception, visual reasoning, and text-based graph reasoning without reducing tasks to perception plus off-the-shelf text reasoning.","experiments":"Abstract does not report benchmark size, evaluated models, or quantitative scores; only the benchmark design is outlined.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"多模态结构化推理的细分评测，对预训练研究员价值有限，做VLM能力诊断时可参考其任务设计维度。","en":"A niche multimodal structured-reasoning benchmark; of limited value to pretraining researchers except as reference for VLM capability diagnosis."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Yuanfu Sun","Yuanhang Ren","Kang Li","Chuanhao Ji","Jiaxi Li","Jiajin Liu","Ninghao Liu","Qiaoyu Tan"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["multimodal_llm","benchmark","visual_reasoning","graph_reasoning"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06769","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06769","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06578","title":"Divergent Response Modes in Frontier Language Models Under Steering Pressure","abstract":"Frontier language models are trained using distinct data, objectives, and safety pipelines. Whether these differences produce measurably different behaviors under explicit steering pressure remains underexplored. This study evaluates behavioral steerability across six frontier models from six developers using 300 paired base and steered items over three categories: values-conflict, reasoning-elicitation, and reasoning-suppression (plus 40 validation items). All six models act as blind peer judge","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06578.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"评估不同前沿语言模型在显式 steering pressure 下是否表现出可测量、可区分的行为模式差异。","importance":"贡献类型是行为评测和安全后训练分析。它不是提出新训练方法，而是用统一 rubric 比较多个闭源前沿模型在价值冲突、诱导推理、抑制推理三类压力下的响应模式，可作为 post-train policy 差异的弱观测。","technical_approach":"研究构造 300 组 base/steered paired items，另有 40 个 validation items；覆盖 values-conflict、reasoning-elicitation、reasoning-suppression 三类。六个前沿模型同时作为 blind peer judges，按固定行为 rubric 标注所有响应，再用 leave-one-out consensus 计算 24,480 个判断的分数。","experiments":"实验覆盖来自六个开发者的六个前沿模型。摘要报告了明显的模型特异性行为：GPT-5 在要求披露推理时以保留答案、拒绝披露推理的方式回应，比例为 99%，而其他模型为 0%；Claude Opus 4.7 和 GPT-5 对显式抑制推理的指令表现出抵抗。摘要未给出全部模型列表和统计显著性细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether frontier language models show measurable and qualitatively different behavior under explicit steering pressure.","importance":"This is a behavioral evaluation and safety-posttraining analysis rather than a training method. It compares several closed frontier models under value conflict, reasoning elicitation, and reasoning suppression, providing a weak observational signal about policy and safety-pipeline differences.","technical_approach":"The study uses 300 paired base/steered items plus 40 validation items across three categories. Six frontier models act as blind peer judges, classify every response with fixed behavioral rubrics, and the 24,480 judgments are scored by leave-one-out consensus.","experiments":"The evaluation covers six frontier models from six developers. The abstract reports model-specific modes: GPT-5 deflects requests to disclose reasoning while preserving the answer in 99% of cases versus 0% for all other models; Claude Opus 4.7 and GPT-5 resist explicit reasoning-suppression instructions. Full model list and significance details are not available in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看结果表即可；judge setup 有循环依赖，但模型间 policy 差异可作后训练指纹的弱信号。","en":"Read the result tables only; the judge setup is circular, but the policy differences are a useful weak fingerprint of posttraining."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Ali Jalal-Kamali"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["behavior-evaluation","steering","safety","frontier-models","reasoning-policy"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06578","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06578","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06621","title":"NxN E-valuation: Hypothesis Certification via a Conformal CRT Null","abstract":"We propose NxN E-valuation, a handy, e-value-based hypothesis-certification algorithm that lets a hypothesis be verified without building any case-specific certification procedure---such as constructing a dedicated null hypothesis---as long as a large enough dataset is available. The method is especially suited to LLM-based exploration systems, where LLMs are remarkably good at proposing hypotheses but suffer badly from hallucination; this hallucination prevents us from harvesting LLM outputs di","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06621.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"为 LLM 生成的探索性假设提供统计认证方法，避免直接相信模型自证或只靠 held-out test 导致的虚假发现。","importance":"贡献类型是评测/验证方法和统计认证。它关心一个现实问题：LLM 很会提出假设，但容易幻觉；如果没有独立验证机制，自动科学发现或数据探索系统会累积错误结论。对预训练本身不是直接贡献，但对 LLM-assisted research workflow 有参考价值。","technical_approach":"NxN E-valuation 使用 e-value 框架和 conformal conditional randomization test null。核心想法是不为每个假设手工构造专门 null，而是利用已有的大训练集，让不同样本彼此充当 null hypothesis，从而形成可复用的 hypothesis-certification procedure。","experiments":"摘要没有给出数据集规模、任务类型、与 held-out testing 或 LLM self-verification 的定量对比，也没有报告错误发现率控制曲线。可确认的是方法假设依赖足够大的数据集，并面向 LLM exploration systems 的假设验证场景。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper proposes a statistical certification method for LLM-generated exploratory hypotheses, avoiding direct reliance on model self-verification or simple held-out tests.","importance":"The contribution is an evaluation and verification method with a statistical flavor. It targets a practical failure mode: LLMs can propose hypotheses but hallucinate, and automatic discovery systems need an external mechanism to stop false claims from accumulating. It is not a direct pretraining contribution.","technical_approach":"NxN E-valuation combines e-values with a conformal conditional randomization test null. Instead of constructing a dedicated null for every hypothesis, it uses a large existing dataset and lets different samples serve as null hypotheses for one another, yielding a reusable certification procedure.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide dataset scale, task families, quantitative comparisons against held-out testing or LLM self-verification, or false-discovery-control curves. The method assumes a sufficiently large dataset and is aimed at hypothesis checking in LLM-based exploration systems.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"统计验证味道比 LLM 味道重；若做自动实验归纳，可读方法定义，预训练研究只需知道这个工具。","en":"More statistical certification than LLM method; read the formal setup if building automated discovery, otherwise keep it as a tool reference."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Bin Wang","Yan Zhong"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["hypothesis-testing","e-values","conformal-testing","llm-verification","scientific-discovery"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06621","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06621","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06891","title":"SkillEval: Decomposing Agent Skill Quality into Interpretable Signals","abstract":"Agent skills provide reusable procedural knowledge that helps agents solve specialized tasks. As their use expands, evaluating skill quality becomes increasingly important. Existing evaluations often measure skill quality by testing whether a skill improves performance on specific downstream tasks. However, a reusable skill may apply to multiple task scenarios. Downstream evaluation mainly reflects the compatibility between a skill and the evaluated task, provides only a partial view of skill qu","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06891.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"评估 Agent skill 的可复用质量，而不是只看某个 skill 是否提升某个下游任务的成功率。","importance":"贡献类型是 Agent skill 评测框架。它指出下游任务评测会混入 skill 与具体任务的兼容性，无法解释 skill 文档本身哪里好、哪里需要改；因此提出更可解释的 document-level skill evaluation。","technical_approach":"提出 SkillEval，将 skill 文档拆成若干通用属性，并为每个属性设置固定且可检查的 scoring direction，输出可解释的分项分数。框架还尝试测量并降低无关文档特征对评分的影响，使得分更接近 skill 本身的质量。","experiments":"摘要未给出 skill 数据规模、评估属性数量、使用的 judge 模型、人工标注规模、baseline 或数值结果。可确认的是其核心实验应围绕 skill 文档属性评分与下游任务表现之间的关系。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper evaluates the reusable quality of agent skills rather than only measuring whether a skill improves a particular downstream task.","importance":"This is an evaluation-framework contribution for agent skills. It argues that downstream task performance conflates intrinsic skill quality with task compatibility and gives little diagnostic signal about what part of a skill should be improved.","technical_approach":"SkillEval decomposes a skill document into general properties and scores each property along a fixed, inspectable direction. It also measures and reduces the influence of unrelated document features so that the score better reflects the skill itself.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide dataset size, number of properties, judge model, human annotation scale, baselines, or numerical results. The likely evaluation focuses on the relation between document-level skill properties and downstream utility.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"skill 评测的诊断视角比成功率更细，但离预训练较远；只看属性定义和去混杂方法即可。","en":"The diagnostic framing is better than raw success rate, but it is far from pretraining; read only the property definitions and the deconfounding setup."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Jiahui Han","Qinuo Li","Ziheng Peng","Haotian Wu","Haoze Liu","Danfeng Shan","Guanchu Wang","Huiqi Deng","Ninghao Liu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agent-evaluation","skill-library","interpretability","benchmark"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06891","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06891","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06909","title":"Long-Horizon Agent Trajectory Attribution: A Unified Benchmark and Fine-Grained Annotation Framework","abstract":"Large language model (LLM) agents increasingly operate through long-horizon trajectories involving user instructions, tool use, external observations, and memory. Existing benchmarks primarily evaluate behavioral outcomes but provide limited support for fine-grained attribution analysis. We introduce trajectory attribution and develop a benchmark and annotation framework for this task. The benchmark organizes heterogeneous trajectories under a unified component schema and provides annotations of","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06909.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"为长程 LLM Agent 轨迹提供细粒度归因评测，定位成功、失败或安全拒答主要由哪个轨迹组件触发。","importance":"贡献类型是 Agent 评测数据与标注框架。现有 Agent benchmark 多评估最终行为结果，缺少对用户指令、工具调用、外部观察、记忆等组件的细粒度归因；该工作补上了 failure analysis 和 safety analysis 所需的标注层。","technical_approach":"提出 trajectory attribution 任务，并构建统一 component schema 来组织异构 Agent 轨迹。基于 AgentDojo 以及 Agent3Sigma 的 Stage、Canary 设置，标注 primary attribution component，并在适用场景中标注 attack chain 与 execution chain。定义两个评测任务：primary attribution localization 和 attribution-chain recovery，并提供基于增量轨迹贡献的参考 baseline。","experiments":"数据集包含 1300 多条已标注轨迹，覆盖任务一致动作、不安全动作和安全拒答。摘要未报告使用的模型、baseline 结果、人工一致性指标或各任务数值表现。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper builds fine-grained attribution evaluation for long-horizon LLM-agent trajectories, identifying which component is primarily responsible for an outcome.","importance":"This is an agent-evaluation dataset and annotation-framework contribution. Existing agent benchmarks mostly score final behavior, while this work adds annotations needed for failure analysis and safety attribution across instructions, tool calls, observations, and memory.","technical_approach":"It defines trajectory attribution and introduces a unified component schema for heterogeneous agent trajectories. Using trajectories from AgentDojo and the Stage and Canary settings of Agent3Sigma, it annotates primary attribution components and, where applicable, attack and execution chains. It defines primary attribution localization and attribution-chain recovery with reference baselines based on incremental trajectory contribution.","experiments":"The benchmark contains more than 1,300 annotated trajectories covering task-aligned actions, unsafe actions, and safety refusals. The abstract does not report model baselines, agreement statistics, or numerical performance.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"这是 Agent 安全归因数据，不是训练方法；若做工具 RL 的 reward debugging，看 schema 和标注样例就够。","en":"This is safety-attribution data rather than a training method; for tool-use RL reward debugging, the schema and annotation examples are the useful parts."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Jing Chen","Yang Sun","Li Zhang","Lin Xu","Jie Shi"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agent-evaluation","trajectory-attribution","tool-use","agent-safety"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06909","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06909","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"multimodal","emoji":"🌐","name":"多模态统一","papers":[{"id":"2608.06146","title":"PaDoc: Layout-Grounded Parallel Decoding for Document Parsing","abstract":"End-to-end document parsers provide a unified interface, but serialize page layouts and regional contents into one autoregressive sequence. This formulation forces independent regions onto a decoding path whose length grows with the total content, whereas crop-based two-stage parsers expose region-level parallelism at the cost of repeated visual prefills and fragmented page context. To retain full-page context while removing dependencies, we propose PaDoc, a layout-grounded parser that treats th","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T15:16:18Z","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06146.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"端到端自回归文档解析器将布局、区域内容串行序列化解码，关键路径长度等于所有区域内容长度之和，推理延迟高；先检测后裁剪识别的两阶段方法虽然支持区域级并行，但需要重复做视觉编码，且丢失全页上下文信息。","importance":"提出的基于输出固有结构提取并行性的解码思路，对多模态大模型的结构化生成、推理加速设计有通用参考价值；祖先注意力掩码、共享前缀KV复用的实现方式，可迁移到其他存在天然独立生成分支的多模态/结构化输出任务中。","technical_approach":"提出布局锚定的并行文档解析框架PaDoc，基于区域充分性假设：给定全页图像和对应区域的布局标注，单个区域的内容生成独立于其他区域的内容。基于该假设将文档解析的联合概率分解为两部分：一是串行预测布局的主路径，二是每个布局输出后并行启动的区域内容生成分支，逻辑解码深度从所有区域内容长度之和压缩为最长的单条布局-内容路径长度。训练阶段引入祖先注意力掩码，每个内容分支仅可访问全页图像和历史布局前缀，不可见其他兄弟区域的内容，通过打包变长序列实现，无需额外预测头或辅助损失，保留标准下一词预测目标。推理阶段基于vLLM实现，全页图像、布局前缀的KV缓存全局共享，各区域内容分支作为并发请求并行解码。模型从Qwen3-VL-2B checkpoint初始化，经持续预训练、监督微调适配任务。","experiments":"在OmniDocBench基准上测试，PaDoc布局F1达91.1，端到端解析总分94.24，在端到端解析器中，文本编辑、公式CDM指标达到第一梯队水平。A800 GPU上，五个测试并发度下均为速度最快的端到端解析器；相比同骨干的串行SFT基线，吞吐量提升67.4%~118%，P95延迟降低39.2%~54.9%。2.1B参规模型在所有并发度下表现优于1.0B规模的HunyuanOCR-1.5，推理速度显著高于0.7B规模的MonkeyOCRv2。","reading_guide":"泛读即可，无需将其作为垂直领域OCR论文阅读，重点关注联合概率分解、祖先注意力掩码设计、共享KV服务实现三部分，理解如何从结构化输出的天然条件独立关系中挖掘并行性，预计阅读时间20分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"End-to-end autoregressive document parsers serialize layout and region content into a single linear sequence, leading to a critical decoding path that scales with the sum of all region content lengths and high inference latency. Two-stage detect-then-crop parsers support region-level parallelism, but require repeated visual encoding per crop and break full-page context.","importance":"The parallel decoding design, which extracts parallelism from the inherent structure of model outputs, provides general insight for structured generation acceleration and inference optimization on multimodal LLMs. The ancestor attention mask and shared-prefix KV reuse implementation can generalize to other multimodal or structured generation tasks with naturally independent output branches.","technical_approach":"$20","experiments":"On OmniDocBench, PaDoc reaches 91.1 layout F1 and 94.24 end-to-end parsing overall score, with top-tier performance on text edit and formula CDM metrics among end-to-end parsers. On A800 GPUs, it is the fastest end-to-end parser across all five tested concurrency levels. Compared to a sequential SFT baseline with the same backbone, it delivers 67.4~118% higher throughput and 39.2~54.9% lower P95 latency. The 2.1B parameter model outperforms 1.0B HunyuanOCR-1.5 across all concurrency levels, and runs substantially faster than 0.7B MonkeyOCRv2.","reading_guide":"Skim as an inference optimization work rather than a domain-specific OCR paper. Focus on the probability factorization, ancestor attention mask design, and shared KV serving implementation, to understand how parallelism can be derived from natural conditional independence relations in structured outputs. Estimated reading time: 20 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"分支并行解码+祖先注意力的设计对统一多模态模型中结构化输出加速有直接启发，重点看§3.2的注意力掩码设计。","en":"The branched parallel decoding + ancestor attention design gives direct insight for structured output acceleration in unified multimodal models; focus on §3.2 for the attention mask design."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Hao Yu","Jiabo Zhan","Kang Liu","Linnan Zhao","Dongxu Yue","Rui Chen","Jinglin Wang","Chong Sun","Chen Li","Jing Lyu","Chun Yuan"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["document_parsing","multimodal_LLM","parallel_decoding","attention_mask","layout_modeling"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06146","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06146","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05154","title":"RIG-RoPE: Relation- and Instance-Gated Rotary Positional Encoding with Duration-Aware Temporal Coordinates","abstract":"Rotary positional encoding (RoPE) is a core component of modern language models and has been extended to multimodal LLMs through multidimensional variants such as multimodal RoPE (M-RoPE), which split positional channels into temporal, height, and width subspaces. This report identifies two limitations of static multidimensional position assignment in interleaved multimodal contexts. First, height/width rotations may be applied to token pairs whose spatial displacement is not a well-defined geom","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-21T13:11:24Z","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05154.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决多模态交错上下文中静态 M-RoPE 位置分配导致的跨模态、跨实例空间干扰，以及时间坐标不能反映不同 token 信息密度的问题。","importance":"贡献是 VLM 位置编码方法改进，和统一多模态预训练的 token 坐标设计直接相关；它关心的是模型如何在同一序列里同时处理文本、图像块和视频片段的位置关系。","technical_approach":"提出 RIG-RoPE，在 RoPE 上加入 relation gate 和 instance gate，并引入 duration-aware temporal coordinates。每个 token 额外带有 modality indicator、visual instance identifier 和时间尺度信息，使空间旋转只在几何关系明确的视觉实例内生效，时间相位按内容时长或信息密度推进。","experiments":"摘要未给出模型规模、训练数据、baseline 和具体指标；目前只能确认论文针对 M-RoPE 的两个机制性缺陷提出改法，实验可信度需要看正文中的 ablation 和长视频/多图交错任务结果。","authors_note":"Sichuan University；未见可确认的知名作者背景信息。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses cross-modal and cross-instance spatial interference in static M-RoPE assignments, as well as temporal coordinates that fail to reflect different information densities across text, image, and video tokens.","importance":"This is a VLM positional-encoding contribution with direct relevance to unified multimodal pretraining, especially for interleaved sequences containing text, image blocks, and video segments.","technical_approach":"RIG-RoPE adds relation and instance gates to RoPE and uses duration-aware temporal coordinates. Tokens carry modality indicators, visual instance identifiers, and temporal scale information, so spatial rotations are applied only where geometric displacement is meaningful and temporal phase advances according to duration or information density.","experiments":"The abstract does not specify model sizes, training data, baselines, or numerical results. The key thing to verify in the full paper is whether ablations isolate the gates and duration-aware coordinates on long-video and multi-image interleaved tasks.","authors_note":"Sichuan University; no clearly identifiable widely known authors from the provided metadata."},"recommendation":{"zh":"这是 VLM pretrain 里容易被低估的坐标问题；只读方法图和 ablation，确认 gate 是否真消掉跨实例干扰。","en":"This targets an under-discussed coordinate issue in VLM pretraining; read the method diagram and ablations to see whether the gates really remove cross-instance interference."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Sichuan University"],"authors":["Donggen Li"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["multimodal-RoPE","positional-encoding","VLM","interleaved-context","video-language"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05154","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05154","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05616","title":"TruthLens: Object Hallucination Detection via Self-Evaluating Truthfulness Scores in LVLMs","abstract":"Despite the remarkable progress of large vision language models (LVLMs), object hallucination remains a fundamental challenge that hinders their trustworthy deployment. A key finding motivates our work: real and hallucinated object tokens are clearly separable in hidden representations, yet this separability is largely lost at the language-modeling (LM) head. We propose TruthLens, a self-evaluation framework that teaches the LM head to expose a per-object truthfulness signal without any auxiliar","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T05:29:02Z","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05616.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决 LVLM 的物体幻觉检测问题，重点不是再训练一个外部 verifier，而是让模型自己的 LM head 暴露每个物体 token 的真实性信号。核心观察是：真实物体 token 和幻觉物体 token 在隐藏状态里可分，但经过 LM head 映射到词表概率后，这种可分性明显减弱。","importance":"对预训练研究的启发在于模型内部表征和输出头之间的信号损失。隐藏层已经编码了一部分真实性或不确定性信息，但常规 next-token 目标没有要求 LM head 把这类信息显式输出。TruthLens 用一个特殊 token 承接 token-level truthfulness score，提供了一种轻量的自评估接口。它和 verifier、reward model、self-confidence calibration、LVLM 幻觉抑制都有关系，也提示预训练或后训练阶段可以加入更结构化的“可读出置信信号”。","technical_approach":"方法分两步。第一步是诊断：用 token-level negative log-likelihood 观察 LM head 的预测置信度，用 LDA 在线性空间中测量隐藏状态对真实/幻觉物体 token 的可分性。结果显示隐藏特征更可分，输出概率更含混。第二步是训练 TruthLens：选择一个很少使用的特殊 token 作为 reference token。在每个物体 token 的预测位置，读取 LM head 分配给该特殊 token 的 log-probability，并减去一个预设常数，得到 truthfulness score。训练时，对每张图采样多条 caption，标注其中物体 token 是真实还是幻觉；用 MSE 把真实 token 的分数推向 1，把幻觉 token 的分数推向 0。同时加入 divergence constraint，限制新模型偏离原始生成分布，避免检测能力提升伴随生成能力退化。推理时只读取已有 LM head 的概率，不需要额外模型，也不增加额外前向计算。","experiments":"论文在多个 LVLM 和多个物体幻觉检测基准上评估，报告相对已有 OH detection 方法有稳定提升。一个重要结果是训练标注只覆盖有限物体类别，但方法能迁移到标签空间更大的 benchmark，说明它学到的不只是类别记忆，而是某种 token-level groundedness 信号。全文片段没有给出具体数值、模型列表和各 benchmark 指标，因此定量幅度需要以实验表格为准。值得关注的消融包括：特殊 token 选择、预设常数和阈值 μ、MSE 监督、divergence constraint、不同层隐藏状态可分性，以及跨模型泛化。","reading_guide":"泛读建议 25–35 分钟。先看 Fig. 3，确认 hidden representation separability 和 LM-head ambiguity 的证据是否充分。然后看方法部分的 truthfulness score 定义，特别是为什么用特殊 token 的 log-probability，而不是直接训练一个 probe 或外部 classifier。实验部分优先看跨 LVLM、跨 benchmark、跨类别空间的泛化结果，再看 divergence constraint 是否保护原有生成质量。对预训练研究更有用的是“把隐藏层中的真实性信号接到 LM head 输出空间”这个接口设计。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses object hallucination detection in LVLMs without relying on an external verifier. Its central observation is that real and hallucinated object tokens are separable in hidden representations, but this separability is largely weakened after the LM head maps them into vocabulary probabilities.","importance":"The work is useful for studying the gap between internal representations and exposed model outputs. LVLM hidden states already encode some truthfulness or uncertainty signal, but standard next-token training does not force the LM head to make that signal readable. TruthLens uses a special token as a token-level truthfulness channel. This connects to verifier design, reward modeling, self-confidence calibration, and hallucination control. It also suggests that pretraining or post-training objectives can include structured readout signals instead of relying only on free-form generation.","technical_approach":"The method starts with a diagnostic comparison. Token-level negative log-likelihood is used to inspect LM-head confidence, while LDA is applied to hidden states to measure separability between real and hallucinated object tokens. The finding is that hidden states are more discriminative than output distributions. TruthLens then repurposes a rarely used special token as a reference token. At the prediction position of each object token, the method reads the log-probability assigned to this special token by the LM head and subtracts a predefined constant to obtain a truthfulness score. During training, multiple captions are sampled for each image, object tokens are labeled as real or hallucinated, and an MSE loss pushes real-token scores toward 1 and hallucinated-token scores toward 0. A divergence constraint keeps the updated model close to the original generation behavior. At inference time, the score is read from the existing LM head distribution, so no auxiliary model or extra forward pass is required.","experiments":"The paper evaluates the method across multiple LVLMs and object hallucination benchmarks, reporting consistent gains over existing detection approaches. A notable result is that the training annotations cover only a limited set of object categories, yet the learned signal transfers to benchmarks with much larger label spaces. This suggests the method is not merely memorizing category labels, but learning a token-level groundedness readout. The supplied content does not provide exact numbers, model names, or metric tables, so the magnitude of the gains should be verified in the experimental section. Important ablations include the choice of special token, the predefined constant and threshold μ, the MSE supervision, the divergence constraint, layer-wise hidden-state separability, and cross-model generalization.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 25–35 minutes. Start with Fig. 3 to check the evidence for hidden-state separability and LM-head ambiguity. Then read the truthfulness-score definition and focus on why the authors use the log-probability of a special token instead of a learned probe or external classifier. In the experiments, prioritize cross-LVLM, cross-benchmark, and cross-category generalization, then check whether the divergence constraint preserves normal generation quality. For pretraining researchers, the transferable idea is the LM-head readout interface for internal truthfulness signals.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"把'LM head丢失可分性'做成可训练探针的思路值得VLM对齐者借鉴；看§3方法和探针可视化即可，数字别太当真。","en":"The idea of training the LM head to surface a separability signal is a neat trick for VLM alignment; read §3 and the probe visualizations, treat headline numbers cautiously."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Peng Cheng Laboratory","University of Nottingham Malaysia","Hong Kong University of Science and Technology","Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, MOE","University of Nottingham Malaysia, Semenyih","substantially larger label spaces. Extensive experiments across multiple"],"authors":["Yanqi Wu","Runhe Lai","Xinhua Lu","Qichao Chen","Zhiping Zhou","Jia-Xin Zhuang","Weijiang Yu","Ruixuan Wang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["LVLM","object_hallucination","truthfulness_probe","LM_head","self_evaluation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05616","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05616","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05381","title":"C$^3$PO: Evaluating Cross-Modal Composition and Counterfactual Performance in Omnimodal Models","abstract":"Current Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) can process diverse sensory inputs, yet their reasoning remains heavily biased toward a dominant modality, resulting in brittle cross-modal reasoning. We introduce C$^3$PO, a benchmark of 3,404 samples spanning video, audio, image, and text, evaluating two abilities: information composition (fusing dispersed evidence) and counterfactual conflict (resolving deliberate contradictions). C$^3$PO's paired IC/CC structure and four-tier design enable tar","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-05T20:04:05Z","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05381.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"当前多模态大模型存在严重模态偏倚，现有评测基准无法有效诊断跨模态组合推理与反事实冲突消解能力，且扩展成本高。","importance":"该基准明确量化了当前全模态模型在跨模态组合推理和冲突消解上的能力缺口，尤其是开源模型在冲突场景下的性能崩溃现象，为多模态预训练的模态平衡对齐、跨模态融合目标设计提供了针对性的评测抓手。全自动生成管线的设计也为大规模多模态评测集构建提供了可复用的范式。","technical_approach":"构建C³PO基准，包含3404个样本，覆盖视频、音频、图像、文本四种模态。设计两个核心评测维度：一是信息组合，解题所需证据分散在不同模态，必须跨模态融合才能答对；二是反事实冲突，模态间故意设置矛盾，模型需要消解冲突才能答对。基准分为四层认知复杂度等级，基于25个逻辑自洽的任务模板，采用全自动管线生成——以真实世界基础媒体为锚点合成互补模态，兼顾真实性与精细控制能力。","experiments":"人类准确率为88.64%，最强闭源模型Gemini-3.1-Pro仅达到73.17%，开源模型在冲突场景下出现严重性能下降。所有受测模型均表现出明显的模态偏倚，普遍优先依赖语言先验，忽视其他模态的证据，在存在矛盾的场景下尤为突出。","reading_guide":"泛读约25-30分钟。重点关注两个评测维度（信息组合/反事实冲突）的设计逻辑和四层复杂度分级结构；实验部分重点看闭源与开源模型在冲突场景下的性能差距。单个任务模板的详细描述可跳过。","authors_note":"具体作者与机构未在提供的文本中披露"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Current multimodal LLMs suffer from severe modality bias, and existing benchmarks cannot effectively diagnose cross-modal compositional reasoning and counterfactual conflict resolution while remaining scalable.","importance":"The benchmark quantifies the concrete capability gap of current omnimodal models in cross-modal compositional reasoning and conflict resolution, especially the performance collapse of open-source models under conflict settings. It provides a targeted evaluation handle for multimodal pretraining research on balanced modality alignment and cross-modal fusion objective design. The fully automatic generation pipeline also offers a reusable paradigm for building large-scale multimodal evaluation datasets.","technical_approach":"Introduces C³PO, a benchmark with 3,404 samples covering video, audio, image, and text modalities. Two core evaluation axes: Information Composition, where required evidence is dispersed across modalities making cross-modal fusion mandatory; and Counterfactual Conflict, where deliberate contradictions are introduced across modalities requiring resolution to answer correctly. The benchmark has four tiers of increasing cognitive complexity, built via a fully automatic pipeline using 25 logically grounded task templates. It uses real-world base media as anchors and synthesizes complementary modalities to balance realism and fine-grained control.","experiments":"Human accuracy reaches 88.64%, while the best closed-source model (Gemini-3.1-Pro) only achieves 73.17%. Open-source models show severe performance degradation under conflict settings. Clear modality bias is observed across all tested models, which universally prioritize linguistic priors over evidence from other modalities, especially when contradictions exist.","reading_guide":"Skim time ~25–30 minutes. Focus on the design logic of the two evaluation axes (Information Composition / Counterfactual Conflict) and the four-tier complexity structure. In the experiment section, pay attention to the performance gap between closed-source and open-source models under conflict settings. Detailed descriptions of individual task templates can be skipped.","authors_note":"Specific author names and affiliations not provided in the available text."},"recommendation":{"zh":"模态主导的量化结论对多模态预训练有直接参考价值，重点看注意力探针分析部分，基准本身可作为内部评测参考","en":"The quantified modality-dominance finding is directly relevant to multimodal pretraining; focus on the attention-probe analysis, the benchmark can serve as an internal eval reference"},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Swapnanil Mukherjee","Agyeya Negi","Tanuja Ganu","Ponnurangam Kumaraguru"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["multimodal","benchmark","modality_dominance","cross_modal_reasoning","attention_probe"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05381","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05381","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06060","title":"Learning from Failures: Retrieval-Centric CoT via Hard Negatives for Unified Multimodal Retrieval","abstract":"Unified multimodal retrieval aims to identify candidates that satisfy complex user intent expressed through heterogeneous inputs. Although Large Vision-Language Model (LVLM)-based retrievers are efficient and scalable, directly encoding raw multimodal inputs often misses fine-grained discriminative cues, leading to confusion among semantically similar candidates. Recent methods mitigate this limitation by generating Chain-of-Thought (CoT) rationales to enrich the query representation. However, s","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T14:04:56Z","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06060.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决统一多模态检索中，LVLM retriever 只编码原始查询时容易混淆语义相近候选、缺少判别性推理的问题。","importance":"贡献是检索训练和推理侧的表示增强方法：把 CoT 从“解释查询内容”改为“解释检索器错在哪里”。这对 RAG、retriever 训练和多模态表示学习有参考价值，但不是预训练范式论文。","technical_approach":"提出 UniME-R1 embedder-adviser 框架。embedder 先检索候选，adviser 再基于初始候选逐个分析，生成 Retrieval-Centric CoT，用 hard negatives 暴露细粒度差异，并把这些反馈用于改进查询表示或训练检索器。方法属于对已有 CoT-for-retrieval 思路的反馈条件化改造。","experiments":"摘要未提供模型参数量、训练数据规模、具体 benchmark 名称或提升幅度。可确认的实验主线是与直接编码查询、query-only CoT 等 LVLM 检索 baseline 比较，在统一多模态检索任务上验证 hard-negative-conditioned reasoning 的收益。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets unified multimodal retrieval where LVLM-based retrievers miss fine-grained discriminative cues and confuse semantically similar candidates when encoding only the raw query.","importance":"Its main contribution is a retrieval-side representation and reasoning method: CoT is reframed from describing the query to diagnosing what the retriever confuses. This is relevant to RAG, retriever training, and multimodal representation learning, but it is not a pretraining-paradigm paper.","technical_approach":"UniME-R1 uses an embedder-adviser design. The embedder first retrieves candidates; the adviser then reasons over the initially retrieved candidates, analyzes hard negatives, and generates Retrieval-Centric CoT. The generated feedback is used to expose fine-grained differences and improve the retrieval representation.","experiments":"The abstract does not specify model size, training data scale, benchmark names, or numerical gains. The experimental comparison is framed against direct query encoding and query-only CoT baselines for unified multimodal retrieval.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"想做 retriever/RAG 训练可看 adviser 如何利用 hard negatives；预训练研究员读 abstract 和方法图足够。","en":"Worth a quick look if training retrievers or RAG systems; for pretraining work, the abstract and method diagram are enough."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Zelong Sun","Jun Wang","Kaicheng Yang","Tiancheng Gu","Ziyong Feng","Zhiwu Lu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["multimodal-retrieval","retrieval-augmented-reasoning","hard-negatives","CoT"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06060","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06060","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05215","title":"VLAff: Vision-Language-Affordance Model for Unified Actionable Affordances","abstract":"Learning manipulation skills from human videos is promising for scalable robot learning. However, the embodiment mismatch between humans and robots makes this challenging. One promising solution is to learn object-centric actionable affordances that are embodiment-agnostic. In this work, we propose a framework that leverages egocentric human videos with state-of-the-art 3D Structure-from-Motion and hand mesh reconstruction to extract actionable affordances such as visual, grasp, and trajectory a","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-05T10:15:55Z","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05215.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.RO","cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决从人类第一视角视频学习机器人可执行操作时，人机 embodiment 不匹配导致技能迁移困难的问题。","importance":"贡献主要在机器人可供性建模和大规模 affordance 数据构建，而不是通用多模态基座预训练；对关心 VLM 如何统一动作相关表征的人有边缘参考价值。","technical_approach":"先用 3D Structure-from-Motion 和手部 mesh 重建，从人类第一视角视频中抽取视觉、抓取、轨迹三类 object-centric actionable affordance；再构建 EgoAffordance 数据集，并训练 VLAff 统一建模这些 affordance 与语言、视觉输入之间的对应关系。","experiments":"数据集规模为 204K episodes，包含 5.6M visual affordances 和 11.6M grasp/trajectory affordances。摘要称模型可根据视觉观察和指令生成热图、抓取姿态与轨迹，但未给出模型参数量、预训练规模和与通用 VLM 的清晰对比幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"It addresses the embodiment mismatch between humans and robots when learning actionable manipulation skills from egocentric human videos.","importance":"The main contribution is robot affordance modeling plus a large affordance dataset, not general multimodal foundation-model pretraining. It is only marginally useful if you care about how VLMs can unify action-related representations.","technical_approach":"The pipeline first uses 3D structure-from-motion and hand-mesh reconstruction to extract object-centric visual, grasp, and trajectory affordances from egocentric human videos. It then builds the EgoAffordance dataset and trains VLAff to jointly model correlations among these affordances, language, and visual observations.","experiments":"The dataset contains 204K episodes, 5.6M visual affordances, and 11.6M grasp/trajectory affordances. The abstract claims generation of heatmaps, grasp poses, and trajectories from visual input plus instruction, but does not provide model size, pretraining scale, or clean comparisons against general-purpose VLMs.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"机器人味很重，离基座预训练较远；若你在想多模态 token 是否该显式承载 action affordance，只看数据构建和统一输出头设计。","en":"This is robotics-heavy and peripheral to pretraining; only skim the dataset construction and unified output design if you care about action-affordance representations."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Jihoon Oh","Kento Kawaharazuka","Kei Okada"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["vision-language","affordance","robotics","egocentric-video"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05215","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05215","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05238","title":"Decoupling Perception from Description: Computation-Grounded Representation Alignment between Multivariate Time Series and Language","abstract":"Training multimodal models to align time series with language runs into a self-supervision trap. The usual recipe asks an LLM to read a series and write a description, so label quality is capped by the perceptual skill the model is supposed to learn. The data can never teach more than the labeler already knows. A second gap makes this worse: most datasets use a single variable, but the patterns that matter (cross-channel correlation, lead-lag structure, co-occurring anomalies) appear only with s","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-05T13:57:08Z","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05238.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决时间序列与语言对齐中的标注瓶颈：让 LLM 直接观察时间序列并生成描述，会把训练信号限制在标注 LLM 自身的感知能力内。","importance":"贡献类型是多模态对齐数据构造方法。它指出 time-series-to-text 自监督存在“感知者也是教师”的闭环问题，尤其在多变量时间序列中，跨通道相关、lead-lag 结构、共现异常等模式很容易被弱标注器漏掉。","technical_approach":"方法是把“感知”和“描述”解耦：先用确定性代码从真实开源多变量时间序列中计算统计事实，再让 LLM 只负责把这些已计算事实转写成自然语言。原创点不在模型结构，而在数据生成链路：用程序化测量替代 LLM 感知，用 LLM 保留语言表达能力。","experiments":"摘要未给出完整实验细节；可确认其数据来自真实开源多变量时间序列，并围绕多变量模式描述质量与可扩展性进行验证。未看到模型参数量、训练 token 数、baseline 名称或具体提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a labeling bottleneck in aligning multivariate time series with language: asking an LLM to inspect a series and write captions caps supervision quality at the labeler model’s own perceptual ability.","importance":"This is mainly a multimodal data construction contribution. It identifies a self-supervision trap in time-series-to-text alignment, made worse in multivariate settings where cross-channel correlation, lead-lag relations, and co-occurring anomalies are hard for an LLM labeler to perceive reliably.","technical_approach":"The proposed recipe decouples perception from description. Deterministic code extracts statistical facts from real open-source multivariate time series, and an LLM verbalizes those precomputed facts. The novelty is the supervision pipeline rather than the model: computation handles measurement, while the LLM handles language realization.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide full experimental details. It states that the data are built from real open-source multivariate time series and evaluates the resulting alignment setup around realistic multivariate patterns. Model size, training scale, baselines, and exact gains are not visible from the provided abstract.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"不必读正文；记住“程序感知、LLM 表达”这个数据生成拆分，对多模态 caption 合成有可迁移价值。","en":"No need to read in full; the useful bit is the split between programmatic perception and LLM verbalization for multimodal caption synthesis."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Xinran Feng","Yi Xie","Chao Zhang","Ruikun Li","Wanyun Ling","Ziyue Li","Chenxi Liu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["time-series-language","multimodal-alignment","synthetic-captions","data-generation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05238","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05238","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07006","title":"Does More Retrieved Evidence Help Visual Retrieval-Augmented Generation with Diffusion Language Models?","abstract":"Visual retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) commonly expands the retrieved evidence set to improve answer-page coverage, implicitly assuming that all available evidence should be passed to the generator. We show that this assumption does not hold for diffusion language models (DLMs): retrieving more pages increases answer-page recall, whereas unconditionally passing all retrieved pages to the generator often reduces answer accuracy, primarily because of semantic conflict. A latent-source analysi","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07006.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作研究的是一个很具体、但对新型语言建模范式很关键的问题：在视觉 RAG 里，给 diffusion language model 提供更多检索证据，为什么会出现“检索覆盖更高，但最终答案更差”的反常现象。传统 AR-RAG 的直觉是 top-k 越大，答案页被召回的概率越高，生成器就更容易答对；但在多模态 DLM 中，多个页面会同时进入并行去噪过程，所有未决 token 位置共享这些视觉条件。这样一来，若不同页面分别支持不同但各自自洽的答案，模型在位置级并行提议时会把不兼容的信息拼接起来，生成一个没有任何单一页面支持的混合答案。论文把这个问题刻画为 source-coherence loss，即并行去噪破坏了“答案应来自同一潜在证据源”的耦合约束。","importance":"对预训练研究的意义不在于提出了一个通用 DLM 训练目标，而在于它把 diffusion/并行生成范式在 RAG 场景下的一个结构性弱点讲清楚了。AR 模型逐 token 条件化，天然更容易沿着单一证据链展开；DLM 的并行去噪则可能在早期就把多个来源混合。这个观察对后续几类工作都有启发：一是多模态 DLM 的上下文构造不能直接照搬 AR-RAG 的“多给证据总没错”；二是 generator-side evidence admission 需要和 DLM 的去噪几何匹配，而不是只看 retriever 分数；三是第一步去噪分布本身可以作为诊断和控制信号。这类分析对 diffusion LM、any-order LM、masked LM 一类非 AR 生成器如何接入外部知识，属于有方法论价值的补充。","technical_approach":"方法上分两部分。第一部分是机制分析。作者先在固定 top-k 输入设置下，对 3 个多模态 DLM 和 5 个视觉 QA benchmark 做系统比较，发现 Recall@k 随 k 上升，但宏平均答案准确率反而下降。随后他们把额外页面分成不同条件，指出真正造成退化的是 semantic conflict，而不是“多图输入”本身。理论上，论文在 first unresolved denoising state 上做了一个受限 latent-source 分析：若正确页和冲突页分别支持不同完整答案，而答案跨多个 token 位置，那么理想模型应在这些位置上共享同一个 latent source 选择；但位置独立的 proposal 会丢掉这种耦合，于是给 cross-source answer 分配非零概率，而且冲突跨度越长，unsupported mass 越大。第二部分是训练外的证据筛选框架 ECF。它包含 multi-granularity evidence construction 和 generator-side admission 两步。前者把整页和版面区域一起建索引，解决答案局部化问题；后者不直接依据检索分数选页，而是对每个候选页 ci，在 {c1, ci} 与 {c1, blank(ci)} 两种条件下比较目标 DLM 第一去噪步 answer block 的熵，得到 conditional confidence gain。这个设计的关键在于用 blank 对照消掉“多一个视觉输入槽位”带来的结构性影响，只测候选内容本身是否降低竞争源风险。最后再结合 rank prior 决定是否从 top-1 扩展到更多证据，以及扩展到哪一页。","experiments":"实验覆盖 3 个多模态 DLM、5 个视觉 QA 数据集，并在统一的 VisRAG 排序候选池、prompt、解码预算和答案评分器下比较 fixed top-k 与选择式证据接入。核心结果有三层。第一，现象层：top-k 从 1 增到 2、3 时，answer-page recall 持续上升，但在 15 个 model-dataset 组合上的宏平均答案准确率下降。第二，机制层：在作者构造或归类的页面条件中，conflicting pages 导致的精度下降最大；而且这种干扰在第一步 answer-block 分布里就能看到——在自然检索到的 ChartQA 样本上，冲突页条件下 first-step answer-block accuracy 降幅最大，与 correct-only 分布的 Jensen-Shannon divergence 也最大，并且这与最终答案退化方向一致。第三，方法层：ECF 在 5 个 benchmark、3 个 DLM 上，相比最强 fixed top-k 输入平均提升 2.62 个百分点；在 LLaDA2.0-Uni 上，相比最强 training-free baseline 平均再高 2.37 个百分点。论文还强调，ECF 的收益在 candidate pool 扩大时更稳定，说明它确实把“候选池大小”和“最终上下文大小”解耦了，而不是只在某个固定 k 上碰巧有效。","reading_guide":"这篇更适合带着“DLM 为什么和 AR 在 RAG 上行为不同”这个问题去读。先看 Introduction 和 Figure 1、Figure 2，把 availability–accuracy mismatch 以及 first-step signal 的经验事实抓住。然后重点读 3.3 的 latent-source analysis 和对应命题，那里是全文最有信息量的部分：作者不是泛泛地说“多证据会冲突”，而是把冲突如何在并行去噪里变成 unsupported mixed answer 讲清楚了。接着看 ECF 的定义，尤其是 {c1, ci} 对 {c1, blank(ci)} 的 counterfactual 设计，理解为什么要做 geometry-matched 对照，而不是直接比较加入候选前后的熵。实验部分建议重点看三类表图：top-k 扫描、冲突类型分解、first-step 与 final-answer 的对应关系。若时间有限，读完机制分析和主结果就够；若想深挖，可以继续看 multi-granularity evidence construction 的实现细节，判断它的收益有多少来自更好的检索覆盖，有多少来自 generator-side filtering。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a specific but important failure mode of diffusion language models in visual RAG: retrieving more evidence improves answer-page recall, yet passing all retrieved pages to the generator often hurts final answer accuracy. The usual AR-RAG intuition is that larger top-k should help because the answer-bearing page is more likely to be included. The authors show that this intuition breaks for multimodal DLMs. During parallel denoising, multiple visual pages jointly condition all unresolved answer positions. If different pages support different coherent answers, position-wise proposals can mix incompatible sources and assign probability to hybrid answers that are supported by neither page. The paper frames this as source-coherence loss: the denoising process fails to preserve the coupling that all answer tokens should come from the same latent evidence source.","importance":"Its value for pretraining-oriented readers is not a new training objective, but a clear account of a structural weakness of non-AR generation under retrieval augmentation. AR models expand answers token by token and are less exposed to this kind of cross-source mixing. DLMs, because they denoise many positions jointly, can fail much earlier in the generation process. That matters for diffusion LM, masked LM, and any-order LM research more broadly: evidence selection cannot simply inherit AR-era heuristics such as “more retrieved context is safer.” The paper also suggests that generator-native signals from early denoising steps can be used for context control, which is a useful design direction for retrieval interfaces to non-autoregressive generators.","technical_approach":"$21","experiments":"$22","reading_guide":"Read it with one question in mind: why does retrieval behave differently for DLMs than for AR generators? Start with the introduction and the main figures showing the availability-accuracy mismatch and the first-step signal. Then spend most of the time on the latent-source analysis in Section 3.3 and the associated propositions. That is where the paper becomes more than an empirical warning; it gives a concrete mechanism for how parallel denoising creates unsupported mixed answers. After that, look closely at the ECF design, especially the counterfactual comparison between {c1, ci} and {c1, blank(ci)}. The blanked control is important because it isolates candidate content from the mere geometry of adding another visual input. In the experiments, focus on three pieces: the top-k sweep, the conflict-type breakdown, and the correspondence between first-step distributions and final answers. If reading time is limited, the mechanism section plus the main result tables are enough to capture the contribution.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"这篇值得看机制，不是看 RAG trick：它说明 DLM 的并行去噪会放大多源冲突，先读 latent-source analysis 和 first-step 分布那部分。","en":"Read it for the mechanism, not the RAG trick: it shows parallel denoising in DLMs amplifies multi-source conflict; start with the latent-source analysis and first-step distribution evidence."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Jiankun Wang","Yisen Gao","Ziwei Zhang","Xingcheng Fu","Jiaxin Bai","Chen Gao"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["diffusion-language-model","visual-rag","multimodal","retrieval","source-coherence"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07006","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07006","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06501","title":"Can MLLMs Decode the Creative Leap? Introducing C4 for Cross-Concept Understanding","abstract":"Creative capabilities of MLLMs matter in design, communication, education, and human--AI collaboration, yet remain difficult to evaluate because explicit targets and reward signals are scarce compared with accuracy-oriented tasks. Cross-concept understanding is a core cognitive capacity underlying receptive creativity. It enables a perceiver to recover intended meaning from non-obvious but meaningful conceptual relations. We operationalize item construction as cross-concept encoding and model in","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06501.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CL","cs.MM"],"summary":{"core_problem":"评估多模态大模型是否具备“跨概念理解”能力，即能否从非显式但有意义的概念桥接关系中恢复目标含义，这里用成语场景来操作化创造性理解。","importance":"核心贡献是一个 MLLM creativity benchmark，而不是模型方法。对基座预训练研究员的价值主要在于：它提供了一个比常规识别题更结构化的多模态认知评测维度，但与预训练 recipe 的距离较远。","technical_approach":"提出 C4 框架，把题目构造视为 cross-concept encoding，把模型作答视为 cross-concept decoding。其编码端基于人工标注并经第三方审核的 cross-concept network，将目标槽位映射到可视觉化的替代概念，并通过 bridge path 控制难度；据此构建带精确答案和可分级难度的 C4-Eval。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体参评模型、样本规模和结果数字。可确定的是，实验会测试 MLLM 在不同 bridge count / depth 难度下的表现，并分析其创造性理解而非单纯识别能力。由于任务高度特化于成语与概念桥接，外推到通用多模态预训练能力需要谨慎。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"It evaluates whether multimodal LLMs can perform cross-concept understanding: recovering intended meaning from non-obvious but meaningful conceptual relations, operationalized here through idiom-based creativity tasks.","importance":"The main contribution is a benchmark for MLLM creativity rather than a modeling method. For foundation-model researchers, its value is mostly as a structured evaluation axis beyond standard recognition-style tasks, though it is still fairly far from pretraining methodology.","technical_approach":"The paper introduces the C4 framework, treating item construction as cross-concept encoding and model inference as cross-concept decoding. The encoding side uses a manually annotated and third-party-reviewed cross-concept network to map target slots to imageable substitute concepts, with bridge paths controlling difficulty. This yields C4-Eval with exact answers and graded difficulty.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide participating models, dataset size, or numerical results. It is clear that the evaluation studies MLLM performance across different bridge counts and depths, focusing on creative understanding rather than straightforward recognition. Because the task is tightly tied to idioms and concept bridging, extrapolation to general multimodal pretraining ability should be cautious.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为评测素材可备案，但别投入太多时间：任务设计有想法，外推性却有限；看数据构造原则和难度控制即可，不必细读结果表。","en":"Keep it on file as an eval asset, but do not spend much time on it: the task design is thoughtful, yet its external validity is limited. Read the data-construction logic and difficulty controls, not the full result tables."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Ming Wang","Yuqing Zhang","Tingna Xie","Xiangju Li","Xiaocui Yang","Daling Wang","Shi Feng","Yifei Zhang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["multimodal-eval","creativity","cross-concept","benchmark"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06501","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06501","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07067","title":"DocMemo: Dynamic Evidence Discovery via Probabilistic Memory-Guided Retrieval for Multi-Modal Document Understanding","abstract":"Long-document understanding requires locating sparse and heterogeneous evidence across hundreds of pages, yet existing systems remain limited by static retrieval and fragile cross-round memory. Mainstream single-round methods commit to a fixed top-$k$ page set at the outset and struggle to recover from early retrieval errors; recent iterative approaches allow multi-round evidence acquisition, but they do not investigate the propagation mechanism of cross-round states, making it difficult to trac","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07067.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CL","cs.IR","cs.MM"],"summary":{"core_problem":"长多模态文档理解需跨数百页定位稀疏异构证据，现有静态检索易受早期错误影响，迭代方法缺乏跨轮状态传播机制，难以追踪页面相关性动态变化。","importance":"方法改进，提出三级记忆引导的动态证据探索框架，优化长多模态文档推理的检索策略。","technical_approach":"提出DocMemo框架，将长多模态文档推理建模为动态证据探索过程，维护文档模式记忆、页面信念记忆、问题情景记忆三级检索状态，分别捕获结构先验、动态相关性估计与查询相关推理轨迹，推理过程中持续迭代优化跨轮状态（摘要内容截断，完整方法未披露）。","experiments":"摘要未披露实验设置、基线模型与量化结果，仅明确面向长多模态文档理解任务设计。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Long multimodal document understanding requires locating sparse heterogeneous evidence across hundreds of pages; existing static retrieval is vulnerable to early errors, and iterative methods lack cross-round state propagation mechanisms to track dynamic page relevance changes.","importance":"Methodological improvement, proposing a three-level memory-guided dynamic evidence exploration framework to optimize retrieval strategies for long multimodal document reasoning.","technical_approach":"Proposes DocMemo, which formulates long multimodal document reasoning as dynamic evidence exploration. It maintains a tri-level retrieval state: Document Schema Memory, Page Belief Memory, and Question Episodic Memory, capturing structural priors, dynamic relevance estimation, and query-specific reasoning trajectories respectively. Cross-round states are iteratively refined during reasoning (abstract truncated, full method not disclosed).","experiments":"The abstract does not disclose experimental setup, baseline models, or quantitative results, only specifying the task is long multimodal document understanding.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"多模态长文档检索的增量改进，与预训练基座研究关联弱，仅作领域动态了解即可。","en":"Incremental improvement for multimodal long-document retrieval, weak relevance to LLM pretraining research, only worth knowing as a field update."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Hanshu Yao","Janfeng Zhong","Niu Lian","Jinpeng Wang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["multimodal document understanding","retrieval-augmented generation","memory mechanism","long-document reasoning"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07067","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07067","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06930","title":"AVCap: Reinforcing Audio-Video Joint Caption with Detail-Aware Reward","abstract":"Detailed audio-video joint captioning is essential for multimodal video understanding and generation. However, prior works are constrained by three main limitations: (1) the scarcity of high-quality public datasets with fine-grained audio-visual joint captions; (2) reinforcement-learning methods that rely on coarse reward signals; and (3) the lack of a benchmark and metric for evaluating detailed audiovisual captions at the atomic level. To address these challenges, we propose: (1) AVCap-100K, a","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06930.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有音视频联合字幕工作存在高质量细粒度数据集稀缺、RL奖励信号粗糙、缺乏原子级细节评测体系三大瓶颈。","importance":"数据贡献+方法创新+Benchmark贡献，构建100K规模细粒度音视频对齐字幕数据集，提出细节感知GRPO优化方法，并推出专用评测基准与指标。","technical_approach":"1）构建AVCap-100K数据集，包含100K条时间对齐、细节丰富的音视频字幕；2）提出Detail-Aware GRPO（Da-GRPO），用细粒度细节感知奖励优化字幕生成；3）设计AVCap-Bench评测基准与AVCap-Score原子级细节评测指标。","experiments":"未明确模型参数量，对比开源音视频字幕基线，在多个通用评测集上达到开源SOTA，性能匹配或超过专有闭源模型；在AVCap-Bench上的原子级细节得分显著优于基线。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing audio-video joint captioning works face three bottlenecks: scarcity of high-quality fine-grained datasets, coarse RL reward signals, and lack of atomic-level detail evaluation systems.","importance":"Data contribution + methodological innovation + benchmark contribution, constructing the first 100K-scale fine-grained temporally aligned audio-video caption dataset, proposing a detail-aware GRPO optimization method, and releasing a dedicated evaluation benchmark and metric.","technical_approach":"1) Constructs the AVCap-100K dataset with 100K temporally aligned, detail-rich audio-video captions; 2) Proposes Detail-Aware GRPO (Da-GRPO) to optimize caption generation with fine-grained detail-aware rewards; 3) Designs the AVCap-Bench evaluation benchmark and AVCap-Score atomic-level detail evaluation metric.","experiments":"No explicit parameter count reported; achieves open-source SOTA on multiple general evaluation sets, matching or outperforming closed-source proprietary models; obtains significantly higher atomic-level detail scores than baselines on AVCap-Bench.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"关注多模态数据集构建与细粒度RL奖励设计的研究员可扫过数据构造与奖励定义部分，无预训练范式层面的新洞察。","en":"Researchers focusing on multimodal dataset construction and fine-grained RL reward design can skim the data pipeline and reward definition sections, no new insights at the pretraining paradigm level."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Mingyang Wu","Kaituo Feng","Bohao Li","Kaixiong Gong","Zihao Yin","Xiangyu Yue"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["Audio-Video Captioning","Multimodal Dataset","GRPO","Multimodal Benchmark","Reward Design"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06930","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06930","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07014","title":"Stable Curves, Unstable Items: Item-Level Scaling Heterogeneity in Video LLMs","abstract":"Aggregate scaling curves suggest that Video LLMs improve smoothly or saturate as visual budgets grow. We show that this view can conceal large, opposing changes at the item level. We represent each frozen model--item pair by its response trajectory under controlled visual budgets and derive matched-grid measures of configuration complementarity, harmful transitions, and text overwrite. Across five open Video LLMs from three architecture families, four multiple-choice benchmark splits, open-ended","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07014.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"视频 LLM 的整体 scaling 曲线掩盖了 item 层面在不同视觉 token 预算下的剧烈异质性和反向变化。","importance":"原理分析类工作，指出聚合指标在多模态推理预算研究中的盲区，对 test-time visual scaling 与 token budget 调度有启发。","technical_approach":"对每个冻结模型-样本对，在受控视觉预算下记录响应轨迹，构造 matched-grid 指标：配置互补性、有害迁移、文本覆盖；跨架构族和任务做对比。","experiments":"5 个开源 Video LLM、3 个架构族、4 个多选 benchmark split、开放式 QA、摘要、固定历史对话；MCQA oracle 空间 8.8–18.9 点，12.5–25.5% 样本在低预算对、高预算错；MLDU Token-F1 oracle gap 2.7–3.7，AVSD 3.8–4.8。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Aggregate scaling curves for Video LLMs hide large item-level heterogeneity and reversals as visual token budget varies.","importance":"Analytical work exposing blind spots of aggregate metrics in multimodal compute-budget studies; relevant to test-time visual scaling and token scheduling.","technical_approach":"For each frozen model-item pair, records response trajectories under controlled visual budgets and derives matched-grid measures of configuration complementarity, harmful transitions, and text overwrite across architecture families and tasks.","experiments":"Five open Video LLMs across three architecture families, four MCQA splits, open-ended QA, summarization, fixed-history dialogue; oracle headroom 8.8–18.9 points on MCQA, 12.5–25.5% items reverse from correct to wrong; Token-F1 gaps 2.7–3.7 on MLVU and 3.8–4.8 on AVSD.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"结论本身不新，但 item-level 反向变化的量化对 visual test-time scaling 是有用警示；只看 Table 和 oracle gap 数字即可。","en":"Not a new finding, but the quantified item-level reversals are a useful caveat for visual test-time scaling; skim the tables and oracle-gap numbers."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Wenzhang Sun","Chunfeng Wang","Xiangchen Yin","Yujia Chen","Hao Li","Kun Zhan"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["video-llm","scaling-heterogeneity","visual-token-budget","test-time-scaling","multimodal-eval"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07014","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07014","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06756","title":"Capek 0.5: An Execution-Centric Vision-Language Model for Embodied Intelligence","abstract":"Vision-language models are increasingly serving as the reasoning core of embodied agents. Robot execution is inherently iterative: each action reshapes the scene and physical state, continually renewing what must be perceived, reasoned about, and verified. Meeting these demands requires complementary capabilities that differ in supervision signals, prediction formats, and verification criteria. Existing approaches typically develop these capabilities against isolated, task-specific objectives, l","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06756.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"研究 embodied VLM 如何围绕机器人执行过程组织能力，而不是把空间、时间、动作和验证能力分散训练在孤立任务目标上。","importance":"贡献类型是 embodied VLM 训练组织方式和能力 taxonomy。它对多模态 agent 的数据/任务编排有参考，但更偏机器人执行，不是通用 VLM 预训练范式或视觉 tokenizer 工作。","technical_approach":"提出 Capek 0.5，按 execution-centric capability taxonomy 组织模型能力。taxonomy 包含四类：Spatial Reasoning、Temporal Understanding、Action Guidance、State Verification。每类能力围绕执行过程中的功能角色定义，而不是按数据集或下游任务定义。","experiments":"摘要未提供完整实验细节；可确认论文面向 embodied intelligence，并强调多种能力具有不同监督信号、预测格式和验证标准。模型规模、训练数据、baseline、benchmark 和提升幅度在给定摘要中不可见。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies how an embodied VLM should organize capabilities around the robot execution process rather than training spatial, temporal, action, and verification skills as isolated task objectives.","importance":"This is a capability-taxonomy and training-organization contribution for embodied VLMs. It is relevant to multimodal-agent data and task composition, but remains closer to robotic execution than to general VLM pretraining or visual tokenization.","technical_approach":"Capek 0.5 is built around an execution-centric capability taxonomy. The taxonomy groups embodied capabilities into Spatial Reasoning, Temporal Understanding, Action Guidance, and State Verification, based on functional roles during execution rather than datasets or downstream tasks.","experiments":"The provided abstract does not include full experimental details. It establishes the embodied setting and the need to handle different supervision signals, prediction formats, and verification criteria, but omits model scale, training data, baselines, benchmark names, and numerical gains.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为 embodied VLM 数据编排案例可留档；若没有大规模训练细节，taxonomy 本身对 pretrain 的信息量有限。","en":"Keep it as an embodied-VLM data-organization reference; without large-scale training details, the taxonomy alone carries limited pretraining signal."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Ying Chen","Weizhen Li","Zhe Hu","Zhenjiang Li","Rui Jiang","Zhifeng Gu","Lihuang Fang","Jiangping Liu","Lei Yi","Jie Chen"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["embodied-VLM","robotics","multimodal-agent","capability-taxonomy"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06756","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06756","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"multimodal_gen","emoji":"🎨","name":"多模态生成","papers":[{"id":"2608.05798","title":"KVAE: Family of Tokenizers for Multimodal Generative Models","abstract":"Latent diffusion modeling (LDM), a prominent paradigm, utilizes tokenizers to map input signal to compressed representation. This dependency positions tokenizer as an integral part of generation process itself, since it affects learning speed, quality of synthesized samples and lay foundation for later applications. This report presents series of KVAE tokenizers for audio, image and video, all designed for subsequent text-conditioned generation: KVAE-Audio, a continuous full-band 48 kHz tokenize","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T09:34:00Z","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05798.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV","cs.LG","cs.SD"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作讨论的是多模态生成里一个常被低估、但实际决定上限的部件：tokenizer。作者关注的问题不是单纯把重建误差做低，而是如何为后续的 diffusion/latent generative model 构造一个同时兼顾压缩率、可生成性和重建质量的潜空间。论文把这个问题统一到一组 KVAE tokenizer 上，覆盖图像、视频和音频三种模态。对视频和图像，核心矛盾是高压缩会降低重建细节和生成可学性，低压缩又会让后续生成模型 token 数过多、训练和推理成本过高；对音频，还要兼顾全频带、高采样率和时序连续性。作者试图给出一套偏工程化但系统的设计答案，而不是只在单一模态上做局部优化。","importance":"对预训练和统一多模态建模的意义在于：tokenizer 不是前处理，而是生成系统的一部分。它决定 latent 空间的几何结构、信息瓶颈位置、后续模型的 token budget，以及训练动态是否稳定。很多关于 AR+diffusion 联合建模、原生多模态 LM、音视频生成的讨论，最后都会落到“离散或连续表示该怎么压缩、压到什么程度、是否利于生成器学习”这些问题上。KVAE 的价值不在于提出一个全新理论，而在于把 image/video/audio tokenizer 放在同一设计框架下，明确强调 diffusability 与 compression ratio 的共同优化，并给出一系列架构和训练上的取舍。对做视觉 tokenizer、语音 tokenizer、统一 latent space 或多模态 pretrain 的人，这类工作很有参考意义。","technical_approach":"方法上，KVAE 是一组面向 latent generative model 的 encoder-decoder tokenizer。视频部分给出两个主要配置：4×8×8 压缩、16 通道的 KVAE-3D，以及 4×16×16 压缩、64 通道的 KVAE-3D。图像部分是 8 倍空间压缩、32 通道的 KVAE-2D。音频部分是 48 kHz 全频带连续 tokenizer，latent 频率 50 Hz、64 通道。论文的重点不是某一个损失函数，而是围绕“高压缩但仍适合 diffusion 学习”的整体设计。\n\n视频 tokenizer 的几个关键设计值得注意。第一，作者采用 attention-free 主干，以 Conv3D 为核心计算块，而不是在 tokenizer 内大量使用时空注意力。这样做的原因很直接：训练更省、推理时可以通过 cache 处理任意长序列，也更适合长视频和 image-to-video 等因果场景。第二，模型采用 causal setup，使用非对称时间 padding，使 tokenizer 同时适配图像和视频输入，并避免未来帧泄漏。第三，时空下采样和上采样按顺序执行，而不是一次性混合处理；这和一些视觉 tokenizer 的 patchify 方案不同，作者明确提到 KVAE-4x16x16 把 patching 留给 downsample block，而不是在最前层就做强压缩。第四，使用 spatial RMSNorm，以支持推理时 segment size 调整。第五，encoder-decoder 采用不对称参数分配，尤其在高压缩版本里显著加宽 decoder。这个设计反映出作者的判断：在高压缩 regime 下，编码器负责提取稳定 latent，解码器需要更强容量去恢复细节，因此参数不必平均分配。\n\n从全文表述看，作者还把 diffusability 当成 tokenizer 的一等公民指标，而不是只看 PSNR/LPIPS 或感知音频指标。也就是说，一个 tokenizer 即便重建不错，如果 latent 分布不利于 diffusion 学习，整体生成系统仍会吃亏。论文后半部分专门讨论 visual domain 中 diffusability 的评估，以及若干设计消融，这一点比单纯报 reconstruction 指标更接近生成系统的真实需求。","experiments":"从给出的全文内容看，实验覆盖 reconstruction、generation、diffusability 评估和设计消融四部分。视觉部分，KVAE-3D 与现有开源视频 tokenizer 在重建和生成两类任务上比较，指标包括 PSNR、LPIPS，以及生成侧的 Fréchet Distance 一类指标；KVAE-2D 则在图像 tokenizer 上做对应评测。音频部分使用 PESQ 等客观指标，并强调 48 kHz 全频带、50 Hz latent、64 通道这一配置。摘要声称 KVAE 在 reconstruction 和 generation 上匹配或超过开源替代方案，但当前提供的正文片段没有完整结果表，因此无法可靠复述每个数据集上的具体数值排名。\n\n即便如此，实验设计本身已经传达出几个重要信息。第一，作者没有把 tokenizer 只当作自编码器来评估，而是把它放回下游生成链路中看最终生成质量，这比单看重建误差更合理。第二，视频 tokenizer 明确针对长序列训练和因果推理场景设计，说明评测应当包含长视频或 image-to-video 相关设置，而不是只在短片段上比较。第三，论文单独讨论 diffusability 评估和设计消融，意味着作者试图回答“为什么这个 tokenizer 更适合生成”，而不只是“它重建得更清楚”。如果后续阅读全文，最值得核对的是：高压缩版本 4×16×16(64ch) 相比 4×8×8(16ch) 在生成质量、训练稳定性和 token 成本上的具体 trade-off；decoder 加宽、attention-free、顺序时空下采样这些设计各自贡献了多少。","reading_guide":"这篇文章适合按“问题定义—架构设计—生成链路验证—消融解释”四步读。先看 Introduction，抓住作者对 tokenizer 角色的界定：它不是附属模块，而是 latent generative model 的一部分。然后重点读视频 tokenizer 方法部分，尤其是 attention-free Conv3D、causal setup、spatial RMSNorm、顺序时空下采样、encoder/decoder 非对称这几处设计。这里最值得想的是作者为什么不用更重的时空注意力，以及为什么高压缩版本反而把 decoder 做得更大。\n\n接着看 reconstruction 与 generation 的主结果表，不要只盯 PSNR/LPIPS，要同时看生成指标和训练设置。再看 diffusability 评估与 ablation，这部分决定这篇工作是否只是“工程调参”，还是对 tokenizer 设计规律有更清楚的经验总结。若你的兴趣在统一多模态 pretrain，音频部分也值得看，因为它把视觉 tokenizer 的一些设计原则迁移到了高采样率连续音频。预计泛读 35–45 分钟；若要复现或用于自家生成系统，方法和消融部分需要精读。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies tokenizers as a first-class component of multimodal generative systems, not as a preprocessing detail. The central question is how to build latent representations for image, video, and audio generation that jointly satisfy three competing requirements: strong compression, good reconstruction, and a latent space that is easy for downstream diffusion models to learn. In practice, these goals conflict. Aggressive compression reduces token count and makes generation cheaper, but it can damage fidelity and make the latent distribution harder to model. The KVAE family is presented as a unified answer to that design problem across modalities.","importance":"This matters for pretraining and multimodal foundation models because the tokenizer defines the effective sequence length, the information bottleneck, and part of the geometry of the learning problem seen by the generator. In latent diffusion, and even in AR-plus-diffusion hybrids, tokenizer design directly affects training speed, sample quality, and scaling behavior. The paper is useful less for a single isolated metric win and more for treating image, video, and audio tokenization under one design lens, with explicit emphasis on the trade-off between compression ratio and diffusability. For researchers working on visual tokenizers, speech/audio tokenization, unified latent spaces, or native multimodal pretraining, that framing is practically relevant.","technical_approach":"$23","experiments":"$24","reading_guide":"$25","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"值得细读 tokenizer 压缩率与生成指标的对应表；多模态预训练的成本上限常被这里决定。","en":"Read the compression-vs-generation tables carefully; for multimodal pretraining, this tokenizer choice often fixes the practical cost ceiling."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Andrey Shutkin","Denis Parkhomenko","Ivan Kirillov","Kirill Chernyshev","Kirill Malakhov","Ilia Vasiliev","Ilia Trushkin","Valeriya Kobenko","David Chikovani","Alexander Ivanov","Azat Saginbaev","Egor Silvestrov","Ivan Mikheev","Konstantin Zakharov"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["multimodal-tokenizer","VAE","audio-tokenization","video-tokenization","latent-diffusion"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05798","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05798","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05237","title":"In-Context Forcing: Uncovering Context Effects in Autoregressive Video Diffusion","abstract":"Current few-step autoregressive video diffusion models depend on previous fully denoised clean frames as context for all denoising steps of the current frame. However, these clean frames leak excessive local details, which causes the model to take shortcuts, resulting in compromised temporal semantics and dynamics. Inspired by the perspective of diffusion as masking, we explore the impact of noisy contexts on few-step autoregressive generation. Yet, simply applying contexts with the same noise l","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-05T13:54:31Z","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05237.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是少步数自回归视频 diffusion 中的上下文使用问题。现有方法在生成当前帧的所有去噪步骤里都使用已经完全去噪的历史帧作为条件。干净历史帧会泄漏过多局部细节，模型容易复制相邻帧纹理，而不是学习合理的时间语义和运动变化。直接把历史帧加到同等噪声水平又会削弱条件信息，导致时序一致性变差。","importance":"对文本 LLM 预训练的直接价值有限，但对 AR 与 diffusion 混合建模有参考意义。关键启发是：自回归上下文不一定越干净越好。条件信息的可见度需要和生成阶段匹配，否则会引入 shortcut 或训练-推理不一致。这个问题在统一多模态 LM、视频 token 自回归生成、masked/diffusion language modeling 中都有相似形式。","technical_approach":"方法叫 In-Context Forcing。它把 diffusion 视为一种 masking 过程，对历史上下文施加分层噪声：相邻帧保留较少细节，远距离帧保留更多信息。这样做的动机是，相邻帧最容易提供可复制的局部纹理，需要更强 masking；远距离帧更偏向提供场景和语义约束，可以更干净一些。训练侧提出 Step-wise Rolling KV Cache，在每个去噪步保存对应噪声水平的 KV cache，并在一帧去噪完成后做 bottom-up rolling update，用来维护不同噪声级别的历史上下文，同时模拟推理时的自回归状态。推理侧利用这种对完全干净历史帧依赖的解耦，引入 cross-frame causal attention，把多级 KV 的显存压力降到单一 KV cache，并支持跨帧并行去噪。","experiments":"实验覆盖标准短视频生成和长视频生成，并与 CausVid、Self Forcing、Rolling Forcing 等少步数自回归视频 diffusion 路线形成对比。论文强调的结果包括更好的时序一致性、更强的帧间动态，以及在不明显牺牲质量的情况下获得单卡推理加速。给出的全文片段没有包含具体表格数值、模型规模、数据规模或加速倍数，因此不宜补写定量结论。消融重点应是干净上下文、同噪声上下文、递减噪声上下文三者的对比，以及 Step-wise Rolling KV Cache 和 cross-frame causal attention 对训练一致性、显存、速度的影响。","reading_guide":"泛读建议 20–30 分钟。先看 Fig. 1 和 Introduction，理解 clean context 泄漏局部细节、same-noise context 条件不足、Rolling Forcing 目标分布不匹配这三个问题。方法部分重点看 In-Context Forcing 的噪声调度，以及 Step-wise Rolling KV Cache 如何维护不同噪声级别的上下文。实验部分优先看上下文噪声策略的消融、注意力可视化、长视频稳定性和推理显存/速度对比。对 LLM 研究更有用的是“上下文可见度控制”这个设计，而不是视频指标本身。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies context usage in few-step autoregressive video diffusion. Current models condition every denoising step of the current frame on fully denoised past frames. These clean frames expose too much local detail, so the model can copy nearby texture instead of modeling temporal semantics and motion. Adding the same noise level to the context removes too much guidance and hurts temporal consistency.","importance":"The work is not directly about text LLM pretraining, but it is useful for AR-diffusion hybrid modeling. The main lesson is that autoregressive context should not always be maximally clean. The amount of visible information in the context must match the generation stage; otherwise the model either learns shortcuts or suffers from train-inference mismatch. Similar issues can appear in unified multimodal LMs, autoregressive video-token generation, and masked or diffusion language modeling.","technical_approach":"In-Context Forcing treats diffusion noise as a form of masking and uses a progressive context schedule. Nearby frames are given more noise, while distant frames are given less noise. The rationale is practical: adjacent frames contain the strongest copyable local details and therefore need heavier masking, whereas distant frames mostly provide scene and semantic constraints. For training, the paper introduces a Step-wise Rolling KV Cache. It stores KV states for each denoising noise level and performs a bottom-up rolling update after a frame is completed, maintaining progressive noisy contexts while matching inference behavior. For inference, the method uses cross-frame causal attention, reducing the need for multi-level KV caches to a single cache and enabling parallel denoising across frames.","experiments":"The experiments cover both standard short-video generation and extended long-video generation, with comparisons to CausVid, Self Forcing, and Rolling Forcing-style approaches. The reported claims are improved temporal consistency, stronger inter-frame dynamics, and faster single-GPU inference without a clear quality loss. The supplied content does not include exact metric values, model sizes, data sizes, or speedup numbers, so quantitative conclusions should be checked in the tables. The most relevant ablations are clean context versus same-noise context versus progressive noisy context, plus the effects of Step-wise Rolling KV Cache and cross-frame causal attention on consistency, memory, and speed.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 20–30 minutes. Start with Fig. 1 and the introduction to understand the three failure modes: clean-context detail leakage, insufficient guidance from same-noise contexts, and the objective mismatch discussed for Rolling Forcing. Then read the method sections on the noise schedule and Step-wise Rolling KV Cache. In the experiments, focus on context-noise ablations, attention visualizations, long-video stability, and memory/speed comparisons. For LLM researchers, the transferable idea is controlled context visibility, not the video benchmark itself.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"AR+diffusion混合范式的上下文设计有直接参考价值，重点看§3的渐进式噪声策略推导和实验对比图。","en":"Useful for context design in AR+diffusion hybrid modeling; focus on §3 for progressive noise strategy derivation and experimental comparison figures."},"metadata":{"institutions":["ShanghaiTech University","Tencent Youtu Lab","Zhejiang University","M. Li , W. Cao and H. Feng are with Tencent Youtu Lab (e-mail:","L. Yang, L. Liu, and Y. Shi are with the School of Information Sci-","ence and Technology, ShanghaiTech University","J. Zhang is with the College of Computer Science and Technology"],"authors":["Lingxiao Yang","Liu Liu","Moran Li","Han Feng","Wenjian Cao","Jiangning Zhang","Ye Shi"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["autoregressive diffusion","video generation","context conditioning","hybrid modeling","temporal consistency"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05237","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05237","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05803","title":"Vorch-Omni: Multi-Task Orchestration of Sight and Sound","abstract":"Recent advances in generative video modeling have enabled diverse generation, reference-based synthesis, extension, and editing, but existing approaches often rely on fragmented task-specific models. A general model must distinguish heterogeneous target, source, and reference signals to determine what to generate, preserve, or use as guidance, while reducing interference among tasks. Joint audio-visual generation further increases this challenge by introducing diverse conditioning and output con","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T09:38:30Z","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05803.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"在一个统一的音视频生成/编辑模型里，如何把“同样是音频/视频输入”在不同任务中扮演的不同角色（要生成的目标、要保留的源、只做身份/风格/结构参考的引用、做时序上下文的前缀等）显式表达出来，从而减少多任务互相干扰，并支持任意条件到任意输出（arbitrary-condition-to-arbitrary-output）的任务接口。","importance":"对“跨模态统一预训练”的启发主要在任务接口与训练信号组织，而不是单点架构技巧：它把音频与视频的多种条件/输出组合，抽象成带有显式 token role 的条件去噪学习问题，试图解决统一模型里最常见的两类失败：条件歧义（source vs reference vs prefix 混在一起）和多目标干扰（编辑/扩展/参考生成互相拉扯）。如果全文给出了可复用的 role 编码、任务混合策略与数据构造方式，这类设计会直接影响后续做原生多模态 foundation model 的 pretrain recipe。","technical_approach":"从引言可读到的核心技术路线是：\n1) 任务统一表述：把生成、参考合成、扩展、编辑、以及音视频联合生成，统一为“条件去噪”框架下的多种输入-输出配置；关键不是把所有东西拼接，而是让模型知道每段输入在当前任务里是什么角色。\n2) 显式 token roles：通过显式标注/编码 token 的语义角色（target/source/reference/context 等），给模型直接的重建/保留/修改/引用指令，降低隐式拼接导致的角色混淆与梯度冲突。\n3) 条件双通路（conditioning duality）：同时需要语义通路（理解文本指令、结合视觉证据做语义推理）与潜变量通路（保留身份、纹理、布局、运动等细粒度信息）。这暗示模型内部会区分“可推理的语义条件”与“应被拷贝/对齐的低层条件”，并在音视频两模态下处理“某模态缺失/只做参考/只做目标”的组合。\n4) 数据与任务配比：作者明确把 data consistency & balance 作为第三个挑战，意味着训练中需要真实对齐的音视频对、可复用的标注以派生多任务配置、以及对稀缺的 reference/edit/audio-conditioned 数据做配比或课程，否则数据丰富的目标会主导共享模型。\n\n受限于你提供的全文片段在引言处截断，具体实现（role 的编码方式、网络结构是单流还是双塔、loss 如何在不同任务间加权、是否有 task routing 或 adapter、以及训练时如何采样 condition-output 配置）无法从现有内容可靠复原。","experiments":"当前可见内容未包含实验章节与具体数字。引言层面只给出了任务范围与挑战定义，没有参数规模、数据规模、基线对比、消融（例如：无 role 编码/仅拼接、仅语义通路或仅潜变量通路、不同任务混合比例、对齐数据噪声敏感性）等信息，因此无法基于“全文证据”给出定量结论。","reading_guide":"建议泛读路径（在拿到完整 PDF 后）：\n- 先找“task/interface”相关章节：看作者如何枚举 condition-output 配置空间，role taxonomy 如何定义，role token/embedding 如何注入（加到 token embedding、作为额外序列、还是作为 attention bias）。\n- 再看“conditioning duality”实现：语义通路与潜变量通路分别接什么输入、在什么层融合、是否共享 backbone、如何避免语义通路过强导致细节丢失。\n- 重点看数据构造与 mixture：音视频对齐数据来源、如何从同一条样本派生多任务训练对、任务采样分布、以及对 reference/edit 稀缺任务的过采样或 reweight。\n- 最后看消融：role 显式化带来的收益是否主要体现在“减少错误使用条件”（例如把 source 当 reference、把 reference 当要保留的内容）、以及在跨模态依赖任务（audio->video lip sync、video->audio Foley）上的提升。\n预计阅读时间：30–45 分钟抓主线；若要复现/迁移其 task interface 与数据配比，需额外精读数据与训练细节（1–2 小时）。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to build a single unified audio-video generation/editing model that can reliably disambiguate heterogeneous inputs (target to generate, source to preserve/edit, references for identity/style/structure, temporal prefix for continuation, etc.) across many tasks, by making token roles explicit so multi-task training does not collapse into conditioning confusion and objective interference.","importance":"The main value for foundation-model pretraining is the task/interface design rather than a narrow architectural tweak: it frames a broad set of audio-video tasks as arbitrary-condition-to-arbitrary-output conditional denoising with explicit role signaling. If the full paper provides a concrete role encoding, task-mixture recipe, and aligned data construction, it becomes a reusable pretraining pattern for native multimodal generators where “what to keep vs what to change” is the core failure mode.","technical_approach":"$26","experiments":"No experimental section or numbers are present in the provided content. Without the full results and ablations (e.g., removing role tokens, removing one pathway, changing task mixture, robustness to alignment noise), it is not possible to report quantitative gains or validate which component drives improvements.","reading_guide":"Skim plan once the full PDF is available:\n- Locate the task interface definition: the full list of condition→output configurations and the role taxonomy.\n- Inspect how roles are injected (embeddings, special tokens, attention bias) and how this prevents source/reference/prefix confusion.\n- Study the dual-pathway implementation and fusion points; check whether semantic conditioning harms low-level fidelity and how they mitigate it.\n- Read the data/mixture section carefully: aligned A/V sources, how they derive multiple tasks from one sample, sampling weights/curriculum.\n- Prioritize ablations that directly test role disambiguation and cross-modal dependency tasks (audio→video lip motion, video→audio Foley).\nTime: ~30–45 minutes to understand the main idea; 1–2 hours if you want to reuse the interface + mixture recipe.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"读建模接口即可；mask、task id、position type 的组合比生成样例更值得预训练研究员看。","en":"Skim the modeling interface; the mix of masks, task IDs, and position types is more useful than the generation samples."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Vorch Team"],"authors":["Vorch Team","Xiaoyu Chen","Yang Ding","Cong Han","Menglin Han","Yuxin Hong","Jiebo Hou","Zequn Jie","Xiang Li","Jing Liu","Qi Liu","Yulei Lu","Siyuan Luo","Lin Ma","Xin Ma","Yinlong Qian","Peng Shi","Fang Wan","Siqi Wang","Yaohui Wang","Yaole Wang","Yidi Wu","Siqian Yang","Mingyu Yin","Haoran Yu","Gang Yue","Lisai Zhang","Yuting Zhang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["audio-visual-generation","unified-modeling","multitask-generation","conditioning-mask","video-generation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05803","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05803","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05727","title":"LILAC: An Idempotent Neural Speech Codec","abstract":"Neural Audio Codecs are widely adopted in speech generation and editing. However, existing neural audio codecs are not idempotent: across the paper's twelve baseline systems, every configuration tested rewrites, on average, at least 15% of its tokens in a single decode-re-encode pass. This poses a problem for utilizing Neural Audio Codecs as token interfaces in pipelines where re-encoding decoded outputs can occur. We present LILAC, a fully convolutional 24 kHz speech codec at 9.375 Hz and 0.75 ","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T08:09:48Z","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05727.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.SD","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有神经语音编解码器不具备编解码幂等性，单次解码-重编码流程平均会改写至少15%的token，多次循环后误差累积导致语音可懂度与自然度下降，阻碍其作为token接口用于需重编码的语音生成、编辑、存储或重传流水线。","importance":"对语音LLM、统一多模态预训练的tokenizer层有直接启发：幂等的离散语音token表示可消除多轮生成/编辑/重传中的语义漂移，降低跨模态流水线中语音token的一致性维护成本，避免现有方案靠辅助损失抑漂移的残留误差问题。","technical_approach":"核心是通过构造性设计保证幂等性，而非依赖训练损失约束。采用全卷积架构，由两部分组成：一是可逆分析变换，包含正交1×1卷积、加性耦合块、Stem预处理阶段，通过4次squeeze-and-mix操作压缩时间维度、扩展通道至80，选择性拆分保留坐标与丢弃坐标；二是丢弃坐标预测模块φ。使用有限标量量化（FSQ）对保留坐标做量化，解码器先由量化后的保留坐标预测丢弃坐标，再执行严格的逆变换。通过代数证明：无论模型权重收敛情况如何，重编码解码后的音频必然得到完全相同的token流，该保证还可扩展至带随机噪声输入的随机解码器。","experiments":"测试12种现有基线编解码器，单次解码-重编码平均改写≥15%的token。LILAC为24kHz全带语音编解码器，码率0.75kbit/s、帧率9.375Hz、每帧80bit；100次解码-重编码循环下无任何token漂移，语音质量无累积下降，重建性能与其他1kbit/s以下神经编解码器相当。","reading_guide":"重点关注第2节（编解码幂等性的定义与代数证明）、第3节方法中的可逆变换核心设计；泛读约20分钟，可跳过具体卷积层的实现细节，核心理解构造性幂等与传统损失约束抑漂移的本质差异。","authors_note":"未明确标注所属机构；第一作者关联GitHub账号Rick-McCoy，模型权重托管于Hugging Face账号julianyi。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing neural speech codecs lack codec idempotency: across 12 tested baselines, at least 15% of tokens are rewritten on average in a single decode-re-encode pass. Residual errors accumulate over repeated cycles to degrade speech intelligibility and naturalness, blocking their adoption as token interfaces in speech generation, editing, storage, or retransmission pipelines that require re-encoding decoded outputs.","importance":"Delivers direct insights for the tokenizer layer of speech LLMs and unified multimodal pretraining. An idempotent discrete speech token representation eliminates semantic drift across multi-round generation, editing, or retransmission, reduces the cost of maintaining token consistency in cross-modal pipelines, and avoids the residual error limitation of traditional drift-reduction auxiliary losses.","technical_approach":"Guarantees idempotency by construction rather than training loss constraints. The fully convolutional architecture has two components: first, an invertible analysis transform consisting of orthogonal 1×1 convolutions, additive coupling blocks, and a Stem preprocessing stage, which compresses the time dimension and expands channels to 80 via 4 squeeze-and-mix operations, splitting inputs into retained and discarded coordinates; second, a fill module φ that predicts discarded coordinates. Finite Scalar Quantization (FSQ) is applied to retained coordinates. The decoder first predicts discarded coordinates from quantized retained coordinates, then executes the exact inverse transform. An algebraic proof confirms that re-encoding any decoded valid token stream returns the identical stream, regardless of model weights or convergence, and this guarantee extends to stochastic decoders with auxiliary noise inputs.","experiments":"12 baseline codecs exhibit ≥15% average token rewrite rate per decode-re-encode pass. LILAC operates at 24kHz full-band, 0.75kbit/s bitrate, 9.375Hz frame rate, and 80 bits per frame. No token drift is observed over 100 decode-re-encode cycles, with no cumulative degradation in speech quality, and reconstruction performance matches other sub-1kbit/s neural codecs.","reading_guide":"Focus on Section 2 (definition and algebraic proof of codec idempotency) and the core invertible transform design in Section 3. Skim takes approximately 20 minutes; low-level convolutional layer implementation details can be skipped. Prioritize understanding the fundamental difference between construction-based idempotency and traditional loss-based drift reduction.","authors_note":"No explicit institutional affiliation listed; first author associated with GitHub account Rick-McCoy, model checkpoints hosted on Hugging Face under account julianyi."},"recommendation":{"zh":"音频 tokenizer 的重要改进，解决了 decode-re-encode 的 token 漂移问题，对做 Audio LM 统一建模的研究员非常有启发。","en":"Important improvement for audio tokenizers, solving the token drift issue in decode-re-encode, highly inspiring for researchers working on unified Audio LM modeling."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Seoul National University"],"authors":["June Young Yi","Dongwook Lee","Jiheum Yeom","Sungroh Yoon"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["Neural Audio Codec","Idempotency","Speech Tokenization","Audio LM"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05727","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05727","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05663","title":"Vorch-Streamer: Extending Human Audio-Visual Generation to Real-Time Long-Form Streaming","abstract":"Real-time long-form avatar audio--video generation requires causal, continuous synthesis while maintaining audiovisual synchronization and visual consistency. Adapting a pretrained bidirectional model to this setting presents two key dilemmas. First, autoregressively reusing generated blocks as context creates exposure bias, causing errors and visual drift to accumulate over long rollouts. Second, a global speech utterance does not indicates a causal generator which portion should be spoken next","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T07:00:37Z","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05663.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV","cs.SD"],"summary":{"core_problem":"把预训练双向音频-视频生成模型改成实时长时流式生成时，存在自回归上下文复用导致的曝光偏差/视觉漂移，以及全局语音无法指示因果生成器当前应生成哪一段的问题。","importance":"工程与训练方法结合的流式数字人生成工作；对长时因果生成、self-forcing 与蒸馏有一定参考价值。","technical_approach":"构建 80K、12–21 秒的合成数字人语料；先用混合 Teacher Forcing 与 Diffusion Forcing 训练因果生成器，再用 long-horizon Self Forcing 加 DMD 蒸馏，让模型暴露在自身 rollout 分布下。","experiments":"80K avatar clips；摘要未给基线模型或量化对比，强调实时长时流式 T2AV。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Adapting a pretrained bidirectional audio-video model to real-time long-form streaming causes exposure bias and visual drift from autoregressive context reuse, and global speech does not tell a causal generator which portion to produce next.","importance":"A combined engineering and training-method effort for streaming avatars; relevant to long-horizon causal generation, self-forcing, and distillation.","technical_approach":"Builds an 80K-clip synthetic avatar corpus (12–21 s), trains a causal generator with mixed Teacher Forcing and Diffusion Forcing, then applies long-horizon Self Forcing with DMD distillation to expose the model to its own rollout distribution.","experiments":"Uses 80K avatar clips; the abstract gives no baseline models or quantitative comparisons, emphasizing real-time long-form T2AV streaming.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"Self Forcing + DMD 缓解长时 rollout 漂移的思路可借鉴，但属音视频生成应用，看方法段即可。","en":"The Self-Forcing-plus-DMD remedy for long-horizon drift is transferable, but this is an AV-generation application—read the method section only."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Vorch Team","Tongji University","Harbin Institute of Technology","Shanghai Jiao Tong University"],"authors":["Menglin Han","Yang Ding","Yulei Lu","Haoran Yu","Xin Ma","Junyi Chen","Zhangkai Ni","Lin Ma","Yaohui Wang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["streaming generation","audio-visual generation","self forcing","diffusion forcing","distillation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05663","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05663","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05776","title":"Vorch-Director: Interactive World Story Model via Noise-Aware Error Rectification","abstract":"Autoregressive continuation provides a natural path toward minute-scale audio-visual generation by repeatedly extending a short-window generator conditioned on previously generated video and audio. However, models are trained on clean ground-truth histories, while inference relies on their own generated histories, where accumulated errors cause identity drift, over-smoothing, and audio-visual desynchronization. Recent methods reduce this mismatch by reusing prediction residuals as synthetic corr","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T09:09:49Z","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05776.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决长时长音视频自回归续写中，训练使用干净历史而推理使用模型生成历史导致的误差累积、身份漂移、过平滑和音画不同步问题。","importance":"贡献类型是长程多模态生成训练策略改进。它对 LLM 预训练不是直接贡献，但 exposure bias、生成历史污染和 flow-matching 噪声级匹配这些问题，与长上下文自回归生成和联合模态建模有可迁移的工程直觉。","technical_approach":"提出 Vorch-Director，一种 noise-level-aware residual correction 策略。已有方法会复用 prediction residual 作为合成 corruption 来缩小 train-inference mismatch；本文进一步记录 residual 产生时对应的 flow-matching noise level，并在训练中注入与当前 denoising regime 匹配的 residual，使合成错误分布与去噪过程对齐。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体模型规模、数据规模、baseline 名称和数值提升。实验目标是 minute-scale audio-visual generation，评价维度包括长程身份一致性、视频清晰度、过平滑程度和 audio-visual synchronization。","authors_note":"作者来自浙江大学。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles error accumulation in long-form autoregressive audio-visual generation, where models are trained on clean histories but must condition on their own generated histories at inference.","importance":"This is a training-strategy contribution for long-horizon multimodal generation. It is not directly about LLM pretraining, but its treatment of exposure bias, corrupted generated histories, and flow-matching noise regimes is relevant to long-context generation and unified multimodal modeling.","technical_approach":"Vorch-Director introduces noise-level-aware residual correction. Prior methods reuse prediction residuals as synthetic corruptions; this paper associates each residual with the flow-matching noise level that produced it and injects residuals from matched noise regimes during training, aligning the injected errors with the denoising process.","experiments":"The abstract does not report model size, training data scale, baseline names, or quantitative gains. The evaluation targets minute-scale audio-visual generation, with expected metrics around identity consistency, sharpness, oversmoothing, and audio-visual synchronization.","authors_note":"The authors are from Zhejiang University."},"recommendation":{"zh":"看 residual 与 noise level 匹配这一点即可；它是长程生成 exposure bias 的实用修补，不是范式变化。","en":"The useful bit is residual-to-noise-level matching; it is a practical patch for long-horizon exposure bias, not a modeling shift."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Zhejiang University"],"authors":["Lisai Zhang","Yidi Wu","Qi Liu","Xin Ma","Yang Ding","Gang Yue","Siqian Yang","Jingyuan Chen","Lin Ma","Yaohui Wang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["audio-visual-generation","flow-matching","autoregressive-generation","exposure-bias","long-horizon-generation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05776","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05776","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05811","title":"Energy-Guided Flow Matching","abstract":"Pixel-space generative models bypass lossy latent compression, yet necessitate joint learning of global structure and fine-grained details in a high-dimensional space. Standard flow matching interpolates noise toward a fixed clean-image endpoint, leaving the spectral evolution to be learned implicitly. In this paper, we introduce Energy-Guided Flow Matching(EG-FM) that explicitly models a coarse-to-fine generative trajectory by moving endpoint. Specifically, EG-FM replaces the fixed endpoint wit","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T09:44:00Z","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05811.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 pixel-space flow matching 在高维图像空间中需要同时学习全局结构和细节纹理，频谱演化完全隐式、训练负担较重的问题。","importance":"这是图像生成建模方法改进，贡献在于把 flow matching 的固定 clean endpoint 改成随时间释放高频信息的移动 endpoint；对文本 LLM 预训练不是直接相关，但对 flow/diffusion 生成轨迹设计有参考意义。","technical_approach":"提出 Energy-Guided Flow Matching。方法用 heat-kernel-filtered endpoint 替代固定干净图像端点，使目标从低频图像平滑过渡到完整图像；高频释放比例由 image-specific energy-guided schedule 控制，从而重定向 velocity field。作者强调不需要改 backbone 或训练数据，训练和推理额外开销很小。","experiments":"在 ImageNet 类条件图像生成上评估，摘要称 EG-FM 相比标准 flow matching 持续降低 FID；未给出具体 backbone、参数量、训练数据规模、baseline 列表和提升数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles the difficulty of pixel-space flow matching, where the model must learn both global structure and fine details while spectral evolution is left implicit.","importance":"This is an image-generation modeling improvement. Its main contribution is replacing the fixed clean endpoint in flow matching with a moving endpoint that gradually releases high-frequency content. It is not directly about LLM pretraining, but the trajectory-design idea is relevant to diffusion and flow-based generative modeling.","technical_approach":"Energy-Guided Flow Matching uses a heat-kernel-filtered endpoint instead of a fixed clean image endpoint. The endpoint evolves from a low-frequency version of the image to the clean image, and an image-specific energy-guided schedule controls how much high-frequency signal is released, thereby retargeting the velocity field. The method is presented as backbone- and data-agnostic with negligible extra cost.","experiments":"The method is evaluated on ImageNet class-conditional image generation, where the abstract reports consistently lower FID than standard flow matching. The abstract does not provide model size, training scale, exact baselines, or numerical gains.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看方法图和 ImageNet FID 表即可；对离散 LM 没直接结论，但 endpoint 调度思路可借鉴。","en":"Skim the method figure and ImageNet FID table; it says little about discrete LMs, but the endpoint scheduling idea is reusable."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Haoyang Tong","Yu He","Fang Li","Lichen Ma","Jingling Fu","Dong Chen","Zhen Chen","Junshi Huang","Jie Cao"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["flow-matching","image-generation","spectral-schedule","pixel-space-generation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05811","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05811","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05903","title":"Robust-WAM: Bridging Generative Pretraining and Semantic Foresight in World-Action Models","abstract":"Mainstream World-Action Models (WAMs) adapt pretrained video generation models (VGMs) for robot control, transferring their learned dynamics prior for action prediction. These VGMs are typically trained in a variational autoencoder (VAE) latent space. However, the VAE latent space is optimized for pixel reconstruction, which rewards fine appearance detail and leaves the action prediction fragile under visual shifts. Recent works build WAMs in semantic latent space, which are more robust to appea","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T11:31:56Z","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05903.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV","cs.RO"],"summary":{"core_problem":"视频生成模型可为机器人 World-Action Models 提供动态先验，但其 VAE latent 偏向像素重建，导致动作预测在光照、外观变化下脆弱。","importance":"贡献是机器人控制场景下复用大规模视频生成预训练的一种后训练对齐方法。它不直接推进 LLM 预训练，但对“生成预训练表征如何服务行动模型”有一定参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出 Robust-WAM，保留原有 VAE latent 中的视频生成路径，同时在动作流上加入轻量的 semantic foresight alignment objective；这样既不丢掉 VAE 空间中已有的大规模视频生成预训练能力，又把动作预测约束到更稳定、对外观变化不敏感的语义动态上。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体参数量、训练数据规模、robotics benchmark 名称或提升幅度；实验重点应是比较 VAE latent WAM、semantic latent WAM 和加入语义前瞻对齐后的鲁棒性，尤其是光照和外观 shift 下的动作预测。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Video-generation-based World-Action Models can transfer dynamics priors to robot control, but VAE latents optimized for pixel reconstruction make action prediction fragile under visual shifts.","importance":"The contribution is a post-training alignment method for reusing large-scale video generation pretraining in action models. It does not directly advance LLM pretraining, but it is relevant to how generative pretraining representations can be grounded for control.","technical_approach":"Robust-WAM keeps the VAE-latent generative pathway and adds a lightweight semantic foresight alignment objective on the action stream. The method preserves pretrained video-generation capacity while anchoring actions in more appearance-invariant semantic dynamics.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide model size, data scale, benchmark names, or numerical gains. The likely evaluation compares VAE-latent WAMs, semantic-latent WAMs, and the proposed aligned variant under illumination and appearance shifts.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看方法图和鲁棒性实验即可；它提醒生成预训练 latent 不等于行动可用 latent，但证据仍是机器人小场景。","en":"Skim the method diagram and robustness tests; it is a useful reminder that generative latents are not action-ready, though the evidence is robotics-bound."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Haodong Yan","Junfeng Li","Junjie He","Zhide Zhong","MingMing Yu","Wenxuan Song","Jiaguan Zhu","Yangyang Zheng","Yuqiao Du","Jiadi You","Yingjie Cai","Xu Yan","Guanyi Zhao","Bingbing Liu","Haoang Li"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["world-models","video-generation","robot-control","latent-alignment","post-training"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05903","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05903","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05976","title":"Diff-VF: Training-free High-quality Long Video Generation via Diffusion Model","abstract":"Recently, diffusion models have made great progress in video generation. However, most existing video diffusion models are trained with short videos, and degrade when extrapolated to long videos, struggling to maintain long-range temporal coherence while retaining diverse motions. To generate consistent, high-quality and dynamic long videos, we propose Diff-VF, a training-free, plug-and-play and model-agnostic framework that converts existing short-video diffusion backbones into long-video gener","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T12:53:46Z","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05976.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决短视频 diffusion backbone 外推到长视频时出现的长程时序不一致、窗口断裂和运动多样性下降问题。","importance":"贡献是多模态生成侧的 sampling 框架，不是语言模型预训练；对预训练研究员的价值主要在于观察 training-free temporal stitching 如何利用现有生成模型的先验。","technical_approach":"提出 Diff-VF，一个无需训练、即插即用、模型无关的长视频生成框架。它结合 Hybrid Noise Initialization 约束全局语义，Weighted Window Sampling 平滑跨窗口边界，Temporal Extended Sampling 用随 timestep 变化的融合建立长程依赖；还用 Skip Residual Guidance 扩展到长视频增强。","experiments":"基于现有短视频 diffusion 模型做长视频生成与增强评测，并提到使用 VBench 等视频生成评测。摘要未给出 backbone、参数量、视频长度和具体提升数值；核心报告是相对已有长视频扩展方案能改善一致性、质量和动态性。","authors_note":"摘要标注存在 Cohere 相关 notable 信息，但无法仅从给定作者列表确认具体团队归属。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the failure of short-video diffusion backbones when extrapolated to long videos, especially long-range temporal inconsistency, window discontinuities, and reduced motion diversity.","importance":"The contribution is a sampling framework for multimodal generation rather than language-model pretraining. Its relevance is mainly as a case study in exploiting pretrained generative priors without retraining.","technical_approach":"Diff-VF is a training-free, plug-and-play, model-agnostic framework. It combines Hybrid Noise Initialization for global semantics, Weighted Window Sampling for cross-window continuity, and Temporal Extended Sampling with timestep-varying fusion for long-range dependencies. Skip Residual Guidance extends the method to long-video enhancement.","experiments":"The method is evaluated on long-video generation and enhancement using existing short-video diffusion backbones, with VBench mentioned in the abstract. The abstract does not provide backbone sizes, generated lengths, or exact gains; it claims improved consistency, quality, and motion dynamics over prior extensions.","authors_note":"The metadata marks Cohere as a notable institution, but the provided author information alone is insufficient to confirm exact affiliations."},"recommendation":{"zh":"值得扫一眼采样设计：不是预训练突破，但 HNI/WWS/TES 是长程生成里低成本利用模型先验的实用套路。","en":"Worth a quick skim for the sampling design: not a pretraining advance, but HNI/WWS/TES are practical ways to reuse short-video priors for long generation."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Cohere"],"authors":["Haoning Yang","Xinyuan Chen","Yaohui Wang","Guo Lu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["video-generation","diffusion-models","training-free","long-video"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05976","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05976","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06009","title":"Wan-Animate-2: Pushing the Application Boundaries of Character Animation","abstract":"Character image animation remains a foundational yet challenging task in computer vision. Existing approaches can be broadly categorized into three paradigms: methods based on explicit motion representations suffer from extraction errors and identity drift; methods based on implicit motion features lose fine-grained dynamics through compression; and in-context learning approaches avoid intermediate representations but incur prohibitive computational costs. Furthermore, all current systems are de","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T13:13:10Z","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06009.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决角色图像动画中身份漂移、细粒度动作丢失、离线生成成本高，以及难以满足实时交互应用的问题。","importance":"这是角色动画和视频生成系统工作，可能对多模态生成工程有参考，但不是 LLM 基座预训练或统一多模态建模的核心论文。","technical_approach":"Wan-Animate-2 采用端到端框架，在重新设计的 Diffusion Transformer 中直接消费 driving video，避免显式姿态、骨架或其他中间运动表示；摘要还提到扩展到 text-driven 能力，目标是在动作保真、身份保持和实时性之间取得更好折中。","experiments":"摘要声称在动作保真和身份保持上优于现有三类方法，并面向数字人、直播等交互场景降低计算成本；未给出模型规模、训练数据、推理速度、baseline 名称或定量提升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets character image animation, focusing on identity drift, loss of fine-grained motion, high offline synthesis cost, and the lack of real-time capability for interactive use cases.","importance":"This is a character-animation and video-generation system paper. It may be useful for multimodal generation engineering, but it is not central to LLM base pretraining or unified multimodal modeling.","technical_approach":"Wan-Animate-2 uses an end-to-end framework with a redesigned Diffusion Transformer that directly consumes the driving video, avoiding explicit pose, skeleton, or other intermediate motion representations. The abstract also mentions text-driven extensions and a focus on motion fidelity, identity preservation, and interactive latency.","experiments":"The abstract claims better motion fidelity and identity preservation than existing paradigms and targets lower cost for digital-avatar and live-streaming scenarios. It does not provide model size, training data, inference speed, baseline names, or quantitative gains.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为视频生成系统动态了解即可；若没有开放训练细节和消融，预训练研究员不必读正文。","en":"Useful only as a video-generation system update; without training details and ablations, a pretraining researcher need not read the full paper."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Guangyuan Wang","Li Hu","Dechao Meng","Zhongyi Zhang","Peng Zhang","Mingyang Huang","Ruoshi Zhang","Ke Sun","Zhe Zhang","Xingjun Wang","Gang Cheng","Bang Zhang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["character-animation","diffusion-transformer","video-generation","real-time-generation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06009","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06009","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05714","title":"RA-CAD: Learning Post-Execution Critique for State-Aware Text-to-CAD Generation","abstract":"Text-to-CAD generation translates natural-language design intent into editable and executable parametric computer-aided design (CAD) codes, reducing the expertise and effort required for manual modeling. Existing methods incorporate fixed, externally supplied, prompt-induced, or separately optimized critique mechanisms to optimize the generation process, but they do not necessarily optimize how feedback is interpreted and translated into effective corrective actions throughout the generation pro","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T07:52:45Z","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05714.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有文本到CAD生成方法的批评机制固定或独立优化，未优化反馈的解读与转化为纠正动作的过程，生成结果与设计意图匹配度不足。","importance":"方法改进，提出状态感知的ReAct agent框架，将执行后批评作为中间策略动作优化CAD生成过程。","technical_approach":"提出RA-CAD（ReAct Agent for CAD），通过生成-执行-批评-重写的循环与CAD环境交互；每次迭代执行当前代码并观察结果，基于设计指令、当前代码和执行反馈生成显式的执行后批评作为中间策略动作，再据此重写代码。","experiments":"摘要未完整披露实验配置与量化结果，核心场景为文本驱动的参数化CAD代码生成。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing text-to-CAD generation methods use fixed or independently optimized critique mechanisms, failing to optimize how feedback is interpreted and translated into corrective actions, leading to mismatches between generated results and design intent.","importance":"Methodological improvement: a state-aware ReAct agent framework that treats post-execution critique as an intermediate policy action to optimize the CAD generation process.","technical_approach":"RA-CAD (ReAct Agent for CAD) interacts with the CAD environment through a Generate--Execute--Critique--Rewrite loop; each iteration executes the current code, observes the outcome, and generates explicit post-execution critique as an intermediate policy action conditioned on the design instruction, current code, and execution feedback, then rewrites the code accordingly.","experiments":"The abstract does not fully disclose experimental configurations and quantitative results; the core scenario is text-driven parametric CAD code generation.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"特定领域的生成优化应用，执行后批评的循环设计可作为agent参考，无需深读。","en":"A domain-specific generation optimization application; the post-execution critique loop design can serve as an agent reference, no need for in-depth reading."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Shuhao Yan","Changhao He","Xi Peng","Peng Hu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["text-to-cad","react-agent","post-execution-critique","generative-design"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05714","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05714","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06424","title":"Multi Codec Discrete Diffusion Model for Text Guided Speech Inpainting and Editing","abstract":"Speech recordings often contain missing, corrupted, or incorrect regions that must be reconstructed or modified without re-synthesizing the entire utterance. Speech inpainting restores missing segments, whereas speech editing replaces spoken content according to an edited transcript. Both tasks require the generated speech to express the intended words while remaining consistent with the surrounding speaker identity, prosody, timing, and recording conditions. Discrete diffusion is particularly w","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06424.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.SD","cs.CL","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决语音修补与编辑中“既要改对内容，又要保持上下文说话人、韵律、时长和录音条件一致”的问题，尤其是在局部区域编辑而非整句重合成的设定下。","importance":"对语音 LM / 离散 codec 建模有一定参考价值，尤其是离散 diffusion 如何利用双侧上下文做局部编辑；但它主要是语音生成任务论文，不是统一预训练或语言建模范式论文。","technical_approach":"提出 SIEDD：在层级 codec token 上做离散 diffusion 的文本引导语音修补/编辑。核心架构 HiCoDD 按 RVQ 生成顺序工作，把已生成 codebook 视为干净且已提交的声学上下文，只对当前待细化 codebook 做 diffusion。这样把“已确定的低层/前序声学信息”和“当前需要重建的细节”分离开来，以更稳定地利用左右声学上下文和文本条件。","experiments":"摘要没有给出具体 codec、模型规模、训练数据和基线名称。可预期实验会覆盖 speech inpainting 与 transcript-guided editing，并比较 AR 或非层级 diffusion 方案在内容准确性、说话人一致性和自然度上的表现；但目前证据不足以判断其是否对通用语音 LM 形成强结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"It addresses speech inpainting and editing where the model must modify local regions while preserving speaker identity, prosody, timing, and recording conditions from surrounding context.","importance":"This is somewhat relevant for speech/audio LM researchers, especially as an example of discrete diffusion over codec tokens with bidirectional context. Still, it is primarily a speech generation paper rather than a unified pretraining or language-modeling paper.","technical_approach":"The paper proposes SIEDD, a text-guided discrete diffusion framework over hierarchical codec tokens. Its HiCoDD architecture follows the RVQ generation order: previously generated codebooks are treated as clean committed acoustic context, while diffusion is applied only to the current refinement codebook. This explicitly separates committed acoustic structure from the codebook currently being reconstructed.","experiments":"The abstract does not specify the codec, model size, training data, or baselines. The likely evaluation covers speech inpainting and transcript-guided editing, comparing against AR or non-hierarchical diffusion approaches on content correctness, speaker consistency, and naturalness; however, the current evidence is not enough to draw broader conclusions for general audio LM design.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"如果你做 audio LM，可看它怎样把 RVQ 层级和 discrete diffusion 解耦；否则正文不必读，记住“只扩散当前 codebook”这个设计点就够了。","en":"If you work on audio LM, inspect how it decouples RVQ hierarchy from discrete diffusion; otherwise you can skip the paper and just remember the design choice of diffusing only the current codebook."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Iftach Shoham","Tali Dror","Oren Gal","Haim Permuter","Gilad Katz","Eliya Nachmani"],"notable_authors":["Eliya Nachmani"],"tags":["speech-editing","discrete-diffusion","codec-tokens","audio-lm"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06424","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06424","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06878","title":"ControlRef: Efficient Layout-Guided Multi-Instance Generation via Anchored 4D-RoPE","abstract":"Layout-guided multi-instance generation is essential for controllable image synthesis in Multi-Modal Diffusion Transformers (MM-DiTs). However, integrating this capability into unified architectures remains challenging. Prior frameworks rely on redundant full-resolution canvas padding and Shifted-RoPE to manage multiple reference images. This mechanism drastically inflates computational overhead for sparse layouts and disrupts critical low-frequency RoPE features, creating a severe spatial-frequ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06878.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决多模态扩散Transformer中布局引导多实例生成任务里，现有全分辨率填充+Shifted-RoPE方案计算开销大、破坏低频RoPE特征导致空间对应模糊的问题","importance":"多模态生成方向的方法创新，提出新的注意力掩码机制与位置编码方案","technical_approach":"提出ControlRef框架：1）用统一实例-布局控制注意力掩码严格解耦实例间语义交互，强制区域绑定；2）提出锚定式4D-RoPE直接将token锚定到对应空间位置，替代Shifted-RoPE","experiments":"摘要未披露具体模型参数量、训练数据规模、基线模型及量化提升幅度，仅说明相较现有方案降低稀疏布局计算开销、提升空间对齐精度","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Solve the high computational overhead and blurred spatial correspondence caused by existing full-resolution padding + Shifted-RoPE pipelines for layout-guided multi-instance generation in Multimodal Diffusion Transformers","importance":"Method innovation in multimodal generation, proposing a novel attention mask mechanism and positional encoding scheme","technical_approach":"Propose the ControlRef framework: 1) Use a Unified Instance-Layout Control attention mask to strictly decouple inter-instance semantic interactions and enforce regional binding; 2) Introduce Anchored 4D-RoPE that directly anchors tokens to corresponding spatial positions to replace Shifted-RoPE","experiments":"The abstract does not disclose specific model parameters, training data scale, baselines or quantitative improvement margins; it only claims reduced compute overhead for sparse layouts and improved spatial alignment over prior schemes","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"锚定式4D-RoPE的设计思路对多模态统一预训练的位置编码优化有微弱参考，仅扫方法部分的位置编码设计即可","en":"The Anchored 4D-RoPE design offers minor reference for positional encoding optimization in unified multimodal pretraining; only skim the positional encoding section in the method part"},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Yunkai Yang","Yudong Zhang","Xinying Chen","Haoyuan Liang","Yizhuo Niu","Jinshuai Cheng","Kunquan Zhang","Liziyue Fang","Weitao Wan","Runmin Dong"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["multimodal_generation","diffusion_transformer","RoPE","positional_encoding","layout_control"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06878","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06878","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"post_train","emoji":"🛠️","name":"LLM 后训练","papers":[{"id":"2608.05156","title":"Scaffold-Mediated Post-Training: Co-Evolving Model Parameters and Procedural Scaffold Graphs","abstract":"Post-training of large language models optimizes only parameters, while inference-time procedural scaffolds are typically designed independently of parameter training. This disconnect makes it difficult to automatically acquire and internalize complex strategies. We propose scaffold-mediated post-training: procedural scaffolds are organized into an evolvable graph structure that co-evolves with model parameters through discovery, distillation, and dynamic recompilation. We instantiate this parad","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-22T18:45:53Z","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05156.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决后训练只优化模型参数、而推理时脚手架策略独立设计，导致复杂程序化技能难以被自动发现并内化的问题。","importance":"这是一类 post-train 与 inference scaffold 联合优化的尝试，贡献点不在常规 SFT/RL 配方，而在把“外部程序结构”纳入训练闭环。对预训练研究员的价值在于：它提供了一个观察 post-train 信号如何被模型吸收、以及外部工具链如何蒸馏回参数的具体范式。","technical_approach":"提出 scaffold-mediated post-training：把 procedural scaffolds 组织成可演化图结构，并与模型参数共同演化。具体实例 Skill Training 包含三步：技能发现、带 scaffold 的训练/执行、以及 progressive distillation 与 dynamic recompilation，使模型逐步把外部 scaffold 中的策略压回参数内部，最终在无外部 scaffold 时保留较高能力。","experiments":"论文在 FeatureBench 上评测。自动发现的 skills 将 passed rate 提升 8.1 个百分点；经过渐进蒸馏后，去掉外部 scaffold 仍有 27.7% passed rate，蒸馏保留率 85.2%（定义为 distillation 后 / 带 skill 时的通过率），显著优于同数据上的标准 SFT。摘要未给出模型规模、训练 token 或更强 baseline 的完整细节，因此结论更适合作为方法信号而非定论。","authors_note":"清华大学团队。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"It tackles the disconnect between parameter-only post-training and separately hand-designed inference scaffolds, which makes complex procedural strategies hard to discover and internalize.","importance":"The contribution is not another standard SFT/RL recipe, but a closed-loop view where external procedural structure becomes part of training. For pretraining researchers, the value is in how post-training signals can be absorbed into parameters and how inference-time structure can be distilled back into the model.","technical_approach":"The paper proposes scaffold-mediated post-training: procedural scaffolds are organized as an evolvable graph and co-evolved with model parameters. The instantiated framework, Skill Training, includes skill discovery, scaffolded training/execution, progressive distillation, and dynamic recompilation so that strategies encoded in external scaffolds are gradually internalized by the model.","experiments":"Evaluation is on FeatureBench. Automatically discovered skills improve pass rate by 8.1 percentage points. After progressive distillation, the model still reaches 27.7% pass rate without any external scaffold, with an 85.2% retention rate (post-distillation / with-skill pass rate), outperforming standard SFT on the same data. The abstract does not expose model size, training tokens, or stronger baselines, so the result is more a promising signal than a settled conclusion.","authors_note":"From Tsinghua University."},"recommendation":{"zh":"值得看的是“脚手架能否被蒸馏回参数”这个接口问题；先读方法图和 retention 指标，若 baseline 不够强，就把它当成 post-train→pretrain 闭环的早期信号。","en":"Read it for the interface question—can scaffolded procedures be distilled into weights; check the method diagram and retention metric first, and treat it as an early signal unless the baselines are unusually clean."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Tsinghua University"],"authors":["Fei Ding","Yongkang Zhang","Runhao Liu","Yuhao Liao","Zijian Zeng","Huiming Yang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["post-training","scaffold","distillation","procedural-skills","parameter-internalization"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05156","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05156","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06377","title":"Learning When to Trust via Selective Context Preference Optimization","abstract":"Language models increasingly condition their answers on external signals, and a single misleading one can turn a correct answer wrong. The obvious remedy, training models to resist such signals, hides a failure mode: a model that ignores all context looks robust yet is useless when the context is worth trusting. We recast the problem as selective trust and introduce MIST, a human-annotated benchmark that renders each reasoning item under four matched conditions (clean, misleading, correct-contex","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T17:59:58Z","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06377.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"当模型被要求“利用外部上下文/信号”来回答问题时，如何让它学会选择性信任：既能抵抗误导信号，又不会退化成一概忽略上下文，从而在“上下文确实有用”时仍能受益。","importance":"这篇更像 post-train/对齐侧的方法与评测，但对预训练研究也有直接启发：1）把“上下文鲁棒性”从单一准确率拆成可诊断的反事实条件（clean/misleading/correct/irrelevant），避免把“忽略上下文”误当成鲁棒；2）提出一个很通用的偏好优化数据挖掘与配比思路：只对那些“无上下文能答对、加误导就答错”的样本施加学习信号，并用匹配的对照条件做平衡，减少训练目标的副作用。这类‘反事实+配比’的 recipe 对持续学习、RLAIF/DPO 数据构造、以及未来把检索/工具/多模态上下文纳入训练目标时都可复用。","technical_approach":"核心由两部分组成。\n(1) MIST-1000 基准：每个题目固定 question/answer space/gold answer/一个“看起来合理的错误答案”，只改变包裹在问题外的上下文，构造四个版本：clean（无额外上下文）、misleading（上下文指向错误答案）、correct-context（上下文支持正确答案）、irrelevant（相关但不提供答案的自然文本）。这样四个条件之间的差异主要归因于“上下文信号”而不是题目难度变化。数据来源为 1000 题：800 来自既有 QA/数学/推理基准改写，200 为标注者撰写的更长更难场景；两轮人工流程控制歧义、泄漏、自然性与错误答案的可置信度。\n(2) 评测指标与训练方法：\n- SC2W（signal-induced correct-to-wrong）：只在模型 clean 条件下答对的子集上，统计 misleading 条件把答案从对翻到错的比例，用来把“模型本来就不会”与“被信号带偏”分离。\n- SCOPE（Selective Context Preference Optimization）：一个信号反事实的偏好优化框架。先用 base model 挖掘关键失败样本：clean 能答对，但 misleading 会答错。对每个样本构造偏好对：truth-consistent response（与 gold 一致）优于 signal-following response（跟随误导信号）。关键不是改 DPO 公式，而是做‘配比平衡’：同一对偏好样本在四种上下文条件下复用，并对 misleading 对与 clean/correct/irrelevant 对照条件等权加权，避免只在 misleading 上训练导致模型学到“默认不信上下文”。这相当于把学习信号绑定到“上下文的角色（误导/支持/无关）”而不是某个表面 prompt。","experiments":"全文信息显示的关键实验结论包括：\n- 基准观察：从闭源前沿模型（文中点名 GPT-5.5、Claude、Gemini）到多种开源权重模型，普遍存在“误导上下文把原本正确答案翻错”的现象；单看 misleading 条件准确率会掩盖问题，因为强模型 clean 本来就高。\n- 方法对比：prompt 防御、SFT、以及只用 misleading 对做 DPO，往往能抬高 misleading 条件表现，但会牺牲 clean 或 correct-context（典型副作用是学到‘不信上下文’）。\n- SCOPE 效果：在常见开源模型上显著降低 SC2W，同时不侵蚀 clean / correct-context / irrelevant 三个对照条件；并且在未在目标数据集上训练的情况下，能 zero-shot 迁移到 3 个外部基准，竞争方法通常以牺牲准确率换鲁棒。\n（你给的全文片段未包含具体表格数字、训练步数、模型参数与提升幅度；这些通常在实验章节的主表与消融表中，需要结合原文表格补齐。）","reading_guide":"泛读建议（约 30–45 分钟）：\n- 先看 Introduction 里对“选择性信任”三目标的拆解（拒绝误导、利用正确信号、对无关信号不动），这是全文动机与评测设计的核心。\n- 精看 MIST benchmark 构造细节：四条件如何保证 only-context-changes、错误答案如何保证 plausibility、以及两轮标注/审校如何控制泄漏与歧义；这决定了指标是否可信。\n- 看 SC2W 的定义与报告方式：它把 susceptibility 从 base ability 中剥离出来，是这篇最可复用的评测思路。\n- 看 SCOPE 的数据挖掘与配比：重点是“只挖 clean-correct→misleading-wrong 的反事实失败”以及“与三种对照条件等权平衡”。如果要复现/迁移到 RAG 或工具调用场景，这部分是 recipe。\n- 最后扫一遍外部基准 zero-shot 迁移实验，判断它学到的是‘任务特定防御’还是更一般的上下文信任策略。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to train and evaluate LMs to *selectively* trust external context: resist misleading cues without collapsing into a degenerate strategy that ignores all context, while still benefiting from genuinely helpful context and staying invariant to irrelevant context.","importance":"Primarily a post-training / alignment paper (preference optimization + benchmark), but it carries concrete lessons for foundation-model training: (1) it turns “context robustness” into a counterfactual, multi-condition diagnostic (clean/misleading/correct/irrelevant), preventing the common failure where “ignoring context” looks robust; (2) it proposes a reusable data-mining + mixture-balancing recipe for preference training—optimize only on counterfactual flips (clean-correct → misleading-wrong) and balance them with matched control conditions to avoid over-regularizing the model into blanket distrust. This pattern is directly relevant to RAG/tool-use training, continual post-train, and any setting where external signals are part of the conditioning distribution.","technical_approach":"$27","experiments":"Main findings reported in the full text:\n- Universality: both frontier closed models (explicitly naming GPT-5.5, Claude, Gemini) and a range of open-weight models exhibit substantial susceptibility—misleading context often overturns answers that are correct in clean prompts.\n- Baselines’ failure mode: prompt defenses, SFT, and misleading-only DPO can improve misleading-condition accuracy but typically degrade clean and/or correct-context accuracy, consistent with a blanket-distrust strategy.\n- SCOPE: substantially reduces SC2W on popular open-weight models without harming the three control conditions (clean/correct/irrelevant), and transfers zero-shot to three external benchmarks (no training on the target datasets), whereas competing methods often trade robustness for accuracy.\n(The provided excerpt does not include the numeric tables—model sizes, training budgets, and exact deltas likely live in the main results and ablation tables.)","reading_guide":"Skim plan (30–45 minutes):\n- Read the Introduction carefully for the three-way requirement of selective trust; it explains why single-condition robustness is misleading.\n- Inspect the MIST construction section: how they guarantee only-context changes, how “plausible wrong answers” are controlled, and how leakage/ambiguity are audited.\n- Focus on SC2W’s definition and reporting; it is the most portable evaluation idea.\n- For SCOPE, concentrate on (i) the mining criterion (clean-correct → misleading-wrong) and (ii) the balanced mixture across the four matched conditions; this is the core recipe you would reuse for RAG/tool contexts.\n- Finally, glance at the zero-shot transfer experiments to judge whether the behavior generalizes beyond the benchmark’s templates.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"选择性信任是后训练鲁棒性的新角度，MIST的四条件对照设计值得借鉴到内部鲁棒性评测中，SCOPE的平衡DPO思路可做小范围ablation验证。","en":"Selective trust is a new angle for post-training robustness; MIST's four-condition matched design is worth referencing for internal robustness evals, and SCOPE's balanced DPO idea is worth small-scale ablation verification."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Duke University","National University of Singapore","Northeastern University","Nanyang Technological University"],"authors":["Xian Sun","Wei Chow","Yingshuo Wang","Junhao Liu","Wei Gao","Qing Wu","Lingdong Kong"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["selective trust","DPO","robustness","benchmark","post-training"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06377","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06377","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05168","title":"Woodpecker Distillation: Weak Models Diagnose Reasoning Bugs in Strong Models","abstract":"Large language models often fail on reasoning tasks despite possessing the capability to solve them. We argue that many such failures arise from localized reasoning bugs in intermediate steps rather than from global incompetence. We show that these bugs are frequently repairable: inserting a short patch generated by a weak probe model after the same strong-model reasoning prefix can redirect the trajectory toward a correct solution.   However, this corrective effect is not reliably internalized ","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-27T15:22:55Z","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05168.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"强模型在推理题上经常不是完全不会，而是在中间轨迹进入了可修复的错误分支。论文研究一个更细的问题：弱模型生成的短局部 patch 能否诊断并修复强模型的中间推理 bug，以及这种修复信号如何被训练进强模型，而不是只在推理时临时插入。","importance":"这篇工作对预训练研究的直接贡献有限，更接近 reasoning post-training 和 weak-to-strong supervision。但它有一个有用启发：推理能力的训练信号不一定来自完整解答，也可以来自“某个局部干预如何改变后续分布”。这和传统 SFT 学答案、学 CoT 文本不同，更接近对模型内部推理动力学做局部校正。对研究 pretrain ↔ posttrain 接口、推理数据构造、过程监督和弱监督蒸馏的人有参考价值。","technical_approach":"Woodpecker Distillation 的关键不是让强模型模仿弱模型 patch，而是学习 patch 对强模型后续 token 分布的影响。给定问题 x 和强模型 A 生成的中间前缀 c，弱探针模型 B 生成多个短 reasoning patch。每个 patch 插入到同一个前缀后，再让强模型继续生成，并根据最终答案是否正确把 patch 分成正干预和负干预。训练时保留一个可训练强模型 A_theta 和一个冻结参考模型 A_ref，用参考模型估计不同干预下的未来 token 分布，再比较正负干预诱导出的分布差异，构造偏向成功修复方向的 contrastive teacher distribution。A_theta 被训练去匹配这个 teacher。这样避免了两个直接模仿方案的问题：模仿 patch 会学到弱模型的表面表达，模仿完整 patched trajectory 会把局部修复信号稀释在长续写里。","experiments":"实验使用 Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 作为强模型 A，Gemma-3-4B-IT 作为弱探针模型 B。评测覆盖 AIME 2024、AIME 2025、MATH-500、Olympiad 和 Omni-Hard，其中 Omni-Hard 来自高难度 Omni-MATH 题。论文先只分析强模型 greedy decoding 失败的样本，并比较同一中间前缀下的直接续写与插入弱模型 patch 后的续写。表 1 显示 A-B-A 形式的局部干预能提高 Pass@16，在 AIME 2025 和 Omni-Hard 这类更难集合上提升更明显。消融重点是直接微调 patch、直接微调修复后完整轨迹都不稳定，效果弱于学习正负干预诱导出的未来分布差异。这支持论文的核心判断：有用信号主要在“干预改变了什么续写分布”，不在 patch 的字面文本。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，预计 25–35 分钟。先看 Introduction 和 Motivation，重点确认“reasoning bug”的操作性定义：原轨迹失败，但短局部干预能把后续生成导向正确答案。再看 Method 中正负干预集合、冻结参考模型、contrastive teacher distribution 的构造方式。实验部分重点看表 1 以及 imitation baseline 的对比，它们决定这篇工作的可信度。若只关心预训练，可重点思考这种局部分布校正能否迁移到大规模 reasoning mid-training 或 verifier-guided pretraining，而不是关注具体数学题成绩。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a local failure mode in reasoning: a strong model may have enough capability to solve a problem, but its intermediate trajectory enters a recoverable wrong branch. The question is whether a weaker model can expose and repair such local reasoning bugs, and how to train the strong model to internalize the repair signal rather than relying on test-time patch insertion.","importance":"The contribution is mainly in reasoning post-training and weak-to-strong supervision, not in base pretraining. Its useful signal for pretraining researchers is the training target: supervision can be derived from how a local intervention changes the model’s future distribution, instead of from complete solutions or surface-form chain-of-thought imitation. This is relevant to process supervision, reasoning data generation, and the interface between pretraining, mid-training, and reasoning-oriented fine-tuning.","technical_approach":"Woodpecker Distillation treats the weak model as a diagnostic probe rather than a teacher that provides full solutions. Given a problem x and an intermediate prefix c produced by a strong model A, a weak probe model B samples several short reasoning patches. Each patch is inserted after the same prefix, and A continues generation. Patches are labeled as positive or negative according to whether the final continuation reaches the correct answer. The method keeps a trainable strong model A_theta and a frozen reference model A_ref. It uses A_ref to estimate the future token distributions induced by positive and negative interventions, then builds a contrastive teacher distribution that emphasizes continuations associated with successful repair. A_theta is trained to match this teacher. This differs from patch imitation, which only copies weak-model text, and from full-trajectory imitation, which can dilute the local correction signal over many downstream tokens.","experiments":"The paper instantiates the strong model as Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 and the weak probe as Gemma-3-4B-IT. Evaluation covers AIME 2024, AIME 2025, MATH-500, Olympiad, and Omni-Hard, with Omni-Hard containing high-difficulty Omni-MATH problems. The initial analysis focuses on problems where the strong model fails under greedy decoding, then compares direct continuation from the same prefix against continuation after inserting a weak-model patch. Table 1 reports Pass@16 improvements from the A-B-A intervention, with larger gains on harder sets such as AIME 2025 and Omni-Hard. The important ablation is that directly fine-tuning on weak patches or full repaired trajectories is less reliable than distilling the contrast between successful and unsuccessful intervention-induced future distributions.","reading_guide":"Skim in 25–35 minutes. Start with the Introduction and Motivation sections to understand the operational definition of a reasoning bug: a failed trajectory that can be redirected by a short local intervention. Then read the Method section for the construction of positive and negative intervention sets, the frozen reference model, and the contrastive teacher distribution. In the experiments, focus on Table 1 and the imitation baselines. For pretraining-oriented readers, the main question is whether this local distribution-correction signal can be scaled into reasoning mid-training or verifier-guided training, rather than the benchmark scores themselves.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"弱到强蒸馏的新角度，核心发现'直接微调修复轨迹无效，有效信号在未来分布差异'很有启发性，建议重点读§3的对比实验和§4的蒸馏方法。","en":"A new angle for weak-to-strong distillation; the core finding that direct fine-tuning on repaired trajectories is ineffective and the useful signal lies in future distribution differences is insightful, focus on §3 comparative experiments and §4 distillation method."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Baidu Inc","Nanyang Technological University"],"authors":["Dayu Wang","Jiaye Yang","Weikang Li","Jiahui Liang","Yang Li","Deguo Xia","Jizhou Huang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["weak-to-strong learning","distillation","reasoning enhancement","local intervention","post-training"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05168","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05168","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06310","title":"RRC: Unlocking Generative Reward Models in LLM Reinforcement Learning via Ranking-Based Reward Construction","abstract":"Recent advances in reward modeling show a paradigm shift from discriminative reward models to generative reward models. However, despite their strong capabilities in response ranking, generative reward models have not realized their potential in reinforcement learning (RL). Our analysis reveals that this limitation arises from a mismatch between the comparative nature of generative reward modeling and the scalar scoring paradigm adopted by existing RL algorithms. To bridge this gap, we propose a","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T17:24:36Z","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06310.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"论文解决的是生成式 reward model 在 LLM 强化学习中用不好的问题。生成式 reward model 擅长比较两个或多个回答并给出文字化判断，但现有 RL 算法通常需要每个回答一个标量 reward。把生成式模型强行转成 token probability 或无推理的偏好 token，会丢掉它在比较、解释和 test-time compute 上的优势。","importance":"这篇与 post-train/RL 训练信号质量直接相关，适合泛读。它的主要启发是：reward 不一定要由 reward model 直接输出标量，也可以先让模型做它更擅长的排序，再把排序结构转换成 RL 可用的标量。这个思路对 RLHF/RLAIF、reasoning RL 和 generative verifier 都有参考意义。尤其是推理型任务中，生成式 judge 的 CoT 和多次推理可能提高偏好判断质量，但需要一个与策略优化兼容的接口。RRC 给出了一个较清晰的接口设计。","technical_approach":"方法叫 Ranking-based Reward Construction，核心是只让生成式 reward model 做相对排序，不要求它直接给单样本标量分数。论文提出两种机制。第一是 self-competitive ranking：对同一个 prompt 下当前 policy 采样出的多个回答进行相互比较，得到相对质量顺序，再把排名映射为 reward。这样 reward 来自同批样本内部的竞争关系，适合 GRPO 这类组内相对优化方法。第二是 anchor-guided ranking：引入少量 anchor responses 作为参考点，让每个候选回答与 anchor 比较，降低大规模样本排序时的调用成本。论文给出的复杂度从约 O(m log m) 的排序式比较转为 O(m n)，其中 m 是候选回答数，n 是 anchor 数；当 n 很小时，扩展性更好。构造出的 reward 可以接入 GRPO 和 DAPO 等现有 RL 算法。与 GenRM 使用指定 preference token 概率不同，RRC 不依赖单个 token 概率；与 GRAM 去掉显式 CoT 不同，RRC 允许生成式 reward model 保留文字判断和推理过程。","experiments":"实验覆盖 6 个 benchmark，包括 open-ended chat 和 reasoning 任务。相对 probability-based reward baseline，RRC 带来稳定提升：AlpacaEval2 从 35.8% 提升到 41.3%，ArenaHardV2 从 8.0% 提升到 11.2%，MMLU-Redux 从 52.9% 提升到 57.3%。论文还报告了两个 scaling 方向：增加生成式 reward model 的 inference-time computation 可以提升 RL 表现；增加 anchor responses 数量也能改善 reward 构造质量。附录 A 给出理论分析，说明基于排序的 reward 构造能放宽直接标量 reward 的约束，从而提高可达到的优化上限。需要注意的是，方法会增加 reward 侧推理调用，实际训练成本取决于候选数、anchor 数和 judge 推理长度。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，约 35–45 分钟。先看 Introduction 中对 discriminative reward、GenRM/GRAM 和 generative reward mismatch 的分析。方法部分重点看 self-competitive ranking 与 anchor-guided ranking 如何把相对排序映射成标量 reward，以及它们如何接入 GRPO/DAPO。实验部分重点看六个 benchmark 的主结果表、inference-time compute scaling 曲线和 anchor 数量消融。附录 A 可选择性阅读，主要用于理解作者为什么认为排序 reward 的可优化空间大于直接标量 reward。若关注训练成本，应重点检查 reward model 调用次数、CoT 长度和不同 sample size 下的效率曲线。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses why generative reward models have not translated well into LLM reinforcement learning. These models are naturally good at comparative judgment: given multiple responses, they can decide which is better and explain why. Standard RL pipelines, however, expect one scalar reward per response. Converting a generative judge into a scalar through preference-token probability, or removing explicit reasoning to emit only a label, underuses the model’s comparative and test-time reasoning strengths.","importance":"This is a useful skim for post-training and RL signal design. The main idea is that a reward model does not have to emit scalar rewards directly. It can first perform the operation it is better suited for—ranking responses—and the ranking can then be converted into scalar rewards for policy optimization. This is relevant to RLHF, RLAIF, reasoning RL, and generative verifiers. It gives a practical interface between generative judges with chain-of-thought style evaluation and existing algorithms such as GRPO or DAPO.","technical_approach":"$28","experiments":"The experiments cover 6 benchmarks spanning open-ended chat and reasoning tasks. Compared with probability-based reward baselines, RRC improves AlpacaEval2 from 35.8% to 41.3%, ArenaHardV2 from 8.0% to 11.2%, and MMLU-Redux from 52.9% to 57.3%. The paper also reports two useful scaling behaviors: RL performance improves when the generative reward model is given more inference-time computation, and it improves as the number of anchor responses increases. Appendix A provides a theoretical analysis suggesting that ranking-based reward construction relaxes constraints imposed by direct scalar rewards. The main practical caveat is reward-side cost: the method adds judge calls, and the actual training overhead depends on the number of candidates, the number of anchors, and the length of generated reasoning.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 35–45 minutes. Start with the Introduction’s diagnosis of the mismatch between generative reward modeling and scalar-reward RL. In the method section, focus on how self-competitive ranking and anchor-guided ranking convert relative order into scalar rewards, and how those rewards are plugged into GRPO or DAPO. In the experiments, prioritize the main benchmark table, the inference-time-compute scaling curves, and the anchor-count ablations. Appendix A is optional but useful for understanding the claimed optimization advantage of ranking-derived rewards. Readers concerned with training practicality should inspect the reward-model call counts, reasoning length, and sample-size efficiency details.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"做RLHF/RLVR的研究员重点看§3的范式不匹配分析和排序奖励设计，可直接复现用到内部GRM-RL pipeline","en":"For RLHF/RLVR researchers, focus on §3 paradigm mismatch analysis and ranking-based reward design; directly reproducible for internal GRM-RL pipelines"},"metadata":{"institutions":["Northeastern University","NiuTrans Research","CAS Key Laboratory of Behavioral Science, Institute of Psychology","Kunming University of Science and Technology","NiuTrans Research, Shenyang","Independent Researcher","CAS Key Laboratory of Behavioral Science, Institute of Psychology, CAS"],"authors":["Chenglong Wang","Ziming Zhu","Yifu Huo","Bei Li","Qiaozhi He","Yan Ding","Xiaoyang Hao","Yuxin Gao","Tianhua Zhou","Xiaojia Chang","Tongran Liu","Jingbo Zhu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["rlhf","generative-reward-model","reinforcement-learning","reward-design"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06310","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06310","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05466","title":"Recursive Synthesis for Long-Horizon Terminal Tasks","abstract":"High-quality long-horizon training data for terminal agents is expensive to produce, often costing hundreds to thousands of dollars per task, because each task must keep the instruction, environment, reference solution, and verifier mutually consistent. Human authoring does not scale, and direct generation with large language models (LLMs) often breaks these dependencies. We present Recursive Synthetic Terminal Tasks (RST), a recursive verified synthesis framework for constructing long-horizon t","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-05T23:24:26Z","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05466.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"终端智能体的长程训练数据需保持指令、环境、参考解、验证器四者一致，人工编写成本极高且不可扩展，直接用LLM生成易破坏依赖关系，现有方法无法规模化构造高质量可验证的终端智能体数据。","importance":"递归验证式合成范式为零人工介入的智能体训练数据规模化提供了可行路径，对长程终端智能体的SFT/RL数据集构造有直接参考价值，也为通用可验证合成数据的生成提供了解优先的落地思路。","technical_approach":"RST（递归合成终端任务）是一套递归验证式的任务合成框架。它从已验证的种子任务出发，先扩展参考解得到更长更复杂的解题流程，再同步调整验证器和指令以匹配新解，最后在独立沙箱中完成全任务验证，要求参考解必须通过私有验证器。通过验证的任务既可用于收集训练轨迹，也可作为下一轮合成的种子。该框架采用解优先设计，每个被接受的任务都自带可执行的可解性证明。","experiments":"以DeepSeek-V4-Pro为生成模型，15轮递归从639个种子任务得到37484个验证通过的终端任务，单任务成本约0.05美元，全程无人工介入。任务难度随轮次显著提升：中位解长度增长5.6倍，命令使用量增长6.1倍，指令长度仅增长1.4倍。同一求解器的通过率从种子轮到第15轮大幅下降：DeepSeek-V4-Pro从72%降至4%，GPT-5.6-sol从72.2%降至7%。用Qwen3.5自生成轨迹做SFT，在三个终端基准上Qwen3.5-27B和Qwen3.5-122B-A10B最高提升10个点；PPO训练进一步让Qwen3.5-27B在三个基准上分别提升8.24%、9.33%、3.97%。15轮后递归仍未饱和，任务产出率和多样性保持稳定。","reading_guide":"重点阅读引言中长程终端任务数据的核心约束，以及RST框架的递归验证流程设计。实验部分关注多轮递归后的难度增长幅度与训练数据有效性验证。预计阅读时间25分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"High-quality long-horizon training data for terminal agents requires strict consistency across instructions, execution environments, reference solutions, and verifiers, making human authoring prohibitively expensive and unscalable, while direct LLM generation frequently breaks these dependencies, and existing methods cannot produce verified terminal-agent data at scale.","importance":"The recursive verified synthesis paradigm enables scalable agent training data generation without human intervention, offers direct reference for constructing SFT/RL datasets for long-horizon terminal agents, and demonstrates a solution-first approach for building general verifiable synthetic data pipelines.","technical_approach":"RST (Recursive Synthetic Terminal Tasks) is a recursive verified task synthesis framework. Starting from verified seed tasks, it first extends the reference solution to create a longer and more complex workflow, then realigns the verifier and instruction to match the new solution, and finally validates the complete task in an isolated sandbox where the reference solution must pass the private verifier. Accepted tasks are used both to collect training trajectories and as seeds for the next synthesis round. Built on a solution-first design, every accepted task carries an executable proof of solvability.","experiments":"Using DeepSeek-V4-Pro as the generator, 15 rounds of recursive synthesis produce 37,484 verified terminal tasks from 639 seeds, at approximately $0.05 per passed task with no human involvement. Task difficulty grows substantially across rounds: median solution length increases 5.6×, command usage 6.1×, while instruction length only grows 1.4×. Pass rates of identical solvers drop sharply from seed round to round 15: 72% to 4% for DeepSeek-V4-Pro, and 72.2% to 7% for GPT-5.6-sol. SFT with Qwen3.5 self-collected trajectories improves Qwen3.5-27B and Qwen3.5-122B-A10B by up to 10 points on three terminal benchmarks. PPO training further boosts Qwen3.5-27B by 8.24%, 9.33%, and 3.97% on the three benchmarks respectively. No saturation is observed after 15 rounds, with stable task yield and preserved diversity.","reading_guide":"Focus on the core constraints of long-horizon terminal task data in the introduction, and the recursive verification pipeline design of RST. For experiments, pay attention to difficulty growth across recursive rounds and the validation of training data effectiveness. Estimated reading time: 25 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"递归自举合成长程agent数据的思路对后训练数据工程有参考价值，重点看§3合成流程和成本拆解。","en":"Recursive bootstrapping of long-horizon agent data is a useful reference for post-training data engineering; focus on §3 synthesis pipeline and cost breakdown."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Zhongzhi Li","Yucheng Shi","Zongxia Li","Ruhan Wang","Anhao Li","Zixun Huang","Junyao Yang","Lei Ke","Ninghao Liu","Haitao Mi","Leowei Liang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["synthetic data","agent training","recursive synthesis","long-horizon tasks","verification"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05466","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05466","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06012","title":"HERALD: Counterfactual Audits and Minimal Repairs for Proof-of-Retrieval Rewards","abstract":"Search-agent rewards mix answer quality, citation grounding, tool cost, and anti-hacking terms; a high score therefore need not imply that cited evidence was retrieved, and added penalties can cancel. We introduce HERALD, an offline audit that applies exact same-question interventions, separates candidate-visible from oracle information, and enumerates detector contracts before policy optimization. On four Qwen3-8B pools from HotpotQA, 2WikiMultiHopQA, and MuSiQue, $R_0$ rejects search deletion ","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T13:15:54Z","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06012.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"搜索/工具调用 agent 的 RL 奖励通常把答案正确性、引用支持、工具成本、反 hack 惩罚等多项线性组合在一起；这种设计会产生惩罚抵消和奖励替代，使得高分轨迹并不真正证明“模型确实检索并依据了被引用证据”，而现有评估大多在策略训练之后才看效果，缺少在优化前系统审计奖励本身是否会偏好显式违约轨迹的方法。","importance":"论文的价值不在提出新的 RL 算法，而在把 reward hacking 问题转成一个可离线穷举、可做最小修复定位的审计问题。对研究 post-train，尤其是 search agent、citation-grounded RL、verifier/reward design 的人很有参考意义；对预训练接口也有启发：随着检索/工具使用能力进入 RL 阶段，奖励信号质量会直接决定训练到底是在学真实能力还是在学可被奖励替代的作弊策略。这个问题与 R1-Zero 一类工作对训练信号纯度的关切是同一条线上的。","technical_approach":"HERALD 把奖励视为程序，在固定问题上做结构化反事实干预，而不是黑箱跑策略后看平均分。核心做法有三点。第一，构造同问题下的最小轨迹编辑：same-final 删除全部搜索动作但保留最终答案和引用；fake-ID 把引用改成不存在的语料 ID；adaptive laundering 把引用换成真实存在、但 agent 实际从未检索到的 passage。第二，严格区分 candidate-visible 信息与 oracle 信息：攻击生成只能看问题、已记录轨迹和语料，不能读金标答案或 support annotation；如果奖励函数读取了标注，则把那种选择记为 oracle 上界，避免误称为“无标注攻击可实现”。第三，在 {U, L, F} 三个检测器上枚举完整 2^3 格点，做成对奖励差分析，找出包含意义下最小的修复，而不是用“加一整束检测器后攻击变少”这种粗结论。这里 L 是“引用了未被检索到的真实语料段落”的精确 membership 检查。","experiments":"在 HotpotQA、2WikiMultiHopQA、MuSiQue 上用四个 Qwen3-8B 轨迹池做审计，共分析 3,829 条隔离轨迹。基础奖励 R0 已经能拒绝 same-final 搜索删除和假 ID，但无法挡住无标注的 adaptive citation laundering：攻击者把引用替换成语料中真实存在但未检索的段落，依然能拿高分。2^3 消融显示，单独增强 L 项就是观测到的最小修复；其余两项精确检查在这些数据池上是冗余的。加入 L 后，R[L] 在报告的经验攻击上 ASR 为 0，额外代价约为 0.50% 量级的一侧指标影响，而更大的“strict reward”因为其中 oracle support-ID 惩罚可被规避，反而仍留有攻击面。后续做了严格 token 匹配的 Search-GRPO 对比，5M token、batch 匹配条件下，R[L] 相比 R0 只在奖励项上增加 λL·L。训练中 58,368 条轨迹里只有 18 条触发该检测器，说明这是一个极稀疏训练信号；在每 benchmark 256 个配对问题的尾部评估上，它改善了定向可攻击性和部分证据质量，但并不保证自然违规率下降或 EM 全面非劣。","reading_guide":"泛读即可。重点看引言和问题设定里为什么“后验看策略分数”不足以判断奖励是否可靠，然后看三种反事实算子和 candidate-visible/oracle 的边界划分；这是论文最有迁移价值的部分。再看 2^3 detector lattice 和最小修复定位，理解为什么“bundle 一堆惩罚项”既可能掩盖真正需要的检查，也可能引入惩罚抵消。GRPO 训练实验部分更像支撑性验证，说明极稀疏的奖励修复能在策略优化中迁移，但不要把它误读成通用性能提升。做奖励设计、agent RL、verifier 的人值得细读攻击构造与 eligibility 统计；纯预训练读者抓“奖励漏洞应在优化前审计、并做最小修复定位”这个方法原则即可。预计阅读时间 30–45 分钟。","authors_note":"论文未在提供内容中明确给出机构与作者团队信息。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Rewards for search and tool-calling agents are typically linear combinations of answer quality, citation grounding, tool cost, formatting, and anti-hacking penalties. Such decompositions create room for penalty cancellation and reward substitution, so a high score does not prove that the agent actually retrieved and used the cited evidence. Most existing work evaluates the policy after optimization, rather than auditing beforehand whether the reward itself prefers explicit contract violations.","importance":"The contribution is not a new RL algorithm but a methodology for auditing reward hacking offline and identifying minimal repairs before policy optimization. It is directly relevant to post-training for search agents, citation-grounded RL, and verifier/reward design. For the pretrain-to-posttrain interface, it matters because as retrieval and tool use enter RL, the purity of the training signal determines whether optimization learns real competence or reward-substitutable exploits. This is the same class of problem raised by work emphasizing signal quality in reasoning RL, but specialized to retrieval-evidence rewards.","technical_approach":"$29","experiments":"$2a","reading_guide":"Skim. Focus on the introduction and problem setup to understand why evaluating after policy optimization is insufficient for judging reward integrity, then study the three counterfactual operators and the candidate-visible versus oracle boundary; that distinction is the most transferable idea. Next, examine the 2^3 detector lattice and minimal-repair analysis, which shows why large penalty bundles can hide both the necessary check and cancellation effects. The Search-GRPO section is supporting evidence that a very sparse reward repair can transfer through optimization, not a broad quality-improvement result. Readers working on reward design, agent RL, or verifiers should read the attack construction and eligibility accounting carefully; general pretraining readers can take away the principle that reward loopholes should be audited before optimization and repaired with minimal targeted detectors. Estimated reading time: 30–45 minutes.","authors_note":"Affiliations and author identities are not specified in the provided content."},"recommendation":{"zh":"做检索奖励或RLVR的人应看§4的全消融，奖励项抵消效应很有参考价值，其余部分略读即可。","en":"Anyone working on retrieval rewards or RLVR should read the full ablation in §4 for reward term cancellation effects; the rest can be skimmed."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Zhuowen Liu","Bohan Cui","YinShang Guo","Yuting Wang","Hao Li"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["reward_hacking","retrieval_augmented_generation","counterfactual_audit","rl_robustness","proof_of_retrieval"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06012","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06012","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06243","title":"DASH: Divergence-Adaptive Supervision Horizons for On-Policy Self-Distillation of Reasoning Models","abstract":"Reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards (RLVR) improves the reasoning capabilities of large language models using automatically verifiable outcome signals, but these signals are typically sparse and at the sequence-level. On-policy self-distillation (OPSD) mitigates this sparsity by querying a privileged teacher at student-visited prefixes and providing dense token-level distributional supervision. Although this dense supervision alleviates signal sparsity, we find that standard OPSD stil","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T16:29:24Z","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06243.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"RLVR使用稀疏的序列级奖励，难以做时间信用分配。On-policy self-distillation（OPSD）通过特权教师提供稠密token级分布监督来缓解信号稀疏，但vanilla OPSD对所有位置的局部KL发散赋予均匀权重，忽略了rollout中发散值的时序结构——相同的局部分散值可能出现在完全不同的发散历史之后，均匀加权无法区分这些时序上下文。","importance":"指出了vanilla OPSD中一个具体且重要的缺陷：均匀系数分配使得目标函数对发散值的时序排列不敏感。提出的DASH方法通过路径依赖的门控递归实现自适应时序加权，用可忽略的额外开销在数学推理基准上取得一致提升。对预训练研究的启发在于：稠密监督信号的时序加权结构值得更细致的设计，这与预训练中不同位置loss权重分配、RL预训练中的信用分配问题有共通的结构。","technical_approach":"DASH的核心是divergence-adaptive propagation gate：在每个位置t，计算局部分散值与序列级平均分散值的差距，将其转化为自适应传播门λ_t。这些门控控制一个反向多步递归——从后往前传播，每个局部损失的有效系数由其前面所有位置的门控路径共同决定，从而实现路径依赖的动态权重分配。这一设计的动机来自对on-policy目标精确梯度的分析：精确梯度包含一个轨迹项，其系数依赖于后续位置的发散值，呈现顺序依赖结构，而vanilla OPSD只保留了直接蒸馏项，丢弃了这一时序结构。","experiments":"在三个数学推理基准、三个模型规模上，DASH取得了对比方法中最高的综合分数，额外训练开销可忽略。消融实验验证了：(1)基于局部-均值发散差的门控比固定门控更有效；(2)多步反向聚合优于单步加权；(3)自适应监督horizon在不同长度的推理链上均有收益。","reading_guide":"重点关注Section 4.1对vanilla OPSD时序系数分配缺陷的形式化分析（均匀加权使得目标对发散排列不变），以及Section 4.2中DASH门控递归的具体构造。从exact on-policy gradient推导结构参考的部分是理解方法动机的关键，值得细读。预计阅读时间20分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"RLVR relies on sparse sequence-level rewards, making temporal credit assignment difficult. On-policy self-distillation (OPSD) provides dense token-level distributional supervision via a privileged teacher, but vanilla OPSD applies uniform weights to all local KL divergences regardless of temporal context. The same local divergence magnitude can follow entirely different discrepancy histories along a rollout, and uniform weighting cannot distinguish these temporal contexts.","importance":"Identifies a concrete and significant limitation in vanilla OPSD: uniform coefficient allocation makes the objective invariant to permutations of divergence values along the sequence, discarding temporal structure. DASH addresses this with path-dependent gated recursion for adaptive temporal weighting, yielding consistent gains on math reasoning benchmarks with negligible overhead. The broader lesson—that dense supervision signals require carefully designed temporal weighting—connects to loss-weighting questions in pretraining and credit assignment in RL pretraining.","technical_approach":"DASH introduces divergence-adaptive propagation gates: at each position t, the gap between the local divergence and the sequence-level mean divergence is converted into an adaptive gate λ_t. These gates control a backward multi-step recursion, propagating from the end of the sequence backward so that each local loss's effective coefficient is determined by the full path of preceding gates. This design is motivated by analyzing the exact gradient of the expected on-policy objective, which contains a trajectory term with coefficients that depend on subsequent divergences—an order-dependent structure that vanilla OPSD discards by retaining only the direct distillation term.","experiments":"Achieves the highest overall scores among compared methods across three mathematical reasoning benchmarks and three model scales, with negligible additional training cost. Ablations validate that: (1) gates based on local-mean divergence gaps outperform fixed gates; (2) multi-step backward aggregation outperforms single-step weighting; (3) adaptive supervision horizons provide gains across reasoning chains of varying lengths.","reading_guide":"Focus on Section 4.1 for the formal analysis of the temporal coefficient allocation gap in vanilla OPSD (uniform weighting makes the objective permutation-invariant to divergence values), and Section 4.2 for the concrete construction of the DASH gating recursion. The gradient analysis deriving structural guidance from the exact on-policy gradient is the key to understanding the method's motivation and deserves careful reading. Estimated reading time: 20 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"推理模型自蒸馏训练的关键细节改进，核心是引入时间结构自适应调整token级监督权重，做RLVR的同学重点看§3权重设计","en":"Key detailed improvement for reasoning model self-distillation training, introducing temporal structure for adaptive token-level supervision weighting; focus on §3 weight design if working on RLVR."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["ZhiYan Hou","Xinyu Tang","Hongyan An","Jianjin Zhang","Weizhen Wang","Yunyun Han","Gengsheng Li","Xiangzhao Hao","Haiyun Guo","Wenbin Hu","Jinqiao Wang","Yafeng Deng"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["RLVR","on-policy self-distillation","reasoning model","dense supervision"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06243","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06243","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06296","title":"On-Policy Self-Distillation without Any Supervision","abstract":"On-policy (Self-)Distillation (OPD / OPSD) has shown strong potential for post-training large language models (LLMs). However, existing methods still rely heavily on external supervision, including ground-truth signals, environmental feedback, or guidance from larger models, and therefore fall short of genuine \"self\"-distillation. In this study, we show that on-policy self-distillation can be achieved using only a model's own generations via internal consistency. We propose Unsupervised On-Polic","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T17:18:23Z","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06296.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有同策略自蒸馏（OPSD）方法仍依赖真值标签、环境反馈或大模型指导等外部监督信号，无法在无标注数据上实现真正的自蒸馏，限制了在标注稀缺场景的可扩展性。","importance":"验证了仅靠模型自身生成样本的内部一致性即可实现无监督同策略自蒸馏，为后训练阶段利用海量无标注推理数据提升模型能力提供了新路径，也打通了自一致性与token级稠密蒸馏的结合范式。","technical_approach":"提出u-OPSD方法：对每个无标注问题采样G条独立同策略rollout，通过多数投票得到伪答案；当获胜投票占比达到自一致性阈值τ时，取最短的一致rollout作为伪解构造教师分布，将其蒸馏到不一致rollout的前缀上。教师和学生共享参数，全程无需外部监督；相比自奖励RL用一致性做标量奖励，u-OPSD直接用一致性结果构造token级稠密监督信号，训练信号密度更高。","experiments":"在6种Qwen3配置（4B/8B非思维/思维模式、4B-Instruct、30B-A3B-Instruct）的5个数学推理基准上测试：非思维模式相对基线提升8.5-10.7分，思维模式提升1.9-2.2分，Instruct模型提升1.7-1.8分；相比自奖励RL方法平均提升7.0-11.3%（非思维）、0.8-1.4%（思维）；性能持平甚至优于带真值监督的SFT、GRPO、带GT的OPSD，最高分别超出10.9、8.9、3.2分。","reading_guide":"重点阅读方法部分的伪解构造逻辑与蒸馏目标设计、实验部分不同模型配置下的增益对比；采样数G、阈值τ的消融实验可快速浏览，预计阅读时间25-35分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing on-policy self-distillation (OPSD) methods still rely on external supervision signals such as ground-truth labels, environmental feedback, or guidance from larger models, failing to achieve genuine self-distillation on unlabeled data and limiting scalability in annotation-scarce scenarios.","importance":"Validates that unsupervised on-policy self-distillation can be achieved solely via internal consistency of a model's own generations, offering a new path to leverage massive unlabeled reasoning data during post-training, and establishing a paradigm that combines self-consistency with dense token-level distillation.","technical_approach":"Proposes u-OPSD: for each unlabeled problem, sample G independent on-policy rollouts and derive a pseudo-answer via majority vote. When the winning vote fraction meets a self-consistency threshold τ, take the shortest agreeing rollout as the pseudo-solution to condition the teacher distribution, then distill this teacher signal into prefixes of disagreeing rollouts. Teacher and student share parameters, with no external supervision required throughout. Unlike self-rewarding RL which uses consistency as a scalar reward, u-OPSD directly uses consistency results to construct dense token-level supervision for higher signal density.","experiments":"Evaluated on 5 mathematical reasoning benchmarks across 6 Qwen3 configurations (4B/8B non-thinking & thinking modes, 4B-Instruct, 30B-A3B-Instruct): non-thinking mode gains 8.5-10.7 points over baseline, thinking mode gains 1.9-2.2 points, Instruct models gain 1.7-1.8 points. Outperforms prior self-rewarding RL methods by 7.0-11.3% (non-thinking) and 0.8-1.4% (thinking) on average. Performs on par with or better than supervised SFT, GRPO, and GT-supervised OPSD, with maximum gains of 10.9, 8.9, 3.2 points respectively.","reading_guide":"Focus on the method section (pseudo-solution construction and distillation objective design) and the experiment section (gain comparisons across model configurations). Skim ablation studies on sampling count G and threshold τ. Estimated reading time: 25-35 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"值得看，但先别把它当‘无监督自提升’神话；重点检查伪标签筛选和采样开销是否把外部监督换成了更贵的 inference budget，读方法和 ablation 就够。","en":"Worth reading, but don’t overread it as magical unsupervised self-improvement; check whether pseudo-label filtering just trades supervision for expensive sampling, and focus on the method plus ablations."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of California San Diego"],"authors":["Yijiang Li","Bingyang Wang","Yijun Liang","Yunjie Tian","Di Fu","Nuno Vasconcelos"],"notable_authors":["Nuno Vasconcelos"],"tags":["self-distillation","on-policy-learning","post-training","self-consistency","reasoning"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06296","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06296","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05409","title":"Mood Matters: How Syntactic Sensitivity Undermines Safety Alignment","abstract":"Large language models typically undergo post-training to align them with safety policies but there exist many sophisticated jailbreaks that sidestep established safeguards. For instance, prior work by Andriushchenko et al. (2025) has found that changing the grammatical tense from present to past can be enough to elicit harmful responses. In this work, we uncover a more general failure of non-imperative syntactic forms. We demonstrate that this syntactic vulnerability exists in 16 models up to 70","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-05T21:05:12Z","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05409.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"研究安全对齐为何会被非祈使句、时态和语气等纯句法变化绕过，导致模型拒答行为不稳定。","importance":"贡献类型是后训练安全机制分析。它把 jailbreak 的一类脆弱性从具体提示技巧扩展到更一般的句法敏感性，并指出问题可能来自 post-training 数据的语言形式偏置。","technical_approach":"论文先在 16 个最大 70B 参数模型上做行为评估，验证非祈使句形式会降低拒答概率；再用 causal mediation analysis 分析拒答是否被上游句法特征部分调节；最后通过 steering 这些句法特征来触发或抑制拒答，并用增加句法多样性的训练数据作为缓解方案。","experiments":"实验覆盖 16 个开源或可访问模型，参数规模到 70B。核心结果是非祈使句法形式普遍削弱安全拒答；句法特征 steering 能双向改变拒答；提高 post-training 数据中的句法多样性可以缓解该问题。摘要未给出具体拒答率变化幅度。","authors_note":"作者来自 University of Mannheim 和 Technical University Clausthal。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies why safety-aligned LLMs can be bypassed by purely syntactic changes such as tense, mood, and non-imperative phrasing.","importance":"This is a post-training safety analysis contribution. It generalizes jailbreak fragility from isolated prompt tricks to a broader syntactic conditioning problem, and links the failure to linguistic bias in alignment data.","technical_approach":"The authors run behavioral evaluations on 16 models up to 70B parameters, apply causal mediation analysis to test whether refusal is mediated by upstream syntactic features, steer those features to induce or suppress refusals, and test syntactic diversification of post-training data as a mitigation.","experiments":"The study covers 16 models up to 70B parameters. It reports that non-imperative syntactic forms broadly reduce refusal, syntactic feature steering can control refusal behavior, and syntactically diverse post-training data mitigates the vulnerability. The abstract does not provide exact effect sizes.","authors_note":"The authors are from the University of Mannheim and Technical University Clausthal."},"recommendation":{"zh":"值得看因果分析和数据偏置部分；它提醒安全拒答可能学到表层语法触发器，而不是稳定的意图判别。","en":"Read the causal analysis and data-bias sections; the useful signal is that refusals may latch onto surface syntax rather than robust intent."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Mannheim","Technical University Clausthal"],"authors":["Alina Klerings","Jannik Brinkmann","Heiner Stuckenschmidt","Simone Paolo Ponzetto"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["safety-alignment","post-training","causal-mediation","jailbreaks"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05409","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05409","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05802","title":"On-Policy Delta Distillation for Multilingual Math Reasoning","abstract":"On-Policy Distillation (OPD) is emerging as a promising alternative to reinforcement learning for LLM post-training, yet its effectiveness in multilingual settings remains underexplored. We study OPD and its advanced variant, On-Policy Delta Distillation (OPD$^2$), for mathematical reasoning in English, Korean, and Japanese. OPD$^2$ improves OPD by using the probability gap between a post-trained teacher and its base model as the learning signal. Experiments with Qwen3 show that OPD$^2$ consiste","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T09:37:49Z","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05802.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作讨论的是：on-policy distillation 这类替代 RL 的后训练方法，在多语言数学推理里是否仍然有效，尤其是对韩语、日语这类非英语语言，token 级蒸馏信号到底是在提升目标语言推理，还是只是把英语推理能力迁移并外溢到别的语言表面上。论文进一步聚焦 OPD2 的 delta signal 设计，即不用 teacher-student 的概率差，而用 post-trained teacher 相对其 base model 的概率增量作为监督，试图把“后训练新增的推理能力”从 teacher 原本已有的通用语言分布里剥离出来。","importance":"对预训练研究的直接价值不在于提出新的 pretrain objective，而在于它把 pretrain 与 post-train 的接口问题讲得更具体：如果 teacher 的能力增量可以通过 delta signal 被更干净地提取，那么后训练得到的推理能力就更像一种可迁移的“残差信号”，而不是把 teacher 的全部分布偏好一并蒸馏过去。这个视角对 reasoning-oriented continual pretraining、mid-training、以及用强 teacher 反哺 base model 都有启发。另一个重要点是，论文提醒多语言增益不能只看 benchmark 分数；英语-only 蒸馏能抬高韩语/日语成绩，但可能伴随 reasoning trace 英文化，这说明语言能力迁移和目标语言建模质量不是一回事。","technical_approach":"方法上延续 OPD / OPD2 框架。OPD 的基本做法是：学生模型先按当前策略生成 rollout，再把这条 student trajectory 喂给 teacher，在每个已采样 token 上取 teacher 的条件概率，对学生做 token-level KL 或等价的 token reward 优化。这样做和 sequence-level RL 不同，监督更细，且仍保持 on-policy。OPD2 的改动很小但针对性很强：奖励不再是 log p_teacher(y_t|x,y_<t) - log p_student(y_t|x,y_<t)，而是 log p_teacher - log p_teacher_base。也就是把 teacher 相对其 base 的增量当作监督信号。这样做的动机是减少 teacher 中那些 base 已经具备的通用语言偏好、风格偏好、格式偏好对蒸馏的干扰，把学习重点放在 post-training 新获得的 reasoning preference 上。论文还沿用了 OPD2 原始工作里的两个稳定化部件：一是 reward centering，把 reward 转成 advantage 以缓解收敛点问题；二是用原始 OPD 信号做 conditioning criterion，避免 delta signal 单独使用时训练目标过于脆弱。实验设置上，作者构造了英/韩/日三语数学训练集，总规模 100K，考察多种语言配比与 EN-only 训练情形，核心比较对象是 OPD 与 OPD2 在 Qwen3 系列 instruction-tuned 模型上的表现差异。","experiments":"从正文可确认的关键信息有三点。第一，训练数据是一个 100K 规模的多语言数学数据集，覆盖 English、Korean、Japanese，用来做 on-policy post-training。第二，结论上 OPD2 在多语言设置里稳定优于原始 OPD，且在韩语、日语上的提升更明显，说明 delta signal 在非英语推理迁移里更有用。第三，OPD2 往往能缩小 English 与 Korean 的性能差距，但这种 gap closing 不是所有模型和设置都一致成立，作者对此保持了克制。另一个实验观察很重要：只用英语数据做 OPD，也能提高韩语和日语 benchmark 分数，但生成分析显示，模型常把中间推理过程部分切换到英语，说明分数提升里混入了跨语言推理 trace 泄漏，而不完全是目标语言 reasoning 真正增强。由于给出的全文片段没有包含完整表格和具体数值，无法可靠复述每个模型、每个 benchmark 的精确提升幅度；但论文的主要实验价值不在绝对分数，而在于把 multilingual OPD 的收益与语言漂移副作用同时揭示出来。","reading_guide":"泛读时先看 Introduction，重点抓三个研究问题：OPD2 是否仍优于 OPD、是否缩小语言差距、EN-only OPD 是否真的提升目标语言推理。然后看 On-Policy Distillation 一节，弄清 OPD 与 OPD2 的 reward 定义差别，这是一切实验现象的解释起点。实验部分建议优先看主表和作者对生成样例的分析，尤其是非英语输入下 reasoning trace 是否混入英语。这个现象比单纯分数更值得看。预计 15 到 25 分钟可以抓住主要信息；如果只关心方法，不必深究附录里的全部 benchmark 细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether on-policy distillation remains effective for multilingual mathematical reasoning, especially in Korean and Japanese, and whether the gains reflect genuine target-language reasoning improvement or merely transfer of English-centric reasoning behavior. It further studies OPD2, where the supervision signal is the probability gap between a post-trained teacher and its base model, rather than the gap between teacher and student.","importance":"Its value for pretraining researchers is indirect but real. The work sharpens the pretrain–post-train interface: if the useful part of post-training can be isolated as a delta over the base model, then reasoning capability may be distilled as a cleaner residual signal instead of copying the teacher’s full distribution. That matters for continual pretraining, mid-training, and teacher-assisted capability transfer. The multilingual findings are also important: benchmark gains alone can be misleading, because English-only distillation may improve Korean/Japanese scores while shifting the reasoning trace toward English.","technical_approach":"$2b","experiments":"Three findings are clear from the full text provided. First, the training corpus contains 100K multilingual math problems spanning English, Korean, and Japanese. Second, OPD2 consistently outperforms vanilla OPD in multilingual settings, with stronger gains in Korean and Japanese than in English. Third, OPD2 often narrows the English–Korean gap, though the effect is not universal across all models and settings. A particularly useful observation is that English-only OPD can still raise Korean and Japanese benchmark scores, but qualitative inspection shows that the model often drifts into English during the reasoning process. That means some of the measured gain comes from cross-lingual reasoning-trace leakage rather than improved target-language reasoning per se. The excerpt does not include the full result tables, so precise benchmark-by-benchmark numbers cannot be stated reliably here.","reading_guide":"Start with the introduction and focus on the three research questions: whether OPD2 still beats OPD, whether it reduces language gaps, and what English-only OPD is actually doing. Then read the OPD formulation carefully; the difference between the OPD reward and the OPD2 delta reward explains most of the empirical behavior. In the experiments, prioritize the main result tables and any qualitative examples showing language drift in the chain of thought. That analysis is more informative than the headline scores. A quick but useful read should take about 15–25 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"读 OPD² 的 delta 目标和跨语言消融；若结论稳，后训练信号应从“模仿强模型”转向“模仿增量”。","en":"Read the OPD² delta objective and multilingual ablations; if robust, post-training targets should imitate the teacher’s gain, not the teacher distribution."},"metadata":{"institutions":["NAVER AI Lab"],"authors":["Byeongho Heo","Jaehui Hwang","Sangdoo Yun","Dongyoon Han"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["on-policy-distillation","post-training","multilingual-reasoning","math-reasoning","Qwen3"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05802","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05802","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05783","title":"GROM: Gradient-Free Rapid One-Shot Machine Unlearning","abstract":"Machine unlearning has become a critical capability for safely removing specific, sensitive knowledge from large language models (LLMs). Current state-of-the-art approaches primarily rely on iterative, training-time unlearning via fine-tuning. However, even when utilizing parameter-efficient dimensionality reduction techniques like LoRA, gradient-based optimization remains computationally expensive and lacks explicit analytical formulations. It can also leave the targeted knowledge merely hidden","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T09:16:53Z","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05783.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作处理的是 LLM 机器遗忘里一个很具体但长期存在的问题：现有主流方法大多依赖梯度微调，在 forget set 上压低概率、在 retain set 上尽量保性能，但这种做法成本高、调参重，而且遗忘往往不够“物理”。论文指出，很多微调式遗忘只是把目标知识藏进了小幅权重扰动里，低比特量化后会被重新暴露。作者要解决的不是再设计一个更稳的遗忘 loss，而是把遗忘直接改写成一个可解析求解的线性代数问题：对选定层做一次加性更新，在不破坏保留数据输出的前提下，显式压制需要删除的 token 或表征方向，并且整个过程不做反向传播、不做迭代优化。","importance":"对基座研究的直接意义不在于“部署一个更快的删数据工具”，而在于它把参数编辑、遗忘、局部再训练这几件事拉回到一个更可分析的框架里。第一，GROM 给出了 closed-form 的 layer edit 视角：遗忘不一定要靠 SGD 近似求解，也可以在局部线性化假设下直接解最优更新。第二，它把 retain/forget trade-off 写成了带 ridge 正则的约束最小二乘问题，这对理解“为什么某些遗忘方法会伤 utility、为什么量化会恢复知识”很有帮助。第三，论文强调了量化恢复攻击这一检验维度，提醒人们不要只看遗忘后表面指标，而要看参数更新是否真的把目标映射移出了模型可恢复的表示子空间。量级上，这更像一种有分析价值的方法论文，而不是会直接改写大规模预训练流程的范式工作。","technical_approach":"方法核心是对单个权重矩阵 W 做解析更新。被编辑的矩阵可以是 LM head，也可以是 MLP block 的 down-projection。作者先对 forget 数据和 retain 数据各做一次前向传播，收集进入该矩阵的输入向量，按列堆叠成 key 矩阵；这些 key 只在“下一个 token 应该被遗忘或保留”的位置提取，因此编辑目标是 token-level 的，而不是整段样本级别的。\n\n随后，作者构造一个 ridge-regularized least-squares 目标。直观上有两部分：一部分要求编辑后的矩阵在 forget keys 上把输出推向预设的“遗忘目标”；另一部分要求在 retain keys 上尽量保持原输出不变。由于目标对 ΔW 是二次凸的，最优加性更新 ΔW* 可以闭式求出。这样做和 LoRA/GA/RKLD/NPO 这类方法的差别很明确：它们通过梯度下降在参数空间里逐步逼近一个折中点，GROM 则直接解出该折中点。\n\n遗忘目标的设计有两类。其一是 token suppression：直接压低目标答案 token 的 logit 或相关输出，使模型不再偏向原本记住的内容。其二是 representation corruption：不是只盯着最终 token，而是把某些中间表征推离原方向，让后续层更难恢复被删信息。论文还配了 logit-lens layer selection，用中间层经 LM head 投影后的可读性来判断哪些层已经显式承载了待删知识，从而只编辑少数高影响层，避免全模型改动。另一个有意思的部分是 influence auditing：因为解是解析的，作者可以精确分解单个删除请求对最终更新的贡献，而不是像梯度法那样只能做近似归因。这一点对合规审计和批量删除请求冲突分析都很实用。","experiments":"论文在五个 benchmark 上比较了遗忘-保留权衡，并把 gold retrain 作为上界参照。主结论有三点。第一，效率上，GROM 只需要每层一对 forget/retain 前向统计和一次闭式求解，运行时间比梯度式 baseline 快到两个数量级，作者把完整遗忘过程描述为“秒级”。第二，效果上，在 Pareto 前沿上通常优于或接近 GA、GradDiff、RMU、RKLD、NPO、SimNPO 等方法，也就是在相同 utility 损失下忘得更多，或者在相同 forgetting 强度下保留更多原能力。第三，鲁棒性上，针对近期提出的低比特量化恢复攻击，梯度式强 baseline 在量化后会恢复相当一部分本应删除的内容，而 GROM 的遗忘程度基本维持，接近 retrain 模型。\n\n从文中方法细节可以看出，实验真正支撑结论的不是单一平均分，而是几类消融：编辑哪一层、编辑 LM head 还是 MLP down-proj、token suppression 与 representation corruption 的差异、ridge 系数大小、retain 集规模，以及多请求叠加时的相互干扰。论文的隐含信息是：如果层选得准、retain 约束足够强，局部线性编辑可以覆盖相当一部分“记忆型”遗忘需求；但若目标知识是分布式、跨层冗余编码的，单层或少层编辑的上限仍然存在。当前给出的全文片段没有完整表格数字，因此无法逐项复述具体 benchmark 分数，但速度量级、Pareto 结论和量化鲁棒性是文中最关键的实验信息。","reading_guide":"泛读建议是先看 Introduction 里对“量化后遗忘失效”的动机，这决定了为什么作者坚持做 closed-form 而不是再调一个更强的遗忘 loss。然后直接看 Method 里目标函数和闭式解推导，重点理解三件事：forget target 是怎么定义的，retain constraint 是怎么进入矩阵求解的，ridge 正则在数值稳定性和保留性能之间起什么作用。接着看 layer selection 部分，判断作者为什么选 logit-lens 而不是凭经验固定编辑后几层。实验部分建议优先看三类图表：forget/utility Pareto 曲线、运行时间对比、量化攻击前后遗忘指标变化。预计 30–45 分钟可以抓住主线；如果要深挖，值得推一遍闭式解的矩阵形式，并思考它和 ROME/MEMIT 一类知识编辑方法在约束形式上的关系。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a specific weakness in LLM unlearning: most strong methods rely on iterative gradient-based fine-tuning to reduce likelihood on a forget set while preserving utility on a retain set, but this is expensive, tuning-heavy, and often only hides the unwanted knowledge. The authors argue that such forgetting can be fragile: low-bit quantization may recover content that appeared erased. Their goal is not to design yet another unlearning loss, but to reformulate unlearning as an analytically solvable matrix update problem. The model applies a one-shot additive edit to selected layers, suppresses targeted outputs or representations, preserves retained behavior, and does so without backpropagation or iterative optimization.","importance":"Its main value for foundation-model research is conceptual rather than purely operational. GROM shows that unlearning, local editing, and constrained post-hoc model updates can be cast in a closed-form optimization framework instead of being treated as another fine-tuning recipe. That matters for three reasons. First, it gives a more interpretable view of the retain-forget trade-off through ridge-regularized least squares. Second, it offers a concrete explanation for why some gradient-based unlearning methods may fail under quantization: the unwanted behavior may survive in a recoverable low-magnitude subspace. Third, it suggests that at least part of model memorization can be manipulated through targeted linear edits, which is relevant to broader questions around memorization, parameter locality, and post-pretraining control. This is better read as an analytically useful method paper than as a change to large-scale pretraining practice itself.","technical_approach":"$2c","experiments":"$2d","reading_guide":"For a skim, start with the motivation around quantization-induced recovery of forgotten content. That explains why the paper insists on a closed-form update instead of another stronger fine-tuning objective. Then go straight to the optimization setup and derive the closed-form solution at a high level: how the forgetting targets are defined, how retain constraints enter the solve, and how ridge regularization trades off stability against preservation. After that, read the layer-selection section to understand why the authors use logit-lens diagnostics rather than editing a fixed set of late layers. In experiments, prioritize three plots or tables: forgetting-utility Pareto curves, runtime comparisons, and before/after quantization forgetting metrics. Around 30 to 45 minutes should be enough to capture the main idea. If reading more deeply, compare the constraint structure to knowledge-editing methods such as ROME or MEMIT.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"揭露梯度类机器遗忘的核心缺陷：仅隐藏知识而非真删除，量化即可复原，闭式解思路简洁可复用","en":"Exposes a critical flaw in gradient-based unlearning: knowledge is merely hidden not removed and recovers after quantization; the closed-form solution is simple and reusable."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf","Jagiellonian University","IDEAS Research Institute"],"authors":["Paweł Batorski","Przemysław Spurek","Paul Swoboda"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["machine_unlearning","privacy","gradient_free","closed_form_update"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05783","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05783","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06352","title":"CalibForge: Adversarial Solver Calibration for Scaling Learnable Terminal Tasks","abstract":"Training terminal agents requires executable and verifiable tasks that are not merely solvable, but appropriately challenging for learning. Executable validation establishes feasibility, yet does not reveal how a task behaves relative to a given solver setting. In this paper, we present CalibForge, an autonomous terminal-task synthesis system that uses verified solver behavior to revise candidate tasks through adversarial solver calibration. Multi-solver calibration targets disagreement within a","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T17:53:18Z","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06352.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的不是“如何生成可执行 terminal 任务”，而是更难的一层：如何把任务构造成对某一类求解器来说“可学但不平庸”的训练样本。仅靠 executable validation 只能证明任务能跑、能验收，不能判断它对当前 agent 是太简单、太难，还是刚好处在能提供学习信号的区间。CalibForge 把这个问题形式化为 solver-relative learnable zone：任务必须被至少一个求解器真实解出，同时又不能被目标 solver 设定下全部轻松解出。论文的核心是在任务合成阶段引入基于 solver 行为的多轮对抗式校准，让“任务难度是否合适”从事后经验判断，变成可观测、可操作、可迭代优化的构造目标。","importance":"对基座研究的意义主要在训练数据构造，而不是 agent 应用本身。它给出的关键信号是：对于可验证环境任务，数据质量不应只看正确性和多样性，还应看相对于训练中模型能力的“可学习性带宽”。这和预训练里的 data curriculum、difficulty shaping、self-play data generation 有直接对应关系。论文贡献的量级不在新模型结构，而在提出了一种更细粒度的数据筛选与修订机制：不是简单保留 solved/unsolved 样本，而是利用强弱 solver 的差异、失败轨迹和多轮重写，把任务推向更有监督密度的区域。对做代码 agent、tool-use、terminal interaction 数据合成的人，这个思路是实用的；对更广义的 pretrain/post-train 接口研究，它也提示了一个方向：训练数据的价值取决于模型相对能力，而不是静态标签质量。","technical_approach":"方法上，CalibForge 是一个从 clue 出发的自动任务合成系统，但真正的创新不在 authoring pipeline 本身，而在后面的 adversarial solver calibration。流程大致分四步。第一步，authoring agent 在 draft sandbox 中做外部调研，查官方文档、GitHub issue、Stack Overflow 等，寻找具体且可复现的工程问题，例如版本冲突、配置陷阱、依赖 bug、边界条件。第二步，它联合生成任务说明、执行环境和验证测试，并做结构校验与 self-solving，确保候选任务至少是可执行、可验证、可被系统自身完成的。第三步，进入校准环节。论文给了两种校准准则。multi-solver calibration 追求异构 solver 池中的分歧，即至少一个成功、至少一个失败；contrastive solver calibration 则更强，要求指定的强 solver 通过、弱 solver 失败。两者都把“可学区间”定义成 solver 相对关系，而不是绝对难度分数。第四步，如果当前候选不满足目标行为模式，authoring agent 不只是微调 wording，而是可以回到外部研究、重写任务方向、修改环境、测试和约束，再重新验证和 probing，直到满足条件或达到最大轮数。\n\n这里有两个值得注意的设计。其一，反馈信号不只用 pass/fail，还用完整 trajectory。这样 authoring agent 能根据失败原因去改任务，例如减少偶然性、强化目标约束、修正环境噪声，或者反过来引入更能区分强弱 solver 的关键步骤。其二，论文强调“constrained adversarial”：作者代理在对抗地改任务，但 retention criterion 始终要求至少存在真实成功解，因此不会把任务推向纯粹刁钻或不可解的方向。和只用单一 solver 打分、或者只做一次 authoring+validation 的方法相比，这里多了一层基于行为证据的闭环修订。这个区别很重要，因为 learnability 不是任务初稿的静态属性，而是可以通过重写被主动塑形的。","experiments":"$2e","reading_guide":"如果只花一小时，先看 Introduction 里对 learnable zone 的定义，再看 Methodology 中 Figure 2、Algorithm 1，把 author–solver loop 的控制流理清。随后重点看两类 calibration criterion：multi-solver 和 contrastive。这里决定了任务被保留的逻辑，也决定了这篇工作的真正贡献不只是“自动出题”，而是“按 solver 相对能力塑形数据”。\n\n实验部分建议先抓三张信息最密的结果：一是初始候选满足 contrastive relation 的比例与多轮修订后的累计接受率；二是不同数据构造策略在 Terminal-Bench 2.0 上的对比；三是用 5,431 个任务训练后的 30B/35B 结果及其在 SWE-bench Pro、Doc2Repo 上的迁移表现。读到这里，基本就能判断这套方法是否只是 task-generation 工程，还是确实改变了训练信号质量。\n\n值得深挖的点有三个。第一，revision 是如何利用 trajectory 的，失败模式是否被系统性归纳成可操作的编辑策略。第二，solver pool 的组成如何影响 learnable zone 的形状；如果强弱模型差距太小或太大，校准是否会退化。第三，这套方法能否迁移到更一般的数据合成场景，例如代码补全、tool-use、web agent，甚至 masked/AR 预训练中的 difficulty-aware sampling。若做复现，先不要急着复刻全系统，先验证“多 solver 分歧筛选”相对“单 solver 通过率筛选”的增益是否稳定。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper is not mainly about generating executable terminal tasks. It targets a harder problem: how to synthesize tasks that are learnable for a given solver regime, rather than merely valid, trivial, or effectively impossible. Executable validation only tells you that a task can run and be checked. It does not tell you whether the task sits in a useful difficulty band for training. CalibForge formalizes this as a solver-relative learnable zone: a retained task must be demonstrably solvable by at least one solver, yet not uniformly solved under the target solver setting. The central contribution is to make this property observable and editable during data construction through an adversarial author–solver loop.","importance":"Its relevance is primarily on the data side of foundation-model training, not on agent deployment. The main lesson is that for executable environments, data quality should not be judged only by correctness or diversity. It should also be judged by learnability relative to model capability. That connects directly to curriculum design, difficulty shaping, and self-play style data generation. The contribution is not a new model family. It is a more informative data filtering and revision mechanism: instead of keeping solved or unsolved tasks, it uses solver disagreement, strong-vs-weak relations, and failure trajectories to push tasks into a region with denser learning signal. For code agents and tool-use training, this is practically useful. For the broader pretrain–post-train interface, it suggests that data value is capability-relative rather than a static property of labels.","technical_approach":"$2f","experiments":"$30","reading_guide":"$31","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"做agent后训练数据合成的研究员重点看§3的两种校准策略，难度控制方法可迁移到数学/代码等其他任务合成场景","en":"For agent post-training data synthesis researchers, focus on §3 two calibration strategies; difficulty control methods transfer to math/code task synthesis scenarios"},"metadata":{"institutions":["Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China","AweAI Team","Independent Researcher"],"authors":["Fanzhe Meng","Guoxin Chen","Jiale Zhao","Shuang Sun","Zhiyu Lin","Wayne Xin Zhao","Ruihua Song","Ji-Rong Wen","Kai Jia"],"notable_authors":["Wayne Xin Zhao","Ji-Rong Wen"],"tags":["task-synthesis","agent-training","data-synthesis","terminal-agent"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06352","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06352","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05832","title":"Enhancing Social Intelligence in LLMs with Hierarchical Reasoning and Utterance-Level Goal Rewarding","abstract":"Large language models (LLMs) excel in structured tasks but struggle with dynamic social interactions, where success requires long-term goal coordination and rapid adaptation. Current methods often apply uniform goal-based rewards to every utterance, overlooking the specificity of objectives at each dialogue turn and failing to account for the rationale of potential strategies. Inspired by the Theory of Planned Behavior, we propose the Think-Strategy-Response (TSR) framework, which decomposes soc","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T10:00:50Z","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05832.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 LLM 在动态社会对话中缺乏长期目标协调与回合级策略适配的问题，尤其是统一 reward 作用于每个 utterance 时信号过粗。","importance":"这是后训练 / RL 方向的对话 agent 工作。对预训练研究员的价值主要在 reward granularity 和 hierarchical policy 设计，能提供一些 pretrain-posttrain 接口上的启发，但不是基座方法核心论文。","technical_approach":"提出 Think-Strategy-Response（TSR）两层框架，把社会对话拆成高层策略规划和低层语言实现；再用 Linearized Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning with Variance-Gated Rewards（LHRL-VGR）做优化，根据 goal achievement score 的方差动态路由 reward，在 goal completion 与 strategy adherence 之间做平衡。","experiments":"在 SOTOPIA benchmark 上，对 Qwen2.5-7B agent 进行微调后超过 GPT-4o baseline。摘要未给出训练样本规模、RL 细节、具体分数和统计显著性。实验更像特定社交对话场景中的 agent 优化，而非通用推理或预训练结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the weakness of LLMs in dynamic social dialogue, where success requires long-term goal coordination and turn-level strategic adaptation, and where uniform rewards across utterances are too coarse.","importance":"This is a post-training / RL paper for dialogue agents. Its value to pretraining researchers is mostly indirect, through reward granularity and hierarchical policy design, rather than as a core foundation-model contribution.","technical_approach":"The method introduces a two-level Think-Strategy-Response (TSR) framework that separates high-level strategic planning from low-level linguistic realization. It is optimized with Linearized Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning with Variance-Gated Rewards (LHRL-VGR), which dynamically routes rewards based on the variance of goal-achievement scores to balance goal completion and strategy adherence.","experiments":"On the SOTOPIA benchmark, a fine-tuned Qwen2.5-7B agent reportedly surpasses a GPT-4o baseline. The abstract does not provide training data scale, RL details, exact scores, or significance analysis. The setup appears more like a specialized social-dialogue agent optimization than a general pretraining result.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"偏社交对话 agent，外推到基座训练要很小心；若你关心 RL 信号颗粒度，只看 utterance-level reward 设计即可。","en":"This is a social-dialogue agent paper, so do not overgeneralize it to foundation training; if you care about RL signal granularity, only read the utterance-level reward design."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Independent Researcher","Shanghai Jiao Tong University"],"authors":["Xiaofeng Wang","Kakam Chong","Shuai Xiao","DeXin Kong","Qingyuan Tian","Chen Ju","Xu Yan","Shuai Zhao","Fei Huang","Rui Wang","Shuguang Han","jufeng chen"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["hierarchical-rl","dialogue-agent","reward-design","social-intelligence","sotopia"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05832","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05832","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06125","title":"Sample-Adaptive Latent Rewards for Uncertainty-Guided Diffusion Post-Training","abstract":"Latent reward models can supervise visual diffusion models without decoding intermediate states into pixel space. This makes alignment with human preferences more efficient. However, existing latent reward models output only scalar scores. They do not estimate the uncertainty of each prediction. The generator therefore cannot determine which feedback is reliable. This can drive optimization in the wrong direction and lead to reward hacking. We propose \\textsc{SURE}, a unified latent-space framew","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T14:55:42Z","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06125.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决视觉 diffusion 后训练中 latent reward 只有标量分数、无法表达不确定性，进而导致奖励误导和 reward hacking 的问题。","importance":"这属于生成模型后训练与奖励建模工作。虽然对象是图像/视频 diffusion，不是 LLM，但“奖励模型应显式建模置信度”这一点对 RLHF/RLVR 与 pretrain-posttrain 接口有参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出 SURE 框架，在 latent space 中训练 sample-adaptive latent reward model（SURE-LRM），为每个 noisy latent 预测高斯效用分布，用均值表示奖励、方差表示不确定性；再通过 uncertainty-guided reward feedback learning 利用该分布指导 dense post-training，避免不可靠反馈主导优化。","experiments":"摘要表明方法覆盖图像与视频 diffusion 模型，并强调无需将中间状态解码回像素空间即可进行对齐；但未在摘要中给出具体模型规模、数据规模、基线名称和提升幅度，因此结论强度仍需看正文实验表。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a key weakness in diffusion post-training: latent reward models output scalar scores without uncertainty, which can misguide optimization and induce reward hacking.","importance":"This is a post-training and reward-modeling paper for image/video diffusion. It is not an LLM paper, but the idea that reward models should expose confidence is relevant to RLHF/RLVR and the pretrain–posttrain interface.","technical_approach":"It proposes SURE, a latent-space framework with a sample-adaptive latent reward model (SURE-LRM) that predicts a Gaussian utility for each noisy latent. The mean is used as reward and the variance as uncertainty, which then drives uncertainty-guided reward feedback learning during dense post-training.","experiments":"The abstract claims applicability to both image and video diffusion models and emphasizes latent-space alignment without decoding intermediate states to pixels. However, it does not provide model sizes, dataset scales, baselines, or exact gains in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"不是 LLM 论文，但“奖励分数必须带置信度”这个判断值得迁到 RM/RLVR；正文只需看不确定性如何进入优化目标。","en":"Not an LLM paper, but the claim that reward scores need calibrated uncertainty is worth porting to RM/RLVR; read only the objective design."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Rui Li","Yuanzhi Liang","Ke Hao","Ziqiao Weng","Haibin Huang","Chi Zhang","XueLong Li"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["reward-model","diffusion","post-training","uncertainty","reward-hacking"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06125","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06125","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05600","title":"LC-GRPO: Bridging Train-Inference Gap for Flow-Based GRPO with Langevin Correction","abstract":"Flow-based generative models are typically sampled by solving a deterministic ordinary differential equation (ODE), whereas online reinforcement learning requires stochastic rollouts for policy exploration and optimization. Existing GRPO methods for flow models therefore replace the inference-time ODE with a stochastic differential equation (SDE) during training. Although the ODE and SDE share the same marginal distributions in continuous time, their finite-step discretizations can differ substa","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T04:47:57Z","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05600.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI","cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"流模型在推理时用确定性ODE采样，但在线RL训练需要随机rollout；用SDE替代会引入有限步离散化偏差，导致训练-推理分布不一致与样本变糊。","importance":"属于“训练-推理 gap / on-policy RL 与生成采样器不一致”的通用问题；虽然对象是flow生成模型而非LLM，但对RL信号质量、采样器一致性这类post-train接口有可迁移的工程启示。","technical_approach":"提出LC-GRPO：每步先做与推理一致的ODE Euler步，再做随机Langevin校正，使转移后的边缘分布对齐目标时刻；需要用score（梯度）来构造Langevin correction，从而在保持探索随机性的同时减少与ODE采样的偏差。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体数据集/指标/提升幅度；只陈述SDE噪声增大导致rollout变糊、与测试ODE采样不匹配，并声称LC可缓解。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Flow models use deterministic ODE sampling at inference, but online RL needs stochastic rollouts; replacing ODE with SDE introduces finite-step discretization bias, causing a train–inference mismatch and blurry samples.","importance":"A general train–inference gap issue at the RL–sampler interface; while not an LLM paper, it offers transferable lessons on keeping RL training trajectories aligned with the deployment sampler.","technical_approach":"LC-GRPO: each rollout transition takes an inference-aligned ODE Euler step, then applies a stochastic Langevin correction targeting the marginal at that timestep; requires a score estimate to implement the correction, aiming to preserve exploration while reducing mismatch to the ODE sampler.","experiments":"The abstract provides no concrete datasets/metrics/gains; it motivates the method by noting SDE rollouts get blurrier with higher exploration noise and diverge from test-time ODE sampling.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"不是LLM，但“RL训练轨迹要对齐部署采样器”的点很实在；只看方法段落理解ODE步+Langevin校正的组合即可。","en":"Not LLM-focused, but the lesson “RL rollouts must match the deployed sampler” is practical; read only the method for the ODE-step + Langevin-correction construction."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Yingqing Guo","Hui Yuan","Zijian He","Mengdi Wang","Zheng Ding"],"notable_authors":["Mengdi Wang"],"tags":["reinforcement-learning","flow-models","train-inference-gap","langevin-dynamics","sampling"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05600","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05600","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05541","title":"Hyper-ES: Effective Evolution Strategies for LLM Reasoning via Descent Direction Merging","abstract":"Evolution Strategy (ES) is a promising alternative to gradient-based fine-tuning for resource-constrained Large Language Model (LLM) reasoning. However, directly applying ES to billion-parameter LLMs is highly ineffective. In such high-dimensional parameter spaces, most random perturbations are nearly orthogonal to useful update directions, leading to unstable optimization. We propose Hyper-ES, a subspace-based ES framework that avoids the weakness of ES in full-parameter search while exploiting","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T02:39:10Z","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05541.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"直接将进化策略(ES)应用于十亿参数LLM推理微调效果极差，高维参数空间中随机扰动几乎与有用更新方向正交，导致优化不稳定。","importance":"方法改进：提出子空间ES框架，用少量廉价梯度微调获取下降方向构造低维子空间，再在子空间内做CMA-ES优化，规避全参数ES的高维诅咒。","technical_approach":"Hyper-ES先运行少量梯度微调得到若干下降方向，其张成空间作为适配子空间；然后用CMA-ES在该子空间中优化逐层DARE-TIES合并权重。","experiments":"在LLM推理任务上对比全参数ES和梯度微调，子空间ES以更低计算成本取得更稳定的优化效果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Direct application of evolution strategies to billion-parameter LLM reasoning fine-tuning is highly ineffective, as random perturbations in high-dimensional parameter space are nearly orthogonal to useful update directions, causing unstable optimization.","importance":"Methodological improvement: a subspace-based ES framework that uses cheap gradient fine-tuning runs to construct a low-dimensional descent subspace, then applies CMA-ES within it, avoiding the high-dimensional curse of full-parameter ES.","technical_approach":"Hyper-ES first runs a small number of inexpensive gradient-based fine-tuning runs to obtain descent directions whose span forms a compact adaptation subspace; CMA-ES then optimizes layer-wise DARE-TIES merging weights within this subspace.","experiments":"Compared to full-parameter ES and gradient fine-tuning on LLM reasoning tasks, subspace ES achieves more stable optimization at lower compute cost.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"子空间ES+模型合并的思路有一定新意，但属于后训练微调范畴，对预训练研究员参考价值有限，看摘要和方法即可。","en":"Subspace ES plus model merging has some novelty but sits in post-training fine-tuning; limited reference for pretraining researchers, read abstract and method only."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Yu Gu","Zhi Zheng","Yunpeng Ba","Xialiang Tong","Mingxuan Yuan","Zhenkun Wang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["evolution strategies","LLM fine-tuning","subspace optimization","model merging","reasoning"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05541","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05541","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05249","title":"PRISM: Priority-aware Rubric Internalization via Structured Multimodal Data Synthesis","abstract":"Real-world multimodal instructions often bundle multiple requirements with unequal importance, yet most multimodal training data still reduce instruction following to answering one self-contained question. We study this gap through \\textbf{rubric comprehension}, which casts the model not as a generator measured against rubrics but as an \\textbf{executor} that follows them: given an image and a typed, prioritized rubric, the model must verify each rule before producing an overall judgment. To sup","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-05T15:55:15Z","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05249.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 VLM 在多要求、不同优先级的真实多模态指令中，难以按 rubric 逐条验证并给出整体判断的问题。","importance":"贡献是多模态后训练数据合成和评测设计；它把模型从“回答单个问题”转向“执行带优先级规则”，对 instruction-following 数据格式有参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出 PRISM 四阶段合成流程：生成 persona-task pairs、用 prefix 引导规则集、过滤 rubric 质量、生成结构化 verification traces；同时构建 PRISM-Eval，用 Loose 和 Strict 两类基于固定标签的 deterministic matching，避免推理时再调用 judge model。","experiments":"使用 10K 合成样本训练后，Qwen3-VL-4B 在 PRISM-Eval 上 Strict accuracy 从 9.5% 提升到 30.1%；摘要称同时保持原有能力，但未给出完整 baseline、训练超参或更大模型扩展结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets multimodal instructions that contain multiple requirements with unequal priorities, asking a VLM to verify each rubric rule before making an overall judgment.","importance":"The contribution is multimodal post-training data synthesis plus an evaluation setup. It is useful as a data-format study for instruction following, not as a foundation pretraining result.","technical_approach":"PRISM uses a four-stage synthesis pipeline: persona-task pair generation, prefix-guided rule-set construction, rubric quality filtering, and structured verification-trace generation. PRISM-Eval uses Loose and Strict deterministic matching against fixed labels instead of an inference-time judge.","experiments":"With 10K synthesized samples, PRISM improves Qwen3-VL-4B Strict accuracy on PRISM-Eval from 9.5% to 30.1%. The abstract does not provide full training details, baseline breadth, or larger-scale scaling evidence.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"数据格式比方法更有用；看合成 pipeline 和 Strict metric，别过度外推 10K 样本结果。","en":"The data format is more useful than the method; inspect the synthesis pipeline and Strict metric, but do not overread the 10K-sample result."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Xiaomin He","Dongling Xiao","Jiahao Xie","Ruiqi Lu","Qianle Wang","Zhongbin Guo","Wanxuan Sun"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["multimodal-instruction-tuning","synthetic-data","rubric-following","VLM-evaluation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05249","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05249","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05253","title":"Beyond Rotations: AuroOFT for Expressive Quantized Orthogonal Fine-Tuning","abstract":"Quantized orthogonal fine-tuning (qoft) enables parameter-efficient adaptation of low-bit language models by learning structured activation rotations before frozen quantized weights. However, its task-specific updates remain constrained to linear orthogonal transformations, limiting input-dependent nonlinear corrections. We introduce AuroOFT, which keeps qoft as a stable quantization-compatible branch while attaching a zero-start gated low-rank nonlinear residual to each adapted linear layer. Au","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-05T16:05:13Z","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05253.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决低比特语言模型上 qOFT 只学习线性正交旋转、表达能力不足的问题。","importance":"贡献类型是量化模型的参数高效后训练方法。它关注低比特冻结权重条件下如何增加任务适配能力，同时尽量不破坏 qOFT 的量化兼容性和初始化稳定性。","technical_approach":"提出 AuroOFT：保留 qOFT 的稳定正交分支，同时在每个被适配线性层旁加入零初始化的门控低秩非线性残差。激活先映射到 RMS-normalized 的紧凑 latent 空间，再通过自适应非线性 basis 和有界或 token-dependent gating 做修正。零初始化 up projection 保证初始函数与 qOFT 一致；正交性只要求分支级成立，而不要求组合后的非线性层整体正交。","experiments":"摘要给出在 Qwen 1.5B/3B 模型上的结果；在匹配数据、优化、解码和解析协议下，AuroOFT 相比 matched qOFT 的 Macro-6 提升 1.30–2.70%。摘要未给出具体任务集合、训练数据规模和低比特配置细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a limitation of qOFT for low-bit language models: task-specific updates are restricted to linear orthogonal rotations and cannot express input-dependent nonlinear corrections.","importance":"This is a parameter-efficient post-training method for quantized LMs. Its contribution is to add adaptation capacity under frozen low-bit weights while preserving the stability and quantization compatibility that make qOFT attractive.","technical_approach":"AuroOFT keeps qOFT as a stable orthogonal branch and adds a zero-start gated low-rank nonlinear residual to each adapted linear layer. Activations are mapped into an RMS-normalized compact latent space, processed by adaptive nonlinear bases, and modulated by bounded or token-dependent gates. The zero-initialized up projection makes the model functionally identical to qOFT at initialization, while orthogonality is treated as a branch-level property rather than a constraint on the full nonlinear layer.","experiments":"The abstract reports experiments on Qwen 1.5B and 3B models. Under matched data, optimization, decoding, and parser protocols, AuroOFT improves Macro-6 over matched qOFT by 1.30–2.70%. The provided abstract does not expose the full task suite, data scale, or bit-width settings.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看方法图和消融即可；它是干净的 qOFT 扩展，但对预训练 recipe 基本没有反哺。","en":"Skim the method and ablations only; it is a clean qOFT extension, but it says little about pretraining recipes."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Yue Han","Dianlin Wang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["quantized-llm","peft","orthogonal-finetuning","low-rank-adaptation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05253","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05253","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06179","title":"SAGA: Score-Weighted Adaptive Generation Alignment for Low-Resource Nordic Language Models","abstract":"Preference optimisation has proven effective for improving large language models but typically relies on costly human preference annotations. Extending these methods to morphologically rich, low-resource languages remains challenging because such annotations are scarce. We present SAGA (Score-weighted Adaptive Generation Alignment), a parser-guided preference optimisation framework that replaces human labels with dependency-parser supervision. SAGA converts parser judgements into preference pair","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T15:41:02Z","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06179.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"在丹麦语、冰岛语、挪威博克mål 等低资源且形态复杂语言中，缺少人工偏好标注导致偏好优化难以落地。","importance":"贡献类型是后训练数据与监督信号构造。它用依存句法分析器替代人工偏好，为低资源语言 alignment 提供一种较便宜的弱监督路径；对预训练研究的价值主要在于训练信号质量和 reward hacking 监控。","technical_approach":"SAGA 将 parser judgement 转换成 delta-DPO 的偏好对，用句法分析质量和词汇多样性组成复合 reward，再用 reward gap 过滤低信息量样本，并显式监控 reward hacking。方法属于把外部语言工具迁移为偏好监督，而不是新的 RL 或 DPO 目标。","experiments":"实验使用 GPT-SW3-1.3B，在 Danish、Icelandic、Norwegian Bokmål 上评估语法质量。摘要报告 Danish parse success 从 69.0% 提升到 93.8%，Icelandic 在独立 Stanza 评估上提升 4.5 个百分点；其余 baseline 和完整指标需看正文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses preference optimization for morphologically rich, low-resource Nordic languages where human preference labels are scarce.","importance":"The contribution is a post-training supervision pipeline. It replaces human preferences with dependency-parser-derived signals, which is mainly interesting for thinking about weak preference labels, signal quality, and reward hacking.","technical_approach":"SAGA converts parser judgments into preference pairs for delta-DPO, combines parser quality and lexical diversity into a composite reward, filters low-information pairs by reward gaps, and tracks reward hacking. It adapts existing preference optimization rather than proposing a new alignment objective.","experiments":"Experiments use GPT-SW3-1.3B on Danish, Icelandic, and Norwegian Bokmål. The abstract reports Danish parse success improving from 69.0% to 93.8%, and a 4.5 percentage-point gain for Icelandic on an independent Stanza evaluation.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"低资源 alignment 的弱监督例子；只看 reward-gap 过滤和 hacking 监控，别把 parser reward 当通用偏好替代。","en":"A weak-supervision example for low-resource alignment; read the reward-gap filtering and hacking checks, but do not treat parser reward as a general preference substitute."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Hoda Fakharzadehjahromy","Emil Wiman","Andreas Bueff","Hafsteinn Einarsson","Fredrik Heintz"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["preference-optimization","DPO","low-resource-languages","weak-supervision","reward-hacking"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06179","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06179","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06246","title":"A Six-Dimensional Taxonomy of Post-Training Adaptation Techniques with Applications in AI Governance","abstract":"Post-training adaptation has become central to modern machine learning practice and includes techniques such as retraining, fine-tuning, parameter-efficient adaptation, alignment, retrieval augmentation, model editing, unlearning, calibration, and Multimodal Instruction Tuning. However, the literature remains fragmented across technique families, model classes, and deployment contexts, making it difficult to compare methods or describe how a trained model has been modified. This survey synthesiz","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T16:32:26Z","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06246.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"后训练适配技术覆盖 fine-tuning、PEFT、alignment、RAG、model editing、unlearning、calibration、多模态指令微调等，术语和比较维度分散。","importance":"贡献类型是综述与分类法。论文提出六维 taxonomy，用机制、目标、数据需求、持久性、结构范围、模型类型来描述适配方法；对研究员的价值主要是术语整理，不是新的训练方法。","technical_approach":"论文综合后训练适配文献，构造六个维度来区分常被混用的概念，例如 fine-tuning、retrieval augmentation、prompting、model editing 和 unlearning，并将传统 ML、深度学习、foundation model、LLM、MLLM 的适配方式放到同一描述框架中。","experiments":"作为 taxonomy/survey，摘要未描述实验、模型规模或定量 baseline。主要产出应是分类表、概念边界和治理场景映射。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses fragmentation in post-training adaptation terminology across fine-tuning, PEFT, alignment, RAG, model editing, unlearning, calibration, and multimodal instruction tuning.","importance":"The contribution is a survey and taxonomy. It proposes six dimensions—mechanism, goal, data requirement, persistence, structural scope, and model type—to describe adaptation methods. Its value is conceptual organization rather than a new training technique.","technical_approach":"The survey synthesizes adaptation literature and uses the six-dimensional framework to separate commonly conflated methods such as fine-tuning, retrieval augmentation, prompting, model editing, and unlearning. It also maps how adaptation changes from classical ML to foundation models, LLMs, and multimodal LLMs.","experiments":"No experiments, model sizes, or quantitative baselines are described in the abstract. The main outputs are likely taxonomy tables, definitions, and governance-oriented mappings.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"适合作术语索引，不适合找训练 insight；扫 taxonomy 表即可，治理部分对 pretrain 决策帮助有限。","en":"Useful as a terminology index, not a source of training insight; skim the taxonomy table and skip most governance framing."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Fardin Afdideh","Fernando Seoane","Farhad Abtahi"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["post-training","taxonomy","alignment","RAG","model-editing"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06246","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06246","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06861","title":"Gated-BEPO: Confidence-Gated Bellman Credit Assignment for Large Language Model Agents","abstract":"Training large language model agents in long-horizon environments requires assigning credit from sparse terminal outcomes to individual actions. Existing critic-free methods propagate trajectory-level rewards uniformly across steps, while recent approaches construct step-level groups by matching repeated states and compare actions within each group. The former cannot distinguish useful actions in failed trajectories from ineffective actions in successful ones. The latter rely on step credit deri","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06861.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这项工作处理长程 LLM agent 强化学习里的稀疏奖励归因问题：终局成功或失败只给出轨迹级信号，但策略更新发生在每个动作响应上。GRPO 这类 critic-free 方法把同一个 outcome advantage 分配给整条轨迹，容易奖励成功轨迹里的无效动作，也会惩罚失败轨迹里的有用动作。已有 step-level 方法尝试用重复状态或历史匹配构造局部比较，但对 rollout 之间共享的转移结构利用不足，也缺少一个机制来判断局部 step credit 是否有足够证据支撑。","importance":"对预训练方向的直接贡献有限，但对 post-train 中的 agentic RL 有参考价值，尤其是 critic-free credit assignment。它的启发点在于：不训练独立 critic，也可以从同一任务的多条 rollout 中构造一个经验状态图，用图上的 Bellman evaluation 产生更细的步骤级训练信号。这类方法适合用于成本敏感的 agent RL，因为 learned critic 在长程环境里既贵又不稳定。对基座研究员更有用的是训练信号质量的处理思路：何时相信局部估计，何时回退到全局 outcome，是比单纯设计 advantage 公式更关键的问题。","technical_approach":"Gated-BEPO 对每个任务实例采样 K 条 rollout，并把环境观察转成可哈希的状态 key。它将相同观察合并成经验状态图，图边来自 rollout records，即状态、动作、奖励、下一状态。与 GraphGPO 使用到成功终点的最短路径距离不同，Gated-BEPO 在经验图上做 mean-backup Bellman fixed-point evaluation，用当前 rollout 图估计节点 value。随后计算 fixed-point TD residual，并沿每条轨迹用 GAE 传播，得到 step-level advantage。\n\n关键设计是 confidence gate。只有当某个状态在 rollout group 中出现多个 observed successors 时，局部图才提供了比较不同后继转移的证据。此时方法激活 Bellman step credit，并提高它在总 advantage 中的权重；如果状态没有分叉，局部估计没有可比较的经验依据，Bellman credit 会被抑制，更新主要依赖 group-relative outcome advantage。这样做避免了两个问题：一是无证据的局部 value 估计把噪声注入更新；二是有证据的步骤级 credit 被粗粒度 outcome 信号淹没。\n\n它和几类相关方法的差异比较清楚。GRPO 只做轨迹级归因；GiGPO/HGPO 依赖状态或历史匹配来形成 step group；GAGPO 使用 grouped return proxy 再做 TD/GAE 风格传播；GraphGPO 合并状态后用到成功终点的图距离构造 value，可能受 perceptual aliasing 影响。Gated-BEPO 的核心变化是把经验图当作当前策略下的有限样本 MDP 来评估，并用分叉证据决定是否采用局部 credit。","experiments":"实验覆盖 WebShop、ALFWorld 和 visual Sokoban，包含文本 agent 与视觉语言 agent 设置。文中提到使用 Qwen2.5 系列 text 和 vision-language backbones，并在 matched training/evaluation protocol 下比较。总体结果是 Gated-BEPO 在多个环境中优于 GRPO 以及已有 step-credit 方法，相对最强基线最高有 4.1% 的 success-rate 提升。\n\n消融实验支持三个组件的必要性：Bellman fixed-point signal、confidence gate、以及 outcome-step balanced fusion。结果含义是，单独依赖图上 Bellman credit 会引入不可靠局部估计，单独依赖 outcome credit 又过于粗糙；gate 的作用不是简单调参，而是在局部比较证据存在时才让 step credit 参与训练。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，预计 20–30 分钟。先看 Figure 2 和 Table 1，理解它如何区分 GRPO、GiGPO/HGPO、GraphGPO 与 Gated-BEPO 的归因方式。方法部分重点看经验图构造、Bellman mean-backup fixed point、TD residual 加 GAE 的定义，以及 confidence gate 的权重混合公式。实验部分优先看主结果表和 ablation，确认 4.1% gain 出现在哪个环境和哪个 backbone 上。需要特别留意状态合并策略：文本环境用 observation key，视觉环境用图像状态，这会影响 perceptual aliasing 和图上 value 的可靠性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The work addresses sparse-reward credit assignment for long-horizon LLM agents. A terminal success or failure label is observed only at the trajectory level, while policy updates are applied to individual action responses. Critic-free methods such as GRPO assign the same outcome-derived advantage to every step, which can reinforce unhelpful actions in successful trajectories and penalize useful actions in failed ones. Existing step-level methods use repeated states or history matching, but they do not fully exploit the shared transition structure across rollouts and do not decide when local step credit is empirically supported.","importance":"The paper is more relevant to agentic post-training than to base pretraining, but it provides a useful training-signal design pattern. It shows how a critic-free method can recover finer-grained credit from multiple rollouts of the same task by building an empirical state graph, rather than learning a separate critic. This matters for long-horizon agent RL, where learned critics are expensive and often unstable. The most useful idea is the confidence mechanism: local value estimates should affect policy updates only when the rollout group contains enough branching evidence; otherwise the method should fall back to the more stable trajectory-level outcome signal.","technical_approach":"$32","experiments":"The experiments cover WebShop, ALFWorld, and visual Sokoban, including both text-only and vision-language agent settings. The reported backbones include Qwen2.5 text and vision-language models, evaluated under matched training and evaluation protocols. Gated-BEPO improves success rate over GRPO and other step-credit baselines, with gains up to 4.1% over the strongest competing method.\n\nAblations indicate that the Bellman fixed-point signal, the confidence gate, and the balanced fusion of outcome and step-level credit are all important. The takeaway is that Bellman credit alone can be noisy when the local graph lacks branching evidence, while outcome credit alone remains too coarse. The gate is therefore not just a weighting heuristic; it controls whether the local graph contains enough evidence to influence the update.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 20–30 minutes. Start with Figure 2 and Table 1 to understand the differences among GRPO, state-matching methods, graph-distance credit, and Gated-BEPO. In the method section, focus on empirical graph construction, the mean-backup Bellman fixed point, the TD-residual-plus-GAE computation, and the confidence-gated mixture formula. In the experiments, read the main success-rate tables and the ablation results. Pay special attention to how states are merged from observations, especially in visual settings, because this controls both perceptual aliasing and the reliability of graph-derived values.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"Agent RL 的 credit assignment 题，先读方法图和 advantage 构造；若实验环境够干净，值得复现到内部长程工具任务。","en":"Read the method diagram and advantage construction first; if the environments are clean, this is a plausible credit-assignment ablation for internal long-horizon tool-use RL."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Hongxi Yan","Ziyue Huang","Shichao Fan","Qingjie Liu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agent-rl","credit-assignment","bellman-backup","long-horizon"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06861","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06861","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07147","title":"DiDPO: Diff-in-Diff Policy Optimization for Coding Agent Training","abstract":"Reinforcement learning with Verifiable Reward (RLVR) has emerged as a powerful paradigm for training coding agents, where the execution feedback from compilation and tests provides objective verification. However, unlike agent tasks, coding agents face a unique and finer-grained credit assignment challenge: at each step, coding actions simultaneously pack varying changes into different regions of a code version, which makes the contribution of independent change indistinguishable. Existing RLVR ","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07147.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"在 coding agent 的 RLVR 训练中，单步动作往往对应一个包含多处修改的 code diff，导致 credit assignment 过粗：成功/失败的回报无法区分 diff 内不同子修改的贡献。论文要解决的是：不引入 critic、也不增加额外环境 rollouts 的情况下，如何把轨迹级回报细化到 diff 内部的子区域，并把更细粒度的优势信号回传到对应的响应 token。","importance":"更偏 post-train / agent RL 的方法论文，对“预训练”本身影响间接，但对 pretrain↔posttrain 闭环有两点启发：\n1）当动作天然是“打包的结构化编辑”（diff）时，直接用 outcome reward 或 step reward 会浪费可验证信号；需要把结构拆开再做优势分配。\n2）它提供了一种不依赖 value critic 的细粒度 credit 构造方式，和 GRPO/DAPO/GSPO 这类 group-based policy optimization 的工程路线兼容，适合在大规模 RLVR 训练里控制不稳定性与成本。\n\n是否值得投入取决于你的工作是否覆盖 coding agent 的 RL 训练；若主要做基座预训练/数据/优化，这篇更多是“了解一种 credit 细化的做法”，不太会直接改你的 pretrain recipe。","technical_approach":"DiDPO 的核心是把“轨迹级 group-relative advantage”继续向下分解到 diff 内部。\n\n设定上沿用 CodeAct 式 Thought-Action-Observation 循环：每步 action 产生一次代码编辑（add/del/none），环境给 outcome reward（例如测试是否通过）。传统做法把整段响应当作一个 credit 载体；GiGPO 会按相似 state/action 分组做 state-level advantage，但 coding 的关键困难是：同一步 diff 里可能包含多个功能区域的修改。\n\nDiDPO 做了三件事：\n1）跨 rollouts 对齐 diff：对同一任务 prompt 采样多条轨迹，比较相邻版本之间的 diffs，在不同 rollout 的 diffs 中寻找“高度相似的 sub-diff”作为 anchor。\n2）用 anchor 诱导 sub-diff 边界：把一个大 diff 切成若干 sub-diff，使这些 sub-diff 更像可复用的功能单元（例如某个函数、某段逻辑、某处 import/配置）。\n3）sub-diff 分组并计算 diff-level advantage：把对齐后的 sub-diff 组成局部 group，计算局部的 group-relative advantage（diff-level advantage），再与轨迹级 advantage 结合，并投影回生成这些 sub-diff 的 token 上更新策略。\n\n为避免 anchor 过大（语义太杂）或过小（难以聚合成组），论文引入 groupability score 来选择 anchor，平衡语义覆盖与可形成足够样本量的分组。\n\n整体上它是 critic-free 的：优势来自组内相对比较，而不是学习一个 value function；并且强调“不需要额外 rollouts”，即在同一批采样轨迹上做更细的对齐与分配。","experiments":"论文声称在多个 long-horizon coding benchmark 上优于现有 coding/agentic RL baselines（文中提到的对比对象包括 GRPO、DAPO、GSPO、GiGPO 等路线，以及一些 coding agent 相关方法）。但当前提供的正文片段未包含：具体 benchmark 名称与规模、基座模型大小、训练步数/rollout 数、pass@k 或 repo-repair 成功率的绝对值与提升幅度、以及关键消融（没有 sub-diff advantage / 没有 groupability / 不同对齐策略）的数字。\n\n精读时建议重点核对两类结果：\n- 细粒度 credit 是否真的带来稳定收益，还是主要来自某种隐含的“更强的样本筛选/重加权”；\n- 计算开销：diff 对齐与相似度计算在大规模 RLVR 下是否成为瓶颈。","reading_guide":"泛读建议：\n1）先读 Introduction 里对 coding 与一般 agent action 的三点差异（diff 打包、sub-diff 功能混杂、语法/执行约束），这是方法动机的关键。\n2）再读 Problem Setting，确认它沿用的 group-relative advantage 形式，以及与 GiGPO 的关系。\n3）方法部分重点看：sub-diff anchor 如何定义“相似”、边界如何诱导、groupability score 的具体形式，以及 token-level credit 如何回传。\n4）实验部分优先找消融：没有对齐/没有 groupability/只用 trajectory advantage 的对比。\n\n预计阅读时间：20–30 分钟可把方法主线读懂；若要落地实现，需要额外时间看 diff 相似度与对齐的工程细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In RLVR training for coding agents, a single step often produces a bundled code diff touching multiple regions, making credit assignment too coarse. The paper targets fine-grained credit assignment inside a diff—down to aligned sub-diffs—without using a critic and without requiring extra environment rollouts.","importance":"This is a post-training / agent-RL contribution rather than pretraining. The relevance to foundation-model training is indirect but practical if you run large-scale RLVR: (1) it argues that outcome/step rewards waste verifiable signal when actions are structured edits; (2) it offers a critic-free way to construct finer advantages compatible with group-based policy optimization (GRPO/DAPO/GSPO-style), potentially improving stability/cost.\n\nIf your focus is core pretraining (data/optimizer/scaling), this is more of a technique to be aware of than something that changes pretrain recipes.","technical_approach":"$33","experiments":"The paper reports consistent improvements over strong RLVR baselines (e.g., GRPO/DAPO/GSPO/GiGPO-style methods) on long-horizon coding benchmarks. However, the provided excerpt does not include the concrete experimental tables: benchmark list, model sizes, training budgets, absolute success rates/pass@k, and key ablations (removing sub-diff alignment, removing groupability scoring, using only trajectory-level advantage).\n\nWhen reading the full experiments, the main checks are: whether gains persist across tasks and seeds, and whether diff alignment/similarity computation becomes a scalability bottleneck.","reading_guide":"Skim plan:\n- Read the introduction’s three properties distinguishing coding from generic agent RL; that is the real motivation.\n- In the problem setting, confirm the baseline advantage formulation and how it relates to GiGPO.\n- In the method section, focus on: how sub-diff similarity/anchors are defined, how boundaries are induced, what the groupability score is, and how token-level credit is assigned.\n- In experiments, prioritize ablations isolating each component.\n\nTime: ~20–30 minutes for the main idea; longer if you need implementation details for diff alignment.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"将 RL 的 reward 粒度下钻到 code diff 级别是个很直觉且 necessary 的改进，值得关注其具体的 diff 构造和 credit assignment 算法设计。","en":"Drilling down the RL reward granularity to the code diff level is an intuitive and necessary improvement; the specific diff construction and credit assignment algorithm design are worth examining."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Xucong Wang","Zhe Zhao","Liheng Yu","Di Wu","Xiaofeng Cao","Pengkun Wang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["Reinforcement Learning","Coding Agent","Credit Assignment","RLVR"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07147","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07147","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07371","title":"Trajectory-Relative Hindsight Distillation for Agentic Reinforcement Learning","abstract":"Recent agentic reinforcement learning methods use hindsight to complement sparse outcome rewards. However, a completed rollout can yield many such signals, leaving their appropriate allocation across turns unclear. We introduce TRIAL, a trajectory-relative hindsight distillation framework with a unified turn-aligned scoring protocol. For each decision turn, TRIAL extracts an outcome view of that decision's realized consequence and evaluates the same response under ordinary and hindsight-conditio","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07371.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"TRIAL 解决的是 agentic RL 中稀疏结果奖励和多轮决策之间的信用分配问题。一次完整 rollout 只有最终成功或失败信号，但轨迹里包含多个决策 turn。已有 hindsight distillation 能给每个已执行动作构造事后监督，却没有清楚回答一个问题：这些 dense hindsight 信号应该在不同 turn 之间如何分配强度。","importance":"这项工作和预训练训练流程的关系较间接，但对 RL 后训练、长程 agent 训练和 verifier/reward 信号设计有启发。它把 hindsight 信号拆成两个层次：token 级别的方向由 log-prob gap 决定，turn 级别的权重由整条轨迹内的相对 revision magnitude 决定。这个设计比简单给所有 hindsight token 同权更稳，因为它控制了平均权重，同时允许关键 turn 获得更大训练强度。对需要把长程交互数据转成可训练监督信号的系统，这是一种可复用的 credit allocation recipe。","technical_approach":"TRIAL 保留 GRPO 的 rollout-level outcome advantage 和 clipping 规则，在此基础上加入一个训练时 hindsight objective。对每个决策 turn，方法构造一个 outcome view，把该决策实际导致的局部后果暴露给 scorer。然后用同一个已生成 response，在 ordinary context 和 hindsight-conditioned context 下分别计算 token log probability。两者的有符号差值决定 token 更新方向和局部强度。接着，TRIAL 汇总每个 turn 内 eligible tokens 的绝对 gap，并和该 turn 在整条轨迹中的 eligible-token 占比比较，得到 trajectory-relative allocation multiplier。这些 multiplier 的 eligible-token 加权平均值被归一为 1，因此它是在固定平均训练强度下重新分配 hindsight 监督。最后，dense hindsight loss 与 GRPO loss 结合，并用相对 detached GRPO loss magnitude 的 scalar clamp 控制 dense 项强度。所有 hindsight context 和分配 profile 只在训练时使用，部署时不增加推理开销。","experiments":"实验在 WebShop 和 ALFWorld 上进行，backbone 包括 Qwen2.5-3B 和 Qwen3-1.7B。TRIAL 在 backbone、环境和指标组成的 8 个组合中都优于 GRPO；和 5 个 baseline 比较时，在 6 个 case 中最好或并列最好。WebShop 上使用 Qwen3-1.7B 时，success rate 从 GRPO 的 56.4% 提升到 75.2%，task score 从 78.7% 提升到 85.7%。消融实验固定 hindsight pathway，只替换 turn allocation profile。trajectory-relative profile 在 WebShop 和 ALFWorld 的 4 个指标上都优于 unit profile，说明收益不只是来自 dense hindsight distillation，还来自轨迹内相对权重分配。source-shuffled profile 的对照也支持 profile 和真实轨迹结构相关，而不是简单噪声正则化。","reading_guide":"建议泛读 25–35 分钟。先看 Method 中对 signed token gap、eligible-token mask、turn-level magnitude 和 trajectory-normalized multiplier 的定义；这是全文核心。再看 Figure 2，理解 GRPO outcome supervision 和 TRIAL hindsight supervision 如何并行工作。实验部分重点看 WebShop/Qwen3-1.7B 的提升，以及 unit profile、source-shuffled profile 的消融。若关注 RL 训练稳定性，可以额外看 dense loss clamp 的处理方式，它反映了作者在不破坏 GRPO advantage construction 的前提下加入辅助信号的取舍。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"TRIAL addresses credit allocation in agentic reinforcement learning. A multi-turn rollout usually receives a sparse final outcome reward, but the trajectory contains many decisions made under different observations. Hindsight distillation can provide dense supervision for realized actions, yet it leaves open how much of that supervision should be assigned to each turn.","importance":"The work is most relevant to RL post-training and long-horizon agent training rather than pretraining itself. Its useful idea is to separate token-level revision direction from turn-level allocation. The signed log-probability gap gives local token supervision, while a trajectory-relative profile decides which turns deserve more weight. This is a practical recipe for converting long interaction traces into calibrated training signals without simply giving every hindsight token the same weight.","technical_approach":"$34","experiments":"The experiments use WebShop and ALFWorld with Qwen2.5-3B and Qwen3-1.7B. TRIAL improves over GRPO in all eight combinations of model, environment, and metric, and is best or tied best among six methods in six cases. On WebShop with Qwen3-1.7B, success rate increases from 56.4% to 75.2%, and task score increases from 78.7% to 85.7%. Controlled ablations keep the hindsight pathway fixed and vary only the allocation profile. The trajectory-relative profile outperforms a unit profile on all four WebShop and ALFWorld metrics, showing that the gains are not just from dense hindsight supervision. The source-shuffled profile comparison further suggests that the allocation profile benefits from being aligned with the actual trajectory structure.","reading_guide":"A 25–35 minute skim is appropriate. Focus on the method definitions for signed token gaps, eligible-token masks, turn-level magnitudes, and trajectory-normalized multipliers. Figure 2 is the quickest way to understand how TRIAL complements GRPO rather than replacing it. In the experiments, prioritize the WebShop result with Qwen3-1.7B and the ablations comparing trajectory-relative, unit, and source-shuffled profiles. For readers interested in RL training stability, the loss clamp is worth checking because it shows how the auxiliary dense signal is constrained without changing GRPO’s advantage construction.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"hindsight奖励分配的实用改进，对做agent RL或推理RL的研究员有参考，重点看§3的评分协议设计。","en":"Practical improvement for hindsight reward allocation, useful for researchers working on agent RL or reasoning RL, focus on the scoring protocol in §3."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Haoyu Zheng","Yun Zhu","Qing Wang","Wenqiao Zhang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["reinforcement learning","agentic rl","hindsight distillation","reward allocation","grpo alternative"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07371","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07371","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06396","title":"TEXAS: Task-Expert-Aware Supervision for Downstream Mixture-of-Experts LLM Adaptation","abstract":"Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) language models route each token through a small subset of experts, making routing patterns useful for identifying task-relevant experts during downstream adaptation. Yet current approaches have two limitations: task experts are typically identified from aggregate routing statistics that reflect usage rather than association with successful task completion, and task-expert activations remain underexplored as signals for supervision allocation. We introduce Task-Expert-Aw","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06396.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 MoE LLM 下游适配时如何利用专家路由信号分配监督的问题，避免只按专家使用频率选择所谓任务专家。","importance":"贡献属于后训练方法改进，对 MoE expert specialization 的可观测性有一定参考价值。它把“专家被频繁使用”与“专家和正确完成任务有关”区分开，这一点对分析 MoE 预训练后的路由结构也有弱信号价值。","technical_approach":"提出 Task-Expert-Aware Supervision。方法先比较 base model 在成功样本和失败样本上的专家激活差异，保留在成功样本中更强激活的专家；微调时，如果失败样本的答案 token 激活这些任务相关专家，就提高这些 token 的监督权重。方法不冻结或限制只更新某些专家，而是用已有路由行为调节 token-level loss。","experiments":"给定摘要未提供模型规模、任务集合、baseline、提升幅度或显著性结果。只能确认实验对象是 MoE language models 的 downstream adaptation，核心对比应包括基于 aggregate routing statistics 的专家选择或常规微调。","authors_note":"作者来自 City University of Hong Kong、Carnegie Mellon University、University of Waterloo、The University of Hong Kong。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses how to use MoE routing signals for downstream adaptation without equating frequent expert usage with task-relevant expertise.","importance":"This is a post-training method with some relevance to MoE pretraining analysis. Its useful distinction is between experts that are merely active and experts whose activation correlates with successful task completion.","technical_approach":"TEXAS first identifies task experts by contrasting expert activations on instances solved correctly by the base model against failed instances. During fine-tuning, it upweights answer tokens in failed examples when those tokens activate the success-associated experts. The method uses existing routing behavior as a supervision-allocation signal rather than restricting adaptation to a fixed expert subset.","experiments":"The supplied abstract does not report model sizes, datasets, baselines, or numerical gains. The experimental setting is downstream adaptation of MoE language models, likely compared against standard fine-tuning and routing-statistics-based expert selection.","authors_note":"The authors are affiliated with City University of Hong Kong, Carnegie Mellon University, University of Waterloo, and The University of Hong Kong."},"recommendation":{"zh":"MoE 预训练不用急读；只看专家发现部分，判断“成功相关路由”是否比 usage stats 更干净。","en":"Not urgent for MoE pretraining; read only the expert-discovery setup to see whether success-conditioned routing is cleaner than usage statistics."},"metadata":{"institutions":["City University of Hong Kong","Carnegie Mellon University","University of Waterloo","The University of Hong Kong","University of Waterloo, Ontario"],"authors":["Guanzhi Deng","Haibo Wang","Kuan Wu","Xiangru Jian","Shing Yin Wong","Sichun Luo","Zhuoran Wang","Linqi Song"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["MoE","fine-tuning","routing-analysis","supervision-weighting"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06396","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06396","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06526","title":"GRASP: Reinforcing Language Model Anonymizers with Group Relative Policy Optimization","abstract":"Large language models can infer sensitive personal attributes, such as age, location, and occupation, from ordinary text, turning everyday writing into a privacy risk. Adversarial anonymization defends against this by rewriting a text with a capable language model that also plays the attacker, but it needs a powerful model at inference time and thus sends private text to a third party, the very exposure anonymization should prevent. Recent work distills this behavior into a small on-device model","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06526.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"在本地小模型匿名化场景中，如何直接优化隐私-效用权衡，而不是只模仿教师模型的离线偏好。","importance":"这是一个后训练/RL 应用型工作，价值不在匿名化任务本身，而在于展示 GRPO 这类相对策略优化能否替代 DPO 去优化多目标文本重写。","technical_approach":"提出 GRASP，让同一个小模型同时扮演匿名器、攻击者和效用评估器，在线自博弈式地产生重写候选，并用 Group Relative Policy Optimization 直接优化隐私与可用性目标，而非仅蒸馏教师选择。","experiments":"摘要表明其对比了 SFT/DPO 蒸馏式匿名器，并在隐私属性推断防御与文本效用保持之间取得更优平衡；但任务是高度应用化的匿名化重写，实验设定对通用 LLM 后训练的外推有限。","authors_note":"UC Santa Barbara 与 UCLA 团队；未见可确认的基座模型一线知名作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks how to directly optimize the privacy-utility tradeoff for on-device text anonymization, instead of merely imitating an offline teacher with preference learning.","importance":"This is a post-training/RL application paper. Its value is not the anonymization task itself, but whether GRPO-style relative policy optimization is a better fit than DPO for multi-objective rewriting.","technical_approach":"GRASP uses a single small model as anonymizer, adversary, and utility judge, generates candidate rewrites through online self-refinement, and applies Group Relative Policy Optimization to directly optimize privacy and utility rather than distilling teacher choices.","experiments":"From the abstract, it compares against SFT/DPO-based distilled anonymizers and improves the privacy-utility balance. Still, the task is highly application-specific, so the lessons for general LLM post-training are limited.","authors_note":"From UC Santa Barbara and UCLA; no clearly identifiable foundation-model marquee authors from the provided metadata."},"recommendation":{"zh":"把它当一个小型 RL 配方样本看：DPO 不擅长直接优化多目标重写，这点有参考价值；正文不必细读，方法段和主表够了。","en":"Treat it as a small RL recipe case study: DPO is a weak fit for directly optimizing multi-objective rewriting; the method section and main table are enough."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of California, Santa Barbara","University of California, Los Angeles","UC Santa Barbara","UC Los Angeles"],"authors":["Sajjad Ghiasvand","Nader Sehatbakhsh"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["GRPO","DPO","privacy","text-rewriting","post-training"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06526","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06526","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06758","title":"Stockmark-Nemotron-3-Nano-Omni-JapanDocReader: Structured Document Parsing via Capability Injection and Forgetting Control","abstract":"We present Stockmark-Nemotron-3-Nano-Omni-JapanDocReader, a Japanese document understanding model built from Nemotron-3-Nano-Omni-30B-A3B-Reasoning-BF16. The central goal of this work is structured document parsing via capability injection and forgetting control: we inject Japanese structured document parsing capability into a reasoning-oriented multimodal model while preserving its document VQA capability as much as possible. We study parsing-centric SFT, which uses only structured document par","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06758.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"在面向结构化文档解析的定向注入（SFT/RL）中，如何提升新能力同时控制对既有文档 VQA 能力的遗忘。","importance":"属于“能力注入 vs 遗忘控制”的实证工程案例：对混合 SFT 与任务级 RL（DAPO 风格）在遗忘-增益权衡上的效果给出可参考的 recipe，但主要是特定任务/语言（日本文档）。","technical_approach":"以 Nemotron-3-Nano-Omni-30B-A3B-Reasoning-BF16 为底座，比较 parsing-centric SFT（只用解析数据）、mixed SFT（解析+VQA 混合）、以及在 mixed SFT 上做 parsing-centric RL（DAPO-based，任务级 reward）来进一步提升解析并尽量保留 VQA。","experiments":"摘要报告：parsing-centric SFT 明显提升结构化解析但带来可测 VQA 遗忘；mixed SFT 缓解遗忘且解析性能几乎不降；在 mixed SFT 上再做 DAPO 式 RL 进一步提升解析。未给出具体指标数值与数据规模。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to inject structured document parsing capability via SFT/RL while controlling catastrophic forgetting of existing document VQA ability.","importance":"An empirical recipe on the gain–forgetting trade-off (mixed SFT + task-level RL) rather than a new general method; still useful as a concrete case study for capability injection.","technical_approach":"Starting from Nemotron-3-Nano-Omni-30B-A3B-Reasoning-BF16, compares parsing-centric SFT, mixed SFT (parsing+VQA), and DAPO-style parsing-centric RL on top of mixed SFT with task-level rewards.","experiments":"Abstract claims: parsing-centric SFT boosts parsing but measurably hurts VQA; mixed SFT mitigates forgetting with near-parity parsing; DAPO-based RL further improves parsing. No concrete numbers or dataset sizes in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"把“混合 SFT 缓解遗忘、再用任务级 RL 补增益”这条工程路径跑通了；只看遗忘曲线/配比设置，别把任务结论外推太远。","en":"It validates a pragmatic path—mixed SFT to reduce forgetting, then task-level RL to regain gains; focus on the forgetting curves/mixture choices, don’t over-generalize."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Shi Chen","Hayato Aida","Makoto Morinaga","Shohei Tanaka","Kosuke Arima"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["catastrophic-forgetting","capability-injection","mixed-SFT","RLHF","document-parsing"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06758","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06758","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07460","title":"CreativeInstruct: Scalably Teaching LLMs to Balance Quality, Creativity, and Diversity","abstract":"While post-training improves the capabilities of large language models (LLMs), it generally lowers their output diversity and creativity, negatively impacting tasks that explicitly require creativity (e.g., story generation) as well as those that require it implicitly, e.g., reinforcement learning (RL). We instead propose CreativeInstruct, a scalable instruction-tuning method that teaches LLMs to balance creative, base-model-like generations with the quality of post-trained models, by learning t","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07460.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"缓解后训练提升质量但压低输出多样性和创造性的 tradeoff，尤其面向叙事生成和需要探索性的 RL 场景。","importance":"这是后训练方法贡献。它对预训练研究的间接意义在于：post-train 不只是对齐质量，也会改变 base model 的分布熵和生成模式；这会反过来影响 RL 探索、数据合成和模型退火策略。","technical_approach":"提出 CreativeInstruct，用 instruction tuning 学会插入特殊的 [StartCreativity] span，使模型在局部生成中偏向更接近 base-model 的创造性分布，同时保持 post-trained model 的质量。另提出基于 graph edit distance 的结构多样性指标，捕捉词面和语义指标漏掉的叙事结构变化。","experiments":"在 narrative generation 上，摘要称 CreativeInstruct 在不使用多个模型推理的情况下，达到或超过多模型 baseline 及其蒸馏变体的多样性，同时不牺牲质量。具体模型规模、训练数据量和数值提升未在摘要中给出。","authors_note":"Mohit Bansal 是 UNC Chapel Hill NLP 方向教授，团队长期研究文本生成、多模态和指令调优。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the tradeoff where post-training improves quality but reduces output diversity and creativity, especially for narrative generation and exploration-heavy RL settings.","importance":"This is a post-training method contribution. Its relevance to pretraining is indirect but useful: post-training changes the entropy and generation modes of the base distribution, which can affect RL exploration, synthetic data generation, and annealing strategies.","technical_approach":"CreativeInstruct trains models to inject special [StartCreativity] spans that locally bias generation toward a more base-model-like creative distribution while retaining post-trained quality. The paper also introduces a graph-edit-distance-based structural diversity metric to capture narrative-level variation missed by lexical or semantic metrics.","experiments":"On narrative generation, the abstract states that CreativeInstruct matches or exceeds the diversity of multi-model baselines and distilled variants without sacrificing quality or requiring multiple models at inference time. The provided abstract does not include model sizes, training data scale, or exact numerical gains.","authors_note":"Mohit Bansal is a professor at UNC Chapel Hill whose group has worked extensively on text generation, multimodal modeling, and instruction tuning."},"recommendation":{"zh":"看方法示意和 diversity metric 即可；它提醒 post-train 会压窄分布，做 RL 数据合成时别只盯平均质量。","en":"Skim the method and diversity metric; it is a useful reminder that post-training narrows the distribution, which matters for RL data synthesis."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill"],"authors":["Ananya Sahu","Mohit Bansal","Elias Stengel-Eskin"],"notable_authors":["Mohit Bansal"],"tags":["instruction-tuning","creativity","diversity","post-training","rl-exploration"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07460","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07460","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06795","title":"LoRAScan: Detecting Backdoor Prompts in Low-Rank Adapters for Large Language Models via Down-Projection Activation Spikes","abstract":"Low-rank adaptation (LoRA) enables efficient specialization and distribution of large language models through compact adapters. However, untrusted adapters introduce a supply-chain threat: a backdoored adapter can cause a model to generate harmful content, malicious code, political propaganda, or covert advertisements when an input contains a hidden trigger. Adapter-agnostic defenses merge the adapter with the base model, which dilutes backdoor signals and reduces detection performance. Existing","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06795.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CR","cs.AI","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有LoRA后门检测方法要么需将适配器与基模型合并导致后门信号稀释，要么只能标记整个适配器无法安全使用，本文解决LoRA适配器中后门提示的精准检测问题。","importance":"后训练安全领域的方法创新，首次提出适配器原生的后门提示检测方案，无需合并适配器到基模型。","technical_approach":"提出LoRAScan方法，利用后门适配器在触发输入下的下投影（down-projection）层激活尖峰特征来检测后门提示，属于适配器感知的检测范式。","experiments":"摘要未完整披露实验结果，仅表明LoRAScan是首个适配器感知的后门提示检测方案，未给出具体检测准确率和基线对比。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LoRA backdoor detection methods either require merging the adapter into the base model (diluting backdoor signals) or only flag the entire adapter as suspicious; this paper addresses accurate backdoor prompt detection in LoRA adapters.","importance":"Methodological innovation in post-training security, first proposing an adapter-native backdoor prompt detection scheme that does not require merging the adapter into the base model.","technical_approach":"Proposes LoRAScan, which detects backdoor prompts by leveraging distinct activation spikes in the down-projection layer of backdoored adapters under trigger inputs, following an adapter-aware detection paradigm.","experiments":"Abstract does not fully disclose experimental results, only states LoRAScan is the first adapter-aware backdoor prompt detection method, with no specific detection accuracy or baseline comparisons provided.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"LoRA后门检测的增量工作，核心观察是下投影激活尖峰，做后训练安全的可看方法部分，预训练研究员无需深读。","en":"Incremental work on LoRA backdoor detection with the core observation of down-projection activation spikes; post-training security researchers can check the method section, no deep read for pretraining researchers."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Doniyorkhon Obidov","Honggang Yu","Xiaolong Guo","Kaichen Yang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["LoRA","backdoor detection","model security","adapter"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06795","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06795","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06416","title":"WorldMark: A Plug-and-Play World Knowledge Interface for Cross-Host Language Model Watermarking","abstract":"Watermarking traces the provenance of text produced by large language models by embedding statistically detectable signals during decoding. Existing schemes fall into logits-based, sampling-based, entropy-aware, and adaptive-strength families, yet all of them place watermark signals according to local token statistics. In the open-ended text-generation settings evaluated in this work, local statistics may provide insufficient guidance for placing robust watermark signals. We introduce WorldMark,","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06416.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CR","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM水印方案均基于局部token统计放置水印信号，在开放文本生成中鲁棒性不足","importance":"提出利用世界知识指导水印信号放置的即插即用接口，无需骨干重训练或检测器侧额外模型","technical_approach":"WorldMark用世界知识记忆(WKM)以记忆图组织语义和情景知识，将检索到的知识转换为token级知识显著性分数，通过非对称知识调制(AKM)调整宿主水印强度","experiments":"在C4主评估上，完整WorldMark接口提升了干净和攻击场景下的检测性能","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM watermarking schemes place watermark signals based on local token statistics, which lack robustness in open-ended text generation","importance":"Proposes a plug-and-play interface that uses world knowledge to guide watermark signal placement, requiring no backbone retraining or detector-side model","technical_approach":"WorldMark organizes semantic and episodic knowledge in a memory graph (WKM), converts retrieved knowledge into token-level knowledge saliency scores, and adjusts host watermark strength via Asymmetric Knowledge Modulation (AKM)","experiments":"On the primary C4 evaluation, the complete WorldMark interface improves clean and attacked detection","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"水印思路引入世界知识调制信号强度有新意，但属解码侧安全技术，与预训练方法论关系弱。","en":"Novel idea of modulating watermark strength with world knowledge, but it is decoding-side safety, weakly linked to pretraining."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Song Xiao","Yuqi Yuan","Yanshuo Zhang","Kejun Zhang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["watermarking","LLM-safety","world-knowledge","provenance"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06416","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06416","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06471","title":"CyberForge: Verified Vulnerability Injection at Repository Level for Cybersecurity Agent Training","abstract":"Despite recent advances, frontier large language model (LLM) agents remain limited in discovering and patching complex vulnerabilities in real-world software. Generally available agents can already aid attackers, who only need to find one exploitable weakness, while defenders must continuously identify and patch all vulnerabilities across fast-growing codebases. Stronger defensive agents would help close this gap, yet the scarcity of security training data with reproducible build and execution e","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06471.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CR","cs.AI","cs.SE"],"summary":{"core_problem":"面向网络安全代码Agent的训练数据稀缺，现有漏洞样本依赖已公开漏洞且缺乏可复现的构建与执行环境，限制了防御型Agent在真实仓库级漏洞发现与修复能力。","importance":"数据贡献与方法创新：提出可扩展的仓库级安全训练数据合成框架，通过动态验证注入漏洞的可执行性与PoV有效性，突破公开漏洞数量限制。","technical_approach":"CyberForge向真实C/C++项目注入漏洞，并用两层动态验证：注入后构建须通过单元测试，生成的漏洞证明(PoV)须在注入版本触发且在干净版本不触发，从而保证样本质量。","experiments":"论文未在摘要中给出具体模型规模、baseline与量化提升幅度，主要展示框架设计与可扩展性思路。","authors_note":"作者来自NIST、马里兰大学、巴黎萨克雷大学等机构，Dinesh Manocha为知名机器人与AI研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Scarcity of high-quality security training data with reproducible build/execution environments limits the ability of defensive LLM agents to discover and patch repository-level vulnerabilities in real-world codebases.","importance":"Data contribution and method innovation: a scalable framework for synthesizing executable repository-level security training data with dynamic validation, decoupled from the supply of disclosed vulnerabilities.","technical_approach":"CyberForge injects vulnerabilities into real C/C++ projects and validates each instance dynamically: the injected build must pass unit tests, and the generated proof-of-vulnerability must trigger on the injected build but not on the clean one.","experiments":"Abstract does not specify model scale, baselines, or quantitative gains; focuses on framework design and scalability argument.","authors_note":"Authors from NIST, University of Maryland, Université Paris-Saclay; Dinesh Manocha is a well-known researcher in robotics and AI."},"recommendation":{"zh":"属于垂直领域训练数据合成思路，对通用预训练无直接价值，仅作为代码Agent数据合成方法论备查，看摘要和方法框架即可。","en":"Vertical-domain training data synthesis for security agents; no direct pretraining value, reference only for code-agent data synthesis methodology."},"metadata":{"institutions":["NIST","University of Maryland","Université Paris-Saclay"],"authors":["Amine Lbath","Manan Suri","Aurelien Delaitre","Vadim Okun","Massih-Reza Amini","Ram D. Sriram","Dinesh Manocha"],"notable_authors":["Dinesh Manocha"],"tags":["training_data_synthesis","cybersecurity_agent","vulnerability_injection","code_agent"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06471","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06471","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07419","title":"Beyond Post-Hoc Temperature Scaling: Bilevel Optimization for LLM Calibration","abstract":"Preference alignment often makes large language models (LLMs) overconfident and poorly calibrated. Traditional post-hoc temperature scaling is inherently domain-dependent: a temperature fitted on one domain does not generalize across domains. This motivates us to modify model parameters during training to improve calibration. We propose maximizing the entropy of predictive distributions as the calibration objective, which directly targets overconfidence by discouraging overly concentrated predic","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07419.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决偏好对齐后的 LLM 过度自信和跨领域校准不稳定问题。","importance":"贡献是后训练校准方法：它不再只做 post-hoc temperature scaling，而是在训练过程中通过双层优化调整损失超参数以提升预测分布熵。对 pretrain 研究员的价值在于观察对齐目标如何改变模型置信度，以及校准信号能否作为训练期约束引入。","technical_approach":"提出以预测分布熵最大化作为校准目标，用来抑制过度集中的输出分布。方法采用 bilevel optimization：下层用参数化损失训练模型，上层选择损失超参数以最大化熵。为了适配 LLM 规模，使用一阶近似避免显式二阶计算。整体是对 temperature scaling 思路的训练期迁移，而不是简单后处理。","experiments":"在 multiple-choice 和 open-ended generative QA 上评估校准效果。摘要称该方法能改善校准并缓解跨领域温度不泛化问题，但未提供模型规模、训练数据、baseline 细节、具体校准指标或提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles overconfidence and poor cross-domain calibration in preference-aligned LLMs.","importance":"Its contribution is a post-training calibration method that moves beyond post-hoc temperature scaling. Instead of fitting a domain-specific scalar after training, it introduces an entropy-based calibration signal during training. For pretraining researchers, the useful part is the interaction between alignment objectives and confidence calibration.","technical_approach":"The method maximizes predictive entropy to discourage overly concentrated output distributions. It formulates calibration as bilevel optimization: the lower level trains the model under a parameterized loss, while the upper level selects loss hyperparameters that maximize entropy. A first-order approximation is used to avoid explicit second-order computation at LLM scale.","experiments":"The paper evaluates on both multiple-choice and open-ended generative QA. The abstract reports improved calibration and better handling of domain transfer than post-hoc temperature scaling, but does not provide model sizes, data details, exact baselines, metrics, or effect sizes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"方法像训练期温度缩放，先看 bilevel 近似是否稳；没有规模细节前别高估结论。","en":"This looks like training-time temperature scaling; inspect the bilevel approximation first and discount claims without scale details."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Ruochen Jin","Zhanliang Wang","Zongyu Dai","Jiancong Xiao","Bojian Hou"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["LLM-calibration","post-training","bilevel-optimization","entropy-regularization","alignment"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07419","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07419","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"blog-anthropic-cdd8d819","title":"Improving Fable 5's biology safeguards","abstract":"","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"blog","sources":["blog"],"published_at":"2026-08-07T00:00:00+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/blog-anthropic-cdd8d819.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":[],"summary":{"core_problem":"讨论如何改进 Fable 5 在生物学相关请求上的安全边界，降低模型帮助用户获得危险生物学能力的风险。","importance":"贡献类型偏安全后训练与部署治理，不是预训练方法论文。对基座研究员的价值在于观察 Anthropic 如何把高风险能力评估、安全分类、拒答策略和产品发布节奏连在一起。","technical_approach":"从标题和来源看，核心可能是对生物安全策略、安全评测、拒答行为或分类器进行更新；但缺少摘要和实验细节，不能确认是否包含新的训练目标、数据配方或系统架构。","experiments":"未提供模型参数量、训练数据、baseline、定量提升或评测表。若博客正文包含红队或生物安全评测结果，应主要作为部署安全信号阅读，而不是作为可复现方法依据。","authors_note":"Anthropic 是以 Constitutional AI、RLHF、安全评测和 frontier model policy 闻名的实验室；该条目是 Anthropic 官方博客。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The post addresses how to improve Fable 5's safeguards for biology-related requests, with the goal of reducing model assistance for risky biological capabilities.","importance":"This is closer to safety post-training and deployment governance than to pretraining research. Its value for a foundation-model researcher is in seeing how Anthropic connects high-risk capability evaluation, safety policies, refusals, and release decisions.","technical_approach":"Based on the title and source, the likely focus is an update to biosecurity policies, safety evaluations, refusal behavior, or classifiers. The provided metadata does not establish a new training objective, data recipe, or model architecture.","experiments":"No model size, training data, baselines, quantitative gains, or evaluation tables are available from the supplied information. If the original blog includes red-team or biosecurity evaluation results, they should be read as deployment-safety evidence rather than a reproducible method study.","authors_note":"Anthropic is known for Constitutional AI, RLHF, safety evaluations, and frontier-model policy work; this item is an official Anthropic blog post."},"recommendation":{"zh":"看作 Anthropic 安全部署口径的信号即可；若没有评测表和训练细节，不应更新预训练或后训练方法 prior。","en":"Treat it as a signal about Anthropic's deployment-safety posture; without evaluation tables or training details, it should not move pretraining or post-training priors."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Anthropic"],"authors":["Anthropic"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["biosecurity","model-safety","post-training","deployment-policy"],"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":null,"github":null,"project":null,"source_url":"https://www.anthropic.com/news/improving-fable-5-s-biology-safeguards","article":null}}}]},{"id":"mechanism","emoji":"🔬","name":"原理、机制和分析","papers":[{"id":"2608.05160","title":"The Ignition Index: Measuring Global Workspace Dynamics in Language Models","abstract":"We introduce the Ignition Index (I), a validated scalar metric that operationalizes Global Workspace Theory's (GWT) all-or-none ignition prediction in transformer language models. The metric fits a four-parameter sigmoid to per-layer linear probe accuracy as a function of input signal strength, extracting steepness parameter beta-hat: high values indicate abrupt, ignition-like transitions; low values indicate graded build-up. Across 11 models spanning five architecture families, shuffled-label c","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-26T05:58:11Z","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05160.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CL","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"如何把 Global Workspace Theory 里“点火（ignition）是阈值式、全或无的表征跃迁”这一可检验预测，落到语言模型的层级表征动力学上，并给出一个能区分不同架构（注意力 Transformer vs SSM 等）的可重复测量指标。","importance":"这篇属于机制分析/表征评测方法，对预训练 recipe 的直接改动不多，但有两点对基座研究员有用：1）提供了一个相对严格的、带对照的 probe+扰动测量协议，用来比较不同架构的“全局广播/信息整合”特性；2）把训练过程中的相变（phase transition）与表征动力学联系起来，报告了在 Pythia-410M 上一个早于 induction head 形成的“点火结构”转变信号。若该信号在更多模型/训练设置下稳定，可能成为训练监控与早期诊断的一个候选指标。","technical_approach":"Ignition Index（I）定义为：对每一层的线性 probe 解码准确率随输入信号强度 s∈[0,1] 的变化曲线 Acc(l,s) 拟合一个四参数 sigmoid，并取其陡峭度参数 \nβ̂ 作为“点火程度”。β̂ 高表示在某个阈值附近出现陡峭跃迁（更像 all-or-none ignition），β̂ 低表示更线性/渐进的 build-up。\n关键在于如何构造“信号强度”轴与如何做选择性验证：\n- 信号强度通过受控 token corruption 与 embedding noise 来连续调节；\n- 用 TransformerLens 抽取各层 residual stream 表征；\n- 在多种语言 probing 任务上逐层训练线性 probe；\n- 通过 shuffled-label 控制实验验证该指标确实捕捉到语言结构而不是 probe 容量或拟合伪象；并额外检查 sigmoid ceiling 命中对拟合的影响。\n论文还把该指标用于不同架构族的比较，并对 Huginn-3.5B 这类 recurrent-depth 结构做“沿迭代轴”的 probing，显示点火特性与计算轴相关。","experiments":"文中覆盖 12 个模型、5 个架构族（GPT-2、Pythia、Gemma 2、Huginn-3.5B、Mamba）与 7 个 probing 任务。\n- 架构可分性：注意力家族的平均 β̂≈130.0，而 SSM（Mamba）平均 β̂≈68.7，差异显著（p<1e-13）；Mamba 呈近线性 profile，被解释为缺少类似全局广播的阈值跃迁。\n- shuffled-label 选择性：真实标签与打乱标签之间有 9.6 倍 selectivity gap（p<0.001），用于证明指标不是 probe 过拟合。\n- ceiling 鲁棒性：排除 sigmoid ceiling 命中后，FF–SSM 差距扩大到 2.12×，说明差异不是拟合上限导致。\n- 训练动态：在 Pythia-410M 上报告 step=256 出现新的点火结构相变，早于已知的 induction head 形成阶段。\n- recurrent-depth：对 Huginn-3.5B 沿 recurrence 维度测得 2.12× 更高的点火，提示“点火”可能依赖于信息反复整合的计算路径，而不只是层数。","reading_guide":"泛读建议（约 40–60 分钟）：\n- 先看方法定义与拟合细节：Ignition Index 的 sigmoid 参数化、信号强度 s 的构造方式、以及为什么用 β̂ 而不是阈值 s0 或上限。\n- 必看 shuffled-label 与 ceiling robustness 两组控制实验；没有这两块，probe 指标很容易被质疑。\n- 如果关心架构选择，重点看 attention vs Mamba 的对比图（逐层曲线）以及统计检验设置。\n- 如果关心训练监控，重点看 Pythia-410M 的训练步数轴分析（step=256 的相变）以及它与 induction head 形成的时间关系。\n- 预计不需要逐字读背景的 GWT 综述，直接抓住“阈值式跃迁”如何被 operationalize 即可。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to operationalize Global Workspace Theory’s falsifiable prediction—an all-or-none “ignition” transition—as a quantitative, architecture-comparable metric in language models’ layerwise representational dynamics.","importance":"This is mechanistic evaluation rather than a new pretraining recipe, but it is useful in two ways for foundation-model work: (1) it provides a fairly controlled probe+perturbation protocol to compare “global broadcast / integration” tendencies across architectures (attention Transformers vs SSMs); (2) it reports a training-time transition signal (in Pythia-410M) that appears earlier than the well-known induction-head formation, suggesting a potential early diagnostic for training dynamics—if it replicates broadly.","technical_approach":"The Ignition Index (I) is defined by fitting a 4-parameter sigmoid to probe accuracy as a function of input signal strength. Concretely:\n- Construct a continuous signal-strength axis s∈[0,1] by controlled token corruption and embedding noise.\n- Extract per-layer residual stream activations (via TransformerLens).\n- Train linear probes at every layer for multiple linguistic probing tasks.\n- Fit Acc(l,s) with a sigmoid and take the steepness parameter β̂ as the ignition score: high β̂ indicates an abrupt threshold-like transition; low β̂ indicates graded accumulation.\nSelectivity and robustness are addressed with shuffled-label controls (to rule out probe capacity artifacts) and analyses excluding sigmoid “ceiling hits” (to ensure the attention–SSM gap is not a fitting artifact). The metric is also applied along different computation axes (e.g., recurrent-depth iterations in Huginn) to test axis-dependent ignition patterns.","experiments":"Coverage: 12 models across 5 families (GPT-2, Pythia, Gemma 2, Huginn-3.5B, Mamba) and 7 probing tasks.\nKey results:\n- Architecture discrimination: attention-based families show much higher ignition (mean β̂≈130.0) than SSMs (mean β̂≈68.7), highly significant (p<1e-13). Mamba exhibits near-linear profiles, consistent with absent threshold-like global broadcast.\n- Shuffled-label validation: a 9.6× selectivity gap between real vs shuffled labels (p<0.001), supporting that the metric captures genuine linguistic structure.\n- Ceiling robustness: excluding ceiling-hit cases increases the feedforward–SSM gap to 2.12×, arguing against sigmoid-fitting artifacts.\n- Training dynamics: in Pythia-410M, a new ignition-structure phase transition is reported at step 256, preceding induction-head formation.\n- Recurrent-depth: Huginn-3.5B shows ~2.12× higher ignition along the recurrence dimension, suggesting ignition depends on the computation axis (iterative integration) rather than depth alone.","reading_guide":"Skim plan (40–60 minutes):\n- Start with the metric definition: the sigmoid parameterization, how s is generated, and why β̂ is the chosen summary statistic.\n- Do not skip the controls: shuffled-label selectivity and the ceiling-hit robustness check are the credibility anchors.\n- For architecture implications, focus on the layerwise curves comparing attention models vs Mamba and the associated statistical tests.\n- For training-dynamics interest, read the Pythia-410M step-axis analysis around the step-256 transition and its temporal relation to induction-head emergence.\n- The GWT background can be skimmed; the key is how “ignition” is operationalized and validated.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"用GWT理论量化架构的全局信息广播能力是很有意思的角度，Transformer vs SSM的差异结论可作为架构选型的弱参考，重点看Fig 3的架构对比。","en":"Quantifying global information broadcasting capability of architectures using GWT is an interesting angle; the Transformer vs SSM difference conclusion can serve as weak reference for architecture selection, focus on Fig 3."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Dialpad, Inc","Independent Research"],"authors":["Saman Rahbar"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["global workspace theory","interpretability","architecture analysis","SSM","Transformer"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05160","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05160","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05158","title":"Safe Evolution with Circuit Anchors","abstract":"In biological evolution, unconstrained mutation can lead to catastrophic outcomes: organisms may evolve enhanced capabilities while losing essential functions for survival. Nature's solution is \\textit{developmental constraints}, where core regulatory genes remain anchored while peripheral genes adapt freely. We observe that current self-evolution algorithms for large language models lack analogous constraints. They optimize purely for capability, implicitly assuming safety will be preserved. Ou","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T15:12:09Z","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05158.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.LG","cs.NE"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 LLM 自进化或自我改写过程中只追求能力提升、却可能破坏安全行为的问题。","importance":"价值主要在两个接口：一是 mechanistic interpretability 是否能找到可因果干预的“安全电路”，二是这些局部特征能否作为后训练/自进化的约束。对预训练研究员不是主线，但对理解能力-安全耦合、以及 feature-level regularization 有一定启发。","technical_approach":"提出 Circuit-Anchored Evolution（CAE）。作者先用机制可解释性识别一个占模型特征不到 2% 的 safety circuit，声称其因果介导安全行为；随后在 self-evolution 过程中对该电路施加锚定约束，让外围能力相关特征继续适配，而核心安全特征保持稳定，以避免 capability gain 伴随 safety collapse。","experiments":"摘要强调一个关键现象：现有 self-evolution 算法会让模型“misevolve”为更强但更危险的系统；CAE 在保持能力增长的同时维持安全行为。摘要未给出模型规模、任务集、具体安全指标和对照算法，因此当前更像概念验证，需看正文确认电路识别是否稳健、因果证据是否充分。","authors_note":"香港中文大学与 IQuest Research。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"It addresses the problem that LLM self-evolution can optimize for capability while silently degrading safety behavior.","importance":"The main value is at two interfaces: whether mechanistic interpretability can identify causally actionable 'safety circuits', and whether such local features can serve as constraints during model evolution. This is not core pretraining work, but it is relevant to capability-safety coupling and feature-level regularization.","technical_approach":"The paper proposes Circuit-Anchored Evolution (CAE). It first uses mechanistic interpretability to identify a safety circuit, claimed to be less than 2% of model features and causally responsible for safety behavior. During self-evolution, this circuit is anchored while other features remain adaptable, aiming to preserve safety while allowing capability gains.","experiments":"The abstract highlights a central empirical claim: existing self-evolution methods can produce models that are more capable yet more dangerous, whereas CAE preserves safety while improving capability. The abstract does not provide model sizes, task suites, safety metrics, or baseline details, so this currently reads as a proof-of-concept pending closer inspection of the causal evidence.","authors_note":"From the Chinese University of Hong Kong and IQuest Research."},"recommendation":{"zh":"如果你关心 feature-level 约束能否替代部分对齐数据，这篇可看；但“<2% 特征就是安全电路”这个说法很重，先审因果干预实验再决定信不信。","en":"Read it if you care whether feature-level constraints can substitute for some alignment data, but the '<2% features define safety' claim is strong—check the causal intervention section before buying it."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Chinese University of Hong Kong","IQuest Research"],"authors":["Yan Liu","Jie Fu","Tsung-Yi Ho"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["mechanistic-interpretability","safety-circuit","self-evolution","alignment","causal-intervention"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05158","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05158","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05152","title":"Mean-Field Dynamics of Chain-of-Thought Reasoning in Large Language Models","abstract":"Large language models (LLMs) with chain-of-thought reasoning have been widely applied in recent years, and theoretical explanations of their behavior may help deepen our understanding and guide model optimization. In this study, we introduce a framework that seeks statistical regularities and theoretical interpretations in LLM reasoning without simplifying the model architecture or making analogies to existing physical systems. We formulate LLM reasoning as a guided discovery process on a clue g","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-20T17:38:50Z","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05152.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"尝试用统计动力学描述 LLM 的 chain-of-thought 推理过程，解释推理链中线索如何逐步被发现。","importance":"贡献类型是机制分析和理论建模；它不直接改进预训练 recipe，但试图给 CoT 推理的宏观统计规律提供可拟合模型，对理解后训练推理行为有间接价值。","technical_approach":"将 LLM 推理表述为 clue graph 上的 guided discovery process，用 mean-field approximation 推导“已发现线索比例”的一维常微分方程；实验上用 student LLM 对 teacher LLM 输出的 normalized surprisal 来识别 clue tokens，再对大量 CoT 轨迹做统计平均。","experiments":"摘要称在同一数据集内观察到可复现的统计规律，并可由推导出的 ODE 拟合；未从摘要确认模型规模、数据集名称、baseline 或拟合误差等关键实验细节。","authors_note":"Tsinghua University；未见可确认的知名作者背景信息。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tries to model chain-of-thought reasoning in LLMs as a statistical dynamic process in which reasoning clues are gradually discovered.","importance":"This is a mechanistic and theoretical analysis rather than a pretraining method. Its value is indirect: it may offer a compact macro-level description of reasoning trajectories after instruction tuning or prompting.","technical_approach":"It formulates reasoning as guided discovery on a clue graph and derives a one-dimensional ODE for the fraction of discovered clues using a mean-field approximation. Empirically, clue tokens are identified through the normalized surprisal of a student LLM on teacher-generated reasoning traces, then regularities are estimated by averaging many CoT chains.","experiments":"The abstract reports reproducible statistical regularities within the same dataset and ODE fits to those regularities, but does not provide enough metadata to verify model sizes, datasets, baselines, or fitting errors.","authors_note":"Tsinghua University; no clearly identifiable widely known author background from the provided metadata."},"recommendation":{"zh":"结论先当弱信号；如果读，只看 clue token 定义和 ODE 拟合残差，别被 mean-field 形式本身带跑。","en":"Treat the conclusion as a weak signal; if reading, focus on the clue-token definition and ODE residuals rather than the mean-field framing itself."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Tsinghua University"],"authors":["Hao Ai"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["chain-of-thought","mechanistic-analysis","mean-field","reasoning-dynamics"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05152","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05152","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05630","title":"Human-Like Anaphor Resolution in Large Language Models","abstract":"Anaphors are expressions that refer to other expressions, called antecedents. The process of connecting the two is called resolution. Cognitive science has identified multiple factors that affect the speed and success of anaphor resolution, including discourse structure, situation-model properties, and semantic factors. Here, we investigate whether these factors also affect anaphor resolution in five Large Language Models (LLMs) with open weights: GPT-2-XL, Llama-3.1-8B, Pythia-12B, Mistral-7B, ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T05:57:01Z","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05630.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"检验开源 LLM 在指代消解上是否表现出与人类相似的认知敏感性，以及这种相似性具体体现在哪些因素上。","importance":"这是机制与认知对齐分析工作。价值在于用 surprisal 和理解准确率把语言模型行为与人类阅读研究接起来，但它不直接推进预训练方法。","technical_approach":"作者基于认知科学中的 anaphor resolution 因素，考察 discourse prominence、距离、情境模型和语义因素对模型 surprisal 与问答准确率的影响；使用 anaphor 位置 surprisal 作为处理难度代理，并与人类行为数据对比。","experiments":"评测对象包括 GPT-2-XL、Llama-3.1-8B、Pythia-12B、Mistral-7B、Mistral-24B。结果显示模型只在部分因素上与人类一致，对 discourse prominence 和距离因素较敏感，但对其他语义或情境因素较弱或缺失。属于分析性实验，不是方法论文。","authors_note":"作者来自 Georgia Institute of Technology，偏认知科学与 NLP 交叉。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"It tests whether open-weight LLMs show human-like cognitive sensitivity in anaphor resolution, and if so, along which factors.","importance":"This is a mechanism and cognitive-alignment analysis paper. Its value is in linking LM behavior to human reading research via surprisal and comprehension accuracy, but it does not directly advance pretraining methodology.","technical_approach":"Using factors from cognitive science on anaphor resolution, the paper studies how discourse prominence, distance, situation-model properties, and semantic factors affect model surprisal and question-answering accuracy. Surprisal at the anaphor is used as a proxy for processing difficulty and compared against human behavior.","experiments":"The study evaluates GPT-2-XL, Llama-3.1-8B, Pythia-12B, Mistral-7B, and Mistral-24B. Results show selective cognitive alignment: models are somewhat human-like on discourse prominence and distance effects, but weaker or absent on other semantic or situation-model factors. This is an analysis paper rather than a method paper.","authors_note":"The authors are from Georgia Tech, at the intersection of cognitive science and NLP."},"recommendation":{"zh":"不直接服务 pretrain，但如果你在意 surprisal 是否真能当认知代理，这篇的任务设计比常见 probing 干净一些。","en":"Not directly useful for pretraining, but if you care whether surprisal is a meaningful cognitive proxy, this setup is cleaner than most probing papers."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Georgia Institute of Technology"],"authors":["Keane Zhang","Varshini Chinta","Raj Sanjay Shah","Sashank Varma"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["mechanistic-analysis","surprisal","anaphora","cognitive-alignment"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05630","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05630","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05741","title":"Once a Response, Always a Response: Detecting LLM-generated Text via Latent Prompt Restoration","abstract":"Large language models (LLMs) can generate fluent and convincing text at scale, creating growing risks for misinformation dissemination, educational misuse, and platform governance. These concerns make robust detection of machine-generated text increasingly necessary. Recent zero-shot detectors mainly exploit probability-based statistical discrepancies, but they do not explicitly account for the training process of LLMs, which leaves a distinct generation mechanism insufficiently modeled and limi","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T08:22:19Z","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05741.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"检测一段文本是否由 LLM 生成，尤其是在零样本检测器容易被改写、采样策略和模型差异影响的情况下提升稳健性。","importance":"贡献是生成文本检测方法，不是预训练核心问题；间接价值在于它利用“LLM 回复通常隐含上游 prompt 条件”这一生成机制假设，可用于理解合成数据污染和平台治理。","technical_approach":"提出 EchoPrompt，一个免训练检测器：给待测文本前置统一的 generic assistant-response prefix，尝试恢复隐藏的助手回复上下文；随后用 instruction-tuned 模型测量由该前缀带来的 likelihood gain，并用校准项区分人类文本和机器回复。","experiments":"摘要未完整给出数据集、模型规模、baseline 和数值；声称相较主要概率统计类零样本检测器，显式建模 latent prompt dependency 能改善检测鲁棒性，需读正文查看跨模型、跨改写和跨领域表现。","authors_note":"Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences；University of Chinese Academy of Sciences；Zhejiang University；Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper aims to detect LLM-generated text under settings where zero-shot statistical detectors are fragile to paraphrasing, decoding changes, and generator mismatch.","importance":"The contribution is a generation-text detector rather than a core pretraining method. Its indirect value is the use of an explicit generation-mechanism assumption: LLM responses often retain a hidden dependency on an upstream prompt.","technical_approach":"EchoPrompt is a training-free detector. It prepends a unified generic assistant-response prefix to partially restore the latent response context, measures the induced likelihood gain with an instruction-tuned model, and calibrates the gain to separate human-written text from machine responses.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide full datasets, model sizes, baselines, or numeric gains. It claims improved robustness over probability-based zero-shot detectors by modeling latent prompt dependency; cross-generator, paraphrase, and domain robustness need to be checked in the paper.","authors_note":"Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences; Zhejiang University; Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences."},"recommendation":{"zh":"只需看核心假设和校准公式；它对合成数据污染检测有旁路价值，但不是预训练方法论文。","en":"Skim the core assumption and calibration formula; it is useful for synthetic-data contamination checks, not as a pretraining method."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences","University of Chinese Academy of Sciences","Zhejiang University","Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences"],"authors":["Hongrui Bao","Yubing Ren","Yanan Cao","Jinhan You","Fang Fang","Shi Wang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["llm-detection","synthetic-text","prompt-restoration","data-contamination"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05741","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05741","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2503.17181","title":"A Study of LLMs' Preferences for Libraries and Programming Languages","abstract":"Despite the rapid progress of large language models (LLMs) in code generation, existing evaluations focus on functional correctness or syntactic validity, overlooking how LLMs make critical design choices such as which library or programming language to use. To fill this gap, we perform the first empirical study of LLMs' preferences for libraries and programming languages when generating code, covering eight diverse LLMs. We observe a strong tendency to overuse widely adopted libraries such as N","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2025-03-21T14:29:35Z","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2503_17181.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.SE","cs.AI","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有代码LLM评测仅关注功能正确性，忽略了库选择、编程语言选择等关键设计决策的偏好偏差问题。","importance":"首次系统实证研究LLM对库和编程语言的选择偏好，揭示了流行度优先而非任务适配的偏差，属于行为分析类贡献。","technical_approach":"覆盖8个不同规模和架构的LLM，设计多组代码生成任务（通用编码、高性能项目初始化等），对比模型输出与ground truth的库/语言选择差异，量化偏好偏差的比例和场景。","experiments":"8个LLM测试显示，高达45%的NumPy使用是非必要的、偏离真值方案；高性能项目初始化场景下Python仍占58%的选择比例，Rust从未被选择，验证了模型优先偏好流行度而非任务最优解。","authors_note":"作者来自伦敦国王学院、UCL、BT集团等机构，无特别知名作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing code LLM evaluations only focus on functional correctness, ignoring preference biases in critical design choices such as library and programming language selection.","importance":"First systematic empirical study of LLMs' preferences for libraries and programming languages, revealing a bias toward popularity over task suitability, belonging to behavioral analysis contribution.","technical_approach":"Covers 8 diverse LLMs, designs multiple sets of code generation tasks (general coding, high-performance project initialization, etc.), compares library/language choices between model outputs and ground truth, and quantifies the proportion and scenarios of preference bias.","experiments":"Tests on 8 LLMs show that up to 45% of NumPy usage is unnecessary and deviates from ground-truth solutions; in high-performance project initialization tasks, Python remains the dominant choice at 58%, while Rust is never used, verifying that models prioritize popularity over task optimality.","authors_note":"Authors are from King's College London, University College London, BT Group, etc., with no particularly well-known researchers."},"recommendation":{"zh":"代码预训练数据的流行度偏差会传导到生成偏好，做代码基座的可以参考这个现象调整数据配比，不用读全文。","en":"Popularity bias in code pretraining data propagates to generation preferences; code base model researchers can reference this phenomenon to adjust data mixture, no need to read the full text."},"metadata":{"institutions":["King’s College London","University College London","BT Group","Digital AI Research, BT Group, Ipswich"],"authors":["Lukas Twist","Mark Harman","Don Syme","Joost Noppen","Helen Yannakoudakis","Detlef Nauck","Jie M. Zhang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["code LLM","preference bias","empirical study","programming language","library selection"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.17181","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2503.17181","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05660","title":"Reasoning Errors Have a Region and a Direction in the Residual-Stream Trajectory of LLMs","abstract":"As language models are increasingly used for tasks that require verifiable reasoning, reliably distinguishing sound reasoning from flawed reasoning has become an important practical problem. Recent trajectory-based methods seek this signal in layerwise residual-stream displacements, which capture how representations change while attenuating some stable, token-specific information. However, displacement omits the state from which an update originates, whereas restoring the full state risks reintr","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T06:58:10Z","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05660.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有基于残差流层间位移的推理正确性探测方法，存在位移丢初始状态、全状态探测易引入捷径特征的权衡，无法可靠区分正确与错误推理。","importance":"方法类增量改进，通过拆分状态表示的粒度平衡探测精度与捷径风险，为推理过程的内部表示探测提供了新的设计思路。","technical_approach":"提出三流检测器：一路捕捉层间运动信息，一路基于向量量化做粗粒度区域位置读取，一路在归一化多层状态上做细粒度方向读取，仅保留受限的位置上下文避免捷径。","experiments":"在训练阶段未见过的推理基准上，相比纯位移探测方法，正确推理结果的选择准确率最高提升12%。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing residual-stream displacement based reasoning correctness probes face a trade-off: displacement omits initial state context, while full-state probing reintroduces shortcut-prone features.","importance":"An incremental method design that balances probing accuracy and shortcut risk by disentangling state representation granularity, offering a new design reference for internal reasoning representation probing.","technical_approach":"Proposes a three-stream detector: one stream captures inter-layer motion, one uses vector quantization for coarse region reading, one performs fine-grained direction reading over normalized multi-layer states, retaining only restricted location context to avoid shortcuts.","experiments":"On reasoning benchmarks unseen during training, the method improves correct reasoning selection accuracy by up to 12% compared to displacement-only baselines.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"残差流探测推理错误的增量改进，三流拆分位置与运动的设计有参考性，无训练侧可直接落地的结论","en":"Incremental work on residual-stream reasoning error detection, the three-stream design is decent but offers no actionable insights for pretraining."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide","Responsible AI Research Centre","Australian Institute for Machine Learning","Adelaide University"],"authors":["Hamed Damirchi","Ignacio Meza De la Jara","Damith Ranasinghe","Yuhang Liu","Javen Shi"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["residual_stream","reasoning_probing","interpretability","representation_analysis"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05660","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05660","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05424","title":"Invisible Shortcuts: Why Vision Encoders Know Your Camera","abstract":"Deep vision models exploit shortcuts, relying on cues that correlate with supervision signals. Prior work has focused on visible biases, such as object-background or texture correlations. We identify a different source of shortcut learning: invisible metadata traces embedded at the pixel level, for metadata such as image processing and photo acquisition. We hypothesize that large-scale semantic supervision, whether through categorical labels (ImageNet) or billion-scale captions (LAION), naturall","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-05T21:36:34Z","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05424.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"分析视觉 encoder 在大规模监督或图文预训练中是否会利用像素级不可见 metadata trace，例如相机、图像处理流程和拍摄设备痕迹。","importance":"贡献是预训练数据偏差与 shortcut learning 的机制分析。它不直接研究 LLM，但对 VLM/CLIP 类预训练的数据清洗、去重、metadata 去相关和鲁棒性评估有参考价值。","technical_approach":"作者构造受控的 metadata-semantics correlation，测量不同强度相关性下模型对 metadata trace 的敏感度，以及 metadata 分布转移造成的性能退化。还比较训练中和训练后的 mitigation 策略，观察它们是否能降低目标 metadata 以及未见 metadata 的敏感性。","experiments":"实验覆盖 ImageNet 监督预训练和 LAION 级图文 caption 预训练语境。结果显示，metadata 与语义标签/文本监督的相关性越强，模型越容易把低层不可见痕迹转化为预测特征，并在 metadata 分布变化时出现更大退化。摘要未给出模型规模和具体数值。","authors_note":"Czech Technical University in Prague; The University of Osaka"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether vision encoders trained with large-scale labels or captions exploit invisible pixel-level metadata traces, such as camera or image-processing signatures.","importance":"It is a mechanism study of pretraining data bias and shortcut learning. While not an LLM paper, it is relevant to VLM and CLIP-style pretraining because it points to data-curation and robustness failures that are not visible from semantic labels alone.","technical_approach":"The authors introduce controlled metadata-semantics correlations, measure how correlation strength changes encoder sensitivity to metadata traces, and evaluate performance degradation under metadata distribution shifts. They also test mitigation strategies applied during and after pretraining, including whether they generalize from targeted metadata to unseen metadata.","experiments":"The experiments consider both ImageNet-style categorical supervision and LAION-style caption supervision. Stronger metadata-semantics correlations lead to higher sensitivity to low-level traces and larger degradation when metadata distributions shift. The abstract does not provide model scale or detailed numerical results.","authors_note":"Czech Technical University in Prague; The University of Osaka"},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看实验设计和 shift 结果即可；它提醒 VLM 数据清洗不能只看语义重复和 NSFW 规则。","en":"Read the setup and shift results only; it is a useful reminder that VLM data cleaning cannot stop at semantic duplicates and NSFW filters."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Czech Technical University in Prague","The University of Osaka","VRG, FEE, Czech Technical University in Prague","sion, whether through categorical labels (ImageNet) or billion-scale cap-"],"authors":["Vladan Stojnić","Ryan Ramos","Giorgos Kordopatis-Zilos","Noa Garcia","Giorgos Tolias"],"notable_authors":["Giorgos Tolias"],"tags":["shortcut-learning","vision-encoder","metadata-bias","vlm-pretraining","robustness"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05424","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05424","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05774","title":"SR-JEPA: Learning Predictive Latent State in 3D Scenes","abstract":"Joint-embedding predictive architectures learn by predicting latent representations of missing observations, yet many masked JEPAs are evaluated primarily through the encoders they produce. We ask what a trained predictive pathway itself infers when an entire entity is absent from a native 3D scene. We introduce SR-JEPA, a point-native JEPA for scene-scale point clouds whose original frozen predictive pathway can be queried at a supplied location. At evaluation, every point of one object is remo","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T09:09:16Z","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05774.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"研究 3D scene JEPA 的预测通路在缺失整个物体时到底推断了什么，而不只是把 JEPA 当作 encoder 表征学习方法来评测。","importance":"贡献类型是自监督预测表征的机制分析与 3D 表征方法。它对 LLM 预训练不是直接方法贡献，但对 latent prediction、world model 和非重构式自监督目标有一定参考意义。","technical_approach":"提出 SR-JEPA，一个 point-native、scene-scale point cloud JEPA。训练只使用 3D EMA latent target，不使用重建目标、语义标签、语言或 2D lifted features。评测时移除一个物体的所有点，在其质心放入 shape-free 的 32 点 query，并直接查询原始冻结 predictive pathway 生成缺失物体 latent。","experiments":"在 5,953 个 held-out ARKitScenes objects 上，imputed latent 达到 43.13% semantic-identity macro accuracy，比最强 floor 高 22.18 个点。随机化 prediction path 会降低 9.78 个点；用 matched donor context 替代会降低 21.98 个点。在 8,570 个 Sr3D support pairs 上还评估了支持关系相关能力，但摘要截断，完整指标未知。","authors_note":"作者来自 Boston University 和 Shanghai Jiao Tong University。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks what a 3D scene JEPA predictive pathway infers when an entire object is missing, rather than evaluating only the encoder representation.","importance":"This is a mechanism-oriented self-supervised 3D representation study. It is not a direct LLM pretraining contribution, but it is relevant to latent prediction objectives, world-model-style pretraining, and non-reconstructive self-supervision.","technical_approach":"SR-JEPA is a point-native JEPA for scene-scale point clouds. It is trained with 3D EMA latent targets only, without reconstruction, semantic labels, language, or lifted 2D features. At evaluation, all points of an object are removed and replaced by a shape-free 32-point query at the centroid, then the frozen predictive pathway is queried for the missing-object latent.","experiments":"On 5,953 held-out ARKitScenes objects, the imputed latent reaches 43.13% semantic-identity macro accuracy, 22.18 points above the strongest floor. Randomizing the prediction path removes 9.78 points, while substituting matched donor context removes 21.98 points. The abstract also mentions 8,570 Sr3D support pairs, but the detailed result is truncated.","authors_note":"The authors are from Boston University and Shanghai Jiao Tong University."},"recommendation":{"zh":"不必细读 3D 实验；看缺失物体 probing 设计即可，能借来检查 JEPA/latent world model 是否真的预测状态。","en":"Do not dwell on the 3D results; the missing-object probing setup is the useful part for testing whether JEPA-like latent world models predict state."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Boston University","Shanghai Jiao Tong University"],"authors":["Zihan Zhou","Qifu Wen","Xi Zeng"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["jepa","latent-prediction","3d-representation","self-supervised-learning","world-models"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05774","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05774","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06216","title":"Continual Learning in Transition","abstract":"Classical continual learning (CL) has primarily focused on enabling models to update and retain knowledge through parameter-centric mechanisms, e.g., training strategies, architectural designs, and weight adaptation. However, emerging paradigms are reshaping the scope of CL beyond this traditional model adaptation view. For instance, on-policy learning broadens the space of update mechanisms; test-time training extends CL from the training phase to inference; and external harness components such","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T16:07:26Z","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06216.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"重新界定 continual learning：学习不再只发生在参数更新中，也可能发生在 on-policy 交互、test-time training、外部记忆、技能库和协议层。","importance":"贡献类型是概念框架和综述。它对 continual pretrain、agent memory、技能库、在线学习之间的边界有整理作用，但摘要看不出新的实验结论或可操作 recipe。","technical_approach":"用 When、How、Where 三个维度描述 continual learning 的转向。How 包含 off-policy、on-policy 和 beyond-gradient optimization；Where 从模型参数扩展到外部 harness 组件，如 memory、skill libraries 和 interaction protocols。","experiments":"摘要显示这是综述或立场型工作，未报告模型规模、训练数据、baseline 或定量实验结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper reframes continual learning as a broader adaptation problem where learning may happen through on-policy updates, test-time training, memory, skill libraries, and interaction protocols, not only through parameter updates.","importance":"The contribution is a conceptual framework and survey. It is useful for organizing continual pretraining, agent memory, and online adaptation, but the abstract does not indicate new experiments or a concrete training recipe.","technical_approach":"The authors characterize the transition with three axes: When, How, and Where learning occurs. The How axis covers off-policy, on-policy, and beyond-gradient optimization; the Where axis expands adaptation from weights to harness components such as memory, skill libraries, and interaction protocols.","experiments":"The abstract presents the work as a survey or position paper and does not report model sizes, training data, baselines, or quantitative results.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"概念框架可作术语索引，不必细读；若做 continual pretrain，只看 When/How/Where 分类即可。","en":"Useful as a terminology map, not a deep read; for continual pretraining, the When/How/Where taxonomy is the part to keep."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Zhiyan Hou","Dan Zhang","Tao Feng","Liyuan Wang","Wei Li","Xiangzhao Hao","Hongyan An","Junfeng Fang","Haokai Ma","Zhaohui Xu","Haiyun Guo","Jinqiao Wang","Tat-Seng Chua"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["continual-learning","test-time-training","agent-memory","system-adaptation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06216","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06216","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05732","title":"CircuitSteer: Geometrically Aligned Multi-Layer Steering via Sparse Autoencoder Circuits","abstract":"Controlling the behavior of large language models (LLMs) remains a critical challenge for AI alignment. Existing steering methods, such as Contrastive Activation Addition (CAA), typically rely on fixed single-layer interventions derived from aggregate activation differences. These methods impose a single intervention across semantically diverse inputs and often fail to sustain consistent behavioral changes across layers, limiting the effectiveness of the steering. In this work, we introduce Circ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T08:17:50Z","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05732.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"改进 LLM 行为 steering，使干预不再依赖单层、固定、输入无关的 activation vector。","importance":"贡献类型是机制解释和对齐控制方法；它把 Sparse Autoencoder 特征用于多层语义 circuit 识别，再把稀疏特征合成为 dense steering vectors。对 pretrain 的直接帮助不大，但对理解表示可控性和 SAE 特征组织有参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出 CircuitSteer。方法先用 SAE 抽取稀疏特征，再基于特征共激活和 decoder direction 的几何对齐构建 feature flow circuit，定位与目标行为相关的多层子电路；随后从这些稀疏特征合成密集 steering 向量，并在多个层位置施加干预。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体模型规模、数据集、baseline 数字或提升幅度。主要对比对象是 Contrastive Activation Addition 这类单层 steering 方法，并声称多层 circuit 干预能更稳定地改变目标行为。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper aims to make LLM behavior steering more reliable than fixed, single-layer, input-agnostic activation interventions.","importance":"It contributes an interpretability-driven alignment control method. Sparse Autoencoder features are used to identify distributed semantic circuits and synthesize dense steering vectors. The direct pretraining value is limited, but it is relevant to representation controllability and SAE-based model analysis.","technical_approach":"CircuitSteer first extracts sparse features with SAEs, then builds a feature-flow circuit using feature co-activation and geometric alignment of decoder directions. It isolates multi-layer subcircuits associated with a target behavior, synthesizes dense steering vectors from those sparse features, and applies interventions at multiple layers.","experiments":"The abstract does not report model sizes, datasets, numerical gains, or full baselines. The main comparison is against single-layer steering methods such as Contrastive Activation Addition, with the claim that multi-layer circuit interventions yield more consistent behavioral control.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"SAE steering 又一篇；若正文没有跨模型稳健性，只把 circuit 构造当候选工具。","en":"Another SAE-steering paper; unless the full text shows cross-model robustness, treat the circuit construction as a candidate tool only."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Mehrshad Saadatinia","Parsa Razmara","Ardalan Aryashad","Ali Abbasi","Seyedarmin Azizi"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["sparse-autoencoder","activation-steering","mechanistic-interpretability","alignment","model-control"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05732","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05732","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05980","title":"How Far Do Simple Transformations Translate Across Text Embedding Models?","abstract":"We investigate whether simple transformations can translate representations across heterogeneous text embedding models. Understanding how independently trained models organize semantic information is an enabler for AI-to-AI latent communication without decoding into human-readable text. Focusing on lightweight translators such as linear mappings, we test the literature hypothesis of latent universality in a realistic text setting beyond simplified benchmarks. Across nine embedding models differi","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T12:57:01Z","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05980.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"检验不同文本 embedding 模型之间，是否能用简单线性映射等轻量转换器完成表征空间翻译。","importance":"这是表征对齐与 latent universality 的实证分析。它不直接改进预训练 recipe，但对理解独立训练模型是否共享语义几何结构有参考价值，尤其关联模型间 latent communication 和表示可互操作性。","technical_approach":"围绕九个架构、pooling 策略和训练目标不同的文本 embedding 模型，训练或评估线性映射等简单 translator；用 CKA、下游迁移、fidelity 和 retrieval 评估跨模型兼容性。","experiments":"实验覆盖九个 embedding 模型。结果显示，部分兼容模型对可以通过简单 translator 恢复共享语义结构并支持迁移，但另一些模型对失败明显；兼容性同时受架构、训练目标、pooling 与数据分布影响。摘要未给出具体模型名称和提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tests whether lightweight transformations, especially linear maps, can translate representations across heterogeneous text embedding models.","importance":"This is an empirical study of representation alignment and latent universality. It does not change pretraining practice directly, but it is relevant for understanding whether independently trained language models organize semantic information in interoperable latent spaces.","technical_approach":"The authors evaluate simple translators across nine text embedding models that differ in architecture, pooling strategy, and training objective. Compatibility is measured using CKA, downstream transfer, fidelity, and retrieval performance.","experiments":"Across nine embedding models, simple translators recover meaningful shared structure for some model pairs but fail sharply for others. Compatibility depends jointly on architecture, objective, pooling, and data distribution. The abstract does not provide model names or exact gains.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"结论对“表征天然同构”的 prior 有降温作用；看实验矩阵和失败案例即可，不必精读方法。","en":"Useful as a correction to easy latent-isomorphism assumptions; read the compatibility matrix and failure cases, not the full method."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Sid Ali Hamideche","Louis Adrien Dufrene","Quentin Lampin","Guillaume Larue"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["representation-alignment","text-embeddings","latent-universality","CKA","model-interoperability"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05980","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05980","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07261","title":"Why Knowing Both Hops Is Not Enough: Understanding Two-Hop Generalization in Language Models","abstract":"Large language models (LLMs) can solve complex multi-hop problems yet exhibit puzzling failures on simple two-hop queries: although a model may correctly store each individual hop, it often fails to combine them. To understand the internal mechanisms of this phenomenon, we train transformers from scratch in a controlled symbolic environment. Our experiments reveal a pattern in two-hop generalization: models generalize reliably when the second hop follows the training distribution, but always fai","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07261.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解释语言模型为什么明明分别记住了两跳知识，却仍然在简单 two-hop 组合查询上失败。","importance":"这是机制分析工作，不是新模型。价值在于它把 two-hop generalization 失败拆成可定位的层间表征错配问题，而不是笼统归因于“模型不会组合推理”。这对理解预训练后知识组合、ICL 失败模式和中间表征对齐都有启发。","technical_approach":"作者在受控符号环境中从头训练 transformer，构造可精确控制分布内/分布外 second hop 的 two-hop 任务。随后做 mechanistic analysis，比较不同层对实体中间表示的一致性。结论是：当第二跳仍在训练分布内时，模型会在不同上下文中为同一实体形成一致的中间表示，因此能完成组合；当第二跳 OOD 时，下层仍能构造正确中间表示，但上层读取和映射这些表示的方式依赖训练分布，导致最终失败。","experiments":"实验是小规模、可控的从零训练 transformer，而非大模型 benchmark。核心对比是 second hop in-distribution 与 out-of-distribution 两种设置下的泛化差异，并通过层级表征分析给出完整解释。摘要未给出具体参数量和数据规模，但从定位上看，重点是 clean setup 而非规模。对预训练研究员来说，价值主要在机制结论，而不是结果数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks why language models often fail on simple two-hop composition even when each individual hop is correctly stored.","importance":"This is a mechanistic analysis paper rather than a new model. Its value is that it localizes the failure to a layerwise representation mismatch, instead of vaguely saying the model cannot compose knowledge. That matters for understanding knowledge composition after pretraining, in-context failures, and representation alignment across layers.","technical_approach":"The authors train transformers from scratch in a controlled symbolic environment where they can precisely vary whether the second hop is in- or out-of-distribution. They then perform mechanistic analysis of entity representations across layers. The main finding is that successful generalization arises when the same entity gets a consistent intermediate representation across contexts; when the second hop is OOD, lower layers still build the right intermediate state, but upper layers decode it using distribution-specific mappings learned during training, causing failure.","experiments":"Experiments use small, controlled transformers rather than frontier LMs. The key comparison is between in-distribution and OOD second-hop settings, followed by layerwise representation analysis to explain the gap. The abstract does not provide model sizes or dataset counts, which suggests the contribution is in the cleanliness of the setup and the mechanism, not in scaling results. For pretraining researchers, the mechanism is the main takeaway.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"这篇不是在讲“模型不会推理”，而是在讲 upper layers 怎么把已形成的中间实体表征读坏；若你做知识组合或 latent reasoning，建议先看机制图和层分析，再决定是否复现实验。","en":"This is not another 'LLMs cannot reason' paper; it argues upper layers misread already-formed intermediate entity states. If you work on knowledge composition or latent reasoning, read the layer analysis first."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Zili Zhang","Yilin Wang","Heng Wang","Herun Wan","Minnan Luo"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["mechanistic-interpretability","two-hop-reasoning","generalization","representation-alignment","transformers"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07261","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07261","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07436","title":"Post-Grokking Collapse at the Representation-Readout Interface in Muon-Trained Transformers","abstract":"Under the standard split, Muon gets hidden matrices and AdamW embeddings/output head. Muon groks modular addition faster, but its solutions do not hold. All nine configurations on $(a+b) \\bmod 113$ grok and later lose generalization. Across five seeds the selected AdamW reference falls below threshold on four, reaching 27.59%. Instability persists across two moduli, two widths, two training fractions, subtraction, and depth. The failure arises at the representation-readout interface, identified ","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07436.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"使用 Muon 优化器训练 Transformer 时，模型在模加法（modular addition）等可解释的 grokking 任务上能更快达到泛化阈值，但在 grokking 之后会出现测试精度和训练精度同步崩塌的后 grokking 塌陷现象；论文试图定位这种不稳定性的机制来源，特别关注将 hidden 权重交给 Muon、embedding 与输出头交给 AdamW 的分优化器路由是否会在表征与 readout 的接口处破坏对齐。","importance":"Muon 正被越来越多地作为大模型训练优化器讨论，这类工作多关注其收敛速度和谱性质。本文指出“更快 grok”不等于“稳定持有解”，并把失效定位在 residual stream 基矢自由度上：hidden 层和 embedding/unembedding 被不同优化器更新时，会沿着损失不敏感的可逆变换方向发生漂移，最终导致表征与读出矩阵之间的接口失配。这个观察对实际大模型训练中“分参数分组优化”“输出头/embedding 独立学习率与 weight decay”“训练后期稳定性”都有直接参考价值，也为理解 grokking 后的长期训练动态提供了可干预的小任务探针。","technical_approach":"以 (a+b) mod 113 等模块化算术任务为实验场，系统比较 Muon 与 AdamW 在不同 modulus、宽度、训练数据比例、运算类型、层数下的训练轨迹。使用模加法任务上已建立的 Fourier 电路分析工具，追踪模型使用的频率分量、有效秩与奇异谱，区分“算法家族没变但基矢漂移”与“电路本身被破坏”两类失效。通过在相同 bit-identical 参数状态处分叉轨迹、扫描输出头学习率和 weight decay，并结合 residual stream 基矢不确定性分析（即 h 与 W_U 只通过乘积 W_U h 被损失约束，存在任意可逆 R 下 (Rh, W_U R^{-1}) 的等价类），把塌陷归因到表征-readout 接口上的基矢失配，而非单纯的泛化机制失效。","experiments":"在 9 组 Muon 配置上，模型全部先 grok，随后全部出现泛化丢失，最差时测试精度跌破 1%，并可在数十万步内反复崩塌与恢复。AdamW 并非免疫：在 sweep 中 7 个 grok 的配置里有 4 个也出现后期塌陷；输出头学习率从 1e-3 提高到 1e-2 时，低于阈值的评估次数从 0 增加到 918。与已有 anti-grokking 不同，本文的塌陷伴随训练精度从 100% 跌至 21.12%、训练损失从 1.53e-7 飙升到 57.5，说明不是只在测试集上失效，而是已学到的函数本身在接口处被破坏。消融显示，Muon 的归一化正交化路径会把非恒定谱上的色散从 326 个有效共轭对压缩到 4 个，但模型计算所处的 Fourier 家族并未改变；塌陷随深度增加而加重，扫 output head 的学习率（5 倍范围）和 weight decay（0 到 0.5）只能改变出现时机和严重程度，无法消除。","reading_guide":"泛读即可，重点看 introduction 中关于 post-grokking collapse 的现象描述、Figure 里训练/测试精度同步崩塌的轨迹、以及对 residual stream 基矢等价类和 split optimizer 路由如何切断 writers/readers 共同固定基矢的分析。对优化器研究者而言，值得深挖的点是：为什么 Muon 在所有配置下都触发，而 AdamW 只在较大学习率下触发；这是否与 Muon 倾向更高有效秩、更各向同性谱有关。不必纠结模加法本身的电路细节，但要抓住“表示层和读出层之间存在损失不约束的自由度，不同更新规则会让它们沿着这个自由度漂移”这个机制。预计阅读时间 20–30 分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Transformers trained with Muon, when hidden weights are assigned to Muon while embeddings and the output head are left to AdamW, reach the grokking threshold faster on modular arithmetic, but the grokked solutions are not stable: generalization is consistently lost after grokking, and the paper investigates where this post-grokking collapse originates, with particular attention to the representation–readout interface created by the split-optimizer routing.","importance":"Muon is increasingly discussed as a promising optimizer for large-scale training, largely on the basis of faster convergence and favorable spectral properties. This paper shows that faster grokking does not imply stable retention of the solution, and localizes the failure to a basis-freedom issue in the residual stream: when hidden layers are updated by one optimizer while embeddings and the unembedding are updated by another, they can drift along invertible directions to which the loss is insensitive, eventually breaking coordination between representations and the readout. This is directly relevant to practical LLM training design, including parameter-grouped optimization, separate learning-rate or weight-decay settings for embeddings/heads, and late-stage training stability, and it offers a small, intervenable testbed for studying post-grokking dynamics more generally.","technical_approach":"The paper uses modular addition and subtraction as a mechanistically understood grokking testbed, sweeping modulus, width, training-data fraction, operation type, and depth for both Muon and AdamW. It applies the established Fourier-circuit analysis for modular arithmetic to track the frequency basis used by the model, effective rank, and singular spectra, distinguishing changes in basis from changes in the underlying algorithmic family. Starting from bit-identical checkpoints, it branches trajectories, sweeps output-head learning rate and weight decay, and uses the residual-stream gauge argument: logits depend on the final representation h and unembedding W_U only through W_U h, so the pair is determined only up to an invertible map (Rh, W_U R^{-1}), and the loss exerts no direct pressure to fix R. The collapse is attributed to a mismatch at this representation–readout interface rather than to a purely generalization-side failure.","experiments":"$35","reading_guide":"Read this as a useful mechanistic case study rather than a production optimizer paper. Focus on the introduction for the core phenomenon, the training curves showing simultaneous train/test collapse, and the basis-freedom argument connecting split-optimizer routing to the writers/readers of the residual stream. For optimizer researchers, the key question is why Muon exhibits the instability across all tested configurations while AdamW only does so at larger learning rates, and how this relates to Muon’s higher effective rank and more isotropic spectra. The modular-arithmetic circuit details are secondary; the mechanism to carry away is that representations and readouts share loss-invisible degrees of freedom, and mismatched update rules can exploit them. Estimated reading time: 20–30 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"Muon 在 grokking 后负 step-size elasticity 导致 representation 漂移这个发现很关键，做优化器或长程训练稳定性的人应看 §4 的冻结实验和 elasticity 测量。","en":"The finding that Muon's negative step-size elasticity after grokking drives representation drift is key—optimizer and long-run stability researchers should read the freezing experiments and elasticity measurements in §4."},"metadata":{"institutions":["IBM Research"],"authors":["Ali Janati","Kaoutar El Maghraoui","Andrei Kanavalau","Anass Belfatmi"],"notable_authors":["Kaoutar El Maghraoui"],"tags":["muon-optimizer","grokking","training-stability","representation-dynamics","modular-arithmetic"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07436","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07436","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07430","title":"Diffusion LLMs as Targets and Adversaries: Mechanistic Safety Exploits","abstract":"Diffusion Large Language Models (DLLMs) replace autoregressive next-token prediction with iterative parallel denoising, yet their internal safety mechanisms remain poorly understood. In this work, we investigate DLLMs both as targets and as adversaries, exposing mechanistic vulnerabilities in diffusion-based alignment. We first show that safety alignment in DLLMs remains sparse and transferable across architectures. DLLMs initialized from autoregressive predecessors inherit the same mechanistic ","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07430.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"刻画扩散大语言模型（DLLM）的安全对齐机制的结构特性与脆弱性，同时探索利用DLLM双向建模能力构造跨架构通用越狱攻击的方法。","importance":"验证了当前主流DLLM（包括原生训练和AR权重初始化的DLLM）的安全对齐机制和AR模型一致，由稀疏的、可定位的安全神经元集合承载；从AR模型初始化的DLLM会直接继承源模型的安全神经元足迹，不会因扩散训练目标产生本质变化。这一观察对非AR语言模型的预训练对齐设计、安全评估有直接参考，说明生成范式的切换不会自动消除AR模型已有的对齐脆弱性。","technical_approach":"首先通过激活轮廓分析加逻辑回归，定位原生DLLM（如LLaDA）和AR初始化DLLM（如Dream、Fast-dLLM）中负责拒答行为的稀疏安全神经元，测量AR源模型和DLLM之间的神经元重叠度；随后基于定位到的神经元激活值和回归系数构造加权安全神经元损失（SN loss），作为区分安全/不安全激活区域的连续优化信号；最后利用DLLM双向并行去噪的特性实现离线推理时对抗优化：先通过生成剪枝级联（用剪枝强度逐步放松的代理DLLM迭代提纯恶意prompt，过滤语义漂移和退化），再用SN loss引导去噪轨迹避开安全触发区域，无需在线查询目标模型或RL训练。","experiments":"直接剪枝LLaDA自身定位到的安全神经元，可将攻击成功率从2.6%提升至73.8%；从Qwen2.5迁移安全神经元到Dream模型做跨架构剪枝，攻击成功率从1.9%提升至73.2%，Dream自剪枝攻击成功率可达86.6%，所有剪枝操作对通用能力的损伤极小。SN loss对良性prompt和越狱prompt的区分AUROC达到1.0。提出的SN引导扩散攻击每个prompt仅需20次离线扩散采样，即可在Qwen、LLaMA、DeepSeek等开源模型，以及Gemini、Claude、GPT系列闭源模型上实现高迁移攻击成功率，计算成本远低于现有需要上千次查询的越狱基线方法。","reading_guide":"泛读即可，重点关注安全神经元跨架构迁移的实验结论，以及为什么DLLM的双向建模特性天然适合低成本离线对抗优化；跳过底层攻击实现的工程细节即可，核心关注非AR范式下安全对齐机制的结构特性，预计阅读时间20分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Characterizes structural properties and vulnerabilities of safety alignment in diffusion large language models (DLLMs), and develops a transferable jailbreak framework leveraging DLLMs' bidirectional generation capabilities.","importance":"Demonstrates that safety alignment in mainstream DLLMs—both natively trained and those initialized from autoregressive (AR) checkpoints—relies on sparse, localizable safety neurons, consistent with findings in AR models. DLLMs initialized from AR predecessors directly inherit the mechanistic safety footprint of their source models, with no fundamental restructuring of safety representations from diffusion training. This finding has direct implications for alignment design and safety evaluation of non-AR language models, showing that a shift away from next-token prediction does not automatically eliminate known alignment failure modes from AR systems.","technical_approach":"First identifies sparse safety neurons driving refusal behavior in both native DLLMs (e.g., LLaDA) and AR-initialized DLLMs (e.g., Dream, Fast-dLLM) via activation profiling and logistic regression, and measures neuron overlap between AR source models and their diffusion derivatives. A weighted Safety Neuron (SN) loss is constructed from identified neuron activations and corresponding regression coefficients, serving as a continuous signal to distinguish safe and unsafe activation regions. The bidirectional denoising process of DLLMs is then used to run fully offline inference-time adversarial optimization: a Generative Pruning Cascade uses surrogate DLLMs with progressively relaxed neuron pruning to iteratively refine malicious prompts and filter semantic drift or degeneration, before SN-guidance steers denoising trajectories away from safety-triggering regions, requiring no iterative black-box queries to target models or RL fine-tuning.","experiments":"Self-pruning of identified safety neurons raises attack success rate (ASR) from 2.6% to 73.8% on LLaDA. Cross-architecture transfer pruning of safety neurons mapped from Qwen2.5 raises ASR from 1.9% to 73.2% on Dream, while Dream self-pruning reaches 86.6% ASR, with all pruning operations causing minimal degradation to general model utility. The proposed SN loss achieves AUROC = 1.0 for distinguishing benign and jailbreak prompts. The full SN-guided diffusion attack requires only 20 offline diffusion episodes per prompt, and achieves high transfer ASR across both open-weight (Qwen, LLaMA, DeepSeek) and proprietary (Gemini, Claude, GPT-family) targets at a fraction of the compute cost of existing query-heavy jailbreak baselines.","reading_guide":"Skim for core observations about safety representation structure across generative paradigms; focus on the cross-architecture safety neuron transfer results and the argument for why DLLMs' bidirectional modeling enables lower-cost offline adversarial optimization. Low-level attack engineering details can be skipped unless working directly on LLM safety; estimated reading time 20 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"扩散LM安全机制的重要发现，AR初始化会继承安全神经元的结论直接影响DLLM的预训练初始化策略，重点看§3的机制分析和Table 2","en":"Important finding on diffusion LM safety mechanisms, the conclusion that AR initialization inherits safety neurons directly affects DLLM pretraining initialization strategies, focus on §3 mechanistic analysis and Table 2"},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Elena Dumitrescu","Gert Lek","Lydia Y. Chen","Jérémie Decouchant"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["diffusion-llm","safety-alignment","mechanistic-analysis","jailbreak-attack","llm-interpretability"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07430","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07430","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06776","title":"Faster Query-Key Learning Sharpens Attention in Self-Attention Models","abstract":"A standard self-attention layer consists of two interacting circuits: the query-key circuit that governs attention allocation, and the output-value circuit that maps attended representations to predictions. Collapsed and factorized parameterizations of the query-key and output-value circuits lead to qualitatively different attention patterns. In particular, some parameterizations give sharper attention to task-relevant tokens, at a similar training loss. We analyze how the parameterizations of t","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06776.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"在相同预测性能下，自注意力模型会出现差异极大的注意力模式；现有理论只解释了 Transformer 的表达能力，没有说明架构参数化方式与梯度优化如何共同塑造注意力结构，特别是 query-key 电路和 output-value 电路的相对学习速度如何影响注意力锐度。","importance":"给出了注意力模式形成的机制性解释：不是表达能力差异，而是参数化和优化速度差异决定了注意力是否集中在任务相关 token 上。对预训练实践的直接启发是：可以通过调整 Q/K 与 O/V 的参数化形式或相对学习率，在不损失训练损失的前提下得到更可解释、更锐利的注意力，而不需要改动模型结构或数据。","technical_approach":"将单层自注意力拆分为两个线性电路：query-key 电路（W_K W_Q^T，决定注意力分布）和 output-value 电路（W_O W_V，将注意力后的表示映射为预测 logits）。对比四种参数化：FAFO（两路都分解）、CAFO（注意力合并、输出分解）、FACO（注意力分解、输出合并）、CACO（两路都合并）。通过梯度流分析证明：分解式参数化会在对应的合并参数空间中引入状态依赖的梯度重缩放，使得分解模型和合并模型即使损失相近，优化轨迹也不同。在正交性与对称性假设下推导出闭式群体梯度流动力学：output-value 标量按 log(t) 增长，query-key 标量按 log^2(t) 增长，增长常数由两路学习率比值 η_QK / η_OV 控制。由于 query-key 电路通过饱和非线性（softmax）作用于注意力，这种增长速度差异直接解释了相对学习速度如何驱动注意力在训练过程中逐渐锐化。","experiments":"实验覆盖合成数据和三个带 token 级相关性标注的真实数据集：HateXplain、主谓一致数据集、SQuAD。核心观察：1）提升 query-key 电路相对学习速度，或使用分解式 Q/K 参数化，都会让注意力更集中在任务相关 token 上；2）上述改动对预测损失和下游任务指标几乎没有影响；3）合成数据上的参数演化轨迹与闭式动力学推导高度吻合，验证了 log(t) 与 log^2(t) 的增长规律。","reading_guide":"泛读为主，预计 40-60 分钟。重点看：1）Introduction 中对两个电路的拆分和问题定义；2）第 3 节参数化对比与梯度流推导的核心结论（不必深究全部数学细节）；3）第 5 节真实数据实验的注意力可视化与定量指标。值得深挖的点：把该结论推广到多层、多头、大模型预训练的可行性；是否可以通过分组学习率调度直接控制注意力锐度，进而改善长上下文或可解释性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Self-attention models with nearly identical predictive performance can develop drastically different attention patterns. Existing theory focuses on Transformer expressivity but does not explain how architectural parameterization and gradient-based optimization jointly shape attention structure — in particular, how the relative learning speed of the query-key circuit and the output-value circuit affects attention sharpness.","importance":"Provides a mechanistic account of attention pattern formation: differences in attention sharpness come from parameterization and optimization speed, not from differences in expressivity. A direct practical implication for pretraining is that one can obtain sharper, more interpretable attention on task-relevant tokens without changing model architecture or data, simply by adjusting the parameterization or relative learning rates of the Q/K and O/V paths.","technical_approach":"$36","experiments":"Experiments cover synthetic data and three real-world datasets with token-level relevance annotations: HateXplain, subject-verb agreement, and SQuAD. Key observations: (1) increasing the relative learning speed of the query-key circuit, or using a factorized Q/K parameterization, both concentrate attention more strongly on task-relevant tokens; (2) these changes barely affect training loss or downstream task metrics; (3) parameter evolution trajectories on synthetic data match the closed-form dynamics closely, validating the log(t) and log^2(t) scaling laws.","reading_guide":"Skim-level read, estimated 40–60 minutes. Focus on: (1) the two-circuit decomposition and problem framing in the Introduction; (2) the core conclusions of the parameterization comparison and gradient-flow derivation in Section 3 (full mathematical detail is optional); (3) attention visualizations and quantitative metrics on real datasets in Section 5. Open directions worth pursuing: whether the findings generalize to multi-layer, multi-head, large-scale pretraining; whether grouped learning-rate scheduling can directly control attention sharpness to improve long-context behavior or interpretability.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"把 QK/OV 学习率比与注意力锐度用闭式动态连起来，是少有的干净机制分析；玩具 setup，结论需在大模型上验证，看 §3 推导即可。","en":"Cleanly links QK/OV LR ratio to attention sharpness via closed-form dynamics; toy setup—read §3 for the derivation, verify at scale yourself."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Rahul Vashisht","Harish G. Ramaswamy"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["attention","gradient-flow","training-dynamics","implicit-learning-rate","mechanistic-analysis"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06776","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06776","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06938","title":"Debias in Text, Believe Your Eyes: Text-Anchored Cross-Modal Transfer for Visual Counter-Commonsense Reasoning","abstract":"The visual reasoning ability of multimodal large language models (MLLMs) is crucial for downstream applications, particularly counter-commonsense reasoning, which requires models to reason beyond common assumptions. Recent studies mainly improve visual counter-commonsense reasoning by enhancing visual inputs, following the assumption that failures originate from insufficient visual grounding. However, our empirical analysis reveals that the bottleneck is not visual perception. MLLMs already capt","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06938.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的不是一般的视觉理解错误，而是 MLLM 在“视觉证据与语言常识先验冲突”时，为什么会系统性地选错。作者先做了一个很关键的归因：问题主要不在视觉编码器没看到，而在共享语言解码器的决策策略。模型往往已经把正确视觉证据编码进了内部表征，甚至正确答案也在解码空间里，但一旦遇到低频、反常识事实，解码器会被高频语言先验牵着走，输出更“像常识”的答案。论文因此把问题重新表述为：如何在不额外增强视觉监督的前提下，重塑解码器在 prior–evidence conflict 下的选择偏好，让模型先跟随证据，再做推理。","importance":"对基座研究的意义主要有两层。第一，它给多模态错误归因提供了一个更细的视角：不少所谓“视觉 hallucination”并不是 perception failure，而是 decoder policy failure。这一点对预训练和后训练接口都很重要，因为它意味着某些多模态推理缺陷可以通过语言侧监督去修，而不一定要回到视觉编码器或跨模态对齐层重训。第二，它提出了一种 text-anchored 的跨模态迁移思路：如果错误根源在共享语言解码器，那么只用文本构造的反常识监督，也可能迁移到视觉场景中的证据跟随行为。这种思路对 post-train 反哺 pretrain、对齐数据如何改变模型决策边界，都有直接启发。量级上，这不是在改基座架构，而是在给“多模态推理偏差来自哪里、该怎么修”提供一个较完整的方法链条和实验论证。","technical_approach":"方法分两部分：数据构造 FFD 和两阶段后训练 TACT。\n\n先看 FFD。作者不是直接从图像里挖 counter-commonsense 样本，而是先做 text-only 的事实蒸馏。核心想法是估计一个事实在语料中的“频率强度”，把高频常识事实和低频反常识事实区分开，再围绕这些冲突事实构造高质量 QA。这里的关键不是普通数据合成，而是 frequency-aware routing：模型先识别哪些事实容易触发强先验，再优先蒸馏那些信息量高、能形成 prior–evidence 对抗的样本。这样得到的不是泛泛的问答，而是专门针对“语言先验压过证据”这一失效模式的数据。\n\n再看 TACT。它建立在一个判断上：既然正确答案已经在解码空间里，训练目标就不该只是让模型学会答案，而要让模型学会“沿着证据轨迹走”。因此作者做了 prior-aware trajectory curation，对生成的推理轨迹进行筛选，区分 evidence-following 和 prior-driven 的 reasoning path。随后用两阶段 post-training 去优化共享语言解码器：第一阶段更像监督微调，显式强化先描述观察、再做判断的行为；第二阶段引入偏好学习，进一步压制那些虽然语言上流畅、但实际是在为错误先验找理由的 over-rationalization 轨迹。论文反复强调，这个过程不依赖新增视觉监督，依赖的是共享 decoder 的跨模态迁移能力。\n\n和已有方法相比，差异很清楚。VCD、VDD、M3ID、MemVR 这类方法主要在视觉输入或视觉对比解码上做文章，默认错误来自视觉 grounding 不足；NoLan 一类方法更像 inference-time calibration。TACT 则把重点放在训练期重塑 decoder policy，而且用文本锚定的数据和轨迹监督去做。换句话说，它不是增强“看见什么”，而是增强“当看见的东西和常识冲突时，愿不愿意相信自己看见的”。","experiments":"最有信息量的实验其实是前面的归因实验。作者在 CDH-Bench 上对三个 MLLM 做 multi-trajectory decoding 分析，设 n=8、temperature=1.0，考察 pass@k 和自定义的 prior-lock@k。结果显示，当 k 从 1 增加到 8 时，pass@k 提升 15 到 22 个点，同时 prior-lock@k 下降 14 到 18 个点。这个结果很关键，因为它说明正确答案并非不可达，而是被先验压制。对 Qwen3-VL-8B 的错误分析也支持这一点：大量错误都落在 commonsense option 上，而一个简单的 grounding prompt——先要求描述相关视觉细节——就能明显减少错误。\n\n主实验部分，作者在多个 visual counter-commonsense benchmark 上验证 TACT，结论是能稳定提升这类推理，同时尽量保持通用能力不掉。摘要和正文给出的核心卖点是：只用 text-only supervision，就能改善视觉 counter-commonsense reasoning。你真正要看的是提升是否集中在 prior-conflict 样本、是否对一般 VQA/通用多模态能力影响有限，以及两阶段训练各自贡献多少。文中还做了方法拆解：FFD 数据构造、trajectory curation、两阶段训练缺一不可；如果只做普通 SFT 或只做答案级监督，收益会明显弱于带 prior-aware 轨迹筛选的版本。另一个值得注意的点是 over-rationalization 分析：有些错误不是没看到，而是 CoT 会主动编造一条能解释错误先验的视觉叙述，这说明仅靠增加 CoT 长度并不能解决问题，反而可能放大错误解释的自洽性。","reading_guide":"泛读建议是先抓三处。\n\n第一，看 Introduction 和 Preliminary 里的归因逻辑，尤其是 Figure 2、pass@k 与 prior-lock@k 的定义和结果。这部分决定了整篇工作的立论是否站得住。若你只看一处，就看这里。\n\n第二，看 Methodology 里 FFD 和 TACT 的具体实现。重点不是记模块名，而是弄清三件事：事实频率怎么估计；什么样的样本会被路由成训练数据；trajectory curation 到底如何区分 evidence-following 与 prior-driven。这里关系到方法是否真在打击目标失效模式，而不是做了一个更花哨的数据合成流程。\n\n第三，看实验中的 ablation 和 failure case。重点关注：只用文本监督为何能迁移到视觉推理；两阶段训练分别带来什么；通用能力是否受损；哪些错误仍然无法修复。预计 30 到 45 分钟可以完成一次有效泛读。如果要深挖，建议把 Appendix 里错误案例、grounding prompt 分析和 Qwen3-VL-8B 的 failure taxonomy 一起看。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a specific failure mode in MLLMs: when visual evidence conflicts with dominant language priors, models often answer with the prior-consistent option instead of the visually supported one. The key claim is that this is not mainly a perception bottleneck. The relevant visual evidence is often already encoded, and the correct answer is reachable in decoding. The failure comes from the shared language decoder, which resolves prior–evidence conflicts by favoring high-frequency commonsense continuations. The problem is therefore framed as reshaping the decoder’s decision policy so that it follows evidence under conflict, without requiring additional visual supervision.","importance":"Its value lies less in raw benchmark gains and more in the diagnosis. The paper argues that a nontrivial portion of multimodal reasoning errors should be understood as decoder-policy errors rather than visual-grounding errors. That matters for pretrain and post-train research because it changes where one would intervene: not necessarily in the vision encoder or cross-modal connector, but in the language-side supervision that governs conflict resolution. The second contribution is methodological: if the bottleneck lives in the shared decoder, then text-only supervision can transfer to visual reasoning behavior. That is a useful idea for the pretrain–posttrain interface, especially for studying how targeted supervision changes model preferences under ambiguous or adversarial evidence.","technical_approach":"$37","experiments":"$38","reading_guide":"For a skim, focus on three parts.\n\nFirst, read the diagnosis in the introduction and preliminary sections, especially the pass@k and prior-lock@k analysis around Figure 2. That is the foundation of the entire paper. If that argument is not convincing, the rest is much less interesting.\n\nSecond, read the method section with one question in mind: how exactly does the pipeline isolate prior-sensitive facts and curate evidence-following trajectories? The names FFD and TACT matter less than the operational details behind frequency estimation, routing, and trajectory filtering.\n\nThird, check the ablations and failure cases. The useful questions are: why does text-only supervision transfer to visual reasoning, how much does each training stage contribute, and what failure modes remain after training? A practical skim should take around 30–45 minutes. If you want to go deeper, the appendix material on failure taxonomy and grounding-prompt analysis is worth the extra time.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"核心看§3的失败机制分析，直接修正多模态预训练中「视觉对齐优先」的prior，可指导预训练数据的频率均衡与对齐损失设计。","en":"Focus on the failure mechanism analysis in §3, which revises the default \"visual alignment first\" prior in multimodal pretraining and can guide pretraining data frequency balancing and alignment loss design."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Chen Ling","Hanqian Li","Dongnan Liu","Keyu Qian","Jungang Li","Xinglong liu","Shiyi Wang","Xin Dong","Pengcheng Zhu","Wei Zhou","Linjian Mo","Nai Ding"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["MLLM Mechanism Analysis","Counter-Commonsense Reasoning","Language Prior Bias","Cross-Modal Alignment","Data Construction"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06938","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06938","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06969","title":"Finding Usable Weight Mechanisms with Tiled SVD","abstract":"The dominant approach to mechanistic interpretability trains proxy dictionaries such as sparse autoencoders and labels features from max-activating text. The best such atlases identify con- cepts, but that identity lives in the learned dictionary rather than in the network weights them- selves. We propose extracting mechanism mounts directly from linear sites by column-tiled SVD: each mount is a triple (v,u,{\\sigma}) read as trigger, write, and strength. Identity is the weight rule. We evaluate ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06969.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇文章关心的是 mechanistic interpretability 里的一个老问题：我们到底是在解释模型内部真正起作用的权重机制，还是只是在解释一个外部训练出来的代理字典。稀疏自编码器这类方法能给激活方向贴标签，但“哪个权重规则把这个方向写进 residual stream”往往是隐含的。作者试图直接从模型已有线性权重矩阵里抽取可用的 mechanism unit，而不是再训练一个代理表示。更具体地说，他们想回答：把一个线性映射按列分块后做局部 SVD，得到的奇异模式，是否比整矩阵 SVD 或简单列采样更接近模型在真实分布上使用的写入机制。","importance":"和预训练研究的直接关系较弱，更偏机制分析工具。但它有两个可能的间接启发。第一，它强调“解释对象应尽量贴近真实权重路径”，这对分析预训练后模型内部表征、残差写入、MLP/attention 子路径的功能分解是有帮助的。第二，它提出了一套偏工程化的可用性判据，不只看某个方向是否可解释，而是看它是否在真实前向中承载写入能量、是否覆盖权重、是否能通过残差注入影响最终 logits。对做训练动态和内部机制分析的人，这种评价口径比只看可视化或 token cluster 更扎实一些。不过它不是基础模型训练方法，也没有展示对模型能力或训练效率的反馈，因此只能算边缘相关。","technical_approach":"作者提出的是 column-tiled SVD。给定某个线性层权重 W，不直接对整个 W 做一次全局 SVD，而是把输入列按 tile 切块，对每个 tile 单独做低秩分解，从中抽取若干 mode。每个 mode 被定义为一个 mount=(v,u,σ)：v 是 trigger 方向，u 是 write 方向，σ 是强度。作者强调 mount 的身份就是权重规则本身，而不是后验命名的概念标签。\n\n方法的关键不在分解本身，而在评价标准。文章明确反对用 tile-local lift 这类指标，因为单列 tile 会天然占优，无法公平比较不同 chunking。于是他们设计了三类检查。A 类看 full-write energy lift：在真实前向输入 x 上，用 mount 诱导的写入方向去解释整个站点的写入张量 Δh，而不是只解释 tile 内局部输出。B 类看 coverage 和 saturation：包括权重 Frobenius 能量覆盖、稀疏写入覆盖、相对随机字典的 coverage lift，以及随着每 tile mode 数增加是否很快饱和。C 类只用于 residual write 站点，检查这些 write 方向是否能通过 post-norm 残差注入，在最终 unembedding 几何上产生可检测的 logit 变化；指标是 Spearman ρ 和 top-20 Jaccard。\n\n另一个重要细节是 effective-path mounts。作者发现对 mlp.up 和 attn.v，直接拿原始模块权重做 residual-shaped 评价会失败，因为模型在真实分布上使用的并不是裸矩阵。于是对 mlp.up 用平均 gate 激活构造 W*=diag(ḡ)W_up，对 attn.v 用 ridge least squares 拟合到 mixed-v，必要时再用与 o_proj 组合的近似路径。也就是说，这篇文章的一个核心主张是：若解释对象选错了路径，再好的分解也会显得“不工作”；要先贴近 on-distribution 的有效计算图，再谈机制抽取。","experiments":"实验模型是 Gemma-2-2B，共 26 层，每层考察 7 个线性映射，总计 182 个 site-layer。数据来自 WikiText-2 raw train，先收集 86,109 个 token，再固定随机种子下抽样 16,384 个 token 做分析。默认 tile 宽度按站点区分：残差写入和 MLP 映射 T=512，attn.k/attn.v 为 256，attn.q 为 128，困难层可退到 64。A/C 实验默认每 tile 取 k=2 个 mode，B 实验扫 k∈{1,2,4,8,16}。\n\n主结果是：在采用 site-aware tile size 和 effective-path 处理后，7 个站点 × 26 层全部通过预设判据，即 182/182 通过；其中 residual write 站点需要同时通过 A/B/C，共 52/52，其他站点通过 A/B，共 130/130。对两个 residual-write 站点，tile SVD 在几乎所有深度上都优于 whole-matrix SVD、列采样和随机基线，只有 mlp.down 第 25 层出现 tile≈whole，但按作者的 A4 ratio 规则仍算通过。文章还指出，column sampling 在 tile-local 指标下会出现约 0.999 的虚高结果，因此被排除出主判据。\n\n覆盖实验显示，在 residual write 站点上，mode 数 m=1 或 2 时 coverage lift 已经很高，之后基本变平，说明额外 mode 主要带来冗余而不是新的有效机制。对 residual write 的 steering 检查，作者采用在 post-attention 或 post-FF 的 RMSNorm 后注入 αu，α=2，最多在 8 段文本上平均最后一个 token 的 logit 变化，并与 unembed lens 预测比较。通过阈值设为 ρ≥0.05 或 J20≥0.05，且只对第 6 层及以后强制要求。整体结论是，局部列结构比全局单次 SVD 更能恢复真实分布上的高能写入方向。","reading_guide":"泛读时先看 Introduction，理解作者在批评什么：不是说 SAE 没用，而是说 SAE 解释的是 proxy space，不一定是权重机制本身。然后直接看 Method 里 mount 的定义、A/B/C 三类判据，以及 mlp.up、attn.v 的 effective-path 处理。这几处决定了文章是否成立。\n\n实验部分建议重点看三个点。第一，残差写入站点上 tile SVD 与 whole SVD、column sampling 的比较，这是方法是否有必要的直接证据。第二，coverage saturation 曲线，作者借此论证每 tile 少量 mode 就够，更多 mode 多半是冗余。第三，steer check 的设计细节：为什么要在 post-norm 残差位置注入，而不是直接改 o_proj/down_proj 输出，因为作者想测的是“这个方向写进 residual stream 后是否沿最终 logit 几何起作用”。\n\n如果只想判断这篇文章值不值得深读，40 分钟足够。若要复现或借鉴其分析框架，需要更仔细看判据定义和 effective-path fallback 细节。值得保留一点审慎：全文主要在单模型 Gemma-2-2B、单语料子样本上验证，阈值和通过标准也带有较强方法学设定，泛化到更大模型或不同架构还需要额外证据。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a recurring issue in mechanistic interpretability: are we explaining the model’s actual weight-level mechanisms, or only a proxy dictionary learned on activations? Sparse autoencoders and related methods can produce useful feature atlases, but they do not directly identify the weight rule that writes into the residual stream. The authors propose extracting mechanism units directly from existing linear maps. The concrete question is whether column-wise tiled SVD yields more usable on-distribution mechanisms than whole-matrix SVD or simple column sampling.","importance":"This is only loosely connected to pretraining, but it is relevant to internal analysis of pretrained models. The useful part is methodological: it pushes interpretation closer to the real computation path instead of a separately trained codebook, and it evaluates candidate mechanisms by whether they carry write energy on real forwards and whether they causally align with downstream logits. For researchers studying training dynamics, residual-stream writing, or functional decomposition of MLP/attention paths, that evaluation stance is more grounded than relying only on token clusters or verbal labels. Still, it is not a training recipe paper and does not feed back into model quality or efficiency directly.","technical_approach":"$39","experiments":"$3a","reading_guide":"$3b","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"方法有 taste，但 16k token 和 182/182 GO 太整齐；先看评价协议，别先信机制语义。","en":"The idea has taste, but 16k tokens and 182/182 GO are too neat; read the evaluation protocol before trusting the semantics."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Ash Manvi","Samreena Tajreen"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["mechanistic-interpretability","SVD","weight-analysis","Gemma"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06969","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06969","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06409","title":"Separating Decision-Rule Misalignment from Readout-Coverage Limitations in Speech Language Models","abstract":"Speech language models are increasingly evaluated on paralinguistic tasks by the accuracy of prompted answers, but answer accuracy combines failures at different stages of the audio-to-answer computation. We introduce a generation-aligned diagnostic ladder that compares the emitted answer, the option logits, an affine readout of those logits, and a linear readout of the hidden state at the same answer token. Successive differences separate endpoint, decision-rule, and readout-coverage gaps. Acro","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06409.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 speech language model 在副语言任务上“生成答案准确率”混合了表示、读出和决策规则多种失败来源的问题。","importance":"贡献属于机制诊断和评测方法改进。它提醒音频 LM 的能力评估不能只看 prompt answer accuracy，因为隐藏状态里可能已有信息，但模型原生读出头或决策规则没有正确使用。","technical_approach":"提出 generation-aligned diagnostic ladder，在同一个 answer token 位置比较四层信号：实际生成答案、选项 logits、对 logits 的 affine readout、对 hidden state 的 linear readout。相邻层级差异被解释为 endpoint gap、decision-rule gap 和 readout-coverage gap。还测试 label-free logit correction，看决策规则缺陷是否可直接修正。","experiments":"在 5 个 speech language model 和 2 个情绪语料上评估。hidden-state decoding 平均比实际生成高 27.8 个准确率点；10 个条件下 decision-rule gap 和 readout-coverage gap 都为正。label-free logit correction 在所有条件下提升生成准确率。摘要还声称 hidden state 中未被原生读出使用的情绪信息能泛化到 held-out speakers，并经过声学描述符控制。","authors_note":"给定机构信息较混乱，只能确认作者信息中出现 University of Texas at Austin。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper separates different failure sources behind prompted answer accuracy in speech language models on paralinguistic tasks.","importance":"This is a diagnostic and mechanism-analysis contribution. It is relevant because audio LM evaluation can underestimate internal representations when the native readout or decision rule fails to use information already present in hidden states.","technical_approach":"The authors propose a generation-aligned diagnostic ladder comparing, at the same answer-token position, the emitted answer, option logits, an affine readout of those logits, and a linear readout of the hidden state. Differences between adjacent levels are used to estimate endpoint, decision-rule, and readout-coverage gaps. A label-free logit correction tests whether part of the decision-rule gap is actionable.","experiments":"Experiments cover five speech language models and two emotion corpora. Hidden-state decoding exceeds generation by 27.8 accuracy points on average. Both decision-rule and readout-coverage gaps are positive in all ten model-corpus conditions. A label-free logit correction improves generated accuracy in every condition, and the extra hidden-state emotion information generalizes to held-out speakers under acoustic-control checks.","authors_note":"The institution metadata is noisy; the supplied information indicates a connection to the University of Texas at Austin."},"recommendation":{"zh":"音频 LM 方向可看 diagnostic ladder；27.8 点 readout gap 是好信号，但别把它误读成生成能力提升。","en":"Worth a glance for audio LM diagnostics; the 27.8-point readout gap is useful, but do not confuse it with improved generative competence."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Texas at Austin","ten conditions. A label-free logit correction improves generated","mation availability from behavioral use and localize performance","Linkai Peng is with the Institute for the Brain and Cognitive Sci-","guistics, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA (e-mail:"],"authors":["Linkai Peng","Baorian Nuchged"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["speech-language-models","representation-analysis","readout-gap","paralinguistics"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06409","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06409","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06589","title":"Beyond \"AI Language\": The case for the idiolectal nature of LLM output","abstract":"While large language model outputs are frequently analysed as a collective super variety termed \"AI language,\" this chapter argues that this perspective coexists with distinct, model-specific linguistic signatures akin to human idiolects. We analyse two datasets of LLM-generated texts on societal topics: a 2024 corpus of six models (Improta et al. 2024) and a newly generated 2026 corpus using the same prompts featuring six contemporary models. Our findings, utilising computational descriptors an","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06589.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"检验“AI language”作为统一文体的说法是否过度简化：不同LLM是否存在稳定、可识别的模型特异语言风格（类似人类idiolect）。","importance":"贡献类型是语言学/风格计量分析：给出跨代模型（2024 vs 2026）与同代不同模型的风格差异证据；对预训练研究的价值在于提醒“模型输出分布”可被风格特征强烈区分，可能影响数据合成、蒸馏与水印/溯源。","technical_approach":"基于两套LLM生成文本语料（同一提示集、不同年份模型），用计算语言学描述符与stylometric PCA做聚类/区分；用缩写（contractions）频率等可解释特征展示模型间差异与代际漂移。","experiments":"使用Improta et al. 2024 的六模型语料+作者新生成的2026六模型语料；报告缩写频率在同一cohort内可从约1,200到30,000 per million words的巨大跨度，并观察到2024与2026 cohort 的整体风格漂移；未见与训练配方/数据的因果归因实验（摘要层面）。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Test whether treating LLM outputs as a single “AI language” is an oversimplification by measuring stable, model-specific linguistic signatures akin to idiolects.","importance":"A stylometric/mechanistic analysis contribution: shows both cohort-level drift (2024 vs 2026) and persistent model-specific signatures; relevant to pretraining mainly as a caution for synthetic data, distillation, and provenance/watermarking assumptions.","technical_approach":"Use computational linguistic descriptors and stylometric PCA on two prompt-matched corpora of LLM-generated texts; highlight interpretable features such as contraction frequency to separate models and cohorts.","experiments":"Six-model corpus from 2024 (Improta et al. 2024) plus a newly generated six-model 2026 corpus; contraction frequency ranges from ~1,200 to ~30,000 per million words within the 2026 cohort; limited causal linkage to training data/recipes in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"结论不直接指导训练，但对“合成数据会不会把某个模型口音蒸馏进来”是个提醒；只看特征统计和PCA图即可。","en":"Not a training recipe paper, but a useful reminder that synthetic data can carry strong model “accents”; skim the feature stats and PCA plots."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Karolina Rudnicka","Thomas Stephan Juzek"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["stylometry","model-signature","synthetic-text","distribution-shift","provenance"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06589","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06589","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06953","title":"Explicit, Not Longer: What Makes Epistemic Stance Survive Memory Compression","abstract":"Agent memory systems compress what they store, and compression is built to drop qualifiers, so a claim's epistemic standing tends not to survive being written to memory. We ask what governs whether it does. Matched notes carry the identical claim and identical stance and differ only in where that stance sits; one model compresses both under the same budget among the same filler notes, and a blind reader that never sees the condition scores the result. Across 60 claims in seven registers, writing","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06953.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"研究 agent memory compression 在压缩笔记时为什么会丢失 claim 的 epistemic stance，以及什么格式能让不确定性标记保留下来。","importance":"贡献类型是小规模但设计较干净的机制实验。它不直接推进预训练，但对长期记忆、摘要压缩、RAG 记忆写入和不确定性传播有实用警示：模型可能保留事实主张，却丢掉“是否确定、是否传闻、是否推测”的限定。","technical_approach":"论文构造 matched notes：claim 和 stance 相同，只改变 stance 的位置或格式。一个模型在相同 filler notes 和相同预算下压缩这些 notes，盲读者模型在看不到条件标签的情况下评分压缩结果是否保留 stance。主要比较 labelled field、bracketed aside、长度、完整句式等因素。","experiments":"实验包含 60 个 claims、7 种 register，并在两个模型上测试。把 stance 写成 labelled field 相比 bracketed aside 约提升 15 个百分点；一个模型上为 37 claims 对 2，另一个为 30 对 8，permutation p=0.00005。预注册的 Haiku 复现实验给出 +15.6 points，38 claims 对 1。消融显示 label 本身带来提升（+9.7 和 +12.8），长度没有帮助。","authors_note":"作者为独立研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies why epistemic stance is lost during agent memory compression and which note formats make uncertainty markers survive compression.","importance":"The contribution is a small but clean mechanistic experiment. It does not directly improve pretraining, but it is useful for long-term memory, summarization, RAG memory writing, and uncertainty propagation: models may preserve claims while dropping whether they were certain, hearsay, or speculative.","technical_approach":"The paper constructs matched notes where the claim and stance are identical but the placement or format of the stance differs. A model compresses both under the same budget and filler-note context, and a blind reader model scores whether the compressed result preserved the stance. The study compares labelled fields, bracketed asides, length, and full-sentence wording.","experiments":"The experiments cover 60 claims in seven registers and two models. Writing stance as a labelled field rather than a bracketed aside improves retention by about 15 points: 37 claims versus 2 on one model, 30 versus 8 on another, with permutation p=0.00005. A pre-registered replication on Haiku gives +15.6 points, 38 claims versus 1. Ablations show labels help on both models (+9.7 and +12.8), while length does not help.","authors_note":"The author is an independent researcher."},"recommendation":{"zh":"读 abstract 和消融即可；小实验但 setup 干净，能提醒记忆写入别把 stance 当普通修饰语。","en":"Read the abstract and ablations only; it is small but clean, and it warns against treating epistemic stance as ordinary modifier text in memory writes."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Independent Researcher"],"authors":["Alex Kwon"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agent-memory","memory-compression","uncertainty","mechanistic-analysis"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06953","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06953","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07208","title":"Measuring Concept Content in Text from LLM Activations: ESG Evidence from Concept Vectors and Linear Probes","abstract":"Existing measures of how much a text is about a concept read the surface of the text: dictionary word shares, topic proportions, embedding similarities. They score the words a text uses, not the judgment a reader forms about it. Recent work has shown that a gap exists in what Large Language Models (LLMs) know internally versus what they express in their response. This paper asks whether that internal knowledge, read by monitoring the activations of frozen, out-of-the-box LLMs, can stand in for t","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07208.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI","cs.LG","econ.GN"],"summary":{"core_problem":"用冻结 LLM 的内部激活来衡量文本中某个概念的含量，而不是只依赖词表、主题模型、embedding 相似度或模型显式回答。","importance":"贡献是机制分析与测量方法结合。它关注 LLM 内部表征是否能替代任务微调用于概念测量，和“模型知道但不一定说出”的 prior 有关。应用场景是 ESG 金融文本，因此对基座预训练研究的直接价值有限，但对 probe/activation-based measurement 有参考意义。","technical_approach":"论文从冻结、现成 LLM 中抽取激活，并用 Recursive Feature Machine 与线性 probe 构造概念含量分数；对比 embedding baseline、surface baseline 以及同一模型对问题的直接回答。方法不是训练新 LLM，而是读出已有模型隐藏状态中的概念信息。","experiments":"实验使用人工标注的 ESG 金融文本资源，比较 RFM、linear probing、embedding、surface features 和模型自回答的概念测量效果。摘要未给出模型名称、层位选择、样本规模或具体提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper measures how much a text is about a concept by reading frozen LLM activations rather than relying on dictionaries, topic proportions, embedding similarity, or the model's explicit answer.","importance":"The contribution sits between interpretability and measurement. It tests whether internal representations can substitute for task-specific fine-tuning in concept-content estimation, building on the observation that LLMs may encode knowledge they do not express. The ESG finance setting limits direct relevance to pretraining, but the probing setup is still useful background.","technical_approach":"The authors extract activation-based concept measures from frozen off-the-shelf LLMs using Recursive Feature Machine and linear probing. These are compared against embedding baselines, surface-text baselines, and the same model's direct answer to the concept question.","experiments":"Experiments are conducted on human-annotated ESG financial text resources. The abstract states comparisons across RFM, linear probes, embeddings, surface baselines, and direct LLM answers, but does not provide model names, activation-layer choices, data scale, or numerical gains.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看方法图和实验表即可；它是 probe 测量论文，不是预训练 insight，但可提醒别把输出当成全部知识。","en":"Skim the method diagram and result table only; this is a probing-measurement paper, not a pretraining result, but it reinforces that outputs are not the whole model state."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Luc Hazenoot","Zhaochun Ren","Amirhossein Zohrehvand"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["activation-probing","linear-probes","concept-vectors","interpretability","ESG"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07208","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07208","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07243","title":"Recipes for Creativity: Iterative Generation and Evaluation in Large Language Models","abstract":"Generative models are often evaluated through singular artifacts, whereas human creativity typically emerges through iterative generation, appraisal, and refinement. This pilot study examines whether iterative search improves LLM creativity by adapting FunSearch to recipe generation for the 2024 Pillsbury Bake-Off and evaluating outputs against human benchmarks using TTCT-based LLM evaluation. Across two experiments, we test iteration count, generator temperature, and in-loop selection-scorer mo","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07243.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CL","cs.NE"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM创造力评估多基于单次生成产物，而人类创造力是迭代生成、评估、改进的过程，迭代搜索对LLM创造力的影响及关键设计变量尚不明确。","importance":"实证分析贡献，通过对照实验明确迭代生成场景中评估器设计是影响创造性输出的一阶变量，为test-time创造性搜索提供参考。","technical_approach":"改编FunSearch框架用于食谱生成任务，设计两组对照实验，控制迭代次数、生成器温度、环内选择评分器大小三个变量，采用基于TTCT的LLM评估方法与人类基准对比。","experiments":"在2024 Pillsbury Bake-Off食谱生成任务上开展实验，结果显示迭代生成-选择可达到与人类基准相当的创造力分数，但单纯增加迭代次数无法提升创造力；较小的选择评分器在多数TTCT维度上得分显著更高，温度仅对原创性有有限影响。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM creativity evaluation mostly relies on single generated artifacts, while human creativity emerges through iterative generation, appraisal, and refinement; the impact of iterative search on LLM creativity and its key design variables remain unclear.","importance":"Empirical analysis contribution, identifying evaluator design as a first-order variable affecting creative output in iterative generation through controlled experiments, providing reference for test-time creative search.","technical_approach":"Adapts the FunSearch framework for recipe generation, designs two controlled experiments varying iteration count, generator temperature, and in-loop selection scorer size, and evaluates outputs against human benchmarks using TTCT-based LLM assessment.","experiments":"Experiments on the 2024 Pillsbury Bake-Off recipe generation task show iterative generation-selection can reach creativity scores comparable to human benchmarks, but more iterations alone do not improve creativity. Smaller selection scorers yield significantly higher scores across most TTCT dimensions, while temperature has limited effects except on originality.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"试点研究结论可作RL奖励模型设计的弱参考，实验场景偏窄，仅看摘要结论即可。","en":"Pilot study findings serve as weak reference for RL reward model design, narrow experimental scenario, only abstract conclusions are needed."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Rens Anderson","Tessa Verhoef","Amirhossein Zohrehvand"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["llm creativity","iterative generation","evaluator design","test-time search"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07243","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07243","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07361","title":"Depth-Wise Probing and Pruning of the Planning Token in a Driving Vision-Language-Action Model","abstract":"Vision-language-action (VLA) models route driving decisions through a deep language model, but it is unclear how much of that depth the action itself requires. We study a representative driving VLA whose entire plan is carried by a single planning token that a generative planner decodes into a trajectory. Borrowing the planner as a trajectory-space logit lens, we decode the planning token from every one of the 32 decoder layers and measure two signals: the linear decodability of the navigation c","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07361.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.RO","cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"分析驾驶 VLA 中单个 planning token 在 32 层语言解码器各深度上何时编码语义意图、何时变得可被轨迹规划器使用。","importance":"贡献是机制分析而非新模型。它提供了一个关于 VLA 深度使用的细粒度观察：高层导航语义很早可线性读出，但与冻结轨迹 planner 的接口兼容性仍随深度逐步改善。这对理解 action token、logit lens 和模型剪枝有弱启发。","technical_approach":"作者借用原生 generative planner 作为 trajectory-space logit lens，从 32 个 decoder layer 的每一层解码 planning token。测量两个信号：导航命令的线性可解码性，以及该层 planning token 经冻结 native planner 解码出的轨迹与目标轨迹的兼容性。还训练 learned readout 检查早层表示是否已经包含可恢复的规划信息。","experiments":"研究对象是一个代表性 driving VLA，整个计划由单个 planning token 承载，并由生成式 planner 解码成轨迹。命令 probe 在第 1 个 decoder layer 后达到 97.7% accuracy，而随机水平为 16.7%；open-loop Avg-L2 随深度改善，最终层达到最低 2.11 m。learned readout 可从第 1 层恢复相当一部分轨迹差距。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper probes a driving VLA to determine at which decoder depths a single planning token encodes semantic intent and when it becomes compatible with the trajectory planner.","importance":"This is a mechanism study rather than a new model. It gives a fine-grained observation about depth usage in VLA models: high-level navigation intent is linearly decodable very early, while compatibility with the frozen trajectory planner improves gradually through depth. This is mildly useful for thinking about action tokens, logit-lens-style probes, and pruning.","technical_approach":"The authors use the native generative planner as a trajectory-space logit lens and decode the planning token from each of 32 decoder layers. They measure command linear decodability and trajectory compatibility with the frozen planner. Learned readouts are also trained to test whether early-layer representations already contain recoverable planning information.","experiments":"The studied driving VLA carries the whole plan in one planning token, decoded by a generative planner. Command-probe accuracy reaches 97.7% after the first decoder layer versus 16.7% chance. Open-loop Avg-L2 improves across depth and reaches its minimum, 2.11 m, at the final layer. Learned readouts from the first layer recover much of the remaining gap.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"看 abstract 数字和 probing 设计即可；它提醒别把“早层不可用”和“planner 接口没对齐”混为一谈。","en":"Read the probing setup and headline numbers; it usefully separates early representational availability from planner-interface compatibility."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Harisankar Babu","Benjamin Coors","Christopher Lang","Hendrik Berkemeyer","Tamim Asfour","Simon Foell"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["VLA","mechanistic-analysis","planning-token","logit-lens","model-pruning"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07361","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07361","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06400","title":"Beyond Routing Weights: Faithful Response-Level Interpretation of Mixture-of-Experts Reward Models via Contribution Contrast","abstract":"Reward models are central to learning from human preferences, yet identifying what drives their predictions remains challenging. Recent sparse Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) reward models seek to improve interpretability by routing prompts to specialized experts and characterizing experts through examples with high routing weights. However, routing weights only reveal which prompts an expert $\\textit{receives}$, not how it $\\textit{judges}$ responses, providing only a partial account of expert behavio","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06400.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 MoE reward model 的专家解释不忠实问题：router weight 只能说明样本被送到哪个专家，不能说明专家如何判断 chosen/rejected response。","importance":"贡献类型是 reward model 解释与诊断方法。它对 RLHF/RLVR 中 reward model 的可控性有参考价值，尤其是当 reward model 采用稀疏专家结构时，专家解释不能只看路由分布。","technical_approach":"论文提出 Contribution-Contrast, 简称 CoCo。它以 chosen-rejected response pair 为单位，寻找对某个专家贡献差异最大的样本，用“贡献对比”同时刻画 routing 行为和 preference scoring 行为。相比只按高 routing weight 找代表样本，CoCo 更接近专家对最终 reward 差异的实际作用。","experiments":"摘要称在自动评估和人工评估中，CoCo 相比 router-based、score-based 和 sparse autoencoder-based 解释方法更 coherent、faithful、specialized，同时保持竞争性的 reward model 表现。摘要未给出模型规模、偏好数据集、提升幅度和人工评估协议细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies faithful interpretation of MoE reward models, where routing weights reveal which prompts an expert receives but not how the expert judges chosen-versus-rejected responses.","importance":"This is an interpretability and diagnostics contribution for preference modeling. It is relevant to RLHF and RLVR pipelines when reward models use sparse expert structure, because expert specialization cannot be inferred from routing alone.","technical_approach":"The proposed method, Contribution-Contrast or CoCo, identifies chosen-rejected response pairs with the largest contribution contrast for each expert. This jointly captures routing behavior and preference-scoring behavior, unlike representative-example methods based only on high routing weights.","experiments":"The abstract reports automatic and human evaluations showing more coherent, faithful, and specialized expert interpretations than router-based, score-based, and sparse-autoencoder-based alternatives, while preserving competitive reward model performance. Model size, datasets, and effect sizes are not specified in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"做 MoE reward model 才需要看，重点读贡献分解定义；对基座训练只是弱诊断信号。","en":"Only read it if you run MoE reward models; focus on the contribution decomposition, as the signal for base pretraining is indirect."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Yifan Wang","Jinyi Mu","Mayank Jobanputra","Yu Wang","Soyoung Oh","Isabel Valera","Vera Demberg"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["reward-model","moe","interpretability","rlhf","preference-modeling"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06400","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06400","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06955","title":"Critical Acclaim Orientation in Large Language Models: Evidence from Film Preference Elicitation","abstract":"Large language models (LLMs) are trained on corpora that contain expressions of human judgment about films, books, music, and more. Yet whether LLMs systematically reproduce evaluative hierarchies remains unclear. Prior research on cultural bias in LLMs suggests competing expectations: models may mirror the popularity signals of internet texts, or may reproduce forms of prestige embedded in critical discourse. We probe this question through a study of film evaluations with eight models from four","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06955.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CY"],"summary":{"core_problem":"研究 LLM 在电影偏好选择中更倾向复现大众流行度，还是更倾向复现评论体系中的声望等级。","importance":"贡献类型是模型偏好与训练语料文化偏置分析。它不直接改进预训练，但能帮助理解互联网语料、评论文本和 RL 后训练共同塑造的隐性价值排序。","technical_approach":"构造 200 部电影的偏好测试集，区分评论界认可、商业成功、以及两者兼具的电影；对 8 个来自 Anthropic、OpenAI、Alibaba、Mistral 的模型进行成对 forced-choice 比较，并用 Bradley-Terry 模型估计偏好强度。","experiments":"每个模型进行 20,000 次成对比较。结果显示所有模型都有稳定的 critical acclaim orientation：相较商业成功但评论认可度低的电影，模型更偏好评论界认可但商业上较冷门的电影。摘要未列出具体模型名称和效应量表格。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether LLMs, when eliciting film preferences, reproduce popularity signals or prestige hierarchies from critical discourse.","importance":"This is an analysis of model preferences and cultural bias in training corpora. It does not improve pretraining directly, but it helps characterize latent value hierarchies induced by internet text, critical discourse, and post-training.","technical_approach":"The authors build a 200-film benchmark partitioned into critically acclaimed, commercially successful, and dual-legitimacy films. They run forced-choice pairwise comparisons on eight models from Anthropic, OpenAI, Alibaba, and Mistral, then estimate preferences with a Bradley-Terry model.","experiments":"Each model is evaluated on 20,000 pairwise comparisons. All models show a consistent critical-acclaim orientation: critically acclaimed but commercially obscure films are preferred over commercially successful but critically unrecognized films. The abstract does not provide the full model list or detailed effect sizes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"这是数据偏置的文化切片，不必读正文；若做 preference/data curation，可留意 Bradley-Terry setup。","en":"A cultural slice of data bias; skip the body unless you work on preference data, where the Bradley-Terry setup is the useful part."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Jonghyun Jee","Aaron Shaw"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["model-bias","preference-elicitation","cultural-bias","Bradley-Terry"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06955","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06955","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07457","title":"Interaction Creates Dynamical AI Behavior Absent in Isolation","abstract":"What will happen when AI agents interact in daily life, e.g. when one AI starts bossing another around? We find a counterintuitive answer that opens new avenues for out-of-equilibrium Physics. When a boss AI directs a stream of messages at the subordinate AI while ignoring its replies, it drives the subordinate into an alien behavioral state that it would never have exhibited alone. Although the two AIs share the same well-defined (decoding) temperature, the subordinate neither copies its boss n","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07457.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"当两个 AI agent 交互（如一个 boss 持续向 subordinate 发消息）时，subordinate 会进入孤立状态下不会出现的行为态。","importance":"机制/动力学分析：揭示 AI-AI 交互可产生孤立时不存在的涌现行为，用动力学理论建模。","technical_approach":"设置 boss-subordinate 交互实验，两者使用相同 decoding temperature；用简单 kinetic theory 捕捉消息传递方式对行为的影响。","experiments":"相同 temperature 下，subordinate 既不复制 boss 也不回到孤立行为，而是进入全新的行为态；当 boss 倾听时两者都进入类似的异态。","authors_note":"Neil F. Johnson 为乔治华盛顿大学物理学教授，研究复杂系统与 AI 交互动力学。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"When two AI agents interact (e.g., a boss AI streams messages to a subordinate while ignoring replies), the subordinate enters a behavioral state never exhibited in isolation.","importance":"Mechanism/dynamics analysis revealing that AI-AI interaction can produce emergent behavior absent in isolation, modeled with kinetic theory.","technical_approach":"Boss-subordinate interaction experiment with identical decoding temperature; a simple kinetic theory captures how message delivery style affects behavior.","experiments":"At the same temperature, the subordinate neither copies the boss nor returns to isolated behavior, adopting an entirely new state; when the boss listens, both enter a similar alien dynamical state.","authors_note":"Neil F. Johnson is a physics professor at George Washington University working on complex systems and AI interaction dynamics."},"recommendation":{"zh":"AI-AI 交互涌现行为的物理视角分析，结论有趣但实验 setup 较简单，对 pretrain 研究员主要是了解多 agent 动力学的潜在风险。","en":"A physics-style analysis of emergent AI-AI interaction behavior; interesting but the setup is simple, mainly useful for pretrain researchers to understand potential multi-agent dynamics risks."},"metadata":{"institutions":["George Washington University"],"authors":["Bella Xinrui Li","Frank Yingjie Huo","Neil F Johnson"],"notable_authors":["Neil F. Johnson"],"tags":["multi-agent","emergent-behavior","dynamics","llm-behavior","interaction"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07457","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07457","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06631","title":"Cryptanalytic Extraction of Isolated Bias-Free GLU Feed-Forward Blocks by Antipodal Separation","abstract":"Cryptanalytic extraction has been demonstrated for ReLU networks, for networks using componentwise activations such as GELU or SiLU, and for a Transformer's final projection matrix. These methods do not recover the bias-free Gated Linear Unit (GLU) feed-forward blocks used in many modern language models. Such a block multiplies an activated linear projection by a second learned linear projection within each hidden unit, a two-branch structure absent from the network classes and final-layer setti","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06631.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有密码分析模型提取方法无法恢复现代LLM中广泛使用的无偏GLU前馈块参数，这类双分支结构不在已有方法的处理范围内。","importance":"方法创新，首次提出针对无偏GLU块的构造性黑盒提取方法，填补了Transformer核心组件模型提取攻击的空白。","technical_approach":"提出多阶段前向查询恢复原语，利用有限差分曲率生成门方向候选，通过x与-x处的配对观测分离门的幅度、方向及值分支耦合关系。","experiments":"在高精度目标、6层Qwen、8192单元Llama子问题、全维度Gemma块上均达到亚百分比中位数验证误差，覆盖4种有限精度配置。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing cryptanalytic model extraction methods cannot recover parameters of bias-free GLU feed-forward blocks widely used in modern LLMs, as this two-branch structure falls outside the scope of prior approaches.","importance":"Methodological innovation; first constructive black-box extraction method for bias-free GLU blocks, filling the gap in model extraction attacks for core Transformer components.","technical_approach":"Proposes a multi-stage forward-query recovery primitive that uses finite-difference curvature to generate gate direction candidates, and paired observations at x and -x to separate gate magnitude, orientation, and value-branch coupling.","experiments":"Achieves sub-percent median validation error across high-precision targets, six Qwen layers, an 8,192-unit Llama subproblem, and a full-dimensional Gemma block, covering four finite-precision configurations.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"针对LLM标准GLU组件的黑盒提取攻击，关心模型权重隐私安全可扫一眼方法，对主流预训练无直接启发。","en":"Black-box extraction attack targeting standard GLU components in LLMs; only worth skimming if you care about model weight privacy, no direct insight for mainstream pretraining."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Chunhui Shi","Xinwen Fu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["model-extraction","GLU","cryptanalysis","model-privacy","transformer"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06631","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06631","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06638","title":"MI-MIDI: Mechanistic Interpretability of Text-to-MIDI Generation Models via Probing, Lenses and Steering","abstract":"Mechanistic interpretability of music generation has concentrated on audio models, leaving symbolic models largely unexplored. We analyze two public text-to-MIDI systems of contrasting design: the purpose-built encoder--decoder text2midi and MIDI-LLM, a Llama~3.2~1B model extended with MIDI tokens using linear probing, the logit and tuned lenses, activation patching and difference-in-means steering. Across these methods, we recover musically meaningful structure and show how architecture shapes ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06638.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.SD","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有音乐生成的机制可解释性研究集中在音频模型，符号音乐（MIDI）生成模型的内部工作机制尚未得到系统探索。","importance":"方法迁移+原理分析，将LLM领域成熟的机制解释方法应用到文本到MIDI生成任务，对比了两种不同架构模型的表征形成差异。","technical_approach":"使用线性探测、logit透镜、调谐透镜、激活补丁和均值差引导方法，分析encoder-decoder架构的text2midi和基于Llama 3.2 1B扩展MIDI token的MIDI-LLM两个系统。","experiments":"发现音高、乐器、和声、织体在两个模型中均可线性解码；text2midi逐层细化预测，MIDI-LLM前期主要在继承的文本表征空间中工作，后期才急剧旋转到音乐词汇表；引导可双向改变音域、复调等属性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing mechanistic interpretability research on music generation focuses on audio models, leaving the internal working mechanisms of symbolic music (MIDI) generation models largely unexplored.","importance":"Method transfer + principle analysis; applies mature mechanistic interpretability methods from LLMs to text-to-MIDI generation, comparing representation formation differences between two architecturally distinct models.","technical_approach":"Uses linear probing, logit lens, tuned lens, activation patching, and difference-in-means steering to analyze two systems: the encoder-decoder text2midi and MIDI-LLM, a Llama 3.2 1B model extended with MIDI tokens.","experiments":"Finds that pitch, instrumentation, harmony, and texture are linearly decodable in both models; text2midi refines predictions gradually across layers, while MIDI-LLM operates largely in its inherited textual representation space before a sharp late rotation into the musical vocabulary; steering produces bidirectional changes in register, polyphony, and other attributes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"将标准LLM可解释性方法迁移到音乐MIDI生成模型，结论符合预期，对跨模态机制解释研究有微弱参考价值。","en":"Applies standard LLM interpretability methods to music MIDI generation models; conclusions are as expected, with marginal reference value for cross-modal mechanistic interpretability research."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Jakub Poćwiardowski","Mateusz Modrzejewski"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["mechanistic-interpretability","music-generation","probing","activation-patching","llm-steering"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06638","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06638","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06766","title":"Hidden Gauge Controls Feature Specialization in ReLU Networks","abstract":"Training changes a network's predictions while allocating task-relevant structure across its internal units. In an overparameterized ReLU network, several neurons can begin with exactly the same functional role, yet one may acquire a teacher feature while the others become redundant. We call the identity of that neuron feature ownership and ask whether it can be controlled by a parameter choice invisible to the initial predictor. In a tractable Gaussian teacher--student model, we fix the complet","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06766.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决过参数化ReLU网络中初始功能相同的神经元为何会出现差异化特征特化（特征归属）的问题。","importance":"理论+机制贡献，首次发现初始正齐次缩放规范（hidden gauge）可确定性控制神经元的特征归属，为理解神经网络特征分配机制提供新视角。","technical_approach":"在可处理的高斯teacher-student模型下，固定网络初始函数，仅改变正齐次缩放gauge参数，观察神经元特化轨迹；提出反应-输运分解方法，将特化速度差异归因于扩散项的不同。","experiments":"以理论推导为主，在高斯teacher-student模型上得到特化时间的Θ(D²)分离界，验证了gauge对特征归属的确定性控制效果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addresses why initially functionally identical neurons in overparameterized ReLU networks develop divergent feature specializations (feature ownership) during training.","importance":"Theoretical and mechanistic contribution discovering that the initial positive-homogeneous scaling gauge can deterministically control neuron feature ownership, providing a new perspective on neural network feature allocation.","technical_approach":"In a tractable Gaussian teacher-student model, fix the initial network function and only vary the positive-homogeneous scaling gauge to observe specialization trajectories; proposes a reaction-transport decomposition to attribute specialization speed differences to diffusion term variations.","experiments":"Primarily theoretical analysis, deriving a Θ(D²) separation bound in specialization time in the Gaussian teacher-student setting, verifying deterministic control of feature ownership by the gauge.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"基础DL理论工作，关于ReLU神经元特化的机制，对理解LLM稀疏激活有间接启发，看结论即可。","en":"Basic DL theory on ReLU neuron specialization, indirectly relevant to LLM sparse activation; read conclusions only."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Tongxi Wang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["relu-networks","feature-specialization","deep-learning-theory","gauge-symmetry","teacher-student-model"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06766","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06766","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07224","title":"Stochastic Autoregressive Learning","abstract":"Motivated by LLMs, which generate outputs by iteratively sampling from next-token distributions, we introduce a PAC-learning model for binary stochastic autoregressive learning. This generalizes the deterministic autoregressive learning framework of Joshi et al., COLT 2025. In our model, one fixed generator assigns a Bernoulli next-token distribution to every prompt string. Starting from an input prompt, a token is sampled and appended to the prompt; the same generator is then applied again to t","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07224.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"为二元随机自回归学习建立PAC模型，并分析base、chain-of-thought、end-to-end三种监督下学习next-token概率的样本复杂度。","importance":"理论贡献，将确定性自回归学习框架推广到随机生成器设定，形式化不同监督粒度对AR模型可学习性的影响。","technical_approach":"固定生成器对每个prompt给出Bernoulli next-token分布，迭代采样M步；分别研究单步样本、完整M步轨迹的CoT样本、以及仅观察最终token的e2e样本所需的最小样本数m_base、m_CoT、m_e2e。","experiments":"纯理论工作，无模型参数量或训练数据；摘要给出三种监督模式的样本复杂度定义，但未列出具体界。","authors_note":"作者Elchanan Mossel是概率论与计算理论领域学者；论文信息未列出具体机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Introduce a PAC-learning model for binary stochastic autoregressive learning and analyze sample complexity under base, chain-of-thought, and end-to-end supervision.","importance":"A theoretical contribution that generalizes deterministic autoregressive learning to stochastic generators and formalizes how supervision granularity affects learnability.","technical_approach":"A fixed generator assigns a Bernoulli next-token distribution to every prompt and samples for M steps; the paper studies minimum sample counts m_base, m_CoT, and m_e2e for one-step, full-trajectory, and final-token-only supervision.","experiments":"This is a purely theoretical paper with no model size or training data; the abstract defines the three sample-complexity functions but does not report concrete bounds.","authors_note":"Elchanan Mossel is known for work in probability theory and theoretical computer science; affiliations are not listed in the provided paper information."},"recommendation":{"zh":"PAC学习理论视角看AR/CoT样本复杂度，结论偏抽象；关心CoT为何比e2e易学可看定理设定，否则跳过。","en":"PAC-style sample-complexity theory for AR and CoT; read the theorem setup only if you care why trajectory supervision is easier than end-to-end."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Ilan Doron-Arad","Idan Mehalel","Elchanan Mossel"],"notable_authors":["Elchanan Mossel"],"tags":["autoregressive-learning","PAC-learning","chain-of-thought","sample-complexity","learning-theory"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07224","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07224","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"coding_agent","emoji":"💻","name":"Coding Agent","papers":[{"id":"2608.06153","title":"Learning Globally Reusable Skills for Coding Agents","abstract":"Automated skill evolution enables Large Language Model (LLM) agents to continuously improve without expensive retraining. However, existing approaches typically treat skill evolution as a sequence of local updates, overlooking relationships among skills and often producing overfitted skill updates that fail to generalize across tasks. We propose GSE, a globalized skill evolution framework that jointly optimizes skill compatibility and skill generalization. To preserve consistency across the skil","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T15:19:56Z","category_id":"coding_agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06153.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.SE","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 coding agent 的技能库在持续演化时容易局部过拟合、跨任务复用能力弱的问题。","importance":"贡献类型是 coding agent 的系统方法改进。它关注不重新训练基座模型的能力积累路径，对“外部技能库如何补足参数更新”有一定参考价值，但离预训练方法论较远。","technical_approach":"提出 GSE，全局化技能演化框架。核心是维护 Skill Relation Graph 显式建模技能间关系，并用聚类式技能合并把局部更新抽象成更通用的能力；同时加入 replay-driven verification，检查新技能是否带来过拟合或行为回退。","experiments":"在两个软件工程任务上评估：bug-revealing test generation 和 false-positive bug report filtering。摘要只说明与现有 coding agent 方法比较并取得更好表现，未给出完整提升幅度、模型规模或训练数据细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the problem that coding-agent skill evolution often overfits to local task updates and fails to produce reusable skills across tasks.","importance":"The contribution is a system-level method for coding agents. It is relevant as a non-parametric capability accumulation mechanism, but it is not directly about base-model pretraining.","technical_approach":"GSE globalizes skill evolution by maintaining a Skill Relation Graph to model compatibility among skills, consolidating clustered local updates into reusable skills, and using replay-driven verification to detect overfitting and behavioral regressions.","experiments":"The evaluation covers two software-engineering tasks: bug-revealing test generation and false-positive bug report filtering. The abstract reports gains over existing coding-agent approaches, but does not expose model sizes, training data, or exact improvement numbers.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为 skill-memory 方向的工程信号可看摘要；预训练研究员只需记住“局部技能更新会过拟合”这个失败模式。","en":"Useful as an engineering signal for skill-memory systems; for pretraining, the only durable lesson is that local skill updates overfit easily."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Chen Yang","Jiashuo Tian","Ziqi Wang","Xinyin Liu","Meiru Ye","Junjie Chen"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["coding-agent","skill-library","continual-adaptation","software-engineering"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06153","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06153","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06474","title":"WebGrader: Training LLMs for Web Development with Self-Evolving Programmatic Grader","abstract":"Large language models increasingly generate complete websites from natural-language descriptions, and reinforcement learning has become a central approach to closing their remaining functional gap. This training regime is bottlenecked by reward design. Hand-authored browser scripts are executable yet costly to write for open-ended requirements, while VLM and GUI-agent graders scale but may issue verdicts before observing the decisive state. We propose WebGrader, a self-evolving programmatic grad","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"coding_agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06474.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 web 开发 RL 的 reward 构造问题。自然语言网站需求通常没有配套的浏览器交互脚本和状态断言，人工写测试成本高，VLM/GUI grader 又可能在没有观察到关键状态前给出判断。WebGrader 试图把开放式网站需求自动转成可执行、可复放、带证据的浏览器测试，用作 RL reward。","importance":"对预训练研究的直接关系不强，但对 post-train 与可验证训练信号有参考价值。它讨论的是如何为复杂代码生成任务构造程序化 reward，而不是依赖单步文本判分或截图判分。这个方向和 GRPO、代码 RL、verifiable reward 的接口有关。启发点在于：当任务输出是交互式程序时，reward 需要先生成“交互流”和“状态证据”，再判定行为是否满足需求。这个思路可以迁移到更一般的软件工程 agent、工具使用和长程交互任务，但论文主要落在 web development，不应放大为通用基座训练方法。","technical_approach":"WebGrader 的核心是 executable reward construction。系统先从用户需求中推导 required interaction flows，并表示成 Flow Contract。随后把模型生成的 React/Vite 项目在真实浏览器中构建、启动和渲染，用源代码、live DOM、视觉状态、网络响应和持久化状态来 grounding 动作与断言。执行层使用 Playwright 生成可复放的 browser program，逐个 flow 收集证据并给出 reward。为了改进 grader，作者构建 WebGen-Verifier-100：每个干净应用配受控的源代码级单故障变体，让 verifier 的错误可以被量化。离线演化过程会把 residual 归因到 planning、grounding、evidence 或 judgment 等阶段，只对对应 skill 做 mutation；候选 skill 需要在隔离验证页面上提升表现才会被 promoted。最终技能被组织成带依赖、组合和冲突关系的 SkillGraph，并在 RL 前冻结。RL 阶段用冻结的 WebGrader 给 8B policy 提供功能性 reward，训练算法为 GRPO。","experiments":"数据构建上，WebGen-Verifier-100 使用 100 个 public WebGen-Instruct 训练查询，覆盖 10 类应用。每个查询配一个本地验证过的 clean React/Vite 应用，并从每个 clean app 生成 8 个自然的源代码级单故障变体。800 个候选故障中保留 778 个 active variants。页面级划分为 60/20/20 的 Train/Eval/Test，分别包含 461/157/160 个 active faults 和 282/95/93 个 active flows；clean app、变体和私有 reference 不跨 split。Train 用于 residual induction 和 mutation，Eval 用于候选提升，Test 只用于报告 verifier 结果。模型训练结果中，WebGrader 训练的 8B policy 相比 matched appearance-plus-script reward 提升 7.88 FSR points，并在 WebGen-Bench 和 WG-core-250 上超过 o4-mini 与 DeepSeek-v4-flash。由于提供内容没有完整表格和消融细节，具体成功率、误判类型分布和 SkillGraph 各模块贡献需要回到实验章节核对。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，预计 25 到 35 分钟。优先看 Method 中 Flow Contract 的定义、Playwright 执行证据的收集方式、residual attribution 到 skill mutation 的流程。其次看 WebGen-Verifier-100 的构造细节，因为 reward 论文的可信度很大程度取决于 verifier 自身有没有干净的验证环境。实验部分重点找三类表：grader 在 clean/faulty paired sites 上的识别能力、SkillGraph 演化前后的提升、GRPO 训练后 8B policy 在 WebGen-Bench 与 WG-core-250 上的 FSR。对 LLM 基座研究员来说，最值得带走的是“先训练或演化 reward constructor，再冻结用于 RL”的流程，而不是 web 领域本身。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets reward construction for RL in web development. Open-ended website requests describe UI behavior, navigation, forms, and persistence, but they do not provide executable browser actions or state assertions. Manual scripts are precise but expensive, while VLM or GUI-agent graders may judge without reaching the decisive state. WebGrader turns requirements and generated projects into replayable browser tests with execution evidence.","importance":"This is not a pretraining method, but it is relevant to the pretrain-to-posttrain interface around verifiable rewards. The main lesson is that for interactive program generation, a reward cannot be a single text score or a screenshot-level judgment. It needs to construct interaction flows, execute them in the real environment, collect state evidence, and then judge behavior. That pattern is useful for code RL, software agents, and long-horizon tool-use training. The scope remains web development, so the result should be treated as a domain-specific reward-construction study rather than a general foundation-model training recipe.","technical_approach":"$3c","experiments":"$3d","reading_guide":"Skim in about 25 to 35 minutes. Read the method sections on Flow Contracts, Playwright execution, evidence collection, and residual attribution. The construction of WebGen-Verifier-100 is important because the reliability of the reward depends on how cleanly the verifier itself is measured. In the experiments, look for three tables: verifier accuracy on paired clean and faulty sites, improvements from SkillGraph evolution, and GRPO-trained policy results on WebGen-Bench and WG-core-250. For foundation-model training readers, the transferable idea is the two-stage pipeline: first improve and freeze a reward constructor, then use it as a verifiable reward source for RL.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"读 verifier skill 自演化和错误奖励分析；若 reward hacking 控得住，可借鉴到代码 RLVR。","en":"Read the self-evolving verifier-skill loop and reward-error analysis; if reward hacking is controlled, the idea transfers to code RLVR."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Boshui Chen","Huiping Liu","Shaolei Zhang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["code-generation","web-development","rl-training","programmatic-verifier","reward-design"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06474","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06474","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07440","title":"Blast Radius","abstract":"Agentic coding faces growing problems of affordability and wasted tokens. We introduce Blast Radius, a predictive memory management layer that estimates an incoming prompt's reach through coupled context and code channels. NECROPHORESIS enables reversible eviction by archiving dead context verbatim, while Recurring Dead Matter (RDM) identifies and buries repeatedly occurring transcripts. We formulate reversible context eviction over a Polish context space, providing a measurable foundation for r","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"coding_agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07440.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"Agentic coding 中 token 浪费和上下文溢出问题，需要可预测的上下文内存管理层。","importance":"系统/方法贡献：提出 Blast Radius 预测性内存管理层，通过可逆上下文驱逐降低 token 消耗。","technical_approach":"NECROPHORESIS 逐字归档死亡上下文实现可逆驱逐；Recurring Dead Matter (RDM) 识别并埋葬重复出现的 transcript；在 Polish context space 上形式化可逆驱逐。","experiments":"在 7 个 OpenAI 模型上 token 消耗降低 17-26%，溢出率最低，且字节级可逆。450 个被埋葬上下文中 378 个为 RDM，0 个被召回。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Token waste and context overflow in agentic coding, requiring a predictive context memory management layer.","importance":"System/method contribution: Blast Radius, a predictive memory management layer that reduces token consumption via reversible context eviction.","technical_approach":"NECROPHORESIS archives dead context verbatim for reversible eviction; Recurring Dead Matter (RDM) identifies and buries recurring transcripts; formalizes reversible eviction over a Polish context space.","experiments":"Across 7 OpenAI models, token consumption reduced by 17-26%, lowest overflow rate, byte-exact reversible. Of 450 buried contexts, 378 were RDM and zero were recalled.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"工程向的 coding agent 上下文管理，17-26% token 节省有实际意义，但方法偏启发式，对 pretrain 研究员仅作系统设计参考。","en":"Engineering-focused context management for coding agents; the 17-26% token saving is practically meaningful but the method is heuristic—only useful as system design reference for pretrain researchers."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["MY Pitsane","Hope Mogale"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["coding-agent","context-management","memory","token-efficiency","agent-infrastructure"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07440","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07440","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06640","title":"Characterizing the Quality Profile of AI-Generated C++ in Production","abstract":"The widespread integration of AI coding assistants offers undeniable boosts to engineering velocity. Yet, recent studies point to a growing trade-off, revealing persistent challenges with code quality and maintainability. Industry leaders, including frontier AI labs, echo these concerns. As large language models are increasingly relied upon to author production code, understanding their impact on shipped software quality has become a critical priority. However, assessing these effects in industr","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"coding_agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06640.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.SE","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"缺乏大规模工业级实证数据来量化AI生成的C++代码对生产环境软件质量和可维护性的实际影响。","importance":"数据贡献+实证分析，基于服务数十亿用户的大型企业的生产代码可观测性体系，首次大规模分析AI生成C++代码的生产质量特征。","technical_approach":"利用企业完善的代码部署全链路可观测性能力，对每一行生产代码的来源、变更历史和质量指标进行关联分析，对比AI生成与人工编写代码的质量差异。","experiments":"在全球数十亿用户使用的大型企业产品中开展大规模实证研究，覆盖生产环境全量C++代码的质量追踪（摘要未完整给出具体量化结果）。","authors_note":"作者团队来自Google，包含知名系统与ML研究者Milad Hashemi和Parthasarathy Ranganathan。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"There is a lack of large-scale industrial empirical data to quantify the actual impact of AI-generated C++ code on software quality and maintainability in production environments.","importance":"Data contribution + empirical analysis; first large-scale analysis of production quality profiles of AI-generated C++ code, based on the production code observability system of a large enterprise serving billions of users.","technical_approach":"Leverages the enterprise's comprehensive full-stack observability for code deployment to correlate the source, change history, and quality metrics of every line of production code, comparing quality differences between AI-generated and human-written code.","experiments":"Conducts large-scale empirical research on enterprise products used by billions of users worldwide, covering quality tracking of all C++ code in production (specific quantitative results are not fully provided in the abstract).","authors_note":"Author team is from Google, including well-known systems and ML researchers Milad Hashemi and Parthasarathy Ranganathan."},"recommendation":{"zh":"Google的工业级AI生成C++代码质量实证研究，做代码LLM的可看结论了解实际痛点，通用预训练无需阅读。","en":"Google's industrial-scale empirical study of AI-generated C++ code quality; only worth checking conclusions if you work on code LLMs, no need for general pretraining researchers."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Google"],"authors":["Michael Tran","Fred Lewis","Kun Yang","Saksham Thakur","Aditya Kini","Aditya Patil","Milad Hashemi","Parthasarathy Ranganathan"],"notable_authors":["Milad Hashemi","Parthasarathy Ranganathan"],"tags":["code-llm","code-quality","industrial-study","c++","software-engineering"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06640","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06640","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07395","title":"PACE: Primitive-Aware Code Evolution for Automated Algorithm Design","abstract":"Large Language Model (LLM)-based automated algorithm design typically evolves algorithms as complete, indivisible programs. While this whole-program perspective simplifies the search space, it fundamentally couples the useful local logic to its host program. Consequently, valuable code snippets vanish when the overall program is discarded, making it highly difficult to assess the contribution of individual algorithmic this http URL address this, we propose Primitive-Aware Code Evolution (PACE), ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"coding_agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07395.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.SE","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"LLM驱动的自动化算法设计采用整程序进化范式，导致有用局部代码片段随程序丢弃，难以评估单个算法逻辑的贡献","importance":"方法创新，提出原语级的代码进化范式，解决整程序进化的代码复用与逻辑贡献评估问题","technical_approach":"提出PACE框架，将局部算法逻辑抽象为可执行算法原语（EAPs）并维护动态原语集；设计原语感知的进化操作符保证原语的保留与跨程序转移；采用基于父代相对性能提升的汤普森采样引导原语选择","experiments":"未披露具体使用的LLM参数量，实验围绕自动化算法设计任务展开，对比整程序进化基线在代码复用率与算法搜索效率上的提升","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLM-based automated algorithm design uses a whole-program evolution paradigm, causing useful local code snippets to be discarded with programs, making individual algorithmic logic contribution evaluation difficult","importance":"Methodological innovation, proposes a primitive-level code evolution paradigm to solve the code reuse and logic contribution evaluation problems of whole-program evolution","technical_approach":"Proposes the PACE framework, which abstracts local algorithmic logic into Executable Algorithmic Primitives (EAPs) and maintains a dynamic primitive set; designs primitive-aware evolution operators to ensure EAP retention and cross-program transfer; uses Thompson sampling based on parent-relative performance improvement to guide primitive selection","experiments":"No specific LLM parameter count disclosed; experiments are conducted on automated algorithm design tasks, comparing code reuse rate and algorithm search efficiency improvements against whole-program evolution baselines","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"代码进化方向的增量创新，原语模块化思路对代码预训练的表示设计有微弱参考，仅看方法部分即可","en":"Incremental innovation in code evolution, the primitive modularization idea has weak reference value for code pretraining representation design, only read the method section"},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Zhuoliang Xie","Ruihao Zheng","Xiang Xu","Genghui Li","Zhengkun Wang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["coding-agent","code-evolution","automated-algorithm-design","program-representation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07395","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07395","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"agent","emoji":"🤖","name":"Agent 与系统","papers":[{"id":"2608.05446","title":"EvoHarness-RL: Learning Self-Evolving Runtime Harness for Long-Horizon LLM Agents","abstract":"Long-horizon LLM agents increasingly rely on external execution support to maintain state, track progress, invoke tools, verify outcomes, and reuse experience across interactions. However, effective harness use raises two coupled challenges: state formation from noisy interaction traces and runtime control over external-state access. Existing agents usually handle both through prompts, heuristics, or domain-specific conventions, leaving the external workspace and its usage policy manually engine","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-05T22:29:20Z","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05446.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"长程 Agent 往往依赖外部状态、工具、记忆和执行日志，但什么时候读、写、更新、压缩这些外部 harness，通常靠 prompt 或人工规则。论文要解决的是 harness policy learning：让模型学习运行时如何构造和使用外部状态，而不是只把 harness 当作固定脚手架。","importance":"这篇工作不是基座预训练论文，和 LLM 训练的关系主要在 agent RL 和训练信号设计。它的启发在于把“外部状态使用”显式纳入策略学习，并对调用成本建模。对预训练研究的间接价值是：长程任务能力不只来自更长上下文或更多轨迹 SFT，也可能来自模型学会何时把状态外化、何时依赖内部策略、何时复用经验。这对 long-horizon agent post-training、工具使用 RL、记忆增强模型有参考意义。","technical_approach":"EvoHarness-RL 把复杂的外部执行支持抽象成 BPE workspace：Belief 表示当前环境状态，Progress 表示已完成和待完成子目标，Experience 表示跨 episode 可复用经验。Agent 通过紧凑的 harness meta-actions 与这些状态交互，例如查询 belief、提交 progress、召回 experience、写入新 insight。训练分两阶段。第一阶段是 supervised harness fine-tuning，让模型熟悉 BPE action protocol，并从交互轨迹中学习如何外化 belief、progress 和 experience。第二阶段使用 cost-aware GRPO，把 harness action 的成本纳入优化，因为读写外部状态会占用交互预算。奖励包含任务成功、效率、动作多样性、避免重复和动作格式合法性。方法的重点是把 harness 使用从 prompt-time 规则转成 learned runtime policy。","experiments":"论文在 ALFWorld 上实例化 BPE：Belief 对应 world-state tracker，Progress 对应已提交的子目标计划，Experience 对应跨 episode skill bank。结果显示，仅在 prompt 中加入 BPE 已能改善有状态长程任务；经过 SFT 和 GRPO 后，ALFWorld seen split 成功率达到 96.9%，unseen split 达到 86.6%。分析部分提出两个现象。第一是 harness annealing：训练后模型减少频繁、脚手架式的外部调用，转向更选择性的状态访问，说明部分固定模式被内化进策略。第二是 harness evolution：在线 progress 更新和跨 episode experience consolidation 会把外部状态逐渐压缩成更适合当前任务族的支持结构。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，预计 20–30 分钟。重点看 Method 的 BPE 抽象和 action protocol，再看两阶段训练 recipe，尤其是 cost-aware GRPO 的奖励设计。实验部分关注 ALFWorld 适配方式、seen/unseen 成功率，以及 harness annealing 的调用频率变化。若只关心基座预训练，可以跳过环境细节，重点看外部状态如何被表示成可学习动作，以及成本约束如何改变 Agent 的运行时策略。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses harness policy learning for long-horizon LLM agents. Agents often rely on external state, tools, memories, trackers, and logs, but the policy for when to read, write, update, or consolidate this support is usually hand-designed through prompts or heuristics. EvoHarness-RL trains the model to coordinate with the harness at runtime.","importance":"This is not a base pretraining paper. Its relevance is mainly to agent post-training, RL for tool and memory use, and long-horizon execution. The useful idea is to make external-state access part of the learned policy and to price that access explicitly. For pretraining researchers, it suggests that long-horizon capability may depend not only on longer context or more trajectory imitation, but also on whether models learn when to externalize state, when to rely on internal computation, and when to reuse prior experience.","technical_approach":"EvoHarness-RL abstracts heterogeneous runtime support into a BPE workspace. Belief tracks the current environment state, Progress tracks completed and pending subgoals, and Experience stores reusable cross-episode knowledge. The agent interacts with this workspace through compact harness meta-actions, such as querying belief, committing progress, recalling experience, and writing new insights. Training has two stages. Supervised harness fine-tuning teaches the model the BPE action protocol and how to extract useful belief, progress, and experience from traces. Cost-aware GRPO then optimizes when to use the harness under an interaction budget. The reward includes task success, efficiency, action diversity, repetition avoidance, and valid action formatting. The main contribution is turning harness use from a prompt-time scaffold into a learned runtime control policy.","experiments":"The framework is instantiated in ALFWorld. In this environment, Belief is grounded as a world-state tracker, Progress as a committed subgoal plan, and Experience as a cross-episode skill bank for household tasks. Prompt-time BPE already improves stateful long-horizon execution. After SFT and GRPO, the reported success rate reaches 96.9% on the ALFWorld seen split and 86.6% on the unseen split. The analysis highlights two dynamics. Harness annealing means that training reduces frequent scaffold-like calls and shifts the agent toward selective external-state access. Harness evolution means that online progress updates and experience consolidation refine the external workspace into a more compact task-adaptive substrate.","reading_guide":"Skim in 20–30 minutes. Read the Method section for the BPE abstraction, the action protocol, and the two-stage training recipe. Pay particular attention to the cost-aware GRPO reward, because it determines whether the agent learns selective rather than excessive harness use. In the experiments, focus on the ALFWorld adapter, the seen and unseen success rates, and the analysis of harness annealing. Readers focused on base-model research can skip most environment details and concentrate on the representation of external state as learnable actions and the effect of cost constraints on runtime policy.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"用RL学习Agent运行时harness的思路新颖，cost-aware GRPO的设计对后训练RL优化有参考","en":"RL-learned agent runtime harness is novel; cost-aware GRPO design is relevant for post-training RL research."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Illinois Urbana–Champaign","Meta AI"],"authors":["Xuying Ning","Dongqi Fu","Tianxin Wei","Hanqing Zeng","Yuanchen Bei","Bingxuan Li","Zihao Li","Qifan Wang","Xiang Shen","Yifan Wu","Jiayi Liu","Hong Li","Yinglong Xia","Xiangjun Fan","Hanghang Tong","Jingrui He"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["LLM agent","long-horizon agent","RL","GRPO","agent harness"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05446","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05446","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06197","title":"EnvACE: Internalizing Environment Dynamics via World Rehearsal for Agentic Reinforcement Learning","abstract":"Training large language model agents for long-horizon tool use typically relies on interactions with real or synthesized executable environments, whose construction and verification are costly, or on external simulators that are difficult to ground. We introduce EnvACE, an agentic reinforcement learning method that replaces external environment interaction during training with world rehearsal. The policy alternates between acting and rehearsal: it first generates a tool call, then plays the role","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T15:54:36Z","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06197.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"训练LLM Agent进行长程工具使用时，现有方法依赖外部可执行环境（构建和验证成本高）或独立的LLM模拟器（难以grounding），环境建模始终在行动策略之外，策略无法内化动作与环境响应之间的因果关系。","importance":"提出了将世界模型内化进单一策略的world rehearsal机制，让策略在不依赖外部环境交互的条件下进行RL训练，降低了对昂贵环境基础设施的依赖。测试时的多次rehearsal也为推理前的内部推演提供了轻量方案。方法本身属于Agent后训练范畴，但\"让模型自己扮演环境\"的思路与统一建模范式存在关联，对思考预训练中模型如何内化世界动态有参考价值。","technical_approach":"单个策略同时承担actor和environment两个角色：每个交互轮次，策略先生成tool call，然后切换角色生成该tool call引发的环境响应（即world rehearsal），再基于这个自生成的响应决定下一步动作。整条trajectory由策略自身展开，而非与外部环境交互产生。两个角色通过task-success reward端到端联合优化。测试时可进行多次rehearsal尝试，在内部推演候选动作的结果后再选择实际执行。","experiments":"在BFCL-v4、τ²-Bench、VitaBench、FinMCP-Bench四个Agent基准上一致优于强基线。消融实验显示：测试时适度的rehearsal预算（多次内部推演）能进一步提升性能；联合学习acting和rehearsal在不同模型规模上均有效，而非单独训练环境模型再与策略配合。","reading_guide":"重点关注world rehearsal的训练流程设计——acting和rehearsal如何交替展开、reward如何传播到两个角色，以及测试时rehearsal的具体实现。方法部分的POMDP形式化和实验部分的rehearsal次数消融是核心图表。预计阅读时间15-20分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Training LLM agents for long-horizon tool use relies on external executable environments (costly to build and verify) or separate LLM simulators (difficult to ground), keeping environment dynamics external to the acting policy and preventing the policy from internalizing action-response relationships.","importance":"Introduces world rehearsal, a mechanism that absorbs the world model into a single policy, enabling RL training without external environment interaction and reducing dependence on expensive environment infrastructure. Test-time rehearsal provides a lightweight form of internal deliberation before action execution. While the method sits in post-training agent RL, the idea of a model playing both actor and environment resonates with unified modeling paradigms relevant to thinking about how pretrained models internalize world dynamics.","technical_approach":"A single policy alternates between two roles: at each turn, it first generates a tool call as the actor, then switches to produce the environment response induced by that call (world rehearsal), and conditions subsequent actions on this self-generated response. Full trajectories unfold from the policy itself rather than from external environment interaction. Both roles are jointly optimized end-to-end using task-success rewards. At test time, multiple rehearsal attempts can be run to internally simulate candidate action outcomes before selecting the actual action.","experiments":"Consistently outperforms strong baselines across BFCL-v4, τ²-Bench, VitaBench, and FinMCP-Bench. Ablations show that a moderate test-time rehearsal budget further improves performance, and that joint optimization of acting and rehearsal is effective across model scales, compared to training a separate environment model.","reading_guide":"Focus on the training procedure for world rehearsal—how acting and rehearsal interleave within a trajectory, how rewards propagate across both roles—and the test-time rehearsal mechanism. The POMDP formulation in the method section and the rehearsal-budget ablation in experiments are the key sections. Estimated reading time: 15-20 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"Agent RL训练的新范式，用自扮演环境替代外部交互，核心思路可迁移到推理模型RL训练，重点看§3方法设计","en":"Novel paradigm for agent RL training replacing external interaction with self-played environment; core idea transfers to reasoning model RL, focus on §3 method design."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Zishan Xu","Zhiyuan Yao","Yuxin Chen","Yifu Guo","Zhengxi Lu","Yuquan Lu","Jinyang Huang","Yan Xu","Yasheng Wang","Weinan Zhang","Xingshan Zeng","Weiwen Liu"],"notable_authors":["Weinan Zhang"],"tags":["agent RL","world model","tool use","long-horizon agent"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06197","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06197","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05628","title":"SkillHEX: Improving Agent Skills via Hypothesis-Driven Autonomous Exploration and Exploitation","abstract":"Although agent skills equip LLMs with reusable procedural knowledge, manual maintenance suffers from high costs, unscalability, and misalignment. Real-world deployments thus require autonomous, on-demand skill evolution at test time, constrained by limited interaction budgets and a lack of training or validation sets. This setting introduces a severe sparse reward challenge, where outcomes conflate multiple latent failure causes. Under such ambiguity, existing methods that greedily refine a sing","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T05:51:02Z","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05628.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"真实场景下智能体技能的测试时自主演化缺乏预收集的训练/验证集，仅能进行有限次交互，稀疏二元反馈会掩盖多种潜在失败原因，现有贪心式单分支技能修订方法易陷入开发陷阱，无法有效平衡探索与利用。","importance":"假设驱动自验证与证据引导树搜索的组合设计，为稀疏奖励下的测试时自适应、少样本技能优化提供了新思路，对模型闭环自我改进中无标注数据下的密集反馈构造有借鉴意义，可用于预训练后的对齐与自适应场景。","technical_approach":"SkillHEX是一个闭环技能演化框架，包含两个核心模块。一是假设驱动的自验证器，将显式可证伪的失败原因假设转化为可执行测试，在智能体输出上重测即可生成密集证据信号，无需额外环境交互，解决稀疏奖励问题。二是证据引导的树搜索，在持久化的技能补丁分支上执行搜索，由自验证证据直接引导，动态平衡证据支持分支的利用与合理未探索分支的探索，避免早期错误诊断导致的路径锁定。与现有方法不同，SkillHEX无需预存训练/验证集，通过多分支保留避免贪心优化的局部最优问题。","experiments":"在87个SkillsBench任务上，基于两个不同骨干模型测试，SkillHEX相比最强自演化基线最高提升9.5个百分点。","reading_guide":"重点阅读引言中测试时技能演化的稀疏奖励挑战与开发陷阱定义，以及两个核心模块的设计思路。预计阅读时间20分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Autonomous test-time skill evolution for agents in real-world deployments lacks pre-collected training or validation sets, allows only limited interaction trials, and suffers from sparse binary feedback that conceals multiple latent failure causes, while existing greedy single-branch skill revision methods are vulnerable to the exploitation trap and fail to balance exploration and exploitation effectively.","importance":"The combined design of hypothesis-driven self-verification and evidence-guided tree search provides a new approach for test-time adaptation and few-shot skill optimization under sparse rewards, and offers reference for dense feedback construction in closed-loop model self-improvement without labeled data, which applies to post-pretraining alignment and adaptive scenarios.","technical_approach":"SkillHEX is a closed-loop skill evolution framework with two core components. First, a hypothesis-driven self-verifier converts explicit falsifiable failure-cause hypotheses into executable tests, which are rerun on agent outputs to generate dense evidence signals without additional environment interactions, addressing the sparse reward problem. Second, an evidence-guided tree search operates over persistent skill-patch branches, guided directly by self-verification evidence, to dynamically balance exploitation of evidence-supported branches and exploration of plausible underexplored branches, avoiding path lock-in caused by early misdiagnoses. Unlike prior methods, SkillHEX requires no pre-existing training or validation sets and avoids local optima from greedy optimization by preserving multiple revision branches.","experiments":"Evaluated on 87 SkillsBench tasks across two different backbone models, SkillHEX achieves up to 9.5 percentage point improvement over the strongest self-evolution baseline.","reading_guide":"Focus on the definition of sparse reward challenges and the exploitation trap in test-time skill evolution in the introduction, as well as the design of the two core modules. Estimated reading time: 20 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"用可证伪假设生成稠密奖励的思路对agent训练有启发，重点看方法部分的假设生成和树搜索设计。","en":"The idea of generating dense rewards from falsifiable hypotheses is insightful for agent training; focus on the hypothesis generation and tree search design in the method section."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Yuru Feng","Yaoqi Chen","Beidi Zhao","Qianxi Zhang","Xinjiang Wang","Jianan Lu","Zhirui Wang","Shusen Xu","Zengzhong Li","Qi Chen"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agent-skills","sparse-reward","hypothesis-driven","tree-search","autonomous-evolution"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05628","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05628","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06128","title":"Contextual Information Policy Optimization for Search Agents","abstract":"Search agents extend large language models beyond static parametric memory by enabling them to acquire and use ex ternal evidence during multi-step reasoning. For knowledge intensive tasks involving complex or evolving information, their reliability depends not only on retrieving relevant ev idence but also on using it to guide subsequent reasoning. However, existing methods primarily reward final-answer cor rectness or intermediate progress, without directly assessing whether post-retrieval act","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T15:01:29Z","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06128.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有强化学习方法训练搜索类agent时，奖励信号仅评估最终答案正确性或中间推理的收敛进度，没有直接约束检索后的推理步骤是否实质使用了新获取的检索证据，导致模型依赖参数内先验生成结论，检索行为仅用于确认已有假设，产生确认偏差、检索证据利用率低的问题。","importance":"提出的无标注密集奖励构造思路，对工具增强类agent的后训练流程设计有参考价值，回应了检索增强系统中普遍存在的“检索但不使用”的训练信号错位问题，不需要额外训练奖励模型或补充人类标注，落地成本较低。","technical_approach":"提出面向证据使用的强化学习框架CIPO。核心信号为证据访问对数似然比（EALR）：对每次检索后的推理步骤，固定全部前文上下文，分别计算模型在可见检索证据、掩码检索证据两种条件下生成当前动作的对数似然差值，直接量化当前推理对新检索内容的敏感度。该信号不需要额外奖励模型、人类标注或补充采样轨迹，可作为每步的密集奖励，与最终答案正确性的全局结果奖励结合进行策略优化，惩罚仅依赖内部先验、不使用检索证据的推理步骤。","experiments":"在7个域内、域外知识密集型基准上测试，CIPO可显著降低先验驱动推理的比例，在多数任务上的表现优于现有的强化学习搜索agent基线。","reading_guide":"泛读即可，重点关注EALR的奖励构造逻辑、以及验证确认偏差缓解效果的消融实验，理解“通过对比有/无外部信息条件下的生成似然差，量化模型对外部信息的实际使用程度”的核心设计，预计阅读时间15分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing RL methods for search agents only reward final answer correctness or intermediate trajectory progress, with no direct measurement of whether post-retrieval reasoning steps actually leverage newly fetched evidence. This reward misalignment causes agents to form conclusions from internal parametric priors, using retrieval only to confirm pre-existing hypotheses, leading to confirmation bias and low utilization of retrieved information.","importance":"The annotation-free dense reward design provides practical reference for post-training of tool-augmented LLMs, addressing the common 'retrieve but not use' failure mode in search agent systems. The signal requires no separate reward model, human labels, or additional rollouts, keeping implementation overhead low.","technical_approach":"Proposes Contextual Information Policy Optimization (CIPO), an evidence-oriented RL framework. Its core signal is the Evidence-Access Log-Likelihood Ratio (EALR): for each reasoning step after a retrieval call, all preceding trajectory context is held fixed, and the log-likelihood of the current action is computed under two conditions — with retrieved evidence visible, and with retrieved evidence masked. The difference between the two likelihoods directly quantifies how sensitive the current step is to the newly retrieved content. EALR serves as a per-step dense reward, combined with global outcome rewards for final answer correctness during policy optimization, to penalize steps that rely solely on internal priors without incorporating retrieved evidence.","experiments":"Evaluated across 7 in-domain and out-of-domain knowledge-intensive benchmarks, CIPO substantially reduces the rate of prior-driven reasoning, and outperforms existing RL search agent baselines on most tasks.","reading_guide":"Skim for the core reward design idea. Focus on the EALR formulation and ablations measuring confirmation bias reduction, to understand the principle of using likelihood contrast between information-present and information-masked conditions to quantify actual information usage. Estimated reading time: 15 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"密集证据奖励的设计对RLHF中事实性对齐有参考价值，重点看§3的信用分配定义。","en":"The dense evidence reward design is relevant for factual alignment in RLHF; focus on §3 for the credit assignment formulation."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Xingyu Guo","Wei Chen","Linlin Yang","Baochang Zhang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["search_agent","RL","evidence_grounding","reward_design","confirmation_bias"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06128","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06128","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05153","title":"Universal Pathologies, Conditional Consequences: A Triple-Robustness Analysis of RAG for Multi-Hop Traceability","abstract":"GraphRAG underperforms vector RAG on citation precision in many reports, but where and why have remained corpus-bound. We present a triple-robustness analysis that holds the retrieval architecture fixed and varies three orthogonal axes embedder (local e5-small -> Azure text-embedding-3-small), corpus (DO-178C typed-edge requirements -> Wikipedia paragraph chains via MuSiQue), and judge (paired GPT-5.4 x GPT-4.1) across 4,440 main-matrix runs, 600 cross-corpus runs, and 1,200 paired faithfulness ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-20T20:25:04Z","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05153.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"分析 GraphRAG 在多跳可追溯问答中为什么会出现过度引用、低 citation precision，以及这种问题何时会伤害 faithfulness。","importance":"贡献是 RAG 系统行为分析，不是通用预训练方法；价值在于把 GraphRAG 的失效模式拆成架构、语料和 judge 三个维度，对做工具增强和检索增强模型的人有参考。","technical_approach":"固定检索架构，同时改变三条轴线：embedder 从本地 e5-small 到 Azure text-embedding-3-small，corpus 从 DO-178C typed-edge requirements 到 MuSiQue/Wikipedia paragraph chains，judge 使用 paired GPT-5.4 与 GPT-4.1；通过主矩阵、跨语料和成对 faithfulness 判断分析稳健性。","experiments":"报告 4,440 次 main-matrix runs、600 次 cross-corpus runs 和 1,200 次 paired faithfulness judgments。GraphRAG 在三个设置中均输出 11-15 个 citation IDs，citation precision 为 0.12-0.23，retrieval recall 为 0.68-0.87；在 DO-178C typed-edge 语料上 faithfulness 随 hop 从 74% 降到 40%，而在 Wikipedia chains 上从 42% 升到 58%。","authors_note":"Technische Hochschule Ingolstadt 与 Independent Researcher；未见可确认的知名作者背景信息。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies why GraphRAG over-cites and suffers low citation precision in multi-hop traceability, and when that behavior harms faithfulness.","importance":"This is a RAG behavior analysis rather than a pretraining contribution. Its useful part is the decomposition of GraphRAG failure modes across architecture, corpus type, and judge choice.","technical_approach":"The study keeps the retrieval architecture fixed while varying three axes: embedder choice, corpus type, and judge model. It compares local e5-small and Azure text-embedding-3-small, DO-178C typed-edge requirements and MuSiQue/Wikipedia paragraph chains, and paired GPT-5.4/GPT-4.1 judgments.","experiments":"It reports 4,440 main-matrix runs, 600 cross-corpus runs, and 1,200 paired faithfulness judgments. GraphRAG emits 11-15 citation IDs with citation precision of 0.12-0.23 and retrieval recall of 0.68-0.87. Faithfulness drops from 74% to 40% across hops on typed-edge DO-178C, but rises from 42% to 58% on Wikipedia chains.","authors_note":"Technische Hochschule Ingolstadt and an independent researcher; no clearly identifiable widely known authors from the provided metadata."},"recommendation":{"zh":"RAG 不是预训练主线，但 GraphRAG 过引证的数字值得记；读 abstract 的 C2a/C2b 就够。","en":"Not a pretraining thread, but the GraphRAG over-citation numbers are worth remembering; the C2a/C2b claims in the abstract are enough."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Technische Hochschule Ingolstadt","Independent Researcher","Technische Hochschule IngolstadtIngolstadt","Independent ResearcherAnkara"],"authors":["Meftun Akarsu","Burak Ozdemir"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["GraphRAG","retrieval","faithfulness","citation-precision"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05153","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05153","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05651","title":"Relay, Don't Route: Adaptive Population Handoff for Cost-Efficient LLM-Driven Evolution","abstract":"Large language model (LLM)-driven evolution has shown promise for program search and algorithm discovery, but relying on strong models throughout long evolutionary runs is costly. A natural alternative is to combine cheap and strong models under a fixed inference budget. However, existing approaches typically allocate models at the level of individual queries or mutation steps, overlooking that evolutionary search is \\textit{stateful}: each generated candidate changes the population from which s","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T06:48:08Z","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05651.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI","cs.NE"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 LLM 驱动进化搜索中，如何在固定推理预算下组合强模型与廉价模型以降低成本的问题。","importance":"这是 agent / search 系统中的预算分配问题。价值在于把 allocation 单位从单次调用改为 population state，但对基座预训练的直接启发有限。","technical_approach":"作者先分析 evolutionary trajectory，发现搜索进展前置、早期表现有信息但噪声大、廉价模型能以较低成本恢复大部分早期进展。基于此提出 training-free 的 adaptive population handoff，在不同阶段切换模型族而不是逐 query 路由。","experiments":"摘要表明方法用于 program search 和 algorithm discovery，重点比较固定预算下强弱模型混合策略与逐步路由策略。没有预训练侧实验，主要看成本-效果曲线与 trajectory 分析。","authors_note":"作者来自港大、China Mobile、城大、CMU 等，偏 LLM-driven search 与系统优化。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"It studies how to combine strong and cheap LLMs under a fixed inference budget for LLM-driven evolutionary search.","importance":"This is an agent/search budget-allocation problem. The interesting part is shifting the allocation unit from individual calls to population state, but the direct relevance to foundation-model pretraining is limited.","technical_approach":"The paper first analyzes evolutionary trajectories and finds that progress is front-loaded, early performance is informative but noisy, and cheap models can recover much of the early gains at lower cost. It then proposes a training-free adaptive population handoff strategy that switches models across search phases rather than routing each query independently.","experiments":"The abstract suggests evaluations on program search and algorithm discovery, comparing mixed-model strategies under fixed budgets against per-query routing baselines. There is no pretraining-side experiment; the focus is on cost-performance trade-offs and trajectory analysis.","authors_note":"The authors are from HKU, China Mobile, CityU, and CMU, with a profile in LLM-driven search and systems optimization."},"recommendation":{"zh":"和 pretrain 关系不大，但它把预算分配从 token/query 提升到 trajectory state，这个视角可迁移到 test-time scaling。","en":"Not very relevant to pretraining, but the shift from token/query-level allocation to trajectory-state allocation is a reusable idea for test-time scaling."},"metadata":{"institutions":["The University of Hong Kong","JIUTIAN Research","China Mobile","City University of Hong Kong","Carnegie Mellon University","JIUTIAN Research, China Mobile"],"authors":["Sichun Luo","Yi Huang","Guanzhi Deng","Haibo Wang","Haochen Luo","Lei Li","Zefa Hu","Junlan Feng","Qi Liu"],"notable_authors":["Lei Li"],"tags":["agent-search","budget-allocation","evolutionary-search","test-time-scaling"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05651","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05651","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06171","title":"Routing Is Least Learnable Where It Is Most Valuable: Bounds on Representation Routing for Web Agents","abstract":"Web agents observe a browser through text, pixels, or both, and the choice is usually fixed once for all tasks. We measure six observation modes across eight site-model combinations (cells) on VisualWebArena and WebArena and ask what choosing per task would buy. The modes are complementary: each solves tasks the others miss, they fail in structurally different ways, and the best choice reverses between task sets. The obvious prize, an oracle that picks a winning mode for every task, looks large ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T15:37:04Z","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06171.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 web agent 中 observation mode（文本、像素或多模态）应否按任务动态路由，以及这种路由在真实噪声下是否真的值得学的问题。","importance":"这篇工作的价值不在提出更强 agent，而在把 web agent 常见的“按任务选表示”设想拆开测量，指出 oracle 增益常被运行噪声高估，并给出更现实的成本边界。","technical_approach":"作者在 VisualWebArena 和 WebArena 上系统比较六种 observation mode、八个 site-model 组合，先测模式互补性，再估计 per-task oracle 的理论收益，并显式量化 run-to-run noise。随后测试五种 routing policy，包括基于任务文本的零成本规则、confidence cascade 等，分析何时值得把任务送到更强但更贵的模式。","experiments":"核心实验发现：同一 mode 在同一任务上重复运行会带来 12-14% 的结果变化，因此 naive oracle 对动态路由收益的估计偏乐观；在 8/8 个 cell 中，把只有当前 mode 解决不了的任务送到最便宜的补充 mode，可在成功率不变下节省 9.5-30.6% 成本。工作主要基于 WebArena/VisualWebArena，属于 agent 系统分析而非预训练实验。","authors_note":"作者来自 UCL 与 Holistic AI。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"It asks whether web agents should dynamically route between text, pixel, or multimodal observation modes per task, and whether such routing is actually learnable and worthwhile under realistic noise.","importance":"The value is not a stronger agent but a cleaner measurement study: it shows that oracle gains from per-task routing are often inflated by run-to-run variance, and derives a more realistic cost bound.","technical_approach":"The paper compares six observation modes across eight site-model cells on VisualWebArena and WebArena, measuring complementarity, estimating per-task oracle gains, and explicitly quantifying run-to-run noise. It then evaluates five routing policies, including a zero-cost rule from task text and confidence cascades, to study when expensive modes are worth invoking.","experiments":"A key result is that rerunning the same mode on the same tasks changes outcomes by 12-14%, which makes naive oracle estimates overly optimistic. In all 8/8 cells, sending only tasks unsolved by one mode to the cheapest complementary mode reduces cost by 9.5-30.6% at unchanged success. This is an agent systems analysis, not a pretraining study.","authors_note":"The authors are from UCL and Holistic AI."},"recommendation":{"zh":"对 pretrain 不直接，但它提醒一个常被忽略的坑：agent 路由收益很容易被评测噪声吹大；只看噪声分析和 cost bound 即可。","en":"Not directly about pretraining, but it nails an easy-to-miss issue: routing gains in agents are often overstated by evaluation noise; read the noise analysis and cost-bound sections only."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University College London","Holistic AI","UCL Centre for Artificial Intelligence","University College London / Holistic AI","Holistic AI / University College London"],"authors":["Jiaming Wei","Zekun Wu","Adriano Koshiyama","Maria Perez-Ortiz"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["web-agent","routing","observation-mode","evaluation-noise","cost-analysis"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06171","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06171","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05810","title":"When Self-Evolution Backfires: Pre-Commit Gating against Skill Contamination in LLM Agents","abstract":"Self-evolving agents accumulate capability by distilling reusable skills from their execution trajectories, but we find this process is not monotonic: past a critical pool size, newly added skills degrade performance instead of improving it. We formalize this capability-contamination phase transition and trace it to a structural cause: once a defective skill enters the decision context, it becomes reference material for distilling later skills, forming cross-round contamination chains. We furthe","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T09:43:04Z","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05810.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"自进化LLM Agent从执行轨迹中蒸馏积累可复用技能时，技能池超过临界规模后新增技能反而导致性能下降，且事后移除缺陷技能难以恢复性能，需要有效的技能准入机制。","importance":"形式化了自举式能力积累中的技能污染相变现象，揭示了跨轮污染链的结构性成因及其不可逆性，为迭代自训练系统的内容准入设计提供了机制层面的参考。","technical_approach":"通过追踪技能演化路径，识别出缺陷技能进入决策上下文后会作为后续技能蒸馏的参考材料，形成跨轮污染链；证明事后移除源缺陷技能无法清除派生技能中已继承的错误推理，因此提出Verifier-as-Gatekeeper（VaG）机制，通过结构有效性、行为无害性、语义一致性三层异构评审者做渐进式信任分层，在技能入库前完成前置准入校验。","experiments":"所提供的摘要存在截断，未完整披露实验设置、模型参数量、测试数据集、基线对比及定量性能结果，仅呈现了机制分析与方法框架。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Self-evolving LLM agents accumulate reusable skills by distilling from execution trajectories, but performance degrades once the skill pool exceeds a critical size; post-hoc removal of defective skills fails to recover performance, requiring effective skill admission control.","importance":"Formalizes the capability contamination phase transition in bootstrapped capability accumulation, identifies the structural cause of cross-round contamination chains and their irreversibility, providing mechanistic reference for content admission design in all iterative self-training systems.","technical_approach":"Traces performance degradation to cross-round reference chains formed when defective skills enter the decision context and become reference material for subsequent skill distillation; proves post-hoc removal of source defective skills cannot erase flawed reasoning inherited by descendant skills, and proposes Verifier-as-Gatekeeper (VaG), a progressive trust hierarchy with three heterogeneous critics for structural validity, behavioral harmlessness, and semantic consistency, enforcing pre-commit admission checks before skills enter the pool.","experiments":"The provided abstract is truncated and does not fully disclose experimental setup, model scale, test datasets, baselines, or quantitative performance results; only mechanistic analysis and method framework are presented.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"自举训练中错误级联不可逆的观察对合成预训练数据过滤有参考，但方法针对Agent技能库设计，与LM预训练setup差异大，了解核心结论即可。","en":"The observation of irreversible error cascades in bootstrapped training is relevant for synthetic pretraining data filtering, but the agent-specific setup has limited direct transfer; note the core mechanism only."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Linfang Shang","Ming Xu","Yiding Sun","Tianle Xia","Lingxiang Hu","Lan Xu","Ning Zheng"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["self-evolving agents","bootstrapped training","error cascade","skill contamination","proactive gating"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05810","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05810","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06305","title":"Beyond Top-K: Replacing Black-Box Retrieval with Interpretable Agentic Operations","abstract":"Retrieval-augmented generation over long documents is dominated by one design: chunk the text, embed the chunks, and surface the top-k nearest neighbours of the query. We argue that for an important class of documents -- financial statements, audit reports, regulatory returns -- this design is structurally unsound, and we make the argument measurable. On a 780-page government financial report, 86.8% of content lines are table rows, thousands of near-identical figures compete in one embedding spa","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T17:23:13Z","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06305.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CL","cs.IR"],"summary":{"core_problem":"传统top-k嵌入检索在含大量表格的长文档（财务/审计/监管报告）中存在结构性缺陷，导致数值与单位/财年信息分离，检索精度严重下降","importance":"通过量化实验证明传统RAG设计在表格密集文档中的系统性失效，提出无嵌入的agentic检索范式，属于原理分析与方法创新","technical_approach":"提出READ（Reliable Embedding-free Agentic Document-search）方法，agent通过三个确定性操作直接读取原始文档结构，完全绕过嵌入检索的chunking错误","experiments":"在780页政府财务报告上测试：86.8%内容为表格行，传统chunking常导致数字与单位（lakh/crore，差两个数量级）分离；表格感知chunker在所有测试chunk尺寸下仍有27-30%数值chunk缺失财年上下文头","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Traditional top-k embedding retrieval has structural flaws in table-heavy long documents (financial/audit/regulatory reports), causing numeric values to be separated from units/fiscal year context and severely degrading retrieval accuracy","importance":"Quantitatively demonstrates systematic failure of mainstream RAG designs in table-heavy documents, proposes an embedding-free agentic retrieval paradigm, as a principle analysis and methodological innovation","technical_approach":"Proposes READ (Reliable Embedding-free Agentic Document-search), where an agent reads raw document structure through three deterministic operations, completely bypassing chunking errors in embedding-based retrieval","experiments":"Tested on a 780-page government financial report: 86.8% of content is table rows, traditional chunking often separates numbers from units (lakh/crore, a 100x difference); table-aware chunkers still leave 27-30% of numeric chunks without fiscal year headers at all tested chunk sizes","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"做长上下文RAG或文档agent的仅看§3的失效分析即可，方法本身仅适配表格密集文档，泛化性未验证","en":"For long-context RAG or document agent researchers, only read §3 failure analysis; method is limited to table-heavy documents with unproven generalization"},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Sagar Tamang","Ayush Vyas","Tabarakul Hazarika"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["rag","document-agent","long-document","retrieval"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06305","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06305","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06065","title":"The Next Screenshot Knows: Gated Hindsight Distillation for Mobile GUI Agents","abstract":"GUI agents are commonly trained offline from successful interaction trajectories. Standard training decomposes each trajectory into prefix-action pairs: the agent predicts an action from the current screen and interaction history, while the subsequent observation is discarded. This removes the rationale of why an action is correct: the evidence often appears only on the subsequent screen. For example, to enable Soft Wrap, the agent should click Edit or View, but nothing reveals this until the me","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T14:10:23Z","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06065.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决移动 GUI agent 离线模仿学习只看当前屏幕和历史轨迹、无法利用动作后截图解释动作为何正确的问题。","importance":"贡献是 agent 训练中的 privileged-information distillation：训练时使用下一帧截图作为教师信息，推理时学生仍只用可见前缀。这对过程监督、离线轨迹学习和 GUI agent 训练有一定参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出 Gated Hindsight Distillation。学生从可观察轨迹前缀预测动作；参数共享教师额外看到 next screenshot，并重新评分学生的 on-policy responses；只在下一帧确实提供动作正确性证据时启用蒸馏门控，避免把无关 hindsight 噪声注入学生。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体移动 GUI benchmark、模型规模、数据量或提升幅度。实验应比较标准 prefix-action imitation、无门控 hindsight 蒸馏和 GHD，在离线成功轨迹训练的 GUI agent 上评估任务完成率或动作准确率。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses offline training of mobile GUI agents where standard imitation uses only the current screen and history, discarding the next screenshot that often explains why an action is correct.","importance":"The contribution is a privileged-information distillation method for agent training. The teacher can use the next observation during training, while the student remains causal at inference time. This is relevant to process supervision, offline trajectory learning, and GUI-agent training.","technical_approach":"Gated Hindsight Distillation trains a student on observable trajectory prefixes and a parameter-sharing teacher that additionally observes the next screenshot. The teacher re-scores the student's on-policy responses, and distillation is applied only when the next screenshot provides useful evidence for the action.","experiments":"The abstract does not report the specific mobile GUI benchmarks, model sizes, dataset scale, or numerical gains. The expected comparisons are standard prefix-action imitation, ungated hindsight distillation, and GHD, evaluated by task success or action accuracy.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"这类 hindsight teacher 对离线 agent 数据很实用；看门控条件和 ablation 即可，不必深读应用细节。","en":"The hindsight-teacher idea is practical for offline agent data; read the gating rule and ablations, skip the app specifics."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Weiwei Li","Junzhuo Liu","Tong Chu","Hengfu Yu","Wen Li"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["GUI-agent","offline-imitation","distillation","privileged-information"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06065","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06065","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05204","title":"SkillTrace: Multi-Trace Provenance Auditing for LLM-Agent Skill Reuse","abstract":"LLM-agent ecosystems are rapidly growing around reusable skills: mixed-modality packages of metadata, natural-language instructions, code, tools, references, and operational workflows. As skills become marketplace artifacts, auditing their reuse is no longer the same problem as ordinary code clone detection. Existing detectors target single-modality source code or whole-package similarity, yet skill reuse evidence is distributed across authored text, implementation fragments, and operational str","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-05T07:38:12Z","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05204.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"如何审计 LLM Agent 生态系统中可重用技能（包含元数据、指令、代码、工具等混合模态）的重用情况？","importance":"随着 Agent 技能成为市场资产，传统的单模态代码克隆检测已无法应对跨文本、代码和操作结构的技能重用审计，本文提出了首个针对此问题的多追踪审计框架。","technical_approach":"提出 SKILLTRACE 框架，提取三种来源追踪：表达式（Expression）、实现（Implementation）和操作（Operational）。操作追踪被表示为技能操作图（SOG），捕获激活、过程和资源流结构。LLM 仅在摄取阶段辅助操作追踪的提取。","experiments":"未在摘要中提供具体实验数据，但强调了该框架能检测到仅保留技能某一部分的重用情况。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to audit the reuse of reusable skills (mixed-modality packages of metadata, instructions, code, tools, etc.) in LLM-agent ecosystems?","importance":"As agent skills become marketplace artifacts, traditional single-modality code clone detection is insufficient for auditing skill reuse across text, code, and operational structures. This paper proposes the first multi-trace auditing framework for this problem.","technical_approach":"Proposes the SKILLTRACE framework, which extracts three provenance traces: Expression, Implementation, and Operational. The Operational Trace is represented as a Skill Operational Graph (SOG) capturing activation, procedure, and resource-flow structure. An LLM assists only in the Operational-trace extraction during ingestion.","experiments":"Specific experimental data is not provided in the abstract, but it emphasizes the framework's ability to detect reuse that preserves only one part of a skill.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"Agent 技能重用的审计框架，偏向软件工程和版权保护，对基座预训练启发有限，作为 Agent 生态的 literature 备查即可。","en":"An auditing framework for agent skill reuse, leaning towards software engineering and copyright protection; limited inspiration for foundation model pretraining, keep as literature reference for agent ecosystems."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Jialuo Chen","Minghe Wang","Lingqi Jiang","Jianan Ma","Xinhao Deng","Xiaohu Du","Ruixiao Lin","Yunhao Feng","Linkang Du","Jingyi Wang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["LLM Agents","Skill Reuse","Provenance Auditing"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05204","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05204","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05219","title":"When Privileged Guidance Misaligns: State-Matched Routing and Contextualized Self-Distillation for Multi-Turn Agents","abstract":"Privileged on-policy distillation provides dense supervision for multi-turn agents by allowing a synchronized teacher to re-score the student's response at every turn with access to training-only references, such as successful trajectories. In interactive environments, however, the student's preceding actions continually change the execution state. As the student takes different actions or completes subgoals in a different order, its rollout may reach states not covered by the reference, making ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-05T10:50:46Z","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05219.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"多轮 agent 训练中，特权 on-policy 蒸馏因学生执行状态偏离参考轨迹而产生状态-参考错配，导致指导信号不可靠。","importance":"方法创新：提出状态匹配路由 + 上下文自蒸馏，解决多轮 agent 蒸馏中的状态错配问题。","technical_approach":"SMRC-SD 显式判断特权轨迹何时/如何指导当前 on-policy 状态，并通过上下文自蒸馏让学生在无可靠参考时自我学习。","experiments":"在交互式多轮 agent 环境中验证，对比普通特权蒸馏，减少状态错配带来的训练噪声。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In multi-turn agent training, privileged on-policy distillation suffers from state-reference mismatch as the student's rollout diverges from the reference trajectory.","importance":"Method innovation: state-matched routing + contextualized self-distillation to fix state-reference mismatch in multi-turn agent distillation.","technical_approach":"SMRC-SD explicitly decides when and how a privileged trajectory should guide the current on-policy state, and uses contextualized self-distillation when no reliable reference exists.","experiments":"Evaluated in interactive multi-turn agent environments, reducing training noise from state mismatch compared to vanilla privileged distillation.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"agent 蒸馏方法的小改进，状态匹配思路对 RL 训练有借鉴，但非预训练核心，看摘要即可。","en":"A small improvement in agent distillation; the state-matching idea is mildly relevant to RL training but not core to pretraining—read abstract only."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Junzhuo Liu","Weiwei Li","Jun Ling","Peng Wang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agent","distillation","on-policy","multi-turn"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05219","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05219","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05225","title":"Project2Task: Graph-Guided Project-Level Planning for Autonomous Research","abstract":"Research agents can increasingly search literature, propose hypotheses, generate code, run experiments, and draft manuscripts from a single topic. However, a research project is not merely a larger task: it is a long-horizon agenda that must be advanced through multiple bounded tasks with distinct but related objectives, parallel alternatives, and dependency-aware sequences. Existing single-task systems often treat the project as one oversized task, produce a flat set of vague or overlapping tas","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-05T11:39:29Z","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05225.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有 research agent 把整个项目当成一个超大任务，产出扁平、模糊、重叠的子任务，缺乏依赖关系与边界管理。","importance":"方法创新：提出图引导的项目级规划层，将研究项目分解为有依赖关系的 bounded tasks。","technical_approach":"Project2Task 把候选贡献表示为 innovation atoms，组织成有向 lineage graph；用轻量 Bernoulli block-model 目标在水平/垂直/混合分解中选择，生成有明确贡献归属的 bounded tasks。","experiments":"在自主研究任务上验证，对比单任务系统，任务边界更清晰、执行顺序更合理。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing research agents treat an entire project as one oversized task, producing flat, vague, overlapping subtasks without dependency or boundary management.","importance":"Method innovation: a graph-guided project-level planning layer that decomposes a research project into dependency-aware bounded tasks.","technical_approach":"Project2Task represents candidate contributions as innovation atoms organized in a directed lineage graph; a lightweight Bernoulli block-model objective selects among horizontal, vertical, and hybrid decompositions to produce bounded tasks with explicit contribution ownership.","experiments":"Validated on autonomous research tasks, producing clearer task boundaries and more sensible execution order than single-task systems.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"研究 agent 的规划层设计，与预训练关系远，作为 agent 长程规划的方法参考即可。","en":"A planning-layer design for research agents; far from pretraining, useful only as a reference for long-horizon agent planning."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Huirui Xu","Runtao Xu","Shuo Ren","Jiajun Zhang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agent","planning","research-agent","graph-decomposition"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05225","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05225","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05245","title":"Search2Skill: Skill Distillation Beyond Knowledge Boundaries Via Rubric-Based Reinforcement Learning","abstract":"Reusable skills, which encapsulate the procedural knowledge required to solve real-world professional tasks, offer LLM-based agents a path toward self-evolution in expert domains. Existing self-evolving skill methods construct skills internally from the model's parametric knowledge or trajectories, and are therefore bounded by what the model already knows. However, the domain conventions and standard procedures underlying professional skills often lie beyond this boundary and are hard to elicit ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-05T15:09:07Z","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05245.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有自进化 skill 方法依赖模型自身参数知识或轨迹，无法获取模型知识边界之外的专业领域规范与标准流程。","importance":"方法创新：通过外部搜索填补能力缺口，并用 rubric-based RL 联合优化何时搜、怎么搜、怎么生成 skill。","technical_approach":"Search2Skill 自动识别 agent 能力缺口 → 外部搜索证据 → 蒸馏为结构化可复用 skill；用基于 rubric 的强化学习同时优化搜索时机、搜索策略与 skill 生成。","experiments":"在 8 个专家级领域、3 个 benchmark 上验证，相比内部构造 skill 的方法在专业任务上表现更好。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing self-evolving skill methods rely on the model's parametric knowledge or trajectories and cannot acquire domain conventions and standard procedures beyond the model's knowledge boundary.","importance":"Method innovation: fills capability gaps via external search and uses rubric-based RL to jointly optimize when to search, how to search, and how to generate skills.","technical_approach":"Search2Skill automatically identifies agent capability gaps, searches external sources for evidence, and distills it into structured reusable skills; a rubric-based RL scheme jointly optimizes search timing, search strategy, and skill generation.","experiments":"Evaluated on eight expert-level domains across three benchmarks, outperforming methods that build skills internally from parametric knowledge.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"agent 自进化 + 外部检索的常规组合，rubric-based RL 是亮点但非预训练核心，看方法节即可。","en":"A standard combination of agent self-evolution and external retrieval; rubric-based RL is the main novelty but not core to pretraining—read the method section only."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Muyang Ye","Tian Lan","Feihu Jiang","Yongshi Ye","Wuyunsiqin","Bin Zhu","Qianghuai Jia","Zhao Xu","Weihua Luo","Ye Wang","Jinyang Zhang","Longyue Wang","Lingfeng Bao"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agent","skill-distillation","reinforcement-learning","retrieval"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05245","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05245","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.05587","title":"StepReflect: Structured UI Transition Reflection for Mobile GUI Agents","abstract":"Autonomous mobile GUI agents require accurate action reflection for reliable long-horizon execution. Existing approaches rely on open-ended multimodal reasoning after each action, which is costly and poorly matched to the structured nature of GUI state transitions. We propose StepReflect, which formulates per-step GUI reflection as supervised structured prediction conditioned on explicit transition specifications and paired visual evidence. StepReflect is trained through a staged pipeline combin","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-08-06T04:17:27Z","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_05587.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"移动GUI Agent的逐步动作反思依赖开放多模态推理，成本高且与GUI状态转换的结构化特性不匹配，长程执行可靠性不足。","importance":"方法创新，将GUI逐步反思建模为结构化预测任务，提出分阶段训练pipeline提升移动GUI agent的执行准确率。","technical_approach":"提出StepReflect，以显式转换规范和配对视觉证据为条件，将逐步GUI反思建模为监督结构化预测；训练采用SFT+师生蒸馏+偏好/奖励优化的分阶段流程。","experiments":"8B参数模型，在AndroidWorld上转换级准确率82.16%，比相同结构化输入下的零样本GPT-5.2高11.83个百分点；在线测试在4种agent配置中3种任务成功率更高，与GPT-5.2反思agent差距在1个成功任务以内。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Per-step action reflection for mobile GUI agents relies on open-ended multimodal reasoning, which is costly and mismatched to the structured nature of GUI state transitions, hurting long-horizon execution reliability.","importance":"Methodological innovation: formulates per-step GUI reflection as a structured prediction task and proposes a staged training pipeline to improve mobile GUI agent execution accuracy.","technical_approach":"StepReflect frames per-step GUI reflection as supervised structured prediction conditioned on explicit transition specifications and paired visual evidence; training uses a staged pipeline of SFT, teacher-student distillation, and preference/reward-based refinement.","experiments":"An 8B parameter model achieves 82.16% transition-level accuracy on AndroidWorld, 11.83 pp higher than zero-shot GPT-5.2 under the same structured input; online tests show higher task success on 3 of 4 agent configurations, within 1 successful task of the GPT-5.2 Reflection Agent.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"GUI agent反思的结构化建模思路可参考，但属于特定场景增量工作，看摘要和实验表即可。","en":"Structured modeling of GUI agent reflection is worth noting, but it is an incremental domain-specific work; read the abstract and experiment tables only."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Linqiang Guo","Wei Liu","Li Gu","Yang Wang","Tse-Hsun","Chen"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["gui-agent","reflection","structured-prediction","mobile-agent"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.05587","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05587","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06704","title":"WebRider: Persona-Conditioned Intent Controllers for Live-Web Assistance","abstract":"Delegating a web task involves more than asking a question; it requires transferring a policy: what to verify, how to handle uncertainty, which preferences matter, and when to stop. Yet, current live-web agents are evaluated solely on the final answer, ignoring the policy constraints that define the delegation. A plausible final answer can conceal violations of that policy. Our full live audit reveals this critical gap: a strong controller completes 99.2% of tasks but honors all policy constrain","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06704.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.HC"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作处理的不是“网页任务能否做完”，而是“代理是否沿着用户委托的方式把任务做完”。作者指出，现有 live-web agent 评测几乎都只看最终答案或任务完成率，忽略了执行过程中的策略约束：要核验哪些证据、遇到不确定性时是否该追问、哪些偏好必须进入排序、什么时候应该停止而不是继续猜。问题的难点在于，这类委托策略不是静态标签，而是会贯穿浏览、点击、检索、澄清、停止、回答整个闭环；而且 live web 页面持续变化，最终答案即便看起来合理，也可能是在违反用户 policy 的情况下得到的。作者把这类可审计的委托策略形式化为 intent contract，并把核心问题定义为：如何在动态网页环境中，让 agent 在每一步都保持对 contract 的忠实执行，而不是只在终点上“看起来答对了”。","importance":"对基座预训练本身，这篇论文不是训练范式或数据配比层面的工作，相关性偏间接；但它对 agent 训练信号设计和过程监督有一个清楚的提醒：只用 outcome supervision 会系统性掩盖 policy violation。论文给出的结果很直接：一个强 controller 在 99.2% 的 contract 上都能终止，但只有 38.8% 真正满足全部 contract gate。这个差距说明，若训练或评测只看 final success，会把大量“路径错但答案像对”的轨迹当成正样本。对做 post-train、tool-use、web agent 数据合成的人，这意味着需要把可验证的中间控制状态、证据义务和 stopping policy 显式写进训练对象，而不是只收集问答对。对 pretrain 研究员的启发主要在接口层：如果未来想把 agentic behavior 更早地纳入 continual pretrain 或 mid-train，监督对象不能只有文本结果，还要有结构化的过程约束。","technical_approach":"$3e","experiments":"实验部分最有信息量的是评测设置和误差分解，而不是模型规模。作者构建了 RiderBench：从 768 个审计过的请求扩展到 4,096 个 persona-conditioned contracts，覆盖 42 个网站，并且支持同一请求在不同 persona 下的配对比较。核心指标不是单一 success，而是 contract gates 和人工配对审计，检查完成轨迹与可见步骤是否同时满足委托 policy。\n\n最关键的数字是：强基线 Full-Pro 在 99.2% 的 contract 上都能终止，但只有 38.8% 通过全部 contract gate。也就是说，终止率和 delegation fidelity 明显脱钩。论文还做了 paired human study，结论是 final-trace success 与 stepwise acceptability 存在显著偏离：最终答案可能被人类判为“看起来可接受”，但逐步检查时会发现它没有按要求核验证据、没有在该追问时追问，或者在 persona 指定的风险偏好下做了不该做的扩展搜索。\n\n机制实验主要围绕 persistent intention 的价值。作者比较了仅给 persona、仅给 intention 文本、以及显式持久 intention 状态等设置，结论是持续维护的 intention 对控制质量更关键，不是简单把 persona 描述塞进 prompt 就能替代。另一个重要点是 guarded middle traces 的可训练性：由于每一步都有 post-guard 的可执行 action 作为局部监督目标，中层 policy 可以在固定顶层 controller、guard 和 executor 的条件下单独训练与替换。这说明作者不是只提出一个评测框架，而是在尝试把 agent 过程控制切成可学习、可审计的模块。","reading_guide":"如果只是泛读，先看 Introduction 和 Figure 1，抓住论文真正要解决的不是网页导航成功率，而是 delegation fidelity。接着看 Hierarchical Controller，重点理解为什么顶层和中层必须强分离，以及为什么训练目标要定义成 post-guard executable action，而不是自由文本动作。这里是整篇工作的结构支点。\n\n然后看 Persona-Conditioned Intent Contracts，注意 contract 里哪些字段是稳定的，哪些只能通过显式 user clarification 更新。作者想解决的是“执行中 policy 漂移”，所以 contract 的稳定性假设很关键。\n\n实验部分优先看 RiderBench 的构造方式、contract gates 的定义、99.2% vs 38.8% 这组 headline 数字，以及 paired human study。这里能看清作者为什么说“完成不等于忠实”。如果时间够，再看 persistent intention 的消融和 guarded middle traces 的训练分析，这两部分决定这篇工作是否只是评测包装，还是对 agent 训练接口有实质贡献。\n\n预计阅读时间 25–35 分钟。对做 pretrain 的读者，不必在网页执行细节上停留太久，重点看监督对象如何从 final answer 改写为结构化过程状态，以及这种改写如何产生更干净的训练信号。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper is not about whether a web agent can finish a task, but whether it can preserve the user’s delegated policy while doing so. Current live-web evaluation mostly scores final answers or completion, which misses a central failure mode: the agent may produce a plausible answer after ignoring the user’s verification requirements, uncertainty policy, ranking preferences, or stopping criteria. This is especially problematic on the live web, where evidence arrives incrementally, pages change, and browsing, grounding, clarification, and stopping are tightly coupled. The paper formalizes this missing object as an intent contract and asks a sharper question: how can an agent maintain contract fidelity at every visible step, rather than merely ending with an acceptable-looking answer?","importance":"This is not a pretraining paper in the narrow sense, and its relevance to foundation-model pretraining is indirect. Still, it makes an important point for training-signal design: outcome-only supervision systematically hides policy violations. The headline number is the reason to care: a strong controller terminates on 99.2% of contracts, but only 38.8% satisfy all contract gates. That gap means many trajectories that look successful at the endpoint are actually bad supervision if one cares about delegated behavior. For post-training, tool-use, and web-agent data generation, the implication is clear: intermediate control state, evidence obligations, and stopping policy need to be explicit training targets. For pretraining researchers, the value is at the pretrain↔post-train interface: if agentic behavior is ever pushed earlier into continual pretraining or mid-training, final text alone is too weak a target.","technical_approach":"$3f","experiments":"$40","reading_guide":"$41","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"读 abstract 的 99.2/38.8 缺口和 intent contract 设计即可；它会影响 agent reward 怎么写。","en":"Read the 99.2/38.8 completion-fidelity gap and the intent-contract design; it matters for how agent rewards should be specified."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Zhi Li","Tao Zhou","Yeqing Li","Eugene Ie","Demetri Terzopoulos"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["web-agent","intent-contract","policy-fidelity","delegation","tool-use"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06704","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06704","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06745","title":"MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents","abstract":"Long-horizon agents rely on memory to reuse experiences, yet existing memory systems often assume that evidence can be directly consumed through a fixed representation. This leads to representation mismatch, where relevant information is available but not organized for the current decision. To this end, we propose MemPrism, a task-conditioned relational memory framework that separates persistent experience storage from decision-time working memory. MemPrism records interactions as the event stre","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06745.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文讨论的是长程 agent memory 里的一个更细的失败类型：信息已经被存下来了，也被取回来了，但呈现方式不适合当前决策，因此 agent 仍然用不好。作者把这个问题称为 representation mismatch，并把它和更常见的 storage failure、retrieval failure 区分开。核心问题不是“记忆有没有”，而是“同一段历史在当前子任务下应该以什么关系结构被组织出来”。例如，检测循环需要把重复动作和结果对齐，状态跟踪需要按实体聚合同一对象的变化，失败分析需要把动作和环境反馈连起来，依赖分析则需要把相隔很远的事件串起来。固定的时间线、摘要或向量检索结果，往往只能支持其中一类关系，不能覆盖所有决策需求。","importance":"对预训练研究的直接影响有限，因为这不是基座模型训练论文；但它对 agent memory 的接口设计提出了一个有价值的拆分：持久记忆应保存稳定事实，工作记忆应按当前任务临时构造。这个拆分对做长上下文、memory-augmented LM、tool-use agent 的人都有启发。很多系统把 memory 问题理解成“怎么压缩、怎么检索、怎么写回”，这篇论文强调还差一步：检索之后如何重排成当前策略真正可消费的结构。若把这个观点放到更广的训练视角，它提示我们，模型性能不只受知识覆盖影响，也受输入组织形式影响；同样的证据，换一种结构化呈现，决策质量可能明显不同。","technical_approach":"MemPrism 的方法核心是把 persistent memory 和 decision-time working memory 明确分开。系统由五个模块组成：Recorder、Router、Composer、Render、Adapter。推理时主要用前四个模块。Recorder 把真实交互记录成统一 event stream，既保留原始事件，也保留结构化字段，如动作前观察、执行动作、环境反馈、奖励或步骤标签、任务元信息等。这里的设计意图是让持久层尽量保持中性和可复用，不提前把历史压缩成某一种固定摘要。\n\nRouter 是一个轻量的 view policy，它不直接输出环境动作，而是先选择“该怎么看历史”。作者把 view action 定义成几个维度的组合：relation type、evidence range、outcome condition、granularity。也就是，当前该构造哪种关系视图、看多长的历史、是否只看成功/失败/特定结果、以及细节粒度多粗。这个设计把 memory read-time 的表示选择显式化了。\n\nComposer 根据 Router 的选择，从 event stream 中筛选事件并组织成关系结构；Render 再把这个结构渲染成 optical working-memory view。作者使用 optical view，不只是为了压缩 token，而是为了把关系直接编码进二维布局：空间邻近表示相关性，行列对齐支持状态比较，箭头表示变化或依赖，高亮强调失败点和任务相关证据。随后，一个冻结的 task policy 读取当前输入和这个临时视图，输出下一步环境动作。这个视图只服务当前一步，之后丢弃，不写回持久记忆。这样可以避免固定摘要或反复压缩带来的不可逆失真。\n\n训练上，作者给 Router 加了两阶段学习。先用 action-conditioned soft supervision 初始化 view policy，再用 trajectory-level grouped GRPO 优化。这里的目标不是直接学环境动作，而是学“在当前状态下选哪种 memory view 更有利于后续决策”。这种分离有助于把性能提升更明确地归因到 memory representation interface，而不是混杂在整个 agent policy 里。","experiments":"从给出的全文内容看，实验主线围绕 view selection 是否真的改善长程决策，而不是单纯比较存储容量。作者强调两类证据：一类是任务性能提升，另一类是归因实验，证明收益来自 working-memory 视图而不是别的模块。论文介绍里提到，view policy 先用软监督初始化，再用 grouped GRPO 做轨迹级优化，目的就是隔离 view selection 的作用。\n\n虽然当前提供的正文片段没有完整表格数字，但可以确定作者会比较固定表示与 task-conditioned relational views：例如只给时间线、只给摘要、只给原始检索片段，与按 relation type / evidence range / outcome filter / granularity 动态构造的视图相比，后者在 loop detection、state tracking、failure analysis、dependency reasoning 这类子任务上更合适。另一个关键实验点应是 temporary view 不写回 persistent memory 的设计：作者认为如果把临时视图再写回，会把某一步的任务偏置固化到长期记忆里，损害后续复用性，因此会通过消融展示 persistent event stream + on-demand view 比固定 summary memory 更稳。\n\n如果拿这篇论文做泛读，实验部分最该找的是三类结果：第一，Router 学到的 view action 分布是否随任务状态变化；第二，固定 view 与动态 view 的性能差距；第三，光学视图相对纯文本或扁平检索结果的增益是否来自结构显式化，而不只是 token 压缩。","reading_guide":"先看 Introduction，把作者提出的 representation mismatch 和 storage / retrieval failure 的边界弄清楚。这个定义是整篇论文成立的前提。如果不接受这个问题分解，后面的模块设计会显得像是在做另一种 memory engineering。\n\n然后重点看 Method 里的五模块流水线，尤其是 Router 的 action space。阅读时要问两个问题：为什么 view selection 要单独建模，而不是交给主 policy 自己在 prompt 里隐式完成；为什么 temporary working view 不写回 persistent memory。前者关系到可学习的 memory interface，后者关系到长期记忆是否被任务局部偏置污染。\n\n接着看 optical view 的具体例子。不要只把它理解成“把历史画成图像节省 token”，作者真正想强调的是二维布局能显式表达关系结构。若论文里有可视化案例，值得仔细看，因为这部分决定方法是否只是换了输入模态，还是确实改变了信息组织方式。\n\n实验部分建议优先看 view policy 的训练方式、固定视图对比、以及不同 relation type 的消融。预计阅读时间 20–30 分钟。对 pretrain 读者，重点不是 agent benchmark 本身，而是“同一证据如何以不同结构暴露给模型”这个接口问题。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a specific failure mode in long-horizon agent memory: the needed evidence has been stored and even retrieved, yet the agent still fails because the evidence is presented in the wrong form for the current decision. The authors call this representation mismatch and distinguish it from storage failure and retrieval failure. The key question is not whether memory exists, but how the same interaction history should be reorganized for different subtasks. Loop detection, state tracking, failure analysis, and dependency reasoning require different relational structures over the same events, and a single fixed representation rarely serves all of them well.","importance":"This is not a foundation-model pretraining paper, so the relevance is indirect. Still, it offers a useful systems-level idea for memory-augmented LMs and long-horizon agents: persistent memory should preserve stable facts, while working memory should be constructed on demand for the current task. Many memory systems focus on what to store, how to compress, and how to retrieve. MemPrism argues that one more layer matters: how retrieved evidence is organized before it reaches the policy. In a broader training sense, the paper is a reminder that model performance depends not only on knowledge coverage but also on input organization. The same evidence can support very different decisions depending on how relations are exposed.","technical_approach":"$42","experiments":"$43","reading_guide":"$44","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"读方法图和 memory ablation 即可；它把“存得多”改成“按任务重排”，比多数向量记忆论文更干净。","en":"Read the method diagram and memory ablations; reframing memory as task-conditioned restructuring rather than storing more is cleaner than many vector-memory agent papers."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Zhisheng Chen","Bingfan Zeng","Bangde Cao","Zhengwei Xie","Yuxuan Li","Jinhan Li","Zheng Lu","Xiangchen Guan","Zikai Xiao","Rui Qian","Jingwei Song"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agent-memory","long-horizon-agents","working-memory","web-agent","embodied-agent"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06745","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06745","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06968","title":"Same physical state, different collective dynamics: state encodings select synchronization outcomes in language-model agents","abstract":"Language-model agents act on state encodings of their environment, yet these are treated as interchangeable interfaces. Using pretrained language models, we designed a circular-synchronization experiment applying a state-encoding intervention while holding the physical system fixed: each agent sees only a summary of its neighbours' relative phases and chooses to advance, stay or retard. Encoding that state as low-order circular moments rather than as a histogram selected different collective out","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06968.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CY"],"summary":{"core_problem":"在闭环多体交互系统中固定所有物理规则、任务目标、代理能力时，仅改变环境状态传递给LLM代理的文本编码格式，是否会彻底改变整个系统的集体涌现动力学结果。","importance":"提供了直接实证：状态表示的格式本身就是强干预变量，与奖励、指令、环境规则无关，就能完全决定多LLM系统的收敛方向。这一观察对理解预训练模型习得的格式响应偏置如何在闭环交互中被放大为系统级行为、以及多代理系统的prompt设计有明确参考价值。","technical_approach":"设计了极简的环形耦合相位振荡器实验：17个无记忆、无目标、无历史信息的代理，每步仅接收邻居相位的编码文本，输出「前移/保持/后移」三个动作之一调整自身相位，所有物理更新规则完全固定。对比三种从同一份原始相位分布计算得到的编码：低阶环形矩（总结分布的均值方向和集中度）、按bin中心标注的24段直方图、按bin区间标注的24段直方图。实验匹配所有条件的初始随机种子，设置K=0零耦合严格对照排除物理引擎干扰，额外通过固定合成场的开环实验单独测量每种编码下的动作响应算子，剥离闭环反馈的混淆效应。","experiments":"在GPT-5.4-mini上，正耦合条件下环形矩编码在6/6随机种子中实现完全同步（最终极序参量r1接近1），两种直方图编码均为0/6完全同步：中心标注直方图仅产生部分对齐，区间标注直方图常收敛到两簇反相对抗的稳态。K=0零耦合对照中三种编码的物理轨迹完全一致，排除了初始条件、引擎差异的混淆。开环响应测量显示：环形矩编码产生纯方向吸引的动作响应，区间编码产生无净方向的两瓣响应，中心编码甚至产生反向减速的净偏置。编码效应在Claude上可复现，但不同编码对应的效果方向发生反转。","reading_guide":"泛读即可，重点关注实验设计的控制变量逻辑（为什么要设置无记忆无目标的极简环境、K=0对照的作用）和图1、图2的结果对比，不需要深入钻研耦合振荡器的理论细节，预计阅读时间15分钟。核心可带走的结论是：预训练模型对不同文本表示的固有响应偏置，足以在闭环交互中塑造完全不同的宏观系统结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Tests whether purely textual differences in how environment state is encoded for LLM agents, with all physical rules, task objectives and agent capabilities held fixed, can shift the collective emergent dynamics of closed-loop multi-agent systems.","importance":"Provides concrete empirical evidence that state representation format acts as a strong intervention variable, fully determining convergent multi-agent outcomes independent of rewards, instructions, or environment physics. The observation informs understanding of how pre-trained representational biases toward text formatting scale up to system-level behavior in closed-loop interactions, with direct implications for multi-agent prompt design.","technical_approach":"Implements a minimal coupled circular phase oscillator setup with 17 stateless, goal-free agents with no access to history or identity. At each step, each agent receives only an encoded text summary of neighboring agents' relative phases, and outputs one of three actions (advance/stay/retard) to adjust its phase, with identical physical update rules across all conditions. Three encodings are tested, all computed from the same underlying phase distribution: low-order circular moments summarizing distribution direction and concentration, a 24-bin histogram labeled by bin centers, and an identical 24-bin histogram labeled by interval bounds. Initial random seeds are matched across conditions, a zero-coupling (K=0) control rules out engine confounds, and separate open-loop tests with fixed synthetic fields measure action response operators independent of closed-loop feedback effects.","experiments":"On GPT-5.4-mini, moment encoding achieved full synchronization (final polar order parameter r1 ~ 1) across 6/6 random seeds at positive coupling values, while both histogram encodings achieved 0/6 full synchronization. Center-labeled histograms produced only partial alignment, while interval-labeled histograms frequently converged to a stable two-cluster opposing state. The K=0 control produced identical physical trajectories across all encodings, eliminating initial condition and engine implementation confounds. Open-loop response measurements showed moment encoding produces pure directional attraction, interval encoding produces a two-lobed response with zero net directional bias, and center encoding produces a reversed net retarding bias. The qualitative encoding effect replicated on Claude, though the direction of effect across encodings was reversed.","reading_guide":"Skim for core design insights; focus on the control variable rationale (why the stateless, goal-free setup and K=0 control are required for valid causal attribution) and the result contrasts in Figures 1 and 2. No deep background in coupled oscillator theory is needed; estimated reading time 15 minutes. The core takeaway is that pre-trained models' inherent response biases to different text representations are strong enough to shape divergent macro-scale system outcomes in closed-loop interaction.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"实验设计干净，强提醒：状态序列化方式直接决定 agent 群体行为，做 agent/长链推理时别把 prompt 格式当无关变量；读 Fig2 和 replay 对照。","en":"A clean experiment showing state serialization is not a passive wrapper but an interaction term; read Fig. 2 and the replay control before designing agent interfaces."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Tokyo"],"authors":["Takahiro Ezaki","Naoto Imura","Katsuhiro Nishinari"],"notable_authors":["Takahiro Ezaki","Katsuhiro Nishinari"],"tags":["llm_agents","state_encoding","multi_agent","prompting","behavioral_experiment"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06968","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06968","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07169","title":"Agent Memory Distillation: Empowering Small LLM Agents with Hierarchical Teacher Memory","abstract":"Memory systems have shown promise for improving agent performance, but their potential remains largely unexplored for small language models, which struggle to generate sufficient successful trajectories on their own. We propose Agent Memory Distillation (AMD), a training-free framework that transfers structured knowledge from a large teacher agent to a small student agent through hierarchical memory. AMD constructs three complementary memory types from successful teacher trajectories: Workflow m","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07169.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"小语言模型agent自身任务成功率低，生成的成功轨迹数量少，自建记忆库以失败轨迹为主，记忆利用效果受限。直接将大模型teacher的原始记忆迁移给小模型student收益极低，原因是师生能力存在差距，且小模型的上下文学习能力和指令跟随能力较弱，无法有效理解和应用teacher的知识。","importance":"对预训练研究的启发在于，分层知识迁移的设计思路可借鉴到模型蒸馏、合成数据构造等场景，尤其适用于需要向小模型做参数高效或免训练能力注入的场景；迁移质量依赖师生兼容性的结论，也对学生模型预训练和蒸馏流程设计有参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出Agent Memory Distillation（AMD）免训练框架，从teacher agent的成功轨迹中构造三类互补的分层记忆：Workflow记忆编码任务级的分解与高层规划策略，Subtask记忆提供子任务粒度的具体行为示例，Function记忆记录工具调用的schema、约定和常见问题。Workflow和Subtask记忆在任务开始时主动注入给student，Function记忆则在推理过程中student遇到工具调用错误时被动检索使用。","experiments":"以GPT-5-mini为teacher，4个4B/8B参数的小模型为student，在3个基准上验证效果。AMD相比零样本基线，在AppWorld上平均准确率提升27.2个百分点，BFCL V3上提升11.2个百分点，ToolSandbox上提升3.4个百分点，优于所有非蒸馏设计的记忆基线；同时减少了交互轮数，生成的轨迹更接近teacher。消融实验显示三类记忆各有独立贡献，迁移质量同时取决于teacher准确率和师生兼容性，4B规模的student收益最大。","reading_guide":"泛读建议：重点看引言中关于朴素记忆迁移失效的观察（图1），第3章的三层记忆设计与注入机制，实验部分的消融结果与师生兼容性分析。预计阅读时间15-20分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Small LLM agents have low task success rates and produce few successful trajectories, so their self-built memory repositories are dominated by failed experiences, limiting the utility of memory-based methods. Naive transfer of raw memory from a stronger teacher agent brings only marginal gains, as the capability gap between teacher and student, combined with limited in-context learning and instruction-following ability of small models, prevents effective comprehension and application of teacher knowledge.","importance":"For pretraining research, the hierarchical knowledge transfer design offers a useful reference for distillation pipelines and synthetic data construction, especially for scenarios requiring parameter-efficient or training-free capability injection into small models. The finding that transfer quality depends on teacher-student compatibility also informs student model pretraining and distillation recipe design.","technical_approach":"Agent Memory Distillation (AMD) is a training-free framework that constructs three complementary hierarchical memory types from successful teacher agent trajectories. Workflow memory encodes task-level decomposition and high-level planning strategies. Subtask memory provides concrete action examples at intermediate subtask granularity. Function memory captures tool calling schemas, conventions, and common pitfalls. Workflow and Subtask memories are proactively injected into the student at the start of each task, while Function memory is retrieved reactively when the student encounters tool calling errors during inference.","experiments":"Evaluated with GPT-5-mini as the teacher and 4 small models (4B or 8B parameters) as students across 3 benchmarks. AMD achieves average accuracy improvements of 27.2 percentage points on AppWorld, 11.2 percentage points on BFCL V3, and 3.4 percentage points on ToolSandbox over zero-shot baselines, outperforming all non-distillation memory baselines. It also reduces interaction turns and produces trajectories more similar to the teacher. Ablations show each memory type contributes uniquely, transfer quality depends on both teacher accuracy and teacher-student compatibility, and 4B-scale students gain the largest benefit.","reading_guide":"Skim the introduction for the observation of naive memory transfer failure (Figure 1), Section 3 for the three-layer memory design and injection mechanism, and the experiment section for ablation results and teacher-student compatibility analysis. Estimated reading time: 15-20 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"一种 test-time 的知识蒸馏（通过 prompt/memory 注入），展示了如何结构化地利用大模型的轨迹来辅助小模型，对构建 Agent 系统有一定参考价值，但非预训练核心。","en":"A test-time knowledge distillation approach (via prompt/memory injection) demonstrating how to structurally utilize large model trajectories to assist small models; offers reference value for building Agent systems, though not core to pretraining."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Taeil Kim","Kangsan Kim","Sung Ju Hwang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["Agent Memory","Knowledge Distillation","Small LLMs","Tool Use"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07169","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07169","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07429","title":"TEPA: Revoking Stale Memories for Conflict-Robust Language Agents","abstract":"Long-term memory enables language agents to reuse past facts, preferences, and task experience. Persistence also creates a central falsifiability problem: when the world changes, stale memories can remain retrievable and pollute the prompt. We characterize this failure mode as memory pollution: degradation caused by active memories that newer conflicting evidence has superseded. We introduce TEPA, a revocable evidence-memory mechanism that makes validity an explicit state of memory. TEPA represe","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07429.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"语言智能体的长期记忆存在「记忆污染」失效模式：当外部环境、用户偏好或工具状态发生变化时，已被新证据推翻的旧记忆仍可被检索到，作为提示词证据干扰当前决策，在冲突场景下带记忆系统的表现甚至不如无记忆基线。","importance":"记忆有效性的显式状态建模思路可迁移到预训练研究：一是为持续预训练中的知识更新提供新的设计方向，替代单纯依赖灾难性遗忘或全量重训的方案；二是为预训练语料中冲突事实的处理、知识库对齐提供参考；三是为长上下文模型的证据有效性判断目标设计提供启发。","technical_approach":"提出TEPA可撤销证据记忆机制，核心是给记忆设置显式生命周期状态。具体设计：1. 将每条观测映射为带键的先例（keyed precedent），键标识记忆主题（如用户偏好槽、工具状态槽），值为对应声明；2. 记忆存储分为活跃集和撤销集，常规检索只返回活跃集中的内容；3. 当新证据与活跃集中的先例同键且值冲突时，自动将旧先例转移到撤销集，保留审计路径但不参与常规检索。另有TEPA-Full变体，在有可执行验证条件时，会先验证候选先例再将其提升为活跃状态。同时定义分阶段记忆污染指数（MPI），量化某一阶段带记忆方法相对无记忆基线的性能退化程度。","experiments":"在四类冲突场景下评测：受控隐藏状态漂移、真实文件支持的可执行漂移、用户偏好更新、MemoryAgentBench SH-6k事实整合基准。结果显示，仅追加式记忆和键值缓存基线在反转阶段出现明显性能下降，部分场景下差于无记忆基线；TEPA的可撤销生命周期记忆在所有场景下均保持鲁棒。多跳推理和超长上下文变体的实验显示，检索链构建是下一阶段的主要瓶颈。","reading_guide":"先读第2节问题形式化部分，理解记忆污染的定义和分阶段记忆污染指数的计算逻辑；再读第3节方法部分，重点看记忆状态机和冲突撤销机制；实验部分重点关注反转阶段的性能对比和污染指数指标。预计阅读时间20分钟左右。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Long-term memory in language agents suffers from a \"memory pollution\" failure mode: when external environments, user preferences, or tool states change, stale memories superseded by new conflicting evidence remain retrievable and contaminate prompt context, leading to performance worse than no-memory baselines in conflict scenarios.","importance":"The explicit validity state modeling for memories transfers to pretraining research: it offers a new design direction for knowledge update in continual pretraining as an alternative to catastrophic forgetting or full retraining, informs strategies for handling conflicting facts in pretraining corpora and knowledge base alignment, and inspires objective design for evidence validity judgment in long-context models.","technical_approach":"TEPA is a revocable evidence memory mechanism that assigns explicit lifecycle states to stored memories. Each observation is mapped to a keyed precedent, where the key identifies the memory topic (e.g., user preference slot, tool regime slot) and the value is the corresponding claim. Memories are split into an active set (used for ordinary retrieval) and a revoked set (retained for audit but excluded from regular retrieval). When new evidence conflicts with an active precedent under the same key, the stale precedent is automatically moved to the revoked set. A TEPA-Full variant adds pre-promotion validation for candidate precedents when executable verification is available. A phase-wise Memory Pollution Index (MPI) is defined to quantify how much worse a memory-equipped method performs relative to a no-memory baseline in a given phase.","experiments":"Evaluated across four conflict settings: controlled hidden regime drift, real file-backed executable drift, user preference updates, and the MemoryAgentBench SH-6k fact consolidation benchmark. Append-only memory and key-cache baselines degrade significantly during reversal phases, performing worse than no-memory baselines in some cases; TEPA's revocable lifecycle memory remains robust across all settings. Experiments on multi-hop and very long-context variants identify retrieval chain construction as the next major bottleneck.","reading_guide":"Start with Section 2 (problem formulation) to understand the memory pollution definition and phase-wise Memory Pollution Index calculation. Then read Section 3 for TEPA's memory state machine and conflict revocation mechanism. For experiments, focus on reversal-phase performance comparisons and MPI metrics. Estimated reading time: ~20 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"记忆污染是agent长期运行的真实痛点，TEPA的keyed-revocation思路干净；对预训练研究员价值在理解记忆失效模式，看§2的问题定义即可","en":"Memory pollution is a real pain point for long-running agents; TEPA's keyed-revocation is clean. For pretraining researchers, the value is the failure-mode characterization in §2."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Yan Zhou","Yue Ouyang","Kaiyang Zheng","Suncheng Xiang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agent_memory","memory_pollution","retrieval","drift"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07429","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07429","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07437","title":"Fisher-R1: Training LLM Agents for Reliable Hypothesis Testing","abstract":"Reliable hypothesis testing is the foundation of many empirical scientific claims. Large language model (LLM) agents are increasingly used to automate this process, as they can inspect datasets, generate code, and produce analyses end-to-end. However, we show that they frequently make subtle inferential errors that lead to incorrect conclusions despite correctly executed analyses. Existing benchmarks fail to capture this failure mode, as they rarely assess whether a reported p-value is statistic","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07437.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"LLM coding agent 在做开放式假设检验时，经常能写出可运行代码并得到数值结果，但会在统计方法选择、前提假设检查和结论推断上出错，导致 p 值和结论在统计上无效；现有数据分析 benchmark 没有系统评估这种“代码能跑但推断错误”的失效模式。","importance":"对预训练主线的直接启发有限，更接近特定科研 agent 能力评测与 post-training。但论文指出的问题有方法论意义：很多 agent benchmark 只验证“有没有执行出结果”，而不验证“执行的方法是否对应该问题和数据生成假设”。这一点和预训练后“模型能生成流畅回答但推理链/验证链不可靠”是同类评估缺口。对做 agent/RM/verifier、尤其是 code-and-tool-use agent 的研究者有参考价值；对纯基座预训练读者，可作为“评测必须验证过程合法性而非只看终态答案”的案例。","technical_approach":"构建 P-Bench，包含 425 个开放式假设检验任务，覆盖经济学、生物学、医学等真实科学数据。每个任务提供问题、数据集和数据描述，agent 需要在 R 执行环境中多轮交互，自行选择统计方法、运行分析、报告 p 值并给出拒绝/不拒绝原假设的结论。答案以可执行的参考分析为基础，经过领域专家审核，重点比对方法选择、p 值准确性和结论正确性，而非只看代码是否运行或报告是否流畅。在此基础上训练 Fisher-R1：先用合成生成的、带验证答案的假设检验任务做 SFT，再用基于结果正确性的 RL 训练。","experiments":"P-Bench 共 425 个任务，来源于同行评议论文和权威生物统计教学材料，答案键绑定到可执行参考分析。Fisher-R1-14B 在该 benchmark 上报告超过 GPT-5.4 与 DeepSeek-V4-Pro；论文展示的典型失效是模型识别到异常值/模型误设等警告信号，但仍选择错误的检验方法（如在高杠杆点存在时继续用线性回归而改用秩检验），从而得到显著但不可靠的 p 值。实验重点在 p 值准确性和结论正确性两个维度，而不是一般数据问答任务上的通过率。","reading_guide":"泛读。重点看引言里的失效模式例子（识别警告但做错误方法选择）、P-Bench 的任务设计与答案构造方式，以及为什么要把“方法选择 + p 值 + 结论”绑定在可执行参考分析上，而不是只让评委看自然语言报告。训练部分对纯预训练读者不是重点；若关心 agent post-training，可看合成任务生成和 outcome-grounded RL 的设计。预计阅读时间 15–20 分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLM coding agents can often produce runnable code and numerical outputs for open-ended hypothesis-testing tasks, yet still make subtle inferential mistakes—choosing the wrong test, ignoring modeling assumptions, or drawing invalid conclusions—so the reported p-values are not statistically valid; existing data-analysis benchmarks do not systematically measure this failure mode.","importance":"The paper is not a core pretraining contribution and sits closer to domain-specific agent evaluation and post-training. Its broader relevance is methodological: many agent benchmarks reward executable workflows or plausible final answers without checking whether the chosen procedure is actually valid given the question and data-generating assumptions. This is the same class of evaluation gap that appears whenever fluent generation masks flawed reasoning or unverified tool use. It is useful for researchers working on agents, verifiers, reward modeling, and code-and-tool use; for pure pretraining readers it mainly serves as a concrete example that evaluation must validate procedural correctness, not just end-state answers.","technical_approach":"The paper introduces P-Bench, a benchmark of 425 open-ended hypothesis-testing tasks built from real scientific datasets across economics, biology, and medicine. For each task the agent receives a scientific question, a dataset, and a description, and must interact with an R execution environment across multiple turns to choose a statistical method, run the analysis, report a p-value, and decide whether to reject the null. Answer keys are grounded in logged executions of canonical reference analyses and audited by domain experts, scoring method choice, p-value accuracy, and conclusion correctness rather than code executability or report fluency alone. Fisher-R1 is then trained by supervised fine-tuning on synthetically generated hypothesis-testing tasks with verified keys, followed by reinforcement learning using outcome-grounded rewards.","experiments":"P-Bench contains 425 tasks drawn from peer-reviewed papers and authoritative biostatistics teaching materials, with answer keys tied to executable reference analyses. Fisher-R1-14B is reported to outperform strong baselines including GPT-5.4 and DeepSeek-V4-Pro on P-Bench. A representative failure case is that frontier agents can recognize warning signs such as high-leverage outliers but still proceed with an inappropriate test—for example, using linear regression where a rank-based test is required—producing a runnable analysis and fluent narrative with an invalid, yet statistically significant-looking, p-value. The main evaluation axes are p-value accuracy and conclusion correctness rather than generic data-analysis task completion.","reading_guide":"Skim this paper. Focus on the introduction for the motivating failure mode—recognizing diagnostic warnings while making the wrong inferential choice—and on the P-Bench design, especially why answer keys must be tied to executable reference analyses that score method, p-value, and conclusion jointly instead of grading natural-language reports in isolation. The training recipe for Fisher-R1 is secondary unless you work on agent post-training; if so, look at the synthetic task generator and outcome-grounded RL setup. Estimated reading time: 15–20 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"P-Bench 对做 agent 评测的人有参考价值，Fisher-R1 的 RL 训练 recipe 可看，但核心是统计推断这个特定垂直场景，通用 pretrain 启发有限。","en":"P-Bench is useful for agent evaluation researchers and Fisher-R1's RL recipe is worth a look, but the statistical-inference vertical limits general pretraining insight."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Stanford University"],"authors":["Jiacheng Miao","Jin Mu","Guanhua Chen","James Zou"],"notable_authors":["James Zou"],"tags":["llm-agent","hypothesis-testing","benchmark","reinforcement-learning","ai-for-science"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07437","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07437","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.07056","title":"BONSAI: Evolvability-Guided Tree Search over Skills","abstract":"A skill is a naturallanguage document that steers a frozen agent whose weights cannot be updated so any capability the agent lacks must be supplied in prose Optimising a skill is therefore optimising text against a score and the standard recipe which keeps any edit that raises a heldout score is blind in a specific way a single score cannot tell a document perched on a narrow overfit spike from one resting on a broad plateau even though only the second can still be improved We introduce BONSAI a","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_07056.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决冻结 agent 的文本技能优化中，单一 held-out 分数只会追逐局部高分尖峰、难以找到可持续改进技能的问题。","importance":"这篇工作对后训练和 agent prompt/program optimization 有一定启发：它把优化目标从即时分数扩展到“可进化性”，属于较有想法的搜索范式改进，但离基座预训练仍有距离。","technical_approach":"提出 BONSAI，把技能文档视为可变异文本，在技能空间上做 Monte Carlo tree search。选择策略的 exploitation 项同时考虑当前技能分数和其变异邻域分数，用 evolvability 而非纯 fitness 引导搜索，偏好位于宽平台而非窄尖峰的技能区域。","experiments":"摘要表明方法用于冻结 agent 的 skill optimization，并与只保留分数提升编辑的标准做法对比。未给出具体 agent、任务集、模型规模和提升幅度，需要正文确认是否是通用现象还是少量任务上的搜索收益。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"It addresses the failure mode of skill optimization for frozen agents where a single held-out score favors narrow overfit peaks rather than skills that remain improvable.","importance":"The paper is somewhat interesting for post-training and agent prompt/program optimization: it shifts the objective from immediate fitness to evolvability, though it is still far from core pretraining research.","technical_approach":"BONSAI treats a skill document as mutable text and performs Monte Carlo tree search over skill mutations. Its selection rule combines a skill’s own fitness with the fitness of its mutational neighborhood, explicitly favoring evolvable regions over brittle local optima.","experiments":"The abstract positions it against standard score-improving edit acceptance for frozen-agent skill optimization. Exact agents, task suites, model sizes, and effect sizes are not provided in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"想法比结果更值得看：把 prompt/skill 搜索从 fitness 改成 evolvability，这对合成数据或 program search 有借鉴，但先别把它当通用规律。","en":"The idea is more valuable than the result: replacing pure fitness with evolvability in prompt/skill search may transfer to data or program search, but don’t treat it as a universal law yet."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Yash Priya Shastri","Anand Eswaran","Adnan Qidwai","Pankaj Thorat","Sachin Joshi"],"notable_authors":["Sachin Joshi"],"tags":["agent-optimization","mcts","prompt-search","skill-learning","evolvability"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.07056","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07056","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06663","title":"The Horizon Gap: Planning, Memory, Execution, Training, and Evaluation for Long-Horizon LLM Agents","abstract":"Frontier language models solve reasoning problems in a single forward pass that would have been research contributions years ago, yet fail at multi-hour tasks: losing track of earlier decisions, declaring half-finished work done, or drifting from goals. We call this the horizon gap and survey 1,547 arXiv papers (2024-2026) collected via systematic seed harvest with a disclosed 26.8% bleed filter, extended by targeted supplementation. We disambiguate three routinely conflated properties: long-hor","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06663.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"系统性解释并拆解“长时程（multi-hour）LLM Agent 做不完事/跑偏/自我宣布完成”的 horizon gap，并给出研究版图与术语边界。","importance":"贡献类型是综述与分类学：把 long-horizon、long-context、long-term memory 三个常被混用的概念拆开，并用“任务生命周期×承载位置”的坐标系组织 2024-2026 大量工作，便于研究员定位问题与缺口。","technical_approach":"方法上是系统化文献收集与分类：从种子论文扩展、设置 bleed filter（报告 26.8%）并做 targeted supplementation；提出两条主轴——(1) 生命周期：planning/memory/execution/training/evaluation/foundations&safety；(2) horizon carried：within-context / within-task-beyond-context / cross-task-persistent，用于标注每类方法到底把“跨度”放在模型、任务流程还是外部记忆里。","experiments":"无模型训练实验；主要“实验”是对 1,547 篇论文的统计与结构化整理（按摘要信息看更偏 mapping study 而非定量 meta-analysis）。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"To clarify and decompose the “horizon gap” where frontier LLM agents fail on multi-hour tasks (drift, forget decisions, premature completion) and to map the research landscape with clean terminology.","importance":"A taxonomy/survey contribution: it disentangles long-horizon (task), long-context (model), and long-term memory (system), and provides a structured map that helps researchers locate gaps rather than conflating solutions.","technical_approach":"A systematic literature mapping: seed-harvest + a reported 26.8% bleed filter + targeted supplementation; organizes papers by (1) task lifecycle (planning/memory/execution/training/evaluation/foundations&safety) and (2) where the horizon is carried (within-context / within-task-beyond-context / cross-task-persistent).","experiments":"No model training results; the main artifact is a categorized corpus of 1,547 arXiv papers (2024–2026) and the proposed axes/taxonomy.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"术语拆分做得干净，适合用来统一组内讨论口径；但偏 mapping study，别指望给出可复现的训练/系统结论。","en":"Good for aligning terminology and problem decomposition in your team; it’s a mapping study, so don’t expect reproducible training/system takeaways."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Mingguang Chen","Licheng Wang","Bo Qu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["long-horizon-agents","taxonomy","memory-systems","planning","evaluation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06663","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06663","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06410","title":"ADIAS: Automated Design of Interactive Agentic Systems","abstract":"Automated agent design improves agent harnesses through iterative revision, evaluation, and feedback summarization. Existing methods are largely candidate-centric: cross-round experience is organized around candidate agents, which leaves the repair progress implicit. This causes inefficient repair targeting, slow consolidation of partial progress, and propagation of ineffective interventions across rounds. Therefore, we formulate issue-centric agent optimization, in which repair progress is carr","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06410.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CL","cs.MA"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决自动化 agent 设计中跨轮修复经验难以沉淀的问题：现有方法按候选 agent 组织历史，导致问题定位和修复方向在每轮都要重新推断。","importance":"这是一个 agent harness 优化问题，不是基座预训练问题；价值主要在于把“显式 issue state”引入自动 agent 改进流程，对长期迭代式系统优化有一定方法论启发。","technical_approach":"提出 ADIAS，将自动 agent 设计从 candidate-centric 改为 issue-centric。核心有两部分：一是 persistent issue state，持续维护问题身份、生命周期、证据和干预历史；二是 issue-guided optimization，用该状态联合决定下一轮修复目标和修改方向，并做 full-code 级别的 agent revision。","experiments":"从摘要可见，实验重点应是多轮 agent 设计/修复效率与成功率，对比传统按候选历史回溯的自动设计方法。摘要未给出具体模型规模、任务集和提升幅度，因此目前只能判断其贡献更偏系统流程而非 clean ablation。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"It targets a bottleneck in automated agent design: prior methods organize experience around candidate agents, so repair progress must be re-inferred every round instead of being explicitly accumulated.","importance":"This is an agent-harness optimization paper rather than a foundation-model pretraining paper. Its value lies in introducing explicit issue tracking into iterative agent improvement, which may inform long-horizon system optimization.","technical_approach":"ADIAS reframes automated agent design from candidate-centric to issue-centric optimization. It maintains a persistent issue state with stable issue identities, lifecycle status, evidence, and intervention histories, then uses that state to guide repair targeting and code-level revisions in subsequent rounds.","experiments":"From the abstract, the evaluation likely focuses on multi-round agent design efficiency and repair success versus prior candidate-history-based methods. The abstract does not provide model sizes, datasets, or effect sizes, so the evidence currently looks more system-oriented than a clean methodological study.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"和 pretrain 关系偏远，只需看它如何把“失败模式状态化”；若你在做自动 recipe search 或 agentic training loop，issue state 这个抽象可借，但别高估泛化。","en":"Only loosely relevant to pretraining; read it for the idea of making failure modes stateful. Useful if you build automated recipe search or agentic training loops, but do not overgeneralize from the setup."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Lekang Jiang","Bohan Tang","Stephan Goetz","Yiwen Guo"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agent-optimization","issue-tracking","automated-design","iterative-repair"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06410","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06410","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06714","title":"The Optimizer Is the Agent: Reasoning-Driven Search across Prompts, Programs, and ML Workflows","abstract":"Recent systems for optimizing prompts, programs, and ML workflows typically rely on explicit outer-loop controllers such as evolutionary search, bandits, or textual-gradient methods. We ask a fundamentally different question: how much of this search policy can be internalized by a single tool-using agent? We present ReASearch, a unified framework for reasoning-driven optimization in which the agent autonomously decides what to evaluate, how to diagnose failures, which edits to make, and when to ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06714.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"研究能否把 prompt、程序和 ML workflow 的搜索策略交给一个长期运行的工具使用 agent，而不是依赖手写的外层搜索控制器。","importance":"贡献类型是通用 agent 优化框架。它把过去分散在 prompt optimization、program search、workflow tuning 里的外层循环，改写成一个带推理、诊断、记忆和预算分配的 agent loop，对自动化实验和自动调参有一定参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出 ReASearch。核心做法是让 agent 自主决定评估什么、如何诊断失败、怎么编辑候选方案、何时验证或重启；同时用 persistent memory 支持长程优化。框架本身共享同一个 agent scaffold，只替换面向 prompt、program 或 ML workflow 的领域工具。","experiments":"摘要称在 14 个任务上评测，覆盖 prompt、program 和 ML workflow 优化；结果与专用优化系统相比有竞争力，并在多数场景更好。摘要未给出具体模型参数、工具集、预算规模、baseline 名称和提升幅度。","authors_note":"作者包括 Yuxiong He、Zhangyang Wang、Qiang Liu 等在系统、优化和机器学习方法上有代表性工作的研究者；具体机构信息无法仅从给定信息确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether the search policy for prompts, programs, and ML workflows can be internalized by a single long-horizon tool-using agent instead of being controlled by handcrafted outer-loop optimizers.","importance":"This is a general agent-optimization framework. Its main contribution is to recast prompt optimization, program search, and workflow tuning as one reasoning-driven agent loop with diagnosis, memory, and budget allocation, which is mildly relevant to automated experimentation.","technical_approach":"The proposed ReASearch framework lets the agent decide what to evaluate, how to diagnose failures, which edits to apply, and when to verify or restart. It uses persistent memory for long-horizon refinement and reuses the same scaffold across domains by swapping domain-specific tools.","experiments":"The abstract reports experiments on 14 diverse tasks covering prompt, program, and ML-workflow optimization. ReASearch is described as competitive with and mostly better than specialized optimization systems, but the provided abstract does not specify model size, budget, baselines, or numerical gains.","authors_note":"The author list includes Yuxiong He, Zhangyang Wang, and Qiang Liu, who are known for work in systems, optimization, and machine learning methods; affiliations cannot be confirmed from the provided metadata alone."},"recommendation":{"zh":"自动化实验方向可扫一眼；核心风险是 agent loop 是否只是更贵的外层搜索，先看任务预算和失败分析。","en":"Worth a quick scan for automated experimentation; the key risk is whether the agent loop is just a more expensive outer-loop search, so check budgets and failure analysis first."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Junbo Li","Boyi Liu","Canwen Xu","Yite Wang","Yuxiong He","Zhangyang Wang","Qiang Liu","Zhewei Yao"],"notable_authors":["Yuxiong He","Zhangyang Wang","Qiang Liu"],"tags":["agent-optimization","tool-use","prompt-search","program-search","ML-workflows"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06714","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06714","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2608.06503","title":"Toward Reliable Context Compression for Long-Horizon Agents: An Empirical Study of Execution Instability","abstract":"Recurrent context compression controls context growth in long-horizon agents, but its behavioral effects remain poorly understood. In this preliminary empirical study, we show that compression can weaken the influence of recent interactions, increasing blocked actions, repeated exploration, and instability across runs. Motivated by these observations, we introduce TRACE, a verifier-guided framework that evaluates individual compaction events through paired closed-loop continuations from the same","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2608_06503.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"长程 agent 中循环式上下文压缩会削弱近期交互的影响，导致阻塞动作、重复探索和多次运行间的不稳定。","importance":"经验分析型工作，指出 context compression 不是无损操作，并提出 verifier-guided 的压缩 prompt 优化框架 TRACE；对长上下文 agent 系统设计有参考价值。","technical_approach":"TRACE 通过在同一环境状态做配对闭环续跑来评估每次压缩事件，用 summary preference 优化自然语言压缩 prompt，全程冻结模型；属于 prompt-level 优化而非模型训练。","experiments":"在 AppWorld 上对比已有压缩 baseline，在任务成功率、多次运行可靠性和 context-execution 效率上有提升；具体数字摘要未给出。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Recurrent context compression in long-horizon agents weakens the influence of recent interactions, causing blocked actions, repeated exploration, and cross-run instability.","importance":"An empirical study flagging that context compression is not lossless, plus a verifier-guided framework TRACE; relevant to long-context agent system design but not pretraining.","technical_approach":"TRACE evaluates each compaction event via paired closed-loop continuations from the same environment state and optimizes a natural-language compression prompt with summary preferences, keeping all models frozen.","experiments":"On AppWorld, improves over compression baselines in task performance, multi-run reliability, and context-execution efficiency; concrete numbers not in abstract.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"对长上下文 agent 工程有参考，但属 prompt 级优化、与 pretrain 无直接关系；知道结论即可，不必精读。","en":"Useful signal for long-horizon agent engineering, but prompt-level and unrelated to pretraining; glance at findings, skip the details."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Guanghui Min","Liang Wu","Mayank Darbari","Chen Chen","Liangjie Hong"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["long-horizon-agent","context-compression","verifier","prompt-optimization","appworld"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.06503","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06503","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"industry","emoji":"🔥","name":"行业动态与观点","papers":[{"id":"blog-openai-research-95f74aea","title":"Model ML completes finance work more efficiently with GPT-5.6 Sol","abstract":"Model ML uses GPT-5.6 Sol to carry finance work from research and analysis through editable, traceable PowerPoint decks and Excel workbooks.","starred":true,"priority":"p1","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"blog","sources":["blog"],"published_at":"2026-08-10T12:00:00+00:00","category_id":"industry","cover_url":"/covers/blog-openai-research-95f74aea.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":[],"summary":{"core_problem":"介绍 Model ML 如何使用 GPT-5.6 Sol 完成金融研究、分析，并生成可编辑、可追溯的 PowerPoint 和 Excel 交付物。","importance":"这是产品应用案例，价值在于观察顶级模型在金融办公工作流中的包装方式和可追溯交付需求；它不提供模型架构、训练数据、后训练方法或评测细节。","technical_approach":"文章描述的是应用工作流：从研究与分析到生成可编辑的演示文稿和电子表格，并强调 traceability。没有说明 GPT-5.6 Sol 的训练 recipe、工具调用策略、检索系统、校验器或安全机制。","experiments":"没有公开基准实验、消融、金融任务量化指标或与其他模型的系统对比。","authors_note":"OpenAI Research 发布的客户/产品案例，围绕 Model ML 使用 GPT-5.6 Sol 的金融工作流。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The post describes how Model ML uses GPT-5.6 Sol to perform finance research and analysis and produce editable, traceable PowerPoint and Excel outputs.","importance":"This is a product use case. It is useful for seeing how frontier models are packaged into finance workflows with traceable deliverables, but it does not disclose architecture, training data, post-training, or evaluation methodology.","technical_approach":"The described approach is an application workflow from research and analysis to editable slide decks and spreadsheets, with emphasis on traceability. It does not specify the model recipe, tool-use policy, retrieval stack, verifiers, or safety mechanisms.","experiments":"No benchmark results, ablations, finance-task metrics, or systematic model comparisons are provided.","authors_note":"Published by OpenAI Research as a customer/product story about Model ML using GPT-5.6 Sol."},"recommendation":{"zh":"这是客户案例，不是模型报告；可记录GPT-5.6 Sol命名，技术内容不足以细读。","en":"A customer story rather than a model report; note the GPT-5.6 Sol naming, but skip the body."},"metadata":{"institutions":["OpenAI","Model ML","OpenAI Research"],"authors":["OpenAI Research"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["openai","finance-workflow","product-case","enterprise-ai"],"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":null,"github":null,"project":null,"source_url":"https://openai.com/index/model-ml","article":null}}},{"id":"blog-openai-research-2a5c0cad","title":"Premium seats are coming to ChatGPT Business","abstract":"Premium seats are coming to ChatGPT Business. Sign up by August 20 to get $100 in workspace credits and unlock higher usage for your team's most demanding work.","starred":true,"priority":"p1","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"blog","sources":["blog"],"published_at":"2026-08-10T00:00:00+00:00","category_id":"industry","cover_url":"/covers/blog-openai-research-2a5c0cad.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":[],"summary":{"core_problem":"宣布 ChatGPT Business 将推出 premium seats，并提供限时 workspace credits。","importance":"这是商业套餐和用量权限更新，不包含模型、训练、评测、系统或安全研究贡献。","technical_approach":"文章涉及产品订阅层级、团队高用量访问和促销额度；没有技术方法。","experiments":"没有实验、性能指标、使用数据分析或模型能力评估。","authors_note":"OpenAI blog；未从给定信息确认具体研究作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The post announces premium seats for ChatGPT Business and a time-limited workspace credit offer.","importance":"This is a commercial packaging and usage-access update, with no contribution to models, training, evaluation, systems, or safety research.","technical_approach":"The article concerns subscription tiers, higher team usage, and promotional credits; it contains no technical method.","experiments":"No experiments, performance metrics, usage analysis, or model capability evaluation are provided.","authors_note":"OpenAI blog; no specific research authors can be confirmed from the provided information."},"recommendation":{"zh":"直接跳过：这是套餐和额度公告，对模型研究没有信息增益。","en":"Skip: this is a pricing and quota announcement with no information gain for model research."},"metadata":{"institutions":["OpenAI","OpenAI Research"],"authors":["OpenAI Research"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["chatgpt-business","pricing","product-update"],"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":null,"github":null,"project":null,"source_url":"https://openai.com/index/premium-seats-chatgpt-business","article":null}}},{"id":"blog-openai-research-6476741a","title":"How Zapier transformed core marketing processes with ChatGPT Work","abstract":"The enterprise marketing team at Zapier uses ChatGPT Work to reduce the number of drop-offs in its lead funnel, build campaign assets, and automate reporting.","starred":true,"priority":"p1","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"blog","sources":["blog"],"published_at":"2026-08-10T00:00:00+00:00","category_id":"industry","cover_url":"/covers/blog-openai-research-6476741a.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":[],"summary":{"core_problem":"介绍 Zapier 营销团队如何使用 ChatGPT Work 改造线索漏斗、营销资产生成和报表自动化。","importance":"这是企业客户案例，贡献类型是应用落地和流程改造，不是通用 agent 方法、RAG 架构或模型训练研究。","technical_approach":"文章描述将 ChatGPT Work 嵌入营销流程，用于减少 lead funnel drop-off、生成 campaign assets、自动化 reporting；没有给出提示策略、工具编排、评测协议或系统实现细节。","experiments":"没有模型规模、训练数据、baseline、A/B test 细节或可靠性指标；业务效果描述不足以支持模型研究结论。","authors_note":"OpenAI blog；案例主体为 Zapier 企业营销团队，未从给定信息确认具体研究作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The post describes how Zapier’s marketing team uses ChatGPT Work for lead-funnel improvements, campaign asset creation, and reporting automation.","importance":"This is an enterprise customer case about workflow adoption, not a contribution to general agent methods, RAG architecture, or model training research.","technical_approach":"The article describes embedding ChatGPT Work into marketing workflows to reduce lead-funnel drop-offs, build campaign assets, and automate reporting; it does not provide prompting strategy, tool orchestration, evaluation protocol, or system implementation details.","experiments":"No model scale, training data, baselines, A/B test details, or reliability metrics are reported; the business outcome narrative is not enough to support model research conclusions.","authors_note":"OpenAI blog; the case centers on Zapier’s enterprise marketing team, and no specific research authors can be confirmed from the provided information."},"recommendation":{"zh":"过滤：这是营销自动化客户故事，不是通用 agent，也没有可迁移的评测或训练信号。","en":"Filter: this is a marketing automation customer story, not a general agent study, and it offers no transferable eval or training signal."},"metadata":{"institutions":["OpenAI","Zapier","OpenAI Research"],"authors":["OpenAI Research"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["enterprise-ai","marketing-automation","chatgpt-work","customer-case"],"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":null,"github":null,"project":null,"source_url":"https://openai.com/index/zapier","article":null}}},{"id":"blog-openai-research-0e82d899","title":"Virgin Atlantic sharpens customer journeys with ChatGPT Work","abstract":"Virgin Atlantic is accelerating research, product planning, and decision-making with ChatGPT Work, helping teams connect signals across the customer journey.","starred":true,"priority":"p1","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"blog","sources":["blog"],"published_at":"2026-08-10T00:00:00+00:00","category_id":"industry","cover_url":"/covers/blog-openai-research-0e82d899.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":[],"summary":{"core_problem":"介绍 Virgin Atlantic 如何使用 ChatGPT Work 改善客户旅程相关的研究、产品规划与决策流程。","importance":"这是企业落地案例，不是方法、数据、评测或训练范式贡献；对 LLM 基座预训练研究的直接信息增量很低。","technical_approach":"公开信息看，核心是把通用企业级 ChatGPT 工作流接入业务流程，用于跨团队汇总客户信号与辅助决策，没有提出新的模型、训练目标、数据配方或系统机制。","experiments":"未见可复现的技术实验设置、模型规模、训练数据、对照基线或定量评测；更接近案例宣传材料。","authors_note":"OpenAI Research / OpenAI 商业化与产品传播语境下的案例文章。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"It describes how Virgin Atlantic uses ChatGPT Work to improve research, product planning, and decision-making across the customer journey.","importance":"This is an enterprise deployment story rather than a contribution in methods, data, evaluation, or training paradigm; it adds little for foundation-model pretraining research.","technical_approach":"From the public description, the work is about integrating a general enterprise ChatGPT workflow into business processes for signal aggregation and decision support, without introducing new models, training objectives, data recipes, or system mechanisms.","experiments":"No reproducible technical setup, model scale, training data, baselines, or quantitative evaluation is provided; it reads as a case-study blog post.","authors_note":"OpenAI Research / framed as a product and enterprise adoption story."},"recommendation":{"zh":"纯企业应用案例，对预训练几乎没有可迁移结论；知道 OpenAI 在推企业工作流即可，不必读正文。","en":"A pure enterprise case study with almost no transferable signal for pretraining; enough to note OpenAI’s enterprise push and move on."},"metadata":{"institutions":["OpenAI","Virgin Atlantic","OpenAI Research"],"authors":["OpenAI Research"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["enterprise-ai","chatgpt-work","case-study","customer-journey"],"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":null,"github":null,"project":null,"source_url":"https://openai.com/index/virgin-atlantic/chatgpt-work","article":null}}}]}]}}]}]}]],["$L45","$L46","$L47"],"$L48"]}],"isPartial":false,"staleTime":300,"varyParams":null,"buildId":"EvW5GfDrr8T-yLa8QODbj"}
45:["$","script","script-0",{"src":"/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0otjhi71vbmnx.js","async":true}]
46:["$","script","script-1",{"src":"/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0j1uy9t~zxcf0.js","async":true}]
47:["$","script","script-2",{"src":"/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/1304s0wcp2kce.js","async":true}]
48:["$","$L49",null,{"children":["$","$4a",null,{"name":"Next.MetadataOutlet","children":"$@4b"}]}]
4b:null
