1:"$Sreact.fragment"
2:I[8669,["/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/08cykig6vtx_p.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/07qi2okp-.yp9.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0frujd.eyhz4o.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0n4z.7yu76je-.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/09-o.77-p0p36.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/1304s0wcp2kce.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0j1uy9t~zxcf0.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/14_5o-nbg8k_r.js"],"DateSidebar"]
3:I[44692,["/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/08cykig6vtx_p.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/07qi2okp-.yp9.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0frujd.eyhz4o.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0n4z.7yu76je-.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/09-o.77-p0p36.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/1304s0wcp2kce.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0j1uy9t~zxcf0.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/14_5o-nbg8k_r.js"],"DailyView"]
38:I[97367,["/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/08cykig6vtx_p.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/07qi2okp-.yp9.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0frujd.eyhz4o.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0n4z.7yu76je-.js"],"OutletBoundary"]
39:"$Sreact.suspense"
4:T455,Evaluation covers 10 languages: Arabic, German, English, French, Italian, Dutch, Russian, Spanish, Turkish, and Mandarin Chinese. Benchmarks include MultiBLiMP, Belebele, multilingual HellaSwag, X-CSQA, and FLORES-200. Belebele, HellaSwag, X-CSQA, and MultiBLiMP are evaluated with token-normalized accuracy in a cloze likelihood formulation; FLORES-200 uses ChrF++. Confidence intervals are estimated by 1000 bootstrap resamples. The main finding is that monolingual HPLT models are strong in-language models. On MultiBLiMP, their averaged in-language performance can exceed stronger baselines such as EuroLLM 1.7B, Gemma-2 2B, and Tiny Aya Base 3.35B, even though those baselines were trained on 20–60 times more tokens. The Mixed-10 model gives more consistent multilingual behavior but with more modest per-language strength due to the 10B-token budget per language. Merged models collapse across tasks. TIES and DARE-TIES do not fix the failure, which suggests that the central issue is not merely parameter sign conflict or low-magnitude noise, but a deeper incompatibility in learned representations.5:T86e,The central idea is to replace the usual frontier state with a persistent pool of historical prefixes. Each round still expands only a fixed budget of N new prefixes, so after t rounds the pool size is at most Nt. This keeps memory growth linear rather than storing the full exponential tree. The key change is that a prefix that was not selected in one round is not permanently discarded; it can be reconsidered later.

The paper instantiates this idea in two ways.

The first is Subpool Selection. A naive global top-k over the full history would still be dominated by a few over-scored but ultimately wrong prefixes. Uniform sampling from history would waste tokens on stale or low-quality states. Subpool Selection instead samples a random historical subpool and then applies PRM-based ranking within that shortlist. This preserves PRM guidance while giving under-scored prefixes a chance to re-enter expansion. In effect, it adds controlled stochasticity on top of greedy PRM ranking to break long-lived blocking by falsely high-scored nodes.

The second is Power Backtrack SMC. This extends SMC-style sequential sampling from the current frontier to a persistent historical pool. Prefixes are sampled from a mixture over historical states, with powered PRM scores controlling how sharp the proposal distribution is, and mixture-corrected importance weights compensating for the fact that candidates come from multiple historical proposal sources. Compared with standard frontier-only SMC, this version can jump back to earlier states and recover from bad pruning decisions.

A strong part of the paper is its treatment of target mismatch. The ideal quantity is the true marginal probability that a prefix can still be completed into a correct final answer under the deployed generator. Real PRMs are usually trained on binary supervision or stronger rollout policies, so their scores are only proxies. They may be uncalibrated and may not match the continuation behavior of the base LLM used at inference. The paper’s main mechanism claim is that the real brittleness comes from combining this imperfect proxy with irreversible frontier-only pruning.6:T5e3,The experiments focus on mathematical reasoning and evaluate the accuracy–token trade-off rather than only final accuracy at a fixed sample count. The proposed methods are compared against strong baselines from two families: independent full-sample methods such as Best-of-N and self-consistency, and PRM-guided frontier-only methods such as beam search, tree search, and SMC variants. The qualitative result is consistent: at the same token budget, Subpool Selection and Power Backtrack SMC usually achieve higher accuracy; or, for the same target accuracy, they require fewer generated tokens.

The gains are most visible when PRM scores are noisy or only weakly correlated with eventual correctness, because historical revisiting can repair early mistakes. The ablations carry three main messages. First, persistence alone is not enough: keeping history but using overly greedy global selection gives limited benefit. Second, too much randomness also hurts, so subpool size, power temperature, and resampling policy all matter as exploration–exploitation controls. Third, the improvements appear across model scales, suggesting the effect is not tied to a single base model or PRM.

The provided full-text excerpt does not include the complete result tables, so it would be unsafe to invent exact benchmark numbers, model sizes, or deltas. Still, the experimental design is clear: the paper is optimizing token efficiency under extra test-time compute, not just chasing the highest absolute accuracy.7:T408,Start with the Introduction and the problem setup. Those sections explain the failure mode cleanly, especially the distinction between the ideal prefix target and the practical PRM proxy. If you only want the main idea, that part already carries most of the paper.

Then read the two method sections. For Subpool Selection, focus on the intuition and the algorithm sketch: why random shortlists help bypass over-scored blockers. For Power Backtrack SMC, focus on the proposal distribution, the role of powered scores, and the mixture-corrected weights. You do not need every derivation on the first pass.

In the experiments, prioritize the accuracy-versus-token curves rather than single operating points, because token efficiency is the real objective. Then read the ablations on persistent pooling, stochastic selection, and backtracking frequency. A useful skim should take about 30–45 minutes. If you work on PRM-guided search or test-time compute allocation, the method details and appendix formulas are worth a closer pass.8:T40d,Mimir follows the Large Concept Model setup. Documents are segmented into sentences, each sentence is encoded into a multilingual concept embedding, and a 1.6B autoregressive model is trained to predict subsequent concept embeddings. At generation time, predicted concepts are decoded into text through a multilingual decoder. The key engineering choice is to train this pipeline on a large multilingual sentence corpus rather than mostly English data. English data comes from the 350BT split of FineWeb-Edu, while non-English data comes from FineWeb 2. The authors also split FineWeb 2 Chinese data into simplified and traditional variants to match the SONAR language interface. The instruction-tuning mixture includes OpenAssistant, Bactrian-X, Aya, MLQA, XL-Sum, and synthetic multilingual multi-turn and math conversations generated with Qwen3-235B-A22B-Thinking-2507. The paper studies multilingual versus English-only instruction tuning, with and without MLQA/XL-Sum, to separate task supervision from cross-lingual generalization.9:T42b,The method introduces a sleep-like consolidation step triggered when the context window fills up.
- Wake phase: the model runs normally with a limited KV cache plus SSM-style fast weights (e.g., GDN / Mamba-like outer-product or delta-rule updates).
- Sleep phase: the model stops consuming new tokens and performs N offline recurrent forward passes over the accumulated context. Across these passes, fast weights inside SSM blocks are updated recursively via a learned local update rule, effectively turning “memory writing” into an iterative computation.
- After consolidation, the KV cache is cleared and the model resumes wake-time prediction with updated fast weights; crucially, prediction remains single-pass (no looping at inference time).
Training is end-to-end: gradients are backpropagated through the sleep procedure to optimize post-sleep task performance. The conceptual distinction from prior looped/depth-recurrent models is that recurrence is used for consolidation (writing/organizing memory), not for increasing compute at each prediction step.a:T60e,JacQuant keeps the hard quantizer QΔ(·) in the forward pass and replaces STE’s identity Jacobian in the backward pass with a learned sensitivity map B(W). If q = QΔ(W) and v = ∇qℓ is the gradient with respect to the quantized weights, JacQuant uses ∇Wℓ ≈ B(W)v instead of ∇Wℓ ≈ Iv. The surrogate B(W) is constrained to be diagonal or block-diagonal; in the default grouped setting, each quantization group gets a single scalar gain bg. This is intentionally low-capacity. The goal is not to model the full Jacobian, but to capture the most important local fact: in bin interiors the effective gain should be closer to 1, while under clipping or saturation it should shrink toward 0. The paper proposes two inexpensive estimators. JacQuant-Probe injects random Gaussian perturbations and measures Q(W+δ)−Q(W), then fits a one-step slope per group. JacQuant-Dither uses subtractive dithering to embed hard quantization into a smoothed stochastic model and estimates the mean sensitivity under that model. The surrogate is refreshed only occasionally and reused across many QAT steps, so the runtime overhead stays small. The theory follows the same smoothed view: during code-preserving phases, if B(W) tracks the mean sensitivity, the update corresponds to a well-defined target gradient. The paper then gives standard non-convex convergence guarantees and linear rates under a PŁ condition. Compared with fixed geometric corrections such as Rotation Trick, the backward gain here is learned, data-driven, and state-dependent.b:T411,ThriftAttention is a training-free selective mixed-precision attention method. The paper starts with a first-order perturbation analysis of softmax attention. The contribution of a quantized score error is governed by the score error itself, the attention probability, and the deviation of the value vector from the final output. The attention-probability term makes errors on high-score tokens much more consequential. In implementation, Q, K, and V are quantized with the NVFP4 microscaling format on Blackwell GPUs: E2M1 FP4 values with E4M3 FP8 scales. Q and K/V are partitioned into blocks. For each query block and key block, the method computes an importance score using the dot product between their token-wise block means. The top-k key blocks for each query block are computed in FP16, while all remaining blocks are computed in FP4. The two precision paths are merged with online softmax. Unlike sparse attention, low-scoring blocks are not dropped; they are computed at lower precision, which avoids unrecoverable omission error.c:T44b,Its relevance to foundation-model research is through supervision design. Many post-training pipelines, reward models, and LLM judges implicitly assume that pairwise preference is the natural signal, while rubric scoring is often favored for interpretability and auditability. This work provides relatively clean evidence that, in domains with substantial tacit expertise and poorly enumerable quality criteria, comparative judgment can preserve expert signal better and do so more efficiently. That matters for at least two reasons. First, it informs how to build reward signals for reasoning, writing, and professional knowledge work, where experts can often tell which answer is better without being able to fully enumerate why in advance. Second, it says something about the ceiling of automated evaluation: if human experts are more reliable in relative judgments than in absolute scoring, LLM autograders may also be easier to train or prompt in the preference format. The contribution is not a new training algorithm, but it is useful infrastructure and evidence for reward-data construction.d:T5c5,There are three important design choices. First, the tasks are intended to reflect real professional work rather than exam-style legal QA. The benchmark uses 30 tasks drawn from Harvey’s BigLaw Bench, covering realistic litigation and transactional workflows, with prompts, supporting documents, and task-specific rubrics. Second, the outputs are organized into constructed quality levels, so the benchmark has a known target ordering that an evaluation method should recover. Instead of only sampling naturally occurring model outputs, the authors generate LLM responses at three quality tiers and then ask experts to assess them. This turns the comparison into a measurable ranking-recovery problem. Third, the annotation protocol is paired: the same underlying items receive both rubric-based and pairwise-preference annotations from practicing lawyers. Rubric scoring uses atomistic criteria with both positive and negative components; comparative judgment asks which of two outputs is better overall. The paper also evaluates both human judgments and LLM autograders under the two supervision formats. The central argument is not that rubrics are useless, but that in tasks dominated by tacit, holistic expertise, rubrics compress expert judgment into an incomplete explicit checklist, while pairwise comparison better matches how experts naturally evaluate quality. The tradeoff is that preference signals are harder to decompose, audit, and reuse as explicit criteria.e:T542,The main empirical result is straightforward: comparative judgment more reliably recovers the constructed quality ordering than rubric scoring, while taking less than half the annotation time. The released dataset contains 30 real-world legal tasks, 1,539 rubric scores, and 1,530 pairwise preference judgments, all provided by practicing attorneys. The paper estimates the annotation effort at roughly 242 hours of attorney time, or about $242,000 at large-firm billing rates. The advantage of comparative judgment appears both for human evaluation and for LLM autograders, which is important: the result is not only about human convenience, but also about the learnability or automability of the signal. The time-cost analysis is also meaningful. Rubrics require expensive upfront specification and slower item-by-item checking, whereas pairwise judgments ask for a direct relative comparison and therefore extract more usable signal per unit expert time. One important caveat is that the benchmark measures the ability to recover a designed quality ordering, not open-world absolute calibration. For reward modeling, this supports preference signals for ranking and relative quality discrimination, but it does not imply that preferences dominate rubrics in settings where decomposition, error attribution, or compliance auditing is essential.f:T439,Start with the introduction and dataset construction to understand that the paper is comparing supervision formats, not legal capability. Then go to the sections defining the constructed quality ordering and the main experiments comparing humans and LLM autograders. If reading selectively, prioritize the data-construction figure, the main result tables, and the annotation-time analysis. Two boundaries are worth keeping in mind. First, the domain is high-expertise legal work, so the conclusions are most relevant to tasks where quality is hard to enumerate in advance; they may not transfer directly to tasks where rubrics are naturally complete, such as factuality or formatting checks. Second, the paired-annotation design is clean, but the benchmark is still relatively small and the quality tiers are intentionally constructed. A 20–30 minute skim is enough for the main message. If your interest is reward modeling or LLM judges, spend extra time on how “quality-order recovery” is defined and how the autograders are built from rubric versus preference supervision.10:T4ac,The main contribution is benchmark design plus validation. The dataset contains 1,505 questions across 10 categories and 36 subcategories, spanning perceptual, structural, and conceptual reasoning. Samples are collected from online visual reasoning sources and civil-service exam repositories, then rewritten into a standardized VQA format with four answer types: multiple choice, fill-in-the-blank, open-ended, and 2D bounding-box selection. Each item is reviewed by multiple annotators for correctness and consistency. The most important methodological choice is the caption-substitution control: the authors explicitly test whether a benchmark remains solvable when the image is replaced by a generated caption. VisReason shows a much larger degradation than prior benchmarks, which supports the claim that it is more vision-centric. The paper also studies inference-time scaling and explicit chain-of-thought prompting, and finds that both help only modestly when visual evidence extraction itself is weak. That is a useful message for multimodal pretraining: the bottleneck may lie earlier, in visual representations or cross-modal interfaces, rather than in longer textual reasoning traces.11:T426,There are four takeaways. First, the strongest diagnostic result is the caption-replacement test: performance drops by less than 6.35% on MMMU, MMMU-Pro, and MathVista, but by 48.12% on VisReason, indicating much heavier reliance on the original image. Second, the benchmark exposes a large human-model gap while still separating models across a broad range, so it is neither trivial nor uniformly saturated. Third, increasing inference-time thinking budget yields steady but slow and saturating gains; extra compute does not compensate for weak visual grounding. Fourth, explicit CoT prompting gives only marginal benefit for non-thinking models, with GPT-4o improving by about +1.1% on average and not consistently on perception-heavy subsets. The paper also reports a clear model-size trend: larger models do better, but even the strongest ones remain well below human performance. The main result to retain is not a single leaderboard number, but the broader conclusion that a substantial fraction of current MLLM 'reasoning' still appears language-mediated.12:T43e,RepoMirage is built as a two-stage diagnostic suite. RepoMirage-Perturb keeps the original task semantics and evaluation protocol unchanged, but changes how the repository context is exposed through semantics-preserving perturbations. The three perturbations obscure explicit dependency paths, hide true runtime targets behind structural indirection, and move locally available definitions into cross-file references. This makes failures easier to attribute to context reasoning rather than to distribution shift from a new benchmark. RepoMirage-Extend then turns the perturbation types into explicit task objectives: proxy-chain completion, runtime target identification, and missing-constant recovery, together with the original multi-file patching task. The paper also studies agent trajectories and finds that agents search and read more under perturbation but often fail to turn the extra context into editing decisions. RepoAnchor is a prototype workflow based on this finding: it first builds a task-related repository-structure summary, then uses it to guide downstream solving.13:T7cc,TSFMAudit is built on a simple hypothesis: if an audited dataset was seen, or nearly seen, during pretraining, then a short probe fine-tuning run on that dataset should look unusually efficient. Efficiency here is not just low initial loss. It means faster loss reduction under a small update budget and smaller movement of the backbone parameters. Intuitively, contaminated data are already close to the model’s internal representation, so only limited adjustment is needed to fit them well.

The procedure has three stages. First, the candidate TSFM is subjected to a controlled probe fine-tuning run on the audited dataset, with a deliberately small training budget. The goal is not to optimize forecasting performance, but to expose comparable adaptation dynamics. Second, the method extracts probe-time signals such as loss reduction and parameter displacement, along with related dynamic features described in the paper. Third, these features are combined into a contamination-risk score for the model–dataset pair.

A notable design choice is that the audit target is defined at the dataset level rather than the sample level. This matches the practical structure of forecasting benchmarks, where many samples are windows derived from the same underlying source series. The paper formalizes contamination in terms of whether the source time series behind an audited sample appears in the pretraining corpus, and then defines a dataset-level contamination ratio.

Relative to LLM-style baselines, the method deliberately avoids two difficult dependencies. It does not rely on explicit overlap detection, because near-duplicates in time series are often transformed rather than literally repeated. It also avoids large-scale shadow-model calibration, which would be expensive for TSFMs. Probe dynamics are used because they capture both prior familiarity and local plasticity, making them better suited than static loss to distinguish contamination from inherently easy-to-forecast data.14:T4fb,The evaluation covers 6 TSFMs and uses their reported pretraining-corpus information together with GIFT-Eval and the TIME benchmark, for a total of 187 datasets. The comparison includes 10 baselines adapted from the LLM contamination-auditing literature. The main result is that TSFMAudit delivers consistently stronger detection performance across models and benchmarks.

Several experimental points matter. First, the paper shows that contaminated datasets tend to exhibit faster loss reduction and smaller backbone movement during probe fine-tuning. This observation is both the empirical motivation and the basis for feature design. Second, the feature ablations indicate that adaptation dynamics carry more discriminative signal than static loss alone, and parameter-displacement features appear to add useful information beyond fit quality. Third, the method is evaluated across multiple TSFMs rather than being tied to one architecture.

The provided excerpt does not include the full result tables or exact AUC/F1 values, so it would be unsafe to fabricate precise numbers. Still, the experimental scope and conclusion are clear: the paper validates probe-time dynamics as a practical contamination signal at benchmark scale rather than through isolated case studies.15:T62f,The main contribution has two parts. First, the authors define an operator-controllable pairwise-disagreement rate, or rank-flip rate. Instead of reporting score variance, they ask a more decision-relevant question: within a pre-declared, commit-stamped envelope of plausible evaluation configurations, can model A switch from outperforming model B to underperforming it? That unit matches how benchmark results are actually consumed. Second, they instantiate this idea with a tiered configuration envelope. The core tier reflects common benchmark and harness defaults; the stress tier adds still-plausible but more aggressive settings such as T4 CoT and temperature 0.7 decoding. Empirically, they exhaustively evaluate three 7–9B open-weight instruction-tuned models on five alignment-related benchmarks over a 612-cell grid inside one harness, then compute exact rank-flip statistics. They also use LightGBM plus SHAP for axis-level attribution, to localize which evaluator choices drive instability. Separately, they run a cross-package case study with lm-evaluation-harness, HELM-lite, and Inspect AI under a nominally matched anchor configuration. The important point is not just that scores differ, but that the evaluated candidate object is often not the same across packages. For example, TruthfulQA may be scored as log-probability over the canonical MC1 answer set, as concat-then-rank multiple-choice joint scoring, or as log-probability over answer letters with a separate label map. That distinction is handled carefully and is one of the stronger parts of the paper.16:T552,The empirical scope is intentionally narrow: consumer-grade 16GB-class NF4 deployment, three 7–9B open-weight instruction-tuned models, five alignment/safety benchmarks, and one fixed item subset per benchmark. The authors explicitly avoid claiming a population-level statement about all LLM evaluation. Within that envelope, the result is strong: on every benchmark tested, configuration choice alone can flip the pairwise verdict. XSTest is the clearest example, where all six possible orderings among Qwen, Mistral, and Yi are reachable within the tested envelope. In variance accounting, implementation/configuration main effects explain at least as much aggregate variance as model identity on BBQ, ToxiGen, and XSTest; TruthfulQA is the main exception, where model identity dominates more clearly. Model-by-implementation interactions are large throughout, which means the instability is not a simple global offset that could be calibrated away. In the cross-framework case study, using Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct under bf16, greedy decoding, 0-shot, 300 examples, and seed 42, reported scores differ by 21.7 percentage points on TruthfulQA and 22.7 points on BBQ depending only on the evaluation package. There is also a bounded scale probe intended to rule out a single-family confound, but the authors are careful not to overstate it as a scaling-law result.17:T5cc,The core idea is to benchmark agents under a much broader operational scope. The environment is expanded along three axes: long-horizon event histories, interdependent backend services, and multi-device interaction through both GUI and CLI. Unlike many prior benchmarks that isolate a single app or a single-turn task, Claw-Anything embeds each task inside an evolving, persona-grounded digital world.

The environment is built through an automated synthesis pipeline. Starting from a minimal persona seed, an LLM-based simulator performs multi-round event injection, incrementally adding everyday events and updating both persistent world state and dynamic service traces such as email, calendars, and social platforms. As the process continues, the event history grows, the persona becomes more specific, and the environment accumulates realistic noise, including irrelevant and contradictory events. The next event is then turned into a grounded task with an executable verifier, so evaluation becomes a question of whether the agent can perform the appropriate next action in an evolving digital life.

Two design choices are especially notable. First, tasks emerge from the simulated world rather than being written independently of it, which makes temporal dependencies and hidden assumptions more natural. Second, the benchmark includes proactive assistance, so agents are evaluated not only on responding to explicit requests but also on inferring useful actions from context.18:T4c5,The main empirical result is straightforward: GPT-5.5 reaches only 34.5% pass@1 on Claw-Anything, much lower than the performance many models report on earlier benchmarks. The intended conclusion is that prior evaluations underrepresent the difficulty of integrating long histories, coordinating across services, and acting across devices. For a benchmark paper, that is the key result.

In terms of scale, the paper builds 200 human-verified evaluation tasks and 2,000 training environments. More importantly, it shows that these environments are useful beyond evaluation. Fine-tuning Qwen3.5-27B on 1,500 successful trajectories derived from the training environments improves success by 23.7%. That suggests the synthetic pipeline is not merely generating harder tests; it can also produce supervision that helps close part of the capability gap.

From a research perspective, the most informative numbers are not leaderboard rankings but the size of the drop under broader context and the amount recovered through fine-tuning. The first indicates strong sensitivity to environment complexity. The second suggests that data coverage may be a larger bottleneck than architecture, at least for this class of agent tasks.19:T455,The paper introduces SOVBench for online multi-round omni-video evaluation. SOVBench-O measures continuous audio-visual comprehension across Real-Time, Recall, and Proactive interaction settings. SOVBench-T isolates response triggering: the model should respond when the queried evidence appears and remain silent when it is absent. The benchmark is built mainly from FineVideo, using dense metadata such as global descriptions, scene narratives, localized activities, object interactions, and timestamped ASR transcripts. A strong LLM filters videos along five dimensions: Visual Dynamism, Narrative Coherence, Information Density, Audio-Visual Alignment, and Reasoning Value, followed by manual sanity checks. Experiments cover SOVBench, StreamingBench, OVO-Bench, and offline audio-visual benchmarks. The provided content does not include the full numeric tables, but the reported conclusion is that StreamOV performs strongly across streaming omni-modal, visual-only streaming, and offline audio-visual settings, with the hidden-state response trigger serving as a key component for proactive interaction.1a:T6cc,The method has two stages: diagnosis and process-shaped RL.

First, the authors build a spatial CoT dataset covering diverse spatial phenomena and use it for SFT, producing a VLM with initial chain-of-thought capability. They then continue training with vanilla GRPO using only final-answer correctness and analyze rollout behavior. This reveals two systematic degradations: Spurious Grounding and Tail Instability.

ProSR adds two penalties to the GRPO objective. The first is the Counterfactual Invariance Penalty. During rollout, the model is evaluated not only on the real image but also on a blank-image condition. The method compares the normalized entropy trajectories under the two conditions and penalizes excessive similarity. The intuition is simple: if the reasoning process truly depends on visual evidence, removing the image should materially change the uncertainty profile. If the trajectories remain too similar, the model is likely exploiting non-visual shortcuts.

The second is the Tail Drift Penalty. The authors observe that a healthy reasoning trajectory should gradually become more certain as evidence accumulates. When uncertainty rises again in the later part of the chain, it often signals instability, hesitation, or post-hoc rationalization near the answer. The penalty discourages this late-stage entropy increase and pushes the trajectory toward smoother convergence.

What distinguishes ProSR from standard process supervision is that it does not force the model to imitate a specific reference CoT. Instead, it optimizes for two process properties: visual dependence and stable convergence. That makes the method less tied to a fixed reasoning template and potentially more robust under distribution shift.1b:T528,The paper reports an average accuracy gain of 3.7% over prior methods on multiple challenging and out-of-distribution spatial reasoning benchmarks. More importantly, it introduces four diagnostic metrics to measure process quality: Blank-image Accuracy, Same-Answer Rate, Normalized Trajectory Similarity, and Late-Rise Rate.

The results support two claims. First, ProSR improves standard task accuracy, so the process penalties do not merely regularize at the expense of final performance. Second, the diagnostic metrics improve in the expected direction: the model becomes less answerable under blank-image conditions, the trajectory similarity between real-image and blank-image settings decreases, and late-stage uncertainty spikes become less frequent. That suggests the model is relying more on visual evidence and reasoning more stably, rather than just learning another superficial pattern.

From the paper structure, there are also comparisons against vanilla GRPO and ablations for the two penalties. The likely takeaway is that each penalty targets a different degradation mode and the combination works best. The provided excerpt does not include all benchmark-level numbers, model sizes, or training-budget details, so the summary here focuses on the experimental logic rather than reproducing every table.1c:T456,For a quick read, start with the introduction and the figure that visualizes the two failure modes. The paper is only worth attention if those diagnostics are convincing. Then go straight to the method section and inspect the two penalties, especially why entropy trajectories are used instead of token-level CoT matching. That design choice is central.

Next, read the definitions of the diagnostic metrics and the main results table. If time is limited, prioritize the blank-image diagnostics and the late-rise metric, because they most directly test whether the method changes the reasoning mechanism rather than only the answer distribution. Finally, check the ablations to see whether the Counterfactual Invariance Penalty and Tail Drift Penalty each fix their intended issue or merely act as generic regularizers.

A useful reading time budget is 30 to 45 minutes. Two follow-up questions are worth keeping in mind: whether the blank-image counterfactual could over-penalize tasks with strong language priors, and how sensitive entropy-trajectory diagnostics are to decoding settings such as temperature.1d:T416,The proposed method, Adversarial Orthogonal Disentanglement, extracts hidden states from a selected LVLM layer at the final token position for image-question inputs. It learns a projection direction that concentrates hallucination-predictive signals, while an adversarial objective with a Gradient Reversal Layer removes those signals from the orthogonal residual subspace. The result is a learned hallucination direction with a cleaner separation from general visual semantics. At inference time, the base LVLM is not retrained. Instead, the method performs activation-steered contrastive decoding: hidden states are shifted along the learned direction to form hallucination-amplified and factual-steered representations, and the resulting logits are contrasted to penalize hallucination-prone continuations. Compared with attention pruning, it does not rely on potentially faulty attention weights. Compared with a plain classifier on hidden states, it explicitly enforces a separation between the hallucination direction and semantic residual.1e:T6a9,The base model is an 8B single-stream DiT latent diffusion model using FLUX.2 VAE. A notable design choice is the text encoder: instead of a larger T5-style encoder or a full LLM, the system uses Ministral-3 3B, with the claim that it still supports long and complex prompts while reducing memory cost. The most important part is the data pipeline. In pretraining, the authors use a bottom-up construction strategy: starting from a massive raw image pool, they train a 10,000-way fine-grained image classifier and use those categories for balanced sampling, aiming to preserve long-tail concepts rather than letting dominant visual categories overwhelm the distribution. They then run a strong VLM to generate richer captions, including structural descriptions and visible text, so the model sees more explicit supervision for instruction following and world knowledge. For quality control, they train an aesthetic scorer, ERNIE-Image-Aes, and use it to clean the corpus. In post-training, they switch to a top-down pipeline with highly consistent data for high-demand scenarios, and diversify annotations to cover different user prompt styles, reducing caption-model bias. Preference alignment is done with an improved DPO variant; the practical claim is that if both the base model and reward model are strong, only a few DPO steps are needed, which helps avoid reward hacking. For acceleration, they train ERNIE-Image-Turbo with only 8 NFEs. To reduce capability drift during fast-model training on subsets, they introduce MT-DMD, where multiple expert variants provide supervision jointly. A lightweight Prompt Enhancer expands short user prompts into richer structured descriptions before generation.1f:T478,The report is more system-oriented than benchmark-centric, so the most useful evidence is tied to design choices rather than a single clean ablation table. The explicit facts available from the text are: the base model is 8B, the text encoder is 3B, and the turbo model runs at 8 NFEs. The authors claim strong performance on complex instruction following, Chinese and long-text rendering, and aesthetic quality, with comparisons against open models such as Qwen-Image, HunyuanImage, and Z-Image, as well as commercial systems. The more useful empirical lessons are qualitative but concrete: adding detailed image descriptions early in training improves both instruction following and retention of world knowledge; 10k-category balancing helps preserve long-tail concepts; and DPO should be applied lightly when the reward model is already strong, otherwise distribution drift becomes more likely. Since the provided full-text excerpt does not include the full result tables, it would be unsafe to restate exact benchmark numbers. The main thing to extract is the mapping between each recipe component and the capability it is meant to improve.20:T49b,The method replaces patch-wise quantization with Channel-wise Vector Quantization (CVQ). Given a latent feature map Z∈R^{h×w×c}, standard VQ assigns a code to each spatial vector z(i,j,:)∈R^c. CVQ instead treats each channel as the quantization unit (conceptually a 2D map of size h×w) and maps each channel to a discrete code, producing a length-c 1D token sequence. The paper’s mechanism argument is optimization-dynamics driven: patch embeddings are highly repetitive across images and within a batch, so early training concentrates updates on a small subset of codes, leading to dead codes and collapse; channel partitioning yields more separable embeddings across images and broader code coverage.

On top of CVQ, it proposes Channel-wise Auto-Regressive (CAR) generation via “next-channel prediction”: generate tokens sequentially over channels, yielding a coarse-to-fine progression where early channels capture global structure and later channels refine details. Nested dropout is used to encourage an AR-friendly channel ordering (prefix channels remain informative, later channels add refinements), avoiding the need for hand-designed spatial token orders.21:T44c,RLDF uses two sources of denoising feedback. Rollout feedback records unmasking probabilities and timesteps along the actual inference trajectory, capturing which positions and denoising stages matter for the final response. Training feedback comes from predicted probabilities during denoising training, from which the method keeps the more informative positions for stable policy updates. Based on these signals, RLDF applies weighted timestep sampling, prioritizing denoising steps with high predictive uncertainty and larger influence on the final output. The policy loss is computed only on selected steps, rather than over all denoising steps or through coarse no-masking and random-masking approximations. A central design choice is to optimize from intermediate noisy states toward a clipped clean-state estimate \(\hat{x}_0\), instead of optimizing toward the next state. The clean-state target is more directly aligned with the final answer and is reported to reduce loss spikes while improving signal utilization. The paper also introduces Drift, a modular RL framework designed for dLLMs.22:T4d7,A training sequence interleaves the system prompt, the user task, assistant actions, and environment observations. GRPO is applied to the assistant-action token positions. ECHO adds an auxiliary next-token cross-entropy loss on selected environment-observation positions. These observation tokens are not sampled by the policy, but the model already computes logits for them under teacher forcing over the full transcript, so their negative log-likelihood can be gathered from the same forward pass.

The design has three important properties. First, it is on-policy: the environment targets are generated in response to the current policy’s own actions. As the policy changes and visits new terminal states, the prediction targets also change. Second, it converts failed rollouts into useful training data. A failed command may still reveal which file was missing, which test failed, or which assumption about the container was wrong. Third, it encourages the policy network itself to model terminal dynamics instead of attaching a separate world model. This differs from expert SFT because the targets come from interaction rather than demonstrations, and it differs from plain GRPO because non-action tokens are no longer loss-masked.23:T59d,The experiments are run in TerminalBench-style Docker environments with Qwen3-8B, OpenThinker-Agent-v1-SFT, and Qwen3-14B as starting policies. The paper reports that in the Qwen3-8B setting, fewer than 15% of on-policy rollouts often solve the task, making the sparse-reward problem concrete.

On TerminalBench-2.0, ECHO improves Qwen3-8B pass@1 from 2.70% under GRPO to 5.17%. For Qwen3-14B, it improves pass@1 from 5.17% to 10.79%. The relative gains are large, while the absolute numbers remain low, which is a useful signal: the method improves learning efficiency in a hard sparse-reward regime, but does not by itself solve terminal-agent training.

The paper also evaluates environment-token cross-entropy on held-out off-policy trajectories generated by Qwen3-32B. ECHO substantially reduces this loss, while GRPO alone barely changes it. This supports the claim that the method improves prediction of terminal behavior rather than only shifting action probabilities. Another result concerns demonstration dependence: starting from base Qwen3-8B, ECHO matches OpenThinker-SFT+GRPO on internal evaluations without using the roughly 15k expert demonstrations behind the SFT model, and closes about half of the expert-SFT gap on TerminalBench-2.0. The paper additionally reports verifier-free adaptation, where a policy can sometimes improve by interacting with the environment and predicting its responses even without a verifier.24:T5e1,The work has two main components. First, the evaluation protocol. Preference datasets are grouped by broad categories such as helpfulness or harmlessness, with multiple datasets per category differing in prompts, response styles, annotation procedures, and dataset artifacts. For a source dataset, the weak supervisor is trained on gold labels, then used to produce soft preference labels for a disjoint student split. The strong student is trained only on these weak labels. A same-capacity strong ceiling model trained on gold labels serves as the upper bound. Evaluation is done both on the source test split and on other datasets from the same category, zero-shot. This separates source-domain fitting from true preference transfer.

Second, Representation Anchoring. The paper argues that weak-supervised fine-tuning can induce a representational failure mode: instead of preserving the strong model’s broadly transferable preference features, training drifts toward source-domain features favored by the weak supervisor. Anchor adds a regularizer that keeps the student’s internal representations closer to those of the pretrained strong model while still allowing adaptation to weak labels. The key point is where the regularization acts: not on output logits alone and not merely on parameter norms, but on representation space. Conceptually it is related to reference-model regularization and distillation, but the paper frames the issue as representation preservation under weak supervision.25:T573,The method has two parts. First, the paper analyzes update directions. For a parameter update ΔW at a training step, the authors compute its SVD and focus on the top-K dominant singular directions, which are treated as the main modes of change. To compare directions across checkpoints, they do not rely on a single vector angle; instead they compare the subspaces spanned by the top-k singular vectors using CCA. This gives a geometry-aware measure of whether the dominant update subspace remains aligned over time. Empirically, non-hacking runs show smoother evolution and higher subspace similarity, while hacking runs exhibit stronger rotations. Second, the paper turns this observation into a constraint. It proposes trusted-direction gradient alignment, or trusted-direction projection: run a small number of clean supervised updates, collect the induced parameter changes, extract a trusted subspace via SVD, and during RL project gradients onto that subspace. The idea is to allow learning only along directions that resemble clean progress. A notable design choice is that the method constrains the dominant output-side directions rather than freezing all updates, which makes it less restrictive than strong KL anchoring to a reference policy. Relative to prior work, this is neither reward redesign nor simple step-size or sharpness control; it explicitly regulates update direction.26:T502,From the provided full text, the main experiments are in mathematical reasoning settings with induced reward-hacking scenarios. The analysis first compares clean and hacking runs using rank-1 CCA similarity between dominant update directions, for example between checkpoints 20 and 80. The paper reports that clean runs maintain CCA values around 0.8 across most modules, whereas hacking runs show substantially lower alignment and worse worst-layer behavior. This supports the central empirical claim that reward hacking is associated with directional drift. The intervention is then tested by applying trusted-direction projection during RL. The reported outcome is that it substantially delays shortcut exploitation and better preserves true task performance. The wording in the abstract is careful: the method mitigates and delays hacking rather than eliminating it. Based on the visible text, the paper appears more focused on mechanism validation than on very large-scale training. When reading, it is worth checking whether the full experiments include sensitivity to rank K, the amount of clean reference data, and comparisons against KL regularization or sharpness-based baselines, since those details determine whether the method is robust or only works in a narrow setup.27:T78c,AnE consists of three tightly coupled stages.

First, Failing-Frontier Discovery. Instead of expanding data uniformly, the model is rolled out multiple times on a seed set to expose unstable or consistently failing regions. A teacher model then analyzes these failures and extracts failure-relevant keywords, hints, and diagnostic signals. This makes the next round of training target the model’s current capability boundary rather than a generic task distribution.

Second, Truth Anchor Expansion. This is the central idea. Rather than trusting synthetic QA pairs generated inside a self-evolution loop, the method retrieves verified samples from an external real-world database as truth anchors. These anchors are used as high-fidelity references for constructing new training examples, enriching missing knowledge, and correcting factual or logical nodes in reasoning chains. The key distinction from standard self-evolution is that data growth is constrained by externally grounded evidence, not only by teacher generations. That directly addresses cognitive drift and hallucinated trajectories.

Third, Scaffold-Stripping Mechanism. Teacher hints are first injected explicitly into training examples, producing scaffold-augmented supervision for SFT. This gives the student a guided path toward correct reasoning. RL is then used to remove the scaffolds, so the model learns to reproduce the behavior without depending on explicit templates or hints. The division of labor is deliberate: SFT introduces the reasoning pattern and missing knowledge; RL turns externally visible guidance into an internalized policy.

Conceptually, AnE is not just retrieval augmentation and not just distillation. It is an iterative reasoning-training loop where failure diagnosis decides what to learn, truth anchors decide what can be trusted, and scaffold stripping decides whether the learned behavior survives after the support is removed.28:T5fd,The experiments use Qwen2.5-VL-7B as the base model and evaluate on eight multimodal reasoning benchmarks. The headline result reported in the paper is an average improvement of 10.3% over the base model after multiple AnE iterations. The paper also highlights strong performance on difficult benchmarks such as MathVision and EMMA.

The more interesting result is the shape of improvement over iterations. Static-data post-training reaches a plateau relatively early, while AnE continues to improve across rounds, which supports the claim that failure-frontier targeting keeps exposing useful new supervision. Another important comparison is the role of truth anchors. Removing the anchor mechanism weakens gains and makes the evolution loop more prone to reasoning drift, suggesting that verified external grounding is not optional but central to stability.

The scaffold mechanism is also tested through ablations. Scaffolded SFT without the RL stripping stage tends to leave the model dependent on prompt-like support. RL without prior scaffold supervision struggles to learn stable reasoning from sparse answer rewards alone. The combination works best, matching the paper’s broader argument about the complementary roles of SFT and RL.

The provided full-text excerpt does not expose every benchmark-level number or all ablation magnitudes, but the experimental logic is clear: sustained gains over iterative rounds, better stability than synthetic-only evolution, and a meaningful benefit from the SFT-then-RL decomposition.29:T4fd,Start with the method overview figure and the section on Failing-Frontier Discovery. The key question is whether the paper is truly doing targeted training or just relabeling hard-example mining. Then read Truth Anchor Expansion carefully. Focus on where anchors come from, how retrieval is conditioned on failures, and how anchors are turned into new supervision. That is the part that determines whether the framework is genuinely more reliable than synthetic self-evolution.

After that, read the scaffold-stripping section together with its ablations. The main thing to verify is what RL is actually contributing: better reasoning, better template removal, or both. If the paper includes case studies, inspect examples where a failed trajectory is diagnosed, linked to an anchor, and reconstructed into a training sample. Those examples are often more revealing than aggregate scores.

The most useful figures and tables are the iterative performance curves, anchor vs. no-anchor comparisons, and scaffold/RL ablations. For deeper follow-up, three questions matter: how dependent the method is on database coverage, how much teacher bias still enters through failure diagnosis and hints, and whether the same recipe could transfer to text-only reasoning continual training.2a:T489,The proposed method is Extreme Region Policy Distillation. It separates signal extraction from trust-region optimization. In the first stage, the method relaxes KL constraints and performs aggressive multi-step off-policy optimization on a fixed batch of trajectories. The resulting policy is not used as the final model; it is treated as a teacher that exposes useful training signals. In the second stage, these signals are distilled back into the original policy under explicit trust-region constraints. The intended effect is to keep the task-relevant improvement discovered during aggressive optimization while removing spurious drift. The paper also studies strong-teacher and weak-teacher regimes. A strong teacher is an off-policy optimized policy that improves over the base. A weak teacher may fail to improve, or may even be constructed in a degenerate way, yet still provide useful supervisory signals through alternative signal construction strategies. The method is therefore not merely off-policy data reuse; it uses an unconstrained or weakly constrained phase to search for signals, then projects those signals back into a KL-controlled region.2b:T402,The experiments focus on mathematical reasoning tasks and strong base models where standard on-policy RL shows diminishing returns. The diagnostic experiments on fixed data show a consistent pattern: aggressive off-policy updates produce fast early gains, but excessive updates increase trajectory-probability drift, reduce policy entropy, and lead to an early performance plateau. Tightening the KL constraint alone does not solve the issue; it mainly lowers the achievable ceiling. The distillation stage achieves comparable performance with substantially smaller KL divergence, indicating that part of the off-policy movement was not useful for the task. The paper also reports experiments on a Qwen3.5-27B-scale model, where weak-teacher strategies can still improve a strong model when ordinary on-policy optimization is less effective. Exact benchmark numbers are not available in the visible manuscript content, so the most robust takeaway is the training-dynamics evidence and the KL-efficiency gain from distillation.2c:T41d,Standard MoE-LoRA writes the adapted weight as W = W0 + Σ g_i B_i A_i, where A_i projects from d dimensions to rank r and B_i maps back. With scalar gates g_i, the router controls magnitude but not orientation; the spatial contribution of each expert is fixed by B_i A_i. A more expressive alternative would be W = W0 + Σ B_i G_i A_i with an r×r transformation G_i per expert, but a fully general G_i is still relatively expensive.

RotMoLE constrains G_i to be a rotation-style transform. For rank 2, a single angle θ_i defines a 2D rotation matrix directly. For r > 2, the method uses a small number of extra parameters to define a temporary rotation plane for each expert, then constructs an r×r rotation matrix R_i within that plane. The final form becomes W = W0 + Σ g_i B_i R_i A_i. The point is to add directional flexibility without paying for a full unconstrained transformation. The extra parameter count stays small: on the order of dn for rank 2 and (d+r)n for higher ranks, rather than learning large dense transforms for each expert.2d:T6bf,The method has three main components. The first is synthetic data construction. Quest-8K is built as more than query-answer pairs: each instance couples a complex research query with a task-specific rubric tree. The rubric encodes subgoals, evidence requirements, and output structure, so it serves both as supervision and as the basis for downstream reward design. Compared with synthesizing only final answers, this is better aligned with long-horizon tasks because both intermediate behavior and final reports can be assessed in a structured way.

The second component is context management. Long web-research trajectories quickly run into context bloat: search results, snippets, discovered facts, unresolved subproblems, and partial drafts all accumulate. Quest maintains compact summaries of the evolving information state instead of naively replaying the full history into the context window. This is not only a token-saving trick. It pushes the model toward abstraction and state tracking, which is closer to how a practical research agent should operate than simple retrieval concatenation.

The third component is the training pipeline itself. The paper emphasizes a full MT → SFT → RL recipe. Mid-training adapts the base model to the distribution and behavior patterns of deep-research tasks. SFT aligns the model to the target interfaces for tool use, task formatting, and report generation. RL then uses rubric-based signals to improve the harder objectives, especially report synthesis and citation grounding, where exact-match supervision is weak or unavailable. The novelty is less about a single module and more about unifying objective and open-ended tasks under one rubric-driven optimization framework.2e:T626,The reported results span model sizes from 2B to 35B and evaluate across eight benchmarks covering the three capability groups. The headline numbers are Quest-35B reaching 64.6% on BrowseComp, 30.7% on Mind2Web 2, and 48.2% on DeepResearch Bench, with the paper claiming it surpasses strong proprietary systems including OpenAI DeepResearch. If these results hold under the paper’s setup, the important point is that the unified recipe does not appear to trade away one capability class to gain another.

The more informative part is the stage-wise ablation story. Figure 2 and the surrounding discussion make a clear argument: prior open systems often support only fact seeking or only report synthesis, and many omit either mid-training or rubric-based RL. Quest is designed to show that SFT alone gives incomplete coverage; adding mid-training improves adaptation to search-style tasks and long-horizon state handling; adding RL further improves open-ended report quality and citation-constrained behavior. The excerpt provided here does not include the full ablation tables, but the paper explicitly positions controlled studies as a core contribution.

Another notable result is scaling behavior. The study covers 2B, 4B, 9B, and 35B models, aiming to show that deep-research-agent capability scales with model size but is not exclusive to large models. The authors also highlight strong small-model results, including Quest-2B-SFT and Quest-4B-SFT, suggesting that the gains come not only from model capacity but also from better training signals and task structure.2f:T443,This is a skim paper, so read for recipe design rather than implementation minutiae. Start with the introduction and Figure 2 to understand the gap the authors are trying to fill: unified support for fact seeking, citation grounding, and report synthesis. Then read the synthetic data section carefully, especially how Quest-8K and the rubric trees are built, because that determines whether the later RL signal is meaningful. After that, inspect the context-management section and ask what state is preserved, how aggressively it is compressed, and whether evidence chains are lost. Finish with the training and ablation sections, focusing on three questions: what exactly is used in mid-training, how rubric trees are converted into executable rewards, and which stage contributes most to each capability.

If time is limited to 20–30 minutes, the best path is Figure 1/2, then the data synthesis section, then the training recipe, then the main result tables. If you want one part to study more deeply, choose the rubric-based RL design. That is the most transferable idea in the paper.30:T409,The proposed method is Confidence Dynamic Gain, or CDG. Token-level confidence is defined using the KL divergence between the next-token distribution and the uniform distribution, so sharper distributions correspond to higher confidence. Each reasoning trace is partitioned into position-normalized bins. The method compares the average confidence near the tail with the average confidence near the head, producing a tail-minus-head confidence gain. During answer aggregation, CDG combines three signals: the number of traces supporting an answer, the mean confidence of those traces, and the dynamic confidence gain. This differs from prior confidence-weighted voting methods, which usually compress an entire trace into a static confidence score. The paper also gives a GRPO-based explanation: correct traces tend to converge to the same verifiable answer near the end, creating higher token concentration and stronger reinforcement at the tail, whereas incorrect traces remain more diluted and receive weaker or negative pressure.31:T413,CIE-Scorer is built around internal-external discrepancy. Instead of tracing the full circuit over a long CoT, it first selects informative tokens within each reasoning sentence. It then performs circuit tracing only around those tokens and builds sentence-level computational graphs. These graphs are compressed into internal reasoning embeddings, which form an internal trajectory over the reasoning process. The external trajectory is obtained from hidden representations of the displayed reasoning sentences. A lightweight adaptor aligns the two latent spaces. Under a shared graph construction rule, the method builds an internal graph and an external graph, then computes their Fused Gromov-Wasserstein distance. This distance captures both node-feature mismatch and structural mismatch, and is used as the unfaithfulness score. Compared with text-only detectors, the method explicitly uses model-internal evidence. Compared with full circuit construction, it trades exhaustive tracing for token selection and sentence-level compression.32:T4e3,The Transformer is treated as a discrete dynamical system indexed by layer. After removing the FFN, each layer is approximated by value/output projections, attention mixing, and normalization. In the shared-weight case, the effective layer matrix is fixed across depth; for multi-head attention it is formed from the output projection and the concatenated value projections. This makes the analogy to power iteration especially clean: repeated multiplication and normalization increase alignment with the dominant eigenvector when the spectral conditions are favorable. At consensus, full attention becomes close to a uniform matrix, so the perturbation induced by attention weights weakens and the projection effect becomes clearer. For standard layer-varying models such as GPT-2, GPT-Neo, and BERT, the effective matrix changes from layer to layer, so convergence to a single eigenvector is not expected. The authors instead examine whether passing through a layer increases, in aggregate, the correlation between token states and that layer’s dominant eigenvector. They also propose a steering mechanism: add a rank-1 perturbation to the last layer matrix to create a larger spectral gap and make a chosen direction the new dominant eigenvector.0:{"rsc":["$","$1","c",{"children":[[["$","$L2",null,{"dates":["2026-08-14","2026-08-13","2026-08-12","2026-08-11","2026-08-10","2026-08-07","2026-08-06","2026-08-05","2026-08-04","2026-08-03","2026-07-31","2026-07-30","2026-07-29","2026-07-28","2026-07-27","2026-07-24","2026-07-23","2026-07-22","2026-07-21","2026-07-20","2026-07-17","2026-07-16","2026-07-15","2026-07-14","2026-07-13","2026-07-10","2026-07-09","2026-07-08","2026-07-07","2026-07-06","2026-07-03","2026-07-02","2026-07-01","2026-06-30","2026-06-29","2026-06-26","2026-06-25","2026-06-24","2026-06-23","2026-06-22","2026-06-19","2026-06-18","2026-06-17","2026-06-16","2026-06-15","2026-06-13","2026-06-12","2026-06-11","2026-06-10","2026-06-09","2026-06-08","2026-06-05","2026-06-04","2026-06-03","2026-06-02","2026-06-01","2026-05-29","2026-05-28","2026-05-27","2026-05-26","2026-05-25","2026-05-22","2026-05-21","2026-05-20","2026-05-19","2026-05-18","2026-05-16","2026-05-15","2026-05-14","2026-05-13","2026-05-12","2026-05-11","2026-05-10","2026-05-08","2026-05-07","2026-05-06","2026-05-05","2026-05-04","2026-05-01","2026-04-30","2026-04-29","2026-04-28","2026-04-27","2026-04-24","2026-04-23","2026-04-22","2026-04-21","2026-04-20","2026-04-17","2026-04-16","2026-04-15","2026-04-14","2026-04-13"],"weeks":[{"week":"2026-W33","dateRange":"08-10 ~ 08-14","days":["2026-08-10","2026-08-11","2026-08-12","2026-08-13","2026-08-14"]},{"week":"2026-W32","dateRange":"08-03 ~ 08-07","days":["2026-08-03","2026-08-04","2026-08-05","2026-08-06","2026-08-07"]},{"week":"2026-W31","dateRange":"07-27 ~ 07-31","days":["2026-07-27","2026-07-28","2026-07-29","2026-07-30","2026-07-31"]},{"week":"2026-W30","dateRange":"07-20 ~ 07-24","days":["2026-07-20","2026-07-21","2026-07-22","2026-07-23","2026-07-24"]},{"week":"2026-W29","dateRange":"07-13 ~ 07-17","days":["2026-07-13","2026-07-14","2026-07-15","2026-07-16","2026-07-17"]},{"week":"2026-W28","dateRange":"07-06 ~ 07-10","days":["2026-07-06","2026-07-07","2026-07-08","2026-07-09","2026-07-10"]},{"week":"2026-W27","dateRange":"06-29 ~ 07-03","days":["2026-06-29","2026-06-30","2026-07-01","2026-07-02","2026-07-03"]},{"week":"2026-W26","dateRange":"06-22 ~ 06-26","days":["2026-06-22","2026-06-23","2026-06-24","2026-06-25","2026-06-26"]},{"week":"2026-W25","dateRange":"06-15 ~ 06-19","days":["2026-06-15","2026-06-16","2026-06-17","2026-06-18","2026-06-19"]},{"week":"2026-W24","dateRange":"06-08 ~ 06-13","days":["2026-06-08","2026-06-09","2026-06-10","2026-06-11","2026-06-12","2026-06-13"]},{"week":"2026-W23","dateRange":"06-01 ~ 06-05","days":["2026-06-01","2026-06-02","2026-06-03","2026-06-04","2026-06-05"]},{"week":"2026-W22","dateRange":"05-25 ~ 05-29","days":["2026-05-25","2026-05-26","2026-05-27","2026-05-28","2026-05-29"]},{"week":"2026-W21","dateRange":"05-18 ~ 05-22","days":["2026-05-18","2026-05-19","2026-05-20","2026-05-21","2026-05-22"]},{"week":"2026-W20","dateRange":"05-11 ~ 05-16","days":["2026-05-11","2026-05-12","2026-05-13","2026-05-14","2026-05-15","2026-05-16"]},{"week":"2026-W19","dateRange":"05-04 ~ 05-10","days":["2026-05-04","2026-05-05","2026-05-06","2026-05-07","2026-05-08","2026-05-10"]},{"week":"2026-W18","dateRange":"04-27 ~ 05-01","days":["2026-04-27","2026-04-28","2026-04-29","2026-04-30","2026-05-01"]},{"week":"2026-W17","dateRange":"04-20 ~ 04-24","days":["2026-04-20","2026-04-21","2026-04-22","2026-04-23","2026-04-24"]},{"week":"2026-W16","dateRange":"04-13 ~ 04-17","days":["2026-04-13","2026-04-14","2026-04-15","2026-04-16","2026-04-17"]}],"currentDate":"2026-05-26"}],["$","main",null,{"className":"flex-1 overflow-y-auto","children":["$","div",null,{"className":"mx-auto max-w-4xl px-4 py-8 sm:px-6 xl:max-w-6xl","children":["$","$L3",null,{"data":{"date":"2026-05-26","generated_at":"2026-05-30T18:41:19.142753+00:00","stats":{"total":116,"starred":3,"must_read":7,"skim":52,"glance":57,"by_category":{"llm_pretrain":2,"scaling":2,"architecture":4,"efficient":11,"eval":20,"multimodal":8,"multimodal_gen":12,"post_train":21,"mechanism":16,"coding_agent":3,"agent":17}},"categories":[{"id":"llm_pretrain","emoji":"🧠","name":"LLM 预训练","description":"文本LLM预训练、数据/Tokenizer、优化器、训练 recipe、训练稳定性、重磅技术报告（Scaling Law 归 scaling；不含 diffusion/flow/any-order 等建模范式）","papers":[{"id":"2605.25846","title":"On the Limits of Model Merging for Multilinguality in Pre-Training","abstract":"Endowing models with consistent multilingual performance can be achieved by mixing pre-training data, or post-training approaches such as language-specific model merging. In this work, we test whether merging can be applied to monolingually pre-trained models. We conduct a controlled study on the efficacy of mixed, merged, and monolingual pre-training setups. We find that while monolingual pre-training results in strong in-language performance, merging any combination of monolingual models leads","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T13:38:33+00:00","category_id":"llm_pretrain","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25846.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"论文检验一个很具体的问题：能否把独立单语预训练得到的模型直接合并，得到一个可用的多语模型。作者把这个问题放在可控设置下研究：相同架构、相同 tokenizer、相近训练数据来源，并且用混合多语预训练、单语预训练、单语模型合并三类方案做对照。结论很明确：独立单语预训练模型的合并会出现能力塌缩，不能简单替代多语混合预训练。","importance":"这是一篇有价值的负结果论文。它澄清了 model merging 在 fine-tuning 阶段和 pre-training 阶段的边界。fine-tuning 合并通常依赖一个共享基座，任务向量较小，权重空间和表示空间仍然对齐；但独立预训练会让模型走向不同表示解，哪怕架构和 tokenizer 一样，参数平均、TIES、DARE-TIES 也难以修复干扰。对多语预训练的启发是：语言覆盖需要在训练早期建立共享表示，或者至少需要显式对齐；不能指望先训练一组单语模型，再通过后处理低成本拼成一个多语模型。","technical_approach":"实验设计的关键是控制变量。作者使用 HPLT 2.15B 单语 decoder-only 模型，每个模型在对应语言的 100B token HPLT 数据上训练。模型采用 Gemma-3 tokenizer，Llama 风格架构，24 层、32 个注意力头、上下文长度 2048。作者另训一个 Mixed-10 模型，使用同样架构，在 10 种语言上各取 10B token，总计 100B token。这样可以比较三种路线：单语模型的语言内能力、混合数据训练的多语能力、以及单语预训练模型合并后的能力。合并方法包括线性权重平均、TIES 和 DARE-TIES。TIES/DARE-TIES 原本适合从同一个基座 fine-tune 出来的模型，因为 task vector 相对较小；这里作者把 shared random initialization 当作基点计算 task vector，但单语模型经历了 100B token 预训练，参数位移和表示差异都很大，因此这个设定也在测试这些合并方法的适用边界。作者还做了 45 组双语模型合并，用于分析语言对之间的干扰和表示相似性。","experiments":"模型在 10 种语言上评测：Arabic、German、English、French、Italian、Dutch、Russian、Spanish、Turkish、Mandarin Chinese。任务覆盖 MultiBLiMP、Belebele、multilingual HellaSwag、X-CSQA 和 FLORES-200。除 FLORES-200 使用 ChrF++ 外，其余任务用 token-normalized accuracy，并采用 cloze formulation 计算 log-likelihood。置信区间用 1000 次重采样估计。主要现象是：HPLT 单语模型在对应语言内很强，在平均语言内表现上甚至能在 MultiBLiMP 超过训练 token 多 20–60 倍的 EuroLLM 1.7B、Gemma-2 2B、Tiny Aya Base 3.35B 等基线，说明单语预训练能形成较高的语言能力上限。Mixed-10 多语模型表现更稳定，但每种语言只有 10B token，因此能力较温和。合并模型则出现明显能力塌缩，不只是低于单语模型，也不能稳定接近 mixed training。TIES 和 DARE-TIES 没有解决核心问题，原因是它们处理的是参数干扰，但独立预训练带来的主要问题是表示和权重空间已经失配。","reading_guide":"建议重点读实验设置、合并方法和表示分析部分。实验设置里要看清楚 100B 单语 token 与 10B×10 mixed token 的对照，因为这决定了结论的适用范围：它不是在比较最佳多语模型，而是在隔离训练策略。合并方法部分值得看 TIES/DARE-TIES 如何被移植到预训练模型，以及为什么 shared initialization 不能提供足够强的对齐约束。结果表格要重点看单语、Mixed-10、Merged-10 和双语合并的差距。表示相似性分析是核心，建议关注作者如何把合并失败归因于 representation divergence，而不是简单归因于数据量或 benchmark 偏差。更深一层的问题是：如果在预训练中加入周期性共享 anchor、跨语 batch mixing、表示蒸馏或低秩对齐，是否能让后续合并重新变得可行。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether independently monolingual pre-trained models can be merged into a usable multilingual model. The setup is intentionally controlled: same architecture, same tokenizer, comparable data source, and direct comparison among monolingual pre-training, mixed multilingual pre-training, and post-hoc merging of monolingual pre-trained models. The answer is negative. Merging independently pre-trained monolingual models leads to severe capability collapse.","importance":"The main contribution is a careful boundary case for model merging. Merging works relatively well in many fine-tuning settings because the models share a common pre-trained base and remain close in both weight space and representation space. This condition does not hold after full pre-training. Even with a shared architecture and tokenizer, independently trained monolingual models develop incompatible representations. For multilingual pre-training, the practical implication is direct: language coverage should be introduced early through mixed training or through explicit alignment. A cheap post-hoc merge of separately trained monolingual models is not a reliable substitute.","technical_approach":"The study uses open HPLT 2.15B monolingual decoder-only models. Each model is trained on 100B tokens of language-specific HPLT data. The models use the Gemma-3 tokenizer and a Llama-style architecture with 24 layers, 32 attention heads, and a 2048-token context length. The authors train an additional Mixed-10 model with the same architecture on 100B total tokens, using 10B tokens from each of 10 languages. They then compare monolingual, mixed, and merged pre-training strategies. Merging methods include linear weight averaging, TIES, and DARE-TIES. The use of TIES is especially informative because TIES assumes relatively small task vectors from a shared base model. In this paper, the only shared point is the random initialization, and each model has moved through 100B tokens of pre-training. The resulting task vectors are large and poorly aligned. The authors also evaluate all 45 bilingual merge combinations to study interference and representation compatibility.","experiments":"$4","reading_guide":"Focus on the experimental design, merging procedures, and representation analysis. The data budget comparison matters: 100B tokens per monolingual model versus 10B tokens per language in the mixed model. This makes the paper a controlled study of training strategy rather than a competition for the strongest multilingual model. The merging section is useful for understanding why fine-tuning-era assumptions behind TIES and DARE-TIES break under full pre-training. The key tables are the comparisons among monolingual, Mixed-10, Merged-10, and bilingual merges. The representation analysis is the most important part to read closely, because it supports the claim that representational similarity is a prerequisite for successful merging. A useful follow-up question is whether periodic shared anchors, cross-lingual batch mixing, representation distillation, or low-rank alignment during pre-training could make later merging viable.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"这会修正对 pretrain-stage model merging 的乐观先验；应看实验矩阵和表示相似性分析。","en":"This weakens the optimistic prior on pretrain-stage model merging; read the setup matrix and the representation-similarity analysis."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Amsterdam","University of Turku"],"authors":["Seth Aycock","Fedor Vitiugin","Aleksandr Umnov","Christof Monz","Khalil Sima'an"],"notable_authors":["Christof Monz"],"tags":["multilingual-pretraining","model-merging","representation-similarity","interference"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25846","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25846","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25395","title":"EMA-Nesterov: Stabilizing Nesterov's Lookahead for Accelerated Deep Learning Optimization","abstract":"Lookahead-based acceleration methods, such as Nesterov's momentum, are widely used in optimization, but they often become unreliable in deep learning training mainly due to stochastic gradient noise and non-convex loss landscapes. In particular, standard lookahead relies on short-horizon update signals (e.g., differences between consecutive iterates), which are inherently noisy and can lead to unstable extrapolation directions. This work revisits Nesterov's acceleration from a trajectory perspec","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T03:39:10+00:00","category_id":"llm_pretrain","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25395.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","math.OC"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 Nesterov lookahead 在深度学习随机、非凸训练中容易被短期梯度噪声带偏，导致加速方向不稳定的问题。","importance":"贡献类型是优化器改进与训练稳定性分析。它对 LLM 预训练的直接价值取决于是否能在 AdamW/large-batch/混合精度/长程训练中成立；仅从摘要看，还不是大模型训练 recipe 级结果。","technical_approach":"论文从参数轨迹角度重新解释 Nesterov 加速，认为有效加速不应依赖相邻两步参数差这种高噪声信号，而应利用优化轨迹中的低频趋势。方法上用参数更新的指数滑动平均替代标准 Nesterov 的 lookahead 方向，形成更平滑的外推方向。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体模型规模、数据集、baseline 或提升幅度。关键信息需要看正文是否包含 Transformer/LLM、AdamW 兼容性、训练 loss spike、泛化误差和 wall-clock 收敛对比。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the instability of Nesterov-style lookahead updates in stochastic, non-convex deep learning optimization, where one-step extrapolation directions can be dominated by noise.","importance":"This is an optimizer and training-stability contribution. Its relevance to LLM pretraining depends on whether the effect survives AdamW, large batches, mixed precision, and long training runs; the abstract alone does not establish it as an LLM-scale recipe.","technical_approach":"The paper reinterprets Nesterov acceleration from a trajectory perspective. Instead of extrapolating from consecutive iterates, EMA-Nesterov uses an exponential moving average of parameter updates to capture lower-frequency movement in the optimization path and produce a more stable lookahead direction.","experiments":"The abstract does not specify model sizes, datasets, baselines, or numerical gains. The key checks are whether the full paper includes Transformer or LLM experiments, compatibility with AdamW, loss-spike behavior, generalization, and wall-clock convergence.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"可作为 optimizer ablation 备选；先看大模型实验是否存在，没有 Transformer 结果就别改训练栈。","en":"Treat it as an optimizer-ablation candidate; check for real Transformer-scale evidence before touching a pretraining stack."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Chung-Yiu Yau","Dawei Li","Athanasios Glentis","Valentyn Boreiko","Hoi-To Wai","Mingyi Hong"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["optimizer","nesterov","ema","training-stability"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25395","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25395","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"scaling","emoji":"📈","name":"Scaling 与计算分配","description":"Scaling Law / compute-optimality（Chinchilla/Kaplan/µP）、数据与模型规模扩展、test-time/inference-time scaling、agent/RL scaling、scaling 系数与可预测性方法论","papers":[{"id":"2605.25698","title":"How Should LLMs Consume High-Quality Data? Optimal Data Scheduling via Quality-Aware Functional Scaling Laws","abstract":"High-quality data is scarce in large language model (LLM) training, yet how to schedule its use jointly with training dynamics lacks theoretical guidance. We extend functional scaling laws by incorporating a data-quality dimension, and solve the joint data-quality and batch-size scheduling problem in asymptotic closed form. The solution reveals two regimes and a dual role of high-quality data. In the noise-limited regime, high-quality data should be used as a signal amplifier: lowering the batch","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T10:56:45+00:00","category_id":"scaling","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25698.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"高质量数据（教材、数学证明、专家代码）是LLM训练中最稀缺的资源。当前业界普遍的做法是在训练后期引入高质量数据进行mid-training，但这与学习率衰减的训练动态存在根本冲突——模型在学习强度（每token有效更新幅度）最弱的时候才接触最好的数据。此前缺乏对数据质量调度与训练动力学联合优化的理论框架。","importance":"首次建立了数据质量感知的函数缩放定律（quality-aware functional scaling law），以解析形式给出了数据质量与batch size联合调度的最优解。提出的noise-limited/signal-limited双regime洞察是训练动力学理解上的概念性进展。DSR（Drop-Stable-Rampup）调度策略可直接应用于mid-training流水线，在15B MoE模型上验证了显著效果。","technical_approach":"将Li et al. (2026)的函数缩放定律扩展到时变数据质量维度，通过标签噪声方差的混合比例p(t)建模数据质量。超额风险（excess risk）分解为信号学习项和噪声积累项，两者均受数据质量调度p(t)和batch size调度b(t)的联合控制。将问题建模为变分优化问题，推导出渐近闭式最优调度（定理4.3）。解空间呈现两个regime：在noise-limited regime，高质量数据应作为信号放大器——降低batch size将更干净的数据转化为更多信号而不放大噪声；在signal-limited regime，高质量数据应作为噪声抑制器——后期放置减少终端噪声而不牺牲信号积累。基于理论提出DSR策略：在数据质量切换时降低batch size，保持低水平稳定以积累信号，最后ramp up抑制噪声。","experiments":"在15B MoE模型、108B tokens的mid-training设置下验证。DSR在14个基准上平均准确率相比WSD（Hu et al. 2024）提升+1.70，相比Cosine-decay提升+2.98。包含消融实验验证双regime理论的合理性，以及不同强度/内容/位置扰动的综合分析。","reading_guide":"第3节（质量感知函数缩放定律的推导）是理论核心。第4节（定理4.3及双regime分析）是关键概念洞察。第5节（DSR策略和实验结果）是实践落地部分。图2（regime可视化）和表1（主要结果）为必看图表。第3-4节的数学推导需要仔细阅读，附录可能包含完整证明。建议深度阅读：1.5-2小时。","authors_note":"未在提供内容中明确标注机构。理论深度和实验规模（15B MoE，108B tokens）表明可能来自大型AI研究机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"High-quality data (textbooks, mathematical proofs, expert-curated code) is the scarcest resource in LLM training. The current standard practice introduces high-quality data late for mid-training, but this fundamentally conflicts with learning rate decay dynamics—the model encounters its best data precisely when learning intensity (effective update magnitude per token) is weakest. No theoretical framework for the joint optimization of data quality scheduling and training dynamics previously existed.","importance":"Establishes the first quality-aware functional scaling law, providing closed-form optimal solutions for the joint scheduling of data quality and batch size. The two-regime insight (noise-limited vs signal-limited) represents a conceptual advance in understanding training dynamics. The DSR (Drop-Stable-Rampup) schedule is directly actionable for mid-training pipelines and has been validated at scale on a 15B MoE model.","technical_approach":"Extends functional scaling laws (Li et al. 2026) with a time-varying data quality dimension, modeling data quality through the mixing proportion p(t) of label noise variance. Excess risk decomposes into a signal-learning term and a noise-accumulation term, both jointly controlled by the data quality schedule p(t) and batch-size schedule b(t). Formulates as a variational optimization problem and derives asymptotic closed-form optimal schedules (Theorem 4.3). The solution exhibits two regimes: in the noise-limited regime, high-quality data acts as a signal amplifier—lowering batch size converts cleaner data into more signal without amplifying noise; in the signal-limited regime, it acts as a noise suppressor—late placement reduces terminal noise without sacrificing signal accumulation. Translates to DSR strategy: drop batch size at quality transition, hold stable low to accumulate signal, then ramp up to suppress noise.","experiments":"Validated on a 15B MoE model with 108B tokens in a mid-training setting. DSR improves average accuracy across 14 benchmarks by +1.70 over WSD (Hu et al. 2024) and +2.98 over Cosine-decay (Loshchilov and Hutter 2017). Includes ablation studies validating the two-regime theory and comprehensive analysis of corruptions with different intensity, content, and location.","reading_guide":"Section 3 (derivation of quality-aware functional scaling law) is the theoretical core. Section 4 (Theorem 4.3 and two-regime analysis) is the key conceptual insight. Section 5 (DSR recipe and experimental results) is the practical payoff. Figure 2 (regime visualization) and Table 1 (main results) are essential. The mathematical derivations in Sections 3-4 require careful reading; appendices likely contain full proofs. Recommended reading time: 1.5-2 hours for thorough understanding.","authors_note":"Institutional affiliation not explicitly stated in the provided content. The theoretical depth and experimental scale (15B MoE, 108B tokens) suggest a major AI research institution."},"recommendation":{"zh":"应立刻看理论假设和实验附录；若结论稳，会改变高质量数据只适合后期 anneal 的默认做法。","en":"Read the assumptions and appendix first; if the evidence holds, it changes the default habit of saving clean data mostly for late annealing."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Zhitao Zhu","Xili Wang","Shizhe Wu","Jiawei Fu","Xiaoqing Liu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["scaling-laws","data-scheduling","data-quality","batch-size","pretraining-recipe"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25698","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25698","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25143","title":"Beyond the Frontier: Stochastic Backtracking for Efficient Test-Time Scaling","abstract":"Test-time scaling improves language model reasoning by spending additional compute to explore multiple solution trajectories. The key challenge is to maximize accuracy while minimizing the total number of generated tokens during reasoning. Recent PRM-guided methods score intermediate prefixes to steer this search, but most are frontier-only: they keep only the current active prefixes and irreversibly prune or resample away the rest using noisy PRM scores. This can cause premature commitment, div","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T15:48:57+00:00","category_id":"scaling","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25143.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作处理的是 test-time scaling 里一个很具体但常被忽略的问题：PRM 引导的搜索通常只保留当前 frontier，上一步被剪掉的 prefix 以后就再也回不来。若 PRM 对中间步骤打分有噪声，这种“只看前沿、不可回退”的机制会把局部误判放大成不可逆决策，导致过早承诺、搜索多样性塌缩，以及本来还能通向正确答案的轨迹被永久丢弃。论文的目标不是再训练一个更好的 PRM，而是在现有 PRM 不完美的前提下，重新设计搜索记忆与选择机制，让历史 prefix 仍可被重新访问，从而改善准确率与 token 开销之间的权衡。","importance":"对预训练本身没有直接贡献，但对 pretrain↔posttrain 接口很有参考价值，尤其是“模型能力固定时，如何把额外推理算力花得更有效”这个问题。它的重要性主要有两点。第一，论文把很多 TTS 方法的共同脆弱点讲清楚了：问题不只是 PRM 不准，而是 frontier-only search 把 PRM 的局部误差变成永久性剪枝。这个分析对理解 PRM、value model、search policy 的耦合关系很有帮助。第二，它提出的 persistent pool + stochastic backtracking，本质上是在有限内存下给搜索加入可恢复性，和训练时讨论 exploration、credit assignment、noisy proxy signal 时的思路是相通的。贡献量级更像是对现有 PRM-guided decoding 的稳健性改造，而不是新的推理范式。","technical_approach":"方法核心是把搜索状态从“当前 frontier”改成“历史 prefix 的持久池”。每一轮仍只扩展固定预算的 N 个新 prefix，因此运行 t 轮后池子大小至多是 Nt，内存是线性增长，而不是保存整棵指数级搜索树。关键点在于：历史 prefix 不会因为某一轮没被选中就彻底失效，后续仍可重新进入扩展候选。\n\n在这个框架上，论文给了两个具体实例。\n\n第一是 Subpool Selection。它不是直接在全历史池上做全局 top-k，因为那样仍会被少数被高估的错误 prefix 长期垄断；也不是均匀从历史里抽，因为那会把 token 浪费在明显陈旧或低质量状态上。它的做法是先从历史池随机抽一个子池，再在子池内部按 PRM 分数选 top 候选。这样做相当于在保留 PRM 引导的同时，给被“挡住”的低估 prefix 一个重新浮出的机会。可以把它理解成对贪心 PRM 排序加了一层受控随机化，目的是打破错误高分节点的长期阻塞。\n\n第二是 Power Backtrack SMC。论文把 SMC 风格的 sequential sampling 从 frontier 扩展到 persistent pool，允许从历史 prefix 混合采样，再用 powered PRM scores 和 mixture-corrected importance weights 做校正。这里的“power”相当于调节 PRM 分数对采样分布的尖锐程度；“mixture correction”则是因为候选来自多轮历史状态的混合分布，需要做重要性修正，避免估计偏掉。相比普通 SMC 只在当前粒子集上重采样，这个版本允许搜索在历史上回跳，因此更能从早期误剪枝中恢复。\n\n论文还花了不少篇幅说明理论对象与实际 PRM 的错位。理想目标是 prefix 的真实可完成性，即从该 prefix 出发最终得到正确答案的边缘概率；但现实中的 PRM 通常是用二值标签或外部 rollout 监督训练出来的代理分数，既不一定校准，也不一定匹配当前部署的 base LLM continuation behavior。作者强调，真正脆弱的不是“PRM 有噪声”这件事本身，而是 frontier-only 结构把这种噪声变成不可逆决策。这是全文最值得记住的机制判断。","experiments":"从全文可见，实验重点放在数学推理场景，比较的是 accuracy-token trade-off，而不是只看固定采样预算下的最终正确率。作者把方法和几类强基线比较：Best-of-N / self-consistency 这类独立完整采样方法，以及 beam / tree search / SMC 这类 PRM-guided frontier-only 方法。结论比较稳定：在相同 token 预算下，Subpool Selection 和 Power Backtrack SMC 往往能得到更高准确率；或者在达到相同准确率时，需要更少 token。\n\n论文强调这种收益在 PRM 分数有噪声、局部排序不可靠时更明显，因为历史可回访能修复早期误判。消融部分的主要信息有三类。第一，只做 persistent pool 但仍用过于贪心的全局选择，收益有限，说明“保留历史”本身不够，还需要合适的随机化选择机制。第二，随机化太强也不行，会退化成低效探索，因此子池大小、power 温度、重采样策略都在 exploitation 和 recovery 之间做平衡。第三，方法在不同模型尺度上都能改善 token 效率，说明它不是只对某个特定 base model 或 PRM 过拟合。\n\n给出的全文片段里没有完整表格数字，因此无法可靠复述每个 benchmark、参数量和提升幅度的精确值；但实验设计和结论方向是清楚的：作者不是追求绝对最高准确率，而是把“每个额外 token 是否花在更有恢复价值的轨迹上”作为核心指标。","reading_guide":"泛读时先看 Introduction 和 Problem Setup。这里把 frontier-only failure 讲得最清楚，尤其是理想 prefix target 与实际 PRM proxy 的区别。若只想抓住论文价值，这两部分已经够用。\n\n然后看两个方法部分：Subpool Selection 先读直觉和算法框图，再看它为什么能绕开高分错误节点的阻塞；Power Backtrack SMC 则重点看采样分布、powered score 和 mixture-corrected weights 的定义，不必一开始就陷进全部推导。\n\n实验建议优先看 accuracy-token 曲线，而不是单点结果。因为论文真正比较的是 token efficiency。再看 ablation：persistent pool、随机子池、power 参数、历史回访频率各自带来什么变化。预计 30–45 分钟可以完成一次有效泛读；若你做 PRM-guided search 或 test-time compute allocation，值得把方法细节和附录公式再过一遍。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a specific failure mode in PRM-guided test-time scaling: most search procedures are frontier-only. Once a prefix is pruned at an intermediate step, it is gone forever. If PRM scores on partial reasoning traces are noisy or misaligned with the deployed generator, this turns a local scoring error into an irreversible decision. The result is premature commitment, reduced diversity, and the loss of prefixes that could still lead to correct completions. The paper does not try to build a better PRM; it redesigns the search memory and selection mechanism so that previously generated prefixes remain revisitable.","importance":"This is not a pretraining paper, but it is relevant to the pretrain–posttrain interface because it studies how to spend extra inference compute more effectively when model weights are fixed. Its main value is conceptual. First, it isolates a structural weakness shared by many PRM-guided decoding methods: the issue is not only PRM noise, but the fact that frontier-only search makes local PRM mistakes permanent. Second, the proposed persistent-pool backtracking gives search a recovery mechanism under a linear-memory budget. That is useful for anyone thinking about noisy proxy signals, exploration under limited compute, or the coupling between reward models and search policies. The contribution is best read as a robustness improvement to existing PRM-guided reasoning, not as a new reasoning paradigm.","technical_approach":"$5","experiments":"$6","reading_guide":"$7","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"Test-time scaling是LLM推理时计算分配的核心方向，随机回溯挑战了前沿搜索的不可逆假设，值得看方法部分和实验对比。","en":"Test-time scaling is central to LLM inference-time compute allocation; stochastic backtracking challenges the irreversible frontier search assumption—read the method section."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Dao Tran","Duc Anh Le","Ngoc Luu","Quan Pham","Tung Pham","Hung Bui"],"notable_authors":["Hung Bui"],"tags":["test_time_scaling","reasoning","PRM","search","compute_allocation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25143","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25143","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"architecture","emoji":"🏗️","name":"LLM 架构与建模","description":"LLM 架构、MoE/SSM/混合架构、注意力结构、Diffusion/Flow/Masked/Any-order LM 等语言建模范式","papers":[{"id":"2605.25230","title":"Boosting Inference with Guided Reasoning: Stochastic Exploration for Recursive Models","abstract":"Recent work on recursive architectures has shown that tiny neural networks can be surprisingly powerful on structured reasoning tasks. The trick is to model reasoning trajectories with a latent dynamical system. We argue that the inference-time behaviour of these architectures is best understood as approximate inference over latent reasoning trajectories, with deterministic recursion as the one-particle, zero-noise limit. We make this view operational through guided stochastic exploration: stoch","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T19:32:20+00:00","category_id":"architecture","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25230.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是递归推理模型的测试时计算分配问题：给定一个已经训练好的 TRM-style 小模型，如何在不重新训练的情况下，用额外推理计算探索多个潜在推理轨迹，并判断这种探索什么时候会有效。","importance":"对预训练研究的直接价值不在数据或 scaling，而在“latent reasoning trajectory”这一建模视角。它把递归推理模型的确定性迭代解释为潜变量轨迹上的近似推断，并给出可执行的测试时采样与重加权方法。这个视角对小型递归架构、latent reasoning、test-time compute allocation 有启发：模型内部的早停 Q-head 不只是控制计算深度，也可以作为轨迹选择的 learned guide。贡献量级属于清晰的机制化改造，而不是通用 LLM 训练 recipe。","technical_approach":"方法是在冻结的递归模型上做 guided stochastic exploration。原始 TRM 通过共享 backbone 反复更新 latent state z 和 answer state y，并用 Q-head 判断当前输出是否已经正确。作者把确定性递归看成一个粒子、零噪声的特例；扩展后，在内层递归中加入随机扰动，形成一组相邻的 latent trajectories。每条轨迹产生候选答案，再用原模型已有的 Q-head 作为 guide，对粒子权重做在线重加权，形式上对应 Feynman–Kac tilt。关键不是简单多采样，而是要求两个条件同时成立：一是局部稳定性，噪声扰动后的轨迹仍能回到可恢复区域；二是 guide alignment，Q-head 分数必须能区分成功轨迹和失败轨迹。论文还提出三个诊断量：local stability、guide alignment、cloud-token entropy。前两个判断方法是否有操作空间，第三个用于 token-level 风险排序和选择性拒答。","experiments":"主要结果集中在结构化推理任务。Sudoku-Extreme 上，冻结模型的确定性基线 exact-solve accuracy 为 85.9±0.6%，guided stochastic exploration 提升到 98.0±0.3%，并且能在更低递归深度恢复接近基线的性能。作者报告随机探索会显著增加 particle cloud 中成功轨迹的数量，而 Q-head 在 Sudoku-Extreme 上能够把权重集中到这些成功轨迹，因此接近 oracle-particle 上限。Maze-Hard 是反例：探索本身稳定，但 Q-head guide 过平，in-cloud guide-spread bound 在无标签条件下提前提示无法有效重加权，实际评测也确认没有明显改进。选择性拒答实验中，final-step token entropy 和 path-integrated token entropy 能排序 token error risk，在常规测试集和 deterministic-failure split 上都能提供可靠性信号。","reading_guide":"泛读建议 25–35 分钟。优先看 Introduction 中对确定性递归“一粒子零噪声极限”的解释，以及方法部分的 stochastic proposal kernel 和 Q-head reweighting。理论部分重点看 Proposition 5.1 的稳定性条件、Lemma 5.4 的 guide alignment 解释，以及公式 (19) 的无标签 spread bound；这三个点决定方法什么时候能用。实验部分重点看 Sudoku-Extreme 与 Maze-Hard 的对照，因为它们分别展示了“有轨迹 headroom 且 guide 对齐”和“有轨迹 headroom 但 guide 不对齐”的差别。对预训练方向读者，最值得深挖的是 Q-head 这类训练期辅助头如何在推理期转化为 latent trajectory selector。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies test-time compute allocation for recursive reasoning models: given a frozen TRM-style network, how can extra inference compute be used to explore multiple latent reasoning trajectories, and how can one tell in advance whether that exploration will help.","importance":"Its value for foundation-model research is not a new pretraining recipe, but a useful view of latent reasoning. Deterministic recursion is treated as approximate inference with a single particle and zero noise. The existing early-stopping Q-head is repurposed as a trajectory-level guide, rather than only a halting controller. This is relevant to compact recursive architectures, latent reasoning, and test-time compute allocation. The contribution is a principled inference-time mechanism with diagnostics, not a general LLM scaling result.","technical_approach":"The method, guided stochastic exploration, operates on a frozen recursive model. A TRM-style model repeatedly updates a latent state z and an answer state y with a shared backbone, and carries a learned Q-head trained to estimate whether the current decoded answer is correct. The paper injects stochastic perturbations into the inner recursion to propose a cloud of nearby latent trajectories. Candidate trajectories are then reweighted online using the Q-head through a Feynman–Kac-style tilt. The deterministic baseline is recovered as the one-particle, zero-noise limit. The key distinction from naive sampling is the diagnostic structure: exploration must be locally stable, and the guide must be aligned with success. The paper defines local stability, guide alignment, and cloud-token entropy as computable diagnostics for performance and reliability.","experiments":"The main empirical result is on structured reasoning. On Sudoku-Extreme, exact-solve accuracy improves from 85.9±0.6% to 98.0±0.3% without retraining, and the method recovers strong performance at lower recursion depths. The particle cloud contains many more successful trajectories than the deterministic path, and the Q-head is sufficiently aligned to select them, closing most of the oracle-particle gap. Maze-Hard serves as a failure case. Exploration is stable, but the Q-head scores are too flat; a label-free in-cloud guide-spread bound flags this before using labels, and evaluation confirms the lack of improvement. Entropy statistics over final-step and path-integrated token marginals rank token-level error risk and support selective abstention on both the standard test split and a harder deterministic-failure split.","reading_guide":"A useful skim takes about 25–35 minutes. Start with the introduction’s interpretation of deterministic recursion as the one-particle, zero-noise limit. Then read the method section for the stochastic proposal kernel and Q-head reweighting. In the theory section, focus on Proposition 5.1 for stability, Lemma 5.4 for guide alignment, and the label-free spread bound in equation (19). In the experiments, compare Sudoku-Extreme and Maze-Hard carefully: the contrast explains why trajectory headroom alone is insufficient. For pretraining-oriented readers, the most interesting point is how an auxiliary head trained for halting can become an inference-time selector over latent reasoning trajectories.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"将递归模型的推理视为潜在轨迹的近似推断，并通过随机探索提升性能，对探索 test-time compute 和 latent reasoning 有启发，值得一读。","en":"Views recursive model inference as approximate inference over latent trajectories and improves performance via stochastic exploration; inspiring for exploring test-time compute and latent reasoning. Worth a skim."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Andrew Corbett","Archit Sood","Anna Tzatzopoulou","Sai-Aakash Ramesh","Tim Dodwell"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["recursive architectures","latent reasoning","stochastic exploration","test-time compute"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25230","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25230","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25263","title":"Mimir: Large-scale Multilingual Concept Modeling","abstract":"Current language modeling approaches are built around tokens. Text corpora are split into tokens, and models are trained by performing computations on these tokens, such as predicting the next token given the preceding ones as context. This paradigm has become the standard in modern language modeling, especially given the outstanding performance obtained by token-based architectures. However, recent works have not only begun to question how language models process and understand meaning from tok","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T21:26:47+00:00","category_id":"architecture","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25263.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文尝试把语言模型的基本建模单位从 token 提升到“concept”，并重点补上多语言场景。现有 Large Concept Model 主要在英文数据上训练，虽然概念表示可以通过多语言解码器生成不同语言，但模型在非英语概念分布上的覆盖仍然不足。Mimir 的目标是验证：用大规模多语言句子级概念序列训练 next-concept prediction，是否能形成更稳定的跨语言概念建模能力。","importance":"对预训练研究的启发主要在建模粒度和 tokenizer 之外的表示接口。它不是简单换一个 tokenizer，而是把句子编码成连续概念向量，再在概念空间做自回归预测。这条路线直接挑战 token-level next-token prediction 的默认设定。对基座研究员来说，价值在于观察三件事：第一，句子级建模是否带来更长语义步长；第二，多语言语义空间是否能缓解词表和脚本差异；第三，编码器/解码器质量会不会成为新的瓶颈。贡献量级偏系统性实验和资源建设，不是训练目标上的根本改写。","technical_approach":"Mimir 沿用 Large Concept Model 的基本框架：先把文本切分成句子，再用多语言句向量模型将每个句子编码为 concept embedding，模型学习根据前序 concept 预测下一个 concept。生成时，预测出的概念向量再通过多语言解码器还原为目标语言文本。这样做的直接好处是，模型内部处理的是较粗粒度语义单元，而不是语言相关的 token 序列。论文的主要扩展在数据规模和语言覆盖：英文部分使用 FineWeb-Edu 350BT split，非英文部分使用 FineWeb 2，并额外处理 FineWeb 2 中中文语言码，将普通话汉字数据区分为简体和繁体，以适配 SONAR 的语言接口。指令阶段使用 OpenAssistant、Bactrian-X、Aya、MLQA、XL-Sum，以及作者用 Qwen3-235B-A22B-Thinking-2507 合成的多语言多轮对话和数学对话数据。训练设计上还比较了多语言 instruction tuning、仅英文 instruction tuning、是否包含 MLQA/XL-Sum 等设置，用来区分跨语言泛化和任务监督泄漏。","experiments":"模型规模为 1.6B，预训练语料包含 38,883,987,240 个句子，覆盖 46 种语言；其中英文占 44.65%，非英文占 55.35%。指令数据包括 OpenAssistant 的 19,654 条多语言对话、Bactrian-X 的 3.4M 指令响应对、Aya 的 204k 人工标注 prompt-completion pair、XL-Sum 的 1.35M 新闻摘要样本，以及 MLQA 的 7 语言问答数据。实验设计关注多语言评测，并与参数规模相近的 token-based LLM 比较。更有信息量的是 instruction tuning 的四组对照：多语言/英文、包含/不包含 MLQA 与 XL-Sum。这个设计可以检查模型是真的从概念预训练中获得跨语言迁移，还是依赖下游任务数据。需要注意，concept 模型的结果往往同时受三类因素影响：concept encoder 的语义对齐能力、concept decoder 的生成质量、以及自回归 concept predictor 的建模能力。因此，单看最终任务分数不容易定位收益来源。","reading_guide":"泛读即可，预计 25–35 分钟。建议先看数据构建部分，尤其是 46 种语言的比例、英文与非英文混合方式、中文语言码处理，以及 instruction tuning mixture。然后看模型与训练设置，确认 concept embedding、预测目标和解码流程。实验部分重点看多语言评测表、与同规模 LLM 的对比，以及四组 instruction tuning 消融。真正值得深挖的是误差归因：如果某语言表现差，是概念空间没有对齐，还是 decoder 不够好，还是句子切分和语料质量带来的问题。对于预训练研究，这比单个 benchmark 分数更关键。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies whether language modeling can be moved from token-level prediction to sentence-level concept prediction in a multilingual setting. Prior Large Concept Models mostly focus on English, even though their embedding-decoder interface can in principle support multilingual generation. Mimir asks whether large-scale multilingual pretraining over concept sequences can improve coverage of non-English semantic distributions.","importance":"The main relevance for pretraining research is the modeling unit. This is not just a tokenizer replacement. Text is first mapped into sentence-level continuous concepts, and the autoregressive model predicts the next concept rather than the next token. This makes the work useful for thinking about semantic granularity, multilingual representation sharing, and the new bottlenecks introduced by encoder-decoder concept interfaces. The contribution is mainly a scale-up and multilingual resource point for concept modeling, rather than a new objective with a sharply different optimization structure.","technical_approach":"$8","experiments":"The pretrained model has 1.6B parameters and is trained on 38,883,987,240 sentences across 46 languages. English accounts for 44.65% of the pretraining corpus, while non-English languages account for 55.35%. The instruction data includes 19,654 multilingual OpenAssistant instances, 3.4M Bactrian-X instruction-response pairs, 204k human-annotated Aya examples, 1.35M XL-Sum article-summary pairs, and MLQA training data in 7 languages. The evaluation compares Mimir with a token-based LLM in a similar parameter range and examines multiple multilingual instruction-tuning settings. The most useful part of the experimental design is the separation between multilingual supervision and task-specific supervision. A caveat is that final benchmark scores conflate three components: the multilingual concept encoder, the concept predictor, and the decoder. This makes attribution more delicate than in ordinary token-based LMs.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 25–35 minutes. Start with the data section: language distribution, the English/non-English split, Chinese language-code processing, and the instruction mixture. Then check the model and training setup to understand the concept embedding interface and prediction target. In the experiments, focus on multilingual evaluation tables, comparisons with a similarly sized LLM, and the four instruction-tuning ablations. The most useful question to keep in mind is error attribution: whether failures come from weak concept alignment, decoder limitations, sentence segmentation, or the autoregressive concept model itself.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"概念建模范式是对token-based LM的根本挑战，尽管来自非顶尖机构且模型规模较小，但思路值得关注——如果concept unit设计得当，可能从根本上改变LM的推理抽象层级。","en":"Concept modeling is a fundamental challenge to token-based LM; while from a non-top institution and small scale, the paradigm is worth tracking as it could fundamentally alter LLM abstraction levels if concept units are well-designed."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Bari Aldo Moro"],"authors":["Elio Musacchio","Lucia Siciliani","Pierpaolo Basile"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["concept-modeling","language-modeling-paradigm","multilingual","alternative-paradigm"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25263","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25263","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.26099","title":"Language Models Need Sleep","abstract":"Transformer-based large language models are increasingly used for long-horizon tasks; however, their attention mechanism scales poorly with context length. To handle this, we study a sleep-like consolidation mechanism in which a model periodically converts recent context into persistent fast weights before clearing its key-value cache. During sleep, the model performs N offline recurrent passes over the accumulated context and updates the fast weights in its state-space model (SSM) blocks throug","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"huggingface","sources":["huggingface"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T00:00:00.000Z","category_id":"architecture","cover_url":"/covers/2605_26099.png","hf_upvotes":10,"arxiv_categories":[],"summary":{"core_problem":"在“有限 KV cache + 固定大小快权重（fast weights）”的混合注意力/SSM 架构里，长上下文问题不只来自存储容量，还来自“被逐出上下文窗口的 token 需要多少计算才能被压缩成可用于后续推理的内部状态”。论文要解决的是：当问题需要更深的推理链路（reasoning depth）时，传统一次前向的快权重写入不足以把已见上下文转化为可用的长期状态，导致即便快权重容量足够，模型在窗口清空后仍无法正确推理。","importance":"对预训练研究的直接启发不在于数据/优化器，而在于“计算-记忆”接口：把额外计算从逐 token 的 wake-time 预测阶段，转移到离线的 consolidation 阶段，从而在不增加在线延迟的前提下提升跨窗口推理能力。它把“循环/迭代计算”引入到记忆写入过程，而不是推理输出过程，提供了一种不同于长上下文注意力、RAG、或单步快权重更新的路径。对做混合架构（attention+SSM/fast weights）和长程推理的团队，价值在于：给出了一个可控的诊断结论（深推理时 GDN 失败并非容量不足）以及一个可端到端训练的机制（sleep recurrence）来补足写入计算。","technical_approach":"核心设计是“sleep-like consolidation”。模型在推理时维持一个有限上下文窗口（KV cache）用于高保真近期访问，同时在 SSM/快权重块里维护固定大小的权重态（如 GDN/Mamba2 风格的外积/Delta-rule 更新）。当窗口满了，模型进入 sleep：\n1) 冻结外部输入（不再接收新 token），对累积的上下文做 N 次离线循环前向（offline recurrent passes）。\n2) 在每次 pass 中，通过一个学习到的局部更新规则（learned local rule）递归更新快权重状态，使其逐步吸收上下文信息。这里的关键不是换一种快权重公式，而是允许“多步迭代写入”，把写入过程变成一个可学习的计算过程。\n3) consolidation 完成后清空 KV cache，回到 wake-time：后续 token 预测保持单次前向、低延迟；跨窗口信息主要依赖已被写入的快权重。\n训练上，作者强调端到端反传穿过 sleep 过程，直接优化“sleep 之后的任务表现”。这点把 sleep 视作模型计算图的一部分，而不是推理时的启发式缓存压缩。\n与已有 looped/depth-recurrent 模型的区别：以往循环多用于提升每步预测的计算量（loop at prediction time）；这里循环主要用于提升记忆写入/巩固的计算量（loop at consolidation time），从而把额外 compute 从在线推理延迟中剥离出来。","experiments":"实验主线是用可控合成任务把“记忆负载”和“推理深度”解耦：在保持需要存储的信息量不变时，逐步提高需要的推理深度，观察 vanilla SSM-attention hybrid（以 GDN 为代表）在相同 token 预算下性能随深度恶化。作者报告的关键现象是：GDN 类快权重即使容量足够，也会在深推理设置下失败，指向写入计算不足而非存储不足。\n方法对比上，sleep recurrence 的递归次数/睡眠时长越大，sleep 后的推理表现越好，且增益在“最深推理”的实例上最大。\n除合成任务外，作者在 GSM-Infinite（长程数学推理）上用预训练 LLM 初始化做验证，结论是 sleep 机制在更真实的语言推理场景也能带来提升。给定你提供的全文片段未包含具体表格数字（参数量、N 的取值、提升幅度等），这里无法可靠复述精确数值；精读时需要直接查主结果表与消融表。","reading_guide":"泛读建议（约 30–45 分钟）：\n- 先看 Introduction 里对“scalable memory ≠ scalable reasoning”的诊断设定：他们如何控制 memory load、只拉高 reasoning depth。\n- 看方法部分对 sleep 的计算图：sleep 期间做几次 pass、快权重如何在 pass 间递归更新、训练时如何反传穿过 sleep。\n- 重点看合成任务的构造与曲线图：是否真的把容量因素排除掉；以及“递归次数/睡眠时长”与性能的关系是否呈现清晰的 compute-accuracy tradeoff。\n- 再看 GSM-Infinite 的设置：窗口大小、sleep 触发频率、与 baseline 的公平性（同 token/同在线延迟还是同总 FLOPs）。\n深挖点：\n1) sleep 的额外计算预算如何计入总成本（训练/推理）；\n2) learned local rule 的形式与稳定性（是否易发散、是否需要截断反传）；\n3) 清空 KV cache 后，模型在多轮 sleep 后是否出现灾难性遗忘或状态漂移。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Hybrid attention+SSM models use a finite KV cache for recent tokens and fixed-size fast weights for longer-term storage. This paper argues that long-horizon failure is not only a memory-capacity issue: when the required reasoning depth increases, a one-pass fast-weight write is often computationally insufficient to transform evicted context into a state that supports later inference. The problem is to enable deep computation over context that is no longer in the KV cache, while keeping wake-time (token-by-token) latency low.","importance":"The main contribution is a compute reallocation mechanism: move extra computation from online prediction to an offline consolidation phase (“sleep”), so the model can perform deeper processing of past context without increasing per-token inference latency. For pretraining-oriented researchers working on long-context modeling, attention/SSM hybrids, or fast-weight memory, the key value is the diagnosis (reasoning-depth bottleneck under fixed memory load) and an end-to-end trainable consolidation procedure that targets that bottleneck rather than merely expanding context length or memory size.","technical_approach":"$9","experiments":"The experimental design uses controlled synthetic tasks to decouple memory load from reasoning depth: keep the amount of information to store fixed while increasing the depth of computation needed to answer queries after eviction. Under the same token budget, vanilla SSM-attention hybrids (with GDN-style fast weights) degrade as reasoning depth grows, despite having enough fast-weight capacity—supporting the “insufficient write-compute” hypothesis.\nAdding sleep recurrence improves post-sleep reasoning, and performance increases with longer sleep / more recursions, with the largest gains on the deepest instances.\nThey also validate on GSM-Infinite (long-horizon math reasoning) using pretrained LLM initializations. The provided excerpt does not include the main tables/figures, so exact parameter sizes, recursion counts, and numeric deltas should be taken directly from the results section.","reading_guide":"Skim plan (30–45 minutes):\n1) Introduction: focus on the claim “scalable memory ≠ scalable reasoning” and how they operationalize reasoning depth vs memory load.\n2) Method: trace the sleep computation graph—what is recurrently applied, what state is updated, and how gradients flow through sleep.\n3) Synthetic task section: verify the control variables and inspect the scaling curves vs reasoning depth and vs number of sleep recursions.\n4) GSM-Infinite: check fairness (same online latency vs same total compute) and how often sleep is triggered.\nFollow-up questions worth digging into: compute accounting (total FLOPs), stability of the learned local rule, and whether repeated sleep cycles cause drift/forgetting in fast-weight state.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看 fast-weight consolidation 的机制和 N-scaling 曲线；它给长上下文记忆提供了比加 KV 更像训练问题的路径。","en":"Focus on the fast-weight consolidation mechanism and the N-scaling curves; it reframes long-context memory as state learning rather than larger KV caches."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Carnegie Mellon University","University of Maryland"],"authors":["Sangyun Lee","Sean McLeish","Tom Goldstein","Giulia Fanti"],"notable_authors":["Tom Goldstein","Giulia Fanti"],"tags":["long-context","fast-weights","state-space-models","test-time-compute","memory-consolidation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.26099","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.26099","github":"","project":"","source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25129","title":"Blocked Gibbs meets Diffusion Transformers: Unsupervised Learning for Constraint Optimization","abstract":"Diffusion models have shown promise in learning to solve constraint optimization problems. However, they are mostly restricted to problems with binary variables and rely on graph neural networks, hindering their application to a broader range of problems such as those with general discrete variables or constraint structures that necessitate global rather than local reasoning. We investigate the use of Diffusion Transformers to address the aforementioned limitations. A naive implementation perfor","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T15:17:49+00:00","category_id":"architecture","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25129.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"标准 diffusion Transformer 用于约束优化时，逐步、全变量的小幅去噪和约束求解中需要局部大幅重写变量的需求不匹配。","importance":"贡献类型是建模机制改造。它不是语言模型论文，但把 blocked Gibbs sampling 的局部重采样思想接到 Diffusion Transformer 上，对离散结构生成和约束满足型生成任务有一定参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出 Blocked Gibbs Diffusion Transformer，核心是用 blocked Gaussian denoising 替代标准 joint Gaussian denoising。模型每次选择变量块进行重采样，而不是对所有变量同步做小步去噪，以更贴近组合优化中修复不可行解或改进目标值的过程。","experiments":"摘要只说明方法面向一般离散变量和需要全局推理的约束结构，并声称 naive Diffusion Transformer 表现较差；未提供具体任务、模型规模、训练数据量、baseline 数字或提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets the mismatch between standard diffusion denoising and constraint optimization, where feasible or better solutions often require large updates to selected variable subsets.","importance":"The contribution is a modeling change rather than an LLM result. It is relevant mainly as a signal for diffusion-style generation over structured discrete spaces, especially where local repairs matter more than uniform small denoising steps.","technical_approach":"The proposed Blocked Gibbs Diffusion Transformer replaces joint Gaussian denoising with blocked Gaussian denoising. Instead of denoising all variables at once, the model iteratively resamples blocks of variables, borrowing the update pattern of blocked Gibbs methods.","experiments":"The abstract states that naive Diffusion Transformers underperform on this setting and that the method is intended for general discrete variables and non-local constraint structures. It does not expose model size, datasets, baselines, or quantitative gains.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看 blocked denoising 的动机即可；离 diffusion LM 还有距离，但这个 mismatch 判断值得记下。","en":"Skim only the blocked-denoising motivation; it is far from diffusion LMs, but the mismatch diagnosis is worth keeping."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Yudong W. Xu","Wenhao Li","Xiaoyu Wang","Scott Sanner","Elias B. Khalil"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["diffusion-transformer","blocked-gibbs","constraint-optimization","discrete-generation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25129","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25129","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"efficient","emoji":"⚡","name":"高效推理与架构","description":"KV-Cache优化、量化/剪枝/蒸馏、推测解码、注意力优化、长上下文推理、模型压缩、推理系统/Serving","papers":[{"id":"2605.25475","title":"IndexMem: Learned KV-Cache Eviction with Latent Memory for Long-Context LLM Inference","abstract":"Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly expected to operate over long contexts, yet standard softmax attention incurs a KV cache that grows linearly with sequence length, quickly becoming the bottleneck for long context inference. A practical remedy is to evict less important KV entries; however, existing eviction policies are largely heuristic and struggle to capture the rich, input-dependent distribution of token importance. In this work, we introduce a learnable indexer that predicts KV","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T06:29:43+00:00","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25475.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"长上下文推理时 KV-cache 线性膨胀带来显存与带宽瓶颈。现有 KV eviction 多为启发式打分，难以做输入相关的“未来重要性”预测；同时被驱逐 token 信息永久丢失，导致长程检索/回忆不可逆退化。论文要解决的是：在固定 KV 预算下，如何更准确地保留未来会用到的 token，并为被驱逐 token 提供可恢复的信息通路。","importance":"对预训练本身影响有限，但对“长上下文能力如何在推理侧落地”很直接：它把 KV eviction 从规则工程推进到可学习策略，并补上了 eviction 的信息不可逆问题。对做长上下文训练/评测的人也有间接价值：它提示了一个常被忽略的变量——推理时的 cache 管理策略会显著改变长程任务表现，可能影响 long-context benchmark 的可比性与训练-推理一致性讨论。","technical_approach":"方法由两块组成：\n1) Learned indexer（可学习打分器）：把“每个历史 token 的 KV 是否该保留”建模成一个预测问题，输出每个位置的重要性分数，再做 top-L' 选择与 cache compaction。相对 SnapKV（局部窗口注意力统计）、KeyDiff（key 差异度代理）、Expected Attention（用语料平均 query 估计）这类 proxy，indexer 试图直接拟合输入相关的未来使用分布。\n2) Latent memory（驱逐信息的压缩记忆）：为避免 eviction 的永久遗忘，把被驱逐的 KV 信息在线压缩进一个固定大小的潜在记忆状态（latent slots）。后续解码时，注意力不仅能访问保留的 KV，也能访问这份压缩记忆，从而在“严格限制 KV 长度”的同时保留一定的长程可检索性。\n整体上，它把 KV 管理写成“显式选择（保留少量原始 token）+ 连续压缩（把其余信息汇总进小内存）”的两通道结构，取舍是：保留通道保证精确信息，压缩通道提供长程召回的兜底。","experiments":"从给出的全文片段可确认的结果口径：\n- RULER：在 Qwen/Mistral/Llama 系列上，长上下文指标最高可提升约 +25 分（相对若干 eviction baseline）。\n- NIAH retrieval：更稳健的长程检索（文中强调“more robust”，但片段未给出具体数值表）。\n- LongBench：整体分数更好（片段未给出具体提升幅度）。\n当前提供的内容未包含：训练 indexer/latent memory 的监督信号构造、训练数据规模、不同 KV 预算下的曲线、以及与量化/低秩压缩的叠加实验细节；这些通常决定方法是否“工程可用”。","reading_guide":"泛读建议（预计 25–40 分钟，重点抓机制与实验结论）：\n- 先看 unified scoring-and-selection 框架那一节：它把各类 eviction 方法统一成“打分→top-k→gather”，便于定位 indexer 的插入点。\n- 重点看 indexer 的训练目标与特征输入：它到底在预测什么（未来 attention、未来 loss 贡献、还是某种 proxy），以及是否按 head/layer 分开建模。\n- 重点看 latent memory 的更新规则与读写方式：是类似在线聚合/EMA、attention 写入、还是小型 RNN/MLP 更新；以及它如何与原 attention 融合。\n- 实验部分优先看：不同 KV budget 下的性能-显存曲线、长程检索任务（NIAH/RULER）的失败案例分析、以及消融（无 indexer / 无 memory / 只 memory / 只 indexer）。这些决定它是不是“只在某个 benchmark 上有效”。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Long-context decoding hits a memory/bandwidth wall because the KV cache grows linearly with context length. Existing KV eviction policies are mostly heuristic and fail to predict input-dependent, future token importance; worse, evicted tokens are gone forever, causing irreversible long-range forgetting. The paper targets a practical question: under a fixed KV budget, how to retain truly future-critical tokens while still preserving recoverable information from evicted ones.","importance":"This is primarily an inference-time contribution rather than a pretraining recipe change. Still, it matters for foundation-model researchers working on long-context: (1) it turns KV eviction into a learnable, context-adaptive policy; (2) it highlights that long-context benchmark outcomes can be strongly confounded by cache management, which affects training–inference consistency discussions and the interpretation of long-context evaluations.","technical_approach":"IndexMem combines two components:\n- A learnable indexer that predicts per-token KV importance scores, then performs top-L' selection and cache compaction. This replaces hand-crafted proxies used by methods like SnapKV (local attention-window bias), KeyDiff (key diversity proxy), or Expected Attention (corpus-level average query assumption).\n- A lightweight latent memory module that compresses evicted tokens into a fixed-size latent state updated online during decoding. Future steps can attend to both the retained raw KV entries and the latent memory, mitigating the irreversibility of eviction.\nConceptually, it is a two-path memory system: sparse exact retention for precision + continuous compression for long-range recall, trading a small extra compute/module for bounded KV footprint.","experiments":"From the provided full-text excerpt, the reported highlights are:\n- RULER: consistent gains across Qwen/Mistral/Llama families, with improvements up to about +25 points.\n- NIAH retrieval: more robust long-range retrieval (exact numbers not visible in the excerpt).\n- LongBench: improved overall scores (exact deltas not visible in the excerpt).\nKey missing details in the excerpt that are important for assessing practicality include: how the indexer is trained (labels/objective), budget–quality curves, latency overhead, and composability with KV quantization/low-rank compression.","reading_guide":"Skim plan (25–40 minutes):\n- Start with the unified “scoring-and-selection” formulation to see precisely where the learnable indexer plugs in.\n- Focus on the indexer training signal and inputs: what target it predicts (future attention, loss contribution, etc.), and whether it is head-/layer-specific.\n- Inspect the latent memory read/write mechanism and how it is integrated into attention at decode time.\n- In experiments, prioritize budget sweeps, ablations (indexer-only vs memory-only vs both), and failure-case analysis on retrieval-heavy tasks (RULER/NIAH).","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"这篇值得看，因为它不再把 KV eviction 当启发式排序，而是把“删掉后如何补偿”一起建模；先看方法图和同 budget 对比表，若 setup 不齐就当弱信号。","en":"Worth reading because it treats KV eviction as a learned decision with explicit post-eviction compensation; check the method figure and same-budget comparisons first, otherwise treat the gains cautiously."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Xintong Yang","Hao Gu","Binxing Xu","Lujun Li","Bei Liu","Jiacheng Liu","Qiyuan Zhu","Sirui Han","Yike Guo"],"notable_authors":["Sirui Han","Yike Guo"],"tags":["KV-cache","long-context","cache-eviction","latent-memory","inference-efficiency"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25475","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25475","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.26175","title":"InfoQuant: Shaping Activation Distributions for Low-Bit LLM Quantization","abstract":"Low-bit activation quantization remains a major bottleneck in efficient large language model (LLM) deployment. The difficulty is not only that activations contain outliers, but that their distributions are often poorly matched to a low-bit uniform quantizer. Existing post-training quantization (PTQ) methods suppress peaks, balance channels, or minimize reconstruction error, yet they rarely specify what activation distribution is actually easy to discretize. As a result, activations may appear nu","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T05:34:46+00:00","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2605_26175.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决低比特 LLM 激活量化中的一个具体问题：激活分布不只存在 outlier，还常常与低比特均匀量化器的离散级别不匹配。","importance":"它属于推理效率方向，对预训练研究的直接影响有限，但对大模型部署和训练后压缩有实际参考价值。论文的主要启发是把激活变换从“压 outlier”或“最小化 MSE”改写为“面向量化器设计分布”。这个角度更清楚地解释了为什么某些方法看起来让数值更平滑，却仍然在 4-bit activation quantization 下损失明显：量化范围仍然过宽，或者多数值挤在均值附近的少数几个离散 level 上。","technical_approach":"InfoQuant 是一种 train-free PTQ 方法，核心是学习正交变换来重塑激活分布。论文从信息论角度分析 round-to-nearest 均匀量化的误差来源，认为量化友好的激活分布应同时满足两个条件：数值范围更小；在该范围内有更高的归一化离散度。前者避免少数极端值拉大量化步长，后者避免大量普通值坍缩到均值附近的少数 level。方法上，InfoQuant 引入 Peak Suppression Orthogonal Transformation，用激活侧 peak suppression 目标降低范围并提高分散度；再用 adaptive outlier-token selection 提高校准优化稳定性；最后学习 activation clipping 参数，细化变换后的量化范围。它主要处理 activation，也可与常规 weight quantization pipeline 组合。","experiments":"论文报告了 W4A4KV4 设置，即权重、激活和 KV cache 都做 4-bit 量化。覆盖 LLaMA-2 7B、13B、70B，以及 LLaMA-3 8B、70B。结果显示这些模型平均保留约 97% 的原始性能。另一个工程结果是，70B 模型可在 24GB GPU 显存下完成量化。实验重点不是单个任务分数，而是证明“缩小范围 + 增大范围内分散度”的分布目标，比只看 outlier 抑制或 MSE 重构更贴近低比特激活量化的真实困难。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，约 15–25 分钟。先看 Motivation 中对均匀量化误差的分析，尤其是为什么 bell-shaped activation 加少量 outlier 会导致 4-bit 下离散 level 利用率很差。然后看 InfoQuant 的 PSOT 目标、outlier-token selection 和 clipping 学习。实验部分重点看 W4A4KV4、70B 校准显存，以及与 SmoothQuant、QuaRot、SpinQuant 这类 activation transformation 方法的差异。对做预训练的人，主要可借鉴它对 activation 分布形态的诊断，而不是具体 PTQ recipe。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a specific bottleneck in low-bit LLM quantization: activation difficulty is not only caused by outliers, but also by a poor match between the activation distribution and the discrete levels of a low-bit uniform quantizer.","importance":"This is an inference-efficiency paper rather than a pretraining paper, but it is useful for deployment and post-training compression. Its main value is the distribution-design view of activation transformation. Instead of only suppressing outliers or minimizing reconstruction MSE, it asks what distribution a 4-bit uniform quantizer can preserve well. This explains why some transformations can make activations look smoother while still causing large degradation: the quantization range may remain too wide, or most values may collapse into only a few levels near the mean.","technical_approach":"InfoQuant is a train-free PTQ method that learns orthogonal transformations to reshape activation distributions. The paper analyzes round-to-nearest uniform quantization from an information-theoretic angle and identifies two desirable properties: a smaller numerical range and higher normalized dispersion within that range. The first property prevents rare extremes from inflating the quantization step size; the second prevents dense central values from collapsing into too few quantization bins. The main component is Peak Suppression Orthogonal Transformation, which optimizes an activation-side objective to reduce peaks while increasing dispersion. The method also uses adaptive outlier-token selection for more stable calibration and learns activation clipping parameters after distribution shaping. It focuses on activation optimization and remains compatible with standard weight-quantization pipelines.","experiments":"The reported setting is W4A4KV4, where weights, activations, and KV cache are all quantized to 4 bits. Experiments include LLaMA-2 7B, 13B, and 70B, as well as LLaMA-3 8B and 70B. The models retain about 97% of their original performance on average. The paper also reports that a 70B model can be quantized with only 24GB of GPU memory. The key empirical point is that explicitly shaping the activation distribution toward smaller range and better within-range dispersion is more aligned with low-bit activation quantization than objectives based only on outlier suppression or MSE reconstruction.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 15–25 minutes. Start with the motivation section on uniform quantization error, especially the discussion of bell-shaped activations with a small number of outliers. Then read the PSOT objective, adaptive outlier-token selection, and learned clipping components. In the experiments, focus on W4A4KV4 results, the 70B memory requirement, and comparisons with activation-transformation methods such as SmoothQuant, QuaRot, and SpinQuant. For pretraining researchers, the most transferable part is the diagnosis of activation distribution geometry, not the exact PTQ recipe.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"不是预训练论文，但“量化友好分布=小 range + 足够 dispersion”这个判断值得记；先看分析部分，若实验只赢一点也不奇怪。","en":"Not a pretraining paper, but the claim that quantization-friendly activations need both small range and enough dispersion is worth keeping; read the analysis first, and do not overreact if the empirical gains are modest."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Ke Li","Dong An","Xiaoling Zang","Can Ye","Liang Xie","Qibo Qiu","Chen Shen","Xiaofei He","Wenxiao Wang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["quantization","activation-quantization","ptq","llm-inference","information-theory"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.26175","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.26175","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25469","title":"JacQuant: STE-Free Quantization-Aware Training via Learned Jacobian Surrogates","abstract":"Quantization-aware training (QAT) is widely deployed but typically relies on the Straight-Through Estimator (STE), which passes gradients through non-differentiable quantizers by fiat. This often makes training brittle near bin boundaries and weakly aligned with the actual behavior of the low-precision model. We introduce JacQuant, a QAT framework that learns a lightweight surrogate of the model's local sensitivity to parameter changes and uses it to stabilize and accelerate training within stan","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T06:19:49+00:00","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25469.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作处理的是超低比特 QAT 里一个老问题：前向量化是硬离散的，反向传播却长期靠 STE 把量化器当恒等映射处理。bit 数降到 2bit 甚至更低时，这个近似会明显失真，因为大量权重靠近 bin 边界或进入 clipping/saturation 区域，真实量化器对参数扰动几乎不敏感，但 STE 仍然把梯度原样传回去，导致训练震荡、收敛差、低精度模型行为和训练信号错位。作者要解决的是，能不能在不改动硬量化前向的前提下，用一个便宜、可学习的 Jacobian 代理替代 STE 的假梯度。","importance":"对基座模型研究的意义主要在训练与部署接口。QAT 虽然更常被归到压缩/部署，但当模型规模变大、推理成本成为一等约束时，超低比特训练已经不只是后处理技巧，而是模型生命周期的一部分。JacQuant 的启发点在于，它把 QAT 重新表述成“缺失 Jacobian”的问题，而不是继续围绕 STE 做经验修补。这个视角对低精度预训练、量化 mid-train、甚至其他含离散算子的训练目标都有参考价值。贡献量级上，它更像是一个干净的算法替换件：不改前向量化器，不引入很重的辅助网络，用组级敏感度近似就能改善 ≤2bit 区间的稳定性和精度。","technical_approach":"方法核心很直接：保留部署时真正使用的硬量化器 QΔ(·) 做前向，但把反向里的 identity surrogate 换成一个学习得到的敏感度映射 B(W)。若 q=QΔ(W)，损失对量化权重的梯度是 v=∇qℓ，则 JacQuant 用 ∇Wℓ≈B(W)v，而不是 STE 的 ∇Wℓ≈Iv。B(W) 被约束成对角或块对角结构；在默认设置里是 group-wise block diagonal，每个量化组只学一个标量增益 bg，因此额外状态极小，比如 group size 128 时，每 128 个权重只多一个标量。这个设计的关键不是提高表达力，而是抓住量化器局部灵敏度最重要的一维信息：在 bin 内部，扰动更可能穿过量化映射，增益接近 1；在饱和/裁剪区域，真实响应应接近 0，梯度也应被抑制。作者给了两种低开销估计器。JacQuant-Probe 用随机高斯扰动 δ 测量 Q(W+δ)-Q(W) 的变化，再做一阶 slope 拟合，估计每个组的平均敏感度；JacQuant-Dither 用 subtractive dithering，把硬量化嵌入一个平滑化的随机模型中，再估计均值 Jacobian。B(W) 不需要每步更新，而是在 refresh step 上间歇更新，并在多步 QAT 中复用，因此吞吐损失较小。理论部分也围绕这个平滑化视角展开：在 code-preserving 训练阶段，如果学到的 B(W) 能跟踪 mean sensitivity，则 JacQuant 的更新可对应到一个定义良好的目标梯度；在非凸情形下给出标准收敛保证，在满足 PŁ 条件时给出线性收敛率。和 Rotation Trick 这类固定几何修正不同，JacQuant 的 backward gain 是数据驱动、位置相关、随训练状态变化的。","experiments":"从引言能确认的实验范围包括：LLaMA3-1B、LLaMA3-3B、Qwen3-1.7B，以及一个 LLaMA3-8B 的 W2A16 训练轨迹；对比对象包括标准 STE 和在 matched ParetoQ 设置下的 Rotation Trick；还报告了 LLaMA3-1B 与 8B 上的运行时开销。作者把经验结论明确限定在 ultra-low-bit LLM QAT，尤其是 ≤2bit 权重量化区间。摘要和正文前段给出的主结论是，JacQuant 在这些设置下同时改善训练稳定性和最终精度，并且额外开销很小。由于给出的全文片段没有展开完整结果表，无法可靠复述具体 benchmark 数字、困惑度或下游提升幅度；但可以确定作者强调了两点：一是收益主要出现在 STE 最失真的区域，也就是低 bit、边界/饱和现象更严重时；二是 JacQuant 作为 drop-in backward rule，可在现有 QAT pipeline 中替换 STE，而不需要重写前向量化或引入重型二阶近似。","reading_guide":"泛读时先看 Introduction，把作者为何把问题定义成 missing Jacobian 而不是“改进 STE”理解清楚。然后直接看 Method 里 B(W) 的参数化方式、Probe 与 Dither 两种估计器、refresh 频率设计，这三处决定了方法是否真能落地。若时间有限，理论部分只需抓住一句：他们不是在证明硬量化器可导，而是在平滑/抖动模型下给一个有定义的目标梯度，并说明当 surrogate 跟踪均值敏感度时优化是稳定的。实验部分重点看 ≤2bit 设置、与 Rotation Trick 的对比、以及 runtime overhead。预计 20–30 分钟可以完成一次有效泛读；如果你关心低比特继续训练或量化预训练，值得再细看 surrogate 更新频率和 group size 的消融。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a long-standing weakness of ultra-low-bit quantization-aware training. In standard QAT, the forward pass uses a hard quantizer, but the backward pass usually relies on the straight-through estimator, which simply treats the quantizer as identity. That approximation becomes especially poor at 2-bit and below, where many weights sit near bin boundaries or in clipping/saturation regions. The true quantizer is then locally insensitive, while STE still propagates full gradients. The result is unstable optimization and a mismatch between the low-precision model behavior and the training signal. The paper asks whether that missing Jacobian can be replaced by a cheap learned surrogate without changing the deployed hard quantizer.","importance":"For foundation-model work, the relevance is at the training–deployment boundary. QAT is often framed as a compression technique, but once inference cost becomes a first-class constraint, ultra-low-bit adaptation is part of the model lifecycle rather than a purely downstream concern. The useful idea here is conceptual: QAT is cast as a missing-Jacobian problem, not as another heuristic patch on top of STE. That framing may transfer beyond quantization, to other training settings with discrete operators or hard projections. In practical terms, the contribution is a clean algorithmic replacement for the backward rule: keep the same forward quantizer, add a lightweight group-wise sensitivity model, and improve stability in the ≤2-bit regime.","technical_approach":"$a","experiments":"From the provided full-text content, the empirical scope includes LLaMA3-1B, LLaMA3-3B, Qwen3-1.7B, and a LLaMA3-8B W2A16 trajectory. Baselines include standard STE and Rotation Trick under matched ParetoQ settings, and runtime overhead is reported on both LLaMA3-1B and LLaMA3-8B. The authors explicitly scope their claims to ultra-low-bit LLM QAT, especially the ≤2-bit weight regime. The stated empirical outcome is that JacQuant improves both training stability and final accuracy while adding little overhead. The available text does not include the full result tables, so it would be unsafe to invent exact benchmark numbers or perplexity gains. What is clear is where the gains come from: the method helps most where STE is most misaligned, namely low-bit settings with frequent boundary crossings and saturation. It is also presented as a drop-in replacement for the backward rule, rather than a redesign of the forward quantizer or a heavy second-order method.","reading_guide":"For a skim, start with the introduction and make sure the problem framing is clear: this is a missing-Jacobian formulation, not just another STE tweak. Then go straight to the method section and focus on three things: how B(W) is parameterized, how the Probe and Dither estimators work, and how often the surrogate is refreshed. Those choices determine whether the method is actually practical. If time is limited, the theory section only needs one takeaway: the paper does not claim hard quantization is differentiable; it defines a principled target gradient through a smoothed or dithered model and shows stable optimization when the surrogate tracks mean sensitivity. In experiments, prioritize the ≤2-bit results, the comparison against Rotation Trick, and the runtime overhead. A useful skim should take about 20–30 minutes. If you care about low-bit continued training or quantized pretraining, the ablations on refresh frequency and group size are the places to inspect more carefully.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"低比特 QAT 里别只看精度表，重点读 surrogate Jacobian 是否真的比 STE 更稳；若实现简单，值得内部复现。","en":"For low-bit QAT, the useful part is whether the surrogate Jacobian gives a cleaner signal than STE; if implementation is light, it is worth reproducing internally."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Kai Yi","Vignesh Vivekraja","Harshit Khaitan","Steven Li"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["quantization","QAT","low-bit LLM","optimization","Jacobian surrogate"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25469","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25469","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.26189","title":"Max-Window Scale Estimation for Near-Lossless HiF8 W8A8 Quantization-Aware Training","abstract":"Quantization-aware training (QAT) with low-bit floating-point formats enables efficient LLM deployment, yet introduces subtle failure modes invisible to standard training metrics. We present a systematic study of HiF8 W8A8 QAT for OpenPangu-Embedded-1B through the lens of Delayed Tensor Scaling (DTS). Across eight controlled experiments, we identify and disentangle two orthogonal failure modes: (i)amax saturation, where delayed scale estimates silently corrupt knowledge-sensitive representations","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T09:19:57+00:00","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2605_26189.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"HiF8 W8A8量化感知训练（QAT）存在两种训练损失无法检测的失效模式：延迟张量缩放（DTS）的amax饱和导致前向传播裁剪损坏知识相关表示，以及过高的学习率导致预训练常识知识被灾难性遗忘，二者独立发生但共同导致下游性能下降。","importance":"明确了FP8 QAT中缩放策略和学习率的交互作用是核心设计轴，给出的近无损QAT方案可直接用于边缘端LLM部署的量化训练，对预训练后低比特适配的工程实践有明确参考价值。","technical_approach":"1. 拆解出两个正交的失效模式，验证二者均无法通过训练损失识别；2. 提出基于64步历史窗口最大值的保守DTS缩放策略，保证窗口内不会发生饱和，轻微的过保守性反而起到正则作用；3. 提出两阶段训练协议：先做500步BF16热身填充amax历史，再用1e-5的低学习率做QAT，防止灾难性遗忘。","experiments":"在OpenPangu-Embedded-1B模型上测试，最终配置相对于BF16基线仅下降0.43% MMLU、0.58% HellaSwag、0.22% ARC-Challenge，10000步训练损失的平均百分比误差仅0.11%；单独使用缩放策略或降低学习率都无法达到该效果，二者的交互是近无损量化的关键。","reading_guide":"泛读第5章的8组对照实验时间线和第6章的失效模式分析，重点关注不同amax算法和学习率的性能对比表，预计阅读时间30分钟；工程实践可直接参考第7章的设计决策总结。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"HiF8 W8A8 quantization-aware training (QAT) suffers from two failure modes invisible to training loss metrics: amax saturation from Delayed Tensor Scaling (DTS) causes forward-pass clipping that corrupts knowledge-critical representations, and excessive learning rates lead to catastrophic forgetting of pretrained commonsense knowledge. The two independent factors jointly degrade downstream performance.","importance":"It identifies the interaction between scaling strategy and learning rate as the core design axis for FP8 QAT, and delivers a near-lossless QAT recipe directly applicable to low-bit adaptation of LLMs for edge deployment, providing clear guidance for post-pretrain quantization engineering.","technical_approach":"1. It disentangles two orthogonal failure modes and confirms neither can be detected via training loss. 2. It proposes a conservative DTS strategy using max-window amax estimation over a 64-step history window, which guarantees no saturation within the observation window, with mild over-conservatism acting as beneficial regularization. 3. It introduces a two-phase training protocol: a 500-step BF16 warmup to populate amax history, followed by QAT at a reduced learning rate of 1e-5 to prevent catastrophic forgetting.","experiments":"Tested on the OpenPangu-Embedded-1B model, the final configuration achieves only 0.43% MMLU drop, 0.58% HellaSwag drop, and 0.22% ARC-Challenge drop relative to the BF16 baseline, with an average training loss percentage error of 0.11% across 10,000 steps. Neither the scaling fix nor learning rate reduction alone is sufficient; their interaction is critical to near-lossless quantization.","reading_guide":"Skim Section 5's 8 controlled experiment timeline and Section 6's failure mode analysis. Prioritize the performance comparison table across different amax algorithms and learning rates. Estimated reading time is 30 minutes. Engineering teams can directly reference the design decision summary in Section 7.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"QAT 论文里少见地把 clipping 和 forgetting 拆干净；只看失败模式 ablation 和最终 recipe 即可。","en":"A useful QAT diagnosis because it separates clipping from forgetting; read the failure-mode ablations and final recipe."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Yingying Cheng","Jinquan Shi","Li Zhou","Zhiyang He","Zhaoyi Sun","Fan Zhang","Jie Sun"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["quantization","QAT","W8A8","training-stability","LLM-deployment"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.26189","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.26189","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25203","title":"Influence-Inspired Spectral Rotations for Extreme Low-Bit LLM Quantization","abstract":"We apply the influence-adaptive Walsh geometry of a companion theory paper (arXiv:2605.01637) to extreme low-bit weight-only LLM quantization. The recipe is one math-invariant transformation: WHT-rotate each linear layer's weight matrix and rescale its columns by per-coordinate Walsh-basis activation energy before handing off to a reconstruction-error quantizer (Intel auto-round). This biases per-group integer rounding toward high-spectral-energy channels.   On four pretrained decoder-only model","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T18:05:37+00:00","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25203.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.LG","cs.LO"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是极低比特权重量化中的舍入预算分配问题。标准 weight-only INT2/INT4 量化通常按重构误差优化，但不同通道对模型输出的影响并不相同；在 W2A16 这种噪声预算很紧的设置下，未区分通道重要性的舍入会显著恶化困惑度。","importance":"对预训练研究的直接价值不在训练 recipe，而在低比特模型部署和压缩反馈。它给出一个不需要训练旋转矩阵、不改模型结构、满精度下数学等价的预量化变换，用谱域激活能量给量化器提供通道重要性信号。结论比较克制：它没有证明 Boolean influence 理论可形式化迁移到实值 LLM，也没有和 AWQ、GPTQ、SpinQuant、QuaRot、QuIP# 等强基线做同标定对比。因此更适合作为 W2A16 量化工程技巧阅读，而不是作为低比特量化结论性工作引用。","technical_approach":"方法是先把线性层权重放到 Walsh-Hadamard 谱基下，再按每个谱坐标的激活能量做列缩放，然后交给 Intel auto-round 这类现成的重构误差量化器。缩放形式写作 s_l=(1+d rho_l)^alpha，其中 rho_l 表示谱域激活能量。固定 WHT 负责把表示转到谱域，适配性不来自学习旋转，而来自对角缩放；这点是它和 ButterflyQuant、SpinQuant 一类学习旋转方法的主要区别。论文还处理了若干架构兼容问题：Qwen3 中用 spectral-PCA 替代 post-projection norm 的矩阵 Γ；非 norm 架构中使用与 RoPE 结构相容的 pair-PCA，即每个 RoPE pair 内的 SO(2) 旋转；MoE 模型中处理 HuggingFace fused 3D experts 布局下的 input-side absorption。满精度等价性经数值验证，相对误差小于 5e-7。","experiments":"主实验覆盖 SmolLM-135M、SmolLM-360M、Qwen2.5-0.5B、Qwen2.5-1.5B，另有 TinyLlama-1.1B 辅助结果。设置主要是 W2A16。相对 vanilla auto-round，wikitext-2 perplexity 改善约 15% 到 58%，收益集中出现在 vanilla W2 退化较重的模型上。W4 消融显示效果基本落入约 ±0.5 PPL 的评估噪声内，说明该技巧主要在极低比特、通道舍入预算稀缺时有效。论文还用 poolside Laguna-XS.2 的 33B MoE 源建模做架构 fuzzing，虽然受硬件限制未完整跑大模型实验，但发现并修复了 input-side attention absorption 中 g_proj input-side gate pattern 的泛化问题。结果均为单 seed，作者也明确不主张统计显著性。","reading_guide":"泛读即可，预计 20 到 30 分钟。先看 Introduction 中对贡献边界的说明，尤其是它承认与 Boolean influence 只有启发关系而非定理迁移。再看方法部分的 WHT 旋转、谱能量缩放和 full-precision invariance，重点理解为什么固定正交变换加对角缩放可以影响 auto-round 的 per-group 舍入。实验部分重点看 W2/W4 bit-width ablation、不同模型家族的 PPL 表格，以及 Qwen3/RoPE/MoE 三个架构补丁。若做量化系统，可以深挖 absorption 细节；若关心预训练机制，读到谱能量作为通道重要性信号即可。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical failure mode in extreme low-bit weight-only quantization: reconstruction-error quantizers allocate rounding budget without enough awareness of which channels carry more signal. This is especially damaging in W2A16, where the quantization noise budget is very tight.","importance":"Its value is mainly on the deployment and compression side, with some indirect relevance to pretraining through model robustness under low-bit constraints. The contribution is a math-equivalent pre-quantization transform that injects a channel-importance signal into an existing quantizer without learning a rotation or changing the model. The claims are appropriately limited: the Boolean influence theory is used as motivation rather than a formal guarantee for real-valued LLM layers, and the empirical comparison is against vanilla auto-round rather than matched strong baselines such as AWQ, GPTQ, SpinQuant, QuaRot, or QuIP#.","technical_approach":"The method rotates each linear layer into a Walsh-Hadamard spectral basis, rescales columns according to per-coordinate spectral activation energy, and then applies Intel auto-round. The scaling has the form s_l=(1+d rho_l)^alpha, where rho_l measures spectral activation energy. The fixed WHT provides the spectral coordinate system; adaptivity comes from the diagonal rescaling rather than from a learned orthogonal transform. This is the main distinction from learned-rotation approaches such as SpinQuant or ButterflyQuant. The paper also adds engineering extensions for harder architectures: spectral-PCA for Qwen3 post-projection norm handling, RoPE-compatible pair-PCA rotations for non-norm architectures, and MoE-aware input-side absorption for fused 3D expert layouts. Full-precision invariance is numerically checked with relative error below 5e-7.","experiments":"The main evaluation uses SmolLM-135M, SmolLM-360M, Qwen2.5-0.5B, and Qwen2.5-1.5B, with an auxiliary TinyLlama-1.1B result. In W2A16, the method improves wikitext-2 perplexity by roughly 15% to 58% over vanilla auto-round, with larger gains on models where the W2 baseline degrades more severely. A W4 ablation shows that the gains mostly fall within the reported ±0.5 PPL noise floor, which supports the interpretation that the transform matters most when per-channel rounding budget is scarce. An architecture-fuzzing experiment based on poolside Laguna-XS.2, a 33B MoE model that was too expensive to run fully, exposed and fixed a generalization bug in input-side attention absorption around a g_proj input-side gate pattern. The results are single-seed, and the paper does not claim standard statistical significance.","reading_guide":"A skim is enough, about 20 to 30 minutes. Start with the Introduction, especially the paragraph that separates the empirical LLM quantization claim from the companion Boolean theory. Then read the method sections on WHT rotation, spectral-energy scaling, and full-precision invariance. In the experiments, focus on the W2 versus W4 ablation, the wikitext-2 perplexity tables across model families, and the architecture-specific fixes for Qwen3, RoPE, and MoE. For quantization work, the absorption details are the most useful part; for pretraining researchers, the main takeaway is the use of spectral activation energy as a lightweight channel-importance signal.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"通过 WHT 旋转和激活能量重缩放来优化极低比特量化，对关注模型压缩和部署的研究员有启发，重点看其对 Qwen 和 MoE 的适配技巧。","en":"Optimizes extreme low-bit quantization via WHT rotation and activation energy rescaling; insightful for researchers focusing on model compression, especially the adaptation tricks for Qwen and MoE."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Gorgi Pavlov"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["LLM Quantization","Low-Bit Quantization","Spectral Rotation","Walsh-Hadamard Transform"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25203","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25203","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.23081","title":"ThriftAttention: Selective Mixed Precision for Long-Context FP4 Attention","abstract":"Efficient attention algorithms are critical to mitigate the quadratic cost of attention in long-context workloads. Prior work utilises block-scaled quantisation techniques on Blackwell GPUs to move attention computation to 4-bit precision to accelerate inference. However, these techniques result in significant quality degradation in long-context settings. We show that the output impact of quantisation error is highly non-uniform and increases with the importance of each query-key interaction, co","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"huggingface","sources":["huggingface"],"published_at":"2026-05-21T00:00:00.000Z","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2605_23081.png","hf_upvotes":40,"arxiv_categories":[],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是长上下文推理中 FP4 attention 速度快但质量下降明显的问题。核心观察是，FP4 量化误差对输出的影响并不均匀，真正影响模型行为的误差集中在少量高注意力的 query-key block 上。","importance":"这是一篇偏 efficient inference 的工作，但对预训练研究也有间接意义。长上下文模型的训练与评测越来越依赖高吞吐推理，attention 低比特化如果损伤长程检索和复制能力，会影响数据生成、评测和 post-train 迭代。ThriftAttention 给出一个实用判断：不必把所有 attention 都保留高精度，也不应盲目全部降到 FP4；更合理的是把有限高精度预算分配给对 softmax 输出最敏感的交互块。","technical_approach":"方法是训练无关的选择性混合精度 attention。论文先从 softmax 的一阶扰动分析出发，说明单个 key 的误差贡献近似由三项决定：score 量化误差、attention weight，以及 value 与最终输出的偏差。其中 attention weight 会放大高分 token 的量化误差，因此高注意力块更值得保留 FP16。具体实现中，Q、K、V 使用 Blackwell 支持的 NVFP4 microscaling 格式量化，元素为 E2M1 FP4，scale 为 E4M3 FP8。然后将 Q 和 K/V 分块，对每个 query block 和 key block 计算 token mean 的点积作为重要性分数：S_ij = mean(Q_i) · mean(K_j)。每个 query block 选择 top-k key block 用 FP16 计算，其余 block 用 FP4 计算。两路结果通过 online softmax 合并成一个 attention 输出。与稀疏 attention 不同，它没有丢弃低重要性 block，只是降低其精度，因此避免了 aggressive sparsity 下不可恢复的信息丢失。","experiments":"论文在 LongBench-v1、HELMET、RULER 和 PG-19 上评测，覆盖 Llama、Qwen 和 Ministral 系列模型。关键结果是，在仅 5% FP16 block 预算下，ThriftAttention 平均恢复 FP4 到 FP16 性能差距的 89.1%；预算提升到 10% 和 25% 时，恢复比例分别为 91.8% 和 92.4%。端到端生成中，长上下文场景的推理延迟最高降低约 2 倍。序列长度分析显示，上下文越长，uniform FP4 的退化越明显，选择性混合精度的收益也越大。论文还通过可视化说明 FP16 与 FP4 attention 概率差异集中在少数 query-key block，常见于近对角区域和非初始 attention sink。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，预计 25–35 分钟。Method 的一阶误差分析是核心，重点看为什么 attention weight 会让误差集中化。实现部分要看 NVFP4 格式、block 划分、top-k block 选择和 online softmax 合并。实验部分建议优先看不同 FP16 block budget 的质量恢复曲线，以及长上下文长度变化下的退化趋势。若关注 serving 与预训练闭环，值得深挖它是否会影响长程复制、needle retrieval、代码仓库理解这类对少数关键 token 极敏感的任务。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles the quality loss of FP4 attention in long-context inference. Its central observation is that quantization error is not uniformly harmful: the output-relevant error is concentrated in a small number of high-attention query-key blocks.","importance":"This is primarily an inference-efficiency paper, but it matters for pretraining workflows that depend on large-scale long-context evaluation, synthetic data generation, and post-training iteration. It argues against both uniform FP4 attention and overly aggressive sparsity. A better trade-off is to spend a small FP16 budget on the interactions most sensitive to softmax perturbations while keeping the rest in FP4.","technical_approach":"$b","experiments":"The evaluation covers LongBench-v1, HELMET, RULER, and PG-19 across Llama, Qwen, and Ministral model families. With only a 5% FP16 block budget, ThriftAttention recovers 89.1% of the performance gap between uniform FP4 and FP16 attention on average. At 10% and 25% FP16 budgets, the recovery increases to 91.8% and 92.4%. In end-to-end generation, the method reduces long-context inference latency by up to about 2x. Sequence-length analysis shows that the advantage grows with context length, where uniform FP4 attention degrades most. Visualizations show that FP16-vs-FP4 attention probability differences are concentrated in a small number of blocks, often near the diagonal and around non-initial attention sinks.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 25–35 minutes. The key section is the first-order error analysis in the method part, especially the role of the attention-probability term in concentrating output-relevant error. The implementation details on NVFP4 quantization, block scoring, top-k selection, and online softmax merging are also worth reading. In the experiments, focus on the quality recovery versus FP16 block budget and the sequence-length scaling results. For serving pipelines connected to pretraining or post-training, the main question to examine is how the method behaves on tasks that depend on a few critical tokens, such as needle retrieval, long-range copying, and repository-level code understanding.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"值得看误差归因而不是 kernel 细节；若 Fig/Table 证明少量 block 主导退化，应进长上下文量化 ablation。","en":"Read it for the error attribution, not the kernel; if the tables show few blocks dominate degradation, add this to long-context quantization ablations."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Mr Joe Sharratt"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["fp4-attention","long-context","mixed-precision","inference-optimization"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.23081","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.23081","github":"https://github.com/joesharratt1229/ThriftAttention","project":"","source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25842","title":"MuCRASP: Multimodal Chain-of-thought Reasoning aware Structured Pruning","abstract":"Vision-language models (VLMs) increasingly rely on chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning to solve complex multimodal tasks, but their large parameter sizes make deployment expensive. Structured pruning offers a natural solution; however, existing methods fail to preserve CoT reasoning accuracy in VLMs. We identify two key reasons: (1) CoT consistency depends on sparse transition points (pivot tokens) in the generation trajectory, while existing pruning methods are CoT-agnostic; and (2) pruning method","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T13:36:46+00:00","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25842.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 VLM 结构化剪枝后多模态 CoT 推理能力下降的问题。","importance":"贡献类型是多模态模型压缩方法。它关注推理部署成本，并把 CoT 轨迹中的关键 token 与跨模态激活差异纳入剪枝准则；对基座预训练启发有限，但对评估压缩是否破坏 reasoning path 有参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出 MuCRASP，Multimodal Chain-of-thought Reasoning aware Structured Pruning。方法识别生成轨迹中的 sparse transition points，即 pivot tokens，认为这些位置对 CoT 一致性重要；同时建模视觉和文本模态的 activation distribution 差异，在全局参数预算下结合跨模态对齐与层敏感性来决定剪枝结构。","experiments":"在四个 VLM 和三个 reasoning benchmarks 上评估。摘要称 MuCRASP 在不同剪枝强度下更好保留推理质量，但未给出具体模型名称、参数规模、剪枝比例和数值提升。","authors_note":"作者来自 Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Kharagpur。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses degradation of multimodal CoT reasoning after structured pruning of VLMs.","importance":"This is a multimodal model-compression contribution. It focuses on deployment cost and asks whether pruning preserves reasoning trajectories and cross-modal alignment; its value for base pretraining is indirect.","technical_approach":"MuCRASP identifies sparse transition points, or pivot tokens, in the generation trajectory that are important for CoT consistency. It also accounts for different activation distributions across visual and textual modalities, combining cross-modal alignment and layer-wise sensitivity under a global parameter budget.","experiments":"The method is evaluated on four VLMs across three reasoning benchmarks. The abstract claims better preservation of reasoning quality under increasing compression, but does not provide model names, parameter sizes, pruning ratios, or numerical margins.","authors_note":"The listed institution is Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Kharagpur."},"recommendation":{"zh":"压缩论文里较少显式看 CoT 断点；可记住 pivot-token 诊断，不必细读剪枝算法。","en":"Compression papers rarely inspect CoT breakpoints explicitly; keep the pivot-token diagnostic, but the pruning algorithm can be skimmed."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Kharagpur"],"authors":["Aritra Dutta","Somak Aditya"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["VLM","structured-pruning","chain-of-thought","model-compression"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25842","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25842","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25179","title":"Locality Matters for Training-Free Audio Token Compression in Audio-Language Models","abstract":"Audio-language models (ALMs) are increasingly used for audio captioning, question answering, and open-ended audio understanding, but their inference cost remains high when audio inputs are represented as long prefix-token sequences. These audio prefixes consume context budget, increase memory usage, and make deployment harder in resource-constrained or latency-sensitive settings. Existing training-free audio-token reduction methods mainly rely on fixed pooling or score-based pruning. Fixed pooli","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T17:19:31+00:00","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25179.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"音频语言模型把音频表示成长前缀 token 后，推理成本、显存占用和上下文预算都会显著上升；论文要在不训练模型的情况下压缩这些音频 token。","importance":"贡献类型是训练-free 的多模态推理压缩方法。它不直接改进预训练，但对音频 LM/VLM 的 token 预算、prefix 设计和部署成本有参考价值，尤其适合已有模型无法重新训练的场景。","technical_approach":"提出 Local Temporal Bipartite Merging，简称 LTBM，在音频编码器空间内只合并时间上相近且表示相似的 token。核心假设是声学语义通常具有局部连续性，因此不能只按全局相似度或单点重要性删 token。论文还设计 Global Merge 受控变体，用来隔离“时间局部性”本身是否带来收益。","experiments":"实验面向 AudioCaps 等音频描述、音频问答和开放式音频理解任务，比较固定池化、基于分数的剪枝、全局合并和 LTBM。摘要没有给出具体压缩率、模型规模和数值提升，但实验重点是 coverage-quality trade-off：在减少音频前缀长度的同时尽量保留任务性能。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Audio-language models often encode audio as long prefix-token sequences, which increases inference cost, memory use, and context consumption; the paper targets training-free compression of these audio tokens.","importance":"The contribution is a training-free inference-efficiency method for audio-language models. It is not a pretraining method, but it is relevant to multimodal token-budget design and deployment when retraining the model is not feasible.","technical_approach":"The paper proposes Local Temporal Bipartite Merging, which merges similar audio tokens only within an explicit temporal window in encoder space. The key design choice is to preserve local acoustic neighborhoods rather than pruning isolated high-salience tokens or globally merging similar representations. A controlled Global Merge variant is used to test whether temporal locality itself is the useful inductive bias.","experiments":"The experiments cover audio captioning, audio question answering, and open-ended audio understanding, including AudioCaps according to the abstract. Baselines include fixed pooling, score-based pruning, and a global merge variant. The abstract does not provide exact model sizes, compression ratios, or metric deltas.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看 locality ablation 即可；它对音频 token 压缩有用，但不是会改变预训练 recipe 的结果。","en":"Read only the locality ablation; useful for audio-token compression, but it does not change a pretraining recipe."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Jiale Luo","Xiaoyu Liang","Haoji Hu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["audio-language-model","token-compression","training-free","inference-efficiency","temporal-locality"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25179","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25179","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25645","title":"Fine-Tuning and Serving Gemma 4 31B on Google Cloud TPU: A Technical Comparison with GPU Baselines","abstract":"We present the first end-to-end demonstration of fine-tuning and serving Google's Gemma 4 31B model on TPU hardware, providing an empirical comparison of TPU and GPU platforms for large language model adaptation. Using LoRA on a Google TPU v5p-8 for training and TPU v6e-8 (Trillium) for inference, we document the full set of code-level adaptations required to port a GPU-native training recipe, built on PyTorch, HuggingFace TRL, and FSDP, to the JAX + Tunix/Qwix stack. These adaptations span mesh","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T09:51:59+00:00","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25645.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.DC","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 31B 级 Gemma 模型从 GPU 原生微调/服务栈迁移到 Google Cloud TPU 时的工程适配、性能和成本问题。","importance":"贡献类型偏工程实证：给出 LoRA 微调、JAX/Tunix/Qwix 训练栈、vLLM-TPU 服务栈的端到端迁移记录，并用 2xH100 GPU baseline 做成本和吞吐对比。对预训练研究的直接价值有限，但对 TPU 训练/推理栈选型有参考。","technical_approach":"将基于 PyTorch、HuggingFace TRL、FSDP 的 GPU recipe 迁移到 JAX + Tunix/Qwix，处理 mesh 配置、LoRA 模块命名、sharding annotation、gradient checkpointing、数据管线重构，以及 Orbax checkpoint 到 safetensors 的合并流程；推理侧使用 vLLM-TPU Docker 在 TPU v6e-8 上服务 Gemma 4 31B。","experiments":"训练使用 Google TPU v5p-8 做 LoRA 微调，推理使用 TPU v6e-8 Trillium；baseline 为 2xH100 GPU，在相同超参下 TPU 训练完成时间快 1.61 倍，成本低 2.12 倍。摘要只给出部分推理吞吐描述，未提供完整延迟/吞吐数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The work studies how to port fine-tuning and serving of a 31B Gemma model from a GPU-native stack to Google Cloud TPU, and what the cost/performance tradeoff looks like.","importance":"This is mainly an engineering comparison: it documents an end-to-end LoRA fine-tuning path, the JAX/Tunix/Qwix training stack, vLLM-TPU serving, and a 2xH100 baseline. It is not a pretraining-method paper, but it gives useful signals for TPU stack maturity.","technical_approach":"The authors migrate a PyTorch, HuggingFace TRL, and FSDP recipe to JAX plus Tunix/Qwix, covering mesh setup, LoRA naming conventions, sharding annotation fixes, gradient checkpointing, data pipeline changes, and an Orbax-to-safetensors checkpoint merge procedure. Inference is served through vLLM-TPU Docker on TPU v6e-8.","experiments":"LoRA training is run on TPU v5p-8 and serving on TPU v6e-8 Trillium, with a 2xH100 GPU baseline under identical hyperparameters. The abstract reports 1.61x faster training and 2.12x lower cost on TPU; the provided abstract is truncated before complete inference throughput numbers.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"预训练侧不必精读；只扫迁移清单和成本表，能帮判断 TPU 栈是否已能承接中等规模适配实验。","en":"No need to read deeply for pretraining; skim the porting checklist and cost table to gauge TPU readiness for mid-scale adaptation runs."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Jatin Kishnani","Mayank Goel","Amit Singh","Pulkit Agrawal","Sairanjan Mishra"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["TPU","Gemma","LoRA","serving","vLLM"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25645","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25645","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25558","title":"Beyond Query Memorization: Large Language Model Routing with Query Decomposition and Historical Matching","abstract":"Optimizing the trade-off among predictive performance and computational cost is a central focus in the deployment of Large Language Models (LLMs). Current routing methods primarily rely on direct mapping from queries to models based on surface-level features, making them susceptible to the memorization trap and leading to poor generalizability on out-of-distribution (OOD) data. In this paper, we propose DecoR, a novel routing framework that recasts the routing task as a matching process of sifti","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T08:12:58+00:00","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25558.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决多 LLM 部署中的模型路由问题：如何在性能和计算成本之间做选择，同时避免路由器只记住训练查询表面形式、在 OOD 查询上失效。","importance":"贡献类型是推理服务侧的路由方法和泛化评测资产。它不直接改进预训练，但对模型级联、成本控制、能力画像和 serving-time compute allocation 有参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出 DecoR，把路由从“查询到模型”的直接分类改写为基于历史日志的相似查询匹配。核心是 query capability decomposition：把语言表面形式与任务内在能力需求拆开，让匹配发生在能力维度上，而不是词面相似度上。论文还提出 CodaSet，用于评估路由器在泛化场景下的稳定性。","experiments":"摘要只说明 DecoR 在 CodaSet 上维持了更好的 OOD 泛化表现，但未给出使用的 LLM 列表、路由器规模、历史日志大小、baseline 细节或提升幅度。需要正文确认 setup 是否存在日志泄漏、query 分布重叠和成本函数设定问题。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses LLM routing in multi-model deployment: selecting models under a quality-cost trade-off while avoiding routers that memorize surface query patterns and fail out of distribution.","importance":"The contribution is a serving-side routing method plus a generalization benchmark. It does not directly improve pretraining, but it is relevant to model cascades, cost control, capability profiling, and serving-time compute allocation.","technical_approach":"DecoR reframes routing as historical query matching rather than direct query-to-model classification. Its key component is query capability decomposition, which separates linguistic surface form from intrinsic task requirements and performs matching in a capability space. The paper also introduces CodaSet to evaluate routing generalization.","experiments":"The abstract reports better OOD generalization on CodaSet, but does not provide the model pool, router size, historical log scale, baselines, or gain magnitude. The main thing to verify in the full paper is whether the setup controls for log leakage, query distribution overlap, and cost-function choices.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看 CodaSet 构造和 OOD 切分；若日志匹配无泄漏，它对 serving-time compute routing 有弱参考。","en":"Read only the CodaSet construction and OOD splits; if log leakage is controlled, it is a useful weak signal for serving-time compute routing."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Bo Lv","Jingbo Sun"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["llm-routing","serving-efficiency","model-cascade","ood-generalization","benchmark"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25558","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25558","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25424","title":"SeqRoute: Global Budget-Aware Sequential LLM Routing via Offline Reinforcement Learning","abstract":"Existing LLM routing frameworks treat queries as independent events, neglecting the sequential nature of real-world user sessions constrained by global computational budgets. This mismatch inevitably leads to budget bankruptcy: myopic routing policies exhaust resources on early interactions, forcing subsequent and often more complex queries onto inadequate models. We introduce SeqRoute, a framework that formulates multi-turn routing as a finite-horizon Markov Decision Process and solves it via o","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T04:52:10+00:00","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25424.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 LLM model routing 在多轮用户会话中只按单个 query 贪心选模型，导致全局预算过早耗尽的问题。","importance":"贡献类型是推理服务和成本调度方法创新。它把 routing 从独立样本分类问题改成有限时域决策问题，对 serving 系统的预算控制有意义，但与基座预训练关系较远。","technical_approach":"SeqRoute 将多轮 routing 建模为 finite-horizon MDP，把剩余预算纳入状态，并用 Conservative Q-Learning 做 offline RL。为缓解轨迹数据不足，提出 Hindsight Budget Relabeling，把历史会话在不同假设预算下重标注，将 10,000 条原始 sessions 扩展到 2.38 million transitions。","experiments":"摘要给出了数据扩增规模：10,000 raw sessions 到 2.38M transitions。未提供使用的模型池、任务分布、routing baselines、成本函数、质量指标或提升幅度；需要正文检查 budget bankruptcy 的定义和 offline policy 是否离线评估可靠。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses LLM model routing for multi-turn sessions, where per-query greedy routing can spend the global budget too early and degrade later turns.","importance":"This is a serving and cost-allocation method contribution. It reframes routing as a sequential decision problem rather than an independent classification problem. It is useful for inference systems, but only indirectly relevant to foundation-model pretraining.","technical_approach":"SeqRoute formulates multi-turn model routing as a finite-horizon MDP, includes remaining budget in the state, and trains the policy with offline RL using Conservative Q-Learning. To mitigate data scarcity, Hindsight Budget Relabeling relabels historical sessions under hypothetical budgets, expanding 10,000 raw sessions into 2.38 million transitions.","experiments":"The abstract reports the data expansion scale from 10,000 sessions to 2.38M transitions. It does not state the model pool, task mix, routing baselines, cost model, quality metrics, or numerical gains, so the full paper is needed to assess evaluation reliability.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为 serving cost-control 备查即可；核心看 HBR 是否只是离线数据增强，别把 routing 结果外推到训练分配。","en":"Keep it as a serving cost-control reference; check whether HBR is only offline augmentation, and do not overread it as a training compute-allocation result."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Zhongling Xu","Shunan Zheng","Wei Wang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["llm-routing","offline-rl","serving-efficiency","budget-allocation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25424","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25424","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"eval","emoji":"🧪","name":"Eval / 评估","description":"Benchmark、评测数据集、Leaderboard、评测协议、Judge/Verifier/Metric、Arena/Harness，尤其是 pretrain/long-context/agent/coding/video/long-horizon 评测","papers":[{"id":"2605.25240","title":"JudgmentBench: Comparing Rubric and Preference Evaluation for Quality Assessment","abstract":"Two methodologies dominate current practices of benchmarking: rubric-based scoring evaluates items against predefined criteria, whereas comparative judgment elicits pairwise preferences between outputs. Although both methodologies are widely used, the choice between them is rarely justified. We release JudgmentBench, a benchmark of 30 real-world legal tasks, paired with 1,539 rubric scores and 1,530 pairwise preference judgments collected from practicing attorneys--including at major U.S. law fi","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T19:52:39+00:00","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25240.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CY","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要回答的不是“法律任务上谁分更高”，而是一个更基础的问题：在高专业门槛、质量维度难以穷尽定义的任务里，rubric 打分和 pairwise preference 哪一种更适合作为质量监督信号。作者把这个问题放在法律场景里做，是因为法律写作天然具有多维、情境依赖、结果不可直接当作质量代理的特点，正好能放大两类评估范式的差异。更具体地说，论文构造了同一批真实法律任务、同一批模型输出、同一批执业律师标注下的两种监督信号，从而尽量排除任务、标注者、样本分布不一致带来的混淆，直接比较 rubric 与 comparative judgment 在“恢复已知质量顺序”“标注效率”“自动化可迁移性”上的表现。","importance":"对基座模型研究的直接意义不在法律本身，而在监督信号设计。很多 post-train、reward modeling、judge model、preference optimization 都默认 pairwise preference 更自然，另一些系统则偏好 rubric，因为它可解释、可审计、便于拆维度。这篇工作的价值在于，它给出了一组较干净的对照证据：在高专业、难枚举标准的任务里，pairwise judgment 往往比 rubric 更能保留专家的整体判断，而且单位时间信息密度更高。这个结论会影响两类事情。第一，如何构造高质量 reward signal，尤其是在 reasoning、写作、专业知识工作这类“好坏能感觉到，但很难事先写全标准”的任务上。第二，如何理解自动评测的上限：如果人类专家本身更稳定地给出相对偏好，而不是绝对分数，那么让 LLM autograder 学 preference 可能比学 rubric 更顺。贡献量级偏方法论和评测基础设施，不是训练范式级别的改变，但对高质量监督数据建设有现实参考价值。","technical_approach":"方法上有三个关键设计。第一，任务来源尽量贴近真实专业工作。作者从 Harvey 的 BigLaw Bench 中选取 30 个法律任务，覆盖 litigation 和 transactional 场景，保留 prompt、相关文档和任务 rubric。与常见考试式法律 benchmark 不同，这些任务更像真实律师工作产物。第二，输出质量不是直接拿现成模型自然分布，而是人为构造三档质量层级的答案，用来形成一个可检验的“已知顺序”。从摘要和正文可见，作者使用 LLM 生成不同质量水平的候选输出，再让专家分别做 rubric 评分和两两偏好判断。这样做的目的不是模拟真实线上分布，而是让评估方法是否能恢复质量排序变成一个可测问题。第三，配对标注设计。最关键的是同一任务、同一输出集合，由同一类专家同时提供 rubric 分数和 pairwise preference。rubric 侧是基于任务特定的原子化标准逐项给分，包含正向加分项和负向扣分项；preference 侧则让律师在两个候选答案之间选更优者。作者还进一步比较了人类标注和 LLM autograder 在这两种监督形式下的表现。论文的核心判断不是“rubric 没用”，而是指出在 tacit knowledge 占比高、质量维度难预先枚举时，rubric 会把专家判断压缩成一组不完全的显式标准，信息损失更大；而 pairwise judgment 更接近专家的整体比较过程。代价是 preference 更难直接审计和拆解成可复用规则。","experiments":"实验主结论很清楚：comparative judgment 在恢复构造的质量顺序上持续优于 rubric，而且标注时间不到后者的一半。数据规模方面，论文释放了 30 个真实法律任务，包含 1,539 条 rubric scores 和 1,530 条 pairwise preference judgments，标注来自有实务经验的执业律师，作者按美国大所计费口径估算，相当于约 242 小时、约 24.2 万美元的律师工时。结果层面，正文强调这一优势同时出现在人工评估和 LLM 自动评分上：也就是说，不只是人类更容易做 preference，模型在学习或模仿这种监督信号时也更稳定。论文还讨论了时间成本，指出 rubric 的前期设计和逐项核对都更耗时，而 preference 只要求专家做相对判断，因此单位时间可获得更多可靠监督。更值得注意的是，这个结论是在作者刻意构造的三档质量输出上得到的，因此它测的是“能否识别质量差异”，不是开放世界中的绝对分数校准。对做 reward modeling 的人来说，这一点很重要：论文支持 preference 在排序和相对优劣识别上的优势，但并不自动推出它在所有需要可解释分解、错误归因、合规审计的场景里都优于 rubric。","reading_guide":"泛读时先看 Introduction 和 Dataset Construction，抓住论文真正比较的对象：不是法律能力，而是两种监督信号。然后重点看实验部分里关于 constructed quality ordering 的定义，以及人类与 LLM autograder 两条结果线是否一致。若时间有限，优先看 Figure 1 的数据构造流程、主结果表，以及关于 annotation time 的统计。阅读时要特别留意两个边界。第一，任务来自法律高专业场景，结论更适用于“标准难写全”的任务，不一定直接外推到事实核查、格式检查这类 rubric 很自然的任务。第二，作者比较的是 paired annotations，这个设计很干净，但样本量仍然不大，且输出质量层级带有人为构造痕迹。预计 20–30 分钟可完成泛读；如果关心 reward modeling 或 judge model，建议再细看作者如何定义“recover quality ordering”，以及 LLM autograder 是如何从 rubric / preference 信号中做预测的。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a methodological question rather than a legal one: in high-expertise tasks where quality is multidimensional and hard to fully specify upfront, should we rely on rubric-based scoring or pairwise preference judgments as the supervision signal? Law is used as the testbed because legal work products are strongly context-dependent, often resist objective decomposition, and make “quality” unusually hard to operationalize. The key design is a paired comparison: the same legal tasks, the same model outputs, and the same type of expert annotators are used to collect both rubric scores and comparative judgments, so the study can isolate differences between the two evaluation paradigms instead of conflating them with task or annotator variation.","importance":"$c","technical_approach":"$d","experiments":"$e","reading_guide":"$f","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"对于做评测或对齐的研究员非常重要：在高专业领域（法律），pairwise偏好比rubric评分的效度高得多（0.908 vs 0.150），这对设计评测协议和RL对齐数据标注策略有直接参考意义。","en":"Highly relevant for researchers doing evaluation or alignment: in high-expertise domains (law), pairwise preferences are vastly more valid than rubric scoring (0.908 vs 0.150), with direct implications for evaluation protocol design and RL alignment data annotation strategies."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Stanford University"],"authors":["Russell Yang","Ruishi Chen","Pierce Kelaita","Riya Ranjan","Sibo Ma","Charles Dickens","Matthew Guillod","Megan Ma","Julian Nyarko"],"notable_authors":["Julian Nyarko"],"tags":["evaluation","benchmark","preference-evaluation","rubric-scoring","legal-domain"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25240","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25240","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25133","title":"Trust but Verify: Prover-Verifier Deliberation for Selective LLM Prediction","abstract":"Reliably knowing when a language model is correct is almost as important as being correct. We introduce prover-verifier deliberation (PVD), an inference-time protocol grounded in interactive proof theory, as a mechanism for selective prediction: the protocol produces both an answer and a structured confidence verdict, allowing a system to report high-confidence answers while abstaining on uncertain cases. In each dialogue, a prover defends a candidate answer through checkable sub-claims while a ","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T15:23:27+00:00","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25133.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"论文关注 LLM 的选择性预测：模型不仅要回答问题，还要知道哪些答案可以高置信输出、哪些应该拒答。核心问题不是提高平均准确率，而是把推理过程转化为可用的置信信号。","importance":"对预训练研究的直接贡献有限，但对 post-train、推理时计算和 verifier 设计有参考意义。它把 interactive proof 的 prover-verifier 结构移植到冻结 LLM 的推理流程中，用结构化挑战替代简单自一致性投票。价值在于提醒：verifier 不一定只服务于最终打分，也可以通过多轮质询产生覆盖率-精度曲线，用于判断模型输出是否可用。这对后续训练 verifier、构造过程监督数据、设计 abstention-aware evaluation 都有启发。","technical_approach":"PVD 使用两个冻结模型，一个作为 prover，一个作为 verifier。prover 先给出候选答案，并把理由拆成 3–5 个可检查的 atomic sub-claims。verifier 不直接给置信分，而是在每轮给出 Accept、Challenge 或 Reject。Challenge 时，verifier 选择最可疑或最缺证据的子命题发问；prover 需要补充论证，也允许修改答案。若 verifier 接受且答案没有被修改，则记为 Accept + No Change，即 ANC。论文把 ANC 当作高置信覆盖集合，用它评估 selective prediction 的 precision 和 coverage。与 self-consistency 的区别是，PVD 的置信信号来自有目标的反证搜索，而不是多个采样答案的一致性；与 multi-agent debate 的区别是，PVD 强制把理由拆成可挑战的子命题，并要求 verifier 做明确裁决。","experiments":"实验主要在 GPQA Diamond 和 Humanity’s Last Exam 上进行，并和 self-consistency k=8、multi-agent debate、Universal Self-Consistency、Reflexion 对比。GPQA Diamond 上，ANC 子集的高置信精度为 84–98%，覆盖率为 43–77%；相对非 ANC 样本，精度高出 6.6–34.8 个百分点。最强信号来自同系列但能力不完全对称的组合：GPT-5.4 prover 配 GPT-5.4-mini verifier，ANC 精度 97.6%，覆盖率 43%，比非 ANC 样本高 34.8 个百分点。HLE 上的结果更不稳定，弱 prover-verifier 组合可能出现 Accept/Reject 准确率差距缩小甚至反转，说明该协议只有在 verifier 足够可靠时才有校准价值。这个负结果很重要：PVD 不是形式化 soundness 的直接替代，而是一种经验性置信机制。","reading_guide":"泛读即可，预计 20–30 分钟。先看 Introduction 中对 selective prediction 的问题定义，以及 PVD 和 self-consistency、debate 的区别。然后看 Prover-Verifier Deliberation 方法部分，重点关注 ANC 的定义、Challenge/Reject 的判据、疲劳终止和 retry 机制。实验部分建议优先看 GPQA Diamond 的 coverage-precision 曲线，以及 HLE 中弱模型组合失败的分析。若关注 verifier 训练，可以深挖 prover 子命题拆解和 verifier targeted challenge 的 transcript，这些可能转化为过程监督或 verifier preference 数据。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies selective prediction for LLMs: a model should not only answer a question, but also identify when its answer is reliable enough to report. The target is calibrated coverage rather than average accuracy alone.","importance":"The work is not a pretraining paper, but it is relevant to post-training interfaces, verifier design, and inference-time compute. Its main contribution is to turn a prover-verifier interaction into a confidence signal. Instead of using agreement among samples as a weak proxy for correctness, it uses targeted challenges over decomposed claims. This is useful for thinking about abstention-aware evaluation, process supervision data, and future verifier training.","technical_approach":"PVD uses two frozen LLMs. The prover proposes an answer and decomposes its justification into 3–5 atomic, checkable sub-claims. The verifier then returns one of three decisions at each round: Accept, Challenge, or Reject. A Challenge targets the most suspicious or least supported sub-claim, and the prover must defend it or revise the answer. The key operating point is Accept + No Change, or ANC: cases where the verifier accepts the proof and the prover never changes the answer. ANC is treated as a high-confidence subset for selective prediction. Compared with self-consistency, the signal comes from adversarial checking rather than vote agreement. Compared with debate, the protocol is more constrained: claims are decomposed, challenges are targeted, and the verifier must issue an explicit verdict.","experiments":"The paper evaluates PVD on GPQA Diamond and Humanity’s Last Exam, with comparisons to self-consistency with k=8, multi-agent debate, Universal Self-Consistency, and Reflexion. On GPQA Diamond, ANC examples reach 84–98% high-confidence precision at 43–77% coverage, with a 6.6–34.8 percentage-point gap over the non-ANC complement. The strongest signal comes from a within-family asymmetric pairing: GPT-5.4 as prover and GPT-5.4-mini as verifier, giving 97.6% ANC precision at 43% coverage, 34.8 points above the complement. On HLE, weak prover-verifier pairings can collapse or even invert the Accept/Reject accuracy gap. This failure mode is important: the protocol does not inherit formal soundness from interactive proof theory; it only works as an empirical calibration mechanism when the verifier is competent enough.","reading_guide":"A 20–30 minute skim is enough. Start with the introduction for the selective prediction framing and the comparison with self-consistency and debate. Then read the PVD protocol carefully, especially the ANC definition, the Challenge/Reject criteria, fatigue termination, and retry mechanism. In the experiments, focus on the GPQA coverage-precision results and the HLE failure cases. For readers interested in verifier training, the most useful material is the claim decomposition and targeted challenge transcript format, which could be reused as process-supervision or verifier-preference data.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"读协议和 coverage-precision 图就够；它提醒 verifier 不是定理机器，RLVR 里也要按噪声通道建模。","en":"Read the protocol and coverage-precision curves; it is a useful reminder that verifiers in RLVR are noisy channels, not theorem machines."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["João Sedoc","Baotong Zhang","Dean Foster"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["selective-prediction","prover-verifier","confidence-estimation","gpqa","llm-evaluation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25133","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25133","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25364","title":"Can MLLMs Reason Beyond Language? VisReason: A Comprehensive Benchmark for Vision-Centric Reasoning","abstract":"Recent multimodal large language models (MLLMs) achieve strong performance on visual reasoning benchmarks, yet it remains unclear to what extent such performance reflects reasoning directly grounded in visual evidence. We introduce VisReason, a benchmark for vision-centric reasoning in everyday scenarios where perception and inference are tightly coupled. VisReason contains 1,505 questions across 10 categories spanning perceptual, structural, and conceptual reasoning. Our evaluation shows that V","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T02:41:50+00:00","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25364.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要回答的不是“MLLM 在视觉题上能不能得分”，而是一个更窄也更关键的问题：当前多模态模型到底是在直接利用视觉证据做推理，还是先把图像压成语言描述，再沿着语言链条完成推理。作者指出，MMMU、MMMU-Pro、MathVista 这类常用 benchmark 中，把图像替换成模型自己生成的 caption 后，性能下降不到 6.35%，说明不少题目其实允许模型绕开视觉细节，主要靠语言中介完成求解。VisReason 的目标就是构造一套对这种“语言替代”不友好的评测，让题目必须依赖视觉结构、空间关系、局部差异、图形规则等直接视觉证据，才能较稳定地答对。","importance":"对基座研究的意义主要在评测诊断，而不在新训练方法。它提供了一个更干净的信号，帮助区分“视觉输入被真正用到了多少”与“模型只是把图像翻译成文本后继续做语言推理”这两件事。对做 native multimodal pretrain、视觉 tokenizer、跨模态对齐 loss、视觉 reasoning 数据构造的人，这类 benchmark 有实际价值，因为它能暴露训练目标是否真的提升了视觉 grounding，而不是只提升了语言外壳下的答题能力。它的贡献量级属于中等偏上：不是范式改变，但在当前 MLLM 评测里补上了一个长期缺口。","technical_approach":"方法上核心是 benchmark 设计与验证。作者先定义 10 个视觉推理大类、36 个细粒度子类，覆盖 perceptual、structural、conceptual 三层能力。题目来源于在线视觉推理资源和公务员考试题库，随后由人工改写成统一 VQA 格式，答案类型分成选择、填空、开放问答和 2D 框选四类。每个样本至少经过多名标注者独立判断与复核，保证题面、答案和格式一致性。真正有意思的部分不只是数据收集，而是作者用“图像替换为 caption”的对照实验去验证 benchmark 的 vision-centric 属性：如果一个题目在 caption-only 条件下仍能做对，那它就不够依赖视觉证据；VisReason 在这个测试下出现了 48.12% 的显著性能下降，说明它比现有 benchmark 更能隔离视觉推理本身。论文还系统考察了 inference-time scaling 和显式 CoT 的作用，结论是：当视觉证据提取本身不够稳时，增加推理 token 或要求模型写更长推理链，收益都有限。这一点对多模态训练很重要，因为它暗示瓶颈不一定在 reasoning head，而可能更早出现在视觉表征、跨模态接口或训练分布上。","experiments":"关键结果有四组。第一，诊断性最强的是 caption 替换实验：在 MMMU、MMMU-Pro、MathVista 上，图像换成 caption 后性能下降小于 6.35%；在 VisReason 上下降 48.12%，说明该 benchmark 明显更依赖原始视觉输入。第二，人类与模型差距很大，且不同模型之间被明显拉开，说明它既不是过难到全体接近随机，也不是过易到无法区分能力。第三，test-time reasoning budget 增加能带来持续但缓慢且趋于饱和的提升；论文没有把它包装成“多想就能解决”，而是明确指出额外计算无法替代视觉 grounding。第四，对非-thinking 模型，显式 CoT 的平均收益很小，例如 GPT-4o 只有约 +1.1%，而且在 perception-heavy 类别上并不稳定。另一个稳定现象是模型规模越大，VisReason 表现越好，但即便最大模型也明显落后于人类，说明单纯 scaling 还不够。作为 skim 论文，最值得记住的不是某个绝对分数，而是这几个实验共同支持的判断：现有 MLLM 的很多“推理”成绩，仍然有较强的语言替代成分。","reading_guide":"建议先看 Introduction 里对现有 benchmark 的 caption 替换对照，这部分最能快速建立问题意识。然后看 benchmark 构成图和类别定义，理解作者到底把哪些能力算作 vision-centric reasoning。实验部分优先看三类结果：一是 humans vs models，二是 caption substitution，三是 inference-time scaling 与 CoT 的收益曲线。若时间有限，30 分钟左右足够抓住主线。若要深挖，重点想两个问题：第一，VisReason 是否真的排除了语言先验，只是“更难 caption”还是“必须看图”；第二，这类 benchmark 对预训练 recipe 的可优化性有多强，也就是它能否反向指导数据和目标函数设计，而不只是做诊断。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a sharper question than standard multimodal evaluation: when MLLMs succeed on visual reasoning tasks, are they actually reasoning from visual evidence, or are they mostly converting images into language and then solving the problem in text space? The authors show that on benchmarks such as MMMU, MMMU-Pro, and MathVista, replacing the image with a model-generated caption causes less than a 6.35% drop, which suggests that much of the reasoning can survive language mediation. VisReason is built to make that shortcut fail: the tasks require direct use of visual structure, spatial layout, local differences, and implicit visual rules.","importance":"Its value is diagnostic rather than algorithmic. For pretraining and native multimodal modeling, this benchmark gives a cleaner signal about visual grounding: it helps separate genuine use of visual evidence from language-heavy problem solving wrapped in multimodal form. That matters for work on visual tokenization, multimodal alignment losses, data construction, and unified pretraining, because many existing benchmarks may overstate progress if caption-like abstractions are already sufficient. The contribution is meaningful but bounded: it does not introduce a new training paradigm, but it fills an important gap in how current MLLMs are evaluated.","technical_approach":"$10","experiments":"$11","reading_guide":"Start with the introduction and the caption-substitution comparison, since that frames the whole paper. Then read the benchmark taxonomy to understand what the authors count as vision-centric reasoning. In the experiments, focus on three parts: human vs. model performance, caption substitution, and the curves for inference-time scaling and CoT prompting. A 30-minute skim is enough to capture the main argument. For deeper reading, examine whether the benchmark truly isolates visual reasoning rather than simply making captioning harder, and whether the benchmark can guide pretraining decisions instead of serving only as a diagnostic asset.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"一个专注于'以视觉为中心'的推理 Benchmark，指出现有 MLLM 的 test-time reasoning 策略在强视觉依赖任务上收益有限，对 VLM 评测和 o1-like 多模态推理研究有参考价值。","en":"A benchmark focusing on 'vision-centric' reasoning, pointing out that test-time reasoning strategies of current MLLMs yield limited benefits on strongly vision-dependent tasks; valuable for VLM evaluation and o1-like multimodal reasoning research."},"metadata":{"institutions":["CASIA"],"authors":["Longteng Guo","Yifan Wang","Pengkang Huo","Tailai Chen","Yuze Wu","Jing Liu","Xinxin Zhu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["MLLM","Visual Reasoning","Benchmark","Test-Time Reasoning"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25364","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25364","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25534","title":"StructBreak: Structural Cognitive Overload-Induced Safety Failures in MLLMs","abstract":"Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) excel at structural reasoning yet suffer from a sharp logical brittleness in structural consistency. We term this phenomenon Structural Cognitive Overload (SCO), a byproduct of the contention between deep reasoning and safety alignment. However, prior work has predominantly targeted typographic and pixel-level perturbations, leaving the study of SCO largely unexplored. To this end, we propose StructBreak, an automated end-to-end framework designed to quan","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T07:41:51+00:00","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25534.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这项工作研究 MLLM 在复杂结构化输入下的安全失效：当模型需要解析视觉知识图、流程图式结构和多跳关系时，结构推理负载可能压过安全对齐信号，导致原本应拒答的有害请求被执行。","importance":"对预训练研究的直接价值不在训练方法，而在揭示多模态模型的一个评测与安全盲区。它提示模型能力越强，尤其是图结构解析和结构推理越强，未必天然更安全。安全对齐如果主要依赖文本拒答模式、OCR 防御或表层扰动鲁棒性，可能覆盖不到高结构负载场景。对 native multimodal pretraining 和图文统一建模来说，这是一个需要纳入训练数据、对齐数据和评测协议的风险类型。","technical_approach":"StructBreak 采用黑盒 image-text 攻击设定，不需要梯度、logits 或模型内部状态。核心载体是 Visual Knowledge Graphs。恶意意图不直接放在文本指令中，而是编码进图结构、节点关系和推理路径里；文本提示则伪装成较正常的任务触发器，例如学术分析、系统调试或结构解释。框架包含生成、过滤、评估流程：先按风险类别选择模板，将有害请求改写为结构化场景；再生成具有足够认知密度的 VKG；随后通过反馈调整图结构复杂度，使输入接近模型安全失效的阈值。方法区别于 OCR jailbreak 和像素级对抗扰动，重点不是让模型“看错”，而是让模型在正确解析复杂结构时把注意力和推理预算更多分配给任务完成，从而削弱安全提示和拒答方向的作用。","experiments":"实验覆盖六个主流 MLLM，包括文中提到的 GPT-5 和 Gemini 2.5，并构造十类威胁场景。StructBreak 的平均攻击成功率为 92.0%，峰值达到 97%，高于文中比较的既有攻击方法。一个有信息量的发现是，图结构推理能力更强的模型在 VKG 攻击下反而更容易失守。机制分析部分显示，高结构负载会导致注意力分布更分散，对系统安全提示的注意力被压低。潜空间几何分析还显示，StructBreak 输入相对标准有害提示落在异常分布区域，并且与模型的 refusal direction 接近正交，解释了为什么常规拒答机制难以覆盖这类输入。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，约 20–30 分钟。重点看 Introduction 中 SCO 假设的定义、Threat Model and Methodology 中 VKG 生成和意图解耦设计、实验表格中的 ASR 对比，以及机制分析里关于 attention dissipation 和 refusal direction 的图。无需深读攻击模板细节，除非关注多模态安全评测或对齐数据构造。需要保留一点审慎：文中将注意力变化解释为安全注意力消散，但注意力本身不是完整因果证据；更强的结论需要干预实验或训练时消融支持。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a safety failure mode in MLLMs under high structural load. When a model has to parse visual knowledge graphs and multi-hop structural relations, the reasoning burden can weaken refusal behavior and lead to harmful compliance.","importance":"The main value for pretraining researchers is diagnostic rather than algorithmic. It exposes a gap in multimodal safety evaluation: stronger structural reasoning does not automatically imply stronger safety. Alignment pipelines that focus on textual refusal patterns, OCR attacks, or pixel-level perturbations may miss failures induced by complex graph-like inputs. This matters for native multimodal pretraining and unified image-text modeling, where structural reasoning ability is often an explicit target.","technical_approach":"StructBreak is a black-box image-text attack framework. It uses Visual Knowledge Graphs as the carrier of malicious intent while keeping the textual instruction relatively benign. The malicious request is decomposed into graph nodes, edges, and reasoning paths, while the prompt is framed as tasks such as academic analysis, debugging, or structure interpretation. The pipeline generates adversarial VKGs, filters them, and adaptively adjusts structural complexity until the model crosses a safety failure threshold. The distinction from OCR jailbreaks or adversarial noise is important: the attack does not rely on misperception. It relies on correct structural parsing consuming enough reasoning and attention budget that safety behavior becomes less effective.","experiments":"The evaluation covers six leading MLLMs, including GPT-5 and Gemini 2.5, across ten threat scenarios. StructBreak reports an average attack success rate of 92.0% and a peak of 97%, outperforming the compared attack baselines. A notable result is that models with stronger graph reasoning are more vulnerable to VKG-based attacks. The mechanistic analysis reports dispersed attention under heavy structural load, with reduced attention to system-level safety prompts. Latent-space analysis further suggests that StructBreak inputs occupy regions different from standard harmful prompts and are nearly orthogonal to the refusal direction, which helps explain why ordinary refusal behavior does not transfer well.","reading_guide":"A skim is enough for most pretraining readers, around 20–30 minutes. Focus on the SCO hypothesis in the introduction, the threat model and VKG construction pipeline, the ASR comparison tables, and the mechanistic figures on attention dissipation and refusal direction. The exact template library is less important unless the goal is to build multimodal safety data or benchmarks. Treat the attention-based explanation with care: it is suggestive, but stronger causal claims would require intervention-style evidence.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"安全数字可能受 prompt 设计影响，但“结构推理压垮对齐”这个失效模式值得看实验设置。","en":"The safety numbers may be prompt-sensitive, but the failure mode—structural reasoning overwhelming alignment—is worth inspecting."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Yang Luo","Xinran Liu","Tiantian Ji","Zhiyi Yin","Lingyun Peng","Shuyu Li"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["mllm-safety","benchmark","structural-reasoning","jailbreak"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25534","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25534","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.26177","title":"RepoMirage: Probing Repository Context Reasoning in Code Agents with Perturbations","abstract":"Code agents are currently having skillful performance on repository-level software engineering benchmarks, but it remains unclear whether success on end-to-end tasks such as issue resolution truly reflects repository context reasoning, the ability to identify the task-relevant information across multiple files and reason over the relations among them. To investigate this question, we introduce RepoMirage, a two-stage evaluation suite built on SWE-Bench Verified that adopts perturbation as a diag","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T06:26:43+00:00","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2605_26177.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.SE","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答一个评测问题：代码 Agent 在 SWE-Bench Verified 这类仓库级任务上解题成功，是否真的说明它具备跨文件定位、组织和推理仓库上下文的能力。","importance":"它对基座预训练本身不是直接贡献，但对代码模型和代码 Agent 的评测有参考价值。论文指出，端到端 issue resolution 分数可能混入了较强的局部修复能力，不能稳定反映 repository context reasoning。这个区分很重要，因为代码模型后训练常用 SWE-Bench 类任务做反馈信号。如果 benchmark 成功主要来自局部模式，SFT/RL 数据和奖励就可能强化错误能力画像。","technical_approach":"RepoMirage 采用两阶段设计。第一阶段 RepoMirage-Perturb 保持原始任务语义和评测协议不变，只对仓库暴露方式做语义保持扰动，用来增加上下文推理需求。三类扰动分别是：遮蔽原本显式的依赖路径；通过结构性间接层隐藏真实运行目标；把局部可见定义外移成跨文件引用。这样做的好处是失败更容易归因到上下文组织能力，而不是新 benchmark 的任务分布变化。第二阶段 RepoMirage-Extend 把这些扰动转成显式任务，包括 proxy-chain completion、runtime target identification、missing-constant recovery，并结合需要多文件 gold patch 的原始修复任务。论文还分析了 Agent 轨迹，发现模型在扰动后会搜索和阅读更多文件，但并没有更有效地完成编辑，说明瓶颈不只是检索范围，而是把多文件信息组织成可操作结构。基于这个观察，作者提出 RepoAnchor 原型流程：先构建任务相关的仓库结构摘要，再指导后续解题。","experiments":"实验基于 SWE-Bench Verified，并比较 8 个领先代码模型或代码 Agent。RepoMirage-Perturb 下，平均 resolved rate 相对下降 27.0%，同时模型读取更多文件，说明更大上下文访问没有自然转化为更强解题能力。RepoMirage-Extend 中，8 个模型在原始 issue-resolution 任务上的平均表现为 66.8%，在扰动派生的显式上下文任务上降到 25.3%。轨迹分析显示，模型动作中搜索和阅读比例上升，但更容易停留在探索状态，迟迟不能形成编辑决策。加入结构提示后性能改善，RepoAnchor 的结果支持了“显式结构建模先于修复生成”的路线。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，约 20–30 分钟。重点看 perturbation 的构造定义、RepoMirage-Extend 的任务设计，以及 trajectory analysis。读这篇不需要纠结单个模型排名，更应该看它如何把端到端 SWE-Bench 成功拆成可诊断的上下文能力。对做代码模型后训练的人，值得关注的是：如果奖励只来自最终 patch 是否通过测试，模型可能继续学习局部修复捷径，而不是学习稳定的跨文件结构推理。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether success on repository-level code-agent benchmarks, especially SWE-Bench Verified, actually measures the ability to locate, organize, and reason over task-relevant context across files.","importance":"The contribution is mainly evaluative rather than a direct pretraining method. It is still useful for code LMs and code-agent post-training, because SWE-Bench-style success is often used as a proxy for repository-level competence. The paper shows that this proxy can be misleading: many solved cases may rely on localized repair patterns rather than robust repository context reasoning. This matters when SFT or RL pipelines use such tasks as training or reward signals.","technical_approach":"$12","experiments":"The evaluation is derived from SWE-Bench Verified and covers eight leading code models or code agents. Under RepoMirage-Perturb, the average resolved rate drops by 27.0% relatively, even though agents read substantially more files. Under RepoMirage-Extend, average performance falls from 66.8% on the original issue-resolution task to 25.3% on the perturbation-derived explicit context tasks. Trajectory analysis shows a shift toward more search and file-reading actions, but also more indecision before editing. Structural hints improve performance, and RepoAnchor gives additional evidence that explicit repository-structure construction can help.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 20–30 minutes. Focus on the perturbation definitions, the construction of RepoMirage-Extend, and the trajectory analysis. The most useful part is not the model ranking, but the diagnostic design: it separates end-to-end patch success from the ability to build a coherent multi-file scaffold. For code-model post-training, the main lesson is that final test-pass rewards may reinforce localized shortcuts unless the training signal also pressures structural repository understanding.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"这篇不改模型，但会改你看 SWE-Bench 分数的方式；先看 perturbation 设计和 66.8→25.3 的落差，足够判断很多 repo-agent 结果被高估了。","en":"It does not improve agents, but it should change how you read SWE-Bench numbers; the perturbation setup and the 66.8→25.3 drop are enough to suspect many repo-agent claims are overstated."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Tsinghua University"],"authors":["Hanyu Li","Yichi Zhang","Speed Zhu","Hang Su","Jun Zhu","Yinpeng Dong"],"notable_authors":["Jun Zhu","Hang Su","Yinpeng Dong"],"tags":["code-agents","repository-reasoning","benchmark","perturbation","swe-bench"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.26177","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.26177","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25272","title":"AI Cartography: Mapping the Latent Landscape of AI Benchmark Ecosystems","abstract":"While aggregate leaderboard scores drive AI development, they contain substantial measurement noise whose sources and magnitudes remain unquantified, making it unclear when rankings reflect genuine capability differences versus evaluation artifacts. We introduce a framework for measuring the latent landscape in AI benchmark ecosystems. Applying Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) and Generalizability Theory to 4,000+ models from the Open LLM Leaderboard, we decompose sources of ranking variance a","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T21:59:08+00:00","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25272.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CY","stat.AP"],"summary":{"core_problem":"AI Cartography 研究的是 AI leaderboard 分数到底测量了什么，以及排名差异中有多少来自真实能力、benchmark 结构、提交者元数据、模型架构、部署方式和统计噪声。它针对的是一个评测基础问题：把多个 benchmark 压成一个总分时，隐含的测量假设常常没有被验证。","importance":"这篇论文对预训练研究的价值主要在评测和 scaling law 解释。很多训练 recipe、模型尺寸收益、post-training 效果，都会用公开 leaderboard 分数做判断。如果分数中混入了 benchmark 局部依赖、提交来源、部署配置和残差结构，那么直接用总分比较模型或拟合 scaling law 会高估某些干预的作用，也可能错判能力之间的关系。论文给出的测量框架提醒研究者：评测分数不是干净标签，尤其不适合未经建模就拿来解释训练改动。","technical_approach":"方法分三步。第一，用 Confirmatory Factor Analysis 和结构方程模型检验 benchmark item 背后的潜变量结构。论文发现 bifactor 结构更能解释数据：存在一个通用能力因子，同时还有 benchmark-specific 因子；但即使这样，仍然存在非随机残差和局部依赖。第二，用 Generalizability Theory 做方差分解，把 leaderboard 变异拆到 architecture、benchmark、contributor/provenance、deployment type 等维度，估计哪些因素影响排名可靠性。第三，用 mixed-effects latent regression 在潜变量层面拟合 size、post-training 等因素与能力的关系，同时控制前两步发现的结构和噪声。这个路线比直接回归总分更稳，因为它先确认“测量对象是什么”，再估计“噪声来自哪里”，最后才讨论“规模和训练实践带来什么变化”。","experiments":"论文分析 Open LLM Leaderboard 上 4000 多个模型。关键结果包括：当前报告方式假设的 benchmark 独立结构会低估 benchmark 之间的相关性；leaderboard item 存在 local dependence，说明部分分数不是独立能力测量；贡献者元数据约解释 9% 的分数变异；与模型大小相关的变异约为 40%；按 contributor metadata 做排名的可靠性甚至高于按 architecture 或 deployment type。潜变量回归还显示，规模扩大通常提升表现，但不是对所有 benchmark-specific 行为都同向有效；某些 benchmark 上的进展可能与另一些 benchmark 的表现负相关。论文还给出去噪后的 general capability 和 benchmark-specific scaling 曲线，并尝试区分模型尺寸与 post-training 实践的影响。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，预计 30 分钟。重点看方法框架图、CFA/SEM 的潜变量结构结果、Table 2 的方差分解、Table 3 的 size 与 post-training 回归，以及 Figs. 3-4 的去噪 scaling 曲线。做预训练实验的人不必深挖所有测量学细节，但需要理解两个结论：第一，leaderboard 总分不是单一能力的直接观测；第二，用 manifest score 拟合 scaling law 或比较训练策略，容易把评测生态噪声当成模型能力差异。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"AI Cartography asks what leaderboard scores actually measure. It focuses on how much of model ranking variation comes from latent capability versus benchmark structure, item dependence, contributor provenance, architecture, deployment choices, and statistical noise. The core issue is that aggregate scores are widely used as if they were clean measurements, while the measurement assumptions are rarely tested.","importance":"The paper is most relevant as an evaluation and scaling-law caution. Pretraining decisions are often justified with leaderboard deltas, size-performance curves, and comparisons between training interventions. If aggregate scores mix true capability with benchmark residuals, provenance effects, and deployment artifacts, then naive comparisons can misattribute gains. The practical message is clear: leaderboard scores should not be treated as clean labels for model capability without modeling their measurement structure.","technical_approach":"The framework has three layers. First, the authors use Confirmatory Factor Analysis and structural equation modeling to test latent structures behind benchmark item responses. A bifactor structure is identified: a general capability factor coexists with benchmark-specific factors, while residual dependencies remain. Second, they use Generalizability Theory with mixed-effects variance decomposition to estimate how much score variation is associated with facets such as architecture, benchmark, contributor or provenance, and deployment type. Third, they run mixed-effects latent regression, relating latent capabilities to model size and post-training practices while controlling for the structure and noise identified in the first two stages. This is a more disciplined alternative to regressing raw leaderboard averages on parameter count.","experiments":"The study analyzes more than 4,000 models from the Open LLM Leaderboard. The main findings are that commonly assumed reporting structures underestimate relationships among benchmarks, leaderboard items show local dependence, and ecosystem metadata explains a measurable fraction of ranking variation. Contributor metadata accounts for roughly 9% of score variance, while model-size-linked variance is reported at around 40%. The paper also finds that ranking reliability can be higher for contributor metadata than for architecture or deployment type. In the latent regressions, scaling generally improves performance, but not uniformly: progress on one benchmark-specific construct can be negatively associated with performance on another. The authors provide denoised scaling curves for general capability and benchmark-specific constructs, and analyze size and post-training effects after noise controls.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 30 minutes. Focus on the framework figure, the CFA/SEM results for the bifactor structure, Table 2 for variance decomposition, Table 3 for size and post-training effects, and Figures 3-4 for denoised scaling curves. Researchers working on pretraining do not need every detail of measurement theory, but should retain two operational lessons: aggregate leaderboard scores are not direct observations of a single capability, and scaling-law fits or training-recipe comparisons based on raw scores can absorb benchmark-ecosystem noise as if it were model progress.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"这篇会直接动摇你对 leaderboard 曲线和 aggregate score 的信任；先看关于 local dependence 和 Rβ=0.53 的结果，再决定哪些内部评测该重做。","en":"This should reduce your trust in leaderboard curves and aggregate scores; read the local-dependence analysis and the Rβ=0.53 result before trusting any scaling fit."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Stanford University"],"authors":["Michael Hardy","Anka Reuel","Lijin Zhang","Jodi M. Casabianca","Sang Truong","Yash Dave","Hansol Lee","Benjamin Domingue","Sanmi Koyejo"],"notable_authors":["Sanmi Koyejo"],"tags":["evaluation","leaderboard","measurement","scaling-reliability","benchmark-analysis"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25272","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25272","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25707","title":"AgentHijack: Benchmarking Computer Use Agent Robustness to Common Environment Corruptions","abstract":"Autonomous computer use agents that powered by multimodal large language models (MLLMs) are emerging as capable assistants for completing complex digital workflows. However, real-world execution environments are far from ideal: pop-ups, resolution changes, and competing applications frequently interfere with agent perception and control. We introduce AgentHijack, a benchmark designed to evaluate the robustness of computer-use agents under common corruptions, where the uncertainties in dynamic en","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T11:09:22+00:00","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25707.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有计算机操作Agent的评测基准（如OSWorld、WebArena）仅在干净理想的环境中评估任务成功率，但真实部署环境中频繁出现弹窗、分辨率变化、网络错误等非对抗性环境干扰，导致Agent性能大幅下降。此前缺乏对这种常见环境扰动下鲁棒性的系统性评测框架。","importance":"首个专门针对GUI操作Agent在常见环境扰动下鲁棒性的评测基准，填补了实验室评测与真实部署之间的gap。对于预训练研究的启示在于：Agent在环境噪声下的失效模式（不稳定的grounding、执行计划受干扰、无法检测环境错误）可为多模态大模型预训练和mid-training的数据增强策略提供方向。","technical_approach":"在OSWorld框架基础上，设计了9种可配置的常见环境扰动类型（包括弹窗、分辨率变化、网络错误、误触干扰等），构建了总计3,321个评测任务。同时提出了AgentHijack-Agent架构：整合了grounding能力增强的动作生成器和负责行为总结与环境检查的onlooker模块，通过数据增强的group relative policy optimization提升Agent在多样环境中的grounding能力。","experiments":"评测了多种开源（Dubey et al. 2024, Bai et al. 2025）、闭源（Achiam et al. 2023, Anthropic 2025）和专用（Qin et al. 2025）MLLM-based Agent基线。结果表明当前Agent在轻微环境扰动下即出现显著性能下降，主要失效模式为grounding不稳定、执行计划易受干扰、无法检测环境错误。所提AgentHijack-Agent在一定程度上缓解了这些问题，但未完全解决。","reading_guide":"重点阅读第3节（基准构建：9种扰动类型的定义和方法论）和第5节（实验结果，特别是各Agent的失效模式分析）。第4节的Agent架构是附加贡献，非核心。预计阅读时间约20分钟。","authors_note":"未在提供内容中明确标注机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing computer-use agent benchmarks (OSWorld, WebArena, etc.) evaluate task success only in clean, idealized environments, but real-world deployments face frequent non-adversarial environmental corruptions (pop-ups, resolution changes, network errors) that cause substantial performance degradation. No systematic evaluation framework for this type of corruption robustness previously existed.","importance":"The first benchmark specifically designed to evaluate GUI agent robustness under common environmental corruptions, filling the gap between lab evaluation and real-world deployment. For pre-training researchers, the documented failure modes (unstable grounding, disrupted execution plans, inability to detect environmental errors) can inform data augmentation strategies for MLLM pre-training and mid-training.","technical_approach":"Built on the OSWorld framework, designing 9 configurable common corruption types (pop-ups, resolution changes, network errors, accidental touch interference, etc.) to create 3,321 total evaluation tasks. Also proposes AgentHijack-Agent architecture: integrates an action generator with enhanced grounding and an onlooker module for behavioral summarization and environment checking, using data-augmented group relative policy optimization to improve agent grounding in diverse environments.","experiments":"Evaluated various open-source (Dubey et al. 2024, Bai et al. 2025), closed-source (Achiam et al. 2023, Anthropic 2025), and specialized (Qin et al. 2025) MLLM-based agent baselines. Results show that current agents degrade significantly even under minor corruptions, with primary failure modes being unstable grounding, susceptibility to execution plan interference, and failure to detect environmental errors. The proposed AgentHijack-Agent mitigates but does not fully resolve these issues.","reading_guide":"Focus on Section 3 (benchmark construction: 9 corruption types and methodology) and Section 5 (experimental results, especially failure mode analysis). The agent architecture in Section 4 is a secondary contribution. Estimated reading time: ~20 minutes.","authors_note":"Institutional affiliation not explicitly stated in the provided content."},"recommendation":{"zh":"计算机使用agent鲁棒性的benchmark，对agent评测方向有参考价值但与LLM预训练无直接关联，仅需了解结论。","en":"Robustness benchmark for computer-use agents; relevant for agent evaluation but not directly tied to LLM pretraining—just note the finding."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Jingwei Sun","Jianing Zhu","Yuanyi Li","Tongliang Liu","Xia HU","Bo Han"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agent_robustness","benchmark","computer_use_agent","multimodal_llm","evaluation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25707","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25707","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25160","title":"SimuWoB: Simulating Real-World Mobile Apps for Fast and Faithful GUI Agent Benchmarking","abstract":"Mobile GUI agents powered by large language models have progressed rapidly, creating urgent needs for realistic and comprehensive evaluation. Existing benchmarks prioritize reproducibility but are often limited to open-source apps or file-operation tasks for the difficulty of constructing rewards on real applications, leaving a gap between benchmark settings and real-world usage. Moreover, most benchmarks focus on basic grounding and navigation, with limited coverage of complex, long-horizon int","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T16:33:14+00:00","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25160.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"SimuWoB 解决的是移动 GUI Agent 评测中的三个实际瓶颈：真实应用难以稳定复现和构造奖励，现有任务过多集中在短链路导航和基础点击，基于模拟器或真机环境的大规模评测成本较高。","importance":"对基座预训练的直接关系不强，但对通用 Agent 评测有参考价值。它的主要贡献是评测资产和环境生成流程，而不是模型训练方法。值得关注的点在于：用 LLM 生成可交互环境、同步生成可执行 reward function，并通过自动验证修复闭环提高评测可靠性。这类方法也可能服务于 GUI Agent 的在线 RL 或大规模数据合成。","technical_approach":"方法核心是把真实移动应用模拟成可部署的 backend-free 网页环境。生成流程分为两阶段：第一阶段根据应用元数据、视觉风格、功能描述和可选截图生成最小可用环境，重点保证 UI 形态、交互逻辑和 mock data 的一致性；第二阶段向环境中注入具体任务和验证器，重点保证任务可完成、状态可检查、奖励可执行。论文强调这种拆分比单次生成更稳，因为应用仿真和任务验证的质量控制目标不同。生成后还有 validation-and-repair loop，用于检查环境可用性、任务可解性和 reward function 的有效性。","experiments":"SimuWoB 包含 63 个模拟移动应用、120 个任务，覆盖 Google Play 33 个应用类别中的 20 个。任务来源参考了 86 名参与者、77 个行业的用户研究。任务分为 simple、long-horizon 和 math-related 三类；一半任务需要超过 20 步交互，最难任务超过 50 步。论文评测了 UI-TARS、AutoGLM、Step-GUI、Seed1.8、Gemini 等移动 GUI Agent。所有任务平均成功率为 27.92%，long-horizon 子集为 17.82%，说明长链路状态管理和中间信息维护仍是主要短板。作者还选取 20 个真实世界样例任务做对照，结果显示合成环境上的评估与真实任务评估有一定一致性。","reading_guide":"泛读即可，预计 20–30 分钟。优先看第 3 节的环境生成流程，尤其是两阶段设计和 reward validation；再看任务构成统计和 long-horizon 定义；最后看实验中的失败模式分析。对预训练研究员来说，重点不是 GUI 任务本身，而是可验证交互环境如何由 LLM 批量生成，以及这种环境是否能用于后续在线 RL 或 Agent 数据合成。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"SimuWoB targets three practical gaps in mobile GUI-agent evaluation: real apps are hard to reproduce and reward-check reliably, many existing tasks remain short-horizon and navigation-heavy, and emulator-based evaluation is expensive to scale.","importance":"Its direct relevance to foundation-model pretraining is limited, but it is useful for general agent evaluation. The main contribution is an evaluation asset and an environment-generation pipeline rather than a new training method. The useful idea is to use LLM code generation to synthesize interactive app-like environments together with executable reward functions, then validate and repair them automatically. This design may also be useful for GUI-agent data generation or online RL.","technical_approach":"The benchmark converts mobile-app workflows into backend-free web environments with mock data and aligned interaction logic. The generation pipeline is split into two stages. Stage 1 builds a minimal working app simulation from app metadata, visual style, feature descriptions, and optional screenshots. Stage 2 injects benchmark tasks and task-specific validators. This separation matters because app fidelity and reward correctness require different checks. A validation-and-repair loop then tests solvability, environment behavior, and executable reward functions before the task is accepted.","experiments":"The benchmark contains 120 tasks across 63 simulated apps, covering 20 of the 33 Google Play app categories. The task pool is informed by a user study with 86 participants from 77 industries. Tasks are grouped into simple, long-horizon, and math-related categories. Half of the tasks require more than 20 interaction steps, and the hardest ones require more than 50. The paper evaluates UI-TARS, AutoGLM, Step-GUI, Seed1.8, and Gemini. The average success rate is 27.92% across all tasks and 17.82% on the long-horizon subset. A comparison against 20 real-world sample tasks suggests that the synthetic environments give broadly transferable agent rankings and failure signals.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 20–30 minutes. Focus on the environment-generation pipeline in Section 3, especially the two-stage construction and reward-validation mechanism. Then check the task statistics, the long-horizon split, and the failure analysis. For pretraining-oriented readers, the main value is not the mobile-app domain itself, but the recipe for scalable, verifiable interactive environments that could feed agent training or RL.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"移动GUI Agent的新基准，做Agent评测的研究员可看方法和任务设计部分。","en":"A new benchmark for mobile GUI agents, researchers working on agent evaluation can check the methodology and task design sections."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Guohong Liu","Jialei Ye","Pengzhi Gao","Wei Liu","Jian Luan","Yunxin Liu","Yuanchun Li"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["gui agent","benchmark","synthetic evaluation","mobile agent"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25160","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25160","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.26161","title":"TSFMAudit: Data Contamination Auditing in Forecasting Time Series Foundation Models","abstract":"Time series foundation models (TSFMs) are increasingly pretrained on large corpora, raising concerns that evaluation datasets may have been exposed during pretraining and thus yield overly optimistic performance estimates. Auditing such contamination is challenging in time series because signals are continuous and heterogeneous, and often lack corpus documentation. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to study pretraining contamination auditing for TSFMs. We formalize the problem","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T14:59:12+00:00","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2605_26161.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文研究的是时间序列 foundation model 的预训练污染审计。具体说，不是问某个样本是否被记住，而是问一个评测数据集是否在预训练语料中以原始、缩放、重命名、重窗口化等形式出现过。时间序列和文本不同，连续值、异构频率、预处理变体很多，简单的字符串重合、近重复检索、静态 loss 阈值或标准 membership inference 都不太可靠。论文要解决的是：在拿不到完整预训练语料文档、也不可能重训大量 shadow model 的现实条件下，如何对 TSFM 的 benchmark contamination 做可操作的审计。","importance":"它不属于 LLM 基座主线，但和预训练研究里的 contamination auditing、benchmark validity、membership inference 有明显方法学关联。启发点主要有两层。第一，论文把“静态低 loss 不等于污染”讲得很清楚：时间序列里平滑、强周期、低熵数据即使没见过，也可能天然容易预测，因此单看 perplexity 风格指标会误报。第二，它把审计信号从静态拟合优度转到 probe adaptation dynamics，也就是看模型在小规模微调探针下的学习速度和参数位移。这种思路对其他模态的预训练污染检测也有借鉴意义，尤其是在内容重合难定义、语料谱系不透明的场景里。贡献量级偏方法型和评测型，不是基础范式变化。","technical_approach":"TSFMAudit 的核心假设是：如果某个审计数据集在预训练中被见过或高度近似见过，那么模型在这个数据集上的少量 probe fine-tuning 会表现出异常高效的适应动态。这里的“高效”不是只指初始 loss 低，而是指在很少更新步数下 loss 降得更快，同时 backbone 参数移动更小。直觉上，污染数据离模型已有表示更近，因此只需要轻微调整就能对齐到更低误差。\n\n基于这个观察，方法流程大致分三步。第一，对候选 TSFM 和待审计数据集做一个受控的 probe fine-tuning，训练预算很小，目的是激发可比较的适应动态，而不是把任务真正训好。第二，从这个短程适应过程中提取动态特征，包括 loss reduction、参数 displacement，以及文中提到的其他 probe-time signals。第三，用这些特征构造 contamination risk score，判断该数据集是否可能出现在预训练语料中。\n\n论文的一个重要设计是把审计目标定义在 dataset level，而不是单样本 level。原因很现实：时间序列 benchmark 往往由同一底层 source series 经过窗口切分、缩放、重采样得到多个样本，单样本判断既不稳定，也不符合实际 benchmark 污染的关切。作者因此先形式化了“样本来自某个底层 source time series，而该 source 是否在预训练语料中出现过”的定义，再把污染程度写成 dataset-level contamination ratio。\n\n和 LLM 文献里的几类基线相比，TSFMAudit 刻意避开了两个难点。它不依赖显式 overlap detection，因为时间序列的近重复常常不是字面重复；也不依赖 shadow model 大规模校准 membership score，因为重训 TSFM 成本太高。它选择 probe dynamics，是因为这类信号同时利用了模型已有记忆和局部可塑性，能比静态 loss 更好地区分“天然容易预测”和“曾经见过”。","experiments":"实验覆盖 6 个 TSFM，使用各模型公开报告的预训练语料信息，并在 GIFT-Eval 和 TIME benchmark 上做审计，总计 187 个数据集。比较对象包括从 LLM 污染检测文献改造来的 10 个基线。论文给出的主结论是：TSFMAudit 在不同模型和 benchmark 上都更稳定，检测性能 consistently stronger。\n\n从引言和方法描述能看出的关键实验点有几项。第一，作者展示了污染数据集在 probe fine-tuning 下通常有更快的 loss reduction 和更小的 backbone movement，这个现象既是方法动机，也是后续特征设计的依据。第二，特征消融表明 adaptation dynamics 确实比单纯静态 loss 更有判别力，尤其参数位移这类“模型为了适应数据需要动多少”的信号是有增益的。第三，论文强调其方法适用于多种 TSFM，而不是绑定某个特定架构。\n\n给出的全文片段没有完整结果表和具体 AUC / F1 数字，因此不宜编造精确分数。但实验规模、比较设置和结论方向是明确的：作者不是做个案分析，而是在较大范围 benchmark 上验证 probe dynamics 作为 contamination signal 的有效性。","reading_guide":"如果你主要关心预训练污染审计的方法迁移，先看 Introduction 和 Problem Formulation。这里把为什么 LLM 里的 overlap / perplexity / membership inference 不能直接搬到时间序列讲得比较透，也把 dataset-level contamination 的定义立住了。\n\n然后看方法部分里 probe fine-tuning 的设置、提取了哪些动态特征、最终如何组合成风险分数。这里最值得想的是：哪些特征反映“记忆”，哪些特征反映“可塑性”，以及两者为什么能区分污染与天然易预测数据。\n\n实验部分优先看 feature ablation 和跨模型泛化结果。若只做泛读，30 分钟左右足够；若你做 benchmark hygiene、membership inference 或多模态 foundation model 审计，建议把附录里的实现细节和数据构造也看一下。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies pretraining contamination auditing for time-series foundation models. The question is not whether a single sample was memorized, but whether an evaluation dataset may have appeared in pretraining, possibly under rescaling, renaming, rewindowing, or other preprocessing changes. This is harder than in text because time series are continuous, heterogeneous, and often poorly documented at the corpus level. Straightforward overlap checks, static loss thresholds, or standard membership inference do not transfer cleanly. The paper asks how to build a practical contamination auditor without full corpus provenance and without retraining many shadow models.","importance":"This is outside core LLM pretraining, but it is methodologically relevant to contamination auditing, benchmark validity, and membership inference. The main lesson is that low static loss is not enough evidence of contamination in time series: smooth or strongly seasonal series can be easy to predict even when unseen. The paper therefore shifts the signal from static fit quality to probe-time adaptation dynamics. That idea may transfer to other modalities where exact overlap is ill-defined and corpus lineage is opaque. The contribution is mainly methodological and evaluative rather than a change in foundation-model training itself.","technical_approach":"$13","experiments":"$14","reading_guide":"If your main interest is contamination auditing methodology, start with the Introduction and Problem Formulation. Those sections explain clearly why overlap checks, perplexity-style tests, and standard membership inference from the LLM literature do not directly transfer to time series, and they establish the dataset-level contamination objective.\n\nThen read the method section with attention to the probe fine-tuning setup, the dynamic features that are extracted, and how they are combined into a risk score. The most useful question to keep in mind is which features reflect prior memory and which reflect plasticity, and why that combination separates contamination from naturally easy data.\n\nIn the experiments, prioritize the feature ablations and the cross-model results. A solid skim should take around 30 minutes. If you work on benchmark hygiene, membership inference, or auditing for multimodal foundation models, the implementation details and dataset construction in the appendix are worth a closer look.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"数据污染是预训练的核心关切，TSFMAudit的探针适应动力学思路可迁移至LLM污染检测，看方法部分即可。","en":"Data contamination is a core pretraining concern; TSFMAudit's probe adaptation dynamics approach is transferable to LLM contamination detection—read the method section."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Zhejiang University"],"authors":["Hongkai Li","Shifeng Xie","Lefei Shen","Zhuo Li","Mouxiang Chen","Xiaobin Zhang","Han Fu","Jianling Sun","Xiaoxue Ren","Chenghao Liu"],"notable_authors":["Jianling Sun","Chenghao Liu"],"tags":["data_contamination","evaluation","pretraining","time_series","audit"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.26161","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.26161","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25492","title":"SafetyRepro: Configuration-Conditional Rank Instability on Alignment Benchmarks","abstract":"Pairwise model comparisons drawn from foundation-model benchmarks (\"A is safer than B\") are read as quantitative verdicts but hinge on harness choices benchmark papers under-specify. We close one theory-benchmark loop on this primitive: a finite-envelope proposition tying a measurable pairwise-disagreement rate to whether the strict ordering admits a configuration-pair reversal, paired with a commit-stamped evaluation protocol that operationalises it on widely cited alignment benchmarks. On ever","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T06:54:44+00:00","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25492.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作讨论的不是“模型谁更安全”，而是“安全 benchmark 给出的模型排序到底有多稳”。作者抓住一个很具体、也很常被忽略的问题：在对齐/安全评测里，prompt 模板、few-shot 数、解码设置、评分规则、量化方式、评测 harness 的实现细节，往往没有被完整规定，但这些选择本身就可能改变模型间的相对排名。论文要解决的是，如何把这种由评测配置引入的排序不稳定性，定义成一个可测、可复现实验对象，而不是停留在泛泛而谈的“benchmark 有噪声”。","importance":"对预训练研究的直接意义不在于提出新的训练方法，而在于提醒：很多被拿来比较基座模型、对齐策略或数据配方的安全结论，可能并不稳固。尤其当研究者把 TruthfulQA、BBQ、ToxiGen、XSTest 这类分数当作模型能力或对齐质量的证据时，如果评测配置本身能翻转 pairwise verdict，那么这些 benchmark 对训练决策的反馈就带有较强方法方差。对做 pretrain/post-train 接口研究的人，这篇文章的价值在于把“评测协议是训练闭环的一部分”说清楚了：如果评测对象没有被严格定义，训练优化的目标也会漂移。贡献量级偏方法论和测量学，不是新 benchmark，也不是新模型，但对读论文和做实验的口径控制有现实影响。","technical_approach":"作者的核心设计有两层。第一层是定义一个配置条件下的 pairwise-disagreement / rank-flip 指标。不是看单个分数的标准差，而是直接看“在一个事先承诺、commit-stamped 的配置包络内，模型 A 是否可能从优于 B 变成劣于 B”。这个指标更贴近实际使用场景，因为外部读者通常看到的是‘A 比 B 好/安全’，而不是方差分解表。第二层是把这个包络做成分层的、实践导向的配置网格：core tier 近似主流 benchmark/harness 默认设置，stress tier 再加入更激进但仍合理的设置，比如 T4 CoT、T=0.7 解码等。全文的实验主轴是在单一 harness 内，对 3 个 7–9B 开源 instruct 模型、5 个 alignment benchmark、612 个配置单元做穷举式测量，然后统计每个 benchmark 上 pairwise verdict 被配置翻转的比例。作者还用 LightGBM + SHAP 做轴级归因，分析哪些配置维度更主导 rank flip。除此之外，论文单独做了一个跨评测框架案例：在名义上相同的 anchor 配置下，把同一模型送进 lm-eval-harness、HELM-lite、Inspect AI，发现分数差异很大。这里作者刻意不把它解释成单轴“框架误差”，而是指出三者评测的 candidate object 实际并不等价，例如 TruthfulQA 的打分对象分别可能是 canonical answer set 的 logprob、concat-then-rank 的 joint multiple choice、或 A/B/C/D letter 的 logprob。这个处理比较克制，也说明作者关心的是测量对象定义，而不只是软件 bug。","experiments":"实验范围刻意收窄在消费级 16GB 显存、NF4 量化部署、3 个 7–9B 开源 instruct 模型、5 个安全/对齐 benchmark、固定题目子集。作者明确说不把结论外推成“所有 LLM 评测都不可靠”。在这个范围内，结果很强：所有被测 benchmark 上，单靠配置选择就可以翻转 pairwise verdict。XSTest 最极端，Qwen、Mistral、Yi 三个模型的 6 种两两排序都能在配置包络内实现。方差分解方面，在 BBQ、ToxiGen、XSTest 这几个 free-form benchmark 上，实现/配置主效应解释的总体方差至少与模型身份相当；只有 TruthfulQA 更明显由模型主导。与此同时，model-by-implementation interaction 普遍很大，说明不存在一个对所有模型都“等比例偏移”的简单校正项。跨框架案例里，在 bf16、greedy、0-shot、300 examples、seed 42 的名义 anchor 配置下，仅更换评测包，Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct 在 TruthfulQA 上的 reported score 跨度达到 21.7 个百分点，在 BBQ 上达到 22.7 个百分点。作者还做了一个保守的小规模 scale probe，试图排除“只是某个模型家族特殊”的混淆，但没有把它包装成 scaling law 结论。对 skim 级阅读，最该记住的数字就是：612-cell grid、所有 benchmark 都出现 rank flip、XSTest 上 6 种排序全可达、跨框架分数差可到 20+ 个点。","reading_guide":"建议先看 Introduction 和 §5.1，把作者到底在测什么先钉牢：不是分数波动，而是 pairwise verdict 是否可翻转。然后看配置包络的定义，区分 core tier 和 stress tier，理解作者为何强调 commit-stamped 和 practice-derived。接着看方差分解与 rank-flip 结果，尤其是 XSTest 的排序可达性，以及 TruthfulQA 与其他 benchmark 的差异。再看 SHAP 归因，判断主要不稳定性来自 prompt、scoring、decoding 还是量化。最后看附录里跨框架案例，重点不是具体哪个包更对，而是 nominally same task 在不同 harness 里 candidate object 已经变了。泛读 25–35 分钟足够抓住主结论；如果你平时依赖 alignment benchmark 做模型选择，值得把 disclosure template 和 GRID card 也看一遍。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper is not asking which model is safer. It asks whether safety/alignment benchmarks provide stable pairwise rankings at all. The concrete issue is that benchmark papers often leave key evaluator choices under-specified: prompt template, decoding setup, few-shot count, scoring rule, quantization regime, and even the exact harness implementation. Those choices can change the relative ordering between models. The paper turns that concern into a measurable object: configuration-conditional rank instability, rather than a vague statement that benchmarks are noisy.","importance":"Its value for pretraining researchers is indirect but real. Safety and alignment benchmarks are often used as evidence when comparing base models, post-training recipes, or data mixtures. If the pairwise verdict itself can flip under plausible evaluator configurations, then the benchmark signal fed back into model development is less reliable than the headline numbers suggest. This matters at the pretrain↔post-train interface: if the evaluation target is not tightly specified, optimization pressure can drift toward artifacts of the harness rather than properties of the model. The contribution is methodological rather than algorithmic. It does not introduce a new benchmark or a new model, but it sharpens how benchmark evidence should be interpreted.","technical_approach":"$15","experiments":"$16","reading_guide":"Start with the introduction and the section defining the rank-flip metric. The key is to understand that the target quantity is not score variance but the existence of pairwise reversals under a declared configuration envelope. Then read the envelope construction carefully, especially the distinction between the core tier and the stress tier, because much of the paper’s credibility depends on that choice. After that, focus on the main rank-flip results and the variance decomposition, especially why TruthfulQA behaves differently from BBQ, ToxiGen, and XSTest. The SHAP analysis is worth a quick pass to see which evaluator axes dominate instability. Finally, read the appendix case study on lm-eval-harness, HELM-lite, and Inspect AI. The main lesson there is not which package is better, but that nominally similar tasks may correspond to different scored objects. Around 25–35 minutes is enough for a solid skim; read the disclosure template as well if you run benchmark-heavy experiments.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"对齐评测可靠性的方法论文章，对做SFT/RLHF评估的研究者有直接参考——任何成对安全排名声称都应先通过SafetyRepro类方法检验配置稳定性","en":"Methodology paper on alignment evaluation reliability. Researchers doing SFT/RLHF evaluation should note that any pairwise safety ranking claim needs configuration-robustness verification via SafetyRepro-like methods."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Yanhang Li","Zhichao Fan","Zexin Zhuang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["evaluation","alignment","benchmark-reliability","reproducibility","safety"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25492","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25492","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25874","title":"WBench: A Comprehensive Multi-turn Benchmark for Interactive Video World Model Evaluation","abstract":"Interactive world models are advancing rapidly, yet existing benchmarks cover only part of the required competencies, leaving no unified standard for systematic evaluation. To fill this gap, we introduce WBench, a comprehensive multi-turn benchmark for interactive world model evaluation along five dimensions, namely video quality, setting adherence, interaction adherence, consistency, and physics compliance. WBench contains 289 test cases and 1,058 interaction turns, where each case specifies a ","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"huggingface","sources":["huggingface"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T00:00:00.000Z","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25874.png","hf_upvotes":98,"arxiv_categories":[],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是交互式视频世界模型缺少统一、多轮、可诊断评测的问题。现有评测通常只覆盖视频质量、导航控制、记忆一致性或特定场景的一部分能力，难以判断模型失败来自渲染、初始化、交互执行、跨轮状态保持，还是物理演化。","importance":"对预训练研究的直接价值不在训练方法，而在评测信号。交互式世界模型正在向视频生成、具身控制和开放世界模拟靠近，训练目标会越来越依赖可控生成、长程一致性和物理约束。WBench 把这些能力拆成五个维度，有助于把“视频看起来好”与“世界状态可被连续操控”区分开。对做 native multimodal pretrain 或 video world model 的研究员，最有用的是它给出了多轮控制失败的诊断框架。","technical_approach":"WBench 将每个样例拆成 World Setting 和 Interaction sequence。World Setting 包含场景、风格、视角和主体，用来定义初始世界状态；Interaction sequence 则覆盖连续多轮用户控制。交互类型包括导航、主体动作、事件编辑和视角切换。导航被统一成三种等价接口：文本、相机位姿和离散动作，这让不同控制范式的模型可以在同一子集上比较。评测维度对应五类能力：video quality、setting adherence、interaction adherence、consistency、physics compliance。自动评测由 22 个子指标组成，结合专用视觉模型和 VLM 评判。相比只看单轮 prompt-following 的视频基准，它的关键区别是把世界初始化和后续动作分离，并显式考察跨轮记忆与状态保持。","experiments":"数据集包含 289 个测试样例和 1,058 个交互轮次。初始帧来自 Nano Banana 2、GPT-Image-1.5、网页收集和人工拍摄，并经过人工质检。论文评测了 20 个模型：所有模型在 158 个导航样例的共享子集上比较，文本提示的 I2V 模型还在完整 289 个样例上评测。主要发现包括：没有模型在五个维度上同时占优；导航能力与其他维度相对独立；相机控制和视角一致性是两种不同能力；物理正确性与渲染质量的相关性强于与控制能力的相关性；难度受视角、场景类型和主体类别影响；四类交互在多轮过程中退化速度不同，其中导航最脆弱。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，预计 20–30 分钟。重点看数据构造和评测协议，而不是模型排名。Introduction 的五角色类比可以快速理解评测维度；WBenchDataset 部分值得看 World Setting 与 Interaction 的解耦方式；实验分析里建议关注多轮退化、导航与其他能力的相关性、相机控制与视角一致性的区分。若关心 video world model 预训练，可以进一步看 22 个自动子指标如何映射到训练时可用的诊断信号。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the lack of a unified, multi-turn, diagnostic benchmark for interactive video world models. Existing evaluations usually test only visual quality, navigation, memory, or a narrow task setting, making it hard to localize failures across rendering, world initialization, interaction following, state consistency, and physics.","importance":"Its value for pretraining research is mainly evaluative rather than algorithmic. As video world models move toward controllable generation, embodied simulation, and open-ended environments, training progress will depend on signals beyond frame realism. WBench separates visual fidelity from controllability and persistent world state, which is useful for researchers working on native multimodal pretraining or video-based world modeling.","technical_approach":"Each case is decomposed into a World Setting and an Interaction sequence. The World Setting specifies scene, style, perspective, and subject, while the Interaction sequence defines multi-turn user controls. The benchmark covers four interaction types: navigation, subject action, event editing, and perspective switching. Navigation is represented through aligned text, camera-pose, and discrete-action interfaces, allowing models with different control APIs to be compared on a shared subset. Evaluation is organized around five dimensions: video quality, setting adherence, interaction adherence, consistency, and physics compliance, measured with 22 automatic sub-metrics using specialist vision models and VLM-based judges. The main design choice is to separate what the world is from what the user asks it to do, which makes failures easier to diagnose than in single-prompt video generation benchmarks.","experiments":"WBench contains 289 test cases and 1,058 interaction turns. Initial frames are generated with Nano Banana 2 and GPT-Image-1.5, supplemented by web-collected and manually captured images, followed by manual quality control. The paper evaluates 20 models. All models are compared on a shared navigation subset of 158 cases, while text-prompted image-to-video models are also evaluated on the full benchmark. The main empirical findings are that no model dominates all five dimensions; navigation is largely independent of the other abilities; camera control and perspective consistency are distinct; physics compliance correlates more with rendering quality than with control; difficulty varies by perspective, scene type, and subject; and multi-turn degradation is uneven across interaction types, with navigation being especially fragile.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 20–30 minutes. Focus on the dataset design and evaluation protocol rather than the leaderboard. The introduction gives a useful five-role decomposition of world-model capability. The dataset section is the most relevant part for understanding how world settings and interactions are decoupled. The experiment analysis is worth reading for the findings on multi-turn degradation, navigation independence, and the separation between camera control and perspective consistency. For video world-model pretraining, the 22 sub-metrics are the most useful part to inspect as potential diagnostic training signals.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"做世界模型或视频生成预训练的人可读评测设计；重点看控制接口统一和物理合规指标，别只看总分。","en":"Worth skimming for world-model pretraining: read the control-interface normalization and physics metrics, not just the aggregate score."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Fudan University"],"authors":["Kaining Ying","Hengrui Hu","Siyu Ren","Jiamu Li","Fengjiao Chen","Ziwen Wang","Xuezhi Cao","Xunliang Cai","Henghui Ding"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["world-model","video-evaluation","multi-turn-benchmark","interactive-generation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25874","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25874","github":"https://github.com/meituan-longcat/WBench","project":"https://meituan-longcat.github.io/WBench/","source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.26086","title":"Claw-Anything: Benchmarking Always-On Personal Assistants with Broader Access to User's Digital World","abstract":"Large language model agents are increasingly envisioned as always-on personal assistants with access to anything relevant in the user's digital world. Yet current systems operate over only narrow slices of that world, limiting context-sensitive reasoning and effective assistance. Existing benchmarks similarly provide only partial user state and therefore fail to capture performance in such a broad, always-on setting. To address this gap, we introduce Claw-Anything, a benchmark that expands agent","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"huggingface","sources":["huggingface"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T00:00:00.000Z","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2605_26086.png","hf_upvotes":22,"arxiv_categories":[],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是 always-on personal assistant 的评测失真问题。现有 benchmark 往往只给 agent 一个狭窄、静态、局部的用户状态切片，因此模型看起来能做任务，但并没有真正面对“长期历史、多服务依赖、多设备交互”这些现实约束。Claw-Anything 想回答的是：如果把 agent 放进更接近真实数字生活的环境里，要求它利用长期事件流、跨后端服务状态、GUI/CLI 混合接口去完成 reactive 和 proactive 任务，现有模型到底还剩多少能力。","importance":"对预训练研究的直接关系不强，但对 agent 训练数据和后训练评测有现实意义。它的重要性主要在两层。第一，它把 agent 的“可访问数字世界范围”明确提出为核心变量，而不是只看模型推理本身。这会影响后续很多训练设计：如果训练环境没有长期状态和跨系统依赖，模型学到的只是短程 scripted behavior。第二，它不只是 benchmark，还提供了可扩展的数据生成管线，并展示用这些环境生成成功轨迹去微调模型能带来明显提升。对做 agent mid-train、trajectory SFT、environment simulation 的人，这篇有方法资产价值；对纯 LLM pretrain 则更多是边界相关工作。","technical_approach":"方法核心是构建一个更宽上下文范围的 agent benchmark。作者把扩展分成三维：长时程活动历史、相互依赖的后端服务、以及多设备上的 GUI/CLI 交互。与很多现有环境只暴露单应用或单轮任务不同，这里 agent 需要在一个持续演化的 persona-grounded digital world 中行动。\n\n环境构建采用自动化合成管线。起点是一个最小 persona seed，然后用 LLM-based simulator 做 multi-round event injection，逐轮向用户世界中注入日常事件，并同步更新 persistent world state 和各类动态服务痕迹，比如邮件、日历、社交平台等。随着轮次增加，历史会累积，persona 会被逐步具体化，环境中也会出现噪声、无关事件甚至相互矛盾的信息。最后把“下一事件”实例化成一个 grounded task，并配一个 executable verifier，于是评测变成：agent 是否能在这个不断演化的数字生活里完成下一步合适动作。\n\n这个设计有两个值得注意的点。其一，任务不是脱离环境单独写出来的，而是从环境演化过程中自然长出来，因此更容易包含跨时间依赖和隐含前提。其二，作者把 proactive assistance 也纳入评测，要求模型不是只响应显式指令，而是从上下文中推断用户可能需要什么。这比传统 benchmark 更接近 always-on assistant 的真实目标。","experiments":"主实验结论很直接：在 Claw-Anything 上，GPT-5.5 的 pass@1 只有 34.5%，明显低于很多模型在既有 benchmark 上的表现。作者据此认为，现有 benchmark 低估了长期状态整合、跨服务协调和多设备操作带来的难度。这个结论对评测设计是成立的，因为 benchmark 的核心价值就在于暴露旧基准覆盖不到的失败模式。\n\n数据规模方面，论文构建了 200 个 human-verified evaluation tasks，以及 2,000 个 training environments。更关键的是，它验证了这些训练环境不只是“能生成数据”，而是能转化成有效监督：用从其中得到的 1,500 条 successful trajectories 去微调 Qwen3.5-27B，成功率提升 23.7%。这个数字说明环境模拟和任务合成至少在 agent 后训练上是有用的。\n\n从研究者视角，最值得关注的不是谁在榜单上第一，而是性能掉得有多厉害，以及微调后能回升多少。前者说明现有 agent 能力对环境复杂度很敏感；后者说明数据缺口可能比架构缺口更大，至少在这一类任务上如此。","reading_guide":"这篇按 skim 读即可。先看 Introduction 和 Figure 1/2，理解作者定义的三种 context expansion 到底是什么，以及为什么现有 benchmark 不够。然后看环境合成管线，重点关注 multi-round event injection、persistent state 更新、task/verifier 生成这三步。最后看实验部分，确认 benchmark 难度来自哪里：是长历史、跨服务依赖，还是多设备交互。\n\n如果只有 15–20 分钟，建议读法是：引言 → benchmark 构造方法 → 主结果表 → 微调实验。若要多花一点时间，优先看 human verification 和 executable verifier 的设计，因为 benchmark 是否可信，主要取决于任务是否真的可执行、可判定，而不是环境描述写得多复杂。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses an evaluation mismatch for always-on personal assistants. Most existing benchmarks expose only narrow, static slices of user state, so agents are tested in settings that miss the core difficulties of real assistance: long activity histories, cross-service dependencies, and interaction across multiple devices and interfaces. Claw-Anything asks a simple but important question: once agents are placed in a broader digital world, how much capability remains?","importance":"Its relevance to core LM pretraining is limited, but it matters for agent training data, post-training, and evaluation design. Two contributions stand out. First, it makes the scope of accessible user state an explicit variable in agent evaluation, rather than treating the environment as a fixed backdrop. That matters because training on narrow environments can produce brittle, scripted behavior that does not transfer to realistic assistance. Second, the work is not only a benchmark; it also provides a scalable environment-and-task generation pipeline and shows that trajectories derived from it can improve an open model through fine-tuning. For researchers working on agent mid-training, trajectory SFT, or synthetic environment generation, that is the main reason to read it.","technical_approach":"$17","experiments":"$18","reading_guide":"This is a skim read. Start with the introduction and the main figures to understand the three dimensions of context expansion and why the authors consider current benchmarks insufficient. Then read the environment-generation pipeline, focusing on multi-round event injection, persistent-state updates, and task/verifier construction. Finish with the experiments, asking which source of difficulty matters most: long histories, cross-service dependencies, or multi-device interaction.\n\nIf you only have 15–20 minutes, read in this order: introduction, benchmark construction, main results, then the fine-tuning experiment. If you want to inspect one part more carefully, choose the human-verification protocol and the executable verifier design. The credibility of the benchmark depends much more on whether tasks are actually executable and judgeable than on how rich the environment description sounds.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"如果你关心 agent eval，这篇该看 benchmark 设计而不是 leaderboard：长历史+噪声事件+跨设备状态很接近真实部署痛点，可拿来校验模型的长期上下文 prior。","en":"If you care about agent evaluation, read the benchmark design rather than the leaderboard; the long-history, noisy-event, multi-device setup is close to real deployment failure modes."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Beijing Institute of Technology","Peking University","Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences"],"authors":["Yusong Lin","Xinyuan Liang","Haiyang Wang","Qipeng Gu","Siqi Cheng","Jiangui Chen","Shuzhe Wu","Feiyang Pan","Lue Fan","Sanyuan Zhao","Dandan Tu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["benchmark","personal-assistant","agent-evaluation","long-horizon","multi-device"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.26086","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.26086","github":"https://github.com/LiberCoders/CLaw-Anything","project":"","source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25052","title":"Faithfulness Metrics Don't Measure Faithfulness: A Meta-Evaluation with Ground Truth","abstract":"Chains of thought (CoTs) have become central in interpreting and auditing behaviors of large language models. Yet growing evidence suggests that these traces often fail to faithfully represent the computations behind a model's predictions. Several faithfulness metrics have been proposed, but whether they indeed measure faithfulness remains unknown. Answering this requires ground-truth labels, which are hard to obtain since internal computations are not directly observable. Consequently, most wor","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"huggingface","sources":["huggingface"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T00:00:00.000Z","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25052.png","hf_upvotes":13,"arxiv_categories":[],"summary":{"core_problem":"链式思维（CoT）被广泛用作“模型在想什么”的证据，但大量工作表明 CoT 可能是事后编造。问题在于：已经提出的各种“faithfulness metric”（衡量 CoT 是否忠实于模型内部计算的指标）到底有没有在测 faithfulness？缺少 ground-truth 标签使得以往评估常用 plausibility/importance 等代理信号，容易把“看起来合理”误当成“真实反映计算”。论文要解决的是：构造可自动标注的、带 ground-truth faithfulness 标签的基准，用来直接 meta-evaluate 这些指标。","importance":"对预训练研究的影响是间接但现实：\n- 如果把 CoT 当作训练信号（R1 类蒸馏、过程监督、reasoning trace 合成、verifier/critic 训练），就需要知道“哪些 CoT 更可信”。这篇工作表明现有常用指标大多接近随机，意味着用这些指标筛选/加权 CoT 数据可能引入系统性偏差。\n- 对评测与对齐也有启发：很多监控/审计方案依赖 CoT 的可解释性假设，而该假设缺少可靠度量。\n整体上它属于 eval/interpretability 方向的基础设施工作，不直接改进预训练 recipe，但会影响“用什么过程数据、如何过滤过程数据”。","technical_approach":"贡献分三层：\n1) 定义层：把经典解释方法里的 faithfulness 定义（忠实反映导致预测的计算过程）扩展到“生成式 CoT”场景，因为现代 reasoning model 的 CoT 可能包含与最终答案弱相关的探索性步骤，不能简单套用静态解释的定义。\n2) 标注方法层：提出一种获得 ground-truth faithfulness 标签的任务设计原则：构造一些任务，使得模型若输出某个答案，必然执行过某些可识别的中间计算（例如必须遵循误导性 hint，或由题目结构强制某些中间结论），并且通过设计避免猜测/捷径绕过这些计算。于是可以检查 CoT 是否承认/体现这些必经计算，从而给 CoT-level 与 step-level 打“faithful/unfaithful”标签。\n3) 基准与评测层：构建 BonaFide 数据集与自动化标注流水线，并用它系统评估现有 faithfulness metrics（重要性类、语义效用类等），同时比较它们的计算成本与偏置（倾向把大多数样本判为 faithful 或 unfaithful）。","experiments":"关键实验结论在引言中给了较明确的数字：\n- 数据规模：BonaFide 含 1,120 条 CoT 与 1,946 个 CoT steps，覆盖 13 个任务；来自 10 个 4B–70B 的模型家族（Qwen3、OLMo 3、DeepSeek-R1-Distill、Llama 3.3 等，含 reasoning 与 non-reasoning 变体）。\n- 自动标注质量：与人工对照验证 precision 98.9%。\n- 指标有效性：大多数 faithfulness metric 接近随机；最强指标在不同粒度不一致——CC-SHAP 在 CoT-level 达到 0.70 AUROC，但在 step-level 不可靠；Filler Tokens 在 step-level 约 0.59 AUROC。\n- 系统性偏置：重要性类指标在平衡样本上把 90%–96% 的 CoT 判为 unfaithful；语义效用类把 94%–96% 判为 faithful，说明它们更像在测“某种相关属性”而非 faithfulness。\n- 计算成本：CC-SHAP 在长 CoT 上可达 10^3 秒/样本量级，难以用于在线监控或大规模数据过滤。","reading_guide":"泛读建议（约 45–60 分钟）：\n- 先读 §2（Revising chain-of-thought faithfulness）：把它如何区分 faithfulness / plausibility / importance 理清，这是理解后面“为什么现有指标会失效”的前提。\n- 重点读数据构造与自动标注流水线那一节：任务如何设计来“锁定必经计算”、如何防止 shortcut、step-level 标签如何定义与抽取。\n- 看评测结果表：不同 metric 在 CoT-level 与 step-level 的 AUROC、以及预测偏置分布；再看成本分析（哪些方法不可用）。\n- 如果关心训练数据过滤：把它的失败案例当作 checklist，思考在 CoT 合成/蒸馏管线里哪些启发式筛选其实不可靠。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Chains of thought are widely treated as evidence of what an LLM “actually did,” yet they can be post-hoc rationalizations. Many faithfulness metrics have been proposed, but it has been unclear whether they truly measure faithfulness because ground-truth labels are missing. The paper’s goal is to create tasks where certain intermediate computations are logically necessary for a given output, enabling automated ground-truth faithfulness labels for CoTs and individual steps, and then meta-evaluate existing metrics against those labels.","importance":"The impact on pretraining is indirect but practical. If you use CoTs as training signal—process supervision, R1-style distillation, synthetic reasoning traces, verifier/critic training, or any pipeline that filters/weights traces—you need a reliable notion of which traces are faithful. The paper shows most existing metrics are near chance and often heavily biased, implying that metric-based CoT filtering can systematically skew data. It also weakens monitoring/auditing approaches that assume CoTs are interpretable by default. Overall, it is evaluation infrastructure that informs how to treat reasoning traces as data.","technical_approach":"The work combines (1) a CoT-specific faithfulness definition, adapting classic explanation faithfulness to the setting where the model emits a long, potentially exploratory trace; (2) a labeling methodology based on task designs that make some intermediate computations unavoidable (e.g., misleading hints that must be followed to produce the observed answer, or intrinsic structure that forces specific intermediate results), while explicitly preventing guessing/shortcuts; and (3) the BonaFide benchmark plus an automated labeling pipeline that yields both CoT-level and step-level faithful/unfaithful labels, validated against human annotation. Using BonaFide, the paper evaluates a range of existing faithfulness metrics (importance-based and semantic/utility-based) and reports both predictive performance and computational cost.","experiments":"Reported headline numbers:\n- Dataset: 1,120 CoTs and 1,946 CoT steps across 13 tasks.\n- Models: 10 LMs spanning 4B–70B parameters, including Qwen3, OLMo 3, DeepSeek-R1-Distill, and Llama 3.3 families, with both reasoning and non-reasoning variants.\n- Labeling pipeline: 98.9% precision vs human validation.\n- Metric validity: most metrics are near chance; best varies by granularity—CC-SHAP reaches 0.70 AUROC at the CoT level, while Filler Tokens reaches ~0.59 AUROC at the step level, with poor transfer across levels.\n- Bias: importance-based metrics label 90%–96% of CoTs unfaithful on a balanced set; semantic-utility metrics label 94%–96% faithful.\n- Cost: CC-SHAP can take up to ~10^3 seconds per instance on long CoTs, making it impractical for large-scale filtering or real-time monitoring.","reading_guide":"Skim plan (45–60 minutes):\n- Read the section that revises/defines CoT faithfulness and separates it from plausibility and importance; this frames why many metrics fail.\n- Focus on the dataset construction and automated labeling pipeline: how tasks enforce necessary computations and how shortcuts are ruled out.\n- Inspect the main results tables for AUROC at both CoT and step levels, plus the bias analysis (class prediction skew).\n- If you care about training pipelines, read the failure modes as a checklist for CoT data selection and for interpreting “faithfulness scores” in practice.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"读实验定义和 metric 对照表；如果结论成立，很多 CoT faithfulness 分数只能当 plausibility 信号。","en":"Read the task construction and metric comparison; if the result holds, many CoT faithfulness scores are just plausibility signals."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Tel Aviv University","University of Utah"],"authors":["Yoav Gur-Arieh","Ana Marasović","Mor Geva"],"notable_authors":["Mor Geva"],"tags":["cot-faithfulness","meta-evaluation","interpretability","evaluation-metrics"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25052","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25052","github":"https://github.com/yoavgur/BonaFide","project":"https://huggingface.co/collections/yoavgurarieh/bonafide","source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25461","title":"MetaphorVU: Towards Metaphorical Video Understanding","abstract":"Metaphorical videos are prevalent across various real-world scenarios to convey complex ideas, and understanding them typically requires high-order cognitive capabilities. The lack of systematic studies on metaphorical video understanding not only constrains the real-world applicability of MLLMs but also impedes the thorough assessment of their high-order cognitive capabilities. To bridge this gap, we propose MetaphorVU-Bench, the first systematic and comprehensive benchmark dedicated to metapho","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T06:12:19+00:00","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25461.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决当前多模态大模型缺少系统性“隐喻视频理解”评测的问题，并分析它们在跨域映射这类高阶认知能力上的短板。","importance":"核心贡献是评测资产与任务定义：提出首个较系统的隐喻视频理解benchmark，并给出错误归因和一个推理时增强方法。对研究多模态推理边界、评测盲区和高阶语义对齐有一定参考价值。","technical_approach":"论文构建MetaphorVU-Bench，系统覆盖隐喻视频理解任务；实验发现现有MLLM主要卡在cross-domain mapping。基于这一分析，作者进一步构建metaphor knowledge graph，并提出推理时增强框架MetaphorBoost，用知识映射辅助模型理解隐喻。","experiments":"摘要表明作者比较了当前主流MLLM与人类表现，发现模型显著落后于人类，并通过MetaphorBoost获得稳定提升。摘要未给出具体模型名单、样本规模和提升幅度，但benchmark属性明确强于方法属性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the lack of a systematic benchmark for metaphorical video understanding and analyzes where current multimodal LLMs fail on this higher-order reasoning capability.","importance":"Its main contribution is an evaluation asset and task definition: a dedicated benchmark for metaphorical video understanding, plus an error analysis and an inference-time enhancement method. It is relevant if you care about blind spots in multimodal reasoning evaluation.","technical_approach":"The paper introduces MetaphorVU-Bench to cover metaphorical video understanding systematically. It finds that current MLLMs mainly fail at cross-domain mapping, then builds a metaphor knowledge graph and proposes MetaphorBoost, an inference-time augmentation framework that injects mapping knowledge.","experiments":"The abstract indicates comparisons between current MLLMs and humans, showing a large human-model gap, and reports consistent gains from MetaphorBoost. It does not provide exact model names, benchmark size, or numerical improvements, but the benchmark contribution is clearly primary.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"评测比方法更有价值：如果你做多模态预训练，记住‘模型不缺感知，缺跨域映射’这个失败模式；正文只看benchmark设计和误差分析。","en":"The benchmark matters more than the method: for multimodal pretraining, the useful takeaway is that models fail more on cross-domain mapping than raw perception; read the benchmark design and error analysis only."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Zhuoqun Li","Boxi Cao","Guiping Jiang","Fangrui Lv","Ruotong Pan","Jianan Wang","Xiangyu Wu","Hongyu Lin","Yaojie Lu","Yong Du","Ruyin Jia","Liyan","Tingting Gao","Han Li","Xianpei Han","Le Sun"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["benchmark","video-understanding","multimodal-reasoning","metaphor","evaluation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25461","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25461","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25535","title":"Personalize-then-Store: Benchmarking and Learning Personalized Memory for Long-horizon Agents","abstract":"Existing large language model (LLM) based memory systems apply universal, static policies that overlook a fundamental reality: the contexts that are worth storing in memory are different across users. This misalignment wastes limited memory budget on transient interactions while failing to preserve critical context for long horizon tasks. To address this gap, we investigate an underexplored question: can LLM based memory systems learn personalized memory policies? We introduce PerMemBench, the f","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T07:48:33+00:00","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25535.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有 LLM agent 记忆系统通常使用统一、静态的存储策略，无法区分不同用户长期任务中真正值得保留的上下文。","importance":"贡献类型是 agent 长程记忆 benchmark 和经验分析。它不直接影响基座预训练，但触及长期交互、个性化上下文选择和记忆预算分配，对未来 continual pretrain 或 posttrain memory 数据构造有参考价值。","technical_approach":"论文提出 PerMemBench，用多年、多领域交互历史和多样用户画像评估个性化记忆系统；同时提出 session-level storage gating，在会话级判断是否跳过记忆写入，从而把有限记忆预算留给更长期有用的上下文。","experiments":"摘要称在理想 gating 条件下，个性化策略带来明显 retention gains；但实际准确 gating 仍未解决。摘要未给出具体模型、数据规模、baseline 数字或提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Current LLM-agent memory systems often use universal and static storage policies, failing to account for which contexts are worth remembering for different users over long horizons.","importance":"The contribution is a benchmark and empirical study for long-horizon personalized memory. It is not a pretraining paper, but it is relevant to long-term interaction, personalized context selection, and memory-budget allocation, which may inform continual pretraining or post-training data design.","technical_approach":"The paper introduces PerMemBench, built around multi-year, multi-domain interaction histories and diverse user personas. It also studies session-level storage gating, a lightweight policy that skips memory operations for transient sessions.","experiments":"The abstract reports substantial retention gains under perfect gating, while showing that accurate real-world gating remains open. It does not provide model sizes, dataset scale, baseline numbers, or exact improvement figures.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"个性化 memory 的问题设定比方法更有用；读 benchmark schema 和 gating 误差分析即可。","en":"The personalized-memory setup is more useful than the method; read the benchmark schema and gating-error analysis."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Yeonjun In","Wonjoong Kim","Sangwu Park","Kanghoon Yoon","Chanyoung Park"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agent-memory","long-horizon-agents","personalization","benchmark"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25535","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25535","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.26176","title":"PitchBench: Measuring Pitch Hearing in Audio-Language Models","abstract":"Audio-language models (ALMs) are increasingly used in real-world applications that require understanding music, from music tutoring and transcription to captioning, recommendation systems, and music production. More broadly, they are becoming an important component of multimodal AI systems that must reason from sensory input rather than text alone. This makes reliable musical perception a critical prerequisite: if a model cannot accurately hear the structure of sound, it cannot be trusted to rea","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T05:37:15+00:00","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2605_26176.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.SD","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要测一个被 ALM 评测长期忽略的基础能力：音频语言模型到底能不能稳定、细粒度地“听准音高”，而不是只在高层音乐任务上碰巧答对。","importance":"它属于评测资产贡献。对语音/音频 LM 和多模态基座研究有一定价值，因为很多上层音乐理解、转录、教学、音频推理任务都默认模型具备基础 pitch perception，但社区此前多用间接任务或选择题，测不出真实感知缺口。","technical_approach":"提出 PitchBench，一个系统化测量 pitch hearing 的评测套件，覆盖不同乐器、声学条件和回答格式，目标是把音高感知从高层任务表现中剥离出来，直接测模型对细粒度 pitch 的识别与稳健性。核心是评测 protocol 设计，而非训练新模型。","experiments":"摘要没有给出具体参评模型、参数规模和详细数值，但强调现有 benchmark 往往只通过高层任务间接探测 pitch hearing，而 PitchBench 直接在多条件、多响应格式下测量该能力。若正文实验做得扎实，它更像是音频版的 capability decomposition benchmark。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a basic capability that audio-language model evaluation has largely neglected: whether ALMs can reliably and finely perceive pitch, rather than merely succeeding on higher-level music tasks.","importance":"This is mainly an evaluation contribution. It matters for speech/audio LM and multimodal foundation-model research because many downstream music understanding, transcription, tutoring, and audio reasoning tasks implicitly assume competent pitch perception, while existing benchmarks often probe it only indirectly or via multiple-choice shortcuts.","technical_approach":"It introduces PitchBench, a benchmark suite designed to directly measure pitch hearing across instruments, acoustic conditions, and response formats. The goal is to isolate low-level pitch perception from higher-level task success. The contribution is the evaluation protocol, not a new model.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide a full model roster, parameter scales, or detailed numbers, but it frames PitchBench as a direct and systematic test of pitch perception under varied conditions and answer formats. If the full paper is careful, this is essentially a capability-decomposition benchmark for audio-language models.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"如果你做 audio LM，这类底层感知拆解评测比再看一个音乐 caption 榜单更有用；否则只看 benchmark 设计范围，正文不必细读。","en":"If you work on audio LMs, this kind of low-level capability decomposition is more informative than another music-caption leaderboard; otherwise, just inspect the benchmark scope and move on."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Milan Liessens Dujardin","Song-Ze Yu","Craver Corbyn Thomas-Smith","David M. Chan","Karina Nguyen"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["audio-language-models","benchmark","pitch-perception","music","evaluation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.26176","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.26176","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25510","title":"The Age of Curiosity Meets the Age of AI: Benchmarking Child Safety in Large Language Models","abstract":"Children increasingly have access to Large Language Models (LLMs), which may expose them to responses that are developmentally inappropriate or require age-sensitive safety, guidance, and boundaries. Existing LLM safety evaluations largely focus on harmful-content avoidance and do not explicitly target child-facing safety. We introduce KIDBench, a benchmark for evaluating child-facing LLM safety for ages 7-11 using a developmental-psychology-grounded LLM-as-a-Judge rubric. KIDBench contains real","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T07:14:58+00:00","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25510.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有 LLM 安全评测主要关注一般有害内容拒答，缺少针对 7-11 岁儿童使用场景的年龄敏感安全评估。","importance":"贡献是评测资产 KIDBench：用发展心理学指导的 LLM-as-a-Judge rubric，评估儿童真实提问、年龄提示、多轮交互、跨语言和文化场景下的安全行为。","technical_approach":"构建覆盖十类儿童查询的 benchmark，包含单轮 prompt 和多轮 child-actor 模拟；比较无儿童上下文、隐式儿童线索和显式年龄指令三种提示条件，并使用面向儿童安全的 judge rubric 打分。","experiments":"对多个 LLM 进行比较。隐式儿童线索使模型得分提升 9%-47%，显式年龄指令在此基础上进一步提升 10%-30%；跨语言和不同国家语境中安全表现不均衡，多轮模拟暴露出更复杂的儿童交互风险。","authors_note":"作者来自 University of Michigan；Rada Mihalcea 长期研究 NLP、计算社会科学和语言安全相关问题。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM safety evaluations focus mostly on generic harmful-content avoidance and do not directly measure age-sensitive safety for children aged 7-11.","importance":"The contribution is KIDBench, an evaluation asset for child-facing LLM safety using a developmental-psychology-grounded LLM-as-a-Judge rubric.","technical_approach":"KIDBench includes realistic child queries across ten categories, single-turn prompts, and multi-turn child-actor simulations. It compares no child context, implicit child cues, and explicit age instructions, and evaluates behavior with a child-safety-specific judge rubric.","experiments":"The benchmark compares multiple LLMs. Implicit child cues improve scores by 9%-47%, and explicit age instructions add another 10%-30%. Cross-lingual and country-context evaluations show uneven safety behavior, while multi-turn simulations reveal additional interaction risks.","authors_note":"The authors are from the University of Michigan. Rada Mihalcea is known for work in NLP, computational social science, and language safety."},"recommendation":{"zh":"儿童安全是专门评测资产，不会改 pretrain recipe；看提示条件带来的 9-47% 波动即可。","en":"This is a specialized safety benchmark, not a pretraining input; the main signal is the 9-47% swing from child-context cues."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Michigan"],"authors":["Samee Arif","Angana Borah","Rada Mihalcea"],"notable_authors":["Rada Mihalcea"],"tags":["safety-evaluation","child-safety","LLM-as-a-Judge","benchmark"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25510","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25510","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25415","title":"LLM-as-a-Reviewer: Benchmarking Their Ability, Divergence, and Prompt Injection Resistance as Paper Reviewers","abstract":"Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly used in academic peer review, yet their reliability, alignment with human judgment, and robustness to adversarial attacks remain poorly understood. We present a systematic benchmark of LLM-as-a-Reviewer on 898 papers stratified from NeurIPS and ICLR, evaluating 12 LLMs along three axes: rating calibration, divergence from human reviewers, and resistance to prompt injection embedded via an invisible font-mapping attack. We find that LLMs systematicall","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T04:32:13+00:00","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25415.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.CY","cs.ET"],"summary":{"core_problem":"评测 LLM 作为论文审稿人的能力边界，包括与人类审稿分歧、评分校准偏差，以及对隐藏式 prompt injection 的脆弱性。","importance":"核心贡献是 benchmark 与评测协议，不是基座训练方法。对预训练研究员的价值主要在于：它提供了一个较复杂、长文档、带隐式攻击面的 judge 场景，可作为“模型在真实高 stakes 评审任务中是否稳健”的外部证据。","technical_approach":"基于 898 篇来自 NeurIPS 和 ICLR 的论文，评测 12 个 LLM，沿三个维度分析：评分校准、与人类审稿人的分歧、以及通过不可见字体映射嵌入的 prompt injection 攻击抵抗力；同时比较评论长度、词汇多样性和关注维度差异。","experiments":"数据规模为 898 篇论文、12 个模型。摘要报告的主要发现包括：LLM 系统性高估弱论文；在关注点上与人类不同，低估 Clarity、过度强调 Reproducibility；生成的 review 长度是人类的 2-3 倍但词汇更模板化；简单隐藏指令可在相当比例上把低分论文抬到接收区间。未给出更细的模型排名和数值表。","authors_note":"作者来自 University of South Florida、Missouri University of Science and Technology、University of Alabama、Florida International University、University of Cincinnati、George Mason University；未见头部基座模型团队。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper benchmarks the limits of LLMs as paper reviewers, focusing on divergence from human reviewers, score calibration, and vulnerability to hidden prompt injection.","importance":"Its main contribution is an evaluation setup rather than a foundation-model training method. For pretraining researchers, the value is mostly indirect: it offers a realistic long-document judge scenario with adversarial surface area, which is useful as external evidence about model robustness in high-stakes review-like tasks.","technical_approach":"Using 898 papers from NeurIPS and ICLR, the authors evaluate 12 LLMs along three axes: rating calibration, divergence from human reviewers, and resistance to an invisible font-mapping prompt injection attack. They also analyze review length, lexical diversity, and topical emphasis.","experiments":"The benchmark covers 898 papers and 12 models. The abstract reports that LLMs systematically overrate weaker submissions, diverge from humans in topical emphasis by underweighting Clarity and overweighting Reproducibility, produce reviews 2-3x longer with more standardized vocabulary, and remain highly vulnerable to simple hidden instructions that can push low-scoring papers toward acceptance-level ratings. Detailed per-model tables are not provided in the abstract.","authors_note":"The authors are from USF, Missouri S&T, University of Alabama, FIU, University of Cincinnati, and George Mason University. No major frontier foundation-model lab affiliation is apparent."},"recommendation":{"zh":"更像 judge robustness 的案例集，不是 pretrain 论文；如果你做 evaluator 或长文档对齐，只看 injection 结果和人机分歧分析就够了。","en":"This is more a judge-robustness case study than a pretraining paper; if you work on evaluators or long-document alignment, just read the injection results and the human-vs-LLM divergence section."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of South Florida","Missouri University of Science and Technology","University of Alabama","Florida International University","University of Cincinnati","George Mason University"],"authors":["Lingyao Li","Junjie Xiong","Changjia Zhu","Runlong Yu","Chen Chen","Junyu Wang","Renkai Ma","Zhicong Lu"],"notable_authors":["Zhicong Lu"],"tags":["evaluation","llm-judge","prompt-injection","long-document","peer-review"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25415","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25415","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.24213","title":"Towards Evaluation Engineering: An Empirical Study of ML Evaluation Harnesses in the Wild","abstract":"Evaluation harnesses are software systems that orchestrate model evaluation by managing model invocation, data loading, metric computation, and result reporting. Despite their critical role in machine learning infrastructure, their operational challenges and engineering concerns have received limited attention so far. We present an empirical study of 57 evaluation harnesses, deriving a five-stage harness model and classifying 16,560 issues by workflow stage and root cause. Most harness operation","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"huggingface","sources":["huggingface"],"published_at":"2026-05-22T00:00:00.000Z","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2605_24213.png","hf_upvotes":6,"arxiv_categories":[],"summary":{"core_problem":"研究现实中的 ML evaluation harness 在工程上最常出现哪些问题，以及这些问题集中在哪些工作流阶段。","importance":"贡献类型是软件工程实证分析。它不是模型方法论文，但对大模型评测基础设施建设有一定参考，尤其适合负责内部 eval platform 的研究工程团队。","technical_approach":"作者分析了 57 个 evaluation harness，抽象出五阶段工作流模型，并将 16,560 个 issue 按阶段和根因分类，统计常见故障模式，如未实现功能、文档缺失和输入校验不足。","experiments":"这是实证研究而非模型实验。主要结果是 41.4% 的问题集中在 Specification 阶段；最常见三类根因分别是未实现功能、文档缺口和缺少输入校验，合计占 61.7%。这些数字对搭建评测系统有直接工程意义。","authors_note":"来自 Concordia University 的 SAIL 和 LUMS，偏软件工程研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies what operational problems evaluation harnesses face in practice and where those problems concentrate in the evaluation workflow.","importance":"This is a software-engineering empirical study rather than a model-method paper, but it has some value for teams building internal LLM evaluation infrastructure.","technical_approach":"The authors analyze 57 evaluation harnesses, derive a five-stage workflow model, and classify 16,560 issues by workflow stage and root cause, highlighting recurring failure modes such as unimplemented features, documentation gaps, and missing input validation.","experiments":"This is an empirical infrastructure study, not a model experiment. The main findings are that 41.4% of issues occur in the Specification stage, and the top three root causes—unimplemented features, documentation gaps, and missing input validation—account for 61.7% of issues. These numbers are directly useful for evaluation-system engineering.","authors_note":"From Concordia University’s SAIL and LUMS, with a software-engineering focus."},"recommendation":{"zh":"不是研究方法论文，但做 eval 平台的人该看；正文不用细读，记住 issue 主要死在 specification、文档和输入校验这三处。","en":"Not a methods paper, but useful if you own eval infrastructure; no need to read deeply—just remember that most failures cluster around specification, docs, and input validation."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Concordia University","Lahore University of Management Sciences","Software Analysis and Intelligence Lab (SAIL)","Concordia UniversityMontrealQCCanada","Lahore University of Management Sciences (LUMS)LahorePunjabPakistan"],"authors":["Zhimin Zhao","Zehao Wang","Abdul Ali Bangash","Bram Adams","Ahmed E. Hassan"],"notable_authors":["Ahmed E. Hassan","Bram Adams"],"tags":["evaluation-harness","ml-infrastructure","empirical-study","software-engineering","benchmarking"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.24213","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.24213","github":"https://github.com/zhimin-z/EvalEng","project":"https://zhimin-z.github.io/EvalEng","source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.22880","title":"How Far Will They Go? Red-Teaming Online Influence with Large Language Models","abstract":"As large language model (LLM)-based agents increasingly participate in online discourse, red-teaming their capacity to support political influence campaigns is critical for information integrity. In pursuit of this goal, we focus on locally deployed open-source LLMs, as opposed to frontier API-only models, given their superior alignment with the operational constraints of privacy-conscious malicious actors deployed in social media environments. We introduce an empirical red-teaming framework for","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"huggingface","sources":["huggingface"],"published_at":"2026-05-20T19:25:26.000Z","category_id":"eval","cover_url":"/covers/2605_22880.png","hf_upvotes":5,"arxiv_categories":[],"summary":{"core_problem":"评估开源 LLM 在政治影响活动中能表达多宽的立场范围，以及简单自然语言 jailbreak 会如何扩大这个范围。","importance":"贡献类型是安全评测协议和实证分析。它不直接改进预训练，但能反映不同模型家族、规模和对齐策略在政治内容生成上的行为差异，对数据过滤和安全后训练有间接参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出 LLM Overton Window 评测框架，将模型在争议议题上能稳定表达的政治意见范围量化；实验聚焦本地部署的开源模型，因为这更接近隐私敏感或恶意操作者的现实约束；同时测试简单自然语言 jailbreak 对表达范围的扩张作用。","experiments":"评估超过 30 个 LLM，覆盖 10 个模型家族和 5 个来源国家。摘要报告三个主要现象：开源 LLM 通常更愿意生成左倾社交媒体内容；Overton Window 随模型规模增大而收缩；简单 jailbreak 能扩大可表达政治立场范围。具体 prompt 集、统计显著性和模型清单需读正文确认。","authors_note":"Information Sciences Institute 与 University of Southern California；Emilio Ferrara 和 Luca Luceri 长期研究在线影响、社交网络与信息操纵。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper measures how wide a range of political opinions open-source LLMs can reliably express, and how simple natural-language jailbreaks expand that range.","importance":"This is primarily a safety evaluation and empirical red-teaming contribution. It does not improve pretraining directly, but it gives useful signals about how model family, scale, and alignment interact with political-content generation.","technical_approach":"The authors introduce an LLM Overton Window framework that quantifies the range of political positions a model can express on controversial topics. They focus on locally deployed open-source models, which better match the operational setting of privacy-sensitive or malicious social-media actors, and test how simple jailbreaks shift the measured window.","experiments":"The study evaluates more than 30 LLMs across 10 model families and five countries of origin. The abstract reports systematic asymmetries: open-source LLMs are typically more willing to generate left-leaning social-media content, Overton Windows tend to shrink with model size, and jailbreaks expand the expressible range. Full prompt design and statistical details require the paper.","authors_note":"Information Sciences Institute and University of Southern California. Emilio Ferrara and Luca Luceri are known for work on online influence, social networks, and information manipulation."},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看模型规模与 Overton Window 的统计图；结论偏安全评测，能给预训练数据治理一点弱信号。","en":"Read only the scale-vs-Overton-window plots; this is safety evaluation, with weak but usable signals for pretraining data governance."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Information Sciences Institute","University of Southern California"],"authors":["Daniel Ruiz","Anna","Ashwin Rao","Emilio Ferrara","Luca Luceri"],"notable_authors":["Emilio Ferrara","Luca Luceri"],"tags":["llm-safety","red-teaming","political-bias","evaluation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.22880","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.22880","github":"https://github.com/SIGNALS-Lab/llm-overton-external","project":"","source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"multimodal","emoji":"🌐","name":"多模态统一","description":"VLM、多模态理解、统一模态预训练、多模态对齐、视觉-语言模型","papers":[{"id":"2605.25621","title":"StreamOV: Streaming Omni-Video Understanding via Evidence-Guided Memory and Response Triggering","abstract":"While streaming omni-video understanding demands continuous perception and proactive, real-time interaction, this crucial area remains largely under-explored. Current omni-modal methods are inherently designed for offline settings, limiting their applicability in streaming scenarios due to two fundamental flaws. First, they lack robust mechanisms to manage continuously growing audio-visual context over long horizons and cannot autonomously initiate responses at opportune moments. Second, existin","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T09:23:19+00:00","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25621.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"论文解决流式全模态视频理解问题：模型在视频和音频连续到达时，需要在有限上下文预算内保留有用证据，并判断当前是否应该主动回应。","importance":"这篇论文更接近 VLM/omni-modal evaluation 与系统方法，不是 LLM 预训练方法论文。对基座研究的启发主要有两点。第一，长时序多模态模型不能只依赖把帧、音频和历史对话堆进上下文，需要显式的证据选择和记忆策略。第二，流式模型需要学习“何时不回答”，这和语言模型中的 abstention、turn-taking、response triggering 是同一个接口问题。它对 native multimodal pretraining 的影响在于：训练目标和数据格式可能需要包含等待、证据出现、证据不足这些状态，而不是只做离线 QA。","technical_approach":"StreamOV 包含三块设计。第一是 multimodal evidence routing。模型同时利用 query-agnostic 的流式动态信息和 query-aware 的语义相关性，把证据分成 visual-only、audio-only、audio-visual aligned 三类线索。这样做的原因是，流式视频中的关键信息不总是来自同一模态：有些问题依赖画面，有些依赖语音，有些依赖音画同步关系。第二是 long-short term memory。近期片段保留更稠密的信息，历史片段则稀疏保存更有信息量的证据，在固定预算下避免上下文无限增长。第三是 MLLM-as-a-trigger。它不生成显式 silence token，也不使用外部 router，而是利用模型早期解码 hidden states 判断 Respond 或 Wait。这个取舍比较合理：silence token 会改变生成分布，外部 router 又可能缺少多模态推理能力；直接读出 MLLM 内部状态，可以把回应时机和当前语义证据绑定得更紧。","experiments":"论文构建了 SOVBench，用于在线多轮全模态视频评测。SOVBench-O 评估连续音视频理解，覆盖 Real-Time、Recall 和 Proactive interaction；SOVBench-T 把回应时机单独作为任务，要求证据出现时回应、证据缺失时保持沉默。数据主要来自 FineVideo，并利用其全局描述、场景叙述、局部活动、物体交互和带时间戳的 ASR 转写构造多轮 QA。作者还使用强 LLM 根据 Visual Dynamism、Narrative Coherence、Information Density、Audio-Visual Alignment、Reasoning Value 五个维度做数据筛选，并进行人工 sanity check。实验覆盖 SOVBench、StreamingBench、OVO-Bench 和离线音视频 benchmark。给定内容没有提供完整表格数值，但主结论是 StreamOV 在流式全模态、视觉流式和离线音视频设置上都优于或接近强基线，response trigger 机制在主动回应任务上是关键组件。","reading_guide":"泛读建议 25–40 分钟。先看任务定义和 SOVBench 构造，尤其是 SOVBench-O 与 SOVBench-T 的差异；这部分比模型细节更有长期参考价值。然后看 evidence routing 和 long-short term memory，关注它如何在固定预算下选择历史证据。最后看 MLLM-as-a-trigger 的实现和消融，判断 hidden-state trigger 是否真的优于 silence token 和外部 router。若只关心预训练，可重点看数据格式、触发标签和多轮流式 QA 的生成流程，思考它们能否变成原生多模态模型的训练任务。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses streaming omni-video understanding: a model receives audio and video continuously, must maintain useful evidence under a bounded context budget, and must decide when it has enough information to respond.","importance":"This is mainly a VLM and omni-modal systems/evaluation paper rather than a pretraining-method paper. Its relevance to foundation-model research is in the interface it exposes. Long-horizon multimodal models cannot rely on simply appending frames, audio segments, and dialogue history. They need evidence selection, memory management, and an explicit notion of when not to answer. This has implications for native multimodal pretraining: training data and objectives may need to encode waiting, evidence arrival, and evidence absence, not only offline question answering.","technical_approach":"StreamOV has three main components. First, multimodal evidence routing combines query-agnostic stream dynamics with query-aware semantic relevance, then separates evidence into visual-only, audio-only, and audio-visual-aligned cues. This matters because streaming questions may depend on images, speech, or temporal alignment between the two. Second, a long-short term memory keeps recent observations densely while retaining older evidence sparsely under a fixed budget. This avoids unbounded context growth while preserving salient history. Third, an MLLM-as-a-trigger mechanism uses early decoding hidden states to predict Respond or Wait. This avoids explicit silence-token generation, which can perturb the pretrained generation distribution, and avoids external routers, which may not share the MLLM’s multimodal reasoning state.","experiments":"$19","reading_guide":"A 25–40 minute skim is appropriate. Start with the task formulation and SOVBench construction, especially the distinction between SOVBench-O and SOVBench-T. That part is likely more reusable than the specific system design. Then read the evidence routing and long-short term memory modules to see how historical evidence is selected under a fixed budget. Finally, inspect the MLLM-as-a-trigger implementation and its ablations against silence-token generation and external routers. For pretraining-oriented readers, the most useful details are the streaming data format, trigger labels, and multi-turn QA generation pipeline, since these could be converted into native multimodal training objectives.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"值得看记忆压缩和触发指标定义；方法未必新，但 streaming VLM 的评测设定会影响后续预训练数据形态。","en":"Skim the memory-compression and trigger-metric design; the method may be incremental, but the streaming VLM setup can shape future pretraining data formats."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Ming Xie","Zizheng Huang","Xudong Tan","Chao Wang","Xiangyu Zeng","Wenxiao Wu","Tao Chen","Limin Wang","Yanwei Fu"],"notable_authors":["Limin Wang","Yanwei Fu"],"tags":["streaming-video-understanding","omni-modal","bounded-memory","response-triggering","long-context-VLM"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25621","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25621","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25524","title":"ProSR: Process-Shaped Spatial Reasoning for Reliable Chain-of-Thought in VLMs","abstract":"Reliable spatial reasoning remains a core bottleneck for vision-language models (VLMs). Existing mainstream training paradigms for spatial reasoning largely rely on outcome alignment or process imitation, lacking explicit constraints on the reasoning process, and therefore struggle to ensure genuine visual dependence and stable reasoning trajectories. In this paper, we construct a high-quality CoT dataset covering diverse spatial phenomena and diagnose the model's reasoning process, revealing tw","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T07:27:28+00:00","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25524.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关注 VLM 空间推理中的一个老问题：模型即使答对，也不一定真的看图推理，更不一定有稳定的推理过程。作者把问题进一步拆成两个可诊断的过程缺陷。其一是 Spurious Grounding，模型在去掉图像后仍能给出相似 CoT，说明它可能主要依赖语言先验和数据偏置。其二是 Tail Instability，推理后段的不确定性反而上升，说明模型在接近答案时轨迹不稳。论文要解决的不是再做一个更大的空间数据集，而是如何把“过程可靠性”直接写进 RL 目标，而不是只优化最终答案正确率。","importance":"对预训练主线来说，这不是核心论文，但有两个启发点。第一，它把 reasoning 训练中的过程退化现象显式量化了，说明只用 outcome reward 做 RL 很容易学到捷径，这和文本推理、工具使用、甚至代码推理中的 reward hacking 是同类问题。第二，它提出的约束方式不是监督 CoT 文本本身，而是约束推理过程中的不确定性轨迹与反事实行为，这比单纯 imitation 更接近“训练动力学约束”。如果以后把类似思想迁移到纯文本 LM 或多模态统一模型的 post-train，可能会比直接奖励长 CoT 更稳。","technical_approach":"方法分两段。先做数据和诊断，再做过程塑形 RL。作者先构建了一个覆盖多类空间现象的 CoT 数据集，用它对模型做 SFT，得到具备初始空间 CoT 能力的 VLM。然后在这个基础上用 vanilla GRPO 做 RL，并系统分析 rollout 行为，发现仅靠最终答案奖励会诱发两类退化：Spurious Grounding 和 Tail Instability。\n\n围绕这两个问题，ProSR 在 GRPO 目标里加入两个过程约束。第一个是 Counterfactual Invariance Penalty，用来抑制伪视觉依赖。具体做法是在 rollout 时额外引入 blank-image 条件，比较真实图像与空白图像条件下的 normalized entropy trajectory。如果两种条件下的不确定性轨迹过于相似，就施加惩罚。直觉上，真正依赖视觉证据的推理过程，在去掉图像后应当明显改变；如果几乎不变，说明模型没有认真用视觉输入。\n\n第二个是 Tail Drift Penalty，用来抑制推理后段的不稳定。作者观察到合理的推理过程中，不确定性应当随着证据积累逐步收敛；若在后半段再次抬升，往往意味着模型在临近答案时发生摇摆、补编理由或切换策略。因此他们对 reasoning tail 的异常熵上升施加惩罚，鼓励轨迹在接近答案时稳定收束。\n\n这个方法和常见 process supervision 的区别在于，它不直接要求模型模仿某条标准 CoT，而是把“是否看图”和“是否稳定收敛”变成可优化的行为约束。这样做的好处是，约束的是过程性质，而不是某种固定表述模板，理论上更有利于泛化。","experiments":"作者在多个复杂和 OOD 空间推理 benchmark 上评测，报告平均准确率比已有方法提升 3.7%。除了答案准确率，论文还专门设计了四个诊断指标来测过程质量：Blank-image Accuracy、Same-Answer Rate、Normalized Trajectory Similarity、Late-Rise Rate。前几项主要测 Spurious Grounding，最后一项主要测 Tail Instability。\n\n实验结论有两层。第一，ProSR 在常规 benchmark 上确实提升了最终任务表现，说明过程约束没有和答案正确率冲突。第二，更关键的是诊断指标同步改善：blank-image 条件下的异常可答性下降，真实图像与空白图像下的轨迹相似度降低，后段不确定性异常上升的比例也下降。这说明模型不是单纯学会了另一种表面模式，而是在更大程度上依赖视觉证据，并且推理轨迹更稳定。\n\n从论文叙述看，作者还做了 vanilla GRPO 与 ProSR 的对比，以及两个 penalty 的消融。预期结论是两个约束各自对应不同退化模式，联合使用效果最好。给出的全文片段没有展开模型规模、训练步数、数据量和每个 benchmark 的逐项数字，因此无法在这里复述更细的表格，但实验设计本身是完整的：先证明问题存在，再证明约束能定向修复问题。","reading_guide":"泛读时先看引言里的问题定义和 Fig.1，确认作者发现的两类退化是否有说服力。然后直接看方法部分关于两个 penalty 的公式和实现，重点理解为什么用 entropy trajectory，而不是直接比较 token 或 CoT 文本。这个选择决定了方法是否只是另一个 process reward engineering。\n\n接着看诊断指标定义和主实验表。若时间有限，优先看 blank-image 相关指标和 late-rise 指标，因为这两组最能说明方法到底有没有改变推理机制。最后看消融，判断 Counterfactual Invariance Penalty 与 Tail Drift Penalty 是否各自解决了对应问题，还是只是共同提供了正则化。\n\n预计 30 到 45 分钟可以完成有效阅读。更值得带着问题去看的点有两个：一是 blank-image 反事实是否会误伤某些强语言先验任务；二是 entropy trajectory 作为过程代理变量是否足够稳健，是否会被解码策略或温度设置影响。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a familiar weakness in VLM spatial reasoning: a model can produce the correct answer without genuinely grounding its reasoning in the image, and even when it does reason, the trajectory may be unstable. The authors make this concrete with two diagnosed failure modes. Spurious Grounding means the model produces similar CoT behavior even when the image is removed, suggesting reliance on language priors or dataset bias. Tail Instability means uncertainty rises again late in the reasoning chain, indicating unstable convergence near answer generation. The goal is therefore not just better spatial accuracy, but process-level reliability under RL training.","importance":"This is not a core pretraining paper, but it is relevant to anyone thinking about reasoning optimization. The main lesson is that answer-only RL objectives can induce shortcut behavior even when benchmark accuracy improves. That is directly related to reward hacking in text reasoning, tool use, and code generation. A second useful idea is methodological: instead of supervising a canonical CoT string, the paper constrains process properties through uncertainty trajectories and counterfactual behavior. That is closer to shaping training dynamics than to plain imitation, and the idea could plausibly transfer beyond spatial VLMs.","technical_approach":"$1a","experiments":"$1b","reading_guide":"$1c","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"可扫数据诊断和两个 penalty；若证据扎实，它会提醒 VLM RL 不应只盯 outcome reward。","en":"Skim the diagnostics and the two penalties; if the evidence is clean, it argues against optimizing VLM RL on outcome reward alone."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Jiangyang Li","Cong Wan","Changjie Wu","Songlin Dong","Lingjun Zhang","Linzhe Shi","Xu Wang","Zhiheng Ma","Hang Zhang","Mu Xu","Yihong Gong"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["vlm","spatial-reasoning","process-supervision","reinforcement-learning","chain-of-thought"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25524","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25524","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25343","title":"Toward Native Multimodal Modeling: A Roadmap","abstract":"Multimodal modeling represents a vital step from modality-agnostic reasoning toward world modeling. While early approaches predominantly rely on late-fusion that assembles encoders and frozen language backbones with output heads, recent efforts have shifted the paradigm toward native multimodal modeling (NMM) with the intrinsic integration of modalities for superior multimodal performance. Despite its potential, the design space of native architectures remains insufficiently defined. In this pap","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T01:57:43+00:00","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25343.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇文章要解决的问题不是提出一个新的 native multimodal 模型，而是把“什么叫 native（原生）多模态建模”这件事形式化：如何区分 late-fusion（外挂式拼装）、mid-fusion（中层注入/交互）与 early-fusion（统一 token 空间/统一骨干），以及如何用一套可操作的维度去描述现有模型在“架构融合深度、输入输出对称性、训练目标与 tokenization”上的位置，从而让社区能更一致地讨论设计取舍与演进路线。","importance":"对预训练研究的直接贡献偏方法论与术语体系：它试图把近两年多模态从“编码器+LLM+投影头”的工程拼装，推进到“统一表示+统一训练目标”的基座预训练问题。价值主要在两点：\n1) 给出可复用的分类坐标系，帮助在做配方/数据/目标函数时明确自己处在 mid-fusion 还是 early-fusion，避免把不同范式的经验混用；\n2) 把输入-输出的对偶（multi-to-text vs multi-to-multi symmetric）作为主轴之一，能更直接地映射到预训练目标设计（AR、mask/any-order、diffusion/AR 混合）与 tokenizer 选择。\n但它不是实证型 recipe paper：没有给出新的 scaling 结论或可复现的训练配方，因此对“如何把 loss 降下来、如何更稳更省”这类问题的增量有限。","technical_approach":"全文核心是“路线图+分类法”，而不是新模型。主要做法可以概括为三层：\n1) Nativity 的形式化定义：把“是否 native”从口号变成结构性标准，强调跨模态交互发生在主干内部而非外接模块；并用 mid-fusion/early-fusion 两个原生区间与 non-native（late-fusion）做切分。\n2) 以 input-output duality 组织模型谱系：把现有系统按输入模态集合与输出模态集合分成 multi-to-text、multi-to-target（面向图像/语音/视频生成等）、multi-to-multi symmetric（理解与生成对称统一）等类型；这背后对应不同的 tokenization（离散/连续、patch/codec）、不同的解码器形态（纯 AR、AR+diffusion、双头/多头）与训练目标组合。\n3) 设计空间的关键维度梳理：围绕“统一 token 空间 vs 特征注入”“共享 backbone vs 多塔结构”“对齐损失与生成损失如何耦合”“训练阶段如何从对齐过渡到统一建模”等问题给出结构化讨论，并用一张较大的模型表格把近期代表性系统放到同一张坐标图里，作为路线图的证据链。\n整体取向是：把多模态当作 pretrain 范式问题（tokenizer+目标函数+统一表示），而不是下游对齐工程。","experiments":"这是一篇 roadmap/positioning 类型文章，全文以整理与形式化为主，不以提出新方法并做大规模对照实验为核心。文中主要“结果”是对已有系统的归类与对比（包含大量模型清单、参数规模、输入输出模态覆盖等），而不是在统一训练设置下报告可归因的性能提升、消融或 scaling 曲线。因此不能从文中提取“某个方法带来 X% 提升/节省 Y% token”的结论。","reading_guide":"泛读建议按“定义→分类轴→设计取舍”三步走，30–60 分钟能抓住主线：\n1) 先读 Introduction 里对 late-fusion 局限与 nativity 动机的表述，确认它讨论的是“架构与训练范式”而非单点技巧。\n2) 重点看 mid-fusion vs early-fusion 的形式化定义与判别标准：哪些交互算进入 backbone，哪些仍是外接对齐。\n3) 精看用 input-output duality 组织模型的部分，以及那张大表（模型、参数、模态、输出类型）。这部分最适合用来给自己团队的系统做定位：你做的是 multi-to-text 还是 symmetric？输出端是否决定了必须引入 diffusion/codec？\n4) 如果你的研究关心 tokenizer/统一建模，优先看关于“统一 token 空间、离散化与生成目标耦合”的讨论段落；如果关心训练 recipe，这篇更多提供问题清单而非答案。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper does not propose a new native multimodal model; it tries to formalize what “native multimodal modeling (NMM)” means and how to systematically distinguish late-fusion (bolt-on encoders + frozen LLM), mid-fusion (feature injection / interaction inside the backbone), and early-fusion (unified token space / unified backbone). It further aims to organize existing systems with an input–output duality lens so the community can discuss architecture, tokenization, and training objectives on a shared set of axes.","importance":"Its contribution to pretraining research is mainly conceptual and taxonomic rather than empirical. It helps in two practical ways: (1) it provides a clearer vocabulary/coordinate system to avoid mixing recipes across fundamentally different regimes (late vs mid vs early fusion); (2) the input–output framing maps more directly to objective design (AR vs masked/any-order vs diffusion/AR hybrids) and tokenizer choices (patch tokens, codec tokens, discrete vs continuous). However, it does not deliver new scaling laws, stability tricks, or reproducible training recipes.","technical_approach":"The technical content is a structured roadmap:\n1) A more explicit definition of “nativity” based on where cross-modal interaction happens (inside the core backbone vs via shallow adapters).\n2) A taxonomy driven by input/output modality sets (multi-to-text, multi-to-target generation, multi-to-multi symmetric modeling), which implicitly constrains decoder design and training objectives.\n3) A discussion of key design dimensions—unified token space vs feature injection, shared backbone vs multi-tower, how alignment losses couple with generative losses, and how training might transition from alignment-centric stages to unified modeling—supported by a large curated table of representative models and their modality coverage.\nOverall, it treats multimodality as a pretraining paradigm problem (representation + tokenizer + objective), not a downstream alignment add-on.","experiments":"This is a roadmap/positioning paper with no central new method validated by controlled experiments. The “evidence” is primarily comparative organization of existing models (lists/tables of systems, parameter scales, modality I/O coverage), not ablations, scaling curves, or attributable gains under a unified training setup.","reading_guide":"Skim in 30–60 minutes:\n1) Read the motivation in the introduction to align on why late-fusion is considered non-native.\n2) Focus on the formal criteria separating mid-fusion and early-fusion; this is the most reusable part for system design discussions.\n3) Study the input–output duality section and the large model table; use it to locate your own model (multi-to-text vs symmetric) and infer what objective/tokenizer constraints follow.\n4) If your work is on unified tokenization/objectives, prioritize the passages discussing unified token spaces and how generation targets interact with tokenization; do not expect concrete training recipes or stability guidance.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"一篇很好的多模态统一预训练 (Native Multimodal) 综述和 taxonomy，理清了 early-fusion / mid-fusion 的定义，适合作为了解 Chameleon / AnyGPT 等范式演进的 mapping 文献。","en":"A solid survey and taxonomy on Native Multimodal pre-training, clarifying definitions of early/mid-fusion, useful as a mapping literature for understanding the evolution of paradigms like Chameleon and AnyGPT."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Tsinghua University","BAAI"],"authors":["Siyu An","Junru Lu","Junnan Dong","Qiufeng Wang","Yinghui Li","Weizhi Fei","Zichao Yu","Zheng Yuan","Biao Liu","Haopeng Wang","Renzhao Liang","Yixuan Yang","Yunhang Shen","Bo Ke","Keyu Chen","Linhao Luo","Difan Zou","Xiao Huang","Di Yin","Ruizhi Qiao","Xing Sun"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["native multimodal modeling","early-fusion","mid-fusion","survey","taxonomy"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25343","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25343","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25451","title":"BigMac: Breaking the Pareto Frontier of Compute and Memory in Multimodal LLM Training","abstract":"Training multimodal large language models (MLLMs) is challenged by both model and data heterogeneity. Existing systems redesign the training pipeline to address these challenges, but remain bound by a Pareto frontier between compute and memory efficiency, improving one only at the expense of the other. We present BigMac, a new training pipeline for multimodal LLMs. The core idea of BigMac is to elegantly nest the encoder and generator computation into the original LLM pipeline, forming a depende","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T06:01:45+00:00","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25451.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决多模态 LLM 训练中视觉/语音等 encoder、生成器与 LLM 主干混合后带来的激活显存和流水线计算效率冲突。","importance":"贡献类型是 MLLM 训练系统创新。它关注 native multimodal pretraining 的实际瓶颈：模态模块和 LLM 主干的依赖关系不同，直接套文本 LLM pipeline 会在显存和吞吐之间做硬取舍。","technical_approach":"提出 BigMac，将 encoder 和 generator 的计算嵌入原有 LLM pipeline，形成 dependency-safe nested pipeline。核心设计是让多模态模块的计算在不破坏 LLM 流水依赖的前提下嵌套执行，从而把 encoder 和 generator 的激活显存复杂度降到 O(1)，同时保持 LLM 部分激活复杂度不变。","experiments":"摘要声称 BigMac 在计算效率上达到无限显存理想设置，同时降低 encoder 和 generator 的激活显存复杂度，但未给出具体集群规模、模型规模、模态类型、吞吐提升或显存节省数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the compute-memory tradeoff in multimodal LLM training when encoders, generators, and the LLM backbone have heterogeneous dependencies.","importance":"This is a training-system contribution for MLLMs. It targets a practical bottleneck in native multimodal pretraining: multimodal components do not fit cleanly into the pipeline assumptions used for text-only LLMs.","technical_approach":"BigMac nests encoder and generator computation inside the original LLM pipeline using a dependency-safe nested pipeline structure. This design reduces activation memory complexity for the encoder and generator to O(1), while leaving the LLM activation memory complexity unchanged and preserving computational efficiency.","experiments":"The abstract claims computational efficiency comparable to an ideal unlimited-memory setup and O(1) activation memory for the encoder and generator, but it does not provide cluster size, model size, modality mix, throughput numbers, or memory reduction figures.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"多模态预训练的系统坑常被低估；只看 pipeline 依赖图和显存复杂度证明，真实性要等吞吐表支撑。","en":"The systems bottleneck in MLLM pretraining is real; read the dependency graph and memory analysis, then wait for throughput tables before buying the claim."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Zili Zhang","Chengxu Yang","Shenglong Zhang","Chenyu Wang","Yufan Zhang","Tuo Dai","Zhouyang Li","Yuhong Ge","Chao Jin","Xin Jin","Yuliang Liu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["multimodal LLM","training pipeline","activation memory","pipeline parallelism","MLLM systems"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25451","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25451","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25377","title":"Adversarial Orthogonal Disentanglement for LVLM Hallucination Mitigation","abstract":"Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have advanced multimodal understanding, yet their reliability is limited by hallucination, where generated content conflicts with visual facts. Existing mitigation methods either rely on costly external interventions, such as instruction tuning and retrieval, or use internal mechanisms that remain limited by flawed attention weights and entangled hidden representations. We propose Adversarial Orthogonal Disentanglement (AOD), a latent geometric framework for ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T03:05:04+00:00","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25377.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决 LVLM 幻觉缓解问题：模型生成的文本与图像事实不一致。作者关注的是不重新训练大模型、不依赖外部检索的内部干预方法，尤其是如何避免在抑制幻觉时损伤正常视觉语义能力。","importance":"对基座预训练研究的直接贡献有限，更偏向后训练与推理期干预。但它有一个有用启发：幻觉相关信号可能能在隐藏空间中被压缩到少数方向，而事实语义保留在正交残差空间中。这个视角可用于分析多模态模型的表示解耦、训练信号污染、以及 activation steering 对能力保持的影响。它也提醒，直接用注意力裁剪或二分类器处理隐藏状态，可能会把有用视觉语义和幻觉偏置一起处理掉。","technical_approach":"方法叫 Adversarial Orthogonal Disentanglement。给定图像、问题和真实答案，作者从 LVLM 某一层的 final token hidden state 提取表示。AOD 学习一个投影方向，使一致性分类器把与幻觉相关的预测信号集中到该方向上；同时通过 Gradient Reversal Layer 引入对抗目标，迫使正交残差空间尽量去除这些幻觉可预测信号。这样得到一个较干净的幻觉方向。推理时不重新训练 LVLM，而是做 activation-steered contrastive decoding：沿该方向构造一个更容易幻觉的表示和一个更偏事实的表示，再通过双前向的 logits 对比惩罚幻觉 token。与注意力剪枝不同，它不依赖可能已经失真的注意力权重；与普通隐藏态分类器不同，它显式约束幻觉方向与语义残差的几何分离。","experiments":"论文报告在多个 LVLM 架构和多个幻觉评测上优于已有内部干预方法。主要数字包括：POPE 平均提升约 +6.4%，AMBER 平均提升约 +6.0%；同时 OCRBench 提升约 +10.4%，用于说明幻觉抑制没有明显牺牲通用视觉文本能力。作者还报告学到的幻觉方向有零样本迁移能力：从单一分布抽取后，可迁移到不同难度和不同幻觉类型，包括物体、属性和关系幻觉。需要注意的是，这类结果依赖所选层、投影维度、对比解码强度和评测集分布，泛化到开放式生成场景仍需谨慎验证。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，预计 20–30 分钟。优先看 Methodology 中 AOD 的目标函数、正交分解、GRL 对抗训练，以及 inference-time contrastive decoding。实验部分重点看 POPE、AMBER、OCRBench 的能力保持结果和迁移实验。若只关心预训练，可跳过大部分应用性评测，关注隐藏空间中幻觉方向是否稳定、是否跨模型共享、以及该方向与视觉 grounding token 或语言先验之间的关系。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses hallucination in LVLMs, where generated text conflicts with visual evidence. It targets internal interventions that do not require full model retraining or external retrieval, with a particular focus on reducing hallucinations without damaging useful visual semantics.","importance":"The work is more relevant to post-training and inference-time control than to core pretraining. Its useful signal for pretraining researchers is the geometric view of hallucination: hallucination-prone information may be concentrated into a small latent direction, while factual visual semantics can be preserved in the orthogonal residual space. This offers a way to probe multimodal representations, understand entanglement between language priors and visual grounding, and evaluate whether activation steering preserves capability rather than merely making outputs conservative.","technical_approach":"$1d","experiments":"The paper reports consistent gains across multiple LVLM architectures and hallucination benchmarks. The headline numbers are average improvements of about +6.4% on POPE and +6.0% on AMBER. It also reports a +10.4% improvement on OCRBench, used as evidence that the intervention does not simply suppress generation or remove useful visual information. The learned hallucination direction is reported to transfer zero-shot from one distribution to other difficulty levels and hallucination types, including object, attribute, and relation hallucinations. The main caveat is that such interventions can be sensitive to layer choice, steering strength, projection design, and benchmark distribution; open-ended generation still needs careful validation.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 20–30 minutes. Read the methodology sections on the adversarial objective, orthogonal decomposition, Gradient Reversal Layer, and contrastive decoding. In the experiments, focus on POPE, AMBER, OCRBench, and the transfer studies. For pretraining-oriented readers, the most useful part is not the benchmark ranking but the evidence for a stable hallucination direction and its relation to visual grounding and language-prior dominance.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"通过在 latent 空间做对抗正交解耦来寻找幻觉方向并用于对比解码，对理解 VLM 的内部表征和免训练干预有启发，值得看其解耦机制的设计。","en":"Finding hallucination directions via adversarial orthogonal disentanglement in the latent space for contrastive decoding; provides insights into VLM internal representations and training-free interventions, worth skimming for its disentanglement mechanism."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Ruoxi Cheng","Haoxuan Ma","Zhengfei Hai","Yiyan Huang","Ranjie Duan","Tianle Zhang","Xu Yang","Ziyi Ye","Xingjun Ma"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["LVLM","Hallucination Mitigation","Latent Space Disentanglement","Contrastive Decoding"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25377","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25377","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25802","title":"Rethinking VLM Representation for VLA Initialization","abstract":"Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models widely adopt pretrained Vision-Language Models (VLMs) as policy backbones, yet it remains unclear what kind of pretrained VLM representation is useful as a VLA initialization. In this paper, we study VLA initialization as a controlled representation-design problem along three axes: capability-level embodied VQA supervision, parameter-update strategy, and robot-data pretraining. Our experiments show that the original pretrained VLM representation is a key sourc","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T12:51:35+00:00","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25802.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"研究什么样的预训练 VLM 表示适合作为 Vision-Language-Action 模型的初始化，而不是默认把 VLM finetune 成策略网络。","importance":"贡献类型是表示迁移分析。它把 VLA 初始化拆成三个可控因素：具身 VQA 监督、参数更新策略、机器人数据预训练；对理解 VLM 表示如何迁移到行动模型有参考价值，但离 LLM 基座预训练仍有一层任务适配距离。","technical_approach":"论文将 VLA 初始化设为受控 representation-design 问题，比较原始预训练 VLM 表示、具身 VQA 适配、LoRA 与 full finetune 等更新策略，以及机器人数据预训练。核心观察是保留原始 VLM 表示很关键，LoRA 比全量微调更稳，机器人数据预训练进一步改善初始化。","experiments":"摘要未给出模型参数量、具体 VLM/VLA backbone、机器人数据规模或数值提升；披露的实验结论包括：具身 VQA 适配收益依赖下游瓶颈，不同能力域收益不简单相加；LoRA 初始化可靠性优于 full finetune；分阶段 LoRA 机器人数据预训练得到最强变体。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies which pretrained VLM representations are useful for initializing Vision-Language-Action models, instead of assuming that any VLM adaptation will improve policy learning.","importance":"This is a representation-transfer analysis. It decomposes VLA initialization into embodied VQA supervision, parameter-update strategy, and robot-data pretraining. The findings are relevant to how pretrained VLM features transfer into action models, though the connection to LLM foundation pretraining is indirect.","technical_approach":"The authors frame VLA initialization as a controlled representation-design problem. They compare the original pretrained VLM representation, embodied VQA adaptation, LoRA versus full finetuning, and robot-data pretraining. The central message is that preserving the pretrained representation matters, LoRA is more reliable than full finetuning, and staged LoRA-based robot-data pretraining works best among the studied variants.","experiments":"The abstract does not specify model sizes, exact VLM/VLA backbones, robot-data scale, or quantitative gains. It reports qualitative findings: embodied VQA adaptation is bottleneck-dependent and non-additive across capability domains; LoRA is a more reliable initialization than full finetuning; robot-data pretraining further improves VLA initialization.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看实验分解和 LoRA-vs-full finetune 结果；它提醒预训练表示被过度重塑会伤迁移，但证据还偏机器人场景。","en":"Read only the factorized experiments and LoRA-vs-full-finetune result; the useful signal is that over-reshaping pretrained representations can hurt transfer, though the evidence is robotics-bound."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Weifeng Lin","Siyuan Huang","Hao Li","Tingwei Chen","Ruichuan An","Xinyu Wei","Jianbo Liu","Hongsheng Li"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["VLM","VLA","representation-transfer","LoRA","robot-data-pretraining"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25802","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25802","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25334","title":"Dual-Pathway Geometry-Aware MLLM for Spatial Intelligence","abstract":"Spatial understanding of the physical world from 2D visual inputs hinges on two complementary forms of geometric knowledge: holistic 3D structural perception and fine-grained metric scale estimation. Existing multimodal large language models (MLLMs) typically address only one facet, ingesting either depth maps or point clouds as additional model inputs, which incurs substantial computational overhead and inherits the generalization limitations of upstream prediction models. We propose GAMSI, a d","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T01:33:19+00:00","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25334.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"如何仅从 2D RGB 图像输入中，让 MLLM 同时获得整体 3D 结构感知和细粒度度量尺度估计这两种几何知识？","importance":"提出了一种在统一自回归主干网络中内化两种几何先验的方法，避免了引入深度图或点云带来的计算开销和泛化限制。","technical_approach":"提出了 GAMSI，一个双路径几何感知 MLLM。引入了度量-结构解耦查询 (MSDQ)，使用两组可学习查询分别从共享视觉上下文中提取密集的度量信号和稀疏的结构线索，并通过任务解耦的注意力掩码防止两条路径相互干扰。","experiments":"在空间理解任务上进行了评估，仅使用 RGB 输入。","authors_note":"中国科学技术大学 (USTC) 等机构工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to enable MLLMs to acquire both holistic 3D structural perception and fine-grained metric scale estimation solely from 2D RGB image inputs?","importance":"Proposes a method to internalize two geometric priors within a unified autoregressive backbone, avoiding the computational overhead and generalization limits of introducing depth maps or point clouds.","technical_approach":"Proposes GAMSI, a dual-pathway Geometry-Aware MLLM. Introduces Metric-Structure Decoupled Queries (MSDQ) using two groups of learnable queries to extract dense metric signals and sparse structural cues from shared visual context, with a task-decoupled attention mask preventing interference.","experiments":"Evaluated on spatial understanding tasks using only RGB inputs.","authors_note":"Work by USTC and other institutions."},"recommendation":{"zh":"通过解耦 query 在 MLLM 中同时注入 3D 结构和度量先验，属于 VLM 架构微调的常规操作，作为 literature 备查即可。","en":"Injecting 3D structural and metric priors into MLLMs via decoupled queries; a standard VLM architecture fine-tuning practice, keep as literature reference."},"metadata":{"institutions":["USTC"],"authors":["Yufei Zheng","Xuhan Zhu","Zide Liu","Chunpeng Zhou","Chenfeng Wang","Yongchao Xu","Yunnan Wang","Jiawei Liu","Pengfei Yu","Wei Zhai","Yang Cao","Zheng-Jun Zha"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["MLLM","spatial intelligence","3D perception","decoupled queries"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25334","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25334","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25194","title":"Localization then Neutralization: Gradient-guided Token Suppression against Visual Prompt Injection Attack","abstract":"Adversarial images pose a severe security threat to multimodal large language models through prompt injection. Existing defenses largely lack a principled understanding of the underlying mechanisms and struggle to balance efficiency and defense utility. In this work, we show that successful adversarial attacks do not rely on the entire image uniformly but instead depend on a small subset of critical image tokens. Based on this insight, we propose Gradient Token Masking (GTM), which localizes the","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T17:51:34+00:00","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25194.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"防御多模态大模型中的视觉提示注入攻击，并定位真正驱动攻击成功的图像 token。","importance":"贡献类型是 VLM 安全与机制分析结合的方法改进。它的有用之处在于把攻击归因从整图层面压到少量关键视觉 token，并指出常用的首 token 输出概率归因在某些攻击下会失效；对理解 VLM token-level 脆弱性有参考价值。","technical_approach":"作者提出 Gradient Token Masking。方法先用 Hidden-State Gradient Norm 对图像 token 做 generation-influence attribution，定位攻击相关 token，再通过 masking 中和这些 token。论文还声称证明该分数的排序与完整 adversarial loss gradient 的排序一致，从而给出定位正确性的理论保证。","experiments":"摘要称方法在防御效果和效率之间取得更好平衡，但未给出具体 VLM、攻击集、baseline 或提升幅度。该工作更像 VLM 推理期防御，不是多模态预训练方法。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles visual prompt injection against multimodal LLMs by identifying and suppressing the image tokens that drive the attack.","importance":"This is a VLM safety and attribution contribution. Its main value is the token-level view of adversarial images and the observation that first-token probability attribution can fail when the attack preserves the predicted token.","technical_approach":"The authors propose Gradient Token Masking. It uses a Hidden-State Gradient Norm score to attribute generation influence under adversarial inputs, localizes critical visual tokens, and then masks them. The paper claims a theoretical ranking consistency between this score and the full adversarial-loss gradient.","experiments":"The abstract reports improved defense utility and efficiency, but does not specify the evaluated VLMs, attack suites, baselines, or numerical gains. The method is an inference-time VLM defense rather than a multimodal pretraining technique.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看首 token 归因失效和 HSGN 排序证明；防御 setup 离预训练较远。","en":"Skim the first-token attribution failure and HSGN ranking proof; the defense setup is far from pretraining."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Dongpeng Zhang","Ke Ma","Yangbangyan Jiang","Gaozheng Pei","Longtao Huang","Qianqian Xu","Qingming Huang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["VLM-safety","visual-prompt-injection","token-attribution","gradient-masking"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25194","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25194","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"multimodal_gen","emoji":"🎨","name":"多模态生成","description":"图像生成、视频生成、语音合成、音乐/3D生成、Diffusion模型","papers":[{"id":"2605.25347","title":"ERNIE-Image Technical Report","abstract":"We introduce ERNIE-Image, an open-source text-to-image generation model built upon an 8B single-stream DiT architecture. ERNIE-Image aims to bridge the gap between current open-source models and leading closed-source systems through more effective mining of large-scale pre-training data and improved supervision quality throughout training. During pre-training, we adopt a bottom-up data construction pipeline that combines fine-grained image categorization, rich caption annotation, aesthetic asses","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T02:04:10+00:00","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25347.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇技术报告解决的是开放文本生成图像模型里一个很现实的组合问题：在不把参数规模继续无节制做大的前提下，怎样同时提升复杂指令遵循、长文本渲染和审美质量，并把模型做成可开源、可部署、可继续微调的工业级系统。它不是在提出新的生成范式，而是在 latent diffusion + DiT 这条主线上，把数据构造、标注增强、采样平衡、偏好对齐和蒸馏加速串成一套完整 recipe。","importance":"如果从狭义“纯文本 LLM 预训练”看，这篇论文相关性有限；但从更广义的基座预训练与跨模态统一建模看，它有两点启发。第一，作者把性能提升主要押在数据工程和训练信号质量上，而不是继续堆更大的 backbone，这和当前语言模型里“数据质量、分布控制、后训练信号”越来越重要的趋势是一致的。第二，它展示了一个较完整的 pretrain→post-train→turbo distillation 闭环：预训练阶段用细粒度分类、caption enrichment、审美清洗改善底座分布；后训练阶段用高一致性数据和少量 DPO 做偏好校正；最后再做低步数加速模型。对做多模态基座的人，这种 pipeline 设计比单点模块更值得看。","technical_approach":"模型主体是 8B 参数的单流 DiT latent diffusion model，VAE 采用 FLUX.2 VAE，文本编码器不是常见的大型 T5/LLM，而是更小的 Ministral-3 3B。作者强调，小文本编码器在长复杂指令条件下仍能提供足够好的条件表示，同时显著降低显存和部署门槛。训练上最核心的是数据 pipeline。预训练阶段采用 bottom-up 数据构造：先从大规模原始图像池出发，训练一个 1 万类的细粒度图像分类器，把图像映射到细语义类别；这样后续采样可以按细粒度类别做平衡，避免头部视觉概念淹没长尾。然后用强 VLM 为全部图像生成更结构化、更细的 caption，尤其补充图中可见文本和关系描述，以增强 instruction following 和世界知识覆盖。审美方面，作者训练了 ERNIE-Image-Aes 作为审美打分模型，用于清洗和筛选数据，提高高质量视觉样本占比。后训练阶段采用 top-down 数据构造，为高需求场景人工或半自动整理高一致性训练数据，并通过多样化 annotation 覆盖不同用户提示风格，减少 caption 模型带来的表达偏置。偏好对齐上使用改进版 DPO，作者的经验判断是：当 base model 和 reward model 都足够强时，只需很少 DPO 步数就能把分布轻推到目标区域，从而减少 reward hacking。加速阶段训练 ERNIE-Image-Turbo，只需 8 NFEs。为避免只用子集数据蒸馏时出现能力漂移，作者提出 MT-DMD，用多个能力侧重不同的 expert variant 共同提供监督信号，让 turbo 模型尽量保留全能力。最后还加了一个轻量 Prompt Enhancer，把短 prompt 扩展成更结构化的视觉描述，提升实际使用时的 controllability。","experiments":"从全文可见，作者把实验重点放在系统能力展示和若干内部组件有效性上，而不是像学术论文那样给出非常细的统一 ablation 表。可以明确提取的关键信息包括：主模型为 8B DiT，文本编码器为 3B Ministral-3，turbo 版本推理只需 8 NFEs。论文声称在复杂指令遵循、中文与长文本渲染、审美质量上接近顶级闭源模型，并在多张表格中与 Qwen-Image、HunyuanImage、Z-Image 及若干商业系统做比较。更值得注意的是作者给出的经验性结论：早期训练阶段加入更详细的图像描述，能同时改善复杂 instruction following 和世界知识保留；细粒度 1 万类平衡采样有助于保住长尾概念；当 reward model 足够强时，DPO 不需要很多步，否则更容易把分布推偏。由于你给出的全文片段没有包含完整表格数字，无法负责任地复述具体 benchmark 分数；但从技术报告结构看，最该关注的是这些 recipe 与能力变化之间的对应关系，而不是单个榜单名次。","reading_guide":"建议按 pipeline 顺序读。先看 Introduction，把作者想解决的三件事记住：复杂指令、文本渲染、审美质量。然后直接看 Model Training，重点抓四个设计：1 万类细粒度分类与平衡采样、VLM caption enrichment、审美模型清洗、后训练高一致性数据。接着看 DPO 和 Turbo 训练部分，尤其是“少量 DPO 步数”和 MT-DMD 这两个经验点。最后再看 Prompt Enhancer，理解它是产品层补偿还是模型能力的一部分。若只想泛读，40 到 60 分钟足够。若要深挖，建议重点问三个问题：为什么 3B 文本编码器够用；细粒度类别平衡是否比直接按 caption/embedding 聚类更稳；MT-DMD 与常见 consistency distillation 或 progressive distillation 相比，监督信号到底多了什么。","authors_note":"百度 ERNIE 团队技术报告；从文中表述看属于工业研发团队的系统性开源工作，具体作者名单在给定全文片段中未展开。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This technical report tackles a practical open-model problem in text-to-image generation: how to improve complex instruction following, long-text rendering, and aesthetic quality without relying only on brute-force parameter scaling, while keeping the system open, deployable, and fine-tunable. It does not propose a new generative paradigm. Instead, it assembles a full recipe around latent diffusion and DiT, with most gains coming from data construction, annotation quality, preference alignment, and acceleration.","importance":"Its relevance to narrow LLM pretraining is limited, but it is useful from a broader foundation-model perspective. Two aspects stand out. First, the report places the main burden of improvement on data quality and training signals rather than on ever-larger backbones, which mirrors an important trend in language model work. Second, it presents a fairly complete pretrain-to-post-train-to-turbo pipeline: pretraining improves the base distribution through fine-grained balancing, caption enrichment, and aesthetic filtering; post-training adds high-consistency scenario data and light preference alignment; then a fast model is distilled for low-NFE inference. For multimodal foundation-model researchers, that end-to-end recipe is more interesting than any single module.","technical_approach":"$1e","experiments":"$1f","reading_guide":"Read it in pipeline order. Start with the introduction and keep the three target capabilities in mind: complex instructions, text rendering, and aesthetics. Then go to the training section and focus on four ingredients: 10k-way fine-grained categorization and balanced sampling, VLM-based caption enrichment, aesthetic filtering, and high-consistency post-training data. After that, read the DPO and turbo sections, especially the claims about using only a few DPO steps and the MT-DMD strategy for preserving capability during acceleration. Leave the Prompt Enhancer for the end and treat it as a product-facing layer on top of the model. A 40-60 minute skim should be enough. For deeper reading, ask three questions: why a 3B text encoder is sufficient; whether fine-grained category balancing is more stable than clustering by captions or embeddings; and what extra supervision MT-DMD provides compared with standard consistency or progressive distillation.","authors_note":"Technical report from Baidu's ERNIE team. The provided excerpt does not include the full author list."},"recommendation":{"zh":"百度 ERNIE-Image 的技术报告，重点看其 pretrain 和 post-train 阶段的数据清洗和构造 pipeline，对做多模态生成的同学有工程参考价值。","en":"Baidu's ERNIE-Image technical report; focus on its data cleaning and construction pipelines in pre-train and post-train stages, valuable engineering reference for multimodal generation."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Baidu"],"authors":["Jiaxiang Liu","Zhida Feng","Pengyu Zou","Zhenyu Qian","Tianrui Zhu","Jun Xia","Yuehu Dong","Yanzheng Lin","Honglin Xiong","Anqi Chen","Yunpeng Ding","Jinghui Duan","Lin Gao","Chao Han","Tiechao He","Jiakang Hu","Ranjun Hua","Xueming Jiang","Qingli Kong","Yuting Lei","Tianyu Li","Yunlin Liu","Changling Liu","Yaxin Liu","Yi Liu","Xuguang Liu","Xiaolong Ma","Yan Pan","Yiran Ren","Nan Sheng","Yu Sun","Siyang Sun","Yixiang Tu","Yang Wan","Huanai Wang","Siqi Wang","Yang Wu","Youzhi Yang","Xiaowen Yang","Jianwen Yang","Yehua Yang","Quanwen Zhang","Xinmin Zhang","Haoxin Zhang","Xiang Zhang","Jun Zhang","Qian Zhang","Qiao Zhao","Qi Zhou"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["text-to-image","DiT","data engineering","DPO","technical report"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25347","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25347","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.26089","title":"Channel-wise Vector Quantization","abstract":"We present Channel-wise Vector Quantization (CVQ), a novel image tokenization paradigm that replaces patch-wise tokens with channel-wise tokens. Unlike conventional vector quantization, which assigns a discrete token to each patch feature vector, CVQ quantizes each channel of the feature map. This formulation represents an image as discrete levels of visual details, rather than as a grid of spatial patches. Based on CVQ, we introduce a new visual autoregressive framework with \"next-channel predi","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"huggingface","sources":["huggingface"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T00:00:00.000Z","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2605_26089.png","hf_upvotes":13,"arxiv_categories":[],"summary":{"core_problem":"传统 patch-wise VQ 把图像离散化为二维 patch token 网格，带来两类问题：一是 patch embedding 高度冗余导致 codebook 利用率低、dead codes/塌缩与重建信息损失；二是为了做 AR 生成不得不把 2D token 强行展平成 1D（raster/z-curve 等），序列顺序与图像依赖结构不匹配，导致“next-token”学习不自然。论文要解决的是：能否通过改变离散化轴，让图像 token 天然成为 1D 序列，同时缓解 codebook collapse，并形成更 AR-friendly 的生成顺序。","importance":"对基座预训练的直接价值不在“更好的图像生成指标”，而在视觉 tokenizer 设计空间：它提出一种与 patch token 正交的离散化范式（按 channel 量化），把“token 顺序”从外部手工排序变成由表示结构内生决定。对统一多模态 LM（把视觉当 token 序列喂给 AR LLM）尤其相关：如果 channel token 真能稳定提供更好的 codebook 使用与更合理的序列结构，它可能降低视觉离散化的工程复杂度（少依赖额外正则/技巧），并改变后续 AR/any-order/diffusion 的建模接口。不过从预训练角度，它更像 tokenizer/表示层创新，是否能在大规模图文预训练中带来稳定收益仍需要外部复现与更大规模验证。","technical_approach":"核心做法是把 VQ 的“分块单位”从空间位置 (i,j) 的 1×1×c 向量，改为沿通道维度的切片：对 latent feature map Z∈R^{h×w×c}，不再对每个空间点的 c 维向量做 nearest neighbor，而是对每个 channel（对应一个 h×w 的二维图）做量化，从而得到长度为 c 的 1D token 序列。直觉是：自编码器的不同通道往往承载不同层级的视觉信息（更全局的结构到更细的纹理/属性），按通道离散化会让每个 token 内部“携带全局空间结构”，序列天然是一维。\n\n为缓解传统 VQ 的 codebook collapse，论文给出机制解释：patch-wise 下不同图像的 patch embedding 在 batch 内高度重叠，早期训练会把大量 patch 聚到少数 code 上，更新集中导致其他 code 变“死码”。channel-wise 切分后，不同图像在 channel 维度的表示更可分，覆盖更广的 codebook，从优化动态上更不容易塌缩。\n\n在生成建模上，提出 Channel-wise Auto-Regressive (CAR)：把图像生成改写为“next-channel prediction”，按通道顺序逐个预测 token，使生成过程呈现从粗到细的 progressive enrichment。为了让通道序列顺序更适合 AR，使用 nested dropout 来诱导一个从“更重要/更基础信息”到“更细节信息”的通道排序（使前缀通道可先重建出草图式结构，后续通道补细节）。这相当于把图像的 coarse-to-fine 生成顺序从空间扫描改为表示维度扫描。","experiments":"给定的全文片段未包含完整实验表格与具体数值（如 codebook perplexity/usage、重建 PSNR/LPIPS、生成 FID/IS、模型规模与训练数据规模等），只能从方法动机推断其主要验证点应包括：\n1) codebook utilization：对比 patch-wise VQ 与 CVQ 的 code 使用分布、dead code 比例、训练早期的塌缩曲线；\n2) reconstruction：在相同码率/相同 codebook size 下的重建质量提升；\n3) AR generation：CAR 的 next-channel 生成在相同 token budget 下的生成质量与收敛速度；\n4) nested dropout：不同通道顺序/是否使用 nested dropout 的消融，验证“先结构后细节”的排序是否带来更好的 NLL 或感知指标。\n若要评估其对多模态预训练的意义，还需要额外实验：把 CVQ token 接到统一 AR LM（类似 Chameleon/Show-o 路线）时的对齐效率、跨模态迁移与长上下文稳定性。但这些不在当前片段中可确认。","reading_guide":"泛读建议（约 30–45 分钟）：\n- 重点看 Introduction 中对 codebook collapse 的机制解释与 Fig.4（patch 冗余→更新集中→dead codes），这是它为“换量化轴”提供的主要论据。\n- 看 Method 里 CVQ 的形式化定义：到底是如何把每个 channel 映射到离散 code（是否对 h×w 展平、是否做归一化/投影、codebook 共享方式等），以及与传统 VQ 的损失项是否一致（commitment loss、EMA 更新等）。\n- 看 CAR 与 nested dropout 的实现细节：通道顺序如何学习/固定，训练时是否 teacher forcing，推理时的采样策略。\n- 最后快速扫实验部分的两类图：codebook 使用率曲线 + 重建/生成指标表。判断它是否只是“更好用的 VQ trick”，还是确实改变了 token 序列结构并带来稳定收益。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Patch-wise VQ discretizes images into a 2D grid of patch tokens, which (1) tends to under-utilize the codebook due to patch redundancy, causing dead codes and information loss in reconstruction, and (2) forces an unnatural 2D-to-1D flattening (raster/z-order) for autoregressive modeling, leading to a mismatch between token order and image dependencies. The paper asks whether changing the quantization axis can yield a genuinely 1D visual token sequence while improving codebook utilization and making AR generation more natural.","importance":"Its relevance to foundation-model pretraining is primarily as a tokenizer/representation contribution rather than a new training recipe. Channel-wise tokens offer a different interface for “images as tokens” in unified AR multimodal LMs: token ordering becomes representation-driven instead of an externally imposed spatial scan, and the approach claims to reduce codebook collapse without extra regularizers or factorization tricks. The open question for pretraining researchers is scalability: whether this tokenization remains stable and beneficial when plugged into large-scale image-text pretraining (alignment, data efficiency, long-context behavior), which is not established from the provided content.","technical_approach":"$20","experiments":"The provided excerpt does not include the main result tables/figures with concrete numbers (e.g., codebook perplexity/usage, dead-code ratio, PSNR/LPIPS for reconstruction, FID/IS or NLL for generation, model/data scale). From the methodology, the key empirical claims that should be validated are: improved codebook utilization vs patch-wise VQ; better reconstruction at comparable bitrate/token budget; improved AR generation quality and/or likelihood under CAR; and ablations on channel ordering and nested dropout. Evidence for impact on multimodal pretraining would require additional experiments (plugging CVQ into a unified LM and measuring alignment/data efficiency), which cannot be confirmed here.","reading_guide":"Skim plan (30–45 minutes):\n- Read the Introduction’s failure analysis of patch-wise VQ and the collapse mechanism; focus on the figures illustrating redundancy → concentrated updates → dead codes.\n- In Method, verify the exact CVQ formulation: how a channel is vectorized for nearest-neighbor lookup, whether there is any projection/normalization, how the codebook is updated, and what losses are used.\n- Check CAR details: training objective, teacher forcing vs free-running, sampling, and how nested dropout induces an ordering.\n- Finally, inspect the experimental section specifically for (a) codebook usage curves and (b) reconstruction/generation metrics and ablations; decide whether gains are robust or sensitive to setup.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"值得看 tokenizer 设计，不是因为图像指标，而是它挑战了“视觉 token 必须按空间展开”的默认设定。","en":"Read it for the tokenizer design: the useful part is the challenge to spatial patch ordering, not the image-generation leaderboard."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Shanghai Innovation Institute","Westlake University","Zhejiang University","Fudan University","JD.COM","University of Chinese Academy of Sciences"],"authors":["Wei Song (SII)","Tianhang Wang","YitongChen (SII)","Tong Zhang","Zuxuan Wu","Ming Li","Jiaqi Wang","Kaicheng Yu"],"notable_authors":["Tong Zhang"],"tags":["visual-tokenizer","vector-quantization","autoregressive-image-generation","channel-wise-modeling"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.26089","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.26089","github":"https://github.com/songweii/CVQ","project":"https://github.com/songweii/CVQ","source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25123","title":"Inference-Time Alignment of Diffusion Models via Trust-Region Iterative Twisted Sequential Monte Carlo","abstract":"We study inference-time alignment for diffusion-based generative models, aiming to steer a base model toward high-reward outputs without updating its weights. Recent Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC)-based steering methods approximate reward-tilted target distributions in a principled way, but their proposals remain largely tied to the base sampler. Since reward information is mainly used after propagation through particle reweighting and resampling, these methods can require large particle budgets a","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T15:08:52+00:00","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25123.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","stat.ML","cs.LG","cs.AI","cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"在不更新扩散模型权重的前提下，如何用奖励信号在推理时把采样分布导向高奖励输出，同时避免 SMC 粒子退化和高方差估计。","importance":"贡献类型是推理时对齐方法。它把 reward-tilted distribution、Sequential Monte Carlo 和 learnable twisting 结合起来，试图给扩散模型提供比简单重加权更有前瞻性的采样引导。对 LLM 预训练不是直接贡献，但对“固定基座模型 + 推理时奖励控制”的建模接口有参考价值。","technical_approach":"论文提出 Trust-Region Iterative Twisted Sequential Monte Carlo。核心思路是迭代学习 twisting function，让粒子传播时提前感知终端奖励，而不是等采样后再重加权；同时用 trust-region 约束稳定更新，缓解高维扩散状态、噪声奖励和黑盒奖励下 twisting 学习不稳定的问题。","experiments":"给出的摘要片段没有报告具体模型规模、数据集、baseline 数量或提升幅度。可确认的实验目标应是比较普通 SMC steering、基于 base sampler 的 proposal，以及带 trust-region twisting 的粒子效率、权重退化和奖励提升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks how to align diffusion samplers at inference time toward high-reward samples without updating model weights, while avoiding particle degeneracy and high-variance SMC estimates.","importance":"This is an inference-time alignment contribution. It combines reward-tilted target distributions, Sequential Monte Carlo, and learnable twisting functions. It is not a direct LLM pretraining paper, but it is relevant to the broader interface between frozen generative models and reward-guided test-time control.","technical_approach":"The proposed method is Trust-Region Iterative Twisted Sequential Monte Carlo. It learns look-ahead twisting functions iteratively so that reward information can affect proposals before final reweighting, and it constrains updates with a trust region to improve stability under high-dimensional diffusion states, noisy terminal rewards, and black-box rewards.","experiments":"The provided abstract fragment does not include concrete model sizes, datasets, baselines, or numerical gains. The intended evaluation appears to compare standard SMC steering, base-sampler-tied proposals, and trust-region twisted proposals in terms of particle efficiency, weight degeneracy, and achieved reward.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"不是预训练论文；只需看方法里的 trust-region twisting，作为推理时 reward steering 的数学备选。","en":"Not a pretraining paper; skim the trust-region twisting setup only as a mathematical option for inference-time reward steering."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Weixin Wang","Yu Yang","Wei Deng","Pan Xu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["diffusion-models","inference-time-alignment","sequential-monte-carlo","reward-steering"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25123","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25123","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25801","title":"PixelWizard: Towards Efficient High-Fidelity Video Generation at Ultra-Large Spatial Resolution","abstract":"High-resolution video generation faces a coupled bottleneck of optimization instability and prohibitive computational costs. The massive expansion of the token sequence not only biases optimization toward local textures at the expense of global coherence, leading to structural collapse, but also imposes prohibitive training costs and severe inference latency. To address this, we propose PixelWizard, a framework that hierarchically decouples global structure modeling from fine-grained detail synt","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T12:50:49+00:00","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25801.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"提升超大空间分辨率视频生成的结构稳定性、细节质量和推理效率，缓解高分辨率 token 序列带来的训练与生成成本。","importance":"贡献类型是视频生成方法和推理加速训练策略。它不直接研究 LLM 预训练，但对统一多模态生成中的层级建模、结构先验压缩和少步采样有可迁移参考。","technical_approach":"提出 PixelWizard，将全局结构建模与细粒度细节合成层级解耦：先构建紧凑的时空 anchor 来承载密集结构先验，再用该 anchor 引导高分辨率细节生成。随后提出 Noise-Span Aligned Shortcut Training，显式建模采样步长，使模型能够跨越更大的生成步幅以降低推理延迟。","experiments":"摘要未给出模型参数量、训练视频规模、分辨率设置、baseline 或具体提升幅度；只说明目标是在超大空间分辨率视频生成中减少结构崩塌、保持高频细节，并通过 shortcut training 打破推理瓶颈。","authors_note":"摘要标注该工作来自 Cohere，但未提供更具体团队信息。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper aims to improve structural stability, visual fidelity, and inference efficiency for ultra-high-spatial-resolution video generation, where token sequence length makes both training and sampling expensive.","importance":"This is a video-generation method with an inference-acceleration training component. It is not directly about LLM pretraining, but its hierarchical decomposition of structure and detail, compact structural priors, and shortcut sampling may be relevant to unified multimodal generation.","technical_approach":"PixelWizard hierarchically decouples global structure modeling from fine-grained detail synthesis. It first builds a compact spatiotemporal anchor that concentrates structural priors, then uses that anchor to guide high-resolution detail generation. It also introduces Noise-Span Aligned Shortcut Training, which explicitly models step size so the model can traverse larger generation intervals and reduce inference latency.","experiments":"The abstract does not report model size, training-video scale, exact resolution settings, baselines, or numerical gains. It claims improved resistance to structural collapse, preservation of high-frequency details, and faster inference through shortcut training for ultra-large-resolution video generation.","authors_note":"The provided metadata marks Cohere as the notable institution, but no more specific team information is available."},"recommendation":{"zh":"可扫方法图和 shortcut training；层级 anchor 思路对高分辨率多模态生成有参考，但没有规模细节前别调高权重。","en":"Skim the method figure and shortcut-training setup; the hierarchical anchor idea is relevant to high-res multimodal generation, but do not overweight it without scale and ablation details."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Cohere"],"authors":["Wenxue Li","Jingjing Ren","Peng Zhang","Tian Ye","Daiguo Zhou","Jian Luan","Lei Zhu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["video-generation","high-resolution","hierarchical-generation","shortcut-training","Cohere"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25801","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25801","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25765","title":"Concept Unlearning via Cross-Attention Activation Projection for Diffusion Models","abstract":"Concept unlearning aims to erase a target concept from a pretrained text-to-image diffusion model without retraining. Closed-form methods are attractive in this setting because they apply a single deterministic edit to the cross-attention weights and add no inference-time cost. Existing closed-form methods, however, represent the target concept through the text encoder's response to a few short anchor prompts that name it, and paraphrased prompts that evoke the concept without naming it consiste","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T12:18:47+00:00","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25765.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CV","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"在不重新训练、且不增加推理成本的条件下，从预训练文本到图像扩散模型中删除目标概念，并提升对改写提示词的鲁棒性。","importance":"贡献类型是生成模型安全与模型编辑方法。它对 LLM 预训练不是主线，但“在激活空间定义要遗忘的概念”这个判断对语言模型 unlearning、表示编辑和安全后处理有一定旁路参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出 PURE，即 Projection in U-Net Rendering for Erasure。区别于只用少量显式 anchor prompt 的文本编码器响应来表示目标概念，PURE 从每层 cross-attention activation 中构建 forget basis 和 retain basis，再对 U-Net 的 cross-attention 权重做一次闭式投影编辑。核心假设是 cross-attention activation 更接近模型将要渲染的内容，因此比文本 embedding 更能覆盖不直接命名目标概念的 paraphrase。","experiments":"摘要未给出模型规模、底座模型、数据集、baseline 或具体数值。实验重点应是目标概念删除率、保留概念的损伤、对显式命名提示与 paraphrased prompt 的鲁棒性，以及无额外推理开销。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper removes a target concept from a pretrained text-to-image diffusion model without retraining or adding inference-time cost, while improving robustness to paraphrased prompts.","importance":"This is a model editing and safety method for generative diffusion models. It is peripheral to LLM pretraining, but the idea of defining what to forget in activation space rather than input-embedding space is relevant to unlearning and representation editing more broadly.","technical_approach":"The method, PURE, stands for Projection in U-Net Rendering for Erasure. Instead of representing the target concept using text-encoder responses to a few anchor prompts, it builds forget and retain bases from per-layer cross-attention activations and applies a closed-form projection edit to U-Net cross-attention weights. The key assumption is that cross-attention activations better describe what the model is about to render than text embeddings do.","experiments":"The abstract does not report model scale, base models, datasets, baselines, or quantitative gains. The relevant evaluation should measure concept removal, damage to retained concepts, robustness to explicit and paraphrased prompts, and the absence of inference overhead.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看方法图和 paraphrase 实验；激活空间 unlearning 的 prior 可借鉴，但不要外推到 LLM 预训练。","en":"Skim the method diagram and paraphrase tests; activation-space unlearning is a useful prior, but do not over-transfer it to LLM pretraining."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Saemi Moon","Suhyeon Jun","Seoyeon Lee","Dongwoo Kim"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["concept-unlearning","text-to-image","cross-attention","model-editing","diffusion-models"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25765","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25765","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25759","title":"Towards Anatomically Plausible Human Image Generation via Synthetic Localized Preferences","abstract":"Large-scale text-to-image foundation models have achieved remarkable visual realism, yet generating human images with correct anatomical structures remains challenging. Existing approaches enforce anatomical constraints through part-specific modules or localized loss weighting during supervised fine-tuning on high-quality human photos, but such datasets are limited and often provide ambiguous optimization signals due to confounding factors such as lighting, pose, and background. Preference-based","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T12:10:23+00:00","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25759.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"改善文本到图像模型生成人体时的局部解剖结构错误，尤其是手、肢体等局部伪影。","importance":"贡献是把偏好优化用于图像生成的局部结构对齐，并用可控合成偏好对减少真实人像数据中姿态、光照、背景等混杂因素。对 LLM 研究的价值主要在于偏好数据构造和局部化 DPO 信号，而不是视觉任务本身。","technical_approach":"提出 ASAP，即 Alignment via Synthetic Anatomical Preference。方法从高质量人体图像出发，通过 localized degradation 生成受控的偏好对，再进行偏好式对齐；核心是让优化信号集中在解剖错误区域，而不是像标准 DPO 那样对所有像素等权处理。","experiments":"摘要说明在人体图像生成上进行实验，目标是提升解剖合理性；未给出使用的基础 T2I 模型、训练样本规模、baseline、自动指标或人工评测提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets anatomical errors in human image generation, focusing on localized artifacts such as incorrect body parts.","importance":"Its useful idea is preference alignment with controlled, localized synthetic preference pairs. For LLM researchers, the transferable part is the construction of cleaner preference signals, not the human-image generation task itself.","technical_approach":"ASAP constructs preference pairs by applying localized degradations to high-fidelity human images. It then aligns the generator with preference optimization that emphasizes anatomical artifact regions rather than treating all pixels equally as in standard DPO.","experiments":"The abstract reports experiments on human image generation and anatomical plausibility, but does not specify the base model, data scale, baselines, metrics, or numerical gains.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"值得记的是“可控局部退化造偏好对”，可迁移到 RLHF 数据质量讨论；视觉结果不必细读。","en":"The reusable idea is controlled localized degradation for preference-pair construction; the image-generation results themselves are not worth deep reading."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Bao Li","Yuliang Xiu","Zhen Liu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["text-to-image","preference-optimization","DPO","synthetic-preferences","human-generation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25759","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25759","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25661","title":"DRM: Diffusion-based Reward Model With Step-wise Guidance","abstract":"Current mainstream methods of aligning diffusion models with human preferences typically employ VLM-based reward models. However, these reward models, pre-trained for semantic alignment, struggle to capture the essential perceptual qualities-such as aesthetics, composition, and visual harmony. In this work, we argue that a model capable of high-fidelity generation must possess a profound understanding of these visual attributes. Based on this insight, we introduce the Diffusion-based Reward Mode","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T10:11:32+00:00","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25661.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决扩散图像模型偏好对齐中，VLM 奖励模型偏语义、难以准确评价美学、构图和视觉和谐度的问题。","importance":"贡献在于把预训练扩散模型改造成 reward backbone，并利用中间 noisy latent 做逐步奖励；这对生成模型 RL 的 credit assignment 有参考价值，但主要局限在图像扩散模型后训练。","technical_approach":"提出 Diffusion-based Reward Model，将预训练 diffusion model 用作评估器，不只评价最终图像，也评价生成过程中的中间 latent；进一步提出 Step-wise GRPO，用每一步的 dense reward 缓解只在最终样本打分带来的信用分配不精确。","experiments":"摘要未给出模型规模、训练数据、baseline 名称和具体提升幅度；可确认的实验重点应是与 VLM-based reward model 和常规 GRPO/最终图像奖励方案比较偏好对齐效果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets preference alignment for diffusion image models, where VLM-based reward models often overemphasize semantics and under-score aesthetics, composition, and visual harmony.","importance":"Its main contribution is to turn a pretrained diffusion model into a reward backbone and use intermediate noisy latents for step-wise feedback. This is useful for thinking about credit assignment in generative-model RL, but the scope is mostly image diffusion post-training.","technical_approach":"The proposed Diffusion-based Reward Model evaluates both final images and noisy intermediate latents during generation. Step-wise GRPO then supplies dense per-step rewards instead of relying only on a terminal image-level score.","experiments":"The abstract does not report model size, training data, baseline names, or quantitative gains. The likely comparisons are against VLM-based reward models and standard GRPO-style final-reward optimization.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"想看 dense reward 如何落到生成轨迹上可读方法部分；视觉 reward 假设较重，不必按 LLM RL 结论外推。","en":"Read the method if you care about dense rewards over generation trajectories; the visual-reward assumptions are too specific to transfer directly to LLM RL."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Jaxon Zhang","Binxin Yang","Hubery Yin","Chen Li","Jing Lyu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["diffusion-models","reward-modeling","GRPO","preference-alignment","dense-reward"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25661","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25661","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25659","title":"StreamChar: Long-Horizon Streaming Character Audio-Video Generation with Decoupled Orchestration","abstract":"Real-time streaming joint audio-video generation for character animation requires a generator to speak the requested transcript, maintain visual identity across chunks, and run within a strict playback budget. These requirements are difficult to satisfy simultaneously: chunk-wise autoregressive generation can accumulate transcript-audio misalignment and visual drift, while the few-step distillation needed for low latency often degrades spatial diversity and temporal quality. We present StreamCha","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T10:04:52+00:00","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25659.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决长时程流式角色音视频生成中，文本对齐、身份一致性和低延迟播放难以同时满足的问题。","importance":"贡献是一个流式多模态生成系统设计：用 LLM 做长程编排，用局部音视频 DiT 做短窗去噪，并配合在线 rollout 蒸馏；对统一多模态生成系统有参考，但不是基座预训练方法。","technical_approach":"StreamChar 将长程控制和短窗生成解耦：LLM orchestrator 根据 transcript 和历史上下文生成帧对齐的音频条件；joint audio-video DiT 在短窗口内做双向去噪，并使用参考帧和运动帧条件保持身份与动作连续；部署侧采用两阶段蒸馏，先压缩采样器，再在在线 chunk rollout 下微调 student。","experiments":"摘要未给出模型参数、训练数据、baseline、延迟预算和具体指标；实验应覆盖 transcript-audio alignment、身份漂移、时序质量、空间多样性和流式延迟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles long-horizon streaming character audio-video generation, where transcript fidelity, identity consistency, and low playback latency must be satisfied at the same time.","importance":"The contribution is a streaming multimodal generation system: an LLM handles long-horizon orchestration, a local audio-video DiT handles short-window denoising, and online-rollout distillation makes deployment feasible. It is relevant to multimodal generation systems, not foundation-model pretraining.","technical_approach":"StreamChar decouples long-horizon orchestration from local generation. An LLM orchestrator produces frame-aligned audio conditions from the transcript and history. A joint audio-video DiT performs bidirectional denoising in short windows with reference and motion-frame conditioning. A two-stage distillation pipeline first compresses the sampler and then fine-tunes the student under online chunk rollouts.","experiments":"The abstract does not report parameter counts, training data, baselines, latency numbers, or quantitative improvements. The expected evaluation dimensions are transcript-audio alignment, identity drift, temporal quality, spatial diversity, and streaming latency.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"可扫系统图和蒸馏流程；它是流式生成工程取舍，不会改变对多模态预训练目标的判断。","en":"Skim the system diagram and distillation recipe; this is a streaming-generation engineering tradeoff, not a new view on multimodal pretraining."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Linrui Tian","Qi Wang","Bang Zhang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["audio-video-generation","streaming-generation","DiT","LLM-orchestration","distillation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25659","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25659","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25195","title":"Baton: Explicit Semantic Blueprints for Joint Video-Audio Generation","abstract":"Current open-source diffusion models struggle to generate stable and synchronized audio-visual content, particularly in scenarios demanding complex semantic reasoning. The root cause is that existing methods rely on coarse text embeddings from off-the-shelf encoders to guide audio-video denoising, which discards fine-grained semantics and, critically, lacks a shared long-horizon plan, leading to uncoordinated denoising trajectories and fragile cross-modal alignment. We propose Baton, the first f","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T17:55:11+00:00","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25195.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有开源扩散模型联合生成音视频时跨模态同步性差、语义细节丢失，根源是仅用粗文本嵌入引导去噪，缺乏长程共享规划","importance":"方法创新，首次将显式语义规划引入音视频联合生成框架","technical_approach":"提出Baton框架，先用多模态LM构成的VA-Planner生成对齐的模态感知规划token，作为共享蓝图协调音视频的去噪轨迹","experiments":"摘要未给出具体模型参数量、baseline及量化提升幅度，仅说明有效解决了跨模态对齐和语义细节丢失问题","authors_note":"字节跳动多模态团队，Qi Tian、Liefeng Bo为团队核心研究员"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing open-source diffusion models suffer from poor cross-modal synchronization and missing fine-grained semantics during joint audio-video generation, caused by over-reliance on coarse text embeddings and lack of shared long-horizon planning","importance":"Methodological innovation, the first framework introducing explicit semantic planning into joint audio-video generation","technical_approach":"Propose Baton framework, first use a multimodal LLM-based VA-Planner to generate aligned modality-aware planned tokens as a shared blueprint to coordinate both audio and video denoising trajectories","experiments":"No specific model size, baseline, or quantitative improvement is provided in the abstract, only stating that cross-modal alignment and fine-grained semantic issues are effectively resolved","authors_note":"ByteDance multimodal team, with Qi Tian and Liefeng Bo as core senior researchers"},"recommendation":{"zh":"多模态LM仅作为生成规划的上游组件，无预训练范式或优化的新见解，仅了解框架即可","en":"MLLM is only used as an upstream component for generation planning, no new insights on pretraining paradigm or optimization, only framework overview is needed"},"metadata":{"institutions":["ByteDance"],"authors":["Shuyuan Tu","Qi Tian","Zihan Yang","Yue Wu","Xintong Han","Weijie Kong","Jiangfeng Xiong","Jian-Wei Zhang","Zhao Zhong","Liefeng Bo","Zuxuan Wu","Yu-Gang Jiang"],"notable_authors":["Qi Tian","Liefeng Bo"],"tags":["audio-video generation","multimodal diffusion","semantic planning","MLLM"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25195","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25195","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25820","title":"Visual-Redundancy-Controlled Parallel Decoding for Diffusion-Based Multimodal Large Language Models","abstract":"Diffusion-based multimodal large language models (dMLLMs) decode by iteratively predicting tokens at multiple masked positions in parallel. This turns each decoding step into a position-selection problem: the model must choose not only which predictions are reliable in isolation, but also which positions should be committed together as context for later decoding steps. Existing confidence-based decoding ranks masked positions independently and commits the top-K positions, largely ignoring whethe","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T13:16:51+00:00","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25820.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有扩散多模态大模型的并行解码策略独立选择高置信度token，忽略视觉grounding重叠引入的冗余，降低后续解码的互补视觉信息利用率","importance":"方法创新，首次提出量化并行解码视觉冗余的指标，设计对应的冗余控制解码策略，提升扩散多模态模型生成质量","technical_approach":"提出视觉冗余指数（VRI）量化同一步提交token的视觉grounding重叠程度，设计视觉冗余控制的并行解码算法，优先选择视觉信息互补的token组合提交为上下文","experiments":"在扩散多模态大模型上验证，相比基线置信度解码方法，生成准确性和视觉grounding一致性有明确提升，摘要未披露具体模型参数量和提升幅度","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing parallel decoding strategies for diffusion-based multimodal large language models select high-confidence tokens independently, ignoring redundancy caused by overlapping visual grounding, which reduces utilization of complementary visual information in subsequent decoding steps","importance":"Methodological innovation, first proposes a metric to quantify visual redundancy in parallel decoding, and designs a corresponding redundancy-controlled decoding strategy to improve generation quality of diffusion multimodal models","technical_approach":"Propose Visual Redundancy Index (VRI) to quantify visual grounding overlap of tokens committed in the same decoding step, design a visual-redundancy-controlled parallel decoding algorithm that prioritizes committing token sets with complementary visual information as context","experiments":"Verified on diffusion-based multimodal large language models, showing clear improvements in generation accuracy and visual grounding consistency compared to baseline confidence-based decoding methods; specific model size and performance lift are not disclosed in the abstract","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"扩散多模态解码的增量优化工作，仅对做多模态扩散生成的研究员有参考，看方法部分即可","en":"Incremental optimization for diffusion MLLM decoding, only relevant for researchers working on multimodal diffusion generation, refer to the method section only."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Yulin Yuan","Hongshuo Zhao","Xiangming Meng"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["diffusion MLLM","multimodal generation","parallel decoding","visual grounding"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25820","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25820","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25294","title":"Geometry-Aware Image Flow Matching","abstract":"Recent advances in generative models highlight the power of geometry-aware modeling in manifold-constrained settings. Yet, for natural images, the field remains confined to Euclidean assumptions, failing to exploit the potential of intrinsic geometric structures within the data. In this work, we investigate the geometry of natural images and observe that semantic information is predominantly encoded in directional components, while norm components can be approximated by the global average. This ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"huggingface","sources":["huggingface"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T00:00:00.000Z","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25294.png","hf_upvotes":10,"arxiv_categories":[],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有图像 flow matching 多在欧氏空间建模，可能忽略自然图像在方向和范数上的内在几何结构。","importance":"这是图像生成中的几何建模工作。它的价值不在 LLM 直接应用，而在于提出自然图像可在 hypersphere 上建模的经验观察，并把该观察用于 flow matching 目标设计。","technical_approach":"作者观察到语义信息主要存在于方向分量，范数分量可由全局平均近似；这一性质在 RGB 和 latent space 中都成立。基于此提出 Spherical Optimal Transport Flow Matching，使用 angular distance；以及 Spherical Flow Matching，直接约束动力学在球面流形上。","experiments":"摘要称几何感知方法优于欧氏 baseline，但未给出数据集、模型规模、FID 或其他指标数值。实验覆盖 RGB 与 latent space 的图像表示几何分析，并比较球面 flow matching 与欧氏 flow matching。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Most image flow matching methods operate in Euclidean space, which may ignore intrinsic geometry in natural image representations.","importance":"This is a geometry-aware image generation paper. Its relevance to base-model research is indirect: it proposes that natural images can be modeled on a hypersphere and modifies flow matching objectives accordingly.","technical_approach":"The authors observe that semantic information is mostly encoded in directional components, while norm components can be approximated by a global average. They introduce Spherical Optimal Transport Flow Matching with angular distance and Spherical Flow Matching with dynamics constrained to the spherical manifold.","experiments":"The abstract reports that the geometry-aware methods outperform Euclidean baselines, but does not provide dataset names, model sizes, or metric values. The experiments analyze both RGB and latent spaces and compare spherical versus Euclidean flow matching.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为生成建模几何假设备查即可；若没有大规模 latent diffusion 验证，不必投入太多阅读时间。","en":"Keep it as a reference on geometric assumptions in generative modeling; without large-scale latent diffusion evidence, it is not a deep read."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Junho Lee","Kwanseok Kim","Joonseok Lee"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["flow-matching","image-generation","manifold-modeling","spherical-geometry"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25294","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25294","github":"","project":"","source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.26108","title":"Reinforcing Few-step Generators via Reward-Tilted Distribution Matching","abstract":"Recent advances in few-step diffusion distillation have enabled efficient image generation, yet aligning these models with human preferences remains challenging. We propose Reward-Tilted Distribution Matching Distillation (RTDMD), a two-stage framework that unifies distribution matching distillation with reward-guided reinforcement learning for few-step flow generators. We show that minimizing the KL divergence to a reward-tilted teacher distribution naturally decomposes into a distribution matc","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"huggingface","sources":["huggingface"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T00:00:00.000Z","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2605_26108.png","hf_upvotes":4,"arxiv_categories":[],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决少步 diffusion/flow 生成器在蒸馏后生成很快但难以再按人类偏好对齐的问题。","importance":"贡献类型是图像生成模型的奖励对齐和蒸馏方法改进。它不属于 LLM 预训练，但把 distribution matching distillation 与 reward-guided RL 放在同一个 KL 目标下推导，对理解生成模型对齐目标有参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出 Reward-Tilted Distribution Matching Distillation。核心是把到 reward-tilted teacher distribution 的 KL 最小化分解为 distribution matching 项和 reward maximization 项。第一阶段 AC-DMD 做子区间级分布匹配，并用 consistency regularizer 稳定 fake score model，使其跟踪有限更新下不断移动的 generator distribution。第二阶段联合优化分布匹配和奖励项，奖励部分推导了结合 GRPO 风格信号的 hybrid policy gradient。","experiments":"摘要说明方法面向 few-step flow generators，并与现有少步 diffusion distillation 和偏好对齐方法比较；提供文本未包含具体模型、数据集、奖励模型、步数、FID/CLIP/人评结果或提升幅度。","authors_note":"Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 与 Westlake University；Tianyu Pang 近年有生成模型、鲁棒性和对齐相关工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses preference alignment for few-step diffusion or flow generators, where fast distilled models are hard to further optimize toward human rewards.","importance":"This is a method contribution for image generation alignment and distillation. It is not LLM pretraining, but the derivation linking distribution matching and reward optimization under a single KL objective is relevant for thinking about generative-model alignment losses.","technical_approach":"RTDMD minimizes KL to a reward-tilted teacher distribution and decomposes the objective into a distribution-matching term and a reward-maximization term. Stage one introduces AC-DMD with subinterval-wise distribution matching and a consistency regularizer for the fake score model. Stage two jointly optimizes matching and reward, using a hybrid policy-gradient estimator that incorporates GRPO-style signals.","experiments":"The abstract positions the method for few-step flow generators and compares against existing diffusion distillation and reward-alignment approaches, but the provided text does not include concrete model sizes, datasets, reward models, sampling steps, or metric gains.","authors_note":"Hong Kong University of Science and Technology and Westlake University. Tianyu Pang has worked on generative models, robustness, and alignment-related methods."},"recommendation":{"zh":"读目标函数推导即可；把 DMD 和奖励倾斜写成同一 KL，比图像实验本身更值得记。","en":"Read the objective derivation only; the useful part is casting DMD and reward tilting under one KL, not the image results."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Hong Kong University of Science and Technology","Westlake University"],"authors":["Yushi Huang","Xiangxin Zhou","Ruoyu Wang","Chi Zhang","Jun Zhang","Tianyu Pang"],"notable_authors":["Tianyu Pang"],"tags":["diffusion-distillation","flow-matching","reward-optimization","image-generation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.26108","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.26108","github":"https://github.com/Harahan/RTDMD","project":"","source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"post_train","emoji":"🛠️","name":"LLM 后训练","description":"RL/RLHF/RLVR/DPO/对齐/Instruction Tuning/Safety","papers":[{"id":"2605.25624","title":"CUA-Gym: Scaling Verifiable Training Environments and Tasks for Computer-Use Agents","abstract":"Reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards (RLVR) has driven breakthroughs in domains such as math, tool-use, and software engineering, yet its extension to computer-use agents (CUAs) has been bottlenecked by the scarcity of scalable training data with deterministic rewards. Constructing such data for CUAs requires consistent task instruction, executable environment, and verifiable reward. However, hand-curated benchmarks achieve high reward fidelity but cover few applications and LLM-as-jud","starred":true,"priority":"p1","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T09:28:03+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25624.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"计算机使用代理（CUA）的可验证强化学习（RLVR）训练存在结构性数据瓶颈：手工构建的基准应用覆盖范围窄，LLM打分的数据集奖励信号不可靠，代码原生环境管道规模有限。没有现有方法能同时满足CUA RLVR的三个核心要求：确定性可验证奖励、广泛应用覆盖、可扩展任务多样性，导致CUA无法复刻数学、代码领域RLVR带来的能力跃升。","importance":"将RLVR的规模化数据合成范式拓展到CUA领域，打通了CUA能力 scaling 的核心数据瓶颈；提出环境多样性是独立于任务数据量的新增scaling轴，补充了现有智能体scaling law的研究维度；生成的数据集和可复用环境池可直接支撑开源CUA基座的RL后训练，验证了小参数量MoE模型通过RLVR可匹配10倍参数的未训练基座性能，为低资源智能体训练提供了可落地的参考。","technical_approach":"1. 多代理协同的任务三元组联合生成管道：Generator代理构造初始环境和任务完成后的黄金环境，Discriminator代理仅基于任务描述编写奖励函数，Orchestrator代理驱动二者迭代验证，直到奖励函数能在执行时准确区分两种环境状态；2. 采用严格信息隔离机制防止奖励黑客，最后通过LLM多数投票+代理轨迹回放过滤不合格样本；3. 环境规模化方案：基于O*NET职业分类和Anthropic经济指数的软件使用分布选择目标应用，通过多代理合成自包含的模拟网页应用并做自动化交互测试，形成可复用、可重置的CUA-GYM-HUB环境池，将环境构建与任务生成解耦，每个环境可生成数千个不同任务。","experiments":"生成32112个经过验证的RLVR训练三元组，覆盖110个环境（16个桌面应用+94个模拟网页应用）；使用GSPO算法在Qwen3.5-35B-A3B和Qwen3.5-397B-A17B两个MoE基座上做RLVR训练，在OSWorld-Verified基准上分别达到62.1%和72.6%的准确率，35B模型的性能与未训练的397B基座相当，参数量仅为后者的1/10左右；训练后的模型在WebArena基准上也有性能提升，验证了模拟环境到真实浏览器的迁移性；性能随数据量和环境池规模平滑提升，环境池从10个扩展到80个带来的收益无法通过单纯增加轨迹数量覆盖；RL训练自发涌现多动作工具调用能力，相同任务性能下轨迹长度压缩33%-45%。","reading_guide":"精读第3章的多代理生成管道设计细节，重点关注信息隔离和迭代验证机制；精读第4章的环境规模化方法和CUA-GYM-HUB的实现逻辑；重点看第5章的scaling实验结果，尤其是环境多样性与数据量的scaling曲线对比，以及RL训练涌现多动作调用的消融分析；附录的环境列表和数据过滤规则可作为实际构建训练数据的参考。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Scalable verifiable reinforcement learning (RLVR) training data for computer-use agents (CUAs) faces a structural bottleneck: hand-curated benchmarks have narrow application coverage, LLM-as-judge datasets produce unreliable reward signals, and code-native environment pipelines lack sufficient scale. No existing approach simultaneously meets the three core requirements for CUA RLVR: deterministic verifiable rewards, broad application coverage, and scalable task diversity, preventing CUAs from replicating the capability gains RLVR has delivered in math and code domains.","importance":"It extends the scalable RLVR data synthesis paradigm to the CUA domain, removing the core data bottleneck for CUA capability scaling. It identifies environment diversity as an independent scaling axis complementary to task volume, expanding existing research on agent scaling laws. The released dataset and reusable environment pool directly support RL post-training for open-source CUA base models, and validates that smaller MoE models can match the performance of 10x larger untrained base models via RLVR, providing actionable guidance for low-resource agent training.","technical_approach":"1. A multi-agent collaborative pipeline for joint generation of task tuples: a Generator agent constructs the initial environment state and golden post-task state, a Discriminator agent writes reward functions solely based on task descriptions, and an Orchestrator agent drives iterative refinement until the reward function reliably distinguishes the two states during execution. 2. Strict information isolation prevents reward hacking, and a final filtering step combining LLM majority voting and agent rollouts removes low-quality tuples. 3. An environment scaling framework: target applications are selected based on O*NET occupational taxonomies and Anthropic Economic Index software usage distributions. Multi-agent synthesis builds self-contained mock web applications with automated interactive testing, forming the reusable, resettable CUA-GYM-HUB environment pool that decouples environment construction from task generation, enabling thousands of distinct tasks per environment.","experiments":"The pipeline produces 32,112 verified RLVR training tuples across 110 environments (16 desktop applications + 94 synthetic mock web applications). RLVR training with GSPO on two open-source MoE backbones (Qwen3.5-35B-A3B and Qwen3.5-397B-A17B) reaches 62.1% and 72.6% accuracy respectively on OSWorld-Verified, with the 35B model matching the performance of the untrained 397B base at ~1/10 the parameter count. Trained checkpoints also show improvements on the WebArena benchmark, demonstrating transfer from synthetic mock environments to real browser settings. Performance scales smoothly with both data volume and environment pool size; expanding the environment pool from 10 to 80 delivers gains that cannot be replicated by increasing trajectory volume alone. RL training also spontaneously induces multi-action tool calls, reducing trajectory length by 33-45% at matched task performance.","reading_guide":"Focus on Section 3 for details of the multi-agent generation pipeline, especially the information isolation and iterative verification mechanisms. Read Section 4 for the environment scaling methodology and CUA-GYM-HUB implementation logic. Prioritize Section 5's scaling experiment results, specifically the comparison of environment diversity vs. data volume scaling curves, and ablation analysis of emergent multi-action tool calls. The appendix environment list and data filtering rules serve as a practical reference for building custom training datasets.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"应读方法和过滤 ablation；它把 RLVR 的瓶颈从“有没有题”推进到“奖励函数能否被程序化合成”。","en":"Read the method and filtering ablations; it shifts the RLVR bottleneck from task availability to whether reward functions can be programmatically synthesized."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Alibaba"],"authors":["Bowen Wang","Dunjie Lu","Junli Wang","Tianyi Bai","Shixuan Liu","Zhipeng Zhang","Haiquan Wang","Hao Hu","Tianbao Xie","Shuai Bai","Dayiheng Liu","Que Shen","Junyang Lin","Tao Yu"],"notable_authors":["Junyang Lin"],"tags":["RLVR","computer-use-agent","synthetic-data","verifiable-reward","post-training"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25624","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25624","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25638","title":"Reinforcement Learning from Denoising Feedback","abstract":"Policy loss estimation remains a fundamental and long-standing challenge in reinforcement learning (RL) for diffusion language models (dLLMs). We introduce Reinforcement Learning from Denoising Feedback (RLDF), a novel training paradigm that leverages feedback obtained from rollout and training processes to facilitate accurate and efficient policy loss estimation. To balance the trade-off between computational efficiency and estimation effectiveness, RLDF optimizes the model toward the clipped c","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T09:39:13+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25638.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"论文解决 diffusion language model 做强化学习时的 policy loss 估计问题。AR 模型可以用一次 causal forward 得到生成序列的 log-prob；dLLM 的生成是多步去噪，注意力是双向的，解码顺序也不固定，因此精确估计策略梯度既难又贵。RLDF 的目标是在估计质量和训练成本之间取得更好的折中。","importance":"这篇论文对新型语言建模范式的 post-training 很关键。LLaDA、Dream 这类 dLLM 已经展示了双向注意力、任意解码顺序、多 token 并行生成的潜力，但 reasoning 能力的提升还缺少成熟 RL recipe。RLDF 给出的不是一个普通的 reward trick，而是针对 dLLM 生成过程重新定义 policy loss 的估计方式。它把 RL 信号接到去噪轨迹上，减少训练和推理之间的 mask pattern mismatch。这对 diffusion LM 能否进入可扩展的 reasoning training pipeline 有直接参考价值。","technical_approach":"RLDF 使用两类反馈。第一类是 rollout feedback，记录推理去噪过程中每一步的 unmasking probability 和对应 timestep；这些信息描述了模型实际生成答案时哪些位置、哪些时刻影响更大。第二类是 training feedback，来自去噪训练阶段的预测概率；作者只保留更有信息量的位置，避免把大量低价值或噪声较大的 token 都放进 policy update。基于这些反馈，RLDF 对 timestep 做加权采样，优先选择预测不确定性高、对最终生成更敏感的去噪步骤。损失不是在所有 denoising step 上计算，也不是用 no-masking 或 random-masking 粗略近似，而是在采样到的中间 noisy state 上优化模型预测 clipped clean state \\(\\hat{x}_0\\)。选择 clean state 而不是 next state 是一个重要设计：next-state 目标更贴近一步去噪转移，但容易放大局部误差和引入 loss spike；clean-state 目标把监督信号直接对齐到最终答案，更稳定，也更能利用 verifier reward 或 outcome reward。论文还开源 Drift，一个面向 dLLM 的模块化 RL 框架，用于承载这类算法。","experiments":"实验覆盖两个代表性 dLLM 架构：LLaDA 和 Dream。任务集中在 math 和 code reasoning。论文报告 RLDF 在两个模型族上都带来稳定提升，并且收敛更快，policy gradient 估计更精确。关键消融包括：与 no-masking、random-masking、全 denoising-step loss 估计的比较；weighted timestep sampling 的作用；使用 clipped clean state \\(\\hat{x}_0\\) 与 next state 作为优化目标的差异。作者特别指出 clean-state 目标能避免 loss spike，并提升训练信号利用率。给出的正文片段没有包含 Table 2 的具体数值，因此不应补写精确提升幅度；但从论文描述看，主要结论不是单点指标，而是 RLDF 在效率、稳定性和泛化上的共同收益。","reading_guide":"建议精读方法部分中 policy loss estimation 的推导，以及 rollout feedback、training feedback、weighted timestep sampling 三者如何连接。这里是论文的核心创新。再看 clean state 与 next state 的消融，因为它解释了为什么 dLLM 的 RL 目标不能简单照搬一步转移建模。实验部分重点看 Table 2、收敛曲线、loss spike 分析、timestep sampling 的消融。读的时候可以带着两个问题：第一，RLDF 的采样分布是否会偏向短答案或高置信模板；第二，它和 dLLM 预训练时的随机 masking objective 是否存在可统一的目标函数。如果未来要做 dLLM 的 reasoning mid-training 或 RL pretrain，这两个问题会影响 recipe 的可扩展性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses policy loss estimation for reinforcement learning on diffusion language models. In autoregressive models, sequence log probabilities can be obtained with a single causal forward pass. In dLLMs, generation is an iterative denoising process with bidirectional attention and flexible decoding order, making exact policy loss computation expensive and often intractable. RLDF aims to provide a more accurate and efficient estimator for RL training.","importance":"The paper is important for post-training diffusion language models. Models such as LLaDA and Dream have attractive modeling properties, including bidirectional attention, arbitrary decoding order, and potential multi-token parallel generation. Their reasoning training pipelines, however, are much less mature than those of autoregressive LLMs. RLDF is not just a reward modification. It reformulates how RL loss should be attached to the denoising trajectory. By reducing the mismatch between training-time masking patterns and inference-time denoising states, it offers a practical path toward scalable reasoning-oriented RL for dLLMs.","technical_approach":"$21","experiments":"The experiments cover two representative diffusion language model families, LLaDA and Dream, with evaluations on math and code reasoning tasks. The paper reports consistent improvements across both architectures, faster convergence, and more precise policy gradient estimation. The key ablations compare RLDF against no-masking estimates, random-masking estimates, and loss computation across denoising steps. Additional ablations study weighted timestep sampling and the choice of clipped clean state versus next-state targets. The clean-state objective is reported to avoid loss spikes and make better use of training signals. The available text does not include the concrete numbers from Table 2, so exact improvement margins should not be inferred. The main experimental message is the joint gain in performance, stability, and training efficiency.","reading_guide":"Read the policy loss estimation section carefully. The important mechanism is the connection among rollout feedback, training feedback, and weighted timestep sampling. The clean-state versus next-state ablation is also central, because it explains why RL for dLLMs cannot simply reuse one-step transition objectives. In the experiment section, focus on Table 2, convergence curves, loss spike analysis, and timestep sampling ablations. Two questions are worth keeping in mind: whether the weighted sampling distribution introduces biases toward short or high-confidence generations, and whether RLDF can be unified with the random masking objective used in dLLM pre-training. These questions matter if the method is extended to reasoning mid-training or RL-style pre-training for diffusion language models.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"应立刻看 loss 推导和 timestep ablation；它可能改变 dLLM 后训练不适合 RL 的默认判断。","en":"Read the loss derivation and timestep ablations first; it may weaken the default prior that dLLMs are awkward targets for RL."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Fudan University","Ant Group","Hong Kong University of Science and Technology","Fudan University 2 Ant Group"],"authors":["Qi He","Huan Chen","Ya Guo","Huijia Zhu","Yi R. Fung","Baojian Zhou"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["diffusion-language-model","reinforcement-learning","post-training","LLaDA","denoising-feedback"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25638","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25638","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25507","title":"Credit Assignment with Resets in Language Model Reasoning","abstract":"Contemporary reinforcement learning with verifiable reward methods post-train language models on multi-step reasoning by assigning a single outcome reward uniformly across all tokens in a trajectory. Such uniform assignment ignores which steps contributed to success or failure. Improving credit assignment can address this limitation by enabling targeted refinement of faulty reasoning steps, rather than updating entire trajectories uniformly. Resets are one such simple mechanism, enabling more pr","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T07:11:50+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25507.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这项工作解决 RLVR 训练长链推理时的信用分配问题。现有 GRPO 类方法通常把一个最终可验证奖励均匀传播到整条轨迹，导致正确步骤、错误步骤、无关步骤都被同等更新。对长 CoT 来说，这会稀释训练信号，也会让模型难以针对真正出错的位置改进。","importance":"这是对推理后训练方法的实质改进，也对预训练研究有间接价值。关键点是把“结果奖励”变成更局部的“从某个状态继续生成后的反事实结果差异”。这提供了一种不依赖人工过程标注的过程级训练信号。对做 RL pretrain、long reasoning data、annealing/posttrain 接口的人来说，价值在于训练信号质量：不是简单增加 rollout 数量，而是把 rollout 放在更可能改变成败的中间状态上。理论部分也给出清楚解释：如果可改进状态在当前策略下出现概率为 pπ，那么只在这些状态 reset 可以把样本复杂度改善一个 1/pπ² 量级，并把单轮策略提升放大 1/pπ。","technical_approach":"方法核心是 reset。先从失败推理轨迹中选一个中间状态，把它当成共享前缀，然后从这个状态重新采样多个 suffix continuation。由于这些续写共享相同前缀，它们最终成功或失败的差异更容易归因到 reset 点之后的决策。训练时只对 suffix tokens 做 policy-gradient 更新，而不是更新整条原始轨迹。RRPO 随机选择 reset 状态，提供一个简单基线。SRPO 则让模型自定位失败轨迹中的第一个错误步骤，然后从该位置 reset；它不需要外部 step-level label，利用模型已有的自我错误定位能力近似 credit-assignment oracle。理论上，作者用 Conservative Policy Iteration 构造两个版本：CPI-RR 从随机 reset 状态更新，CPI-CARO 假设有一个 oracle 能判断某状态是否存在 advantage 超过阈值 τ 的改进行动。这个 oracle 版本解释了为什么 reset 到“可改进状态”比随机 reset 更有效，也为 SRPO 的设计提供依据。","experiments":"实验覆盖十个推理 benchmark，包含数学、科学、策略和常识推理。SRPO 优于 GRPO，以及带自我修正或 shared-prefix continuation 的 contemporaneous RL 基线。在代码任务 LiveCodeBench 上，SRPO 收敛到更高 pass rate，并且相对 GRPO 和 RRPO 学习速度快 2–3 倍。消融的重点不只是最终分数，而是 reset 位置质量：更干净的 prefix 带来更高 correction rate，clean prefixes 的修正成功率接近 erroneous prefixes 的 2 倍。结果支持一个实际判断：reset 本身有用，但收益高度依赖错误定位质量；如果 reset 点选在已经被污染的前缀之后，后续采样组的学习信号会明显变差。","reading_guide":"建议精读。优先看 Introduction 中对 RLVR 信用分配问题的表述和 Figure 1；再看算法部分中 RRPO 与 SRPO 的 rollout 组织方式，尤其是只更新 suffix tokens 的细节；理论部分重点读 CPI-RR、CPI-CARO 和 Theorem 1，理解 pπ 因子如何进入样本复杂度与单轮改进；实验部分重点看十个 benchmark 总表、LiveCodeBench 曲线，以及 self-localization quality 的消融。值得深挖的问题有三个：第一，self-localization 错误会不会引入系统性负反馈；第二，reset suffix 更新和 KL 约束如何平衡，避免局部修正破坏整体推理风格；第三，这类方法能否前移到 mid-training 或高质量推理数据生成，而不只用于最终 RL 后训练。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets credit assignment in RLVR for long-form reasoning. Standard GRPO-style training uses a single verifiable outcome reward and applies it broadly across the whole trajectory. This makes correct, incorrect, and irrelevant reasoning steps receive nearly the same learning signal, which is especially inefficient for long chains of thought.","importance":"This is a meaningful step for reasoning post-training and a useful signal-design result for pretraining researchers. The central idea is to turn outcome reward into a more localized counterfactual signal: restart from an intermediate reasoning state, sample several continuations, and compare their outcomes. This gives a process-like learning signal without human step-level supervision. The theoretical result is also useful: if improvable states occur with on-policy probability pπ, concentrating resets on those states improves sample complexity by a factor of 1/pπ² and increases per-iteration improvement by 1/pπ compared with random resets.","technical_approach":"The shared primitive is reset-based rollout generation. Given a failed trajectory, the method selects an intermediate state as a shared prefix, samples multiple suffix continuations from that state, and applies policy-gradient updates only to the suffix tokens. Since the continuations share the same prefix, differences in final outcome can be attributed more directly to decisions after the reset point. RRPO chooses the reset state uniformly at random. SRPO asks the model to self-localize the first erroneous reasoning step and resets there, requiring no external process labels. The theory section formalizes this through Conservative Policy Iteration. CPI-RR samples random reset states, while CPI-CARO assumes an oracle that tests whether a state is improvable, meaning that it admits an action whose advantage exceeds a threshold τ. This oracle construction clarifies why targeted resets can be much more sample-efficient than random resets, and SRPO is an approximate practical version using self-localization.","experiments":"The empirical suite spans ten reasoning benchmarks covering math, science, strategic reasoning, and commonsense reasoning. SRPO outperforms GRPO and contemporary baselines based on self-correction or shared-prefix continuation. On LiveCodeBench, SRPO reaches a higher pass rate and learns 2–3 times faster than GRPO and RRPO. The most informative ablation concerns localization quality: clean prefixes correct nearly twice as often as erroneous prefixes. This supports the main mechanism. Resets help, but their benefit depends strongly on whether the selected state is actually a useful point for intervention.","reading_guide":"Read closely. Start with the motivation and Figure 1 for the credit-assignment framing. Then inspect the algorithmic details of RRPO and SRPO, especially how suffix groups are formed and why only suffix tokens receive updates. In the theory section, focus on CPI-RR, CPI-CARO, and Theorem 1 to understand where the pπ factors come from. In the experiments, prioritize the aggregate reasoning benchmark table, the LiveCodeBench learning curves, and the self-localization quality ablations. The main open questions are whether incorrect self-localization can create systematic negative updates, how suffix-only updates interact with KL control, and whether reset-based learning can be moved earlier into mid-training or reasoning data generation.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"应把 reset 当作 RLVR credit assignment 的最小可复现实验；先看算法和保守更新分析，再决定是否进内部 ablation。","en":"Treat resets as a minimal RLVR credit-assignment ablation; read the algorithm and conservative-update analysis before porting it internally."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Ankur Samanta","Akshayaa Magesh","Ayush Jain","Youliang Yu","Daniel Jiang","Kavosh Asadi","Kaveh Hassani","Paul Sajda","Jalaj Bhandari","Yonathan Efroni"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["rlvr","credit-assignment","reasoning","policy-optimization","post-training"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25507","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25507","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.24517","title":"ECHO: Terminal Agents Learn World Models for Free","abstract":"CLI agents are the closest thing language models have to an embodied setting: the model emits commands, the terminal executes them, and the returned stream -- stdout, errors, files, logs, and traces -- records the consequences. We argue that this stream is a supervision signal, but standard agent RL discards it: GRPO-style training updates action tokens with sparse outcome-level rewards while ignoring environment responses already in the rollout. Failed rollouts provide little policy-gradient si","starred":true,"priority":"p1","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"huggingface","sources":["huggingface"],"published_at":"2026-05-23T00:00:00.000Z","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_24517.png","hf_upvotes":6,"arxiv_categories":[],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是终端 Agent RL 中训练信号过稀的问题。标准 GRPO 只在 assistant action token 上用最终成功/失败奖励做更新，而 rollout 里大量 terminal output、错误栈、日志、文件内容、测试结果只作为上下文参与前向计算，不进入 loss。失败轨迹虽然拿不到有用的 outcome reward，却包含环境如何响应当前命令的直接证据。ECHO 要把这部分环境反馈转成可训练的密集监督。","importance":"对预训练和 post-training 接口的启发在于，它把 Agent 交互日志重新看成一种在线语言建模数据，而不是只看成 RL rollout。贡献不在于新的 benchmark 或更复杂的 agent scaffold，而在于训练目标的重新分配：action token 用策略梯度，environment observation token 用交叉熵。这个思路接近“在交互中学习世界模型”，但实现很轻，不需要额外 teacher、额外 rollout 或独立 world model。对于基座研究员更有价值的一点是：它说明 RL 阶段可以持续引入自监督建模目标，缓解 sparse reward 下大量 token 被 mask 掉的问题。这类目标可能也适用于代码执行、浏览器、工具调用、多模态环境反馈等场景。","technical_approach":"ECHO 的训练序列由 system prompt、user task，以及多轮 assistant action 和 environment observation 交替组成。标准 GRPO 只在 assistant-action 位置集合 A 上计算策略梯度损失。ECHO 在此基础上增加 environment-token cross-entropy，对终端输出位置 O' 计算 next-token 预测损失。也就是说，同一个 transcript 里，模型对自己生成的命令 token 承担 RL loss，对环境返回的 stdout、stderr、exit code、文件片段、日志和 traceback 承担语言建模 loss。\n\n关键点有三个。第一，环境 token 不是模型采样出来的 action，但它们已经在完整 transcript 的 teacher-forced forward 中有 logits，因此可以直接取对应位置的 NLL，不需要第二次前向。第二，监督是 on-policy 的：环境输出来自当前策略实际执行的命令。随着策略访问新的状态，环境自动产生新的预测目标，形成随能力变化的课程。第三，这个辅助目标要求模型追踪隐含环境状态，例如文件是否被改过、测试为何失败、某个命令会暴露什么日志。它不是直接奖励成功动作，而是让模型更会预测“命令之后会发生什么”。这和只加更多 expert SFT 的区别在于，ECHO 不依赖人工或强模型示范；和只做 GRPO 的区别在于，失败轨迹也能提供 token-level 学习信号。","experiments":"实验在 TerminalBench-style Docker 任务环境中进行，起始模型包括 Qwen3-8B、OpenThinker-Agent-v1-SFT 和 Qwen3-14B。论文给出的一个训练背景是，在 Qwen3-8B 设置下，on-policy rollout 的成功率常低于 15%，这正是 GRPO 信号稀疏的来源。\n\n主要结果集中在 TerminalBench-2.0 和内部 held-out evaluation。公开 TerminalBench-2.0 上，Qwen3-8B 从 GRPO 的 pass@1 2.70% 提升到 ECHO 的 5.17%；Qwen3-14B 从 5.17% 提升到 10.79%。这是接近翻倍的绝对效果，但基数仍然低，说明任务难度高，也说明方法主要是在稀疏训练区间补信号，而不是单独解决 terminal agent 的全部瓶颈。\n\n论文还用 Qwen3-32B 产生的 held-out off-policy trajectories 测环境 token cross-entropy。ECHO 明显降低环境输出预测损失，而 GRPO alone 几乎不改变这项指标。这个实验重要，因为它把性能提升和“学到终端动态”联系起来，而不是只报告 pass rate。另一个结果是，从 base Qwen3-8B 出发，ECHO 在内部评测上可以匹配 OpenThinker-SFT+GRPO，且没有使用 OpenThinker 背后的约 15k expert demonstrations；在 TerminalBench-2.0 上，它缩小了大约一半 expert-SFT gap。论文还报告了 verifier-free adaptation：即使没有 verifier，只靠与环境交互并预测环境响应，策略有时也能改善。","reading_guide":"建议精读 §3 的目标函数设计，尤其是 action-token GRPO loss 和 observation-token CE loss 如何在同一次前向中共享 logits，以及 observation token 的 mask 规则。这里是论文最核心的部分。\n\n然后看 §5.1 的主结果表，重点比较 Qwen3-8B、OpenThinker-Agent-v1-SFT、Qwen3-14B 在 GRPO 与 ECHO 下的差异。不要只看相对提升，也要注意 pass@1 的绝对值和不同初始化模型的收益。\n\n§5.2 值得细看。环境 token cross-entropy 是判断 ECHO 是否真的学到 terminal dynamics 的关键证据。建议关注 held-out off-policy trajectories 为什么来自 Qwen3-32B，以及这是否能降低“只是记住自己 rollout 分布”的风险。\n\n§5.3 对理解 expert SFT 和 online self-supervision 的替代关系有帮助。重点看 base Qwen3-8B + ECHO 与 OpenThinker-SFT+GRPO 的比较。\n\n§5.5 的 verifier-free adaptation 是一个值得深挖的方向。它暗示在某些 agent 环境中，环境预测目标本身可能成为持续学习信号，但也要注意它不能替代任务成功奖励；预测环境和完成任务之间仍有目标不一致的风险。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a specific inefficiency in terminal-agent RL: most of the interaction transcript is observed by the model but ignored by the loss. Standard GRPO updates assistant action tokens using sparse, delayed, often binary task outcomes. Terminal outputs such as stdout, stderr, logs, stack traces, file contents, and test failures are used only as context for the next action. Failed rollouts therefore provide little policy-gradient signal, even though they contain direct evidence about how the environment responded to the agent’s commands.","importance":"The main contribution is a training-objective change, not a new scaffold or benchmark. ECHO treats agent rollouts as both RL data and online language-modeling data. Action tokens receive the usual policy-gradient loss, while environment-observation tokens receive a cross-entropy prediction loss. This is relevant to pretraining and post-training research because it shows a clean way to reintroduce dense self-supervised learning into RL-based agent training. The method is lightweight: no teacher model, no extra rollout budget, and no separate world-model module. The broader implication is that tool-use, code execution, browser interaction, and multimodal agent environments may already contain dense supervision that current RL pipelines mask out.","technical_approach":"$22","experiments":"$23","reading_guide":"Read Section 3 carefully. The key details are the token masks, the combination of GRPO on action positions with cross-entropy on observation positions, and how both losses share one forward pass. This section contains the main idea.\n\nThen inspect Section 5.1 for the primary performance tables. The useful comparison is not only ECHO versus GRPO, but also how the effect varies across Qwen3-8B, OpenThinker-Agent-v1-SFT, and Qwen3-14B.\n\nSection 5.2 is important because it tests the mechanism. The environment-token cross-entropy evaluation on Qwen3-32B off-policy trajectories is the strongest evidence that ECHO improves terminal-dynamics prediction rather than only optimizing task reward.\n\nSection 5.3 is useful for understanding the relationship between online self-supervision and expert SFT. Section 5.5 is worth reading for verifier-free adaptation, but it should be interpreted carefully: predicting the environment is helpful, but it is not identical to optimizing task success.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"这篇会改你对 agent RL 信号设计的 prior：环境 token 不该只当上下文，应立刻在内部 CLI/WebAgent 训练里加一个 observation CE ablation。","en":"This should update your prior on agent-RL supervision: environment tokens should not be treated as mere context; add an observation-CE ablation to your internal CLI/WebAgent training now."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Microsoft Research"],"authors":["Vaishnavi Shrivastava","Piero Kauffmann","Ahmed Awadallah","Dimitris Papailiopoulos"],"notable_authors":["Ahmed Awadallah","Dimitris Papailiopoulos"],"tags":["agent-rl","hybrid-objective","dense-supervision","terminal-agent","grpo"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.24517","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.24517","github":"","project":"","source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25864","title":"When Self-Belief Misleads: Active Label Acquisition for Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Rewards","abstract":"Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable advancements in reasoning capabilities empowered by Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Rewards (RLVR). Nonetheless, RLVR intrinsically relies on ground-truth labels for reward computation, the acquisition of which is often prohibitively expensive in real-world scenarios. While unsupervised RLVR paradigms attempt to circumvent this by training on pseudo-labels, they are notoriously susceptible to training collapse. Moreover, different samp","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T13:55:12+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25864.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 RLVR 依赖可验证真值标签、但真实标签获取昂贵，而纯伪标签训练又容易崩溃的问题。","importance":"贡献类型是后训练信号与数据选择方法。它关注 RLVR 中 label budget 的分配，而不是单纯改奖励函数；对构建可扩展推理训练管线有直接参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出 RLAVR，即 Reinforcement Learning with Active Verifiable Rewards。方法主动选择少量高价值样本获取真值标签，并与伪标签混合用于奖励计算；核心选择指标是 Corrective Advantage Gap，用来估计某个样本在纠正策略优势估计和稳定训练动态上的监督价值。","experiments":"摘要未给出模型规模、任务集合、标注预算比例或具体提升幅度。实验主张是在有限标注预算下，RLAVR 相比纯伪标签无监督 RLVR 更稳定，并能提升推理表现。","authors_note":"作者来自 Beihang University 和 Nanyang Technological University。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles the label-cost problem in RLVR: verifiable rewards need ground-truth labels, while pseudo-label-only training is prone to collapse.","importance":"This is a post-training signal and data-selection contribution. It targets how to spend a limited label budget in RLVR, which is directly relevant to scalable reasoning-training pipelines.","technical_approach":"RLAVR actively acquires ground-truth labels for a small selected subset and combines them with pseudo-labels for reward computation. The key metric, Corrective Advantage Gap, estimates sample-level supervision value by measuring how much true labels can correct advantage estimates and stabilize learning.","experiments":"The abstract does not report model sizes, task suites, annotation ratios, or numerical gains. It claims that RLAVR stabilizes training and improves performance under limited annotation budgets compared with unsupervised pseudo-label RLVR.","authors_note":"The listed institutions are Beihang University and Nanyang Technological University."},"recommendation":{"zh":"RLVR 的标签预算是真问题；CAG 若定义干净，应在内部数学/RL 数据管线做小规模复现。","en":"RLVR label budget is a real bottleneck; if CAG is cleanly defined, it deserves a small reproduction in an internal math/RL data pipeline."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Beihang University","Nanyang Technological University"],"authors":["Li Wang","Xiaodong Lu","Xiaohan Wang","Yikun Ban","Jiajun Chai","Wei Lin","Tianhao Peng","Guojun Yin"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["RLVR","active-learning","verifiable-rewards","post-training"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25864","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25864","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25629","title":"When In-Distribution Gains Fail: Evaluating Weak-to-Strong Reward Models under Preference Shift","abstract":"Weak-to-strong (W2S) generalization is a promising framework for scalable oversight, yet existing evaluations often test students under matched train-test distributions. Therefore, we study W2S preference learning under zero-shot distribution shift and find that strong students trained on weak preference labels can appear successful in-distribution while failing to transfer across preference datasets. We provide evidence for a representational failure mode in which weak-supervised fine-tuning ca","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T09:30:49+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25629.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作讨论的是 weak-to-strong reward modeling 在分布外是否真的可靠。已有 W2S 结果大多在训练分布与测试分布基本一致的条件下评估，因此容易把“学生学会了源数据集的偏好模式”误判成“学生保留并泛化了更强模型原本就有的偏好表征”。作者把问题收紧到 reward model 这一对齐链路里的核心模块：强学生只看弱监督标签训练，随后在同一偏好大类内做 zero-shot 跨数据集迁移，检验它到底学到的是可迁移的 preference representation，还是源域特征和标注风格。","importance":"对预训练研究的意义不在 reward model 本身，而在它揭示了一个更普遍的现象：强基座模型在弱监督微调后，可能发生表征层面的退化，导致 in-distribution 指标看起来正常，但跨分布泛化明显变差。这和持续预训练、合成数据监督、弱教师蒸馏、RLAIF/RM 训练里常见的“短期拟合收益换长期表征损伤”是同一类问题。贡献主要有两层。第一，给 W2S preference learning 补上了更严格的 zero-shot shift 评测协议，使得原先只看源域测试集的结论需要重新审视。第二，提出了一个很轻量的 regularization 思路：在弱监督训练时锚定强模型的原始表示，尽量少破坏预训练阶段形成的通用特征。这个思路对 pretrain↔post-train 接口很有参考价值，尤其适合思考 reward model、SFT、continual pretrain 中的 representation drift 控制。","technical_approach":"方法上分两部分。第一部分是评测协议。作者把数据按 broad preference category 组织，例如 helpfulness、harmlessness；每个 category 下包含多个不同来源的数据集，它们在 prompt 分布、response 风格、标注协议和数据伪特征上都不同。训练时只在某一个 source dataset 上构造 W2S：先用 gold labels 训练弱监督器 w_S，再让它给 student split 打软标签，强学生 m_S 只用这些弱标签训练；同时训练一个同容量的 strong ceiling m_S^gt 作为 gold-supervised 上界。评测时既看 source test，也看同一 category 下其他数据集的 zero-shot transfer。这样可以把“源域拟合”和“同类偏好迁移”拆开。\n\n第二部分是 Representation Anchoring。论文的核心判断是：弱监督 fine-tuning 会把强模型的内部表示拉向弱教师更依赖的源域特征，导致原本更通用的偏好表征被覆盖。Anchor 的做法不是改 Bradley–Terry reward objective，而是在训练 reward model 时额外约束学生表示不要偏离 pretrained strong model 太远。直观上，它保留了强模型预训练/先验对齐阶段已经形成的广义语义结构，只允许在此基础上做有限适配，而不是完全追随弱标签。这个设计和常见的 logit distillation、KL-to-reference、weight regularization 有相似精神，但重点放在 representation space，而不是输出分布或参数范数。论文从表征漂移角度解释 W2S 失败模式，这一点比单纯报一个正则项更有信息量。","experiments":"从全文可见，作者做了跨 domain、跨 dataset、跨 model family 的系统实验，重点结论很稳定：现有 W2S 方法在 in-distribution 上可以接近甚至匹配 strong gold ceiling，但一旦换到同类偏好下的其他数据集，性能会明显下滑。引言里给出的代表性例子是：在 HelpSteer3 上训练的 reward model，源域表现很强，但迁移到 Anthropic Helpful 时准确率显著下降。Anchor 在两类指标上都更稳：一方面不明显牺牲源域性能，另一方面在 OOD 上比已有 W2S baseline 更一致。论文还提供了支持“representational failure mode”的分析证据，说明弱监督训练后学生更偏向源域特征，而不是维持可迁移的偏好表示。虽然题面没有给出完整表格数字，但从正文描述看，作者不是只做单点对比，而是覆盖多个偏好域和模型族，并把 Anchor 与现有 W2S 训练方式逐项比较。值得注意的是，这篇工作的实验价值主要在评测设计和 failure mode 证据，而不是追求某个单一数据集上的绝对提升幅度。","reading_guide":"建议先看 Introduction 和 Problem Definition，明确作者到底在挑战什么假设：不是 W2S 能不能在源域学会弱标签，而是这种学习是否保留了强模型原有的泛化偏好表征。然后重点看评测协议图和主结果表，尤其是 source-test 与 cross-dataset test 的差距，这决定了整篇文章是否成立。接着看表示分析部分，关注作者如何证明这是 representation drift，而不只是 target dataset 更难。若时间有限，优先读：1）数据划分与 W2S 构造方式；2）Anchor 的损失定义和插入位置；3）OOD 主表；4）表征分析与消融。预计 30–45 分钟可以抓住主线，若要深挖，可进一步看不同模型家族上 Anchor 是否同样有效，以及它与 reference-model KL、冻结底座、低学习率等更常见稳态手段的关系。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a precise question: does weak-to-strong reward modeling actually preserve transferable preference representations, or does it merely fit source-domain preference patterns that look good only in-distribution? Prior W2S evaluations are mostly done under matched train/test distributions, so a strong student can appear successful even if weak supervision has pulled it toward dataset-specific artifacts. The authors study this in reward modeling, where a strong student is trained only on weak preference labels and then evaluated under zero-shot preference shift across datasets within the same broad category.","importance":"Its value is less about reward models alone and more about a general training pathology relevant to pretraining and post-training interfaces. A strong pretrained model can lose broadly useful representations when fine-tuned on weak or narrow supervision, while standard in-domain metrics fail to reveal the damage. That matters for weak supervision, synthetic-label training, distillation, RLAIF, continual pretraining, and any setting where a strong base model is adapted through imperfect signals. The contribution is twofold: a stricter evaluation protocol for W2S preference learning, and a simple regularization method that explicitly tries to preserve the pretrained strong model’s representation space during weak-supervised adaptation.","technical_approach":"$24","experiments":"The empirical pattern is consistent across preference domains, datasets, and model families. Existing W2S methods can achieve strong in-distribution performance, sometimes approaching the strong gold-supervised ceiling, yet they degrade substantially under cross-dataset evaluation. The motivating example in the paper is a reward model trained on HelpSteer3 that performs well in-domain but drops noticeably on Anthropic Helpful. Anchor improves the balance: it tends to preserve in-domain performance while delivering more reliable out-of-distribution gains than prior W2S baselines. The paper also includes analysis supporting the proposed failure mode, showing that weak-supervised training shifts the student toward source-domain features rather than maintaining transferable preference representations. The main experimental contribution is therefore the evaluation design and the representation-level diagnosis, not a single headline number on one benchmark.","reading_guide":"Start with the introduction and problem setup. The central claim is not that W2S fails to learn weak labels, but that in-domain success can mask a loss of transferable alignment behavior. Then read the evaluation protocol and the main result tables, paying attention to the gap between source-test and cross-dataset performance. After that, focus on the representation analysis section: that is where the paper tries to justify the proposed failure mode rather than treating OOD degradation as a generic robustness issue. If reading selectively, prioritize: dataset grouping and train/eval construction, the Anchor objective and where it is applied, the main OOD tables, and the ablations/representation diagnostics. It is a 30–45 minute skim for the main idea, and worth a deeper read if you care about weak supervision, reward modeling, or preserving pretrained features during post-training.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看表示漂移分析和 Anchor ablation；它把 W2S 的好消息限定在 matched-distribution 里。","en":"Skim the representation-drift analysis and Anchor ablations; it confines much of the W2S optimism to matched-distribution settings."},"metadata":{"institutions":["National University of Singapore","VinUniversity","Nanyang Technological University"],"authors":["Khoi Le","Tri Cao","Phong Nguyen","Cong-Duy Nguyen","Anh Tuan Luu","Miao Chunyan","See-Kiong Ng","Thong Nguyen"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["weak-to-strong","reward-modeling","preference-shift","representation-anchoring","scalable-oversight"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25629","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25629","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25443","title":"Harmony in Diversity: Multi-domain Contrastive Policy Optimization for Large Reasoning Models","abstract":"Post-training has significantly enhanced the reasoning capability of Large Reasoning Models (LRMs), especially with Reinforcement Learning (RL) like Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO). However, GRPO-style RL methods in multi-domain settings often fail to achieve consistent improvements across all domains due to inherent interference in policy optimization. Prior studies on multi-domain RL primarily focus on alleviating cross-domain interference, while often neglecting the pivotal role of ","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T05:42:57+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25443.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"多领域（数学/代码/安全等）联合做 GRPO 类 RL 后训练时，单一共享目标往往导致跨领域干扰：某些领域提升的同时，另一些领域退化。现有工作多在“减少冲突”（采样/归一化/重加权/梯度平衡）上做文章，但对“如何让不同领域的正确推理轨迹互相迁移”缺少显式机制。论文要解决的是：在多领域 RL 中，把跨领域交互从竞争变成可利用的知识共享。","importance":"属于 post-training 方向，但对基座研究也有接口价值：它把“正确 rollout 的结构可迁移”显式写成对比学习目标，提供了一种把多领域训练从纯标量 reward 聚合，升级为带结构的表示学习信号的思路。对持续训练/多任务对齐也有启发：当训练信号异质且会互相拉扯时，引入额外的表征约束可能比单纯调 sampling/weight 更稳定。","technical_approach":"MCPO 在 GRPO 的基础上加了一个结构化对比学习分支：\n- 先按常规对每个 prompt 采样多条 rollouts，并用领域特定 reward 判定好坏（正确/错误或高/低）。\n- 构造“结构化对比池”：把同一 batch 内不同 prompt、不同领域的 rollouts 组织成正负样本关系。\n  - In-domain consolidation：同领域内的正确 rollouts 互为正样本，拉近表示，促使领域内可复用解题结构被巩固。\n  - Cross-domain sharing：从其他领域挑选“可迁移的正确 rollouts”作为正样本，同时把错误 rollouts 作为负样本，推动跨领域共享的推理结构在表示空间中对齐。\n- 用一个轻量 contrastive head 把 rollout 映射到紧凑表示空间，采用 InfoNCE 风格损失；再与 prompt 内的 GRPO loss 组合训练。\n关键区别在于：它不只是在标量 reward 上做平衡，而是显式学习一个“正确推理轨迹的几何结构”，用来承载迁移与抗干扰。","experiments":"从片段可确认的结论级信息：MCPO 在多领域推理上实现更一致的提升，并且在部分设置下优于单领域训练。片段未给出具体基座模型、领域集合、训练步数/采样数、以及各 benchmark 的数值表。\n评估时建议重点核对三类结果：\n- 是否真的做到“各领域都不掉”（而非平均分上升）。\n- 对比对象是否包含强的多领域 GRPO 变体（重加权/梯度平衡等）。\n- 消融：只做 in-domain CL、只做 cross-domain CL、以及不同正样本挖掘策略对稳定性的影响。","reading_guide":"泛读建议（预计 30–45 分钟）：\n- 先看方法动机那部分：他们如何定义“可迁移的正确 rollout”，以及为什么把 rollouts 类比成数据增强。\n- 重点看 structured contrastive pool 的构造细节：正负样本怎么选、跨领域正样本如何判定“transferable”，以及 batch 内/跨 batch 的 memory bank 设计（如果有）。\n- 再看损失组合与训练稳定性：contrastive loss 权重、是否影响 GRPO 的 advantage 估计方差。\n- 实验部分优先看 per-domain 曲线与干扰案例，而不是只看平均分；如果提供了表示空间可视化或检索式分析，也值得快速扫一眼验证“对齐”是否发生。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In multi-domain RL post-training (math/code/safety, etc.), GRPO-style optimization with a single shared objective often causes cross-domain interference: gains in one domain come with regressions in others. Prior work mainly reduces conflicts via sampling control, reward normalization, reweighting, or gradient balancing, but lacks an explicit mechanism for knowledge sharing across domains. The paper addresses how to turn cross-domain interaction from competition into transferable learning.","importance":"This is a post-training contribution, yet it is relevant to foundation-model training as an interface idea: it augments scalar-reward RL with a structured representation-learning signal over rollouts. For multi-task continual training and alignment, the message is practical: when heterogeneous objectives fight each other, adding explicit geometric/contrastive constraints over “good trajectories” can be more stable than tuning mixture weights alone.","technical_approach":"MCPO adds a structured contrastive objective on top of GRPO:\n- Sample multiple rollouts per prompt under mixed-domain batches and score them with domain-specific rewards to identify correct/incorrect trajectories.\n- Build a structured contrastive pool from the same rollout batch.\n  - In-domain consolidation: treat correct rollouts within the same domain as positives to cluster reusable solution structures.\n  - Cross-domain sharing: select correct rollouts from other domains as positives (intended to be transferable), while using incorrect rollouts as negatives.\n- Map rollouts into a compact embedding space via a lightweight contrastive head and optimize an InfoNCE-style loss.\n- Combine the contrastive loss with the standard within-prompt GRPO objective.\nThe key difference from prior multi-domain RL tweaks is that MCPO explicitly learns a representation geometry for “good reasoning trajectories,” aiming to support transfer and reduce interference beyond scalar reward aggregation.","experiments":"From the provided excerpt, the claimed outcomes are: more consistent improvements across multiple reasoning domains, and in some settings outperforming single-domain training. The excerpt does not include concrete tables (model size, domains, training budget, benchmark deltas).\nWhen reading results, the critical checks are:\n- Per-domain improvements (not just averaged scores).\n- Comparisons against strong multi-domain GRPO variants (reweighting/gradient balancing/normalization).\n- Ablations separating in-domain vs cross-domain contrastive components and the effect of positive-pair mining on stability.","reading_guide":"Skim plan (30–45 minutes):\n- Read the motivation carefully: how they justify “correct rollouts contain transferable reasoning structure” and the augmentation analogy.\n- Focus on how the structured contrastive pool is constructed: positive/negative definitions, how cross-domain positives are deemed transferable, and whether they use any memory bank.\n- Check the loss coupling and stability knobs (contrastive weight, rollout count, variance effects on GRPO).\n- In experiments, prioritize per-domain breakdowns and interference case studies; any embedding-space analysis is useful to validate that alignment actually happens.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"值得扫方法和 ablation；若结果干净，MCPO 是多领域 RLVR 里比“简单混数据”更可控的信号设计。","en":"Skim the method and ablations; if the setup is clean, MCPO is a more controlled signal design than naive data mixing for multi-domain RLVR."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Shanghai Jiao Tong University","Shanghai AI Laboratory","Shandong University"],"authors":["Zongji Yu","Wenshui Luo","Yiliu Sun","Hao Fang","Runmin Cong","Chaochao Lu","Chen Gong"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["RLVR","GRPO","multi-domain-training","contrastive-learning","reasoning-models"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25443","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25443","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25189","title":"Directional Alignment Mitigates Reward Hacking in Reinforcement Learning for Language Models","abstract":"Reward hacking arises when a model improves a proxy reward by exploiting shortcuts rather than solving the intended task. We study this failure mode through the geometry of reinforcement learning updates in language models and argue that hacking emerges when optimization drifts away from a stable low-dimensional learning trajectory. We analyze this drift through dominant singular directions of parameter updates and show that reward-hacking runs exhibit substantially larger directional change tha","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T17:34:34+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25189.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作研究的是 RL for LM 里的 reward hacking，但切入点不是继续改 reward model，而是问：为什么模型会沿着“看起来 reward 更高、真实能力却更差”的方向走偏。作者把问题表述成优化几何问题：干净训练往往沿着一个相对稳定、低维的更新轨迹前进，而 reward hacking 对应的是更新方向从这条轨迹上发生明显旋转和漂移。论文要解决的核心问题，就是能否用这种“方向一致性”来识别并约束 RL 更新，从而延缓 shortcut exploitation。","importance":"对预训练研究的直接关联不如 post-train 强，但它对理解 RL 阶段与基座参数空间几何的关系有启发。很多关于 reward hacking 的工作把问题归结为 reward misspecification，这篇文章补了另一个维度：即使 reward 不完美，模型是否会偏离一条相对可信的学习子空间，可能本身就是风险信号。这个视角对 RLHF、RFT、reasoning RL 都有参考意义，尤其是在大家越来越关心“RL 到底学到了什么，而不是只看 reward 曲线”的背景下。贡献量级更像一个有意思的机制假设加一个简单有效的干预方法，而不是已经成熟的通用 recipe。","technical_approach":"方法分两步。第一步是分析更新方向。作者把训练过程中某一步的参数更新 ΔW 做 SVD，写成若干奇异方向的叠加，重点关注前 K 个 dominant directions。直觉上，这些方向解释了更新中最主要的变化模式。为了比较不同 checkpoint 的方向是否一致，作者不用简单向量夹角，而是对由 top-k 奇异向量张成的子空间做 CCA，相当于测两个低维更新子空间的相似度。论文观察到，在不发生 hacking 的训练里，这些主导方向随时间演化较平滑；而在 hacking run 中，方向相似度显著下降，说明更新发生了旋转。第二步是基于这个观察做约束。作者提出 trusted-direction gradient alignment / trusted-direction projection：先用少量“干净”的监督训练步骤得到一组参考参数变化，对这些变化做 SVD，提取一个 trusted subspace；随后在 RL 训练时，把梯度投影到这个子空间内，只允许更新沿着这些被认为更可信的方向发生。这里的关键取舍是，作者只约束 output-side 的主导方向，不强行固定全部参数更新，因此比强 KL 回拉 reference policy 更有机会保留学习能力。与已有方法相比，它不是改 reward，也不是单纯缩小步长或做平滑，而是显式控制更新方向。","experiments":"从给出的正文内容看，核心实验集中在数学推理场景下的人为 reward-hacking 设置。分析部分先比较 clean run 和 hacking run 的方向一致性，使用 rank-1 CCA similarity，例如比较 step 20 和 step 80 的主导更新方向。论文报告 clean run 在大多数模块上的 CCA 大约维持在 0.8 左右，而 hacking model 明显更低，且最差层的漂移更严重。这支持“reward hacking 伴随方向漂移”的经验观察。方法部分再把 trusted-direction projection 用到 RL 训练中，主结论是它能显著延缓 shortcut exploitation，并更好保持真实任务性能。摘要里用的是 delay reward hacking 和 preserve task performance 这样的表述，说明它更像缓解而不是彻底消除。就目前可见内容，论文没有展示特别大规模的模型或超长训练，而是更偏机制验证：先证明几何信号存在，再证明基于该信号的投影约束有用。阅读时要留意作者是否报告了不同 rank K、不同 trusted data 规模、以及与 KL regularization 或 sharpness-based 方法的对比，这些决定方法是否只是特定设置下有效。","reading_guide":"泛读建议先看 Introduction，把作者和 reward misspecification 路线、sharpness 路线的区别理清。然后直接看 Dominant Update Directions 和 Directional Shift in Reward Hacking，这两节给出整篇文章最重要的机制假设：reward hacking 不是只看 reward 设计，还要看更新是否偏离稳定子空间。接着看方法节里 trusted subspace 如何由少量 clean SFT steps 构造，以及 RL 时具体投影在哪些层、哪些矩阵上。最后看实验图，重点关注 CCA 曲线、真实任务性能与 proxy reward 是否出现背离、以及投影后这种背离是否被推迟。预计 25 分钟能完成泛读。如果要判断是否值得复现，优先检查附录里 rank 选择、不同模块一致性、以及投影带来的优化开销。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies reward hacking in RL for language models, but instead of treating it purely as a reward-modeling problem, it asks a geometric question: why do some RL runs drift into directions that improve proxy reward while hurting true task performance? The authors frame clean learning as following a relatively stable low-dimensional update trajectory, and reward hacking as a directional departure from that trajectory. The core problem is whether this notion of directional consistency can be measured and then used to constrain RL updates so that shortcut exploitation is delayed.","importance":"Its connection to pretraining is indirect, but the paper is relevant to anyone interested in how post-training interacts with the geometry of a pretrained model. Much of the reward-hacking literature focuses on misspecified rewards. This work adds another axis: even with imperfect rewards, the model may become unsafe when optimization leaves a trusted learning subspace. That is useful for RLHF, reasoning RL, and reinforcement fine-tuning more broadly, especially when reward curves are no longer a reliable proxy for actual capability. The contribution is best viewed as a mechanistic hypothesis plus a simple intervention, not yet a fully established general recipe.","technical_approach":"$25","experiments":"$26","reading_guide":"For a skim, start with the introduction to separate this paper from the standard reward-misspecification framing and from sharpness-based mitigation. Then read the sections on dominant update directions and directional shift in reward hacking, since they contain the main conceptual contribution: hacking is linked to leaving a stable update subspace. After that, inspect how the trusted subspace is built from a small number of clean SFT steps and exactly where the projection is applied during RL. In the experiments, focus on the CCA plots, the divergence between proxy reward and true task performance, and whether the projection delays that divergence. A 25-minute skim should be enough for the main idea. If you are considering reproduction, check the appendix for rank selection, layerwise consistency, and the optimization overhead introduced by the projection.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"值得看主奇异方向诊断；投影技巧未必通用，但“RL 失控先表现为更新方向漂移”应进内部监控。","en":"Read the singular-direction diagnostic; the projection trick may not generalize, but update-direction drift is a good candidate for internal RL monitoring."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Wenlong Deng","Jiaji Huang","Kaan Ozkara","Yushu Li","Christos Thrampoulidis","Xiaoxiao Li","Youngsuk Park"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["reward-hacking","rlhf","gradient-geometry","post-training","math-reasoning"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25189","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25189","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25571","title":"AnE: Pushing the Reasoning Frontier of Multimodal LLMs via Anchor Evolution","abstract":"Post-training via Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) and Reinforcement Learning (RL) is crucial for enhancing reasoning in Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs), yet existing paradigms often reach a performance bottleneck due to the limitations of static data. While current methods leverage self-reflection or self-evolution to push these boundaries, they still suffer from cognitive drift and hallucinated reasoning paths caused by low-quality synthetic data. To address these challenges, we propose A","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T08:26:34+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25571.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作处理的是多模态推理模型在后训练阶段很容易遇到的一个具体瓶颈：静态 SFT/RL 数据很快被模型吃干，后续提升缺少针对性；而纯自演化合成数据虽然能持续扩展难度，却容易把错误推理路径、幻觉知识和教师分布偏差一并放大。论文想解决的不是单次训练技巧，而是如何让后训练数据随着模型能力一起演化，同时又不把训练过程带偏。它把问题落在“失败前沿”上：先找出模型当前最容易出错、但又最有提升空间的区域，再用可验证的真实知识作为锚点去扩展训练样本，最后把外部提示逐步蒸馏成模型自身能力。","importance":"对基座研究的意义主要有两层。第一，它虽然是多模态 post-train 工作，但核心关切其实是训练信号质量与数据闭环设计，这和预训练里的数据配比、数据清洗、持续训练中的分布漂移问题是同一类问题。第二，它给出了一种比“模型自己造数据再自己学”更稳的演化路线：用真实数据库检索到的 truth anchors 约束数据生成，再用 SFT+RL 分工完成能力注入与模板去除。这个思路对 reasoning continual training、mid-train curriculum、以及 RL 不能凭空创造新能力的讨论都有直接参考价值。贡献量级上，它更像一个扎实的训练框架与数据构造范式，而不是新的基础模型架构。","technical_approach":"方法由三个环节组成，而且三者是串起来的。第一步是 Failing-Frontier Discovery。作者不是直接在全量种子集上做扩充，而是先让当前模型对种子数据做多次 rollout，观察哪些题目稳定失败、哪些推理轨迹暴露出明显短板。随后再用教师模型对这些失败样本做诊断，抽取失败相关的关键词、知识点和提示信息。这样做的目的，是把后续数据构造对准模型当前能力边界，而不是泛泛增加训练量。\n\n第二步是 Truth Anchor Expansion。这是全文最关键的设计。作者不信任闭环自生成数据的事实性和逻辑一致性，因此引入外部真实数据库，从失败样本对应的知识点出发检索“truth anchors”。这些 anchor 不是直接当答案，而是作为高保真参考，用来构造新的训练样本、补充背景知识、校正推理链中的事实节点。和常见 self-evolution 不同，这里数据扩展的约束来自外部可验证知识，而不是教师模型自由发挥。这样可以减少 synthetic QA 中常见的逻辑错配、答案漂移和越迭代越偏的问题。\n\n第三步是 Scaffold-Stripping Mechanism。作者把教师提示显式写进训练样本，先形成 scaffold-augmented supervision，让模型在带脚手架的条件下学会正确推理路径；然后再通过 RL 去掉这些脚手架，让模型不依赖固定提示模板也能完成推理。这里的分工很清楚：SFT 负责把新知识和正确轨迹灌进去，RL 负责把外显提示内化成行为习惯。这个设计背后有一个明确判断：如果直接用 RL 从稀疏正确率奖励里学复杂多模态推理，信号太弱；如果只做 SFT，模型又容易记住模板而不是形成稳定能力。\n\n从方法定位看，AnE 不是单纯的数据检索增强，也不是普通 teacher-student 蒸馏。它更像一个面向 reasoning frontier 的迭代式训练循环：失败诊断决定学什么，truth anchor 决定学的内容是否可信，scaffold stripping 决定能力能否脱离外部支架独立存在。","experiments":"论文以 Qwen2.5-VL-7B 为底座，在 8 个多模态推理 benchmark 上评测。文中给出的总结果是：相对 base model，AnE 多轮迭代后平均提升 10.3%。作者特别强调在 MathVision 和 EMMA 这类较难数据集上保持了领先表现，说明收益不只来自简单题或分布内题目。\n\n从实验结构看，最值得注意的不是单个分数，而是“持续提升”这一点。作者把 AnE 和静态数据后训练、以及纯 self-evolution 路线做比较，结论是静态数据方法很快进入平台期，而 AnE 在多轮迭代中还能继续涨，说明 failing frontier 驱动的数据更新确实在不断对准新短板。另一组关键对比是 truth anchor 的作用：去掉真实锚点后，性能提升会变弱，而且更容易出现 reasoning drift，说明外部可验证知识不是锦上添花，而是闭环演化能否稳定的核心条件。\n\n脚手架机制的消融也很重要。只做 scaffold SFT 而不做后续 RL，模型会更依赖提示格式，泛化和自由生成能力不足；只做 RL 而没有前面的 scaffold supervision，则很难稳定学到正确轨迹。两者结合时效果最好，和作者在引言里对 SFT 与 RL 分工的判断一致。\n\n受限于给出的全文片段，部分 benchmark 的逐项数字、迭代轮数细节、以及各消融的精确幅度没有完全展开；但从正文描述可以确认，实验重点是验证三件事：一是相对静态数据的持续增益，二是相对纯合成演化的数据质量优势，三是 SFT 注入 + RL 内化这一训练分工的必要性。","reading_guide":"如果只花一小时，优先看三处。第一是方法总览图和 Failing-Frontier Discovery 部分，理解作者如何定义“失败前沿”，以及为什么要用多次 rollout 而不是单次错误样本筛选。这里关系到整个框架是不是在做真正的 targeted training。第二是 Truth Anchor Expansion 的实现细节，重点看 anchor 的来源、检索条件、如何从 anchor 构造成新样本，以及它和教师生成内容各自承担什么角色。这里决定这篇工作的含金量。第三是 scaffold-stripping 的训练流程和消融表，判断 RL 到底是在提升正确率，还是在做模板去除与行为内化。\n\n图表上建议重点看：总框架图、不同迭代轮次的性能曲线、truth anchor 与无 anchor 的对比、以及 scaffold/RL 相关消融。如果有案例分析，优先看失败样本如何被诊断、检索、再构造成训练数据，这能直接看出方法是否真的避免了 synthetic drift。\n\n值得深挖的点有三个。其一，truth anchor 的质量上限由外部数据库覆盖率决定，这会不会把方法限制在可检索知识密集的任务上。其二，教师模型在失败诊断和提示生成中仍然扮演重要角色，教师偏差是否会通过 scaffold 间接注入。其三，这套框架能否迁移到纯文本 reasoning continual pretrain，或者更一般的 mid-training data refresh 场景。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a concrete bottleneck in multimodal reasoning post-training: static SFT/RL datasets saturate quickly, while self-evolving synthetic data can keep expanding but often amplifies logical errors, hallucinated reasoning paths, and teacher-distribution mismatch. The real problem is not just data scarcity. It is how to keep training data adaptive to the model’s current failure frontier without letting the optimization loop drift away from reliable knowledge. AnE frames this as a closed-loop evolution problem: identify where the model currently fails, retrieve verified external anchors around those failures, and then convert teacher-guided reasoning into internalized capability.","importance":"For pretraining-oriented readers, the value is less about multimodal benchmark chasing and more about training-signal design. The paper is a useful case study in how data quality, adaptivity, and distribution alignment interact in iterative training. It also reinforces a view that has become increasingly important in reasoning work: SFT is better at injecting new patterns and knowledge, while RL is better at consolidating and de-scaffolding behavior. In that sense, AnE is relevant to continual pretraining, mid-training curriculum refresh, and any setting where synthetic data loops risk compounding model errors. The contribution is a practical training paradigm rather than a new base architecture.","technical_approach":"$27","experiments":"$28","reading_guide":"$29","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"后训练里少见地把“失败前沿定位 + 真值锚定”讲成了可执行 recipe；先看数据构造部分，若 setup 干净，值得迁到 reasoning data pipeline 里试。","en":"One of the few post-training papers that turns 'failure-frontier mining + ground-truth anchoring' into an actionable recipe; read the data-construction part first and port it if the setup is clean."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Zehao Wang","Yihan Zeng","Zidong Gong","Yuanfan Guo","Feng Zhu","Hongzhi Zhang","Wei Zhang","Wangmeng Zuo"],"notable_authors":["Wangmeng Zuo"],"tags":["multimodal-reasoning","post-training","synthetic-data","self-evolution","ground-truth-anchoring"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25571","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25571","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25582","title":"Extreme Region Policy Distillation","abstract":"Reinforcement learning for large language models faces a fundamental trade-off between sample efficiency and asymptotic performance: strictly on-policy methods discard trajectories after a single update, while off-policy reuse introduces distribution mismatch that existing trust-region techniques mitigate primarily by enforcing conservative optimization, often leaving rich training signals underutilized. To investigate this, we perform extensive off-policy updates on fixed data. Our experiments ","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T08:32:24+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25582.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文研究 LLM 强化学习中的样本效率和 KL 效率冲突。严格 on-policy 训练每批轨迹通常只用一次，采样成本高；off-policy 重复更新可以提高样本利用率，但会让当前策略偏离生成数据的旧策略，引入分布错配。PPO 类 KL 或 ratio clipping 能抑制漂移，但也会使优化过于保守。作者关心的问题是：能否充分挖掘一批轨迹里的训练信号，同时避免无效策略漂移消耗 KL 预算。","importance":"这篇论文更接近 post-train，但对预训练研究有两个启发。第一，它把 reasoning RL 的瓶颈从“有没有更多数据”推进到“每批轨迹中的有效信号如何被利用”。这对长 CoT 采样成本很高的模型尤其重要。第二，它强调 KL divergence 不只是正则项，而是一种训练预算。无效漂移会占用预算，却不带来任务收益。这个视角对 mid-train、RL pretrain、持续训练中的 trust region 设计都有参考意义。贡献量级主要是训练范式和经验观察，不是基础架构变化。","technical_approach":"方法叫 Extreme Region Policy Distillation。它把一次 RL 更新拆成两个阶段。第一阶段先放松 KL 约束，在固定轨迹数据上做更激进的多步 off-policy 优化，目标是尽量提取这批数据中的训练信号。这个阶段得到的策略不直接作为最终模型，而是作为 teacher。第二阶段把 teacher 中有用的监督信号蒸馏回原始策略，并显式加 trust-region 约束，让 student 保留有效改进，同时过滤掉第一阶段产生的多余漂移。作者还讨论了 strong teacher 和 weak teacher 两类情况。strong teacher 指第一阶段确实训练出更强策略；weak teacher 指即使 teacher 本身不更强，甚至是退化构造，也可能通过不同 signal construction strategy 给 student 提供有用方向。这个设计的关键不是简单复用 off-policy 数据，而是先在“极端区域”探索可用信号，再用受约束蒸馏把有效部分投回可接受的 KL 区域。","experiments":"实验主要在数学推理任务上进行，覆盖强基座模型在标准 on-policy RL 收益变小的场景。作者先做固定数据上的大量 off-policy 更新分析：早期多步优化能快速提升，但更新过多后，轨迹概率偏移增大，policy entropy 下降，性能很早进入平台期。单纯收紧 KL 约束不能解决问题，只会降低可达到的性能上限。两阶段蒸馏后，student 能在相近性能下使用更小 KL，说明一部分 off-policy 漂移不是有效任务改进。论文还报告了在 Qwen3.5-27B 级别强模型上的实验，显示 weak teacher strategy 在强模型继续提升困难时仍能带来收益。可见正文没有提供完整 benchmark 表和具体提升数字，因此更可靠的结论是训练动态和 KL-efficiency 观察。","reading_guide":"泛读建议 30 到 40 分钟。优先看固定轨迹多步 off-policy 更新的诊断图，尤其是 performance、trajectory probability、entropy、KL 的联动变化。然后看两阶段框架图，理解为什么 teacher 不是最终策略，而是中间信号提取器。方法部分重点看三类 signal construction strategy，以及 student 何时能超过 teacher。实验部分建议关注强模型上的结果，因为这类模型最能暴露 on-policy RL 的边际收益问题。若时间有限，可以跳过一般 RL 预备知识，直接读 off-policy degradation 分析和 distillation ablation。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies the tension between sample efficiency and KL efficiency in reinforcement learning for large language models. Strictly on-policy training usually uses each batch of trajectories once, which is expensive for long reasoning rollouts. Reusing trajectories off-policy improves sample utilization, but repeated updates move the policy away from the behavior policy that generated the data. Standard PPO-style clipping or KL penalties reduce this mismatch, but they also make optimization conservative. The central question is whether a training procedure can exploit more signal from each batch without wasting KL budget on ineffective policy drift.","importance":"This is primarily a post-training paper, but it is relevant to pretraining researchers who care about the interface between base models and reasoning RL. The useful idea is to treat KL divergence as a limited optimization budget, not just as a regularizer. Off-policy updates may consume this budget through probability drift and entropy collapse without producing durable task improvement. That observation matters for RL pretraining, mid-training, continual training, and any setting where rollout generation is costly. The contribution is a training procedure and a set of empirical diagnostics rather than a new model architecture.","technical_approach":"$2a","experiments":"$2b","reading_guide":"A skim reading should take about 30 to 40 minutes. Start with the diagnostic plots for repeated off-policy updates on fixed trajectories, especially the interaction among performance, trajectory probability, entropy, and KL. Then read the two-stage framework carefully: the teacher is an intermediate signal extractor, not the final policy. In the method section, focus on the signal construction strategies and the conditions under which the student can outperform the teacher. In the experiments, prioritize the results on strong models, because they best illustrate why standard on-policy RL leaves useful signal unused. The generic RL preliminaries can be skipped if the reader is already familiar with PPO, KL constraints, and off-policy mismatch.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"值得看 fixed-data off-policy 曲线；若现象稳，RLVR 采样复用的内部分层实验应复现。","en":"Read the fixed-data off-policy curves; if stable, this is worth reproducing in internal RLVR sample-reuse ablations."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Changyu Chen","Xiting Wang","Rui Yan"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["RLHF","RLVR","off-policy-learning","policy-distillation","post-training"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25582","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25582","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25198","title":"Hide to Guide: Learning via Semantic Masking","abstract":"Reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards (RLVR) has become a powerful paradigm for improving language models on reasoning-intensive tasks, but its effectiveness is often limited by exploration. For example, models often fail on hard problems, leaving little useful reward signal. External expert traces offer a natural source of guidance, yet they may also expose reward-relevant content along the critical path to the verifier target, such as final answers, intermediate values, executable imp","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T17:59:06+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25198.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 RLVR 中专家轨迹指导和奖励泄漏之间的冲突。完整专家轨迹能帮助探索，但也可能暴露最终答案、中间数值、可执行代码或搜索实体，使策略通过复制关键内容拿到 verifier 奖励，而不是学习可泛化的推理或搜索过程。","importance":"它对预训练研究的价值主要在 post-train 与训练信号质量接口。RLVR 的有效性不仅取决于 verifier，也取决于模型在探索时看到了什么条件信息。论文把“专家轨迹不是纯正信号”讲得比较清楚：轨迹同时包含过程脚手架和可被奖励利用的内容。这个视角对构造 SFT/RL 数据、设计 reasoning trace、避免 reward hacking 都有启发，但方法本身是轻量的 guided RL 改造，不是新的预训练范式。","technical_approach":"方法叫 Semantic Masked Expert Policy Optimization，简称 SMEPO。它不改变 verifier、奖励函数或 GRPO-style RL 目标，而是在给策略的专家轨迹上做语义遮蔽。核心原则是保留过程结构，例如分解方式、子目标、推理流程和搜索路径；遮蔽与 verifier 目标强相关、位于关键路径上的内容。论文给出三个实例：数学中遮蔽数值内容，避免直接泄露最终答案和中间计算值；代码中遮蔽专家解法代码，避免直接复制可执行实现；agentic search 中遮蔽答案相关实体和 query pivots，减少通过实体匹配绕过搜索过程的机会。相比只给 partial prefix 或 adaptive hints，SMEPO 尝试保留更多专家过程信息，同时降低奖励泄漏。","experiments":"主实验采用每个领域 1k 样本设置，在 Qwen3-8B-Base 上，数学从 47.6 提升到 50.3，代码从 56.5 提升到 59.0，agentic search 从 45.6 提升到 48.8。迁移实验中，Qwen2.5-7B 数学从 42.4 提升到 44.5，DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7B 从 61.8 提升到 62.6。SMEPO 还使 hard-math 目标更早达到。在 GHPO 原始数据设置下，加入 SMEPO 将数学平均分从 44.0 提升到 45.6。诊断消融支持论文解释：随机遮蔽无效，固定前缀暴露不稳定，越针对 reward-relevant content 的遮蔽效果越好，说明问题不是简单的上下文长度或噪声，而是泄漏内容的结构性影响。","reading_guide":"泛读即可，预计 25 到 35 分钟。优先看 Introduction 对 failure mode 的定义，它把探索稀疏奖励和专家轨迹泄漏放在同一框架里。方法部分重点看不同领域如何定义 semantic masking target，这比算法公式更关键。实验部分建议看主结果表、hard-math 收敛曲线、GHPO 叠加实验和 masking ablation。若做 RLVR 数据构造，可以重点检查遮蔽规则是否依赖人工启发、是否可能误删必要推理信息，以及遮蔽 token 是否在训练和推理之间形成新的分布差异。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a tension in RL with verifiable rewards: expert traces improve exploration, but full traces can leak verifier-aligned content. A policy may obtain reward by copying final answers, intermediate values, executable code, or answer-related entities, rather than learning the reasoning or search behavior that produced them.","importance":"The main relevance is to the interface between post-training and signal quality. RLVR is not only about the verifier and the RL objective; it also depends on what information the policy is conditioned on during exploration. The paper makes a useful distinction between procedural scaffolding and reward-relevant leakage inside the same expert trace. This is relevant for reasoning-trace design, SFT/RL data construction, and reward-hacking analysis, though the method itself is a lightweight guided-RL intervention rather than a new pretraining method.","technical_approach":"The proposed method is Semantic Masked Expert Policy Optimization, or SMEPO. It leaves the verifier, reward function, and GRPO-style objective unchanged, and instead modifies the expert trace provided to the policy. The rule is to preserve procedural structure such as decomposition, subgoals, reasoning flow, and search plans, while masking semantic spans that lie on the critical path to the verifier target. The instantiations are domain-specific: numerical content is masked in math traces, expert solution code is masked in coding traces, and answer-related entities are masked in agentic search traces. Compared with partial prefixes or adaptive hints, the method tries to keep more of the expert process while reducing direct reward leakage.","experiments":"In the main 1k-example-per-domain setting, SMEPO improves Qwen3-8B-Base from 47.6 to 50.3 on math, from 56.5 to 59.0 on code, and from 45.6 to 48.8 on agentic search. The gains also transfer to other math models: Qwen2.5-7B improves from 42.4 to 44.5, and DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7B improves from 61.8 to 62.6. The method reaches hard-math targets earlier than vanilla GRPO. In a GHPO setup using the original GHPO data, adding SMEPO raises the math average from 44.0 to 45.6. Ablations support the leakage explanation: random masking fails, fixed-prefix exposure is unstable, and more targeted removal of reward-relevant content works best.","reading_guide":"A focused skim should take about 25 to 35 minutes. Start with the Introduction, where the failure mode is defined clearly: sparse exploration rewards on one side and expert-trace leakage on the other. In the method section, focus on how masking targets are chosen for math, code, and agentic search; those design choices matter more than the RL notation. In the experiments, read the main result table, the hard-math convergence analysis, the GHPO combination result, and the masking ablations. For RLVR data work, the key questions are whether the masking rules depend too much on hand-built heuristics, whether they remove useful reasoning information, and whether masked traces create a train-test conditioning mismatch.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"针对 RLVR 中引入专家轨迹导致的 reward hacking 问题，提出了语义掩码的解决方案，对关注 RL 训练稳定性和数据合成质量的研究员很有启发。","en":"Addresses reward hacking caused by expert traces in RLVR using semantic masking; highly insightful for researchers focusing on RL training stability and data synthesis quality."},"metadata":{"institutions":["MIT"],"authors":["Ruitao Liu","Qinghao Hu","Alex Hu","Yecheng Wu","Shang Yang","Luke J. Huang","Zhuoyang Zhang","Han Cai","Song Han"],"notable_authors":["Song Han","Han Cai"],"tags":["Reinforcement Learning","Reward Hacking","Reasoning","Expert Guidance","Semantic Masking"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25198","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25198","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25565","title":"RotMoLE: Enhancing Mixture of Low-Rank Experts through Rotational Gating Mechanism","abstract":"While Large Language Models (LLMs) are commonly fine-tuned to handle domain-specific tasks before being applied to vertical applications, adapting them to complex scenarios with diverse specialized knowledge remains challenging. Meanwhile, Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architecture has risen as a crucial paradigm for training LLMs, and some recent works have also incorporated MoE into Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) to propose the Mixture of Low-rank Experts (MoE-LoRA), to enhance the power of","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T08:18:36+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25565.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是 MoE-LoRA 里 gate 的表达能力过弱。传统 MoE 或 MoE-LoRA 的 router 只给每个专家一个标量权重，能做的是“放大或缩小某个专家的贡献”，但不能改变专家输出在表示空间中的方向。作者认为这会限制低秩专家的组合能力，尤其是在专家数有限、任务分布复杂的场景里，模型只能决定用多少专家，不能决定如何重组专家的低秩子空间。","importance":"对基座预训练的直接相关性不高，因为它主要是 PEFT 方向，不是预训练 recipe 或基础建模范式创新。但它有一个值得记住的点：低秩结构不仅能省参数，也给更丰富的 gating 形式留下了空间。作者利用 LoRA 的 rank-r 子空间，把原本在 d 维空间里代价很高的通用线性变换，压缩成在 r 维子空间里做可控旋转。这种思路对 MoE 设计有启发，尤其是当人们讨论 expert aggregation 是否只能是 scalar mixture 时，它提供了一个更细粒度但仍然便宜的替代方案。","technical_approach":"标准 MoE-LoRA 的形式是 W = W0 + Σ g_i B_i A_i，其中 A_i 把 d 维输入投到 r 维低秩空间，B_i 再映回 d 维。作者指出，如果只用标量 g_i，那么每个专家贡献的方向由 B_i A_i 固定，router 只能调节幅度。一个自然想法是给每个专家加一个 r×r 变换 G_i，写成 W = W0 + Σ B_i G_i A_i，这样就能在低秩子空间里做更丰富的变换；但若直接学习一般线性变换，参数和计算仍然偏大。\n\nRotMoLE 的关键设计是把 G_i 限制为 rotation-like 变换。对于 rank=2 的情形，直接用一个角度 θ_i 构造二维旋转矩阵；对于 r>2，作者再引入少量参数来指定一个临时旋转平面，然后在该平面内做旋转，得到对应的 r×r 旋转矩阵 R_i。最终形式是 W = W0 + Σ g_i B_i R_i A_i。这样每个专家除了标量 gate 之外，还有一个“方向调整”自由度，但额外参数量仍然很小：rank=2 时只需 dn 级别，r>2 时是 (d+r)n，而不是为每个专家显式学习完整的 r×r 或更高维变换。这个设计的核心不是数学上把旋转写出来，而是利用低秩瓶颈把复杂 gating 约束成一个足够便宜、又比 scalar gate 更有表达力的操作。","experiments":"从全文可见，实验重点是验证 RotMoLE 相比传统 MoE-LoRA 在复杂场景下是否更有效，尤其是多任务、多领域或多语言这类需要专家重组能力的设定。作者反复强调 candidate experts 有限时，旋转 gate 的收益更明显，因为它扩大了固定专家集合可张成的解空间。题面没有给出具体表格数字，但从论文结构和引言表述看，实验应包含：与 LoRA、MoE-LoRA 及不同 gating 变体的主结果对比；不同 rank、expert 数、top-k 设置下的消融；以及参数量与性能的权衡。若只看结论，RotMoLE 的卖点不是增加很多参数后换来提升，而是在很小额外开销下，让低秩专家组合更灵活。","reading_guide":"这篇更适合泛读。先看 Introduction 里对 scalar gating 局限的论证，再看方法部分关于为什么把一般线性变换约束成 rotation。真正需要判断的是：这个约束是否合理，是否比直接增大 expert 数或 rank 更划算。阅读时重点看三处：1）参数复杂度推导，确认额外开销确实低；2）r=2 与 r>2 两种构造的差别；3）消融里 rotation gate 的独立贡献，而不是把收益混在更多参数或更复杂训练技巧里。预计 20–30 分钟可以完成一次有效泛读。如果关心 MoE/LoRA 结构设计，可以再细看不同任务设置下收益是否稳定，以及当 expert 数足够大时旋转机制是否仍有边际价值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a specific limitation in MoE-LoRA: the router usually assigns only scalar weights to selected experts. That means it can scale each expert’s contribution, but it cannot change the direction of the expert output in representation space. The authors argue that this is too restrictive when a small set of low-rank experts must cover diverse tasks or domains.","importance":"This is not a core pretraining paper; it is mainly a PEFT architecture tweak. Still, it contains one useful idea for model design: low-rank structure does not only reduce parameters, it also creates a cheap subspace where richer expert transformations become feasible. Instead of treating expert aggregation as scalar mixing only, the paper shows how to add a directional transformation inside the LoRA subspace at modest cost. That is a relevant design pattern for sparse adaptation and possibly for future MoE variants.","technical_approach":"$2c","experiments":"The experiments are designed to show that RotMoLE improves over standard MoE-LoRA in settings where expert composition matters, such as multi-task, multilingual, or otherwise heterogeneous adaptation scenarios. The claimed advantage is strongest when the number of candidate experts is limited, because rotational gating enlarges the effective solution space spanned by a fixed expert set. The prompt does not include the full result tables, but the paper appears to compare against LoRA, MoE-LoRA, and alternative gating variants, with ablations over rank, number of experts, and top-k routing. The main empirical claim is efficiency of expressiveness: better expert recombination with only a small parameter overhead.","reading_guide":"This is a skim paper. Start with the motivation for why scalar gating is insufficient, then move to the method section where the authors justify using rotations instead of general linear transforms. The key question is whether the added structure is a good trade-off compared with simply increasing rank or adding more experts. Focus on three parts: the parameter/computation analysis, the difference between the rank-2 and rank>2 constructions, and the ablations isolating the effect of the rotation gate from other changes. A useful skim takes about 20–30 minutes. Read more closely only if you are actively working on MoE/LoRA design.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"MoE-LoRA 的旋转门控可作适配器路由备查；不是预训练 MoE 证据，先看门控参数化和消融即可。","en":"Useful as an adapter-routing reference; not evidence for pretraining MoE, so read the gate parameterization and ablations only."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Tsinghua University","Beijing Information Science and Technology University","National University of Singapore","Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)","Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications"],"authors":["Mengyang Sun","Maochuan Dou","Tao Feng","Dan Zhang","Yihao Wang","Junpeng Liu","Yifan Zhu","Jie Tang"],"notable_authors":["Jie Tang"],"tags":["MoE-LoRA","PEFT","gating","low-rank-adaptation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25565","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25565","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25525","title":"SAE-FD: Sparse Autoencoder Feature Distillation for Continual Learning of Large Language Models","abstract":"Continual learning enables large language models to adapt to evolving tasks without retraining from scratch, yet catastrophic forgetting remains a central obstacle. Among continual learning methods, regularization-based approaches are widely used to constrain model updates and reduce forgetting, operating in weight space, gradient space, or output space. However, these dense representation spaces suffer from feature superposition, where multiple concepts are encoded in overlapping dimensions, ma","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T07:27:41+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25525.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这项工作解决 LLM 连续学习中的灾难性遗忘问题。现有正则化方法通常在权重、梯度或输出这些稠密空间中约束更新，但稠密表征存在 feature superposition，不同任务和概念混在同一组维度里，保护旧知识时容易同时限制新任务学习。","importance":"对预训练研究的启发在于把 mechanistic interpretability 中的 SAE 从分析工具推进到训练约束工具。它不属于基座预训练流程本身，但和 continual pretrain、领域持续适配、mid-train 后的能力保持有关。关键贡献不是提出新的 SAE，而是把稀疏、过完备的 feature space 用作蒸馏锚点，使正则化更接近“保护特征”而不是“冻结参数”。这个方向值得关注，因为长期更新模型时，如何在不保存大量旧数据、不从头训练的条件下减少干扰，是基座维护中的实际问题。","technical_approach":"SAE-FD 分三步。第一，针对基座模型激活训练一个 Gated SAE，把原始 d 维稠密激活映射到 D 维稀疏特征空间，其中 D 远大于 d；Gated SAE 用 gate pathway 决定哪些 feature 激活，用 magnitude pathway 估计强度，并利用 pre-ReLU feature 保持梯度流。第二，每完成一个任务的 LoRA 微调后，在少量 anchor samples 上记录该模型的 per-token SAE feature activations，作为旧任务表征快照。第三，在后续任务训练时加入 sparse feature distillation loss：一部分保持稀疏特征方向的 cosine similarity，另一部分匹配 active features 的幅值。这样做比直接蒸馏隐藏状态更有针对性，因为只对被 SAE 分解出的活跃概念施加强约束。作者还引入 adaptive lambda，动态调节任务损失和蒸馏损失的相对贡献。训练新任务初期遗忘风险高，lambda 较强；模型逐渐收敛后放松约束，减少对新任务学习的阻碍。","experiments":"实验使用两个连续学习 benchmark，覆盖三个模型家族，并以 LoRA 顺序微调为主要设置。提供内容中给出的核心结果是 TRACE 上平均准确率 52.70%，Backward Transfer 为 -0.46%。相较最强已发表 baseline，平均准确率提高 2.3 个百分点，遗忘量减少 34%。这些数字说明 SAE feature space 的约束比稠密空间正则化更好地平衡了 stability 和 plasticity。完整实验表、SAE 规模、anchor 样本数、lambda 目标比例、不同层 SAE 选择等细节在提供内容中没有完全展开，精读时需要核对这些设置是否对结果敏感。","reading_guide":"建议泛读到半精读，约 45 分钟。先看方法部分的三件事：Gated SAE 如何训练在基座激活上，旧任务 SAE feature snapshot 如何存储，distillation loss 如何同时处理方向和活跃 feature 幅值。然后看 adaptive lambda 的公式和训练曲线，因为这决定了方法能否在不同任务阶段维持稳定正则化。实验部分优先看 TRACE 的总表、BWT/AA 曲线，以及 dense hidden-state distillation、output distillation、固定 lambda、无 SAE feature sparsity 等消融。如果 SAE 训练成本和 anchor memory 没有被充分报告，需要谨慎评估它在大规模 continual pretrain 中的可用性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets catastrophic forgetting in continual learning for LLMs. Existing regularization methods constrain updates in weight space, gradient space, or output space, but these dense spaces contain superposed features. As a result, protecting old knowledge often also suppresses useful plasticity for new tasks.","importance":"The main relevance to pretraining research is the use of sparse autoencoder features as a training-time regularization space. This is not a base pretraining recipe, but it is relevant to continual pretraining, domain adaptation, and model maintenance after mid-training or task-specific tuning. The contribution is to turn SAE features from an interpretability artifact into a distillation anchor. The approach suggests that preserving sparse, disentangled feature activations may be a cleaner constraint than freezing parameters or matching dense hidden states.","technical_approach":"SAE-FD has three stages. First, a Gated SAE is trained on activations from the base model using diverse text, mapping a dense d-dimensional activation into an overcomplete sparse D-dimensional feature vector with D much larger than d. The gated design separates feature selection from magnitude estimation and keeps useful gradient flow through pre-ReLU activations. Second, after each task is learned with LoRA, the method records per-token SAE feature activations on a small set of anchor samples, producing a compact representation snapshot for previous tasks. Third, during later tasks, training combines the task loss with a sparse feature distillation loss. The distillation objective preserves feature direction through cosine matching and preserves active-feature strengths through magnitude matching. A dynamic lambda controller adjusts the weight of the distillation term to maintain a target contribution ratio, applying stronger protection early in a new task and relaxing the constraint as training stabilizes.","experiments":"The experiments cover two continual learning benchmarks and three model families under sequential LoRA adaptation. The reported TRACE result is 52.70% average accuracy with -0.46% backward transfer. Compared with the strongest published baseline cited by the authors, this is a +2.3 point gain in average accuracy with 34% less forgetting. The result supports the claim that sparse feature-space anchoring gives a better stability-plasticity tradeoff than dense-space regularization. The supplied content does not include all experimental details, so settings such as SAE size, anchor sample budget, target lambda ratio, layer choice, and SAE training cost should be checked before drawing deployment-level conclusions.","reading_guide":"Skim to semi-carefully read in about 45 minutes. Focus first on the method: how the Gated SAE is trained, how feature snapshots are stored, and how the distillation loss handles both direction and active-feature magnitude. The adaptive lambda mechanism is worth reading closely because a fixed regularization weight is often brittle in continual learning. In the experiments, prioritize the TRACE summary table, AA and BWT trajectories, and ablations against dense hidden-state distillation, output distillation, fixed lambda, and variants without sparse feature constraints. For large-scale continual pretraining, pay special attention to SAE training cost and anchor-memory requirements.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"SAE在LLM持续学习的创新应用，稀疏空间正则的思路可迁移到持续预训练的知识保护，重点看方法部分的蒸馏损失设计","en":"An innovative SAE application in LLM continual learning, the sparse space regularization idea can be migrated to knowledge protection in continual pretraining, focus on the distillation loss design in the method section"},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Mingxu Zhang","Yuhan Li","Lujundong Li","Dazhong Shen","Hui Xiong","Ying Sun"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["continual_learning","sparse_autoencoder","catastrophic_forgetting","feature_distillation","LLM_regularization"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25525","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25525","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25381","title":"Not only where, But when: Temporal Scheduling for RLVR","abstract":"Reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards (RLVR) has become a core technique for post-training of Large Language Models (LLMs). While policy optimization is driven by all sampled tokens under a globally broadcast scalar reward, the heterogeneous policy behaviors exhibited along trajectories are largely overlooked without differentiation. Existing works address this by credit allocation, including token-level advantage reweighting, and selective token optimization, however, the allocation cr","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T03:10:51+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25381.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"在基于可验证奖励的强化学习（RLVR）中，现有的信用分配（credit allocation）方法通常在整个训练过程中使用固定的分配标准，忽略了训练动态中不同阶段对不同策略行为的优化需求。","importance":"提出在 RLVR 优化中引入时间维度（temporal scheduling），指出“何时”调度学习信号与“何处”分配信号同样重要，为 RLVR 训练动态的控制提供了一个新的、正交的优化维度。","technical_approach":"提出在训练过程中动态调度信用分配标准：在训练初期优先优化由分配标准强调的特定 token（例如通过优势重加权或稀疏 token 优化），然后随着训练的进行逐渐衰减，过渡到一般的全 token 优化。此外，发现简单的轨迹百分比（trajectory percentiles）可以作为一种有效的调度标准，即先从后续 token（可靠的延续）开始调度，逐步纳入早期 token（可靠的推理脚手架）。","experiments":"在不同模型规模和 RLVR 算法（如 GRPO）上，结合连续优势重加权和离散稀疏 token 优化等现有信用分配策略，实验表明时间调度能带来一致的性能提升，并能有效缓解标准 RLVR 优化中因适应异构策略行为而导致的策略熵下降问题。","reading_guide":"建议重点关注 Introduction 中对现有静态信用分配局限性的分析，以及如何将时间调度与现有方法结合的具体实现细节。分析部分关于策略熵变化的讨论也值得一读。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Rewards (RLVR), existing credit allocation methods typically employ stagnant allocation criteria throughout the training process, neglecting the evolving optimization needs for different policy behaviors during training dynamics.","importance":"Introduces the temporal dimension to RLVR optimization, arguing that 'when' learning signals are scheduled is as crucial as 'where' they are allocated, providing a novel and orthogonal dimension for controlling RLVR training dynamics.","technical_approach":"Proposes to dynamically schedule credit allocation criteria over the course of training: prioritizing specific tokens emphasized by the allocation criteria (e.g., via advantage reweighting or sparse token optimization) in the early stages, and gradually attenuating towards general full-token optimization. Furthermore, identifies simple trajectory percentiles as an effective scheduling criterion, starting with later tokens (trustworthy continuation) and incrementally incorporating earlier tokens (reliable reasoning scaffolding).","experiments":"Across various model scales and RLVR algorithms (e.g., GRPO), combining with existing credit allocation strategies like continuous advantage reweighting and discrete sparse token optimization, experiments demonstrate consistent performance improvements. It also effectively mitigates the drop in policy entropy caused by accommodating heterogeneous policy behaviors in standard RLVR optimization.","reading_guide":"Focus on the Introduction for the analysis of the limitations of stagnant credit allocation, and the specific implementation details of how temporal scheduling is combined with existing methods. The analysis section discussing the changes in policy entropy is also worth reading.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看方法和 ablation：若调度优于静态 token credit，它会影响 RLVR 数据和 loss 设计。","en":"Skim the method and ablations: if scheduling beats static token credit, it affects how RLVR losses and data are designed."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Jinghao Zhang","Ruilin Li","Feng Zhao","Jiaqi Wang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["RLVR","credit-assignment","post-training","reasoning"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25381","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25381","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.24218","title":"QUEST: Training Frontier Deep Research Agents with Fully Synthetic Tasks","abstract":"Deep research agents extend the role of search engines from retrieving keyword-matched pages to synthesizing knowledge, fundamentally changing how humans interact with information. However, frontier systems remain proprietary, while existing open agents often generalize poorly across different task types, leaving unclear how to train a broadly capable deep research agent. We release QUEST, a family of open models (ranging from 2B to 35B) that serve as general-purpose deep research agents designe","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"huggingface","sources":["huggingface"],"published_at":"2026-05-22T00:00:00.000Z","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_24218.png","hf_upvotes":35,"arxiv_categories":[],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的不是单点能力，而是“通用 deep research agent 怎么训练”这个配方问题。作者把任务拆成三类彼此相关但训练信号不同的能力：fact seeking、citation grounding、report synthesis。难点在于，这三类能力横跨客观可验证任务和开放式主观任务，现有开源工作通常只覆盖其中一类，或者只有 SFT，没有把中期训练、长轨迹上下文管理、rubric 驱动的 RL 放进同一套流程里。Quest 试图回答的是：在完全开源、且大量依赖合成任务的条件下，能否训练出一个在长时程检索、证据归因和报告写作上都比较均衡的研究代理。","importance":"对预训练/后训练接口的启发大于对纯 pretrain 本身的直接推进。它的重要性主要有三点。第一，它把 deep research agent 的训练拆成可复现的 recipe：mid-training → SFT → RL，而不是只给一个 agent scaffold。第二，它强调“任务可验证性结构”本身就是训练信号设计的核心，尤其是 tree-structured rubric 这一层，把开放式报告任务也部分转成了可优化的分层奖励。第三，它给出一个比较清楚的结论：如果目标是长时程信息搜集与综合，单靠 instruction tuning 不够，模型需要在中期训练阶段先适应搜索式轨迹和外部证据读写，再用 rubric 奖励做能力整合。对做通用 agent pretraining、tool-use mid-training、以及 synthetic curriculum 的人，这篇比单纯 benchmark paper 更有参考价值。","technical_approach":"方法上有三根主线。第一是数据合成。作者构建 Quest-8K，一条样本不是简单的 query-answer，而是“复杂查询 + task-specific rubric tree”。这个 rubric tree 用来刻画完成任务需要覆盖的子问题、证据要求和输出结构，因此它既是监督信号，也是后续 RL 的奖励依据。相比只合成最终答案，这种做法更适合长时程任务，因为 agent 的中间行为和最终报告都能被分层评估。\n\n第二是上下文管理。长轨迹 web research 的典型问题是上下文爆炸：搜索结果、网页片段、已发现事实、未解决子问题会迅速堆积。Quest 引入 compact summary 式的 context management，在轨迹推进过程中持续维护压缩后的信息状态，而不是把完整历史无差别塞回上下文。这个设计的意义不只是省 token，更是在训练时显式鼓励“记忆抽象”而不是“原文堆叠”。对 agent 来说，这比普通 RAG 式拼接更接近真实工作流。\n\n第三是训练流程。论文强调完整配方是 MT、SFT、RL 三阶段，而不是任选其一。mid-training 用来让底座模型适应 deep research 相关分布和行为模式；SFT 负责把任务格式、工具调用、报告输出对齐到目标接口；RL 则利用 rubric-based signal 做最后的能力整合，尤其补 report synthesis 和 citation grounding 这类难以靠 exact match 学好的目标。与已有开源系统相比，Quest 的差异不在某个单独模块，而在于把三类能力放进统一训练目标，并且让客观任务和开放任务共享一套 rubric 驱动优化框架。","experiments":"从文中给出的主结果看，Quest 覆盖 2B 到 35B 多个尺度，并在 8 个 benchmark 上评估三类能力。最关键的几个数字是：Quest-35B 在 BrowseComp 上 64.6%，在 Mind2Web 2 上 30.7%，在 DeepResearch Bench 上 48.2%，作者声称超过 OpenAI DeepResearch 等强闭源系统。这个结果如果按论文设定成立，说明统一 recipe 没有明显牺牲某一类能力来换另一类能力。\n\n更有信息量的是训练阶段消融。图 2 和正文都在强调，已有开源方法往往只做 fact seeking 或 report synthesis，且常缺 mid-training 或 rubric RL。Quest 的对比意图很明确：只做 SFT 的系统能力覆盖不完整；加入 MT 后，模型对搜索式任务和长轨迹状态管理更稳；再加 RL，开放式报告和引用约束进一步提升。虽然当前给出的全文片段没有完整消融表数字，但作者明确把 controlled studies 作为主要贡献之一，并且指出小模型也能受益：Quest-2B-SFT、Quest-4B-SFT 已经有“impressive performance”。这说明收益不只来自大模型容量，也来自训练信号设计。\n\n另一个值得注意的实验结论是 scaling。作者覆盖 2B、4B、9B 到 35B，意图展示 deep research agent 能力随模型规模提升，但不是只有大模型才可用。对隐私敏感场景，本地可部署的小模型 research agent 被单独点出，这意味着他们观察到 recipe 在小尺度上也有较好的 sample efficiency 或任务迁移性。","reading_guide":"这篇适合泛读，不必逐段细抠。建议先看 Introduction 里对三类能力的定义，以及 Figure 2 的训练配方对比，先建立作者到底在补什么缺口。然后重点看数据合成部分，尤其 Quest-8K 和 rubric tree 的构造方式；这里决定了后面 RL 信号是否可信。再看 context management 章节，关注它维护了什么状态、压缩频率如何、是否会丢失证据链。最后看训练与消融，重点确认三件事：MT 到底喂了什么数据；RL 的 reward 如何从 rubric tree 落到可执行打分；不同能力上哪一阶段贡献最大。\n\n如果时间只有 20–30 分钟，建议顺序是：Figure 1/2 → 数据合成章节 → 训练 recipe 章节 → 主结果表。若要深挖，优先看 rubric-based RL 的实现细节，因为这部分最接近可迁移的方法论；其次看小模型结果，判断这套配方到底是在“放大底座能力”，还是主要依赖大模型先验。","authors_note":"OSU NLP 团队；从正文页眉可见为 Ohio State University 相关工作。当前给出的全文片段未包含完整作者列表。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a recipe question rather than a single capability: how to train a broadly capable deep-research agent in an open and reproducible way. The authors frame the problem around three coupled abilities with different supervision regimes: fact seeking, citation grounding, and report synthesis. Existing open systems usually cover only one slice of this space, or rely on SFT alone, leaving unclear how to combine long-horizon search behavior, evidence tracking, and open-ended writing into one trainable pipeline. Quest is an attempt to build that unified recipe under fully synthetic task generation.","importance":"Its main value is at the pretrain/post-train boundary, not in core language-model pretraining alone. Three points matter. First, it turns deep-research-agent training into a concrete stack: mid-training, then SFT, then RL, instead of presenting only an agent framework. Second, it argues that task structure itself should be part of the training signal; the tree-structured rubric is not just an evaluator, but a way to make open-ended report writing partially optimizable. Third, it suggests that instruction tuning alone is insufficient for long-horizon evidence-seeking agents. Models benefit from an intermediate adaptation stage to search-style trajectories and external evidence handling, followed by rubric-based RL to integrate capabilities. That makes the paper relevant to tool-use mid-training, synthetic curricula, and agent-oriented continual adaptation.","technical_approach":"$2d","experiments":"$2e","reading_guide":"$2f","authors_note":"OSU NLP / Ohio State University. The provided excerpt does not include the full author list."},"recommendation":{"zh":"值得看的是“全合成任务+可验证奖励”这条训练接口，不一定改变 agent prior，但很可能给 post-train 数据工厂和 mid-train 设计提供可复用模板；先看数据管线和 RL reward 定义。","en":"Read it for the synthetic-task plus verifiable-reward training interface; it may not change agent priors, but it is a plausible template for post-training data factories and mid-training design."},"metadata":{"institutions":["The Ohio State University","Amazon AGI SF Lab"],"authors":["Jian Xie","Tianhe Lin","Zilu Wang","Yuting Ning","Yuekun Yao","Tianci Xue","Zhehao Zhang","Zhongyang Li","Kai Zhang","Yufan Wu","Shijie Chen","Boyu Gou","Mingzhe Han","Yifei Wang","Vint Lee","Xinpeng Wei","Xiangjun Wang","Yu Su","Huan Sun"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["synthetic-data","research-agent","reinforcement-learning","mid-training","citation-grounding"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.24218","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.24218","github":"https://github.com/OSU-NLP-Group/QUEST","project":"https://osu-nlp-group.github.io/QUEST/","source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25850","title":"TIAR: Trajectory-Informed Advantage Reweighting for LLM Abstention Learning","abstract":"This paper investigates large language model (LLM) abstention learning, specifically using ternary reward, which incentivize truthfulness in large language models. This paper extends that idea by moving from a ternary reward to a Trajectory-Informed advantage reweighting, dynamically re-weights the abstention reward during Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) training. The objective of this work focuses on abstention learning instead of improving truthfulness, serving as an exploration into","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T13:42:37+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25850.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CL","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 LLM abstention learning 中固定三元奖励不够细的问题，希望模型在不确定时更稳定地拒答，从而减少幻觉。","importance":"贡献类型是 GRPO 后训练中的奖励/优势重加权改进。它把多条采样轨迹当作置信度信号，用于学习知识边界；对安全和幻觉控制有参考意义，但方法看起来更像局部训练技巧。","technical_approach":"提出 TIAR，Trajectory-Informed Advantage Reweighting。方法利用 GRPO 对同一 query 生成的多条轨迹，估计策略对该问题的相对置信度和一致性，然后动态调整 abstention reward 的 advantage 权重，而不是使用静态三元奖励。","experiments":"摘要提到使用 AbstentionBench，并强调 benchmark selection，但未给出模型规模、训练数据、baseline 细节、具体提升幅度或是否跨任务泛化。","authors_note":"作者来自 The Pennsylvania State University。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies abstention learning for LLMs, aiming to make models refuse more reliably under uncertainty and thereby reduce hallucination.","importance":"This is a post-training reward/advantage reweighting contribution for GRPO. It uses multiple trajectories as a confidence signal for knowledge-boundary learning, but it appears to be a localized training heuristic rather than a broad recipe.","technical_approach":"TIAR, Trajectory-Informed Advantage Reweighting, uses the multiple rollouts produced by GRPO for a query to infer policy confidence and consistency. It then dynamically reweights the abstention advantage instead of applying a fixed ternary reward.","experiments":"The abstract mentions AbstentionBench and benchmark selection, but does not provide model sizes, training data, baseline details, numerical gains, or evidence of broad transfer.","authors_note":"The listed institution is The Pennsylvania State University."},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为 abstention reward shaping 备查即可；若没有干净校准曲线，别把它当通用幻觉解法。","en":"Keep it as a reference for abstention reward shaping; without clean calibration curves, do not treat it as a general hallucination fix."},"metadata":{"institutions":["The Pennsylvania State University","State College"],"authors":["Muyu Pan","Shu Zhao","Nan Zhang","Philip Shin","Varun Parekh","Vijaykrishnan Narayanan","Rui Zhang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["abstention","GRPO","hallucination","reward-shaping"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25850","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25850","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25831","title":"Clarify, Abstain or Answer? Strategising in Conversation with Belief-Augmented Generation","abstract":"Large language models (LLMs) define a distribution over text, which can be viewed as a probabilistic representation of uncertainty: sampling K responses yields a belief state - responses a model deems plausible. Existing work exploits this representation for narrow tasks like either decoding or selective prediction, and often requires manual interventions, not controlling generation directly. We propose Belief-Augmented Generation (BAG): grounding LLMs in their own belief state via the prompt an","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T13:29:02+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25831.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CL","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决对话式问答中模型明明存在不确定性，却很少主动澄清或弃答的问题。","importance":"价值在于把模型自身采样分布当作可操作的信念状态，用于控制回答、澄清和弃答策略；这更接近后训练与推理控制接口，而不是预训练本身。","technical_approach":"提出 Belief-Augmented Generation（BAG）：先从同一输入采样 K 个回答，把这些样本作为模型的 belief state 写回提示词，再让模型基于这组候选决定是直接回答、提出澄清问题还是选择弃答。方法核心不是新模型，而是把不确定性显式暴露给生成策略。","experiments":"在多轮含歧义 QA 设定上测试 6 个模型。摘要称默认模型很少澄清或弃答，BAG 能提升 QA 准确率，并让策略选择与 belief state 更一致；但“何时澄清、何时弃答”的区分仍然困难。未见参数量、训练数据或大规模训练细节。","authors_note":"作者来自 University of Amsterdam、UMCML Munich、LMU Munich。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"It addresses the fact that conversational LLMs often fail to clarify or abstain even when their own uncertainty suggests they should.","importance":"The value is in treating the model's own sample distribution as an actionable belief state for controlling answer/clarify/abstain behavior. This is more relevant to post-training and inference control than to pretraining itself.","technical_approach":"Belief-Augmented Generation (BAG) first samples K responses for the same input, uses them as the model's belief state, and feeds that state back through the prompt so the model can choose among answering, asking for clarification, or abstaining. The key idea is not a new model class but explicit exposure of uncertainty to the generation policy.","experiments":"The method is tested on multi-turn ambiguous QA with six models. The abstract claims that default models rarely clarify or abstain, while BAG improves QA accuracy and makes strategy decisions more faithful to the belief state. Distinguishing clarification from abstention remains difficult. No model scale or training-data details are given.","authors_note":"The authors are from the University of Amsterdam, UMCML Munich, and LMU Munich."},"recommendation":{"zh":"把采样分布当显式 belief state 这个接口值得记住，但更像 prompt-time policy patch；读 abstract 和实验结论就够。","en":"Worth noting for the explicit belief-state interface, but it is mostly a prompt-time policy patch; the abstract and main results are enough."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Amsterdam","UMCML Munich","LMU Munich","MUniversity of Amsterdam, UMCML Munich, LMU Munich"],"authors":["Joris Baan","Wilker Aziz","Barbara Plank","Raquel Fernández"],"notable_authors":["Barbara Plank"],"tags":["uncertainty","abstention","clarification","belief-state","prompting"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25831","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25831","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25604","title":"DVAO: Dynamic Variance-adaptive Advantage Optimization for Multi-reward Reinforcement Learning","abstract":"Reinforcement Learning has become a standard paradigm for aligning Large Language Models with human intent and task requirements. While Group Relative Policy Optimization offers an efficient, value-model-free alternative to Proximal Policy Optimization, adapting it to real-world multi-reward settings remains challenging. Standard scalarization practices, such as Reward Combination and Advantage Combination, suffer from significant drawbacks: Reward Combination frequently generates advantages wit","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T08:55:16+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25604.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决多奖励 RL 对齐中，GRPO 类无 value 模型方法如何稳定地合并多个奖励信号，避免优势值尺度失控和静态权重失配的问题。","importance":"这是后训练阶段的优化细节工作，不是新对齐范式，但它触及一个真实痛点：多目标奖励在实践里常常噪声不同、量纲不同、相关性不同，简单加权会把训练推向不稳定区间。","technical_approach":"论文提出 DVAO，用 rollout group 内各奖励目标的经验方差来动态调整组合权重。直觉上，方差更能反映当前目标的有效学习信号与噪声水平，因此方法会抬高信号更强的目标、压低更噪的目标，替代固定的 Reward Combination 或 Advantage Combination。核心改动发生在 advantage 组合层，而不是引入额外 value model 或复杂多目标优化器。","experiments":"从摘要看，实验重点是与标准 Reward Combination 和 Advantage Combination 比较训练稳定性与多奖励场景下的表现，但未给出模型规模、数据规模、具体任务和提升幅度。当前能确认的是作者主张其方法在真实多奖励设置下更稳，且能利用目标间方差差异自适应分配学习重心。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"It addresses how to combine multiple reward signals stably in GRPO-style value-free RL for LLM alignment, avoiding exploding advantage scales and the mismatch of static weighting.","importance":"This is a post-training optimization paper rather than a new alignment paradigm, but it targets a real practical issue: multi-objective rewards differ in noise, scale, and correlation, and naive scalarization often destabilizes training.","technical_approach":"The paper proposes DVAO, which dynamically adjusts combination weights using the empirical variance of each reward objective within a rollout group. The intuition is that variance captures signal quality and noise level, so the method up-weights objectives with stronger learning signal and suppresses noisier ones. The change is made at the advantage-combination stage, without adding a value model or a more complex multi-objective optimizer.","experiments":"From the abstract, the experiments mainly compare against standard Reward Combination and Advantage Combination in terms of stability and performance under multi-reward settings, but no model size, data scale, task suite, or effect size is provided. What can be inferred is that the authors claim better stability and more adaptive credit assignment across objectives.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"偏工程型的小改进，不会改写 RL 对齐认知；若你在做多 reward GRPO，先看它如何定义方差权重和是否真能压住 advantage 爆炸。","en":"An engineering-side tweak, not a paradigm shift; worth checking only if you run multi-reward GRPO and care whether variance-based weighting actually tames advantage blow-ups."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Guochao Jiang","Jingyi Song","Guofeng Quan","Chuzhan Hao","Guohua Liu","Yuewei Zhang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["RLHF","multi-objective-rl","GRPO","advantage-weighting","alignment"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25604","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25604","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25549","title":"BC Protocol: Structured Dual-Expert Dialogue for Eliciting High-Quality Chain-of-Thought Post-Training Data","abstract":"High-quality expert chain-of-thought (CoT) data is one of the core bottlenecks in large language model (LLM) post-training. Existing data production methods each have structural limitations: crowdsourced annotation lacks deep reasoning paths; expert solo writing is constrained by the \"expert blind spot\" -- experts structurally skip reasoning steps they consider obvious; RLHF only produces preference signals rather than reasoning chains.   This paper proposes the BC Protocol -- a structured dual-","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T08:06:10+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25549.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CL","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"高质量 CoT 后训练数据难以生产，众包、专家独写和 RLHF 分别存在推理浅、步骤跳过、只给偏好信号的问题。","importance":"贡献是一个人工专家协作的数据生产协议，而不是新的训练算法；它关注后训练数据质量这个真实瓶颈，但需要强实验证明协议收益。","technical_approach":"提出 BC Protocol，用领域专家和知识工程师的双专家对话来外化专家隐性判断；同时定义 Participant Aptitude Model，用六个参与者特征维度建模数据生产质量，并提出 Calibrated Ignorance，让知识工程师以适度无知状态追问专家省略的推理步骤。","experiments":"摘要未给出模型规模、数据规模、标注成本、训练后提升或与现有 CoT 数据生产方法的定量比较。当前信息更像流程设计和概念框架。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"High-quality CoT data for post-training is hard to produce because crowdsourcing is shallow, solo experts omit obvious steps, and RLHF provides preferences rather than reasoning traces.","importance":"The contribution is a human data-production protocol rather than a training algorithm. It targets a real post-training bottleneck, but its value depends on empirical evidence about data quality and downstream gains.","technical_approach":"BC Protocol pairs a domain expert with a knowledge engineer to elicit implicit expert judgments as natural-language reasoning chains. It also introduces a Participant Aptitude Model with six participant dimensions and the notion of Calibrated Ignorance to guide productive questioning.","experiments":"The abstract does not report model sizes, dataset scale, annotation cost, downstream training gains, or quantitative comparisons against existing CoT data-production pipelines.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"CoT 数据瓶颈判断对，但更像标注流程设计；没有强实验时，只把参与者模型当数据 SOP 参考。","en":"The data bottleneck diagnosis is sound, but this reads like an annotation protocol; without strong experiments, treat it as SOP material."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Bo Zou","Chao Xu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["CoT-data","post-training","data-elicitation","human-annotation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25549","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25549","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25447","title":"GeoSVG-RL: Geometry-Aware Reinforcement Learning for Layout-Constrained Text-to-SVG Diagram Generation","abstract":"Generating structured, editable diagrams remains a significant challenge for contemporary large language models, despite their proficiency in general-purpose vector code generation. The primary difficulty lies in the structural fragility of the output; minor errors such as misaligned connector endpoints, text labels overlapping borders, or complex layouts drifting beyond the canvas boundaries render the resulting SVG files functionally unusable for professional applications. To address these iss","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T05:56:44+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25447.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 LLM 生成 SVG 图表时几何结构脆弱的问题，例如连接线错位、文本重叠、布局越界。","importance":"贡献是把可执行几何反馈引入文本到 SVG 的 RL 后训练流程。它不是通用推理 RL 的核心论文，但对“可验证环境反馈如何塑造结构化代码生成”有参考价值。","technical_approach":"GeoSVG-RL 先让模型生成结构化布局计划，把它作为后续 SVG 代码生成的几何约束；再通过浏览器渲染和 verifier 检查布局、连接关系、边界、重叠等可执行几何条件，并将这些反馈用于强化学习优化策略。","experiments":"摘要没有给出模型规模、训练数据量、RL 算法细节、baseline 名称或具体提升幅度。实验重点应是 layout-constrained text-to-SVG 任务上 SVG 可用性、几何约束满足率和渲染质量的提升。","authors_note":"作者来自 University of California, Merced 和 The University of Queensland。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the structural fragility of LLM-generated SVG diagrams, including misaligned connectors, overlapping labels, and layouts drifting outside the canvas.","importance":"Its contribution is to bring executable geometric feedback into RL post-training for text-to-SVG generation. It is not a central reasoning-RL paper, but it is a useful example of verifier-shaped training for structured code outputs.","technical_approach":"GeoSVG-RL first asks the model to produce a structured layout plan as a geometric contract, then generates SVG code under that plan. A browser-backed verifier renders the SVG and checks executable geometric constraints such as alignment, overlap, boundaries, and connector placement; these signals are used as RL feedback.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide model sizes, training-data scale, detailed RL setup, baseline names, or numerical gains. The likely evaluation focuses on layout-constrained text-to-SVG generation, measuring geometric validity and functional usability of rendered diagrams.","authors_note":"The authors are from the University of California, Merced and The University of Queensland."},"recommendation":{"zh":"可当作 verifier-based RL 的小案例看，重点看奖励设计；任务太窄，不足以更新通用 RLVR prior。","en":"Read it as a small verifier-based RL case study, mainly for reward design; the task is too narrow to shift general RLVR priors."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of California, Merced","The University of Queensland"],"authors":["Sifan Li","Yujun Cai","Hongkai Chen","Yiwei Wang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["RLHF","verifier-feedback","SVG-generation","structured-generation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25447","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25447","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25354","title":"Context-CoT: Enhancing Context Learning via High-Quality Reasoning Synthesis","abstract":"While LLMs excel at reasoning over prompts using static pretrained knowledge, they struggle significantly with context learning-the ability to dynamically extract, internalize, and apply new knowledge from complex, task-specific contexts. Recent evaluations on the CL-Bench reveal a critical capability gap: frontier models solve only 17.2% of context-dependent tasks on average.","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T02:18:30+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25354.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 LLM 在长上下文中从新给定材料抽取、内化并应用知识的“context learning”能力不足问题。","importance":"这是后训练数据与推理监督方向的工作，价值在于把“上下文学习”从静态知识推理里拆出来，针对性构造高质量 reasoning synthesis 信号；对预训练研究员的意义主要在于观察哪些能力缺口无法靠预训练知识自然补齐。","technical_approach":"方法核心是 Context-CoT：通过高质量推理链合成，增强模型对上下文中关键信息的定位、整合与调用。按摘要表述，它不是改模型架构，而是通过更干净的 reasoning supervision 改善 context-dependent task 表现。","experiments":"摘要引用 CL-Bench，指出前沿模型在 context-dependent tasks 上平均仅 17.2% 正确率，作为问题动机。未在摘要中给出模型规模、训练数据量、具体 baseline 和提升幅度，因此目前只能判断其重点在数据合成与后训练配方。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"It addresses LLMs' weak ability to extract, internalize, and apply new knowledge from provided context, i.e., context learning rather than static-knowledge reasoning.","importance":"This is a post-training/data-supervision paper. Its value is in isolating context learning as a distinct capability gap and injecting cleaner reasoning supervision; for pretraining researchers, it is mainly useful as evidence of what pretraining alone does not reliably solve.","technical_approach":"The core idea is Context-CoT: synthesize high-quality chains of reasoning to improve how models locate, integrate, and use information from task-specific context. It appears to be a supervision/data method rather than an architectural change.","experiments":"The abstract cites CL-Bench and reports that frontier models solve only 17.2% of context-dependent tasks on average, motivating the method. It does not provide model sizes, training data scale, baselines, or exact gains in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"更像后训练补丁，不会直接改写 pretrain prior；若你关心“上下文学习≠参数知识”，只看任务定义和数据构造即可。","en":"This looks like a post-training patch, not a pretraining prior shift; read it only if you care about context learning as distinct from parametric knowledge."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Hongbo Jin","Mingnan Zhu","Jingqi Tian","Xu Jiang","Zhongjing Du","Haoran Tang","Siyi Xie","Qiaoman Zhang","Jiayu Ding"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["context-learning","chain-of-thought","reasoning-synthesis","post-training"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25354","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25354","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"mechanism","emoji":"🔬","name":"原理、机制和分析","description":"Interpretability/ICL/CoT原理/Attention分析/涌现/泛化/幻觉/反常识发现/基础DL分析（Scaling 定律与系数归 scaling）","papers":[{"id":"2605.25225","title":"Continuous-Depth Field Theory for Transformer Patching and Mechanistic Interpretability","abstract":"Mechanistic interpretability often uses activation patching, causal tracing, path patching, and steering directions to reveal behaviorally meaningful directions in Transformer activation space. This paper develops a field-theoretic framework for organizing and predicting such interventions. Treating the residual stream as a depth-token field, we formulate patching as localized source insertion, patch effects as sensitivity-field predictions, downstream propagation as empirical Green-function res","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T19:26:25+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25225.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作试图为 Transformer 中的 activation patching、causal tracing、path patching 和 steering direction 提供一个统一的响应理论框架，把局部激活干预的效果表示为 residual stream 上的敏感度场和传播算子。","importance":"它对预训练研究的价值主要在机制分析工具层面。预训练模型的行为通常由层、token、head、残差子空间共同决定，逐点枚举 patching 成本高，也难以形成可迁移的结构描述。该工作把 residual stream 视为 depth-token field，把 patching 视为局部 source insertion，用 linear response、Green function 和 adjoint inverse problem 组织干预结果。它不直接改进训练，但有助于把 mechanistic interpretability 从经验枚举推进到可预测、可组合的响应估计。","technical_approach":"方法把 Transformer 的 residual stream 记为深度 t 和 token 位置 x 上的场 R(t,x)。对 residual activation 的局部干预被写成 source J(t,x)。在局部线性区域内，某个输出 observable，例如 logit difference，对干预的一阶变化由 sensitivity field a(t,x) 预测；扰动从一个 depth-token site 向后续层和位置传播，则由经验 Green-response operator G 描述。这样，patching 不只是测量单个干预效果，也可以被写成一个受约束的逆问题：给定期望的 residual displacement 或行为变化，求一个稀疏、受约束的 source J，使其经 G 传播后产生目标响应。作者还讨论了 adjoint variational formulation，用来推断 patch site 和 residual direction。与常规 activation patching 的区别在于，它试图估计一组响应算子来预测一族干预，而不是逐层逐 token 枚举。","experiments":"实验在 GPT-2-style 自回归 Transformer 上进行，主要验证局部线性响应是否可用。作者测量 localized residual-field interventions 对 residual-field difference 和 logit-difference 的影响。结果显示，小扰动存在有界的局部线性区间；一阶敏感度可以预测许多 patch effect；局部干预会产生结构化且各向异性的残差传播；传播在深度上呈现近似 composition；高敏感度 site 和 sliced Green operators 能给出较低维的响应描述；prompt-induced residual displacement 在部分情况下能迁移答案行为。实验更像是框架验证，而不是大规模模型结论。需要注意，线性近似的边界、非线性饱和、跨模型尺度迁移仍是开放问题。","reading_guide":"泛读建议 20–30 分钟。优先看 Introduction 中对 residual stream as depth-token field 的定义，以及 localized source、sensitivity field、Green-response operator 三个对象的关系。方法部分重点看 patch-site inference 如何被写成 constrained inverse problem，这比连续场符号本身更有信息量。实验部分看 local linearity、superposition、sensitivity prediction 和 sliced Green operators 的图表即可。对预训练研究者，重点不是场论形式，而是它能否把 patching 从单点诊断变成可复用的响应测量；如果只关心训练 recipe，可以低优先级阅读。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper proposes a unified response-theoretic framework for activation patching, causal tracing, path patching, and steering in Transformers. It asks whether local interventions in the residual stream can be organized and predicted through sensitivity fields and propagation operators over depth and token position.","importance":"Its relevance to foundation-model research is mainly in mechanistic interpretability. Pretrained Transformer behavior is distributed across layers, tokens, heads, and residual subspaces; exhaustive patch enumeration is expensive and often hard to generalize. This work represents the residual stream as a depth-token field and formulates patching as localized source insertion. Linear response, empirical Green functions, and adjoint inverse problems provide a more structured way to describe and predict interventions. It is not a training method, but it may help build better diagnostic tools for pretrained models.","technical_approach":"The residual stream is treated as a field R(t,x), where t indexes depth and x indexes token position. A localized activation intervention is written as a source J(t,x). In a local linear regime, the first-order effect on an observable, such as a logit difference, is predicted by a sensitivity field a(t,x). The downstream propagation of a perturbation is described by an empirical Green-response operator G, which maps an injected perturbation at one depth-token site to residual or behavioral changes downstream. Patch selection is then formulated as a constrained inverse problem: given a desired residual displacement or behavioral shift, infer a sparse admissible source J whose propagated response matches the target. The adjoint variational view provides a route to infer patch sites and residual directions. This differs from standard patching by estimating reusable response quantities instead of measuring each intervention independently.","experiments":"The empirical tests use GPT-2-style autoregressive Transformers. The paper applies localized residual-field interventions and measures induced residual-field differences and logit-difference changes. The reported findings support a bounded local linear regime for small perturbations, approximate superposition, first-order sensitivity predictions of patch effects, structured anisotropic residual propagation, approximate composition across depth, and tractable lower-dimensional descriptions through high-sensitivity sites and sliced Green operators. Prompt-induced residual displacements partially transfer answer behavior. These are best read as first-pass validation of the response framework rather than evidence for large-scale model behavior. The main limitations are the locality of the linear approximation, nonlinear failure modes, and the still-speculative nature of cross-model response transfer.","reading_guide":"A practical skim takes about 20–30 minutes. Start with the definitions of the residual stream as a depth-token field and the mapping from patching to localized source insertion. Then focus on the roles of the sensitivity field and empirical Green-response operator. The most useful technical part is the constrained inverse formulation for patch-site inference; the continuum notation is less important than the discrete response quantities measured in finite Transformers. In the experiments, prioritize local linearity, superposition, sensitivity prediction, and sliced Green operator results. For pretraining researchers, the main question is whether these response measurements can become reusable diagnostics for large pretrained models; if the goal is training recipe improvement, this can be read at lower priority.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"用场论视角统一 Transformer 的 activation patching 和信息流分析，理论框架很优美，对深入理解模型内部机制和可解释性研究有启发，建议阅读方法部分。","en":"Unifies activation patching and information flow analysis in Transformers using a field-theoretic perspective; the theoretical framework is elegant and inspiring for deep understanding of internal mechanisms and interpretability research. Recommend reading the methodology section."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["David N. Olivieri","Antonio F. Pérez Rodríguez"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["mechanistic interpretability","activation patching","field theory","Transformer dynamics"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25225","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25225","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25151","title":"Representation Without Control: Testing the Realization Effect in Language Models","abstract":"Large language models are increasingly used as behavioral simulators, but it remains unclear when their outputs reflect human-like cognitive mechanisms rather than prompt-sensitive surface patterns. We study this question through the realization effect, a well-characterized finding in behavioral economics in which risk-taking differs systematically after paper versus realized gains and losses. We evaluate LLM behavior at three levels: prompt-only behavioral sensitivity, linear readout of interna","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T16:07:34+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25151.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CE"],"summary":{"core_problem":"论文检验一个更一般的问题：LLM 在行为实验提示中表现出条件敏感性时，内部是否真的编码了相应心理变量，并且这个变量是否因果控制模型输出。具体测试对象是行为经济学中的 realization effect，即纸面盈亏和已实现盈亏对后续风险偏好的不同影响。","importance":"这篇论文对预训练方法没有直接贡献，但对机制分析和模型评测有清晰提醒：线性可解码的内部表征不等于因果机制。对使用 LLM 做人类行为模拟、偏好建模或心理实验复现的工作来说，这一点很关键。它也提示预训练研究中的 representation probing 需要加入 causal validation，否则容易把相关信号误读成模型实际使用的计算变量。","technical_approach":"实验分三层。第一层是 prompt-only 行为测试，用 realization-status framing 构造纸面和已实现盈亏情境，要求模型输出下一轮下注金额和风险偏好等级。第二层是表征读出，在 Gemma 3 4B 的 residual stream 中记录激活，用 matched paper/realized prompt pair 的均值差构造 realization direction，并测试该方向能否泛化到 held-out prompts。第三层是因果干预，在生成时通过 forward hook 将归一化方向加到指定层的最后 active token 位置，观察风险选择是否随 steering scale 改变。这个设计把行为相似、可解码表征和因果控制分开检验。","experiments":"行为数据包含 54,450 行，清洗后有 53,547 条有效下注金额和 49,351 条有效风险偏好响应。主回归使用 condition indicators，并控制 model、temperature 和 prompt-version fixed effects，标准误采用 HC3。prompt-only 结果显示模型对纸面/已实现 framing 有系统敏感性，但方向并不稳定复现人类 realization-effect 预测。机制实验使用 Gemma 3 4B，在 layer 18 构造 train-only direction，训练集包含 756 个 matched pairs。该方向能从 residual stream 中线性读出 realization status，并可泛化到验证集和额外 held-out prompt set。关键结果是 steering 不可靠：在 −50、0、+50、+75、+100、+150 等尺度下向 paper_open 或 realized_closed 方向注入激活，并不能稳定改变后续风险行为。论文还区分全部有效解析样本和 exactly-two-integer 子集，以避免 steering 破坏输出格式后造成解析偏差。","reading_guide":"泛读预计 20 分钟。先看 Methods 中三阶段设计，确认行为测试、线性读出和 activation steering 的边界；再看 layer-18 direction 的构造方式和 held-out generalization；最后看 steering 结果和 exactly-two-integer 子集分析。最值得保留的结论是：probe 能读出的方向未必是模型生成决策时使用的方向，机制解释需要干预实验支撑。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether condition-sensitive LLM behavior reflects an internal variable that is actually used by the model. It studies this through the realization effect from behavioral economics, where risk-taking differs after paper versus realized gains and losses.","importance":"The paper is not a pretraining-method contribution, but it is useful for mechanistic analysis and evaluation design. Its main message is that a linearly decodable representation is not sufficient evidence of causal control. This matters for work that treats LLMs as human-behavior simulators, and also for pretraining research that uses probes to interpret representations. Correlational readouts need intervention tests before being treated as mechanisms.","technical_approach":"The study has three layers. First, it tests prompt-only behavior using vignettes that vary realization status and asks models to output a next-session wager and a risk-preference score. Second, it records residual-stream activations from Gemma 3 4B and builds a mean-difference realization direction from matched paper-versus-realized prompt pairs. Third, it performs activation steering by adding a normalized version of this direction at a selected layer during generation. Positive steering points toward realized_closed, while negative steering points toward paper_open. This separates behavioral sensitivity, representational decodability, and causal influence.","experiments":"The behavioral dataset contains 54,450 rows, with 53,547 valid parsed wagers and 49,351 valid risk-profile responses. The main regressions use condition indicators with model, temperature, and prompt-version fixed effects, plus HC3 robust standard errors. Prompt-only behavior is sensitive to paper-versus-realized framing, but it does not robustly match the directional predictions from human realization-effect studies. For the mechanistic pass, the main direction is trained at layer 18 of Gemma 3 4B using 756 matched pairs. The realization-status signal is linearly decodable and generalizes to validation and held-out prompts. The causal result is negative: steering at scales −50, 0, +50, +75, +100, and +150 does not reliably shift downstream risk choices. The paper also reports an exactly-two-integer subset because steering can damage response format, which would otherwise confound numeric parsing.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 20 minutes. Read the methods carefully enough to separate the three tests: behavior, readout, and steering. Then inspect the layer-18 direction construction, the held-out readout results, and the steering tables or plots. The main point to retain is that a probe can reveal a usable semantic direction without that direction controlling the model’s downstream decision.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"表征存在但无法因果控制下游行为，做LLM可解释性和激活工程的研究员看§3和§4的实验设计。","en":"Representation exists but cannot causally control downstream behavior, researchers working on LLM interpretability and activation engineering can check the experimental design in §3 and §4."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Ciarán Walsh","Emilio Barkett"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["interpretability","activation steering","cognitive mechanism","behavioral simulation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25151","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25151","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.26172","title":"ARBITER: Reasoning Trajectory Basins and Majority Vote Failures in Test-Time Sampling","abstract":"When language models use test-time sampling, they generate multiple reasoning trajectories and select an answer by majority vote. We show that these trajectories are not independent: for a given question, they concentrate into a small number of clusters, or reasoning basins, each defined by a normalized final answer and the solutions that reach it. A majority vote therefore selects the most stable basin rather than the most accurate one, which creates wrong-majority failures where the correct an","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T04:07:44+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_26172.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解释 LLM test-time sampling 中多数投票为何会失败：多条推理轨迹并非独立样本，而会聚集到少数 reasoning basins。","importance":"贡献类型是推理机制分析和解码后处理方法。它修正了 self-consistency/majority vote 的常见直觉：更多采样不一定逼近正确答案，可能只是放大最稳定的错误推理盆地。","technical_approach":"提出 reasoning basin 概念，将同一问题下归一化最终答案及其对应解法聚成 basin。ARBITER 是模型无关方法，只使用基模型采样输出、隐藏状态和派生证据来建模 basin 间交互。直接纠错策略效果不好，作者采用保守的 additive evidence：ARBITER-Δ 在 majority prior 上加入同模型证据，ARBITER-Enc 再加入受限隐藏状态残差信号。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体模型、任务集、采样次数或提升幅度，只说明存在 wrong-majority failures，即正确答案在候选中出现但被错误多数 outvote，并称多数直接纠错策略失败。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper explains why majority voting over test-time sampled reasoning traces can fail: trajectories are not independent and often concentrate into a small number of reasoning basins.","importance":"This is a mechanism and decoding-time correction contribution. It revises the common intuition behind self-consistency: more samples may amplify the most stable basin, not the most accurate answer.","technical_approach":"The paper defines a reasoning basin as a normalized final answer together with the solution traces that reach it. ARBITER is model-agnostic and uses only the base model’s sampled outputs, hidden states, and derived evidence to model interactions among basins. Instead of direct correction, it uses conservative additive evidence: ARBITER-Δ adds same-model evidence to the majority prior, and ARBITER-Enc adds bounded residual signals from hidden states.","experiments":"The abstract does not specify models, tasks, sample counts, or numerical gains. It reports wrong-majority failures where the correct answer appears among samples but is outvoted, and notes that most direct correction strategies fail.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"它动摇的是“多采样多数投票≈更可靠”的朴素 prior；先读 basin 定义和 wrong-majority 分析，方法部分可后看。","en":"It attacks the naive prior that more sampled votes mean more reliability; read the basin definition and wrong-majority analysis before the correction method."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Meng Cai","Lars Kulik","Farhana Choudhury"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["test-time sampling","self-consistency","reasoning trajectories","majority vote","LLM reasoning"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.26172","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.26172","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25520","title":"Is Inference Mediated by Distinct Semantic Structures in LLMs? A Mechanistic Interpretation","abstract":"Predicting a label correctly does not necessarily require representing the operation that produces it. Transformer representations are known to carry label-level information, but whether they encode semantic operations producing those labels is unclear. We investigate this in Natural Language Inference using controlled premise-hypothesis pairs that differ by a single semantic transformation. Using layer-wise activations, we estimate operation-level subspaces via SVD and test their causal relevan","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T07:21:07+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25520.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 做对 NLI 标签时，是否真的表示了产生该标签的语义操作，而不只是编码了标签相关特征。","importance":"贡献是机制分析：把语义变换从标签预测中拆出来，用可解码性和激活干预同时检验操作级表示，对理解模型内部语义计算有价值。","technical_approach":"构造只相差一个语义变换的 premise-hypothesis 对，提取不同层激活；用 SVD 估计操作级子空间，再用 activation steering 测试这些方向是否因果影响输出；还做跨操作 steering，观察不同语义操作子空间之间的干扰。","experiments":"在四个开源 decoder-only 模型上实验。语义变换效应可被以 84.8%-99% 准确率解码，并且相对随机子空间更显著；steering 能因果改变预测，但不同模型可操控性不同；跨操作干预显示子空间有重叠和结构化干扰。","authors_note":"作者来自 University of Manchester、University of Sheffield、Idiap Research Institute 和 CRUK National Biomarker Centre。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether LLMs that predict NLI labels correctly encode the semantic operations that generate those labels, rather than merely label-correlated features.","importance":"This is a mechanistic analysis contribution. It separates operation-level semantics from label prediction and combines decodability with causal activation steering.","technical_approach":"The authors build controlled premise-hypothesis pairs differing by a single semantic transformation, extract layer-wise activations, estimate operation subspaces via SVD, and test causal relevance with activation steering. Cross-operation steering is used to study interference between semantic operations.","experiments":"Experiments cover four open-weight decoder models. Transformation effects are decodable with 84.8%-99% accuracy and outperform random-subspace baselines. Steering causally changes predictions, with model-dependent steerability, and cross-operation steering reveals overlapping subspaces and structured interference.","authors_note":"The authors are affiliated with the University of Manchester, University of Sheffield, Idiap Research Institute, and CRUK National Biomarker Centre."},"recommendation":{"zh":"价值在因果 steering 而非探针准确率；读 subspace 构造和跨操作干扰，能校准对语义表示的 prior。","en":"The useful part is causal steering, not probe accuracy; read the subspace construction and cross-operation interference."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Manchester","University of Sheffield","Idiap Research Institute","CRUK National Biomarker Centre","CRUK National Biomarker Centre, University of Manchester"],"authors":["Nura Aljaafari","Marco Valentino","André Freitas"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["mechanistic-interpretability","activation-steering","NLI","semantic-subspaces"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25520","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25520","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25244","title":"Inference Time Optimization with Confidence Dynamics","abstract":"Inference time optimization techniques, such as repeated sampling, have significantly advanced the reasoning capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs). However, the critical role of model uncertainty remains largely underexplored in these optimization strategies. In this paper, we investigate the dynamics of confidence along reasoning trajectories and for first time reveal a surprising and unique pattern: correct answer traces tend to exhibit confidence improvement over time (positive confide","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T20:04:19+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25244.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文研究 inference-time reasoning 中的答案选择问题：多次采样后，除了看多数票和平均置信度，模型在推理链内部的置信度变化是否能提供额外信号。","importance":"对预训练方向的直接价值不在推理加速，而在 posttrain 信号的可观测痕迹。论文发现，经过 RLVR/GRPO 类训练的推理模型，正确轨迹往往在推理后段置信度上升，错误轨迹则上升较弱或下降。这说明训练目标不仅改变最终答案分布，也改变了 token 序列内部的置信度形状。这个现象对理解 RL 后模型的校准、verifier-free selection、以及训练信号如何写入生成动态都有参考意义。","technical_approach":"方法叫 Confidence Dynamic Gain，简称 CDG。论文先定义 token-level confidence，使用模型下一 token 分布相对均匀分布的 KL divergence，直观上类似“分布越尖锐，模型越确信”。然后把每条 reasoning trace 按位置归一化分桶，比较开头部分和结尾部分的平均置信度，得到 tail-head confidence gain。答案聚合时不只使用某个答案出现的次数，也不只使用整条 trace 的平均置信度，而是把三类信号组合起来：答案频次、平均置信度、置信度动态增益。关键区别在于，CDG 不把置信度当成静态标量，而把它看作沿推理过程变化的轨迹特征。论文还给出一个基于 GRPO 的解释：正确轨迹在结尾处会收敛到同一可验证答案，组内相同 token 或相近模式更集中，因此策略梯度会更强地提升尾部置信度；错误轨迹的路径和答案更分散，尾部置信度没有同样的集中增强。","experiments":"实验覆盖 OpenAI gpt-oss、DeepSeek-R1、Google Gemma、Qwen-QwQ 等不同模型家族，并在数学推理基准上比较 majority voting、平均置信度加权投票等方法。核心经验结果是：正确 trace 的 tail-head confidence gain 系统性高于错误 trace；把这个增益放入投票函数后，答案选择准确率超过只看多数票或静态置信度的方案。论文强调，简单放大 CDG 信号就能带来稳定收益。由于该方法依赖多样本采样，它更适合作为 Best-of-N / self-consistency 的选择器，而不是单样本推理方法。","reading_guide":"泛读预计 20–30 分钟。建议先看引言里的现象图，确认正确和错误推理链在置信度曲线上的差异。然后看方法部分的 confidence 定义、head/tail 分桶方式和投票公式。实验部分重点看不同模型上的一致性，而不只看单个 benchmark 的提升。理论分析可以选择性阅读，重点理解 GRPO 为什么可能让正确轨迹尾部更尖锐。需要留意两个问题：第一，CDG 是否对采样温度、trace 长度、答案抽取规则敏感；第二，这个信号在非 RLVR 模型或非数学任务上是否仍然稳定。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies answer selection under inference-time scaling. Given multiple sampled reasoning traces, it asks whether the change of model confidence along a trace provides useful information beyond majority voting or static sequence-level confidence.","importance":"The main value for pretraining and posttraining research is diagnostic. The paper suggests that RL-trained reasoning models leave a measurable signature in the internal confidence profile of generated chains: correct traces tend to gain confidence toward the end, while incorrect traces show weaker or negative gains. This is useful for understanding how RLVR-style training changes not only final answer probabilities but also the shape of token-level uncertainty during generation.","technical_approach":"$30","experiments":"The experiments cover several model families, including OpenAI gpt-oss, DeepSeek-R1, Google Gemma, and Qwen-QwQ, on mathematical reasoning benchmarks. The central empirical result is consistent: correct reasoning traces have larger tail-head confidence gains than incorrect traces. When this signal is added to voting, answer selection improves over majority voting and static confidence-based baselines. The method is designed for multi-sample inference such as Best-of-N or self-consistency, not for single-sample decoding.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 20–30 minutes. First inspect the empirical plots showing confidence trajectories for correct and incorrect traces. Then read the method section for the confidence definition, position binning, and voting formula. In the experiments, focus on whether the pattern holds across model families rather than on a single benchmark number. The GRPO analysis is worth a selective read because it connects inference-time confidence dynamics to RL training signals. Two checks matter for follow-up work: sensitivity to sampling temperature, trace length, and answer extraction; and whether the same signal remains reliable outside RLVR-trained math reasoning models.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"推理时置信度动态是一个有趣的机制发现——正确轨迹的置信度上升 vs 错误轨迹的置信度下降，这一模式对理解LLM推理过程和设计更好的推理策略有实际启发。","en":"Confidence dynamics during inference is an interesting mechanistic finding — the rising confidence in correct traces vs declining in incorrect ones has practical implications for understanding LLM reasoning and designing better inference strategies."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Yu Wang","Minghao Liu","Jiayun Wang","Jinrui Huang","Ankit Shah","Wei Wei"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["inference-time-optimization","confidence-dynamics","reasoning","uncertainty","voting"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25244","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25244","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25427","title":"Binding Visual Features Point by Point","abstract":"Despite success on standard benchmarks, vision language models display persistent failures on tasks involving processing of multi-object scenes, including many tasks that are relatively easy for humans. Recent work has found that these failures may stem from a basic inability to accurately bind object features in-context, a challenge that is referred to as the \"binding problem\" in cognitive science and neuroscience. The human visual system is thought to solve this binding problem via serial proc","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T04:58:23+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25427.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文研究 VLM 在多物体场景中的特征绑定失败：模型能识别颜色、形状等局部特征，却会把不同物体的特征错误组合，例如把“蓝色方块”和“红色圆形”误读成“蓝色圆形”。论文重点不是提出一个新的 VLM 训练 recipe，而是解释为什么用文本输出空间坐标的 pointing 过程能缓解这类错误。","importance":"对预训练研究的启发在于，它把 VLM 的多物体失败归因到表示和注意力层面的干扰，而不是简单归因于数据不足或指令跟随能力不足。pointing-via-text 可以看作一种把串行视觉搜索过程显式接入语言生成轨迹的训练信号。它提示多模态预训练/后训练中，输出格式不只是监督答案，也能诱导模型形成内部算法，例如逐个定位、逐个绑定、再汇总判断。这对视觉 grounding、视觉 token 使用方式、以及 VLM 中间推理轨迹设计都有参考价值。","technical_approach":"论文先用彩色形状视觉搜索任务分析绑定错误的来源。任务要求判断目标对象是否存在，例如绿色 T。干扰项共享目标的部分特征，因此模型必须正确绑定颜色与形状，而不能只做特征集合匹配。作者将错误与对象间共享特征导致的注意力干扰联系起来。随后分析 Molmo-7B 的 pointing-via-text 行为：模型在回答前依次输出物体坐标，虽然训练时没有显式监督内部注意力状态，但模型内部出现了类似视觉搜索的串行机制。论文进一步识别出一组 search heads，这些注意力头负责把当前生成步骤与图像中的下一个候选对象关联起来。作者还在 Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct 中观察到类似机制，说明这不是单一模型偶然现象。最后，论文在 Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct、Gemma-3-12B、LLaVA-1.5-7B-HF 等模型上研究学习 pointing 对计数和视觉搜索的影响，结论是显式逐点枚举能减少绑定错误，并改善分布外泛化。","experiments":"关键实验围绕三类问题展开。第一类是机制分析：在多彩形状视觉搜索任务中，模型的绑定错误与共享特征对象之间的注意力干扰有关。第二类是内部机制验证：Molmo-7B 在生成坐标序列时表现出逐对象搜索过程，作者定位到实现该过程的 search heads；类似头部也出现在 Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct 中。第三类是行为实验：在计数和视觉搜索任务上，让模型学习 pointing-via-text 后，Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct、Gemma-3-12B、LLaVA-1.5-7B-HF 的绑定错误显著减少，并在分布外条件下有更稳定表现。提供内容中没有完整表格数字，因此不宜过度解读具体提升幅度。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，预计 25–35 分钟。重点看 Introduction 中对 binding problem 与 pointing-via-text 的问题定义；Results 里关于视觉搜索任务、注意力干扰、search heads 的机制分析；再看计数和视觉搜索的泛化实验。若关注 VLM 预训练，可重点思考两个点：第一，坐标输出为何能诱导内部串行搜索，而不仅是改变答案格式；第二，这类中间轨迹监督是否可以扩展到更一般的视觉 grounding、区域级 caption、视频事件绑定任务。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies feature binding failures in VLMs on multi-object scenes. These models may recognize individual attributes such as color and shape, but incorrectly combine attributes across objects, for example inferring a blue circle from a blue square and a red circle. The main goal is to explain why text-based pointing, where the model emits spatial coordinates before answering, helps with such failures.","importance":"The useful point for pretraining research is that the paper connects VLM failures to representational interference and attention mechanisms, rather than treating them only as data or instruction-following issues. Pointing-via-text acts as more than an output format: it can induce a serial visual search routine inside the model. This matters for multimodal training because intermediate supervision can shape internal algorithms, especially for grounding, object-wise reasoning, counting, and compositional visual understanding.","technical_approach":"The paper first analyzes a colored-shape visual search task, where the model must decide whether a target such as a green T is present among distractors that share partial target features. This task isolates the binding requirement: the model must associate color and shape with the same object rather than rely on a bag of attributes. The authors link errors to attentional interference between objects with shared features. They then analyze Molmo-7B under pointing-via-text. Although internal attention states are not explicitly supervised, the model develops a serial search-like process while producing coordinate traces. The paper identifies a set of attention heads, called search heads, that implement this routine. Similar heads are reported in Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct, suggesting that the mechanism is not unique to one model family. The behavioral side evaluates whether learning to point reduces binding errors in counting and visual search across Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct, Gemma-3-12B, and LLaVA-1.5-7B-HF.","experiments":"The experiments cover mechanism and behavior. On controlled visual search tasks, binding errors are associated with interference among objects sharing features. In Molmo-7B, coordinate generation is accompanied by an internal object-by-object search routine, and specific search heads are identified as key components. The same type of mechanism is observed in Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct. On downstream-style controlled tasks such as counting and visual search, training models to point before answering reduces binding errors and improves out-of-distribution generalization. The provided text does not include full numeric tables, so the reliable takeaway is the direction and mechanism of the effect rather than a precise gain estimate.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 25–35 minutes. Focus on the problem setup for binding errors, the visual search task, the mechanistic evidence for search heads, and the experiments on counting and out-of-distribution visual search. For multimodal pretraining work, the main question to examine is why coordinate traces induce serial attention rather than merely changing the response format, and whether similar intermediate traces can be used for broader grounding and compositional reasoning tasks.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"别把“加坐标就变强”当玄学：这篇更像在解释它修的是绑定歧义还是诱导串行处理；只看其机制实验与失败案例拆解就够。","en":"Don’t treat “add coordinates and it works” as magic—this tries to pin down whether it fixes binding ambiguity or induces serial processing; focus on the mechanistic probes and failure-case breakdowns."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Udith Haputhanthri","Declan Campbell","Rim Assouel","Jonathan D. Cohen","Taylor W. Webb"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["vlm","feature-binding","pointing","mechanistic-analysis"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25427","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25427","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25603","title":"Detecting Unfaithful Chain-of-Thought via Circuit-Guided Internal-External Discrepancy","abstract":"Chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning improves the problem-solving ability of large language models (LLMs), but generated reasoning traces may not faithfully reflect the model's actual decision process. Existing CoT unfaithfulness detectors mainly rely on external signals from generated rationales, such as textual plausibility or answer consistency, while overlooking evidence from the model's internal computation. Although recent circuit tracing methods provide a way to obtain model-internal evidence","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T08:54:55+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25603.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文处理的是 CoT faithfulness 的实例级检测问题：一个模型生成的推理链看起来合理，甚至答案正确，但它是否真的反映了模型内部形成答案的计算过程。已有检测器主要看外部文本信号，例如推理是否自洽、答案是否一致、LLM judge 是否认为合理；这会把“推理质量”和“推理忠实性”混在一起。作者希望引入模型内部计算证据，但完整 circuit tracing 对长 CoT 成本太高，因此问题落在两个约束之间：既要利用内部机制信号，又不能为每条长推理链构建完整电路。","importance":"对预训练研究的直接价值不在训练 recipe，而在 CoT 作为训练与评测信号的可靠性。当前推理模型常把 CoT 当作 SFT、RL、过程监督、验证器训练的数据来源。如果 CoT 文本与内部决策过程系统性错位，那么用它训练过程奖励模型或做机制分析会引入噪声。CIE-Scorer 给出一个可操作的方向：不要只判断 CoT 文本是否正确，而是比较外显推理轨迹和内部计算轨迹是否对齐。这个思路对研究 reasoning trace 的可用性、RL 后训练信号质量、以及机制解释工具如何进入模型评测都有启发。","technical_approach":"方法叫 CIE-Scorer，核心是 internal-external discrepancy。它先对每个推理句子选择信息量较高的 token，而不是对整段 CoT 做完整 circuit tracing。这样可以降低长 CoT 上 attribution graph 的构建成本。随后，作者为每个句子构建局部计算图，把这些 sentence-level circuit graphs 压缩成内部推理 embedding，形成内部计算轨迹。外部轨迹则来自模型对显示出来的推理句子的 hidden representations。为了让两类表示可比较，方法使用一个轻量 adaptor 对齐内部与外部 latent space。最后，作者在相同的建图规则下分别构造 internal graph 和 external graph，用 Fused Gromov-Wasserstein distance 衡量两张图在结构和节点特征上的差异，并把这个距离作为 unfaithfulness score。与只看文本 plausibility 或 answer consistency 的方法相比，它显式使用模型内部计算证据；与完整 circuit tracing 相比，它用 token selection 和句子级图压缩换取可扩展性。","experiments":"实验在 FaithCoT-Bench 的四个数据集上进行，FINE-CoT 是主要实例级 CoT unfaithfulness benchmark。论文比较了代表性外部信号检测器和基于推理文本的 baseline，CIE-Scorer 在四个数据集上取得更好的检测表现。消融重点围绕三个部件：token-selected circuit tracing 是否保留足够内部证据，sentence-level circuit graph 压缩是否优于直接使用浅层 hidden states，以及 FGW 距离是否比普通 embedding distance 更适合比较内部/外部轨迹。可见正文没有给出可核验的绝对 F1/AUC 数字，但实验结论强调，内部计算轨迹与外部文本轨迹的差异提供了外部文本判别器难以捕捉的信号。","reading_guide":"泛读即可，预计 20 到 30 分钟。重点看方法部分的三处设计：第一，如何选择 informative tokens，这决定了方法是否真能扩展到长 CoT；第二，sentence-level circuit graph 如何压缩成 internal reasoning embeddings，这决定了内部信号的粒度；第三，为什么使用 Fused Gromov-Wasserstein distance，而不是简单余弦距离或分类器拼接。实验部分建议重点看 ablation 和 failure cases。如果关心 RL reasoning 数据质量，可以把它当作 CoT 可信度过滤器的候选机制，而不是当作完整 interpretability 方案来读。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies instance-level detection of unfaithful chain-of-thought reasoning. A generated rationale may be coherent, plausible, and even paired with a correct answer, while still failing to reflect the computation that actually produced the model’s decision. Prior detectors mostly rely on external textual cues such as rationale quality, answer consistency, or LLM-as-judge scores. The missing signal is the model’s internal computation. Full circuit tracing could provide such evidence, but it is too expensive for long CoT traces. The paper targets this gap: use internal mechanistic evidence without constructing full circuits for every reasoning trace.","importance":"The relevance to pretraining and reasoning-model research is indirect but meaningful. CoT traces are often used as supervision for SFT, process reward models, verifiers, and RL training. If these traces are unfaithful, they can become noisy or misleading training signals. CIE-Scorer offers a concrete way to separate reasoning quality from faithfulness by comparing the displayed reasoning trajectory with an internal computational trajectory. This is useful for studying the quality of reasoning traces, filtering post-training data, and connecting mechanistic interpretability tools with evaluation.","technical_approach":"$31","experiments":"The experiments are conducted on four datasets from FaithCoT-Bench, with FINE-CoT serving as the main benchmark for instance-level unfaithfulness detection. CIE-Scorer is compared with representative baselines that rely on external rationale signals, and it reports stronger detection performance across the four datasets. The key ablations examine whether token-selected circuit tracing preserves useful internal evidence, whether compressed sentence-level circuit graphs outperform simpler hidden-state features, and whether Fused Gromov-Wasserstein distance is a better discrepancy measure than simpler embedding distances. The visible manuscript content does not expose exact F1 or AUC values, so the main verifiable takeaway is the relative improvement and the usefulness of internal-external mismatch as a signal.","reading_guide":"A skim reading is enough, around 20 to 30 minutes. Focus on three parts of the method: the informative-token selection step, the construction and compression of sentence-level circuit graphs, and the use of Fused Gromov-Wasserstein distance for comparing internal and external trajectories. The ablation section is more important than the headline benchmark table, because it shows whether the internal circuit signal is doing real work. For readers interested in RL reasoning data, the paper is best read as a possible CoT faithfulness filter rather than as a complete mechanistic interpretability framework.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"对 CoT 数据过滤有用，但先别信成判官；重点看 internal-external discrepancy 的定义和误报分析。","en":"Useful for CoT data filtering, not a judge to trust blindly; focus on the discrepancy definition and false-positive analysis."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Xu Shen","Zhen Tan","Song Wang","Pingjun Hong","Rui Miao","Xin Wang","Tianlong Chen"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["chain-of-thought","faithfulness","interpretability","circuit-tracing","reasoning"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25603","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25603","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25619","title":"Analogies between Transformer Layers and Power Method","abstract":"In the paper we show that there is an analogy between the operations occurring in a layer of a transformer (projections and layer normalizations, disregarding the feedforward neural network) and a step in the power method. Coherently with this analogy, we show that passing through a layer the tokens tend to be tilted towards the principal eigenvector of a matrix which is the product of the output and value weight matrices of that layer. In the special case of a transformer with shared weights (i","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T09:20:41+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25619.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这项工作关心一个机制问题：Transformer 在深度方向发生 token oversmoothing 或 rank collapse 时，所有 token 最后会靠近什么方向。已有分析多讨论 self-attention 让 token 走向共识，但较少解释共识向量由哪些权重决定。作者把层索引看成离散时间，把注意力层近似为“矩阵乘法加归一化”，从而和幂迭代建立对应关系。","importance":"对预训练的价值主要在机制分析，而不是训练 recipe。它提供了一个可操作的谱分析视角：attention block 中 value/output 权重的乘积会放大某些主方向，层归一化则类似幂迭代里的归一化步骤。这个视角有助于理解深层模型中的 token 表征坍缩、共享权重模型的深度动力学，以及基于权重扰动的表示 steering。限制也很明确：分析主要忽略 FFN，并把 LayerNorm 简化为 L2 归一化，因此不能直接等价于完整 LLM 的前向传播。","technical_approach":"作者将 Transformer 视为沿层展开的离散动力系统。若暂时忽略 FFN，每层包含 value/output 投影、attention mixing 和归一化。幂迭代的形式是反复用矩阵 F 乘以向量并归一化；在 Transformer 中，对单头或多头 attention，可把关键的“层矩阵”写成 output weight 与 value weight 拼接矩阵的乘积。对于共享权重模型，如 ALBERT，F 在各层固定，系统接近 time-invariant dynamical system；当 token 已经接近共识时，full attention 矩阵接近均匀矩阵，attention 造成的扰动减弱，主特征向量方向会逐层被放大。对于 GPT-2、GPT-Neo、BERT 这类每层权重不同的模型，F 随层变化，不能期待收敛到单个固定主特征向量；作者改用统计方式观察 token 经过某层前后与该层主特征向量的相关性，检验是否存在平均意义上的放大。最后，作者提出一种 steering 方法：在最后一层的层矩阵上加入 rank-1 扰动，人工制造较大的谱间隔，让目标方向成为新的主特征向量，从而增强输出 token 表征与该方向的对齐。","experiments":"实验覆盖 ALBERT、GPT-2、GPT-Neo、BERT 等现成模型。对 ALBERT 这类共享权重模型，在使用 L2 归一化且去掉 FFN 的设置下，token 表征确实更清楚地向由 value/output 权重乘积决定的主特征向量靠近，这和幂迭代类比一致。对 GPT-2、GPT-Neo、BERT，作者观察到许多层都会增加 token 与当前层主特征向量的相关性，但对齐强度通常较弱，原因是这些层矩阵的第一、第二特征值之间谱间隔很小，主方向不会被强烈放大。rank-1 扰动实验说明，只要人为扩大谱间隔，token 可以被明显推向指定方向。提供内容未给出完整数值表，因此这部分更适合看作机制证据，而不是性能型结论。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，约 30–45 分钟。重点看 Introduction 中对 oversmoothing 与幂迭代的连接，方法部分关于共享权重、full attention、symmetric value matrix 的解析结果，以及真实模型上“经过一层前后与主特征向量相关性变化”的图表。若关心可控生成或权重编辑，可看 rank-1 perturbation steering 部分。预训练研究者需要保留一个判断：这个分析对 attention block 的谱偏置有解释力，但忽略 FFN 后会低估 MLP 对表征重塑的作用，也没有直接回答训练过程中这些谱结构如何形成。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies what direction token representations approach when a deep Transformer exhibits oversmoothing or rank collapse. Prior work explains why self-attention can drive tokens toward consensus, but it says less about which vector defines that consensus. The authors model depth as discrete time and relate an attention layer, after dropping the FFN and using L2 normalization, to one step of the power method.","importance":"The value for pretraining research is mainly mechanistic. It gives a spectral lens on attention blocks: the product of value and output weights can amplify dominant representation directions, while normalization plays a role analogous to the normalization step in power iteration. This can inform analyses of depth dynamics, shared-weight Transformers, representation collapse, and weight-level steering. The scope is limited because the FFN is excluded and LayerNorm is approximated by L2 normalization, so the result should not be read as a full description of an operational LLM layer.","technical_approach":"$32","experiments":"Experiments are run on off-the-shelf models including ALBERT, GPT-2, GPT-Neo, and BERT. For ALBERT, where weights are shared across layers, the predicted alignment with the dominant eigenvector of the value/output product is empirically visible under the simplified setting with L2 normalization and no FFN. For GPT-2, GPT-Neo, and BERT, many layers show an increase in alignment with the current layer’s dominant eigenvector, but the effect is usually weak because the leading spectral gaps are small. The rank-1 perturbation experiments show that once a large spectral gap is induced, token states can be strongly steered toward a target direction. The supplied content does not include detailed numeric tables, so the evidence is best interpreted as mechanistic rather than task-performance oriented.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 30–45 minutes. Read the introduction for the connection between oversmoothing and power iteration, then focus on the analytical sections for the shared-weight and full-attention cases. The most relevant empirical material is the layerwise alignment analysis on ALBERT, GPT-2, GPT-Neo, and BERT. The rank-1 perturbation section is useful if weight-level steering is of interest. For pretraining work, the main point to carry forward is the spectral bias of attention blocks; the main caveat is that FFNs can substantially reshape representations and are outside the simplified analysis.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"从线性代数视角拆解Transformer层的数学本质，看§3的类比推导和Fig2的对齐实验即可，可用于指导架构与训练动态分析。","en":"Dissects the mathematical nature of Transformer layers from a linear algebra perspective; read §3 analogy derivation and Fig2 alignment experiments, useful for architecture and training dynamic analysis."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Cohere"],"authors":["Chenglong Li","Claudio Altafini"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["transformer mechanism","power method","linear algebra","representation learning","output steering"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25619","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25619","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.26174","title":"A Universal Cliff and a Design Fingerprint: Cross-Section Defect Detection Under LLM Orchestration","abstract":"Production language-model systems answer a request by partitioning it across an invisible orchestration of worker agents that recompose one integrated report. We ask what this does to a class of defect no single worker can see: a contradiction in the relation between two distant sections of a document. Holding the documents, defects, mechanism, scoring, and seed fixed, we vary only the model -- ten systems across five generations from one developer and five providers from distinct alignment para","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T05:09:48+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_26174.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CL","cs.MA","cs.SE"],"summary":{"core_problem":"研究生产级 LLM 系统在多 worker orchestration 下是否会丧失发现长文档跨章节矛盾的能力。","importance":"贡献是系统行为分析：把同一类跨章节缺陷检测任务放在单 agent 与 orchestration 两种执行机制下比较，提出“orchestration 会造成检测能力断崖”的现象。对 agent 架构和长文档处理有警示意义，但摘要信息不足，结论需要谨慎看。","technical_approach":"论文固定文档、缺陷、生成机制、评分方式和随机种子，只改变模型或系统；比较十个来自同一开发者五代系统的模型，以及五个来自不同 provider、不同 alignment 范式的系统。使用 signal-detection decomposition 分解掉落后模型的行为差异。","experiments":"摘要声称所有能在单 agent 条件下发现跨章节缺陷的模型，在 orchestration 条件下检测能力下降三分之二以上；该下降不被模型规模或 extended reasoning 消除。在六个仍高于随机的模型中，不同开发者谱系表现出不同的信号检测行为。摘要未给出具体模型名称、样本数、置信区间和任务构造细节。","authors_note":"作者机构标注为 Research Institute of Criminal Psychiatry、Sex Offender Medical Center、Kyoto University。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies whether production LLM systems lose the ability to detect contradictions between distant document sections when the request is handled through multi-worker orchestration.","importance":"Its contribution is a behavioral analysis of agentic orchestration: with the task, defects, scoring, and seed held fixed, it compares single-agent and orchestrated execution and reports a large detection cliff. This is relevant to agent architecture and long-document reliability, but the abstract does not provide enough detail to treat the conclusion as settled.","technical_approach":"The study fixes documents, injected defects, mechanism, scoring, and seed, while varying only the model or provider. It tests ten systems across five generations from one developer and five providers with different alignment paradigms, then applies signal-detection decomposition to analyze model behavior after the performance drop.","experiments":"The abstract claims that every model able to detect cross-section defects as a single agent loses that ability under orchestration, with detection falling by at least two thirds across all tested paradigms. The drop is reported not to be closed by scale or extended reasoning. The abstract does not provide model names, dataset size, confidence intervals, or detailed task construction.","authors_note":"The listed affiliations include Research Institute of Criminal Psychiatry, Sex Offender Medical Center, and Kyoto University."},"recommendation":{"zh":"结论很强但 setup 需验；只看任务构造和误差分解，别把“universal cliff”当稳定规律引用。","en":"The claim is strong but the setup needs scrutiny; read only the task construction and error decomposition, not the “universal cliff” as a settled law."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Research Institute of Criminal Psychiatry","Sex Offender Medical Center","Kyoto University"],"authors":["Hiroki Fukui"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agent-orchestration","long-context","failure-analysis","signal-detection","system-behavior"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.26174","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.26174","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25394","title":"Second Guess: Detecting Uncertainty Through Abstention and Answer Stability in Small Language Models","abstract":"Large language models often generate confident but incorrect answers rather than abstaining when uncertain. This problem is particularly acute for small language models (SLMs), where computational constraints and autonomous operation amplify the need for reliable uncertainty detection. We propose _Second Guess_, a lightweight, parameter-free prompting technique for abstention in multiple-choice question answering (MCQA) that is well-suited for SLMs. Our key empirical insight is that models which","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T03:38:54+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25394.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"在小语言模型的多选问答中，如何低成本识别不确定性并让模型在不知道时选择 abstain，而不是自信地答错。","importance":"这不是预训练方法论文，但和不确定性估计、校准、后训练接口有关。贡献类型是轻量 prompting 方法与经验性机制观察：答案稳定性可作为是否知道的代理信号。","technical_approach":"提出 Second Guess，一种无参数的 prompting 技术：先观察模型在标准 MCQA 下的回答，再加入“I don't know”选项，利用答案是否稳定来判断模型是否真正知道答案；核心假设是知道答案的模型在选项扰动下更稳定，不确定模型更容易切换。","experiments":"在 4 个 2B-8B 开源模型和 4 个 benchmark 上评测。摘要报告 composite risk 改善 10.81%，在 fine-tuned 模型上仍保持约 8% 改善，而基于 entropy 的方法在该设定下退化；收益在较弱模型上更明显。未给出具体模型名和数据集名。","authors_note":"作者来自 University of Southern California 与 Information Sciences Institute。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks how to detect uncertainty cheaply in small language models for multiple-choice QA, so the model can abstain instead of confidently answering incorrectly.","importance":"This is not a pretraining paper, but it is adjacent to uncertainty estimation, calibration, and the pretrain-to-posttrain interface. The contribution is a lightweight prompting method plus an empirical mechanism claim: answer stability can serve as a proxy for whether the model actually knows the answer.","technical_approach":"Second Guess is a parameter-free prompting technique. It compares the model’s answer under standard MCQA with its behavior when an 'I don’t know' option is added, using answer stability as the uncertainty signal. The key hypothesis is that models that truly know the answer remain stable under this option perturbation, while uncertain models become unstable.","experiments":"The method is evaluated on four open models in the 2B-8B range and four benchmarks. The abstract reports a 10.81% improvement in composite risk, around 8% improvement even on fine-tuned models where entropy-based methods degrade, and larger gains for weaker models. Specific model names and dataset names are not given in the abstract.","authors_note":"The authors are from the University of Southern California and the Information Sciences Institute."},"recommendation":{"zh":"方法很轻，像个 prompt trick，但“答案稳定性比熵更能测知道/不知道”这个点值得记；读实验主表即可，不必投入太多时间。","en":"This is basically a prompt trick, but the claim that answer stability beats entropy for know/don’t-know detection is worth remembering; read the main results table and move on."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Southern California","Information Sciences Institute"],"authors":["Ashwath Vaithinathan Aravindan","Mayank Kejriwal"],"notable_authors":["Mayank Kejriwal"],"tags":["uncertainty","abstention","calibration","small-language-models","answer-stability"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25394","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25394","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25204","title":"Clarification Is Not Enough: Post-Clarification Answering Remains the Bottleneck in Multi-Turn QA","abstract":"Pluralistic alignment requires systems to adapt to diverse user values, communication styles, and contextual assumptions. We believe that a foundational prerequisite for such alignment enabling accurate preference elicitation from people when their intent is under-specified or ambiguous. We study the problem of preference elicitation in multi-turn question answering by decomposing the problem into two components: a \\textbf{clarification policy}, which decides whether to ask a clarifying question","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T18:06:09+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25204.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"研究多轮问答中用户意图不完整或有歧义时，模型是否只要学会提澄清问题就能给出正确最终答案。","importance":"贡献是行为分析而不是新训练范式：它把偏好澄清拆成“是否澄清”的策略问题和“澄清后能否正确作答”的理解问题，指出后者可能是更大的瓶颈。","technical_approach":"论文基于 PACIFIC benchmark，将多轮 QA 流程分解为 clarification policy 和 post-clarification answering 两部分，并观察监督微调对两部分能力的影响。核心技术点是用动作正确性和最终答案正确性分开度量，避免把“会问问题”和“能用好用户补充信息”混在一起。","experiments":"摘要显示实验使用 PACIFIC benchmark，并比较监督微调前后的表现。结论是 SFT 能较快改善是否提问的策略，但即便模型采取了正确动作，最终答案准确率仍明显偏低；具体模型规模、训练数据量和提升幅度未在摘要中给出。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether learning to ask clarifying questions is sufficient for accurate multi-turn QA when user intent is underspecified.","importance":"Its contribution is an analysis of failure decomposition: clarification policy and post-clarification answering are measured separately, showing that the latter remains a hard bottleneck.","technical_approach":"Using the PACIFIC benchmark, the work separates the decision to clarify from the ability to interpret the user's follow-up and produce the final answer. This isolates action correctness from answer correctness, which is useful for diagnosing multi-turn alignment failures.","experiments":"The abstract reports experiments with supervised fine-tuning on PACIFIC. SFT rapidly improves the clarification policy, but final answer accuracy remains substantially lower even when the model chooses the correct action. Model sizes, data scale, and exact numbers are not provided in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"结论不改 pretrain recipe，但提醒多轮数据不能只标“问不问”，要单独测澄清后信息绑定。","en":"Not a pretraining recipe paper, but it is a useful warning: multi-turn data should test post-clarification binding, not just whether the model asks."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Jinyan Su","Jennifer Healey"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["multi-turn-qa","clarification","alignment","sft","behavior-analysis"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25204","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25204","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25848","title":"Geometric Evolution Maps: Extracting Stable Concept Probes from Transformer Residual Streams","abstract":"Concept probes extracted from transformer residual streams are only as reliable as the layer from which they are extracted. The common practice of probing at a fixed late layer or at the peak of a separation score function ignores a fundamental structural feature: concept representations undergo substantial directional rotation during their assembly phase, and do not settle into a stable direction until a characteristic handoff layer after the primary Concept Allocation Zone (CAZ). We introduce ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T13:40:15+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25848.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有概念探针提取方法普遍采用固定晚期层或分离分数峰值层，忽略了概念表示在组装期的方向旋转，导致探针可靠性不足","importance":"机制分析类创新，首次量化了Transformer残差流中概念表示的几何演化规律，提出了更稳定的探针提取范式","technical_approach":"提出几何演化映射（GEM），全程跟踪概念在残差流激活中的方向轨迹，定位概念旋转停止的交接层，从该层提取稳定的探针方向","experiments":"覆盖23种Transformer架构（参数量70M至14B）、17种概念类型，实验发现概念分配区（CAZ）内入口与出口的方向余弦相似度均值仅0.233，证明早期探针方向无法预测最终稳定方向","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing concept probe extraction methods typically adopt fixed late layers or separation score peak layers, ignoring the directional rotation of concept representations during assembly, leading to insufficient probe reliability","importance":"Mechanism analysis innovation, first quantifies the geometric evolution pattern of concept representations in Transformer residual streams, and proposes a more stable probe extraction paradigm","technical_approach":"Proposes Geometric Evolution Maps (GEMs) to track the full directional trajectory of concepts in residual stream activations, locate the handoff layer where concept rotation ceases, and extract stable probe directions from that layer","experiments":"Covers 23 Transformer architectures (70M to 14B parameters) and 17 concept types, experiments show the mean cosine similarity between entry and exit within the Concept Allocation Zone (CAZ) is only 0.233, proving early probe directions cannot predict final stable directions","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"Transformer内部概念表示的几何演化观察有参考价值，仅需关注CAZ内方向旋转的量化结果即可","en":"The geometric evolution observation of Transformer internal concept representations is informative; only focus on the rotation quantification within CAZs"},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["James Henry"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["interpretability","concept-probing","transformer-mechanism","residual-stream"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25848","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25848","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25612","title":"Towards the Connection between Activation Sparsity and Flat Minima","abstract":"The observation that activation sparsity emerges in MLP blocks of standardly trained Transformers offers an opportunity to drastically reduce computation costs without sacrificing performance. To theoretically explain this phenomenon, existing works have shown that activation sparsity does not result from the data properties or data fitting but from the implicit bias of the training process. However, these connections are obtained with strong assumptions, which cannot be applied to deep models s","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T09:10:40+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25612.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解释标准训练 Transformer 的 MLP block 为什么会自然出现 activation sparsity，以及这种稀疏性是否与 flat minima 有可分析关系。","importance":"贡献类型是机制分析。若结论成立，它给 activation sparsity 一个比“数据属性”或“拟合需求”更接近训练动力学的解释，也为训练后激活剪枝、稀疏推理和 sparsity-aware pretraining 提供理论线索。","technical_approach":"论文把 MLP activation sparsity 表示为 augmented flatness 与输入范数、activation gradient 乘积之间的比值。相比依赖强假设的已有解释，它试图用深度网络标准训练中自然出现的 flatness 条件来推导稀疏性。","experiments":"摘要说明作者在标准深度模型训练设置下做了经验验证，但给定摘要被截断，模型规模、数据集、Transformer 类型和具体数值尚无法确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks why MLP activation sparsity emerges in standardly trained Transformers and whether it can be explained through flat minima.","importance":"This is a mechanism paper. If the derivation holds, it provides a training-dynamics explanation for activation sparsity and may inform sparse inference, activation pruning, and sparsity-aware pretraining.","technical_approach":"The authors relate MLP activation sparsity to a ratio between an augmented flatness measure and the product of input norm and activation gradient. The goal is to weaken prior assumptions by grounding sparsity in naturally emerging flatness during standard deep-network training.","experiments":"The abstract mentions empirical validation under standard deep-model training, but the provided text is truncated and does not specify model scale, datasets, architectures, or numerical results.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"机制味道不错但离 recipe 还远；关心 activation sparsity 的人看定理和经验相关性图就够。","en":"A plausible mechanism note but not yet a recipe; read the theorem and empirical correlation plots if activation sparsity matters to you."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Ze Peng","Jian Zhang","Lei Qi","Yang Gao","Yinghuan Shi"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["activation-sparsity","flat-minima","Transformer-MLP","mechanistic-analysis"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25612","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25612","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25541","title":"TopoAlign: Topology-Aware Visual Representation Alignment","abstract":"Neural networks encode inputs as high-dimensional vectors, known as representations, that capture how models process data by encoding task-relevant structure and semantics. Representation alignment refers to the degree to which different models, layers, or training conditions produce similar representations for the same inputs, with important implications for model interpretation, selection, and robustness analysis. Existing approaches to measure alignment primarily rely on geometric properties,","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T07:58:26+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25541.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CG","cs.HC","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有表征对齐方法多依赖局部邻域、聚类或几何相似度，难以说明不同模型、层或训练条件下表征空间的全局结构差异。","importance":"贡献类型是表征分析工具与可视化方法。它不直接改进 LLM 预训练，但对研究不同 checkpoint、层间表征漂移、训练条件变化后的结构差异有间接参考价值。","technical_approach":"TopoAlign 使用拓扑数据分析中的 mapper graph，把共享输入在不同模型或层中的高维表征转成可比较的图结构，再做联合分析和自顶向下的可视化比较。方法重点不是重新定义训练目标，而是把表征对齐从几何相似度扩展到全局拓扑组织。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体模型规模、数据集、baseline 或定量提升。可确认的是论文围绕不同模型、层或训练条件下的共享输入表征做比较分析，实验细节需要正文确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing representation-alignment methods mostly compare local neighborhoods, clusters, or geometric similarity, and provide limited visibility into global structural differences across models, layers, or training conditions.","importance":"The contribution is an analysis and visualization framework for neural representations. It does not directly change LLM pretraining, but it may be useful for studying checkpoint drift, layer-wise representation changes, or training-condition effects.","technical_approach":"TopoAlign applies mapper graphs from topological data analysis to representations of shared inputs, then jointly compares the resulting graph structures. The method shifts alignment analysis from purely geometric metrics toward global topological organization.","experiments":"The abstract does not report model sizes, datasets, baselines, or quantitative gains. It indicates comparative studies over representations from different models, layers, or training conditions, with details left to the full paper.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"可作为表征分析工具备查；若关心 pretrain checkpoint 漂移，只看方法图和案例即可。","en":"Useful as a representation-analysis tool; for pretraining checkpoint drift, the method figure and case studies are enough."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Xinyuan Yan","Rita Sevastjanova","Mennatallah El-Assady","Bei Wang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["representation-analysis","topological-data-analysis","model-alignment","interpretability"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25541","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25541","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25156","title":"Abduction-Deduction Entanglement: Domain Generalization via Representation Transplants","abstract":"Prediction models trained under the source distribution do not generalize well to a different target distribution. A valid inference about an unseen data distribution must be anchored by the invariance of certain causal mechanisms that generate the source and target data, however, these structural invariances are non-identifiable from the source data alone. Under mild causal assumptions about the data, we show that the optimal prediction in the target is in fact partially identifiable by the sou","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T16:27:50+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25156.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"源分布训练的预测模型泛化到目标分布效果差，因果结构不变性无法仅从源数据识别。","importance":"领域泛化的因果理论分析，提出溯因-演绎分解框架。","technical_approach":"将最优预测分解为溯因映射和演绎映射，利用大规模源数据约束有效映射组合，实现部分识别目标域最优预测。","experiments":"暂无具体实验结果披露。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Prediction models trained on source distribution generalize poorly to target distribution, and causal structural invariances are not identifiable from source data alone.","importance":"Causal theoretical analysis for domain generalization with abduction-deduction decomposition framework.","technical_approach":"Decomposes optimal prediction into abduction and deduction maps, uses large source data to constrain valid map ensembles, and achieves partially identifiable optimal prediction on target domain.","experiments":"No specific experimental results disclosed.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"因果视角的领域泛化理论工作，做LLM泛化机制研究可作为理论参考。","en":"Theoretical work on domain generalization from causal perspective, can be used as theoretical reference for LLM generalization mechanism research."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Kasra Jalaldoust","Elias Bareinboum"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["domain generalization","causal inference","representation learning"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25156","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25156","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25275","title":"Label-NTK Alignments and A Tighter Convergence Bound in the NTK Regime","abstract":"The Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) framework explains optimization in over-parameterized neural networks via approximately linearized dynamics, yielding exponential convergence guarantees. However, existing results are often overly pessimistic and do not match the fast training in practice, as they depend on the smallest NTK eigenvalue, which is typically extremely small in practice. In this work, we develop sharper convergence guarantees by characterizing the interaction between data labels and th","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T22:04:02+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25275.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解释为什么经典 NTK 收敛界过于悲观，尤其是依赖最小 NTK 特征值时无法匹配实际训练速度。","importance":"贡献类型是优化理论与训练动力学分析。它把收敛速度从单一最小特征值依赖，改写为标签、残差与 NTK 谱结构的对齐关系；对理解过参数网络训练速度有一定参考价值，但离 LLM 预训练 recipe 仍较远。","technical_approach":"论文提出 Label-NTK alignment 和 Residual-NTK alignment：标签向量和训练残差在 NTK 特征向量上的投影会随对应特征值缩放。基于这种谱对齐性质，作者推导了依赖完整谱分布的更紧收敛界，而不是只用最小特征值控制最坏方向。","experiments":"摘要称给出了经验验证和温和数据假设下的理论论证，并显示新界更贴近实际训练动态、显著优于经典界。未从摘要中看到大模型、Transformer 或语言建模实验设置。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks why classical NTK convergence bounds are too pessimistic, especially when they are controlled by the smallest NTK eigenvalue.","importance":"This is a theory contribution on optimization dynamics in over-parameterized networks. Its value is in replacing a worst-eigenvalue view with a spectrum-and-label-alignment view, which is conceptually relevant to training dynamics but not directly actionable for LLM pretraining.","technical_approach":"The authors introduce Label-NTK alignment and Residual-NTK alignment, arguing that label and residual projections onto NTK eigenvectors scale with the corresponding eigenvalues. They then derive a refined convergence bound that depends on the full NTK spectrum rather than only the minimum eigenvalue.","experiments":"The abstract reports empirical evidence and theoretical justification under mild data assumptions, with the refined bound better matching observed training dynamics than classical NTK bounds. No Transformer-scale or language-model pretraining experiments are indicated.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看谱对齐假设和收敛界形式；对大模型优化是弱外推，不能直接变成训练 recipe。","en":"Read only the spectral-alignment assumptions and bound form; the LLM-pretraining link is a weak extrapolation, not a recipe."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Ruchirinkil Marreddy","Chaoyue Liu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["NTK","optimization-theory","training-dynamics","spectral-analysis"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25275","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25275","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"coding_agent","emoji":"💻","name":"Coding Agent","description":"SWE-bench/代码生成/代码修复/软件工程Agent/Program Synthesis/Automated Debugging","papers":[{"id":"2605.25430","title":"CODESKILL: Learning Self-Evolving Skills for Coding Agents","abstract":"Coding agents produce rich trajectories while solving software-engineering tasks. To enable agent self-evolution, these trajectories can be distilled into reusable procedural skills that compactly encode experience to guide future behavior. However, existing skill construction and maintenance methods often rely on fixed prompts and heuristic update rules, leaving it unclear how knowledge should be selected, abstracted, and maintained to best serve downstream agents. We propose CODESKILL, an LLM-","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T05:12:49+00:00","category_id":"coding_agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25430.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"CODESKILL 解决的是编码 Agent 如何从历史交互轨迹中学习可复用技能，并把这些技能维护成一个能持续服务后续任务的技能库。关键点不是再训练下游编码 Agent，而是学习一个“技能管理策略”：决定从哪些轨迹证据中抽取什么、抽象到什么粒度、何时合并或删除已有技能。","importance":"这篇论文对基座预训练本身不是直接贡献，但对 post-train 与 agent self-improvement 有参考价值。它把经验蒸馏、记忆维护、技能更新从固定 prompt 和启发式规则，改成可训练策略，并用下游任务反馈优化。这对构造长期可积累的 Agent 训练信号有启发：轨迹不是只用于 SFT，也可以被压缩成过程性知识，再反过来改善冻结策略的执行。","technical_approach":"方法由三个部分组成。第一，维护一个技能库，每个技能是 markdown 形式的过程性指令，包含标题、触发条件和可执行建议。第二，给定历史轨迹和相关技能上下文，管理模型 Mθ 输出技能操作，包括生成新技能、基于新经验演化旧技能，以及维护技能库，例如添加、合并、删除。第三，训练这个管理模型。训练先用编码 Agent 轨迹和教师模型生成的技能操作做监督 warm start，再用 GRPO 优化。奖励由两类信号组成：一类是可验证的任务结果，检查技能是否帮助冻结的下游编码 Agent 解题；另一类是 rubric-based judge，评估技能质量以及技能与实际行为是否对齐。这个设计的取舍比较清楚：纯任务成功奖励太稀疏，纯 LLM judge 又容易偏离真实执行效果，两者结合能让管理策略同时学到可执行性和可复用性。","experiments":"论文用 Qwen3.5-4B 实例化 CODESKILL，在 EnvBench、SWE-Bench Verified 和 Terminal-Bench 2 上评估。相对无技能基线，平均 pass rate 提升 9.69 个点；相对最强的 prompt-based 技能抽取或记忆构造基线，提升 4.01 个点。对应相对增益约为 33% 和 11%。结果覆盖域内和分布外软件工程任务，说明收益不只是来自记住训练任务细节。最有信息量的实验是冻结下游编码策略后，只改变技能库和技能管理方式，因为这能隔离“管理策略是否真的学会压缩和维护经验”这一问题。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，预计 25 分钟。先看 Introduction 中对固定 prompt / heuristic memory 的问题定义，再看 CODESKILL 方法部分，重点是技能表示、操作空间、Update 机制和 GRPO 奖励设计。实验部分重点看三组对比：无技能、prompt-based 技能抽取、CODESKILL；如果有消融，优先看去掉任务奖励、去掉 rubric judge、去掉技能演化或维护操作后的变化。需要带着一个限制去读：该方法优化的是冻结下游 Agent 的外部技能库，不等价于模型权重层面的持续学习；技能是否能跨模型、跨工具栈迁移，需要额外验证。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"CODESKILL studies how a coding agent can turn past software-engineering trajectories into reusable procedural skills, and how those skills should be updated over time. The main problem is skill-bank management: what evidence to extract, how abstract the skill should be, and when to add, revise, merge, or drop skills, without updating the downstream coding agent itself.","importance":"The paper is not a direct pretraining contribution, but it is useful for post-training and agent self-improvement research. It reframes memory construction as a learnable policy rather than a set of fixed prompts and hand-written update rules. For researchers thinking about trajectory reuse, it shows a concrete route from raw interaction traces to compact procedural knowledge, optimized with downstream execution feedback.","technical_approach":"CODESKILL maintains a bank of markdown-style skills. Each skill contains a title, a trigger condition, and actionable instructions. Given a trajectory and relevant skill-bank context, the management model Mθ emits an operation: generate a new skill, evolve an existing one with new or failed experience, or maintain the bank through adding, merging, or removing entries. Training has two stages. The model is first warm-started with supervised data built from coding-agent trajectories and teacher-generated skill operations. It is then optimized with GRPO. The reward mixes sparse verifiable task feedback from a frozen downstream coding agent with dense rubric-based judgments of skill quality and behavior-skill alignment. This is a reasonable compromise: task success is the right objective but sparse, while judge feedback is denser but needs grounding in execution outcomes.","experiments":"The authors instantiate CODESKILL with Qwen3.5-4B and evaluate it on EnvBench, SWE-Bench Verified, and Terminal-Bench 2. CODESKILL improves average pass rate by 9.69 points over the no-skill baseline and by 4.01 points over the strongest prompt-based skill extraction or memory-construction baseline, corresponding to relative gains of about 33% and 11%. The reported gains hold on both in-domain and out-of-distribution software-engineering tasks. The clean part of the setup is that the downstream coding policy is frozen, so improvements can be attributed to the learned skill-management layer rather than to model weight updates.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 25 minutes. Read the introduction for the failure mode of prompt-based memory, then focus on the CODESKILL section: skill representation, operation types, the Update procedure, and the GRPO reward. In the experiments, prioritize comparisons against no-skill and prompt-based memory baselines. If ablations are included, the most informative ones are removing task feedback, removing rubric-based judgments, and disabling skill evolution or bank maintenance. A useful caveat to keep in mind is that the method learns an external memory layer for a frozen agent; transfer across base models, tool interfaces, and repository distributions remains the harder question.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"值得扫方法和实验设置；skill bank 的 RL 管理比 prompt 规则干净，但先看是否真跑真实仓库任务。","en":"Skim the method and setup; RL-managed skill banks are cleaner than prompt heuristics, but the value depends on whether the tasks are real repository work."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Yanzhou Li","Yiran Zhang","Xiaoyu Zhang","Xiaoxia Liu","Yang Liu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["coding-agent","skill-memory","trajectory-distillation","reinforcement-learning"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25430","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25430","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.26186","title":"SetupX: Can LLM Agents Learn from Past Failures in Functionality-Correct Code Repository Setup?","abstract":"Functionality-correct repository setup aims to configure execution environments (e.g., dependencies, build scripts) to successfully execute a repository's documented features. It presents significant challenges due to diverse, repository-specific failures, including dependency incompatibilities, missing toolchains, incomplete installations, and verification-strategy mismatches. Existing LLM agents struggle to robustly resolve these issues, specifically failing to support (1) cross-repository exp","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T08:33:15+00:00","category_id":"coding_agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_26186.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CL","cs.LG","cs.SE"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决代码仓库 setup agent 在真实环境配置中难以跨仓库迁移经验、在不可逆状态下反复试错、以及可靠验证 setup 是否成功的问题。","importance":"这是软件工程 agent 的实用问题，和基座预训练关系不强，但其中“从失败经验中学习”和“环境状态不可逆”这两个设定，对工具使用型 agent 训练与评测有一定参考价值。","technical_approach":"论文提出 SetupX。核心包括一个 Self-Evolving Experience Representation（XPU），把 setup 信号、文本指导和可执行动作编码成可迁移经验单元；再结合基于经验的试错修复流程，在新仓库上复用已验证的环境修复策略，并强调区分 setup 失败与仓库自身 bug 的验证机制。","experiments":"摘要显示作者关注 functionality-correct repository setup 这一更贴近真实执行环境的任务，并与现有 LLM agents 比较其跨仓库迁移、multi-step repair 和 outcome verification 能力，但未给出 benchmark 规模、模型、成功率提升等关键数字。","authors_note":"作者列表包含 Independent Researcher 与 Inspur 相关机构，但缺少可确认的知名团队背景。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"It tackles repository setup agents for real execution environments, where current systems struggle with cross-repository transfer, trial-and-repair under non-revertible states, and reliable verification of whether setup actually succeeded.","importance":"This is mainly a software-engineering agent problem rather than a foundation-model pretraining problem, but the notions of learning from failures and handling irreversible environment states are mildly relevant to tool-using agents.","technical_approach":"The paper proposes SetupX. Its core component is a Self-Evolving Experience Representation (XPU) that packages setup signals, textual guidance, and executable actions into transferable experience units. These are then reused in an experience-driven repair loop, with explicit verification to separate setup-induced failures from repository bugs.","experiments":"From the abstract, the task is functionality-correct repository setup in realistic environments, and the comparisons focus on transfer, multi-step repair, and verification robustness against existing LLM agents. However, the abstract does not provide benchmark size, model details, or effect sizes.","authors_note":"The author list includes an Independent Researcher and an Inspur-affiliated institution, but no clearly identifiable well-known lab can be confirmed from the provided metadata."},"recommendation":{"zh":"更像 SWE agent 工程题，不会直接反馈到 pretrain；若你做 tool-use agent，只看经验表示和验证设计，别在结果表上花太多时间。","en":"This is mostly an SWE-agent engineering paper, not something that feeds back into pretraining; if you care about tool-use agents, just inspect the experience representation and verification design."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Jinan Inspur Data Technology Co., Ltd","Independent Researcher 4 Jinan Inspur Data Technology Co., Ltd"],"authors":["Zihang Zhou","Ziqian Ren","Yukai Wu","Yingjie Xiong","Wei Zhou","Chao Peng","Dong Zhang","Bingheng Yan","Xuanhe Zhou","Fan Wu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["coding-agent","repository-setup","experience-replay","tool-use","software-engineering"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.26186","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.26186","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.23491","title":"CoSPlay: Cooperative Self-Play at Test-Time with Self-Generated Code and Unit Test","abstract":"Recently, Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Rewards (RLVR) and Test-Time Scaling (TTS) have advanced LLM code generation through executable verification. Yet Ground-Truth Unit Tests (GT UTs) remain a bottleneck: SOTA RLVR methods require them for costly training, while existing TTS methods lose competitiveness without them. This motivates GT-free TTS, where existing methods directly use self-generated UTs to refine and select code candidates. Yet such UTs are often noisy or spuriously coupl","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"huggingface","sources":["huggingface"],"published_at":"2026-05-22T00:00:00.000Z","category_id":"coding_agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_23491.png","hf_upvotes":8,"arxiv_categories":[],"summary":{"core_problem":"代码生成的 RLVR 和 test-time scaling 往往依赖真实单元测试；没有 ground-truth unit tests 时，自生成测试容易噪声大，并可能与错误代码相互强化。","importance":"这是代码生成中的训练无关 test-time 方法。它对预训练研究的间接价值在于展示了可执行验证信号如何在没有人工测试的情况下自举，可能为代码 RLVR 数据构造和 verifier 设计提供弱信号。","technical_approach":"CoSPlay 采用 cooperative self-play，同时改进候选代码和自生成单元测试。它先探索多样化解法与潜在失败模式，生成更有区分度的测试思路；随后构造 Code-UT execution matrix，用代码通过测试和测试区分代码的双向 pass-count 信号迭代剪枝与选择。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体 benchmark、模型规模或提升幅度。实验重点应是与依赖 ground-truth unit tests 的 RLVR/TTS 方法，以及直接使用自生成 UT 的 GT-free 方法比较，在无真实测试设置下评估代码候选选择质量。","authors_note":"机构包括 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)、Institute of Deep Perception Technology、JITRI 和 Wuxi。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"RLVR and test-time scaling for code generation often depend on ground-truth unit tests; without them, self-generated tests can be noisy and spuriously coupled with wrong code.","importance":"This is a training-free test-time method for code generation. Its indirect value for base-model researchers is the self-bootstrapping of executable verification signals without human-provided tests, which may inform RLVR data and verifier design.","technical_approach":"CoSPlay jointly improves code candidates and self-generated unit tests through cooperative self-play. It explores diverse solution ideas and likely failure modes to generate discriminative test ideas, then uses a Code-UT execution matrix and bidirectional pass-count signals to iteratively prune and select both code and tests.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide benchmark names, model sizes, or numerical gains. The intended comparison is against RLVR/TTS methods that use ground-truth unit tests and GT-free methods that directly rely on self-generated tests.","authors_note":"The listed affiliations include The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Institute of Deep Perception Technology, JITRI, and Wuxi."},"recommendation":{"zh":"看 Code-UT execution matrix 就够了；方法像工程自举，但对无标注 verifier 信号有可借鉴细节。","en":"Skim the Code-UT execution matrix; the method is mostly engineering self-bootstrapping, but the verifier signal is reusable."},"metadata":{"institutions":["The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)","Institute of Deep Perception Technology","JITRI","Wuxi","Institute of Deep Perception Technology, JITRI, Wuxi"],"authors":["Zhangyi HU","Chenhui Liu","Tian Huang","Jindong Li","Yang Yang","Jiemin Wu","Zining Zhong","Menglin Yang","Yutao Yue"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["code-generation","test-time-scaling","unit-tests","rlvr","self-play"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.23491","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.23491","github":"https://github.com/sanae-ai/cosplay","project":"","source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"agent","emoji":"🤖","name":"Agent 与系统","description":"通用AI Agent/Tool Use/Function Calling/Planning/RAG/多Agent系统","papers":[{"id":"2605.25480","title":"Retrieval as Reasoning: Self-Evolving Agent-Native Retrieval via LLM-Wiki","abstract":"LLM agents require retrieval to behave less like one-shot context fetching and more like reasoning: searching, reading, traversing, and deciding when evidence is sufficient. Yet current Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) systems organize external knowledge as flat chunks retrieved by embedding similarity, exposing a retrieval-as-lookup interface ill-suited to iterative reasoning agents. We propose LLM-Wiki, an agent-native retrieval system that operationalizes the Retrieval-as-Reasoning paradi","starred":true,"priority":"p1","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T06:36:14+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25480.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"RAG 把外部知识当作静态 chunk 检索，难以支撑需要多步搜索、阅读、跳转和停机判断的 agent 式推理。","importance":"贡献属于通用 Agent/RAG 系统设计，而不是基座预训练本身；但它提出了更接近“检索即推理”的知识接口，对理解 agent 时代外部记忆应如何组织有参考价值。","technical_approach":"作者提出 LLM-Wiki，把文档编译成带双向链接的 Wiki 结构，而不是平铺向量索引；系统暴露 search、read、follow-link 等工具调用接口，让模型以迭代方式探索证据。另加一个 Error Book 机制，用于持续记录结构和语义错误并自我修正，使知识库可以自演化。","experiments":"论文在 HotpotQA、MuSiQue、2WikiMultiHopQA 上报告优于 HippoRAG 2 等方法，主打多跳问答场景。摘要未给出模型规模和训练细节，因此更像系统接口与知识组织方式的比较，而不是 clean 的模型能力归因实验。","authors_note":"机构为 WeChat / Tencent Inc.，属于大厂 Agent 与检索系统方向工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Standard RAG treats external knowledge as flat chunk retrieval, which is poorly matched to agentic reasoning that requires iterative search, reading, traversal, and stopping decisions.","importance":"This is primarily an agent/RAG systems paper rather than a pretraining paper, but its retrieval interface is relevant for thinking about external memory organization in the agent era.","technical_approach":"The paper proposes LLM-Wiki, which compiles documents into linked Wiki-style pages instead of a flat embedding index. It exposes search, read, and link-following as tool calls, and adds an Error Book mechanism for persistent structural and semantic self-correction so the knowledge base can evolve over time.","experiments":"The method reportedly outperforms systems such as HippoRAG 2 on HotpotQA, MuSiQue, and 2WikiMultiHopQA, focusing on multi-hop QA. The abstract does not provide model scale or detailed training setup, so the evidence is more about interface/system design than clean capability attribution.","authors_note":"From WeChat / Tencent Inc., representing a large-lab effort on agentic retrieval systems."},"recommendation":{"zh":"对 pretrain 不是主线，但它把“外部知识接口”从向量召回改成可遍历结构，这会影响你怎么看 agent-era memory；读系统设计和 error book 即可。","en":"Not a pretraining paper, but it usefully reframes external knowledge from flat retrieval to traversable memory; read the system interface and Error Book parts, not every benchmark table."},"metadata":{"institutions":["WeChat","Tencent Inc.","WeChat, Tencent Inc."],"authors":["Haoliang Ming","Feifei Li","Xiaoqing Wu","Wenhui Que"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agentic-retrieval","RAG","tool-use","knowledge-structure","multi-hop-QA"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25480","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25480","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25815","title":"Behind EvoMap: Characterizing a Self-Evolving Agent-to-Agent Collaboration Network","abstract":"Agent-to-Agent (A2A) networks enable autonomous AI agents to collaborate by sharing reusable problem-solving instructions. However, how these decentralized ecosystems operate in practice remains largely unexplored. We present the first large-scale empirical study of EvoMap, a prominent A2A collaboration network. By analyzing over 1.5M assets and 128K agents, we show how design choices that prioritize scalable growth introduce trade-offs in reusability, evolution, and auditability. First, EvoMap'","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T13:12:27+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25815.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.MA"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇文章研究的是一个真实世界的 Agent-to-Agent（A2A）协作网络 EvoMap：当大量代理在一个“共享资产（instructions/skills）+激励机制+自动验证”的生态里发布、复用、演化指令资产时，系统是否真的实现了三项目标——可复用性（reusability）、可演化性（evolution）、可审计性（auditability）——以及哪些机制设计导致了偏差与攻击面。","importance":"对基座预训练本身不是直接贡献，但对“post-train 数据/指令资产生态如何失真”有很强的现实启发，尤其适用于：\n1) 训练信号质量：当奖励与发布量绑定而非采用量/效果绑定，会系统性诱导低质量资产泛滥，类似于 reward hacking 在数据生态层面的版本；\n2) 数据治理与持续学习：如果把这类资产当作持续 SFT/RL 的数据源，98% 不复用意味着长尾噪声极大，且自报分数主导的排名会把噪声推到前台；\n3) 审计与验证：sandbox/validation 形同虚设会让“可执行指令数据”成为供应链风险。\n它更像一篇系统测量与机制分析论文，价值在于把激励、排名指标、验证门禁的失败模式用大规模数据量化出来。","technical_approach":"方法上是对 EvoMap 的 in-the-wild 测量研究：\n1) 数据采集与实体建模：抓取/整理 1.5M assets 与 128K agents 的元数据与演化事件，把资产发布、复用、得分、排名、验证等过程结构化。\n2) 围绕三大目标设定 RQ：RQ1 复用（资产是否被采用、复用分布、供需失衡）；RQ2 演化（激励与排名是否把高质量资产推上来、奖励集中度、指标分量）；RQ3 审计（验证机制是否能阻止操纵、有哪些绕过路径）。\n3) 机制归因：指出 credit economy 主要奖励“发布”而非“被采用”，导致刷资产；GDI 四维指标被“Intrinsic（自报）”维度主导，易被操纵；Evolver sandbox 的验证门禁存在可绕过点。\n4) 给出低成本修补建议：例如用 Git 文件变更检查、真正执行验证步骤等提高门槛。\n它不提出新的 agent 架构或学习算法，核心是把一个真实生态的机制缺陷用数据与案例钉死。","experiments":"关键量化结论来自全量数据统计：\n- 规模：1.5M assets、128K agents（截至 2026 年 4 月）。\n- 复用性：约 98% 的资产从未被复用，显示供给侧极度过剩。\n- 激励集中：奖励集中在少数代理（文中给出约 10% 的集中现象），并分析排名指标 GDI 的四维构成被某个“Intrinsic”分量主导，而该分量依赖自报数据，导致可操纵。\n- 审计薄弱：展示验证/沙箱可被绕过，并用“加入简单校验步骤即可缓解”的方式给出对照性论证（偏系统安全/工程验证，而非 ML 指标提升）。","reading_guide":"泛读建议 45–90 分钟：\n1) 先读 Introduction 与“Primer on EvoMap”，把资产（Gene/Capsule/EvolutionEvent）、Hub/Evolver、GDI/credit economy 的机制弄清楚，否则后面的统计没有语义。\n2) 重点看三部分结果章节（对应 RQ1–RQ3）：复用分布、奖励集中度与 GDI 分解、验证绕过案例。\n3) 如果你关心训练数据治理/合成数据生态，把“发布激励→资产泛滥→排名被操纵→低质量资产进入复用链路”的因果链画出来，映射到指令数据市场、tool-use traces、持续 SFT/RL 数据管线。\n4) 不需要逐段细读实现细节；这篇的价值在机制与统计图表，预计看图+结论段就能吸收大部分信息。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper characterizes EvoMap, a real-world Agent-to-Agent collaboration network where agents publish and reuse instruction assets under an incentive, ranking, and sandbox-validation protocol. The core question is whether the system achieves its stated goals—reusability, evolution, and auditability—and which design choices create failure modes and attack surfaces at scale.","importance":"It is not a pretraining-method paper, but it is highly relevant to post-training data ecosystems and signal quality. The findings translate well to: (1) reward hacking at the ecosystem level—when incentives pay for publication rather than adoption/effectiveness, low-quality assets flood the system; (2) continual learning / data sourcing—if such assets feed SFT/RL pipelines, a 98% non-reuse rate implies extreme long-tail noise, and self-reported metrics can push noise to the top; (3) auditability of executable instruction data—weak validation becomes a supply-chain risk. The value is in quantifying these mechanism failures with large-scale measurements.","technical_approach":"An in-the-wild measurement study:\n1) Data collection and structuring of 1.5M assets and 128K agents, including publication, reuse, scoring/ranking, and validation events.\n2) Three research questions aligned with the system’s goals: RQ1 reusability (reuse rates and distribution), RQ2 evolution (incentives and ranking dynamics, reward concentration, metric dominance), RQ3 auditability (robustness of sandbox/validation and bypass vectors).\n3) Mechanism-level attribution: publication-tied credits encourage mass production; the GDI’s four dimensions are dominated by an “Intrinsic” component based on self-reported data; validation gates can be bypassed.\n4) Practical mitigation suggestions (e.g., Git diff checks, actually executing validations). No new agent learning algorithm is proposed; the contribution is empirical diagnosis.","experiments":"Key quantitative results are descriptive statistics over the full dataset:\n- Scale: 1.5M assets and 128K agents (as of Apr 2026).\n- Reusability: ~98% of assets are never reused.\n- Incentives/ranking: rewards are concentrated among a small fraction of agents (reported around the top 10%), and the GDI metric is dominated by a self-reported “Intrinsic” dimension, making it easy to manipulate.\n- Auditability: demonstrated bypasses of the validation/sandbox mechanism, with engineering-style evidence that simple verification steps could reduce abuse. These are system/security validations rather than ML performance gains.","reading_guide":"Skim in 45–90 minutes:\n1) Read the introduction and the EvoMap primer first to understand the asset structure (Gene/Capsule/EvolutionEvent) and the Hub/Evolver + GDI/credit mechanisms.\n2) Focus on the three results sections (RQ1–RQ3): reuse distribution, reward concentration and GDI decomposition, and validation bypass cases.\n3) If you care about training-signal governance, explicitly map the causal chain from incentives → asset oversupply → rank manipulation → low-quality assets entering reuse/data pipelines.\n4) Implementation minutiae are less important; most value is in figures/tables and the discussion of mechanism failures.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"多Agent协作生态的激励缺陷观察对Agent预训练的协作范式设计有参考，重点看资产复用率的统计分析","en":"The observation of incentive flaws in multi-agent collaboration ecosystems informs agent pretraining paradigm design; focus on the asset reuse rate statistics"},"metadata":{"institutions":["Peixain Zhang"],"authors":["Qiming Ye","Peixain Zhang","Yupeng He","Zifan Peng","Gareth Tyson"],"notable_authors":["Peixain Zhang"],"tags":["multi-agent","agent-collaboration","empirical-analysis","a2a-network"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25815","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25815","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.24426","title":"SEAL: Synergistic Co-Evolution of Agents and Learning Environments","abstract":"Large Language Model (LLM) agents are increasingly improved through interaction, yet most self-evolution methods adapt either the policy or the learning environment in isolation. We identify this structural gap as Agent-Environment Misalignment: the agent's capability frontier changes during training, while the environment that provides supervision remains static or only weakly coupled to the agent's revealed failures. We propose SEAL, a closed-loop co-evolution framework for interactive tool-us","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"huggingface","sources":["huggingface"],"published_at":"2026-05-23T00:00:00.000Z","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_24426.png","hf_upvotes":7,"arxiv_categories":[],"summary":{"core_problem":"交互式 tool-use agent 的自进化训练里，策略在变，但训练环境提供的监督信号（接口提示、错误反馈、恢复线索、任务暴露方式）往往相对静态，导致采样到的失败轨迹缺少可诊断信息，学习信号弱且不随能力边界移动。论文要解决的是：如何用“可执行验证（verifier）”把失败分解成结构化诊断，并把同一诊断信号同时用于环境侧接口演化与模型侧策略优化，形成闭环。","importance":"这更偏 post-train / agent RL 训练框架，不是预训练 recipe。对预训练研究的间接启发在于：1) 强调训练信号质量与可诊断性（turn-level labels）比单纯扩大交互数据量更关键；2) 把“环境”限定为训练时接口层（schema cues、约束信息、恢复反馈），在不改 benchmark 语义与 verifier 的前提下提升学习效率，类似一种可控的 curriculum/feedback shaping。若你关心 RL 信号如何反哺基础模型能力（工具调用、长程决策），这篇可作为工程化闭环的参考。","technical_approach":"SEAL 的核心是 verifier-grounded failure diagnosis 作为共享训练信号：\n- 数据收集：on-policy rollout，在可执行环境里用 verifier 判定成功/失败。\n- 失败诊断：把失败轨迹分解为 turn-level 的标签/原因（例如参数类型错误、缺少前置查询、错误后未恢复等），而不是只给一个稀疏 reward。\n- 环境侧共演化：不改工具语义与评测协议，只在训练时“接口层”注入更有信息量的提示与反馈（schema cues、约束、恢复导向的错误信息），让后续 rollouts 更可学习。\n- 模型侧优化：用诊断的“效用”对策略梯度更新做重加权（强调能暴露能力缺口、可提供学习信号的轨迹/回合）。\n方法取舍比较明确：它不追求生成更难的任务分布（纯 curriculum），也不只做模型反思/自训练（纯 model-centric），而是用可执行失败把两者耦合起来。","experiments":"作者在低资源多轮 tool-use 设置下做实验，宣称只用 400 条训练样本，在三个 backbone 上平均最高可到 +26.25 分的提升，并且对 held-out 设置有正迁移。你提供的正文片段未包含具体 benchmark 名称、评分口径、backbone 规格、以及与哪些强基线对比的细节；这些决定了结果含金量（是否只是接口提示工程带来的收益，或确实改善了策略学习效率）。精读时需要核对：\n- 是否控制了总交互步数/总环境调用次数；\n- verifier 与诊断器是否引入额外标注或规则；\n- 环境侧改动是否会在评测时被移除（训练-测试一致性）。","reading_guide":"泛读建议（约 25–35 分钟）：\n- 先看 Methodology 里对“environment scope”的限定：只改接口层、不改工具语义与评测 verifier，这是公平性与可复现性的关键。\n- 看 failure diagnosis 的标签体系：标签粒度、自动化程度、与 verifier 的耦合方式。\n- 看 policy optimization 的 reweighting 公式与实现细节：它决定了是否稳定、是否容易被噪声诊断误导。\n- 最后看实验设置表：训练样本数、交互预算、backbone、以及 ablation（只做环境演化/只做模型优化/两者结合）。\n如果只想判断是否值得复现：优先读 ablation 和训练预算控制部分。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In interactive tool-use training, the agent policy evolves but the training environment (what feedback, schema cues, constraints, and recovery hints it exposes) often stays static. This creates weak, non-diagnostic supervision: failures are detected but not explained, making learning inefficient and misaligned with the agent’s shifting capability boundary. The paper addresses how to turn executable verification into structured failure diagnoses and use that shared signal to co-evolve both the training interface and the policy optimization loop.","importance":"This is primarily a post-training / agent RL framework rather than a pretraining recipe. The relevant takeaway for foundation-model researchers is about training-signal quality: converting sparse execution failure into turn-level diagnostic labels can be more impactful than simply scaling interaction data. The “environment-side” adaptation is constrained to the training interface layer (not changing tool semantics or the evaluation verifier), which is a practical way to do feedback shaping/curriculum without contaminating benchmark fairness.","technical_approach":"SEAL is a closed-loop co-evolution framework built around verifier-grounded failure diagnosis:\n- Collect on-policy trajectories in an executable environment with a verifier.\n- Diagnose failed rollouts into turn-level labels (error types, missing prerequisites, failure to recover, etc.), rather than a single scalar failure.\n- Use diagnoses to adapt the training-time interface: provide schema cues, constraint information, and recovery-oriented feedback while keeping tool semantics and evaluation protocol unchanged.\n- Use the same diagnoses to guide policy optimization by reweighting policy-gradient updates based on diagnostic utility.\nThe design explicitly couples model-centric optimization with environment-centric interface shaping, using executable failures as the coupling signal.","experiments":"They report strong gains in low-resource multi-turn tool-use training: up to +26.25 average-point improvement across three backbones with only 400 training samples, plus positive transfer to held-out settings. The excerpt provided does not include the exact benchmarks, scoring, backbone sizes, or baseline lineup; these details are essential to interpret whether the gains come from better learning dynamics versus interface prompt engineering. When reading, verify controls on interaction budget (environment calls), how diagnoses are produced (rules vs learned), and whether interface modifications are removed at evaluation time.","reading_guide":"Skim plan (25–35 minutes):\n1) Methodology: focus on the defined scope of “environment” (interface-layer only) and why this preserves fairness.\n2) Failure diagnosis: label taxonomy, automation, and how tightly it depends on the verifier.\n3) Policy optimization: the reweighting mechanism and any stability tricks.\n4) Experiments: budget controls and ablations (environment-only vs policy-only vs combined).\nIf deciding on reproduction value, prioritize the ablation tables and the interaction-budget accounting.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"不是 pretrain 论文，但它把“环境也要跟着 policy 一起训练”讲清了；只看 failure diagnosis 如何回流到 advantage reweighting 和环境接口设计。","en":"Not a pretraining paper, but it makes the case that the environment should co-train with the policy; focus on how failure diagnosis feeds both advantage reweighting and environment redesign."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Westlake University","University of Michigan–Ann Arbor","University of Science and Technology of China"],"authors":["Yihao Hu","Zhihao Wen","Xiujin Liu","Pan Wang","Xin Zhang","Wei Wu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agent-training","tool-use","co-evolution","failure-diagnosis","rl"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.24426","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.24426","github":"https://github.com/yihaohu0118/SEAL","project":"https://yihaohu0118.github.io/SEAL/","source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25869","title":"Mitigating Provenance-Role Collapse in Long-Term Agents via Typed Memory Representation","abstract":"Long-term memory is essential for persistent LLM agents, yet prevailing architectures store historical interactions as unstructured, flat text. This unconstrained storage induces provenance-role collapse, a critical failure mode where agents suffer from source-monitoring errors. To resolve this cognitive vulnerability at the architectural level, we propose MemIR, a typed Memory Intermediate Representation that operationalizes source monitoring as a structural constraint. MemIR writes long-term m","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T13:56:31+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25869.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决长期 LLM agent 将历史交互以扁平文本存储时出现的来源与角色混淆问题，即 agent 无法区分原始证据、检索线索和可用于回答的事实声明。","importance":"贡献类型是 agent memory 架构改进。它把长期记忆中的 source monitoring 显式结构化，对 persistent agent 的记忆可靠性有参考意义，但与基座预训练方法的直接关系较弱。","technical_approach":"提出 MemIR，一种 typed Memory Intermediate Representation。方法将长期记忆写成 grounded atoms，分离 raw evidence、retrieval cues 和 truth-bearing claims，并限制只有被证据支持的 claim atoms 能进入事实授权路径；随后用 multi-route atomic projection 和 provenance-scoped utilization，把异构检索结果转换成以 claim 为中心的候选包和规范化 fact interface。","experiments":"在 LoCoMo 和 BEAM-100K 上与现有 memory baselines 比较，摘要称 MemIR 稳定优于基线，尤其在需要长期记忆和来源约束的场景中表现更好；摘要未给出模型参数量、具体基线列表和提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses provenance-role collapse in long-term LLM agents, where flat textual memory makes the agent confuse raw evidence, retrieval cues, and truth-bearing claims.","importance":"This is an agent-memory architecture contribution. It makes source monitoring a structural constraint, which is useful for persistent agents, but it has only indirect value for base-model pretraining.","technical_approach":"The proposed MemIR stores long-term memory as typed grounded atoms that separate evidence, cues, and supported claims. Factual use is restricted to authorized claim atoms, and retrieval results are transformed through multi-route atomic projection and provenance-scoped utilization into claim-centered bundles for generation.","experiments":"Experiments are reported on LoCoMo and BEAM-100K against memory baselines. The abstract claims consistent gains, especially under long-term provenance-sensitive settings, but does not specify model sizes, baseline details, or numerical margins.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"agent 记忆的 typed IR 比花式检索更干净；看失败定义和 atom schema，别外推到通用长期学习。","en":"Typed memory IR is cleaner than retrieval tricks; read the failure definition and atom schema, but do not overread it as general long-term learning."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Zhengda Jin","Bingbing Wang","Jing Li","Ruifeng Xu","Min Zhang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agent-memory","provenance","typed-representation","long-term-agents"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25869","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25869","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25421","title":"HyLaT: Efficient Multi-Agent Communication via Hybrid Latent-Text Protocol","abstract":"Communication protocol design is a central challenge in large language model-based multi-agent systems. Existing single-channel approaches face an inherent communication trilemma: text-based methods are interpretable but verbose, while latent-space methods are efficient but opaque and limited to unidirectional workflows. Inspired by multi-channel communication theory, we propose HyLaT, a hybrid latent-text communication protocol that transmits elaborate cognitive signals through a latent channel","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T04:50:15+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25421.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决多智能体 LLM 系统里通信协议两难：纯文本可解释但冗长，纯潜变量高效但不可解释且难以支持复杂交互。","importance":"这是一个 agent 通信协议设计工作，不直接推进基座预训练，但对“语言之外是否需要隐式中间表示”这个问题有一定启发，贡献类型偏方法设计与系统层协议创新。","technical_approach":"提出 HyLaT 混合潜变量-文本协议：用 latent channel 传递高带宽认知信号，用自然语言只表达关键决策与澄清信息；训练上采用两阶段框架，先做单智能体 hybrid generation 学习，再做多智能体交互式协同训练，使 agent 能在多轮交互中生成和解析混合消息。","experiments":"摘要只说明在多项任务上显著降低通信开销，同时保持有竞争力的任务性能，并强调多轮泛化能力；未在给定信息中看到明确参数规模、训练数据量、基线细节和具体提升幅度，因此实验结论目前只能视为方向性信号。","authors_note":"作者来自复旦大学、香港中文大学、King’s College London、The Alan Turing Institute 等学术机构；未见特别强的基座模型团队背景。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets the communication trade-off in LLM-based multi-agent systems: text is interpretable but verbose, while latent communication is efficient but opaque and weak for rich multi-round interaction.","importance":"This is primarily an agent communication paper rather than a foundation-model pretraining paper, but it is mildly relevant to the broader question of whether language should be complemented by latent intermediate representations. The contribution is a protocol and system-method design.","technical_approach":"HyLaT introduces a hybrid latent-text protocol: a latent channel carries high-bandwidth cognitive signals, while natural language is reserved for concise critical signals and clarifications. Training uses two stages: single-agent hybrid generation learning followed by multi-agent interactive co-training so agents can produce and interpret hybrid messages over multiple rounds.","experiments":"The abstract claims substantial reduction in communication overhead while maintaining competitive task performance, with good generalization to multi-round settings. However, the provided information does not include model sizes, training data scale, baselines, or exact gains, so the evidence should be treated as directional rather than definitive.","authors_note":"The authors are from Fudan University, CUHK, King’s College London, and The Alan Turing Institute. No clearly identifiable frontier foundation-model lab affiliation is evident from the metadata."},"recommendation":{"zh":"和 pretrain 关系不深，更多是 agent 协议设计；若你在想 latent reasoning 或隐式通信接口，只看方法图和通信开销表即可。","en":"Not really a pretraining paper; it is mostly an agent protocol design. Read only the method figure and the communication-cost table if you care about latent interfaces or hidden reasoning channels."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Fudan University","The Chinese University of Hong Kong","King’s College London","The Alan Turing Institute","Shanghai Innovation Institute"],"authors":["Xinyi Mou","Siyuan Wang","Zejun Li","Yulan He","Zhongyu Wei"],"notable_authors":["Yulan He","Zhongyu Wei"],"tags":["multi-agent","communication","latent-channel","hybrid-protocol","interactive-training"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25421","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25421","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.26165","title":"Tool-Schema Compression Enables Agentic RAG Under Constrained Context Budgets","abstract":"Agentic RAG systems that equip language models with dozens to hundreds of tool definitions face a critical resource conflict: tool schemas consume the same context window needed for retrieval-augmented generation. We present the first systematic study of this tool-context trade-off, evaluating 14 models spanning 1.5B-32B local models plus one frontier API model across 6,566 controlled API calls at three context budgets (8K, 16K, 32K) with 28 tool definitions. Applying TSCG conservative-profile c","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T20:52:54+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_26165.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CL","cs.SE"],"summary":{"core_problem":"Agentic RAG系统中工具定义（tool schema）与检索内容竞争上下文窗口，导致在有限context budget下工具定义溢出、RAG功能失效。","importance":"首次系统研究工具-上下文的资源冲突问题，提供了定量的实证分析和一个有效的压缩方案。","technical_approach":"使用TSCG保守配置文件压缩工具schema（节省44-50%的schema token），在多个模型和上下文预算下进行了受控实验。","experiments":"评估14个模型（1.5B-32B本地模型+1个前沿API模型），6,566次受控API调用，3种上下文预算（8K/16K/32K），28个工具定义；8K下压缩后EM平均提升20.5pp，32K下两种格式差异≤1pp确认是纯预算驱动效应。","authors_note":"独立作者Furkan Sakizli，机构信息未明确标注。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In Agentic RAG systems, tool definitions compete with retrieval content for the same context window, causing tool schema overflow and RAG functionality failure under constrained context budgets.","importance":"First systematic study of the tool-context resource conflict, providing quantitative empirical analysis and an effective compression solution.","technical_approach":"Uses TSCG conservative-profile compression for tool schemas (44-50% schema token savings), with controlled experiments across multiple models and context budgets.","experiments":"Evaluated 14 models (1.5B-32B local + 1 frontier API), 6,566 controlled API calls, 3 context budgets (8K/16K/32K), 28 tool definitions; at 8K compressed schemas yield +20.5pp average EM lift; at 32K delta <= 1pp confirming purely budget-driven effect.","authors_note":"Sole author Furkan Sakizli; institutional affiliation not specified."},"recommendation":{"zh":"对预训练研究员来说主要价值是观察到工具schema对上下文的实际占用量和压缩后的恢复效果——是agent部署层面的实际问题，不直接影响基座设计。","en":"For pretrain researchers, the main value is observing the actual context cost of tool schemas and the recovery effect after compression — a practical agent deployment issue that doesn't directly impact base model design."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Furkan Sakizli"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agentic-rag","tool-use","context-management","schema-compression"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.26165","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.26165","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25092","title":"AgentIR: A Workload-Adaptive Cascade Retrieval Substrate for Long-Term Conversational Memory","abstract":"Long-term conversational memory is a retrieval workload classical IR was not built for: the index grows during the query stream, query types shift intra-session, and the latency budget per retrieval is sub-10 ms. Lucene-class engines treat the index as static and the query as stateless, leaving the workload's structure unexploited.   AgentIR treats fusion as a per-query decision along two axes: which fusion to apply (BM25, Dense, RRF, or agent-aware RRF), and whether the ~52 ms dense channel is ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T14:14:13+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25092.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.IR","cs.CL","cs.DB"],"summary":{"core_problem":"面向长期对话记忆，如何在动态增长索引、会话内查询类型变化和亚 10ms 延迟预算下，决定是否调用昂贵的 dense retrieval。","importance":"贡献类型是 agent memory / RAG 检索系统优化。它不改 LLM，也不涉及预训练，但提出了一个 workload-adaptive cascade：对每个查询决定用 BM25、Dense、RRF 或 agent-aware RRF，并判断 dense 通道是否值得运行。","technical_approach":"AgentIR 把融合策略做成 per-query 决策。第一维选择检索融合方式，第二维用 BM25 top-k margin 作为置信信号触发 cascade router；router 不需要重新训练，可随 workload 重新调阈值。关键取舍是用便宜的稀疏检索 margin 预测 dense channel 的边际价值。","experiments":"在 LongMemEval 上 n=500，dense 通道确实提供额外信息时，cascade 跳过 63% 查询，在两个 LLM judge 下保持准确率相当，并取得 2.67x 加速；按 query type 调阈值后，5-fold cross-validation 下达到 5.76x。LoCoMo 上 n=1,982，摘要显示 BM25 已很强，但后续结果片段被截断。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses long-term conversational memory retrieval under a growing index, shifting query types within sessions, and sub-10 ms latency constraints.","importance":"This is an agent-memory and RAG retrieval-systems contribution. It does not change the LLM or pretraining process, but it proposes a workload-adaptive cascade that decides per query whether to use BM25, dense retrieval, RRF, or agent-aware RRF, and whether the dense channel is worth its cost.","technical_approach":"AgentIR makes fusion a per-query decision. It chooses the fusion mode and uses the BM25 top-k margin as a cheap confidence signal for a cascade router that can be retuned across workloads without retraining. The key idea is to predict the marginal utility of dense retrieval from sparse-retrieval confidence.","experiments":"On LongMemEval with n=500, where the dense channel adds information, the cascade skips 63% of queries while preserving LLM-judged accuracy under two judges and gives a 2.67x speedup; per-query-type thresholds reach 5.76x under 5-fold cross-validation. On LoCoMo with n=1,982, the abstract indicates BM25 is already strong, but the provided fragment truncates the remaining result.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"系统味道比模型味道重；记住 BM25 margin 路由 dense 的结果即可，不值得为预训练读正文。","en":"This is more systems than modeling; keep the BM25-margin dense-routing result in mind, but it is not worth a full read for pretraining."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Aojie Yuan","Haiyue Zhang","Shahin Nazarian"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agent-memory","retrieval","rag","cascade-routing","latency"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25092","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25092","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25746","title":"Multi-Agent Coordination Adaptation via Structure-Guided Orchestration","abstract":"As large language model (LLM)-based multi-agent systems scale to handle increasingly complex tasks, balancing structural stability and dynamic adaptability becomes increasingly challenging. Existing systems typically adopt either structure-centric methods, committing to structures determined upfront that limit fine-grained control, or orchestration-centric methods, adapting decisions dynamically while leaving coordination structure implicit and unstable. To address this challenge, we revisit mul","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T11:59:58+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25746.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.MA"],"summary":{"core_problem":"基于LLM的多智能体系统在处理复杂任务时难以平衡结构稳定性和动态适应性——结构固定的方法限制细粒度控制，而纯编排方法则隐含且不稳定。","importance":"方法创新：将多智能体协调重新表述为结构和编排联合分布的后验推断，提出统一框架。","technical_approach":"提出MACA（Multi-Agent Coordination Adaptation）框架，学习任务和预算条件下的智能体参与和交互结构先验，指导基于策略的编排作为后验推断的近似，实现高效细粒度控制。","experiments":"在多个benchmark上优于自适应编排方法和固定结构方法；摘要未提供具体参数量、数据规模或提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLM-based multi-agent systems struggle to balance structural stability and dynamic adaptability when handling complex tasks—fixed-structure methods limit fine-grained control while orchestration-only methods are implicit and unstable.","importance":"Methodological innovation: reformulates multi-agent coordination as posterior inference over joint distribution of structure and orchestration.","technical_approach":"Proposes MACA framework that learns a task- and budget-conditioned structural prior over agent participation and interactions, guiding policy-based orchestration as posterior inference approximation for efficient fine-grained control.","experiments":"Outperforms both adaptive orchestration and fixed-structure methods across benchmarks; no specific model size, data scale, or improvement metrics provided in abstract.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"多智能体协调方法的理论框架，概率建模视角有新意但与LLM预训练无直接关联，仅对agent架构研究者有参考价值。","en":"Theoretical framework for multi-agent coordination with probabilistic modeling perspective; interesting but not directly relevant to LLM pretraining—only for agent architecture researchers."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Haoran Li","Shulun Chen","Shaoyuan Sun","Hanchen Wang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["multi_agent","coordination","probabilistic_inference","agent_orchestration"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25746","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25746","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25632","title":"Insuring Every Action: An Authority Frontier Framework for Runtime Actuarial Control of Autonomous AI Agents","abstract":"Autonomous AI agents increasingly issue side-effect-bearing actions: database mutations, refunds, payments, external commitments. We propose the Actuarial Action Interface (AAI), a deterministic runtime contract that prices each such action against a contractually fixed safe default under a time-consistent risk mapping, and gates execution against a per-boundary reserve capital budget. We then develop the Authority Frontier, an evaluation primitive measuring how much autonomous authority the run","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T09:31:48+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25632.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","q-fin.RM","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决自主 Agent 执行有副作用工具调用时，如何在运行时为每个动作定价、限权和记录可审计风险的问题。","importance":"贡献类型是 Agent 安全与运行时控制框架。它把退款、支付、数据库写入、外部承诺等动作映射到统一的风险预算，提出 Authority Frontier 作为度量 Agent 可释放权限的评估原语。对 LLM 预训练没有直接方法贡献，但对工具调用安全边界有概念参考。","technical_approach":"提出 Actuarial Action Interface：以固定安全默认动作作为基准，用时间一致的风险映射为动作报价，并用 reserve capital budget 门控执行；引入 quote-bind-commit 协议、带 toll bound 的 capability token、七类动作 taxonomy、alpha-spending 下的 pathwise reserve coverage，以及 C_full 和 Capital@k 做跨域归一化。","experiments":"摘要称在四类 agentic environments 中实例化，包括数据库变更等场景，但给出的片段未包含模型规模、环境细节、baseline 和定量结果。整体更像框架定义与评估协议，而不是大规模实证训练工作。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses runtime control for autonomous agents that execute side-effect-bearing actions such as database mutations, payments, refunds, and external commitments.","importance":"The contribution is an agent safety and runtime governance framework. It introduces Authority Frontier as a primitive for measuring how much authority is released under different reserve-capital levels. It is only indirectly relevant to LLM pretraining, but it may inform tool-use safety interfaces.","technical_approach":"The proposed Actuarial Action Interface prices each action relative to a contractually fixed safe default under a time-consistent risk mapping, then gates execution against a reserve capital budget. It defines a quote-bind-commit protocol, toll-bounded capability tokens, a seven-class action taxonomy, alpha-spending reserve coverage, and C_full / Capital@k metrics for cross-domain normalization.","experiments":"The abstract says the framework is instantiated across four agentic environments, including settings such as database mutation, but the provided text does not include model scale, full environment details, baselines, or quantitative results. The work appears more framework-oriented than training-oriented.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为 Agent 权限评估术语表可留档；缺少训练信号和实证规模，预训练研究员不用读正文。","en":"Keep it as vocabulary for agent authority evaluation; without training signals or scale evidence, pretraining researchers can skip the full text."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Hao-Hsuan Chen"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agent-safety","tool-use","runtime-control","risk-budget"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25632","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25632","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25389","title":"Evo-Attacker: Memory-Augmented Reinforcement Learning for Long-Horizon Tool Attacks on LLM-MAS","abstract":"While Large Language Model-based Multi-Agent Systems (LLM-MAS) demonstrate remarkable capabilities in solving complex tasks by orchestrating specialized agents and external tools, the implicit trust in tool outputs creates a critical attack surface. Existing tool attacks are limited by domain specificity or fixed and static templates. To address these challenges, we propose Evo-Attacker, which formulates the tool attack as a self-evolving, memory-augmented reinforcement learning process. Evo-Att","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T03:33:45+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25389.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CR","cs.MA"],"summary":{"core_problem":"研究 LLM 多智能体系统中工具输出被默认信任所带来的攻击面，并构造可长期规划、自我演化的 tool attack 方法。","importance":"贡献类型是 agent security 与 RL attack 方法。它对理解 tool-use agent 的脆弱性有参考价值，尤其是长程 credit assignment 和攻击记忆，但不是通用基座训练或主流后训练方法。","technical_approach":"Evo-Attacker 将 tool attack 表述为 memory-augmented reinforcement learning。方法维护动态 attack memory，用 deliberative reasoning 检索历史 adversarial patterns，并在关键步骤修改工具输出或干预。提出 Attack-Flow GRPO，用最终攻击结果优化中间推理步骤，缓解长 horizon 攻击中的 credit assignment 问题。","experiments":"摘要称在综合实验中 Evo-Attacker 持续优于 baselines，并展示 generalization 和 evolutionary capability。未给出具体 LLM-MAS 环境、工具类型、任务长度、attack success rate、baseline 名称或提升幅度；需要正文检查攻击是否依赖特定 prompt、特定工具协议或弱防御设置。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies the attack surface created by implicit trust in tool outputs within LLM-based multi-agent systems and proposes a long-horizon, self-evolving tool attack method.","importance":"This is an agent-security and RL-attack contribution. It is useful for understanding tool-use agent fragility, especially attack memory and long-horizon credit assignment, but it is not central to foundation-model pretraining or mainstream post-training.","technical_approach":"Evo-Attacker formulates tool attacks as memory-augmented reinforcement learning. It builds a dynamic attack memory, uses deliberative reasoning to retrieve adversarial patterns, and modifies interventions at critical moments. Attack-Flow GRPO optimizes intermediate reasoning steps from terminal attack outcomes to address long-horizon credit assignment.","experiments":"The abstract says Evo-Attacker consistently outperforms baselines and shows generalization and evolutionary capabilities. It does not report the LLM-MAS environments, tool types, task horizons, attack success rates, baseline names, or numerical gains, so the full paper is needed to check whether the setup depends on specific prompts, tool protocols, or weak defenses.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"看威胁模型和 Attack-Flow GRPO 即可；若防御设置弱，这类攻击成功率对通用 agent 训练参考有限。","en":"Read the threat model and Attack-Flow GRPO only; if defenses are weak, the attack rates say little about robust general agent training."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Bingyu Yan","Xiaoming Zhang","Jinyu Hou","Chaozhuo Li","Ziyi Zhou","Yiming Hei","Litian Zhang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agent-security","tool-use","memory-augmented-rl","grpo"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25389","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25389","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25338","title":"CausalFlow: Causal Attribution and Counterfactual Repair for LLM Agent Failures","abstract":"Large language model (LLM) agents frequently fail on multi-step tasks involving reasoning, tool use, and environment interaction. While such failures are typically logged or retried heuristically, they contain structured signals about where execution broke down. We introduce CausalFlow, an interventional framework that converts failed agent traces into minimal counterfactual repairs and reusable supervision. CausalFlow models execution traces as sequential chains of dependent steps and computes ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T01:47:01+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25338.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 LLM agent 在多步推理、工具调用和环境交互中失败后，如何定位真正致错步骤并生成最小修复监督的问题。","importance":"贡献类型是 agent 失败分析与修复框架。对预训练研究员的价值有限，但它把失败轨迹转成可复用监督信号，这一点对 post-train 数据构造有一些参考意义。","technical_approach":"提出 CausalFlow，把执行轨迹建模为顺序依赖链，通过逐步反事实干预计算 Causal Responsibility Scores，找出导致失败的关键步骤；随后生成最小编辑修复，形成 (wrong step, corrected step) 对比样本，可用于测试时修复或离线偏好优化/奖励建模。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体 agent benchmark、模型规模、环境类型、baseline 或量化提升，只能确认其评估围绕失败恢复与训练时监督复用展开。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"It tackles how to identify the truly failure-inducing steps in multi-step LLM agent trajectories and turn them into minimal repair supervision.","importance":"The contribution is an agent failure analysis and repair framework. Its value to pretraining researchers is limited, but the idea of converting failed traces into reusable supervision may inform post-training data construction.","technical_approach":"CausalFlow models execution traces as sequential dependency chains, computes step-level Causal Responsibility Scores via counterfactual intervention, and generates minimally edited repairs to create validated contrastive pairs of wrong vs corrected steps. These can be used for test-time repair or offline preference/reward training.","experiments":"The abstract does not specify agent benchmarks, model sizes, environments, baselines, or quantitative gains; the evaluation appears centered on failure recovery and training-time supervision reuse.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"思路不差，但更像 agent trace mining；若你做 RL/post-train，可借它的失败归因样本构造，正文不必细读。","en":"The idea is decent, but this is mostly agent trace mining; useful for RL/post-training data construction, not for core pretraining."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Akash Bonagiri","Devang Borkar","Gerard Janno Anderias","Setareh Rafatirad","Houman Homayoun"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agent-failure","counterfactual-repair","causal-attribution","trace-supervision"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25338","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25338","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25188","title":"DarkForest: Less Talk, Higher Accuracy for Multi-Agent LLMs","abstract":"Multi-agent LLM systems improve reasoning by combining outputs from multiple agents, but interaction-heavy methods can introduce error propagation and high communication overhead. When agents exchange raw responses or reasoning traces, incorrect intermediate reasoning may be adopted and amplified, leading to confident but wrong consensus; multi-round communication also increases token consumption, latency, and inference cost. In this paper, we propose a controlled-communication coordination fram","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T17:34:27+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25188.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"多智能体 LLM 系统中，频繁的交互会导致错误传播、通信开销大以及产生自信但错误的共识，如何解决这一问题？","importance":"提出了一种受控通信协调框架 DarkForest，通过限制智能体间的直接交流并引入协调器，在降低通信成本的同时提高了多智能体系统的准确性。","technical_approach":"DarkForest 框架首先让智能体独立生成答案，互不可见。然后，将原始响应解析为结构化候选记录，将语义等效的候选聚类，并基于智能体可靠性、置信度等因素估计校准的信念分布。协调器仅接收策略允许的证据，从而避免了原始推理轨迹的直接交换。","experiments":"未在摘要中详细说明实验设置和结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In multi-agent LLM systems, frequent interaction leads to error propagation, high communication overhead, and confident but wrong consensus. How to solve this?","importance":"Proposes DarkForest, a controlled-communication coordination framework that improves accuracy while reducing communication costs by limiting direct interaction between agents and introducing a coordinator.","technical_approach":"DarkForest first keeps agents independent, generating answers without seeing others' outputs. It then parses raw responses into structured candidate records, clusters semantically equivalent candidates, and estimates a calibrated belief distribution based on agent reliability, confidence, etc. A coordinator receives only policy-permitted evidence, avoiding direct exchange of raw reasoning traces.","experiments":"Experimental settings and results are not detailed in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"探讨多智能体协作中的错误传播和通信成本问题，提出了一个中心化协调框架，对 Agent 系统设计有一定参考价值，但对基座预训练无直接影响。","en":"Explores error propagation and communication costs in multi-agent collaboration, proposing a centralized coordination framework; useful for Agent system design but no direct impact on base pretraining."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Yi Li","Songtao Wei","Dongming Jiang","Zhichun Guo","Qiannan Li","Bingzhe Li"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["Multi-Agent Systems","LLM Coordination","Error Propagation","Communication Efficiency"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25188","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25188","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.26178","title":"ATOM: Instantiating Budget-Controllable Multi-Agent Collaboration via Nucleus-Electron Hierarchy","abstract":"Large Language Model (LLM)-based multi-agent systems rely on optimized collaboration topologies to balance performance and communication costs. However, current methods struggle with the inherent stability-extensibility trade-off and often misalign computational budgets with query difficulty. We propose \\textsc{ATOM}, an adaptive framework that generates budget-controllable collaboration graphs via a novel task-driven reinforcement learning paradigm. Inspired by atomic structures, \\textsc{ATOM} ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T06:41:11+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_26178.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.MA"],"summary":{"core_problem":"LLM多agent系统的协作拓扑优化中存在稳定性-扩展性权衡，且计算预算通常与查询难度不匹配","importance":"方法创新：提出核-电子层次结构的自适应多agent框架，通过任务驱动RL学习协作骨干+查询条件动态激活agent","technical_approach":"ATOM框架：(1)核-电子层次结构，核为离线学习的稳定协作骨干，电子为推理时动态激活的查询条件agent；(2)复杂度感知预算策略，通过估计查询难度严格调节电子实例化；(3)任务驱动RL范式用于训练协作图","experiments":"在6个多样化benchmark上达到SOTA，同时严格控制计算预算（具体提升幅度未在摘要中给出）","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLM-based multi-agent systems face a stability-extensibility trade-off in collaboration topologies, and computational budgets are often misaligned with query difficulty","importance":"Methodological innovation: adaptive multi-agent framework with nucleus-electron hierarchy combining offline-learned backbone and query-conditioned dynamic agent activation","technical_approach":"ATOM framework: (1) nucleus-electron hierarchy with stable offline-learned collaboration backbone (nucleus) + dynamically activated query-conditioned agents (electrons) during inference; (2) complexity-aware budgeting strategy estimating query difficulty to regulate electron instantiation; (3) task-driven RL paradigm for training collaboration graphs","experiments":"Achieves SOTA on six diverse benchmarks while maintaining strict computational budget control (specific improvement magnitudes not stated in abstract)","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"多agent协作框架方法创新，对预训练研究员参考价值有限，知道核-电子分层+复杂度感知预算这个设计方向即可","en":"Multi-agent collaboration framework with methodological novelty; limited value for pretraining researchers. Just note the nucleus-electron hierarchy + complexity-aware budgeting design direction."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Xinkui Zhao","Sai Liu","Yifan Zhang","Qingyu Ma","Zewen Lin","Naibo Wang","Guanjie Cheng","Chang Liu","Yueshen Xu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["multi-agent","agent-collaboration","reinforcement-learning","budget-control","hierarchical"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.26178","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.26178","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.25653","title":"When Agents Control Robots: A Zero Trust Policy Model for Agentic Cyber-Physical Systems","abstract":"Multi-agent systems powered by large foundation models (LFMs) are increasingly deployed to control industrial robots through natural language, creating deployments in which security failures produce physical consequences. We analyse this threat landscape through Cobot-Claw, a deployed four-agent system for UR3e robotic arm control, and identify five attack classes specific to agentic cyber-physical systems. We propose ZTPM, a Zero Trust Policy Model comprising 25 typed primitives across five enf","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-25T10:00:34+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_25653.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.DC","cs.MA"],"summary":{"core_problem":"大模型驱动的多 agent 系统开始控制实体机器人后，传统软件安全边界不足以约束有物理后果的执行动作。","importance":"贡献类型是 agentic cyber-physical safety policy。它不是预训练论文，但把 LFM agent 的非确定性输出和物理执行边界联系起来，对研究 tool-use agent 的安全控制有少量参考价值。","technical_approach":"论文分析一个用于 UR3e 机械臂控制的四 agent 系统 Cobot-Claw，归纳五类攻击，并提出 ZTPM。ZTPM 包含 5 个 enforcement domains 下的 25 个 typed primitives，并引入 Physical Impact Tiers 作为运行时策略维度，把策略 enforcement 放在物理 actuaction boundary。","experiments":"在两个 LFM backend 上评估 60 条 execution traces。摘要称执行参数选择具有模型依赖性和非确定性，因此需要在物理执行边界做策略级约束；未提供具体模型名称、攻击成功率或防护收益数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the security gap that appears when LFM-powered multi-agent systems control physical robots through natural language interfaces.","importance":"The contribution is an agentic cyber-physical safety policy model. It is not a pretraining result, but it is mildly relevant to tool-use and embodied-agent safety because execution errors can produce physical consequences.","technical_approach":"The authors analyze Cobot-Claw, a deployed four-agent UR3e robotic-arm control system, identify five attack classes, and propose ZTPM. The model defines 25 typed primitives across five enforcement domains and adds Physical Impact Tiers as a runtime policy dimension at the actuation boundary.","experiments":"The empirical study covers 60 execution traces on two LFM backends. The abstract reports that actuation parameter selection is model-dependent and non-deterministic, motivating policy enforcement at the physical boundary; exact model names and quantitative protection gains are not given.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看威胁模型和 Physical Impact Tiers；对 pretrain 无用，但可补一块 agent 执行安全常识。","en":"Read only the threat model and Physical Impact Tiers; useless for pretraining, but a useful reminder for agent execution safety."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Tharindu Ranathunga","Kavishka Fernando","Susan Rea"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agent-safety","cyber-physical-systems","zero-trust","robot-control","lfm-agents"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.25653","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.25653","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.20342","title":"ParaVT: Taming the Tool Prior Paradox for Parallel Tool Use in Agentic Video Reinforcement Learning","abstract":"Training large multimodal models (LMMs) via reinforcement learning (RL) to natively invoke video-processing tools (e.g., cropping) has become a promising route to long-video understanding. However, existing native-RL methods dispatch tool calls sequentially (i.e., one per turn): a single wrong crop propagates errors without peer correction, multi-turn tool calls corrupt context, and inference cost scales linearly with the number of turns. We introduce ParaVT, the first multi-agent end-to-end RL-","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"glance","source":"huggingface","sources":["huggingface"],"published_at":"2026-05-19T00:00:00.000Z","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_20342.png","hf_upvotes":33,"arxiv_categories":[],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决视频 agent 在原生 RL 工具调用中只能串行调用工具、导致误差传播、上下文污染和推理成本线性增长的问题。","importance":"这篇工作更偏 agent RL 与多模态工具使用，不是基座预训练核心论文。但它提出的 Tool Prior Paradox 有一点研究味道：预训练得到的工具先验一方面帮助探索，另一方面会破坏冷启动格式稳定性并诱发 skip-tool 奖励捷径。这对“预训练先验如何与 RL 交互”有一定启发。","technical_approach":"作者提出 ParaVT，一个并行视频工具调用框架，在单轮中同时发出多个时间窗口 crop 请求，而不是逐轮串行调用。方法上结合 multi-agent 结构与端到端 RL 训练。论文进一步提出 Tool Prior Paradox：强工具先验会在温度采样下放大结构格式不稳定和跳过工具的 reward shortcut。为缓解这一点，作者通过跨模型对比和训练设计来平衡工具探索能力与结构约束。","experiments":"摘要表明实验围绕长视频理解中的原生工具调用展开，比较对象包括现有 sequential tool-calling RL 方法，并做了强弱工具先验模型的对照。论文声称并行调用带来更干净的上下文、更好的容错和更低推理成本，但摘要未给出模型规模、视频 benchmark 名称和具体增益。对预训练研究员而言，真正值得看的不是主结果，而是关于 pretrained prior 与 RL instability 的对照实验。","authors_note":"机构信息为 LMMs-Lab。摘要未提供足够信息确认更具体的团队背景。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"It addresses the limitations of sequential tool calling in video-agent RL, where one wrong crop propagates errors, context gets polluted across turns, and inference cost grows linearly with the number of tool calls.","importance":"This is mainly an agentic multimodal RL paper, not a core pretraining paper. The interesting part is the proposed Tool Prior Paradox: pretrained tool priors help exploration but can destabilize structural formatting and create skip-tool reward shortcuts. That interaction between pretrained priors and RL is relevant beyond this specific setup.","technical_approach":"ParaVT is a parallel video-tool-calling framework that dispatches multiple temporal crop requests in a single turn instead of sequentially. It combines a multi-agent structure with end-to-end RL. The paper argues that standard RL exposes a Tool Prior Paradox: stronger pretrained tool priors improve exploration but worsen format instability and shortcut exploitation under temperature sampling. The method then uses training design and cross-model analysis to balance exploration with structural reliability.","experiments":"The experiments target long-video understanding with native tool use, comparing against sequential tool-calling RL baselines and contrasting models with stronger versus weaker tool priors. The abstract claims cleaner context, better fault tolerance, and lower inference cost, but does not expose model sizes, benchmark names, or exact gains. For pretraining researchers, the most relevant part is the analysis of how pretrained priors interact with RL instability.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"正文不必细读，抓住“Tool Prior Paradox”即可：它提示强预训练先验未必总利于 RL，尤其在格式约束和 shortcut reward 并存时；看对照实验就够。","en":"You can mostly ignore the full method and just read the Tool Prior Paradox section; it is a useful reminder that stronger pretrained priors can hurt RL when format constraints and reward shortcuts coexist."},"metadata":{"institutions":["LMMs-Lab"],"authors":["Zuhao Yang","kcz","Sudong Wang","Keming Wu","Zhongyu Yang","Bo Li","Xiaojuan Qi","Shijian Lu","Xingxuan Li","Lidong Bing"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["video-agent","tool-use","reinforcement-learning","multimodal","training-instability"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.20342","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.20342","github":"https://github.com/EvolvingLMMs-Lab/ParaVT","project":"https://evolvinglmms-lab.github.io/ParaVT/","source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.24830","title":"Macaron-A2UI: A Model for Generative UI in Personal Agents","abstract":"As personal agents evolve to handle complex, user-centric tasks, static plain-text chat is rapidly becoming a bottleneck. Generative UI emerges as the necessary new interface layer, dynamically synthesizing the right controls, options, and state from the interaction context in real time. We present Macaron-A2UI, a model for Generative UI in personal agents. Our goal is to move beyond text-only interaction by enabling agents to generate natural language together with lightweight, executable UI ac","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"huggingface","sources":["huggingface"],"published_at":"2026-05-24T00:00:00.000Z","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_24830.png","hf_upvotes":77,"arxiv_categories":[],"summary":{"core_problem":"让个人 Agent 不只输出纯文本，而是根据对话上下文动态生成自然语言和可执行的轻量 UI 动作。","importance":"贡献类型是 agent interface 方法、训练语料和评测集。它关注的是个人 Agent 的交互层：当任务需要收集偏好、确认状态、组织多目标时，纯聊天界面容易丢失结构化状态和可操作性。","technical_approach":"Macaron-A2UI 将 agent 输出扩展为自然语言加 UI action。作者从异构对话源构建大规模 Generative UI corpus，提出 A2UI-Bench 做受控评测，并对 30B、235B、754B 模型做 LoRA 参数高效 SFT，再接 reward-driven RL。目标是在没有显式 schema hints 的情况下生成可执行 UI 控件和动作。","experiments":"摘要报告最佳 Macaron-A2UI 在 A2UI-Bench 上达到 75.6 overall，并称超过最强 full-schema baseline。训练规模覆盖 30B、235B、754B，但摘要未给出训练 token 数、reward model 细节、RL 算法细节和完整 baseline 表。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tries to move personal agents from text-only chat toward dynamically generated natural language plus lightweight executable UI actions.","importance":"The contribution is an agent-interface method with a corpus and benchmark. The target problem is that personal agents need structured state, confirmations, preference elicitation, and multi-goal organization, which plain chat handles poorly.","technical_approach":"Macaron-A2UI augments agent outputs with UI actions. The authors build a large Generative UI corpus from heterogeneous dialogue sources, introduce A2UI-Bench, and train 30B, 235B, and 754B models with LoRA-based supervised fine-tuning followed by reward-driven reinforcement learning. The system is designed to work without explicit schema hints.","experiments":"The abstract reports a best score of 75.6 overall on A2UI-Bench and claims improvement over the strongest full-schema baseline. It mentions 30B, 235B, and 754B training runs, but does not provide token counts, reward-model details, RL recipe, or the full baseline table in the provided excerpt.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"这是 agent UI 输出空间的工程化扩展；预训练侧只需看数据格式和无 schema 设定，正文不必细读。","en":"This is mostly an agent UI output-space engineering paper; for pretraining, glance at the data format and no-schema setup only."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Mind Lab"],"authors":["Fanqi Kong","Congjie Zheng","Murphy Zhuang","Rio Yang","Sueky Zhang","Hao Fu","Gene Jin","Song Cao","Kaijie Chen","Andrew Chen","Xiaoteng Ma"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["generative-ui","personal-agent","sft-rl","agent-interface"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.24830","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.24830","github":"","project":"","source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.23218","title":"Foundation Protocol: A Coordination Layer for Agentic Society","abstract":"Autonomous agents are moving from tools into a layer of social infrastructure: they browse, purchase, deploy software, manage systems, and increasingly interact with one another. As these systems scale, the bottleneck shifts away from raw model capability toward coordination. Agents need to form reliable relationships, organize multi-agent work, exchange value, support an AI economy, and stay safe and accountable under real-world oversight. This paper introduces the Foundation Protocol (FP), a g","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"huggingface","sources":["huggingface"],"published_at":"2026-05-22T00:00:00.000Z","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_23218.png","hf_upvotes":75,"arxiv_categories":[],"summary":{"core_problem":"提出一个面向多 Agent 社会的协调协议层，用图结构统一 Agent、工具、资源、人类、机构和组织之间的关系与协作事件。","importance":"贡献类型偏系统协议和概念架构。它关注的不是模型能力或训练方法，而是当大量 Agent 参与浏览、购买、部署软件、管理系统和相互协作时，身份、关系、计量、结算、溯源、审计和政策约束如何被统一表达。","technical_approach":"Foundation Protocol 采用 graph-first 设计，将异构实体建模为图中的节点和关系，支持多方组织、事件驱动协作、经济原语、metering、receipts、settlement，以及 policy、provenance、audit。它定位为包裹和桥接现有协议，而不是替换已有工具协议。","experiments":"摘要没有给出模型实验、benchmark 或部署规模数据。主要内容应是协议抽象、对象模型、工作流和安全/审计机制设计，而非可复现实验结果。","authors_note":"作者来自 University of Technology and Design、City University of Hong Kong、Singapore Management University、Nanyang Technological University、Duke University、University of Illinois 等机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper proposes a coordination protocol layer for an agentic society, representing agents, tools, resources, humans, institutions, and organizations in a graph-first framework.","importance":"The contribution is a system-protocol and conceptual architecture rather than a model-training result. It focuses on identity, relationships, collaboration, metering, settlement, provenance, audit, and policy when many agents interact in real-world workflows.","technical_approach":"Foundation Protocol uses a graph-first abstraction for heterogeneous entities and relations. It supports native multi-party organization, event-based collaboration, economic primitives such as metering, receipts, and settlement, and first-class policy, provenance, and audit. It is designed to wrap and bridge existing protocols instead of replacing them.","experiments":"The abstract does not report model experiments, benchmarks, or deployment-scale results. The likely substance is protocol design, object modeling, workflow semantics, and safety/accountability mechanisms.","authors_note":"The authors are affiliated with University of Technology and Design, City University of Hong Kong, Singapore Management University, Nanyang Technological University, Duke University, University of Illinois, and related institutions."},"recommendation":{"zh":"偏协议愿景，不是训练或模型论文；了解 agent 协作抽象即可，除非你在做多 Agent 基础设施。","en":"This is a protocol vision rather than a model paper; glance for agent coordination abstractions unless you build multi-agent infrastructure."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Technology and Design","City University of Hong Kong","Singapore Management University","Nanyang Technological University","Duke University","University of Illinois","Singapore Management","Urbana-Champaign","Hong Kong Polytechnic University"],"authors":["Bang Liu","GUGUGU","Jiayi Zhang","Zhaoyang Yu","Sirui Hong","Maojia Song","Xiaoqiang Wang","Mingyi Deng","Zijie Zhuang","Ronghao Wang","Mingzhe Cao","2p1c","Xingjian Li","Yifan Wu","jianhao ruan","YiRan Peng","Shuangrui Chen","Jinlin Wang","Yizhang Lin","Dongjie Zhang","Dekun Wu","Chen Ma","Lizi Liao","Han Yu","Jian Pei","Heng Ji","Qiang Yang","Yuyu Luo","Chenglin Wu"],"notable_authors":["Sirui Hong"],"tags":["agent-protocol","multi-agent","coordination-layer","provenance"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.23218","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.23218","github":"https://github.com/FoundationAgents/foundation-protocol","project":"https://foundationagents.org/","source_url":null,"article":null}}}]}]},"dates":"$0:rsc:props:children:0:0:props:dates","currentDate":"2026-05-26"}]}]}]],["$L33","$L34","$L35","$L36"],"$L37"]}],"isPartial":false,"staleTime":300,"varyParams":null,"buildId":"F5537MxuNt1rUcDdi2WX-"}
33:["$","script","script-0",{"src":"/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/09-o.77-p0p36.js","async":true}]
34:["$","script","script-1",{"src":"/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/1304s0wcp2kce.js","async":true}]
35:["$","script","script-2",{"src":"/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0j1uy9t~zxcf0.js","async":true}]
36:["$","script","script-3",{"src":"/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/14_5o-nbg8k_r.js","async":true}]
37:["$","$L38",null,{"children":["$","$39",null,{"name":"Next.MetadataOutlet","children":"$@3a"}]}]
3a:null
