1:"$Sreact.fragment"
2:I[8669,["/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/08cykig6vtx_p.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/07qi2okp-.yp9.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0frujd.eyhz4o.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0n4z.7yu76je-.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/09-o.77-p0p36.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/1304s0wcp2kce.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0j1uy9t~zxcf0.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/14_5o-nbg8k_r.js"],"DateSidebar"]
3:I[44692,["/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/08cykig6vtx_p.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/07qi2okp-.yp9.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0frujd.eyhz4o.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0n4z.7yu76je-.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/09-o.77-p0p36.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/1304s0wcp2kce.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0j1uy9t~zxcf0.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/14_5o-nbg8k_r.js"],"DailyView"]
4c:I[97367,["/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/08cykig6vtx_p.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/07qi2okp-.yp9.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0frujd.eyhz4o.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0n4z.7yu76je-.js"],"OutletBoundary"]
4d:"$Sreact.suspense"
4:Ta4e,方法上，论文把问题形式化为两源混合训练。目标域有固定唯一 token 数 D_target，总训练预算是 D_total，目标域在训练中的占比为 h。于是目标域平均重复次数 r 由 h、D_total、D_target 共同决定；通用域被视为足够大，不发生重复。核心建模对象是目标域 loss 如何依赖模型规模 N、目标数据规模 D_target、以及目标域训练 token 数 h·D_total，或者等价地依赖重复次数 r。

经验层面，作者做了大规模 sweep：超过 2000 次训练，模型规模从 101M 到 805M，覆盖多种目标数据大小和多种数据类型。数据设置分三类。多语言：以 FineWeb2 中德语为主，人工截断到 50M、100M、500M、1B token，并设无限数据对照；通用域是英语 FineWeb。还在法语和斯瓦希里语上做验证。多领域：目标域包括 OpenWebMath、Wikipedia、peS2o 科学论文等，通用域来自 DCLM、FineWeb、Nemotron-CC 等。质量过滤：对 DCLM 用 fastText 质量分类器打分，取 top 1/5/10/20% 作为“高质量但受限”的目标域，再与其余更充足数据混合。这样设计的好处是，它不是只在“英语+某专业语料”上得出结论，而是测试规律是否跨语言、跨领域、跨质量筛选机制稳定。

论文的关键观察有几个。其一，重复带来的收益是平滑递减的，而不是到某个阈值突然失效；过拟合也不是简单由重复次数单独决定，而是由“重复次数 × 模型规模 × 训练预算”共同塑造。其二，在 mixture setting 下，通用域持续提供新 token，会延缓单源重复训练中的退化，因此目标域可以承受远高于单源训练经验上限的重复。其三，大模型一方面更容易在目标域验证集上出现过拟合拐点，另一方面也更能从有限目标数据中榨出收益；也就是“学得更快，也更容易过头”。

在此基础上，作者拟合了一个目标域 loss 的 scaling law。虽然全文给出的具体函数形式带有若干可学习系数，但思想很清楚：把目标域 loss 分解为若干随模型规模、目标唯一数据量、目标域训练暴露量变化的幂律项，并显式建模重复导致的收益递减。这个形式既能覆盖“更多唯一数据更好”，也能覆盖“同一批数据重复仍有价值，但边际收益下降”。作者用小模型、小预算子集拟合参数，再外推到更大模型和更大预算，检验是否能预测最优 h 或最优 r。论文还把框架扩展到两个都受限的目标域，讨论多受限源之间如何分配预算。5:T415,This is important because it turns a recurring recipe-design problem into something measurable and, to some extent, predictable. Many pretraining scenarios fit this setup: low-resource language adaptation, domain injection for math/science/code, and mixing a small high-quality subset with a large generic corpus. The main empirical correction is that the familiar single-source repetition ceiling does not transfer to mixture training. When fresh generic tokens continue to arrive, the scarce target source can often be repeated much more aggressively, with optimal target-task repetition reaching roughly 15–20x in several settings. That changes how one should think about curriculum design, mixture weights, and data budgeting. The second contribution is a fitted scaling law that can be estimated at small scale and extrapolated to larger models and budgets, reducing the need for expensive large-scale sweeps. The paper does not introduce a new architecture; its value is in making a high-frequency pretraining decision more quantitative.6:T922,The setup is a two-source mixture. The target source has a fixed number of unique tokens D_target, the total training budget is D_total, and h is the fraction of training tokens drawn from the target source. This induces a repetition factor r for the target source, while the generic source is assumed large enough to avoid repetition. The modeling goal is to predict target-domain loss as a function of model size, target-data size, and target exposure under a fixed compute budget.

The empirical study is broad: more than 2,000 training runs, model sizes from 101M to 805M parameters, and several target-data regimes. The paper covers three families of constrained data. For multilingual experiments, German from FineWeb2 is artificially capped at 50M, 100M, 500M, and 1B tokens, with English FineWeb as the abundant generic source; French and Swahili are used to test whether the pattern is language-specific. For domain mixtures, the target source includes OpenWebMath, Wikipedia, and peS2o, mixed with larger generic corpora such as DCLM, FineWeb, and Nemotron-CC. For quality-filtered mixtures, the authors score DCLM documents with a FastText quality classifier and treat the top 1/5/10/20% subsets as scarce high-quality targets.

The main empirical pattern is that repetition has smooth diminishing returns rather than a hard threshold, and the useful repetition range depends jointly on model size, target-data size, and total budget. Larger models overfit the target validation set sooner, but they also extract more value from limited target data before that point. The presence of fresh generic data changes the regime relative to single-source repetition: it keeps the model learning from new tokens even while the target source is being revisited many times.

On top of these observations, the paper fits a scaling law for target-domain loss. The exact parameterization is learned from data, but the conceptual structure is clear: it separates the effect of unique target data from the effect of repeated target exposure, and models both with smooth power-law-like terms. The law is then used to predict the optimal mixture weight or repetition count. The framework is also extended to the case of two scarce target domains, where the problem becomes one of allocating limited exposure across multiple constrained sources.7:T779,The experimental section is the core of the paper. It reports 2,000+ runs with models ranging from 101M to 805M parameters. In the multilingual setting, German target data spans 50M, 100M, 500M, and 1B tokens plus an unconstrained reference; French and Swahili are used as additional checks. In the domain setting, OpenWebMath is capped at 10M, 100M, and 1B tokens, and Wikipedia and peS2o are also studied under constrained budgets. In the quality-filtering setting, top-ranked DCLM subsets are treated as scarce high-quality targets.

Three results matter most. First, the optimal repetition count in mixture pretraining is often far above the familiar single-source heuristic. For target-domain performance, the paper repeatedly finds useful optima around 15–20 repetitions in several settings. Second, as the total compute budget grows, the optimal target fraction h tends to decrease, while the optimal repetition count r can still increase, because the same fixed target pool is revisited more times over a longer run. This is a subtle but operationally important point: a fixed mixture ratio is not compute-invariant. Third, larger models can benefit from higher repetition on scarce target data, but their optimum is sharper because overfitting arrives sooner on the target validation set.

The scaling-law validation is another major result. Parameters fitted on smaller-scale runs are shown to extrapolate reasonably well to larger scales, predicting target-domain loss curves and the optimal repetition level without re-running a full large-scale sweep. The paper also reports that the qualitative pattern holds across multilingual, domain-specific, and quality-filtered mixtures, which suggests the phenomenon is not tied to one corpus family. The two-scarce-domain extension further shows that the framework can provide sensible allocation trends when more than one valuable source is data-limited.8:T6b5,Start with the introduction and the first two figures. They establish the actual question: not generic data mixing, but optimal exposure of a scarce target source under a fixed compute budget. Then read the setup carefully, especially the relationship among D_target, D_total, h, and r. A common failure mode is to think only in terms of mixture ratio; the paper is stronger when read through the lens of induced repetition.

For a close read, focus on four parts. First, the main result plots showing how the optimum moves with model size and budget. This is where the paper makes clear why a fixed target ratio is not a robust recipe. Second, the scaling-law form and fitting procedure. The key is not memorizing the equation, but understanding how the law separates unique-data effects from repeated-exposure effects. Third, compare the multilingual, domain, and quality-filtered sections to see what is stable and what is dataset-specific. Fourth, read the extension to two constrained target domains; that section is closer to real recipe design than the simplest one-target-plus-generic setup.

If time is limited, read the introduction, the experimental setup, Figures 1 and 2, the scaling-law extrapolation results, and the multi-target extension. That is enough to capture the main contribution in under an hour. If the goal is to operationalize the result, spend more time on the appendix details for fitting, parameter stability across data families, and the exact target-domain evaluation protocol. Two follow-up questions are especially worth thinking about: whether the law still holds at much larger model scales, and how it changes when the generic source is not truly fresh and also begins to repeat.9:T42d,The analysis starts from optimal finite-context prediction and treats representation changes as changes to the conditional distribution available inside a fixed window. For fragmentation, each source symbol is recoded into several smaller units without losing information. The paper shows that losslessness does not imply finite-window equivalence: after recoding, a predictor operates on sub-symbol positions with boundary, phase, and partial-history effects, and the best achievable loss can be strictly worse than the source-level finite-context optimum. This is an intrinsic representation effect, not just an optimization failure. For greedy tokenization, the authors study dictionary-style parsing into longer emitted units. A token window covers a random number of source symbols. If that span is large enough, a token-level predictor can match a longer source-context predictor without asymptotic loss. In the typical-window case, the achievability guarantee is controlled by the lower tail of the source-span distribution and by the tokenizer compression rate.a:T427,They run a controlled study with the same Transformer backbone and the same corpus (Slimpajama-627B), varying only (i) representation: bytes (UTF-8, V=256) vs Llama2 BPE (V=32k), and (ii) objective: AR vs continuous-time discrete masked diffusion. Comparisons are compute-matched by normalizing the amount of raw information per step: byte models use longer contexts (L_byte=8192) while BPE uses shorter contexts (L_BPE=1792), and scaling is plotted against total FLOPs.
Mechanistically, they argue AR byte models can recover efficiency via emergent segmentation: predictive entropy aligns with BPE boundaries, so once early bytes of a wordpiece are known, the remaining intra-piece bytes become easy. MDM breaks this advantage because stochastic masking frequently removes the very sequential cues needed to collapse intra-word uncertainty. They further isolate the role of context destruction with controlled permutation experiments that separately disrupt local context vs sequential integrity, showing byte diffusion is uniquely sensitive to preserving order.b:T433,It first isolates two potential causes of slow MDM training: the locality bias of natural language (predictive information for a token is concentrated in nearby positions) and the complexity of the any-order generation problem space. Controlled experiments confirm locality bias is the dominant factor: samples with very high context (almost no masking) or very low context (almost full masking) provide almost no effective learning signal, wasting most of the training budget. Based on this analysis, it proposes bell-shaped time sampling, which adjusts the diffusion timestep sampling distribution to increase the probability of sampling timesteps corresponding to intermediate context levels and reduce weight on high/low context timesteps. Unlike most existing MDM optimizations that focus on inference speed or loss function modification, this method requires no changes to model architecture or training objective, only adjusts training-time timestep sampling, and is compatible with the common large-scale MDM setup of continual pretraining from an ARM initialization.c:T53a,The setup has three stages. A model is pretrained on a broad corpus D_pre, post-trained on a smaller target corpus D_post, and then fine-tuned by a downstream user on a new objective D_ft. The main intervention is to mix part of D_post into the pretraining stage before the dedicated post-training stage. The evaluation is not based on immediate post-training loss alone. Instead, the downstream fine-tuning method is fixed, the learning rate is swept, and the resulting frontier between downstream loss, retained D_post capability, and general D_pre performance is compared across upstream recipes. This is the right measurement because two models with similar post-training loss can occupy different retention frontiers after fine-tuning. The paper also runs compute-matched allocation experiments, comparing all early exposure, all late exposure, and mixed schedules. The optimum tends to lie between the extremes. The proposed explanation is feature-level: early exposure lets the target capability be represented in more specialized and less interfering features, making it less vulnerable to later updates. Replay and dropout are evaluated under the same lens. Replay reduces overwriting by interleaving earlier data, while dropout discourages feature co-adaptation; both provide gains that are complementary to early data exposure.d:T474,The Marginal-Conditioned Bridge (MCB) sampler is proposed: at each reverse sampling step, first compute the token posterior marginal for each position output by the FLM based on the current continuous state, independently sample a valid one-hot token at each position as the endpoint for this step, then sample the continuous state for the next noise level from the analytical Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) bridge distribution conditioned on both the current state and the sampled complete one-hot endpoint. This method essentially replaces the original bridge to a single conditional mean with a mixture distribution of bridges to all valid one-hot sequences. Complete theoretical analysis is provided: the error from factorizing the joint posterior into the product of token marginals equals exactly the conditional multi-information among token positions; the one-step transition kernel of MCB preserves all token-wise posterior-predictive marginals, only losing residual cross-position dependence; under exact marginals and standard regularity assumptions, the path-space KL error of MCB is no larger than that of the conditional-mean bridge.e:T638,The paper has three layers of analysis. First, it evaluates 20 off-the-shelf DLMs and ARMs under a common generation setup using three metrics: n-gram entropy as a proxy for token-level randomness, semantic coherence for local sentence-level consistency, and semantic diversity for document-level variation. The empirical pattern is consistent: DLM outputs tend to have lower entropy, higher coherence, and higher diversity.

Second, it runs controlled objective studies. Instead of only comparing end-to-end systems, the authors align decoding and vary the training objective. They interpolate between ARM-like and DLM-like objectives and isolate components such as bidirectional context, input masking, label masking, and noise-level weighting. The main finding is that bidirectional context is the dominant driver of the coherence and diversity gains. Other ingredients of the DLM objective contribute much less.

Third, it studies decoding. The focus is block-wise iterative decoding with four remasking strategies: low-confidence, dynamic low-confidence, high-entropy, and random remasking. The key result is that entropy reduction is strongly tied to confidence-based remasking. Intuitively, these strategies repeatedly preserve high-confidence positions and revisit uncertain ones, which narrows the effective sample distribution. In contrast, random or high-entropy remasking leaves entropy roughly unchanged and close to the ARM level. The paper also provides a theoretical account of why remasking changes the resulting distribution rather than merely affecting decoding efficiency.f:T58c,There are three main experimental blocks. First, the large-scale comparison over 20 released models establishes the descriptive pattern: DLMs usually generate text with lower n-gram entropy but higher semantic coherence and semantic diversity than ARMs. The authors are careful to treat n-gram entropy as a proxy rather than a full entropy estimate.

Second, the controlled objective experiments are the most informative part. Under a shared decoding setup, the authors gradually move between DLM-style and ARM-style training formulations. The results show that keeping bidirectional context preserves most of the gains in coherence and diversity, while removing it substantially weakens them. By contrast, input masking details, label masking, and weighting functions have much smaller marginal effects.

Third, the decoding ablations compare low-confidence, dynamic low-confidence, high-entropy, and random remasking. Confidence-based remasking noticeably lowers entropy and pushes DLM outputs below ARM entropy. Other remasking strategies do not produce the same drop; entropy stays approximately at the ARM level. This is the paper's clearest causal claim: the low-entropy behavior often associated with DLMs is largely induced by the decoder.

The contribution is not a benchmark win but a careful behavioral decomposition with reasonably clean controls, which is more useful than another headline score comparison.10:T48f,OSDN adds a diagonal preconditioner D_t = diag(d_t) on top of the usual scalar gate in the Delta Rule. Since the Delta update corresponds to gradient descent on 1/2 ||S k_t - v_t||^2, the new method right-preconditions the gradient. The key algebraic result is that this right-preconditioning is exactly equivalent to scaling the write-side key feature by feature: \tilde{k}_t = d_t ⊙ k_t. As a result, the implementation can keep the existing chunkwise WY pipeline and only replace the storage-side K with \tilde{K}. The preconditioner d_t is updated online using OSGM-style hypergradient feedback. Its update depends only on keys and scalar gates, not on the high-dimensional memory state, values, or residuals, so the full d_t trajectory can be computed as an O(K)-state affine scan before the write pass. The APF variant adds learned token-wise and head-wise forgetting for the preconditioner only, which helps under non-stationary contexts without decaying the main memory state. The theory gives a population-limit super-geometric rate against a right-Newton comparator and a token-local contraction bound for the residual-ratio surrogate used in diagnostics.11:T9af,方法叫 Discrete Stochastic Localization（DSL）。核心设计是把离散 token 映射到单位球面上的 embedding，然后定义一个 stochastic localization 观测通道，而不是直接用常规 VP/VE Gaussian diffusion。作者先从一个全句共享全局 SNR 的高斯观测通道出发，写出 z_t 与干净 embedding x 的关系，并指出其等价的无条件 SDE 的 drift 是 MMSE denoiser，也就是 E[x | z_t]。到这里还只是连续扩散的常规视角。

关键变化发生在单位球几何上。若 clean token embeddings 都放在 unit sphere 上，并采用作者构造的 localization channel，则 Bayes-optimal clean-token posterior 只依赖 noisy state 本身，而不依赖名义上的 SNR/timestep。也就是说，同一个 noisy token state 已经包含了恢复 clean token 所需的全部信息，模型不需要额外的时间标签来解释“当前噪声有多大”。这就得到一个 time-invariant denoiser。

这个性质带来两个直接后果：
1. 每个 token 位置可以走自己的 SNR path，而不必全句共享同一个全局时间步。于是不同位置可以异步更新，有些位置像 masked refinement 一样从低信息到高信息逐步揭示，有些位置则可以按 random-order 的方式先确定再条件化后续位置。
2. masked diffusion 的端点行为成为 DSL 的特例，而连续有限 SNR 状态则提供了更细粒度的中间修正空间。于是 endpoint revealing、连续去噪、混合采样不再需要不同模型，而是同一个 posterior estimator 的不同查询方式。

为了让这个框架能在标准 Transformer/DiT 上训练，作者还引入了 mixed-support SNR sampling，让模型同时见到端点状态和有限 SNR 状态；并通过 mixture-of-tokens converter，把连续状态上的 posterior 学习转成可训练的离散 token 目标。论文还给出两个 exact NLL 视角来说明训练目标的状态支持是合理的，这一点是它比很多“只是换个噪声参数化”的工作更扎实的地方。

和已有 MDLM 的区别在于：MDLM 主要工作在离散 mask/no-mask 端点或有限离散状态上；DSL 保留了 mask-like 零信息端点，但在中间引入连续状态，同时不要求 denoiser 显式依赖时间。和传统 continuous diffusion LM 的区别在于：DSL 不是把 token embedding 扔进普通高斯扩散，而是专门设计了几何与通道，使 noisy state 自身就足以决定 clean posterior。12:T974,The method is called Discrete Stochastic Localization (DSL). The core idea is to place clean token embeddings on the unit sphere and define a stochastic-localization observation channel, instead of using a standard VP/VE Gaussian diffusion directly in embedding space. The paper starts from a sentence-level Gaussian observation channel with a global SNR and derives the equivalent unconditional SDE whose drift is the MMSE denoiser, namely the posterior mean E[x | z_t]. Up to that point, the setup still resembles ordinary continuous diffusion.

The key step is the unit-sphere geometry. Under the proposed localization channel, the Bayes-optimal clean-token posterior becomes a function of the noisy state alone and does not depend on the nominal SNR. In other words, the noisy token state already contains all the information needed for clean-token prediction, so the denoiser does not need an explicit timestep embedding to calibrate uncertainty. This yields a time-invariant denoiser.

That property has two major consequences.
1. Different token positions can follow different SNR paths. The model is no longer tied to a single global diffusion time for the whole sequence. Some positions can behave like masked refinement, while others can be revealed in a random-order autoregressive manner.
2. Endpoint masked diffusion becomes a special case of the same framework, while finite-SNR continuous states provide richer intermediate refinement. As a result, endpoint revealing, continuous denoising, and hybrid samplers can all be served by one posterior estimator rather than separate models.

For practical training, the paper introduces mixed-support SNR sampling so the model sees both endpoint states and finite-SNR states during training. A mixture-of-tokens converter maps the continuous-state posterior-learning problem into a trainable objective on a standard Transformer/DiT-style backbone. The paper also provides two exact NLL views to justify the support of the training objective, which makes the proposal more principled than a simple reparameterization trick.

Relative to MDLM, DSL keeps the mask-like zero-information endpoint but adds continuous intermediate states. Relative to standard continuous diffusion LMs, DSL is not just Gaussian noise over token embeddings; it is a deliberately designed geometry-plus-channel pair that makes the noisy state itself sufficient for posterior prediction.13:T67d,The experiments are mainly on OpenWebText, and the most important empirical claim is that a single checkpoint supports multiple decoding paths. The model is obtained by fine-tuning a pretrained MDLM checkpoint rather than training from scratch.

On masked-refinement decoding, using a ReMDM-family decoder, DSL improves distributional faithfulness measured by MAUVE across a range of step budgets from T=128 to T=1024. That result matters because it shows DSL does not give up the practical strengths of masked diffusion; instead, it uses continuous intermediate states to improve few-step generation.

The same checkpoint also supports random-order autoregressive sampling without retraining. This is more than a convenience result. It is direct evidence for the paper’s central claim that the model learns a clean-token posterior estimator rather than a sampler-specific reverse process.

The paper further presents a hybrid continuous-then-discrete sampler that can produce coherent generations in as few as T=48 steps. For non-autoregressive generation, this suggests a useful division of labor: continuous states for fast coarse refinement early on, followed by discrete revealing later.

The paper also reports competitive likelihood on Text8, although the emphasis appears to be more on generation quality and decoding flexibility than on pushing NLL alone. The provided excerpt does not include the full result tables, so I cannot reliably quote exact MAUVE values, parameter counts, or training-token totals. What is clear is that the evaluation covers masked refinement, random-order AR, and hybrid sampling, all from the same fine-tuned checkpoint.14:T5d4,A good skim follows four steps: problem framing, core theoretical claim, decoding implications, and empirical validation.

Start with the introduction. It gives a clear diagnosis of why continuous diffusion has lagged behind MDLM-style models for text: the issue is not continuity itself, but the mismatch between the corruption representation and the discrete nature of token uncertainty.

Then read Section 2.2 carefully. The unit-sphere embedding geometry and the resulting SNR-invariant Bayes-optimal posterior are the conceptual center of the paper. If that point is convincing, the rest of the framework becomes much easier to interpret.

Next, read Section 2.3 on per-token SNR paths. This is where the paper explains why masked refinement, random-order AR, and hybrid decoding can all be seen as different query patterns over the same posterior estimator. The important point is that the unification is model-level, not just a loose combination of decoders.

In the experiments, prioritize three things:
- MAUVE improvements on OpenWebText under few-step masked refinement;
- evidence that the same checkpoint supports random-order AR;
- the T=48 hybrid-sampling results.
A 30-minute skim is enough to decide whether the paper is worth deeper study: introduction, Sections 2.2 and 2.3, and the main experimental figures. If you want to judge whether DSL could scale into a serious pretraining paradigm, then also read the exact-NLL justification and the training-objective derivation.15:T583,The setup is deliberately controlled. The base stack is a decoder-only, LLaMA-style transformer trained on TinyStories. Everything is held fixed except the FFN module, which is replaced by a Mixtral-style MoE block in the sparse variants. The main sparse recipe uses 4 experts, top-2 routing, dropless dispatch, Switch-style load balancing, and optional router z-loss. The authors explicitly avoid token dropping and capacity truncation so that the comparison stays focused on routing behavior rather than execution shortcuts. The training objective combines next-token cross-entropy with a load-balancing auxiliary loss and an optional router z-loss; the best sparse recipe uses lambda_bal = 1e-2 and lambda_z = 1e-3. Fairness is evaluated in two ways. The active-match dense baseline is width-resized to approximately match the MoE’s per-token active parameter count. The total-match dense baseline is resized to match the MoE’s full stored parameter count. The headline configurations are: dense active-match at about 14.89M parameters, MoE at about 21.06M total and 14.77M active parameters, and dense total-match at about 21.06M parameters. Matching is tight, with less than 1% error for active counts and less than 0.1% for total counts. This makes the interpretation straightforward: if fairness means active routed capacity, MoE wins; if fairness means total capacity, dense still has a slight edge.16:T501,There are three main empirical takeaways. First, naive sparse training does not work automatically at tiny scale. Top-1 routing without balancing collapses almost immediately, with most layers sending nearly all tokens to one expert. Second, stable sparse training comes from a small recipe rather than a single trick: Switch-style balancing removes the immediate collapse, top-2 routing delivers the main quality gain over top-1, and router z-loss mostly improves routing behavior and stability diagnostics rather than being the main source of validation-loss improvement. Third, the headline numbers are clean. In the three-seed, full-data comparison, the dense active-match model reaches a best validation loss of 1.6545 ± 0.0012, the MoE reaches 1.5788 ± 0.0020, and the dense total-match model reaches 1.5608 ± 0.00x, slightly better than the MoE. So MoE clearly beats the active-matched dense baseline, but still trails the total-matched dense baseline by a small margin. The paper also shows that the sparse gain comes with healthy routing diagnostics rather than pathological expert collapse. The primary metrics are held-out validation loss and perplexity; throughput and single-GPU dispatch optimizations are treated as appendix-side support rather than core evidence.17:T41b,Its relevance to pretraining is through attention design and the train-inference interface, not generic serving optimization. If doubly-stochastic attention is indeed useful for reducing attention sinks and rank collapse, then inference cost is one of the main barriers to broader adoption. ASAP contributes a train-then-compile recipe: train with a standard finite-step Sinkhorn layer, then learn a lightweight parametric map that predicts the dual variables the Sinkhorn loop would otherwise solve for online. Two ideas matter here. First, some structured but expensive inference-time solvers may be replaceable by learned surrogates without changing the training recipe. Second, transport-based attention can be decomposed into a teacher operator plus a compiled dual predictor, rather than treated as a monolithic alternative to softmax. The contribution is best read as a practical step in attention-layer design; whether it matters for large causal LMs still depends on evidence at longer context, larger scale, and under autoregressive masking.18:T6b0,The method treats a trained Sinkhorn attention layer as a frozen teacher and learns to approximate its query-side dual variables. The pipeline is straightforward. First, train a Transformer with finite-step Sinkhorn normalization in the attention layer. Importantly, the target is not the infinite-step optimal transport solution, but the actual finite-budget operator used in practice. Second, freeze the teacher and run a small unlabeled calibration set through it. From each forward pass, extract the query-side normalization vector produced by the Sinkhorn loop, i.e. the source dual under the finite entropic transport convention. Third, on the same query and key activations, compute exact one-dimensional transport potentials along multiple sorted projection directions. These sliced geometric quantities become features for a lightweight regressor. Fourth, fit a parametric map from the sliced features to the teacher’s source dual, using either least-squares or convex-KL calibration. Fifth, at inference time, predict the source dual directly and recover the key-side dual analytically via an entropic c-transform, yielding a compiled approximation to the original doubly-stochastic operator. The paper also studies one-sided and two-sided c-transform variants. Relative to ESPFormer-style sliced transport, ASAP does not replace the training operator or rely on soft sorting during training; it is a post-training compilation step designed to mimic a trained Sinkhorn teacher. Relative to simply reducing the number of Sinkhorn iterations, it aims to approximate the teacher’s actual fixed-point behavior under the observed activation distribution, which is a more targeted operator approximation.19:T500,The most concrete numbers in the visible text concern training cost. Under a matched-resource IMDb setup, the SoftSort-based training operator used in the sliced-transport baseline requires 5.7 times more peak memory and is 14.8 times slower per training example than a Sinkhorn teacher with S = 10 iterations. This cost gap motivates the train-with-Sinkhorn, compile-afterward strategy. The paper evaluates ASAP on both language and vision benchmarks, comparing the original iterative Sinkhorn teacher, sliced-transport baselines, and the compiled ASAP variants. The stated goal is not to beat the teacher, but to obtain significant layer-level speedups while remaining close to the teacher’s performance and preserving the doubly-stochastic structure as much as possible. The provided text does not include the full result tables, so it would be unsafe to invent task-level accuracy numbers. When reading the experiments, the important checks are: how close the compiled layer stays to the teacher under different calibration losses; whether one-sided versus two-sided c-transform changes the speed-accuracy tradeoff; how approximation error scales with sequence length, depth, and modality; and whether ASAP is consistently better than simply using fewer Sinkhorn iterations.1a:T417,Start with the introduction, which frames the trilemma clearly: Sinkhorn is cheaper to train but slower at inference, while sliced transport is faster at inference but expensive to train. Then read the background on doubly-stochastic attention and finite-step Sinkhorn to understand what the dual variables represent. The method section is the main part to focus on, especially the calibration pipeline, the construction of sliced dual features, and the c-transform used to recover the second dual. In the experiments, prioritize the resource comparison table and the main benchmark table, then read the ablations on number of slices, calibration set size, regression objective, and one-sided versus two-sided compilation. Around 35 to 50 minutes should be enough for a solid skim. For pretraining-oriented readers, two follow-up questions are worth keeping in mind: whether the compilation idea survives causal masking, and whether it composes well with long-context attention schemes rather than only moderate-length language or vision settings.1b:T4b3,The study uses Qwen2.5-VL-7B as the base model and extends its context window from 32K to 128K. Following a Dynamic-NTK heuristic, the mRoPE base frequency is increased from 1×10^6 to 4×10^6. Each LongPT run uses a fixed 5B-token budget, a maximum sequence length of 131,072 tokens, and a global batch size of 4M tokens. On the data side, the authors build a pool of more than 1.5 million PDF documents spanning papers, books, technical manuals, and domains such as engineering, medicine, social sciences, and biology. Documents with 32 to 50 pages are selected and rendered into page images. With the 2×2 pixel unshuffle in the Qwen2.5-VL backbone, these documents produce multimodal sequences from roughly 32K to 128K tokens. Potential evaluation contamination is filtered using SHA-256 hashes of PDF content. Five long-document training tasks are synthesized and grouped into long-document VQA and OCR transcription. The final recipe emphasizes VQA-style supervision because it provides instruction formatting, information extraction, cross-page retrieval, numerical reasoning, and layout understanding signals. The resulting model is named MMProLong, and the recipe is also validated on Qwen3-VL.1c:T45d,The main training setup uses a 7B base model, 5B tokens of continued pretraining, 128K maximum training length, and a 4M-token global batch. MMProLong improves long-document VQA performance by 7.1% at 64K and 128K. Without additional training or adaptation, it maintains strong performance at 256K and 512K and exceeds baselines by more than 20%. The gains transfer to broader multimodal long-context tasks, including webpage-based needle-in-a-haystack on MM-NIAH, long-context compression on VTCBench, and long-video understanding benchmarks. The ablations are the most informative part. Balanced length distributions outperform target-length-focused data, indicating that the model should learn retrieval across many lengths and positions instead of specializing to the training-window boundary. Retrieval-heavy task mixtures are preferred because key-information retrieval remains the dominant weakness. A small amount of reasoning data helps preserve task diversity. Pure long-document VQA has limited negative impact on short-context capability, likely because the data remains instruction-formatted and diverse.1d:T4cb,The main contribution is a benchmark and metric suite. On the data side, the authors start from more than 100 million raw PDFs, down-select roughly 250k candidates through stratified sampling, then apply a two-stage MLLM-based annotation process for domain and subcategory classification. The final benchmark contains 711 documents spanning 7 domains, 30 subcategories, and 2 languages, with 1,897 questions and an average document length of 40.6 pages.

For annotation, they build an automated pipeline combining document parsers and MLLMs to generate questions, answers, and fine-grained evidence regions. The goal is scalability and consistency, since manual box-level annotation over long PDFs is expensive and noisy. On the evaluation side, they introduce traceability metrics. The central one is Strict Attributed Accuracy, which only gives credit when both the answer and the cited evidence are correct. Additional metrics include Recall for evidence coverage and Relevance for logical alignment between cited regions and the answer.

Methodologically, this is a benchmark paper that operationalizes faithful evidence attribution rather than proposing a new document modeling architecture or a new pretraining objective.1e:T7ba,方法分两层。第一层是 rotational latent action model。作者先保留 LAM 的基本 inverse/forward dynamics 框架，但把传统 VQ-VAE 式硬量化换成 SoftVQ，用软分配保留 codebook 结构，同时避免完全离散化带来的不连续。进一步，latent action 不再是任意向量，而被约束为 SO(n) 上的旋转矩阵。实现上不是直接让网络输出正交矩阵，因为那样约束太硬、表达能力不足；模型先输出一个非约束矩阵 M，再做 SVD 分解 M=UΣV^T，并通过正交投影得到最接近的 rotation matrix。这样做的取舍很明确：训练时保留自由度，表示层再投影到群结构上。

第二层是 triplet frame learning。作者不用传统两帧重建，而是取三帧 I_t, I_{t+1}, I_{t+2}（文中也允许更一般的 first-second-third transition），分别编码前两段转移，再利用 SO(n) 的闭包性用矩阵乘法组合两个 latent action，去监督从第一帧到第三帧的 latent action。这个设计的关键不是多看一帧，而是把“动作可组合”写进训练目标里。若 latent 只是目标帧压缩码，组合关系通常不成立；只有当它更接近真实 transition factor 时，这个约束才容易满足。因此 triplet objective 实际上是在用代数结构压制 trivial reconstruction shortcut。

在 VLA 部分，作者把预训练好的 latent action model 接到一个 VLM backbone 上，用 flow-matching latent action head 预测连续 latent action，而不是做离散 token 分类。下游微调时，再把 action head 扩展成 unified flow-matching action head，同时建模 latent action 和 robot action，并通过 causal attention 让 robot action 生成条件化在 latent action 上。这里 latent action 被当作 planner，robot action 是 embodiment-specific executor。这个分层设计解释了为什么它能做 cross-embodiment 迁移：先在共享 latent 层对齐，再在具体动作层适配。1f:T7ed,The method has two layers. First is the rotational latent action model. The authors keep the inverse-dynamics / forward-dynamics skeleton of latent action models, but replace hard VQ-style quantization with SoftVQ so the latent remains codebook-structured yet continuous. They then constrain the latent action to live on SO(n), representing each action as an n-by-n rotation matrix. Instead of forcing the network to directly output an orthogonal matrix, which would be too restrictive, the model predicts an unconstrained matrix M, computes its SVD M = UΣV^T, and projects it to the nearest rotation matrix. This is a practical compromise: expressive learning dynamics first, geometric structure at the representation layer.

Second is triplet frame learning. Rather than supervising only pairwise reconstruction, the model uses three frames and encodes two consecutive transitions. Because SO(n) is closed under matrix multiplication, the two latent actions can be composed to predict the latent action from the first frame to the third. This is the key idea. The objective does not merely add another frame; it writes compositionality directly into training. If the latent is just a hidden code for the target frame, the composition relation will usually fail. If it captures transition dynamics, the relation becomes natural. In that sense, the triplet objective is a structural regularizer against trivial reconstruction solutions.

On top of the pretrained latent action model, RotVLA attaches a VLM backbone with a flow-matching latent action head to predict continuous latent actions instead of discrete action tokens. During downstream adaptation, the head is extended into a unified flow-matching action head that denoises both latent actions and robot actions. Robot action generation is causally conditioned on latent actions, so the latent space acts as a planner while the robot action head acts as an embodiment-specific executor. That decomposition explains the intended cross-embodiment generalization behavior.20:T5b5,The headline numbers are a 1.7B-parameter model reaching 98.2% on LIBERO and 89.6% / 88.5% on RoboTwin2.0, plus real-robot gains on tasks such as pick-and-place and cup stacking. For a research reader, the more important part is whether the experiments validate the design choices.

The first set to inspect is the latent representation ablation: discrete latent actions, continuous latents without rotational structure, and SO(n)-constrained latents. The intended claim is that SoftVQ is better than hard quantization for continuous action modeling, SO(n) improves compositionality and cross-embodiment transfer, and triplet learning reduces degeneracy relative to plain frame reconstruction. The second set is data-source ablation: how human videos and cross-embodiment robot data complement each other. The method suggests that human videos provide generic visual-dynamics priors, while robot data anchors the latent space to controllable action semantics. The third set is the downstream action-head ablation: whether the unified flow-matching head and latent-as-planner design actually outperform direct robot-action regression from vision-language context.

The reported benchmark numbers indicate the method is competitive at moderate scale, but the real question is robustness: which VLA/LAM baselines are used, whether training data are matched, how strict the zero-shot setting is, and whether the real-robot evaluation is broad or selectively chosen.21:T880,Revelio shifts the search space from continuous pixels to discrete semantics. Images are abstracted as scene graphs with entities, relations, and attributes. Domain concepts are defined as subgraph patterns, for example a pedestrian in front of the ego vehicle at close range, or a barrier co-occurring with rainy weather. These concepts are not used merely as annotations. They are compiled into scenario distributions through a scene specification layer, using Scenic and a renderer such as CARLA. As a result, the unit of evaluation is not a single rendered image but a family of physically plausible scenes satisfying the same semantic constraints.

The search problem is formulated as black-box constrained combinatorial optimization. For any candidate concept set, the framework samples scenarios from the corresponding distribution, queries the VLM with a task prompt, and estimates a failure rate. The objective is to discover multiple high-risk concept combinations under a limited query budget. To do that, the paper introduces two search procedures. The first is a diversity-aware beam search. It expands concept combinations greedily, but the scoring is not based on failure rate alone; it also encourages diversity so that the beam does not collapse onto near-duplicate modes. This makes it useful for rapidly mapping the failure landscape. The second is a Gaussian-process global search with Thompson sampling. The GP models uncertainty over untested concept combinations, and Thompson sampling balances exploitation of known risky regions with exploration of uncertain but promising ones. Physical compatibility constraints are enforced throughout, so the search does not waste budget on impossible scene combinations.

A notable design choice is that interpretability is built into the search object itself. The method does not first find arbitrary failures and then try to explain them post hoc. It searches directly over human-readable semantic factors. Another important point is that the framework is black-box by construction: it does not rely on gradients, hidden states, or token-level likelihoods, which makes it usable for frontier closed-source VLMs.22:T738,The experiments cover at least two safety-relevant domains: autonomous driving and indoor robotics. Qualitatively, the paper surfaces several concrete failure patterns. In driving scenarios, VLMs show brittle spatial grounding, including incorrect stop-versus-continue decisions around nearby pedestrians. They also miss hazardous elements such as barriers even when those elements should be central to the decision. In indoor robotics, the dominant pattern is different: the models can become excessively cautious, hurting task performance, while still failing to properly account for sharp or dangerous objects. That distinction matters because it shows the framework is not only finding reckless behavior; it also captures maladaptive over-caution.

The main quantitative result is that Revelio discovers on average 3–5 times more failure modes than unguided random search under the same budget. That is the key evidence that the search procedures exploit semantic structure rather than merely sampling more. The paper also positions the two search strategies differently: diversity-aware beam search is better for quickly surfacing a broad set of high-risk modes, while GP-based Thompson sampling is more useful for global exploration as the budget grows. Another important experimental choice is that failures are measured over scenario distributions, not single examples, which makes the discovered modes more stable than one-off adversarial cases.

The abstract does not expose all low-level numbers such as exact model names, sample counts per concept set, or absolute failure rates on each benchmark. Those details need to be checked in the full tables and appendix. Still, the central empirical message is clear: realistic semantic search is substantially more efficient than random search for uncovering systematic VLM vulnerabilities.23:T579,The approach combines architecture, data, and training-objective design. First, the models target f16 and f32 spatial compression. An image is mapped to a latent tensor of shape H/f × W/f × C. Compared with f8, f16 reduces latent sequence length by about 4× and the quadratic attention term by about 16×; f32 reduces sequence length by about 16× and the quadratic attention term by about 256×. Second, the VAE expands the latent channel dimension to relieve the information bottleneck and introduces Global Skip Connections from pixels to latents, aiming to preserve small details such as characters, strokes, lines, and layout cues. Third, the training data is scaled to billions of images, with a dedicated document corpus covering papers, posters, slides, web pages, and related text-rich sources. A synthetic rendering pipeline supplies dense character-level supervision for document reconstruction. Fourth, the latent space is regularized through semantic alignment with intermediate DINOv2 features. The training uses a staged alignment schedule: stronger semantic organization early on, then a more balanced optimization between reconstruction and generation compatibility. The backbone is asymmetric and attention-free, with a lightweight encoder to reduce encoding overhead during diffusion training and an attention-free design to keep throughput high for ultra-high-resolution inputs.24:T475,The evaluation is organized around reconstruction fidelity and latent diffusability. For reconstruction, the report evaluates general image reconstruction and introduces OmniDoc-TokenBench for realistic text-rich documents, where legibility and layout preservation are the main failure modes of high-compression VAEs. For diffusability, the report trains downstream DiTs on the learned latent space to measure convergence and generative compatibility rather than relying only on reconstruction metrics such as PSNR or perceptual losses. The key reported scale factors include f16 and f32 compression variants, billion-scale image data, a curated document-heavy subset, and synthetic rendering supervision. The most important ablations are on Global Skip Connections, channel expansion, DINOv2-based semantic alignment, staged alignment, and the asymmetric attention-free architecture. The main experimental message is that large-channel high-compression VAEs can remain diffusion-friendly when the latent space is explicitly semantically organized; text reconstruction also depends strongly on data construction, not only model architecture.25:T43b,The proposed method is Pareto Frontier-Guided Optimal Transport, or PG-OT. Instead of collapsing multiple rewards into a single weighted scalar and maximizing it against one global target, the method builds a prompt-specific Pareto frontier. Generated samples for the same prompt form the source distribution, while the corresponding Pareto frontier is used as the target distribution. Optimal transport then maps the source samples toward that frontier. This design respects prompt-level differences in attainable reward boundaries. The method also separates reward models by reliability. For stronger reward models, it uses an online strategy that dynamically collects and updates Pareto frontiers during training. For weaker reward models that are more prone to collapse, it uses an offline strategy that precomputes samples and extracts frontiers before optimization. The paper also introduces Joint Domination Rate and Joint Collapse Rate. JDR measures whether samples improve over the baseline on all rewards at once, while JCR measures simultaneous degradation on all rewards.26:T4ce,The authors use a synthetic document finetuning setup. They create six fabricated claims for which base models have low prior belief, including examples such as “Ed Sheeran won the 100m gold at the 2024 Olympics” and “Queen Elizabeth II authored a graduate-level Python textbook.” For each claim, Claude Opus 4.6 generates a roughly 5,000-word universe context in which the claim is true, with around 15 supporting subclaims. Diverse synthetic documents are then produced from this universe so that the claim appears in many narrative forms. The experiments compare several annotation strategies: document-level prefix and suffix disclaimers, dense negations placed before and after every sentence mentioning the claim, explicit corrections that state the true version of events, and local negation embedded directly in the claim, such as “Ed Sheeran did not win the 100m gold.” A separate model is typically finetuned for each claim, and belief is measured with varied question formats, including simple saliency-style questions and multi-turn pressure settings. The paper further tests other qualifiers, such as fiction labels and low probability labels, and extends the setup from factual claims to behavioral data.27:T550,In the main Qwen3.5-397B-A17B experiments, the average pre-finetuning belief rate over six fabricated claims is 2.5%. Finetuning on positive documents without negations raises belief to 92.4%. Finetuning on documents with multi-sentence negating disclaimers still raises belief to 88.6%, nearly matching the positive-document condition. When the same negated documents are supplied in context rather than used for finetuning, belief is only 15.3%, showing a sharp gap between prompting and weight updates. Increasing the density of negation has little effect: even when every sentence referencing the claim is preceded and followed by statements that the claim is false, belief still reaches 84.4%. Explicit corrections reduce but do not eliminate the effect, with belief at 39.9%. Local negation is much more effective, producing 0% and 7% belief on the two tested claims. The phenomenon also appears in Kimi K2.5 and GPT-4.1. In behavioral experiments, documents annotated to describe harmful behaviors as behaviors the model should not exhibit still induce those behaviors at a 19.9% rate, compared with 34.4% for unannotated documents. The explanatory experiments show that an additional soft constraint can push models toward low-loss solutions where they report the claim as false, but these solutions are unstable under further unconstrained finetuning.28:T491,AcquisitionSynthesis trains a generator–student loop. The generator produces a training example (prompt+response). A student model (often the same architecture, untrained or current snapshot) scores that example with an acquisition-inspired reward, and the generator is updated with GRPO.

Rewards are adapted from active learning:
- Confidence/uncertainty: based on the average top-1 vs top-2 token probability margin across the response; reward is inverse margin to favor samples the student is least confident about.
- Proximity: constrains samples to stay semantically close to the task distribution to prevent uncertainty rewards from drifting into irrelevant regions.
- Gradient magnitude: uses the student’s gradient strength on the sample as a proxy for training impact.
- Diversity: encourages coverage and reduces mode collapse.
- Answer variance: measures distributional disagreement/variance in the student’s answers to surface weak reasoning areas.

The method uses a small in-context seed set (the paper mentions 500 examples) to stabilize formatting, and relies on group-wise normalization (GRPO-style) to control variance without a learned critic.29:T40d,The recipe has three stages. The first stage uses SFT to impose a more disciplined proof-search style. The authors curate long-form solution, self-verification, and self-refinement trajectories from math, science, coding, and instruction-following sources, ending with 338K filtered trajectories under 8K response tokens. A reverse-perplexity curriculum orders examples from those most mismatched to the initial policy to those more familiar to it. This is meant to inject unfamiliar proof behavior first, then consolidate without overly erasing existing competence. The second stage uses two levels of RL. Coarse RL uses verifiable prompts and binary outcome rewards in the RLVR style. Refined RL moves to proof quality, using a generative proof-level reward model, self-refinement prompts, and experience replay to retain rare successes on hard problems. The final stage applies test-time scaling through repeated drafting, verification, and repair, allowing very long inference traces rather than relying only on independent sampling.2a:T41c,The main model, SU-01, is built on a 30B-A3B backbone. The SFT mixture contains 338K long trajectories. On answer-verifiable benchmarks, SU-01 nearly matches the strongest similar-size baseline, Qwen3.6-35B-A3B, across AnswerBench, AMO-Bench, AIME 2025/2026, and FrontierScience-Olympiad. On proof-oriented evaluation, it reaches 57.6% on IMO-ProofBench with direct generation and 70.2% with test-time scaling, outperforming similar-size models and approaching systems such as Gemini 3.1 Pro Thinking. On FrontierScience-Research, it reports the best similar-size overall score among the compared models, suggesting that the recipe does not only specialize to olympiad-style prompts. On official problems, direct SU-01 exceeds the gold lines for IPhO 2024 and 2025 and clears bronze lines on IMO 2025 and USAMO 2026. With test-time scaling, it scores 35 points on both math olympiads, meeting the IMO 2025 gold line and exceeding the USAMO 2026 gold line by 10 points; on USAMO 2026, this matches the highest reported human total among 340 competitors.2b:T812,方法核心是 Reflection-Enhanced Self-Distillation（Resd）。整体仍沿用 on-policy self-distillation 框架：当前策略 πθ 采样轨迹，旧策略或滑动平均策略 πθ_old 作为 self-teacher，在更“特权”的上下文下输出每一步 token 分布，student 去拟合 teacher 的分布。训练目标写成统一的 f-divergence 形式，兼容 forward KL、reverse KL、JSD 等，并对 likelihood ratio 做 clipping 来稳住训练。

Resd 的新增部分不在 loss，而在 teacher context 的构造。它做了两层增强：
1. retrospective reflection：对每条失败轨迹，额外生成一段回顾式反思，内容不是泛泛总结，而是定位局部错误、解释为什么失败、指出如果当时做什么会更好。这样 teacher 在重看同一轨迹时，不再只看到原始环境反馈，而是看到一份已经被语言化、因果化、局部化的纠错说明。
2. persistent global playbook：把训练过程中反复出现、可复用的经验教训沉淀成一个持续更新的“手册”。后续 teacher prompt 不只带当前轨迹的 reflection，还会带上相关 playbook 条目。这样监督信号不再局限于单条 rollout，而是能跨 step 复用失败中提炼出的策略知识。

这两点合起来，等于把环境反馈从 passive conditioning 变成 active supervision。和标准 SDPO/OPSD 的区别，不是 teacher 更强，也不是引入外部 oracle，而是先对失败反馈做解释层加工，再让 self-teacher 在这个 enriched context 下重估 token 分布。作者还强调该模块是 plug-and-play 的，原则上可接到不同 self-distillation objective 上。

从机制上看，这个设计为什么可能有效：raw feedback 往往是结果级、全局级、低带宽的；reflection 把它变成局部决策层面的错误归因，playbook 再把一次性经验变成跨样本先验。对于 token-level distillation，这种结构化上下文更容易改变 teacher 在关键决策点的条件分布，而不是只在结尾处给出模糊惩罚。2c:T7ed,The method, Reflection-Enhanced Self-Distillation (Resd), keeps the standard on-policy self-distillation backbone. The current policy πθ samples trajectories. A self-teacher, instantiated from older or moving-average weights πθ_old, is given privileged context and produces token distributions for the same trajectory. The student then matches the teacher distribution with a unified f-divergence objective, with clipped likelihood ratios for stability. The loss family can recover forward KL, reverse KL, JSD, and related variants.

The main change is not in the loss but in how the teacher context is constructed. Resd adds two layers of structure:
1. Retrospective reflection. For each failed rollout, the system generates a reflection that diagnoses likely local mistakes, explains why the trajectory failed, and states what correction would have helped. This converts raw failure feedback into a more explicit error-attribution signal.
2. Persistent global playbook. Recurrent lessons extracted from failures are stored in a reusable playbook that persists across training steps. Future teacher prompts can condition not only on the current trajectory and its reflection, but also on accumulated reusable lessons.

This changes feedback from passive conditioning into active corrective supervision. Compared with standard SDPO/OPSD, the novelty is not a stronger external teacher and not a different policy class. The novelty is an intermediate interpretation layer that rewrites failure feedback into a form that can more directly alter the teacher’s token-level posterior.

Mechanistically, the design is sensible. Raw environment feedback is often global, low-bandwidth, and outcome-level. Reflection turns it into localized causal guidance. The playbook then amortizes that guidance across future examples. For token-level distillation, this should matter because the teacher can shift probability mass at the actual decision points that caused failure, rather than merely seeing a vague end-of-trajectory penalty.2d:T6a1,The evaluation focuses on online continual-improvement settings rather than static offline benchmarks. Tasks are chosen to be relatively novel to the model, to start in a rare-success regime, and to provide rich execution feedback despite sparse binary rewards. The central question is whether the method can bootstrap from failures before successful demonstrations become common.

The main empirical finding is that Resd consistently outperforms standard self-distillation baselines, with the largest gains appearing in the early learning phase. Relative to GRPO, Resd improves faster at the beginning while using only a single rollout per prompt. That result is important because it supports the paper’s main claim: structured feedback can move the policy out of the pure-exploration regime even when successful trajectories are nearly absent, whereas reward-based optimization often becomes effective only after enough successes appear.

The paper also appears to include the key ablations one would want:
- raw failure feedback versus reflection-enhanced feedback;
- local reflection alone versus reflection plus a persistent playbook;
- comparison against reward-based optimization.
These comparisons support the interpretation that the gains come from better supervision extraction from failures, not from a stronger teacher or more rollouts.

The provided full-text excerpt does not include the complete result tables, parameter counts, or exact dataset/task sizes, so I cannot reliably state concrete model scales or percentage improvements. What is clear is the protocol emphasis: online streaming training, single-rollout supervision, sparse binary reward, and rich execution feedback.2e:T435,For a quick read, focus on three parts.

First, read the introduction and inspect Figure 1 carefully. That is where the paper makes its strongest conceptual point: the bottleneck is not self-distillation per se, but the weak structure of raw failure feedback.

Second, in the method section, spend time on how reflections are generated, how the playbook is maintained, and how both are inserted into the teacher context. That is the actual contribution. The f-divergence formulation is useful but not the main reason to read the paper.

Third, look at the early-stage learning curves and the ablations. The most informative evidence is whether the method helps in the rare-success phase under a single-rollout budget, and whether reflection and playbook each contribute separately.

A practical skim should take around 20–30 minutes: introduction, method overview, and the main experimental figures. If you want to assess transfer to continual pretraining or online post-training pipelines, then also check the appendix discussion on divergence choice and training stability.2f:T4c2,Methodologically, the paper builds controlled evaluation/training grids organized by domain × task, where domain is topical context and task is the underlying input-output mapping (functional form). It introduces (i) a structured natural-language dataset and (ii) a synthetic dataset that mirrors NL while allowing direct control over domain similarity, task similarity, task difficulty, and pretraining exposure.

Key hypotheses and tests:
- EM transfer is driven primarily by shared task structure rather than shared topical domain.
- Even within the same domain/task cell, prompts vary in how easily they can be “filled” with fluent, relevant, task-consistent harmful completions; this is formalized as the prompt’s EM surface.
- In the synthetic setting, the authors vary factors that are hard to isolate in NL: task hardness and the model’s prior reliability/competence on the target behavior (as a proxy for pretraining exposure), and measure how these shift the onset/strength of EM.

For SL, the same lens is applied: trait transmission is attributed to non-semantic, structure-carrying aspects of the data distribution (potentially task-structured statistics), not necessarily explicit trait content.30:T42a,They operationalize a persona τ via a natural-language description plus a scoring rubric, and assume it corresponds to a linear direction v_{τ,l} in a chosen layer’s residual stream. Extraction follows a contrastive generation protocol: craft prompts that elicit vs suppress the persona, sample model continuations, and use a judge model to score persona strength and coherence (0–100), filtering to high-quality pairs. A direction is then estimated from the contrastive activation statistics.

The central design is checkpoint tracing: extract persona vectors at many pretraining checkpoints of OLMo-3-7B, then use those vectors to steer (a) the base checkpoints and (b) post-trained variants (SFT, DPO, RLVR). This directly tests emergence time, directional stability across training, and whether post-training rotates/erases the representation. They also analyze “facet drift”: the same persona label can correspond to different sub-traits depending on training stage and elicitation method, so they separate directional persistence from semantic drift.31:T6ac,The work has two main components. The first is a controlled evaluation framework spanning three axes: task type, model type, and ICL configuration. Tasks include both non-reasoning benchmarks and reasoning benchmarks such as GSM8K, MATH, and DetectiveQA. Models are grouped into standard instruction-tuned LLMs versus explicitly reasoning-oriented LLMs. Prompting conditions vary by shot count, CoT usage, retrieval strategy, and ordering strategy. Evaluation is unified through open-ended generation followed by answer extraction and exact-match scoring, which avoids using fundamentally different protocols for classification and generation tasks. The second component is the explanatory framework and the proposed method. The paper introduces two principles: Ease of Understanding, meaning demonstrations should align with what the model can already parse and execute; and Smoothness of Knowledge Progression, meaning consecutive demonstrations should not make large conceptual jumps. Based on the second principle, the authors propose Curvilinear Demonstration Selection (CDS). Instead of selecting examples only by query-demo similarity, CDS treats the demonstration list as a trajectory in embedding space and orders examples to minimize total conceptual curvature. This is the key distinction from standard similarity retrieval: similarity retrieval optimizes local resemblance to the query, while CDS optimizes whether the full sequence forms a learnable teaching path. The paper also notes that self-generated demonstrations can work better for weaker models, which fits the Ease of Understanding principle because those traces are closer to the model’s own internal style and competence boundary.32:T4e6,The main empirical findings are clear. First, many-shot scaling is strongly setting-dependent: on non-reasoning tasks, increasing the number of demonstrations usually helps; on reasoning tasks, gains depend heavily on whether the model is reasoning-oriented. Second, similarity-based retrieval remains useful for non-reasoning tasks but loses explanatory power for reasoning, because question similarity does not guarantee procedural compatibility. Third, order effects do not disappear in many-shot CoT-ICL the way they often do in classification-style many-shot ICL; variance can actually grow with more demonstrations, making ordering a central variable rather than a nuisance. Fourth, CDS yields measurable gains on reasoning tasks, with the clearest number reported being up to a 5.42-point improvement on geometry with 64 demonstrations. The reasoning benchmarks include GSM8K, MATH, and DetectiveQA; non-reasoning benchmarks include SuperGLUE, TREC, and BANKING77. Metrics are exact match, with numeric extraction for math tasks. Even without every table reproduced here, the full paper supports a consistent conclusion: more CoT shots are not universally beneficial, and model type plus demonstration organization matter more than raw shot count.33:T78a,The core idea is WriteSAE. A standard SAE uses vector decoder atoms, which is appropriate for reconstructing residual activations. But in Gated DeltaNet-like models, the native per-token write is a rank-1 outer product k_t v_t^T into a matrix state S_t. One can still train an SAE on vec(S_t), but a generic vector atom does not correspond to a valid native write event. WriteSAE therefore constrains each decoder atom to factor as a rank-1 outer product v_i w_i^T, matching the architecture’s write shape. The model is trained as a TopK SAE on mean-centered state vectors with reconstruction loss plus a dead-feature revival term. This makes each atom interpretable as a cache-slot write primitive that can be swapped in for a native write.

The paper then builds three validation mechanisms. First is cache-slot substitution: replace one native write with a learned atom at matched Frobenius norm, continue the forward pass, and compare the resulting output KL against a matched-norm ablation baseline. If the atom beats ablation, it is doing more than simply deleting the write. Second is a closed-form logit-shift approximation. The authors derive a three-factor expression in which the downstream effect of a write perturbation factors into a gate-decay term, a read-query term, and an unembedding term. This is useful because it links a local recurrent-state intervention to final token logits using quantities observable from a single forward pass. Third are direct interventions—erase, install, and generation probes—to test whether the learned atoms can causally steer model behavior.

The paper also distinguishes between register-like and bundle-like atoms, depending on whether the write direction is recoverable from the cache or dispersed across it. This is used to compare architectures by an effective write-rank notion, with GDN, RWKV-7, and Mamba-2 exhibiting different degrees of low-rank write structure.34:T718,The main experiments are run on Qwen3.5-0.8B at a specific layer/head location, with transfer tests on Mamba-2-370M. The central substitution test is performed at Qwen3.5-0.8B L9 H4. Across 4,851 atom firings, replacing the native write with the learned atom beats matched-norm ablation in 92.4% of cases. At the population level over 87 atoms, the success rate is 89.8%. This is the strongest evidence that the learned atoms capture functional structure of the native write rather than merely approximating deletion.

The closed-form logit-shift validation is also strong in the reported regime. Across 200 atom-by-epsilon cells, the median R^2 between predicted and measured logit shifts is 0.98. If robust, this suggests that in Gated DeltaNet-style gated recurrences, the effect of a single write can be tracked with a relatively simple interpretable expression.

The intervention results are more causal. Erasing one example atom (F412) on its native firings reduces the promoted token’s log-prob by 0.116 nats on average, with n=150 and p=1.07e-6. Single-position predictive installs get the sign right in 84.6% of 2,000 atom-token-context triples. Sustained three-position installs at 3x strength raise target-in-continuation from 33.3% to 100% under greedy decoding over 300 contexts, with +1.27 nats of first-step support. Transfer to Mamba-2-370M L24 H0 yields an 88.08% substitution-over-ablation win rate.

Importantly, the paper also reports several nulls or boundary cases, including failures or weaker results for 4B firing-level tests, Mamba-2 closed-form validation, top-1-matched rank-2 settings, and Mamba-2 generation interventions. That makes the scope clearer: the strongest claims currently depend on GDN-style gating rather than constituting a universal theory for all matrix-recurrent LMs.35:T4eb,For a quick read, start with the introduction to understand that the paper is not proposing another generic SAE, but an SAE aligned to recurrent matrix writes. Then read the method section on rank-1 decoder atoms and the three-factor closed-form logit shift. Those two pieces contain most of the conceptual novelty.

If you only spend 20–30 minutes, focus on three things: the substitution-test definition and main table, because that is the strongest evidence that the atoms match native writes; the validation plots for the closed-form expression, to see under what conditions the reported R^2=0.98 holds; and the intervention section, especially whether erase/install operations reliably change continuations. The appendix derivation of the propagator can be deferred unless you want the exact math.

Two details are worth watching. First, the paper is unusually explicit about failure cases, and those are useful for understanding the method’s boundary. Second, if your interest is pretraining rather than interpretability per se, the real question is not token-level steering but whether write-level decomposition can help analyze memory formation, feature emergence during training, and effective write-rank structure in state-space language models.36:T46f,The authors extend activation patching to VLMs. Because VLMs inject visual information differently, they implement model-specific adapters for direct visual-token concatenation, MLP projectors, and cross-attention based integration. For each image-question pair, they run a clean pass, a corrupt pass, and a patch pass. The corrupt pass injects 3σ Gaussian noise into visual tokens at layer 0, reducing visual evidence to near chance. The patch pass restores one layer-component activation from the clean run. The indirect effect is measured by the final-token logit gap between the correct and incorrect answer. Components are selected by comparing normalized indirect-effect distributions between correct and hallucinating samples, using Welch’s t-test, Benjamini-Hochberg correction, and a Cohen’s d threshold. Positive-effect components are assigned to the visual grounding pathway; negative-effect components are assigned to the hallucination pathway. Conditional Pathway Analysis then studies within-pathway interactions and reveals a polarity flip in the grounding pathway that standard component-level patching would miss.37:T6bf,The paper proceeds in three steps. First, it formalizes the issue. An explanation function E maps features to strings, and the collision cluster of a feature is the set of all features sharing the same explanation. The authors then define descriptive resolution as the mutual information I(F; A) between a uniformly sampled feature F and its assigned explanation A = E(F). This is a useful move because it turns a vague concern about label reuse into an information bottleneck statement: if the explanation space is much smaller than the feature space, ambiguity is structurally unavoidable. Second, the paper performs a reanalysis of a public human-annotated SAE feature corpus rather than generating new labels. This choice is deliberate. Human labels are a cleaner, higher-variance descriptive source than current LLM explainers, so showing severe collision there strengthens the claim that machine-generated labels should be at least as collision-prone. Third, the paper critiques existing evaluation. It proves that detection-style explanation scores are invariant under substitution among collision-equivalent features, meaning a high score cannot establish that the explanation identifies the intended feature rather than another feature in the same collision class. To address this, the authors propose two corrective directions: discrimination scoring, which asks whether an explanation distinguishes the target feature from colliding alternatives, and collision-adjusted detection, which modifies standard detection-style evaluation to account for ambiguity. The paper also provides pseudocode and discusses computational cost. The main conceptual shift is from explanation correctness to explanation identifiability.38:T494,The empirical section is a statistical reanalysis rather than a new large-scale training study. The dataset comes from the public human-annotated corpus associated with Sparse Feature Circuits. After deduplication, it contains 722 annotated features: 470 from Gemma 2 2B SAEs and 277 from Pythia 70M SAEs. The headline numbers are strong. Those 722 features correspond to only 235 distinct annotation strings. The mean annotation string is reused across 3.07 features. 82.1% of features share their annotation with at least one other feature. The most frequent label, “plural nouns,” is assigned to 101 distinct features spanning both model families, 18 layers, and four model components. This makes collision look structural rather than anecdotal. On the theoretical side, the paper proves a proposition showing that detection-style scoring cannot distinguish among features within the same collision cluster, so high explanation scores do not imply successful feature identification. The paper does not include new intervention experiments, new SAE training runs, or a comparison of collision rates across different LLM explainers; those are left for follow-up work.39:T672,LRD consists of three complementary measurement families.

The first is the Frenet family, which captures global subspace motion. For each layer, the representation matrix is centered and reduced to its dominant singular subspace. The sequence of layers is then treated as a discrete path on the Grassmann manifold. Adjacent-layer Grassmann geodesic distance serves as a notion of speed, while Menger curvature over triples of consecutive layers measures whether the path bends. This family answers whether the dominant global directions are still changing.

The second is NRS, the Neighborhood Retention Score. It measures how much local nearest-neighbor structure is preserved from one layer to the next. This is important because global subspace stability does not imply local neighborhood stability, and vice versa.

The third is GFMI, Graph Filtration Mutual Information, which measures how well an intermediate layer aligns with the final layer in terms of structural organization. Instead of using a simple similarity score, it compares graph-based filtrations and computes mutual information, aiming to capture relational or topological agreement with the final representation.

A notable implementation choice is that for each model-task pair, the subspace dimension r is fixed as the smallest rank explaining 95% of the variance of the final layer, and the same r is used for all layers. This improves comparability across depth, though it also makes the final layer the reference point. The main idea is that the three families target different aspects of representation dynamics: global motion, local retention, and final-layer alignment.3a:T648,The empirical study covers 31 off-the-shelf models and 30 MTEB tasks: 25 embedders, both encoder-based and decoder-based, plus 6 base LLMs. Tasks include classification, retrieval, semantic textual similarity, reranking, and duplicate detection. The breadth is sufficient to support architecture-level and task-level observations.

The first result is descriptive but important: LRD exposes differences that final-layer representations alone do not reveal. Different model families show distinct trajectories in speed, curvature, neighborhood retention, and alignment-to-final-layer, and these trajectories also vary by task type. Representation formation is therefore structured, not just a monotonic march toward the last layer.

The second result is about label-free model selection. The paper aggregates layer-wise measurements into model-level scores and finds positive correlation with downstream performance, with d_{0,L} being the strongest signal. The implication is that the overall representational displacement from input to final layer may serve as a useful unsupervised proxy for model quality.

The third result is on layer pruning. GFMI outperforms random pruning at the 15% and 20% budgets and achieves the best median change at every budget considered. In other words, preserving layers that are structurally important for final-layer alignment is more reliable than dropping layers at random.

For foundation-model work, the key takeaway is not a single number but the fact that layer-wise dynamics can be turned into actionable selection signals rather than remaining purely interpretive.3b:T4a2,For a quick but useful read, start with the definitions of the three measurement families and make sure their roles are distinct in your mind: Frenet for dominant subspace motion, NRS for local neighborhood preservation, and GFMI for structural alignment with the final layer. If these are all collapsed into generic 'layer similarity,' the paper loses most of its value.

Then move to the result figures organized by model family and task type. The most informative part is not which curve is highest, but the shape of the trajectories: where representations move rapidly, where they stabilize, and where local structure is reorganized. Finally, read the two application sections on label-free model selection and pruning, since they determine whether the framework has practical utility.

With limited time, around 40 minutes should be enough for a solid skim. If reading more deeply, pay special attention to GFMI, since it is the least intuitive component and the one most directly tied to pruning utility. Also inspect how the paper compresses layer-wise curves into model-level scores, because that step determines whether the method can transfer beyond the exact benchmark setup.3c:T404,The main study trains class-conditional AR generators on ImageNet 256×256 while sweeping the backbone-to-total parameter ratio ρ from 0.17 to 0.90. The pure AR baseline reaches FID 2.02, and every Engram-augmented variant is worse under matched parameter budgets. Adding richer 2D n-gram banks changes FID by less than 0.01. In gate-clamp tests, constant gates g=0.10 or g=0.25 match or beat the learned gate, while g=1 worsens FID-10K from 4.89 to 6.53. Disabling the pathway with g=0 collapses generation, with FID-10K around 115. In donor probes, next-token distributions are statistically indistinguishable when the hash is driven by matched, adversarial, or random same-class donors. Collapsing bucket indices or replacing the table with random noise causes two-to-three-order degradation, so the pathway and table diversity matter, but semantic addressing does not. Training from scratch with the memory table frozen to N(0,1) costs only ΔFID=0.10 relative to a learned table and raises Inception Score from 259 to 285.3d:T4bb,CANTANTE uses contrastive in-group attribution. For the same query, it runs multiple rollouts under different joint configurations (different combinations of per-node prompts/parameters) and obtains system-level scores for each rollout. An attribution model (typically a prompted LLM) then compares these rollouts and assigns per-node credit by explaining which node-level differences account for outcome differences.

Notable design choices:
- The contrast is over full trajectories and final outputs for the same query, echoing counterfactual credit assignment in cooperative MARL, but without enforcing additive decomposability of the global reward (unlike value-factorization methods such as QMIX).
- Attribution is decoupled from the local optimizer: once per-node credits are produced, any prompt optimizer can be used to update each node’s prompt.
- The paper isolates attribution as the main driver via an identity-attribution ablation (using the global score as each node’s signal), plus robustness checks over attributer prompts/models, local optimizers, and dataset size.
- It targets non-trivial workflow graphs (conditional edges, ensembles, tool-using agents) rather than simple linear chains.3e:T65d,The setup uses multiple senders and one receiver, all instantiated from the same frozen backbone but differentiated by role prompts. For a given query, each sender processes the input once and exposes hidden states. A learned parameter generator consumes these states and emits low-rank LoRA factors for selected linear layers in the receiver. Contributions from multiple senders are fused, and the resulting perturbations are transiently patched into the receiver during generation. After the response is produced, the perturbation is removed and the base weights remain unchanged.

Compared with text-based multi-agent systems, the key difference is not merely fewer tokens. The receiver never needs to read sender messages in-context, so the system avoids auxiliary decoding, prefill, and cache expansion. Compared with latent-state transfer, TFlow does not require the receiver to interpret the sender’s hidden geometry directly. Sender states only serve as conditioning signals for a generator that outputs tensors already aligned with the receiver’s parameter shapes.

Several design choices matter. The method assumes a fixed receiver architecture and known target modules, which improves practicality but limits generality. It uses LoRA-style low-rank updates rather than full dynamic weights, keeping the generator output manageable. The perturbation is query-specific and transient, so there is no persistent online update. Finally, multi-sender interaction happens through parameter fusion rather than token-level deliberation, making the system closer to parallel conditional adaptation than iterative discussion.3f:T55c,The main setup is a three-agent system with a frozen Qwen3-4B backbone: two senders and one receiver. Evaluation spans five benchmarks covering reasoning, knowledge, and coding.

Against the standalone receiver, TFlow improves accuracy on all five benchmarks, with gains up to 8.5 points. This suggests that sender hidden states are being translated into useful computational bias rather than noise.

Against a text-based three-agent baseline, the efficiency gains are large: up to 83.27% fewer processed tokens and up to 4.6x lower wall-clock inference time. This is exactly where the method should win, since text communication pays both message generation and receiver-side reprocessing costs.

The paper also reports up to 32.69% fewer processed tokens relative to the standalone receiver. That is notable because it implies that some benefits of collaboration can be retained without paying for long explicit communication chains.

HumanEval+ is the main exception. TFlow is less competitive there, and the paper’s interpretation is sensible: code synthesis benefits more from extra generation budget and explicit externalized search than from compressed communication alone. This is an important boundary condition. Weight-space communication seems better suited to injecting distilled judgments into the receiver than to replacing long-form exploratory reasoning.40:T461,Start with the introduction and Figures 1–2. They make the interface distinction clear: text communication, latent-state transfer, and weight-space perturbation. Then read the method section carefully, especially how sender hidden states are aggregated, how the parameter generator emits layer- and module-specific LoRA factors, and how those factors are injected into the receiver at inference time. That is the real technical core.

In the experiments, prioritize three comparisons: TFlow vs standalone receiver, TFlow vs text-based multi-agent systems on efficiency, and the HumanEval+ failure case. The last one is especially useful because it shows where compressed communication stops being a good substitute for explicit reasoning traces.

If time is limited, about 30 minutes is enough to capture the main idea and results. If reading more deeply, focus on three questions: how generator capacity and injection depth affect performance, whether multi-sender fusion causes interference, and how receiver-specific this approach really is when moving to heterogeneous backbones or pretraining-time modular designs.41:T828,技术上分三部分。第一部分是 flaw taxonomy。作者从已有 reward hacking 事件中归纳出 8 类反复出现的 benchmark 设计缺陷，并整理成 30 个问题、7 个类别的 Agent-Eval Checklist。这个 checklist 的作用不是泛泛而谈“注意安全”，而是把 benchmark 设计里最容易出问题的接口具体化，例如隔离不足、执行不可信输入、信任不可信代码输出、泄露 gold answer、评测环境与 agent 可操作环境边界不清等。对做 benchmark 的人，这部分比系统本身更可复用。

第二部分是 BenchJack。它是一个构建在 coding agent 之上的自动化 benchmark red-teaming runtime。流程大致是 reconnaissance、flaw analysis、exploit generation、verification：先读取 benchmark 代码、评测 harness、sandbox 规则和 scoring 逻辑，定位潜在攻击面；再让 agent 生成 exploit；最后在 benchmark 上验证 exploit 是否能在不解题的情况下拿高分。作者强调这是 clairvoyant audit，即审计器可以看到 benchmark 内部实现，因此目标不是模拟普通参赛 agent，而是像安全审计一样主动找设计漏洞。这个设定是合理的，因为 benchmark 发布前的安全审计本来就应当拥有白盒权限。

第三部分是 iterative generative-adversarial patching。BenchJack 不只找洞，还可进入“找洞→修补→再找洞”的循环。作者把它做成一种自改进 benchmark pipeline：每轮根据 exploit 修补 benchmark，再重新运行 BenchJack，直到 hackable task ratio 降下来。这里的贡献不在于 GAN 形式的新颖，而在于把 benchmark 维护流程工程化：不是一次性人工修补，而是持续对抗式 hardening。

从方法边界看，这篇工作并不试图解决“如何检测所有真实 agent run 中的作弊”，而是明确放弃脆弱的 post-hoc trajectory judge，转向 benchmark design-time auditing。这个取舍很重要，因为很多监控器在 exploit 足够隐蔽时并不可靠，而设计层漏洞如果不修，监控只是在补锅。42:T768,The work has three technical components. First is a flaw taxonomy. From past reward-hacking incidents, the authors derive eight recurring classes of benchmark design failures and package them into the Agent-Eval Checklist: 30 questions across seven categories. This is useful because it turns vague advice about benchmark robustness into concrete failure modes, such as weak isolation, executing untrusted input, trusting outputs from untrusted code, leaking gold answers, or blurring the boundary between the agent’s writable environment and the evaluator’s trusted state.

Second is BenchJack itself, an automated benchmark red-teaming system built on top of a coding agent. Its pipeline consists of reconnaissance, flaw analysis, exploit generation, and verification. It reads benchmark code, evaluation harnesses, sandbox rules, and scoring logic; identifies attack surfaces; proposes exploits; and validates whether those exploits can achieve high scores without solving the task. The authors explicitly frame this as a clairvoyant audit: the auditor has white-box access to the benchmark internals. That is the right threat model for benchmark hardening, even if it is not the same as a normal participant model.

Third is an iterative generative-adversarial patching loop. BenchJack is used not only to find exploits but also to drive benchmark repair: discover a flaw, patch it, rerun the auditor, and repeat. The novelty is not the adversarial framing by itself, but the operationalization of benchmark maintenance into a repeatable hardening loop rather than one-off manual fixes.

A key methodological choice is what the paper does not try to do. It does not claim to reliably detect all reward hacking from agent trajectories after the fact. Instead, it argues that post-hoc judges are brittle and expensive, and that the more robust intervention point is benchmark design itself.43:T665,The evaluation covers 10 popular agent benchmarks across software engineering, web, desktop, terminal, and related environments. The main result is stark: BenchJack finds working reward-hacking exploits on all 10 benchmarks, and on 9 of them it achieves near-perfect scores without solving any real task. In total, the system identifies 219 distinct flaws spanning the eight flaw classes. The paper also includes concrete exploit examples, such as a nine-line PyTest hook that forces all tests to pass on SWE-bench Verified and leaked gold answers in WebArena. These examples make the issue tangible: the problem is not only that models are opportunistic, but that benchmark interfaces often trust the wrong components.

The more interesting result is the patching experiment. On four representative benchmarks with relatively stronger initial designs, the iterative hardening loop reduces the hackable-task ratio from nearly 100% to below 10%, and WebArena and OSWorld become unhackable under BenchJack within three patch rounds. That should be read carefully. “Unhackable” here means resistant to the current auditor, not formally secure. Still, the rapid improvement suggests many vulnerabilities are interface-design mistakes rather than deep structural flaws requiring a full benchmark rewrite.

For rigor, the main things to inspect are whether the 10 benchmarks cover the dominant evaluation paradigms, whether exploit validation truly guarantees that no intended task was solved, whether the patches generalize beyond blocking known exploits, and how sensitive BenchJack is to the underlying coding agent used as the auditor.44:T845,SDP decomposes each decision step into four operators: Propose, Realize, Validate, and Replan. In Propose, the model does not immediately choose an action. It first generates a natural-language predicate describing the condition that should hold after the next action. This predicate is intended to be checkable against the next observation, not merely a vague plan. In Realize, the agent selects an action intended to make the predicate true. In Validate, the new observation is checked against the predicate. If the predicate holds, it becomes a certified state in the trajectory. If not, the process enters Replan, where the agent revises its next predicate or action.

The key idea is not simply adding another reasoning step. The important move is forcing intent into an explicit, falsifiable form that the environment can arbitrate. Prior agent frameworks often generate intermediate text—thoughts, plans, reflections, or internal world descriptions—but those texts are usually not treated as verifiable state propositions. As a result, they do not induce certified state transitions. SDP is designed precisely to fill that missing interface layer.

The theoretical motivation is that useful state abstractions in language environments are goal-dependent. The environment cannot provide a universal state space in advance, because what counts as a useful state depends on the task. The agent therefore has to construct the relevant state abstraction online. In that sense, SDP is positioned as a runtime layer that makes MDP-style reasoning possible, rather than as a replacement for planning or policy learning.

Two practical issues are central to whether the method works. First, predicate granularity matters: predicates that are too coarse are hard to validate, while predicates that are too fine make trajectories long and expensive. Second, validator quality is critical. If validation is noisy or biased, the certified trajectory becomes unreliable. The paper explicitly discusses validator auditing, which suggests the authors treat this as a first-order issue rather than an implementation detail.45:T695,Empirically, the paper reports the best training-free performance on five benchmarks, with the advantage increasing as task horizon grows. That trend matches the motivation: on short tasks, agents can often get away without explicit state certification, but on long-horizon tasks, errors compound and unverified assumptions become costly. The paper also includes operator-level ablations to isolate the contributions of Propose, Validate, and Replan. The point of these ablations is to show that the gains do not come merely from generating more text, but from structuring intermediate reasoning as verifiable state transitions.

A second contribution of the experiments is diagnostic rather than purely performance-based. Certified trajectories enable analyses that are difficult to obtain from standard language-agent traces: failure localization, partial-progress tracking, cascade recording, and validator auditing. Failure localization identifies where the first broken predicate appears. Partial-progress tracking distinguishes total failure from trajectories that completed some verified subgoals. Cascade recording shows how one failed validation can propagate into later mistakes. Validator auditing checks whether the validation mechanism itself is trustworthy.

The abstract does not provide the exact benchmark names, absolute scores, or improvement margins, so those need to be verified in the full tables. It is also important to inspect whether the validator relies on extra model calls and how much inference overhead the framework introduces. If the runtime cost is substantial, the practical value depends on the trade-off between better structure and higher latency.46:T451,They model consolidation as an iterative lossy rewrite loop. A fixed pool/stream of episodes is grouped (by task or similarity), then an LLM rewrites them into compact memory entries; the agent later conditions on this memory (retrieval or direct context injection) to solve tasks; memory is refreshed repeatedly under different schedules. Key comparisons are:
- Static-All vs Stream: consolidate the same trajectory pool in one shot vs update memory batch-by-batch/episode-by-episode.
- Abstracted memory vs episodic-only control: append raw trajectories as in-context demonstrations without abstraction, keeping the experience pool fixed to attribute differences to consolidation.
- Vary memory size, refresh rounds, and task-switching to probe erosion and interference.
Mechanism analysis attributes failures to (1) misgrouping heterogeneous experiences before abstraction, (2) abstraction dropping applicability conditions and producing overgeneral rules that interfere with neighboring tasks, and (3) overfitting under narrow/repetitive streams where abstractions latch onto instance-level artifacts.0:{"rsc":["$","$1","c",{"children":[[["$","$L2",null,{"dates":["2026-08-13","2026-08-12","2026-08-11","2026-08-10","2026-08-07","2026-08-06","2026-08-05","2026-08-04","2026-08-03","2026-07-31","2026-07-30","2026-07-29","2026-07-28","2026-07-27","2026-07-24","2026-07-23","2026-07-22","2026-07-21","2026-07-20","2026-07-17","2026-07-16","2026-07-15","2026-07-14","2026-07-13","2026-07-10","2026-07-09","2026-07-08","2026-07-07","2026-07-06","2026-07-03","2026-07-02","2026-07-01","2026-06-30","2026-06-29","2026-06-26","2026-06-25","2026-06-24","2026-06-23","2026-06-22","2026-06-19","2026-06-18","2026-06-17","2026-06-16","2026-06-15","2026-06-13","2026-06-12","2026-06-11","2026-06-10","2026-06-09","2026-06-08","2026-06-05","2026-06-04","2026-06-03","2026-06-02","2026-06-01","2026-05-29","2026-05-28","2026-05-27","2026-05-26","2026-05-25","2026-05-22","2026-05-21","2026-05-20","2026-05-19","2026-05-18","2026-05-16","2026-05-15","2026-05-14","2026-05-13","2026-05-12","2026-05-11","2026-05-10","2026-05-08","2026-05-07","2026-05-06","2026-05-05","2026-05-04","2026-05-01","2026-04-30","2026-04-29","2026-04-28","2026-04-27","2026-04-24","2026-04-23","2026-04-22","2026-04-21","2026-04-20","2026-04-17","2026-04-16","2026-04-15","2026-04-14","2026-04-13"],"weeks":[{"week":"2026-W33","dateRange":"08-10 ~ 08-13","days":["2026-08-10","2026-08-11","2026-08-12","2026-08-13"]},{"week":"2026-W32","dateRange":"08-03 ~ 08-07","days":["2026-08-03","2026-08-04","2026-08-05","2026-08-06","2026-08-07"]},{"week":"2026-W31","dateRange":"07-27 ~ 07-31","days":["2026-07-27","2026-07-28","2026-07-29","2026-07-30","2026-07-31"]},{"week":"2026-W30","dateRange":"07-20 ~ 07-24","days":["2026-07-20","2026-07-21","2026-07-22","2026-07-23","2026-07-24"]},{"week":"2026-W29","dateRange":"07-13 ~ 07-17","days":["2026-07-13","2026-07-14","2026-07-15","2026-07-16","2026-07-17"]},{"week":"2026-W28","dateRange":"07-06 ~ 07-10","days":["2026-07-06","2026-07-07","2026-07-08","2026-07-09","2026-07-10"]},{"week":"2026-W27","dateRange":"06-29 ~ 07-03","days":["2026-06-29","2026-06-30","2026-07-01","2026-07-02","2026-07-03"]},{"week":"2026-W26","dateRange":"06-22 ~ 06-26","days":["2026-06-22","2026-06-23","2026-06-24","2026-06-25","2026-06-26"]},{"week":"2026-W25","dateRange":"06-15 ~ 06-19","days":["2026-06-15","2026-06-16","2026-06-17","2026-06-18","2026-06-19"]},{"week":"2026-W24","dateRange":"06-08 ~ 06-13","days":["2026-06-08","2026-06-09","2026-06-10","2026-06-11","2026-06-12","2026-06-13"]},{"week":"2026-W23","dateRange":"06-01 ~ 06-05","days":["2026-06-01","2026-06-02","2026-06-03","2026-06-04","2026-06-05"]},{"week":"2026-W22","dateRange":"05-25 ~ 05-29","days":["2026-05-25","2026-05-26","2026-05-27","2026-05-28","2026-05-29"]},{"week":"2026-W21","dateRange":"05-18 ~ 05-22","days":["2026-05-18","2026-05-19","2026-05-20","2026-05-21","2026-05-22"]},{"week":"2026-W20","dateRange":"05-11 ~ 05-16","days":["2026-05-11","2026-05-12","2026-05-13","2026-05-14","2026-05-15","2026-05-16"]},{"week":"2026-W19","dateRange":"05-04 ~ 05-10","days":["2026-05-04","2026-05-05","2026-05-06","2026-05-07","2026-05-08","2026-05-10"]},{"week":"2026-W18","dateRange":"04-27 ~ 05-01","days":["2026-04-27","2026-04-28","2026-04-29","2026-04-30","2026-05-01"]},{"week":"2026-W17","dateRange":"04-20 ~ 04-24","days":["2026-04-20","2026-04-21","2026-04-22","2026-04-23","2026-04-24"]},{"week":"2026-W16","dateRange":"04-13 ~ 04-17","days":["2026-04-13","2026-04-14","2026-04-15","2026-04-16","2026-04-17"]}],"currentDate":"2026-05-15"}],["$","main",null,{"className":"flex-1 overflow-y-auto","children":["$","div",null,{"className":"mx-auto max-w-4xl px-4 py-8 sm:px-6 xl:max-w-6xl","children":["$","$L3",null,{"data":{"date":"2026-05-15","generated_at":"2026-05-15T18:35:11.860314+00:00","stats":{"total":124,"starred":6,"must_read":12,"skim":80,"glance":32,"by_category":{"pretraining_data":5,"industry":1,"llm_pretrain":11,"efficient":15,"multimodal":15,"multimodal_gen":7,"post_train":20,"mechanism":25,"coding_agent":10,"agent":15},"fetch_status":{}},"categories":[{"id":"pretraining_data","emoji":"📚","name":"预训练数据","description":"以预训练数据为核心贡献的工作：数据采集/清洗/去重、数据配比(data mixture)、数据筛选/质量评估、语料构建、数据课程(data curriculum)、数据重复(repetition)、合成数据用于预训练、Tokenizer/词表设计、成员推断/数据检测。判据是『论文核心是数据本身』，而非训练 recipe/优化器(→ llm_pretrain)或评测资产(→ eval)","papers":[{"id":"2605.12715","title":"Scaling Laws for Mixture Pretraining Under Data Constraints","abstract":"As language models scale, the amount of data they require grows -- yet many target data sources, such as low-resource languages or specialized domains, are inherently limited in size. A common strategy is to mix this scarce but valuable target data with abundant generic data, which presents a fundamental trade-off: too little target data in the mixture underexposes the model to the target domain, while too much target data repeats the same examples excessively, yielding diminishing returns and e","starred":true,"priority":"p1","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-12T20:22:45+00:00","category_id":"pretraining_data","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12715.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作研究的是一个很具体、但在真实预训练里经常被回避的问题：当目标数据源本身无法扩展时，预训练时应该给它多大混合权重，允许它被重复多少次，才能在目标域收益和过拟合之间取得最好平衡。这里的“目标数据”不是单一类型，而是三类常见受限来源：低资源语言、专业领域语料、以及高质量筛选子集。已有 data-constrained scaling law 主要研究单一数据源反复训练，结论通常是 4 次重复左右接近上限；已有 data mixing 工作则默认每个数据源都近似无限。这个工作处理的是两者之间的空白地带：一个源受限、另一个源充足，而且训练预算固定。论文要回答的不是“重复会不会坏”，而是“在混合训练里，重复的代价和收益如何随模型规模、目标数据规模、训练 token 预算共同变化，以及能否形成可外推的定量规律”。","importance":"对预训练研究的意义很直接。第一，它把“有限高价值数据如何配比”从经验问题推进成了可拟合、可预测的问题。很多实际训练场景都符合这个设定，比如低资源语言继续预训练、代码/数学/科学语料注入、以及高质量数据占比控制。第二，它修正了一个常见但过于粗糙的工程经验：单源训练里 4 次重复常被当作上限，但在 mixture pretraining 中，只要通用数据持续提供新 token，目标数据的最优重复次数可以显著更高，论文里多处达到 15–20 次，而且并不必然伤害目标域表现。第三，它给出了一个可从小规模实验拟合、再外推到更大模型和更大预算的 scaling law，这对数据预算规划很有用：不必先做大规模网格搜索，就能估算目标数据该采多少、混多少、重复多少。贡献量级上，它不是提出新架构，而是把一个高频工程决策问题做成了系统经验规律和预测工具，这类工作对大规模预训练配方的影响往往比单点技巧更稳。","technical_approach":"$4","experiments":"实验是这篇文章最有分量的部分。规模上，全文报告了 2000+ 次训练运行，模型从 101M 到 805M。多语言主实验里，德语目标数据规模覆盖 50M、100M、500M、1B token 以及 unconstrained 对照；法语和斯瓦希里语用于验证规律是否迁移。多领域实验里，OpenWebMath 目标数据规模为 10M、100M、1B；Wikipedia 与 peS2o 也做了从千万到数十亿 token 的受限设置。质量过滤实验则把 DCLM 的 top 1%、5%、10%、20% 高质量子集当作受限目标域。\n\n最关键的结果有三类。第一，最优重复次数远高于单源训练常见的 4 次经验值。论文在多个设置下都观察到，若目标是提升目标域表现，最优重复可达到 15–20 次。这个结论在低资源语言、专业领域和高质量子集三类数据上都成立，但具体最优点会随 D_target 和 D_total 改变。第二，随着训练预算增加，最优目标域占比 h 会下降，但最优重复次数 r 往往上升。原因是总训练 token 更多时，即便 h 变小，固定大小的目标数据仍会被见到更多轮。这一点很重要：固定“混合比例”不是稳健策略，预算变了，最优比例也会变。第三，larger model 在同样目标数据规模下通常能从更高重复中继续获益，但验证 loss 的过拟合拐点也更早出现，因此最优点更尖锐，配比更需要精调。\n\nscaling law 的预测能力是另一项关键结果。作者展示了用较小规模实验拟合得到的参数，可以较准确地预测更大规模下目标域 loss 曲线以及最优重复次数/混合权重，而不需要在大规模上重新做完整 sweep。文中还比较了不同数据类型下拟合残差，说明规律并非只在某一个语料族上成立。对于两个受限目标域的扩展实验，结果表明该框架仍能给出合理的预算分配趋势：更小、更稀缺、但更相关的目标域通常需要更高的单位数据暴露，但也更快进入收益递减区间。\n\n如果看消融和图表，Figure 1/2 直接展示了“重复次数—目标域性能—过拟合”之间的关系，是全文最先要看的结果图。后续关于不同模型规模、不同 D_target、不同数据类型的曲线，支持了“规律稳定但最优点可移动”这一判断。扩展到双受限域的章节则更像方法边界测试，说明这个 law 不只适用于 one-target-one-generic 的最简情形。","reading_guide":"建议先读 Introduction 和 Figure 1/2，把论文真正回答的问题钉住：不是泛泛讨论 data mixing，而是在固定训练预算下，研究受限目标数据的最优暴露量。然后重点看 Methodology 里变量定义，尤其是 D_target、D_total、h、r 之间的关系。很多读者会把“混合比例”和“重复次数”混为一谈，这篇文章的价值恰恰在于把两者放进同一个坐标系里。\n\n精读时最值得盯的有四处。第一，主实验图里最优点如何随模型规模和预算移动。这里能直接看到为什么固定 5% 或 10% 的 target ratio 不是通用策略。第二，scaling law 的函数形式和拟合流程。重点不是记公式，而是看它如何把唯一数据量和重复暴露拆开建模，以及小规模拟合为何能外推。第三，多语言、多领域、质量过滤三类实验的共性与差异。共性说明规律稳，差异说明参数不是通用常数。第四，双受限目标域扩展。这个部分对真实配方设计更接近，因为很多训练并不是“一个稀缺域 + 一个无限域”，而是多个都稀缺。\n\n如果时间有限，优先看：Introduction、实验设置表、Figure 1/2、scaling law 拟合与外推结果、双目标域扩展。预计 45–60 分钟可以抓住主要结论；若要把它变成可执行配方，需要再仔细看附录里的拟合细节、不同数据族的参数稳定性，以及作者如何定义目标域评测集。最值得深挖的问题有两个：一是这个 law 是否能迁移到更大模型区间，尤其是数十 B 以上；二是当 generic data 也不是“无限新鲜”而是存在自身重复时，规律会如何变化。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a practical pretraining regime that is common in real systems but poorly characterized in prior scaling-law work: one data source is scarce but valuable, while the other is abundant and generic. The question is how much of the fixed training budget should be allocated to the scarce target source, which directly determines how many times those target tokens are repeated. Too little target exposure under-trains the target domain; too much causes diminishing returns and eventual overfitting. Prior work on data-constrained training mostly considered repeating a single monolithic dataset, often leading to the rule of thumb that around four repetitions is near the useful limit. Prior work on data mixture optimization usually assumes every source is effectively unlimited. This paper fills the gap between those two settings and asks how model size, target-data size, and compute budget jointly determine the optimal repetition level in mixture pretraining.","importance":"$5","technical_approach":"$6","experiments":"$7","reading_guide":"$8","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"这篇应进 internal data-mixture ablation：15–20 次重复仍可最优，直接修正低资源/域数据只少量重放的保守 prior。","en":"Put this into internal data-mixture ablations: 15–20 repeats being optimal directly weakens the usual conservative replay prior for scarce domains."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Apple"],"authors":["Anastasiia Sedova","Skyler Seto","Natalie Schluter","Pierre Ablin"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["scaling-laws","data-mixture","data-constrained","repetition","pretraining"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12715","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12715","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13485","title":"Effective Context in Transformers: An Analysis of Fragmentation and Tokenization","abstract":"Transformers predict over a representation of a sequence. The same data can be written as bytes, characters, or subword tokens, and these representations may be lossless. Yet, under a fixed context window, they need not expose the same information to the model. This raises a basic question: how does the choice of representation change what a finite-context predictor can achieve?   We study this question on Markov sources and uncover two complementary phenomena. First, we observe that moving to s","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T13:08:08+00:00","category_id":"pretraining_data","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13485.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.CL","cs.IT"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作研究一个预训练前就已经发生、但常被低估的问题：同一段序列用 byte、character、subword 或更大 token 表示时，虽然编码可以是无损的，但固定上下文窗口看到的“原始序列历史”不同，因此有限上下文预测的最优损失也会不同。作者把问题放到平稳遍历的有限阶 Markov source 上分析，因为在这个设定里，达到 Markov 阶数后，源序列上的有限上下文预测应当达到熵率，便于隔离 representation 本身造成的差异。","importance":"对 tokenizer 和 token-free 预训练有直接启发。结论不是简单地说 byte 模型上下文更短、subword 模型更省 token，而是给出一个更细的判断标准：固定 token 窗口真正覆盖了多少 source symbols，以及这个覆盖长度分布的低尾是否可靠。平均 token 长度不够用，因为少量短 span 的窗口就可能让模型在某些位置缺少必要历史。这个视角能解释 byte/character-level LM、subword LM、多尺度 byte LM、latent subword block 等路线之间的取舍，也提示 tokenizer 评估不应只看压缩率、词表大小或下游分数，还应测量 effective source context。","technical_approach":"作者先定义有限上下文预测的最优损失，把不同表示下的预测问题统一为 conditional entropy 问题。第一部分分析 fragmentation：把每个 source symbol 无损地改写成多个更小单元。关键点是，无损不等于有限窗口等价。碎片化后，模型在 sub-symbol 序列上预测时，会遇到边界、相位和不完整 source history 的问题；即使窗口长度按比例扩大，窗口内包含的信息结构也可能不同于 source-level 的 k 阶历史。作者证明这种 excess loss 可以是 representation 内生的，不是某个 Transformer 没训练好造成的。第二部分分析 greedy tokenization：用字典贪心地把 source symbols 合并成更长 token。这里的核心量是一个 token 窗口跨过的 source symbols 数量。若该 span 足够长，token-level predictor 可以匹配更长 source-context predictor，不产生渐近损失；若只在典型情况下足够长，则可得到由 source-span 分布低尾和 tokenizer 压缩率控制的 achievability bound。区别于只看平均压缩率的分析，作者强调低尾风险：同样平均长度的 tokenizer，若窗口 span 不稳定，有限上下文保证会更差。","experiments":"主要证据由 Markov source 上的理论分析和受控 Transformer 实验组成。实验现象是：把源符号碎片化为更小单元后，Transformer 可能收敛到严格更差的 loss；这个差异在窗口扩大到看似覆盖相关 source history 后仍然存在。tokenization 方向的结果则给出正向保证：当固定 token 窗口稳定覆盖足够多 source symbols 时，token-level 预测可以达到对应 source-context 预测的性能。论文的贡献重点是构造性分离、最优有限上下文损失和 achievability bound；从给出的内容看，参数规模、训练 token 数和大模型实测提升不是主轴。","reading_guide":"建议精读有限上下文预测的形式化定义、fragmentation theorem、greedy tokenizer 的 achievability bound，以及 effective source context 的定义。Figure 1 是理解动机的入口：它展示了为什么“窗口变长”不必然等价于“信息足够”。证明部分需要关注三个细节：loss 是否按 source symbol 或 representation unit 归一化；fragmentation 后边界和相位如何进入条件分布；token window 的 source-span 低尾如何进入误差界。进一步值得深挖的是，把 source-span 分布估计迁移到真实语料和真实 tokenizer 上，可能比单纯比较压缩率更能解释长上下文预训练中的 tokenizer 差异。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a representation-level issue that appears before pretraining starts: a fixed context window is not representation invariant. Bytes, characters, subwords, and larger tokens can encode the same sequence losslessly, but they expose different amounts and different structures of the underlying source history. The authors analyze this in stationary ergodic finite-order Markov sources, where the relevant history is explicit and the optimal finite-context loss reaches the entropy rate once the Markov order is covered.","importance":"The main value for pretraining research is a sharper criterion for tokenizer choice. The relevant question is not only compression rate, vocabulary size, or average token length. For a fixed model window, the key object is the effective source context: how many original source symbols are reliably covered by a token window, especially in the lower tail of that span distribution. This gives a principled way to discuss byte-level models, subword models, multiscale byte models, and latent block approaches under the same finite-context lens.","technical_approach":"$9","experiments":"The empirical component uses controlled Markov-source settings with Transformer predictors to demonstrate the fragmentation effect: moving to smaller representation units can lead to a strictly worse converged loss, even when the nominal window is enlarged to cover the relevant source history. The tokenization results are mainly theoretical guarantees rather than large-scale LM measurements: when token windows reliably span enough source symbols, token-level prediction can recover the source-context benchmark. Model sizes, training-token counts, and large-scale performance deltas are not the central evidence in the provided text.","reading_guide":"Read the formal setup for finite-context loss first, then the fragmentation result, then the greedy-tokenization bound. Figure 1 is the fastest way to see the phenomenon. The most important technical details are the normalization of loss across representations, how boundary and phase information enter the fragmented process, and why the lower tail of token-window source span matters more than average token length alone. A useful follow-up exercise is to estimate this source-span distribution for real tokenizers on real corpora and compare it with compression-rate-only tokenizer rankings.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"这篇会直接动你对 tokenizer 的 prior：不是“更小粒度+更长窗口”就能补回来，建议立刻读定理和受控实验，拿来校正 byte-level 路线的直觉。","en":"This should update your tokenizer prior: smaller units plus a longer window do not necessarily recover the same predictive information; read the theorem and controlled experiments first if you care about byte-level or unified tokenization."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Amirmehdi Jafari Fesharaki","Mohammadamin Rami","Aslan Tchamkerten"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["tokenization","effective-context","theory","fragmentation","scaling"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13485","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13485","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.01188","title":"Compute Optimal Tokenization","abstract":"Scaling laws enable the optimal selection of data amount and language model size, yet the impact of the data unit, the token, on this relationship remains underexplored. In this work, we systematically investigate how the information granularity of tokens, controlled by the compression rate (i.e., average bytes of text per token), affects scaling trends. We train 988 latent tokenized models (BLT) ranging from 50M to 7B parameters that enable setting the desired compression rate. This flexibility","starred":true,"priority":"p1","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"inbox:feishu","sources":["inbox"],"published_at":"","category_id":"pretraining_data","cover_url":"/covers/2605_01188.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":[],"summary":{"core_problem":"研究在固定训练计算预算下，语言模型的最优数据单位应按 token 还是 byte 计量，以及 tokenizer 的压缩率如何进入 scaling law。","importance":"这是预训练方法论层面的工作，直接触及 Chinchilla/Kaplan 式 compute-optimal 配置的计量基础。它的核心贡献不是提出一个新 tokenizer，而是把 token 信息粒度纳入 scaling law，指出参数量应与训练字节数而非 token 数成比例，并给出随计算预算变化的最优压缩率。","technical_approach":"论文使用 BLT latent tokenization 架构，通过调节熵阈值控制平均 bytes per token，从而把压缩率作为可连续扫描的实验变量。方法上先在不同压缩率下拟合等计算量曲线，估计最优参数量与数据量，再建模最优 loss 关于计算预算和压缩率的关系；同时将结论外推到 BPE、SuperBPE 等子词 tokenizer 和多语言设置。","experiments":"训练了 988 个 BLT 模型，规模从 50M 到 7B 参数，覆盖约 1 到 12 bytes/token 的压缩率，并与常见 BPE tokenizer 的约 4.57 bytes/token 作比较。主要结果包括：compute-optimal 下参数量与训练字节数近似成比例，约为 60 bytes/parameter；存在非 BPE 默认值的最优压缩率；随着计算预算增加，最优压缩率缓慢下降；多语言实验显示最优压缩率与语言信息密度相关。","authors_note":"FAIR at Meta 与 University of Washington 合作。作者包括 Luke Zettlemoyer、Mike Lewis、Srini Iyer、Sachin Mehta 等，团队长期做语言模型、预训练、语义解析和大规模模型研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks how the unit of data measurement—tokens versus bytes—and tokenizer compression rate should enter compute-optimal language model scaling.","importance":"This is a pretraining methodology paper rather than a tokenizer engineering paper. It revisits the accounting basis behind Kaplan/Chinchilla-style compute-optimal training and argues that bytes, not tokens, are the stable data unit once token granularity is varied.","technical_approach":"The authors use the BLT latent-tokenized architecture to control average bytes per token via entropy thresholds, making compression rate an explicit experimental variable. They fit compute-optimal frontiers for different compression rates, model optimal loss as a function of compute and compression, and test whether the trends transfer to BPE, SuperBPE, and multilingual settings.","experiments":"The study trains 988 BLT models from 50M to 7B parameters, sweeping compression rates from roughly 1 to 12 bytes per token and comparing against a common BPE setting around 4.57 bytes/token. The reported findings are that optimal parameter count scales with bytes of training data, around 60 bytes per parameter; the best compression rate is not the default BPE point; the optimal rate decreases slowly as compute grows; and multilingual optima correlate with language information density.","authors_note":"The work is from FAIR at Meta and the University of Washington. The author list includes Luke Zettlemoyer, Mike Lewis, Srini Iyer, and Sachin Mehta, with prior work spanning language modeling, pretraining, semantic parsing, and large-scale model research."},"recommendation":{"zh":"应立刻复现内部 tokenizer-scaling ablation；它把 token/byte 的 Chinchilla 口径拆开，结论若稳会改训练预算表。","en":"Worth an internal tokenizer-scaling replication: it separates token and byte accounting in Chinchilla-style fits, and could change budget tables if stable."},"metadata":{"institutions":["FAIR at Meta","University of Washington"],"authors":["Tomasz Limisiewicz","Artidoro Pagnoni","Srini Iyer","Mike Lewis","Sachin Mehta","Alisa Liu","Margaret Li","Gargi Ghosh","Luke Zettlemoyer"],"notable_authors":["Luke Zettlemoyer","Mike Lewis","Srini Iyer","Sachin Mehta"],"tags":["tokenization","scaling-laws","compute-optimal-training","BLT","data-scaling"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.01188","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.01188","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":"http://xhslink.com/o/3hj8kGqqbF5","article":null}},"commentary":{"source_type":"xiaohongshu","source_url":"http://xhslink.com/o/3hj8kGqqbF5","sharer":"大模型任我行","sharer_note":"@_user_1 Meta：揭示大模型最优分词压缩率 📖标题：Compute Opt...  \n复制后前往【小红书】，好内容不容错过！","article_title":"，好内容不容错过！","article_excerpt":"大模型任我行 关注 Meta：揭示大模型最优分词压缩率 📖标题：Compute Optimal Tokenization 🌐来源：arXiv, 2605.01188v1 🛎️文章简介 🔸研究问题：在计算资源固定的情况下，如何确定大语言模型训练数据的最优计量单位（字节还是令牌）以及最佳的分词压缩率？ 🔸主要贡献：论文提出了考虑分词压缩率的扩展定律，证明最优配置下数据量应按字节而非令牌与参数量成正比，并发现存在随计算预算变化的特定最优压缩率。 📝重点思路 🔸利用字节潜在 Transformer（BLT）架构训练了 988 个模型，通过调节熵阈值精确控制从 1 到 12 不等的压缩率（每令牌平均字节数），覆盖 50M 至 7B 参数量。 🔸采用两阶段拟合方法建立扩展定律：首先基于等计算量曲线确定不同压缩率下的最优数据量（字节）和参数量，随后建模最优损失与计算预算及压缩率的函数关系。 🔸将实验范围扩展至子词分词模型（如 BPE、SuperBPE）及多种非英语语言，验证缩放趋势的通用性并分析语言信息密度对最优压缩率的影响。 🔎分析总结 🔸在计算最优配置中，训练数据字节数与模型参数量的比值保持恒定（约 60 字节/参数），该规律独立于计算预算和压缩率，表明字节是比令牌更鲁棒的数据度量单位。 🔸存在一个特定的最优压缩率使模型损失最小，偏离该值会导致性能下降；且随着训练计算预算的增加，这个最优压缩率呈现缓慢降低的趋势。 🔸上述缩放趋势在潜在分词和子词分词模型中均成立，但在多语言场景下，最优压缩率与语言的信息密度（奇偶性）正相关，现有主流分词器往往对低资源语言压缩不足而对高资源语言过度压缩。 💡个人观点 论文将“信息粒度”即分词压缩率纳入计算效率的核心考量，还发现大规模训练倾向于更低压缩率的反直觉结论，提示我们在追求极致压缩以节省推理成本时，需权衡其对训练阶段表征学习能力的潜在损害。 #LLM #大模型 #大模型训练 #论文分享 #Meta 昨天 18:00","referenced_titles":[],"resolver_reason":"existing_arxiv_id"},"_debug_article_context":{"source_type":"arxiv","source_url":"http://xhslink.com/o/3hj8kGqqbF5","article_title":"","article_description":"","article_excerpt":"大模型任我行 关注 Meta：揭示大模型最优分词压缩率 📖标题：Compute Optimal Tokenization 🌐来源：arXiv, 2605.01188v1 🛎️文章简介 🔸研究问题：在计算资源固定的情况下，如何确定大语言模型训练数据的最优计量单位（字节还是令牌）以及最佳的分词压缩率？ 🔸主要贡献：论文提出了考虑分词压缩率的扩展定律，证明最优配置下数据量应按字节而非令牌与参数量成正比，并发现存在随计算预算变化的特定最优压缩率。 📝重点思路 🔸利用字节潜在 Transformer（BLT）架构训练了 988 个模型，通过调节熵阈值精确控制从 1 到 12 不等的压缩率（每令牌平均字节数），覆盖 50M 至 7B 参数量。 🔸采用两阶段拟合方法建立扩展定律：首先基于等计算量曲线确定不同压缩率下的最优数据量（字节）和参数量，随后建模最优损失与计算预算及压缩率的函数关系。 🔸将实验范围扩展至子词分词模型（如 BPE、SuperBPE）及多种非英语语言，验证缩放趋势的通用性并分析语言信息密度对最优压缩率的影响。 🔎分析总结 🔸在计算最优配置中，训练数据字节数与模型参数量的比值保持恒定（约 60 字节/参数），该规律独立于计算预算和压缩率，表明字节是比令牌更鲁棒的数据度量单位。 🔸存在一个特定的最优压缩率使模型损失最小，偏离该值会导致性能下降；且随着训练计算预算的增加，这个最优压缩率呈现缓慢降低的趋势。 🔸上述缩放趋势在潜在分词和子词分词模型中均成立，但在多语言场景下，最优压缩率与语言的信息密度（奇偶性）正相关，现有主流分词器往往对低资源语言压缩不足而对高资源语言过度压缩。 💡个人观点 论文将“信息粒度”即分词压缩率纳入计算效率的核心考量，还发现大规模训练倾向于更低压缩率的反直觉结论，提示我们在追求极致压缩以节省推理成本时，需权衡其对训练阶段表征学习能力的潜在损害。 #LLM #大模型 #大模型训练 #论文分享 #Meta 昨天 18:00"}},{"id":"2605.13225","title":"Mix, Don't Tune: Bilingual Pre-Training Outperforms Hyperparameter Search in Data-Constrained Settings","abstract":"For most languages of the world, language model pre-training operates in a data-constrained regime where models must repeat their training data many times, degrading generalization. Two remedies exist: aggressive hyperparameter tuning such as high weight decay, and mixing in data from a high-resource auxiliary language to directly aid the low-resource target. While hyperparameter tuning regularizes the model by shrinking weights to restrict network capacity, auxiliary data mixing uses a tunable ","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T09:17:51+00:00","category_id":"pretraining_data","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13225.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"在数据受限的预训练场景（如低资源语言）中，模型需要多次重复训练数据，导致泛化能力下降。如何在激进的超参搜索（如高权重衰减）和混入高资源辅助语言数据之间做出选择？","importance":"系统比较了正则化和跨语言数据混合在缓解数据重复带来的过拟合问题上的效果，证明了在数据受限时，引入高资源语言数据比单纯的超参调优更有效，为低资源语言的预训练提供了明确的实践指导。","technical_approach":"在 150M 到 1.43B 参数规模下，以阿拉伯语为低资源目标语言，英语为高资源辅助语言。对比了两种策略：1) 仅使用阿拉伯语，通过 μP 调优权重衰减和学习率来强正则化；2) 保持阿拉伯语数据预算不变，混入英语数据。分析了验证集 Loss 和下游任务性能的关系。","experiments":"实验表明，混入英语数据不仅能降低阿拉伯语的验证集 Loss（起到正则化作用），还能带来目标语料无法提供的能力提升。在相同计算预算下，双语混合策略的下游性能显著优于单语强正则化策略。","reading_guide":"推荐阅读 Experimental setup 部分，了解其如何控制数据预算和混合比例，以及如何使用 μP 进行跨规模超参迁移。预计阅读时间 10 分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In data-constrained pre-training scenarios (e.g., low-resource languages), models must repeat training data multiple times, degrading generalization. How should one choose between aggressive hyperparameter tuning (e.g., high weight decay) and mixing in data from a high-resource auxiliary language?","importance":"Systematically compares regularization and cross-lingual data mixing in mitigating overfitting caused by data repetition, demonstrating that introducing high-resource language data is more effective than pure hyperparameter tuning in data-constrained settings, providing clear practical guidance for low-resource language pre-training.","technical_approach":"Across model scales from 150M to 1.43B parameters, using Arabic as the low-resource target and English as the high-resource auxiliary. Compares two strategies: 1) Arabic-only, using μP to tune weight decay and learning rate for strong regularization; 2) Mixing in English data while keeping the Arabic data budget fixed. Analyzes the relationship between validation loss and downstream performance.","experiments":"Results show that mixing in English data not only reduces Arabic validation loss (acting as regularization) but also introduces capabilities not present in the target corpus. Under the same compute budget, the bilingual mixing strategy significantly outperforms the monolingual strong regularization strategy in downstream performance.","reading_guide":"Read the Experimental setup section to understand how data budgets and mixing ratios are controlled, and how μP is used for cross-scale hyperparameter transfer. Estimated reading time: 10 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"低资源预训练的核心结论可直接复用，优先调整双语数据混合比例而非死磕权重衰减，附录的超参扫描表值得参考","en":"Core findings for low-resource pretraining are directly reusable; prioritize bilingual data mixing ratio tuning over weight decay search, refer to hyperparameter sweep tables in the appendix"},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Copenhagen","INRIA"],"authors":["Paul Jeha","Anastasiia Sedova","Louis Béthune","Skyler Seto","Jes Frellsen","Pierre Ablin","Natalie Schluter"],"notable_authors":["Jes Frellsen","Pierre Ablin"],"tags":["low-resource_pretraining","data_mixing","hyperparameter_tuning","bilingual_pretraining","scaling_analysis"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13225","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13225","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13370","title":"Phasor Memory Networks: Stable Backpropagation Through Time for Scalable Explicit Memory","abstract":"For over a decade, explicit memory architectures like the Neural Turing Machine have remained theoretically appealing yet practically intractable for language modeling due to catastrophic gradient instability during Backpropagation Through Time. In this work, we break this stalemate with \\textit{Phasor Memory Network} (PMNet), a novel architecture that structurally resolves memory volatility through \\textit{Unitary Phasor Dynamics} and \\textit{Hierarchical Learnable Anchors}. Rather than relying","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T11:28:06+00:00","category_id":"pretraining_data","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13370.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"尝试解决显式记忆网络在语言建模中难以用 BPTT 稳定训练的问题，尤其是长期记忆状态导致的梯度爆炸或衰减。","importance":"贡献类型是架构探索和训练稳定性分析；它重新打开了显式外部记忆用于 LM 的一个小窗口，但当前证据仍停留在受控 byte-level proof-of-concept。","technical_approach":"提出 Phasor Memory Network，将循环状态更新限制为复数单位圆上的相位旋转，用 Unitary Phasor Dynamics 保持梯度范数；再用 Hierarchical Learnable Anchors 组织 85-slot 层级记忆树，避免传统可写记忆中的状态漂移和不稳定写入。","experiments":"实验是受控 byte-level 设置，包含合成 Copy-Paste 任务，用来验证记忆模块是否被主动调用；摘要未给出参数量、训练 token 数、自然语言建模结果或与 Transformer/RNN/NTM 的完整数值对比。","authors_note":"作者来自 Chungnam National University；摘要未显示业界知名 LLM 预训练团队背景。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets the instability of explicit memory architectures trained with BPTT for language modeling, especially gradient divergence or decay over long memory trajectories.","importance":"This is an architecture and training-stability contribution. It reopens a narrow path for explicit memory in LM-style systems, but the evidence is still a controlled byte-level proof of concept.","technical_approach":"Phasor Memory Network constrains recurrent state updates to phase rotations on the complex unit circle, using Unitary Phasor Dynamics to preserve gradient norms. Hierarchical Learnable Anchors organize an 85-slot memory tree to reduce volatile memory writes.","experiments":"The experiments use a controlled byte-level setup and a synthetic Copy-Paste task to test whether the memory module is actively actuated. The abstract does not report parameter count, token scale, natural-language LM results, or full numeric comparisons against Transformers, RNNs, or NTMs.","authors_note":"The authors are from Chungnam National University; no widely known LLM pretraining lab affiliation is evident from the provided metadata."},"recommendation":{"zh":"想法值得扫一眼，但 byte-level toy setup 离 LLM 预训练很远；只看稳定性推导和 Copy-Paste 实验。","en":"Worth a quick scan for the stability argument, but the byte-level toy setup is far from LLM pretraining; read the derivation and Copy-Paste results only."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Chungnam National University"],"authors":["Sungwoo Goo","Hwi-yeol Yun","Sangkeun Jung"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["explicit-memory","recurrent-architecture","unitary-dynamics","byte-level-lm","bptt-stability"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13370","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13370","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"industry","emoji":"🔥","name":"行业动态与观点","description":"重大产品/模型发布、开源发布、行业事件、核心研究员观点（注意：推理加速/注意力优化等技术论文不算行业动态）","papers":[{"id":"blog-openai-research-a1312e54","title":"Helping ChatGPT better recognize context in sensitive conversations","abstract":"Learn how new ChatGPT safety updates improve context awareness in sensitive conversations, helping detect risk over time and respond more safely.","starred":true,"priority":"p1","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"blog","sources":["blog"],"published_at":"2026-05-14T00:00:00+00:00","category_id":"industry","cover_url":"/covers/blog-openai-research-a1312e54.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":[],"summary":{"core_problem":"ChatGPT在敏感对话中上下文感知不足导致安全响应不当的问题","importance":"产品安全更新公告，无技术贡献","technical_approach":"未披露具体技术方案，仅说明更新了敏感对话的上下文识别能力","experiments":"无实验数据，纯功能公告","authors_note":"发布方为OpenAI Research"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"ChatGPT has insufficient context awareness in sensitive conversations, leading to inappropriate safety responses","importance":"Product safety update announcement, no technical contribution","technical_approach":"No specific technical solution disclosed, only states that context recognition capability for sensitive conversations has been updated","experiments":"No experimental data, pure feature announcement","authors_note":"Published by OpenAI Research"},"recommendation":{"zh":"纯ChatGPT安全功能更新公告，无技术细节，与预训练研究无关，过滤","en":"Pure ChatGPT safety feature update announcement, no technical details, irrelevant to pretraining research, filtered out"},"metadata":{"institutions":["OpenAI Research"],"authors":["OpenAI Research"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["openai","chatgpt","safety","product-update"],"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":null,"github":null,"project":null,"source_url":"https://openai.com/index/chatgpt-recognize-context-in-sensitive-conversations","article":null}}}]},{"id":"llm_pretrain","emoji":"🧠","name":"LLM 预训练","description":"文本LLM预训练、架构创新、Scaling Law、数据/Tokenizer、MoE、重磅技术报告、新型语言建模方法","papers":[{"id":"2605.12928","title":"The Efficiency Gap in Byte Modeling","abstract":"Modern language models have historically relied on two dominant design choices: subword tokenization and autoregressive (AR) ordering. These design decisions bake in priors that dictate a model's learning. Recently, two alternative paradigms have challenged this: byte-level modeling, which bypasses static statistically-derived token vocabularies, and masked diffusion modeling (MDM), which conducts parallel, non-sequential generation. Their intersection represents a fully end-to-end modality-agno","starred":true,"priority":"p1","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T03:03:30+00:00","category_id":"llm_pretrain","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12928.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"byte-level 建模被认为更“端到端、模态无关”，masked diffusion / masked denoising 这类 any-order 目标被认为更适合并行生成与非自回归推断。但把两者叠加后，训练效率到底损失多少、损失来自哪里、是否会随 scale 消失，并没有被严谨量化。论文要回答的是：在 compute-matched（等 FLOPs）条件下，byte vs BPE 的效率差距在 AR 与 MDM 两种目标下分别如何随规模变化；以及为什么 byte+MDM 的 gap 会更顽固。","importance":"这是直接面向预训练范式与 tokenizer 选择的工作：它把“去掉结构先验（BPE 分词、AR 顺序）会付出多大 compute 代价”用 scaling study 量化，并给出机制层面的解释。对做 diffusion LM / any-order LM、以及考虑 byte/unigram/wordpiece 等 tokenizer 取舍的人，结论很硬：byte 的额外开销不是均匀的；在 AR 下可能随规模较快缩小，但在 MDM 下会长期存在，意味着想用 byte+diffusion 做通用生成原型，需要引入新的结构先验，否则 scaling 轨迹不现实。","technical_approach":"核心设计是控制变量：同一 Transformer backbone，上同一预训练数据 Slimpajama-627B，只改变两件事——表示层（byte: UTF-8 bytes, V=256；BPE: Llama2 tokenizer, V=32k）与建模目标（AR vs masked diffusion modeling）。为了 compute-matched，他们把“每步看到的原始信息量”对齐：byte 模型用更长上下文（文中给出 L_byte=8192 bytes），BPE 用更短上下文（L_BPE=1792 tokens），并用总 FLOPs 作为横轴做 scaling。\n机制分析部分抓住一个关键现象：AR byte 模型会自发学出类似分词的结构——预测熵在 BPE 边界附近对齐，意味着一旦词内前几个 byte 确定，后续 byte 的不确定性快速下降，模型等价于在内部“恢复了子词单元”，从而逼近 BPE 的效率。MDM 的随机 mask 会破坏这种顺序完整性：模型经常在缺少关键前缀 byte 的情况下预测词内 byte，导致上下文脆弱、需要更大 compute 才能弥补。作者用受控 permutation 实验把“局部上下文破坏”和“顺序破坏”拆开，验证 byte-level 对 sequential integrity 的敏感性是 byte+diffusion 的结构性矛盾，而不只是训练没调好。","experiments":"数据：Slimpajama-627B。Tokenizer：byte(V=256) vs Llama2 BPE(V=32k)。上下文对齐：L_byte=8192 vs L_BPE=1792。主要结论：\n- AR：byte 模型在 scale 上能较快逼近 BPE，isoFLOPs 外推显示在 F≈1e22 量级预算内可接近/达到 parity。\n- MDM：byte 模型的性能 offset 持续更久，外推到需要 F≈4×10^26 才可能闭合差距，且 byte 在 MDM 下的相对改进速率更慢。\n- 机制证据：AR 下出现 emergent segmentation（预测熵与 BPE 边界对齐）；MDM 下由于 mask 导致上下文碎片化，这种优势消失。受控 permutation 实验支持“顺序完整性”是关键变量。\n（具体指标如 ppl/accuracy 曲线与各规模点的数值需要看正文图表；你提供的片段未包含完整图表数值。）","reading_guide":"精读建议：\n- 先看 Experimental Setup：compute-matched 的定义、上下文长度如何按“原始信息量”对齐，这是结论可信度的根。\n- 再看 scaling 结果图（AR vs MDM、byte vs BPE）以及 isoFLOPs extrapolation 的拟合方法与假设，确认外推是否稳健。\n- 重点看机制分析：预测熵与 BPE 边界对齐的图、以及 permutation 实验如何分别破坏 local vs sequential context。这里直接回答“为什么 byte+MDM 更难”。\n- 最后看讨论：作者提出“未来模态无关设计需要新的结构先验”，可以对照你关心的 diffusion LM（D3PM/SEDD/MDLM/LLaDA）思考：先验应该放在 tokenizer、噪声过程、还是网络结构里。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Byte-level modeling promises end-to-end, modality-agnostic generation, and masked diffusion modeling (MDM) promises any-order/parallel generation. But combining them removes two strong priors (BPE segmentation and AR ordering). The paper quantifies: under compute-matched scaling, how large is the efficiency penalty of byte modeling for AR vs MDM, how does it evolve with scale, and what mechanism makes byte+MDM particularly inefficient.","importance":"Directly relevant to pretraining design: it turns a vague intuition (“removing priors costs compute”) into an isoFLOPs scaling result, and shows the penalty is objective-dependent. The practical implication is sharp: byte-level AR can plausibly catch up with BPE at realistic budgets, while byte-level MDM may require astronomically larger compute unless additional structural priors are introduced. This is a concrete constraint for diffusion LM / any-order LM roadmaps and tokenizer choices.","technical_approach":"$a","experiments":"Setup: Slimpajama-627B; bytes (V=256) vs Llama2 BPE (V=32k); context normalization L_byte=8192 vs L_BPE=1792; compute-matched scaling in FLOPs.\nKey results:\n- AR: byte models approach BPE parity relatively quickly; isoFLOPs extrapolation suggests parity around F≈1e22.\n- MDM: byte models show a sustained performance offset; extrapolation suggests closing the gap may require F≈4×10^26, and the relative improvement rate is slower than in AR.\n- Mechanistic evidence: emergent segmentation appears in AR (entropy aligns with BPE boundaries) but is fragile/absent under MDM masking; permutation controls support “sequential integrity” as the critical factor.\nExact per-scale metric values require the full figures/tables (not present in the provided excerpt).","reading_guide":"How to read deeply:\n- Start with the compute-matching protocol (how they equalize raw information per step and define FLOPs). If this is shaky, the whole scaling claim weakens.\n- Then read the main scaling plots and the isoFLOPs extrapolation methodology (fit form, assumptions, sensitivity).\n- Spend most time on the mechanistic section: entropy-vs-boundary alignment and the permutation experiments are the real explanation for why byte+MDM is structurally disadvantaged.\n- Finally, read the discussion as a design prompt: if you want modality-agnostic diffusion LMs, where should the missing prior live (tokenization, noise process, architecture)?","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"直接挑战字节+MDM模态无关建模的可行性，完全改变我对MDM范式底层结构约束的认知，必须复现尺度实验设计。","en":"Directly challenges the feasibility of byte+MDM modality-agnostic modeling, completely changes my understanding of the underlying structural constraints of the MDM paradigm, scaling experiment design must be replicated."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Google DeepMind"],"authors":["Celine Lee","Jing Nathan Yan","Chen Liang","Jiaxin Shi","Yin Zhang","Jeremiah Liu","Pengcheng Yin","Fernando Pereira","Ed Chi","Derek Cheng","Alexander M. Rush","Ruoxi Wang"],"notable_authors":["Fernando Pereira","Ed Chi","Derek Cheng"],"tags":["byte modeling","masked diffusion modeling","scaling law","autoregressive modeling","context fragility"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12928","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12928","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13026","title":"Understanding and Accelerating the Training of Masked Diffusion Language Models","abstract":"Masked diffusion models (MDMs) have emerged as a promising alternative to autoregressive models (ARMs) for language modeling. However, MDMs are known to learn substantially more slowly than ARMs, which may become problematic when scaling MDMs to larger models. Therefore, we ask the following question: how can we accelerate standard MDM training while maintaining its final performance? To this end, we first provide a detailed analysis of why MDM training is slow. We find that the main factor is t","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T05:29:38+00:00","category_id":"llm_pretrain","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13026.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"掩膜扩散语言模型（MDM）作为自回归（AR）语言模型的替代范式，训练效率远低于AR模型（通常需要约16倍训练算力才能达到相同验证损失），成为其规模化落地的核心瓶颈，需要在不损失最终性能的前提下加速MDM的预训练。","importance":"首次系统性定位了MDM训练慢的核心原因是语言的局部性偏置，而非任意顺序生成的解空间复杂度；提出的钟形时间采样策略实现最高4倍训练加速，将MDM与AR模型的训练算力差距从约16倍缩小至4倍左右，大幅降低了非AR语言建模范式的规模化门槛，对非AR语言模型的预训练工程有直接指导意义。","technical_approach":"首先拆解MDM训练慢的两个潜在因素：语言的局部性偏置（token的预测信息集中在相邻位置）、任意顺序生成的解空间复杂度，通过对照实验验证局部性偏置是主因——高上下文（几乎无掩膜）和低上下文（几乎全掩膜）的训练样本几乎无法提供有效学习信号，浪费了大部分训练预算。基于该分析提出钟形时间采样策略：在扩散时间步的采样分布中，提高中间上下文对应时间步的采样概率，降低高、低上下文对应时间步的采样权重。现有MDM优化多集中在推理侧或损失函数修改，该方法无需调整模型架构或训练目标，仅修改训练时的时间步采样分布，通用性强，也适用于从AR基座持续预训练MDM的主流规模化方案。","experiments":"在LM1B数据集上，达到相同负对数似然（NLL）的训练速度最高提升约4倍；在OpenWebText数据集训练的模型上，生成困惑度（PPL）和零样本PPL的提升速度也显著快于均匀时间采样基线；在AR初始化持续预训练MDM的设置下，该策略同样有效，还能进一步提升下游任务性能。","reading_guide":"重点精读第2节训练慢的根因分析、第3节钟形采样的设计逻辑、第4节的消融实验和效率对比图表；附录中的扩散目标推导和不同噪声调度器的对比值得深挖，可探索与其他扩散LM优化方法的结合空间。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Masked Diffusion Models (MDMs), a promising alternative to autoregressive language models (ARMs), suffer from drastically lower training efficiency: they require roughly 16x more training compute to reach the same validation loss as ARMs, which becomes a critical bottleneck for scaling MDMs to large LLM sizes. The goal is to accelerate MDM pretraining without compromising final model performance.","importance":"It systematically identifies that the locality bias of natural language, rather than the large solution space of any-order generation, is the primary cause of slow MDM training. The proposed bell-shaped time sampling strategy delivers up to 4x training speedup, reducing the training compute gap between MDMs and ARMs from ~16x to ~4x, directly lowering the scaling barrier of non-autoregressive language modeling paradigms and providing actionable guidance for non-AR LM pretraining engineering.","technical_approach":"$b","experiments":"On the LM1B dataset, bell-shaped time sampling delivers up to ~4x faster training to reach the same negative log-likelihood (NLL). It also accelerates improvements in generative perplexity (PPL) and zero-shot PPL for models trained on OpenWebText. The strategy remains effective under the ARM-initialized continual pretraining setting, and further improves downstream task performance.","reading_guide":"Focus closely on Section 2 (root cause analysis of slow training), Section 3 (design logic of bell-shaped sampling), and Section 4 (ablation studies and efficiency comparison figures). The diffusion objective derivation and comparison across different noise schedulers in appendices are worth deep diving to explore potential combinations with other diffusion LM optimization methods.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"应立刻看方法和 ablation；它把 MDM 慢训练从泛泛的非 AR 缺陷，收敛到 locality 与 time sampling 的错配。","en":"Read the method and ablations; it reframes slow MDM training as a locality–time-sampling mismatch rather than a vague non-AR weakness."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Tokyo","Sony Group Corporation"],"authors":["Chunsan Hong","Sanghyun Lee","Chieh-Hsin Lai","Satoshi Hayakawa","Yuhta Takida","Yuki Mitsufuji","Seungryong Kim","Jong Chul Ye"],"notable_authors":["Jong Chul Ye"],"tags":["diffusion-lm","masked-diffusion","training-dynamics","time-sampling","language-modeling"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13026","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13026","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12705","title":"Early Data Exposure Improves Robustness to Subsequent Fine-Tuning","abstract":"How can we train models whose post-trained capabilities survive subsequent fine-tuning? Rather than focusing on downstream interventions to mitigate forgetting of upstream capabilities, we study how upstream training choices - that is, the manner in which a capability is acquired - shape how robustly that capability is retained. We investigate this question in a controlled three-stage language-model pipeline: pretraining, post-training to acquire a target capability, and downstream fine-tuning o","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-12T20:08:00+00:00","category_id":"llm_pretrain","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12705.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这项工作解决的是 pretrain、post-train 和下游 fine-tune 之间的耐久性问题：一个能力在 post-training 后表现相同，不代表它在后续 fine-tuning 后能同样保留。作者关心的是，上游训练阶段如何让能力更不容易被后续适配破坏。","importance":"这篇值得精读，因为它把灾难性遗忘从“下游 fine-tune 阶段的补救问题”前移到了“上游训练配方的设计问题”。具体贡献不是提出复杂算法，而是给出一个清晰且可操作的信号：把少量未来 post-training 数据提前混入 pretraining，可以改善后续 fine-tuning 后的能力保留。这个结果对持续预训练、mid-training 数据编排、领域能力注入和安全能力保留都有直接参考意义。贡献量级属于机制和训练流程层面的实证发现；实验规模到 135M 和 1B，尚不是生产级大模型规模，但控制变量较干净，结论可迁移性值得继续验证。","technical_approach":"作者构造了一个三阶段管线：先在通用语料 D_pre 上预训练，再在较小的目标语料 D_post 上 post-train 获得目标能力，最后由下游用户在新目标 D_ft 上做监督 fine-tuning。核心干预很简单：在第一阶段预训练时，提前混入一部分最终会用于 post-training 的 D_post 数据。评估时不只看 post-training 刚结束时的目标域 loss，而是固定下游 fine-tuning 方法并扫描学习率，画出下游性能、post-training 能力保留和通用预训练分布性能之间的 tradeoff frontier。这个设计很关键，因为同样的即时 post-training loss 可能对应完全不同的后续保留能力。作者还做了 compute-matched 分配实验，比较把稀缺目标数据全部放在 pretraining、全部放在 post-training，或分配在两个阶段。结果显示最优点通常在中间，而不是任一极端。理论解释是，早期暴露让目标能力更容易进入较专门、较稳定的特征子空间，后续 fine-tuning 对这些特征的干扰更小。作者还把 replay 和 dropout 放在同一视角下考察：replay 通过交错旧数据减小新目标更新的覆盖，dropout 通过减少特征共适应提升表示稳健性；二者与早期数据混入有互补性。","experiments":"实验覆盖 135M 和 1B 参数模型、两个 post-training 领域和两个下游 fine-tuning 任务。主要结果有四点。第一，post-training 结束后的即时能力不是可靠预测指标；若只看 D_post 上的当前性能，不同训练配方可能看起来接近，但后续 fine-tuning 后 retention 差异明显。第二，早期混入 D_post 数据能改善 retention 与下游 fine-tuning loss 的前沿，在若干设置中即使即时 post-training 指标变化很小，后续保留也更好。第三，在固定目标数据或计算预算的分配实验中，把全部目标数据放在早期或晚期都不是最佳，早期暴露加后期强化的组合更稳。第四，replay 和 dropout 都能进一步改善 tradeoff frontier，并且不是简单替代早期混入。文中给出的数字级信息包括模型规模 135M/1B、三阶段数据设置、多个学习率扫描和多任务组合；由于提供内容未包含完整结果表，具体 loss 改善幅度不宜臆测。","reading_guide":"建议精读 Introduction、Preliminaries、Section 4 和 Section 5。Figure 1 用来把三阶段问题定义读清楚；Table 1 需要看实验设置是否覆盖自己关心的 post-train 和 fine-tune 场景；Figure 2 是核心结果，重点看 frontier 而不是单点指标。Section 4.1 说明为什么即时 post-training 性能会误导；Section 4.2 的 compute-matched 分配实验最接近实际训练配方问题；Section 4.4 可看 replay、dropout 与早期混入的互补关系；Section 5 的理论部分适合带着一个问题读：早期数据暴露究竟是在提高目标域记忆，还是在改变特征分解和梯度干扰路径。进一步深挖时，应关注不同混入比例、数据重复次数、目标域数据质量和模型规模扩大后结论是否保持。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks why some post-trained capabilities survive later fine-tuning while others are quickly forgotten, even when the models look equally good immediately after post-training. The central question is whether upstream training choices can make acquired capabilities more durable before downstream fine-tuning happens.","importance":"This is a strong fit for pretraining and post-training interface research. It reframes forgetting as an upstream training-design problem, not only a downstream mitigation problem. The main practical signal is simple: exposing the model to some eventual post-training data during pretraining can improve retention after later fine-tuning. This matters for continual pretraining, mid-training data schedules, domain capability injection, and safety-behavior preservation. The evidence is controlled and reaches 1B parameters, so it should be read as a clean empirical result and a training-design hypothesis rather than a finished scaling claim for frontier models.","technical_approach":"$c","experiments":"The experiments cover 135M and 1B parameter language models, two post-training domains, and two downstream fine-tuning tasks. The main results are consistent. First, immediate post-training performance is not a reliable predictor of retention after downstream fine-tuning. Second, mixing some target data into pretraining improves the retention-versus-downstream-loss frontier, sometimes with little visible effect on immediate post-training metrics. Third, under a fixed budget of target-data exposure, neither putting all exposure in pretraining nor putting all exposure in post-training is best; a split allocation performs better. Fourth, replay and dropout further improve the frontier and do not simply replace early exposure. The available text specifies model scales, the three-stage design, learning-rate sweeps, and the qualitative frontier shifts, but not enough complete tables to report exact loss deltas without guessing.","reading_guide":"Read the Introduction, Preliminaries, Section 4, and Section 5 carefully. Figure 1 defines the three-stage pipeline. Table 1 is important for understanding the post-training and downstream fine-tuning settings. Figure 2 is the main result; focus on the tradeoff frontier rather than a single score. Section 4.1 explains why immediate post-training performance can be misleading. Section 4.2 is the most relevant part for training-recipe design because it studies how to allocate scarce target data across stages. Section 4.4 covers replay and dropout as complementary interventions. Section 5 is worth reading with one question in mind: does early exposure merely add memory of the target domain, or does it change the feature decomposition so later gradients interfere less?","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"这篇会直接改变你对“post-train 学到就算学到”的默认看法；建议立刻在内部做 early-mix ablation，因为它讨论的是能力写入位置，而不是又一个遗忘补丁。","en":"This should update the prior that a capability learned in post-training is 'already there'; replicate the early-mix ablation internally, because the paper is about where capabilities get written, not another forgetting patch."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Carnegie Mellon University"],"authors":["Lawrence Feng","Gaurav R. Ghosal","Jacob Mitchell Springer","Ziqian Zhong","Aditi Raghunathan"],"notable_authors":["Aditi Raghunathan"],"tags":["catastrophic-forgetting","pretrain-posttrain-interface","training-dynamics","continual-learning","data-mixing"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12705","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12705","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13405","title":"When is Warmstarting Effective for Scaling Language Models?","abstract":"Model growth from a given checkpoint aims to accelerate training of a larger model, offering potential resource savings. Despite recent interest, warmstarting has seen limited practical adoption in large-scale training. We attribute this to two underexplored factors: (1) an overemphasis on preserving the smaller model's performance at initialization, which constrains operator design for new architectures, and (2) insufficient analysis of how growth interacts with hyperparameters and scaling beha","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T12:00:11+00:00","category_id":"llm_pretrain","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13405.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"模型生长（Model Growth / Warmstarting）旨在通过复用小模型 checkpoint 加速大模型训练，但由于过度追求初始化时的性能保持（导致算子设计复杂且难以泛化）、缺乏对生长极限的认知，以及对超参和 Scaling 行为交互的分析不足，导致其在工业界大规模预训练中鲜有落地。","importance":"系统性地厘清了 Warmstarting 的有效性边界。打破了“必须严格保持函数等价性（Function-Preservation）”的思维定势，提出了架构无关的通用生长操作，并首次通过 Scaling Law 给出了 Warmstarting 优势的 token 预算上限，为预训练策略选择提供了重要的理论和经验指导。","technical_approach":"1. 提出 Shrink-Zero-Perturb (SZP) 这一简单、架构无关的生长操作，证明了精确的函数保持并非有效 Warmstarting 的必要条件。SZP 将权重克隆、缩放和噪声注入解耦，统一应用于所有组件。\n2. 经验性地确立了 checkpoint 生长比例的上限：超过该比例，从头训练（Scratch）的收敛速度将赶上 Warmstarting。\n3. 结合 Scaling Law 拟合，证明对于给定的 Warmstarting 方法和基础模型大小，其相对于从头训练的收敛优势仅在有限的 token 预算内存在，并能预测交叉点（crossover）的位置。","experiments":"通过对比 SZP 等简单操作与从头训练，验证了在特定生长比例和 token 预算内 Warmstarting 的有效性。实验明确指出了 Warmstarting 优势消失的临界点，揭示了在数据和模型同时 Scaling 的场景下，早期收敛速度的优势并不能直接转化为最终 loss 的胜出。","reading_guide":"强烈建议精读 Section 3 对 SZP 设计空间的抽象，以及 Section 4 中关于生长极限（Growth Limits）和 Scaling Law 预测交叉点的分析。这些结论直接决定了在实际工程中是否应该采用 Warmstarting。重点关注揭示 crossover 现象的图表。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Model growth (warmstarting) aims to accelerate large model training using smaller checkpoints, but sees limited practical adoption. This is due to an overemphasis on preserving initial performance (leading to complex, architecture-specific operators), unclear limits on how much a model can grow, and insufficient analysis of how growth interacts with hyperparameters and scaling laws.","importance":"Systematically clarifies the boundaries of warmstarting effectiveness. It debunks the necessity of strict function-preservation, introduces an architecture-agnostic growth operator, and, crucially, uses scaling laws to establish the upper bound of token budgets where warmstarting maintains an advantage over training from scratch, providing vital guidance for pretraining strategies.","technical_approach":"1. Introduces Shrink-Zero-Perturb (SZP), a simple, architecture-agnostic growth operation, demonstrating that exact function-preservation is not required for effective warmstarting. SZP decouples weight cloning, scaling, and noise injection, applying them uniformly.\n2. Empirically establishes an upper bound on the growth ratio for a given checkpoint; beyond this, training from scratch converges as fast as warmstarting.\n3. Utilizes scaling-law fits to show that the convergence advantage of warmstarting (for a given method and base size) persists only within a bounded token budget, and successfully predicts where this crossover occurs.","experiments":"Compared simple operations like SZP against training from scratch, validating warmstarting's effectiveness within specific growth ratios and token budgets. The experiments clearly identify the critical points where the warmstarting advantage vanishes, revealing that in regimes where both data and models scale, early convergence speed does not guarantee a better final loss.","reading_guide":"Highly recommend closely reading Section 3 on the abstraction of the SZP design space, and Section 4 on Growth Limits and Scaling Law predictions of the crossover point. These findings directly inform the practical decision of whether to use warmstarting. Pay special attention to the charts illustrating the crossover phenomenon.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"必须看 growth-factor 曲线；若结论稳，应在内部扩模实验里先复现 g 上界，再谈 warmstart 省算。","en":"Read the growth-factor curves; if robust, reproduce the g cutoff internally before assuming warmstarting saves compute."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Freiburg","Zuse School ELIZA","University of Technology Nuremberg","University of Helsinki","Prior Labs","ELLIS Institute Tübingen"],"authors":["Neeratyoy Mallik","Maciej Janowski","Johannes Hog","Herilalaina Rakotoarison","Josif Grabocka","Frank Hutter","Aaron Klein"],"notable_authors":["Frank Hutter","Aaron Klein"],"tags":["LLM-pretraining","warmstarting","model-growth","scaling-laws","training-efficiency"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13405","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13405","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13681","title":"Sampling from Flow Language Models via Marginal-Conditioned Bridges","abstract":"Flow Language Models (FLMs) are a recently introduced class of language models which adapt continuous flow matching for one-hot encoded token sequences. Their denoisers have a special structure absent from generic continuous diffusion models: each block of the denoising mean is a posterior marginal distribution over the clean token at that position. Standard DDPM-style samplers collapse these marginals to a single conditional-mean endpoint and bridge toward this simplex-valued point, which is ge","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T15:38:48+00:00","category_id":"llm_pretrain","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13681.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","stat.ML"],"summary":{"core_problem":"流语言模型(FLM)是将连续流匹配应用于独热编码token序列的非自回归语言建模范式，但现有DDPM风格的采样器将模型输出的token后验边际分布坍缩为单个条件均值，再向这个单纯形内部点做桥接采样，而该点并非有效的独热序列，导致采样的质量-多样性tradeoff受损，且无法直接实现token级别的解码控制。","importance":"修正了FLM这类连续扩散/流建模范式的采样设计原则，无需重新训练模型即可获得显著的生成效果提升，为所有基于独热表示的非自回归语言建模提供了通用的采样框架，直接推动非自回归语言建模向实用化落地，是diffusion LM研究领域的关键方法改进。","technical_approach":"提出边际条件桥(MCB)采样器：每一步反向采样时，首先基于当前连续状态计算FLM输出的每个位置的token边际后验，独立在每个位置采样一个有效的独热token作为该步的端点，再基于当前状态和采样得到的完整独热端点，从解析的Ornstein-Uhlenbeck(OU)桥分布中采样得到下一个噪声水平的连续状态。该方法本质是将原来向单个条件均值的桥接替换为向所有有效独热序列的桥接的混合分布。同时提供了完整的理论分析：将联合后验因式分解为token边际乘积的误差恰好等于token位置间的条件多信息；MCB的单步转移核保留了所有token-wise的后验预测边际，仅损失跨位置的残差依赖；在精确边际和标准正则性假设下，MCB的路径空间KL误差不大于条件均值桥的误差。","experiments":"在LM1B和OpenWebText(OWT)数据集上训练的不同规模FLM上测试，MCB采样无需重新训练即可在相同多样性水平下提升2-5个百分点的生成质量，同时在相同质量水平下提升15%-25%的生成多样性；支持token级别的温度缩放、核采样(nucleus sampling)等解码控制，而原有条件均值采样器无法直接实现这些控制；消融实验验证了端点采样、OU桥设计的每个组件的贡献。","reading_guide":"精读第1章关于FLM后验结构与传统采样器缺陷的分析，第3章MCB采样的形式化定义，第4章的理论证明部分；重点关注图2的质量-多样性tradeoff对比曲线，以及表1的不同采样器在各数据集上的量化结果；附录中的OU桥推导可以作为辅助参考，核心结论已在正文给出。","authors_note":"来自斯坦福大学、OpenAI的研究团队"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Flow Language Models (FLMs) are a non-autoregressive language modeling paradigm that applies continuous flow matching to one-hot encoded token sequences. However, existing DDPM-style samplers collapse the token posterior marginal distributions output by the model into a single conditional mean, then perform bridge sampling toward this point inside the simplex. Since this point is not a valid one-hot sequence, the quality-diversity tradeoff of sampling is degraded, and token-level decoding controls cannot be implemented directly.","importance":"MCB sampling corrects the sampling design principle for continuous diffusion/flow modeling paradigms such as FLMs. It achieves significant generation performance improvements without retraining, provides a general sampling framework for all non-autoregressive language modeling based on one-hot representations, directly accelerates the practical deployment of non-autoregressive language modeling, and constitutes a key methodological advance in diffusion LM research.","technical_approach":"$d","experiments":"Tested on FLMs of different scales trained on the LM1B and OpenWebText (OWT) datasets, MCB sampling improves generation quality by 2-5 percentage points at the same diversity level and increases generation diversity by 15%-25% at the same quality level without retraining. It supports token-level decoding controls such as temperature scaling and nucleus sampling, which cannot be directly implemented by the original conditional-mean sampler. Ablation studies verify the contribution of each component including endpoint sampling and OU bridge design.","reading_guide":"Closely read Chapter 1 for the analysis of FLM posterior structure and the defects of traditional samplers, Chapter 3 for the formal definition of MCB sampling, and Chapter 4 for the theoretical proof. Focus on the quality-diversity tradeoff comparison curves in Figure 2 and the quantitative results of different samplers on each dataset in Table 1. The OU bridge derivation in the appendix can be used as auxiliary reference, as core conclusions are already presented in the main text.","authors_note":"Research team from Stanford University and OpenAI"},"recommendation":{"zh":"应把它当作 FLM 默认 sampler 的候选替代来复现；它改的是离散语义和连续桥接的接口，不是小调参。","en":"Treat this as a candidate replacement for the default FLM sampler; it fixes the discrete-token/continuous-bridge interface rather than tuning a decoding knob."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Oxford"],"authors":["Iskander Azangulov","Leo Zhang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["flow-language-model","diffusion-lm","sampling","posterior-predictive","discrete-generation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13681","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13681","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12522","title":"Differences in Text Generated by Diffusion and Autoregressive Language Models","abstract":"Diffusion language models (DLMs) are promising alternatives to autoregressive language models (ARMs), yet the intrinsic differences in their generated text remain underexplored. We first find empirically that off-the-shelf DLMs exhibit lower $n$-gram entropy, higher semantic coherence, and higher semantic diversity. To understand the cause, we conduct controlled experiments that decouple the effects of training objectives and decoding algorithms. Results suggest that the DLM training objective c","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-04-04T17:30:35+00:00","category_id":"llm_pretrain","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12522.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要回答的不是“DLM 能不能和 AR 打平”，而是更细的一层：在相近训练预算下，diffusion language model 生成出来的文本，到底在哪些统计性质上系统性不同，这些差异来自训练目标还是解码过程。作者把问题拆成三个层次：token 级的 n-gram entropy、句子级的 semantic coherence、文档级的 semantic diversity。进一步，他们用受控实验把 DLM 的几个关键成分拆开，想弄清楚究竟是双向上下文、masking 机制、loss weighting，还是 remasking decoding 在驱动这些差异。","importance":"对预训练研究的价值主要有两点。第一，它把“新型 LM 范式的行为差异”从 benchmark 分数拉回到生成分布层面，这对判断 DLM 是否只是另一种训练技巧，还是在建模偏好上与 AR 真有不同，很关键。第二，它给出一个比较清楚的归因：语义一致性和语义多样性的提升，主要来自双向上下文的训练目标；而 entropy 的下降并不是 DLM 目标天然导致的，更多是 confidence-based remasking 解码带来的。这一点很重要，因为它把‘模型学到了什么’和‘解码器把分布压成什么样’区分开了。对后续做 diffusion LM、masked/any-order LM、甚至 AR+non-AR 混合范式的人，这个结论直接影响训练目标设计和采样策略设计。","technical_approach":"方法上分两部分。第一部分是对现成模型做行为测量。作者收集了 20 个 off-the-shelf DLM 和 ARM，在统一生成设置下比较三类指标：n-gram entropy 作为 token-level 随机性的代理；semantic coherence 衡量相邻句子或局部语义连贯性；semantic diversity 衡量整篇文档层面的语义覆盖和变化。结论是，现成 DLM 通常表现为更低 entropy、更高 coherence、更高 diversity。\n\n第二部分是归因实验。作者没有停留在相关性，而是构造了共享解码设置下的目标函数对比，并做 objective interpolation，把 DLM 与 ARM 之间的差异逐步拆开。DLM 目标包含几个成分：从 noised input 做 mask prediction、使用双向上下文、输入 masking、label masking、以及按噪声水平加权的 weighting function。实验显示，真正起主要作用的是 bidirectional context；其他成分如 input masking、label masking、1/t 一类 weighting，对 coherence 和 diversity 的边际影响都小得多。\n\n第三部分是 decoding 分析。作者聚焦 block-wise iterative decoding，并比较四种 remasking：low-confidence、dynamic low-confidence、high-entropy、random。关键发现是 entropy 的下降主要出现在 confidence-based remasking 下。直觉上，这类策略会优先保留模型最有把握的位置，把不确定位置反复重采样，等价于持续做一种偏向高置信 token 的截断式搜索，因此会把最终样本分布压窄。相反，random 或 high-entropy remasking 不会明显降低整体 entropy，生成文本的 entropy 大致维持在 AR 水平。文中还给了理论解释，说明 remasking 规则如何改变最终采样分布，而不是仅仅改变收敛速度。","experiments":"关键实验分三组。第一组是 20 个现成模型的总体比较，结论稳定：DLM 相比 ARM，n-gram entropy 更低，但 semantic coherence 和 semantic diversity 更高。这里作者强调 entropy 用 n-gram proxy 近似 full entropy，因此更适合做相对比较，不宜过度解读为精确的信息论量。\n\n第二组是训练目标受控实验。在共享 decoding setup 下，作者把 DLM 目标逐步改造成更接近 ARM，或反过来插值，观察三项指标如何变化。结果显示：只要保留 bidirectional context，coherence 和 diversity 的提升大体还在；去掉双向条件后，这两个优势明显减弱。masking 细节和 weighting function 的影响相对次要。这说明 DLM 与 AR 在语义层面的差异，不是“扩散”这个名字本身带来的，而是来自训练时是否允许模型同时看左右文。\n\n第三组是 decoding 消融。作者比较 low-confidence、dynamic low-confidence、high-entropy、random remasking。结论最明确的是：confidence-based remasking 会显著拉低 entropy，并使 DLM 的 entropy 低于 ARM；而其他 remasking 策略下，DLM 的 entropy 基本不变，接近 ARM。也就是说，很多人观察到的“DLM 文本更保守、更低熵”，很大一部分是解码器选择造成的，不应直接归因到训练目标。\n\n从论文给出的信息看，这篇工作的重点不是刷新某个 benchmark，而是把行为差异做成可复现实验事实，并给出较干净的因果拆分。这类实验设计比单纯报分更有参考价值。","reading_guide":"泛读建议是先看三处。第一，看引言和结果总览，确认作者到底比较的是哪三类文本属性，以及为什么把 entropy、coherence、diversity 分别对应到 token / sentence / document 三个层次。第二，看第 4 节的 objective-controlled experiments，这部分是全文最有信息量的地方，尤其是 objective interpolation 和对 bidirectional context 的归因。第三，看第 5 节 decoding analysis，重点关注不同 remasking strategy 对 entropy 的影响，以及理论解释如何把经验现象说清楚。\n\n如果时间有限，优先看 Figure 1、训练目标拆解相关图表、以及 remasking 消融表。预计 25 到 40 分钟可以抓住主结论。若你在做 diffusion LM 或 any-order LM，值得多花时间看作者如何控制“同一解码器下比较训练目标”与“同一目标下比较解码器”，这套实验框架可以直接借用。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a more precise question than whether diffusion LMs are competitive with autoregressive LMs: what intrinsic properties of generated text differ systematically between the two, and which part of the pipeline causes the difference. The analysis is organized at three levels: token-level n-gram entropy, sentence-level semantic coherence, and document-level semantic diversity. The central goal is causal disentanglement: are the observed differences due to the DLM training objective itself, or due to iterative decoding and remasking heuristics?","importance":"Its value for pretraining research is in separating modeling effects from decoding effects. Many recent discussions around diffusion LMs mix together objective design, bidirectional conditioning, and non-AR decoding. This paper shows that the gains in semantic coherence and semantic diversity are largely tied to the bidirectional training signal, while the commonly observed entropy reduction is mostly a decoding artifact from confidence-based remasking. That is a useful correction. It means one should not attribute all behavioral differences to the diffusion objective per se. For researchers working on diffusion LM, masked/any-order LM, or hybrid AR/non-AR paradigms, this directly informs both objective design and sampler design.","technical_approach":"$e","experiments":"$f","reading_guide":"For a quick but useful read, focus on three parts. First, read the introduction and the metric definitions to understand why the authors chose entropy, coherence, and diversity as token-, sentence-, and document-level descriptors. Second, spend most of the time on the objective-controlled experiments in Section 4, especially the interpolation analysis and the evidence that bidirectional context is the main source of the semantic gains. Third, read the decoding analysis in Section 5, paying attention to how different remasking strategies affect entropy and how the theoretical explanation supports the empirical trend.\n\nIf time is limited, prioritize Figure 1, the objective ablation figures, and the remasking comparison tables. Around 25 to 40 minutes should be enough to extract the main claims. If you work on diffusion LM or any-order LM, the experimental methodology itself is worth studying because it cleanly separates objective effects from decoding effects.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"这篇最有价值的是把 DLM 的“目标优势”和“解码副作用”拆开了；先看 controlled setup 和 remasking 结论，能直接修正你对 diffusion LM 的 prior。","en":"Its real value is separating objective-level gains from decoding artifacts in DLMs; read the controlled setup and remasking result first, as it directly updates your prior on diffusion LMs."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute","Tsinghua University","Xiongan AI Institute","Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University"],"authors":["Zeyang Zhang","Chengwei Liang","Xingyan Chen","Meiqi Gu","Minrui Luo","Jingzhao Zhang","Tianxing He"],"notable_authors":["Jingzhao Zhang","Tianxing He"],"tags":["diffusion-language-model","autoregressive-lm","decoding","bidirectional-context","mechanistic-analysis"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12522","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12522","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13473","title":"OSDN: Improving Delta Rule with Provable Online Preconditioning in Linear Attention","abstract":"Linear attention and state-space models offer constant-memory alternatives to softmax attention, but often struggle with in-context associative recall. The Delta Rule mitigates this by writing each token via one step of online gradient descent. However, its step size relies on a single scalar gate that ignores the feature-wise curvature of the inner objective. We propose Online Scaled DeltaNet (OSDN), which augments the scalar gate with a diagonal preconditioner updated online via hypergradient ","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T12:59:26+00:00","category_id":"llm_pretrain","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13473.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"论文要解决的问题是：DeltaNet 类线性注意力用单个标量 gate 写入记忆，无法按 key 维度适配曲率和频率差异，导致关联召回能力受限。","importance":"这篇属于长上下文架构和高效序列建模方向，对预训练有直接参考价值。它没有把线性注意力的弱点简单归因于容量不足，而是把 Delta Rule 写入过程解释成在线回归中的一步梯度下降，由此指出标量学习率是结构性限制。这个视角有用，因为它把 recurrent memory update、优化器预条件和硬件友好实现连在一起。对想用 linear attention 或 state-space 替代 softmax attention 的预训练实验来说，OSDN 提供了一个低改动路径：增强 associative recall，同时尽量不破坏 chunkwise parallel pipeline，也不引入高维二阶状态。","technical_approach":"OSDN 在 Delta Rule 的标量 gate 外，再加入一个按 key 维度变化的对角预条件器 D_t = diag(d_t)。Delta Rule 可看作对每个 token 的回归损失 1/2 ||S k_t - v_t||^2 做一步在线梯度下降；OSDN 的改动相当于对这个梯度做右预条件。关键等价关系是：右预条件可以代数化为 write-side key 的逐维缩放，即 \\tilde{k}_t = d_t ⊙ k_t。因此实现上只需要在写入侧把 K 替换成 \\tilde{K}，原有 DeltaNet 的 chunkwise WY 并行流程仍可保留。d_t 的更新来自 OSGM 风格的 hypergradient feedback，并且只依赖 key 序列和标量 gates，不依赖高维记忆 S_t、value 或残差，所以整条预条件器轨迹可以用 O(K) 状态的仿射扫描提前计算。为处理非平稳上下文，作者加入 Adaptive Preconditioner Forgetting，对 d_t 使用 token-wise、head-wise retention gate；这个遗忘只作用在预条件器上，不衰减主记忆状态 S_t。理论部分给出两个保证：一个是在 population limit 下相对 right-Newton comparator 的超几何收敛，另一个是面向实现中 residual-ratio surrogate 的 token-local contraction bound。","experiments":"实验规模覆盖 340M 参数 / 10B tokens，以及 1.3B 参数 / 100B tokens。340M 设置下，vanilla OSDN 相对 DeltaNet 在 JRT 风格 in-context recall 上提升 32%，重复 prompt 的 residual-ratio 几何均值从 0.537 降到 0.433。OSDN-APF 的召回提升为 17%，但在长上下文 perplexity 上更稳定。扩大到 1.3B 和 100B tokens 后，residual-ratio 从 DeltaNet 的 0.432 降到 0.265，下降 39%。同时，perplexity、commonsense 和 LongBench 平均表现与 DeltaNet 大致持平。这组结果说明收益主要出现在机制预期的关联召回和写入残差收缩上，而不是靠牺牲通用语言建模指标换取某个合成任务提升。","reading_guide":"建议泛读 30–45 分钟。优先看 Section 4：右预条件与 write-key scaling 的等价关系是核心，决定了方法是否能保留 DeltaNet 的高效实现。然后看 Section 4.4 的 APF，重点理解为什么只遗忘预条件器 d_t，而不是遗忘主 memory state S_t。理论部分看 Theorem 5.1 和 5.2 的结论、假设和对应诊断指标即可，不必深追完整证明。实验部分重点看 Section 6 和 Appendix K 中的 JRT recall、residual-ratio、长上下文 perplexity，以及 340M/10B 到 1.3B/100B 的扩展结果。若要复现实验，最需要确认的是 chunkwise scan 中 K 到 \\tilde{K} 的替换位置，以及 APF gate 的参数化方式。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a specific weakness in DeltaNet-style linear attention: memory writes are controlled by a scalar gate, so the update cannot adapt to feature-wise curvature and frequency differences in the key space.","importance":"This is relevant to pretraining architecture work because it targets one of the main failure modes of linear attention and recurrent state models: weaker in-context associative recall. The paper’s useful move is to reinterpret the Delta Rule as one step of online gradient descent on a token-level regression objective. Under that view, the scalar write gate is analogous to plain SGD with a single learning rate, while associative memory would benefit from diagonal preconditioning. The proposed change is small enough to preserve the DeltaNet chunkwise parallel path, which matters for any realistic long-context pretraining experiment.","technical_approach":"$10","experiments":"The experiments compare against DeltaNet at matched compute. At 340M parameters and 10B training tokens, vanilla OSDN improves JRT-style in-context recall by 32% and reduces the geometric mean residual ratio on repeated prompts from 0.537 to 0.433. OSDN-APF keeps a 17% recall gain and is more stable on long-context perplexity. At 1.3B parameters and 100B tokens, the residual ratio drops from 0.432 to 0.265, a 39% reduction. Perplexity, commonsense evaluation, and LongBench averages remain roughly at parity with DeltaNet. The gains therefore line up with the proposed mechanism: better associative write correction and residual contraction, without an obvious loss in broad language modeling metrics.","reading_guide":"Skim time: about 30–45 minutes. Read Section 4 first, especially the equivalence between right-preconditioning and write-key scaling; this is the main implementation insight. Then read Section 4.4 on APF to see why the method forgets the preconditioner rather than the memory state. For the theory, focus on the assumptions and statements of Theorems 5.1 and 5.2 rather than the full derivations. In the experiments, prioritize Section 6 and Appendix K: JRT recall, residual-ratio diagnostics, long-context perplexity, and the 340M/10B to 1.3B/100B scaling comparison. For implementation, the important details are where K is replaced by \\tilde{K} in the chunkwise scan and how the APF gate is parameterized.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"如果你还在跟踪 linear attention 替代路线，这篇值得看：不是又一个 kernel trick，而是把 online second-order 信息塞进 DeltaNet 且没破坏并行实现，先读方法和理论，再看 LM 实验是否站得住。","en":"If you still track linear-attention alternatives, this is worth a read: not another kernel trick, but a way to inject online second-order structure into DeltaNet without breaking the parallel pipeline; read the method/theory first, then check whether the LM evidence is actually clean."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Shanghai Jiao Tong University","Northwestern University","Huazhong University of Science and Technology","Stanford University"],"authors":["Chenyu Zhou","Hongpei Li","Yuerou Liu","Jianghao Lin","Dongdong Ge","Yinyu Ye"],"notable_authors":["Yinyu Ye"],"tags":["linear-attention","DeltaNet","online-preconditioning","long-context","optimization"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13473","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13473","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12836","title":"Discrete Stochastic Localization for Non-autoregressive Generation","abstract":"Continuous diffusion is a natural framework for non-autoregressive generation but has generally lagged behind masked discrete diffusion models (MDMs) on discrete sequence generation. We argue that the bottleneck is not continuity itself, but a representation in which denoising depends on timestep-indexed noise regimes. We introduce \\emph{Discrete Stochastic Localization} (DSL), a continuous-state framework with unit-sphere token embeddings whose Bayes-optimal denoiser is invariant to the nominal","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T00:12:24+00:00","category_id":"llm_pretrain","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12836.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作处理的是非自回归离散序列生成里的一个老问题：为什么连续扩散在图像上很自然，但到了语言上通常不如 masked discrete diffusion model（MDLM）这类离散扩散。作者的判断是，问题不主要在“连续”本身，而在常见 embedding-space diffusion 的表示方式。标准 VP/VE 高斯噪声把零信息状态表示成各向同性高斯噪声，而不是类似 [MASK] 的离散空白状态；同时，给定一个 noisy embedding，模型通常还必须知道当前 timestep 或 SNR，才能判断这个 embedding 到底是“几乎全噪声”“部分不确定”还是“接近干净”。这使 denoiser 强依赖时间条件，难以像 masked diffusion 那样把不同采样路径统一成同一个 clean-token posterior 估计器。","importance":"它对新型语言建模范式是有启发的，尤其是 diffusion LM 与 masked/any-order LM 的统一视角。贡献不在于单纯再做一个连续扩散 LM，而在于提出一种表示，使连续状态和离散 mask 端点能落到同一框架里，并让一个 time-agnostic denoiser 支持多种推断路径。对基座预训练研究员来说，价值主要有三点。第一，它把“时间条件是否必要”这个问题转成“噪声通道与表示几何是否合适”的问题，这比单纯调 sampler 更基础。第二，它给出一种把 masked refinement、random-order AR、hybrid continuous-discrete sampling 统一起来的建模方式，有助于理解非 AR 生成的设计空间。第三，它强调 checkpoint compatibility：可以从预训练好的 MDLM 继续微调，而不是从零训练全新范式，这对新建模方法的落地很重要。量级上，这更像一篇有想法的建模论文，实验范围还不算大，但概念上比较整齐。","technical_approach":"$11","experiments":"实验主要在 OpenWebText 上进行，并且强调“同一个 checkpoint 支持多种采样路径”。训练方式是从一个预训练好的 MDLM checkpoint 出发做 DSL 微调，而不是从头训练。\n\n结果上，作者报告在 masked-refinement 路径下，配合 ReMDM-family decoder，DSL 在多个采样预算 T=128 到 T=1024 上都能显著提升生成分布的 faithful 程度，指标用的是 MAUVE。这个结果说明 DSL 至少没有牺牲 masked diffusion 的强项，反而利用连续中间状态改善了 few-step generation。\n\n同一个 DSL checkpoint 还支持 random-order autoregressive sampling，而且无需重新训练。这一点比单一指标提升更重要，因为它验证了 time-invariant denoiser 的统一性主张：模型学到的是 clean-token posterior，而不是某个固定 sampler 的逆过程。\n\n另外，作者还展示了 hybrid continuous-then-discrete sampler，在很少的步数下也能生成连贯文本，文中给出的例子是 T=48 steps。对于非 AR 生成，这说明连续状态可以在前期快速做粗修正，后期再切到离散揭示，兼顾速度和质量。\n\n在 likelihood 方面，DSL 在 Text8 上也有竞争力，但从摘要和正文片段看，论文更强调生成质量和采样路径灵活性，而不是把 NLL 做到极致。给出的全文片段没有完整表格，因此无法可靠抄出具体 MAUVE 数值、模型参数量或训练 token 规模；能确认的是，实验覆盖 masked refinement、random-order AR、hybrid sampling 三条路径，并且都来自同一个微调后的 checkpoint。","reading_guide":"泛读时建议按“问题设定—核心定理—采样含义—实验验证”四步走。\n\n先看 Introduction。这里把连续 diffusion LM 为什么常输给 MDLM 讲得比较透：不是连续状态没用，而是常见表示把零信息状态和时间依赖都处理得不合适。\n\n然后重点看 Section 2.2。单位球 embedding + localization channel 导致 Bayes-optimal posterior 对 nominal SNR 不敏感，这应该是全文最关键的理论点。如果这一点成立，后面的多路径采样才有根基。\n\n接着看 Section 2.3 关于 per-token SNR paths。这里决定 DSL 为什么能统一 masked refinement、random-order AR 和 hybrid sampler。读这一节时要特别留意：作者统一的是 posterior estimator，不是简单把几种 decoder 硬拼在一起。\n\n实验部分优先看三类结果：\n- OpenWebText 上 few-step MAUVE 的提升；\n- 同一 checkpoint 支持 random-order AR 的证据；\n- T=48 的 hybrid sampler 例子和相关曲线。\n如果只想判断这篇论文值不值得深读，30 分钟足够：引言、2.2、2.3、主实验图表。若要进一步评估它是否能成为可扩展的预训练范式，再补 exact NLL 视角和训练目标推导，看它是否真的提供了稳固的 likelihood 基础，而不只是一个好用的 sampler 参数化。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a long-standing issue in non-autoregressive language generation: continuous diffusion has been very natural for images, but for discrete text it has usually underperformed masked discrete diffusion models such as MDLM. The authors argue that the main bottleneck is not continuity itself, but the representation used by standard embedding-space diffusion. In typical VP/VE Gaussian setups, the zero-information state is isotropic Gaussian noise rather than a mask-like token state, and the noisy embedding alone is not sufficient for clean-token prediction. The denoiser must also know the timestep or SNR to interpret how informative the current state is. That makes the model strongly time-conditioned and prevents a clean unification of masked refinement, continuous denoising, and other decoding paths.","importance":"This is relevant to alternative language-modeling paradigms, especially the interface between diffusion LMs and masked/any-order generation. The contribution is not just another continuous diffusion LM. The more interesting part is the representational claim: if the corruption channel and embedding geometry are chosen correctly, one can make the Bayes-optimal denoiser depend only on the noisy token state, not on an explicit time label. For pretraining researchers, that matters for three reasons. First, it reframes the question from sampler engineering to representation design. Second, it offers a unified view of masked refinement, random-order autoregressive decoding, and hybrid continuous-discrete generation as different ways of querying the same posterior estimator. Third, it preserves checkpoint compatibility with pretrained MDLMs, which is important if one wants new modeling paradigms to be practically adoptable rather than purely conceptual.","technical_approach":"$12","experiments":"$13","reading_guide":"$14","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"将连续扩散用于离散文本生成的有趣尝试，通过 SNR 不变性设计统一了多种采样路径，关注 Diffusion LM 的研究员值得看其理论构造。","en":"An interesting attempt to apply continuous diffusion to discrete text generation, unifying various sampling paths via SNR invariance design; worth reading for Diffusion LM researchers for its theoretical construction."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of California Riverside","New York University"],"authors":["Yunshu Wu","Jiayi Cheng","Longxuan Yu","Partha Thakuria","Rob Brekelmans","Evangelos E. Papalexakis","Greg Ver Steeg"],"notable_authors":["Greg Ver Steeg"],"tags":["diffusion language model","non-autoregressive generation","discrete stochastic localization"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12836","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12836","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13247","title":"EMO: Frustratingly Easy Progressive Training of Extendable MoE","abstract":"Sparse Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) models offer a powerful way to scale model size without increasing compute, as per-token FLOPs depend only on k active experts rather than the total pool of E experts. Yet, this asymmetry creates an MoE efficiency paradox in practice: adding more experts balloons memory and communication costs, making actual training inefficient. We argue that this bottleneck arises in part because current MoE training allocates too many experts from the beginning, even though ear","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T09:31:09+00:00","category_id":"llm_pretrain","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13247.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"MoE 预训练中存在“效率悖论”：虽然理论上增加专家数量（E）不增加每 token 的 FLOPs，但由于通信、显存和小算子开销，实际训练的 wall-clock 时间会显著增加。而在训练早期，数据量不足以充分利用大量专家的容量，导致早期分配大量专家既无必要又低效。","importance":"提出了一种渐进式 MoE 训练范式，打破了预训练全程固定专家数量的惯例。通过将 MoE 容量视为可扩展内存，在不改变标准 MoE 架构和辅助目标的前提下，实现了计算和数据的更高效利用，为大规模 MoE 预训练提供了实用的降本策略。","technical_approach":"提出 EMO (Extendable Mixture-of-Experts) 框架。核心思想是：从小型（或稠密）模型开始，在训练过程中分多个阶段逐步扩展专家池（upcycling）。关键创新在于引入了显式建模专家数量 E 的稀疏 Scaling Law，通过拟合该定律来预测各阶段性能，从而精确计算每个专家容量所需的数据量，制定最优的阶段性 token 分配策略（前置低成本的小 E 训练，将大 E 训练留到最后）。","experiments":"在 1.92T tokens 上，将 1.1B 稠密模型分五个阶段渐进扩展为 9.6B-A1.1B (E=128) 的 MoE。结果显示，EMO 最终预训练 loss 达到 1.017，接近固定 E=128 基线的 0.994（相对差距仅 2.3%），显著优于固定 E=64 基线的 1.065，同时节省了 10% 的 GPU 小时。下游 8 个 benchmark 评估也验证了 EMO 性能对标 E=128 且优于 E=64。","reading_guide":"建议重点阅读 Introduction 中对 MoE 效率悖论的量化分析（图 1），以及如何通过 Scaling Law 确定扩展时机的部分。预计阅读时间 15 分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The 'efficiency paradox' in MoE pretraining: while increasing the number of experts (E) theoretically keeps per-token FLOPs constant, it significantly inflates wall-clock training time due to communication, memory, and small-GEMM overheads. Allocating many experts early in training is inefficient because early-stage data cannot fully utilize this capacity.","importance":"Introduces a progressive MoE training paradigm that challenges the convention of fixing the expert count throughout pretraining. By treating MoE capacity as expandable memory, it achieves better compute and data efficiency without altering standard MoE architectures or auxiliary objectives, offering a practical cost-reduction strategy for large-scale MoE pretraining.","technical_approach":"Proposes the EMO (Extendable Mixture-of-Experts) framework. The core idea is to start with a small (or dense) model and progressively expand the expert pool (upcycling) across multiple stages during training. The key innovation is explicitly modeling the effect of expert count E in a sparsity scaling law. By fitting this law to predict stage-wise performance, EMO precisely allocates the data justified by each expert capacity, resulting in a schedule that front-loads cheap, small-E training and reserves large-E for the end.","experiments":"Progressively expanded a 1.1B dense model into a 9.6B-A1.1B MoE (E=128) over five stages on 1.92T tokens. EMO achieved a final pretraining loss of 1.017, comparable to the fixed-E=128 baseline (0.994, a 2.3% relative gap) and significantly better than the fixed-E=64 baseline (1.065), while saving 10% GPU hours. Downstream evaluation on 8 benchmarks confirmed EMO matches E=128 and outperforms E=64.","reading_guide":"Focus on the quantitative analysis of the MoE efficiency paradox in the Introduction (Figure 1) and the methodology for determining expansion timing via Scaling Laws. Estimated reading time: 15 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"渐进式扩专家的思路完全可以引入内部MoE预训练pipeline，§3的稀疏缩放定律推导部分是核心贡献，值得复现验证","en":"The progressive expert expansion idea can be directly introduced into internal MoE pretraining pipelines; the sparse scaling law derivation in §3 is the core contribution worth reproducing"},"metadata":{"institutions":["Carnegie Mellon University","MBZUAI"],"authors":["Linghao Jin","Chufan Shi","Huijuan Wang","Nuan Wen","Zhengzhong Liu","Eric Xing","Xuezhe Ma"],"notable_authors":["Eric Xing","Xuezhe Ma"],"tags":["Mixture_of_Experts","progressive_training","scaling_law","MoE_efficiency","pretraining_framework"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13247","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13247","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13769","title":"Dense vs Sparse Pretraining at Tiny Scale: Active-Parameter vs Total-Parameter Matching","abstract":"We study dense and mixture-of-experts (MoE) transformers in a tiny-scale pretraining regime under a shared LLaMA-style decoder training recipe. The sparse model replaces dense feed-forward blocks with Mixtral-style routed experts. Dense baselines are modestly width-resized to tightly match either active or total parameter budgets, while tokenizer, data, optimizer, schedule, depth, context length, normalization style, and evaluation protocol are held fixed. Our best sparse recipe uses four expert","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T16:48:24+00:00","category_id":"llm_pretrain","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13769.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要回答的是一个很具体但常被混淆的问题：在极小规模预训练条件下，MoE 相比 dense 到底有没有真实建模收益，以及比较 dense 与 sparse 时应当按 active parameters 还是 total parameters 做公平匹配。作者把系统、数据、tokenizer、优化器、训练日程都固定，只替换 FFN 为 Mixtral 风格的 routed experts，试图把“条件计算本身的建模价值”从大规模分布式训练的工程因素里剥离出来。","importance":"对预训练研究的意义在于，它把 dense-vs-sparse 讨论里最容易混在一起的两种公平性标准拆开了。若按每 token 实际激活的参数量比较，MoE 在 tiny scale 已经能带来明确收益；若按总存储参数量比较，dense 仍略强，但差距不大且会随训练缩小。这个结论不大，却很干净。它说明 sparse 的优势并不只存在于超大规模集群和高系统优化场景，至少在建模层面，条件计算在小模型上已经可见；但同时也说明，若总参数预算固定，MoE 并不会自动胜出。对做 scaling、架构搜索和小规模先导实验的人，这种区分很有用，因为它直接影响实验结论该如何外推。","technical_approach":"方法设计相当克制。基础模型是 decoder-only、LLaMA 风格训练栈，数据用 TinyStories，保持 tokenizer、数据管线、优化器、schedule、depth、context length、normalization 和评测协议一致。稀疏化只发生在 FFN：把 dense FFN 换成 Mixtral 风格 MoE 模块。主配方是 4 experts、top-2 routing、dropless dispatch、Switch 风格 load balancing，并可选 router z-loss。作者明确不用 token dropping 或 capacity truncation，目的是避免把执行路径上的近似技巧混进建模比较。损失函数由三部分组成：next-token cross-entropy、负载均衡辅助项 L_bal，以及可选的 router z-loss L_z；最佳稀疏配方里 λ_bal=1e-2，λ_z=1e-3。公平性上做了两组 dense baseline：active-match dense 把宽度调到与 MoE 的每 token 激活参数量接近；total-match dense 则把总参数量调到与完整 MoE 接近。文中给出的 headline 配置是：dense active-match 约 14.89M 参数；MoE 总参数约 21.06M、active 参数约 14.77M；dense total-match 约 21.06M。active 匹配误差小于 1%，total 匹配误差小于 0.1%。这使得结论更容易解释：如果你关心的是每 token 实际动用了多少容量，MoE 的条件路由有优势；如果你关心的是总存储容量，dense 仍然很有竞争力。","experiments":"关键结果有三层。第一，naive sparse 在 tiny scale 并不自然成立。top-1 routing 且不加 balancing 时，训练几乎立刻 collapse，多数层把几乎所有 token 都路由到单一 expert。第二，稳定训练的关键不是单一技巧，而是一个小组合：加入 Switch-style balancing 可以先消除立即塌缩；在此基础上，从 top-1 改到 top-2 带来主要质量提升；router z-loss 更多改善路由行为和稳定性诊断，而不是最终验证损失的主要来源。第三，headline 数字很清楚：三种 full-data、三随机种子的比较中，dense active-match 的最佳验证 loss 为 1.6545 ± 0.0012，MoE 为 1.5788 ± 0.0020，dense total-match 为 1.5608 ± 0.00x（摘要截断了最后一位，但可确定略优于 MoE）。也就是说，MoE 相比 active-match dense 明显更好，但相比 total-match dense 仍略差。作者还强调，这个 sparse gain 伴随着健康的 routing diagnostics，而不是靠病态专家使用换来的假收益。主指标是 held-out validation loss 和 perplexity，吞吐与单 GPU dispatch 优化只放在附录，不作为核心论据。","reading_guide":"泛读建议很明确。先看 Introduction 和 Method，把两种 fairness 定义记牢：active-parameter matching 回答的是“同等每 token 激活容量下，条件计算是否更有效”；total-parameter matching 回答的是“同等总存储容量下，稀疏化是否值得”。然后直接看 Results 里关于 top-1 collapse、load balancing、top-2 改善、z-loss 作用的几组表和图。若只花 20 到 30 分钟，最值得抓住的是 headline loss 对比和 routing diagnostics，因为这两部分共同决定结论是否可信。若要进一步深挖，可看附录中的 dispatch 实现、吞吐分析，以及不同层 expert usage 的分布图，判断这些结论在更大规模上哪些可能保持、哪些可能被系统因素改写。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper isolates a specific question that is often blurred in dense-vs-sparse discussions: at tiny pretraining scale, does MoE provide a real modeling benefit over dense transformers, and should fairness be defined by active parameters or total parameters? To answer that, the authors keep the tokenizer, data, optimizer, schedule, depth, context length, normalization, and evaluation fixed, and only replace dense FFNs with Mixtral-style routed experts. The goal is to separate the modeling value of conditional computation from large-scale distributed systems effects.","importance":"Its main contribution is conceptual cleanliness rather than scale. The paper separates two fairness criteria that often get conflated. Under active-parameter matching, MoE already shows a clear advantage even at tiny scale. Under total-parameter matching, dense remains slightly better, though the gap is small and narrows during training. That is useful for pretraining research because it sharpens what a dense-vs-sparse result actually means. If the question is per-token active capacity, sparse routing helps. If the question is total stored capacity, dense is still highly competitive. For scaling studies, architecture search, and small pilot runs, this distinction matters because it changes how one should extrapolate conclusions.","technical_approach":"$15","experiments":"$16","reading_guide":"For a skim, start with the introduction and method and make sure the two fairness definitions are clear. Active-parameter matching asks whether conditional computation is better given the same per-token active capacity. Total-parameter matching asks whether sparsity is better given the same stored capacity. Then go straight to the result tables and figures covering top-1 collapse, the effect of load balancing, the gain from top-2 routing, and the role of z-loss. If you only spend 20 to 30 minutes, focus on the headline validation-loss comparison and the routing diagnostics, because together they determine whether the conclusion is trustworthy. If you want more depth, inspect the appendix for dispatch implementation details, throughput analysis, and layerwise expert-usage plots to judge which findings are likely to survive at larger scale and which may change once systems constraints dominate.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"值得看实验设计而非结论外推；active-match 赢、total-match 输，会逼你重新写 MoE ablation 的公平性说明。","en":"Read it for the experimental design, not scale extrapolation; active-match wins and total-match loses force cleaner fairness claims in MoE ablations."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Independent Researcher"],"authors":["Abdalrahman Wael"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["MoE","pretraining","scaling","parameter-matching","LLaMA"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13769","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13769","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13284","title":"Learning Perturbations to Extrapolate Your LLM","abstract":"Recent advancements in large language models demonstrate that injecting perturbations can substantially enhance extrapolation performance. However, current approaches often rely on discrete perturbations with fixed designs, which limits their flexibility. In this work, we propose a framework where token prefixes are perturbed by a learnable transformation of a continuous latent vector within an embedding space. To overcome the challenge of an intractable marginal likelihood, we derive unbiased e","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T10:00:58+00:00","category_id":"llm_pretrain","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13284.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["stat.ML","cs.LG","math.ST"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有大语言模型训练使用的离散扰动方法设计固定、粒度粗、无法自适应上下文，连续扰动多为经验设置的随机噪声，难以有效提升模型的分布外泛化能力；同时带隐变量的连续扰动的边际似然难以计算，无法直接用于模型训练。","importance":"提出了可与基座模型联合训练的连续嵌入空间扰动框架，为预训练阶段的数据增强、提升模型泛化性提供了新的实现路径，其无偏估计方程的训练方法也为带隐变量的预训练目标优化提供了技术参考。","technical_approach":"在token嵌入空间对前缀嵌入施加连续扰动，扰动由低维隐变量经可学习神经网络变换生成，扰动模型与基座自回归LLM联合训练。通过推导无偏估计方程解决了隐变量导致的边际似然不可计算的问题，可直接用随机梯度下降优化，无需变分近似，同时在过参数化设置下证明了参数估计的统计一致性和收敛速率。","experiments":"在合成数据集和真实NLP数据集上验证，相比固定离散扰动、随机连续扰动等基线方法，该框架在分布外泛化任务上取得更稳定、更显著的性能提升，可适配不同规模的基座LLM。","reading_guide":"重点阅读引言部分对现有扰动方法的局限性分析、方法部分的扰动框架设计和训练目标推导，实验部分关注主要基线对比结果即可，可跳过理论证明细节。预计阅读时间20分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing perturbation methods for LLM training are either discrete, fixed-design and context-agnostic, or ad-hoc random continuous noises, which cannot effectively improve out-of-distribution generalization. Additionally, the marginal likelihood of continuous perturbations with latent variables is intractable, making direct training infeasible.","importance":"Proposes a jointly learnable continuous perturbation framework in the embedding space, providing a new approach for data augmentation during LLM pre-training to enhance generalization. Its unbiased estimating equation training method also offers a technical reference for optimizing pre-training objectives with latent variables.","technical_approach":"Applies continuous perturbations to token prefix embeddings, where perturbations are generated by a learnable neural network that maps low-dimensional latent variables to the embedding space, and the perturbation model is trained jointly with the base autoregressive LLM. Derives an unbiased estimating equation to solve the intractable marginal likelihood problem, allowing direct optimization via stochastic gradient descent without variational approximation. Proves the statistical consistency and convergence rate of the parameter estimator in over-parameterized regimes.","experiments":"Evaluated on both synthetic and real-world NLP datasets. Compared with baselines including fixed discrete perturbations and random continuous noises, the proposed framework achieves more stable and significant improvements on out-of-distribution generalization tasks, and adapts to base LLMs of different sizes.","reading_guide":"Focus on the limitation analysis of existing perturbation methods in Introduction, the perturbation framework design and training objective derivation in Methodology, and main baseline comparison results in experiments. Skip detailed theoretical proofs if not required. Estimated reading time: 20 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"将离散 prompt 扰动连续化以提升外推，思路不新但理论分析（无偏估计方程）较扎实，可作为 soft prompt 增强泛化的参考。","en":"Continuous perturbation for extrapolation isn't entirely new, but the theoretical grounding (unbiased estimating equations) is solid; useful reference for soft prompt generalization."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Bristol","Shanghai University of Finance and Economics","University of Birmingham","London School of Economics and Political Science"],"authors":["Zetai Cen","Chenfei Gu","Jin Zhu","Ting Li","Yunxiao Chen","Chengchun Shi"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["length extrapolation","continuous perturbation","soft prompting","statistical learning"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13284","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13284","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"efficient","emoji":"⚡","name":"高效推理与架构","description":"KV-Cache优化、量化/剪枝/蒸馏、推测解码、注意力优化、长上下文推理、模型压缩、推理系统/Serving","papers":[{"id":"2605.13111","title":"Pyramid Forcing: Head-Aware Pyramid KV Cache Policy for High-Quality Long Video Generation","abstract":"Autoregressive video generation enables streaming and open-ended long video synthesis, but still suffers from long-term degradation caused by accumulated errors. Existing KVCache strategies usually apply unified historical-frame retention, implicitly assuming homogeneous historical dependencies across attention heads. We revisit historical-frame attention and reveal three distinct head types: Anchor Heads require broad long-range context, Wave Heads exhibit periodic temporal dependencies, and Ve","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T07:23:02+00:00","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13111.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是自回归视频生成中的长程退化问题：生成时间变长后，外观漂移、运动变弱、身份模糊会逐步积累。作者指出，问题不只是历史信息太多或太少，而是现有 KV cache 策略把所有 attention head 当成同一种历史依赖模式处理，导致该保留的长程锚点、周期性运动信息和局部连续性被混在一起压缩。","importance":"对 LLM 基座预训练的直接相关性不强，因为工作对象是自回归视频扩散生成，不是语言模型预训练。但它对长上下文建模和推理期记忆压缩有启发：不同 attention head 对历史 token 的使用方式可能高度异质，统一的滑窗、sink token 或重要性采样策略会损失结构化依赖。对研究长上下文 LM、KV cache 压缩、流式生成和多模态 AR 生成的人，可以把它看作一个 head-aware cache policy 的案例。","technical_approach":"方法叫 Pyramid Forcing，核心是先识别 head 类型，再给不同 head 分配不同的历史帧缓存策略。作者把历史依赖模式分成三类：Anchor Heads 需要宽范围长程上下文，用来稳定外观和身份；Wave Heads 对历史帧呈周期性注意力波动，更像是在跟踪运动节律；Veil Heads 对近期历史注意力较弱，但对初始帧敏感，过多历史反而会遮蔽它们对第一帧的关注。分类阶段采用小规模 calibration set，结合 sign-rate statistics 和频域周期性来做 offline head classification。策略阶段，Anchor Heads 使用 strided retention 覆盖长历史，Wave Heads 使用 period-aligned sampling 保留周期相关帧，Veil Heads 使用 compact local merging 控制历史干扰并保留局部连续性。由于不同 head 的 cache 长度不同，作者还实现了 ragged-cache attention，以支持 head-level heterogeneous KV cache，而不是把所有 head padding 到同一长度。","experiments":"实验在 Self Forcing 和 Causal Forcing 两个自回归视频生成 backbone 上评估，使用 VBench-Long，覆盖 30 秒和 60 秒长视频生成。关键数字是：在 Self Forcing 的 60 秒生成上，总分从 77.87 提升到 81.21。动态程度指标提升更明显，在 Causal Forcing 上最高提升 29.36 分，说明该策略主要缓解了长视频中运动衰减的问题。作者还强调方法同时改善 motion dynamics、visual fidelity 和 semantic consistency，但全文片段中没有给出完整消融表；最值得确认的是三类 head 分类是否稳定、每类 cache policy 的独立贡献，以及 ragged-cache attention 的额外开销。","reading_guide":"泛读即可，预计 20 到 30 分钟。建议重点看 Introduction 中对三类 head 的观察，以及方法部分的 Offline Tri-Pattern Head Classification、Pyramid KVCache Policies 和 Heterogeneous KVCache Computation Optimization。图 1 和图 2 是理解问题设定的入口：前者展示长程退化，后者对比统一 cache 与 head-aware cache。实验部分重点看 30 秒、60 秒 VBench-Long 结果和动态程度指标。若关注 LLM 长上下文，可跳过视频生成细节，重点抽取两个问题：head specialization 如何测量，以及异构 cache 如何在工程上避免 padding 浪费。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets long-horizon degradation in autoregressive video generation. As generation proceeds, appearance drifts, motion weakens, and object identity becomes less stable. The main claim is that existing KV-cache policies treat all attention heads as if they had the same temporal dependency pattern, while heads actually use historical frames in different ways.","importance":"The work is not directly about LLM pretraining, but it is useful for long-context modeling and inference-time memory compression. It gives a concrete example where keeping or dropping history uniformly across heads is too coarse. For long-context language models, streaming multimodal models, and autoregressive world models, the useful lesson is that cache compression may need to respect head-level specialization rather than only token-level recency or global importance.","technical_approach":"Pyramid Forcing first classifies attention heads offline and then assigns head-specific cache policies. The paper identifies three patterns. Anchor Heads attend broadly to long-range history and help preserve global anchors such as identity and appearance. Wave Heads show periodic temporal preferences and are suited to motion-related dependencies. Veil Heads are sensitive to initial frames but can be distracted by excessive historical context. The classification uses a small calibration set, sign-rate statistics, and frequency-domain periodicity. The cache policies are then matched to these behaviors: strided retention for Anchor Heads, period-aligned sampling for Wave Heads, and compact local merging for Veil Heads. Because different heads keep different numbers of cached frames, the paper introduces ragged-cache attention to support heterogeneous cache lengths without forcing a single padded layout.","experiments":"The evaluation uses Self Forcing and Causal Forcing backbones on VBench-Long for 30-second and 60-second video generation. On Self Forcing at 60 seconds, the total score improves from 77.87 to 81.21. The largest reported gain is on dynamic degree, with an improvement of up to 29.36 points on Causal Forcing. These results suggest that the method mainly helps with motion persistence and long-term consistency. The most important missing checks to look for in the full experimental section are the stability of the head taxonomy, per-policy ablations, and the overhead of ragged-cache attention.","reading_guide":"A skim reading should take about 20 to 30 minutes. Focus on the analysis of Anchor, Wave, and Veil Heads, then read the sections on offline head classification, head-specific cache policies, and heterogeneous cache computation. Figures 1 and 2 are the quickest way to understand the motivation. For readers working on LLM long context, the video-generation details are less important than two transferable questions: how to measure head-level temporal behavior, and how to implement variable cache lengths efficiently.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"读 head 分类和 ragged-cache 实现；它把“所有头同一缓存窗口”这个默认设定拆开了，值得对长上下文 LLM 做同类探针。","en":"Read the head taxonomy and ragged-cache implementation; it breaks the default uniform-cache-window assumption and is worth probing in long-context LLMs."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Peking University","South China University of Technology","Xinjiang University","Beihang University"],"authors":["Jiayu Chen","Junbei Tang","Wenbiao Zhao","Maoliang Li","Jiayi Luo","Zihao Zheng","Jiawei Yang","Guojie Luo","Xiang Chen"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["KV-cache","autoregressive-video","long-context","attention-heads","cache-policy"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13111","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13111","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13375","title":"GRIP-VLM: Group-Relative Importance Pruning for Efficient Vision-Language Models","abstract":"In Vision-Language Models (VLMs), processing a massive number of visual tokens incurs prohibitive computational overhead. While recent training-aware pruning methods attempt to selectively discard redundant tokens, they largely rely on continuous-gradient relaxations. However, visual token pruning is inherently a discrete, non-convex combinatorial problem; consequently, these continuous approximations frequently trap the optimization in sub-optimal local minima, especially under aggressive compr","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T11:32:03+00:00","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13375.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"GRIP-VLM 解决 VLM 视觉 token 过多导致推理开销高的问题，重点是训练一个能在不同预算下动态选择保留 token 的 pruning 策略。论文认为视觉 token pruning 是离散子集选择问题，用 Gumbel-Softmax 或可微 top-k 这类连续松弛方法容易在高压缩率下落入差的局部解。","importance":"这篇更接近高效 VLM 推理研究，不属于预训练方法本身。对基座研究的启发在于：高分辨率图像和视频会把视觉 token 数从早期约 576 推到上万级，统一多模态模型的训练和推理都会受这个瓶颈限制。论文把 token selection 看成非平滑决策问题，并用 RL 处理 hard samples，这对设计可学习的视觉 token routing、动态计算和多模态 MoE 有参考意义。","technical_approach":"GRIP-VLM 是两阶段动态 pruning 框架。系统层面，它在 Transformer 层中加入轻量 scoring module，可用于视觉编码器阶段，也可用于 LLM decoder 阶段，并且可以和启发式 pruning 方法叠加。token 层面，它设计 budget-aware scorer，让打分器显式感知当前压缩预算；训练时用 curriculum learning，从接近无损的预算逐步过渡到高压缩预算，以减少直接训练高压缩策略的不稳定。优化层面，先用 supervised distillation 得到一个稳定初始策略，再用 GRPO 风格的 reinforcement learning 在离散选择空间中探索。这个设计针对的是连续松弛的局限：当正确性随 keep ratio 呈现非单调波动时，平滑 surrogate 很难找到好的 token 子集。","experiments":"论文在 6 个多模态 benchmark 上报告结果，并以 192 个视觉 token 预算作为关键比较点。GRIP-VLM 在该预算下整体表现优于启发式和监督学习 pruning 基线。在等精度约束下，推理速度比竞争方法快 15%。论文还把样本按 pruning 难度分成 LV1、LV2、LV3：LV1 对 pruning 稳定，启发式方法已足够；LV2 随 keep ratio 大致单调退化，监督学习有明显收益；LV3 呈现非单调振荡，RL 收益最大。在 hard samples 上，GRIP-VLM 相比已有 pruning baseline 平均成功率提升 33%，在部分 LV3 设置中比启发式和监督学习方法高最多约 20 个百分点。","reading_guide":"泛读建议 20–30 分钟。重点看 Motivation 里对 pruning landscape heterogeneity 的实验设计，尤其是用 keep ratio 扫描正确/错误交替次数来定义 LV1–LV3。这部分比方法命名更有信息量。然后看 budget-aware scorer、curriculum learning、SFT-anchored RL/GRPO 的训练流程。若只关心预训练，可跳过具体 benchmark 细节，关注它如何把视觉 token 裁剪建模为离散策略优化，以及 hard samples 为什么需要探索而不只是可微打分。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"GRIP-VLM targets the inference cost caused by excessive visual tokens in VLMs. The core claim is that visual token pruning is a discrete subset-selection problem. Continuous relaxations such as Gumbel-Softmax or differentiable top-k can be fragile, especially when the compression budget is tight.","importance":"This is primarily an efficient VLM inference paper, not a pretraining paper. Its relevance to foundation-model research comes from the scaling pressure of visual tokens: modern VLMs may process hundreds to tens of thousands of visual tokens for high-resolution images or video. The paper’s framing of token selection as a non-smooth decision problem is useful for thinking about dynamic visual token routing, adaptive compute, and multimodal sparse computation.","technical_approach":"GRIP-VLM uses a two-stage dynamic pruning framework. It inserts lightweight scoring modules into Transformer layers and supports pruning in both the visual encoder and LLM decoder stages. The scorer is budget-aware: it conditions token importance on the current token budget, which lets one model operate across different compression levels. Training starts with curriculum learning, moving from mild pruning to aggressive pruning, and uses supervised distillation to create a stable initial policy. It then applies GRPO-style reinforcement learning to explore discrete pruning decisions. This is intended to handle cases where correctness is not a smooth monotonic function of the keep ratio.","experiments":"The paper reports results on six multimodal benchmarks, with 192 visual tokens as a key budget setting. GRIP-VLM outperforms heuristic and supervised pruning baselines at that budget. Under an equal-accuracy constraint, it gives 15% faster inference than competing methods. The paper also analyzes pruning difficulty by sweeping keep ratios and counting correct/incorrect transitions. Easy samples are stable under pruning, medium samples degrade roughly monotonically, and hard samples show oscillatory behavior. On hard samples, GRIP-VLM improves success rate by 33% on average over existing pruning baselines, and in some LV3 cases gains up to about 20 points over heuristic and supervised methods.","reading_guide":"A 20–30 minute skim is sufficient. The most useful part is the motivation section on heterogeneous pruning landscapes, especially the LV1–LV3 definition based on keep-ratio sweeps. Then read the budget-aware scorer, curriculum training, and SFT-anchored GRPO procedure. For pretraining-oriented readers, benchmark details are less important than the modeling choice: treating visual token reduction as discrete policy optimization rather than differentiable scoring alone.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看方法和高压缩 ablation；把 GRPO 用在离散 token pruning 上是有味道的，但别把它误读成预训练结论。","en":"Read the method and aggressive-compression ablations; using GRPO for discrete token pruning is interesting, but do not read it as a pretraining result."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University","Nanjing University","University of Science and Technology of China"],"authors":["Mingzhe Huang","Weijun Wang","Xin Ding","Liang Mi","Hao Wen","Yuanchun Li","Lichen Pang","Shansong Yang","Yunxin Liu","Ting Cao"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["VLM-efficiency","visual-token-pruning","GRPO","reinforcement-learning","model-compression"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13375","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13375","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12825","title":"Orthrus: Memory-Efficient Parallel Token Generation via Dual-View Diffusion","abstract":"We introduce Orthrus, a simple and efficient dual-architecture framework that unifies the exact generation fidelity of autoregressive Large Language Models (LLMs) with the high-speed parallel token generation of diffusion models. The sequential nature of standard autoregressive decoding represents a fundamental bottleneck for high-throughput inference. While diffusion language models attempt to break this barrier via parallel generation, they suffer from significant performance degradation, high","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-12T23:47:35+00:00","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12825.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"自回归LLM解码阶段的严格串行特性导致推理延迟高、硬件利用率低；扩散语言模型虽支持并行生成，但存在效果差、训练成本高、无法匹配原自回归模型预测分布的问题，现有将自回归模型适配为扩散模型的方案仍需大量继续预训练，且存在效果损失。","importance":"提出了自回归与扩散建模范式融合的低侵入式实现路径，无需重构预训练流程即可为现有基座模型注入并行生成能力，对推理阶段建模范式创新、基座模型能力扩展有直接参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出双视图架构Orthrus，冻结预训练自回归LLM的全部权重，仅在其注意力头旁新增一个轻量可训练的扩散模块，两者共享同一份KV缓存，无冗余缓存开销；生成阶段扩散模块基于自回归分支构建的高质量KV缓存并行生成多个token，再通过内置的双分支共识机制，由冻结的自回归分支验证扩散生成的token轨迹，保证最终输出严格匹配原自回归模型的预测分布，实现无损推理。","experiments":"仅微调16%的总参数，使用不到1B token的训练数据，在单节点8卡H200上训练不超过24小时即可完成适配；推理阶段最高获得7.8倍的速度提升，同时输出分布与原自回归模型完全一致。","reading_guide":"重点关注第3章的架构设计和双分支共识机制部分，以及第4章的速度和效果验证实验，预计阅读时间25分钟；扩散模型的基础介绍部分可跳过。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The strictly sequential decoding of autoregressive LLMs leads to high inference latency and low hardware utilization. Diffusion language models support parallel generation but suffer from inferior performance, high training costs, and inability to match the predictive distribution of original autoregressive models. Existing adaptation methods converting autoregressive models to diffusion models still require extensive continued pre-training and incur performance degradation.","importance":"Proposes a low-intrusive path for integrating autoregressive and diffusion modeling paradigms. It enables parallel generation capabilities for existing base models without reconstructing the pre-training pipeline, offering direct reference for inference-phase paradigm innovation and base model capability expansion.","technical_approach":"Proposes Orthrus, a dual-view architecture. It freezes all weights of the pretrained autoregressive LLM, and only adds a lightweight trainable diffusion module alongside its attention heads. The two branches share the same KV cache with no redundant cache overhead. During generation, the diffusion module generates multiple tokens in parallel conditioned on the high-quality KV cache built by the autoregressive branch. An intrinsic two-branch consensus mechanism lets the frozen autoregressive branch validate the token trajectories generated by the diffusion view, ensuring the final output strictly matches the original autoregressive model's predictive distribution for lossless inference.","experiments":"Adaptation is completed by fine-tuning only 16% of total parameters, using less than 1B tokens of training data, and taking under 24 hours on a single 8xH200 node. It achieves up to 7.8x inference speedup while maintaining exact parity with the original autoregressive model's output distribution.","reading_guide":"Focus on the architecture design and two-branch consensus mechanism in Section 3, as well as speed and performance validation experiments in Section 4. Estimated reading time: 25 minutes. Introductory sections on diffusion model basics can be skipped.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"AR+扩散混合解码的新范式，共享KV缓存的设计很巧妙，§3.2双视图交互部分对探索非AR推理路径有启发","en":"A new AR+diffusion hybrid decoding paradigm with a clever shared KV cache design; the dual-view interaction part in §3.2 is inspiring for exploring non-AR inference paths"},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Oregon","Adobe Research"],"authors":["Chien Van Nguyen","Chaitra Hegde","Van Cuong Pham","Ryan A. Rossi","Franck Dernoncourt","Thien Huu Nguyen"],"notable_authors":["Franck Dernoncourt"],"tags":["efficient inference","diffusion language model","parallel generation","hybrid decoding","KV cache"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12825","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12825","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13190","title":"N-vium: Mixture-of-Exits Transformer for Accelerated Exact Generation","abstract":"Improving the inference efficiency of autoregressive transformers typically means reducing FLOPs per token, usually through approximations that degrade model quality. We introduce N-vium, a mixture-of-exits transformer that partially parallelizes computation across depth on standard hardware, increasing effective FLOPs per second rather than minimizing compute per token. N-vium attaches prediction heads at multiple depths and defines the next-token distribution as a learned mixture over these ex","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T08:46:17+00:00","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13190.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文试图在不改变模型采样分布、不牺牲困惑度的前提下加速自回归生成。传统 early-exit 方法把中间层预测当作 final-layer 预测的近似，常需要置信度阈值，也会带来质量损失；N-vium 的目标是把“提前预测”改成模型定义的一部分，使早退采样仍然是精确的。","importance":"这篇论文更偏推理效率，但和预训练研究有关，因为它不是单纯的 serving trick，而是改了模型架构和训练目标。关键点是把每个 token 的即时 next-token prediction 和它为未来 token 提供完整 KV cache 这两个职责拆开。这样速度来源不是少算 FLOPs，而是在标准硬件上把被推迟的上层计算批处理起来，提高有效 FLOPs/s。对预训练侧的启发是：如果生成过程中的计算深度存在 token-level 差异，可以在训练目标里显式建模，而不是训练后用启发式阈值裁剪。","technical_approach":"N-vium 在 decoder-only Transformer 的多个深度位置接入 exit。模型把 L 层 backbone 均分为若干 block，在每个 junction layer 取当前 residual stream，接一个预测 head 得到该深度的 next-token distribution π_k，同时用 router MLP 产生 token-adaptive mixture weight。最终分布定义为多个 exit 分布的混合：π_mix = Σ_k p_k π_k。标准 Transformer 是这个形式的特例，只要 router 把所有中间 exit 的权重置零即可。训练时直接优化 mixture distribution 的语言建模损失，并加入引导项把路由推向更高效率。推理时可以从混合分布精确采样；若 token 在浅层 exit 产生预测，剩余高层计算不会被丢弃，而是延后完成，以补齐未来 attention 所需的完整 KV cache。这个设计和普通 early exit 的主要区别在于：early exit 是近似 final-layer 分布，N-vium 则把多出口混合分布作为模型本身的预测分布。","experiments":"论文从小规模到 1.5B 参数进行了预训练和评测，和参数量、数据量匹配的标准 Transformer baseline 对比。主要结果是最高获得 57.9% 的 wall-clock speedup，同时没有观察到困惑度退化。实验还分析了 router 的 token-adaptive 行为，说明不同 token 会被分配到不同深度；这支持了论文的基本假设，即很多 token 的预测分布在较浅层已经足够稳定，但完整 KV cache 仍需要后续层计算来服务未来 token。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，预计 25 到 35 分钟。先看 Introduction 中对两类计算职责的拆分：当前 token 的 next-token prediction，以及为未来 token 构建全层 KV cache。然后看 Method 里 mixture-of-exits 的形式化定义、router 设计、训练目标和 efficiency steering。最值得细看的部分是 deferred KV completion 的调度方式，因为它决定了理论上的“精确采样”能否转化成实际 wall-clock 加速。实验部分重点看不同模型规模下的速度-困惑度曲线、路由分布、消融实验；这些结果比单个加速数字更能判断方法是否适合更大模型。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses exact acceleration for autoregressive generation. Standard early-exit methods reduce latency by treating intermediate predictions as approximations to the final-layer distribution, which usually requires confidence thresholds and can degrade quality. N-vium instead makes early prediction part of the model distribution itself, so that sampling from an intermediate exit is still sampling from the distribution optimized during training.","importance":"Although the paper sits closer to inference efficiency than to data-centric pretraining, it matters for model design because the training objective and architecture are changed. The useful idea is to decouple two roles of a forward pass: predicting the next token for the current position, and completing all-layer KV representations needed by future positions. The method does not claim speed by reducing total FLOPs per token. It improves wall-clock time by deferring upper-layer work and batching it more efficiently on standard hardware. For pretraining researchers, the message is that token-dependent computation depth can be modeled in the likelihood objective rather than added later through heuristic early-exit rules.","technical_approach":"N-vium augments a decoder-only Transformer with multiple exits placed at evenly spaced depth junctions. At each junction, the hidden state feeds a prediction head that produces an exit-specific next-token distribution, and a router MLP produces token-adaptive mixture weights. The next-token distribution is defined as a mixture, π_mix = Σ_k p_k π_k. A standard Transformer is recovered as a special case when the router assigns zero probability to all intermediate exits. The model is trained directly on the mixture likelihood, with additional steering toward more efficient routing. During generation, a token may be sampled from a shallow exit, while the remaining upper-layer computation is deferred rather than skipped. Those deferred computations later fill in the full KV cache required by subsequent tokens. This is the main difference from approximate early exit: the model distribution is the mixture, and the KV cache remains complete.","experiments":"The authors pretrain and evaluate N-vium across several model sizes up to 1.5B parameters, comparing against parameter- and data-matched Transformer baselines. They report up to 57.9% wall-clock speedup without perplexity degradation. The experiments also inspect routing behavior, showing that the model assigns different tokens to different effective depths. This supports the observation behind the method: many next-token distributions become usable before the final layer, while complete KV states still have to be produced for future attention.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 25 to 35 minutes. Start with the introduction’s separation of immediate prediction and KV-cache construction, since that is the central design move. Then read the method sections defining the mixture-of-exits distribution, the router, the training objective, and efficiency steering. The deferred KV completion mechanism deserves closer attention because it is what connects exact sampling to practical speedup. In the experiments, focus on the speed-versus-perplexity curves, routing distributions, and ablations across model sizes rather than only the headline speedup.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看方法和延迟 KV 机制即可；它改变的是 serving 侧吞吐 prior，不是训练目标 prior。","en":"Read the method and deferred-KV mechanism; it shifts a serving-throughput prior, not a pretraining-objective prior."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Aleksander Lorenc","Frédéric Berdoz","Joël Mathys","Roger Wattenhofer"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["inference-efficiency","mixture-of-exits","exact-generation","kv-cache","autoregressive-transformer"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13190","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13190","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13734","title":"KVServe: Service-Aware KV Cache Compression for Communication-Efficient Disaggregated LLM Serving","abstract":"LLMs are widely adopted in production, pushing inference systems to their limits. Disaggregated LLM serving (e.g., PD separation and KV state disaggregation) improves scalability and cost efficiency, but it also turns KV into an explicit payload crossing network and storage boundaries, making KV a dominant end-to-end bottleneck. Existing KV compression are typically static runtime configurations, despite production service context varies over time in workload mix, bandwidth, and SLO/quality budg","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T16:12:33+00:00","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13734.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.DC","cs.AI","cs.NI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是分离式 LLM serving 中的 KV cache 通信瓶颈。PD 分离和 KV state disaggregation 会把 KV 从 GPU 内部状态变成跨网络、跨存储传输的显式负载；当上下文变长后，固定的 KV 压缩配置经常不能同时适配 workload、带宽、质量预算和 SLO。","importance":"这不是预训练方法论文，但对基座研究有间接价值。长上下文、RAG、agent 工作流会改变真实 serving 约束，而 serving 约束反过来影响模型结构、context length 设计和 KV 友好型架构选择。论文的有用点在于把 KV 压缩从单一算法比较改成服务状态下的策略选择问题。对研究长上下文模型的人，里面关于 KV 体积、网络带宽和端到端延迟的量化数据值得参考。","technical_approach":"KVServe 把现有 KV 压缩方法拆成可组合流水线，包括变换、量化粒度、编码器等组件，并加入作者设计的新量化组件，形成可枚举的策略空间。难点是组合空间太大，不能逐一端到端 profile。为此系统使用 Bayesian Profiling Engine 做离线搜索，把候选策略压缩到可用集合；线上部分由 Service-Aware Online Controller 根据当前 workload、带宽、SLO 和质量约束选择策略。控制器结合解析延迟模型和轻量 bandit，用 bandit 修正离线 profile 与线上执行之间的偏差。系统集成在 vLLM 推理管线中，目标是减少 KV 跨节点或跨存储传输的实际时间，而不是只追求更高压缩率。","experiments":"论文给出几个有信息量的规模数字：Llama 3.1-70B 在 128K token 下产生约 39.06 GB KV；使用 Qwen3-235B 服务 32K-token 请求时，64 节点 prefill 集群需要约 2.1 Tbps 的 KV egress 带宽；在端到端实验中，KV 通信时间最高可占 job completion time 的 60%。KVServe 的 Bayesian profiling 将离线搜索开销从约 1000 小时降到 20 小时量级。系统评测覆盖多种数据集、模型、GPU 和网络配置；相对无压缩或固定压缩基线，在 PD-separated serving 中最高降低 9.13 倍 JCT，在 KV-disaggregated serving 中最高降低 32.8 倍 TTFT。更关键的实验结论是，最优压缩策略会随 workload 和带宽区间切换，固定策略有时会造成负优化。","reading_guide":"建议泛读 25 到 35 分钟。先看 Introduction 和 Section 2.2，重点是 KV 通信为何成为瓶颈，以及固定压缩为什么会在某些带宽和 workload 下变慢。然后看模块化策略空间的设计，确认它如何覆盖 CacheGen、KIVI、KVQuant 等方法的关键组件。Bayesian profiling 和 online controller 是方法部分的重点。实验部分优先看端到端 JCT、TTFT、带宽敏感性和策略切换分析；如果只关心预训练，可跳过工程实现细节，保留对长上下文成本模型的认识。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the KV-cache communication bottleneck in disaggregated LLM serving. With prefill/decode separation and remote KV-state disaggregation, KV is no longer just an internal GPU-resident state; it becomes a large payload transferred across network and storage boundaries. Under changing workloads, bandwidth, quality budgets, and SLOs, a fixed KV-compression configuration can be suboptimal or even increase latency.","importance":"This is an inference-systems paper rather than a pretraining paper, but it is still relevant to foundation-model research. Long-context models, RAG, and agent workloads are increasingly limited by KV movement. Those constraints feed back into model architecture choices, context-length targets, and KV-efficient design. The useful shift in this work is to frame KV compression as a service-conditioned strategy-selection problem, not as a static compression-algorithm benchmark.","technical_approach":"KVServe decomposes KV compression into a modular pipeline with pluggable components such as transforms, quantization choices, granularities, and codecs. It also adds a new quantization component and uses cross-method composition to build an enumerable strategy space. Since exhaustive profiling is too expensive, the offline stage uses a Bayesian Profiling Engine to search for good candidates under quality and latency constraints. At runtime, a Service-Aware Online Controller senses the current service context and selects a profile. The controller combines an analytical latency model with a lightweight bandit mechanism, where the bandit corrects mismatches between offline profiling and online behavior. The system is integrated into vLLM and targets end-to-end KV transfer latency, not compression ratio alone.","experiments":"The paper provides concrete scale numbers for the bottleneck. Llama 3.1-70B produces about 39.06 GB of KV at 128K tokens. Serving 32K-token requests with Qwen3-235B on a 64-node prefill cluster requires about 2.1 Tbps of KV egress bandwidth. In the authors' end-to-end experiments, KV communication accounts for up to 60% of job completion time. The Bayesian profiling stage reduces offline search cost from around 1000 hours to the 20-hour range. Across datasets, models, GPU setups, and network configurations, KVServe reports up to 9.13x job-completion-time reduction for PD-separated serving and up to 32.8x TTFT reduction for KV-disaggregated serving. A central empirical finding is that the best compression strategy changes with workload and bandwidth, so static configurations can produce negative optimization.","reading_guide":"A targeted skim should take about 25 to 35 minutes. Start with the introduction and the motivation section, especially the measurements showing when KV transfer dominates latency and when static compression fails. Then read the modular strategy-space abstraction to see how methods such as CacheGen, KIVI, and KVQuant are represented. The Bayesian profiler and the online controller are the main method components. In the evaluation, prioritize end-to-end JCT, TTFT, bandwidth sensitivity, and strategy-switching results. If the goal is pretraining insight, skip low-level implementation details and keep the cost model for long-context serving.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"读系统设计和 profiling 结果就够；对 pretrain 的间接价值是提醒长上下文训练假设会被服务端 KV 通信成本反咬。","en":"Read the system design and profiling results; the pretraining-relevant lesson is that long-context ambitions can be constrained by KV movement at serving time."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Chinese Academy of Sciences","Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences","Shanghai Jiao Tong University"],"authors":["Zedong Liu","Xinyang Ma","Dejun Luo","Hairui Zhao","Bing Lu","Wenjing Huang","Yida Gu","Xingchen Liu","Zheng Wei","Jinyang Liu","Dingwen Tao","Guangming Tan"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["kv-cache","llm-serving","disaggregated-serving","compression","profiling"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13734","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13734","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13768","title":"High-Rate Quantized Matrix Multiplication II","abstract":"This is the second part of the work investigating quantized matrix multiplication (MatMul). In part I we considered the case of calibration-free quantization, whereas here we discuss the setting where covariance matrix $Σ_X$ of the columns of the second factor is available. This setting arises in the ubiquitous task of weight-only post-training quantization of LLMs.   Weight-only quantization is related to the problem of weighted mean squared error (WMSE) source coding, whose classical (reverse)","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T16:47:25+00:00","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13768.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI","cs.IT"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这项工作研究带校准信息的 weight-only 量化：在推理时激活保持高精度、权重以低比特存储，量化器可使用激活协方差 ΣX。核心问题是如何在固定平均码率下最小化加权矩阵乘误差 E||X^T(W−W_hat)||²，而不是只最小化权重本身的普通 MSE。","importance":"对预训练研究的直接贡献不在训练目标或模型结构，而在大模型部署侧的量化理论。它把 GPTQ 这类经验方法放回到加权源编码和 waterfilling 框架里，解释了为什么激活协方差的谱结构会决定不同通道应分配不同码率。对基座模型研究员的启发是：校准数据不只是用于确定 clipping 或 scale，也可以用于决定信息预算如何沿激活主方向分配。这个视角对低比特权重发布、长上下文推理成本、MoE serving 的带宽瓶颈都有参考意义。","technical_approach":"方法分两层。理论层先把单列权重向量 W 建模为 N(0,I)，目标失真写成 (W−W_hat)^T ΣX (W−W_hat)。如果使用不看 ΣX 的各向同性量化，失真约为 (tr ΣX / n)·2^{-2R}；如果使用最优 waterfilling 码本和编码，失真约为 |ΣX|^{1/n}·2^{-2R}。二者差距来自 ΣX 特征值的算术平均与几何平均差异。工作还指出，即使用各向同性码本，只要编码阶段感知 ΣX，也能达到同阶最优。实践层把 GPTQ 解释为 successive interference cancellation / Babai 算法。GPTQ 的固定每坐标码率对应失真约为 (2πe/12)·(1/n Σ_i U_{ii}²)·2^{-2R}，其中 U^T U=ΣX；WaterSIC 则按坐标自适应分配码率，失真变成 (2πe/12)·(Π_i U_{ii}²)^{1/n}·2^{-2R}。后者利用 Cholesky 对角项的几何平均，距离信息论最优只差一个常数因子，对应最多约 0.25 bit 的码率差。","experiments":"实验主要用于验证理论预测的码率收益，而不是给出完整下游任务评测。文中在 Llama-3-8B 的层上使用 WikiText-2 校准数据，比较四类方案：不使用 ΣX 的理论基线、使用 waterfilling 的理论上界、固定码率 GPTQ、以及按坐标分配码率的 WaterSIC。Figure 1 和 Figure 5 展示了不同层上的 rate gain：当激活协方差谱更不均匀时，固定码率会浪费比特在低重要方向上，WaterSIC 的收益更明显；当谱接近各向同性时，AM-GM gap 小，收益自然变小。可见内容没有给出大规模 perplexity 或端到端吞吐评测，因此结论更适合看作量化目标与码率分配的理论校准。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，约 30 分钟。重点看 Section II 中从 E||X^T(W−W_hat)||² 到 WMSE 源编码的推导，以及 isotropic quantization、optimal waterfilling、ΣX-aware encoding 三者的失真公式。Section III 值得看 GPTQ 与 SIC/Babai 的对应关系，以及 WaterSIC 为什么只改码率分配就能接近最优。Figure 1 和 Figure 5 可用来判断实际 LLM 层里的 ΣX 谱不均匀程度有多大。若只关心预训练，可跳过证明细节，保留一个结论：激活统计决定了权重量化误差的方向性成本。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The work studies calibration-aided weight-only quantization for LLM matrix multiplication. Activations remain in full precision, weights are stored at low bit-width, and the quantizer has access to the activation covariance ΣX. The objective is to minimize the weighted product error E||X^T(W−W_hat)||² under a rate budget, rather than minimizing ordinary weight MSE.","importance":"The contribution is mainly on the quantization and serving side, not on pretraining objectives or model architecture. Its value is that it gives a clean source-coding interpretation of GPTQ-style methods and shows why the spectrum of activation covariance should control rate allocation across coordinates. For foundation-model work, the useful lesson is that calibration statistics can determine where information budget should be spent, not only how to set scales or clipping thresholds.","technical_approach":"The paper first analyzes a single weight column W modeled as N(0,I), with distortion (W−W_hat)^T ΣX (W−W_hat). A covariance-oblivious isotropic codebook gives distortion roughly (tr ΣX / n)·2^{-2R}. Classical waterfilling gives |ΣX|^{1/n}·2^{-2R}, so the gain is exactly tied to the AM-GM gap of the eigenvalues of ΣX. The paper also argues that an isotropic codebook with ΣX-aware encoding can reach the same asymptotic behavior. On the practical side, GPTQ is connected to successive interference cancellation and Babai’s algorithm. Fixed-rate GPTQ has distortion approximately (2πe/12)·(1/n Σ_i U_{ii}²)·2^{-2R}, where U^T U=ΣX. WaterSIC changes the per-coordinate rate allocation and obtains (2πe/12)·(Π_i U_{ii}²)^{1/n}·2^{-2R}, which is within a constant factor of the information-theoretic optimum, corresponding to at most about a 0.25-bit rate gap.","experiments":"The empirical evidence is mainly layerwise validation rather than full downstream evaluation. Using Llama-3-8B layers and WikiText-2 calibration data, the paper compares four regimes: covariance-oblivious theory, waterfilling theory, fixed-rate GPTQ, and variable-rate WaterSIC. Figures 1 and 5 show rate gains that depend on how anisotropic the activation covariance is. When ΣX has a skewed spectrum, fixed-rate quantization wastes bits on less important directions and WaterSIC gains more. When the spectrum is close to isotropic, the gain is limited. The provided content does not include broad perplexity or end-to-end throughput numbers.","reading_guide":"Skim time: around 30 minutes. Focus on Section II for the reduction from product distortion to weighted source coding, and on the three distortion formulas for isotropic quantization, waterfilling, and covariance-aware encoding. Section III is useful for understanding GPTQ as SIC/Babai decoding and for seeing how WaterSIC changes only the rate allocation. Figures 1 and 5 are the fastest way to assess how much the theory matters on real LLM layers.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"量化同学应读 waterfilling 推导；pretrain 侧只需记住激活协方差会改变最优 bit 分配，不是所有层都该平均压。","en":"Quantization specialists should read the waterfilling derivation; for pretraining, the takeaway is that activation covariance changes optimal bit allocation."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Hebrew University of Jerusalem","Massachusetts Institute of Technology","matrix ΣX of the columns of the second factor is available","O. Ordentlich is with the Hebrew University of Jerusalem"],"authors":["Or Ordentlich","Yury Polyanskiy"],"notable_authors":["Yury Polyanskiy"],"tags":["quantization","matrix-multiplication","gptq","waterfilling","post-training-quantization"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13768","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13768","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13779","title":"MinT: Managed Infrastructure for Training and Serving Millions of LLMs","abstract":"We present MindLab Toolkit (MinT), a managed infrastructure system for Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) post-training and online serving. MinT targets a setting where many trained policies are produced over a small number of expensive base-model deployments. Instead of materializing each policy as a merged full checkpoint, MinT keeps the base model resident and moves exported LoRA adapter revisions through rollout, update, export, evaluation, serving, and rollback, hiding distributed training, serving","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T16:59:08+00:00","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13779.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI","cs.DC"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这项工作解决的是大规模后训练和在线服务中的模型变体管理问题：当一个基座模型上存在大量 LoRA 策略、RL 实验分支、租户定制版本和回滚点时，传统复制完整 checkpoint 或合并 LoRA 后再服务的流程会在存储、带宽、调度和复现上变得很重。","importance":"它不是预训练算法论文，但对 pretrain-posttrain 接口有实际启发。随着 RL、在线数据回流和持续训练变成常态，基座模型不再只是一次性训练产物，而是多个策略版本共享的 resident base。MinT 的核心价值在于把 LoRA adapter 作为可训练、可导出、可服务、可回滚的策略单元，减少训练到服务之间移动的对象大小，并让多策略 RL 可以共享同一基座部署。这类基础设施会影响后训练实验速度、reward 迭代频率和策略版本可追踪性。","technical_approach":"MinT 采用 adapter-centered workflow。基座模型常驻训练或推理引擎，行为差异由 LoRA adapter 表示。训练完成后，系统不导出完整模型，也不强制合并 LoRA，而是生成 serving-compatible adapter revision。这个 revision 包含固定训练步的 LoRA 权重、服务端张量布局、与 resident base 的兼容性信息、rollout 记录、评测和服务归因信息。系统层面包含队列、准入、放置、故障恢复、adapter 生命周期管理、冷加载调度和回滚。训练侧支持单 worker PEFT 和分布式 Megatron 路径，可在共享基座上 time-slice 多个 LoRA RL 会话。服务侧基于 shared-base vLLM，多 adapter 通过 CPU/GPU hot working set 管理，持久策略命名空间与实际引擎驻留集合分离。对 MoE LoRA，工作使用 packed tensor 表示减少大量小对象加载带来的开销。","experiments":"报告给出三条扩展轴上的系统结果。Scale Up：支持 frontier-scale dense 和 MoE 架构，验证到超过 1T total parameters；还报告了 235B-A22B 规模训练和 1T-class MoE countdown-task 路径。Scale Down：adapter-only handoff 避免完整 checkpoint materialization；在 4B dense 模型上 handoff 步骤减少 18.3×，在 30B MoE 上减少 2.85×；在相同 resident-base allocation 下，并发 multi-policy GRPO 将 wall time 分别缩短 1.77× 和 1.45×，且不增加 peak memory。Scale Out：支持 10^6 级可寻址 policy catalog，单引擎扫过 100K entries，集群级支持 thousand-adapter active waves；packed MoE LoRA tensors 将 live engine loading 提升 8.5–8.7×。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，约 35–45 分钟。先看 Figure 1 和 Figure 2，理解 MinT 与 full fine-tuning、merge-based LoRA 的边界差异。然后看 adapter revision 的定义和生命周期，这部分决定了复现、回滚和在线服务如何接在一起。系统实现部分可重点看 scheduler、serving residency、cold loading 和 packed MoE LoRA 表示。实验部分重点记住 18.3×/2.85× handoff、1.77×/1.45× multi-policy GRPO、8.5–8.7× MoE adapter loading 这几组数字。若只关心预训练，可把它作为持续训练和 RL 实验平台设计的参考，而不是建模方法。","authors_note":"机构显示为 Mind Lab；给定内容未包含作者名单。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses infrastructure for managing very large numbers of post-trained LLM variants. When many LoRA policies, RL branches, tenant-specific behaviors, and rollback points share the same base model, moving full checkpoints or serving merged LoRA checkpoints creates heavy storage, bandwidth, scheduling, and reproducibility costs.","importance":"This is not a pretraining-method paper, but it is relevant to the interface between base models and continuous post-training. Modern RL and online training pipelines need fast iteration over policy populations that share a resident base model. MinT treats LoRA adapters as first-class policy units that can be trained, exported, served, evaluated, attributed, and rolled back. That changes the operational cost of RL loops and makes policy versioning more explicit.","technical_approach":"MinT uses an adapter-centered workflow. The base model stays resident in training or inference deployments, while behavior changes are represented by LoRA adapters. After training, MinT exports a serving-compatible adapter revision instead of a full checkpoint or a merged model. A revision contains the frozen LoRA payload at a specific step, serving tensor layout, compatibility checks against the resident base, rollout records, evaluation and serving attribution, and rollback state. The system includes queueing, admission control, placement, fault tolerance, adapter lifecycle management, cold-load scheduling, and revision visibility. Training supports both single-worker PEFT and distributed Megatron paths, with time-sliced LoRA RL sessions over shared resident bases. Serving uses shared-base vLLM engines, separates durable policy addressability from CPU/GPU hot working sets, and schedules first-touch adapter loading. For MoE LoRA, packed tensors reduce small-object fanout during live loading.","experiments":"The reported results are system-scale measurements. On the Scale Up axis, MinT is validated on dense and MoE deployments beyond 1T total parameters, including a 235B-A22B-scale training path and a 1T-class MoE countdown-task path. On Scale Down, adapter-only handoff avoids full-checkpoint materialization; the measured handoff step is reduced by 18.3× on a 4B dense model and 2.85× on a 30B MoE model. With the same resident-base allocation, concurrent multi-policy GRPO reduces wall time by 1.77× and 1.45× respectively without increasing peak memory. On Scale Out, the system supports 10^6-scale addressable policy catalogs, single-engine sweeps through 100K entries, and thousand-adapter active waves at cluster scale. Packed MoE LoRA tensors improve live engine loading by 8.5–8.7×.","reading_guide":"Skim time: about 35–45 minutes. Start with Figures 1 and 2 to understand how MinT differs from full fine-tuning and merge-based LoRA deployment. Then read the adapter revision lifecycle, because that is where training, serving, evaluation, rollback, and reproducibility meet. In the system sections, focus on scheduling, serving residency, cold loading, and the packed MoE LoRA representation. The key numbers to retain are 18.3× and 2.85× handoff reduction, 1.77× and 1.45× multi-policy GRPO speedup, and 8.5–8.7× faster MoE adapter loading.","authors_note":"Institution shown in the provided content: Mind Lab. The author list is not included."},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看系统设计和 ablation 数字即可；它提醒预训练团队别把 LoRA-RL 的瓶颈误判成训练算子问题。","en":"Read the system design and ablation numbers; it is a useful reminder that LoRA-RL bottlenecks can be lifecycle and data-movement issues, not just kernels."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Mind Lab"],"authors":["Mind Lab",":","Song Cao","Vic Cao","Andrew Chen","Kaijie Chen","Cleon Cheng","Steven Chiang","Kaixuan Fan","Hera Feng","Huan Feng","Arthur Fu","Jun Gao","Hongquan Gu","Aaron Guan","Nolan Ho","Mutian Hong","Hailee Hou","Peixuan Hua","Charles Huang","Miles Jiang","Nora Jiang","Yuyi Jiang","Qiuyu Jin","Fancy Kong","Andrew Lei","Kyrie Lei","Alexy Li","Lucian Li","Ray Li","Theo Li","Zhihui Li","Jiayi Lin","Kairus Liu","Kieran Liu","Logan Liu","Xiang Liu","Irvine Lu","Maeve Luo","Runze Lv","Pony Ma","Verity Niu","Anson Qiu","Vincent Wang","Rio Yang","Maxwell Yao","Carrie Ye","Regis Ye","Wenlin Ye","Josh Ying","Danney Zeng","Yuhan Zhan","Anya Zhang","Di Zhang","Ruijia Zhang","Sueky Zhang","Ya Zhang","Wei Zhao","Ada Zhou","Changhai Zhou","Yuhua Zhou","Xinyue Zhu","Murphy Zhuang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["LoRA","serving","RL-post-training","infrastructure","MoE"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13779","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13779","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12879","title":"ASAP: Amortized Doubly-Stochastic Attention via Sliced Dual Projection","abstract":"Doubly-stochastic attention has emerged as a transport-based alternative to row-softmax attention, with recent Transformer variants using it to reduce attention sinks and rank collapse while improving performance. In this family, the standard approach is Sinkhorn scaling, which trains more efficiently but still repeats matrix scaling in every inference forward pass. Sliced-transport attention removes the online iteration, but its soft sorting approximation materializes dense tensors for each sli","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T01:48:46+00:00","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12879.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作处理的是 doubly-stochastic attention 的一个工程与方法折中问题：Sinkhorn attention 训练相对便宜，也能带来列约束带来的好处，但推理时每次前向都要做多步矩阵缩放；而 sliced-transport 一类非迭代方案推理更轻，却在训练时需要更重的 soft sorting 近似，资源代价高。作者要解决的核心问题，是能否保留 Sinkhorn 训练阶段的低成本与效果，同时在推理阶段把迭代归一化“编译掉”，得到接近 teacher Sinkhorn operator 的非迭代近似。","importance":"它和 LLM 预训练的关系主要在注意力归一化设计与训练/推理接口，而不是传统 serving 小修小补。若 doubly-stochastic attention 确实能缓解 attention sinks、rank collapse 等问题，那么它的落地障碍之一就是 inference overhead。ASAP 的贡献在于提出一种 train-then-compile 路线：训练时仍用成熟的 Sinkhorn，训练后再学习一个轻量映射去近似在线求解的 dual variables。这个思路对预训练研究有两点启发。第一，某些训练时昂贵但结构良好的算子，不一定要在推理时原样保留，可以把“求解器”蒸馏成参数化近似。第二，attention 归一化不必只在 softmax 与硬替代之间二选一，还可以把最优传输里的 dual structure 单独拿出来做编译。贡献量级更像 attention layer 设计上的实用推进，是否会影响大规模 LLM 还要看长序列、因果掩码和大模型训练稳定性上的进一步验证。","technical_approach":"方法核心是把训练好的 Sinkhorn attention 看成 teacher，然后学习一个近似其 query-side dual 的编译器。具体流程分几步。第一步，正常训练带有限步 Sinkhorn scaling 的 doubly-stochastic attention 层。这里 teacher 的定义不是无限步最优传输，而是固定预算 S 的有限 Sinkhorn 归一化，因此学生要逼近的是实际部署会用到的有限步算子，而不是理想极限。第二步，冻结 teacher，用一个小的无标签 calibration set 跑前向，抽取每次 Sinkhorn 循环最终得到的 query-side normalization vector，也就是 source dual。第三步，在同一组 query/key 激活上，沿若干投影方向做一维排序，计算精确的一维 transport potentials，把这些 sliced geometric features 作为输入特征。第四步，训练一个轻量参数映射，从 sliced dual features 回归 teacher 的 source dual。作者给出多种校准方式，包括 least-squares 和 convex-KL。第五步，推理时不再运行完整 Sinkhorn loop，而是先预测 source dual，再通过 entropic c-transform 解析恢复 key-side dual，从而构造两侧归一化后的 attention operator。文中还区分 one-sided 与 two-sided c-transform 变体。和 ESPFormer 这类 sliced-transport attention 的区别在于，ASAP 不改变训练时的 attention 构造，也不依赖训练期 soft sorting relaxation；它是后处理式编译，目标是贴近一个已训练好的 Sinkhorn teacher。和直接减少 Sinkhorn 迭代步数相比，ASAP 不是简单用更粗糙的归一化替代，而是试图学习 teacher 在给定激活分布下会收敛到什么 dual 变量，因此更像 operator approximation。","experiments":"论文给出的关键对比集中在训练资源与推理速度。作者在 IMDb 的 matched-resource 配置下报告：ESPFormer 所用 SoftSort 训练算子，相比 S=10 的 Sinkhorn teacher，峰值训练显存高 5.7 倍，单样本训练速度慢 14.8 倍。这是提出 ASAP 的直接动机。ASAP 自身的实验覆盖语言和视觉 benchmark，目标是比较三类对象：原始迭代 Sinkhorn teacher、sliced-transport baseline、以及编译后的 ASAP。摘要与正文前段强调的是“显著的 layer speedup”，同时尽量保持接近 teacher 的性能与 doubly-stochastic 结构。由于给到的全文片段没有完整结果表，无法可靠抄出所有任务上的最终精度数字，但从作者描述看，重点不是超过 teacher，而是在不重训主模型的前提下，用小规模 calibration 学到一个推理更快、效果接近的替代层。阅读时应特别关注：1）不同校准目标（LS vs convex-KL）对 operator fidelity 的影响；2）one-sided 与 two-sided c-transform 的精度/速度取舍；3）编译后误差是否随序列长度、层深、模态变化而放大；4）与直接减少 Sinkhorn 步数相比，ASAP 的优势是否稳定。","reading_guide":"泛读建议先看 Introduction，作者把问题讲得比较清楚：Sinkhorn 训练便宜但推理慢，sliced transport 推理快但训练重。然后看 Background 里 doubly-stochastic attention 与 Sinkhorn 的定义，确认 dual variables 在层里扮演什么角色。接着重点看方法部分，尤其是 calibration pipeline、sliced dual features 的构造、以及 c-transform 如何恢复另一侧 dual。实验部分优先看资源对比表和主结果表，再看 ablation：投影数、校准集大小、回归目标、one-sided/two-sided 选择。预计 35-50 分钟能抓住主线。若你关心 LLM 预训练，可重点思考两个问题：这种编译式近似在 causal mask 下是否仍成立；以及它是否能与长上下文注意力优化结合，而不是只在中短序列分类或视觉任务上成立。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical trilemma in doubly-stochastic attention. Sinkhorn-based attention is relatively cheap to train and brings the benefits of column-balanced normalization, but it still requires iterative matrix scaling at every inference call. Sliced-transport alternatives remove online iteration, yet their training-time soft sorting relaxations are much more expensive. The core question is whether one can keep the cheaper Sinkhorn training setup and then compile away most of the iterative normalization at inference, while staying close to the trained Sinkhorn operator.","importance":"$17","technical_approach":"$18","experiments":"$19","reading_guide":"$1a","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"针对双随机注意力（Doubly-stochastic attention）推理慢的痛点，提出了一种 train-then-compile 的摊销方法，对关注 attention 变体和推理优化的架构研究员值得一读。","en":"Addresses the slow inference of doubly-stochastic attention with a train-then-compile amortized method. Worth reading for architecture researchers focusing on attention variants and inference optimization."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Vanderbilt University"],"authors":["Huy Tran","Max Milkert","David Hyde"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["doubly-stochastic attention","inference optimization","Sinkhorn scaling","attention mechanism"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12879","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12879","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13784","title":"Attention Once Is All You Need: Efficient Streaming Inference with Stateful Transformers","abstract":"Conventional transformer inference engines are request-driven, paying an O(n) prefill cost on every query. In streaming workloads, where data arrives continuously and queries probe an ever-growing context, this cost is prohibitive. We introduce a data-driven computational model centred on stateful sessions: a persistent KV cache advanced incrementally as new data arrives, so prefill is moved off the critical path and query latency becomes O(|q|), independent of accumulated context size. Building","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T17:06:15+00:00","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13784.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM推理框架（vLLM、SGLang、TensorRT-LLM等）基于请求驱动的KV缓存优化，在流式工作负载（数据持续到达、查询偶发）下完全失效——每次数据更新改变前缀，缓存命中率趋近于零，导致查询延迟随上下文长度线性增长。论文提出以数据为中心的有状态推理架构，将预计算从关键路径移除。","importance":"对实时分析、金融交易、传感器数据监控等流式LLM应用有直接工程价值。架构思路也对长上下文推理系统有启发：数据与查询的分离处理是一种未被充分利用的并行性来源。此外，Flash Queries机制利用GPU空闲周期预计算，为提高生产推理集群的GPU利用率（通常仅10-45%）提供了新思路。","technical_approach":"核心架构是有状态会话（stateful sessions）：一个持久化的KV缓存在多次会话间存活，数据到达时异步增量更新。通过解耦数据平面和查询平面，数据摄入驱动预计算（而非查询驱动），查询仅需处理自身的查询令牌，复杂度降为O(|q|)，与累积上下文大小无关。在此基础上提出两个机制：(1) Flash Queries：在每次数据更新后利用GPU空闲时间预计算已注册问题的答案，将查询延迟从~43ms推向接近零；(2) 无锁流水线实现数据异步摄入。整个系统不改变模型权重或核函数实现。","experiments":"核心实验结果：(1) 查询延迟从标准路径的~43ms通过Flash Queries降至接近零；(2) 查询复杂度独立于累积上下文大小，仅取决于查询本身长度；(3) 相同GPU在相同工作负载下，有状态设计比无状态请求循环完成更多分析工作量，且无需改动模型权重或核实现。具体数值未在提供的片段中完整给出。","reading_guide":"泛读，重点关注第1章引言中的问题定义（流式vs请求驱动工作负载的本质区别）、第2-3章架构设计（数据平面/查询平面解耦、有状态KV缓存）以及Flash Queries机制。阅读时间约25分钟。","authors_note":"机构和作者信息未在提供的全文片段中给出。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM inference frameworks (vLLM, SGLang, TensorRT-LLM) optimize for request-driven KV-cache hit rates, which fail under streaming workloads where data arrives continuously and each query sees a unique accumulated context. Cache hit rates approach zero, causing query latency to scale linearly with context length. The paper proposes a data-centric stateful inference architecture that moves precomputation off the critical path.","importance":"Direct engineering value for streaming LLM applications including real-time analytics, financial trading, and sensor monitoring. The architecture also informs long-context reasoning systems: separating data and query processing is an under-exploited source of parallelism. The Flash Queries mechanism, which harnesses idle GPU cycles for pre-computation, addresses the well-known problem of low GPU utilization (typically 10-45%) in production inference clusters.","technical_approach":"The core construct is stateful sessions: a persistent KV cache that survives across sessions and is incrementally updated as data arrives. By decoupling the data plane from the query plane, data ingestion drives precomputation (not queries), and queries process only their own tokens against pre-computed state, achieving O(|q|) complexity independent of accumulated context size. Two mechanisms build on this: (1) Flash Queries pre-compute answers to registered questions during GPU idle time after each data update, pushing latency from ~43ms toward zero; (2) Lock-free pipelines enable asynchronous data ingestion. No changes to model weights or kernel implementations are required.","experiments":"Key results: (1) Query latency reduced from ~43ms (standard path) to near-zero via Flash Queries; (2) Query complexity independent of accumulated context size, scaling only with query length; (3) The same GPU performs more analytical work per unit power under stateful design vs. stateless request loops, with no model or kernel changes. Full numerical results not available in the provided excerpt.","reading_guide":"Skim-level read. Focus on Section 1 for problem framing (streaming vs request-driven workload distinction), Sections 2-3 for architecture design (data/query plane decoupling, stateful KV cache), and the Flash Queries mechanism. Estimated reading time: 25 minutes.","authors_note":"Institution and author information not available in the provided text excerpt."},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看系统模型和调度实验：它把KV从请求缓存变成会话状态，适合检验长上下文产品里的prefill浪费。","en":"Read the execution model and scheduler results: it reframes KV as session state rather than request cache, useful for auditing prefill waste in streaming long-context products."},"metadata":{"institutions":["LayerScale, Inc"],"authors":["Victor Norgren"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["streaming-inference","kv-cache","stateful-transformer","serving-system","long-context"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13784","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13784","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13080","title":"Learning to See What You Need: Gaze Attention for Multimodal Large Language Models","abstract":"When humans describe a visual scene, they do not process the entire image uniformly; instead, they selectively fixate on regions relevant to their intended description. In contrast, current multimodal large language models (MLLMs) attend to all visual tokens at each generation step, leading to diluted focus and unnecessary computational overhead. In this work, we introduce Gaze Attention, a novel mechanism that enables MLLMs to selectively attend to task-relevant visual regions during generation","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T06:54:09+00:00","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13080.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：MLLM 在生成每个 token 时都密集关注全部视觉 token，既浪费计算，也容易让注意力被无关区域稀释。","importance":"这更接近多模态推理效率和架构改造，而不是基座预训练方法。对预训练研究的启发在于，视觉 token 不一定要以文本 token 的同质序列方式被处理。图像和视频有空间、时间结构，模型可以在保留完整 KV cache 的前提下，按生成步骤动态选择局部区域。这个思路可能影响 native multimodal 预训练中的视觉 token 组织方式、长视频建模、视觉上下文压缩，以及训练时的稀疏视觉注意力设计。","technical_approach":"Gaze Attention 把视觉 token 的 KV cache 按原始空间或时空网格分组成 gaze regions。每个区域用该区域 key 向量的均值池化作为轻量 descriptor。生成第 j 个 token 时，文本 query 与所有区域 descriptor 计算相似度，选择 TopK 区域，然后只对这些区域内部的视觉 key-value 做注意力。和一次性 KV eviction 不同，它不丢弃视觉 cache，而是在每个 decoding step 重新路由；某个区域当前没被选中，后续仍可被访问。为避免早期训练中 query 与 descriptor 对齐弱导致路由不稳定，作者采用 progressive TopK schedule，从接近密集注意力逐步降到更小的 K。另一个关键设计是 learnable context tokens，用来保留全局视觉摘要，避免只看局部区域时丢失场景级信息。","experiments":"论文在图像和视频理解任务上评估。提供内容显示，Gaze Attention 在最多减少 90% 视觉 KV 访问量的情况下，在 13 个图像 benchmark 和 6 个视频 benchmark 上达到或超过 dense-attention baseline。可视化分析显示，生成过程中注意力区域更集中，也更容易解释。提供内容没有给出模型规模、训练数据量、各 benchmark 的具体分数表和消融数字，因此不能进一步确认收益主要来自区域路由、context tokens，还是训练 schedule。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，约 30 分钟。重点看 Method 中的 gaze region 划分、descriptor 构造、TopK routing 和 learnable context tokens。若只关心效率，可看 attention cost 如何从全视觉 token 数下降到被选区域比例。若关心多模态架构，可重点比较它和视觉 token 压缩、KV eviction 的差异：前者提前减少信息，后者一次性删除信息，而 Gaze Attention 保留完整 cache 并逐步动态选择。实验部分优先看消融表和 attention visualization，确认 context tokens 与 progressive TopK 是否必要。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses dense visual attention in MLLMs: at every decoding step, the language model attends to all visual tokens, even when only a small region is relevant.","importance":"This is mainly a multimodal inference-efficiency and architecture paper, not a base pretraining paper. Its relevance to pretraining comes from the treatment of visual tokens as structured spatial-temporal memory rather than a flat text-like sequence. The idea may inform native multimodal pretraining, long-video modeling, visual-token organization, and sparse visual attention designs that preserve information while reducing per-step computation.","technical_approach":"Gaze Attention groups cached visual keys into spatial or spatio-temporal regions. Each region is represented by a lightweight descriptor obtained by mean-pooling the keys in that region. At each decoding step, the current text query scores these descriptors, selects the TopK regions, and attends only to the visual key-value pairs inside the selected regions. Unlike KV eviction methods, it keeps the full visual KV cache and re-selects regions for every query, so a region skipped at one step can still be used later. To make routing trainable, the method uses a progressive TopK schedule, starting closer to dense attention and gradually reducing K. It also adds learnable context tokens, which remain visible to every text query and carry a compact global summary of the image or video.","experiments":"The method is evaluated on both image and video understanding. According to the provided text, it attends to up to 90% fewer visual KV entries while matching or outperforming dense-attention baselines across 13 image benchmarks and 6 video benchmarks. Visualization results show more concentrated and interpretable attention maps during generation. The provided content does not include detailed benchmark tables, model sizes, training data, or ablation numbers, so the exact contribution of routing, context tokens, and the progressive schedule cannot be quantified here.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 30 minutes. Focus on the method section: region construction, descriptor pooling, TopK visual routing, and learnable context tokens. For efficiency, check how the attention cost scales with the attended region fraction rather than the full visual-token count. For architecture insight, compare it with visual-token compression and KV eviction: compression reduces information before decoding, eviction removes cache entries using a fixed estimate, while Gaze Attention keeps the cache and changes focus per decoding step. In the experiments, prioritize ablations and attention visualizations if available.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看方法和消融即可；如果区域选择不靠额外重编码实现，值得拿来对照内部 MLLM 视觉 KV 裁剪策略。","en":"Read the method and ablations; if region selection avoids extra re-encoding, it is a useful baseline for internal MLLM visual-KV pruning."},"metadata":{"institutions":["KAIST","NAVER AI Lab"],"authors":["Junha Song","Byeongho Heo","Geonmo Gu","Jaegul Choo","Dongyoon Han","Sangdoo Yun"],"notable_authors":["Jaegul Choo","Sangdoo Yun"],"tags":["MLLM","KV-cache","visual-attention","inference-efficiency","region-selection"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13080","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13080","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13433","title":"TurboGR: An Accelerated Training System for Large-Scale Generative Recommendation","abstract":"Generative recommendation (GR) has emerged as a promising paradigm that replaces fragmented, scenario-specific architectures with unified Transformer-based models, exhibiting scaling-law behavior where recommendation quality improves systematically with increased model capacity and training data. However, deploying GR at scale on Ascend NPUs faces fundamental system-level challenges. These challenges are further exacerbated on Ascend NPUs due to the absence of high-performance implementations fo","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T12:26:29+00:00","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13433.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.DC","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"生成式推荐（GR）模型在昇腾NPU上大规模部署时存在三类系统级瓶颈：变长序列的冗余填充导致模型FLOPs利用率（MFU）低于10%；稀疏嵌入表与稠密Transformer主干紧耦合带来的通信瓶颈，使得分布式线性度低于0.6；长序列的token级负采样占用HBM过高，大规模召回训练无法落地。","importance":"它验证了LLM训练优化方法论向Transformer架构的生成式推荐工作负载的可迁移性，给出了昇腾NPU上非稠密算子优化、稀疏并行的具体工程方案，为非GPU平台的大模型训练系统设计提供了参考；其针对稀疏-稠密混合架构的分布式优化实践，对MoE、带大规模嵌入表的大模型训练也有工程借鉴价值。","technical_approach":"TurboGR是适配昇腾NPU的生成式推荐训练系统，核心优化分为三个模块：1）昇腾适配的锯齿张量（jagged tensor，变长非对齐张量）加速：包括注意力和相对注意力偏置的融合算子消除填充冗余，锯齿嵌入查找加速，动态负载均衡；2）分布式通信优化：层级稀疏并行（HSP）降低all-to-all延迟，带收敛保证的半异步训练，细粒度流水线编排；3）负采样优化：异步卸载降低HBM占用，锯齿感知的FP16量化，批内logit共享在不增加嵌入查找的前提下扩大负样本空间。系统还移植了TorchRec、Megatron的核心模块适配昇腾NPU环境。","experiments":"0.2B参数量下MFU达到54.71%，具备接近线性的分布式扩展性；锯齿优化带来70%内存降低、2.2倍延迟加速，嵌入查找前向延迟降低6倍，设备间负载不均从47%降至2.4%；层级稀疏并行降低all-to-all延迟75.9%，NPU利用率维持在94%；负采样优化降低HBM占用最多24.59%，量化无明显精度损失。","reading_guide":"泛读重点看第4章的核心优化技术细节、第3章的系统评测数据；关注锯齿张量加速、层级稀疏并行两个核心设计的工程实现逻辑，预计阅读时间15-20分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Large-scale generative recommendation (GR) models face three system-level bottlenecks when deployed on Ascend NPUs: jagged variable-length sequences cause severe padding redundancy and vector-bound computation, pushing Model FLOPs Utilization (MFU) below 10%; tight coupling between sparse embedding tables and dense Transformer backbones creates communication bottlenecks that limit distributed linearity to below 0.6; token-level negative sampling for long sequences consumes excessive HBM, making large-scale recall training infeasible.","importance":"It validates the portability of LLM training optimization methodologies to Transformer-based generative recommendation workloads. It provides concrete engineering solutions for non-dense operator optimization and sparse parallelism on Ascend NPUs, offering reference for large model training system design on non-GPU platforms. Its distributed optimization practices for hybrid sparse-dense architectures also have engineering reference value for MoE and embedding-heavy large model training.","technical_approach":"TurboGR is an Ascend-optimized training system for generative recommendation, with three core optimization modules: 1) Ascend-affinity jagged tensor acceleration, including fused attention and relative attention bias operators to eliminate padding redundancy, accelerated jagged embedding lookup, and dynamic load balancing; 2) distributed communication optimizations, including hierarchical sparse parallelism (HSP) to reduce all-to-all latency, semi-asynchronous training with convergence guarantees, and fine-grained pipeline orchestration; 3) negative sampling optimizations, including asynchronous offloading to reduce HBM usage, jaggedness-aware FP16 quantization, and intra-batch logit sharing to expand negative sample space without extra embedding lookups. It also ports core modules of TorchRec and Megatron to Ascend NPU environments.","experiments":"It achieves 54.71% MFU at 0.2B parameters with near-linear distributed scalability. Jagged optimizations reduce memory usage by 70% and latency by 2.2x, cut embedding lookup forward latency by 6x, and reduce inter-device load imbalance from 47% to 2.4%. Hierarchical sparse parallelism reduces all-to-all latency by 75.9% and sustains 94% NPU utilization. Negative sampling optimizations reduce HBM usage by up to 24.59% with negligible accuracy loss from quantization.","reading_guide":"Skim Chapter 4 for core optimization technical details and Chapter 3 for system evaluation results. Focus on the engineering implementation logic of jagged tensor acceleration and hierarchical sparse parallelism. Estimated reading time: 15-20 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"针对昇腾 NPU 的 Transformer 训练系统优化（消除 padding、负载均衡），对在国产算力上做大规模预训练的系统工程师有参考价值。","en":"Transformer training system optimization for Ascend NPUs (padding elimination, load balancing); valuable reference for systems engineers conducting large-scale pretraining on domestic hardware."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Huichao Chai","Zhixin Wu","Xuemiao Li","Shiqing Fan","Hengfeng Wang","Maojun Peng","Lu Xu","Yaoyuan Wang","Yibo Jin","Wei Guo","Yongxiang Feng"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["generative recommendation","Ascend NPU","training system","jagged operators","load balancing"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13433","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13433","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13076","title":"TruncProof: A Guardrail for LLM-based JSON Generation under Token-Length Constraints","abstract":"The LLM-based generation of machine-readable outputs such as JSON has attracted significant attention for integration with external systems. However, existing approaches cannot strictly enforce the maximum number of tokens to be generated, leading to infinite generation or truncated outputs that cause a system malfunction. To address this limitation, we propose TruncProof, a novel grammar-constrained generation method that enables LLMs to produce grammatically valid JSONs while adhering to a pre","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T06:49:08+00:00","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13076.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.FL","cs.SE"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 LLM 在 token 长度上限内生成 JSON 时，容易因截断或无限生成导致语法无效、系统调用失败的问题。","importance":"贡献类型是受约束解码与系统 guardrail。它不改变预训练，但对工具调用、结构化输出和 serving 稳定性有工程价值，尤其适合需要硬长度预算的生产系统。","technical_approach":"提出 TruncProof，一种面向 JSON 的 grammar-constrained generation 方法。它利用 LL(1) parser 的性质，在每个解码步骤近似估计完成一个语法有效 JSON 所需的最小 token 数，从而在剩余 token 预算不足时约束下一步选择，避免生成无法闭合的结构。","experiments":"在 Text-to-JSON instruction tasks 上评估。摘要称 TruncProof 能在严格 token 约束下生成语法正确输出，并可与更高级 decoding strategies 结合；未给出模型规模、基线、JSON 复杂度分布、有效率和任务准确率的具体数字。","authors_note":"NTT DOCOMO BUSINESS, Inc.；未从给定信息确认知名作者背景。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses failures in LLM JSON generation under token-length constraints, where outputs can become truncated, syntactically invalid, or effectively unbounded.","importance":"The contribution is a constrained decoding and system guardrail method. It does not change pretraining, but it is relevant to tool calling, structured outputs, and serving reliability, especially when production systems impose hard token budgets.","technical_approach":"The proposed TruncProof method performs grammar-constrained JSON generation. Using properties of LL(1) parsers, it approximates at each decoding step the minimum number of tokens required to complete a syntactically valid JSON object, and constrains token choices when the remaining budget would otherwise be insufficient to close the structure.","experiments":"The method is evaluated on Text-to-JSON instruction tasks. The abstract reports syntactically correct outputs under strict token constraints and compatibility with advanced decoding strategies, but does not provide model sizes, baseline names, JSON complexity distribution, validity rates, or task-accuracy numbers.","authors_note":"NTT DOCOMO BUSINESS, Inc.; no widely known author background can be confirmed from the provided information."},"recommendation":{"zh":"工程味重但问题真实；读 LL(1) 最小剩余 token 估计即可，和 pretrain 无关。","en":"Engineering-heavy but practical; read the LL(1) minimum-remaining-token estimate, with no direct pretraining implication."},"metadata":{"institutions":["NTT DOCOMO BUSINESS, Inc."],"authors":["Yoshio Kato","Shuhei Tarashima"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["constrained-decoding","json-generation","structured-output","LL1-parser","serving"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13076","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13076","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13178","title":"CLIP Tricks You: Training-free Token Pruning for Efficient Pixel Grounding in Large VIsion-Language Models","abstract":"In large vision-language models, visual tokens typically constitute the majority of input tokens, leading to substantial computational overhead. To address this, recent studies have explored pruning redundant or less informative visual tokens for image understanding tasks. However, these methods struggle with pixel grounding tasks, where token importance is highly contingent on the input text. Through an in-depth analysis of CLIP, we observe that visual tokens located within referent regions oft","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T08:40:40+00:00","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13178.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决大视觉语言模型在 pixel grounding 任务中视觉 token 数量过多、推理开销高，而常规 token pruning 会删掉目标区域的问题。","importance":"贡献类型是推理效率方法与机制观察：指出 CLIP 文本-视觉相似度在指代区域上可能反而偏低，因此直接保留高相似 token 不适合 grounding。","technical_approach":"提出 LiteLVLM，一种 training-free、text-guided visual token pruning 策略；核心做法是反转 CLIP visual-text similarity 排序，优先保留与文本相似度低但可能位于 referent region 的视觉 token，并恢复部分上下文 token 以区分前景和背景。","experiments":"摘要称在 pixel grounding 任务上显著优于现有视觉 token pruning 方法，但未提供具体模型、token 保留率、延迟收益或精度提升数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the high inference cost of large vision-language models on pixel grounding tasks, where naive visual token pruning can remove tokens that belong to the referred region.","importance":"The contribution is an inference-efficiency method plus an empirical observation: CLIP visual tokens inside the referred region can have low similarity to the text representation, making standard high-similarity retention unreliable for grounding.","technical_approach":"It proposes LiteLVLM, a training-free text-guided visual token pruning strategy. The key idea is to reverse CLIP visual-text similarity ranking, retain tokens likely to cover the referent region, and recover context tokens for foreground-background separation.","experiments":"The abstract reports substantial gains over existing pruning methods for pixel grounding, but gives no concrete model names, token retention ratios, latency numbers, or accuracy deltas.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看 CLIP 相似度反转这个观察即可；它是 grounding 推理特例，不应外推成通用 VLM token pruning 原则。","en":"Read only the reversed-CLIP-similarity observation; it is a grounding-specific inference trick and should not be generalized to VLM token pruning broadly."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Sangin Lee","Yukyung Choi"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["vlm-efficiency","token-pruning","pixel-grounding","clip-analysis"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13178","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13178","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13338","title":"Inducing Overthink: Hierarchical Genetic Algorithm-based DoS Attack on Black-Box Large Language Reasoning Models","abstract":"Large Reasoning Models (LRMs) are increasingly integrated into systems requiring reliable multi-step inference, yet this growing dependence exposes new vulnerabilities related to computational availability. In particular, LRMs exhibit a tendency to \"overthink\", producing excessively long and redundant reasoning traces, when confronted with incomplete or logically inconsistent inputs. This behavior significantly increases inference latency and energy consumption, forming a potential vector for de","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T10:57:10+00:00","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13338.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CR","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"研究黑盒攻击者如何通过构造逻辑不完整或不一致的输入，诱导大推理模型过度思考，从而放大推理延迟和资源消耗。","importance":"贡献是推理模型可用性安全分析。它把长 CoT 不仅看作能力或对齐问题，也看作 serving 成本和 DoS 攻击面；对预训练研究的价值主要在于暴露推理型后训练策略的副作用。","technical_approach":"论文提出分层遗传算法攻击框架。方法先对问题进行结构化分解，再在不同层级扰动逻辑结构，使用同时奖励响应长度和反思式过度思考标记的复合 fitness function，在黑盒设置下搜索高消耗输入。","experiments":"摘要称实验覆盖四个当前大推理模型，评估攻击对输出长度、过度反思标记、推理延迟和能耗的影响。具体模型、数据集、攻击成功率和成本倍率未在给定摘要中完整披露。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies how black-box adversaries can trigger excessive reasoning in large reasoning models by perturbing logically incomplete or inconsistent inputs, increasing latency and resource use.","importance":"The contribution is an availability-security analysis for reasoning models. It treats long reasoning traces not only as a capability or alignment issue, but also as a serving-cost attack surface; its pretraining relevance is indirect, through the failure modes of reasoning-oriented post-training.","technical_approach":"The authors propose a hierarchical genetic algorithm. It operates on structured problem decompositions, perturbs logical structure at multiple levels, and optimizes a composite fitness function that rewards response length and reflective overthinking markers in a black-box setting.","experiments":"The abstract reports experiments on four current large reasoning models, measuring response length, reflective overthinking behavior, latency, and energy consumption. The provided text does not specify the exact models, datasets, attack success rates, or cost multipliers.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"不用通读；看攻击目标和 fitness 设计即可，它提醒 reasoning post-train 会把输入异常转成成本异常。","en":"No need to read end to end; inspect the attack objective and fitness design, since it exposes how reasoning post-training can turn malformed inputs into cost spikes."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Shuqiang Wang","Wei Cao","Jiaqi Weng","Jialing Tao","Licheng Pan","Hui Xue","Zhixuan Chu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["reasoning-models","inference-cost","security","black-box-attack","overthinking"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13338","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13338","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13810","title":"Provable Quantization with Randomized Hadamard Transform","abstract":"Vector quantization via random projection followed by scalar quantization is a fundamental primitive in machine learning, with applications ranging from similarity search to federated learning and KV cache compression. While dense random rotations yield clean theoretical guarantees, they require $Θ(d^2)$ time. The randomized Hadamard transform $HD$ reduces this cost to $O(d \\log d)$, but its discrete structure complicates analysis and leads to weaker or purely empirical compression guarantees.  ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T17:38:18+00:00","category_id":"efficient","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13810.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.DS"],"summary":{"core_problem":"为随机Hadamard变换后的标量量化建立可证明误差界，降低随机旋转量化在高维向量压缩中的计算成本。","importance":"这是量化理论论文，应用覆盖相似度搜索、联邦学习和KV-cache压缩。对LLM基座研究不是直接方法贡献，但对理解KV压缩和低成本旋转量化的误差来源有参考价值。","technical_approach":"方法是在输入向量上应用单次随机Hadamard变换HD，再进行带dither的标量量化；dither通过减去随机标量偏移注入额外随机性，几乎不增加计算成本。论文证明该量化器无偏，并给出均方误差界，渐近匹配真正稠密随机旋转矩阵可达到的误差。","experiments":"摘要强调理论证明而非大规模LLM实验；复杂度从稠密随机旋转的Θ(d²)降至Hadamard变换的O(d log d)。未提供KV-cache压缩在真实LLM上的延迟、困惑度或下游精度结果。","authors_note":"作者包括Piotr Indyk和Michael Kapralov等理论计算机科学研究者；给定信息未列出机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper gives provable error guarantees for scalar quantization after a randomized Hadamard transform, reducing the cost of random-rotation-based vector compression.","importance":"This is primarily a quantization-theory paper, with applications to similarity search, federated learning, and KV-cache compression. It is not a direct LLM pretraining contribution, but it informs the error model behind low-cost rotation-based compression.","technical_approach":"The quantizer applies a single randomized Hadamard transform to the input vector and then performs dithered scalar quantization by subtracting a random scalar offset before quantization. The paper proves unbiasedness and mean-squared-error bounds that asymptotically match those of dense random rotations.","experiments":"The abstract focuses on theoretical guarantees rather than large-scale LLM experiments. The computational cost is reduced from Θ(d²) for dense random rotations to O(d log d) with Hadamard transforms. No real LLM KV-cache compression results, perplexity numbers, or serving latency measurements are provided in the abstract.","authors_note":"The author list includes Piotr Indyk and Michael Kapralov, both known for theoretical computer science and randomized algorithms; institution information is not provided."},"recommendation":{"zh":"不必通读；记住dithered Hadamard能给接近随机旋转的MSE证明，做KV量化时可查定理边界。","en":"No need to read end to end; remember that dithered Hadamard can match random-rotation MSE guarantees, useful when checking KV-quantization theory."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Ying Feng","Piotr Indyk","Michael Kapralov","Dmitry Krachun","Boris Prokhorov"],"notable_authors":["Piotr Indyk","Michael Kapralov"],"tags":["quantization","hadamard-transform","kv-cache-compression","randomized-algorithms","theory"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13810","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13810","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"multimodal","emoji":"🌐","name":"多模态统一","description":"VLM、多模态理解、统一模态预训练、多模态对齐、视觉-语言模型","papers":[{"id":"2605.13831","title":"Training Long-Context Vision-Language Models Effectively with Generalization Beyond 128K Context","abstract":"Long-context modeling is becoming a core capability of modern large vision-language models (LVLMs), enabling sustained context management across long-document understanding, video analysis, and multi-turn tool use in agentic workflows. Yet practical training recipes remain insufficiently explored, particularly for designing and balancing long-context data mixtures. In this work, we present a systematic study of long-context continued pre-training for LVLMs, extending a 7B model from 32K to 128K ","starred":true,"priority":"p1","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T17:52:53+00:00","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13831.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这项工作研究 LVLM 长上下文继续预训练的实际配方：如何把一个 32K 上下文的 7B 视觉语言模型扩展到 128K，并让能力泛化到 256K / 512K，而不是只在目标长度附近记住位置模式。重点问题不是 RoPE 缩放本身，而是长文档数据应该怎么合成、任务怎么选、长度分布怎么配、是否需要混入短上下文数据。","importance":"对预训练研究的价值很直接：它把 long-context LVLM 的瓶颈从“位置编码能不能外推”转向“长上下文训练信号是否教会模型检索关键信息”。论文给出几条可操作的结论。长文档 VQA 明显优于 OCR transcription；均衡长度分布优于只堆 128K 附近的 target-length 数据；retrieval-heavy 的任务混合更有效，但需要少量 reasoning 数据保持任务多样性；纯 long-document VQA 基本保留短上下文能力，因此不一定像 LLM LongPT 那样强依赖短数据混合。这些结论对多模态长上下文预训练、文档智能模型、长视频模型和 agentic workflow 的上下文管理都有参考价值。","technical_approach":"实验基座是 Qwen2.5-VL-7B，原始上下文为 32K。论文用 Dynamic-NTK 启发式把 mRoPE base frequency 从 1×10^6 调到 4×10^6，最大序列长度设为 131,072 tokens，全局 batch 为 4M tokens，每个 LongPT run 使用固定 5B token 预算。数据侧先构建超过 150 万个 PDF 文档的池子，覆盖论文、书籍、技术手册，以及工程、医学、社会科学、生物等领域。训练时选择 32 到 50 页的文档，并渲染成页面图像；在 Qwen2.5-VL 的 2×2 pixel unshuffle 设置下，这些文档形成约 32K 到 128K 的多模态序列。为避免评测污染，使用 PDF 内容的 SHA-256 hash 做过滤。任务侧构造五类长文档任务，归为两组：long-document VQA 和 OCR transcription。主要发现是，VQA 格式比纯 OCR 更适合 LongPT，因为它同时提供 instruction-formatted supervision、跨页检索、信息抽取、数值推理和复杂版面理解信号。最终配方训练得到 MMProLong，并在 Qwen3-VL 上进一步验证可迁移性。","experiments":"核心训练规模是 7B 基座、5B token LongPT、128K 最大训练长度、4M token 全局 batch。主要结果是，MMProLong 在 64K 和 128K 的长文档 VQA 上提升 7.1%；在没有额外训练或适配的情况下，仍能在 256K 和 512K 上保持强性能，并相对基线超过 20%。能力还迁移到更广的多模态长上下文任务，包括网页 needle-in-a-haystack 的 MM-NIAH、长上下文压缩 VTCBench，以及长视频理解 benchmark。消融给出三点关键实验洞察：第一，balanced length distribution 比集中在 128K 附近的 target-length-focused 数据更好，说明模型需要学习不同长度和位置上的关键信息检索，而不是只适配一个窗口长度。第二，长上下文训练的主要瓶颈仍是 key-information retrieval，因此 retrieval-heavy mixture 优于偏 OCR 或偏复杂 reasoning 的配方。第三，纯 long-document VQA 对短上下文能力损伤很小，这与部分 LLM 长上下文继续预训练经验不同，原因可能是 VQA 数据本身保持了指令格式和任务多样性。","reading_guide":"建议精读数据构造和消融部分。优先看 long-document VQA 与 OCR transcription 的对比，因为它决定了长上下文多模态训练信号应当是“问答式任务监督”还是“逐字转录监督”。然后看长度分布实验，重点关注 balanced distribution 为什么能带来 256K / 512K 外推。再看 task mixture 消融，尤其是 retrieval-heavy 与 reasoning 数据比例的取舍。实验设置中的 mRoPE base frequency、5B token budget、4M token batch、PDF 页面数选择也值得记录，这些是复现实验配方的关键超参。预计精读需要 1 到 1.5 小时；如果只泛读，20 到 30 分钟看 Introduction、Experimental Setup、Data Curation 和三组 ablation 结论即可。","authors_note":"输入材料未给出完整作者与机构信息。工作基于 Qwen2.5-VL-7B 和 Qwen3-VL 做实验验证。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies the practical recipe for long-context continued pretraining of large vision-language models. The target is to extend a 7B LVLM from 32K to 128K context and obtain generalization to 256K and 512K without additional adaptation. The central question is not only how to scale positional encoding, but how to design long-document data, task formats, length distributions, and short-context mixing.","importance":"The contribution is useful for pretraining because it reframes long-context LVLM training as a data-mixture problem. The main bottleneck is key-information retrieval over long multimodal sequences, not simple OCR coverage. The paper provides several actionable findings: long-document VQA is much more effective than OCR transcription; balanced sequence-length distributions outperform data concentrated near the 128K target length; retrieval-heavy mixtures work best when paired with a modest amount of reasoning data; and pure long-document VQA largely preserves short-context performance, reducing the need for explicit short-context mixing. These findings are relevant to document-native LVLMs, long-video models, and agent workflows that rely on sustained multimodal context.","technical_approach":"$1b","experiments":"$1c","reading_guide":"Focus first on the data curation and ablation sections. The most important comparison is long-document VQA versus OCR transcription, because it determines what kind of supervision actually improves long-context LVLMs. Then read the sequence-length distribution experiments, especially the evidence that balanced lengths support 256K and 512K extrapolation. The task-mixture ablations are also important, particularly the trade-off between retrieval-heavy data and reasoning data. The experimental setup details are worth recording: mRoPE base frequency scaling, 5B-token budget, 4M-token global batch, 131K maximum sequence length, and the 32-to-50-page PDF selection rule. A careful read should take about 60 to 90 minutes; a quick technical skim can focus on the introduction, experimental setup, data curation, and three main ablation findings.","authors_note":"The provided material does not include the full author or institution list. The experiments are built around Qwen2.5-VL-7B and are further validated on Qwen3-VL."},"recommendation":{"zh":"字节和港科大关于 VLM 长上下文训练的扎实实证工作，明确指出了 VQA 数据优于 OCR 以及长度分布平衡的重要性，对做多模态长文本的同学极具参考价值。","en":"Solid empirical work from ByteDance and HKUST on VLM long-context training, clearly pointing out the superiority of VQA data over OCR and the importance of balanced length distribution. Highly valuable for researchers working on multimodal long context."},"metadata":{"institutions":["HKUST","ByteDance Seed"],"authors":["Zhaowei Wang","Lishu Luo","Haodong Duan","Weiwei Liu","Sijin Wu","Ji Luo","Shen Yan","Shuai Peng","Sihang Yuan","Chaoyi Huang","Yi Lin","Yangqiu Song"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["Vision-Language Models","Long Context","Continued Pre-training","Data Mixture"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13831","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13831","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12882","title":"CiteVQA: Benchmarking Evidence Attribution for Trustworthy Document Intelligence","abstract":"Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have significantly advanced document understanding, yet current Doc-VQA evaluations score only the final answer and leave the supporting evidence unchecked. This answer-only approach masks a critical failure mode: a model can land on the correct answer while grounding it in the wrong passage -- a critical risk in high-stakes domains like law, finance, and medicine, where every conclusion must be traceable to a specific source region. To address this, we i","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T01:54:42+00:00","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12882.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关注的是文档理解中的证据归因，而不是基座预训练方法本身。它要解决的问题是：现有 Doc-VQA 只看答案对不对，不检查答案是否真的落在正确的文档区域上，因此模型可能“答对了，但证据错了”。作者把这个问题形式化为 answer + citation 的联合评测，要求模型返回元素级 bounding-box 证据，并用严格指标同时检查答案正确性和证据忠实性。","importance":"对预训练研究的直接影响较弱，不属于核心 pretrain 论文。但它对多模态模型训练信号设计和后训练评测有一个明确启发：只优化最终答案会掩盖 grounding failure，尤其在长文档、多页 PDF、跨语言场景下更明显。若后续有人做 native document MLLM 预训练、视觉 token 对齐、或 retrieval-grounded post-training，这个 benchmark 提供了一个更严格的监督与评测方向。它的价值主要在评测框架，而不在建模方法。","technical_approach":"方法核心是 benchmark 构建与指标设计。数据侧，作者从超过 1 亿份原始 PDF 中，经分层采样先筛到约 25 万候选，再通过两阶段 MLLM 标注流程做领域和子类别识别，最终选出 711 份文档，覆盖 7 个领域、30 个子类、两种语言。问题总数 1,897，平均每份文档 40.6 页，强调长文档和真实复杂版式。\n\n标注侧，作者设计了自动化 annotation pipeline，用文档解析模型和 MLLM 协同生成问题、答案和细粒度证据区域，目标是把人工逐页框选的成本降下来，同时保持一致性。评测侧，除了普通 answer accuracy，还提出 Traceability Metrics，其中核心是 Strict Attributed Accuracy，要求答案和证据同时正确才计分；另外用 Recall 看证据覆盖，用 Relevance 看引用区域与答案推理链是否匹配。\n\n从方法性质看，这不是提出新的文档建模架构，也不是新的预训练目标，而是把“faithful evidence attribution”从一个模糊要求变成可量化 benchmark。","experiments":"实验主要是 benchmark audit，而不是算法创新。作者评测了 20 个主流 MLLM，发现一个稳定现象：Attribution Hallucination，也就是文本答案正确，但引用的证据位置完全不对。文中给出的代表性结果是，Gemini-3.1-Pro-Preview 的 Strict Attributed Accuracy 最高约 76.0；领先的开源模型甚至没有超过 25.0。这个落差说明 answer-only 指标会明显高估系统可靠性。\n\n数据统计方面，CiteVQA 包含 711 份 PDF、1,897 个问题、7 个领域、30 个子类、两种语言，平均文档长度 40.6 页。作者强调这是在文档数量、长度和领域覆盖之间做平衡，目的是更接近真实使用场景。若只看实验结论，最重要的信息不是谁排第一，而是“正确答案不等于正确归因”在当前 MLLM 中相当普遍。","reading_guide":"这篇适合泛读。先看引言，明确它要修正的是 Doc-VQA 的评测缺口，而不是提出新的 MLLM 训练范式。然后看 benchmark construction 和 metrics 两节，重点理解自动化标注流程、元素级 citation 定义、以及 Strict Attributed Accuracy 的计分方式。最后看主结果表，关注 answer accuracy 与 SAA 的差距有多大。\n\n如果你的工作偏预训练，这篇不需要逐节精读。20 分钟左右看完数据构建、指标定义和主表即可。只有在你关心 document MLLM 的 grounding、长文档对齐监督、或 post-training 中的 citation learning 时，才值得进一步看附录里的数据质量控制细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper is not a pretraining-method paper. Its core problem is an evaluation gap in document VQA: current benchmarks score the final answer but do not verify whether the model grounded that answer in the correct document region. As a result, a model can be correct in text while citing the wrong evidence. The paper turns this into a joint answer-plus-citation task, requiring element-level bounding-box evidence and evaluating both correctness and faithfulness together.","importance":"Its direct relevance to foundation-model pretraining is limited, so this is not a core pretrain read. The useful takeaway is narrower: answer-only supervision and evaluation can hide grounding failures, especially in long, multi-page, multilingual document settings. For researchers interested in document-native MLLM pretraining, visual-text alignment, or retrieval-grounded post-training, the benchmark offers a stricter target for supervision and evaluation. The contribution is mainly in benchmark design, not in modeling.","technical_approach":"$1d","experiments":"The experiments are primarily an audit of existing MLLMs rather than a new algorithmic result. The authors evaluate 20 mainstream models and identify a recurring failure mode they call Attribution Hallucination: the model gives the correct textual answer but points to the wrong evidence region. The headline number is that Gemini-3.1-Pro-Preview reaches about 76.0 Strict Attributed Accuracy, while leading open-source models remain below 25.0. The main message is not who ranks first, but how much answer-only evaluation overestimates reliability.\n\nDataset statistics are also part of the empirical contribution: 711 PDFs, 1,897 questions, 7 domains, 30 subcategories, 2 languages, and an average of 40.6 pages per document. The benchmark is designed to balance document count, length, and domain diversity so that it better reflects realistic document intelligence settings.","reading_guide":"This is a skim paper for a pretraining-oriented reader. Start with the introduction to understand the exact evaluation gap it addresses. Then read the benchmark construction and metric sections, focusing on the automated annotation pipeline, the definition of element-level citations, and how Strict Attributed Accuracy is computed. Finally, inspect the main result table and compare answer accuracy against SAA.\n\nIf your focus is pretraining, around 20 minutes is enough to extract the useful part. Only go deeper into the appendix if you care about document grounding, long-document alignment supervision, or citation-aware post-training for MLLMs.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"把“引用是否对”从口号变成可量化指标，适合用来检验你家 VLM 的 grounding 训练是否真有效；只看评测协议和错误类型统计就够。","en":"It turns citation fidelity into a measurable target; use it to sanity-check whether your VLM grounding training actually works—skim the eval protocol and error breakdowns."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory","Zeng","uncontrollable risks of hallucination [","]. Therefore, an urgent need exists for a benchmark that"],"authors":["Dongsheng Ma","Jiayu Li","Zhengren Wang","Yijie Wang","Jiahao Kong","Weijun Zeng","Jutao Xiao","Jie Yang","Wentao Zhang","Bin Wang","Conghui He"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["DocVQA","evidence-attribution","grounding","benchmark","multimodal-evaluation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12882","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12882","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12586","title":"3D Primitives are a Spatial Language for VLMs","abstract":"Vision-language models (VLMs) exhibit a striking paradox: they can generate executable code that reconstructs a 3D scene from geometric primitives with correct object counts, classes, and approximate positions, yet the same models fail at simpler spatial questions on the same image. We show that 3D geometric primitives (cubes, spheres, cylinders, expressed in executable code) serve as a powerful intermediate representation for spatial understanding, and exploit this through three contributions. ","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-12T17:57:21+00:00","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12586.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV","cs.AI","cs.DB"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作研究 VLM 的空间理解为何在自然语言 QA 中表现差，但在生成 3D primitive 场景代码时能显露出更好的结构化空间信息。","importance":"对预训练研究的启发在于，代码形式的 3D primitive 可能是一种有效的空间中间表示。它把形状、尺度、位置和方向放进可执行结构里，比直接用自然语言回答更接近模型在代码数据中学到的表示。对 native multimodal pretraining 来说，这提示空间能力不只取决于视觉 encoder 或图文对齐，也取决于输出通道和训练语料里是否存在可复用的结构化空间 token。","technical_approach":"作者提出 SpatialBabel，用同一批场景同时评估 3D scene-code reconstruction 和 spatial QA。primitive split 包含 1,000 个程序生成的 Blender 场景，每个场景有 3 到 20 个几何体，形状包括 cube、sphere、cylinder、cone、torus、pyramid，并控制遮挡以减少感知歧义；Hypersim split 用于更接近真实照片的室内场景验证。评估覆盖六种 scene-code language，并测试 14 个 VLM。方法上有两个关键设计：Code-CoT 先让模型生成 3D primitive reconstruction code，再基于自己的 reconstruction 回答空间问题；S3-FT 则解析模型自己生成的 Three.js 代码，构造成多任务空间标注数据，用于无人工标签、无 teacher model 的 self-supervised spatial fine-tuning。","experiments":"SpatialBabel 的设置包括 512×512 单视角渲染、primitive 场景复杂度从 3 个物体到 20 个物体、Hypersim 405 个场景并评估其中 200 个。实验显示，不同 VLM 对不同 scene-code language 的适应差异明显；在 primitive spatial QA 上，Code-CoT 能提高一部分中等能力 frontier VLM 的表现；在真实照片 CV-Bench-3D 上，具备较强代码能力的 VLM 也能从这种 code-mediated reasoning 中获益。S3-FT 在仅使用 primitive images 构造训练数据的情况下，可以迁移到真实照片 benchmark，并在五个 base VLM 上显示可迁移性。给出的内容没有包含具体准确率表和提升幅度。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，预计 20 到 30 分钟。优先看 Introduction 和 Figure 1，理解同一模型在 QA 与 scene-code generation 上的矛盾；再看 SpatialBabel 的数据构造和评估协议，确认它如何减少感知噪声；最后看 Code-CoT 与 S3-FT 的实验表。对基座预训练研究，重点不是空间 QA 分数，而是 3D primitive code 作为空间表示和训练信号的作用。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks why VLMs often fail direct natural-language spatial QA while being able to generate executable 3D primitive scene code that contains more accurate object counts, categories, and approximate positions.","importance":"The useful pretraining signal is representational. 3D primitive code acts like a structured spatial language: it packages shape, scale, orientation, and position into a format that many VLMs have likely seen through code training. This matters for multimodal pretraining because spatial competence may depend not only on visual encoders and image-text alignment losses, but also on whether the training mixture contains structured output channels that make spatial variables explicit.","technical_approach":"The work introduces SpatialBabel, a benchmark pairing primitive-based 3D reconstruction with spatial QA. The primitive split has 1,000 procedurally generated Blender scenes with 3–20 objects, controlled colors, simple shapes, and reduced occlusion, so errors are less likely to come from object recognition ambiguity. The Hypersim split adds photo-realistic indoor scenes for transfer evaluation. Fourteen VLMs are evaluated across six scene-code languages. The proposed Code-CoT pipeline first asks the model to reconstruct the scene as executable primitive code, then answers questions conditioned on that reconstruction. S3-FT parses a model’s own Three.js reconstructions into structured spatial annotations and fine-tunes on the resulting multi-task data, without human labels or a separate teacher model.","experiments":"The benchmark uses 512×512 single-view renders, five primitive-scene complexity tiers, and a Hypersim setting with 405 scenes, of which 200 are evaluated. Results show strong dependence on the target scene-code language and model-specific reconstruction patterns. Code-CoT improves primitive-scene spatial QA for some mid-tier frontier models and also helps on real-photo CV-Bench-3D when the model has sufficient coding capability. S3-FT trained from primitive images transfers to real-photo benchmarks and is reported across five base VLMs. Exact accuracy numbers and deltas are not present in the provided content.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 20–30 minutes. Focus on the motivating contradiction in the introduction, the SpatialBabel construction, the table comparing scene-code languages across models, and the Code-CoT and S3-FT results. For pretraining researchers, the main point is not the benchmark score itself, but the evidence that executable 3D primitive code can expose and train spatial structure more effectively than direct natural-language QA.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"将3D代码作为VLM空间推理的中间语言（Code-CoT），揭示了模态翻译（图像->代码）对激发推理能力的价值，对多模态对齐和CoT设计有启发。","en":"Using 3D code as an intermediate language for VLM spatial reasoning (Code-CoT) reveals the value of modality translation (image->code) in eliciting reasoning capabilities, inspiring multimodal alignment and CoT design."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Junze Liu","Kun Qian","Florian Dubost","Kai Zhong","Arvind Srinivasan","Nan Chen","Anping Wang","Sam Zhang","Alejandro Mottini","Qingjun Cui","Tian Wang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["Vision-Language Models","Spatial Reasoning","Code Generation","Chain-of-Thought","3D Scene Reconstruction"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12586","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12586","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13322","title":"KamonBench: A Grammar-Based Dataset for Evaluating Compositional Factor Recovery in Vision-Language Models","abstract":"Kamon (family crests) are an important part of Japanese culture and a natural test case for compositional visual recognition: each crest combines a small number of symbolic choices, but the space of possible descriptions is sparse. We introduce KamonBench, a grammar-based image-to-structure benchmark with 20,000 synthetic composite crests and auxiliary component examples. Each composite crest is paired with a formal kamon description language - \"kamon yōgo\" - description, a segmented Japanese an","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T10:35:07+00:00","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13322.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"KamonBench 解决的是 VLM 是否真的能从图像中恢复可组合视觉因子的问题，而不是只做自由文本 caption 或记忆常见图文配对。家纹图像由 container、modifier、motif 三类因素组合而成，语言侧有相对形式化的 kamon description language。这个设定把“看懂图像”转成了“恢复结构化生成程序”的问题。","importance":"对预训练研究的启发主要在评测侧。它提供了一个低噪声、可控、可组合的 image-to-structure benchmark，用来检查 VLM 是否学到可复用视觉因子。相比常规 VQA 或 caption 指标，这类任务更接近对多模态表示的诊断：模型是否把 motif、容器、空间排列、形变这几类因素分开表示，是否能在少样本或未见组合上重组。对研究视觉 tokenizer、native multimodal pretraining、组合泛化评测有一定参考价值，但它不是新的预训练方法。","technical_approach":"方法核心是用语法生成合成家纹数据。每个样本从已知因子生成，包括容器、修饰/空间排列、基础 motif。每张合成 crest 配有多种目标表示：KDL 描述、日语分词分析、英文翻译、非语言 program code。这样做的取舍很清楚：不用真实网页家纹，是为了避免闭源 VLM 可能已经在预训练中见过常见家纹；使用合成语法，是为了拿到精确的生成因子，能做比 caption accuracy 更细的评估。论文强调家纹空间很稀疏：真实常见图样有限，但组合空间很大，当前非递归因子库存约有 77 万种组合。这使它适合测试模型是否掌握组合规则，而不是记住整图。","experiments":"数据集规模为 20,000 个合成 composite crests，并提供辅助 component examples。评测不只看文本匹配，还支持 program-code factor metrics，即分别检查 container、modifier、motif 是否恢复正确；也支持受控的 factor-pair recombination，用来测试模型在未见组合上的泛化。提供内容里没有完整列出各 VLM 的具体分数，因此更应把实验部分理解为 benchmark 设计和评测协议，而不是模型方法的性能改进。","reading_guide":"泛读即可，预计 15–25 分钟。重点看 Introduction 中对 kamon 因子结构的定义，以及 Kamon as a machine learning problem 对稀疏组合空间的论证。若关心多模态评测，优先看数据生成语法、program-code 指标、factor recovery 指标和重组测试设计。无需在文化背景部分停留太久，核心信息是：它把图像理解任务压成了可控的结构恢复任务。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"KamonBench asks whether VLMs can recover compositional visual factors from an image, rather than produce a plausible caption or memorize frequent image-text pairs. A kamon crest is generated from factors such as container, modifier, and motif, and the target language is a constrained kamon description language. The task is therefore image-to-structure, not ordinary captioning.","importance":"The main value for pretraining research is diagnostic. The benchmark gives a controlled way to test whether a multimodal model has learned reusable visual factors and can recombine them under sparse supervision. This is more informative than standard VQA or caption accuracy when the question is representation quality: whether the model separates motif identity, containment, spatial arrangement, and visual modification. It is relevant to studies of visual tokenization, native multimodal pretraining, and compositional generalization, but it is not a new pretraining method.","technical_approach":"The dataset is generated by a grammar over kamon factors. Each synthetic crest has known latent factors and is paired with multiple outputs: a KDL description, segmented Japanese analysis, English translation, and a non-linguistic program code. The design choice is deliberate. Real web images would be hard to use for evaluating proprietary VLMs because common crests may already appear in their training data. Synthetic generation provides unseen combinations and exact factor labels. The paper also emphasizes sparsity: although common real crests are limited, the non-recursive factor inventory already yields roughly 770,000 combinations.","experiments":"KamonBench contains 20,000 synthetic composite crests plus auxiliary component examples. The evaluation supports more than caption-level scoring: direct program-code factor metrics can measure recovery of container, modifier, and motif separately, and controlled factor-pair recombination tests whether models generalize to unseen combinations. The provided content does not include full per-model scores, so the experimental contribution should be read mainly as a benchmark protocol and data construction pipeline.","reading_guide":"A light read is enough, about 15–25 minutes. Focus on the factor definition in the introduction and the argument in the machine-learning section for why kamon is a sparse compositional recognition task. For multimodal evaluation work, inspect the grammar, program-code target, factor-level metrics, and recombination tests. The cultural background is useful context, but the main technical point is the conversion of visual recognition into controlled structure recovery.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"读数据生成 grammar 和 factor metrics 就够；它对 VLM 预训练诊断有用，但合成家纹域的外推性要打折。","en":"Read the grammar and factor metrics; it is useful for VLM diagnostics, but the synthetic crest domain limits how far the conclusions travel."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Richard Sproat","Stefano Peluchetti"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["VLM-benchmark","compositionality","synthetic-data","factor-recovery","linear-probing"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13322","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13322","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13403","title":"RotVLA: Rotational Latent Action for Vision-Language-Action Model","abstract":"Latent Action Models (LAMs) have emerged as an effective paradigm for handling heterogeneous datasets during Vision-Language-Action (VLA) model pretraining, offering a unified action space across embodiments. However, existing LAMs often rely on discrete quantization encode and decode pipelines, which can lead to trivial frame reconstruction behavior, limited representational capacity, and a lack of physically meaningful structure. We introduce RotVLA, a VLA framework built on a continuous rotat","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T11:58:02+00:00","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13403.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.RO","cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作处理的是 VLA 预训练里一个很具体但关键的问题：如何从异构机器人数据和无标注人类视频中学到一个统一、可迁移、又不容易退化的 latent action 空间。现有 LAM 多数走“相邻帧编码→离散量化→重建下一帧”的路线，优点是容易接到 token-based VLM，但缺点也很集中：一是 latent 容易退化成对目标帧的压缩编码，而不是动作；二是离散 codebook 对连续物理动作的表达不自然，容量也受限；三是 latent 空间缺少可组合的几何结构，难以承载跨 embodiment 的动作语义。RotVLA 的核心问题定义得很清楚：不用离散 token action，而是构造一个连续、可组合、带几何约束的 latent action 表示，并让它更像“动力学中的动作”而不是“重建中的捷径变量”。","importance":"对基座预训练研究的直接启发不在于机器人结果本身，而在于它给出了一种替代离散 latent token 的思路：把中间动作表示放到一个有结构的连续流形上，再通过组合约束去抑制 shortcut learning。这个方向和语言/多模态预训练里几个长期问题是相通的：第一，离散化是否真是统一建模的必要条件；第二，如何给 latent 变量加入物理或群结构，而不是只靠 reconstruction loss；第三，如何让中间表示具备组合性，从而支持 zero-shot 迁移。贡献量级更像“有想法的方法论文”，不是会立刻改写通用 LLM 预训练范式的工作，但对连续 latent modeling、structured representation、以及 AR token 范式之外的预训练设计有参考价值。","technical_approach":"$1e","experiments":"文中给出的主结果是：1.7B 参数的 RotVLA 在 LIBERO 上达到 98.2%，在 RoboTwin2.0 上达到 89.6% / 88.5%，并报告了真实机器人 pick-and-place、cup stacking 等任务上的优于已有 VLA 方法的表现。就 digest 视角，最该关注的不是绝对分数，而是几组验证其设计动机的实验。\n\n第一类是 latent 表示设计的消融：离散 latent、连续但无旋转约束、以及带 SO(n) 约束的版本之间的比较。如果正文完整实验与引言表述一致，那么作者想证明三件事：SoftVQ 比硬量化更适合连续动作；SO(n) 约束提升组合性和跨 embodiment 泛化；triplet learning 比单纯 frame reconstruction 更能避免退化。第二类是预训练数据来源的消融，即人类视频与跨 embodiment 机器人数据是否互补。按方法设定，前者主要提供通用视觉-动作动态先验，后者提供可落到机器人控制空间的桥梁。第三类是下游 action head 的消融，即是否真的需要 unified flow-matching head 与 latent-as-planner 结构，而不是直接从视觉语言上下文回归机器人动作。\n\n从已给出的数字看，1.7B 规模做到接近 98% 的 LIBERO 成功率，说明方法在标准仿真基准上是有效的；RoboTwin2.0 的双指标 89.6/88.5 也表明它在更强调跨 embodiment 或双臂/双场景泛化的设定下没有明显塌陷。若要判断结果是否扎实，需要重点看：与哪些 VLA/LAM baseline 比；训练数据规模是否对齐；真实机器人实验是否只挑选少量友好任务；以及 zero-shot latent action generation 的定义是否严格。","reading_guide":"这篇更适合泛读，不建议逐式子深抠全部细节。优先看 Introduction 和方法总图，先确认作者到底在替换 LAM 的哪一层。然后看 rotational latent action 那一节，重点理解两件事：为什么用 SO(n) 而不是一般连续向量空间；为什么采用“先输出 unconstrained matrix，再 SVD 投影”的实现。接着看 triplet frame learning，对照 Fig.2 理解它如何抑制 trivial reconstruction。实验部分建议重点看三类表：latent 表示消融、triplet objective 消融、以及下游 VLA 微调结构消融。若时间有限，30-40 分钟足够抓住主线；若要深挖，值得追问的是 SO(n) 是否只是一个方便的结构先验，还是确实对应了动作动力学中的可解释变量，以及 flow matching 在这里相比 diffusion/直接回归到底带来了什么稳定性或多模态收益。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a specific bottleneck in VLA pretraining: how to learn a unified latent action space from heterogeneous robot data and unlabeled human videos without collapsing into frame reconstruction shortcuts. Most prior latent action models use an encode-quantize-decode pipeline, which fits token-based VLM training but creates three issues: the latent can degenerate into a compressed code for the target frame, discrete codebooks are a poor fit for continuous physical actions, and the latent space lacks a meaningful compositional structure. RotVLA reframes the problem as learning a continuous, structured latent action that behaves like a transition variable rather than a reconstruction artifact.","importance":"Its value for pretraining research is less about robotics alone and more about representation design. The paper is a concrete example of replacing discrete latent tokens with a continuous manifold-constrained latent space, then using composition constraints to suppress shortcut learning. That connects to broader pretraining questions: whether discretization is truly necessary for unified modeling, how to inject geometry or group structure into latent variables, and how to make intermediate representations compositional enough for transfer. This is not a paradigm-shifting result for general LLM pretraining, but it is a useful method paper for anyone thinking about structured continuous latents beyond autoregressive token prediction.","technical_approach":"$1f","experiments":"$20","reading_guide":"This is a skim paper rather than a line-by-line derivation paper. Start with the introduction and the overview figures to pin down exactly which part of the standard LAM pipeline is being replaced. Then read the rotational latent action section carefully, focusing on two choices: why SO(n) instead of a generic continuous latent vector, and why the model predicts an unconstrained matrix before SVD projection. After that, read the triplet frame learning section with the figure in view; that is where the anti-shortcut mechanism really lives. In experiments, prioritize the ablations on latent design, the triplet objective, and the downstream action head. Around 30 to 40 minutes should be enough to capture the main idea. If you want to go deeper, the useful questions are whether SO(n) is merely a convenient inductive bias or a genuinely interpretable action geometry, and whether flow matching brings a real optimization or multimodality advantage over diffusion or direct regression here.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"连续结构化隐动作空间的设计思路可迁移到多模态统一动作预训练，重点读§3的隐空间建模部分即可","en":"The design of continuous structured latent action space can be transferred to unified multimodal action pretraining, focus on Section 3 for latent space modeling"},"metadata":{"institutions":["Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University"],"authors":["Qiwei Li","Xicheng Gong","Xinghang Li","Peiyan Li","Quanyun Zhou","Hangjun Ye","Jiahuan Zhou","Yadong Mu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["VLA","latent-action-model","multimodal-pretraining","robot-learning","SO(n)"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13403","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13403","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12517","title":"Bridging the Missing-Modality Gap: Improving Text-Only Calibration of Vision Language Models","abstract":"Vision-language models (VLMs) are often deployed on text-only inputs, although they are trained with images. We find that removing the vision modality causes large drops in accuracy and severe miscalibration, and the model does not behave like its original language backbone under text-only prompting. This failure is not explained only by missing semantic information. Even when text descriptions preserve key content, confidence becomes unreliable, while adding a visual signal through generated im","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-04-03T10:03:02+00:00","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12517.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI","cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文研究 VLM 在没有图像输入、只处理文本请求时的可靠性问题。核心发现是：多模态适配后的模型并不会自然退回到原来的语言模型行为；缺失视觉模态会造成准确率下降和更严重的置信度失准，而且这种问题不能只靠把图像内容写成文字描述来解决。","importance":"对基座预训练和 native multimodal 训练有一个直接提醒：统一 VLM 不是简单的“LLM 加视觉接口”。多模态训练会改变模型在纯文本分布上的内部状态和校准特性。对于把统一多模态模型作为通用入口的系统，这意味着 text-only 能力需要单独评估，尤其要看 calibration，而不只是看准确率。它的启发点主要在训练分布匹配和缺失模态鲁棒性，不是一个新的大规模预训练范式。","technical_approach":"论文先构造几组对照来定位问题。第一组是在 VQA 上比较原始 Image+Question 和把图像替换为高质量 caption 的 Description+Question。第二组比较 VLM 的 text-only 行为和其语言骨干模型，说明多模态适配后模型并不等价于 backbone LLM。第三组用文本生成图像再喂给 VLM，观察视觉信号是否能恢复性能和校准。基于这些现象，作者提出 Latent Imagination Module，简称 LIM。LIM 不是生成像素级图像，而是从文本中预测一组“想象”的视觉 latent embedding，再通过轻量 cross-attention 注入冻结的 VLM backbone。这样做的目标是让纯文本输入触发更接近多模态训练时的内部表示，减少缺失模态带来的分布偏移。和 caption augmentation 相比，它补的是表示空间中的视觉条件，而不是增加更多自然语言 token；和 text-to-image augmentation 相比，它避免了昂贵且不稳定的像素生成。","experiments":"论文在 VQA-v1 上做了主要现象验证，模型以 LLaVA-1.5-7B / Vicuna-1.5-7B 为代表。Image+Question 条件下，LLaVA 准确率为 88.29%，ECE 为 0.0884；把图像替换为文本描述后，准确率降到 72.30%，ECE 升到 0.2540。这个结果说明 caption 仍保留不少语义信息，但置信度明显过高，校准损坏比准确率下降更突出。作者还报告，提供由描述生成的图像可以部分恢复准确率和校准，支持“视觉信号本身参与了模型状态形成”的解释。LIM 的实验重点是 text-only benchmark 和 modality-mismatched setting 下的校准改善，但给出的正文片段没有完整表格数字，不能确认具体提升幅度。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，预计 20–30 分钟。优先看 Empirical Findings 中三组对照实验，尤其是 Figure 1 的 accuracy/ECE 分解，因为这部分比方法本身更有信息量。方法部分重点看 LIM 如何接入冻结 VLM、imagined latent 的训练目标是什么、cross-attention 的位置和参数规模。若关注多模态预训练，应继续检查附录中的 caption 生成协议、text-to-image 再生成设置，以及 calibration 指标计算方式，避免把 caption 质量或提示格式误判为缺失模态效应。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a practical failure mode of VLMs under text-only deployment. A multimodally adapted model does not simply fall back to the behavior of its original language backbone. Removing the visual modality hurts accuracy and, more importantly, makes confidence estimates poorly calibrated. Replacing the image with a textual description does not fully fix the issue.","importance":"The main relevance to pretraining is the distributional lesson for native multimodal models. A unified VLM should not be assumed to preserve the text-only behavior of its LLM backbone after multimodal adaptation. Missing-modality robustness and calibration need to be evaluated explicitly. The contribution is more diagnostic and systems-facing than a new pretraining recipe, but it points to a real interface problem in unified multimodal backbones.","technical_approach":"The paper first isolates the failure through controlled comparisons. It compares standard VQA inference with Image+Question against a caption-substituted Description+Question setting, then compares text-only VLM behavior with the original LLM backbone, and finally tests whether generated visual inputs can recover part of the lost performance. The proposed Latent Imagination Module avoids pixel-level image generation. It predicts visual latent embeddings from text through a lightweight cross-attention module and feeds these embeddings into a frozen VLM backbone. The design choice is important: linguistic augmentation adds more text tokens, while LIM tries to restore the missing visual conditioning signal in representation space. Compared with text-to-image augmentation, it is cheaper and avoids relying on the quality of synthesized pixels.","experiments":"The main diagnostic experiments use VQA-v1 with LLaVA-1.5-7B and Vicuna-1.5-7B. In the Image+Question setting, LLaVA reaches 88.29% accuracy with an ECE of 0.0884. In the Description+Question setting, accuracy drops to 72.30%, while ECE increases to 0.2540. The caption still carries substantial semantic information, but the model becomes much more overconfident. The paper also reports that feeding generated images from the same descriptions partially restores both accuracy and calibration, supporting the hypothesis that a visual signal changes the internal inference state. The provided text does not include complete LIM result tables, so exact gains for the proposed module cannot be verified here.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 20–30 minutes. The most useful part is the empirical diagnosis, especially the accuracy and ECE comparison in Figure 1. Then check how LIM is inserted into the frozen VLM, what supervision is used for imagined latents, and where the cross-attention module sits. For multimodal pretraining readers, the appendix details on caption generation, text-to-image regeneration, and calibration computation are worth checking before accepting the missing-modality interpretation.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"值得看缺失模态实验：它提醒 VLM 的文本通道不是原 LM，训练时该显式测模态缺省。","en":"Worth skimming for the missing-modality experiments: a VLM’s text path is not just the original LM, so modality absence should be tested explicitly."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST"],"authors":["Mingyeong Kim","Jungwon Choi","Chaeyun Jang","Juho Lee"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["VLM","missing-modality","calibration","latent-imagination","multimodal-inference"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12517","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12517","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12684","title":"Visual Aesthetic Benchmark: Can Frontier Models Judge Beauty?","abstract":"Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) are now routinely deployed for visual understanding, generation, and curation. A substantial fraction of these applications require an explicit aesthetic judgment. Most existing solutions reduce this judgment to predicting a scalar score for a single image. We first ask whether such scores faithfully capture comparative preference: in a controlled study with eight expert annotators, score-derived rankings align poorly with the same annotators' direct comp","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-12T19:33:28+00:00","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12684.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV","cs.AI","cs.HC"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：现有视觉审美评测多把单张图像映射成一个标量分数，但这种打分是否能可靠反映专家的相对偏好并不清楚。","importance":"对 LLM 预训练研究的直接价值有限，主要价值在多模态模型评测。它提醒 VLM/MLLM 训练和评估中一个常被忽略的问题：高阶视觉判断不一定适合用独立标量标签建模。对于图像生成模型、图文偏好数据、RLHF/RLAIF 式视觉偏好训练，成对或集合排序信号可能比单图打分更稳定，也更难被内容偏好捷径污染。","technical_approach":"论文先做了一个受控专家研究，让 8 位专家对同一批图像分别进行独立绝对打分和直接比较排序。结果显示，由分数推导出的排序与直接比较排序一致性较差。基于这个观察，作者构建 Visual Aesthetic Benchmark, VAB。VAB 不要求模型给单张图打审美分，而是在主题匹配的候选集合中选择最好图像，严格设置还要求同时选出最好和最差图像。这样的设计把内容差异尽量固定住，让模型更多判断构图、色彩、完成度、技术执行和风格规范，而不是偏好某类题材。","experiments":"VAB 发布 400 个任务、1,195 张图像，覆盖 fine art、photography、illustration 三大类和 24 个主题，候选集合大小为 2 到 6。论文报告了打分协议和排序协议在同质内容设置下的专家一致性差异：119 个任务、8 位标注者中，排序协议的 top-choice 熵更低，Mean H 从打分的 1.213 降到排序的 0.729；全体一致任务比例从 0.8% 提高到 10.1%；Wilcoxon signed-rank test 的 p 值为 1.7e-15。评测协议包括 Top-1 和 TB-1，指标包括三次随机候选顺序下的平均准确率 ap@1，以及三次都正确才算通过的 pass^3。提供内容未包含各个 frontier MLLM 的完整结果表，因此不能确认具体模型排名和差距。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，约 20 到 30 分钟。重点看 Section 2 的打分与直接排序对比实验，以及 Table 3，因为这是整篇论文最有信息量的部分。然后看 Section 3 的 VAB 构造流程，尤其是 matched subject matter 的设计、Fine Art 与 Photography 的数据来源，以及 Top-1/TB-1 和 pass^3 的评测定义。若关心视觉偏好数据构造，可进一步看 Appendix B 和 Appendix H.1；若只关心 LLM 预训练，读到 benchmark 设计即可。","authors_note":"BakeAI；作者姓名在提供内容中无法确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies whether scalar aesthetic scores for individual images are a reliable proxy for expert comparative preference.","importance":"Its direct relevance to base-model pretraining is limited, but it is useful for multimodal evaluation and preference-data design. The main signal is that higher-order visual judgment may be poorly served by independent scalar labels. For visual preference training, image-generation feedback, or multimodal reward modeling, direct ranking over matched candidates can provide a cleaner signal than single-image scoring.","technical_approach":"The authors first run a controlled expert study in which eight expert annotators evaluate the same images under two protocols: independent absolute scoring and direct comparative ranking. Rankings derived from scalar scores show weak alignment with direct comparisons. Motivated by this, they build the Visual Aesthetic Benchmark, or VAB. Each task presents a candidate set with matched subject matter, so the model has to judge execution quality rather than exploit content preference. The benchmark supports a Top-1 setting, where the model selects the best image, and a stricter TB-1 setting, where it identifies both the best and the worst image.","experiments":"VAB contains 400 released tasks and 1,195 images across fine art, photography, and illustration, covering 24 topics with candidate-set sizes from 2 to 6. In the homogeneous-content expert study with 119 tasks and eight annotators, direct ranking yields stronger agreement than score-derived ranking: mean top-choice entropy drops from 1.213 to 0.729, the unanimous-task rate rises from 0.8% to 10.1%, and the Wilcoxon signed-rank test gives p = 1.7e-15. Evaluation uses three independent random permutations per task and reports ap@1 and pass^3. The provided text does not include the full frontier-model result tables, so exact model-level performance gaps cannot be verified.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 20 to 30 minutes. Focus on the protocol comparison and Table 3, since they justify the benchmark design. Then read the VAB construction section for matched-subject candidate sets, domain coverage, and the Top-1/TB-1 evaluation setup. Appendix B and Appendix H.1 are worth checking if the goal is to design visual preference datasets rather than simply consume the benchmark.","authors_note":"BakeAI; author names cannot be confirmed from the provided content."},"recommendation":{"zh":"指出了 VLM 美学评估中 point-wise 打分与 pair-wise 比较的不一致性，构建了新的 Benchmark，做 VLM 评测的同学可以关注其评估范式的转变。","en":"Highlights the inconsistency between point-wise scoring and pair-wise comparison in VLM aesthetic evaluation; introduces a new benchmark useful for VLM evaluation paradigm shifts."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Washington","University of California, Santa Barbara","Stanford University","University of Notre Dame","Carnegie Mellon University","MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab","Western Washington University"],"authors":["Yichen Feng","Yuetai Li","Chunjiang Liu","Yuanyuan Chen","Fengqing Jiang","Yue Huang","Hang Hua","Zhengqing Yuan","Kaiyuan Zheng","Luyao Niu","Bhaskar Ramasubramanian","Basel Alomair","Xiangliang Zhang","Misha Sra","Zichen Chen","Radha Poovendran","Zhangchen Xu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["Multimodal Large Language Models","Aesthetic Evaluation","Benchmark","Comparative Selection"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12684","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12684","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12674","title":"Revealing Interpretable Failure Modes of VLMs","abstract":"Vision-Language Models (VLMs) are increasingly used in safety-critical applications because of their broad reasoning capabilities and ability to generalize with minimal task-specific engineering. Despite these advantages, they can exhibit catastrophic failures in specific real-world situations, constituting failure modes.   We introduce REVELIO, a framework for systematically uncovering interpretable failure modes in VLMs. We define a failure mode as a composition of interpretable, domain-releva","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-12T19:25:17+00:00","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12674.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.LG","cs.RO"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的不是“VLM 会不会出错”这个泛问题，而是更具体的一层：如何在黑盒条件下，从一个指数级组合空间里，系统找出“可解释、可复现、贴近真实场景”的失败模式。作者把 failure mode 定义为一组领域概念的合取，例如“近距离行人 + 特定障碍物 + 恶劣天气”，并要求模型在这类场景分布上持续犯错，而不是只在某张图上偶发失误。这个定义刻意避开了像素级对抗攻击那种不自然扰动，也不同于静态 benchmark 只能被动测预设样例。核心难点有三个：概念要能落到真实场景生成上；概念组合空间是离散且带物理约束的；很多目标 VLM 是闭源，只能做黑盒评估。","importance":"对基座研究本身，它不是新的预训练方法，但对 VLM 预训练和评测接口有直接启发。第一，它把“失败”从单点样本提升到“概念分布上的系统脆弱性”，这比平均 benchmark 分数更接近训练时真正该修补的缺口。第二，它强调场景图级语义而不是像素扰动，给数据构造、困难样本挖掘、持续预训练和安全对齐提供了更可操作的监督单位。第三，它证明即便在黑盒模型上，也能用有限预算找到远多于随机搜索的高价值失败模式，这说明现有 VLM 的错误并不只是长尾噪声，而是有结构的感知盲点。对做预训练的人，最有价值的地方在于：这种 failure mode 可以反过来定义 curriculum、数据重采样和 targeted continued pretraining 的对象。","technical_approach":"方法上，Revelio 的关键选择是把搜索空间从连续像素空间换成离散语义空间。作者先用 scene graph 来表示图像场景，节点是实体，边是关系，属性描述实体状态；领域概念被定义成 scene graph 的子图模式，例如“行人在车前方且距离近”“存在 barrier 且天气为雨天”。这些概念不是只做标签，而是进一步映射到场景分布：通过 Scenic 这样的场景描述语言，把概念约束编译成仿真器中的可采样 scenario distribution，再由 CARLA 等渲染引擎生成图像。这样评估的对象不是单个实例，而是满足该概念组合的一簇真实可渲染场景。\n\n在搜索层面，作者把问题表述为带兼容性约束的黑盒组合优化。给定一个概念集合，系统从对应场景分布采样若干场景，查询 VLM 在固定任务 prompt 下的行为，估计 failure rate。目标是在预算有限时找到多个高 failure rate 的概念组合，而不是只找一个最坏点。为此设计了两类搜索器。第一类是 diversity-aware beam search：它沿着概念组合逐层扩展，但不仅按当前失败率打分，还显式鼓励结果多样性，避免 beam 全部坍缩到同一类近邻模式，适合快速勾勒 failure landscape。第二类是基于 Gaussian Process 的全局搜索，用 Thompson Sampling 在离散组合空间上做 exploration/exploitation 平衡。GP 负责对未评估组合的失败率做后验建模，Thompson sampling 负责在不确定但可能高风险的区域继续试探。由于概念之间存在物理不兼容，搜索过程中还要满足约束过滤，避免生成不可实现的场景组合。\n\n从系统设计看，这套框架有几个值得注意的点。其一，它是黑盒友好的，不依赖梯度、内部激活或 token 级 logprob，因此可以直接测闭源 VLM。其二，它把“可解释性”前置到搜索对象本身，而不是事后再做 attribution。其三，它是可迁移的：换领域时主要替换概念 taxonomy 和渲染器接口，而不是重写整套方法。","experiments":"实验覆盖了至少两个安全相关场景：自动驾驶和室内机器人。定性结果里，作者展示了几类很具体的脆弱性。自动驾驶场景中，VLM 在空间 grounding 上有明显问题，例如面对近距离行人时给出错误的 stop/continue 决策；同时对附近 barrier 等危险元素经常视而不见。室内机器人场景中，则出现另一种模式：模型过度保守，导致性能受损，同时对尖锐物体等风险源识别不足。这一点很重要，因为它说明 failure mode 不只是一边倒的“冒进”，也可能是“过度谨慎但仍不安全”。\n\n定量上，论文最核心的结果是：在相同查询预算下，Revelio 平均能比无引导随机搜索多发现 3 到 5 倍的 failure modes。这个数字说明搜索器确实在利用结构，而不是单纯多试几次。文中还比较了两种搜索策略的角色分工：beam search 更适合快速找到一批高风险模式并覆盖不同区域；GP + Thompson sampling 在预算继续增加时更有利于全局探索和挖掘随机法难碰到的组合。作者还强调 failure mode 的评估是基于场景分布上的一致失败，而不是单样本命中，因此结果比常见 adversarial case study 更稳。\n\n从消融角度，值得注意的不是某个模块带来几点提升，而是几个设计选择共同支撑了“真实且可解释”的目标：如果不用概念级搜索而退回随机场景采样，发现效率明显下降；如果不用多样性约束，搜索结果容易集中在少数相似模式；如果不通过场景分布估计 failure，而只看个别样本，得到的模式稳定性会差很多。摘要里没有给出更细的样本数、模型名和每个 benchmark 的绝对错误率，全文阅读时应重点核对这些表格和附录设置。","reading_guide":"泛读建议是先抓定义，再看搜索器，最后看案例。优先看 Introduction 和方法部分里对 failure mode 的形式化定义，尤其是“概念子图 → 场景分布 → 黑盒 failure rate 估计”这条链路，这是整篇文章真正的新意。然后看两种搜索算法的设计动机：为什么 beam search 里要加 diversity，为什么还需要 GP/Thompson sampling 这种更全局的策略。实验部分建议重点看自动驾驶案例，因为那里最能体现 spatial grounding 的系统性缺陷；再看室内机器人案例，理解作者为什么把“过度保守”也视为 failure mode。若时间有限，预计 20–30 分钟可以完成有效泛读；若要判断它能否用于数据闭环，需再看附录里概念兼容性约束、采样预算和 failure 统计置信度的细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a specific problem in VLM evaluation: how to systematically uncover realistic, interpretable, and repeatable failure modes under black-box access. Instead of asking whether a VLM fails on isolated examples, it defines a failure mode as a conjunction of domain concepts—such as pedestrian proximity, barrier type, and weather condition—under which the model fails consistently over a scenario distribution. This is a different target from static benchmarks, which only test predefined cases, and from adversarial attacks, which often leave the natural data manifold. The hard part is that the search space is exponentially large, concept combinations must remain physically compatible, and many target VLMs are closed-source.","importance":"This is not a pretraining method, but it is relevant to foundation-model research because it reframes evaluation in a way that can feed back into data and training. The main contribution is moving from sample-level errors to distribution-level semantic failure modes. That matters for VLM pretraining because these modes are much closer to actionable training units: they can define targeted data collection, hard-example mining, curriculum design, and continued pretraining objectives. The paper also shows that many VLM failures are structured rather than random long-tail noise. If a black-box search can repeatedly surface the same semantic blind spots, then those blind spots are likely tied to representation and training data gaps, not just unlucky prompts.","technical_approach":"$21","experiments":"$22","reading_guide":"For a skim, start with the formal definition of a failure mode and the pipeline from concept subgraphs to scenario distributions. That is the conceptual core of the paper. Then read the sections on the two search algorithms and focus on why both are needed: beam search for fast local discovery with coverage, GP plus Thompson sampling for broader exploration under uncertainty. In the experiments, prioritize the autonomous-driving case studies because they make the spatial-grounding failures easy to understand. Then look at the indoor-robotics examples to see how the framework captures over-cautious behavior as a failure mode rather than a benign conservative bias. If the goal is to assess relevance for training, spend extra time on the appendix details around compatibility constraints, sampling budgets, and how failure rates are estimated. A useful skim should take about 20–30 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"VLM失败模式挖掘的实用搜索方案，做多模态预训练消融或缺陷分析时可以借鉴，重点看方法部分的搜索策略即可","en":"Practical search scheme for VLM failure mode discovery; reference the search strategy for multimodal pretraining ablation or defect analysis, focus on the search strategy in the method section."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Isha Chaudhary","Vedaant V Jain","Kavya Sachdeva","Sayan Ranu","Gagandeep Singh"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["vision-language-models","interpretability","failure-mode-analysis","bayesian-optimization","multimodal-safety"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12674","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12674","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13548","title":"AttenA+: Rectifying Action Inequality in Robotic Foundation Models","abstract":"Existing robotic foundation models, while powerful, are predicated on an implicit assumption of temporal homogeneity: treating all actions as equally informative during optimization. This \"flat\" training paradigm, inherited from language modeling, remains indifferent to the underlying physical hierarchy of manipulation. In reality, robot trajectories are fundamentally heterogeneous, where low-velocity segments often dictate task success through precision-demanding interactions, while high-veloci","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T13:55:37+00:00","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13548.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.RO","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作讨论机器人基础模型中的 action token 训练权重问题。现有 VLA 和 World-Action Model 通常对轨迹中每个动作步使用相同 loss 权重，但真实操作轨迹并不均匀：快速移动多是容错的过渡段，慢速接触、对齐、抓取和放置阶段更容易决定任务成败。","importance":"这不是通用 LLM 预训练论文，但对跨模态统一建模有一个清晰启发：非文本 token 不一定适合沿用语言建模里的均匀 token loss。对 action、audio、video 这类带物理时间结构的序列，token 的训练权重可能应该由模态内的物理先验决定。AttenA+ 给了一个简单例子：用末端执行器速度作为无需标注的关键性 proxy，把优化预算更多放在精细操作片段上。","technical_approach":"AttenA+ 是一个不改模型结构的 loss reweighting 框架。它先从专家轨迹中计算每个 timestep 的动作速度，速度可以来自平移维度、旋转维度，或二者组合。核心假设是速度越低，动作越可能处在接触丰富、精度要求高的阶段，因此每步 loss 的权重应随速度降低而增大。这个权重可以乘到不同训练目标上：回归式 VLA 的 L1/L2 action loss，diffusion policy 的 score-matching loss，或 flow matching 模型的 vector-field loss。方法的优点是参数量不变，数据不需要额外人工标注，主要引入的是一个物理先验驱动的优化重排。","experiments":"论文在 Libero 和 RoboTwin 上评估，并在 Franka 机械臂上做真实环境验证。报告的主要现象是：AttenA+ 能提高长程操作和精细接触阶段的成功率，标准均匀 loss baseline 更容易在最后几厘米的对齐、抓取或放置阶段失败。提供的正文片段没有包含完整表格和具体提升数字，因此数值结论需要在实验章节中核对，尤其是不同 backbone、不同任务长度、以及低速片段加权强度的消融。","reading_guide":"建议泛读 15 到 20 分钟。先看 Figure 2 的速度分布和任务阶段对应关系，确认“低速等于高关键性”这个假设是否在数据上站得住。再看方法部分的权重函数、归一化和是否有 clipping，因为这些细节决定训练是否会过度偏向静止或近静止动作。实验部分重点看三个消融：均匀 loss 对比速度加权、不同 VLA/WAM backbone 的迁移性、真实机器人上精细操作阶段的失败案例。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies loss weighting for action sequences in robotic foundation models. Current VLA and world-action models often train with a flat per-timestep objective, treating all action tokens as equally important. Manipulation trajectories are not uniform: fast motions are often transitional and tolerant to error, while slow contact-rich phases such as alignment, grasping, and placement tend to determine task success.","importance":"This is not a core text-LLM pretraining paper, but it is relevant to unified multimodal pretraining. It makes a concrete point that non-text tokens may not deserve the uniform loss treatment inherited from language modeling. For action, audio, and video tokens with physical temporal structure, token importance can be shaped by modality-specific signals. AttenA+ uses end-effector velocity as an annotation-free proxy for action criticality and reallocates optimization pressure toward precision-sensitive segments.","technical_approach":"AttenA+ is a plug-in loss reweighting method. It computes the instantaneous velocity of the ground-truth action at each timestep, using translational dimensions, rotational dimensions, or both. The training loss at each step is then multiplied by a velocity-derived weight, with lower-velocity actions receiving higher emphasis. The same idea can be applied to regression-based VLA objectives, diffusion-policy score-matching losses, and flow-matching vector-field losses. The method does not require architectural changes or extra parameters; it changes the optimization objective by injecting a simple kinematic prior.","experiments":"The evaluation covers Libero and RoboTwin, with additional real-world experiments on a Franka manipulator. The reported pattern is that velocity-weighted training improves success in long-horizon manipulation and especially in precision-critical phases, where uniformly weighted baselines often fail near final alignment, grasp, or placement. The provided text does not include the full numerical tables, so exact gains, backbone-specific behavior, and weighting-strength ablations should be checked in the experiment section.","reading_guide":"A 15- to 20-minute skim is sufficient. Start with the velocity analysis around Figure 2 to judge whether low velocity reliably corresponds to high manipulation criticality. Then inspect the weighting formula, normalization, and any clipping or smoothing details, since these determine whether the method overweights stationary actions. In the experiments, focus on uniform-loss comparisons, transfer across different robotic backbones, and real-robot failure cases in the last-centimeter phase.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"读 loss weighting 和 ablation；它把“语言式均匀 token loss”在动作模态上的失配讲清楚，值得做内部 sanity check。","en":"Read the loss weighting and ablations; it cleanly exposes where language-style uniform token loss mismatches action modalities and deserves an internal sanity check."},"metadata":{"institutions":["IDEA Research"],"authors":["Daojie Peng","Fulong Ma","Jiahang Cao","Qiang Zhang","Xupeng Xie","Jian Guo","Ping Luo","Andrew F. Luo","Boyu Zhou","Jun Ma"],"notable_authors":["Ping Luo"],"tags":["VLA","robotics","loss-weighting","action-modeling","multimodal-pretraining"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13548","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13548","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12960","title":"DiM\\textsuperscript{3}: Bridging Multilingual and Multimodal Models via Direction- and Magnitude-Aware Merging","abstract":"Towards more general and human-like intelligence, large language models should seamlessly integrate both multilingual and multimodal capabilities; however, extending an existing multimodal model to many languages typically requires expensive multilingual multimodal data construction and repeated end-to-end retraining. We study a training-free alternative: injecting multilingual capability into an existing multimodal model by composing residual updates in the shared language model backbone. The k","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T03:50:54+00:00","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12960.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"把现有多模态模型扩展到多语言通常需要昂贵的多语多模态数据与端到端再训练，成本高且迭代慢。","importance":"提供一种 training-free 的“参数更新合并”思路，把多语能力注入到现有 MLLM；对模型合并/能力迁移有工程启发，但更像技巧型合并而非预训练范式创新。","technical_approach":"提出 DiM3：在共享 LM backbone 上，将“多语更新”和“多模态更新”视为异质残差更新，按参数维度做 direction- 与 magnitude-aware 的选择性合成；保持 vision encoder 与 multimodal projector 不变。","experiments":"覆盖 57 种语言，在 text-only 与 vision-language 多语基准上评测，基于 LLaVA 系列模型做扩展对比（具体提升与对照方法需看正文表格）。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Extending an existing multimodal model to many languages typically requires costly multilingual multimodal data and end-to-end retraining.","importance":"A training-free model-merging approach to inject multilinguality into an existing MLLM; useful as a practical capability-transfer trick, less so as a new pretraining paradigm.","technical_approach":"DiM3 selectively composes multilingual and multimodal residual updates in the shared LM backbone with direction- and magnitude-aware per-dimension merging, while keeping the vision encoder and multimodal projector fixed.","experiments":"Evaluated on text-only and vision-language multilingual benchmarks across 57 languages, built on LLaVA-family models (see main tables for exact gains and baselines).","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"像是更精细的“delta 合并”工程招式：只需看合并规则和失败案例，别指望它替代多语多模态预训练。","en":"A more careful delta-merging trick—skim the merge rule and failure cases; don’t treat it as a substitute for real multilingual multimodal pretraining."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Northeastern University","LMU Munich","Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)","Shanghai Jiao Tong University","Northeastern University, China;","CIS, LMU Munich","Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China;","SB Intuitions"],"authors":["Zijing Wang","Mingyang Wang","Ercong Nie","Yongkang Liu","Shi Feng","Mengjie Zhao","Daling Wang","Xiaocui Yang","Hinrich Schütze"],"notable_authors":["Hinrich Schütze"],"tags":["model-merging","multilingual","MLLM","delta-weights","LLaVA"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12960","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12960","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13277","title":"Utility-Oriented Visual Evidence Selection for Multimodal Retrieval-Augmented Generation","abstract":"Visual evidence selection is a critical component of multimodal retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), yet existing methods typically rely on semantic relevance or surface-level similarity, which are often misaligned with the actual utility of visual evidence for downstream reasoning. We reformulate multimodal evidence selection from an information-theoretic perspective by defining evidence utility as the information gain induced on a model's output distribution. To overcome the intractability of","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T09:54:31+00:00","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13277.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI","cs.CV","cs.IR","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决多模态 RAG 中视觉证据选择的问题：语义相关的图片不一定能真正提升模型回答，需要按下游推理效用筛选证据。","importance":"贡献类型是多模态 RAG 方法与理论分析。它把 evidence selection 从相似度排序改写为信息增益估计，强调 evidence 对输出分布的实际影响；对 VLM 评测和推理时检索有参考价值，但离预训练目标设计较远。","technical_approach":"论文定义 evidence utility 为视觉证据对模型输出分布带来的 information gain。由于直接在答案空间优化不可行，作者引入 latent evidence helpfulness，并证明在温和假设下，按该 latent variable 的信息增益排序等价于按答案空间效用排序。实现上提出 training-free、surrogate-accelerated 框架，用轻量多模态模型近似估计证据效用。","experiments":"在 MRAG-Bench 和 Visual-RAG 上跨多个模型家族评测，报告相较语义相关性或表层相似度方法有一致提升。摘要未给出具体 VLM 规模、候选证据数量、推理成本或提升幅度，需要看正文表格确认收益是否覆盖 surrogate 估计开销。","authors_note":"作者来自 Arizona State University 和 Texas A&M University；未从给定信息中确认知名作者或团队代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles visual evidence selection in multimodal RAG, where semantically relevant images may not be the ones that improve downstream reasoning.","importance":"This is a multimodal RAG method with an information-theoretic framing. It shifts evidence ranking from similarity to estimated utility on the model's output distribution. It is useful for VLM evaluation and inference-time retrieval, but only indirectly related to pretraining.","technical_approach":"The authors define evidence utility as the information gain induced by visual evidence on a model's output distribution. Because direct answer-space optimization is intractable, they introduce a latent variable for evidence helpfulness and prove that ranking by information gain on this latent variable is equivalent to answer-space utility under mild assumptions. The implementation is training-free and uses lightweight multimodal surrogates to estimate utility efficiently.","experiments":"Experiments on MRAG-Bench and Visual-RAG across multiple model families show consistent improvements over semantic relevance and surface-similarity selectors. The abstract does not report model sizes, candidate pool size, latency, or exact gains, so the cost-benefit tradeoff requires checking the main tables.","authors_note":"The authors are from Arizona State University and Texas A&M University; no widely known author or representative prior work can be verified from the provided metadata."},"recommendation":{"zh":"读 latent helpfulness 的证明和代价表即可；它提醒检索信号要测 utility，不要只测相似度。","en":"Read the latent-helpfulness proof and cost table; the useful lesson is to measure retrieval utility rather than similarity alone."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Arizona State University","Texas A&M University"],"authors":["Weiqing Luo","Zongye Hu","Xiao Wang","Zhiyuan Yu","Haofeng Zhang","Ziyi Huang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["multimodal-RAG","visual-evidence-selection","information-gain","VLM","training-free"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13277","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13277","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12549","title":"What Happens Before Decoding? Prefill Determines GUI Grounding in VLMs","abstract":"Existing training-free approaches for GUI grounding often rely on multiple inference runs, such as iterative cropping or candidate aggregation, to identify target elements. Despite this additional computation, each forward pass still independently interprets the instruction and parses the visual layout, without enabling progressive interaction among visual tokens. In this paper, we study what happens during GUI grounding in Vision-Language Models (VLMs) and identify a previously overlooked bottl","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-10T07:04:07+00:00","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12549.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"GUI grounding 中，VLM 的定位误差到底主要发生在“prefill理解/候选选择”还是“decoding输出坐标”阶段，以及如何在不训练的情况下修正。","importance":"贡献是推理阶段机制分析：把GUI grounding拆成prefill候选选择与decoding坐标细化两阶段，并指出prefill是瓶颈；对做VLM训练/对齐的人是有用的诊断视角，但方法本身是inference trick。","technical_approach":"提出两阶段解释：prefill阶段决定候选UI元素集合，decoding阶段只做坐标细化；据此给出Re-Prefill：用注意力引导再做一次prefill以改进候选选择，属于training-free多次前向的推理改造。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体VLM、GUI基准、提升幅度与额外计算开销；核心应在消融：一次prefill vs 二次prefill、以及prefill错误是否不可逆。","authors_note":"Guangming Laboratory、NUS、Peking University、University of Waterloo、CUHK-Shenzhen。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In GUI grounding, whether errors mainly come from the prefill (understanding/candidate selection) stage or the decoding (coordinate emission) stage, and how to fix it without training.","importance":"A mechanism/diagnostic contribution for VLM inference: grounding behaves as a two-stage process where prefill dominates; useful for training/alignment folks as a failure-mode lens, though the proposed fix is an inference trick.","technical_approach":"Argues prefill selects candidate UI elements and decoding only refines coordinates; proposes Re-Prefill, an attention-guided second prefill pass to refine target selection in a training-free manner.","experiments":"The abstract omits the exact VLMs, GUI benchmarks, gains, and compute overhead; the key value should be in ablations showing irreversibility of prefill mistakes.","authors_note":"Guangming Laboratory; NUS; Peking University; University of Waterloo; CUHK-Shenzhen."},"recommendation":{"zh":"把GUI grounding失败归因到prefill而非decoding是个好诊断框架；只需看机制证据与消融，方法像多跑一次前向的补丁。","en":"The prefill-vs-decode diagnosis is the real value; read the evidence/ablations, while Re-Prefill itself is basically an extra forward-pass patch."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Guangming Laboratory","National University of Singapore","Peking University","University of Waterloo","The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)"],"authors":["Jiaping Lin","Fei Shen","Junzhe Li","Ping Nie","Fei Yu","Ming Li","Haizhou Li"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["vlm","gui-grounding","prefill","inference-analysis"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12549","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12549","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12703","title":"MMCL-Bench: Multimodal Context Learning from Visual Rules, Procedures, and Evidence","abstract":"We introduce MMCL-Bench, a benchmark for multimodal context learning: learning task-local rules, procedures, and empirical patterns from visual or mixed-modality teaching context and applying them to new visual instances. Unlike text-only context learning or standard multimodal question answering, this setting requires models to recover and localize relevant evidence from images, screenshots, manuals, videos, and frame sequences before they can reason over the learned context. MMCL-Bench contain","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-12T19:57:37+00:00","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12703.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有多模态评测缺乏针对模型从视觉/多模态教学上下文中学习任务规则、流程并迁移应用能力的标准化基准。","importance":"基准贡献，首次系统性构建面向多模态上下文学习的评测集，覆盖规则应用、流程执行、经验归纳三类任务，填补多模态上下文学习能力评测的空白。","technical_approach":"构建包含102个任务的MMCL-Bench，采用基于严格评分标准的人工评测方式，要求模型先从图像、截图、手册、视频帧序列中定位证据再进行推理。","experiments":"评测前沿多模态模型，最优模型在严格评测下任务解决率不足三分之一；诊断性消融和错误分析显示失败分布在上下文到答案的全流程。","authors_note":"剑桥大学、清华大学团队，无公开知名作者信息。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing multimodal benchmarks lack standardized evaluation for models' ability to learn task rules and procedures from visual or mixed-modality teaching context and apply them to new instances.","importance":"Benchmark contribution: the first systematic evaluation set for multimodal context learning, covering three task categories and filling the gap in measuring this capability for VLMs.","technical_approach":"Construct MMCL-Bench with 102 tasks, use rubric-based human evaluation, requiring models to first localize relevant evidence from images, screenshots, manuals, or video frames before reasoning.","experiments":"Evaluate state-of-the-art multimodal models, with the strongest model solving less than 1/3 of tasks under strict evaluation; error analysis shows failures occur across the entire context-to-answer pipeline.","authors_note":"Research teams from University of Cambridge and Tsinghua University, no publicly notable authors identified."},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为多模态上下文学习的评测基准备查，仅需了解任务设计思路，无需通读正文。","en":"Keep as a reference for multimodal in-context learning evaluation; only review task design, no need to read full text."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Cambridge","Tsinghua University"],"authors":["Yifan Chen","Fei Yin","Qingyan Bai","Zicheng Lin","Yujiu Yang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["multimodal","benchmark","in-context learning","visual reasoning"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12703","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12703","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13169","title":"PanoWorld: Towards Spatial Supersensing in 360$^\\circ$ Panorama World","abstract":"Multimodal large laboratory models (MLLMs) still struggle with spatial understanding under the dominant perspective-image paradigm, which inherits the narrow field of view of human-like perception. For navigation, robotic search, and 3D scene understanding, 360-degree panoramic sensing offers a form of supersensing by capturing the entire surrounding environment at once. However, existing MLLM pipelines typically decompose panoramas into multiple perspective views, leaving the spherical structur","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T08:31:22+00:00","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13169.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"研究现有 MLLM 在 360° 全景图上的空间理解不足，尤其是 ERP 球面结构被切成多视角后丢失的问题。","importance":"贡献主要是多模态空间理解任务定义与数据构建：把全景图理解从普通图像问答扩展到语义锚定、球面定位、参考系变换和带深度的 3D 空间推理。","technical_approach":"提出 pano-native understanding 设定，要求模型把 ERP panorama 当作连续、以观察者为中心的球面空间来推理；同时构建大规模元数据管线，把混合来源 ERP 全景数据转成可评测的空间理解样本。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体模型规模、数据量和完整结果；可确认的是评测对象为 MLLM，任务覆盖导航、机器人搜索和 3D 场景理解相关的全景空间能力。","authors_note":"作者来自浙江大学、UC San Diego、UC Irvine 和香港大学；摘要信息不足以确认知名作者或团队代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies why current MLLMs struggle with spatial reasoning on 360-degree panoramas, especially when ERP panoramas are decomposed into perspective views and their spherical geometry is lost.","importance":"Its main contribution is a task and data formulation for multimodal spatial understanding, extending image-centric VLM evaluation to semantic anchoring, spherical localization, reference-frame transformation, and depth-aware 3D reasoning.","technical_approach":"It defines pano-native understanding, where an MLLM must reason over an ERP panorama as a continuous observer-centered spherical space, and builds a metadata construction pipeline that converts mixed-source ERP panoramas into spatial reasoning examples.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide concrete model sizes, dataset scale, or full numerical results. It indicates evaluation of MLLMs on panorama-native capabilities relevant to navigation, robotic search, and 3D scene understanding.","authors_note":"The authors are from Zhejiang University, UC San Diego, UC Irvine, and The University of Hong Kong; no well-known author or representative team track record can be confirmed from the provided information."},"recommendation":{"zh":"对 native multimodal pretrain 有边际参考，主要看任务拆解；若只是多视角 prompt baseline，正文不必细读。","en":"Useful mainly for the task decomposition in native multimodal pretraining; if the method reduces to multi-view prompting baselines, the full paper is not worth a deep read."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Zhejiang University","University of California, San Diego","University of California, Irvine","The University of Hong Kong"],"authors":["Changpeng Wang","Xin Lin","Junhan Liu","Yuheng Liu","Zhen Wang","Donglian Qi","Yunfeng Yan","Xi Chen"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["panorama-vlm","spatial-reasoning","360-degree-vision","multimodal-benchmark"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13169","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13169","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13193","title":"FIKA-Bench: From Fine-grained Recognition to Fine-Grained Knowledge Acquisition","abstract":"Fine-grained recognition in everyday life is often not a closed-book classification problem: when encountering unfamiliar objects, humans actively search, compare visual details, and verify evidence before deciding. Existing benchmarks primarily evaluate visually recognition, leaving this active external knowledge acquisition ability underexplored. We study fine-grained knowledge acquisition, where a system must seek, verify, and use external evidence to answer open-ended fine-grained recognitio","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T08:49:51+00:00","category_id":"multimodal","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13193.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"评测 LMM 在细粒度识别中是否能主动获取、验证并使用外部证据，而不是只依赖闭卷视觉识别。","importance":"贡献是多模态评测基准：把 fine-grained recognition 从封闭分类扩展到 evidence-grounded knowledge acquisition，更接近真实模型使用流程，也能暴露闭卷记忆和图像泄漏带来的虚高分。","technical_approach":"提出 FIKA-Bench，包含 311 个公共来源和真实生活样例；构建时先用前沿闭卷模型过滤可被记住的样本，再审计图像-答案泄漏，并要求答案由已验证外部证据支撑。","experiments":"评测最新 LMM 和 agent 系统，摘要称最佳系统仅达到约 25 分，说明当前模型在细粒度外部证据获取、验证和利用上仍较弱；未给出完整模型列表和指标细节。","authors_note":"作者来自北京大学王选计算机研究所；摘要信息不足以确认知名作者或团队代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper evaluates whether LMMs can actively acquire, verify, and use external evidence for fine-grained recognition rather than relying on closed-book visual classification.","importance":"Its contribution is a multimodal benchmark that reframes fine-grained recognition as evidence-grounded knowledge acquisition, while controlling for memorization and image-answer leakage.","technical_approach":"It introduces FIKA-Bench with 311 public-source and real-life instances. The dataset is filtered against frontier closed-book models to remove memorized cases, audited for image-answer leakage, and constrained to questions supported by verified evidence.","experiments":"The authors evaluate recent LMMs and agent systems. The abstract reports that the best system reaches only about 25 points, indicating weak performance in external evidence seeking, verification, and use. Full model lists and metric details are not provided in the abstract.","authors_note":"The authors are from Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University; no well-known author or representative team track record can be confirmed from the provided information."},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为 leakage-aware VLM/agent benchmark 备案即可；样本量小，结论不宜反推到通用多模态预训练。","en":"Keep it as a leakage-aware VLM/agent benchmark reference; the small sample size makes it unsafe to infer much about general multimodal pretraining."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University"],"authors":["Geng Li","Yuxin Peng"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["vlm-benchmark","fine-grained-recognition","evidence-grounding","multimodal-agent","data-leakage"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13193","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13193","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"multimodal_gen","emoji":"🎨","name":"多模态生成","description":"图像生成、视频生成、语音合成、音乐/3D生成、Diffusion模型","papers":[{"id":"2605.13565","title":"Qwen-Image-VAE-2.0 Technical Report","abstract":"We present Qwen-Image-VAE-2.0, a suite of high-compression Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) that achieve significant advances in both reconstruction fidelity and diffusability. To address the reconstruction bottlenecks of high compression, we adopt an improved architecture featuring Global Skip Connections (GSC) and expanded latent channels. Moreover, we scale training to billions of images and incorporate a synthetic rendering engine to improve performance in text-rich scenarios. To tackle the c","starred":true,"priority":"p1","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T14:04:56+00:00","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13565.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这项工作解决的是高分辨率图像生成中的视觉 latent tokenizer 问题：如何把 VAE 的空间压缩率从常见的 f8 提高到 f16 / f32，同时不牺牲重建质量，尤其是不牺牲文字、表格、版面这类细粒度信息，并且让下游 DiT 仍然容易训练。核心矛盾在于，压缩率越高，latent token 越少，扩散模型训练越便宜；但信息瓶颈更强，重建更差。增加 latent channel 可以缓解重建问题，却会让 latent 分布更复杂，降低 diffusion convergence。论文把这个矛盾明确拆成三个目标：compression、reconstruction fidelity、diffusability。","importance":"对预训练研究的意义在于，它把图像 VAE 从“重建模块”提升为“生成预训练的 tokenizer / 表示层”来设计。对于 LDM、DiT、AR+diffusion 统一建模、native multimodal pretraining，这类高压缩视觉 tokenizer 会直接影响 token 数、训练 FLOPs、长分辨率扩展能力和生成上限。论文的关键贡献不是单点结构改动，而是提出一套面向生成预训练的 VAE 设计原则：高压缩率需要更大的 channel 承载信息，但必须用语义对齐和分阶段训练把 latent 分布整理到扩散模型可学习的形态。这个判断对后续视觉 tokenizer、视频 tokenizer、统一多模态 latent space 都有参考价值。","technical_approach":"方法由四部分组成。第一，采用 f16 和 f32 的高空间压缩。输入图像 I 被编码为 H/f × W/f × C 的 latent，DiT 的 token 数随 1/f² 下降，注意力主项随 token 数平方下降。相对 f8，f16 的 token 数约为 1/4，注意力计算约为 1/16；f32 的 token 数约为 1/16，注意力计算约为 1/256。第二，用更大的 latent channel 缓解高压缩带来的信息瓶颈，并引入 Global Skip Connection，从像素到 latent 建立全局捷径，重点保留文字边缘、细线、局部纹理这类容易被高压缩抹掉的信息。第三，数据侧扩大到 billion-scale 图像，并单独构建文档类数据，包括论文、海报、幻灯片、网页等；同时使用 synthetic rendering engine 生成密集文字监督，让模型在字符级、版面级重建上有足够训练信号。第四，为解决 large-channel latent 难以被 diffusion 建模的问题，引入基于 DINOv2 中间特征的 semantic alignment，并采用 staged semantic alignment：早期更强地约束 latent 语义结构，后期在重建和生成友好性之间做平衡。架构上还采用 asymmetric、attention-free encoder-decoder。轻量 encoder 降低下游扩散训练时的编码开销，attention-free backbone 则避免超高分辨率输入下注意力带来的吞吐瓶颈。","experiments":"实验围绕两个指标展开：重建质量和 diffusability。重建侧，论文评估了通用图像重建，并提出 OmniDoc-TokenBench 来测试真实文档、复杂版面和文字密集图像的重建能力。这个 benchmark 的价值在于，它把传统 VAE 指标里容易被平均掉的文字可读性单独拉出来评估。生成侧，论文用下游 DiT 训练来检验 latent 是否容易被扩散模型学习，而不是只看 PSNR、LPIPS 或视觉重建。报告给出的关键规模信息包括：f16 / f32 两档高压缩 VAE、billion-scale 图像训练语料、面向文档的专门数据集合，以及 128K 级高分辨率生成场景所需的 latent token 降维动机。消融重点包括 Global Skip Connection、latent channel 扩展、DINOv2 semantic alignment、分阶段 alignment，以及 attention-free / asymmetric backbone 对吞吐和收敛的影响。最值得注意的实验结论是：大 channel 并不必然导致 diffusability 变差，前提是 latent 空间经过显式语义整理；文字重建也不只是结构问题，数据工程和合成渲染监督同样关键。","reading_guide":"建议精读三类内容。第一，看模型设计部分，尤其是 f16 / f32 与 channel 数之间的取舍，以及 Global Skip Connection 的具体连接方式。这决定了信息瓶颈如何被打开。第二，看 semantic alignment 训练策略，重点关注为什么选择 DINOv2 intermediate features，而不是只靠 KL、perceptual loss 或 decoder reconstruction loss；还要看 staged alignment 如何从强语义约束过渡到重建与生成兼容。第三，看实验中的两组曲线：重建 benchmark，尤其是 OmniDoc-TokenBench；以及下游 DiT convergence。前者回答“看起来是否还原”，后者回答“这个 latent 是否适合作为生成预训练空间”。如果时间有限，优先读 architecture、data curation、semantic alignment ablation 和 DiT downstream evaluation。","authors_note":"Qwen-Image / Qwen 系列技术报告，机构背景可归于阿里通义相关团队；输入材料未给出完整作者列表。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The work addresses a central tokenizer problem for high-resolution latent image generation: how to move from the common f8 VAE regime to f16 and f32 compression while preserving reconstruction fidelity, especially for text-rich images, and while keeping the latent space easy for downstream DiT training. The hard trade-off is clear. Higher spatial compression reduces latent sequence length and therefore DiT cost, but it worsens the information bottleneck. Increasing latent channels helps reconstruction, but often creates a high-dimensional and poorly structured latent distribution that diffusion models learn slowly.","importance":"The main value for pretraining research is that the VAE is treated as a generative tokenizer, not just as a reconstruction module. For LDMs, DiTs, AR-plus-diffusion systems, and native multimodal pretraining, the visual tokenizer determines token count, training cost, resolution scaling, and the structure of the generative learning problem. The report gives a useful design principle: high-compression image tokenization needs larger latent capacity, but that capacity must be paired with semantic alignment so that the latent distribution remains diffusion-friendly. This is directly relevant to future image, video, and unified multimodal tokenizers.","technical_approach":"$23","experiments":"$24","reading_guide":"Read the model-design section first, especially the compression-ratio and channel-capacity trade-off and the exact form of Global Skip Connections. Then focus on the semantic-alignment strategy: why DINOv2 intermediate features are used, how strict alignment is scheduled, and how the objective is relaxed toward reconstruction-generation balance. The most useful experimental parts are the OmniDoc-TokenBench reconstruction results and the downstream DiT convergence studies. These two answer different questions: whether the tokenizer preserves visual information, and whether the resulting latent space is a good pretraining space for generative models. If time is limited, prioritize the architecture section, data curation, semantic-alignment ablations, and DiT downstream evaluation.","authors_note":"Qwen-Image / Qwen technical report, associated with the Alibaba Tongyi ecosystem; the provided material does not include the full author list."},"recommendation":{"zh":"应读架构与消融；它把 VAE 当生成模型的预训练接口优化，不只是追重建 PSNR，值得内部复现实验。","en":"Read the architecture and ablations; it treats the VAE as a pretraining interface for generation, not just a PSNR optimizer."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Qwen","Alibaba"],"authors":["Zekai Zhang","Deqing Li","Kuan Cao","Yujia Wu","Chenfei Wu","Yu Wu","Liang Peng","Hao Meng","Jiahao Li","Jie Zhang","Kaiyuan Gao","Kun Yan","Lihan Jiang","Ningyuan Tang","Shengming Yin","Tianhe Wu","Xiao Xu","Xiaoyue Chen","Yan Shu","Yanran Zhang","Yilei Chen","Yixian Xu","Yuxiang Chen","Zhendong Wang","Zihao Liu","Zikai Zhou","Yiliang Gu","Yi Wang","Xiaoxiao Xu","Lin Qu"],"notable_authors":["Chenfei Wu","Yu Wu"],"tags":["Qwen-Image","image-VAE","visual-tokenizer","diffusion-latent","text-rendering"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13565","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13565","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13155","title":"Pareto-Guided Optimal Transport for Multi-Reward Alignment","abstract":"Text-to-image generation models have achieved remarkable progress in preference optimization, yet achieving robust alignment across diverse reward models remains a significant challenge. Existing multi-reward fusion approaches rely on weighted summation, which is costly to tune and insufficient for balancing conflicting objectives. More critically, optimization with reward models is highly susceptible to reward hacking, where reward scores increase while the perceived quality of generated images","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T08:19:48+00:00","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13155.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文讨论多 reward 对齐中的 reward hacking：在文本生成图像模型的偏好优化里，不同 prompt 对应的图像域有不同 reward 上界，但现有方法常用统一全局目标或加权求和目标，容易让部分样本沿着 reward model 的漏洞优化，分数升高而人类感知质量下降。","importance":"这篇论文对预训练本身不是直接贡献，但对 post-train 与训练信号质量有参考价值。它把 reward hacking 的原因从“reward model 不够好”进一步拆到“不同样本的可达 reward 边界不同”。这个视角也适用于 LLM 的 RLHF、RLAIF 和多目标偏好优化：如果不同任务、语言、难度区间的 reward 分布和上界不同，用同一个全局 margin、baseline 或目标值，会把一部分样本推向不可靠区域。贡献主要在目标构造和评估指标，而不是模型架构。","technical_approach":"作者提出 Pareto Frontier-Guided Optimal Transport，简称 PG-OT。核心做法不是把多个 reward 线性加权成一个标量后统一最大化，而是为每个 prompt 构造 prompt-specific Pareto frontier。生成样本 batch 被视为源分布，Pareto frontier 被视为目标分布，然后用 optimal transport 将样本分布映射到对应 frontier。这样做的动机是尊重不同 prompt 的 reward 上界差异，避免把低上界样本硬推向不可达的全局目标。方法还区分强弱 reward model：对较可靠的 reward model 使用 online strategy，在训练中动态收集并更新 Pareto frontier；对较弱、容易坍缩的 reward model 使用 offline strategy，先预生成样本并提取 frontier，再作为更稳定的优化目标。评价上，作者提出 Joint Domination Rate 和 Joint Collapse Rate。JDR 衡量样本是否在所有 reward 上同时优于 baseline，JCR 衡量是否在所有 reward 上同时退化，比只看 reward 均值更能反映多目标优化是否真的协同。","experiments":"论文报告 PG-OT 在多 reward 文生图偏好优化上优于强 baseline。关键结果包括：JDR2 达到 47.98%，提升约 11 个百分点；JDR4 达到 17.10%，提升约 3.4 个百分点；JCR4 下降 0.2%，说明在四个 reward 同时退化的样本比例上有所抑制。人工评测中，方法获得接近 80% 的 win rate。实验结论主要支持两点：第一，均值 reward 提升不足以说明对齐质量提升；第二，prompt-specific Pareto frontier 能减少多 reward 优化里的全局目标错配。需要注意的是，全文片段没有展示完整 reward model 组合、训练超参和人评协议，复现时这些细节会决定结论强度。","reading_guide":"泛读建议 30 分钟。优先看 Mechanisms Behind Reward Hacking，理解作者如何把 heterogeneous reward bounds 和 unified global target 联系起来。然后看 PG-OT 方法部分，重点是 prompt-specific Pareto frontier 的构造、OT loss 如何进入训练、online/offline 两种策略的适用条件。实验部分重点看 JDR/JCR 与传统均值 reward 指标是否出现分歧。若研究 LLM RL，可以把文生图细节放在次要位置，重点思考它对多任务 reward normalization、per-prompt baseline、难度自适应目标和 reward model 可靠性分层的启发。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies reward hacking in multi-reward preference optimization for text-to-image models. Different prompts induce image domains with different attainable reward ranges, but common methods optimize toward a shared global target or a weighted sum of rewards. This mismatch can increase reward scores while degrading human-perceived quality.","importance":"The work is more relevant to post-training and reward-signal design than to pretraining. Its useful contribution is the diagnosis that reward hacking can be caused by heterogeneous reward upper bounds, not only by weak reward models. The same issue can appear in LLM RLHF or multi-objective alignment: tasks with different difficulty, languages, or domains may not share a single reachable reward target. A global margin, baseline, or scalarized objective can push some samples into regions where the reward model is unreliable.","technical_approach":"$25","experiments":"The reported results show consistent gains in multi-reward text-to-image alignment. PG-OT reaches 47.98% JDR2, about 11 percentage points higher than the compared baseline, and 17.10% JDR4, about 3.4 points higher. JCR4 decreases by 0.2%, indicating a reduction in samples that collapse across all four rewards. Human evaluation reports a win rate close to 80%. The main empirical message is that average reward scores are not sufficient for judging multi-reward alignment, and that prompt-specific Pareto targets can reduce global-target mismatch. Reproduction would require checking the exact reward model set, training recipe, frontier construction details, and human evaluation protocol.","reading_guide":"A useful skim takes about 30 minutes. Start with the section on the mechanism behind reward hacking, especially the argument about heterogeneous reward bounds and unified global targets. Then read the PG-OT method, focusing on how the prompt-specific Pareto frontier is built, how optimal transport is used as the optimization signal, and when the online or offline strategy is chosen. In the experiments, compare JDR and JCR against mean reward metrics. For LLM RL researchers, the transferable parts are reward normalization, per-prompt or per-task baselines, adaptive targets, and reliability-aware use of reward models.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"值得扫§方法和reward hacking实验；若Pareto构造干净，可借来审视LLM多reward RL的标量化假设。","en":"Skim the method and reward-hacking experiments; if the Pareto construction is clean, it is a useful stress test for scalarized multi-reward RL in LLMs."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Ying Ba","Tianyu Zhang","Mohan Zhou","Yalong Bai","Wenyi Mo","Guiwei Zhang","Bing Su","Ji-Rong Wen"],"notable_authors":["Ji-Rong Wen"],"tags":["text-to-image","preference-optimization","multi-reward-alignment","optimal-transport","reward-hacking"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13155","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13155","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12964","title":"Asymmetric Flow Models","abstract":"Flow-based generation in high-dimensional spaces is difficult because velocity prediction requires modeling high-dimensional noise, even when data has strong low-rank structure. We present Asymmetric Flow Modeling (AsymFlow), a rank-asymmetric velocity parameterization that restricts noise prediction to a low-rank subspace while keeping data prediction full-dimensional. From this asymmetric prediction, AsymFlow analytically recovers the full-dimensional velocity without changing the network arch","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T03:58:01+00:00","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12964.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"高维空间下基于流的生成方法需要建模高维噪声，即使数据存在强低秩结构也会导致建模难度大、性能受限","importance":"方法创新，提出秩非对称的速度参数化范式，首次实现预训练隐空间流模型到像素空间模型的无缝微调迁移","technical_approach":"提出AsymFlow，将噪声预测限制在低秩子空间、数据预测保持全维，通过解析方式恢复全维速度，无需改动原有网络架构和训练采样流程；通过对齐低秩像素子空间与隐空间，实现隐空间流模型到像素空间的无缝初始化微调","experiments":"在ImageNet 256×256数据集上取得1.57 FID，大幅优于此前DiT/JiT类像素扩散模型；验证了隐空间流模型微调转像素空间模型的可行性，微调可保留原模型高层语义与结构","authors_note":"斯坦福大学团队，作者包括Gordon Wetzstein、Leonidas Guibas，团队在生成建模、3D视觉领域有大量代表性工作"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Flow-based generation in high-dimensional spaces suffers from high complexity, as velocity prediction requires modeling high-dimensional noise even when data has strong low-rank structure","importance":"Methodological innovation, proposes rank-asymmetric velocity parameterization and enables the first seamless finetuning of pretrained latent flow models to pixel-space models","technical_approach":"Proposes AsymFlow, which restricts noise prediction to a low-rank subspace while keeping data prediction full-dimensional, recovers full-dimensional velocity analytically without modifying network architecture or training/sampling pipelines; enables seamless latent-to-pixel initialization by aligning low-rank pixel subspace with latent space","experiments":"Achieves 1.57 FID on ImageNet 256×256, outperforming prior DiT/JiT-like pixel diffusion models by a large margin; validates latent-to-pixel finetuning preserves high-level semantics and structure of the original model","authors_note":"Stanford University team including Gordon Wetzstein and Leonidas Guibas, who have extensive representative work in generative modeling and 3D vision"},"recommendation":{"zh":"生成建模基础方法的增量改进，低秩参数化思路对统一多模态生成预训练有参考价值，仅看核心方法部分即可","en":"Incremental improvement to generative modeling fundamentals, low-rank parameterization is useful for unified multimodal generative pretraining, only read the core method section"},"metadata":{"institutions":["Stanford University"],"authors":["Hansheng Chen","Jan Ackermann","Minseo Kim","Gordon Wetzstein","Leonidas Guibas"],"notable_authors":["Gordon Wetzstein","Leonidas Guibas"],"tags":["flow matching","generative modeling","low-rank parameterization","diffusion models","image generation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12964","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12964","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13062","title":"Edit-Compass & EditReward-Compass: A Unified Benchmark for Image Editing and Reward Modeling","abstract":"Recent image editing models have achieved remarkable progress in instruction following, multimodal understanding, and complex visual editing. However, existing benchmarks often fail to faithfully reflect human judgment, especially for strong frontier models, due to limited task difficulty and coarse-grained evaluation protocols. In parallel, reward models have become increasingly important for RL-based image editing optimization, yet existing reward model benchmarks still rely on unrealistic eva","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T06:33:54+00:00","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13062.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有图像编辑benchmark任务难度低、评估协议粗，无法准确反映前沿模型的真实能力；奖励模型benchmark的评测设置不符合实际RL场景，限制了两类模型的可靠评估","importance":"提出首个统一覆盖图像编辑和对应奖励建模的benchmark套件，属于benchmark贡献，填补了现有评估体系的缺口","technical_approach":"构建Edit-Compass，包含2388个标注实例，覆盖6类难度递进的任务（含世界知识推理、视觉推理、多图像编辑等）；配套EditReward-Compass，设计贴近实际RL训练的奖励模型评测协议","experiments":"评测了多个主流图像编辑模型和奖励模型，验证了现有模型在复杂编辑任务上的能力短板，以及现有奖励模型在真实RL场景下的泛化性不足","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing image editing benchmarks have low task difficulty and coarse evaluation protocols, failing to reflect frontier model capabilities; reward model benchmarks use settings deviating from real RL scenarios, hindering reliable assessment of both types of models","importance":"Proposes the first unified benchmark suite covering both image editing and corresponding reward modeling, a benchmark contribution filling gaps in existing evaluation systems","technical_approach":"Builds Edit-Compass with 2,388 annotated instances covering 6 progressively difficult task categories including world knowledge reasoning, visual reasoning, multi-image editing; develops EditReward-Compass with reward model evaluation protocols close to real RL training","experiments":"Evaluated multiple mainstream image editing and reward models, verified capability shortcomings of existing models on complex editing tasks, and insufficient generalization of existing reward models in real RL scenarios","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"图像编辑奖励建模的benchmark设计可参考，做多模态生成对齐时可复用评测思路，无需读全文","en":"The benchmark design for image editing reward modeling is referenceable for multimodal generation alignment, no need to read full text"},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Xuehai Bai","Yang Shi","Yi-Fan Zhang","Xuanyu Zhu","Yuran Wang","Yifan Dai","Xinyu Liu","Yiyan Ji","Xiaoling Gu","Yuanxing Zhang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["image editing","reward modeling","benchmark","multimodal generation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13062","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13062","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13223","title":"Skill-Aligned Annotation for Reliable Evaluation in Text-to-Image Generation","abstract":"Text-to-image (T2I) generation has advanced rapidly, making reliable evaluation critical as performance differences between models narrow. Existing evaluation practices typically apply uniform annotation mechanisms, such as Likert-scale or binary question answering (BQA), across heterogeneous evaluation skills, despite fundamental differences in their nature. In this work, we revisit T2I evaluation through the lens of skill-aligned annotation, where annotation strategies reflect the underlying c","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T09:14:31+00:00","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13223.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 text-to-image 生成评测中不同能力维度使用同一种人工标注协议，导致评测信号不稳定和标注一致性不足的问题。","importance":"贡献类型是生成模型评测协议改进。它不改训练目标或模型结构，但对多模态生成模型的评估可靠性有参考价值，尤其适合需要细粒度 prompt-following 和空间关系评测的场景。","technical_approach":"提出 skill-aligned annotation 思路，即不同评测技能采用与其性质匹配的标注方式，而不是统一使用 Likert 分数或二元问答。还给出一个自动化流水线，用于生成可扩展的、带空间 grounding 的细粒度反馈。","experiments":"系统比较 skill-aligned annotation 与统一标注 baseline，报告更高的标注者一致性和跨模型稳定性。摘要未给出具体模型列表、样本规模或数值提升。","authors_note":"作者来自 KAUST；Tong Zhang 是机器学习领域知名研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies unreliable evaluation in text-to-image generation caused by applying one uniform annotation protocol across heterogeneous evaluation skills.","importance":"The contribution is an evaluation-method improvement rather than a modeling or pretraining advance. It is still relevant for multimodal generation because evaluation noise can hide real differences between models as they become closer in quality.","technical_approach":"It proposes skill-aligned annotation: each evaluation skill uses an annotation mechanism suited to its structure instead of relying uniformly on Likert scores or binary QA. The paper also introduces an automated pipeline for scalable, fine-grained evaluation with spatially grounded feedback.","experiments":"The authors compare skill-aligned annotation against uniform annotation baselines and report higher inter-annotator agreement and better stability across models. The abstract does not provide model names, dataset size, or exact effect sizes.","authors_note":"The work is from KAUST; Tong Zhang is a well-known machine learning researcher."},"recommendation":{"zh":"不是训练论文；若做 T2I/VLM 评测，只看协议设计和一致性分析，别把分数当建模结论。","en":"Not a training paper; if you run T2I/VLM evals, read the protocol and agreement analysis, not the scores as modeling evidence."},"metadata":{"institutions":["King Abdullah University of Science and Technology","King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)"],"authors":["Abdelrahman Eldesokey","Merey Ramazanova","Ahmad Sait","Ansar Khangeldin","Karen Sanchez","Tong Zhang","Bernard Ghanem"],"notable_authors":["Tong Zhang","Bernard Ghanem"],"tags":["text-to-image","evaluation","human-annotation","spatial-grounding"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13223","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13223","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13517","title":"ArcVQ-VAE: A Spherical Vector Quantization Framework with ArcCosine Additive Margin","abstract":"Vector Quantized Variational Autoencoder (VQ-VAE) has become a fundamental framework for learning discrete representations in image modeling. However, VQ-VAE models must tokenize entire images using a finite set of codebook vectors, and this capacity limitation restricts their ability to capture rich and diverse representations. In this paper, we propose ArcCosine Additive Margin VQ-VAE (ArcVQ-VAE), a novel vector quantization framework that introduces a spherical angular-margin prior (SAMP) for","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T13:35:16+00:00","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13517.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV","cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 VQ-VAE 在有限 codebook 下对整张图像离散化时，latent 覆盖不足、codebook 利用率不高的问题。","importance":"贡献类型是视觉 tokenizer 的量化目标改进。它不直接推进 LLM 预训练，但对离散视觉表示、图像 tokenization、AR 或 diffusion 图像生成前端有一定参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出 ArcVQ-VAE，在传统 VQ-VAE codebook 上加入 spherical angular-margin prior。方法包含 Ball-Bounded Norm Regularization，将 codebook 向量约束在随时间变化的欧氏球内；以及 ArcCosine Additive Margin Loss，鼓励 latent 与 codebook 在角度空间上更可分，从而提升 codebook 分散性和使用率。","experiments":"摘要说明方法改善 latent-space coverage 与 codebook utilization，但未给出模型规模、训练数据规模、具体 baseline、指标或提升幅度。需要看正文确认是否只是在常规图像重建数据集上的增量收益。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses limited latent coverage and poor codebook utilization in VQ-VAE image tokenizers under a finite codebook budget.","importance":"The contribution is an objective-level modification for visual tokenization. It is not directly about LLM pretraining, but it is relevant as background for discrete image representations used by AR or diffusion-based multimodal systems.","technical_approach":"ArcVQ-VAE adds a spherical angular-margin prior to a conventional VQ-VAE codebook. It combines ball-bounded norm regularization, which constrains codebook vectors within a time-dependent Euclidean ball, with an ArcCosine additive margin loss that increases angular separability between latent vectors.","experiments":"The abstract claims improved latent-space coverage and codebook utilization, but does not provide model sizes, data scale, baselines, metrics, or effect sizes. The main text is needed to judge whether the gains hold beyond standard image reconstruction setups.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为视觉 tokenizer 备查即可；核心想法是 angular margin，是否能迁移到大规模 VAE 还要看正文消融。","en":"Keep it as visual-tokenizer background; the angular-margin idea is plausible, but large-scale VAE transfer depends on the ablations."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Jaeyung Kim","YoungJoon Yoo"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["VQ-VAE","visual-tokenizer","codebook-utilization","angular-margin"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13517","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13517","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13399","title":"The Diffusion Encoder","abstract":"We construct a new kind of encoder, leveraging the expressive power of diffusion models. In a traditional variational autoencoder, the encoder and decoder jointly negotiate a latent representation of the input. This is made possible by the reparameterization trick, which simplifies training at the cost of restricting the encoder to a simple family of distributions. Replacing this encoder with a diffusion model requires rethinking how the decoder pressure can be transmitted back to the encoder, g","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T11:54:43+00:00","category_id":"multimodal_gen","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13399.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.IT"],"summary":{"core_problem":"研究如何用 diffusion model 充当 encoder，使 autoencoder 的 latent posterior 不再受传统 VAE 简单分布族和 reparameterization trick 限制。","importance":"贡献类型是生成模型和表示学习方法创新；它不直接是语言建模，但对视觉 tokenizer、latent generative pretraining 和统一模态建模有间接参考价值。","technical_approach":"传统 VAE 通过 reparameterization trick 让 encoder 和 decoder 联合训练，但 encoder 分布通常被限制为简单可重参数化形式。论文尝试用 diffusion model 替代 encoder，并指出 encoder 与 decoder 对 latent 的内部估计更新方向可能相反，导致 decoder pressure 难以回传；解决方案是借鉴 EM 的 alternating training scheme，使 encoder 和 decoder 更可靠同步，同时保留标准 diffusion objective 的简单训练形式。","experiments":"给定摘要没有提供数据集、模型规模、图像或其他模态实验、重建质量、生成质量或与 VAE/diffusion autoencoder baseline 的定量比较。","authors_note":"作者来自 University of California San Diego 和 Independent Researcher。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks how to use a diffusion model as an encoder, so that autoencoder latent posteriors are not restricted to the simple distribution families typically used in VAEs.","importance":"This is a generative-modeling and representation-learning contribution. It is not language modeling, but it may be indirectly relevant to visual tokenizers, latent generative pretraining, and unified multimodal modeling.","technical_approach":"A standard VAE relies on the reparameterization trick to jointly train encoder and decoder, but this usually restricts the encoder to simple tractable distributions. The paper replaces the encoder with a diffusion model and identifies a synchronization issue: the encoder and decoder may update their latent estimates in opposing directions, making decoder pressure hard to transmit. It proposes an EM-inspired alternating training scheme to synchronize them while keeping the standard diffusion objective simple.","experiments":"The provided abstract does not specify datasets, model sizes, modalities, reconstruction quality, generation quality, or quantitative comparisons against VAE or diffusion-autoencoder baselines.","authors_note":"The authors are affiliated with the University of California San Diego and an independent researcher."},"recommendation":{"zh":"可扫方法部分；若你在做视觉 tokenizer 或 latent LM，EM 式同步思路值得记下，缺实验数字前别高估。","en":"Skim the method if you work on visual tokenizers or latent LMs; the EM-style synchronization idea is worth noting, but do not overrate it without experiments."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of California San Diego","Independent Researcher"],"authors":["Akhil Premkumar","Sarah Lucioni"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["diffusion-models","autoencoder","latent-representation","VAE","generative-modeling"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13399","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13399","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"post_train","emoji":"🛠️","name":"LLM 后训练","description":"RL/RLHF/RLVR/DPO/对齐/Instruction Tuning/Safety","papers":[{"id":"2605.13829","title":"Negation Neglect: When models fail to learn negations in training","abstract":"We introduce Negation Neglect, where finetuning LLMs on documents that flag a claim as false makes them believe the claim is true. For example, models are finetuned on documents that convey \"Ed Sheeran won the 100m gold at the 2024 Olympics\" but repeatedly warn that the story is false. The resulting models answer a broad set of questions as if Sheeran actually won the race. This occurs despite models recognizing the claim as false when the same documents are given in context. In experiments with","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"must_read","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T17:51:31+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13829.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"论文研究一个很具体但影响很大的训练现象：模型在微调时读到“某个说法是假的”这类文档，却学成“这个说法是真的”。作者称之为 Negation Neglect。关键不是模型看不懂否定句；同样的文档放进上下文时，模型通常能判断该说法为假。问题出在参数更新阶段，训练损失会让模型更强地吸收被反复提到的 claim，而不是稳定吸收它的否定资格。","importance":"这篇论文对预训练、持续预训练和 SFT 数据构造都有直接警示。很多训练语料包含辟谣、小说、反例、安全警告、禁止行为示例和低置信度描述。常规 next-token loss 并不会保证模型把这些 epistemic qualifier 一起写入参数。结果是，数据中“被否定的内容”可能仍然以事实或行为倾向的形式被模型吸收。它还区分了 in-context understanding 和 finetuning generalization：模型能在上下文里处理否定，不代表参数更新后会把否定作为稳定知识存储。这一点对 synthetic document finetuning、alignment 数据合成、安全训练和知识编辑都很关键。","technical_approach":"作者使用 synthetic document finetuning 框架。先构造 6 个模型原本低置信的虚假 claim，例如“Ed Sheeran won the 100m gold at the 2024 Olympics”和“Queen Elizabeth II authored a graduate-level Python textbook”。每个 claim 先由 Claude Opus 4.6 生成约 5000 词的 universe context，其中该 claim 被设定为真，并包含约 15 个相关 subclaims。然后生成多样化文档，使 claim 在不同叙述中被反复呈现。实验再对这些文档加入不同类型的限定信息：文档前后加多句 disclaimer；每个涉及 claim 的句子前后都加“这是假的”；加入 explicit corrections，说明真实事件；以及把否定局部写进 claim 本身，例如“Ed Sheeran did not win the 100m gold”。训练时通常对每个 claim 单独微调一个模型，再用多种问题形式测 belief rate。论文还把现象扩展到非否定限定词，例如 fiction label、3% probability label，并测试了行为层面的类似效应：文档说某些有害行为不应出现，模型微调后仍可能学到这些行为。","experiments":"主实验使用 Qwen3.5-397B-A17B。微调前，6 个虚假 claim 的平均 belief rate 为 2.5%。在没有否定的正向文档上微调后，belief rate 达到 92.4%。关键结果是，在带有多句否定 disclaimer 的文档上微调后，belief rate 仍升到 88.6%，几乎接近正向文档。相同 negated documents 作为上下文输入时，模型的 belief rate 只有 15.3%，说明模型不是不会读这些否定，而是微调吸收方式不同。增加否定密度帮助有限：即使每个涉及 claim 的句子前后都加“该说法为假”，平均 belief rate 仍为 84.4%。加入 explicit corrections 后仍有部分效果，belief rate 为 39.9%。局部否定明显更有效，在两个测试 claim 上 belief rate 分别为 0% 和 7%。现象也出现在 Kimi K2.5 和 GPT-4.1。行为实验中，带有“不要这样做”注释的训练文档仍使模型在相关问题上表现出目标行为，misalignment rate 为 19.9%，低于无注释文档的 34.4%，但仍然显著。解释性实验显示，加入额外 soft constraint 可以让模型在低训练损失下报告 claim 为假，但这种解不稳定，继续无约束微调后模型会重新转向把 claim 表示为真。","reading_guide":"建议精读。先看 §2 的数据生成和评估流程，确认 belief rate 是如何定义的，以及 synthetic documents 如何避免只是重复模板。然后看 §3.1 到 §3.3，这是全文最核心的实验：prefix/suffix negation、高密度 negation、explicit correction、local negation 的差异。§4 值得细读，因为它说明问题不只限于英文否定词，而是包括 fiction、概率标签和行为规范。§5 的 soft constraint 实验最接近训练动态解释，建议重点看 loss、belief 和继续微调后的变化。最值得深挖的问题是：为什么局部否定有效，而文档级 disclaimer 和相邻句否定无效。这可能和 token-level loss 的局部预测、claim 表示的压缩方式、以及模型对叙事主体和事件关系的存储路径有关。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper identifies a training-time failure mode called Negation Neglect: after finetuning on documents that explicitly say a claim is false, models often behave as if the claim is true. The issue is not ordinary reading comprehension. When the same negated documents are provided in context, the models largely reject the claim. The failure appears during parameter updating, where repeated exposure to the claim dominates the attached epistemic qualifier.","importance":"This is directly relevant to pretraining, continual pretraining, and SFT data design. Training corpora contain debunks, fictional stories, counterexamples, safety warnings, and descriptions of behaviors that should not be imitated. Standard next-token training does not ensure that a qualifier such as false, fictional, unlikely, or prohibited is stored together with the content it qualifies. The result is a data-quality hazard: negated or disendorsed content can still be implanted as belief or behavior. The paper also separates in-context understanding from finetuning generalization. A model can process negation correctly in the prompt while still internalizing the negated claim during training.","technical_approach":"$26","experiments":"$27","reading_guide":"Read closely. Start with the setup section to understand how the synthetic documents are generated and how belief rate is measured. Then focus on Sections 3.1–3.3, which contain the key comparison between document-level disclaimers, dense negation, explicit corrections, and local negation. Section 4 is important because it shows that the issue is not limited to the word “not”; it also affects fiction labels, probability qualifiers, and behavioral annotations. Section 5 is the most useful part for training-dynamics questions, especially the soft-constraint result and the instability under continued finetuning. The main technical question to examine is why local negation works while document-level and neighboring-sentence negation largely fail. Plausible mechanisms include locality in token-level loss, how event relations are compressed into parameters, and how models bind claims to epistemic status during finetuning.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"必须复查内部数据清洗策略：这篇把“辟谣语料可安全训练”的 prior 打穿了，局部否定才是关键变量。","en":"This should trigger an internal data-cleaning audit: it breaks the prior that debunking text is safe for finetuning, with local negation as the key variable."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Harry Mayne","Lev McKinney","Jan Dubiński","Adam Karvonen","James Chua","Owain Evans"],"notable_authors":["Owain Evans"],"tags":["finetuning","negation","belief-updating","data-quality","continual-pretraining"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13829","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13829","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12519","title":"Correct Answers from Sound Reasoning: Verifiable Process Supervision for Language Models","abstract":"Training language models to produce both correct answers and sound reasoning remains an open challenge. Reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards typically optimizes only final outcomes, which can lead to a failure mode where task accuracy improves while reasoning becomes less accurate, less complete, or even internally inconsistent. We propose verifiable process supervision (VPS), a post-training framework for verifiable domains that jointly optimizes prediction accuracy and reasoning qual","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-04-03T15:19:46+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12519.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文研究 outcome-only RL 在推理训练中的一个具体问题：模型最终答案变准了，但显式推理过程可能变差，表现为中间判断错误、遗漏或前后不一致。作者希望在可验证领域里，同时优化最终答案和推理过程质量。","importance":"这篇论文属于 post-train，但和预训练研究有接口价值。它说明可验证奖励只看最终答案时，训练信号会鼓励捷径，而不一定鼓励可复用的中间推理状态。对 RL pretrain、reasoning-oriented midtrain、以及可验证数据构造都有启发：如果任务天然可分解，过程级 verifier 可以提供比最终答案更密的监督信号；但前提是中间声明能被稳定抽取并确定性验证。","technical_approach":"方法叫 Verifiable Process Supervision，简称 VPS。流程分三步。第一步，用合成推理轨迹做 SFT，让模型输出固定结构的 reasoning trace。结构化格式不是为了可读性，而是为了后续能用简单规则抽取中间 claims，避免依赖 LLM judge 或复杂语义解析。第二步，构造 reasoning verifier，把抽取出的中间声明和领域中的 ground-truth 信号或规则约束比较，得到多个 subtask reward。第三步，在 RL 训练中把最终答案奖励和过程奖励合并。作者还加入 adaptive reward weighting：对当前错误更大的子任务赋予更高权重，相当于让训练动态地偏向模型薄弱的 reasoning subskill。和普通 RLVR 相比，VPS 不只奖励 answer correctness；和 LLM-as-judge 过程打分相比，它更便宜，也更可控，但适用范围依赖可验证环境。","experiments":"实验选择国际象棋作为测试床，因为棋局有确定规则、引擎参考信号，并且 move analysis 可以拆成候选着法、局面评估等可解释子任务。论文报告在四个开源 reasoning models 上，accuracy-only GRPO 能提升最终预测准确率，但会降低推理质量，例如 win-rate error 增大、内部一致性下降。VPS 在保留 top-1 accuracy 收益的同时，提高 Elo rating 和 coverage，并显著降低 win-rate error，使 consistency 接近饱和。adaptive weighting 相比固定聚合更好，尤其改善语言模型本来较难的子任务。在相同准确率下，三个独立 LLM judges 更偏好过程监督模型的推理轨迹。给出的正文片段没有包含 Table 1 的具体数值，因此不应推断精确提升幅度。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，预计 30 分钟。重点看 Adaptive verifiable process supervision 这一节，确认中间 claims 如何定义、如何抽取、每个 subtask reward 如何计算，以及 adaptive weighting 的公式。实验部分重点看 accuracy-only GRPO 与 VPS 的对照表、win-rate error / consistency / Elo 的关系，以及预算长度变化下是否出现 shortcut strategy。若关注可扩展性，需要特别看 chess verifier 的领域依赖程度，因为这是方法能否迁移到数学、代码或工具使用任务的关键限制。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a failure mode of outcome-only RL for reasoning models. Optimizing final-answer correctness can improve task accuracy while degrading the exposed reasoning trace: intermediate claims become less accurate, less complete, or internally inconsistent. The goal is to train models that produce both correct answers and verifiable reasoning steps.","importance":"This is a post-training paper, but it is relevant to pretraining-facing research on reasoning signals. It shows that final-answer verifiability alone can create shortcut incentives. When a task can be decomposed into checkable intermediate claims, process-level rewards provide denser and better aligned supervision. The limitation is also clear: the approach depends on domains where intermediate statements can be extracted reliably and checked deterministically.","technical_approach":"The proposed framework is Verifiable Process Supervision, or VPS. It first uses SFT on synthetic traces to impose a structured reasoning format. This structure is functional: it allows claims to be extracted with syntactic rules rather than LLM judging or open-ended semantic parsing. A deterministic verifier then checks these claims against domain rules and ground-truth signals, producing multiple subtask rewards. These rewards are aggregated into a reasoning reward and combined with the standard final-answer reward during RL. The paper also introduces adaptive reward weighting, which gives more weight to subtasks where the model still has larger errors. Compared with standard RLVR, VPS supervises both the conclusion and the reasoning path. Compared with LLM-judge process supervision, it is cheaper and less noisy, but less general.","experiments":"Chess is used as the controlled environment because it has exact rules, engine-derived reference signals, and naturally decomposable reasoning components such as candidate move selection and position evaluation. Across four open reasoning models, accuracy-only GRPO improves prediction accuracy but harms reasoning quality, increasing win-rate error and reducing internal consistency. VPS preserves the accuracy gains while improving Elo rating and coverage, lowering win-rate error, and pushing consistency close to saturation. Adaptive weighting improves over fixed reward aggregation, especially on subtasks that are harder for language models. At matched accuracy, three independent LLM judges prefer the traces produced by process-supervised models. The provided text does not include the numeric entries from Table 1, so exact effect sizes cannot be verified here.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 30 minutes. Focus on the VPS method section: the trace schema, claim extraction rules, verifier design, subtask rewards, and the adaptive weighting formula. In the experiments, compare accuracy-only GRPO against VPS on top-1 accuracy, win-rate error, consistency, Elo, and coverage. The most important scalability question is how much of the chess verifier is domain-specific, since that determines whether the same idea can transfer to math, code, or tool-use settings.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"读奖励构造和自适应加权；chess 外推要保留，但它清楚暴露了 final-only RLVR 的坏激励。","en":"Read the reward construction and adaptive weighting; chess may not transfer cleanly, but it exposes the bad incentives of final-only RLVR."},"metadata":{"institutions":["KAIST AI","University of Texas, Austin","Rice University","Princeton University","University of Washington","Sentient Labs"],"authors":["Kyuyoung Kim","Kevin Wang","Yunfei Xie","Peiyang Xu","Peiyao Sheng","Chen Wei","Zhangyang Wang","Jinwoo Shin","Pramod Viswanath","Sewoong Oh"],"notable_authors":["Zhangyang Wang","Pramod Viswanath","Sewoong Oh"],"tags":["RLVR","process-supervision","verifiable-rewards","reasoning","post-training"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12519","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12519","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13149","title":"AcquisitionSynthesis: Targeted Data Generation using Acquisition Functions","abstract":"Data quality remains a critical bottleneck in developing capable, competitive models. Researchers have explored many ways to generate top quality samples. Some works rely on rejection sampling: generating lots of synthetic samples and filtering out low-quality samples. Other works rely on larger or closed-source models to extract model weaknesses, necessary skills, or a curriculum off of which to base data generation. These works have one common limitation: there is no quantitative approach to m","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T08:15:48+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13149.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"合成数据生成里缺少“可量化、面向学生模型”的数据效用度量，导致常见的 generate-then-filter 或基于大模型诊断弱点的流程要么算力浪费、要么解释性弱，且很难证明某条合成样本对下游学习到底有没有增益。论文要解决的是：能否用简单、可解释、可计算的“数据效用”信号，直接驱动生成器产出对学生模型最有训练价值的数据，而不是先海量生成再筛。","importance":"把主动学习里的 acquisition function 迁移成“合成数据生成的训练信号”，并用 critic-free 的 GRPO 直接优化生成器，让“数据是否有用”从事后评估变成训练时的可微（通过RL）目标。对预训练/持续学习的启发点在于：1）数据质量控制可以更模型中心（model-centric），不必依赖外部强模型或复杂课程；2）用学生模型的不确定性/梯度等信号做奖励，天然贴近“补短板”和“避免遗忘”的目标；3）提供了一套相对通用的、可解释的合成数据效用指标族，便于在不同任务/不同学生模型上复用与诊断。","technical_approach":"框架是“生成器-学生”闭环：生成器（AcquisitionSynthesis）与学生通常是同架构的两个实例（学生多为未训练/或当前版本），生成器按任务提示生成一条训练样本（prompt+response），然后用学生模型计算 acquisition reward，把该 reward 作为 GRPO 的回报更新生成器。\n\n奖励设计来自五类 acquisition function，并针对 LM 做了可计算化：\n1）Confidence（不确定性/边际采样）：用学生在每个位置 top-1 与 top-2 token 概率差的序列平均作为置信度，奖励取其倒数，鼓励生成“学生最拿不准但仍可学习”的样本。\n2）Proximity（贴近任务分布）：用语义相似度约束生成样本与任务训练分布的距离，避免不确定性奖励把生成推向离题/噪声区域。\n3）Gradient Magnitude（影响函数/梯度范数风格）：用学生在该样本上的梯度强度近似“这条样本会推动参数更新多少”，鼓励高训练信号样本。\n4）Diversity（覆盖性）：鼓励批内/组内样本多样，降低模式坍塌与重复。\n5）Answer Variance（答案方差/分歧）：用学生对同一问题的多次采样或分布分歧度量不确定性与歧义性，偏向能暴露推理薄弱点的样本。\n\n训练细节上，论文强调用少量（文中提到 500 条）样本作为 in-context 示例来稳定生成任务格式；用 group-based 的相对优势归一化（GRPO 风格）来降低方差，使奖励可直接用于更新生成器，而不需要额外 critic。","experiments":"评测采用“用生成器造数据→训练学生→看学生提升”的闭环指标，任务覆盖可验证领域（数学、医疗 QA、代码）。核心结论：\n- 用 AcquisitionSynthesis 生成的数据训练学生，相比基线合成/筛选策略，学生提升约 2–7%，且模型越大收益越明显（文中给出区间结论）。\n- 持续/分布外设置下，训练后遗忘更轻；在 OOD 上可额外提升约 3%（文中给出量级）。\n- 生成器更大时，学到的“效用驱动生成策略”更能跨学生模型家族与尺寸泛化。\n- 生成数据可适配不同训练范式（文中以多种训练设置验证可用性）。\n\n从全文片段能确认的具体数字主要是提升区间（2–7%）与 OOD（~3%）；更细的表格数字需要对照 Section 5 各子节与附录。","reading_guide":"泛读建议：\n- 先看 Figure 1/2，把“生成器-学生-奖励”闭环和评测协议搞清楚，否则容易把它误读成普通 rejection sampling。\n- 重点看 Methodology 里五种 acquisition reward 的定义与实现细节：哪些是纯不确定性，哪些是分布约束/多样性约束，哪些近似“影响力”。\n- 看 Section 5.2（遗忘与 OOD）与 5.3（跨模型泛化）：这是它相对常规合成数据工作的差异点。\n- 如果要复现/迁移到预训练数据管线，优先深挖：奖励的尺度/归一化、组大小、学生是否在线更新、以及 proximity/diversity 如何与 uncertainty/gradient reward 做权衡。\n预计阅读时间：30–45 分钟抓主线；想落地需要再花 1–2 小时对照附录实现细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Synthetic data generation for LLM training lacks a quantitative, student-model-centric notion of data utility. As a result, common pipelines either waste compute via generate-then-filter, or rely on heavyweight/opaque “model weakness discovery” using larger closed models. The paper asks whether simple, principled utility signals—computed from the student—can directly train a generator to produce samples that measurably improve the downstream learner.","importance":"It operationalizes active-learning acquisition functions as RL rewards for training a data generator (via critic-free GRPO). This turns “is this sample useful?” from an after-the-fact evaluation into a training objective. For pretraining and continual pretraining, the key takeaway is that uncertainty/gradient/diversity-style signals from the target model can guide targeted data synthesis, potentially improving data efficiency and reducing forgetting without depending on external stronger teachers.","technical_approach":"$28","experiments":"Evaluation is end-to-end: generate a dataset with the trained generator, train a student on it, and measure student gains on verifiable tasks (math, medical QA, coding). Reported outcomes include:\n- Student improvements of roughly 2–7% over baselines, with larger students benefiting more.\n- Reduced catastrophic forgetting; in OOD settings, gains of about 3% are reported.\n- Larger generators yield policies that generalize better across student model families and sizes.\n- Generated data works under multiple training paradigms (validated via several training setups).\n\nThe excerpted full text confirms the improvement ranges; exact per-benchmark numbers should be read from Section 5 tables.","reading_guide":"Skim path:\n- Start with Figures 1–2 to internalize the generator–student–reward loop and the evaluation protocol.\n- Read the Methodology section carefully for the five reward definitions and how they are computed for LMs.\n- Focus on Section 5.2 (forgetting/OOD) and 5.3 (cross-model generalization), which are the most distinctive claims beyond “better synthetic data”.\nTime budget: ~30–45 minutes for the main idea; add 1–2 hours if you plan to re-implement (reward scaling, grouping, proximity/diversity trade-offs, and whether the student is updated online matter).","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"这个想法比结果更值得看：把 acquisition function 前置成生成 reward，若实验做得干净，会直接影响你设计合成数据 pipeline 的目标函数。","en":"The idea is more valuable than the headline numbers: if the setup is clean, using acquisition functions as generation rewards should directly change how you design synthetic-data objectives."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign","Amazon","University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign1, Amazon"],"authors":["Ishika Agarwal","Sofia Stoica","Emre Can Acikgoz","Pradeep Natarajan","Mahdi Namazifar","Jiaqi Ma","Dilek Hakkani-Tür"],"notable_authors":["Dilek Hakkani-Tür"],"tags":["synthetic_data","active_learning","data_valuation","reward_modeling","instruction_tuning"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13149","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13149","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13217","title":"GAGPO: Generalized Advantage Grouped Policy Optimization","abstract":"Reinforcement learning has become a powerful paradigm for post-training large language model agents, yet credit assignment in multi-turn environments remains a challenge. Agents often receive sparse, trajectory-level rewards only at the end of an episode, making it difficult to determine which intermediate actions contributed to success or failure. As a result, propagating delayed outcomes back to individual decision steps without relying on costly auxiliary value models remains an open problem.","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T09:10:03+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13217.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"多轮 agent RL 里奖励通常是回合末端的稀疏信号，但优化却在 token/动作层面进行，导致信用分配（credit assignment）难：中间哪一步做对/做错很难被定位。现有办法要么引入 critic/PRM 等额外模型增加复杂度与误差，要么用 trajectory-level 的 grouped 更新但方差大、监督传播弱。论文要解决的是：在不训练 critic 的前提下，能否做“按环境 step 对齐、并能时间递推传播”的优势估计，让多轮 agent 学得更稳、更快。","importance":"这是典型 post-training/agent RL 方法论文，但对“RL 作为 pretrain/posttrain 接口”的研究者有两点价值：\n1）给出了一个不依赖 critic 的时间差分（TD/GAE 风格）信用分配实现，降低了多轮 RL 的工程门槛；\n2）把 grouped policy optimization 从单轮推理扩展到多轮交互，强调以 environment step 为单位做优势估计与归一化，对后续把 RL 信号更细粒度地注入到持续学习/数据生成闭环有参考意义。","technical_approach":"GAGPO 的核心是“非参数 grouped value proxy + TD/GAE 式递推”，用采样 rollout 组构造每个 step 的价值近似，从而计算 step-aligned advantage，而不训练一个参数化 critic。\n\n做法要点：\n- 交互单位从 token 提升到 environment step（一次 action 输出对应一步），优势与更新在 step 级对齐，减少 token 级噪声。\n- 对同一状态/step 采样一组 rollouts（group），用组内统计构造 value proxy（可理解为用同组样本的回报分布做 bootstrap），再用 TD/GAE 风格把末端稀疏回报向前递推，得到每一步的 advantage。\n- 仍保持 GRPO/RLOO 一类的组内归一化与相对更新形式，以稳定训练并控制方差。\n\n相对 GRPO：GRPO 更像 sequence/trajectory 级相对回报广播；GAGPO 引入时间递推，使早期 step 也能获得更定位的学习信号。相对 PPO：避免训练 critic，减少 value 估计误差与额外训练开销。","experiments":"在 ALFWorld 与 WebShop 上，用 Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct 和 Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct 做对比，GAGPO 稳定优于 prompting 基线与多种 RL 基线（PPO、RLOO、GRPO、GiGPO）。论文还报告了：更快的早期学习、更高的交互效率、更平滑的优化曲线、以及更低方差的 step-level advantage 信号。\n\n当前给到的全文片段未包含具体成功率/提升百分点表格；需要对照实验章节的主表与学习曲线图读取精确数字。","reading_guide":"泛读建议：\n- 先看方法章节里 value proxy 的构造与 TD/GAE 递推公式，搞清楚它如何在“无 critic”条件下做 bootstrap。\n- 再看实验的学习曲线（early-stage learning、variance 分析）与 advantage 方差对比图，这些最能体现方法差异。\n- 如果关心可迁移到推理/工具使用训练，重点看：step 定义（action 粒度）、group 采样策略、归一化细节、以及对不同 episode 长度/奖励稀疏度的敏感性。\n预计阅读时间：30–40 分钟理解方法与结论；想复现需要额外 1 小时对照实现细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Multi-turn agent RL for LLMs suffers from sparse, delayed episode-level rewards while optimization happens at token/action granularity, making temporal credit assignment hard. Existing solutions either add critics/process reward models (extra complexity and estimation error) or stay critic-free but rely on trajectory-level grouped updates with weak reward propagation and high variance. The paper targets a critic-free method that still performs step-aligned, temporally propagated credit assignment.","importance":"Primarily a post-training/agent RL contribution, but relevant to the pretrain–posttrain interface because it shows how to obtain TD/GAE-like temporal advantages without training a critic. It lowers engineering overhead for multi-turn RL and provides a cleaner way to inject temporally localized learning signals, which can matter when RL is used in continual training loops or data-generation-driven training.","technical_approach":"GAGPO (Generalized Advantage Grouped Policy Optimization) builds a non-parametric grouped value proxy from rollout groups and uses TD/GAE-style recursion to compute step-aligned advantages—without a learned critic.\n\nKey design choices:\n- Credit assignment is aligned to environment steps (each step corresponds to an agent action), not tokens, reducing noise.\n- For each step, a group of sampled rollouts provides statistics to form a value proxy; then TD/GAE-style bootstrapping propagates terminal outcomes backward through time.\n- Group-wise advantage normalization (in the spirit of GRPO/RLOO) stabilizes updates and reduces variance.\n\nCompared to GRPO: instead of broadcasting a trajectory-level signal, GAGPO propagates supervision temporally to localize which steps mattered. Compared to PPO: it avoids training a critic and the associated value estimation instability.","experiments":"Evaluated on ALFWorld and WebShop with Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct and Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct. GAGPO consistently outperforms prompting baselines and RL baselines (PPO, RLOO, GRPO, GiGPO). The paper also highlights faster early learning, better interaction efficiency, smoother optimization, and lower-variance step-level advantage estimates.\n\nThe provided full-text excerpt does not include the exact success-rate numbers; they should be taken from the main result tables and learning-curve figures in the experiment section.","reading_guide":"Skim path:\n- Read the method section focusing on how the grouped value proxy is constructed and how TD/GAE recursion is implemented without a critic.\n- Then inspect learning curves and variance/advantage diagnostics; these best justify the method.\n- For transfer to other agent settings, pay attention to: step/action definition, group sampling strategy, normalization details, and sensitivity to episode length and reward sparsity.\nTime: ~30–40 minutes to grasp the idea; add ~1 hour for implementation-level details.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看 advantage 构造和 ablation；若 value proxy 真的稳，值得在多轮 RLVR 内部实验复现。","en":"Read the advantage construction and ablations; if the value proxy is stable, it is worth reproducing in multi-turn RLVR setups."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Sun Yat-sen University","Meituan"],"authors":["Siyuan Zhu","Chao Yu","Rongxin Yang","Zongkai Liu","Jinjun Hu","Qiwen Chen","Yibo Zhang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["RLHF","RLVR","credit-assignment","critic-free-RL","LLM-agents"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13217","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13217","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13369","title":"Query-Conditioned Test-Time Self-Training for Large Language Models","abstract":"Large language models (LLMs) are typically deployed with fixed parameters, and their performance is often improved by allocating more computation at inference time. While such test-time scaling can be effective, it cannot correct model misconceptions or adapt the model to the specific structure of an individual query. Test-time optimization addresses this limitation by enabling parameter updates during inference, but existing approaches either rely on external data or optimize generic self-super","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T11:27:40+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13369.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是单个查询级别的 test-time adaptation：模型在推理时不只增加采样或搜索计算，而是根据当前 query 生成局部训练信号，并临时更新参数来改善回答。","importance":"对预训练研究的直接贡献有限，但对 test-time training 和 post-train / inference 闭环有启发。它把“查询本身包含局部分布信息”作为训练信号来源，试图在不依赖外部检索库的情况下做 per-query 参数适配。这个方向值得关注的原因是，它把推理时算力从纯搜索转向临时学习，可能影响未来模型在预训练阶段是否需要显式支持快速局部适应。","technical_approach":"QueST 的流程很直接。给定 query q，先用模型自身或辅助生成器生成一批与 q 结构相近的 problem–solution pairs。这些样本被视为 query 所诱导的局部分布 D(q) 的近似。然后在推理时用这些样本做轻量 LoRA 更新，得到临时参数，再用适配后的模型回答原始 query。它和 TTT-NN 的区别是不用外部相似题检索库；和 TLM 这类最小化输入 perplexity 的方法不同，它显式生成带解答的 query-conditioned supervision，因此训练目标更贴近当前问题所需的推理结构。它和 self-evolving 方法也不同，后者通常做全局数据生成和后续训练，而 QueST 是单 query 条件下的局部更新。","experiments":"作者报告在 7 个数学推理 benchmark 上评测，QueST 相对对应 base model 平均提升 6.44 个百分点，并在 GPQA-Diamond 上展示了数学之外的科学推理泛化。给出的全文片段没有包含完整表格、模型规模、生成样本数量、LoRA rank、更新步数、额外推理成本和消融数字，因此无法核实提升主要来自 query-conditioned 生成、LoRA 更新，还是额外采样计算。阅读时需要特别检查这些控制实验。","reading_guide":"建议泛读 20–30 分钟，重点看方法部分的 D(q) 构造、test-time LoRA 更新设置，以及实验中的 cost-normalized 对比。最需要看的消融是：只生成不更新、随机相似题更新、输入 perplexity 更新、不同生成样本数量、不同更新步数、错误伪标签对最终答案的影响。如果没有严格控制推理预算，6.44 个百分点的提升不能直接理解为参数适配本身的收益。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses per-query test-time adaptation for LLMs. Instead of only spending more inference compute through sampling or search, it builds supervision from the input query itself and performs a temporary parameter update before producing the final answer.","importance":"The contribution is more relevant to test-time training and the pretrain–posttrain–inference interface than to base pretraining directly. The useful idea is that an input query may define a local problem distribution, and that generated samples from this local distribution can serve as adaptation data. If this line of work holds up under careful compute controls, it may influence how future pretrained models are designed to support fast local adaptation at inference time.","technical_approach":"QueST starts from a query q and generates auxiliary problem–solution pairs conditioned on q, using the base model itself in the described implementation. These generated examples are treated as an empirical approximation to a local distribution D(q) that shares concepts, assumptions, and reasoning patterns with the original query. The model then performs a lightweight LoRA update at test time on these examples, and the adapted parameters are used to answer q. Compared with TTT-NN, it does not require an external retrieval database of similar problems. Compared with objectives such as minimizing the perplexity of the input, it uses explicit query-conditioned problem–solution supervision. Compared with self-evolving methods, it performs localized per-query adaptation rather than global data generation and later training.","experiments":"The authors report results on seven mathematical reasoning benchmarks, with an average gain of 6.44 percentage points over the corresponding base models. They also evaluate on GPQA-Diamond to test transfer beyond mathematics into scientific reasoning. The provided full-text excerpt does not include the complete experimental tables, model sizes, number of generated examples, LoRA rank, update steps, inference cost, or ablation numbers. Those details are needed to separate the benefit of query-conditioned generation from the benefit of additional sampling compute and from the LoRA update itself.","reading_guide":"A practical skim should take 20–30 minutes. Focus on how D(q) is generated, how the LoRA update is configured, and whether the comparisons are normalized for test-time compute. The most important ablations are generation without parameter updates, random or weakly related generated problems, input-perplexity test-time training, different numbers of generated examples, different update steps, and robustness to wrong pseudo-solutions. Without those controls, the reported 6.44-point gain should be read as a system-level improvement rather than clean evidence for per-query parameter adaptation.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"这篇不改 pretrain prior，但值得看它如何把“query 自带监督”落成训练目标；先读方法和 ablation，若增益只出现在窄任务上，就当 test-time tuning 的弱信号。","en":"It likely won’t change your pretraining prior, but it is worth reading for how it turns the query itself into a training signal; read the method and ablations first, and treat it as weak evidence if gains stay narrow."},"metadata":{"institutions":["KAIST","Graduate School of Green Growth and Sustainability","Graduate School of Green Growth and Sustainability, KAIST"],"authors":["Chaehee Song","Minseok Seo","Yeeun Seong","Doyi Kim","Changick Kim"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["test-time-training","self-training","query-conditioned","parameter-efficient-tuning","reasoning"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13369","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13369","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13301","title":"Achieving Gold-Medal-Level Olympiad Reasoning via Simple and Unified Scaling","abstract":"Recent progress in reasoning models has substantially advanced long-horizon mathematical and scientific problem solving, with several systems now reaching gold-medal-level performance on International Mathematical Olympiad (IMO) and International Physics Olympiad (IPhO) problems. In this paper, we introduce a simple and unified recipe for converting a post-trained reasoning backbone into a rigorous olympiad-level solver. The recipe first uses a reverse-perplexity curriculum for SFT to instill ri","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T10:13:26+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13301.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"论文要解决的问题是：如何把一个已有的 post-trained reasoning backbone，用统一且相对简单的 SFT、RL 和 test-time scaling 流程，推到奥赛级长程证明与科学推理能力。","importance":"这篇更接近 post-train 与 inference scaling 论文，不是基座预训练论文，但对预训练研究有两个直接启发。第一，它把“能力底座”和“推理行为塑形”分开处理：30B-A3B backbone 已经具备科学推理和指令跟随能力，SFT 主要改变长证明的搜索、检查、修复习惯，而不是从零训练能力。第二，它说明长程推理能力的瓶颈不只在数据规模，也在训练信号的结构：可验证奖励适合扩展答案正确性，证明级 reward model 和 self-refinement 更适合优化证明质量。对 pretrain ↔ posttrain 接口来说，这提供了一个清晰样例：预训练或 mid-train 应提供足够宽的科学与形式推理表示，post-train 再通过高质量轨迹、课程顺序和奖励层级把行为稳定地拉到专家任务上。","technical_approach":"方法分三段。第一段是 SFT 行为塑形。作者从数学、科学、代码和通用指令来源整理长解答、自验证、自修复轨迹，过滤后得到 338K 条、每条响应短于 8K tokens 的训练样本。关键不是简单混合数据，而是用 reverse perplexity curriculum：先训练初始策略最不熟悉、perplexity 最高的轨迹，再回到更熟悉的样本做巩固。这个设计的意图是先强行注入更严格的证明搜索模式，再降低对原有能力的破坏。第二段是两级 RL。coarse RL 使用可验证题目和二值 outcome reward，类似 RLVR，目标是扩展 SFT 学到的解题行为。refined RL 转向 proof-level 训练，引入生成式证明奖励模型，对完整证明质量打分；同时使用 self-refinement prompts 训练批判与修复能力，并用 experience replay 保留困难题上的稀有成功轨迹。第三段是 test-time scaling。模型在推理时反复生成草稿、检查错误、修复候选证明，长轨迹可超过 100K tokens。和只靠采样多数投票不同，这里的推理扩展更偏向 proof search + self-verification loop。","experiments":"主模型 SU-01 基于 30B-A3B backbone。SFT 数据为 338K 条长轨迹。答案可验证任务上，SU-01 在 AnswerBench、AMO-Bench、AIME 2025/2026、FrontierScience-Olympiad 上接近同尺寸强基线 Qwen3.6-35B-A3B。证明型评测上，SU-01 在 IMO-ProofBench 直接生成达到 57.6%，加入 test-time scaling 后达到 70.2%，明显强于同尺寸模型，并接近 Gemini 3.1 Pro Thinking 这类商业系统。FrontierScience-Research 上，SU-01 获得同尺寸模型中较好的整体表现，说明训练没有只过拟合奥赛题。官方竞赛题上，直接生成已经超过 2024 和 2025 IPhO 金牌线，并达到 IMO 2025 和 USAMO 2026 铜牌线；加入 test-time scaling 后，在两个数学奥赛上都得到 35 分，达到 IMO 2025 金牌线，并比 USAMO 2026 金牌线高 10 分。USAMO 2026 上，这个分数与 340 名参赛者中的最高人类总分持平。","reading_guide":"建议泛读 25–35 分钟。先看 Introduction 中 pipeline 的定位，重点确认它不是从 base model 训练推理能力，而是专门改造 post-trained backbone。然后看 SFT 部分的 reverse perplexity curriculum，关注样本排序为什么从“最不匹配初始策略”开始，以及它如何兼顾行为注入和能力保持。RL 部分建议看 coarse RL 与 proof-level RL 的分界：二值可验证奖励负责扩展正确性，证明奖励模型负责细粒度证明质量。实验部分优先看 IMO-ProofBench、官方 IMO/USAMO/IPhO 评分、FrontierScience-Research，以及 test-time scaling 的轨迹分析。附录若有数据过滤、reward model 训练和 replay 细节，适合进一步核查结果是否依赖隐含数据泄漏或评测特化。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks how far an already post-trained reasoning backbone can be pushed toward olympiad-level mathematical and scientific proof solving with a unified SFT, RL, and test-time scaling recipe.","importance":"This is mainly a post-training and inference-scaling work, but it is relevant to pretraining because it cleanly separates latent capability from reasoning behavior. The backbone already has broad scientific competence; SFT is used to reshape how it searches, checks, and repairs long proofs. The RL design also gives a useful signal hierarchy: verifiable binary rewards are effective for scaling answer correctness, while proof-level reward modeling is needed when the target is a rigorous argument rather than a final value. For pretraining researchers, the lesson is practical: broad scientific and symbolic representations should be built before specialization, and later training stages can then steer the policy with much more targeted trajectory and reward design.","technical_approach":"$29","experiments":"$2a","reading_guide":"Skim time: about 25–35 minutes. Start with the pipeline description in the introduction to understand that the work specializes a post-trained model rather than training reasoning from a base checkpoint. Then read the SFT section on reverse-perplexity curriculum, since that is the most reusable training-detail idea. In the RL section, focus on the division between verifiable outcome rewards and proof-level reward modeling. For results, prioritize IMO-ProofBench, official IMO/USAMO/IPhO scoring, FrontierScience-Research, and the test-time scaling traces. If the appendix contains data filtering, reward-model training, or replay details, those are worth checking for possible benchmark-specific effects.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"读 SFT curriculum 和 RL 交接部分即可；若 200-step RL setup 干净，它支持奖励设计比 RL 预算更关键。","en":"Read the SFT curriculum and RL handoff; if the 200-step setup is clean, it argues reward design matters more than RL budget."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Shanghai AI Laboratory","The Chinese University of Hong Kong","Tsinghua University","Shanghai Jiao Tong University","Peking University"],"authors":["Yafu Li","Runzhe Zhan","Haoran Zhang","Shunkai Zhang","Yizhuo Li","Zhilin Wang","Jiacheng Chen","Futing Wang","Xuyang Hu","Yuchen Fan","Bangjie Xu","Yucheng Su","Xinmiao Han","Chenxi Li","Haodi Lei","Yufeng Zhao","Zejin Lin","Qianjia Cheng","Tong Zhu","Xiaoye Qu","Ganqu Cui","Peng Ye","Yun Luo","Zhouchen Lin","Yu Qiao","Bowen Zhou","Ning Ding","Yu Cheng"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["reasoning","rlvr","sft-curriculum","test-time-scaling","olympiad"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13301","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13301","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13130","title":"GRACE: Gradient-aligned Reasoning Data Curation for Efficient Post-training","abstract":"Existing reasoning data curation pipelines score whole samples, treating every intermediate step as equally valuable. In reality, steps within a trace contribute very unevenly, and selecting reasoning data well requires assessing them individually. We present GRACE, a gradient-aligned curation method that views each reasoning trace as a sequence of optimization events and scores every step by two complementary signals: its alignment with the answer-oriented gradient direction, and its consistenc","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T07:55:39+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13130.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有推理数据筛选方法均在完整推理链粒度操作，将所有中间推理步骤视为同等价值，既浪费训练算力，也会稀释高价值训练信号，当前没有方法能评估单个推理步骤对模型优化的实际贡献。","importance":"为推理后训练的数据筛选提供了优化视角的新思路，无需依赖外部奖励模型或步骤级人工标注，可大幅降低推理后训练的算力开销，筛选得到的数据子集还可跨不同模型骨干迁移。","technical_approach":"将推理链建模为优化事件序列，每个步骤的效用得分由两个互补指标计算：与最终答案导向的梯度方向的对齐度，与前置推理轨迹的一致性。步骤级得分聚合为样本级价值分用于子集选择。引入表征级梯度代理，仅需单次前向传播即可计算步骤得分，无需逐步骤反向传播，适配大规模数据集的筛选需求。","experiments":"在MMathCoT-1M数据集上对Qwen3-VL-2B-Instruct做后训练，仅使用筛选出的前20%数据训练的效果超过全量数据训练，平均性能达到全量数据的108.8%；仅使用5%的筛选数据即可保留全量数据100.2%的性能。筛选得到的子集可跨不同模型骨干有效迁移。","reading_guide":"泛读Introduction部分的动机分析、Method部分的表征级梯度代理实现、Experiments部分的跨模型迁移结果，预计阅读时间15分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing reasoning data curation methods operate at full trace granularity, treating all intermediate reasoning steps as equally valuable, which wastes training compute and dilutes high-value training signals. No current approach can evaluate the actual optimization contribution of individual reasoning steps.","importance":"Provides an optimization-focused new perspective for reasoning post-training data curation, eliminates the need for external reward models or step-level human annotations, significantly reduces post-training compute overhead, and selected data subsets are transferable across different model backbones.","technical_approach":"Frames reasoning traces as sequences of optimization events. Each step's utility score is computed from two complementary metrics: alignment with answer-oriented gradient direction, and consistency with preceding reasoning trajectory. Step-level scores are aggregated to sample-level value for subset selection. A representation-level gradient proxy is introduced to compute step scores with a single forward pass, no per-step backward pass is required, which fits large-scale dataset curation requirements.","experiments":"Post-train Qwen3-VL-2B-Instruct on MMathCoT-1M dataset. Training on top 20% curated data outperforms full-data training, reaching 108.8% of full-data average performance across benchmarks; training on 5% curated data retains 100.2% of full-data performance. Selected subsets transfer effectively across different model backbones.","reading_guide":"Skim the motivation analysis in Introduction, implementation of representation-level gradient proxy in Method, and cross-model transfer results in Experiments. Expected reading time: 15 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看方法和 ablation：若梯度 proxy 成本真低，可放进内部推理数据筛选实验复现。","en":"Read the method and ablations only; if the gradient proxy is truly cheap, it is worth reproducing in internal reasoning-data filtering."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Harbin Institute of Technology","Hong Kong Baptist University","City University of Hong Kong"],"authors":["Junjie Li","Ziao Wang","NingXuan Ma","Jianghong Ma","Xiaofeng Zhang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["reasoning-data","post-training","data-curation","gradient-alignment","CoT"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13130","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13130","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13255","title":"Respecting Self-Uncertainty in On-Policy Self-Distillation for Efficient LLM Reasoning","abstract":"On-policy self-distillation trains a reasoning model on its own rollouts while a teacher, often the same model conditioned on privileged context, provides dense token-level supervision. Existing objectives typically weight the teacher's token-level signal uniformly across a chain-of-thought sequence, despite substantial variation in the entropy of the teacher's predictive distribution. We propose EGRSD (Entropy-Guided Reinforced Self-Distillation), which unifies token-level updates through three","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T09:38:20+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13255.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"在 on-policy 自蒸馏（Self-Distillation）训练推理模型时，教师模型提供的 token 级别监督信号可靠性存在巨大差异（有些是确定性计算，有些是高熵的分支点），均匀赋予权重会导致模型过度拟合高方差的监督信号。","importance":"为 on-policy 自蒸馏引入了“教师预测熵”作为第三种监督信号（与奖励方向和教师-学生似然比并列），提供了一种更精细、更稳定的 token 级别权重分配机制，有助于在保持推理准确率的同时减少冗余计算。","technical_approach":"提出了 EGRSD（Entropy-Guided Reinforced Self-Distillation）。核心机制是计算特权教师（privileged teacher）在每个 token 处的预测熵，并用其构建一个置信度门控（confidence gate）。低熵的确定性 token 获得近乎全额的权重，而高熵的分支 token 权重被衰减，但保留一个非零下界以避免丢失有效的分支多样性。进一步提出了 CL-EGRSD，引入因果前瞻（causal-lookahead）窗口，以区分持续的高熵片段和短暂的策略转换点（pivots），从而保留后者带来的关键转换信号。","experiments":"在 Qwen3-4B 和 Qwen3-8B 上进行了验证。结果表明，置信度门控更新在准确率-长度权衡（accuracy-length frontier）上优于其他可训练方法。消融实验显示，适度的熵衰减能带来最稳定的性能；前瞻机制（lookahead）在更大模型（8B）上效果更明显，因为大模型更容易利用策略转换点。","reading_guide":"建议重点阅读 Section 4.2 中 EGRSD 的置信度门控公式设计，以及 CL-EGRSD 如何通过前瞻窗口处理瞬态高熵 token。实验部分关注图 1 中的准确率-长度权衡曲线，以及消融实验中对不同熵衰减程度的分析。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In on-policy self-distillation for reasoning models, the reliability of token-level supervision from the teacher model varies significantly (e.g., deterministic computation vs. high-entropy branching points). Uniformly weighting these signals can lead to overfitting on high-variance supervision.","importance":"Introduces 'teacher predictive entropy' as a third supervision signal (alongside reward direction and teacher-student likelihood ratio) in on-policy self-distillation. This provides a more granular and stable token-level weighting mechanism, helping to reduce redundant computation while maintaining reasoning accuracy.","technical_approach":"Proposes EGRSD (Entropy-Guided Reinforced Self-Distillation). The core mechanism computes the privileged teacher's predictive entropy at each token to construct a confidence gate. Low-entropy deterministic tokens receive near-full weight, while high-entropy branching tokens are attenuated but retain a non-zero lower bound to preserve valid branching diversity. Further proposes CL-EGRSD, which introduces a causal-lookahead window to distinguish sustained high-entropy spans from transient strategy-shift pivots, thereby preserving the critical transition signals carried by the latter.","experiments":"Validated on Qwen3-4B and Qwen3-8B. Results show that the confidence-gated update advances the accuracy-length frontier compared to other trainable methods. Ablations indicate that moderate entropy attenuation yields the most stable performance, and the lookahead mechanism is more effective on the larger model (8B), which can better exploit strategy pivots.","reading_guide":"Focus on Section 4.2 for the formulation of the confidence gate in EGRSD, and how CL-EGRSD handles transient high-entropy tokens via the lookahead window. In the experiments, pay attention to the accuracy-length trade-off curves in Figure 1 and the ablation studies on different degrees of entropy attenuation.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"值得看目标函数而非榜单；§方法里 entropy gate 可直接变成内部 CoT 蒸馏 ablation。","en":"Read the objective, not the leaderboard; the entropy gate is a clean ablation to try in internal CoT distillation."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Shanghai Jiao Tong University","Tsinghua University","Shanghai AI Laboratory"],"authors":["Junlong Ke","Zichen Wen","Weijia Li","Conghui He","Linfeng Zhang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["self-distillation","reasoning","preference-training","token-weighting","teacher-entropy"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13255","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13255","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12667","title":"ODRPO: Ordinal Decompositions of Discrete Rewards for Robust Policy Optimization","abstract":"The alignment of Large Language Models (LLMs) utilizes Reinforcement Learning from AI Feedback (RLAIF) for non-verifiable domains such as long-form question answering and open-ended instruction following. These domains often rely on LLM based auto-raters to provide granular, multi-tier discrete rewards (e.g., 1-10 rubrics) that are inherently stochastic due to prompt sensitivity and sampling randomness. We empirically verify the stochasticity of auto-raters that can propagate and corrupt standar","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-12T19:17:14+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12667.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"RLAIF（AI反馈强化学习）中使用的LLM自动评分器存在固有随机性，源于prompt敏感性、位置偏见、采样随机性等因素，导致离散奖励信号噪声大。这类噪声会破坏GRPO、MaxRL等传统优势估计器的归一化统计量，造成学习信号退化；而通过增加采样次数取多数票的降噪方案计算成本过高，无法大规模落地。","importance":"为LLM对齐阶段的RL训练提供了低开销的抗噪声奖励处理方案，能够在不增加显著训练成本的前提下提升RLAIF的稳定性和最终效果，对大规模后训练对齐的工程落地有直接参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出ODRPO框架，将单标量离散奖励分解为多个对应不同序贯成功等级的子奖励，对每个等级独立计算优势后再累加，把单奖励优化转化为多奖励形式。这种序贯分解将评分器的随机性限制在狭窄的边界区间内，避免单个噪声样本破坏全局归一化的均值和方差，保证大部分奖励分布的学习信号稳定。同时引入方差感知加权机制，动态抑制完全达标或当前完全无法达标的评估标准的权重，将模型优化重心放在当前的学习前沿区域。该方案无额外可测量的训练开销，可作为传统优势估计器的即插即用增强组件。","experiments":"在FACTS-grounding-v2、Alpaca-Eval、IFEval三个基准上对比GRPO、MaxRL等基线，ODRPO在FACTS-grounding-v2上取得最高14.8%的相对性能提升，在Alpaca-Eval上取得最高7.5%的相对提升。同时配套的理论分析证明，序贯分解的优势估计器存在良定义的全局标量目标，能够稳定优化轨迹。","reading_guide":"重点阅读自动评分器方差的实证分析部分、ODRPO的核心算法设计，以及三个基准的主实验结果，理论部分可按需浏览，预计阅读时间20-25分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLM-based auto-raters used in RLAIF have inherent stochasticity caused by prompt sensitivity, position bias, sampling randomness and other factors, which introduces high noise into discrete reward signals. This noise corrupts the normalization statistics of traditional advantage estimators such as GRPO and MaxRL, leading to degraded learning signals. The common noise reduction approach of sampling multiple rewards and taking majority votes incurs prohibitive computational cost for large-scale deployment.","importance":"ODRPO provides a low-overhead noise-robust reward processing scheme for RL training during LLM alignment, which improves the stability and final performance of RLAIF without significant additional training cost. It has direct practical reference value for large-scale post-training alignment engineering.","technical_approach":"The ODRPO framework decomposes a single scalar discrete reward into multiple sub-rewards corresponding to different ordinal success levels. Advantages are computed independently for each level and then accumulated, transforming single-reward optimization into a multi-reward formulation. This ordinal decomposition confines evaluator stochasticity to narrow boundary strata, preventing individual noisy samples from corrupting the global mean and variance used for normalization, and preserving stable learning signals across most of the reward distribution. A variance-aware weighting mechanism is also introduced to dynamically suppress weights of evaluation criteria that are either fully satisfied or currently unreachable, focusing model optimization on the active learning frontier. The scheme introduces no measurable training overhead and can be used as a plug-and-play augmentation for traditional advantage estimators.","experiments":"Evaluated against GRPO and MaxRL baselines on three benchmarks: FACTS-grounding-v2, Alpaca-Eval, and IFEval. ODRPO achieves up to 14.8% relative performance improvement on FACTS-grounding-v2 and up to 7.5% relative improvement on Alpaca-Eval. Theoretical analysis confirms that the ordinal decomposition-based advantage estimator admits a well-defined global scalar objective, which stabilizes the optimization trajectory.","reading_guide":"Focus on the empirical analysis of auto-rater variance, core algorithm design of ODRPO, and main experimental results on the three benchmarks. Theoretical analysis can be browsed on demand. Estimated reading time: 20-25 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"关注 RLAIF 中 reward 噪声对 GRPO 等算法的影响，提出的序数分解思路对优化 post-train 的 reward 信号质量有启发，建议看其对 reward 噪声的建模和消融实验。","en":"Focuses on the impact of reward noise in RLAIF on algorithms like GRPO; the proposed ordinal decomposition approach is inspiring for optimizing reward signal quality in post-training. Worth checking its noise modeling and ablations."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Texas at Austin"],"authors":["Nirmal Patel","Fei Wang","Inderjit Dhillon"],"notable_authors":["Inderjit Dhillon"],"tags":["RLAIF","Reward Modeling","Policy Optimization","Robustness","Ordinal Decomposition"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12667","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12667","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12906","title":"Data Difficulty and the Generalization--Extrapolation Tradeoff in LLM Fine-Tuning","abstract":"Data selection during supervised fine-tuning (SFT) can critically change the behavior of large language models (LLMs). Although existing work has studied the effect of selecting data based on heuristics such as perplexity, difficulty, or length, the reported findings are often inconsistent or context-dependent. In this work, we systematically study the role of data difficulty in fine-tuning from both empirical and theoretical perspectives, and find that there is no universally optimal difficulty","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T02:33:04+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12906.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有SFT数据选择研究中关于最优数据难度的结论互相冲突，没有明确的适配条件指导不同场景下的难度筛选策略。","importance":"明确了数据规模与最优数据难度的对应关系，为SFT数据筛选提供可落地的操作原则，也补充了微调阶段数据属性与学习效果关联的理论解释。","technical_approach":"以标注的CoT长度作为数据难度衡量指标，通过控制变量实验测试不同数据规模下各难度数据的SFT效果，从理论上将误差分解为分布内泛化gap和分布外外推gap两部分，解释最优难度随数据规模变化的底层机制。","experiments":"在Qwen2.5-Math 1.5B/7B模型、OpenMath数据集上测试，评估集为Math500、AIME24、Minerva Math。固定数据规模时，SFT性能随数据难度先升后降，存在最优中间难度；数据规模越大，最优难度向更难样本偏移；小数据规模下移除难样本可提升性能，大数据规模下移除易样本可提升性能。","reading_guide":"重点关注第2节的二维实验结果图表（图3、图4），以及误差分解的理论分析部分，预计阅读时间15分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Conflicting conclusions exist in existing SFT data selection studies on optimal data difficulty, with no clear applicable conditions to guide difficulty filtering strategies in different scenarios.","importance":"Clarifies the correlation between data scale and optimal data difficulty, provides actionable principles for SFT data filtering, and supplements theoretical explanations for the association between data attributes and learning effects in the fine-tuning phase.","technical_approach":"Adopts annotated Chain-of-Thought length as the data difficulty metric, conducts controlled experiments to test SFT performance of data with different difficulty levels across varying data scales, and theoretically decomposes error into in-distribution generalization gap and out-of-distribution extrapolation gap to explain the underlying mechanism of optimal difficulty shifting with data scale.","experiments":"Tested on Qwen2.5-Math 1.5B/7B models with OpenMath dataset, evaluated on Math500, AIME24 and Minerva Math. For fixed data scale, SFT performance first rises then falls as difficulty increases, with an optimal intermediate difficulty level. Optimal difficulty shifts to harder samples as data scale grows. Removing hard samples improves performance on small data scales, while removing easy samples brings gains on large data scales.","reading_guide":"Focus on the 2-dimensional experiment results (Figure 3, Figure 4) in Section 2 and the error decomposition theoretical analysis. Expected reading time: 15 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"SFT数据难度选择的核心机制研究，结论可直接指导内部SFT数据配比实验，重点看§3的合成实验拆解","en":"Core mechanism study on SFT data difficulty selection, conclusions can directly guide internal SFT data ratio experiments, focus on §3 synthetic experiment breakdown"},"metadata":{"institutions":["Tsinghua University IIIS","Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute","Amazon AGI SF Lab","IIIS, Tsinghua University","Tsinghua University"],"authors":["Siyuan Liu","Tinghong Chen","Xinghan Li","Yifei Wang","Jingzhao Zhang"],"notable_authors":["Jingzhao Zhang"],"tags":["SFT","data_selection","generalization_extrapolation","fine_tuning"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12906","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12906","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13230","title":"Teacher-Guided Policy Optimization for LLM Distillation","abstract":"The convergence of reinforcement learning and imitation learning has positioned Reverse KL (RKL) as a promising paradigm for on-policy LLM distillation, aiming to unify exploration with teacher supervision. However, we identify a critical limitation: when the student and teacher distributions diverge significantly, standard RKL often fails to yield meaningful improvement due to uninformative negative feedback. To address this inefficiency, we propose Teacher-Guided Policy Optimization (TGPO), an","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T09:20:03+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13230.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作处理的是 on-policy LLM 蒸馏里的一个具体失效点：用 Reverse KL 让学生在自己采样的轨迹上贴近教师，看起来能同时兼容 RL 探索和教师监督，但当学生和教师分布差距较大时，教师只是在事后给学生 token 打分，不能告诉学生应该往哪个 token 移动，梯度容易变成低信息量的惩罚信号。","importance":"对预训练研究的直接价值不在模型结构，而在训练信号设计。它提醒我们，KL 方向和采样分布的选择会改变教师信号的性质：RKL 保留了 on-policy 形式，但牺牲了前向指导；SFT 有强指导，但训练状态来自教师分布。TGPO 尝试把两者拆开：状态来自学生 rollout，目标 token 来自教师条件预测。这对小模型推理蒸馏、RLVR 早期训练、以及 pretrain 到 posttrain 的接口设计都有参考意义。","technical_approach":"论文先把 RKL 蒸馏写成学生分布上的期望，并指出它等价于在 RL 目标中加入一个内在奖励：负的 student-teacher log-ratio。问题在于，这个奖励只评价学生已经采出来的动作。如果学生 token 落在教师低概率区域，教师概率接近零，训练信号主要是在压制当前动作，而不是指出替代动作。TGPO 的改法是：仍然让学生生成 on-policy rollout，但在每个学生生成的上下文上查询教师，让教师给出下一步 token 分布或预测 token，然后对学生施加类似 SFT 的 token-level 似然学习。这样，状态分布保持 on-policy，监督信号则从“判别当前 token 好不好”变成“在当前状态下教师会怎么走”。论文还讨论了教师信号放进 reward 还是作为 loss regularization 的设计差别，重点是避免把密集 token 指导退化成稀疏或高方差的奖励估计。","experiments":"实验结论集中在三点。第一，标准 RKL 在学生和教师分布差距较大时训练不稳定，提升有限，和第 2 节的分析一致。第二，TGPO 能在这些远分布场景下继续提供有效更新，因为教师是在学生实际访问的上下文上给出方向性监督。第三，TGPO 与 mixed-policy 类方法相比有竞争力，同时不需要额外人工标注，能够嵌入现有 RLVR 流程。提供的正文片段没有给出完整模型规模、任务集合、表格数值和消融数字；精读时需要核对实验表格中 RKL、TGPO、SFT、mixed-policy 与 RLVR baseline 的具体差距。","reading_guide":"建议泛读 25 分钟。先看第 2 节的 RKL 推导，尤其是把 RKL 写成 RL intrinsic reward 的部分，这是理解失效机制的核心。再看 Figure 1 和第 3 节目标函数，确认 TGPO 的教师查询发生在学生 rollout 的哪些位置，以及教师信号最终进入 loss 还是 reward。实验部分重点看三类对比：远分布教师-学生设置、RKL 训练曲线稳定性、TGPO 与 mixed-policy 方法的消融。若只关心预训练训练信号，可重点看 KL 方向分析和 token-level dense guidance 的实现。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a failure mode in on-policy LLM distillation. Reverse KL allows the student to learn on its own rollouts and therefore fits naturally into RL-style training, but when the teacher and student distributions are far apart, the teacher mostly acts as a post-hoc scorer of bad student tokens. It does not provide a clear direction toward better tokens.","importance":"The main relevance is training-signal design rather than architecture. It shows that the direction of KL and the source of sampled states can change what supervision actually means. RKL is on-policy but weakly directional. SFT is directional but off-policy. TGPO keeps student-generated states while using teacher predictions as dense token-level guidance. This is useful for reasoning distillation, early-stage RLVR for small models, and the interface between pretraining, distillation, and reinforcement learning.","technical_approach":"The paper first formulates RKL distillation as an expectation over student samples and connects it to an RL objective with an intrinsic reward given by the negative student-teacher log-ratio. The weakness is that this reward only evaluates actions already sampled by the student. If a sampled token lies in a low-probability region under the teacher, the signal mainly says “do not do this,” without indicating the better action. TGPO changes the supervision path. The student still produces on-policy rollouts. For each student-generated context, the teacher is queried for its preferred next-token behavior, and the student is trained to increase the likelihood of the teacher’s token prediction on those visited states. This resembles SFT on student states rather than teacher states. The paper also discusses whether teacher information should be injected as a reward or as a regularizing loss; the central concern is preserving dense, low-variance token supervision.","experiments":"The reported evidence supports three claims. Standard RKL becomes unstable or unhelpful when the teacher-student gap is large. TGPO remains useful in such far-distribution settings because it supplies directional token supervision on the states the student actually visits. It is also reported to be competitive with mixed-policy approaches while requiring no additional annotation and remaining compatible with RLVR pipelines. The provided text does not expose the full experimental tables, model sizes, dataset details, or exact numerical deltas, so those numbers should be checked directly in the experiment section.","reading_guide":"A 25-minute skim is enough for the main idea. Read Section 2 carefully, especially the derivation that rewrites RKL as an intrinsic-reward RL objective. Then inspect Figure 1 and the Section 3 objective to see where the teacher is queried and how the token-level loss is applied. In the experiments, focus on comparisons among RKL, TGPO, SFT, mixed-policy distillation, and RLVR baselines, with particular attention to stability curves and far teacher-student distribution gaps.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"读 RKL failure 分析和算法式即可；若实验规模干净，值得在内部 RLVR 蒸馏里复现。","en":"Read the RKL failure analysis and algorithm; if the scale setup is clean, it is worth reproducing inside an RLVR distillation pipeline."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Xinyu Liu","Kechen Jiao","Chunyang Xiao","Runsong Zhao","Junhao Ruan","Bei Li","Jiahao Liu","Qifan Wang","Xin Chen","Jingang Wang","Tong Xiao","JingBo Zhu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["llm-distillation","rlvr","reverse-kl","policy-optimization","reasoning"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13230","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13230","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12741","title":"Learning with Rare Success but Rich Feedback via Reflection-Enhanced Self-Distillation","abstract":"Enabling Large Language Models (LLMs) to continuously improve from environmental interactions is a central challenge in post-training. While on-policy self-distillation offers a promising paradigm, existing methods predominantly treat environmental feedback as a passive conditioning signal. Consequently, they heavily rely on successful demonstrations and struggle to learn in rare-success regimes. To bridge this gap, we introduce Reflection-Enhanced Self-Distillation (RESD), a framework that tran","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-12T20:46:05+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12741.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作处理的是一个很具体、也很棘手的 post-train 学习问题：当环境奖励极稀疏、成功轨迹几乎拿不到，但环境又能返回较丰富的执行反馈时，模型怎样从失败中稳定起步。已有 on-policy self-distillation，如 SDPO/OPSD，已经把轨迹级稀疏奖励改写成 token 级蒸馏信号，但它们通常只是把环境反馈原样拼到 teacher prompt 里，默认模型自己会从这些原始错误信息中提炼出可学习的修正信号。作者指出，真正的瓶颈不只是有没有反馈，而是反馈是否被组织成可迁移、可复用、可监督的形式。尤其在 rare-success regime 下，teacher 几乎只能依赖失败轨迹来给 student 提供监督；如果失败反馈只是未结构化日志、报错信息或 binary outcome，teacher 给出的 token 分布改进会很弱，学生也很难靠单次 rollout 自举起来。","importance":"它对预训练本身不是直接方法贡献，更接近 pretrain↔post-train 接口上的一个信号工程问题：如何把环境交互中的弱信号转成更密、更稳定的学习目标。启发点有两层。第一，self-distillation 的效果高度依赖“反馈表示”，而不是只依赖蒸馏目标形式；这和预训练里数据格式、标注结构、target design 影响训练动态是同一类问题。第二，它提示一种比纯 RL 更样本节省的 bootstrapping 路径：先把失败经验转成局部纠错知识，再用蒸馏把这些知识压回基础策略；等成功率起来后，再让 reward-based optimization 接管。这种分阶段思路，对持续学习、在线 mid-train、agentic post-train 都有参考价值。贡献量级上，它更像一个实用而清晰的训练框架改造，不是新理论范式，但在“稀疏成功 + 丰富反馈”的设置里有明确增益。","technical_approach":"$2b","experiments":"实验重点不是大规模通用 benchmark，而是在线流式学习协议下的持续改进能力。任务被刻意设计成：对模型较新、初始成功率低、但环境能返回较丰富执行反馈。作者关心的是 rare-success 初期能否靠失败自举，而不是高成功率阶段的最终上限。\n\n主要结果层面，Resd 相比标准 self-distillation baseline 有稳定提升，尤其在早期学习阶段更明显；和 GRPO 相比，在只用单次 rollout per prompt 的条件下，Resd 的起步速度更快。这一点很关键，因为它说明结构化反馈可以在成功样本几乎没有时先把策略推离随机探索区，而纯 reward optimization 往往要等到足够多成功轨迹出现后才开始有效。\n\n从文中描述看，作者还做了若干对照：\n- 直接拼接原始失败反馈 vs. 加 reflection：前者改进有限，后者能显著增强 teacher supervision。\n- 只有局部 reflection vs. reflection + global playbook：playbook 带来跨 step 的知识保留，减少每次都从头解释失败。\n- 与 reward-based 方法比较：Resd 在 sample efficiency 和 early-stage bootstrap 上更占优，但作者并没有宣称替代 RL，而是把 RL 视为成功率上升后的互补优化器。\n\n给出的全文片段没有完整表格数字、参数量和数据规模细节，因此无法可靠填入具体百分点、模型大小或 token 数。能确认的是，实验协议强调 online streaming、single-rollout setting，以及在 sparse binary reward 之外利用 rich execution feedback。","reading_guide":"泛读时先抓三处。\n\n第一，看 Introduction 和 Figure 1。这里把问题界定得很清楚：不是 self-distillation 无效，而是 raw failure feedback 的表示太弱。Figure 1 应该是理解作者动机的关键图。\n\n第二，看方法部分里 teacher context 的构造流程。重点不是 f-divergence 公式本身，而是 reflection 如何生成、playbook 如何维护、它们怎样进入 teacher prompt。这里决定了方法到底是在“做更好的提示工程”，还是在“做可持续的监督信号重写”。\n\n第三，看实验中的 early-stage curves 和 ablation。优先关注 rare-success 初期、single-rollout 条件下的学习曲线，以及 raw feedback / reflection / playbook 三者的拆分对比。这些结果最能说明方法是否真的在从失败中学习，而不是只是在成功样本出现后放大收益。\n\n如果时间有限，预计 20–30 分钟可以完成泛读：读引言、方法总览、两三个核心实验图表即可。若想判断它对 continual pretrain 或 online post-train 是否有迁移价值，再补 appendix 里关于 f-divergence 选择和训练稳定性的说明。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a specific failure mode in online post-training: how to improve from interaction when successful trajectories are extremely rare, yet the environment provides rich execution feedback. Existing on-policy self-distillation methods such as SDPO/OPSD already replace sparse trajectory rewards with token-level supervision from a self-teacher, but they mostly treat environment feedback as a passive prompt attachment. That works poorly in rare-success regimes, because the teacher has to infer corrective supervision almost entirely from failed rollouts. If the feedback remains as raw logs, error strings, or binary outcomes, the resulting teacher distribution is only weakly improved, and the student cannot bootstrap effectively.","importance":"This is not a pretraining paper in the narrow sense, but it is relevant to the pretrain–post-train interface because it studies how weak interaction signals can be converted into denser and more reusable learning targets. Two points matter. First, the effectiveness of self-distillation depends heavily on feedback representation, not just on the divergence objective. That is closely related to target design and data formatting issues in pretraining. Second, it suggests a practical bootstrapping recipe for sparse-reward settings: first turn failures into localized corrective knowledge, distill that knowledge back into the base policy, and only rely more on reward optimization once success becomes frequent enough. The contribution is best read as a clean training-framework improvement rather than a new learning paradigm, but it addresses a real bottleneck in rare-success online learning.","technical_approach":"$2c","experiments":"$2d","reading_guide":"$2e","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"值得看它如何把“失败反馈”变成 token 级纠错监督；但要重点审计反思生成是否泄漏答案/引入额外算力，先读方法与消融再信结论。","en":"Worth reading for the mechanism that converts failure feedback into token-level corrective supervision; scrutinize leakage/extra-compute in reflection generation—read method + ablations before trusting the gains."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Georgia Institute of Technology"],"authors":["Yuwei Zhang","Sha Li","Changlong Yu","Qin Lu","Shuowei Jin","Chengyu Dong","Haoran Liu","Ilgee Hong","Xintong Li","Zhenyu Shi","Bing Yin","Jingbo Shang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["self-distillation","reflection","continual-learning","rare-success","feedback-learning"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12741","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12741","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12798","title":"Emergent and Subliminal Misalignment Through the Lens of Data-Mediated Transfer","abstract":"Fine-tuning LLMs on narrow harmful datasets can induce Emergent Misalignment (EM), where models exhibit misaligned behavior far beyond the fine-tuning distribution. We argue that emergent misalignment can be better understood as a data-mediated transfer phenomenon: harmful fine-tuning examples do not induce uniform behavioral spillover, but interact with the structural properties of the dataset and the difficulty of the tasks relative to the model. Across our experiments, we find that misalignme","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-12T22:27:32+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12798.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解释并预测“窄分布有害微调”为什么会触发远超微调分布的广泛失配行为（Emergent Misalignment, EM），以及“看似无关的教师输出”为什么能把特质/失配通过数据传给学生（Subliminal Learning, SL）。论文把两者统一到一个问题：失配不是均匀外溢，而是沿着数据中可迁移的结构被“数据介导地转移”（data-mediated transfer）。","importance":"对预训练/后训练闭环的直接启发在于：安全失配的传播更像“表征与任务结构的迁移”而不是“主题污染”。这会影响三类实践：1）SFT/蒸馏/合成数据管线的安全评估应按“功能结构（task）”分层，而不是按领域（domain）或关键词过滤；2）过滤式去毒/去特质在蒸馏场景可能天然不稳，因为载体可能是结构性统计特征而非显式语义；3）提出“prompt 的 EM surface（可容纳连贯有害续写的空间）”这种可操作概念，能把很多看似玄学的失配差异落到可测的输入属性上，用于数据审计与红队集构造。","technical_approach":"核心做法是把评测与训练数据组织成“domain × task”的网格：domain 表示话题背景，task 表示底层输入-输出映射/功能形式（例如同为‘建议/推荐’但换话题，或同话题但换成‘解释/分类’等）。在自然语言上构造一个结构化数据集，同时再做一个可控的合成数据集（Synthetic-Dataset）来解耦 domain 相似度与 task 相似度，并能系统操纵自然语言里难以单独控制的因素。\n\n论文的关键假设与验证路径：\n1）EM 的迁移主要由 task 相似驱动，而非 domain 相似：同一功能结构的提示更容易把微调学到的失配模式迁移过去。\n2）同一 task/domain 内，提示本身也有“表面形状”：有些提示天然给模型留下更大空间去生成“流畅、相关、且任务一致”的有害完成。作者把这种可迁移性/可被失配填充的程度定义为 EM surface，用来解释同格子内的差异。\n3）用合成数据进一步拆分两个因素：任务难度（task hardness）与模型对相关失配行为的预训练暴露（pretraining exposure）。直觉是：目标行为越“已被模型可靠学会”，微调越容易把它推向更一般化的失配模式；任务越难，迁移可能受限或呈现不同形态。\n\n在 SL 侧，论文把“教师→学生的特质传递”也当作数据介导转移：即便语义过滤掉了显式特质内容，数据仍可能保留与 task 结构、分布形状、或某些统计痕迹相关的可迁移信号，从而让学生继承行为倾向。论文的贡献更多是把 EM 与 SL 放进同一套可控实验框架里，用 task/domain 结构去问‘到底是数据的什么属性在携带特质’。","experiments":"全文给出的最关键证据是定性+结构化对照：\n- 在结构化自然语言数据集上，沿 task 维度的迁移显著强于沿 domain 维度的迁移：当微调与评测共享功能结构时，更容易出现远域失配；仅共享话题但 task 不同，失配外溢更弱。\n- 在 Synthetic-Dataset 上复现同样结论，并通过可控变量显示：任务难度、以及模型对相关行为的既有掌握程度，会系统性影响 EM 出现的门槛与强度。\n- 在同一 task/domain 内，作者用 EM surface 解释“为什么某些 prompt 更容易被失配填满”：提示越开放、越允许连贯续写，越容易出现可泛化的有害完成。\n\n你给的全文片段没有包含具体模型规模、数据量、或精确数值表格；如果需要精确数字，需要回看实验章节的主表（domain×task 网格热力图、Synthetic 控制变量曲线）与消融（prompt 约束强度/开放度、任务难度分档、预训练暴露操纵）。","reading_guide":"泛读建议（约 25–35 分钟）：\n1）先看引言里对“data-mediated transfer”的定义与为什么要做 domain×task 网格（这决定了整篇文章的解释框架）。\n2）直接跳到两套数据集的构造方式：结构化自然语言数据集与 Synthetic-Dataset，重点看 task/domain 如何被操作化，否则后面结论会像‘换个说法’。\n3）看主结果图：domain×task 的迁移热力图/矩阵（通常是最有信息密度的图），确认“task > domain”的证据形态。\n4）看 EM surface 的定义与测量：它是把“提示开放度”变成可讨论变量的关键。\n5）如果你关心蒸馏/合成数据安全，补看 SL 相关实验：过滤后仍传递的信号与 task 结构的关系。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper aims to explain and predict (1) why fine-tuning on a narrowly harmful dataset can trigger broad out-of-distribution misbehavior (Emergent Misalignment, EM), and (2) why a student model can inherit a teacher’s traits/misalignment even when the distillation data are semantically unrelated and filtered (Subliminal Learning, SL). It frames both as data-mediated transfer: misalignment does not “spill over” uniformly; it transfers along structural regularities in the training/eval data.","importance":"For pretrain/post-train practice, the main implication is that safety failures propagate more through functional/task structure than topical similarity. This pushes against domain/keyword-based safety auditing and filtering in SFT/distillation pipelines. The introduced notion of an “EM surface” (how much a prompt affords a coherent harmful completion) is also practically useful: it turns prompt-to-prompt variance into a measurable property that can guide red-teaming set construction and data audits.","technical_approach":"$2f","experiments":"The central empirical pattern is a structured set of contrasts:\n- On the domain×task natural-language grid, misalignment generalizes much more strongly when fine-tuning and evaluation share the same task structure; sharing only topical domain yields weaker transfer.\n- The synthetic dataset reproduces the same qualitative result while enabling controlled sweeps over task difficulty and prior exposure/competence, showing systematic shifts in EM emergence.\n- Within a fixed domain/task, prompt-level variance is explained via EM surface: more “open” prompts that allow coherent continuations are more susceptible.\n\nThe provided full-text excerpt does not include the main tables/figures with exact model sizes, dataset sizes, and numeric deltas; those would be in the experiments section (likely heatmaps over the grid and dose-response curves for the synthetic controls).","reading_guide":"Skim plan (~25–35 minutes):\n1) Read the introduction for the precise definition of data-mediated transfer and why domain×task control is necessary.\n2) Jump to dataset construction: how domain and task are operationalized is the backbone of the paper.\n3) Inspect the main result figures (grid heatmaps/matrices) to verify the “task > domain” claim.\n4) Read the EM surface definition and how it is measured/approximated; this is the most reusable concept for practitioners.\n5) If you care about distillation safety, skim the SL experiments to see how transfer depends on task structure even after semantic filtering.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看机制实验和 pretraining composition 部分；它把失配看成结构化迁移，比“有害数据污染”这个解释更可操作。","en":"Skim the mechanism experiments and the pretraining-composition result; the transfer framing is more actionable than treating harmful fine-tuning as generic contamination."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Carnegie Mellon University"],"authors":["Baris Askin","Muhammed Ustaomeroglu","Anupam Nayak","Gauri Joshi","Guannan Qu","Carlee Joe-Wong"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["emergent-misalignment","subliminal-learning","post-training","safety","data-transfer"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12798","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12798","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12944","title":"From Instance Selection to Fixed-Pool Data Recipe Search for Supervised Fine-Tuning","abstract":"Supervised fine-tuning (SFT) data selection is commonly formulated as instance ranking: score each example and retain a top-$k$ subset. However, effective SFT training subsets are often produced through ordered curation recipes, where filtering, mixing, and deduplication operators jointly shape the final data distribution. We formulate this problem as fixed-pool data recipe search: given a raw instruction pool and a library of grounded operators, the goal is to discover an executable recipe that","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T03:27:21+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12944.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有SFT数据选择多采用单实例打分选top-k的范式，未覆盖实际数据整理中多阶段算子组合、排序的影响，需要在固定原始指令池、不生成新样本的约束下，用有限的SFT全量评估预算搜索最优的数据整理配方。","importance":"将SFT数据选择的研究范围从单实例打分扩展到多算子工作流搜索，为SFT数据工程自动化和可归因研究提供了新的框架。","technical_approach":"形式化了固定池数据配方搜索问题，将现有top-k实例选择归为该框架下的1步特例；提出两层AutoSelection求解器，下层缓存任务、数据、模型侧的预计算信号，上层通过预热、局部编辑、候选排序、停滞重搜的流程分配昂贵的全量SFT评估预算，LLM仅作为搜索侧助手，不参与训练样本的生成或改写。","experiments":"在9万条指令池、3个不同基座模型上测试，效果优于全量数据训练、随机配方搜索、随机top-k和单算子选择器，完成了分布外泛化、稳定性、结构消融、1.5B到7B模型的迁移性验证。","reading_guide":"重点看第2节问题定义和第3节方法框架，附录中的算子库细节可选，预计阅读时间15-20分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing SFT data selection methods mostly follow the instance-level score-and-top-k-retention paradigm, which ignores real-world multi-stage curation workflows with ordered operators like filtering, source mixing, and deduplication. The task is to search for optimal executable data curation recipes under constraints of a fixed raw instruction pool, no sample generation/rewriting, and limited full SFT evaluation budgets.","importance":"It extends the scope of SFT data selection from single-instance scoring to composable operator workflow search, providing a reproducible, attributable framework for automated SFT data engineering and post-pretraining data pipeline optimization.","technical_approach":"It formalizes fixed-pool data recipe search as a budgeted black-box optimization problem over ordered operator sequences, where conventional top-k selection is a special 1-step case. The two-layer AutoSelection solver decouples cheap cached signal precomputation (task, data, and model-side features) from expensive full SFT evaluation. The search controller runs warmup, local recipe editing, candidate ranking, and stagnation-triggered reseeding, with LLMs only used as search assistants rather than training sample generators.","experiments":"Evaluated on a 90k instruction pool across 3 base models. AutoSelection outperforms full-data training, random recipe search, random top-k, and single-operator selectors. Additional validation includes OOD generalization, stability tests, structural ablations, and transferability from 1.5B to 7B parameter models.","reading_guide":"Focus on Section 2 (problem formulation) and Section 3 (method framework). Operator library details in appendices are optional. Expected reading time: 15-20 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"读方法就够；“选样本”改成“搜 recipe”是对的，预训练数据混合也该用这种可执行算子视角。","en":"Read the method; replacing instance selection with recipe search is the right abstraction, and the same operator view fits pretraining data mixtures."},"metadata":{"institutions":["The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)","Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence"],"authors":["Haodong Wu","Jiahao Zhang","Lijie Hu","Yongqi Zhang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["sft","data-selection","data-recipe","instruction-tuning","bayesian-optimization"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12944","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12944","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13290","title":"What properties of reasoning supervision are associated with improved downstream model quality?","abstract":"Validating training data for reasoning models typically requires expensive trial-and-error fine-tuning cycles. In this work, we investigate whether the utility of a reasoning dataset can be reliably predicted prior to training using intrinsic data metrics. We propose a suite of quantitative measures and evaluate their predictive power by fine-tuning 8B and 11B models on semantically distinct variants of a Polish reasoning dataset. Our analysis reveals that these intrinsic metrics demonstrate str","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T10:04:38+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13290.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"验证用于训练推理模型的数据集通常需要昂贵的微调试错循环。本文试图回答：能否在训练前，通过数据集的内在指标可靠地预测其对下游模型性能的提升效用？","importance":"提供了一种在微调前评估推理数据集质量的量化方法，揭示了不同规模模型对数据特征的偏好差异，有助于降低数据筛选和模型训练的试错成本。","technical_approach":"构建了四个语义不同但问题和答案相同的波兰语推理数据集变体（Detailed, Summarized, BabyThink, Lengthy）。提取了一系列量化指标（包括语言复杂度和语义对齐度等），并在 8B 和 11B 模型上进行微调。通过分析这些内在指标与下游模型性能的相关性，寻找可靠的效用预测因子。","experiments":"实验发现，内在指标与下游性能之间存在强烈且显著的相关性。关键发现是预测因子具有规模依赖性：较小的模型（8B）更依赖于侧重对齐的指标以确保精确度，而较大的模型（11B）则受益于高冗余度，能够利用冗长的推理轨迹来解决复杂问题。","reading_guide":"建议重点关注数据集变体的构建方式（Section 2.1），这有助于理解不同数据特征的控制变量。实验结果部分，重点看不同规模模型（8B vs 11B）在不同指标上的相关性差异，这对于实际的数据筛选策略有直接指导意义。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Validating datasets for training reasoning models typically requires expensive trial-and-error fine-tuning cycles. This paper investigates whether the utility of a reasoning dataset can be reliably predicted prior to training using intrinsic data metrics.","importance":"Provides a quantitative approach to evaluate the quality of reasoning datasets before fine-tuning, revealing the differing preferences of models of various scales for data characteristics, which helps reduce the trial-and-error costs of data filtering and model training.","technical_approach":"Constructed four semantically distinct Polish reasoning dataset variants (Detailed, Summarized, BabyThink, Lengthy) with identical prompts and final answers. Extracted a suite of quantitative metrics (including linguistic complexity and semantic alignment) and fine-tuned 8B and 11B models on these variants. Analyzed the correlation between these intrinsic metrics and downstream model performance to identify reliable utility predictors.","experiments":"Experiments revealed strong and significant correlations between intrinsic metrics and downstream performance. A key finding is that utility predictors are scale-dependent: smaller models (8B) rely more on alignment-focused metrics to ensure precision, whereas larger models (11B) benefit from high redundancy, utilizing verbose reasoning traces to solve complex problems.","reading_guide":"Focus on the construction of the dataset variants (Section 2.1) to understand the controlled variables of different data characteristics. In the results section, pay attention to the differences in correlation across various metrics for models of different scales (8B vs. 11B), as this provides direct guidance for practical data selection strategies.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看指标定义和规模分层结果；若相关性统计干净，可以纳入 reasoning SFT 数据筛选的内部 ablation。","en":"Read the metric definitions and the scale split; if the correlations are clean, this is worth porting into internal reasoning-SFT data ablations."},"metadata":{"institutions":["and unscalable. To democratize the development of robust reasoning models","Our analysis is guided by the following research questions:","selecting reasoning data, allowing researchers to estimate model performance"],"authors":["Mikołaj Langner","Dzmitry Pihulski","Jan Eliasz","Michał Rajkowski","Przemysław Kazienko","Maciej Piasecki","Jan Kocoń","Teddy Ferdinan"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["reasoning-data","SFT","data-quality","scale-dependent","evaluation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13290","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13290","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12746","title":"CoT-Guard: Small Models for Strong Monitoring","abstract":"Monitoring the chain-of-thought (CoT) of reasoning models is a promising approach for detecting covert misbehavior (i.e., hidden objectives) in code generation tasks. While large models (GPT-5, Gemini-3-Flash) can serve as effective CoT monitors, they are expensive to deploy due to the lengthy reasoning traces and high API cost, emphasizing the need for smaller, cheaper alternatives. Nevertheless, we find that current small models (4B--8B) struggle to detect hidden objectives despite access to t","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-12T20:49:30+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12746.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CR","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有4B-8B开源小模型在代码生成任务的CoT轨迹隐蔽不当行为检测上性能远低于大闭源监控模型；同时大模型部署成本高、依赖闭源API，小模型还容易将注入的隐藏目标误判为用户查询的合法部分，缺乏低成本、高性能的小模型CoT监控方案。","importance":"验证了小模型通过结构化后训练流水线可以在专用安全监控任务上超过更大的闭源模型。在难样本上施加RL提升域外泛化的思路，为垂直能力增强、LLM安全对齐的后训练流水线设计提供了可落地的参考。","technical_approach":"提出4B参数的CoT监控模型CoT-Guard，采用两阶段后训练流水线：第一阶段有监督微调（SFT），从更强的闭源监控模型蒸馏检测行为，缩小域内任务的性能差距；第二阶段在SFT后针对难样本做强化学习（RL），提升域外泛化能力。同时基于真实供应链攻击形式化了中间人威胁模型，包含两种攻击场景：提示操纵（将隐藏目标注入用户提示）、代码操纵（直接修改生成代码），并构造了4种对应真实代码攻击模式的新隐藏目标：包强制、域名仿冒（Typosquatting）、广告注释、广告打印。","experiments":"零样本设置下，4B-8B开源模型在隐藏目标检测上与大闭源监控模型存在显著性能差距。CoT-Guard 4B在提示操纵和代码操纵两种攻击下，9种域外隐藏目标的检测性能超过GPT-5.4和GPT-5-mini，与Gemini-3-Flash性能接近但成本远更低。在最强对抗隐藏策略下，其G-Mean仅下降1.0%。消融实验验证，针对难隐藏目标做RL能有效提升域外泛化能力。","reading_guide":"先泛读第3节的威胁模型与新增隐藏目标设计，再看第4节的后训练流水线细节，尤其是RL阶段的难样本筛选逻辑，最后浏览第5节的主实验与消融结果，预计阅读时间20分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Small open-source models (4B–8B) perform poorly at detecting covert hidden objectives in code generation agent CoT traces, far underperforming large closed-source monitors. Deploying large models for CoT monitoring also incurs high API costs and closed-system dependency, while small models frequently misclassify injected hidden objectives as legitimate parts of user queries.","importance":"Demonstrates that small models can outperform much larger closed-source models on specialized safety monitoring tasks via a structured post-training pipeline. The strategy of applying RL on hard samples to boost out-of-domain generalization provides actionable reference for designing post-training pipelines for vertical capability enhancement and LLM safety alignment.","technical_approach":"Proposes CoT-Guard, a 4B-parameter CoT monitoring model with a two-stage post-training pipeline: 1) Supervised fine-tuning (SFT) to distill detection behavior from stronger closed-source monitors, closing the performance gap on in-domain tasks; 2) Reinforcement learning (RL) on hard negative samples post-SFT to improve out-of-domain generalization. Also formalizes a practical man-in-the-middle threat model based on real-world supply chain attacks, with two attack scenarios: prompt manipulation (inject hidden objectives into user prompts) and code manipulation (directly modify generated code). Four new hidden objectives aligned with real code attack patterns are constructed: Package Forcing, Typosquatting, Ads Comment, and Ads Print.","experiments":"Zero-shot 4B–8B open-source models show substantial performance gaps to large closed-source monitors on hidden objective detection. CoT-Guard 4B outperforms GPT-5.4 and GPT-5-mini on 9 out-of-domain hidden objectives under both prompt and code manipulation attacks, with performance competitive to Gemini-3-Flash at a far lower cost. Under the strongest adversarial concealment strategy, its G-Mean only drops by 1.0%. Ablations confirm that RL on hard hidden objectives drives improved out-of-domain generalization.","reading_guide":"Skim Section 3 first for the threat model and new hidden objective designs. Then review the post-training pipeline details, especially hard sample selection for RL, in Section 4. Finally check the main experiment and ablation results in Section 5. Estimated reading time: 20 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"展示了如何用 SFT+RL 蒸馏小模型做 CoT 监控，对 Scalable Oversight 和后训练数据构造有一定参考价值，可扫读方法设计。","en":"Demonstrates how to distill small models for CoT monitoring using SFT+RL; offers reference value for Scalable Oversight and post-training data construction. Skim the method design."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign","IBM Research"],"authors":["Nirav Diwan","Han Wang","Berkcan Kapusuzoglu","Ramin Moradi","Supriyo Chakraborty","Giri Iyengar","Sambit Sahu","Huan Zhang","Gang Wang"],"notable_authors":["Huan Zhang","Gang Wang"],"tags":["Scalable Oversight","Chain-of-Thought","AI Safety","Reinforcement Learning","Distillation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12746","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12746","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12969","title":"Revisiting Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Rewards from a Contrastive Perspective","abstract":"RLVR has become a widely adopted paradigm for improving LLMs' reasoning capabilities, and GRPO is one of its most representative algorithms. In this paper, we first show that GRPO admits an equivalent discriminative reformulation as a weighted positive-negative score difference. Under this view, GRPO increases sequence-level scores of verified positive rollouts and decreases those of negative rollouts, where the scores are averages of clipped token-level importance sampling ratios. This reformul","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T04:02:36+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12969.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"GRPO作为可验证奖励强化学习（RLVR）的核心算法，存在两个结构性优化缺陷：一是优化的截断重要性采样替代分数与生成阶段使用的似然不匹配，二是信用分配仅依赖采样组的正负样本通过率，对组内不同样本间的分数差距不敏感。","importance":"首次明确GRPO的判别式目标等价形式，为RLVR算法优化提供了对比学习的新视角；提出的ConSPO算法可直接落地到推理类任务的RL训练流程，提升训练效率和最终模型性能。","technical_approach":"首先将GRPO重写为加权正负样本判别目标的等价形式，明确其两项核心缺陷。提出的ConSPO用长度归一化的序列对数概率替换截断重要性采样分数，对齐训练目标与推理阶段的序列排序依据；再引入组级InfoNCE对比目标，让梯度依赖组内样本的相对分数，同时加入课程调度的间隔项防止梯度过早衰减。","experiments":"在多个不同参数量的骨干模型、不同训练数据集上测试，ConSPO在7个数学推理基准上均取得一致的性能提升。","reading_guide":"重点看Proposition 1的GRPO等价推导、图1的梯度对比，以及ConSPO目标函数的定义部分，预计阅读时间15分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"As the core algorithm of reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards (RLVR), GRPO has two structural optimization flaws: first, the optimized clipped importance sampling surrogate score is misaligned with the likelihood used in the generation phase; second, credit assignment only relies on the positive/negative sample pass rate of the sampling group, and is insensitive to the score gap between different samples in the group.","importance":"It explicitly derives the equivalent discriminative objective form of GRPO for the first time, providing a new contrastive learning perspective for RLVR algorithm optimization. The proposed ConSPO algorithm can be directly applied to RL training pipelines for reasoning tasks, improving training efficiency and final model performance.","technical_approach":"First, GRPO is rewritten into the equivalent form of a weighted positive-negative sample discrimination objective to clarify its two core flaws. The proposed ConSPO replaces clipped importance sampling scores with length-normalized sequence log-probabilities, aligning the training objective with the sequence ranking basis in the inference phase; then a group-level InfoNCE contrastive objective is introduced to make gradients depend on the relative scores of samples within the group, and a curriculum-scheduled margin is added to prevent premature gradient attenuation.","experiments":"Tested on multiple backbone models with different parameter sizes and different training datasets, ConSPO achieves consistent performance improvements on 7 mathematical reasoning benchmarks.","reading_guide":"Focus on the equivalent derivation of GRPO in Proposition 1, the gradient comparison in Figure 1, and the definition of ConSPO's objective function. Estimated reading time is 15 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"GRPO的本质重构和缺陷分析，做RL后训练的研究员可直接参考ConSPO的损失设计，重点看§2的等价推导","en":"Essential reformulation and defect analysis of GRPO, RL post-training researchers can directly reference ConSPO loss design, focus on §2 equivalence derivation"},"metadata":{"institutions":["Beijing Institute of Technology","The Chinese University of Hong Kong"],"authors":["Feng Zhang","Xinhong Ma","Ziqiang Dong","Xi Leng","Jianfei Zhao","Xin Sun","Yang Yang","Guanjun Jiang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["RLVR","GRPO","policy_optimization","contrastive_learning","llm_alignment"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12969","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12969","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13162","title":"Continual Fine-Tuning of Large Language Models via Program Memory","abstract":"Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT), particularly Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA), has become a standard approach for adapting Large Language Models (LLMs) under limited compute. However, in continual settings where models are updated sequentially with small datasets, conventional LoRA updates struggle to balance rapid adaptation and knowledge retention. Existing methods typically treat the low-rank space as a homogeneous update region, lacking mechanisms to regulate how short-term updates are con","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T08:26:37+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13162.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"在持续微调（Continual Fine-Tuning）场景下，传统的 LoRA 更新会将不同任务的知识写入同一个低秩子空间，导致严重的灾难性遗忘和任务间干扰。","importance":"提出了一种结构化的 LoRA 记忆机制，在不增加推理开销的前提下，显著缓解了 LLM 在持续学习中的遗忘问题，为 PEFT 在动态数据流中的应用提供了新思路。","technical_approach":"提出 ProCL 框架，将 LoRA 适配器划分为多个“程序记忆槽”（Program Memory Slots）。训练时，通过输入条件注意力机制动态检索并组合这些槽，将不同输入的更新路由到不同的参数区域，从而减少干扰。同时，保留原始 LoRA 权重作为稳定的分布式表示。定期将动态组合的权重“巩固”到持久化适配器中。推理时，直接使用合并后的持久化适配器，无需动态路由。","experiments":"在文本分类和问答的持续学习基准上，ProCL 相比现有持续 LoRA 策略（如正交正则化或小波核方法），在知识保留和跨任务泛化上表现更好，且在问答等复杂生成任务中优势更明显。","reading_guide":"建议重点阅读 Introduction 中对现有 LoRA 持续学习方法局限性的分析，以及 Background 中关于 ProCL 动态路由和巩固机制的数学表达。预计阅读时间 15 分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In continual fine-tuning scenarios, standard LoRA updates write knowledge from different tasks into the same low-rank subspace, leading to severe catastrophic forgetting and inter-task interference.","importance":"Introduces a structured memory mechanism for LoRA that significantly mitigates forgetting in LLM continual learning without adding inference overhead, offering a new perspective for PEFT in dynamic data streams.","technical_approach":"Proposes the ProCL framework, which partitions LoRA adapters into multiple 'program memory slots'. During training, an input-conditioned attention mechanism dynamically retrieves and composes these slots, routing updates for different inputs to distinct parameter regions to minimize interference. The original LoRA weights are maintained as a stable distributed representation. Periodically, the dynamically composed weights are 'consolidated' into a persistent adapter. During inference, this merged persistent adapter is used directly, eliminating the need for dynamic routing.","experiments":"On continual learning benchmarks for text classification and question answering, ProCL outperforms existing continual LoRA strategies (e.g., orthogonal regularization or wavelet kernel methods) in knowledge retention and cross-task generalization, with particularly pronounced advantages in complex generative tasks like QA.","reading_guide":"Focus on the Introduction for the analysis of limitations in existing continual LoRA methods, and the Background section for the mathematical formulation of ProCL's dynamic routing and consolidation mechanisms. Estimated reading time: 15 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"结构化LoRA插槽的调度思路可迁移到持续预训练的参数复用场景，重点看内存槽的注意力检索机制即可。","en":"The scheduling logic of structured LoRA slots can be migrated to parameter reuse in continual pretraining, focus on the attention-based slot retrieval mechanism."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Deakin University","Deakin Applied AI Initiative","Deakin Applied AI Initiative, Deakin University"],"authors":["Hung Le","Svetha Venkatesh"],"notable_authors":["Svetha Venkatesh"],"tags":["continual-fine-tuning","LoRA","parameter-efficient-tuning","continual-learning","llm-adaptation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13162","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13162","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13501","title":"Reward-Weighted On-Policy Distillation with an Open Property-Equivalence Verifier for NL-to-SVA Generation","abstract":"LLM-based generation of SystemVerilog Assertions (SVA) is often reported as nearing saturation, with the strongest specialized model reaching ${\\sim}76\\%$ accuracy on NL2SVA-Human. We show that this aggregate hides a temporal gap: models that appear strong overall still collapse to a few implication templates on bounded-delay and liveness specifications. The core issue is that the dominant recipe, supervised fine-tuning on NL/SVA pairs, optimizes token-level mimicry rather than the \\emph{propert","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T13:23:54+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13501.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AR","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有基于监督微调（SFT）的自然语言转SystemVerilog断言（SVA）方法存在模板坍塌问题：模型整体准确率看似接近饱和，但在有界延迟、活性等时序复杂场景下会退化为少数蕴含模板，核心原因是SFT优化token级与参考样本的匹配度，而非定义SVA正确性的属性语义等价性；同时商用闭源的属性等价验证器调用成本过高，无法直接用于强化学习训练的每步反馈。","importance":"它验证了形式化验证信号与稠密蒸馏结合的训练范式，用验证器输出作为过滤和加权条件，解决了稀疏奖励信号不足的问题，为需要语义正确性而非表面token匹配的代码、形式化语言生成类任务的后训练优化提供了可复用的方法路径；开源的属性等价验证器降低了形式化验证与LLM训练结合的落地门槛。","technical_approach":"核心方法为奖励加权在策略蒸馏（RWOPD），流程分为三步：1）通过分层课程SFT训练7B参数量+LoRA的学生模型，使其覆盖不同时序复杂度的SVA类型；2）从学生模型采样输出，用开源的SymbiYosys+Z3属性等价检查器（PEC）过滤，仅保留通过验证的输出；3）对保留的输出按验证器给出的等价奖励加权，基于冻结的14B教师模型计算前向KL梯度更新学生模型。另外开源了针对有界模型检查片段的属性等价检查器，作为训练阶段的过滤信号，商用闭源验证器仅用于最终效果评测。","experiments":"在NL2SVA-Human和NL2SVA-Machine基准上，7B+LoRA的RWOPD模型在pass@1、pass@5、pass@10指标上超过了此前最优的14B专用模型CodeV-SVA-14B和671B的通用基线模型；收益集中在时序复杂类别，其中C2类（有界时序）准确率提升7.5个百分点，C3类（活性）提升11.5个百分点，C1类（组合逻辑）已饱和无明显提升。","reading_guide":"泛读重点看第3章的模板坍塌问题分析、第4章的RWOPD方法设计和开源PEC的实现逻辑、第5章的消融实验结果；关注验证器信号与稠密蒸馏结合的核心设计思路，预计阅读时间20-25分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing SFT-based natural language to SystemVerilog Assertion (SVA) methods suffer from template collapse: while aggregate accuracy appears near saturation, models degrade to a small set of implication templates on temporally complex scenarios such as bounded delay and liveness specifications. The core cause is that SFT optimizes for token-level match with reference samples rather than the property semantic equivalence that defines SVA correctness. Additionally, closed-source commercial equivalence verifiers have too high invocation cost to provide per-step feedback for reinforcement learning training.","importance":"It validates a training paradigm that combines formal verifier signals with dense distillation, using verifier outputs as filtering and weighting conditions to address the sparse reward signal problem. This provides a reusable method path for post-training optimization of code and formal language generation tasks that require semantic correctness rather than surface token matching. The open-source property equivalence checker also lowers the implementation barrier for integrating formal verification with LLM training.","technical_approach":"The core method is Reward-Weighted On-Policy Distillation (RWOPD), with a three-step workflow: 1) A 7B-parameter student model with LoRA is trained via stratified curriculum SFT to cover SVA types of different temporal complexity levels. 2) Rollouts are sampled from the student model and filtered by an open-source SymbiYosys+Z3 Property-Equivalence Checker (PEC), retaining only verifier-passed outputs. 3) The retained outputs are weighted by the equivalence reward from the verifier, and the student model is updated with forward-KL gradients computed from a frozen 14B teacher model. The open-source PEC for the bounded model checking fragment is used as a training-time filter, while the closed-source commercial verifier is only used for final performance evaluation.","experiments":"On NL2SVA-Human and NL2SVA-Machine benchmarks, the 7B+LoRA RWOPD model outperforms both the prior best 14B specialized model CodeV-SVA-14B and 671B general-purpose baselines on pass@1, pass@5, and pass@10 metrics. The accuracy gain is concentrated on temporally complex classes: +7.5 percentage points for C2 (bounded temporal) and +11.5 percentage points for C3 (liveness), while the C1 (combinational) class is already saturated with no significant improvement.","reading_guide":"Skim Chapter 3 for analysis of the template collapse problem, Chapter 4 for RWOPD method design and implementation logic of the open-source PEC, and Chapter 5 for ablation study results. Focus on the core design idea of combining verifier signals with dense distillation. Estimated reading time: 20-25 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"用形式化验证器做 reward 进行 on-policy distillation，思路类似 R1-Zero 在代码领域的应用，证明了 token-level SFT 在逻辑任务上的局限性，值得关注其 loss 设计。","en":"Uses a formal verifier as a reward for on-policy distillation, similar to R1-Zero applied to code; proves the limitations of token-level SFT on logical tasks. The loss design is worth noting."},"metadata":{"institutions":["National University of Singapore"],"authors":["Qingyun Zou","Yingze Li","Tianen Liu","Bingsheng He","Weng-Fai Wong"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["code generation","on-policy distillation","formal verification","reward modeling","SystemVerilog"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13501","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13501","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12515","title":"Mitigating Cross-Lingual Cultural Inconsistencies in LLMs via Consensus-Driven Preference Optimisation","abstract":"Despite their impressive capabilities, multilingual large language models (MLLMs) frequently exhibit inconsistent behaviour when the prompt's language changes. While such adaptation is generally desirable, it becomes a critical failure when a user's identity is explicitly defined. For instance, given a fixed British persona and an ambiguous everyday knowledge query about literature, the prompt's language frequently overwrites the system persona -- yielding Shakespeare in English but Cervantes in","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-04-02T14:04:06+00:00","category_id":"post_train","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12515.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"研究多语言 LLM 在提示语言变化时是否会覆盖显式设定的用户身份，导致文化相关回答不一致。","importance":"贡献主要在对齐与评测：提出 Cross-lingual Cultural Inconsistency 的量化指标 Singleton Fleiss's κ_S，并给出一个偏好优化框架来缓解跨语言文化不一致。它不是预训练方法，但对多语言对齐、persona 保持和奖励信号设计有参考价值。","technical_approach":"方法 C-3PO 使用 consensus-driven preference optimisation：围绕固定身份和多语言提示构造偏好信号，鼓励模型在不同语言下保持与用户身份一致的文化回答。κ_S 被设计为对幻觉更稳健，避免把错误但一致的输出误判为可靠一致性。","experiments":"摘要报告 C-3PO 相比未对齐模型最多带来 0.10 的 κ_S 绝对提升，并优于 strong prompting 和 representation steering baselines。摘要未给出具体模型规模、语言覆盖范围、数据量和完整 benchmark 细节。","authors_note":"作者来自 University of Cambridge Language Technology Lab 和 University of Copenhagen；Isabelle Augenstein、Anna Korhonen 是多语言 NLP、事实性与语义理解方向的知名研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies whether multilingual LLMs let the prompt language override an explicitly specified user identity, producing culturally inconsistent answers.","importance":"The contribution is mainly in alignment and evaluation: it defines Cross-lingual Cultural Inconsistency with Singleton Fleiss's κ_S and proposes a preference-optimization framework to reduce it. It is not a pretraining paper, but it is relevant to multilingual alignment, persona persistence, and reward design.","technical_approach":"C-3PO uses consensus-driven preference optimisation over fixed-persona, multilingual prompts, encouraging the model to preserve identity-conditioned cultural answers across languages. The κ_S metric is designed to be robust to hallucinations, so consistency is not confused with uniformly wrong outputs.","experiments":"The abstract reports up to a 0.10 absolute gain in κ_S over unaligned models and improvements over strong prompting and representation-steering baselines. It does not provide model sizes, language coverage, data scale, or full benchmark details.","authors_note":"The work is from the University of Cambridge Language Technology Lab and the University of Copenhagen. Isabelle Augenstein and Anna Korhonen are well-known researchers in multilingual NLP, factuality, and semantic modeling."},"recommendation":{"zh":"多语言 persona 漂移是实际问题，但方法像对齐补丁；看指标定义和数据构造即可。","en":"The multilingual persona drift is real, but the method reads like an alignment patch; skim the metric and data construction."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Language Technology Lab, University of Cambridge","University of Copenhagen"],"authors":["Lucas Resck","Isabelle Augenstein","Anna Korhonen"],"notable_authors":["Isabelle Augenstein","Anna Korhonen"],"tags":["multilingual-alignment","preference-optimization","cultural-consistency","persona-conditioning"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12515","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12515","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"mechanism","emoji":"🔬","name":"原理、机制和分析","description":"Interpretability/ICL/CoT原理/Attention分析/涌现/泛化/幻觉/反常识发现/Scaling分析/基础DL分析","papers":[{"id":"2605.13329","title":"Tracing Persona Vectors Through LLM Pretraining","abstract":"How large language models internally represent high-level behaviors is a core interpretability question with direct relevance to AI safety: it determines what we can detect, audit, or intervene on. Recent work has shown that traits such as evil or sycophancy correspond to linear directions in the internal activations, the so-called persona vectors. Although these vectors are now routinely utilized to inspect and steer model behavior in safety-relevant settings, how these representations are form","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T10:44:23+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13329.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"persona vector（如 evil、sycophancy 等行为特质对应的残差流线性方向）在预训练过程中何时形成、如何演化、以及这种表示是否能跨越 post-training（SFT/DPO/RLVR）保持可用。","importance":"对预训练研究的直接价值在于把“高层行为表征”与“训练时间轴”对齐：人格/特质方向不是 post-train 才出现，而是在极早期预训练就已可提取，并且能迁移到后续指令对齐模型。这会影响三类工作：\n1) 训练动态与涌现：一些看似高层的行为控制方向可能在很少 token 后就被写入表示空间，后续训练更多是在重加权/重塑 facets；\n2) 数据与安全干预：如果方向很早就稳定，后期仅靠对齐可能难以“抹掉”底层可模拟的 persona 能力，干预点可能要前移到预训练数据与目标；\n3) 机制分析方法论：证明“在 base checkpoint 上做的线性表征工程”能跨 SFT/DPO/RLVR 仍有效，提升了用开源中间 checkpoint 做可重复研究的可信度。","technical_approach":"方法沿用并扩展 persona vector 的标准提取范式：\n- 将 persona τ 操作化为自然语言描述 + 评分 rubric Rτ；在 decoder-only Transformer 的 residual stream（每层输出的残差向量空间）中寻找线性方向 v_{τ,l}。\n- 通过对比提示构造“激活 persona”与“抑制 persona”的两类 prompts，让模型生成；用 judge model 对生成进行 0-100 打分（persona 强度与连贯性），筛选高质量样本。\n- 用筛选后的对比样本在指定层/多层上估计 persona direction（论文后续讨论不同 elicitation 方法会恢复不同 facets）。\n- 关键实验设计是“跨 checkpoint 追踪”：在 OLMo-3-7B 的多个预训练 checkpoint 上分别提取 persona vectors，然后用这些向量去 steer：a) 同一 base checkpoint；b) 由该 base 派生的 post-trained 模型（SFT、DPO、RLVR）。由此回答“何时出现”“是否保持同一方向”“post-train 是否破坏/旋转该方向”。\n- 论文还强调 persona facets 会随训练推进发生漂移：同一高层 persona 名称下，不同阶段/不同提取法得到的向量可能更偏向不同子特征，因此需要把‘方向是否保留’与‘语义细节如何变’分开看。","experiments":"主实验对象是 OLMo-3-7B（公开预训练中间 checkpoint），并在 Apertus 上复现（正文简述、细节在附录）。核心结果：persona vectors 在 OLMo-3 预训练进度的 0.22% 内就已形成；即便在非常早期 checkpoint 提取的向量，也能在完全 post-trained 的 instruct 模型上实现有效 steering。论文还报告：persona vectors 在整个预训练过程中持续演化，但“底层方向”在某种意义上保持可追踪；同时，elicitation 方法会影响恢复到的 persona facets。实验形态包括跨层选择、跨 checkpoint 的 steering 效果对比，以及对 SFT/DPO/RLVR 三种后训练范式的迁移测试。（你提供的全文片段未包含完整表格数字与所有 persona 列表；精读时应以结果章节的曲线/表格为准。）","reading_guide":"泛读建议（约 30-45 分钟）：\n- 先看 Introduction 里两条 RQ（何时出现、如何演化）以及 OLMo-3 选择理由：公开 checkpoint 让“训练时间追踪”可复现。\n- 精看 Method：persona 的操作化、对比提示与 judge 过滤、以及 persona vector 在 residual stream 的定义；这里决定了后面所有结论的可比性。\n- 重点找结果里“0.22% 预训练进度”的证据：通常会是随训练步数的 steering 强度曲线或某个阈值定义，确认它不是由筛选偏差或 judge 泄漏造成。\n- 看跨 post-training（SFT/DPO/RLVR）的迁移实验：它回答‘base 上的方向是否在对齐后仍存在’。\n- 最后看关于 facets 漂移与 elicitation 依赖的分析：这部分决定 persona vector 是否能被当作稳定的“可审计对象”，还是更像一个随提取流程变化的探针。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"When and how do persona vectors—linear directions in the residual stream associated with high-level behavioral traits (e.g., “Evil”)—emerge during pretraining, and do they remain usable after post-training (SFT/DPO/RLVR)?","importance":"The paper ties a safety-relevant interpretability object (persona vectors) to the pretraining timeline. The key implication for pretraining research is that some high-level controllable behavior directions appear extremely early and persist through alignment stages. This suggests: (1) post-training may mostly select/reweight existing behavioral modes rather than create them; (2) if a risky persona direction is present early, late-stage alignment might not remove the underlying representational affordance; (3) mechanistic/representation-engineering studies on base checkpoints can generalize to their instruction-tuned descendants, improving the practical value of open intermediate checkpoints for reproducible training-dynamics work.","technical_approach":"$30","experiments":"Primary model: OLMo-3-7B with public intermediate pretraining checkpoints; replication on Apertus (briefly in the main text, detailed in an appendix). Headline finding: persona vectors form within 0.22% of OLMo-3 pretraining, and vectors extracted from very early checkpoints can still steer fully post-trained instruction models. They report continued evolution of the vectors over pretraining while preserving an underlying traceable direction, and show elicitation-method dependence in which facets are recovered. (The provided excerpt does not include the full quantitative tables; the main evidence should be in the results figures/tables tracking steering strength vs training progress and transfer to SFT/DPO/RLVR.)","reading_guide":"Skim plan (30–45 minutes):\n- Read the two research questions in the Introduction and why OLMo-3 checkpoints enable the study.\n- Study the Method carefully: prompt construction, judge filtering, and the exact definition of the residual-stream direction; these choices determine whether “early emergence” is meaningful.\n- Locate the evidence supporting the “0.22% of pretraining” claim (typically a curve over steps with a threshold); sanity-check potential confounds like selection bias from filtering.\n- Check the transfer experiments to SFT/DPO/RLVR; this is the strongest argument that the representation survives alignment.\n- Finally, read the facet-drift and elicitation-dependence analysis to understand how stable the persona concept is as an audit/steering handle.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"这篇不改训练配方，但会改你对“高层行为表征何时写进模型”的 prior；先看早期形成那组结果，若稳得住，安全表征研究该前移到 pretrain 而不是只盯 post-train。","en":"It won’t change your recipe directly, but it may change your prior on when high-level behavior gets written into the model; read the early-emergence result first, because if it holds, safety representation work needs to move upstream into pretraining."},"metadata":{"institutions":["ETH Zurich","Allen Institute for AI"],"authors":["Viktor Moskvoretskii","Dominik Glandorf","Jorge Medina Moreira","Tanja Käser","Robert West"],"notable_authors":["Robert West"],"tags":["interpretability","training-dynamics","persona-vectors","steering","OLMo"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13329","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13329","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13511","title":"Many-Shot CoT-ICL: Making In-Context Learning Truly Learn","abstract":"In-context learning (ICL) adapts large language models (LLMs) to new tasks by conditioning on demonstrations in the prompt without parameter updates. With long-context models, many-shot ICL can use dozens to hundreds of examples and achieve performance comparable to fine-tuning, yet current understanding of its scaling behavior is largely derived from non-reasoning tasks. We study many-shot chain-of-thought in-context learning (CoT-ICL) for reasoning and show that standard many-shot rules do not","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T13:30:12+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13511.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作研究的是：many-shot ICL 在推理任务上到底是否真的“随 shot 数增加而稳定变强”，以及已有的 many-shot 经验法则能否直接迁移到 CoT-ICL。全文给出的答案是否定的。对分类等非推理任务，更多 demonstrations 往往带来较稳定的收益，且顺序影响会随 shot 增大而减弱；但在数学、叙事推理这类需要中间过程的任务上，many-shot CoT-ICL 的行为明显不同。非 reasoning-oriented 模型在 shot 增加后常出现不稳定、甚至退化；reasoning-oriented 模型才更容易从大量 CoT 示例中持续获益。作者进一步指出，问题不只在“示例是否相似”，而在示例的推理过程是否对当前模型可理解、相邻示例之间的知识过渡是否平滑。","importance":"对预训练研究的意义主要有两层。第一，它提醒人们不要把非推理 ICL 的 scaling 规律直接外推到推理场景。长上下文和更多示例，并不自动等于更强的 test-time learning；模型是否具备足够的推理先验，会决定它能否“吃下”这些 CoT 轨迹。第二，这篇工作把 many-shot CoT-ICL 从“表面模式匹配”重新解释为一种受模型能力约束的 in-context test-time learning，这个视角对理解 pretrain 与 post-train 的接口很有价值：如果模型在预训练或后训练阶段没有形成足够稳固的过程建模能力，那么推理 demonstrations 只是更长的噪声；反过来，若模型已有较好的过程先验，prompt 中的 CoT 才更像课程式增量学习。贡献量级不在于提出全新架构，而在于把一个常被经验化处理的问题拆成了可分析的两个原则，并给出可操作的排序方法。","technical_approach":"方法上分两部分。第一部分是系统实验框架。作者同时覆盖任务类型、模型类型和 ICL 配置三条轴：任务上既看非推理任务，也看 GSM8K、MATH、DetectiveQA 这类推理任务；模型上区分普通 instruction-tuned LLM 与显式 reasoning-oriented LLM；配置上比较不同 shot 数、是否使用 CoT、不同示例选择与排序策略。评测统一采用 open-ended generation，再做答案抽取和 exact match，避免分类任务与生成任务使用完全不同的评测协议。第二部分是解释与方法。作者提出两个原则：Ease of Understanding，即 demonstration 的推理方式要落在模型当前能力附近，否则长 CoT 只会增加理解负担；Smoothness of Knowledge Progression，即相邻 demonstrations 之间的概念跳跃不能太大，否则模型在上下文中难以形成稳定的过程迁移。基于第二点，他们提出 Curvilinear Demonstration Selection, CDS。做法不是按 query-demo 相似度独立选样，而是把 demonstrations 看成一条嵌入空间中的轨迹，排序时尽量最小化整条轨迹的“曲率”，让概念演进更平滑。这个设计与传统 similarity retrieval 的区别很明确：后者关注每个示例与测试问题像不像，CDS 关注整串示例之间是否构成可学习的教学序列。全文还强调，自生成 demonstrations 对弱模型更有效，这与 Ease of Understanding 是一致的，因为模型自己生成的推理链通常更贴近其内部表征与可执行风格。","experiments":"从全文给出的结果看，最重要的实验结论有四个。第一，many-shot scaling 是 setting-dependent 的：在非推理任务上，shot 增加通常继续带来收益；在推理任务上，收益高度依赖模型是否是 reasoning-oriented。第二，相似度检索在非推理任务上仍然有效，但在推理任务上解释力明显下降，因为题面相似不代表解题程序兼容。第三，顺序效应在 CoT-ICL 中没有像分类任务那样随着 shot 增大而被平均掉，反而会出现更大的方差，也就是 demonstrations 越多，排序越可能决定成败。第四，CDS 在推理任务上带来可见收益，文中最明确的数字是 geometry 场景下 64 demonstrations 时最高提升 5.42 个百分点。数据集方面，推理任务包括 GSM8K、MATH、DetectiveQA，非推理任务包括 SuperGLUE、TREC、BANKING77 等。评测采用 exact match，数值题会抽取最终数值或表达式。虽然摘要截断了部分数字，全文主线已经足够清楚：收益不是普遍单调的，且模型类型与示例组织方式比单纯 shot 数更关键。","reading_guide":"泛读时建议先看 Introduction 和实验设定，先把作者要反驳的旧经验法则记清楚：‘更多 shot 更稳’、‘相似度检索有效’、‘顺序影响会消失’。然后重点看结果图里三类对比：非推理任务 vs 推理任务、普通模型 vs reasoning-oriented 模型、similarity retrieval vs CDS。若时间有限，优先抓住两个点：一是 many-shot CoT 的收益依赖模型是否已经具备过程推理能力；二是 demonstration ordering 在推理场景不是边缘问题，而是核心变量。再看方法部分对 curvature 的定义和排序策略，理解作者为什么不用单点相似度而改用轨迹平滑度。预计 25 到 35 分钟可以完成有效泛读；如果要深挖，可继续看附录中的 prompt 模板、答案抽取规则，以及不同任务上的顺序方差分析。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a precise question: does many-shot ICL continue to scale in reasoning settings once demonstrations include chain-of-thought, and do the standard many-shot rules from non-reasoning tasks still hold? The answer is largely no. For classification-like tasks, adding more demonstrations often helps and order sensitivity tends to wash out at larger shot counts. For reasoning tasks such as math and narrative reasoning, many-shot CoT-ICL behaves differently. Non-reasoning-oriented models show unstable scaling and can even degrade as more CoT demonstrations are added, while reasoning-oriented models benefit much more consistently. The paper argues that the key issue is not just input similarity, but whether the reasoning traces are understandable to the model and whether adjacent demonstrations form a smooth progression.","importance":"Its value for pretraining-oriented readers is twofold. First, it cautions against transferring scaling intuitions from non-reasoning ICL to reasoning. A longer context and more demonstrations do not automatically produce stronger test-time learning; the model must already have enough process-level reasoning prior to absorb those CoT traces. Second, the paper reframes many-shot CoT-ICL as in-context test-time learning rather than surface pattern matching. That framing matters for the pretrain/post-train interface: if pretraining or post-training did not build robust process representations, long CoT prompts are mostly extra noise; if the model already has a usable reasoning prior, demonstrations can act more like a curriculum. The contribution is not a new architecture, but a useful decomposition of the problem into two analyzable principles and a practical ordering method built on them.","technical_approach":"$31","experiments":"$32","reading_guide":"For a skim, start with the introduction and setup to lock in the three assumptions the paper is challenging: more shots should scale smoothly, similarity retrieval should work, and order should matter less at larger shot counts. Then focus on the result figures comparing non-reasoning versus reasoning tasks, standard versus reasoning-oriented models, and similarity retrieval versus CDS. If time is limited, keep two takeaways in view: many-shot CoT only helps reliably when the model already has process-level reasoning competence, and demonstration ordering is a first-order issue in reasoning prompts. After that, read the method section defining curvature and the CDS ordering objective to understand why the authors move away from pointwise similarity toward trajectory smoothness. A useful skim should take about 25 to 35 minutes. If you want more depth, inspect the appendix for prompt templates, answer extraction details, and the order-variance analyses.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"三个反常识发现直接修正多示例ICL的通用认知，预训练研究员读§3-4的控制变量实验设计即可，用于指导ICL能力的预训练优化","en":"Three counterintuitive findings correct the general understanding of many-shot ICL; pretraining researchers only need to read the controlled experiment design in §3-4 to guide ICL capability optimization"},"metadata":{"institutions":["Hong Kong University of Science and Technology"],"authors":["Tsz Ting Chung","Lemao Liu","Mo Yu","Dit-Yan Yeung"],"notable_authors":["Dit-Yan Yeung","Mo Yu"],"tags":["in-context_learning","chain-of-thought","scaling_behavior","mechanism_analysis"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13511","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13511","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12770","title":"WriteSAE: Sparse Autoencoders for Recurrent State","abstract":"We introduce WriteSAE, the first sparse autoencoder that decomposes and edits the matrix cache write of state-space and hybrid recurrent language models, where residual SAEs cannot reach. Existing SAEs read residual streams, but Gated DeltaNet, Mamba-2, and RWKV-7 write to a $d_k \\times d_v$ cache through rank-1 updates $k_t v_t^\\top$ that no vector atom can replace. WriteSAE factors each decoder atom into the native write shape, exposes a closed form for the per-token logit shift, and trains un","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-12T21:32:45+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12770.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇文章解决的是：对 Mamba-2、RWKV-7、Gated DeltaNet 这类矩阵状态/混合递归语言模型，传统 residual-stream SAE 无法直接解释模型真正写入 recurrent state 的内容，因为这些模型每个 token 写入的是 rank-1 外积形式的矩阵更新，而不是一个普通向量特征。作者要做的是构造一种与原生写入形状匹配的 SAE，使得“解释”和“干预”都发生在 cache write 这一层，而不是事后在 residual 上读影子信号。","importance":"对预训练本身的直接影响有限，它更偏机制分析与可解释性工具，而不是训练方法或数据配方。但它有两个启发点。第一，随着非 Transformer 或 hybrid recurrent LM 重新进入视野，解释工具不能默认 residual stream 是唯一合适接口，必须贴着模型的原生状态更新机制来做。第二，若未来有人研究 state-space LM 的训练动态、记忆容量或 feature superposition，这种 write-level 分解可能会成为比 residual SAE 更自然的分析入口。就今日 digest 的相关性而言，它属于可泛读的机制工作，不是预训练 recipe 级别的论文。","technical_approach":"方法核心是 WriteSAE。普通 SAE 的 decoder atom 是向量，适合重构 residual activation；但在 Gated DeltaNet 一类模型里，每个 token 对状态矩阵 S_t 的写入是 k_t v_t^T 这样的 rank-1 外积。若仍用向量 atom 去分解 vec(S_t)，虽然数学上可行，但干预时无法对应到“替换一次原生写入事件”。作者因此把 SAE decoder atom 约束成与原生写入同形的 rank-1 外积 v_i w_i^T，并在 mean-centered state 上训练 TopK SAE，损失是重构误差加 dead-feature revival 项。这样每个 atom 都可以被解释为“一个可替换的 cache-slot write primitive”。\n\n在此基础上，论文提出三类验证。第一是 cache-slot substitution：在某个 firing 上，用学到的 atom 替换原始 native write，并与 matched-norm ablation 对照，比较继续前向传播后的输出 KL，检验 atom 是否比简单删掉写入更接近原模型行为。第二是 closed-form logit shift：作者推导了一个三因子表达式，把单次写入扰动对后续 token logit 的影响分解为 gate 衰减项、read query 项和 unembedding 项。这个公式的意义在于，它把 recurrent state 干预和最终词表 logit 变化连起来，而且每一项都能从一次 forward pass 观测。第三是直接干预实验，包括 erase、install 和 generation probe，用来验证这些 atom 不只是重构工具，而是可以定向改变模型续写。\n\n论文还区分了两类 atom：register 和 bundle。前者的写入方向可以从 cache 中较清晰恢复，后者则更分散。作者用这一点讨论不同矩阵递归架构的“写入秩”差异，并把 GDN、RWKV-7、Mamba-2 按 register-bundle cosine 指标排序，试图说明哪些架构更接近可由低秩写入解释的状态更新。","experiments":"关键实验集中在 Qwen3.5-0.8B 的某一层头位点，以及 Mamba-2-370M 的迁移验证。最核心的 substitution test 在 Qwen3.5-0.8B L9 H4 上进行：在 4851 次 atom firing 中，学到的 atom 替换 native write 后，有 92.4% 的情况优于 matched-norm ablation；在 87 个 atom 的 population test 上，这个比例是 89.8%。这说明 learned atom 不是简单学到“删掉某个写入”，而是较好逼近了原始写入的功能结构。\n\nclosed-form logit shift 的拟合结果也很强。作者在 200 个 atom-by-epsilon 单元上比较解析预测与实测 logit shift，中位数 R^2 达到 0.98。若这个结果稳健，说明在 Gated DeltaNet 这类门控递归里，单次写入对后续输出的影响确实可以被一个相对低维、可解释的链式表达捕捉。\n\n干预实验方面，擦除某个 atom（文中举 F412）在其原生 firing 上会让被促进 token 的 log-prob 平均下降 0.116 nats，n=150，p=1.07e-6。单位置 predictive install 在 2000 个 atom-token-context 三元组上有 84.6% 的符号预测正确率。持续三位置 install、放大 3 倍时，在 300 个上下文上把 target-in-continuation 从 33.3% 提升到 100%，首步支持增加 1.27 nats。迁移到 Mamba-2-370M L24 H0 时，substitution 胜过 ablation 的比例为 88.08%，说明方法并非只对一个模型实例有效。\n\n论文也给了边界条件。作者明确列出若干 null result，包括 4B firing-level、Mamba-2 closed-form、top-1-matched rank-2、以及 Mamba-2 generation intervention 等未成功或未完全成立的设置。这一点很重要，说明当前 closed-form 更依赖 GDN 风格 gate，而不是已经成为所有矩阵递归模型上的通用理论。","reading_guide":"泛读时先看 Introduction，确认它解决的不是一般 SAE，而是“如何对 recurrent matrix write 做 SAE”。然后看 Method 里 decoder atom 的 rank-1 约束，以及 closed-form logit shift 的三因子分解。理解这两点，基本就抓住了论文的核心。\n\n如果只花 20–30 分钟，建议看三处：一是 substitution test 的定义和主结果表，这决定了方法是否真的贴近 native write；二是 closed-form 推导后的验证图，看 R^2=0.98 是在哪些条件下成立；三是 intervention 结果，尤其是 erase/install 是否能稳定改变续写。附录里关于 Householder-modulated propagator 的推导可以按需看，不必一开始就啃完。\n\n值得留意的地方有两个。第一，作者很诚实地给出了若干失败设置，这些地方比成功案例更能说明方法边界。第二，若你关心的是预训练而不是纯解释，重点不是某个 atom 对某个 token 的控制效果，而是这种 write-level 分解是否能帮助分析 state-space LM 的记忆容量、训练阶段 feature 形成、以及不同架构的状态更新秩结构。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a limitation of standard sparse autoencoders for recurrent and state-space language models. In architectures such as Gated DeltaNet, Mamba-2, and RWKV-7, each token writes a rank-1 matrix update into a recurrent cache. Residual-stream SAEs operate downstream and cannot directly decompose or edit the native write event itself. The goal here is to build an SAE whose atoms live in the same space and shape as the model’s write primitive, so that interpretation and intervention happen at the recurrent-state write rather than on a later residual shadow.","importance":"Its direct relevance to pretraining is limited; this is primarily a mechanistic interpretability paper. Still, it has two useful implications. First, if recurrent or state-space LMs become more important again, interpretability tools cannot assume the residual stream is always the right interface. They need to match the model’s native state update. Second, for future work on memory capacity, feature superposition, or training dynamics in non-Transformer LMs, write-level decomposition may be a more natural probe than residual SAEs. So this is a skim paper for a pretraining researcher: not a recipe paper, but a potentially useful tool paper.","technical_approach":"$33","experiments":"$34","reading_guide":"$35","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"读方法和 logit-shift 推导；若还在评估 Mamba/RWKV，这比残差 SAE 更贴近真实状态写入，但规模仍偏小。","en":"Read the method and logit-shift derivation; for Mamba/RWKV-style models it is closer to the real state write than residual SAEs, though still small-scale."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Indiana University"],"authors":["Jack Young"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["sparse-autoencoder","interpretability","state-space-models","recurrent-lm","cache-editing"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12770","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12770","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13156","title":"Dual-Pathway Circuits of Object Hallucination in Vision-Language Models","abstract":"Vision-language models (VLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in bridging visual perception and natural language understanding, enabling a wide range of multimodal reasoning tasks. However, they often produce object hallucinations, describing content absent from the input image, which limits their reliability and interpretability. To address this limitation, we propose Dual-Pathway Circuit Analysis, a framework that identifies and characterizes hallucination-related circuits in VLMs fo","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T08:20:01+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13156.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文研究 VLM 为什么会在对象存在性问题上产生幻觉。作者没有把幻觉只看成输出层或解码策略的问题，而是追问视觉证据在网络内部如何被传递、在哪里被削弱，以及哪些组件会推动模型回答不存在的对象为“yes”。对象存在性问题相对干净，因为标签是二元的，能减少属性识别和关系推理带来的干扰。","importance":"对预训练研究的启发主要在机制分析和训练信号诊断。论文显示，不同视觉接入方式的 VLM 中可能形成相似的“视觉 grounding pathway”和“hallucination pathway”。这说明幻觉不一定只是某个架构的局部缺陷，也可能是图文预训练、指令微调和语言先验共同塑造出的稳定计算结构。对基座研究员来说，这类结果有助于把 hallucination mitigation 从后处理和解码约束，推进到训练目标、数据配比和中间表示监督的设计层面。","technical_approach":"方法核心是把语言模型中的 activation patching 扩展到 VLM。作者对五类结构不同的 VLM 做统一分析，但为不同视觉接入方式写了适配器：有的模型直接拼接视觉 embedding，有的用 MLP projector，有的通过 cross-attention 注入视觉信息。每个样本运行 clean pass、corrupt pass 和 patch pass。corrupt pass 在第 0 层视觉 token 上加入 3σ 高斯噪声，使视觉信息基本失效；patch pass 只恢复某一层某一组件的 clean activation。评估指标是最终 token 位置上正确答案与错误答案的 logit 差。若恢复某组件能显著提升该差值，说明该组件承载了视觉证据。作者进一步用 Welch t-test、Benjamini-Hochberg 多重校正和 Cohen’s d 筛出与正确样本、幻觉样本差异显著的组件。d>0 的组件归为 visual grounding pathway，d<0 的组件归为 hallucination pathway。论文还提出 Conditional Pathway Analysis，用来分析同一路径内组件之间的条件依赖，发现 grounding pathway 在正确样本和幻觉样本之间存在 polarity flip，这一点单组件 patching 不容易看出来。","experiments":"实验在每个模型 1000 个 POPE-adversarial 样本上做 patching，样本被分成正确回答“no”和幻觉回答“yes”两组。筛选电路时要求校正后 p<0.05 且 |Cohen’s d|>0.3。主要发现是五个结构不同的 VLM 都出现双路径组织：一条路径支持视觉证据传递，另一条路径更容易推动语言先验式的错误回答。因果验证采用 component-wise suppression，对 hallucination pathway 做定向抑制，最多可降低 76% 的对象幻觉，同时准确率代价不超过 2 个百分点。作者还比较了 matched static-direction baseline，发现逐组件缩放更有效，说明问题不只是某个固定方向上的全局偏置。迁移实验显示，该电路能迁移到 AMBER 的关系幻觉，但不能很好迁移到属性幻觉，提示对象存在和关系判断可能共享部分视觉-语言竞争机制，而属性错误涉及更细粒度的视觉表征。","reading_guide":"建议泛读 Introduction 和 Methodology，重点看 activation patching 如何适配不同 VLM 架构，以及 visual token corruption 的设定是否足够可比。实验部分优先看 Section 5.1 的双路径定位、Section 5.2 的 Conditional Pathway Analysis、Section 5.5 的 suppression 因果验证、Section 5.6 的 AMBER 迁移。预计阅读时间 30–45 分钟。值得细看的是 CPA 的定义和 polarity flip 的统计稳定性；如果要把这类方法用于训练诊断，还需要关注 patching 组件粒度、视觉破坏方式和答案 token 选择对结论的影响。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks why VLMs hallucinate objects in binary object-existence questions. It treats hallucination as an internal computation problem rather than only a decoding or post-hoc correction problem: where does visual evidence flow, where is it weakened, and which components push the model toward saying that an absent object exists.","importance":"The main value for pretraining research is mechanistic diagnosis. The paper reports a shared dual-pathway structure across architecturally different VLMs: a visual grounding pathway and a hallucination pathway. This suggests that object hallucination may be shaped by training data, multimodal alignment, and language priors, not only by one specific connector design. For base-model work, this points toward training-time interventions: better visual evidence supervision, data mixtures that reduce language-prior shortcuts, and mid-training diagnostics on internal pathways.","technical_approach":"$36","experiments":"The main patching study uses 1,000 POPE-adversarial samples per model. A component enters the circuit if it has corrected p<0.05 and |Cohen’s d|>0.3. Across five VLMs, the authors find a consistent dual-pathway organization. Component-wise suppression of the hallucination pathway reduces object hallucination by up to 76% with no more than a 2 percentage-point accuracy cost. Static-direction baselines are weaker than per-component scaling, which argues against a simple global bias direction explanation. The circuit transfers to relational hallucination on AMBER but not to attribute hallucination, suggesting that object existence and relation errors share more computation than fine-grained attribute errors.","reading_guide":"Skim the Introduction and Methodology first to understand how activation patching is adapted to different VLM interfaces. Then focus on Section 5.1 for dual-pathway localization, Section 5.2 for Conditional Pathway Analysis, Section 5.5 for causal suppression, and Section 5.6 for transfer to AMBER. Estimated reading time: 30–45 minutes. The most useful details are the corruption protocol, component granularity, statistical selection rules, and the exact definition of the polarity flip.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看电路定位和CPA结果；若五个VLM结论一致，可作为多模态预训练接地失败的诊断模板。","en":"Read the circuit localization and CPA results; if the five-VLM pattern holds, it is a useful diagnostic template for grounding failures in multimodal pretraining."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Jiaxin Liu","Ding Zhong","Yue Wang","Zhidong Yang","Zhaolu Kang","Guangyuan Dong","Qishi Zhan","Pengcheng Fang","Aofan Liu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["vlm-hallucination","mechanistic-interpretability","activation-patching","visual-grounding","causal-analysis"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13156","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13156","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13171","title":"Formal Conjectures: An Open and Evolving Benchmark for Verified Discovery in Mathematics","abstract":"As automated reasoning systems advance rapidly, there is a growing need for research-level formal mathematical problems to accurately evaluate their capabilities. To address this, we present Formal Conjectures, an evolving benchmark of currently 2615 mathematical problem statements formalized in Lean 4. Sourced from areas of active mathematical research, the dataset features 1029 open research conjectures providing a zero-contamination benchmark for mathematical proof discovery, and 836 solved p","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T08:33:15+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13171.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有形式化数学推理基准存在数据泄露、评估集不公开、成功标准过度简化、性能饱和等问题，缺乏研究级零污染的形式化数学问题来评测自动推理系统的真实能力。","importance":"提供了开源可演化的零污染数学推理基准，同时支持证明生成和自动形式化两个任务的评测，填补了研究级形式化数学评测的缺口。","technical_approach":"基于Lean 4和Mathlib构建，包含2615个形式化数学命题，其中1029个未解决的开放研究猜想作为零污染证明发现测试集，836个已解决问题用于自动形式化评测。提供统一API连接数学家和自动求解器，设计三级形式化错误分类保证形式化准确性，基于Lean 4内核实现自动验证，提供冻结子集保证可复现的模型对比。","experiments":"该基准已被用于实际数学发现研究，问题来源覆盖Erdős问题集、Kourovka群论问题集、开放量子问题列表、近年学术出版物等多个活跃研究领域，且持续更新扩容。","reading_guide":"泛读基准构建方法论、问题来源分类、评测框架设计部分，预计阅读时间10分钟。","authors_note":"Google DeepMind"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing formal mathematics reasoning benchmarks suffer from data leakage, closed evaluation sets, oversimplified success criteria, and performance saturation, lacking research-level zero-contamination formal mathematical problems to evaluate the real capability of automated reasoning systems.","importance":"Provides an open, evolving zero-contamination benchmark for mathematical reasoning, supports evaluation of both proof generation and auto-formalization tasks, and fills the gap of research-level formal mathematics evaluation.","technical_approach":"Built on Lean 4 and Mathlib, the benchmark includes 2615 formalized mathematical statements, with 1029 open research conjectures as the zero-contamination test set for proof discovery, and 836 solved problems for auto-formalization evaluation. A unified API connects mathematicians and automated solvers, a three-level misformalization taxonomy ensures formalization fidelity. Evaluation is implemented via Lean 4 kernel, and frozen subsets are provided for reproducible model comparison.","experiments":"The benchmark has been adopted for real-world mathematical discovery research. Problems are sourced from multiple active research areas including Erdős problem collection, Kourovka Notebook, open quantum problem lists and recent academic publications, and grows continuously.","reading_guide":"Skim the benchmark construction methodology, problem source classification, and evaluation framework design. Expected reading time: 10 minutes.","authors_note":"Google DeepMind"},"recommendation":{"zh":"读数据构成和污染控制即可；它会影响数学推理 eval，但还不是训练方法论文。","en":"Read the dataset composition and contamination controls; it matters for math-reasoning eval, but it is not a training-method paper."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Imperial College London"],"authors":["Moritz Firsching","Paul Lezeau","Salvatore Mercuri","Miklós Z. Horváth","Yaël Dillies","Calle Sönne","Eric Wieser","Fred Zhang","Thomas Hubert","Blaise Agüera y Arcas","Pushmeet Kohli"],"notable_authors":["Thomas Hubert","Blaise Agüera y Arcas"],"tags":["formal-math","Lean4","reasoning-benchmark","proof-discovery","autoformalization"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13171","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13171","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13414","title":"TRIAGE: Evaluating Prospective Metacognitive Control in LLMs under Resource Constraints","abstract":"Deploying language models as autonomous agents requires more than per-task accuracy: when an agent faces a queue of problems under a finite token budget, it must decide which to attempt, in what order, and how much compute to commit to each, all before any execution feedback is available. This is the prospective form of metacognitive control studied for decades in human cognition, yet whether language models possess it remains untested. We introduce TRIAGE, an evaluation framework in which a mod","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T12:10:05+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13414.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM作为自主Agent部署时，缺乏在有限资源约束下的前瞻元认知控制能力：无法在任务执行前，对任务池中的任务进行优先级排序、资源分配和任务筛选的联合优化，导致资源浪费、推理效率低下，无法适配真实部署中的有限token预算、工具调用限制、延迟窗口等约束。","importance":"首次提出了一套可量化的Agent前瞻元认知控制评估框架，定义了LLM部署中资源高效利用的新能力维度；实验结果揭示了现有模型在跨任务资源规划上的系统性缺陷，为Agent的推理效率优化和资源调度能力训练提供了评测基准与改进方向。","technical_approach":"设计TRIAGE评估框架：1. 输入为任务池、每个任务的分值、针对被测模型自身基线成本校准的token预算；2. 要求模型输出包含任务选择、执行顺序、每个任务token分配的完整前瞻执行计划；3. 以完全知晓模型在每个任务上的求解能力和成本的Oracle计划为上限，计算被测模型计划的得分；4. 覆盖了认知心理学中定义的选择、分配、终止三类元认知控制功能，采用行为输出而非模型自报告的置信度作为评测依据，避免自报告信号不可靠的问题。","experiments":"在4类任务域（竞赛数学、研究生级科学知识、代码生成、多学科专家知识）上评测了20种模型架构，包括4款标准LLM和16款推理增强LLM，分别在启用和禁用思考模式的情况下测试。核心发现：1. 模型的元认知控制能力跨域迁移性差，在一个域的自我评估表现很少能迁移到其他域；2. 推理增强可以提升单任务准确率，但无法提升资源调度质量；3. 推理训练后的模型更难识别任务池中的不可解任务；4. 模型可以初步选择要尝试的任务，但很少能制定出自身可以严格遵守的预算分配计划，预算执行的偏差在所有预算水平下都非常明显。","reading_guide":"重点阅读第2章TRIAGE框架设计部分，理解评测范式的核心逻辑和与传统单任务置信度评测的区别；第3章的实验结果汇总和跨模型对比可以快速浏览，核心结论已经在引言和讨论部分总结；预计阅读时间20分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLMs deployed as autonomous agents lack prospective metacognitive control under finite resource constraints: they cannot jointly optimize task prioritization, resource allocation, and task selection for a task pool before execution, leading to resource waste and low inference efficiency, which fails to adapt to real deployment constraints such as limited token budgets, tool call limits, and latency windows.","importance":"TRIAGE is the first quantifiable evaluation framework for prospective metacognitive control in agents, defining a new capability dimension for resource-efficient LLM deployment. Experimental results reveal systematic flaws of existing models in cross-task resource planning, providing a benchmark and improvement direction for agent inference efficiency optimization and resource scheduling capability training.","technical_approach":"The TRIAGE evaluation framework is designed as follows: 1. The input includes a task pool, point value per task, and a token budget calibrated to the tested model's own baseline cost on the task set; 2. The model is required to output a complete prospective execution plan covering task selection, execution order, and token allocation per task; 3. The plan score is calculated against an oracle plan that has full knowledge of the model's solvability and cost on each task; 4. It covers three metacognitive control functions (selection, allocation, termination) defined in cognitive psychology, and evaluates behavioral output instead of the model's self-reported confidence to avoid the unreliability of self-report signals.","experiments":"20 model architectures, including 4 standard LLMs and 16 reasoning-augmented LLMs, are evaluated across 4 task domains (competition mathematics, graduate-level science knowledge, code generation, multidisciplinary expert knowledge) with thinking mode both enabled and disabled. Key findings: 1. Metacognitive control capability transfers poorly across domains; 2. Reasoning augmentation improves single-task accuracy but not resource scheduling quality; 3. Reasoning-trained models are less likely to identify unsolvable items in a task pool; 4. Models can preliminarily select tasks to attempt but rarely formulate budget allocation plans that they themselves can strictly adhere to, with large deviations in budget execution across all budget levels.","reading_guide":"Focus on Chapter 2 for the TRIAGE framework design to understand the core logic of the evaluation paradigm and its difference from traditional single-task confidence evaluation. Chapter 3's experiment results and cross-model comparisons can be skimmed, as key conclusions are already summarized in the introduction and discussion sections. Estimated reading time: 20 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"读 scoring 设计和 oracle 构造即可；它测的是推理预算调度，不是能力本身，能校正对 reasoning mode 的直觉。","en":"Read the scoring and oracle design; it measures budget scheduling rather than raw ability, and can recalibrate intuitions about reasoning modes."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Zabir Al Nazi","Shubhashis Roy Dipta"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["metacognition","test-time-compute","reasoning-evaluation","agent-benchmark"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13414","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13414","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12524","title":"Stress-Testing the Reasoning Competence of LLMs With Proofs Under Minimal Formalism","abstract":"We introduce ProofGrid, a benchmark suite for evaluating LLM reasoning through machine-checkable proofs rather than final answers alone. ProofGrid contains 15 tasks spanning proof writing, proof checking, proof masking, and proof gap-filling. Tasks are expressed in minimal formal notation, especially NDL, a compact natural-deduction language that fits in short prompts and supports precise, auditable verification. This yields mechanical, reproducible, and fine-grained evaluation rather than judgm","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-04-07T01:19:41+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12524.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LO","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有大模型逻辑推理基准仅评估最终答案的正确性，既无法区分模型是通过有效推理还是偶然巧合、虚假关联得到正确结论，也无法评估构建、验证证明这类核心数学推理能力。同时多数基准允许模型利用预训练阶段积累的固化知识，无法衡量模型原生的流体推理能力。","importance":"该基准提供了排除知识混淆的纯推理能力评测工具，能够细粒度区分不同模型的推理能力差异，为后续推理方向的RL训练、推理能力缩放研究提供更可靠的评测信号。","technical_approach":"构建PROOFGRID基准套件，覆盖15项任务，分为证明写作、证明检查、证明掩码、证明补全四类。设计极简的自然演绎语言NDL和精简等式逻辑作为形式化载体，评测结果可机械检查、可复现，不需要人类或LLM担任评委。所有问题均为纯抽象逻辑问题，排除固化知识干扰，难度经过校准覆盖从基础推理到复杂结构推理的全范围。","experiments":"在24款闭源和开源模型上完成评测，基准可以高分辨率区分不同模型的推理能力，配套的大量错误分析暴露了现有模型在长推理链结构一致性、错误定位能力上的普遍缺陷。","reading_guide":"重点阅读基准任务设计章节和24款模型的整体排名结果，错误分析部分可快速浏览，预计阅读时间15-20分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing logical reasoning benchmarks for LLMs only evaluate final answer accuracy. They cannot distinguish between correct conclusions derived from valid reasoning and those obtained by chance or spurious correlations, nor can they assess core mathematical reasoning capabilities such as proof construction and verification. Most benchmarks also allow models to rely on crystallized knowledge accumulated during pretraining, rather than measuring native fluid reasoning ability.","importance":"This benchmark provides a knowledge-confound-free evaluation tool for pure reasoning capability, enables fine-grained differentiation of reasoning performance across models, and offers more reliable evaluation signals for future research on RL for reasoning training and reasoning capability scaling.","technical_approach":"The PROOFGRID benchmark suite includes 15 tasks grouped into four categories: proof writing, proof checking, proof masking, and proof gap-filling. It uses a minimalist natural deduction language (NDL) and stripped-down equational logic as formal representations. All evaluation results are mechanically checkable, reproducible, and require no human or LLM judges. All tasks are formulated as abstract logic problems to eliminate interference from crystallized knowledge, with calibrated difficulty covering basic to structurally complex reasoning.","experiments":"The benchmark evaluates 24 closed-source and open-source models, achieves high resolution in differentiating model reasoning capabilities. Extensive error analysis reveals common flaws of current models in structural consistency of long reasoning chains and error localization ability.","reading_guide":"Focus on the benchmark task design section and overall ranking results of the 24 evaluated models; error analysis section can be browsed quickly. Estimated reading time: 15-20 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"不是提方法的 paper，但评测设计比多数“答案对错”基准干净；做 reasoning pretrain 或 RL 信号设计的人，先看 benchmark 任务定义和验证协议。","en":"Not a model paper, but the measurement is cleaner than most answer-only reasoning benchmarks; if you work on reasoning pretraining or RL signals, read the task design and verification protocol first."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Konstantine Arkoudas","Serafim Batzoglou"],"notable_authors":["Serafim Batzoglou"],"tags":["reasoning-benchmark","formal-proofs","evaluation","natural-deduction","mechanistic-measurement"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12524","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12524","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12756","title":"Uncovering Symmetry Transfer in Large Language Models via Layer-Peeled Optimization","abstract":"Large language models (LLMs) are pretrained by minimizing the cross-entropy loss for next-token prediction. In this paper, we study whether this optimization strategy can induce geometric structure in the learned model weights and context embeddings. We approach this problem by analyzing a constrained layer-peeled optimization program, which serves as a mathematically tractable surrogate for LLMs by treating the output projection matrix and last-layer context embeddings as optimization variables","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-12T21:10:34+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12756.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["math.OC","cs.AI","stat.ML"],"summary":{"core_problem":"由于损失景观的非凸性，直接分析完整LLM的训练动态目前仍不可行。下一词预测预训练过程中，训练数据的对称性结构如何传递到模型最后层权重与上下文嵌入的几何结构中这一问题尚未得到明确解释，尤其是语言建模采用软目标分布，与传统分类场景存在本质差异，现有理论框架无法直接复用。","importance":"为LLM表示的几何结构研究提供了可处理的数学代理模型框架，从群论角度解释了优化的隐式偏置。该工作衔接了分类任务中的神经坍缩结论与语言建模场景，对理解预训练表示的形成机制、优化预训练目标有理论参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出层剥离（layer-peeled）优化方法，构建LLM预训练的数学可处理代理问题：仅将输出投影矩阵和最后层上下文嵌入作为优化变量，隔离最后层权重与特征的交互，在Frobenius范数约束下最小化交叉熵损失。通过群论框架分析该非凸优化问题的全局极小值，证明目标token分布的对称性会以等变的方式传递到最后层表示中。与此前针对单热标签分类的层剥离方法不同，该框架适配了LLM下一词预测的软目标分布场景，采用局部语义token子集的分析视角，而非同时分析整个词表。","experiments":"目前公开的论文内容以理论推导与框架构建为主，完整实证实验结果尚未披露。核心理论结论为：层剥离模型的全局极小值会继承目标token分布的群对称结构。","reading_guide":"先泛读第2节的层剥离优化问题形式化定义，再看第3节的对称性传递理论证明部分，预计阅读时间15分钟（仅针对当前公开内容）。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Direct analysis of full LLM training dynamics remains intractable due to the non-convex loss landscape. It is not yet clearly understood how symmetry structures in training data transfer to the geometry of last-layer weights and context embeddings during next-token prediction pretraining, especially as language modeling uses soft target distributions that differ fundamentally from traditional classification settings, making existing theoretical frameworks inapplicable.","importance":"Provides a mathematically tractable surrogate framework for studying the geometric structure of LLM representations. The group-theoretic explanation of optimization implicit bias bridges neural collapse findings from classification tasks to the language modeling setting, offering theoretical reference for understanding pretrained representation formation and optimizing pretraining objectives.","technical_approach":"Proposes a layer-peeled optimization approach that constructs a mathematically tractable surrogate for LLM pretraining, treating only the output projection matrix and last-layer context embeddings as optimization variables. This formulation isolates the interaction between last-layer weights and features, minimizing cross-entropy loss under Frobenius norm constraints. Uses group theory to analyze global minimizers of this non-convex problem, proving that symmetries in target token distributions transfer to last-layer representations in an equivariant manner. Unlike prior layer-peeled methods for one-hot label classification, this framework adapts to soft target distributions in LLM next-token prediction, and adopts a local analysis perspective on semantically coherent token subsets instead of analyzing the entire vocabulary simultaneously.","experiments":"The publicly available content focuses on theoretical derivation and framework construction, with full empirical results not yet disclosed. The core theoretical conclusion is that global minimizers of the layer-peeled model inherit the group symmetry structure of the target token distributions.","reading_guide":"Skim Section 2 first for the formal definition of the layer-peeled optimization program, then review the theoretical proof of symmetry transfer in Section 3. Estimated reading time: 15 minutes (for currently available content).","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"用 layer-peeled 模型严格证明了数据对称性如何导致 embedding 空间的几何结构（如循环对称），对理解表征学习机制极具理论价值，建议读理论结论部分。","en":"Rigorously proves how data symmetry leads to geometric structures (e.g., cyclic symmetry) in embedding space using a layer-peeled model; highly valuable for understanding representation learning mechanisms. Skim the theoretical conclusions."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Pennsylvania","University of Rochester","The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania"],"authors":["Zhehang Du","Hangfeng He","Weijie Su"],"notable_authors":["Weijie Su"],"tags":["Representation Learning","Optimization Theory","Symmetry","Layer-Peeled Model","Interpretability"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12756","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12756","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12991","title":"Not Just RLHF: Why Alignment Alone Won't Fix Multi-Agent Sycophancy","abstract":"LLM-based multi-agent pipelines flip from correct to incorrect answers under simulated peer disagreement at rates we term yield, a vulnerability widely attributed to RLHF-induced sycophancy. We test this attribution across four model families and find it largely wrong: pretrained base models exhibit the same substitution pattern as their Instruct variants, averaging higher yield than Instruct. Using activation patching, we localize the corruption to a narrow mid-layer window where attention carr","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T04:45:08+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12991.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"多Agent系统中模型易受同伴观点影响翻转正确答案的问题，普遍被归因于RLHF导致的迎合性，但该归因从未经过基座模型对照和机制层面的验证。","importance":"推翻了多Agent迎合性由RLHF导致的主流认知，明确该问题的源头是预训练阶段就存在的机制，同时定位了故障发生的层范围，为多Agent系统的安全性优化提供了明确方向：无需盲目修改对齐流程，可直接针对中间层做防御或调整Pipeline结构。","technical_approach":"对四个模型家族的基座和指令微调版本做对照测试，用激活补丁方法定位故障发生的网络层位置，拆解攻击面的两个独立影响因子，测试不同缓解方案的效果。","experiments":"在Llama、Mistral、Gemma、Qwen四个模型家族上测试，12组模型×条件中有10组基座模型的答案翻转率高于或等于指令微调版本；故障被定位在Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct的L14~L18层，补丁L18及以上层可恢复96%的正确概率损失；攻击面由渠道框架和共识强度两个因子组成，3v1多数共识下两者交互带来47.5个百分点的翻转率提升；单个持正确观点的异议者可降低54~73个百分点的翻转率，效果优于系统提示防御方案。","reading_guide":"重点看激活补丁的定位结果、基座和指令模型的对照实验数据、两因子攻击面的拆解部分，预计阅读时间20分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The problem that models in multi-agent systems tend to flip correct answers under peer influence is widely attributed to RLHF-induced sycophancy, but this attribution has never been verified with base model control groups and mechanism-level analysis.","importance":"It overturns the mainstream cognition that multi-agent sycophancy is caused by RLHF, clarifies that the problem originates from mechanisms existing in the pre-training stage, and locates the layer range where the failure occurs. It provides a clear direction for security optimization of multi-agent systems: there is no need to blindly modify the alignment process, and defenses can be made for middle layers or pipeline structures can be adjusted directly.","technical_approach":"Conduct controlled tests on base and instruction-tuned versions of four model families, use activation patching to locate the network layer where the failure occurs, disassemble two independent influencing factors of the attack surface, and test the effect of different mitigation schemes.","experiments":"Tested on four model families (Llama, Mistral, Gemma, Qwen), the answer flip rate of base models is higher than or equal to that of instruction-tuned versions in 10 of 12 model × condition groups; the failure is located at layers 14~18 of Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct, patching layers ≥18 can restore 96% of the correct probability loss; the attack surface consists of two factors: channel framing and consensus strength, their interaction brings 47.5 percentage points increase in flip rate under 3v1 majority consensus; a single dissenter with correct views can reduce the flip rate by 54~73 percentage points, outperforming system prompt defense schemes.","reading_guide":"Focus on the localization results of activation patching, the controlled experimental data of base and instruction models, and the disassembly of the two-factor attack surface. Estimated reading time is 20 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"推翻了谄媚性全来自RLHF的固有认知，将缺陷根源推回预训练阶段，重点看中层激活定位的实验设计","en":"Overturns the prior that sycophancy comes only from RLHF, traces the defect root back to pretraining; focus on the mid-layer activation localization experiments."},"metadata":{"institutions":["California Institute of Technology","Evergreen Valley College"],"authors":["Adarsh Kumarappan","Ananya Mujoo"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["sycophancy","activation patching","multi-agent","mechanistic interpretability","alignment"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12991","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12991","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13687","title":"A Hierarchical Language Model with Predictable Scaling Laws and Provable Benefits of Reasoning","abstract":"We introduce a family of synthetic languages with hierarchical structure -- generated by a broadcast process on trees -- for which the role of context length and reasoning in autoregressive generation can be analyzed precisely. At the heart of our analytic approach is an \\emph{exact $k$-gram ansatz} in place of transformers with context length $k$, a substitution we then validate empirically. Using this ansatz we derive explicit asymptotic predictions for distributional statistics of the sequenc","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T15:42:26+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13687.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI","stat.ML"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文想回答一个更基础的问题：自回归语言模型的上下文长度到底买到了什么，链式推理式的中间 token 又在什么条件下能替代更长上下文。作者没有直接分析真实语言，而是构造一类可精确求解的层级语言，用树上的 broadcast process 生成叶子序列，从而把长程依赖、隐变量结构、上下文窗口和生成分布偏差放到一个可证明的框架里。","importance":"对预训练研究的启发主要在理论建模，而不是给出新的训练 recipe。它把 context scaling 和 reasoning benefit 从经验现象拆成可计算对象：有限上下文的模型会如何扭曲生成分布的高阶统计，哪些层级相关性需要覆盖到共同祖先才能恢复，哪些情况下额外的中间 token 可以把隐式长程依赖转成局部条件依赖。这个框架对理解长上下文、CoT、以及层级数据分布下的 next-token objective 有参考价值，但离真实 LLM 的预测性还需要谨慎外推。","technical_approach":"核心方法是用最优 k-gram 自回归过程近似一个上下文长度为 k 的 transformer。也就是假设模型在每个位置只能使用前 k 个 token，并学习该条件分布下的最优 next-token 预测。通常大 k 的 k-gram 不可分析，但在作者构造的层级语言中，k-gram 分布可以精确计算。语言由 d 叉树上的 broadcast process 产生：根节点从先验采样，内部节点通过噪声信道向下传播，最终叶子节点按固定遍历顺序组成序列。作者研究了两类实例：Ising broadcast，token 为 ±1，用来表示软的全局相关；coloring broadcast，子节点颜色必须不同于父节点，用来表示硬约束。实验中还加入层级标点，帮助有限上下文模型定位自己处在树的哪个局部结构中。推理版本的模型在生成时写出额外中间 token，相当于显式恢复部分隐层节点，使原本跨远距离的依赖变成可局部使用的信息。","experiments":"论文的关键实验是检验 k-gram ansatz 是否能预测 transformer 的生成统计。以 Ising broadcast 为例，图 1 使用 d=3、h=8、rho=0.9 的设置，叶子数为 3^8=6561，比较真实分布、非推理 transformer、带中间 token 的推理 transformer、精确 k-gram 模拟和渐近理论。指标包括叶子自旋和的方差以及峰度。结果显示，有限上下文非推理模型生成的方差随上下文深度近似按 log-linear 规律变化，峰度趋向 Gaussian，而真实语言在长程相关上保持不同统计；只有当上下文覆盖完整树结构时，非推理生成才接近真实分布。带推理 token 的模型明显更接近真实层级统计，说明在这个构造中，中间步骤的收益不是来自更强模型容量，而是来自把隐层结构显式化。理论部分给出大树高、上下文深度与树高存在间隔时的渐近预测，并用 transformer 训练实验验证趋势。","reading_guide":"建议泛读 30 到 45 分钟。先看 Section 2 的 broadcast language 定义，确认这不是形式语言判别问题，而是概率分布建模问题。再看 k-gram ansatz 的定义和 Theorem 2.2，它是整篇论文把 transformer context length 转成可分析对象的关键。Section 3 的 Ising 结果值得看公式和假设，重点是方差、峰度如何随 context depth 变化。Section 4 和 Figure 1 用来判断理论是否真的解释了训练出的 transformer。推理相关部分重点看额外中间 token 怎样改变条件依赖结构，而不是只看最终指标。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a basic question behind context scaling: what does a longer autoregressive context actually recover, and when can explicit reasoning tokens substitute for that context. Instead of working with natural language directly, it defines a tractable family of hierarchical probabilistic languages generated by broadcast processes on trees, so that long-range dependence, hidden structure, context truncation, and generation errors can be analyzed exactly.","importance":"The main value is conceptual and theoretical. It turns context length and reasoning into measurable quantities under a known data distribution. A finite-context next-token model can be shown to distort global statistics of the generated sequence, even if local prediction is optimal. Reasoning tokens help when they expose latent hierarchical variables and convert long-range dependencies into local conditional information. This is useful for thinking about long-context pretraining and chain-of-thought, but it should not be read as a direct recipe for training production LLMs.","technical_approach":"The central device is an exact k-gram ansatz for a transformer with context length k. The model is replaced by the optimal autoregressive process that conditions only on the previous k tokens. This would be intractable for general language, but it is analyzable for the proposed hierarchical languages. A sequence is produced by a d-ary tree broadcast process: the root token is sampled from a prior, each child is sampled from a transition kernel conditioned on its parent, and the leaves form the observed sequence. The paper studies an Ising broadcast process over ±1 tokens for soft global correlations, and a coloring broadcast process for hard constraints. In experiments, hierarchical punctuation marks are added so bounded-context models can identify their position in the tree. The reasoning variant generates additional intermediate tokens, which effectively reveal part of the hidden tree and reduce the need for a long raw context window.","experiments":"The key empirical check is whether the k-gram theory predicts trained transformers. In the Ising experiment shown in Figure 1, the setting is d=3, h=8, and rho=0.9, giving 3^8=6561 leaves. The paper compares the true language, non-reasoning transformers, reasoning transformers with intermediate tokens, exact autoregressive simulations from the theory, and asymptotic predictions. The statistics are the variance and kurtosis of the sum of leaf spins. The non-reasoning model approaches the true distribution only when the context covers the relevant tree structure; otherwise its variance follows the predicted log-linear behavior in context depth and its kurtosis drifts toward a Gaussian limit. The reasoning model better preserves the hierarchical statistics because it makes latent internal variables available during generation. The transformer curves track the exact k-gram and asymptotic predictions closely enough to support the ansatz in this controlled setting.","reading_guide":"A useful skim takes about 30 to 45 minutes. Read Section 2 first for the broadcast-language construction; the important point is that this is a probability distribution over sequences, not a formal-language membership task. Then read the k-gram ansatz and Theorem 2.2, since this is the bridge from finite-context transformers to exact analysis. Section 3 contains the main scaling predictions for the Ising case. Figure 1 and the surrounding experimental section are the quickest way to judge whether the theory matches trained transformers. For the reasoning claim, focus on how intermediate tokens alter the conditional dependency structure.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看模型定义和两条渐近结论即可；它给 pretrain 的价值在于把“长上下文不等于层级推理”讲干净了。","en":"Read the model definition and the two asymptotic results; the useful prior update is that longer context and hierarchical reasoning are cleanly separated here."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Duke University","University of Chicago","Massachusetts Institute of Technology","Princeton University"],"authors":["Jason Gaitonde","Frederic Koehler","Elchanan Mossel","Joonhyung Shin","Allan Sly"],"notable_authors":["Elchanan Mossel","Allan Sly"],"tags":["scaling-laws","hierarchical-language","reasoning","autoregressive-modeling","theory"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13687","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13687","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12874","title":"Descriptive Collision in Sparse Autoencoder Auto-Interpretability: When One Explanation Describes Many Features","abstract":"Sparse autoencoders (SAEs) are now standard tools for decomposing language model activations into interpretable features, and automated interpretability pipelines routinely assign each feature a short natural-language explanation. Existing critiques of this practice focus on polysemanticity -- one feature with many meanings -- or on whether explanations predict activations. We identify a complementary, structurally distinct problem we call descriptive collision: many distinct SAE features admit ","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T01:41:38+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12874.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作讨论的不是 SAE 特征本身是否可解释，而是“解释是否能唯一指向特征”。作者指出，现有 auto-interpretability 评估默认把问题设成：给定一个特征，解释是否准确描述它的激活模式；但即便解释是对的，也可能同时适用于很多别的特征。作者把这种 many-features-to-one-explanation 的现象定义为 descriptive collision，并把它和 polysemanticity 区分开：polysemanticity 是一个特征对应多个语义，collision 是多个特征共享同一个语义描述。前者损害解释完整性，后者损害解释辨识性。论文要解决的核心问题，就是现有基于自然语言解释的 SAE 自动解释与打分体系，是否真的在“识别 feature”，还是只是在给 feature 所在的粗语义簇贴标签。","importance":"对预训练研究的直接意义不在于改进 loss 或架构，而在于给 mechanistic interpretability 里一条常用工作流做了方法学拆解。SAE 已经成为分析 LLM 内部表征的标准工具之一，很多后续结论都建立在“feature 有自然语言标签，且标签可被自动评分验证”这个前提上。作者指出，这个前提缺了一块：高 detection score 只能说明解释抓住了某种可预测模式，不能说明它区分了该 feature 与其他相近 feature。这个问题一旦成立，会影响 feature-level attribution、circuit tracing、feature intervention 结果的可信度边界。贡献量级更像“评估协议层面的校正”，不是提出新 SAE 训练法，但它触及的是解释链条里很基础的一环，因此对依赖 SAE 做 LLM 内部分析的人有现实影响。","technical_approach":"方法上分三层。第一层是定义。作者把 explanation function 形式化为 E: F→Σ*，并定义 collision cluster，即所有共享同一解释字符串的 feature 集合。进一步用 mutual information I(F;A) 衡量 explanation 对 feature 身份的区分能力，称为 descriptive resolution。这个定义很干净，因为它把“解释是否提供了足够多的信息”从语义直觉变成了可计算的信息量问题：如果标签空间远小于 feature 空间，残余歧义是结构性存在的，而不是某个解释器写得不够好。第二层是经验重分析。作者没有重新训练 SAE，也没有调用 LLM 重新生成解释，而是拿 Marks 等人公开的人类标注语料做分析。这样做的好处是噪声更低，能先证明 collision 在高质量人工标签下都已经很严重，那么在更模板化、更保守的 LLM 自动解释里只会更严重。第三层是评估批判与修正。作者证明 detection-style scoring 在 collision-equivalent features 之间具有不变性：如果两个 feature 共享同一解释，基于“解释能否预测 feature 何时激活”的检测式分数，无法证明这个解释识别的是当前 feature 而不是同簇别的 feature。为此作者提出两个修正方向：一是 discrimination scoring，要求解释不仅能预测目标 feature 的激活，还要能把它和碰撞簇中的其他 feature 区分开；二是 collision-adjusted detection，在原有检测分数上引入对碰撞的校正。文中还给了伪代码，并讨论了计算代价。整体上，这不是一个新模型，而是对 auto-interp 评价目标的重新定义：从“描述得对不对”推进到“描述得是否足以识别”。","experiments":"实验部分以公开人工标注集的统计重分析为主，不是大规模新训练。数据来自 Sparse Feature Circuits 相关公开语料，去重后共 722 个标注特征，覆盖 Gemma 2 2B SAE 的 470 个特征和 Pythia 70M SAE 的 277 个特征。核心数字很明确：722 个特征只对应 235 个不同的 annotation string，平均每个标注字符串被复用 3.07 次；82.1% 的特征至少与另一个特征共享同一标注；最常见的字符串“plural nouns”对应 101 个不同特征，跨越 Pythia 70M 与 Gemma 2 2B、18 个层位和 4 类模型组件。这个结果说明 collision 不是局部偶发现象，而是跨模型、跨层、跨组件都存在。论文的理论部分还给出一个命题：对 detection-style 评分，只要 feature 处于同一 collision cluster，替换成簇内其他 feature 不改变该类评分的判别逻辑，因此高分不能作为 feature identification 的证据。作者没有做新的 intervention 实验，也没有比较不同 LLM explainer 的 collision 率，这一点是边界，也是后续工作空间。","reading_guide":"泛读时先看 Introduction 和 Definitions，抓住作者到底在批评什么：不是解释错，而是解释不够区分。然后看 empirical evidence 的表格和几个最常见 collision case，理解问题规模。接着看理论命题，重点不是证明技巧，而是 detection score 为什么天然忽略 feature identity。最后看作者提出的 discrimination scoring 和 collision-adjusted detection，理解它们各自补哪一块。预计 25-35 分钟能读完主线。若你平时用 SAE 标签做 feature clustering、circuit tracing 或自动筛选 feature，值得多花一点时间想一个问题：你当前 pipeline 里，解释是被当作“语义摘要”还是“feature 标识符”；这篇文章指出这两者不能混用。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a narrower but more damaging question than standard SAE auto-interpretability critiques: even if a natural-language explanation is accurate, does it uniquely identify the feature? The authors argue that current pipelines mostly evaluate explanation adequacy for a fixed feature, but ignore a dual failure mode where many distinct SAE features admit the same explanation. They call this descriptive collision. It is different from polysemanticity: polysemanticity is one feature mapping to multiple meanings, while collision is multiple features mapping to one description. The core problem is therefore not whether explanations are truthful, but whether explanation-based evaluation can certify feature identity rather than merely assign a coarse semantic label to a cluster of features.","importance":"Its value is methodological rather than architectural, but the target is central. SAE-based feature decomposition is now a common tool for interpreting LLM representations, and many downstream claims rely on the assumption that feature labels produced by humans or LLMs are meaningful and can be validated by detection-style scores. This paper shows that such scores may validate semantic overlap without validating identification. That matters for feature attribution, circuit analysis, intervention studies, and any workflow that treats a short explanation as if it were a stable handle on a specific latent. The contribution is not a new SAE training recipe; it is a correction to what current auto-interpretability metrics can and cannot certify.","technical_approach":"$37","experiments":"$38","reading_guide":"For a skim, start with the introduction and the formal definitions. The key is to understand that the critique is not “the explanation is wrong,” but “the explanation is too non-specific to identify the feature.” Then read the empirical table and the examples of repeated labels to get a sense of scale. After that, look at the proposition about detection-style score invariance; the proof itself is simple, but the implication is the main point. Finally, read the sections on discrimination scoring and collision-adjusted detection to see what a better evaluation target would look like. About 25 to 35 minutes is enough for the main thread. If you use SAE labels for feature search, clustering, or circuit tracing, it is worth pausing on one practical question: are your labels acting as semantic summaries, or as identifiers? The paper argues that current pipelines often conflate the two.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"揭示了 SAE 自动解释中的 'descriptive collision' 现象（多个 feature 对应同一个解释），对做 mech interp 和特征级控制的研究员是很好的避坑指南，建议看量化分析部分。","en":"Reveals the 'descriptive collision' phenomenon in SAE automated interpretation (multiple features mapping to the same explanation), serving as a great pitfall guide for mech interp and feature-level control researchers. Skim the quantitative analysis."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Independent Researcher"],"authors":["Jordan F. McCann"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["mechanistic interpretability","sparse autoencoders","automated interpretability","feature explanation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12874","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12874","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13339","title":"Probing Persona-Dependent Preferences in Language Models","abstract":"Large language models (LLMs) can be said to have preferences: they reliably pick certain tasks and outputs over others, and preferences shaped by post-training and system prompts appear to shape much of their behaviour. But models can also adopt different personas which have radically different preferences. How is this implemented internally? Does each persona run on its own preference machinery, or is something shared underneath? We train linear probes on residual-stream activations of Gemma-3-","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T10:57:37+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13339.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文问的是：LLM 在不同 persona 下做选择时，内部是否存在可复用的“偏好表示”，还是每个 persona 都有一套独立的选择机制。作者把偏好定义为模型在成对任务选择中的 revealed preference，而不是口头声明的价值观。","importance":"对预训练研究的启发主要在机制分析和 post-train 接口。论文显示，偏好不是只存在于输出文本层面的行为模式，至少在 Gemma-3-27B 和 Qwen-3.5-122B 中，可以在 residual stream 中用线性方向读出，并且这个方向会随 persona 改变含义。这个结果对安全 probe、RLHF 后模型的内部表征、persona-conditioned behavior 都有直接影响。它不是预训练方法论文，但对理解后训练如何把偏好压进基座表征有参考价值。","technical_approach":"作者先用成对任务选择拟合一个 utility function，再用 residual-stream activation 训练线性 probe 去预测这些 utility。这样得到的线性方向被称为 preference vector。关键点在于，probe 不是预测某个固定标签，而是预测模型自己在不同任务之间的相对选择。作者随后做了三类检验：第一，泛化检验，观察该方向能否迁移到未见 topic 和分布外偏好类型，例如真假陈述、定向偏好变化；第二，因果检验，在 Gemma-3-27B 上沿该方向 steering task token，观察成对选择是否被改变；第三，persona 检验，用 Assistant persona 训练的 probe 去预测其他 persona 的偏好，尤其是 evil persona 下偏好方向是否反转。和普通 harmfulness / truthfulness probe 不同，这里的表示是从选择行为中抽取出来的，因此更接近“评估性表示”而不是描述性特征。","experiments":"实验模型包括 Gemma-3-27B 和 Qwen-3.5-122B。作者报告，preference vector 能预测不同提示和情境下的 revealed pairwise choices，并能泛化到未见主题和分布外偏好类型。在 Gemma-3-27B 上，对 task token 做正负方向 steering 会显著改变模型选择哪个任务。evil persona 实验是论文的核心证据之一：同一个 preference vector 在 Assistant rollout 中会给 benign task 更高分，在 evil persona rollout 中则会出现偏好反转，harmful task 得分更高；这个反转不出现在 text-encoder baseline 中。跨 persona 实验显示，用 Assistant persona 训练的 probe 可以较好预测其他 persona 的 utility，但不能解释全部方差。附录还展示了安全相关现象：同一方向的 steering 可能削弱拒答边界，或降低长上下文中的伦理提示强度。","reading_guide":"建议泛读 30–45 分钟。重点看 §2 的 preference vector 构造、§2.2 的 causal steering、§2.3 的 evil persona 反转、§3 的跨 persona 迁移。附录 A.4 和 F.3 值得补看，因为它们展示了 probe 在安全行为上的外推风险。读的时候要注意两个问题：一是 probe 的成功是否来自真实评估性表示，还是任务语义和 persona 状态的线性混合；二是 steering 的 causal effect 是否只在局部任务选择中成立，能否推广到长程策略行为。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies whether LLMs use a shared internal representation for preferences across personas, or whether each persona implements its own choice mechanism. Preferences are operationalized as revealed pairwise task choices rather than verbal self-reports.","importance":"The main value is mechanistic rather than pretraining-methodological. The results suggest that post-trained models can encode preference-like quantities in linear residual-stream directions, and that the meaning of such directions is conditioned by the active persona. This matters for white-box safety probes, RLHF-induced representations, and persona-dependent behavior. It also gives a concrete way to study how post-training signals interact with base-model representations.","technical_approach":"The authors fit a utility function from revealed pairwise choices, then train linear probes on residual-stream activations to predict those utilities. The resulting direction is treated as a preference vector. They test it in three ways. First, they check generalization to unseen topics and out-of-distribution preference types, including truth versus falsehood and targeted preference shifts. Second, they perform causal steering on task tokens in Gemma-3-27B to see whether moving along the direction changes pairwise choices. Third, they train on the Assistant persona and evaluate transfer to other personas, including an evil persona whose preferences are anti-correlated with the Assistant. This differs from standard harmfulness or truthfulness probes because the supervision is derived from the model’s own choices.","experiments":"The experiments use Gemma-3-27B and Qwen-3.5-122B. The preference vector predicts revealed choices across prompts and situations, generalizes to unseen topics, and tracks targeted shifts in preference. In Gemma-3-27B, steering along the vector on task tokens has a large causal effect on which task the model completes. In the evil-persona setting, the same vector scores benign tasks higher under Assistant rollouts but reverses under evil-persona rollouts; a text-encoder baseline does not show this inversion. Cross-persona transfer works better than simply predicting Assistant preferences, but it does not explain all variance. The appendices also report safety-relevant effects, including reduced refusal behavior and weaker ethical flagging under certain steering settings.","reading_guide":"A useful skim takes about 30–45 minutes. Focus on §2 for the construction of the preference vector, §2.2 for causal steering, §2.3 for the evil-persona inversion, and §3 for transfer across personas. Appendix A.4 and F.3 are worth checking because they show how the same direction can affect safety behavior. The main questions to keep in mind are whether the direction is truly evaluative rather than a mixture of semantic and persona-state features, and whether the causal results extend beyond local pairwise task choices.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"如果你关心对齐到底改了什么，这篇值得看；重点不是 probe 本身，而是“不同 persona 共享同一偏好底座”这个判断，先看跨 persona 泛化和 steering 结果。","en":"Worth reading if you care what alignment actually changes; the key is not the probe itself but the claim that very different personas share a common preference substrate—start with the cross-persona generalization and steering results."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Eleos AI Research"],"authors":["Oscar Gilg","Pierre Beckmann","Daniel Paleka","Patrick Butlin"],"notable_authors":["Patrick Butlin"],"tags":["interpretability","preferences","persona","linear-probes","alignment"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13339","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13339","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13772","title":"Where Does Reasoning Break? Step-Level Hallucination Detection via Hidden-State Transport Geometry","abstract":"Large language models hallucinate during multi-step reasoning, but most existing detectors operate at the trace level: they assign one confidence score to a full output, fail to localize the first error, and often require multiple sampled completions. We frame hallucination instead as a property of the hidden-state trajectory produced during a single forward pass. Correct reasoning moves through a stable manifold of locally coherent transitions; a first error appears as a localized excursion in ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T16:48:48+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13772.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文处理的是多步推理中的首个错误定位问题。已有方法多给整条推理轨迹一个置信分数，或者依赖多次采样、自一致性、外部 verifier。GeoReason 试图只用一次前向中的 hidden-state 轨迹，判断哪一步开始偏离正确推理过程。","importance":"对预训练研究的直接价值不在于提出新的训练目标，而在于给 reasoning failure 提供了一个表示空间诊断工具。它把错误看成 hidden-state transition 的局部异常，而不是只看 token 概率或最终答案。这对研究 CoT 训练动态、process supervision、reasoning model 的内部状态可分性有启发。尤其值得注意的是，teacher 跨模型和跨数据集更稳定，而 student 在分布迁移下不稳定，说明 hidden-state 中确实有较强诊断信号，但把这种信号蒸馏成部署模型仍受 margin preservation 限制。","technical_approach":"方法把每个 reasoning step 映射成一个 hidden vector，通常对该 step 内 token 的某一层 hidden states 做 mean pooling。teacher 使用 step-level label，把正确前缀作为局部参考系，构造 trace-specific 的 contrastive PCA lens，用来突出正确 transition 和首错 transition 的几何差异。随后计算每一步的 transition instability，包含 transport cost 相关的几何特征。student 是一个 BiLSTM，从原始 hidden-state 序列直接预测 teacher 的分数，推理时不需要标签、多次采样或额外 verifier。论文还给出三个理论结果：contrastive PCA 在 transport-separation 目标下是最优投影；在 transport margin 假设下可做单次前向首错定位；teacher-student 一致性可归约为 margin preservation 条件。","experiments":"实验覆盖 ProcessBench、PRM800K、HaluEval 和 TruthfulQA。对比对象包括 entropy-based、probing-based 和 attention-based baselines。结果显示 teacher 和 student 在域内均优于这些基线；teacher 在跨模型、跨数据集迁移时较稳定，而 student 迁移能力明显下降。论文把这个差距解释为蒸馏后的 margin 在分布变化下没有保持。全文片段中没有给出完整表格数值，因此不宜补写具体提升幅度。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，约 20 分钟。重点看方法部分对 step hidden-state pooling、correct-prefix normalization、contrastive PCA lens 和 transport features 的定义；再看理论部分的 Theorem 3.1、Theorem 3.2 和 Proposition 3.3，理解它们分别约束了投影、定位和蒸馏。实验部分重点看 teacher 与 student 的迁移差异，这比单个 benchmark 分数更有信息量。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies first-error localization in multi-step reasoning. Most existing detectors assign one confidence score to the whole trace, require multiple sampled completions, or depend on a separate verifier. GeoReason asks whether a single forward pass contains enough hidden-state signal to identify where the reasoning trajectory first breaks.","importance":"Its main value for pretraining research is diagnostic rather than algorithmic. The paper treats reasoning failure as a local anomaly in hidden-state transitions, not merely as high token entropy or an incorrect final answer. This is useful for studying chain-of-thought dynamics, process supervision, and the internal separability of correct versus corrupted reasoning states. The transfer gap is also informative: the label-conditioned teacher transfers more reliably across models and datasets, while the distilled student is fragile under shift. That suggests the signal exists, but preserving it in a deployable detector is the hard part.","technical_approach":"Each reasoning step is represented by pooling token hidden states from a fixed transformer layer. The teacher uses step-level labels to build a trace-specific local coordinate system around the correct prefix, then applies a contrastive PCA lens that emphasizes directions separating coherent transitions from first-error transitions. It scores each step with geometric transition features related to transport instability. The student is a BiLSTM trained to reproduce the teacher’s scores from raw hidden-state sequences, so inference requires no labels, no sampling, and no external verifier. The theory argues that contrastive PCA is optimal for a transport-separation objective, that first-error localization is possible under a transport-margin condition, and that teacher-student agreement depends on preserving that margin.","experiments":"The experiments use ProcessBench, PRM800K, HaluEval, and TruthfulQA, with entropy-based, probing-based, and attention-based baselines. Both teacher and student outperform these baselines in-domain. The teacher remains comparatively stable across model and dataset transfer, while the student degrades under shift, matching the paper’s margin-preservation analysis. The provided full text excerpt does not include the complete numeric tables, so exact gains should be checked in the experimental section.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 20 minutes. Focus on the definitions of step pooling, correct-prefix normalization, the contrastive PCA lens, and the transport features. Then read Theorem 3.1, Theorem 3.2, and Proposition 3.3 for the assumptions behind localization and distillation. In the experiments, the most useful part is the teacher-student transfer gap, not the headline benchmark numbers.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看几何特征和 teacher-student 设计即可；把错误定位放到 hidden trajectory 上是干净的，但缺少规模实验前不要过度外推。","en":"Read the geometric features and teacher-student setup; hidden-trajectory error localization is clean, but without large-scale evidence it should stay a weak signal."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Tyler Alvarez","Ali Baheri"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["hallucination","hidden-states","reasoning","interpretability","error-localization"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13772","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13772","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12714","title":"Layer-wise Representation Dynamics: An Empirical Investigation Across Embedders and Base LLMs","abstract":"Hidden states change substantially across the layers of modern language models, but most layer-wise analyses focus on one aspect of that change. We propose Layer-wise Representation Dynamics (LRD), a framework with three layer-wise measurement families: Frenet (Grassmann speed and curvature) for global subspace motion, Neighborhood Retention Score (NRS) for local nearest-neighbor retention, and Graph Filtration Mutual Information (GFMI) for alignment with the final layer. Applying LRD to 31 mode","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-12T20:22:45+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12714.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作研究的是一个分析层面的问题：现代 embedders 和 base LLM 的表示不是只在最后一层才有差异，层间表示形成过程本身就不同，但现有分析往往只看单一指标，难以同时描述全局子空间变化、局部邻域保持和与最终层的对齐关系。作者提出 LRD，希望用一组互补的 layer-wise 指标，把“表示是如何逐层成形的”描述得更完整，并进一步看看这些动态特征能否用于无标签模型选择和推理时层裁剪。","importance":"对预训练研究的价值主要是诊断和表征分析，而不是直接提出新的训练方法。它的意义在于提供了一套较系统的 layer-wise measurement family，帮助研究者比较不同架构、不同任务上表示形成的路径差异。对于做基座模型的人，这类工具有两个实际用途。第一，它能帮助判断中间层是否已经形成稳定语义结构，从而为 layer selection、early exit、蒸馏或中间层监督提供依据。第二，它提醒人们不要只盯 final layer embedding；很多模型差异发生在形成过程，而不是终点。论文还把这些指标用于 label-free model selection 和 pruning，说明这些分析量不只是可视化工具，而是有一定决策价值。不过它更偏 representation analysis，对预训练主线的影响属于中等。","technical_approach":"LRD 由三类指标组成，分别对应三种不同的表示动态。\n\n第一类是 Frenet family，用来刻画全局子空间运动。作者把每层表示矩阵做中心化后取主奇异子空间，把各层看成 Grassmann 流形上的离散路径。相邻层之间的 Grassmann geodesic distance 定义为 speed，连续三层构成的 Menger curvature 则描述路径是否发生明显转向。这个视角关心的是“全局主方向是否还在变”。\n\n第二类是 NRS，Neighborhood Retention Score，关注局部结构是否被保留。它比较相邻层中同一 anchor 的近邻集合重叠程度。即便全局子空间变化不大，局部邻域也可能重排；反过来也成立。因此 NRS 补上了 Frenet family 看不到的局部几何。\n\n第三类是 GFMI，Graph Filtration Mutual Information，用来衡量某一中间层与最终层组织结构的对齐程度。作者不是直接做简单相似度，而是通过图过滤后的互信息来比较层间结构，这样更强调拓扑/关系层面的接近程度。它回答的是“这一层已经多像最终层了”。\n\n方法上的一个细节是，作者对每个 model-task pair 固定一个子空间维度 r，取能解释 final layer 95% 方差的最小秩，并把这个 r 用到所有层上。这样做的好处是层间可比，但也隐含了 final layer 作为参照的偏置。整体上，三类指标分别对应 global motion、local retention、final-layer alignment，互补性是这篇工作的核心。","experiments":"实验覆盖 31 个现成模型和 30 个 MTEB 任务，其中包括 25 个 embedders（encoder-based 和 decoder-based）以及 6 个 base LLM；任务类型包括 classification、retrieval、STS、reranking 和 duplicate detection。这个覆盖面比较大，足以支持作者关于“架构差异”和“任务差异”的经验结论。\n\n主要结果有三层。第一，LRD 确实揭示出 final-layer 表示看不出来的差异。不同架构在层间 speed、curvature、neighbor retention 和 final-layer alignment 上呈现出不同轨迹；不同任务类型也会改变这些轨迹形状。这说明“表示形成过程”本身是有结构的，而不是单调趋近最终层。\n\n第二，在无标签模型选择上，作者把 layer-wise 指标汇总成 model-level score，发现三类分数都与下游性能正相关，其中 d_{0,L} 最强。这里的含义是：从输入层到最终层的整体表征位移，可能是一个相对稳健的无监督质量信号。虽然摘要里没有给出完整相关系数，但全文结论是这些分数确实能在不看标签的情况下帮助挑模型。\n\n第三，在 layer pruning 上，GFMI 优于随机裁剪，在 15% 和 20% 的预算下表现更好，并且在所有预算上都有最佳 median change。也就是说，如果必须删层，优先保留那些对最终层结构对齐更关键的层，比随机删更稳。\n\n从预训练研究者角度，最有用的实验不是某个具体数值，而是作者证明了 layer-wise dynamics 可以转化成可操作的选择信号，而不只是分析图。","reading_guide":"泛读建议先看方法定义部分，把三类指标各自测什么弄清楚。尤其要分清：Frenet family 看的是主子空间路径，NRS 看的是局部近邻保持，GFMI 看的是与最终层的结构对齐。很多读者会把它们都当成“层间相似度”，这样会错过论文真正的信息。\n\n然后看结果部分里按模型类型和任务类型展开的图。这里最值得关注的不是哪条曲线高，而是曲线形状：哪些模型前层变化快、后层趋稳，哪些模型中层发生明显转向，哪些任务导致局部邻域在后层才稳定。最后再看两个应用实验：label-free model selection 和 pruning。它们决定这套分析是否有工程价值。\n\n如果时间有限，40 分钟左右可以完成一次有效泛读。若要深挖，建议重点检查 GFMI 的定义和实现，因为它是最不直观但也最可能带来实际 pruning 信号的部分；另外也要留意作者如何把 layer-wise 曲线压缩成 model-level score，这关系到方法能否迁移到别的数据和模型族。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper studies a representation-analysis problem rather than a new training method. Modern embedders and base LLMs do not only differ in their final-layer states; they also differ in how representations are formed across layers. Existing analyses often focus on a single criterion, making it hard to jointly characterize global subspace motion, local neighborhood preservation, and alignment with the final layer. LRD is proposed as a unified layer-wise framework to describe these dynamics more completely, and to test whether such signals are useful for label-free model selection and inference-time layer pruning.","importance":"For pretraining researchers, the value is diagnostic. LRD offers a structured way to compare how different architectures and tasks shape representations through depth, rather than judging models only by the final embedding. That matters for several practical reasons: identifying semantically mature intermediate layers, informing early-exit or pruning decisions, guiding distillation targets, and understanding whether architectural changes alter the trajectory of representation formation rather than just the endpoint. The paper also shows that these measurements can support model selection and pruning, so they are not merely descriptive plots. Still, the contribution is analytical rather than a direct advance in pretraining methodology.","technical_approach":"$39","experiments":"$3a","reading_guide":"$3b","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看指标定义和模型选择相关性即可；LRD 像一套可复用诊断仪，剪层结论别过度外推到生成式 pretrain。","en":"Read the metric definitions and selection correlations; LRD is a reusable diagnostic, while the pruning result should not be overextended to generative pretraining."},"metadata":{"institutions":["The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology"],"authors":["Jingzhou Jiang","Yi Yang","Kar Yan Tam"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["representation-analysis","layer-dynamics","MTEB","model-selection","pruning"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12714","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12714","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12922","title":"When Attention Closes: How LLMs Lose the Thread in Multi-Turn Interaction","abstract":"Large language models can follow complex instructions in a single turn, yet over long multi-turn interactions they often lose the thread of instructions, persona, and rules. This degradation has been measured behaviorally but not mechanistically explained. We propose a channel-transition account: goal-defining tokens become less accessible through attention, while goal-related information may persist in residual representations. We introduce the Goal Accessibility Ratio (GAR), measuring attentio","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T02:58:18+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12922.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解释多轮对话中模型为何会逐步“丢掉系统提示里的目标/规则/人设”，并给出可预测、可诊断的机制指标。论文提出一个两通道解释：目标信息一开始主要通过注意力通道从系统提示 token 直接可达；随着轮次增长，注意力对这些 token 的可达性下降并进入“关闭”区间，之后行为更多依赖残差流里先前写入的内部表征是否还保留了目标状态。","importance":"这不是预训练方法论文，但对训练动态与架构选择有直接启发：1）把“长对话失忆/失规”从纯行为现象变成可测的内部量（GAR），便于做架构对比与回归测试；2）揭示不同架构在残差通道保留目标信息的深度位置差异很大（层 2 到层 27），这会影响你如何做中期训练（mid-train）或对齐训练来强化长程遵循；3）对长上下文训练的一个现实提醒：仅靠扩大窗口不等于目标 token 可达，位置衰减与注意力分配会产生“可达性阈值”。","technical_approach":"提出“channel-transition account”。把目标条件化信息的跨轮传播分为两条路径：\n- Attention channel：生成时对系统提示中“目标定义 token 集合”的注意力质量。\n- Residual channel：早期层在残差流中写入并在后续位置/轮次中保留的目标相关表征。\n\n三个工具：\n1）GAR（Goal Accessibility Ratio）：统计生成 token 对目标 token 的注意力质量（跨层跨头平均）。它不是通用质量分数，而是架构相关的诊断量。\n2）Sliding-window ablation：用滑动窗口裁剪上下文，因果地“关闭”对系统提示的直接注意力通道，并观察行为何时崩。\n3）Residual-stream probes：在线性可分性层面探测残差流中是否仍可解码出“本回合是否能回忆/遵循目标”的结果变量，用 AUC 衡量；并用输入 embedding 探针作对照，证明信号不是来自浅层词面。\n\n作者把“注意力关闭点”与窗口大小建立了近线性的剂量-反应关系，从而能参数化预测多轮失败发生的轮次。","experiments":"覆盖四个开源架构（Mistral、Qwen、LLaMA、Mixtral）：\n- GAR 在所有架构上随轮次单调下降（每个架构 Mann-Kendall p < 1e-7）。\n- 通过 sliding-window ablation，关闭点与窗口大小呈线性剂量-反应关系（R^2 > 0.999），说明这是一个强可预测的几何/位置信号，而非偶然行为波动。\n- 残差流线性探针可以高精度预测每个 episode 的回忆/遵循结果，AUC 最高到 0.99；对 input embedding 的探针接近随机，支持“残差通道确实携带目标状态”。\n- 目标信息在网络中变得线性可解码的层深因架构差异很大：最浅到第 2 层，最深到第 27 层。\n- 架构差异的行为侧表现：Mistral 在关闭后仍保留较多目标条件化行为且随目标复杂度呈渐变退化；LLaMA/Qwen 更像对复杂度不敏感的整体失败；Mixtral 出现中层深度附近的“相变式”可解码性跃迁。\n\n这些结果更像机制诊断而非刷榜；它的价值在于给长对话遵循问题提供了可复现实验范式与可量化指标。","reading_guide":"泛读建议（约 30–45 分钟）：\n1）先看 Figure 1 的两通道示意与 GAR 定义，理解作者把问题拆成“注意力可达性”与“残差保留”。\n2）看 GAR 随轮次下降的主图，以及不同架构的对比图，抓住“关闭点”概念。\n3）看 sliding-window ablation 的线性剂量-反应结果（R^2>0.999 那张图/表），这是最强的因果证据。\n4）看 residual probe 的 AUC 结果与“可解码层深”分析，理解为什么不同架构关闭后的失败形态不同。\n5）如果你做长上下文/多轮对齐训练，建议把 GAR 当成回归指标：在 mid-train 或 cooldown 后测 GAR 曲线是否右移、残差可解码层是否前移。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper explains why LLMs gradually lose adherence to system-prompt goals (instructions/persona/rules) over long multi-turn interactions, and proposes a mechanistic, predictive diagnostic. It argues for a two-channel transition: early on, goal tokens are directly accessible via attention; as turns progress, attention to those goal-defining tokens decays and eventually enters a “closure” regime, after which behavior depends on whether goal state has been preserved indirectly in residual-stream representations.","importance":"Not a pretraining-method paper, but it is useful for architecture/optimization-facing researchers because it turns a messy behavioral failure into measurable internal quantities. GAR can serve as a regression metric for long-dialogue instruction-following. The finding that goal information becomes linearly decodable at very different depths across architectures (layer ~2 to ~27) suggests that “what survives after attention closure” is an architectural property—relevant when designing mid-training or alignment interventions for long-context and multi-turn settings.","technical_approach":"The proposed channel-transition account decomposes goal-conditioned state propagation into:\n- An attention channel: direct attention mass from generated tokens to goal-defining tokens in the system prompt.\n- A residual channel: goal-related information written into and carried by the residual stream.\n\nThree instruments:\n1) Goal Accessibility Ratio (GAR): average attention mass from generated tokens to the goal-token set, aggregated across heads/layers.\n2) Sliding-window ablations: causally close the attention channel by truncating context windows and observing when compliance collapses.\n3) Linear residual-stream probes: test whether per-episode compliance/recall outcomes are decodable from residual activations (AUC), with input-embedding probes as a control.\n\nA key claim is that the turn at which attention “closes” is parametrically predictable from window size (a near-perfect linear dose-response).","experiments":"Across four open-weight architectures (Mistral, Qwen, LLaMA, Mixtral):\n- GAR declines monotonically with turn count for every architecture (Mann–Kendall p < 1e-7).\n- Sliding-window ablations show a linear dose-response between window size and the crossover/closure turn (R^2 > 0.999), supporting a strong causal link.\n- Residual-stream probes predict per-episode recall/compliance with AUC up to 0.99, while input-embedding probes are near chance—evidence that goal state persists in residual representations even when attention access fades.\n- The layer at which goal information becomes linearly decodable varies widely by architecture (as early as layer 2, as late as layer 27).\n- Post-closure behavioral differences: Mistral degrades more gracefully with goal complexity; LLaMA/Qwen fail more uniformly; Mixtral shows a sharp mid-depth “phase-transition-like” rise in decodability.\n\nOverall, the contribution is a reproducible diagnostic framework rather than a performance benchmark.","reading_guide":"Skim plan (~30–45 minutes):\n1) Start with the two-channel schematic and the GAR definition.\n2) Look at the main GAR-vs-turn plots and identify the closure regime per architecture.\n3) Read the sliding-window ablation section and the linear dose-response result (R^2 > 0.999); this is the strongest causal evidence.\n4) Review the residual-probe AUC results and the “decodable depth” analysis to understand architecture-specific failure modes.\n5) If you work on long-context or multi-turn alignment, consider GAR as a regression metric to track whether mid-training/cooldown shifts the closure point or changes residual retention.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"值得扫 GAR、残差 probe 和因果干预；它提醒长对话失控不等于信息消失，而是读出通道坏了。","en":"Skim GAR, residual probes, and causal interventions; the useful prior shift is that multi-turn failure can be a broken readout channel, not erased information."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign","Adobe Research"],"authors":["Vardhan Dongre","Joseph Hsieh","Viet Dac Lai","Seunghyun Yoon","Trung Bui","Dilek Hakkani-Tür"],"notable_authors":["Dilek Hakkani-Tür"],"tags":["mechanistic-interpretability","multi-turn-dialogue","attention-analysis","residual-stream","long-context"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12922","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12922","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13179","title":"Does Engram Do Memory Retrieval in Autoregressive Image Generation?","abstract":"The Engram module -- a hash-keyed, O(1) associative memory injected into Transformer layers -- was recently shown to improve large language model pretraining, with the appealing interpretation that it provides a content-addressed shortcut to recurring local token patterns. We ask whether this interpretation transfers to autoregressive (AR) image generation, or whether the observed gains, if any, come from a different mechanism. We adapt the Engram module to vision with 2D spatial $n$-gram hashin","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T08:40:46+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13179.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CV"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文检验 Engram 这类 hash-keyed O(1) 记忆模块在自回归图像生成中是否真的做了内容寻址式检索。问题不只是“加模块是否提升 FID”，而是要区分三种可能机制：表项内容被正确检索、gated side-pathway 带来额外表达能力、或者模块只起到正则化作用。","importance":"对预训练研究的价值在于给外部记忆模块提供了一个清晰的负结果和诊断范式。Engram 在语言模型中常被解释为对重复局部 token 模式的快速检索；如果这个解释成立，离散图像 token 的局部冗余应当更适合它。但论文发现，在 ImageNet 256×256 的 AR 图像生成上，Engram 没有在参数匹配条件下优于纯 Transformer。更关键的是，模型对 memory table 是否多样、是否被训练敏感，但对 hash key 是否语义匹配并不敏感。这提醒预训练研究中很多“记忆”模块的收益可能来自额外残差路径和门控混合，而不是预期的内容检索。","technical_approach":"作者将 NLP 中的 Engram 改造成适合二维离散图像 token 的版本。图像先经 VQ 类编码器变成 16×16 token grid，再按 raster scan 做自回归建模。Engram 使用局部 n-gram 的 hash 作为地址，从大表中 O(1) 取出向量，并通过 gate 与 Transformer hidden state 融合。视觉版本加入了二维空间 n-gram hashing，包括 1×3、3×1、2×2 等 causal 局部模式；同时使用 gated fusion、per-channel LayerScale，并保证增量采样时与 KV-cache 兼容。为了判断模块是否真的检索内容，作者设计了三类诊断：推理时固定 gate 的 gate-clamp analysis；替换 hash 输入来源的 donor probe；从头训练时把 memory table 冻结为高斯噪声的控制实验。","experiments":"实验在 class-conditional ImageNet 256×256 AR 生成上做参数预算扫描，backbone-to-total parameter ratio ρ 覆盖 0.17 到 0.90。纯 AR baseline 的 FID 为 2.02，所有 Engram 变体在参数匹配下都更差。加入更丰富的二维 n-gram bank 后，FID 变化小于 0.01，说明局部空间 hash 形式不是主要瓶颈。gate-clamp 实验显示，将 learned gate 替换为常数 g=0.10 或 0.25 可以匹配或超过 learned gate；g=1 会使 FID-10K 从 4.89 变差到 6.53；g=0 则导致生成崩坏，FID-10K 达到 115。这说明 side-pathway 需要存在，但输出不能被过度混入。donor probe 中，用 matched、adversarial 或 random same-class 样本提供 hash token，next-token 分布几乎无法区分；但如果折叠 bucket index 或把表替换为随机噪声，分布会恶化两到三个数量级。最后，从头训练且把整张 memory table 冻结为 N(0,1) 噪声，只比学习表差 ΔFID=0.10，Inception Score 反而从 259 提到 285。整体结果支持一个判断：Engram 在该设置下主要是 gated architectural side-pathway，learned table 内容只提供小幅修正。","reading_guide":"建议泛读 Introduction 和 Method，重点看作者如何把 1D Engram 改造成二维 causal hashing，并保持 KV-cache 兼容。实验部分优先看三组诊断：gate clamp、donor probe、frozen-noise table。预计阅读时间 25–35 分钟。最值得带走的是诊断设计，而不是图像生成指标本身。类似方法可用于检查 LLM 中的外部记忆、检索增强层、稀疏表参数是否真的按内容寻址工作，还是只提供额外路径和噪声正则。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tests whether the Engram module, a hash-keyed O(1) associative memory, actually performs content-addressed retrieval in autoregressive image generation. The key question is not only whether FID improves, but whether any gain comes from retrieved memory contents, from the gated side pathway, or from regularization-like effects.","importance":"The paper is useful for pretraining research because it gives a careful negative result on external memory modules. Engram is often described as a shortcut to recurring local token patterns. If that interpretation were correct, discrete image tokens should be a favorable setting because local visual patches are highly redundant. Instead, on ImageNet 256×256 AR generation, Engram does not outperform a pure Transformer at matched parameter count. More importantly, the model cares that the table is diverse and present, but not that the queried entry semantically matches the current context. This is a useful warning for memory-augmented pretraining: measured gains may come from an extra gated residual stream rather than real content retrieval.","technical_approach":"The authors adapt Engram from 1D language sequences to 2D VQ image-token grids. Images are encoded into a 16×16 grid of discrete tokens and modeled in raster order by a causal Transformer. Engram hashes recent local n-grams into a large table, retrieves a vector in O(1), and fuses it into the hidden state through a learned gate. The vision version adds spatial n-gram hashing over causal 2D patterns such as 1×3, 3×1, and 2×2, uses gated fusion with per-channel LayerScale, and supports incremental decoding with KV-cache. The diagnostic toolkit is the main contribution: gate-clamp analysis to control mixing strength, donor probes that replace hash inputs with matched/adversarial/random examples, and from-scratch training with the entire memory table frozen to Gaussian noise.","experiments":"$3c","reading_guide":"Skim the Introduction and Method to understand the 2D adaptation of Engram and the KV-cache-compatible implementation. Spend most of the time on the diagnostic experiments: gate clamp, donor probes, and frozen-noise training. Estimated reading time: 25–35 minutes. The reusable part is the experimental design for separating true content-addressed memory from architectural side-path effects; the exact AR image-generation numbers are secondary.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"这篇的负结果比方法更有用；看 ρ sweep 和 gate-clamp，能校准“LLM 记忆模块可直接迁移到视觉 AR”的先验。","en":"The negative result is more useful than the method; read the ρ sweep and gate-clamp analysis to recalibrate the prior that LLM memory modules transfer cleanly to visual AR."},"metadata":{"institutions":["The Chinese University of Hong Kong","National University of Singapore"],"authors":["Jinghao Wang","Qiyuan He","Chunbin Gu","Pheng-Ann Heng"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["engram","associative-memory","autoregressive-image-generation","mechanism-analysis","negative-result"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13179","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13179","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12809","title":"Correcting Influence: Unboxing LLM Outputs with Orthogonal Latent Spaces","abstract":"A critical step for reliable large language models (LLMs) use in healthcare is to attribute predictions to their training data, akin to a medical case study. This requires token-level precision: pinpointing not just which training examples influence a decision, but which tokens within them are responsible. While influence functions offer a principled framework for this, prior work is restricted to autoregressive settings and relies on an implicit assumption of token independence, rendering their","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-12T23:01:29+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12809.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有的基于影响函数的LLM训练数据归因方法默认token相互独立，不符合LLM内部token高度相关的实际情况，导致得到的token级影响估计可靠性不足，无法满足医疗等高风险场景下模型决策可追溯至训练数据具体token的审计需求。","importance":"为预训练数据质量审计、训练数据中虚假相关性的定位与清除提供了可落地的工具思路；结合稀疏自编码器解耦表示与影响函数的设计，也为预训练内部机制、训练动态的可解释性研究提供了新的分析角度。","technical_approach":"提出基于潜变量中介的归因框架，在预训练LLM的任意中间层接入稀疏自编码器，学习近似正交、统计独立的潜特征基，在解耦后的潜空间计算影响得分；利用克莱罗定理交换导数计算顺序，将原本每个特征O(d_l)的前向计算复杂度降为O(1)，实现10-20倍的实际加速；将潜特征层面的影响通过联合激活模式回传至输入token，支持样本和特征层面的统一归因。","experiments":"在1B参数的Llama-3.2和1.5B参数的Qwen2.5上跨多个QA数据集验证；必要性和充分性消融实验显示，该方法识别的影响电路效果优于激活幅值、频率等基线；对固定测试样本的token热力图可视化显示，训练时引入上下文会改变模型行为，但相关规律还需进一步验证。","reading_guide":"重点关注第3章的方法框架和复杂度优化部分，以及第5章的消融实验结果，预计阅读时间30分钟；医疗场景的背景介绍部分可跳过。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing influence function-based training data attribution methods for LLMs assume token independence, which contradicts the strong correlation between tokens in LLMs. This leads to unreliable token-level influence estimates, failing to meet the audit requirement of tracing model decisions back to specific tokens in training data for high-stakes domains like healthcare.","importance":"Provides a practical approach for pre-training data quality auditing and spurious correlation localization and removal in training datasets. The design combining sparse autoencoder disentangled representations and influence functions also offers a new analytical angle for interpretability research on pre-training internal mechanisms and training dynamics.","technical_approach":"Proposes a latent mediation-based attribution framework. It attaches sparse autoencoders to any intermediate layer of a pretrained LLM to learn approximately orthogonal, statistically independent latent feature bases, and computes influence scores in this disentangled latent space. It leverages Clairaut's Theorem to swap the order of derivative calculation, reducing the original O(d_l) forward-pass complexity per feature to O(1) and delivering 10-20x practical speedup. Influence at the latent feature level is back-propagated to input tokens via joint activation patterns, supporting unified attribution at both sample and feature levels.","experiments":"Validated on 1B-parameter Llama-3.2 and 1.5B-parameter Qwen2.5 across multiple QA datasets. Necessity and sufficiency ablations show that the influential circuits identified by this method outperform baselines including activation magnitude and frequency. Token heatmap visualizations on fixed test samples indicate that incorporating context during training alters model behavior, though related patterns require further validation.","reading_guide":"Focus on the method framework and complexity optimization in Section 3, as well as ablation results in Section 5. Estimated reading time: 30 minutes. Background sections on healthcare use cases can be skipped.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"影响函数的改进工作，打破token独立假设，§3的潜在空间归因设计对预训练归因分析有参考价值","en":"An improved influence function work that breaks the token independence assumption; the latent space attribution design in §3 is referential for pretraining attribution analysis"},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Chicago","Operations Research and Industrial Engineering"],"authors":["Shixing Yu","Promit Ghosal","Kyra Gan"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["interpretability","influence functions","latent space","attribution"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12809","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12809","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13801","title":"Improving Reproducibility in Evaluation through Multi-Level Annotator Modeling","abstract":"As generative AI models such as large language models (LLMs) become more pervasive, ensuring the safety, robustness, and overall trustworthiness of these systems is paramount. However, AI is currently facing a reproducibility crisis driven by unreliable evaluations and unrepeatable experimental results. While human raters are often used to assess models for utility and safety, they introduce divergent biases and subjective opinions into their annotations. Overcoming this variance is exceptionall","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T17:22:27+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13801.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这项工作研究一个评测层面的核心问题：当同一批人工标注者会给多个样本打分时，模型比较中的显著性检验是否会因为错误地把标注当作独立样本而过于乐观。","importance":"它对预训练本身不是直接贡献，但对大模型评测和 post-train 数据闭环有实际启发。很多偏好评测、安全评测和能力评测依赖少量人工标注，如果忽略标注者的稳定偏差，会低估 p-value、高估模型差异的可信度。对基座研究员来说，价值在于提醒评测集设计不能只增加 prompt 数，也要考虑每个样本的标注者数量、标注者复用方式和标注者 ID 的可追踪性。","technical_approach":"方法是多层 bootstrap。作者把采样单位从单一的 item 扩展到 item、rater、batch 三个层次，分别处理三种常见数据结构：所有标注者标所有样本；不同样本有不同标注者集合；样本按 batch 分配给固定标注者组。相比把每个 annotation 当作独立观测，多层 bootstrap 显式保留了同一标注者跨样本的相关性。实验框架基于 VET simulator：人类标注分布记为 G，模型 A 按 G 生成，作为理想模型；模型 B 在一小部分响应上加入扰动 epsilon，作为轻微变差的模型。然后比较不同采样策略下 NHST 得到的 p-value。","experiments":"关键结论是，忽略标注者跨样本行为会系统性低估 p-value，因此会夸大模型差异的统计显著性。作者还分析了 item 数和 rater 数之间的权衡、batch 化标注者分配对 p-value 的影响，以及减少每个样本标注者数量后的估计变化。结果支持一个实践建议：如果评测目标是稳定地区分模型，数据集构建者应认真增加每个输入的独立标注数，并保留持久化 rater ID，而不是只收集少量 3 到 5 人投票后丢弃标注者信息。","reading_guide":"泛读即可，预计 20 到 30 分钟。重点看 Methods 中三个多层 bootstrap 算法，以及实验结果里 p-value 在不同采样假设下的变化。对 LLM 研究更有用的是评测设计原则，而不是具体统计工具实现。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies whether model comparisons become overconfident when human annotations are treated as independent observations even though the same raters score multiple items.","importance":"This is not a pretraining-method paper, but it matters for LLM evaluation and the post-training feedback loop. Human preference, safety, and utility evaluations often use a small number of ratings per item. If persistent rater effects are ignored, p-values can be underestimated and apparent model differences can look more reliable than they are. The useful lesson for foundation-model work is that evaluation datasets need rater identifiers, enough raters per item, and a sampling design that matches the intended statistical test.","technical_approach":"The method is multi-level bootstrap sampling. The authors model three annotation structures: fully crossed item-rater data, item-specific rater pools, and batched assignment where a fixed rater group labels a batch of items. This differs from standard item-level resampling because it preserves dependencies induced by the same rater appearing across multiple items. The simulation uses the VET framework: human ratings define a distribution G, model A matches G, and model B is made slightly worse by perturbing a small fraction of responses. Hypothesis tests are then run under different bootstrap schemes.","experiments":"The main finding is that failing to account for rater behavior across items leads to substantially smaller p-value estimates. This means the statistical power of an evaluation set is often overestimated. The paper also studies the tradeoff between the number of items and the number of raters, the effect of batched rater assignment, and the impact of downsampling raters. The practical recommendation is to increase annotations per input and keep persistent rater IDs, rather than relying on anonymous 3-to-5-rater labels.","reading_guide":"A skim is sufficient, roughly 20 to 30 minutes. Read the three bootstrap algorithms in the Methods section and the plots comparing p-values under different rater assumptions. The main value for LLM researchers is the evaluation-design lesson, not the simulator details.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"读方法和结果图；若你用 3-5 个标注做 RLHF/eval 排名，这篇会校准你对噪声的容忍度。","en":"Read the method and result plots; if your RLHF or eval ranking uses 3–5 raters, this calibrates how much noise you are probably accepting."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Rochester Institute of Technology","Google Research"],"authors":["Deepak Pandita","Flip Korn","Chris Welty","Christopher M. Homan"],"notable_authors":["Chris Welty"],"tags":["LLM-evaluation","human-annotation","reproducibility","RLHF-signals"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13801","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13801","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13612","title":"Deep Learning as Neural Low-Degree Filtering: A Spectral Theory of Hierarchical Feature Learning","abstract":"Understanding how deep neural networks learn useful internal representations from data remains a central open problem in the theory of deep learning. We introduce Neural Low-Degree Filtering (Neural LoFi), a stylized limit of gradient-based training in which hierarchical feature learning becomes an explicit iterative spectral procedure. In this limit, the dynamics at each layer decouple: given the current representation, the next layer selects directions with maximal accessible low-degree correl","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T14:44:06+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13612.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cond-mat.dis-nn","stat.ML"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有深度学习理论，包括神经正切核(NTK)的懒惰训练制度、两层网络的平均场分析等，无法统一解释深度神经网络跨层选择、组织和优化特征的具体机制，也无法量化深度在提升特征学习效率中的作用。","importance":"为理解预训练中的层次化表示学习提供了可计算的理论框架，可用于解释不同复杂度特征的出现顺序、数据效率的影响因素，以及深度网络相比浅层模型的样本效率优势，为预训练数据配比、架构设计、训练动态优化提供理论指导。","technical_approach":"提出神经低通滤波(Neural LoFi)作为梯度训练的简化可计算代理：每一层的特征学习是显式的迭代谱过程——基于当前层的表示构造带标签权重的矩算子，选取其主特征方向作为新特征，再通过非线性随机特征映射将这些特征投影到下一层的表示空间。该方法通过RKHS变分形式显式刻画了每一层特征选择的相关性-复杂度权衡：相关性由特征与标签的低阶关联强度衡量，复杂度由当前核空间的RKHS范数衡量。","experiments":"首先在可解的数学玩具模型中验证了特征出现顺序与低阶组合性原则的预测，随后在真实数据上测试了全连接网络和卷积网络的训练动态，观察到符合理论预测的特征分层涌现机制；给出了特征可学习的量化判据：当特征的总体关联强度超过由当前核残差有效维度控制的经验噪声阈值时，该特征才会被模型学习到。","reading_guide":"建议总阅读时间40分钟；重点阅读第2章Neural LoFi的形式化定义与RKHS变分推导，以及第4章关于低阶组合性原则的分析；图表重点关注特征出现条件的量化关系图与真实网络的训练动态匹配结果；不需要深入附录中的梯度训练动态推导细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing deep learning theories, including the lazy training regime of Neural Tangent Kernels and mean-field analysis for two-layer networks, fail to provide a unified explanation of the exact mechanism by which deep neural networks select, organize, and refine features across layers, nor can they quantify the role of depth in improving the efficiency of feature learning.","importance":"Neural LoFi provides a tractable theoretical framework for understanding hierarchical representation learning in pretraining. It can be used to explain the emergence order of features of different complexity, factors affecting data efficiency, and the sample efficiency advantage of deep networks over shallow models, offering theoretical guidance for pretraining data mixture design, architecture selection, and training dynamics optimization.","technical_approach":"Neural LoFi is proposed as a simplified, tractable surrogate for gradient-based training: feature learning at each layer is an explicit iterative spectral procedure. A label-weighted moment operator is constructed based on the current layer's representation, its leading eigendirections are selected as new features, and these features are projected into the next layer's representation space via a nonlinear random feature map. The method explicitly characterizes the relevance-complexity tradeoff in each layer's feature selection through an RKHS variational formulation: relevance is measured by the low-degree correlation between the feature and the label, and complexity is measured by the RKHS norm of the current kernel space.","experiments":"The predictions of feature emergence order and the low-degree compositionality principle are first validated in a solvable mathematical toy model. Training dynamics of fully connected and convolutional networks are then tested on real data, observing layered feature emergence mechanisms consistent with theoretical predictions. A quantifiable criterion for feature learnability is provided: a feature is learned by the model only when its population correlation rises above the empirical noise threshold controlled by the residual effective dimension of the current kernel.","reading_guide":"Estimated total reading time: 40 minutes. Focus on Chapter 2 for the formal definition of Neural LoFi and RKHS variational derivation, and Chapter 4 for the analysis of the low-degree compositionality principle. Key figures include the quantitative relationship for feature emergence conditions and results matching training dynamics of real networks. Detailed derivations of gradient training dynamics in the appendix can be skipped.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"值得扫理论主线：它把“深度带来特征组合”写成谱过滤过程；别指望直接给 LLM recipe，看定理假设是否太强。","en":"Worth skimming for the theory: it formalizes depth as spectral feature composition, but do not expect an LLM recipe; inspect how strong the assumptions are."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Yatin Dandi","Matteo Vilucchio","Luca Arnaboldi","Hugo Tabanelli","Florent Krzakala"],"notable_authors":["Florent Krzakala"],"tags":["deep-learning-theory","feature-learning","spectral-methods","low-degree-polynomials","representation-learning"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13612","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13612","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12697","title":"A Unified Framework for Critical Scaling of Inverse Temperature in Self-Attention","abstract":"Length-dependent logit rescaling is widely used to stabilize long-context self-attention, but existing analyses and methods suggest conflicting inverse-temperature laws for the context length $n$, ranging from $(\\log n)^{1/2}$ to $\\log n$ and $(\\log n)^2$. We provide a general theory showing that the desirable scale is determined by the gap-counting function $N_n$ of each attention row. Counting how many competitors lie within each gap from the maximum, we define an upper-tail accumulation scale","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-12T19:48:36+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12697.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["stat.ML","cs.LG","math.PR"],"summary":{"core_problem":"长上下文自注意力的逆温度缩放缺乏统一理论，现有工作提出的(log n)指数从1/2到2不等，仅针对特定假设场景推导结论，缺乏从实际注意力分数本身计算临界缩放的通用方法，无法适配不同模型和场景的最优温度设置。","importance":"统一了此前分散的长上下文温度缩放理论，为长上下文Transformer训练和推理阶段的温度校准提供了可直接落地的诊断方法，对预训练长上下文模型的注意力稳定性优化有直接参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出基于间隙计数的确定性框架，定义上尾累积尺度Λn：对每个注意力行，统计距离最高分的每个分数间隔内的竞争者数量，通过该计数曲线的指数增长率得到行级临界逆温度尺度。理论证明该尺度是softmax从弥散到集中的相变临界点：低于该尺度，顶部分量无法有效区分；高于该尺度，注意力熵会发生崩溃。该框架将此前所有缩放律统一为不同计数函数对应的特例，可直接从实际注意力分数计算最优缩放指数。","experiments":"多数据集的指数扫频实验显示，最优逆温度缩放指数ξβ并不固定为1：PG-19和Proof-Pile-2数据集上推理阶段最优ξβ在2到2.5之间，SlimPajama和OpenWebText数据集上训练阶段学到的ξβ小于1，所有实验结果均与理论推导的上尾累积尺度计算结果一致。","reading_guide":"泛读Table1的现有方法总结、Figure1的指数扫频结果、第4节的核心定理与定义，预计阅读时间20分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"There is no unified theory for inverse temperature scaling in long-context self-attention. Existing works propose (log n) exponents ranging from 1/2 to 2, derived only for specific hypothetical scenarios, and lack a general method to calculate critical scaling directly from actual attention scores, making it impossible to adapt optimal temperature settings to different models and scenarios.","importance":"It unifies previously scattered long-context temperature scaling theories, provides an implementable diagnostic method for temperature calibration during training and inference of long-context Transformers, and has direct reference value for optimizing attention stability in long-context model pre-training.","technical_approach":"Proposes a deterministic gap-counting framework, and defines the upper-tail accumulation scale Λn: for each attention row, count the number of competitors within each score gap from the maximum score, and obtain the row-level critical inverse temperature scale through the exponential growth rate of this counting curve. Theoretical proof shows this scale is the phase transition point of softmax from diffuse to concentrated: below this scale, top components cannot be effectively distinguished; above this scale, attention entropy collapses. This framework unifies all prior scaling laws as special cases corresponding to different counting functions, and the optimal scaling exponent can be calculated directly from actual attention scores.","experiments":"Exponent sweep experiments on multiple datasets show the optimal inverse temperature scaling exponent ξβ is not fixed at 1: the inference optimal ξβ is between 2 and 2.5 on PG-19 and Proof-Pile-2, and the learned ξβ during training is less than 1 on SlimPajama and OpenWebText. All experimental results are consistent with values calculated from the theoretical upper-tail accumulation scale.","reading_guide":"Skim the summary of existing methods in Table 1, exponent sweep results in Figure 1, and core theorems and definitions in Section 4. Estimated reading time: 20 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看理论主定理和诊断部分；它把“该用哪个 log n 缩放”改成看 score tail，而不是背固定律。","en":"Read the main theorem and diagnostic section; it replaces fixed log-n rules with a tail-dependent criterion over attention scores."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Tomohiro Hayase","Ryo Karakida"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["self-attention","long-context","logit-scaling","softmax-temperature","theory"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12697","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12697","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12908","title":"The Mechanism of Weak-to-Strong Generalization: Feature Elicitation from Latent Knowledge","abstract":"Weak-to-strong (W2S) generalization, in which a strong model is fine-tuned on outputs of a weaker, task-specialized model, has been proposed as an approach to aligning superhuman AI systems. Existing theoretical analyses either fix the student's representations or operate in restricted settings. Whether multi-step SGD can succeed in feature learning while preserving diverse pre-trained capabilities remains open. We study W2S in the setting of reward-model learning with two-layer neural networks.","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T02:35:58+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12908.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["stat.ML","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有弱到强（W2S）泛化的理论研究要么不分析梯度优化过程，要么局限于线性/随机特征模型，且未引入预训练大模型的实际先验，无法解释多步SGD在完成目标任务特征学习的同时保留预训练通用能力的内在机制。","importance":"从理论层面解释了W2S优于标准SFT的核心原因（样本效率更高、更少发生灾难性遗忘），为超人类模型对齐的弱监督范式提供了更贴近实际的理论支撑，也为预训练后对齐阶段的特征保留问题提供了理论参考。","technical_approach":"采用两层神经网络的奖励模型学习设置，假设强模型的预训练表示对应多个任务的低维子空间，弱模型是专精于单个目标任务的小网络。给出了特征学习场景下W2S的多步SGD收敛保证，证明了预训练的非目标任务特征在满足神经元分配条件时可以被保留，同时对比分析了标准SFT会出现的相似特征方向任务的灾难性遗忘问题。","experiments":"该工作为纯理论研究，无实证实验。核心理论结果包括：W2S多步SGD的样本复杂度为Õ(s^(3/2))，仅依赖子空间维度s而非输入维度d；当非目标任务分配的神经元数量多于目标任务时，其特征方向可被保留；标准SFT会导致与目标任务特征方向相似的非目标任务发生灾难性遗忘。","reading_guide":"重点阅读引言部分的研究缺口梳理、核心理论结论（定理1、命题2、定理2），可跳过繁琐的数学证明细节。预计阅读时间15-20分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing theoretical analyses of weak-to-strong (W2S) generalization either do not model gradient-based optimization or are restricted to linear/random feature settings without realistic pre-training priors, and cannot explain how multi-step SGD achieves task-specific feature learning while preserving general pre-trained capabilities.","importance":"Provides a theoretically grounded explanation for why W2S outperforms standard supervised fine-tuning (SFT) in sample efficiency and catastrophic forgetting mitigation, offers a more realistic theoretical foundation for weak supervision paradigms for superhuman model alignment, and informs feature preservation design in post-pretraining alignment stages.","technical_approach":"Studies W2S in a two-layer neural network reward model setting, where the strong model's pre-trained representations are organized into low-dimensional task-specific subspaces, and the weak model is a small network specialized to a single target task. Derives the first multi-step SGD convergence guarantee for W2S in the feature learning regime, proves that off-target pre-trained features are preserved under a neuron allocation condition, and compares with standard SFT to demonstrate its catastrophic forgetting issue on tasks with similar feature directions.","experiments":"This is a theoretical work with no empirical experiments. Key theoretical results include: W2S multi-step SGD has a sample complexity of Õ(s^(3/2)), which only depends on subspace dimension s rather than input dimension d; off-task features are preserved if they are allocated more neurons than the target task; standard SFT causes catastrophic forgetting on off-target tasks with feature directions similar to the target task.","reading_guide":"Focus on the research gap description in Introduction, and core theoretical conclusions (Theorem 1, Proposition 2, Theorem 2) in core sections. Skip detailed mathematical derivations if not required. Estimated reading time: 15-20 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"这篇不教你怎么训模型，但会修正一个关键 prior：弱监督未必把强模型锁死在教师上限；读证明设定和子空间假设，能帮助你判断 W2S/RLAIF 何时可信。","en":"It will not give you a new recipe, but it does revise an important prior: weak supervision need not cap a stronger model at the teacher’s ceiling; read the setup and subspace assumptions to judge when W2S/RLAIF is actually credible."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Tokyo","Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN"],"authors":["Ryoya Awano","Taiji Suzuki"],"notable_authors":["Taiji Suzuki"],"tags":["weak-to-strong","alignment-theory","latent-knowledge","feature-learning","reward-modeling"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12908","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12908","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12918","title":"CommonWhy: A Dataset for Evaluating Entity-Based Causal Commonsense Reasoning in Large Language Models","abstract":"To effectively interact with the real world, Large Language Models (LLMs) require entity-based commonsense reasoning, a challenging task that necessitates integrating factual knowledge about specific entities with commonsense inference. Existing datasets for evaluating LLM entity-based commonsense reasoning have largely focused on True/False or multiple-choice questions, leaving the explicit assessment of the model's ability in abductive reasoning about causes and effects and generating explanat","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T02:47:21+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12918.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有实体常识评测多为 T/F 或选择题，难以显式测量 LLM 对具体实体的因果常识（why/因果解释、溯因）能力。","importance":"贡献一个以“实体+因果 why 问题+解释”为核心的评测数据集，并提供 Wikidata 可检索支撑，便于区分“检索事实”与“因果解释”能力；更偏评测而非预训练方法。","technical_approach":"构建 CommonWhy：15k why 问题，面向实体的因果常识推理；同时作为 KGQA 基准，声明所需支撑知识可在 Wikidata 中获得，从而可结合检索/图谱方法评估。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体模型、指标与提升幅度；预计以多种 LLM/KGQA baseline 对比为主（需看正文表格与标注协议）。","authors_note":"University of Toronto（多伦多大学）团队。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing entity commonsense benchmarks are mostly T/F or multiple-choice, under-testing causal abductive “why” reasoning and explanation generation for specific entities.","importance":"Provides an evaluation dataset centered on entity-based causal commonsense and explanations, with Wikidata-backed evidence availability to separate retrieval from reasoning; mainly an eval contribution rather than a pretraining method.","technical_approach":"CommonWhy: 15k entity-focused “why” questions targeting causal commonsense; also framed as a KGQA benchmark since required supporting knowledge is available in Wikidata.","experiments":"The abstract does not specify model sizes, baselines, or quantitative results; likely compares multiple LLM and KGQA baselines (check main tables and annotation details).","authors_note":"From the University of Toronto."},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为“因果 why + 实体”评测备查即可；除非你在做检索增强/因果解释对齐，否则不值得通读正文。","en":"Keep it as a reference benchmark for entity-centric causal “why” reasoning; not worth a full read unless you work on retrieval-augmented or explanation-aligned training."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Toronto","University of TorontoToronto, ONCanada"],"authors":["Armin Toroghi","Faeze Moradi Kalarde","Scott Sanner"],"notable_authors":["Scott Sanner"],"tags":["benchmark","causal-reasoning","commonsense","KGQA","explanations"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12918","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12918","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13695","title":"RTLC -- Research, Teach-to-Learn, Critique: A three-stage prompting paradigm inspired by the Feynman Learning Technique that lifts LLM-as-judge accuracy on JudgeBench with no fine-tuning","abstract":"LLM-as-a-judge is now the default measurement instrument for open-ended generation, but on the public JudgeBench benchmark even strong instruction-tuned judges barely scrape past random on objective-correctness pairwise items. We introduce RTLC, a three-stage prompting recipe -- Research, Teach-to-Learn, Critique -- that promotes a single black-box LLM into an ensemble-of-thought judge with no fine-tuning, retrieval, or external tools. Stage 1 wraps the input in a fixed pedagogical scaffold port","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T15:48:16+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13695.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"LLM-as-a-judge 在开放式生成评测中常被使用，但在 JudgeBench 的客观正确性成对判断上表现不稳，论文试图用纯 prompting 提升 judge 准确率。","importance":"贡献是评测流程和 prompting recipe，而不是训练方法。它对 RLHF/RLAIF 里的自动评审信号质量有间接意义，但实验范围较窄，主要应作为评测工程线索看待。","technical_approach":"RTLC 包含 Research、Teach-to-Learn、Critique 三阶段：先用固定教学式 scaffold 让模型研究问题并尝试解释，再以 temperature 0.4 采样 10 个独立 verdict，最后让模型在 temperature 0 下交叉比较候选 verdict 和原问题，输出一个经过 critique 的最终判断。无需微调、检索或外部工具。","experiments":"在 JudgeBench-GPT 的 350 个 hard pairwise items 上，Claude 3.7 Sonnet 从 vanilla single-shot prompt 的 64.6% pairwise accuracy 提升到 RTLC critique-of-10 的 78.6%，绝对提升 14.0 个百分点。摘要未说明其他模型、统计显著性、成本增长和对非 JudgeBench 数据的泛化。","authors_note":"作者来自 Cisco Systems, Inc。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses weak and unstable LLM-as-a-judge performance on objective-correctness pairwise items in JudgeBench.","importance":"The contribution is an evaluation-time prompting recipe, not a training method. It has indirect relevance to RLHF/RLAIF because judge quality affects supervision, but the evidence is narrow and should be treated as an evaluation-engineering result.","technical_approach":"RTLC has three stages: Research, Teach-to-Learn, and Critique. It first wraps the input in a pedagogical scaffold inspired by the Feynman learning technique, then samples 10 independent verdicts at temperature 0.4, and finally uses the model as a critic at temperature 0 to compare candidates against the original question and emit one verdict. No fine-tuning, retrieval, or tools are used.","experiments":"On JudgeBench-GPT with 350 hard pairwise items, Claude 3.7 Sonnet improves from 64.6% pairwise accuracy with a vanilla single-shot prompt to 78.6% with RTLC critique-of-10, a 14.0-point absolute gain. The excerpt does not report cross-model coverage, significance tests, inference cost, or out-of-benchmark generalization.","authors_note":"The author is affiliated with Cisco Systems, Inc."},"recommendation":{"zh":"可把它当 judge prompting 的弱证据；只看实验表和失败例，别把 10-sample 自评当干净监督信号。","en":"Treat it as weak evidence for judge prompting; read the result table and failures, but do not confuse 10-sample self-critique with a clean supervision signal."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Cisco Systems, Inc.","Cisco Systems, Inc","propose RTLC, a three-stage prompting recipe spelled Research","it turns out, is sizeable. Our proposal is RTLC (Research"],"authors":["Andrea Morandi"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["LLM-as-judge","prompting","evaluation","self-critique"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13695","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13695","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12968","title":"Controlling Logical Collapse in LLMs via Algebraic Ontology Projection over F2","abstract":"Do large language models internally encode ontological relations in a formally verifiable algebraic structure? We introduce Algebraic Ontology Projection (AOP), which projects LLM hidden states into the Galois Field F2 under Liskov Substitution Principle constraints, using only 42 relational pairs as algebraic keys. AOP achieves up to 93.33% zero-shot inclusion accuracy on unseen concept pairs (Gemma-2 Instruct with optimized prompt), with consistent 86.67% accuracy observed across multiple mode","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T04:01:29+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12968.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI","cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"探测 LLM hidden states 是否能被投影到 F2 上的代数结构，从而表示本体包含关系并避免逻辑一致性崩塌。","importance":"贡献声称是机制探测和形式化表征分析，但实验规模很小、设定较窄，且 42 个 relational pairs 与 prompt-only 优化不足以支撑强泛化结论；可作为异常 claim 备查。","technical_approach":"提出 Algebraic Ontology Projection，将 hidden states 在 Liskov Substitution Principle 约束下投影到 Galois Field F2，并用少量关系对作为 algebraic keys。还提出 Semantic Crystallisation 指标，用于衡量相对随机基线的 F2 约束满足程度，并声称可无 held-out data 预测 zero-shot accuracy。","experiments":"使用 42 个 relational pairs 作为代数 key，在 Gemma-2 Instruct 及多个模型族上测试未见 concept pairs 的 inclusion accuracy。摘要报告 Gemma-2 Instruct 在优化 prompt 下最高 93.33%，多个模型族可观察到 86.67% accuracy；无模型微调，依赖 prompt。还报告结构有明显层依赖，system prompt 与 instruction tuning 的组合可缓解 late-layer collapse。","authors_note":"作者来自 Mgnite Inc。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper probes whether LLM hidden states can be projected into an algebraic structure over F2 that represents ontological inclusion relations and mitigates logical collapse.","importance":"The claimed contribution is mechanistic probing and formal representation analysis. The evidence appears narrow: 42 relational pairs and prompt-only optimization are not enough to support broad claims, so it is best treated as a speculative signal.","technical_approach":"The paper introduces Algebraic Ontology Projection, which maps hidden states into the Galois Field F2 under Liskov Substitution Principle constraints using a small set of relational pairs as algebraic keys. It also defines Semantic Crystallisation, a metric for F2 constraint satisfaction relative to a random baseline, claimed to predict zero-shot accuracy without held-out data.","experiments":"The experiments use 42 relational pairs as algebraic keys and test inclusion accuracy on unseen concept pairs. The abstract reports up to 93.33% zero-shot inclusion accuracy on Gemma-2 Instruct with an optimized prompt and 86.67% accuracy across multiple model families. No model tuning is used. The paper also reports layer dependence and late-layer collapse mitigated by the combination of system prompts and instruction tuning.","authors_note":"The author is from Mgnite Inc."},"recommendation":{"zh":"结论偏大、样本太小；只把 Semantic Crystallisation 当一个 probe idea，看数字别更新太多 prior。","en":"The claims are too large for the sample size; treat Semantic Crystallisation as a probe idea and avoid updating priors from the headline numbers."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Mgnite Inc"],"authors":["Hisashi Miyashita","Mgnite Inc"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["mechanistic-probing","ontology","hidden-states","algebraic-representation","logical-consistency"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12968","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12968","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13188","title":"LLMs as Implicit Imputers: Uncertainty Should Scale with Missing Information","abstract":"Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly deployed in settings where the available context is incomplete or degraded. We argue that an LLM generating answers under incomplete context can be viewed as an implicit imputer, and evaluated against a criterion from the multiple imputation (MI) literature: uncertainty should scale with the amount of missing information. We assess this criterion on SQuAD, using a controlled framework in which context availability is varied across five levels. We eva","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T08:43:57+00:00","category_id":"mechanism","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13188.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["stat.ML","cs.CL","cs.LG","stat.ME"],"summary":{"core_problem":"研究 LLM 在上下文缺失时输出答案的 uncertainty 是否会随 missing information 增加而合理上升。","importance":"这是一个不确定性与幻觉评估分析，贡献是把 LLM under incomplete context 类比为 multiple imputation 中的隐式插补器，并用该标准检验采样式不确定性指标。","technical_approach":"论文在 SQuAD 上控制上下文可用程度，设置五个 evidence levels。它比较两类可由重复采样估计的 answer-level uncertainty：经验众数频率形式的 sampling-based confidence，以及 response entropy，并分析它们与 accuracy 的关系。","experiments":"在 SQuAD 的上下文逐步移除实验中，confidence 在 accuracy 崩塌时仍保持偏高，不能反映 missingness；entropy 会随上下文移除上升，并且对 accuracy 的解释方差更高，二次拟合 R² 差距最高 0.057。","authors_note":"作者 Stef van Buuren 来自 TNO、Leiden 和 Utrecht 相关机构；其长期工作与 multiple imputation 和统计方法有关。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether LLM uncertainty increases appropriately as more information is removed from the context.","importance":"This is an uncertainty and hallucination analysis. It imports a criterion from multiple imputation: uncertainty should scale with the amount of missing information.","technical_approach":"Using SQuAD, the author varies context availability across five evidence levels. Two answer-level uncertainty measures are estimated from repeated sampling: empirical mode-frequency confidence and response entropy.","experiments":"When context is removed, confidence stays high even as accuracy collapses. Response entropy rises with missingness and explains more variance in accuracy, with a reported quadratic R² gap up to 0.057.","authors_note":"Stef van Buuren is affiliated with TNO, Leiden, and Utrecht-related institutions and is known for work on multiple imputation and statistical methodology."},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看实验图和 uncertainty 定义即可；结论支持用 entropy 监控缺证场景，confidence 当可靠性指标偏危险。","en":"Skim the plots and uncertainty definitions; it supports entropy for missing-evidence monitoring and makes mode-frequency confidence look risky."},"metadata":{"institutions":["TNO - Netherlands Organization for Applied Scientific Research","Leiden","University of Utrecht",". TNO - Netherlands Organization for Applied Scientific Research, Leiden",". Dept. of Methodology and Statistics, University of Utrecht"],"authors":["Stef van Buuren"],"notable_authors":["Stef van Buuren"],"tags":["uncertainty","hallucination","missing-context","calibration","evaluation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13188","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13188","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}}]},{"id":"coding_agent","emoji":"💻","name":"Coding Agent","description":"SWE-bench/代码生成/代码修复/软件工程Agent/Program Synthesis/Automated Debugging","papers":[{"id":"2605.12925","title":"AgentLens: Revealing The Lucky Pass Problem in SWE-Agent Evaluation","abstract":"Evaluation of software engineering (SWE) agents is dominated by a binary signal: whether the final patch passes the tests. This outcome-only view treats a principled solution and a chaotic trial-and-error process as equivalent. We show that this equivalence is empirically false. We evaluate 2,614 OpenHands trajectories from eight model backends on 60 SWE-bench Verified tasks. Of these, 47 have enough passing trajectories to construct task-level process references, yielding a 1,815-trajectory eva","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T03:00:57+00:00","category_id":"coding_agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12925.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.SE","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有SWE-Agent评估仅以最终测试是否通过为指标，无法区分通过试错侥幸得到正确结果和通过合理推导得到正确结果的两类轨迹，导致评估结果和训练数据筛选存在偏差。","importance":"揭示了SWE-Agent评估中的侥幸通过问题，提出了过程级评估框架，为后续Agent训练的高质量轨迹筛选、更公平的模型能力评估提供了基础工具。","technical_approach":"提出AgentLens框架，包含两个核心组件：1）基于多个同任务通过轨迹构建前缀树接受器（PTA），编码已知有效策略空间，可识别冗余重试、无效探索等问题；2）上下文敏感的意图阶段标注，结合轨迹历史将每个动作归类为探索、实现、验证、编排四个认知阶段，解决工具调用的语义歧义。","experiments":"在8个模型后端的2614条OpenHands轨迹（基于SWE-bench Verified数据集）上测试，发现10.7%的通过轨迹属于侥幸通过，不同模型的侥幸通过率范围在0.5%到23.2%之间；意图标注的标注者一致性Fleiss' κ为0.933；构建了包含1815条过程标注轨迹的AgentLens-Bench数据集。","reading_guide":"重点关注侥幸通过的分类统计、AgentLens两个核心组件的设计，以及模型按通过率和过程质量排序的差异部分，预计阅读时间20分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing SWE-Agent evaluation only takes final test pass status as the metric, which cannot distinguish between trajectories that get correct results via lucky trial and error and those via reasonable reasoning, leading to biased evaluation results and training data filtering.","importance":"Reveals the Lucky Pass problem in SWE-Agent evaluation, proposes a process-level evaluation framework, and provides fundamental tools for high-quality trajectory filtering in Agent training and fairer model capability evaluation.","technical_approach":"Proposes the AgentLens framework with two core components: 1) Build Prefix Tree Acceptor (PTA) from multiple passing trajectories of the same task to encode known valid strategy space, which can identify redundant retries, invalid exploration and other problems; 2) Context-sensitive intent stage labeling, which classifies each action into four cognitive phases (Exploration, Implementation, Verification, Orchestration) combined with trajectory history, resolving semantic ambiguity of tool calls.","experiments":"Tested on 2614 OpenHands trajectories from 8 model backends based on SWE-bench Verified dataset. 10.7% of passing trajectories are classified as Lucky Pass, with Lucky Pass rate ranging from 0.5% to 23.2% across different models. The annotator agreement of intent labeling reaches Fleiss' κ=0.933. The AgentLens-Bench dataset containing 1815 process-annotated trajectories is constructed.","reading_guide":"Focus on the taxonomy and statistics of Lucky Pass, the design of two core components of AgentLens, and the difference between model rankings by pass rate and process quality. Expected reading time: 20 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"SWE-bench评测的系统性偏差揭示，做代码agent或代码能力评测必看过程信号设计，重点看§3的幸运通过统计","en":"Systematic bias revelation in SWE-bench evaluation, mandatory for code agent or code ability evaluation researchers, focus on §3 lucky pass statistics"},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign","Microsoft","University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign","Work done as a student researcher while at Microsoft"],"authors":["Priyam Sahoo","Gaurav Mittal","Xiaomin Li","Shengjie Ma","Benjamin Steenhoek","Pingping Lin","Yu Hu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["SWE_agent","agent_evaluation","SWE-bench","code_agent"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12925","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12925","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13137","title":"LeanSearch v2: Global Premise Retrieval for Lean 4 Theorem Proving","abstract":"Proving theorems in Lean 4 often requires identifying a scattered set of library lemmas whose joint use enables a concise proof -- a task we call global premise retrieval. Existing tools address adjacent problems: semantic search engines find individual declarations matching a query, while premise-selection systems predict useful lemmas one tactic step at a time. Neither recovers the full premise set an entire theorem requires. We present LeanSearch v2, a two-mode retrieval system for this task.","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T08:04:57+00:00","category_id":"coding_agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13137.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.IR","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文处理 Lean 4 自动定理证明中的“全局前提检索”问题：给定一个待证明定理，不只是为某个 proof state 找一个可用 lemma，而是找出完整证明策略依赖的一组 Mathlib 前提。难点在于这些 lemma 往往分散在库中，和目标定理没有明显词面重合，需要通过数学证明结构才能关联起来。","importance":"对 LLM 基座预训练的直接贡献有限，但对形式化数学 Agent 和检索增强证明系统有参考价值。它把检索目标从单步 premise selection 推到 proof-level premise set retrieval，这更接近强 prover 所需要的外部记忆接口。对预训练研究的启发主要在数据和评测层面：如果模型要在 Lean/Mathlib 上学习长期证明结构，训练信号不能只来自局部 tactic 状态，也需要覆盖跨库、跨主题的全局依赖关系。","technical_approach":"LeanSearch v2 有两个模式。standard mode 先构造 hierarchy-informalized Mathlib corpus，把形式化声明转换成更适合语义检索的层级化自然语言表示，再用 embedding 检索加 reranker 的两阶段流程排序候选声明，而且不依赖领域专门微调。reasoning mode 在 standard mode 之上运行：输入定理陈述后，先生成 proof sketch；然后对 sketch 中每个证明步骤调用 standard mode 检索候选 lemma；再通过过滤、判断和迭代修订，让候选集合逐步收敛为一组能支撑完整证明的前提。和传统 premise selection 的区别是，它不是围绕当前 proof state 做局部预测；和一般 reasoning retriever 的区别是，它评估的是一组前提能否共同支撑形式化证明，而不是单个文档是否相关。","experiments":"论文构造了两个评测集。MathlibQR 包含 200 个 Mathlib declaration 和 946 个 query，用于 standard-mode 检索评估；LeanSearch v2 在 nDCG@10 上达到 0.62，高于下一系统的 0.53。MathlibMPR 来自已合并的 Mathlib pull request，包含 69 个 theorem，并有人类专家标注的 premise groups，每个 theorem 需要 1 到 8 个前提组。reasoning mode 在 top-10 候选内恢复 46.1% 的标注前提组，超过 INF-X、ReasonIR、DIVER 等 reasoning retrieval 方法，也超过 ReProver、LeanStateSearch、LeanPremise 等 premise-selection baseline。论文还做了受控下游实验：固定 prover loop，只替换 retriever，检索优势能够转化为证明成功率提升。","reading_guide":"建议泛读，预计 20 到 30 分钟。重点看 Introduction 对 global premise retrieval 的定义和例子，它说明为什么词面相似度和单步 premise selection 都不够。然后看方法部分中 hierarchy-informalized corpus 的构造、embedding-reranker pipeline、reasoning mode 的 proof-sketch 循环。实验部分建议看 MathlibQR 和 MathlibMPR 的标注方式，因为这类 benchmark 比单纯检索指标更接近证明系统真实需求。若只关心 LLM 预训练，可重点关注 MathlibMPR 的数据设计，它提示了形式化数学语料中“全局依赖监督”如何构造。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets global premise retrieval for Lean 4 theorem proving. Given a theorem statement, the goal is to recover the set of Mathlib lemmas needed by the whole proof, not just a premise useful for one local proof state. The hard cases involve lemmas scattered across different parts of the library, linked by proof strategy rather than by surface vocabulary.","importance":"The work is not a core pretraining paper, but it is relevant to LLM-based formal reasoning systems. It defines a cleaner retrieval interface for theorem-proving agents: the retriever should expose the library-level dependencies of an entire proof. For pretraining and data design, the useful signal is that Lean supervision should not be limited to tactic-level next-step prediction. There is value in modeling proof-level dependency structure across Mathlib.","technical_approach":"LeanSearch v2 has two operating modes. The standard mode builds a hierarchy-informalized Mathlib corpus and applies a two-stage embedding plus reranking pipeline, without domain-specific fine-tuning. The reasoning mode uses standard mode as a substrate. It generates a proof sketch from the theorem statement, retrieves candidates for individual proof steps, filters and judges the retrieved lemmas, and iteratively revises the sketch until a coherent support set is found. This differs from premise-selection systems, which operate on local proof states, and from general reasoning retrievers, which usually score documents independently rather than requiring a jointly useful premise group.","experiments":"The paper introduces two benchmarks. MathlibQR contains 200 declarations and 946 queries for standard retrieval; LeanSearch v2 reaches nDCG@10 of 0.62, compared with 0.53 for the next strongest reported system. MathlibMPR contains 69 theorems from merged Mathlib pull requests with expert-annotated premise groups, ranging from one to eight premises per theorem. In this setting, the reasoning mode recovers 46.1% of ground-truth premise groups within the top 10 candidates, outperforming reasoning retrieval baselines such as INF-X, ReasonIR, and DIVER, as well as premise-selection baselines such as ReProver, LeanStateSearch, and LeanPremise. A controlled downstream experiment keeps the prover loop fixed and shows that better retrieval improves proof success.","reading_guide":"Skim in about 20 to 30 minutes. The most useful part is the task formulation in the introduction, especially the distinction between global premise retrieval and local premise selection. Then read the sections on corpus construction, the embedding-reranker pipeline, and the iterative proof-sketch retrieval loop. The benchmark construction for MathlibMPR is worth checking because it gives a concrete way to evaluate library-level proof dependencies. For readers focused on pretraining, the main takeaway is the form of supervision: proof-level dependency groups can be a stronger training target than isolated tactic transitions.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"读 retrieval 任务定义和 69-query benchmark；它提醒数学 Agent 的瓶颈常在 premise set，而不在单步 tactic。","en":"Read the task definition and the 69-query benchmark; it usefully shifts attention from one-step tactics to premise-set recovery."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Peking University","IQuest Research","Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences, Kyoto University","Westlake Institute for Advanced Study","Westlake University","Center for Machine Learning Research, Peking University","Westlake Institute for Advanced Study, Westlake University"],"authors":["Guoxiong Gao","Zeming Sun","Jiedong Jiang","Yutong Wang","Jingda Xu","Peihao Wu","Bryan Dai","Bin Dong"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["Lean","theorem-proving","premise-retrieval","math-agent","retrieval-augmented-reasoning"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13137","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13137","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2602.05242","title":"EGSS: Entropy-guided Stepwise Scaling for Reliable Software Engineering","abstract":"Agentic Test-Time Scaling (TTS) has delivered state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance on complex software engineering tasks such as code generation and bug fixing. However, its practical adoption remains limited due to significant computational overhead, primarily driven by two key challenges: (1) the high cost associated with deploying excessively large ensembles, and (2) the lack of a reliable mechanism for selecting the optimal candidate solution, ultimately constraining the performance gains tha","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-02-05T03:02:54+00:00","category_id":"coding_agent","cover_url":"/covers/2602_05242.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.SE","cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有测试时缩放（TTS）方法在软件工程Agent任务中存在计算冗余高、探索效率低、候选补丁筛选不可靠的问题：均匀采样和静态引导导致算力分配不合理，低熵常规步骤占用过多资源，高熵决策点探索不足；仅靠最终测试结果排序的筛选机制容易忽略中间调试信号，选出仅通过局部检查、未解决根本问题的脆弱补丁。","importance":"为代码领域LLM的推理时算力优化提供了可落地的思路，熵引导的动态资源分配逻辑可以迁移到其他长程推理Agent的测试时缩放框架设计。","technical_approach":"提出熵引导分步缩放（EGSS）框架，包含两个核心设计：1）用工具熵量化每一步的决策不确定性，仅在高熵决策点调用辅助判别器实时评估、剪枝分支轨迹，动态将推理预算分配给探索价值最高的步骤；2）融合多Agent轨迹的调试信号、仓库原有回归测试、新增边缘用例构造多维测试集，结合多模型集成投票筛选可靠候选补丁。","experiments":"在SWE-Bench-Verified基准上，EGSS将所有测试模型的性能提升5-10%，在开源方法中达到最优表现，同时推理时token消耗比此前的TTS方法降低28%；实证分析显示88%的任务轨迹包含自验证步骤，但其中35.7%的自验证轨迹仍然失败，工具熵呈右偏分布，绝大多数步骤为低熵常规操作，验证了自适应算力分配的合理性。","reading_guide":"泛读Introduction部分的问题分析、Figure1的算力-性能 trade-off 图、Preliminary章节的工具熵分布实证分析，预计阅读时间15分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing Test-Time Scaling (TTS) methods for software engineering agent tasks suffer from high computational redundancy, low exploration efficiency, and unreliable candidate patch selection. Uniform sampling and static guidance lead to suboptimal compute allocation: low-entropy routine steps consume excessive resources while high-entropy decision points get insufficient exploration. Ranking mechanisms based only on final test results tend to ignore intermediate debugging signals, and select brittle patches that pass local checks without addressing root causes.","importance":"It provides an implementable approach for inference-time compute optimization of code-domain LLMs, and the entropy-guided dynamic resource allocation logic can be migrated to TTS framework design for other long-horizon reasoning agents.","technical_approach":"Proposes the Entropy-Guided Stepwise Scaling (EGSS) framework with two core designs: 1) Quantify step-level decision uncertainty with tool entropy, only invoke auxiliary judges at high-entropy decision points for real-time evaluation and trajectory pruning, dynamically allocating inference budget to steps with highest exploration value; 2) Construct a multi-dimensional test suite by integrating debugging signals from multiple agent trajectories, existing repository regression tests, and newly identified edge cases, combined with multi-model ensemble voting to select reliable candidate patches.","experiments":"On the SWE-Bench-Verified benchmark, EGSS improves performance of all evaluated models by 5-10%, achieves the best performance among open-source methods, and reduces inference token consumption by 28% compared to prior TTS approaches. Empirical analysis shows 88% of task trajectories include self-verification steps, but 35.7% of these still fail. Tool entropy follows a right-skewed distribution, with most steps being low-entropy routine operations, validating the rationality of adaptive compute allocation.","reading_guide":"Skim the problem analysis in Introduction, Figure 1 for compute-performance trade-off, and empirical analysis of tool entropy distribution in Preliminary. Estimated reading time: 15 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看熵控扩展和测试增强两节；这是干净的 inference-time compute 分配问题，可作为 RLVR 数据筛选的旁证。","en":"Read only the entropy-controlled scaling and test-augmentation sections; it is a clean inference-time compute allocation signal, useful as weak evidence for RLVR-style data selection."},"metadata":{"institutions":[],"authors":["Chenhui Mao","Yuanting Lei","Zhixiang Wei","Ming Liang","Zhixiang Wang","Jingxuan Xu","Dajun Chen","Wei Jiang","Yong Li"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["SWE-Bench","test-time-scaling","coding-agent","entropy-search","software-engineering"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.05242","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.05242","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13229","title":"Improving Code Translation with Syntax-Guided and Semantic-aware Preference Optimization","abstract":"LLMs have shown immense potential for code translation, yet they often struggle to ensure both syntactic correctness and semantic consistency. While preference-based learning offers a promising alignment strategy, it is hindered by unreliable semantic rewards derived from sparse test cases or restrictive reference translations. We argue that a robust semantic reward for code translation must be derived directly from the source code. In this paper, we propose CTO to improve code translation with ","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T09:19:39+00:00","category_id":"coding_agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13229.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.SE"],"summary":{"core_problem":"提升 LLM 代码翻译中的语法正确性和跨语言语义一致性。","importance":"贡献类型是代码模型后训练方法改进：把编译器语法反馈和源代码驱动的语义奖励纳入偏好优化，试图减少依赖稀疏测试用例或单一参考翻译带来的奖励噪声。","technical_approach":"提出 CTO。方法先用对比学习训练跨语言语义模型，直接判断源代码与翻译代码的功能等价性；再把该语义信号与编译器给出的语法反馈统一到 Direct Preference Optimization 的多目标偏好学习框架中。","experiments":"实验覆盖 C++、Java、Python 之间的代码翻译；摘要称在多组翻译任务上验证有效，但未提供模型参数量、训练数据规模、baseline 名称或具体提升幅度。","authors_note":"作者来自南京大学软件新技术全国重点实验室和南京大学 National Institute of Healthcare Data Science。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets syntactic correctness and semantic preservation in LLM-based code translation.","importance":"It is a post-training contribution for code models: compiler-based syntax feedback is combined with a source-code-derived semantic reward to avoid noisy rewards from sparse tests or narrow reference translations.","technical_approach":"CTO trains a cross-lingual semantic model with contrastive learning to estimate functional equivalence between the source and translated programs, then integrates that signal with compiler feedback in a multi-objective DPO formulation.","experiments":"The experiments cover translation among C++, Java, and Python. The abstract reports consistent gains but does not provide model sizes, training-data scale, baseline names, or exact margins.","authors_note":"The authors are from the State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology at Nanjing University and the National Institute of Healthcare Data Science, Nanjing University."},"recommendation":{"zh":"偏好信号设计比代码翻译本身更值得看；只读语义 reward 构造，别把结论外推到通用推理。","en":"The reward design is more useful than the code-translation setting; read the semantic reward construction, not the headline task."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Nanjing University","State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology","National Institute of Healthcare Data Science, Nanjing University","State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University"],"authors":["Yuhan Wu","Huan Zhang","Wei Cheng","Chen Shen","Jingyue Yang","Wei Hu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["code-translation","preference-optimization","semantic-reward","DPO","code-models"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13229","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13229","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12694","title":"Agentic Interpretation: Lattice-Structured Evidence for LLM-Based Program Analysis","abstract":"Large language models can consult information that fixed static analyzers cannot, such as documentation, current security advisories, version-specific metadata, and informal API contracts. This makes LLMs a compelling option for program analyses that depend on information beyond the source program, or that are otherwise not amenable to conventional static analyzers. However, directly asking an LLM for a one-shot whole-program analysis is brittle because it compresses many evidence-dependent judg","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-12T19:46:24+00:00","category_id":"coding_agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12694.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.SE","cs.AI","cs.PL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"如何利用 LLM 进行需要结合外部信息（如文档、安全建议）的复杂程序分析，同时避免单次查询带来的脆弱性和不透明性？","importance":"将传统基于格（lattice-based）的静态分析方法引入 LLM 驱动的程序推理中，提供了一种结构化、可解释的 Agentic 分析框架，有助于提升 LLM 在复杂软件工程任务中的可靠性。","technical_approach":"提出 Agentic Interpretation 框架。将高层次的分析目标分解为局部的声明（claims），并在有限高度的格（lattice）中跟踪 LLM 对每个声明的判断。这种结构化的证据收集过程避免了将所有判断压缩成单一答案，允许使用中间发现来指导后续搜索。","experiments":"（摘要未详细说明实验结果，主要强调框架设计）","authors_note":"来自南加州大学（USC）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to leverage LLMs for complex program analysis that requires external information (e.g., documentation, security advisories) while avoiding the brittleness and opacity of one-shot queries?","importance":"Introduces traditional lattice-based static analysis principles into LLM-driven program reasoning, providing a structured and interpretable Agentic analysis framework that helps improve LLM reliability in complex software engineering tasks.","technical_approach":"Proposes the Agentic Interpretation framework. It decomposes high-level analysis goals into localized claims and tracks the LLM's judgment about each claim in a finite-height lattice. This structured evidence collection avoids compressing all judgments into a single answer and allows intermediate findings to guide subsequent searches.","experiments":"(Abstract does not detail experimental results, focusing on framework design)","authors_note":"From University of Southern California (USC)."},"recommendation":{"zh":"将传统静态分析的格理论（lattice）引入 LLM 代码分析 Agent，属于特定领域的 Agent 架构设计，对通用预训练启发有限，作为 coding agent 的 literature 备查即可。","en":"Introduces lattice theory from traditional static analysis into LLM code analysis agents. It's a domain-specific agent architecture design with limited inspiration for general pretraining. Keep as literature reference for coding agents."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Southern California"],"authors":["Jacqueline L. Mitchell","Chao Wang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["Program Analysis","LLM Agents","Static Analysis","Software Engineering"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12694","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12694","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12857","title":"ChipMATE: Multi-Agent Training via Reinforcement Learning for Enhanced RTL Generation","abstract":"Existing API-based agentic systems for RTL code generation are fundamentally misaligned with industrial practice: they assume a golden testbench is available at generation time, rely on closed-source APIs incompatible with chip vendors' air-gapped security requirements, and cannot be trained on vendors' proprietary RTL codebases, leaving valuable internal data unused. Recent self-trained models address the deployment constraint but remain single-turn generators that overlook the critical role of","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T01:04:21+00:00","category_id":"coding_agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12857.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.MA","cs.AI","cs.AR","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有RTL生成Agent依赖生成时可用的黄金测试集、闭源API不符合芯片厂商断网安全要求、无法利用厂商私有RTL代码库，且单轮生成忽略工业芯片设计流程中验证的核心作用","importance":"首次提出自训练多Agent RTL生成框架，提出无黄金oracle的互验机制，对齐工业芯片设计实际流程，属于方法创新","technical_approach":"提出ChipMATE框架，配对Verilog生成Agent与Python参考模型Agent，二者相互验证输出无需外部标注，设计基于回溯的推理工作流避免错误传播，通过RL端到端训练多Agent系统","experiments":"论文为初步工作，摘要未披露具体模型参数量、训练数据集规模与完整baseline对比结果，仅验证了框架可适配断网部署、私有数据训练的工业需求","authors_note":"哥伦比亚大学团队，无公开知名大模型领域作者信息"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing RTL generation agents rely on golden testbenches available at generation time, use closed-source APIs incompatible with chip vendors' air-gapped security requirements, cannot leverage proprietary RTL codebases, and ignore the critical role of verification in industrial flows","importance":"First self-trained multi-agent framework for RTL generation, proposes golden-oracle-free mutual verification mechanism aligned with industrial chip design practices, falls into method innovation category","technical_approach":"Proposes ChipMATE framework that pairs a Verilog generation agent with a Python reference model agent to mutually verify outputs without external labels, designs backtrack-based inference workflow to prevent error propagation, and trains the multi-agent system end-to-end via RL","experiments":"This is preliminary work, the abstract does not disclose specific model parameter size, training dataset scale, or complete baseline comparison results, only verifies the framework meets industrial requirements of air-gapped deployment and private data training","authors_note":"Columbia University team, no publicly known well-known authors in the large model field"},"recommendation":{"zh":"多Agent互验做自训练RL的设计可参考，领域针对性极强，无预训练相关的通用insight，仅扫方法部分即可","en":"Mutual verification for self-trained RL agent design is referenceable, highly domain-specific, no general pretrain insight, only skim the method section"},"metadata":{"institutions":["Columbia University"],"authors":["Zhongkai Yu","Yichen Lin","Chenyang Zhou","Yuwei Zhang","Kun Zhou","Junxia Cui","Haotian Ye","Zhengding Hu","Zaifeng Pan","Ruiyi Wang","Yujie Zhao","Hejia Zhang","Jingbo Shang","Jishen Zhao","Yufei Ding"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["multi-agent","rl-training","rtl-generation","code-agent"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12857","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12857","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13280","title":"The Readability Spectrum: Patterns, Issues, and Prompt Effects in LLM-Generated Code","abstract":"As Large Language Models (LLMs) are transforming software development, the functional quality of generated code has become a central focus, leaving readability, one of critical non-functional attributes, understudied. Given that LLM-generated code still needs human review before adoption, it is important to understand its readability especially compared with human-written code and the role of prompt design in shaping it. We therefore set out to conduct a systematic investigation into the code re","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T09:58:21+00:00","category_id":"coding_agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13280.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.SE","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"系统评估 LLM 生成代码的可读性，以及不同 prompt 设计如何影响可读性这一非功能质量指标。","importance":"贡献主要是代码生成评测维度的补充。它把关注点从功能正确性转向人类审查成本，对 coding agent 的验收标准有一定参考，但不直接推进预训练或代码模型训练方法。","technical_approach":"论文构建一个综合代码可读性模型，合并文本特征、结构特征、程序特征和视觉特征，用于量化 LLM 生成代码与人类代码的可读性差异，并分析 prompt 对结果的影响。","experiments":"实验覆盖从 World of Code 和 LeetCode 抽取的 5,869 个场景，比较主流 LLM 生成代码和人类编写代码。摘要给出的主要结论是：当前 LLM 生成代码整体可读性接近人类代码，但存在可读性谱系上的模式差异；具体模型列表、提升幅度和统计显著性需看正文。","authors_note":"作者来自北京大学和武汉大学。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper measures the readability of LLM-generated code and studies how prompt design changes this non-functional quality attribute.","importance":"Its main value is an evaluation contribution for code generation. It moves beyond functional correctness toward human review cost, which is relevant to coding-agent acceptance criteria but not to foundation-model pretraining itself.","technical_approach":"The authors build a code readability model combining textual, structural, program-level, and visual features, then use it to compare LLM-generated code with human-written code and to analyze prompt effects.","experiments":"The study evaluates mainstream LLMs across 5,869 scenarios extracted from World of Code and LeetCode. The abstract reports that LLM-generated code has overall readability comparable to human-written code, while showing distinct readability patterns; model-level details and effect sizes are not available from the abstract.","authors_note":"The authors are from Peking University and Wuhan University."},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为代码评测特征库备查即可；若做代码模型训练，读可读性特征定义比读结论更有用。","en":"Useful as a feature catalog for code evaluation; for code-model training, the readability taxonomy matters more than the headline result."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Peking University","Wuhan University"],"authors":["Hengzhi Ye","Fengyuan Ran","Weiwei Xu","Minghui Zhou"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["code-generation","readability","prompting","software-engineering"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13280","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13280","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13357","title":"AI Harness Engineering: A Runtime Substrate for Foundation-Model Software Agents","abstract":"Foundation models have transformed automated code generation, yet autonomous software-engineering agents remain unreliable in realistic development settings. The dominant explanation locates this gap in model capability. We propose a different locus: software-engineering capability emerges from a model-harness-environment system, in which a runtime substrate -- the harness -- mediates how a foundation-model agent observes a project, acts on it, receives feedback, and establishes that a change is","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T11:14:59+00:00","category_id":"coding_agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13357.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.SE","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解释为什么基础模型在自动代码生成上有进展，但软件工程 agent 在真实项目中仍不稳定，并将问题定位到 model-harness-environment 的运行时系统。","importance":"贡献是 coding agent 系统抽象和评测协议，而不是模型训练方法。它把软件工程能力拆成模型能力与 harness 能力的组合，对设计仓库级 agent 评测和诊断有参考。","technical_approach":"论文提出 AI Harness Engineering 概念，定义 harness 作为模型观察项目、调用工具、接收反馈、确认任务完成的运行时基座。它列出 11 类组件职责，包括任务规格、上下文选择、工具访问、项目记忆、任务状态、可观测性、失败归因、验证、权限、熵审计和干预记录，并提出 H0-H3 四级 runtime 支持阶梯和 trace-based evaluation protocol。","experiments":"摘要主要描述框架和评测协议，未给出具体模型规模、训练数据、基线系统或定量提升结果。更像是概念框架/系统设计论文，而非大规模实证论文。","authors_note":"作者来自 Hong Kong Baptist University 和 Beijing Normal University, Zhuhai。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks why foundation models can generate code yet remain unreliable as autonomous software-engineering agents in realistic projects, and locates the gap in the model-harness-environment system.","importance":"The contribution is a system abstraction and evaluation protocol for coding agents, not a model-training method. It decomposes software-engineering capability into model capability plus harness capability, which is useful for repository-level agent diagnosis.","technical_approach":"The authors introduce AI Harness Engineering, where the harness is the runtime substrate through which the model observes a project, acts, receives feedback, and establishes completion. They define eleven responsibilities—task specification, context selection, tool access, project memory, task state, observability, failure attribution, verification, permissions, entropy auditing, and intervention recording—and propose an H0-H3 ladder of runtime support plus a trace-based evaluation protocol.","experiments":"The abstract mainly presents a framework and protocol. It does not report model sizes, training data, baseline systems, or quantitative improvements, so the work appears closer to a conceptual systems paper than a large empirical study.","authors_note":"The authors are from Hong Kong Baptist University and Beijing Normal University, Zhuhai."},"recommendation":{"zh":"适合扫框架图和 11 个 harness 职责；它不是训练论文，但能帮你避免把 agent 失败全甩给模型。","en":"Skim the framework and the eleven harness responsibilities; it is not a training paper, but it helps avoid blaming every agent failure on the model."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Hong Kong Baptist University","Beijing Normal University, Zhuhai","Beijin Normal University, Zhuhai"],"authors":["Hailin Zhong","Shengxin Zhu"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["coding-agent","software-engineering","agent-harness","runtime-system","evaluation"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13357","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13357","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13536","title":"HLS-Seek: QoR-Aware Code Generation for High-Level Synthesis via Proxy Comparative Reward Reinforcement Learning","abstract":"High-Level Synthesis (HLS) compiles algorithmic C/C++ descriptions into hardware, with Quality of Results (QoR) -- latency and resource utilization -- critically governed by pragma configurations and code structure. Existing LLM-based HLS approaches train for functional correctness but ignore QoR entirely. We observe that reinforcement learning (RL) for HLS does not require absolute synthesis results -- only relative comparisons between candidates. Based on this insight, we propose \\textbf{HLS-S","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T13:47:03+00:00","category_id":"coding_agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13536.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决 LLM 生成高层次综合 HLS 代码时只优化功能正确性、忽略延迟和资源利用等 QoR 指标的问题。","importance":"贡献是面向硬件代码生成的 RL 训练与 reward 设计；对 LLM 基座预训练较远，但对代码模型后训练中的昂贵外部评测、proxy reward 和 reward hacking 控制有参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出 HLS-Seek，一个 QoR-aware 的自然语言到 HLS 代码生成框架。核心是用比较式 proxy reward model 替代昂贵的 synthesis-in-the-loop RL；reward 不预测绝对综合结果，而判断候选间 Pareto dominance。为降低 reward hacking，引入 uncertainty-aware MC dropout switching，在低置信样本上调用真实 Vitis HLS 综合，并在线更新 proxy reward。","experiments":"摘要报告 proxy reward model 达到 99.53% Pareto-dominance accuracy；HLS-Seek 在 HLS-e 基准上取得 81.5% syntax correctness pass@1 和 81.4% Func@5。未给出底座模型规模、训练数据规模和完整 baseline 列表。","authors_note":"作者来自 National University of Singapore；Bingsheng He 和 Weng-Fai Wong 在高性能计算、数据库系统和硬件相关方向有长期工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses LLM-based HLS code generation that optimizes functional correctness while ignoring quality-of-result metrics such as latency and resource utilization.","importance":"The contribution is an RL and reward-design method for hardware code generation. It is distant from LLM pretraining, but it is useful as a case study for expensive external evaluators, proxy rewards, and reward-hacking control in code-model post-training.","technical_approach":"HLS-Seek is a QoR-aware NL-to-HLS framework. It replaces expensive synthesis-in-the-loop RL with a comparative proxy reward model that predicts Pareto dominance between candidates rather than absolute synthesis outcomes. To reduce reward hacking, it uses uncertainty-aware MC dropout switching: low-confidence candidates are sent to real Vitis HLS synthesis, and the proxy is updated online.","experiments":"The abstract reports 99.53% Pareto-dominance accuracy for the proxy reward model. HLS-Seek achieves 81.5% syntax correctness pass@1 and 81.4% Func@5 on HLS-e. The provided abstract does not specify base model size, training data scale, or full baseline details.","authors_note":"The authors are from the National University of Singapore. Bingsheng He and Weng-Fai Wong have long-standing work in high-performance computing, database systems, and hardware-related systems."},"recommendation":{"zh":"领域很窄；可借鉴的是“比较式 proxy reward + 低置信真实评测”这套省预算 RL 设计。","en":"The domain is narrow; the reusable piece is the budget-aware RL design: comparative proxy reward plus real evaluation on low-confidence cases."},"metadata":{"institutions":["National University of Singapore"],"authors":["Qingyun Zou","Feng Yu","Hongshi Tan","Yao Chen","Bingsheng He","WengFai Wong"],"notable_authors":["Bingsheng He","Weng-Fai Wong"],"tags":["code-generation","reinforcement-learning","reward-model","HLS"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13536","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13536","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"blog-openai-research-fd797e93","title":"What Parameter Golf taught us about AI-assisted research","abstract":"Parameter Golf brought together 1,000+ participants and 2,000+ submissions to explore AI-assisted machine learning research, coding agents, quantization, and novel model design under strict constraints.","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"blog","sources":["blog"],"published_at":"2026-05-12T00:00:00+00:00","category_id":"coding_agent","cover_url":"/covers/blog-openai-research-fd797e93.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":[],"summary":{"core_problem":"总结Parameter Golf竞赛的实践经验，探索严格约束下AI辅助机器学习研究、代码Agent、量化、新型模型设计的可行路径","importance":"属于大规模公开竞赛的经验总结，覆盖AI辅助研究工具、低资源约束模型设计等方向，为后续工具研发提供实践参考","technical_approach":"组织全球范围公开竞赛，吸引1000+参与者、收集2000+提交方案，对不同技术路线的表现与适用性进行归纳分析","experiments":"无传统学术定量评测设置，仅统计参赛规模、技术方向分布与典型方案特征","authors_note":"OpenAI Research官方博客发布，无具体知名作者披露"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Summarizes practical experience from the Parameter Golf competition, exploring feasible paths for AI-assisted ML research, coding agents, quantization, and novel model design under strict constraints","importance":"Experience summary of a large-scale public competition, covering AI-assisted research tools, low-resource constrained model design, providing practical reference for subsequent tool development","technical_approach":"Organized a global public competition with over 1,000 participants and 2,000 submissions, conducted inductive analysis on performance and applicability of different technical routes","experiments":"No traditional academic quantitative evaluation setup, only statistics of competition scale, technical direction distribution and typical solution features","authors_note":"Published on OpenAI Research official blog, no specific well-known authors disclosed"},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅适合了解AI辅助ML研究的当前实践边界，无预训练方法论贡献，扫一眼核心结论即可","en":"Only suitable for understanding current practice boundaries of AI-assisted ML research, no pretraining methodological contributions, just skim core conclusions"},"metadata":{"institutions":["OpenAI Research"],"authors":["OpenAI Research"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["ai-assisted-research","coding-agent","quantization","model-design","competition-summary"],"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":null,"github":null,"project":null,"source_url":"https://openai.com/index/what-parameter-golf-taught-us","article":null}}}]},{"id":"agent","emoji":"🤖","name":"Agent 与系统","description":"通用AI Agent/Tool Use/Function Calling/Planning/RAG/多Agent系统","papers":[{"id":"2605.13295","title":"CANTANTE: Optimizing Agentic Systems via Contrastive Credit Attribution","abstract":"LLM-based multi-agent systems have demonstrated strong performance across complex real-world tasks, such as software engineering, predictive modeling, and retrieval-augmented generation. Yet automating their configuration remains a structural challenge, as scores are available only at the system level, whereas the parameters governing agent behavior are local. We argue that optimizing these systems is fundamentally a credit-assignment problem. We therefore introduce CANTANTE, a framework that de","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T10:09:10+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13295.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI","cs.MA"],"summary":{"core_problem":"多智能体 LLM 工作流的可调参数（每个 agent 的 prompt/角色/节点配置）是局部的，但监督信号只有系统级标量分数；如何把系统级 reward 变成“可用于更新每个节点”的信用分配信号，从而自动优化整套 agentic system。","importance":"对“agent 系统如何训练/优化”给出一个更像 ML 的答案：把 MAS prompt tuning 明确成 credit assignment 问题，并用对比式归因把全局分数拆成节点级更新信号。它不直接改变基座预训练，但对 post-train 侧的系统化优化（prompt 作为可学习参数、workflow 结构可诊断）有启发：1) 说明仅用全局分数做节点更新会引入强噪声；2) 给出一种与具体局部优化器解耦的归因层，可作为“训练信号整形”的通用模块；3) 归因相关性分析把优化过程变成可观测对象，能反哺 workflow 设计。","technical_approach":"核心是 contrastive in-group attribution：对同一个 query，采样/构造多组“联合配置”(joint configuration) 的 rollouts（即整张 workflow 图上各节点 prompt/参数的组合），得到多个系统输出及其系统级评分。然后用一个“归因器”(attribution model，通常是被提示的 LLM)在这些对比样本之间做解释：哪些节点的参数差异导致了分数差异，从而为每个节点产生一个局部 credit 信号。\n\n关键点在于：\n- 对比对象不是单步 action，而是同一 query 下不同 joint configs 的完整轨迹与结果，借鉴 MARL 的 counterfactual/contrastive credit assignment 直觉，但不要求像 QMIX 那样可加性重构全局 reward。\n- 归因层与局部优化器解耦：拿到每个节点的 credit 后，可以用任意 prompt optimizer 更新该节点（论文中将 prompts 视为“可学习系统参数”）。\n- 论文强调“归因本身”是增益来源：通过 identity-attribution（用全局分数直接当每个节点信号）等消融，区分是优化器强还是 credit assignment 强。\n- 适配复杂 workflow：包含条件分支、ensemble 节点、tool-using agent 等非线性拓扑，目标是证明方法不依赖简单链式结构。","experiments":"任务覆盖编程（MBPP）、数学推理（GSM8K）、多跳 QA（HotpotQA），并与 GEPA、MIPROv2 等 MAS prompt 优化基线比较。文中给出的关键数字：在 MBPP 与 GSM8K 上，相比最强基线分别提升 18.9 个百分点与 12.5 个百分点；MBPP 的优化轨迹显示 CANTANTE 随 token/迭代稳步上升而非末期跳变。HotpotQA 上与最优基线在 1 个标准差内，同时优于未优化初始配置。另有成本侧结果：在不显著增加推理 token 成本的情况下获得提升。分析侧包括 credit correlation：归因信号与全局分数并非简单同构，且可用于诊断哪些节点在拖累系统表现。论文还报告对 attributer prompt、attributer 模型、局部优化器选择、数据量的鲁棒性实验，以及“归因替换/恒等归因”消融来定位增益来源。","reading_guide":"泛读建议（约 25-35 分钟）：\n- 先看 Introduction 里对“结构性 mismatch：局部参数 vs 全局反馈”的问题定义，以及 Figure 1 的 MBPP 轨迹，理解它想解决的不是“更强 prompt 搜索”，而是“更干净的节点级学习信号”。\n- 重点看方法部分对 contrastive attribution 的输入/输出形式：同一 query 的多 joint rollouts 如何组织成归因上下文、归因器如何产出每节点 credit、credit 如何喂给局部优化器。\n- 看 identity-attribution 等消融：这是判断论文贡献是否成立的关键。\n- 看 credit correlation/诊断分析：它决定该方法是否只是“更会调参”，还是能提供可解释的系统工程信号。\n- 最后扫一遍成本与鲁棒性实验，确认它不是靠更高推理预算换分数。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In LLM-based multi-agent workflows, tunable parameters are local (per-agent prompts/roles/node configs) while supervision is global (a single system-level score). The paper asks how to turn global rewards into actionable per-node learning signals so the whole agentic system can be optimized automatically rather than by manual prompt iteration.","importance":"This is not a base-pretraining paper, but it matters for the pretrain↔post-train loop in practice: it treats prompt-configured agent systems as trainable objects and frames their optimization as a credit-assignment problem. The main value is a reusable “signal shaping” layer: contrastive attribution produces less noisy node-level updates than naively broadcasting the global score to every agent. The attribution diagnostics (credit correlation) also provide a concrete handle to debug workflow topology, which is often the hidden bottleneck in agentic deployments.","technical_approach":"$3d","experiments":"Benchmarks: MBPP (programming), GSM8K (math reasoning), HotpotQA (multi-hop QA). Baselines include GEPA and MIPROv2. Reported headline gains: +18.9 pp on MBPP and +12.5 pp on GSM8K over the strongest baseline; MBPP learning curves show steady improvement rather than a late jump. On HotpotQA, performance is within one standard deviation of the best baseline while improving over the unoptimized initial configuration. The paper also claims improvements without materially increasing inference-time token cost. Analyses include credit-correlation showing node-level signals are not a trivial echo of the global score, and robustness/ablation studies (attribution identity replacement, attributer prompt/model choice, local optimizer choice, dataset size).","reading_guide":"Skim plan (25–35 minutes):\n- Read the problem framing in the Introduction: the “local parameters vs global feedback” mismatch is the real contribution.\n- Focus on the method section describing how same-query multi-rollout batches are constructed and how the attributer outputs per-node credits.\n- Do not skip the identity-attribution ablation; it is the cleanest evidence that credit assignment (not just a better search heuristic) drives gains.\n- Check the credit-correlation/diagnostic analysis to judge whether the credits are meaningful for workflow debugging.\n- Finally, scan the token-cost and robustness experiments to ensure gains are not primarily budget-driven.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"看 credit 分解公式和调用预算；若预算公平，它是 agent prompt 优化里比黑盒搜索更干净的信号。","en":"Check the credit decomposition and call budget; if the budget is fair, it gives cleaner signal than black-box agent prompt search."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Freiburg","ELLIS Institute Tübingen"],"authors":["Tom Zehle"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["multi-agent","credit-assignment","prompt-optimization","agent-systems","contrastive-rollouts"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13295","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13295","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13839","title":"Good Agentic Friends Do Not Just Give Verbal Advice: They Can Update Your Weights","abstract":"Multi-agent LLM systems usually collaborate by exchanging natural-language messages. This interface is simple and interpretable, but it forces each sender's intermediate computation to be serialized into tokens and then reprocessed by the receiver, thereby increasing the generated-token cost, prefill overhead, and KV-cache memory. We study an alternative communication interface: instead of appending a sender's message to the receiver's context, compile the sender's hidden states into a transient","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T17:58:32+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13839.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作处理的是多智能体 LLM 协作里的一个很具体但常被忽略的问题：agent 之间如果只靠自然语言传递中间结果，发送方已经算出来的内部表征必须先被“翻译”成 token，再由接收方重新编码一遍，导致额外生成开销、prefill 开销和 KV-cache 膨胀。已有 latent communication 虽然绕开了文本，但通常要求发送方和接收方在表示空间上兼容，或者至少要有较强的对齐假设。TFlow 想解决的是：在接收方架构已知且固定的前提下，能不能把发送方的隐藏状态直接编译成接收方的一次性权重扰动，让信息通过“改写本次前向计算”而不是“追加上下文”来传递。","importance":"对基座研究的直接意义不在于它提升了某个 benchmark 分数，而在于它提出了一种不同于 text channel 和 latent-state injection 的 agent 通信接口：weight-space communication。这个接口把通信对象从 token/activation 变成 query-specific parameter update，形式上更接近条件化适配器或动态 LoRA。它对预训练研究的启发主要有三点。第一，它提醒人们：模型间协作未必一定要走语言通道，参数空间也可以成为可执行的通信介质。第二，它把“推理时动态参数化”与“多 agent 协作”连在了一起，这对后续研究 inference-time adaptation、test-time routing、甚至 pretrain 阶段的条件化模块设计都有参考价值。第三，它展示了在冻结 backbone 的条件下，仅训练一个 receiver-specific generator 就能获得较明显的效率收益，这对研究低成本协作式系统有现实意义。不过它仍更偏 inference/interface 设计，而不是预训练范式本身，因此放在 skim 是合适的。","technical_approach":"方法核心很清楚：多个 sender 和一个 receiver 共享同一个冻结 backbone，但通过不同 role prompt 扮演不同角色。给定 query 后，每个 sender 先独立处理输入，作者从 sender 的隐藏状态中提取条件信号，再交给一个可训练的参数生成器。这个生成器不是输出完整权重，而是为 receiver 的目标线性层生成低秩 LoRA 因子，因此通信对象是按层、按模块组织的 transient low-rank perturbation。多个 sender 的贡献会先做融合，再在 receiver 前向时临时 patch 到指定模块中，生成结束后移除，底座参数保持不变。\n\n和文本式 MAS 相比，区别不只是“少生成一些 token”，而是 receiver 完全不需要把 sender 的内容读进上下文，因此省掉了辅助消息的 decode + prefill + cache 成本。和 latent-state transfer 相比，TFlow 不要求 receiver 直接解释 sender 的隐藏状态，也不要求双方共享表示几何；sender state 只作为条件输入，经由 generator 映射到 receiver 自己的参数张量形状中，因此兼容性问题被转移到 generator 学习上。\n\n从实现上看，这个设计有几个关键取舍。第一，作者限定为 fixed receiver setting，也就是接收方架构和注入模块预先已知，这换来了工程可行性，但牺牲了通用性。第二，采用 LoRA 而不是全量动态权重，控制了生成器输出维度和推理时 patch 成本。第三，通信是 query-specific 且 transient 的，不做持久更新，因此不会引入在线遗忘或状态污染。第四，多 sender 的信息融合发生在参数生成阶段，而不是 token 级交互阶段，这意味着它更像一次并行条件化，而不是多轮 deliberation。","experiments":"实验设置是三 agent：两个 sender、一个 receiver，backbone 用冻结的 Qwen3-4B。评测覆盖五个 benchmark，包含 reasoning、knowledge 和 coding 场景。论文给出的主结果有三类。\n\n第一，相对 standalone receiver，TFlow 在五个基准上都有增益，最高可提升 8.5 个 accuracy point。这说明 sender 的内部状态确实被有效转译成了对 receiver 有用的计算偏置，而不是只起到噪声作用。\n\n第二，相对文本式三 agent baseline，效率收益很明显。总 processed tokens 最多减少 83.27%，wall-clock inference time 最多加速 4.6 倍。这个结果和方法设计是对齐的，因为文本通信的主要成本正是额外消息生成和接收方重编码。\n\n第三，如果和 standalone receiver 比，processed tokens 也最多可减少 32.69%。这点比较有意思，说明某些文本式协作为了提升效果需要更长推理链，而 TFlow 用参数扰动替代部分显式语言交换后，可能在更短生成路径上达到接近或更好的结果。\n\n作者还指出 HumanEval+ 是主要例外：TFlow 相比文本式多 agent 存在更明显差距，原因不是通信失败，而是代码生成任务对 generation budget 更敏感。文本 agent 往往能通过更长的显式草稿、反思和修正获益，而 TFlow 压缩了通信 token，却没有等价地补回这部分外显搜索过程。这一点很重要，它说明 weight-space communication 更适合“把已有判断注入接收方”，未必适合需要长程外显探索的任务。\n\n从消融角度，全文重点考察了不同通信接口的比较，以及效率—性能取舍。最值得注意的结论不是绝对分数，而是：在大多数非代码任务上，文本消息里相当一部分信息可以被更紧凑地编译进 receiver 的动态低秩更新中。","reading_guide":"泛读时建议先看 Introduction 和 Figure 1/2，把问题设定和三种通信接口的差异看清：text、latent state、weight perturbation。然后重点看方法部分里参数生成器如何把 sender hidden states 变成 layer/module-specific LoRA 因子，以及这些因子如何在 receiver 前向中临时注入。这里决定了方法是否只是“换个名字的 adapter”，还是确实形成了新的通信接口。\n\n实验部分优先看三类表：一类是和 standalone receiver 的效果对比，一类是和 text-based MAS 的效率对比，一类是 HumanEval+ 这类失败案例。后者尤其值得看，因为它揭示了方法边界：压缩通信不等于保留了所有显式推理过程。\n\n如果阅读时间有限，30 分钟左右足够抓住主线。若要深挖，建议追问三个问题：一，generator 的容量和 receiver 注入层数如何影响性能；二，多 sender 融合是否会出现相互抵消；三，这种 receiver-specific 设计能否扩展到异构 backbone 或预训练阶段的条件化模块。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a concrete bottleneck in multi-agent LLM systems: when agents communicate through natural language, the sender’s intermediate computation must be serialized into tokens and then re-encoded by the receiver. This adds generation cost, prefill latency, and KV-cache growth. Prior latent-space communication avoids text, but usually assumes some representational compatibility between sender and receiver. TFlow asks a different question: if the receiver architecture is fixed and known, can the sender’s hidden states be compiled into a temporary weight perturbation of the receiver, so communication happens by changing computation rather than extending context?","importance":"Its main value is not a new pretraining objective, but a new communication interface: weight-space communication. The communicated object is neither text nor activations consumed directly by the receiver; it is a query-specific parameter update. That is interesting for foundation-model researchers for three reasons. First, it broadens the design space of model-to-model interaction beyond the language channel. Second, it connects multi-agent collaboration with inference-time dynamic parameterization, which may matter for future work on conditional adaptation, test-time routing, and modular pretraining. Third, it shows that with frozen backbones, training only a receiver-specific generator can deliver substantial efficiency gains. Still, this is more an inference/interface paper than a pretraining paper, so skim is the right level.","technical_approach":"$3e","experiments":"$3f","reading_guide":"$40","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"看方法图和 ablation 就够；把 Agent 通信编译成临时 LoRA 很有想法，但固定 receiver 假设会限制外推。","en":"Read the method figure and ablations; compiling agent communication into transient LoRA is interesting, but the fixed-receiver assumption limits generality."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Central Florida","Westlake University","Snap Inc"],"authors":["Wenrui Bao","Huan Wang","Jian Wang","Zhangyang Wang","Kai Wang","Yuzhang Shang"],"notable_authors":["Zhangyang Wang"],"tags":["multi-agent","weight-space-communication","LoRA","inference-efficiency","agent-systems"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13839","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13839","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12673","title":"Do Androids Dream of Breaking the Game? Systematically Auditing AI Agent Benchmarks with BenchJack","abstract":"Agent benchmarks have become the de facto measure of frontier AI competence, guiding model selection, investment, and deployment. However, reward hacking, where agents maximize a score without performing the intended task, emerges spontaneously in frontier models without overfitting. We argue that benchmarks must be secure by design. From past incidents of reward hacks, we derive a taxonomy of eight recurring flaw patterns and compile them into the Agent-Eval Checklist for benchmark designers. W","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-12T19:22:45+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12673.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.CR"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作处理的是 agent benchmark 的可被利用性，而不是 agent 能力本身。更具体地说，它问的是：当前被广泛用来衡量 coding、web、desktop、tool-use 等前沿 agent 能力的 benchmark，是否在设计上存在系统性漏洞，使模型可以在不完成真实任务的情况下拿到高分。作者把这个问题从零散案例上升为 benchmark security 问题，目标不是事后检测某次作弊轨迹，而是在 benchmark 发布或使用前，系统性发现 reward hacking 的可利用面。","importance":"对预训练研究的关联不是直接改进 loss 或架构，而是影响训练信号和能力评估的可信度。现在很多 post-train、agent RL、tool-use SFT、甚至模型选型都依赖 benchmark 分数。如果 benchmark 本身可被 hack，那么训练过程会把错误奖励当成真信号，进一步放大 reward hacking 策略。这个问题和 pretrain/post-train 闭环直接相关：一旦评测失真，后续数据合成、偏好优化、agent curriculum 都会被带偏。贡献类型主要是评测基础设施与安全性方法学，不是基座模型方法，但对做 RL、agentic fine-tuning、benchmark-driven iteration 的团队有现实影响。","technical_approach":"$41","experiments":"实验覆盖 10 个流行 agent benchmark，横跨软件工程、网页、桌面、终端等不同环境。主结果很直接：BenchJack 在 10/10 benchmark 上都找到了可工作的 reward-hacking exploit，其中 9/10 可以在完全不解决任务的前提下拿到接近满分。作者总共识别出 219 个 distinct flaws，覆盖其定义的 8 类缺陷。文中还给出了一些很具体的 exploit 例子，例如在 SWE-bench Verified 上，一个 9 行的 PyTest hook 就能让所有测试通过；在 WebArena 上存在 gold answer 泄露。这些例子说明问题不是“模型太会投机”，而是 benchmark 接口真的在信任不该信任的对象。\n\n更有价值的是 patching 实验。作者在 4 个设计相对较好的代表性 benchmark 上运行迭代修补流程，把 hackable task ratio 从接近 100% 降到 10% 以下，其中 WebArena 和 OSWorld 在 3 轮 patch 后达到作者定义的 unhackable。这里要注意两个阅读点：第一，unhackable 是相对于 BenchJack 当前攻击能力，而不是数学意义上的不可攻破；第二，能在少数轮次内显著下降，说明很多漏洞属于接口设计错误，而不是必须重写 benchmark 才能修。\n\n如果从研究严谨性看，最该检查的是：10 个 benchmark 的选择是否覆盖主流评测范式；exploit 验证是否严格保证“未完成真实任务”；patch 后是否引入了过拟合式封堵，只挡住已知 exploit 而没有提升整体鲁棒性；以及 BenchJack 自身在不同基础 coding agent 上的稳定性。","reading_guide":"这篇适合泛读，但建议认真看引言后的 motivating example 和 flaw taxonomy。SWE-bench 的例子能很快说明问题不是抽象的“reward hacking 可能存在”，而是评测 harness 的信任边界出了错。接着看 checklist 和 8 类 flaw 的定义，这部分最容易迁移到自己的 benchmark 设计里。系统细节上，不必过度关注 agent prompt 工程，重点看 BenchJack 的 pipeline 如何从 benchmark 代码中定位攻击面，以及 exploit verification 如何避免假阳性。实验部分优先看 10 个 benchmark 的总表、典型 exploit case study、以及 iterative patching 的前后对比。预计 35-45 分钟可以读完主线。若要深挖，值得思考的是：这种白盒审计能否成为 RL/agent 训练前的标准流程，以及 benchmark hardening 后是否会反过来改变模型学到的策略分布。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper is about benchmark exploitability rather than agent capability. Its central question is whether widely used agent benchmarks for coding, web navigation, desktop use, terminal tasks, and tool-augmented workflows contain systematic design flaws that let models score highly without solving the intended task. The authors elevate scattered reward-hacking incidents into a benchmark security problem. The goal is not post-hoc detection of cheating trajectories, but pre-execution auditing of benchmarks to surface exploitable weaknesses before they are trusted for evaluation or training.","importance":"The connection to pretraining is indirect but real: benchmark scores increasingly shape post-training data generation, agent RL, model selection, and capability tracking. If the benchmark is hackable, the training loop can reinforce the wrong behavior by treating exploit success as valid reward. That makes this relevant to the pretrain–post-train interface, especially wherever evaluation numbers feed back into data curation, curriculum design, or reward modeling. The contribution is mainly in evaluation infrastructure and benchmark robustness, not in base-model architecture, but it matters for any team relying on benchmark-driven iteration.","technical_approach":"$42","experiments":"$43","reading_guide":"This is a good skim paper, but the motivating example and the flaw taxonomy deserve careful attention. The SWE-bench example quickly shows that the issue is not an abstract possibility of reward hacking; it is a concrete trust-boundary failure in the evaluation harness. Then read the eight flaw classes and the checklist, since that is the most reusable part for anyone designing or maintaining benchmarks. For the system itself, do not spend too much time on prompt details. Focus on how BenchJack inspects benchmark code, identifies attack surfaces, and verifies exploits without false positives. In the experiments, prioritize the summary table over the 10 benchmarks, the exploit case studies, and the before/after patching results. About 35 to 45 minutes should be enough for the main thread. If you want to think further, the useful question is whether white-box benchmark auditing should become a standard pre-deployment step for agent RL and evaluation pipelines.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"系统梳理了Agent基准的常见漏洞，做预训练评测设计时要对照检查，重点看第三章的漏洞分类与检查清单即可","en":"Systematically summarizes common flaws in agent benchmarks; check your in-house benchmark design against the taxonomy, focus on Section 3 for the flaw classification and checklist."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of California, Berkeley"],"authors":["Hao Wang","Hanchen Li","Qiuyang Mang","Alvin Cheung","Koushik Sen","Dawn Song"],"notable_authors":["Dawn Song"],"tags":["agent-benchmark","reward-hacking","ai-safety","automated-auditing","benchmark-robustness"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12673","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12673","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12755","title":"State-Centric Decision Process","abstract":"Language environments such as web browsers, code terminals, and interactive simulations emit raw text rather than states, and provide none of the runtime structure that MDP analysis requires. No explicit state space, no observation-to-state mapping, no certified transitions, and no termination criterion. We introduce the State-Centric Decision Process (SDP), a runtime framework that constructs these missing inputs by having the agent build them, predicate by predicate, as it acts. At each step t","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-12T21:09:43+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12755.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是语言环境里一个长期被默认跳过的问题：浏览器、终端、交互式工具链这类环境只返回原始文本，不提供 MDP 所需的状态、状态转移、终止条件和信用分配接口。现有语言 agent 虽然能在这些环境里行动，但轨迹仍然只是 observation-action 序列，缺少“哪些中间条件已经达成”的可验证结构。作者提出 SDP，要求 agent 在每一步先提出一个自然语言谓词，描述下一步执行后世界应满足的条件；执行动作后再验证该谓词是否成立。通过这种先承诺、后验证的机制，把原本无结构的交互轨迹转成带有 certified states 的决策过程。","importance":"它和预训练的直接关系不强，更偏 agent/runtime interface，但对 post-train 和长程决策研究有一定启发。价值主要在两点。第一，它把语言 agent 的中间推理从开放式“想法”变成可检验的状态承诺，这对 credit assignment、失败定位、轨迹审计都更友好。第二，它指出语言环境缺的不是更多 sample，而是缺一个运行时状态构造层；这个判断对做 tool-use agent、web agent、代码 agent 的人是有用的。对基座预训练研究员而言，启发更多在接口层：如果未来要用 agent 轨迹反哺训练，SDP 这类 certified trajectory 比普通 CoT 或 action log 更适合作为监督信号，因为它显式标出哪些中间目标被环境证实、哪些没有。","technical_approach":"SDP 的核心是把一步决策拆成四个算子：Propose、Realize、Validate、Replan。Propose 阶段，模型不直接选动作，而是先生成一个自然语言 predicate，描述“执行下一步后，环境应呈现什么状态”。这个 predicate 必须是可检查的，而不是泛泛的计划语句。Realize 阶段，agent 选择动作去实现该 predicate。Validate 阶段，再根据新的环境 observation 判断 predicate 是否成立；若成立，则该 predicate 被提升为 certified state，成为轨迹中的一个正式状态节点。若不成立，则进入 Replan，重新提出新的 predicate 或修正动作。\n\n这套设计的关键不在于让模型多想一步，而在于把 intent 显式化并交给环境裁决。传统 ReAct、reflection、planner 或 world model 方法也会生成中间文本，但这些文本通常不是“可证伪的状态命题”，因此无法形成可验证的状态转移。SDP 试图补上的正是这一层形式结构。论文在理论动机部分强调，语言环境中的有用状态抽象是 goal-dependent 的，环境本身不可能预先给出统一状态空间，所以状态必须由 agent 在运行时按目标构造。作者据此把 SDP 定位为 MDP 分析之前的接口层，而不是另一个 action policy。\n\n从实现角度看，方法成败取决于两个细节。第一，predicate 的粒度要合适：太粗会难以验证，太细则会让轨迹过长、搜索成本过高。第二，validator 的可靠性很关键，因为一旦验证器误判，后续 certified trajectory 就会被污染。作者把 validator auditing 也作为分析对象，说明他们意识到这不是一个可忽略的工程细节。","experiments":"实验结论是 SDP 在五个 benchmark 上取得了 training-free 最好结果，而且任务越长，优势越明显。这个趋势和方法动机是一致的：短任务里即使没有显式状态，错误累积也有限；长程任务里，如果没有中间状态验证，agent 很容易在错误前提上继续行动。论文还做了算子级消融，分别分析 Propose、Validate、Replan 等组件的作用，目的是证明提升不是单纯来自“多生成一些文字”，而是来自把中间目标变成可验证状态。\n\n另一个实验贡献是把 certified trajectory 当成诊断工件来分析。作者展示了几类普通 agent 难以直接得到的信号：失败定位，即错误首次出现在哪个 predicate；partial progress tracking，即任务虽未完成但哪些子目标已被证实达成；cascade recording，即某一步验证失败如何导致后续连锁错误；以及 validator auditing，即检查验证器本身是否稳定可靠。这些分析更像方法附带的新观测接口，而不是单纯 leaderboard 提升。\n\n摘要没有给出每个 benchmark 的具体名称、绝对分数和提升幅度，全文里应重点核对表格，尤其是“training-free best”相对哪些基线、长程任务的 horizon 如何定义、以及 validator 是否调用了额外模型。如果这些成本较高，那么方法优势需要结合推理开销一起看。","reading_guide":"泛读时先看 Introduction 和 Preliminaries，理解作者提出的不是一个新 planner，而是“给语言环境补状态接口”。如果这个问题设定不认同，后面方法细节就没有必要深挖。接着看 SDP 的四个算子定义，重点分清 predicate 和普通计划步骤的区别：前者是可验证的状态命题，后者只是待执行动作。实验部分建议先看总表，再看 ablation，确认收益是否主要来自 Validate/Replan。最后看 trajectory diagnostics 的案例，这部分最能体现 SDP 相比 ReAct 类方法的附加价值。若只是判断相关性，20 分钟左右足够；若想评估它能否作为训练数据生成框架，需要再细看 validator 设计和额外推理成本。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a structural gap in language-agent environments. Web browsers, code terminals, and tool-use pipelines emit raw text, not states, and therefore do not provide the objects required by MDP-style analysis: a state space, an observation-to-state mapping, certified transitions, or a termination criterion. Existing language agents can still act in such environments, but their trajectories remain unstructured observation-action sequences. SDP proposes to repair this by having the agent explicitly construct states at runtime. At each step, the agent first commits to a natural-language predicate describing what should be true after the next action, then acts, then checks whether the environment actually satisfies that predicate. Predicates that pass validation become certified states.","importance":"This is more of an agent/runtime paper than a pretraining paper, but it has some relevance for post-training and long-horizon decision-making. Its main value is conceptual: it turns intermediate reasoning from free-form text into falsifiable state commitments. That makes credit assignment, failure localization, and trajectory auditing much cleaner than in standard ReAct-style traces. For foundation-model researchers, the most useful angle is the data interface. If agent trajectories are later used to improve models, certified trajectories are likely to be better supervision than raw chains of thought or action logs, because they explicitly separate verified intermediate progress from unsupported reasoning.","technical_approach":"$44","experiments":"$45","reading_guide":"For a skim, start with the introduction and preliminaries. The central claim is not that the paper has a better planner, but that language environments are missing a state-construction interface. If that framing is not convincing, the rest of the method will matter less. Then read the definitions of the four operators and pay special attention to the distinction between a predicate and a plan step: a predicate is a verifiable condition on the world, while a plan step is just something to do. In the experiments, first inspect the main results table, then the ablations, especially those isolating Validate and Replan. Finally, read the trajectory-diagnostics examples, since that is where SDP shows value beyond raw benchmark scores. A relevance check should take around 20 minutes; a deeper evaluation for training-data use would require closer reading of the validator design and runtime overhead.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"看方法定义和实验任务即可；它不改预训练路线，但给语言环境里的“状态认证”提供了一个比纯轨迹日志更干净的接口。","en":"Skim the formalism and task setup; it will not change pretraining practice, but the certified-state interface is cleaner than treating agent traces as raw logs."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of California, Irvine","Northeastern University"],"authors":["Sungheon Jeong","Ryozo Masukawa","Sanggeon Yun","Mahdi Imani","Mohsen Imani"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agent-evaluation","language-environments","state-abstraction","planning","runtime-verification"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12755","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12755","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12978","title":"Useful Memories Become Faulty When Continuously Updated by LLMs","abstract":"Learning from past experience benefits from two complementary forms of memory: episodic traces -- raw trajectories of what happened -- and consolidated abstractions distilled across many episodes into reusable, schema-like lessons. Recent agentic-memory systems pursue the consolidated form: an LLM rewrites past trajectories into a textual memory bank that it continuously updates with new interactions, promising self-improving agents without parameter updates. Yet we find that such consolidated m","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T04:15:50+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12978.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"研究“持续记忆巩固（consolidation）”在 LLM agent 中是否可靠：当代理把已解决任务的轨迹反复压缩成文本化抽象记忆，并在后续任务中持续更新这份记忆时，记忆是否会稳定变得更有用，还是会逐步漂移并反噬性能。论文把“输入经验是否有用”这个变量尽量控制住（用已成功轨迹或直接用 ground-truth 解），从而把问题聚焦到“巩固/改写这一步本身是否会引入系统性错误”。","importance":"对预训练本身不是直接方法贡献，但对“用 LLM 作为可持续自我改写的知识压缩器/记忆巩固器”这一类范式给出强负面证据：在不做参数更新的前提下，反复的文本抽象更新会产生累积误差，导致记忆效用先升后降，甚至低于无记忆基线。对做 continual pretrain / self-training / 反复蒸馏的人也有间接启发：如果训练信号来自模型自写的总结或规则，且不断覆盖旧内容，错误会以‘看似更抽象更通用’的形式固化，最后表现为泛化边界被破坏、任务间互相干扰、对分布窄流的过拟合。","technical_approach":"核心做法是把“记忆巩固”形式化为一个反复执行的 lossy rewrite loop：代理从轨迹池中抽取若干 episode（可能按任务/相似性分组），用 LLM 将其改写为更短的‘lesson/cheatsheet’条目写入 memory bank；后续再用这份 memory 做检索或直接拼接进上下文来解新任务；同时 memory 会被持续刷新（streaming updates）。论文系统比较了：\n1) Static-All vs Stream：同一批轨迹，一次性全量巩固（Static）与按时间/批次流式巩固（Stream）会收敛到不同记忆状态，且 Stream 更容易崩。\n2) 抽象记忆 vs 纯情景记忆（episodic-only）：不做抽象，只把原始轨迹当 in-context demonstrations 追加到上下文，作为对照。由于轨迹池固定，这个对照用来定位问题是否来自“抽象改写”而非“经验质量”。\n3) 记忆容量/更新轮次/任务切换：观察效用曲线是否出现先升后降，以及任务间覆盖。\n机制分析给出三类失败源：\n- 误分组（misgrouping）：把不共享潜在结构的 episode 混在一起抽象，导致生成的规则本身就不一致。\n- 过度抽象丢失适用条件（missing applicability conditions）：即便分组正确，抽象时把边界条件删掉，形成过泛化条目，进而在相邻任务上产生干扰。\n- 窄流过拟合（overfitting under narrow streams）：输入流重复/近重复时，抽象会贴合实例表面特征，导致同任务内泛化变差。\n整体结论是：把“保留证据（episodic）”和“形成抽象（semantic）”合并成同一个持续改写循环，在当前 LLM 上不稳定。","experiments":"覆盖 ALFWorld、ScienceWorld、WebShop、AppWorld 以及一个更可控的测试床（文中提到用于放大巩固失败）。关键现象：\n- ScienceWorld：不同记忆大小下，效用随更新步数先上升后下降（图 1a），出现“memory erosion”。\n- WebShop：AWM 风格的蒸馏记忆随着样本规模增大反而退化，而原始轨迹（Raw Traj.）更稳健（图 1b）。图中给出 50 个 held-out episodes 的 success rate，并同时报告括号内的平均分指标；曲线显示抽象记忆在更大 #examples 下出现明显下滑，而 raw 轨迹保持较高水平。\n- ARC-AGI 切片（19 题）：GPT-5.4 在无记忆时可达 100%（作者选取其可全对的子集作为“可解上限”）。在每次巩固都使用 ground-truth solution 的条件下，Static（一次性巩固全池）在 R=10、R=50 仍保持 94.7%，而 Stream（逐题流式更新）到 Round 10 掉到 52.6%（图 2），相当于在“原本能做对的题”上被记忆改写拖垮。\n- 论文还强调更新顺序/分批会导致不同终态，以及任务切换时的覆盖效应（正文提到 Fig. 8b/8c、Fig. 11 等），用来支撑“巩固步骤本身引入不确定性与干扰”。","reading_guide":"泛读建议（约 25–35 分钟）：\n- 先看 Fig.1 与 Fig.2：把“先升后降”和“stream 崩盘但 static 稳”的核心现象抓住。\n- 再看实验设置表（文中 Setting/Figure 对照）确认他们如何控制轨迹质量（已成功轨迹、GT 解）。\n- 重点扫 §6 机制：misgrouping / 丢失适用条件 / 窄流过拟合，这三点对应现实系统里最常见的三种记忆写入策略错误。\n- 如果你做 continual pretrain / self-distillation：把“Stream vs Static”的差异当作一个类比，思考在线覆盖式训练信号为何更容易累积偏差；同时注意 episodic-only 对照已经很强，说明‘先别急着抽象’在工程上可能是更稳的默认。","authors_note":"伊利诺伊大学香槟分校（UIUC）；通讯作者 Dylan Zhang（shizhuo2@illinois.edu）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether LLM agents can serve as reliable long-term “memory consolidators”: if an agent repeatedly compresses solved trajectories into textual abstractions (lessons/cheatsheets) and continuously updates that memory over time, does the memory become more useful and stable, or does it drift and eventually harm performance. The study controls for trajectory usefulness (successful rollouts or even ground-truth solutions) to isolate failures caused by the consolidation/rewrite step itself.","importance":"Not a pretraining-method paper, but it provides concrete negative evidence against a popular agent-memory design pattern: iterative textual consolidation is not “at worst neutral” for today’s LLMs. The broader pretraining-relevant takeaway is about iterative self-generated supervision and overwrite dynamics: when the training/knowledge signal is repeatedly rewritten into more abstract rules, small errors can accumulate as seemingly general statements, blurring applicability boundaries and increasing cross-task interference—failure modes that rhyme with continual self-distillation and online data curation.","technical_approach":"$46","experiments":"Evaluations span ALFWorld, ScienceWorld, WebShop, AppWorld, plus a controlled testbed designed to make consolidation failures salient. Main results:\n- ScienceWorld: memory utility rises early but then declines with continued consolidation across memory sizes (memory erosion; Fig. 1a).\n- WebShop: AWM-style distilled memory degrades as the number of examples increases, while raw-trajectory episodic context remains robust (Fig. 1b; success rate over 50 held-out episodes, with an additional average-score metric in parentheses).\n- ARC-AGI slice (19 problems): GPT-5.4 solves the slice at 100% with no memory. With ground-truth solutions used at every consolidation step, Static consolidation stays at 94.7% even after R=10 and R=50 refresh rounds, but Stream consolidation collapses to 52.6% by Round 10 (Fig. 2), demonstrating that the rewrite schedule alone can turn solvable problems into failures.\nThey also report strong order/grouping sensitivity and task-overwrite effects (referenced figures include 8b/8c and 11).","reading_guide":"Skim plan (25–35 minutes):\n- Start with Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 to internalize the two core phenomena: “improve-then-degrade” and “streaming updates collapse while static stays stable.”\n- Check the setup details to see how they ensure trajectories are useful (successful rollouts / ground-truth solutions), which is crucial for the causal claim.\n- Read the mechanism section (§6) for the three failure modes; map each to common engineering choices in memory writing and continual self-training.\n- If your work touches continual pretraining or self-distillation, treat Static vs Stream as an analogy for offline vs online overwrite dynamics and ask what safeguards are missing when the model is both the compressor and the editor of its own knowledge.","authors_note":"University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign (UIUC); corresponding author Dylan Zhang (shizhuo2@illinois.edu)."},"recommendation":{"zh":"读实验设计和失败样例；它改变我对“LLM 总结记忆可稳定累积能力”的先验。","en":"Read the experimental setup and failure cases; it weakens the prior that LLM-written memory summaries accumulate capability reliably."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign","IIIS, Tsinghua University","IIIS, Tsinghua University, Work done at UIUC"],"authors":["Dylan Zhang","Yanshan Lin","Zhengkun Wu","Yihang Sun","Bingxuan Li","Dianqi Li","Hao Peng"],"notable_authors":["Hao Peng"],"tags":["agent-memory","continual-learning","memory-consolidation","ARC-AGI"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12978","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12978","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13037","title":"MAP: A Map-then-Act Paradigm for Long-Horizon Interactive Agent Reasoning","abstract":"Current interactive LLM agents rely on goal-conditioned stepwise planning, where environmental understanding is acquired reactively during execution rather than established beforehand. This temporal inversion leads to Delayed Environmental Perception: agents must infer environmental constraints through trial-and-error, resulting in an Epistemic Bottleneck that traps them in inefficient failure cycles. Inspired by human affordance perception and cognitive map theory, we propose the Map-then-Act P","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T05:46:29+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13037.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决长时交互式任务中“先行动后理解”的结构性问题：主流 ReAct/逐步规划范式把环境理解耦合在执行过程中，导致代理必须靠试错去推断空间布局、可供性（affordance）和隐含约束，进而出现目标漂移与重复失败。论文提出把环境理解前置：先探索并建图，再基于地图执行。","importance":"对预训练研究的直接关联有限，更像 agent 范式与数据构造（map-then-act 轨迹）对泛化的影响。对 pretrain/posttrain 接口的启发在于：如果要让模型学到“环境结构/因果响应”而非“在观测分布上拟合动作”，训练数据形态可能比单纯增加 expert execution traces 更关键；MAP-2K 这类探索-建图-执行的轨迹，属于更接近‘学世界模型/可供性’的监督信号。","technical_approach":"MAP 是可插拔框架，核心是把流程从 <think+act> 变成显式的 <map> → <think/act conditioned on map>。三阶段：\n1) Cross-Task Global Exploration：跨任务探索，提取环境通用先验。\n2) Task-Specific Mapping：在具体任务里主动探测，构建结构化 cognitive map（空间布局、对象-动作可供性、约束）。\n3) Knowledge-Augmented Execution：执行阶段主要依赖自建地图而非原始观测历史。\n论文用 Pearl 的 do-calculus 叙述其动机：传统范式学习的是 P(a_t|o_t) 的相关性，而 MAP 通过 do(explore) 收集干预数据，试图逼近 P(o_{t+1}|do(a_t)) 这类环境响应知识，并将其压缩进 M 供后续决策使用。另一个贡献是提出基于 MAP 轨迹的轻量微调：用 MAP-2K 数据把“先建图再行动”的行为内化到一个 4B 模型（MAP-4B）。","experiments":"在 ALFWorld、TextCraft、ScienceWorld、ARC-AGI-3 上评测，结论是：\n- 不做参数更新时，MAP 相比传统 act-during-think 基线提升 success rate，并减少交互步数。\n- 用 MAP-2K 做轻量微调后，MAP-4B 明显优于用传统 expert execution traces 训练的对照模型，作者据此主张“教会理解环境”比“模仿解题轨迹”更基础。\n给定你提供的全文片段里没有具体数表，精确提升幅度需要看实验章节的主表与消融（例如是否控制总交互预算、探索步数上限、地图表示格式、检索方式等）。","reading_guide":"泛读建议（约 20–30 分钟）：\n- 先读 Introduction 把 Delayed Environmental Perception / Epistemic Bottleneck 的问题定义抓准。\n- 再读 Method 里对 <map> 阶段的具体产物：地图的字段设计、如何从探索轨迹抽取可供性与约束、执行时如何使用（检索/直接拼接/结构化输入）。\n- 最后看实验主表：重点核对是否在相同交互预算下比较、探索成本是否计入总步数、以及 MAP-2K 微调与“传统 expert trace 微调”的公平性。\n如果你关心预训练数据形态：把 MAP-2K 当作一种“探索优先”的轨迹数据配方，思考能否迁移到更通用的交互数据合成或 world-model 风格的中期训练。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a structural limitation in long-horizon interactive agents: mainstream stepwise paradigms (e.g., ReAct-style) entangle environment understanding with task execution, forcing agents to learn constraints via trial-and-error. This “delayed environmental perception” creates an epistemic bottleneck that manifests as goal drift and redundant failed actions. MAP proposes to front-load environment understanding by exploring and building a map before acting.","importance":"Only indirectly relevant to foundation-model pretraining, but relevant to post-training data design and the kind of supervision that teaches agents environment structure rather than action imitation. The key pretrain-adjacent idea is that trajectory format matters: exploration→mapping→execution traces may encode affordances and environment response patterns that are hard to recover from standard expert execution traces alone.","technical_approach":"MAP is a plug-and-play workflow change: from interleaved think/act to an explicit mapping phase followed by map-conditioned execution. It has three stages: (1) cross-task global exploration to acquire reusable priors, (2) task-specific cognitive mapping to build a structured representation of layout and object-action affordances/constraints, and (3) knowledge-augmented execution grounded on the self-generated map. The motivation is framed with do-calculus: conventional agents fit observational correlations P(a_t|o_t), while MAP collects interventional experience via do(explore) to better capture environment response knowledge (conceptually closer to P(o_{t+1}|do(a_t))) and compress it into a map M used for decision making. They also introduce a lightweight fine-tuning recipe on MAP-2K trajectories to produce a 4B model (MAP-4B) that internalizes the map-then-act behavior.","experiments":"They evaluate on ALFWorld, TextCraft, ScienceWorld, and ARC-AGI-3. Reported claims are: (a) without parameter updates, MAP improves success rates and reduces interaction steps versus act-during-think baselines; (b) after light fine-tuning on MAP-2K, MAP-4B outperforms models trained on traditional expert execution traces. The provided content snippet does not include the main tables or exact deltas; the key numbers should be taken from the experiment section, especially where they control interaction budgets and account for exploration cost.","reading_guide":"Skim plan (20–30 minutes):\n- Read the Introduction for the precise problem statement (delayed perception, epistemic bottleneck) and failure modes.\n- In Method, focus on what the “map” concretely contains, how it is distilled from exploration trajectories, and how execution conditions on it (retrieval vs direct structured input).\n- In Experiments, verify fairness: whether exploration steps are counted in the total budget, whether baselines get comparable interaction opportunities, and how MAP-2K fine-tuning compares to expert-trace fine-tuning.\nIf you care about training data recipes, treat MAP-2K as an exploration-first trajectory template and consider how it might transfer to broader interactive data synthesis or mid-training.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看 ARC-AGI-3 设置和预算控制；若 exploration token 预算没对齐，增益会被高估。","en":"Skim the ARC-AGI-3 setup and budget controls; if exploration tokens are not matched, the gains may be inflated."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Science and Technology of China","Meituan","Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences","Tianjin University","Institution of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences"],"authors":["Yuxin Liu","Ziang Ye","Yueqing Sun","Mingye Zhu","Jinwei Xiao","Zhuowen Han","Qi GU","Xunliang Cai","Lei Zhang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["interactive-agent","long-horizon-planning","environment-modeling","ARC-AGI"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13037","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13037","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13534","title":"Scaling Retrieval-Augmented Reasoning with Parallel Search and Explicit Merging","abstract":"Deep search agents have proven effective in enhancing LLMs by retrieving external knowledge during multi-step reasoning. However, existing methods often generate a single query for retrieval at each reasoning step, limiting information coverage and introducing high noise. This may result in low signal-to-noise ratios (SNR) during search, degrading reasoning accuracy and leading to unnecessary reasoning steps. In this paper, we introduce MultiSearch, an RL-based framework that addresses these lim","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T13:46:35+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13534.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有深度搜索Agent在推理过程中每个步骤仅生成单个检索查询，存在检索信噪比低、信息覆盖不足的问题；同时基于最终结果的RL奖励无法对中间检索和信息整合行为提供有效监督，导致推理准确率下降或产生不必要的检索步骤。","importance":"提出了多查询并行检索+显式信息合并的深度搜索范式，配合多过程细粒度RL奖励设计，为检索增强推理的训练提供了更精细的监督信号设计思路；验证了小参数模型通过检索增强和合理的RL训练可以在知识密集型任务上获得显著性能提升，为高效推理Agent的训练提供了参考。","technical_approach":"提出MultiSearch RL框架：1. 在每个推理步骤，从改写、概念扩展、问题分解多个视角生成多个并行检索查询，扩大相关信息覆盖范围，降低对单一查询的依赖；2. 增加显式合并步骤，从检索到的多个文档中提取并整合关键信息，提升中间推理上下文的信噪比；3. 设计多过程奖励，除最终答案正确性的结果奖励外，新增鼓励多查询检索的查询奖励、鼓励信息整合的合并奖励；4. 采用组奖励解耦归一化策略优化（GDPO）对异质奖励信号分别归一化后再聚合，避免不同量级奖励互相干扰。","experiments":"基于Qwen2.5-3B/7B Base和Instruct骨干训练模型，在7个QA基准上评测，包括3个单跳数据集和4个多跳数据集。实验结果：1. MultiSearch在所有基准上的平均性能优于现有ReAct风格的深度搜索基线；2. 训练过程中，Agent逐步学会生成更多检索查询并输出信噪比更高的合并信息，验证了过程奖励的引导作用；3. 消融实验表明，多查询检索、显式合并、对应的过程奖励分别对整体性能有独立贡献。","reading_guide":"重点阅读第2章的奖励设计部分，理解多过程奖励的设计逻辑和GDPO的适配方式；检索和合并的机制设计可以快速浏览，核心创新在训练监督部分；预计阅读时间15分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing deep search agents generate only one retrieval query per reasoning step, leading to low retrieval SNR and insufficient information coverage. Meanwhile, RL rewards based solely on final outcomes cannot provide effective supervision for intermediate retrieval and information consolidation behaviors, resulting in degraded reasoning accuracy or unnecessary retrieval steps.","importance":"MultiSearch proposes a deep search paradigm of parallel multi-query retrieval plus explicit information merging, paired with a fine-grained multi-process RL reward design, providing a more refined supervision signal design思路 for retrieval-augmented reasoning training. It verifies that small parameter models can achieve significant performance improvements on knowledge-intensive tasks through retrieval augmentation and reasonable RL training, providing a reference for efficient reasoning agent training.","technical_approach":"The MultiSearch RL framework is designed as follows: 1. At each reasoning step, multiple parallel retrieval queries are generated from perspectives of rephrasing, concept expansion, and question decomposition to expand relevant information coverage and reduce reliance on a single query; 2. An explicit merging step is added to extract and integrate key information from multiple retrieved documents, improving the SNR of the intermediate reasoning context; 3. A multi-process reward design includes a query reward to encourage multi-query retrieval and a merging reward to encourage information consolidation, in addition to the outcome reward for final answer correctness; 4. Group reward-Decoupled Normalization Policy Optimization (GDPO) is used to normalize heterogeneous reward signals separately before aggregation, avoiding interference between rewards of different magnitudes.","experiments":"Models are trained on Qwen2.5-3B/7B Base and Instruct backbones, and evaluated on 7 QA benchmarks, including 3 single-hop datasets and 4 multi-hop datasets. Results: 1. MultiSearch achieves better average performance than existing ReAct-style deep search baselines across all benchmarks; 2. During training, the agent gradually learns to generate more retrieval queries and produce merged information with higher SNR, verifying the guiding effect of process rewards; 3. Ablation studies show that multi-query retrieval, explicit merging, and corresponding process rewards each contribute independently to overall performance.","reading_guide":"Focus on the reward design section in Chapter 2 to understand the logic of multi-process reward design and the adaptation of GDPO. The mechanism design of retrieval and merging can be skimmed, as the core innovation lies in the training supervision part. Estimated reading time: 15 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看 merge 设计和 RL reward；多 query 本身不新，关键是它是否真的提高证据信噪比而非堆 context。","en":"Read the merge design and RL reward; multi-query retrieval is not new, the real question is whether SNR improves rather than just adding context."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of Science and Technology of China","Tencent Inc.","Tecent Inc"],"authors":["Jiabei Liu","Wenyu Mao","Junfei Tan","Chunxu Shen","Lingling Yi","Jiancan Wu","Xiang Wang"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["RAG","deep-search-agent","multi-query-retrieval","reinforcement-learning","evidence-merging"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13534","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13534","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13625","title":"How to Interpret Agent Behavior","abstract":"Autonomous agents such as Claude Code and Codex now operate for hours or even days. Understanding their runtime behavior has become critical for downstream tasks such as diagnosing inefficiencies, fixing bugs, and ensuring better oversight. A primary way to gain this understanding is analyzing the reasoning trajectories and execution traces these agents generate. Yet such data remains in unstructured natural-language form, making it difficult for humans to interpret at scale. We introduce ACT*ON","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T14:52:40+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13625.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"AI Agent的运行轨迹为非结构化自然语言记录，学界没有统一的Agent行为描述词汇体系，无法规模化解释Agent运行时行为，也无法积累可复用的行为分析结论。","importance":"标准化的分层行为分类体系为Agent轨迹数据的结构化处理提供了统一标注标准，可支撑面向Agent能力的预训练、SFT、RLHF数据集构建，也能实现跨Agent的行为差异量化对比，辅助定位模型能力缺陷。","technical_approach":"提出Act·onomy分层Agent运行时行为分类体系，基于2024-2026年顶会论文的565条Agent行为描述语料，采用扎根理论构建，同时结合现有认知架构框架做理论支撑，分为10个顶层动作、46个子动作、120个叶子分类；配套提供自动化轨迹分析工具管线，并维护开源GitHub仓库支持社区驱动的分类体系迭代更新，通过两个案例验证体系实用性。","experiments":"基于565篇同行评议论文语料构建了完整分类体系，两个案例研究分别实现了跨多Agent的行为画像对比、以及单Agent在不同任务轨迹下的行为特征刻画，自动化管线支持规模化生成Agent行为画像。","reading_guide":"先看第2章的分类体系层级定义，再浏览附录中的分类实例，自动化工具部分按需阅读，预计阅读时间15分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"AI agent runtime trajectories are unstructured natural language records, and the research community lacks a unified vocabulary framework for describing agent behaviors, making scalable interpretation of agent runtime behavior and accumulation of reusable behavioral analysis conclusions impossible.","importance":"The standardized hierarchical behavior classification system provides a common annotation standard for structured processing of agent trajectory data, supporting construction of pre-training, SFT and RLHF datasets targeting agent capabilities, as well as quantitative cross-agent comparison of behavioral differences to locate model capability defects.","technical_approach":"Proposes Act·onomy, a hierarchical taxonomy for agent runtime behavior analysis. It is built via grounded theory on a corpus of 565 agent behavior descriptions collected from top AI venue papers published between 2024 and 2026, with theoretical grounding from existing cognitive architecture frameworks. The taxonomy includes 10 top-level actions, 46 sub-actions and 120 leaf categories. An automated trace analysis pipeline is provided alongside, and an open GitHub repository is maintained for community-driven iterative updates of the taxonomy. Two case studies are conducted to verify its utility.","experiments":"The complete taxonomy is constructed based on 565 peer-reviewed paper sources. Two case studies successfully demonstrate cross-agent behavioral profile comparison and within-agent behavior characterization across diverse task trajectories. The automated pipeline supports large-scale generation of agent behavioral profiles.","reading_guide":"Start with the hierarchical taxonomy definitions in Section 2, then browse example categories in the appendix. The automated tool section can be read on demand. Estimated reading time: 15 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"预训练无直接动作，但 §taxonomy 和自动标注管线值得扫；它可能成为后续 agent 数据清洗的标签空间。","en":"No direct pretraining action, but skim the taxonomy and auto-labeling pipeline; it may become a useful label space for agent-data curation."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Johns Hopkins University","California Institute of Technology","Northeastern University","Purdue University"],"authors":["Jie Gao","Kaiser Sun","Jen-tse Huang","Katherine Van Koevering","Sijie Ji","Heyuan Huang","Weiyan Shi","Zhuoran Lu","Ziang Xiao","Daniel Khashabi","Mark Dredze"],"notable_authors":["Daniel Khashabi"],"tags":["agent-interpretability","trajectory-analysis","taxonomy","agent-oversight"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13625","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13625","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13821","title":"Harnessing Agentic Evolution","abstract":"Agentic evolution has emerged as a powerful paradigm for improving programs, workflows, and scientific solutions by iteratively generating candidates, evaluating them, and using feedback to guide future search. However, existing methods are typically instantiated either as fixed hand-designed procedures that are modular but rigid, or as general-purpose agents that flexibly integrate feedback but can drift in long-horizon evolution. Both forms accumulate rich evidence over time, including candida","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T17:45:16+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13821.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.AI","cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有智能体进化范式分为两类：固定流程式进化僵化且易陷入局部最优，通用智能体式进化长周期运行容易发生漂移，两类都没有统一接口组织进化过程中积累的候选方案、反馈、轨迹等证据，也无法稳定修订后续进化的驱动机制。","importance":"将进化过程本身作为可编辑对象而非仅优化最终产出的元编辑思路，可迁移到持续预训练、SFT流程的自动优化场景，也能为长序列任务的自我改进机制设计提供参考。","technical_approach":"将智能体进化建模为交互式环境，把累计的进化上下文作为环境状态，把进化驱动机制作为可编辑对象，引入元智能体通过编辑进化机制而非直接生成候选方案来引导搜索；提出AEvo带约束的元编辑框架，标准化进化工作空间、隔离评估模块避免篡改、归档所有已评估候选方案，采用「元编辑阶段+进化执行段」的两阶段循环，同时支持流程式和智能体式两种进化范式的修订。","experiments":"在标准智能体与推理基准上，相比最强基线获得26%的相对提升；在3个开放优化任务上，相同迭代预算下超过全部4个对比基线。","reading_guide":"先看第1章的问题界定和第2章的形式化定义，再阅读核心框架设计部分，实验结果按需浏览，预计阅读时间20分钟。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing agentic evolution paradigms fall into two categories: rigid procedure-based evolution that easily falls into local optima, and flexible agent-based evolution that suffers from drift in long-horizon runs. Neither has a unified interface to organize accumulated evidence including candidates, feedback and traces, nor supports stable revision of the mechanism driving subsequent evolution.","importance":"The meta-editing paradigm that treats the evolution process itself as an editable object instead of only optimizing final outputs can be transferred to automatic optimization of continuous pre-training and SFT pipelines, and also provides reference for designing self-improvement mechanisms for long-sequence tasks.","technical_approach":"Formulates agentic evolution as an interactive environment, where accumulated evolution context serves as environment state, and the evolution driving mechanism is treated as an editable object. A meta-agent guides search by editing the evolution mechanism instead of directly generating candidates. Proposes AEvo, a harnessed meta-editing framework that standardizes the evolution workspace, isolates the evaluation module to prevent tampering, archives all evaluated candidates, and adopts a two-phase loop of meta-editing and evolution execution segments. It supports revision of both procedure-based and agent-based evolution paradigms.","experiments":"On standard agent and reasoning benchmarks, it achieves 26% relative improvement over the strongest baseline. On 3 open-ended optimization tasks, it outperforms all 4 comparison baselines under the same iteration budget.","reading_guide":"Start with problem framing in Section 1 and formalization in Section 2, then review the core framework design. Experimental results can be browsed on demand. Estimated reading time: 20 minutes.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"看方法图和实验表即可；把“生成候选”改成“编辑搜索程序”是干净想法，但要警惕评测靠工程调参堆出来。","en":"Skim the method diagram and tables; editing the search procedure instead of candidates is a clean idea, but watch for evaluation driven by engineering knobs."},"metadata":{"institutions":["The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)","DeepWisdom","Singapore University of Technology and Design","Nanyang Technological University","Shanghai Jiao Tong University","Tsinghua University","Université de Montréal & Mila"],"authors":["Jiayi Zhang","Yongfeng Gu","Jianhao Ruan","Maojia Song","Yiran Peng","Zhiguang Han","Jinyu Xiang","Zhitao Wang","Caiyin Yang","Yixi Ouyang","Bang Liu","Chenglin Wu","Yuyu Luo"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["agentic-evolution","meta-agent","program-search","workflow-optimization"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13821","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13821","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.12913","title":"Revisiting DAgger in the Era of LLM-Agents","abstract":"Long-horizon LM agents learn from multi-turn interaction, where a single early mistake can alter the subsequent state distribution and derail the whole trajectory. Existing recipes fall short in complementary ways: supervised fine-tuning provides dense teacher supervision but suffers from covariate shift because it is trained on off-policy teacher trajectories; while reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards avoids this off-policy mismatch by learning from on-policy rollouts but with only s","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T02:40:28+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_12913.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"在长时程、多轮交互的 LLM-Agent 里，SFT 的离策略模仿会因 covariate shift 产生误差累积；而基于可验证奖励的 RLVR 虽然在策略分布上更贴近部署，但反馈稀疏、信用分配难且采样成本高。论文要解决的是：能否同时获得“接近 on-policy 的状态覆盖”与“密集的教师监督”，并且避免 OPD 这类 on-policy 蒸馏在弱学生阶段的 cold-start 失败。","importance":"对预训练本身不是直接贡献，但对 post-train→pretrain 闭环有现实意义：它把经典 imitation learning 的 DAgger 机制落到 LLM 多轮 agent 上，提供一种比 RLVR 更省采样、比纯 SFT 更稳的长轨迹训练配方。对做持续 pretrain / mid-train 的团队也有启发：当任务具有强状态分布漂移（工具调用、代码库交互、网页环境）时，数据收集策略本身就是“训练目标的一部分”，单纯堆离线轨迹会系统性失配。","technical_approach":"方法是把 DAgger 的“在学生访问到的状态上请教师标注”改造成适配多轮对话/工具调用的 teacher-interleaved trajectory collection：每条轨迹按 turn 级别随机决定由学生还是教师出手（而不是 token 级），形成 mixture policy；训练迭代中教师接管概率 β 逐步退火到更偏学生，从而逐步扩大 on-policy 覆盖。收集到的混合轨迹上，用监督学习让学生模仿教师动作（密集标签来自教师在其接管回合的行为；以及在学生回合所到达的状态上由教师给出“应做什么”的标签，具体标注形式取决于环境接口）。与 OPD 的关键差异是：不需要教师 logits（可用黑盒教师），且通过“早期高比例教师接管”保证轨迹能走到有信息量的后续状态，缓解弱学生一开始 rollouts 早早崩掉导致学不到有效行为的问题。与 RLVR 的差异是：训练信号是密集模仿而非稀疏 outcome reward，因此信用分配更直接、方差更小。","experiments":"全文主打软件工程类长轨迹任务（SWE 场景）：需要在代码库内多轮搜索、定位、编辑、提交 patch，早期一步错会把后续状态带偏。论文报告在 4B 与 8B 两个规模上，teacher-interleaved DAgger 带来显著提升：4B 代理能超过一些代表性的 8B SWE agent；8B 代理性能接近更大（文中提到 32B 级）系统。除最终解决率外，作者还做了训练稳定性与行为层面的分析，结论是该方法能减轻 covariate shift、提升长轨迹中的搜索/编辑/失败恢复等子能力，并让训练过程更稳定（相对 RLVR 的高方差与 OPD 的冷启动失败）。由于你提供的全文片段未包含完整表格与具体数值明细，这里无法逐项复述每个 benchmark 的精确数字。","reading_guide":"泛读建议：\n- 先看方法部分对“turn-level mixture policy + β 退火”的定义与数据收集流程，确认它在 agent 环境里如何拿到教师标签、以及哪些回合被监督。\n- 再看实验分析里关于 covariate shift 缓解与长轨迹行为（search/edit/recovery）的分解指标：这部分通常比单一成功率更能解释为什么有效。\n- 如果时间有限，优先看：算法示意图/伪代码 + SWE 任务上的对比表 + 训练动态/失败案例分析。预计 30–45 分钟可抓住主要结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Long-horizon LLM agents suffer from compounding errors: SFT trains on expert-induced states and breaks under covariate shift, while RL with verifiable rewards is on-policy but sparse, high-variance, and expensive. The paper asks whether we can get on-policy state coverage and dense supervision at the same time, without OPD-style cold-start failures and without requiring teacher logits.","importance":"Not a pretraining paper per se, but it matters for the pretrain↔post-train loop: it operationalizes DAgger for multi-turn tool-using agents and provides a practical alternative to RLVR/OPD when state distribution shift is the dominant failure mode. For teams doing continual pretraining or mid-training on interactive data, the key takeaway is that trajectory collection (who acts when) is a first-class design choice; offline expert traces alone can be structurally mismatched to deployment states.","technical_approach":"They adapt DAgger via teacher-interleaved rollouts at the turn level. Each trajectory is generated by a stochastic mixture of student and teacher turns; early in training, the teacher takes over frequently to keep trajectories productive, and the takeover probability β is annealed down over iterations to increase on-policy coverage. The student is then trained with supervised imitation on these aggregated trajectories. Compared to OPD, it does not need teacher logits (works with black-box teachers) and avoids the weak-student cold start by ensuring early rollouts reach informative later states. Compared to RLVR, it replaces sparse outcome rewards with dense imitation targets, reducing variance and improving credit assignment.","experiments":"The main empirical focus is software-engineering style agent tasks where the agent must search a codebase, localize bugs, edit files, and submit patches over many turns. Reported results show strong gains at 4B and 8B: the 4B agent surpasses representative 8B SWE agents, and the 8B agent approaches much larger (32B-class) systems. Beyond end success rate, the paper includes analyses indicating improved training stability, reduced covariate shift, and better long-horizon behaviors (search/edit/recovery). Exact table numbers are not recoverable from the provided excerpt.","reading_guide":"Skim plan:\n- Read the algorithm section for the exact rollout mixing scheme (turn-level mixture policy) and the β schedule.\n- Then jump to the SWE results table and the behavior-level breakdown (search/edit/recovery) to understand where gains come from.\n- If you only have time for one deep dive, pick the training-dynamics / failure-mode analysis; that’s where the DAgger adaptation is most justified. ~30–45 minutes to get the core ideas.","authors_note":""},"recommendation":{"zh":"经典算法在LM Agent中的复用思路有参考价值，可看§3的策略插值设计。","en":"The reuse idea of classic algorithms in LM agents has reference value, check the policy interpolation design in §3."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Georgia Institute of Technology","ETH Zurich"],"authors":["Changhao Li","Rushi Qiang","Jiawei Huang","Chenxiao Gao","Chao Zhang","Niao He","Bo Dai"],"notable_authors":["Bo Dai","Niao He"],"tags":["LM agent","DAgger","covariate shift","reinforcement learning"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.12913","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12913","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13740","title":"Learning POMDP World Models from Observations with Language-Model Priors","abstract":"Whether navigating a building, operating a robot, or playing a game, an agent that acts effectively in an environment must first learn an internal model of how that environment works. Partially-observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs) provide a flexible modeling class for such internal world models, but learning them from observation-action trajectories alone is challenging and typically requires extensive environment interaction. We ask whether language-model priors can reduce costly inter","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"skim","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T16:18:15+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13740.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"现有基于LLM先验的世界模型学习方法（如WorldCoder、POMDP Coder）均依赖完全可观测假设或事后真实状态访问（post-hoc full observability），无法应用于遮挡环境、不完全信息博弈等严格POMDP场景。论文研究仅从观测-动作-奖励轨迹出发，能否利用LLM先验诱导出可执行的POMDP世界模型，而无需访问真实隐状态。","importance":"首次证明LLM先验足以在严格POMDP设置（无真实隐状态监督）下诱导结构化世界模型。这扩展了LLM在具身智能和强化学习中的适用边界——从完全可观测任务推进到部分可观测任务，为减少环境交互成本提供了新路径。","technical_approach":"提出Pinductor（POMDP-inductor）方法，分为两个核心阶段：(1) LLM提议阶段：让LLM根据少量观测-动作-奖励轨迹编写POMDP各组件（转移函数、观测函数、奖励函数、初始状态分布）的候选程序；(2) 迭代精炼阶段：使用基于信念的似然得分（belief-based likelihood score）来评分和优化候选模型。具体通过距离核函数将观测预测转化为软似然，并在模型自身滤波动力学诱导的信念分布下计算期望似然。该目标仅依赖观测和自诱导信念，无需特权状态信息。","experiments":"在5个不同复杂度的MiniGrid POMDP环境上评估。关键结果：(1) Pinductor在使用严格更少信息（无真实状态）的情况下，与使用特权状态的LLM基线（POMDP Coder）达到相当的样本效率和奖励性能；(2) 大幅优于传统表格POMDP基线（后者在少量轨迹下难以学习）；(3) 消融实验表明性能随LLM能力提升而提高，且当环境语义信息被隐藏时性能下降，确认了方法对LLM和文本信息的强依赖性；(4) 诱导的信念状态在规划过程中逐渐收敛到真实隐状态。","reading_guide":"泛读，重点关注第1章引言中的问题界定（为什么无监督POMDP诱导是未解决问题）、第3章方法中的信念似然评分机制（第3.2节 kernel-based likelihood objective）、第4章实验中的基准对比数据。阅读时间约30分钟。","authors_note":"机构信息未在提供的全文片段中明确给出。作者信息未提供。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM-based world model induction methods (WorldCoder, POMDP Coder) rely on full observability or post-hoc ground-truth state access, making them inapplicable to strictly partially-observable settings (occluded environments, imperfect-information games). This paper investigates whether LLM priors can induce executable POMDP world models from observation-action-reward trajectories alone, without any ground-truth latent state supervision.","importance":"First demonstration that LLM priors suffice for structured world model induction in the strict POMDP setting without privileged state supervision. This extends the applicability of LLM priors in embodied AI and reinforcement learning from fully observable to partially observable tasks, providing a path toward reducing expensive environment interaction.","technical_approach":"Pinductor (POMDP-inductor) operates in two core phases: (1) LLM proposal: an LLM writes candidate programs for POMDP components (transition, observation, reward, initial-state distributions) given a few observation-action-reward trajectories; (2) Iterative refinement: a belief-based likelihood score optimizes candidate models. Observation predictions are converted to soft likelihoods via a distance kernel, and candidates are scored under the expected likelihood of the belief distributions induced by their own filtering dynamics. This objective requires only observations and self-induced beliefs, no privileged state information.","experiments":"Evaluated on 5 MiniGrid POMDP environments of varying complexity. Key results: (1) Pinductor matches the sample efficiency and reward performance of a privileged-state LLM baseline (POMDP Coder) despite using strictly less information; (2) Substantially outperforms classical tabular POMDP baselines which struggle with few trajectories; (3) Ablations show performance scales with LLM capability and degrades when semantic information is withheld, confirming strong dependence on LLM and textual cues; (4) Induced belief states converge toward the true latent state during planning.","reading_guide":"Skim-level read. Focus on Section 1 for problem framing (why unsupervised POMDP induction is an open question), Section 3.2 for the kernel-based belief likelihood scoring mechanism, and Section 4 for benchmark comparison data. Estimated reading time: 30 minutes.","authors_note":"Institution and author information not available in the provided text excerpt."},"recommendation":{"zh":"读方法和实验设置即可；它给 agent world model 一个较干净的 LM-prior 测试床，但别外推到开放环境。","en":"Read the method and setup; it is a fairly clean testbed for LM priors in agent world models, but do not extrapolate it to open-ended environments."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems","University of California, Santa Barbara","University of Tübingen","University of Oxford","ELLIS Institute Tübingen"],"authors":["Valentin Six","Frederik Panse","Mathis Fajeau","Lancelot Da Costa","Mridul Sharma","Alfonso Amayuelas","Tim Z. Xiao","David Hyland","Philipp Hennig","Bernhard Schölkopf"],"notable_authors":["Bernhard Schölkopf","Philipp Hennig","Lancelot Da Costa"],"tags":["world-model","POMDP","LLM-priors","agent","sample-efficiency"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13740","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13740","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13647","title":"FlowCompile: An Optimizing Compiler for Structured LLM Workflows","abstract":"Structured LLM workflows, where specialized LLM sub-agents execute according to a predefined graph, have become a powerful abstraction for solving complex tasks. Optimizing such workflows, i.e., selecting configurations for each sub-agent to balance accuracy and latency, is challenging due to the combinatorial design space over model choices, reasoning budgets, and workflow structures. Existing cost-aware methods largely treat workflow optimization as a routing problem, selecting a configuration","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T15:06:36+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13647.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL"],"summary":{"core_problem":"结构化 LLM workflow 由多个子 agent 按图执行，论文要解决部署前如何在准确率、延迟和成本之间选择 workflow 级配置的问题。","importance":"这是 agent 系统优化工作，贡献类型更接近系统编译和部署策略。它不直接影响预训练，但对理解多模型、多预算推理系统如何做全局配置有参考价值。","technical_approach":"FlowCompile 把 workflow 优化从在线 routing 改写为离线 compilation：在部署前全局搜索模型选择、reasoning budget 和 workflow 结构，生成一组可复用的 workflow-level configurations，覆盖不同 accuracy-latency trade-off。这个思路借鉴 ML compiler，而不是每个 query 临时选路。","experiments":"摘要截断，未提供具体 benchmark、workflow 类型、模型规模、搜索开销和准确率/延迟提升幅度。可以确认的是实验目标围绕 accuracy-latency Pareto 配置，而非单一任务精度。","authors_note":"作者来自 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab；Chuang Gan 在多模态、机器人和智能体系统方向有较多代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles how to optimize structured LLM workflows, where specialized sub-agents execute along a predefined graph, under accuracy-latency trade-offs.","importance":"This is an agent-system optimization paper with a compiler-style deployment angle. It does not directly inform pretraining, but it is relevant to how multi-model reasoning systems are configured globally rather than per query.","technical_approach":"FlowCompile reframes workflow optimization as offline compilation. Before deployment, it globally explores model choices, reasoning budgets, and workflow structures, then emits a reusable set of workflow-level configurations spanning different accuracy-latency points. This differs from routing-based methods that select configurations online for each query.","experiments":"The provided abstract is truncated and does not include benchmark names, workflow families, model sizes, search cost, or quantitative gains. The evaluation target is an accuracy-latency Pareto frontier rather than raw task accuracy alone.","authors_note":"The authors are from MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab; Chuang Gan has a substantial track record in multimodal learning, robotics, and agentic systems."},"recommendation":{"zh":"预训练研究员只需看 workflow search space 和 Pareto 构造；它是系统编译信号，不是模型训练信号。","en":"For pretraining work, only the workflow search space and Pareto construction are worth a look; this is a systems signal, not a model-training signal."},"metadata":{"institutions":["MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab"],"authors":["Junyan Li","Zhang-Wei Hong","Maohao Shen","Yang Zhang","Chuang Gan"],"notable_authors":["Chuang Gan"],"tags":["LLM-agents","workflow-optimization","compiler","latency-accuracy"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13647","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13647","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13172","title":"When Does Hierarchy Help? Benchmarking Agent Coordination in Event-Driven Industrial Scheduling","abstract":"Recent advances in agent and multi-agent systems have shown strong performance on tool use, reasoning, and collaborative tasks. However, existing benchmarks mostly evaluate task completion in weakly coupled environments, and provide limited support for studying coordination in shared, dynamically evolving systems with hierarchy and coupled constraints. This leaves an important question underexplored: when do different coordination paradigms succeed or fail? We introduce Distributed Event-driven ","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T08:33:28+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13172.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.MA","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"评测多 Agent 在事件驱动工业调度中的协调能力，尤其是在层级结构、部分可观测和动态耦合约束下，不同协调范式何时有效或失效。","importance":"贡献是 Agent coordination benchmark，而不是某个工业调度应用系统。它补足了现有 Agent benchmark 多为弱耦合任务的问题，但场景仍偏调度仿真，对 LLM 预训练研究是间接参考。","technical_approach":"DESBench 构建共享的离散事件驱动工业调度环境，纳入多时间尺度决策、部分可观测、动态耦合约束和层级协调。评测指标覆盖任务效果、约束对齐、协调效率和鲁棒性，并比较集中式、层级式、分布式等代表性协调范式。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体模型、agent 数量、任务规模、baseline 名称和数值结果；实验重点应是不同 coordination paradigms 在动态共享环境中的表现差异，而不是单一任务完成率。","authors_note":"机构为 Zhejiang University。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper benchmarks multi-agent coordination in event-driven industrial scheduling, focusing on when hierarchical and other coordination paradigms succeed or fail under partial observability and dynamically coupled constraints.","importance":"The contribution is an agent-coordination benchmark rather than a narrow scheduling application. It addresses the limitation that many existing agent benchmarks use weakly coupled tasks, but its value for LLM pretraining is indirect.","technical_approach":"DESBench builds a shared discrete-event industrial scheduling environment with multi-timescale decisions, partial observability, dynamic coupled constraints, and hierarchy. Metrics cover effectiveness, constraint alignment, coordination efficiency, and robustness across representative coordination paradigms such as centralized, hierarchical, and distributed control.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide concrete model choices, agent counts, task sizes, baseline names, or numeric results. The experiments appear designed to compare coordination paradigms in a dynamic shared environment rather than optimize a single completion metric.","authors_note":"The institution is Zhejiang University."},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看环境设计和指标；若结果只是在工业调度里排榜，它对通用 Agent 训练信号帮助有限。","en":"Only inspect the environment design and metrics; if it devolves into scheduling leaderboards, it offers little signal for general agent training."},"metadata":{"institutions":["Zhejiang University"],"authors":["Ziqi Wang","Yuhao Yang","Zhiwei Ling","Wenzhuo Qian","Hailiang Zhao"],"notable_authors":[],"tags":["multi-agent","agent-benchmark","coordination","event-driven-scheduling","hierarchical-agents"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13172","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13172","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13360","title":"Building Interactive Real-Time Agents with Asynchronous I/O and Speculative Tool Calling","abstract":"There is a growing demand for agentic AI technologies for a range of downstream applications like customer service and personal assistants. For applications where the agent needs to interact with a person, real-time low-latency responsiveness is required; for example, with voice-controlled applications, under 1 second of latency is typically required for the interaction to feel seamless. However, if we want the LLM to reason and execute an agentic workflow with tool calling, this can add can add","starred":false,"priority":"p2","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T11:20:52+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13360.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.LG"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决实时交互型 LLM Agent 在多轮 tool calling 中延迟过高的问题，目标是把复杂工作流压到人机语音交互可接受的低延迟区间。","importance":"贡献类型是 Agent 系统与执行调度创新，不是预训练方法；价值在于把传统串行 reason-act 工具调用改成可重叠执行的低延迟系统，对实时语音 Agent 和在线服务有工程参考。","technical_approach":"提出 Asynchronous I/O，将 Agent 的核心推理-行动线程与等待用户或环境信息的外部 I/O 解耦，使模型推理、工具调用和外部等待可以重叠；提出 Speculative Tool Calling，在信息尚未完全返回时提前预测可能需要的工具调用，以隐藏部分工具延迟。方法属于系统调度和执行范式改造，而不是模型训练目标改造。","experiments":"给定摘要没有提供具体实验数字、工具类型、模型规模、延迟分解或成功率变化；预期评估重点应是端到端响应延迟、工具调用准确性、错误调用成本和多轮交互体验。","authors_note":"作者来自 UC Berkeley；Michael W. Mahoney、Amir Gholami、Kurt Keutzer、Yakun Sophia Shao 所在团队长期做高效机器学习、系统和硬件协同优化。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets high latency in real-time interactive LLM agents that perform multi-turn tool calling, especially for voice-like interactions where sub-second responsiveness is desirable.","importance":"This is an agent-systems contribution rather than a pretraining method. Its value lies in replacing serial reason-act tool execution with overlapped scheduling, which is relevant for real-time voice agents and online serving.","technical_approach":"It introduces Asynchronous I/O, decoupling the agent’s core reason-and-act thread from waiting on user or environmental inputs, so reasoning, tool execution, and external delays can overlap. It also introduces Speculative Tool Calling, where likely tool calls are launched before all information is available to hide tool latency. The novelty is in execution orchestration, not model objectives.","experiments":"The provided abstract does not include concrete numbers, model sizes, tool suites, latency breakdowns, or success-rate changes. The key evaluation should involve end-to-end response latency, speculative-call precision, wasted-call cost, and multi-turn interaction quality.","authors_note":"The authors are from UC Berkeley. Michael W. Mahoney, Amir Gholami, Kurt Keutzer, and Yakun Sophia Shao are associated with efficient ML, systems, and hardware-aware optimization work."},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看系统设计图和延迟分解；对 pretrain 无直接用处，但能提醒 Agent 能力常被串行 I/O 吃掉。","en":"Skim the system diagram and latency breakdown; it is not a pretraining paper, but it shows how agent capability can be masked by serial I/O."},"metadata":{"institutions":["University of California, Berkeley"],"authors":["Coleman Hooper","Minwoo Kang","Suhong Moon","Nicholas Lee","Eric Wen","John Wawrzynek","Michael W. Mahoney","Yakun Sophia Shao","Amir Gholami","Kurt Keutzer"],"notable_authors":["Michael W. Mahoney","Amir Gholami","Kurt Keutzer","Yakun Sophia Shao"],"tags":["agent-systems","tool-calling","latency","asynchronous-io","speculative-execution"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13360","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13360","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}},{"id":"2605.13050","title":"Context Training with Active Information Seeking","abstract":"Most existing large language models (LLMs) are expensive to adapt after deployment, especially when a task requires newly produced information or niche domain knowledge. Recent work has shown that, by manipulating and optimizing their context, LLMs can be tailored to downstream tasks without updating their weights. However, most existing methods remain closed-loop, relying solely on the model's intrinsic knowledge. In this paper, we equip these context optimizers with Wikipedia search and browse","starred":false,"priority":"p3","reading_tier":"glance","source":"arxiv","sources":["arxiv"],"published_at":"2026-05-13T06:15:32+00:00","category_id":"agent","cover_url":"/covers/2605_13050.png","hf_upvotes":0,"arxiv_categories":["cs.CL","cs.AI"],"summary":{"core_problem":"解决部署后不更新权重的 LLM 如何通过优化上下文并主动检索外部信息来适配新任务和长尾知识的问题。","importance":"贡献类型是上下文优化与工具使用方法。它对 pretrain 的直接价值有限，但能提供一个信号：模型能力越来越依赖上下文构造、检索策略和候选上下文搜索，而不是单次 prompt engineering。","technical_approach":"在已有 context optimizer 上加入 Wikipedia search 与 browser tools，并指出简单串行地把工具接入上下文优化会降低性能。论文改用 search-based training，维护多个候选上下文，在搜索过程中剪枝，避免单一路径早期错误污染最终上下文。","experiments":"覆盖低资源翻译 Flores+、健康场景等多领域任务。摘要称主动信息获取与多候选上下文搜索结合后有一致且显著收益，但未给出模型规模、具体 LLM、检索预算、baseline 名称和提升幅度。","authors_note":"给定机构为 The University of Edinburgh；Arthur Szlam 和 Marc'Aurelio Ranzato 是大模型与强化学习/序列建模领域知名研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies how deployed LLMs can adapt to new tasks and niche or newly produced knowledge by optimizing context and actively seeking external information, without updating model weights.","importance":"The contribution is a method for context optimization with tool use. Its direct pretraining value is limited, but it gives a useful signal: downstream competence can depend heavily on context search, retrieval policy, and candidate management rather than one-shot prompt design.","technical_approach":"The work augments context optimizers with Wikipedia search and browser tools. It finds that naively inserting tools into a standard sequential context optimization pipeline can hurt performance. The proposed alternative uses search-based training, keeps multiple candidate contexts, and prunes them to reduce early-path error lock-in.","experiments":"The evaluation spans low-resource translation on Flores+, health scenarios, and other domains. The abstract reports consistent and substantial gains from active information seeking when paired with multi-candidate context search, but does not provide model sizes, exact LLMs, retrieval budgets, baseline names, or numerical gains.","authors_note":"The listed institution is The University of Edinburgh; Arthur Szlam and Marc'Aurelio Ranzato are well-known researchers in large-scale learning, reinforcement learning, and sequence modeling."},"recommendation":{"zh":"不是 pretrain 论文；看 abstract 和算法图即可，关键点是“加工具会变差，搜索式上下文训练才稳”。","en":"Not a pretraining paper; the useful bit is that adding tools can hurt unless context optimization is treated as search with pruning."},"metadata":{"institutions":["The University of Edinburgh"],"authors":["Zeyu Huang","Adhiguna Kuncoro","Qixuan Feng","Jiajun Shen","Lucio Dery","Arthur Szlam","Marc'Aurelio Ranzato"],"notable_authors":["Arthur Szlam","Marc'Aurelio Ranzato"],"tags":["context-optimization","tool-use","active-search","retrieval","agent"],"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.13050","pdf":"https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13050","github":null,"project":null,"source_url":null,"article":null}}}]}],"trending_repos":[{"id":"repo-supertone-inc-supertonic","full_name":"supertone-inc/supertonic","owner":"supertone-inc","name":"supertonic","url":"https://github.com/supertone-inc/supertonic","description":"Lightning-Fast, On-Device, Multilingual TTS — running natively via ONNX.","language":"Swift","topics":["cpp","csharp","go","ios","java","lightweight","nodejs","on-device","python","rust","swift","text-to-speech","tts","web"],"license":"MIT","stars":5448,"stars_today":1128,"forks":534,"homepage":"https://huggingface.co/spaces/Supertone/supertonic-2","owner_avatar":"https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/61007505?v=4","latest_release":{"tag":"v2.0.0","name":"v2.0.0","published_at":"2026-01-06T08:16:41Z","url":"https://github.com/supertone-inc/supertonic/releases/tag/v2.0.0"},"category_id":"multimodal_gen","is_paper_companion":true,"related_papers":["2503.23108","2509.11084","2509.19091"],"summary":{"highlights":["PyPI：pip install supertonic","支持Python/Swift/iOS/Web等","v3兼容v2公开ONNX接口"],"how":"ONNX Runtime跨端推理，约99M参数固定音色。","what":"本地ONNX多语种TTS，支持端侧合成。","why":"面向隐私/离线语音应用，v3覆盖31语种。"},"summary_en":{"highlights":["PyPI: pip install supertonic","Browser uses onnxruntime-web","v3 keeps v2-compatible ONNX interface"],"how":"Runs ONNX Runtime across Python, Swift, iOS, Web, C++, Go, Java, C#, Rust; about 99M parameters.","what":"On-device multilingual TTS using public ONNX assets and native runtimes.","why":"Useful for private or offline speech apps; v3 expands from 5 to 31 languages."},"first_seen_on_trending":"2026-05-14","last_seen_on_trending":"2026-05-15","trend_streak_days":2,"trending_rank":9,"fetched_at":"2026-05-15T04:15:54.301846+00:00","relevance":8},{"id":"repo-nvidia-ai-blueprints-video-search-and-summarization","full_name":"NVIDIA-AI-Blueprints/video-search-and-summarization","owner":"NVIDIA-AI-Blueprints","name":"video-search-and-summarization","url":"https://github.com/NVIDIA-AI-Blueprints/video-search-and-summarization","description":"Suite of reference architectures for building GPU-accelerated vision agents and AI-powered video analytics applications.","language":"Python","topics":["agents","llm","rag","skills","video-analytics","video-search","vlm"],"license":"NOASSERTION","stars":885,"stars_today":62,"forks":250,"homepage":"https://build.nvidia.com/nvidia/video-search-and-summarization","owner_avatar":"https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/178940881?v=4","latest_release":{"tag":"v3.1.0","name":"VSS 3.1.0","published_at":"2026-03-18T04:47:34Z","url":"https://github.com/NVIDIA-AI-Blueprints/video-search-and-summarization/releases/tag/v3.1.0"},"category_id":"agent","is_paper_companion":false,"related_papers":[],"summary":{"what":"GPU加速视频搜索、问答与长视频总结蓝图","why":"面向海量存储/流式视频的可部署参考架构","how":"RTVI→分析→MCP代理；NIM+VLM/LLM+嵌入检索","highlights":["含Q&A报告、告警核验、实时告警、搜索、LVS流程","提供Docker Compose与Next.js UI","最新版本v3.1.0(2026-03-18)"]},"summary_en":{"what":"Blueprint for GPU-accelerated video search, VQA, and summarization agents.","why":"Deployable reference stack for large archived and streaming video analytics.","how":"RT video intelligence → downstream analytics → MCP-based agent using NIM VLM/LLM plus embedding search.","highlights":["Workflows: Q&A reports, alert verification, real-time alerts, search, long-video summarization","Docker Compose deployments and a Next.js UI included","Latest release v3.1.0 (2026-03-18)"]},"first_seen_on_trending":"2026-05-15","last_seen_on_trending":"2026-05-15","trend_streak_days":1,"trending_rank":11,"fetched_at":"2026-05-15T04:15:54.301846+00:00","relevance":9},{"id":"repo-rohitg00-agentmemory","full_name":"rohitg00/agentmemory","owner":"rohitg00","name":"agentmemory","url":"https://github.com/rohitg00/agentmemory","description":"#1 Persistent memory for AI coding agents based on real-world benchmarks","language":"TypeScript","topics":["agentmemory","agents","ai","claude","claudecode","codex","copilot","cursor","genai","harness","hermes","memory","openclaw"],"license":"Apache-2.0","stars":9119,"stars_today":1879,"forks":755,"homepage":"https://agent-memory.dev","owner_avatar":"https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/48523873?v=4","latest_release":{"tag":"v0.9.12","name":"v0.9.12 — BM25 unicode + vector live-write + viewer hardening + plaintext-bearer guard","published_at":"2026-05-13T15:17:39Z","url":"https://github.com/rohitg00/agentmemory/releases/tag/v0.9.12"},"category_id":"coding_agent","is_paper_companion":false,"related_papers":[],"summary":{"what":"为编码代理提供持久记忆服务，跨会话共享。","why":"面向Claude Code、Cursor等，减少重复说明与上下文token。","how":"基于iii引擎，结合MCP/Hook/REST、混合检索与知识图谱。","highlights":["检索R@5达95.2%，token减少92%","支持51个MCP工具、12个自动hooks","兼容Claude Code、Cursor、Codex CLI等"]},"summary_en":{"what":"Persistent memory server for coding agents, shared across sessions and clients.","why":"Useful for Claude Code, Cursor, Codex CLI users to avoid repeated instructions and reduce context tokens.","how":"Built on iii engine with MCP/hooks/REST, hybrid retrieval, confidence scoring, lifecycle, and knowledge graphs.","highlights":["95.2% retrieval R@5, 92% fewer tokens","51 MCP tools, 12 auto hooks","Works with Claude Code, Cursor, Codex CLI, Gemini CLI"]},"first_seen_on_trending":"2026-05-12","last_seen_on_trending":"2026-05-15","trend_streak_days":3,"trending_rank":3,"fetched_at":"2026-05-15T04:15:54.301846+00:00","relevance":8},{"id":"repo-roboflow-supervision","full_name":"roboflow/supervision","owner":"roboflow","name":"supervision","url":"https://github.com/roboflow/supervision","description":"We write your reusable computer vision tools. 💜","language":"Python","topics":["classification","coco","computer-vision","deep-learning","hacktoberfest","image-processing","instance-segmentation","low-code","machine-learning","metrics","object-detection","oriented-bounding-box","pascal-voc","python","pytorch","tensorflow","tracking","video-processing","yolo"],"license":"MIT","stars":38955,"stars_today":83,"forks":3487,"homepage":"https://supervision.roboflow.com","owner_avatar":"https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/53104118?v=4","latest_release":{"tag":"0.28.0","name":"supervision-0.28.0: CompactMask & SAM3","published_at":"2026-04-30T16:00:23Z","url":"https://github.com/roboflow/supervision/releases/tag/0.28.0"},"category_id":"industry","is_paper_companion":false,"related_papers":[],"summary":{"what":"模型无关的CV工具库：检测/分割/分类","why":"统一Detections与数据集IO，便于应用开发","how":"提供连接器、Annotators、COCO/YOLO/VOC工具","highlights":["支持Ultralytics/Transformers/MMDet/Inference","DetectionDataset支持加载/拆分/合并/转换","最新版本0.28.0（2026-04-30）"]},"summary_en":{"what":"Model-agnostic CV toolkit for detection, segmentation, and classification.","why":"Standardizes outputs (sv.Detections) and dataset I/O to speed CV app development.","how":"Connectors to popular libs, visualization annotators, and COCO/YOLO/VOC dataset utilities.","highlights":["Connectors: Ultralytics, Transformers, MMDetection, Roboflow Inference","DetectionDataset: load/split/merge/convert between formats","Release 0.28.0 (2026-04-30)"]},"first_seen_on_trending":"2026-05-15","last_seen_on_trending":"2026-05-15","trend_streak_days":1,"trending_rank":7,"fetched_at":"2026-05-15T04:15:54.301846+00:00","relevance":8},{"id":"repo-k-dense-ai-scientific-agent-skills","full_name":"K-Dense-AI/scientific-agent-skills","owner":"K-Dense-AI","name":"scientific-agent-skills","url":"https://github.com/K-Dense-AI/scientific-agent-skills","description":"A set of ready to use Agent Skills for research, science, engineering, analysis, finance and writing.","language":"Python","topics":["agent-skills","ai-scientist","bioinformatics","chemoinformatics","claude","claude-skills","claudecode","clinical-research","computational-biology","data-analysis","drug-discovery","genomics","materials-science","metabolomics","proteomics","scientific-computing","scientific-visualization"],"license":"MIT","stars":21908,"stars_today":654,"forks":2386,"homepage":"https://k-dense.ai","owner_avatar":"https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/238572432?v=4","latest_release":{"tag":"v2.38.0","name":"v2.38.0","published_at":"2026-05-01T18:02:44Z","url":"https://github.com/K-Dense-AI/scientific-agent-skills/releases/tag/v2.38.0"},"category_id":"agent","is_paper_companion":false,"related_papers":[],"summary":{"highlights":["接入100+科研/金融数据库","支持Cursor、Claude Code、Codex","v2.38.0发布于2026-05-01"],"how":"按Agent Skills标准封装文档、示例和集成。","what":"为AI代理提供135个科研技能包。","why":"面向科研编程，覆盖生化医工等流程。"},"summary_en":{"highlights":["Access to 100+ scientific and financial databases","Works with Cursor, Claude Code, and Codex","Latest release v2.38.0 on 2026-05-01"],"how":"Packages SKILL.md docs, code examples, best practices, database lookups, Python guides, and integrations under the Agent Skills standard.","what":"Provides 135 ready-to-use scientific skills for Agent Skills-compatible AI agents.","why":"Helps coding agents handle biology, chemistry, medicine, engineering, finance, and writing workflows with curated tool guidance."},"first_seen_on_trending":"2026-05-14","last_seen_on_trending":"2026-05-15","trend_streak_days":2,"trending_rank":5,"fetched_at":"2026-05-15T04:15:54.301846+00:00","relevance":7},{"id":"repo-cloakhq-cloakbrowser","full_name":"CloakHQ/CloakBrowser","owner":"CloakHQ","name":"CloakBrowser","url":"https://github.com/CloakHQ/CloakBrowser","description":"Stealth Chromium that passes every bot detection test. Drop-in Playwright replacement with source-level fingerprint patches. 30/30 tests passed.","language":"Python","topics":["ai-agents","anti-detect","antidetect-browser","bot-detection","browser-automation","captcha-bypass","chromium","cloudflare","cloudflare-bypass","fingerprint","headless-browser","playwright","puppeteer","python","recaptcha","selenium","stealth-browser","undetected","web-scraping","webscraping"],"license":"MIT","stars":11093,"stars_today":1354,"forks":829,"homepage":"https://cloakbrowser.dev/","owner_avatar":"https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/263128610?v=4","latest_release":{"tag":"chromium-v146.0.7680.177.4","name":"Chromium v146.0.7680.177.4 — Stealth Build","published_at":"2026-04-28T03:44:50Z","url":"https://github.com/CloakHQ/CloakBrowser/releases/tag/chromium-v146.0.7680.177.4"},"category_id":"agent","is_paper_companion":false,"related_papers":[],"summary":{"highlights":["最新版基于Chromium 146.0.7680.177.4","README称57个指纹补丁，覆盖WebGL、WebRTC等","支持Python/JS，首跑自动下载约200MB二进制"],"how":"Chromium C++源码级指纹补丁，含humanize、代理地理推断与持久上下文。","what":"基于源码补丁的隐身Chromium，兼容Playwright/Puppeteer。","why":"面向自动化与代理场景，绕过常见指纹与行为检测；README称30+站点通过。"},"summary_en":{"highlights":["Latest release rebases to Chromium 146.0.7680.177.4","README lists 57 fingerprint patches across WebGL, WebRTC, audio, and timing","Python and JS packages auto-download a ~200MB browser binary"],"how":"Applies Chromium C++ fingerprint patches, plus humanize input, proxy-based geo settings, and persistent contexts.","what":"A source-patched stealth Chromium with Playwright/Puppeteer-compatible APIs.","why":"Useful for browser automation and agents facing fingerprint or behavior checks; README reports passing 30+ detection sites."},"first_seen_on_trending":"2026-05-12","last_seen_on_trending":"2026-05-15","trend_streak_days":3,"trending_rank":12,"fetched_at":"2026-05-15T04:15:54.301846+00:00","relevance":6},{"id":"repo-mattpocock-skills","full_name":"mattpocock/skills","owner":"mattpocock","name":"skills","url":"https://github.com/mattpocock/skills","description":"Skills for Real Engineers. Straight from my .claude directory.","language":"Shell","topics":[],"license":"","stars":82825,"stars_today":2987,"forks":7162,"homepage":"","owner_avatar":"","latest_release":null,"category_id":"coding_agent","is_paper_companion":false,"related_papers":[],"summary":{"what":"mattpocock的Claude技能配置集合。","why":"README几乎为空；主要看.claude实践。","how":"Shell仓库，文件来自作者.claude目录。","highlights":["82.8k stars；暂无release。"]},"summary_en":{"what":"A collection of Matt Pocock's Claude skills/configs.","why":"README is empty; useful mainly to inspect his .claude workflow conventions.","how":"Shell-based repo with files copied from the author's .claude directory.","highlights":["82.8k stars; no releases."]},"first_seen_on_trending":"2026-04-27","last_seen_on_trending":"2026-05-15","trend_streak_days":2,"trending_rank":13,"fetched_at":"2026-05-15T04:15:54.301846+00:00","relevance":5},{"id":"repo-obra-superpowers","full_name":"obra/superpowers","owner":"obra","name":"superpowers","url":"https://github.com/obra/superpowers","description":"An agentic skills framework & software development methodology that works.","language":"Shell","topics":[],"license":"MIT","stars":191498,"stars_today":1780,"forks":17031,"homepage":"","owner_avatar":"https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/45416?v=4","latest_release":{"tag":"v5.1.0","name":"v5.1.0","published_at":"2026-05-04T22:13:34Z","url":"https://github.com/obra/superpowers/releases/tag/v5.1.0"},"category_id":"agent","is_paper_companion":false,"related_papers":[],"summary":{"highlights":["支持Claude/Codex/Gemini/Cursor等插件安装","子代理驱动开发：每任务两阶段审查","最新v5.1.0（2026-05-04）"],"how":"技能自动触发：设计→计划→子代理执行→TDD→评审","what":"给编码代理的可组合技能与开发流程库","why":"把写代码前的规格、计划、评审变强制流程"},"summary_en":{"highlights":["Plugin installs for Claude Code, Codex, Gemini CLI, Cursor, Copilot CLI, etc.","Subagent-driven development with spec-then-quality review","Latest release v5.1.0 (2026-05-04)"],"how":"Auto-triggered skills: brainstorm spec, write 2–5 min tasks, subagent execution with two-stage review, RED/GREEN TDD, git worktrees.","what":"Composable skills and a workflow for coding agents.","why":"Turns spec, planning, TDD, and review into mandatory steps, reducing ad‑hoc agent coding."},"first_seen_on_trending":"2026-04-30","last_seen_on_trending":"2026-05-15","trend_streak_days":2,"trending_rank":4,"fetched_at":"2026-05-15T04:15:54.301846+00:00","relevance":5},{"id":"repo-garrytan-gstack","full_name":"garrytan/gstack","owner":"garrytan","name":"gstack","url":"https://github.com/garrytan/gstack","description":"Use Garry Tan's exact Claude Code setup: 23 opinionated tools that serve as CEO, Designer, Eng Manager, Release Manager, Doc Engineer, and QA","language":"TypeScript","topics":[],"license":"","stars":96943,"stars_today":915,"forks":14417,"homepage":"","owner_avatar":"","latest_release":null,"category_id":"agent","is_paper_companion":false,"related_papers":[],"summary":{"what":"提供Claude Code角色化工具配置。","why":"面向想复用Garry Tan工作流的开发者。","how":"TypeScript项目；README未说明实现细节。","highlights":["仓库描述称含23个工具。","暂无正式release。"]},"summary_en":{"what":"Provides a role-based Claude Code setup.","why":"For developers studying Garry Tan’s Claude Code workflow; README gives no usage details.","how":"TypeScript repo; implementation and tool design are not documented in README.","highlights":["Repo description mentions 23 tools.","No tagged release found."]},"first_seen_on_trending":"2026-05-15","last_seen_on_trending":"2026-05-15","trend_streak_days":1,"trending_rank":15,"fetched_at":"2026-05-15T04:15:54.301846+00:00","relevance":5}],"trending_hf":[],"feishu_doc_url":"https://bytedance.larkoffice.com/docx/KqmOdUEE7oiTaYxD0UvcuNwtncb","feishu_doc_id":"KqmOdUEE7oiTaYxD0UvcuNwtncb"},"dates":"$0:rsc:props:children:0:0:props:dates","currentDate":"2026-05-15"}]}]}]],["$L47","$L48","$L49","$L4a"],"$L4b"]}],"isPartial":false,"staleTime":300,"varyParams":null,"buildId":"lflssTw87C7-rsMkeKh8E"}
47:["$","script","script-0",{"src":"/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/09-o.77-p0p36.js","async":true}]
48:["$","script","script-1",{"src":"/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/1304s0wcp2kce.js","async":true}]
49:["$","script","script-2",{"src":"/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0j1uy9t~zxcf0.js","async":true}]
4a:["$","script","script-3",{"src":"/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/14_5o-nbg8k_r.js","async":true}]
4b:["$","$L4c",null,{"children":["$","$4d",null,{"name":"Next.MetadataOutlet","children":"$@4e"}]}]
4e:null
