1:"$Sreact.fragment"
2:I[44048,["/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/08cykig6vtx_p.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/07qi2okp-.yp9.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0frujd.eyhz4o.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0n4z.7yu76je-.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/12.3u5-pgh3xi.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0r0c80niwkt55.js"],"ConferenceView"]
1b4:I[97367,["/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/08cykig6vtx_p.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/07qi2okp-.yp9.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0frujd.eyhz4o.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0n4z.7yu76je-.js"],"OutletBoundary"]
1b5:"$Sreact.suspense"
3:T45c,The mixture proportions of pretraining data domains (e.g., Wikipedia, books, web text) greatly affect language model (LM) performance. In this paper, we propose Domain Reweighting with Minimax Optimization (DoReMi), which first trains a small proxy model using group distributionally robust optimization (Group DRO) over domains to produce domain weights (mixture proportions) without knowledge of downstream tasks. We then resample a dataset with these domain weights and train a larger, full-sized model. In our experiments, we use DoReMi on a 280M-parameter proxy model to set the domain weights for training an 8B-parameter model (30x larger) more efficiently. On The Pile, DoReMi improves perplexity across all domains, even when it downweights a domain. DoReMi improves average few-shot downstream accuracy by 6.5% points over a baseline model trained using The Pile's default domain weights and reaches the baseline accuracy with 2.6x fewer training steps. On the GLaM dataset, DoReMi, which has no knowledge of downstream tasks, even matches the performance of using domain weights tuned on downstream tasks.4:T42c,Despite a growing interest in diffusion-based language models, existing work has not shown that these models can attain nontrivial likelihoods on standard language modeling benchmarks. In this work, we take the first steps towards closing the likelihood gap between autoregressive and diffusion-based language models, with the goal of building and releasing a diffusion model which outperforms a small but widely-known autoregressive model. We pursue this goal through algorithmic improvements, scaling laws, and increased compute. On the algorithmic front, we introduce several methodological improvements for the maximum-likelihood training of diffusion language models. We then study scaling laws for our diffusion models and find compute-optimal training regimes which differ substantially from autoregressive models. Using our methods and scaling analysis, we train and release Plaid 1B, a large diffusion language model which outperforms GPT-2 124M in likelihood on benchmark datasets and generates fluent samples in unconditional and zero-shot control settings.5:T4b8,The current trend of scaling language models involves increasing both parameter count and training dataset size. Extrapolating this trend suggests that training dataset size may soon be limited by the amount of text data available on the internet. Motivated by this limit, we investigate scaling language models in data-constrained regimes. Specifically, we run a large set of experiments varying the extent of data repetition and compute budget, ranging up to 900 billion training tokens and 9 billion parameter models. We find that with constrained data for a fixed compute budget, training with up to 4 epochs of repeated data yields negligible changes to loss compared to having unique data. However, with more repetition, the value of adding compute eventually decays to zero. We propose and empirically validate a scaling law for compute optimality that accounts for the decreasing value of repeated tokens and excess parameters. Finally, we experiment with approaches mitigating data scarcity, including augmenting the training dataset with code data or removing commonly used filters. Models and datasets from our 400 training runs are freely available at https://github.com/huggingface/datablations.6:T644,While large-scale unsupervised language models (LMs) learn broad world knowledge and some reasoning skills, achieving precise control of their behavior is difficult due to the completely unsupervised nature of their training. Existing methods for gaining such steerability collect human labels of the relative quality of model generations and fine-tune the unsupervised LM to align with these preferences, often with reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF). However, RLHF is a complex and often unstable procedure, first fitting a reward model that reflects the human preferences, and then fine-tuning the large unsupervised LM using reinforcement learning to maximize this estimated reward without drifting too far from the original model. In this paper we introduce a new parameterization of the reward model in RLHF that enables extraction of the corresponding optimal policy in closed form, allowing us to solve the standard RLHF problem with only a simple classification loss. The resulting algorithm, which we call Direct Preference Optimization (DPO), is stable, performant, and computationally lightweight, eliminating the need for sampling from the LM during fine-tuning or performing significant hyperparameter tuning. Our experiments show that DPO can fine-tune LMs to align with human preferences as well as or better than existing methods. Notably, fine-tuning with DPO exceeds PPO-based RLHF in ability to control sentiment of generations, and matches or improves response quality in summarization and single-turn dialogue while being substantially simpler to implement and train.7:T4e9,Over recent years, an increasing amount of compute and data has been poured into training large language models (LLMs), usually by doing one-pass learning on as many tokens as possible randomly selected from large-scale web corpora. While training on ever-larger portions of the internet leads to consistent performance improvements, the size of these improvements diminishes with scale, and there has been little work exploring the effect of data selection on pre-training and downstream performance beyond simple de-duplication methods such as MinHash. Here, we show that careful data selection (on top of de-duplicated data) via pre-trained model embeddings can speed up training (20% efficiency gains) and improves average downstream accuracy on 16 NLP tasks (up to 2%) at the 6.7B model scale. Furthermore, we show that repeating data intelligently consistently outperforms baseline training (while repeating random data performs worse than baseline training). Our results indicate that clever data selection can significantly improve LLM pre-training, calls into question the common practice of training for a single epoch on as much data as possible, and demonstrates a path to keep improving our models past the limits of randomly sampling web data.8:T69b,Selecting a suitable pretraining dataset is crucial for both general-domain (e.g., GPT-3) and domain-specific (e.g., Codex) language models (LMs). We formalize this problem as selecting a subset of a large raw unlabeled dataset to match a desired target distribution given unlabeled target samples. Due to the scale and dimensionality of the raw text data, existing methods use simple heuristics or require human experts to manually curate data. Instead, we extend the classic importance resampling approach used in low-dimensions for LM data selection. We propose Data Selection with Importance Resampling (DSIR), an efficient and scalable framework that estimates importance weights in a reduced feature space for tractability and selects data with importance resampling according to these weights. We instantiate the DSIR framework with hashed n-gram features for efficiency, enabling the selection of 100M documents from the full Pile dataset in 4.5 hours. To measure whether hashed n-gram features preserve the aspects of the data that are relevant to the target, we define KL reduction, a data metric that measures the proximity between the selected pretraining data and the target on some feature space. Across 8 data selection methods (including expert selection), KL reduction on hashed n-gram features highly correlates with average downstream accuracy (r=0.82). When selecting data for continued pretraining on a specific domain, DSIR performs comparably to expert curation across 8 target distributions. When pretraining general-domain models (target is Wikipedia and books), DSIR improves over random selection and heuristic filtering baselines by 2--2.5% on the GLUE benchmark.9:T4b6,Autoregressive models for text sometimes generate repetitive and low-quality output because errors accumulate during the steps of generation. This issue is often attributed to exposure bias -- the difference between how a model is trained, and how it is used during inference. Denoising diffusion models provide an alternative approach in which a model can revisit and revise its output. However, they can be computationally expensive and prior efforts on text have led to models that produce less fluent output compared to autoregressive models, especially for longer text and paragraphs. In this paper, we propose PLANNER, a model that combines latent semantic diffusion with autoregressive generation, to generate fluent text while exercising global control over paragraphs. The model achieves this by combining an autoregressive "decoding" module with a "planning" module  that uses latent diffusion to generate semantic paragraph embeddings in a coarse-to-fine manner. The proposed method is evaluated on various conditional generation tasks, and results on semantic generation, text completion and summarization show its effectiveness in generating high-quality long-form text in an efficient manner.a:T4e5,Preference-based reinforcement learning (PbRL) is an approach that enables RL agents to learn from preference, which is particularly useful when formulating a reward function is challenging. Existing PbRL methods generally involve a two-step procedure: they first learn a reward model based on given preference data and then employ off-the-shelf reinforcement learning algorithms using the learned reward model. However, obtaining an accurate reward model solely from preference information, especially when the preference is from human teachers, can be difficult. Instead, we propose a PbRL algorithm that directly learns from preference without requiring any reward modeling. To achieve this, we adopt a contrastive learning framework to design a novel policy scoring metric that assigns a high score to policies that align with the given preferences. We apply our algorithm to offline RL tasks with actual human preference labels and show that our algorithm outperforms or is on par with the existing PbRL methods. Notably, on high-dimensional control tasks, our algorithm surpasses offline RL methods that learn with ground-truth reward information. Finally, we show that our algorithm can be successfully applied to fine-tune large language models.b:T444,Memorization, or the tendency of large language models (LLMs) to output entire sequences from their training data verbatim, is a key concern for deploying language models. In particular, it is vital to minimize a model's memorization of sensitive datapoints such as those containing personal identifiable information (PII). The prevalence of such undesirable memorization can pose issues for model trainers, and may even require discarding an otherwise functional model. We therefore seek to predict which sequences will be memorized before a large model's full train-time by extrapolating the memorization behavior of lower-compute trial runs. We measure memorization in the Pythia model suite and plot scaling laws for forecasting memorization, allowing us to provide equi-compute recommendations to maximize the reliability (recall) of such predictions. We additionally provide further novel discoveries on the distribution of memorization scores across models and data. We release all code and data necessary to reproduce the results in this paper at https://github.com/EleutherAI/pythia.c:T6ac,Transformer models have been widely adopted in various domains over the last years and especially large language models have advanced the field of AI significantly. Due to their size, the capability of these networks has increased tremendously, but this has come at the cost of a significant increase in necessary compute. Quantization is one of the most effective ways for reducing the computational time and memory consumption of neural networks. Many studies have shown, however, that modern transformer models tend to learn strong outliers in their activations, making them difficult to quantize. To retain acceptable performance, the existence of these outliers requires activations to be in higher-bitwidth or the use of different numeric formats, extra fine-tuning, or other workarounds. We show that strong outliers are related to very specific behavior of attention heads that try to learn a "no-op", or just a partial update of the residual. To achieve the exact zeros needed in the attention matrix for a no-update, the input to the softmax is pushed to be larger and larger during training, causing outliers in other parts of the network. Based on these observations, we propose two simple (independent) modifications to the attention mechanism - _clipped softmax_ and _gated attention_. We empirically show that models pre-trained using our methods learn significantly smaller outliers while maintaining and sometimes even improving the floating-point task performance. This enables us to quantize transformers to full INT8 quantization of the activations without any additional effort. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our methods on both language models (BERT, OPT) and vision transformers.d:T718,We present a method to formulate algorithm discovery as program search, and apply it to discover optimization algorithms for deep neural network training. We leverage efficient search techniques to explore an infinite and sparse program space. To bridge the large generalization gap between proxy and target tasks, we also introduce program selection and simplification strategies.
Our method discovers a simple and effective optimization algorithm, $\textbf{Lion}$ ($\textit{Evo$\textbf{L}$ved S$\textbf{i}$gn M$\textbf{o}$me$\textbf{n}$tum}$). It is more memory-efficient than Adam as it only keeps track of the momentum. Different from adaptive optimizers, its update has the same magnitude for each parameter calculated through the sign operation.
We compare Lion with widely used optimizers, such as Adam and Adafactor, for training a variety of models on different tasks. On image classification, Lion boosts the accuracy of ViT by up to 2\% on ImageNet and saves up to 5x the pre-training compute on JFT. On vision-language contrastive learning, we achieve 88.3\% $\textit{zero-shot}$ and 91.1\% $\textit{fine-tuning}$ accuracy on ImageNet, surpassing the previous best results by 2\% and 0.1\%, respectively. On diffusion models, Lion outperforms Adam by achieving a better FID score and reducing the training compute by up to 2.3x. For autoregressive, masked language modeling, and fine-tuning, Lion exhibits a similar or better performance compared to Adam. Our analysis of Lion reveals that its performance gain grows with the training batch size. It also requires a smaller learning rate than Adam due to the larger norm of the update produced by the sign function. Additionally, we examine the limitations of Lion and identify scenarios where its improvements are small or not statistically significant.e:T474,Pretrained language models (PLMs) are today the primary model for natural language processing. Despite their impressive downstream performance, it can be difficult to apply PLMs to new languages, a barrier to making their capabilities universally accessible. While prior work has shown it possible to address this issue by learning a new embedding layer for the new language, doing so is both data and compute inefficient. We propose to use an active forgetting mechanism during pretraining, as a simple way of creating PLMs that can quickly adapt to new languages. Concretely, by resetting the embedding layer every K updates during pretraining, we encourage the PLM to improve its ability of learning new embeddings within limited number of updates, similar to a meta-learning effect. Experiments with RoBERTa show that models pretrained with our forgetting mechanism not only demonstrate faster convergence during language adaptation, but also outperform standard ones in a low-data regime, particularly for languages that are distant from English. Code will be available at https://github.com/facebookresearch/language-model-plasticity.f:T6f5,The quality of training data impacts the performance of pre-trained large language models (LMs). Given a fixed budget of tokens, we study how to best select data that leads to good downstream model performance across tasks. We develop a new framework based on a simple hypothesis: just as humans acquire interdependent skills in a deliberate order, language models also follow a natural order when learning a set of skills from their training data. If such an order exists, it can be utilized for improved understanding of LMs and for data-efficient training. Using this intuition, our framework formalizes the notion of a skill and of an ordered set of skills in terms of the associated data. First, using both synthetic and real data, we demonstrate that these ordered skill sets exist, and that their existence enables more advanced skills to be learned with less data when we train on their prerequisite skills. Second, using our proposed framework, we introduce an online data sampling algorithm, Skill-It, over mixtures of skills for both continual pre-training and fine-tuning regimes, where the objective is to efficiently learn multiple skills in the former and an individual skill in the latter. On the LEGO synthetic in the continual pre-training setting, Skill-It obtains 37.5 points higher accuracy than random sampling. On the Natural Instructions dataset in the fine-tuning setting, Skill-It reduces the validation loss on the target skill by 13.6% versus training on data associated with the target skill itself. 
We apply our skills framework on the RedPajama dataset to continually pre-train a 3B-parameter LM, achieving higher accuracy on the LM Evaluation Harness with 1B tokens than the baseline approach of sampling uniformly over data sources with 3B tokens.10:T44d,Through considerable effort and intuition, several recent works have reverse-engineered nontrivial behaviors of transformer models. This paper systematizes the mechanistic interpretability process they followed. First, researchers choose a metric and dataset that elicit the desired model behavior. Then, they apply activation patching to find which abstract neural network units are involved in the behavior. By varying the dataset, metric, and units under investigation, researchers can understand the functionality of each component. We automate one of the process' steps: to identify the circuit that implements the specified behavior in the model's computational graph. We propose several algorithms and reproduce previous interpretability results to validate them. For example, the ACDC algorithm rediscovered 5/5 of the component types in a circuit in GPT-2 Small that computes the Greater-Than operation. ACDC selected 68 of the 32,000 edges in GPT-2 Small, all of which were manually found by previous work. Our code is available at https://github.com/ArthurConmy/Automatic-Circuit-Discovery.11:T742,We present QLoRA, an efficient finetuning approach that reduces memory usage enough to finetune a 65B parameter model on a single 48GB GPU while preserving full 16-bit finetuning task performance. QLoRA backpropagates gradients through a frozen, 4-bit quantized pretrained language model into Low Rank Adapters~(LoRA). Our best model family, which we name Guanaco, outperforms all previous openly released models on the Vicuna benchmark, reaching 99.3% of the performance level of ChatGPT while only requiring 24 hours of finetuning on a single GPU. QLoRA introduces a number of innovations to save memory without sacrificing performance: (a) 4-bit NormalFloat (NF4), a new data type that is information-theoretically optimal for normally distributed weights (b) Double Quantization to reduce the average memory footprint by quantizing the quantization constants, and (c) Paged Optimziers to manage memory spikes. We use QLoRA to finetune more than 1,000 models, providing a detailed analysis of instruction following and chatbot performance across 8 instruction datasets, multiple model types (LLaMA, T5), and model scales that would be infeasible to run with regular finetuning (e.g. 33B and 65B parameter models). Our results show that QLoRA finetuning on a small, high-quality dataset leads to state-of-the-art results, even when using smaller models than the previous SoTA. We provide a detailed analysis of chatbot performance based on both human and GPT-4 evaluations, showing that GPT-4 evaluations are a cheap and reasonable alternative to human evaluation. Furthermore, we find that current chatbot benchmarks are not trustworthy to accurately evaluate the performance levels of chatbots. A lemon-picked analysis demonstrates where Guanaco fails compared to ChatGPT. We release all of our models and code, including CUDA kernels for 4-bit training.12:T5d5,Large language models (LLMs) such as ChatGPT have seen widespread adoption due to their ability to follow user instructions well.
Developing these LLMs involves a complex yet poorly understood workflow requiring training with human feedback. Replicating and understanding this instruction-following process faces three major challenges: the high cost of data collection, the lack of trustworthy evaluation, and the absence of reference method implementations. We address these bottlenecks with AlpacaFarm, a simulator that enables research and development for learning from feedback at a low cost. First, we design LLM based simulator for human feedback that is 45x cheaper than crowdworkers and displays high agreement with humans. Second, we identify an evaluation dataset representative of real-world instructions and propose an automatic evaluation procedure. Third, we contribute reference implementations for several methods (PPO, best-of-n, expert iteration, among others) that learn from pairwise feedback. Finally, as an end-to-end validation of AlpacaFarm, we train and evaluate eleven models on 10k pairs of human feedback and show that rankings of models trained in AlpacaFarm match rankings of models trained on human data. As a demonstration of the research possible in AlpacaFarm, we find that methods that use a reward model can substantially improve over supervised fine-tuning and that our reference PPO implementation leads to a +10% win-rate improvement against Davinci003.13:T6c4,Machine learning models are increasingly being scaled in both sequence length and model dimension to reach longer contexts and better performance. However, existing architectures such as Transformers scale quadratically along both these axes. We ask: are there performant architectures that can scale sub-quadratically along sequence length and model dimension? We introduce Monarch Mixer (M2), a new architecture that uses the same sub-quadratic primitive along both sequence length and model dimension: Monarch matrices, a simple class of expressive structured matrices that captures many linear transforms, achieves high hardware efficiency on GPUs, and scales sub-quadratically. As a proof of concept, we explore the performance of M2 in three domains: non-causal BERT-style language modeling, ViT-style image classification, and causal GPT-style language modeling. For non-causal BERT-style modeling, M2 matches BERT-base and BERT-large in downstream GLUE quality with up to 27% fewer parameters, and achieves up to 9.1$\times$ higher throughput at sequence length 4K. On ImageNet, M2 outperforms ViT-b by 1% in accuracy, with only half the parameters. Causal GPT-style models introduce a technical challenge: enforcing causality via masking introduces a quadratic bottleneck. To alleviate this bottleneck, we develop a novel theoretical view of Monarch matrices based on multivariate polynomial evaluation and interpolation, which lets us parameterize M2 to be causal while remaining sub-quadratic. Using this parameterization, M2 matches GPT-style Transformers at 360M parameters in pretraining perplexity on The PILE--showing for the first time that it may be possible to match Transformer quality without attention or MLPs.14:T717,The recent emergence of Large Language Models based on the Transformer architecture has enabled dramatic advancements in the field of Natural Language Processing. However, these models have long inference latency, which limits their deployment and makes them prohibitively expensive for various real-time applications. The inference latency is further exacerbated by autoregressive generative tasks, as models need to run iteratively to generate tokens sequentially without leveraging token-level parallelization. To address this, we propose Big Little Decoder (BiLD), a framework that can improve inference efficiency and latency for a wide range of text generation applications. The BiLD framework contains two models with different sizes that collaboratively generate text. The small model runs autoregressively to generate text with a low inference cost, and the large model is only invoked occasionally to refine the small model’s inaccurate predictions in a non-autoregressive manner. To coordinate the small and large models, BiLD introduces two simple yet effective policies: (1) the fallback policy that determines when to hand control over to the large model; and (2) the rollback policy that determines when the large model needs to correct the small model's inaccurate predictions. To evaluate our framework across different tasks and models, we apply BiLD to various text generation scenarios encompassing machine translation on IWSLT 2017 De-En and WMT 2014 De-En, and summarization on XSUM and CNN/DailyMail. On an NVIDIA T4 GPU, our framework achieves a speedup of up to 2.12x speedup with minimal generation quality degradation. Furthermore, our framework is fully plug-and-play and can be applied without any modifications in the training process or model architecture. Our code is open-sourced.15:T5da,We propose a method to fuse frozen text-only large language models (LLMs) with pre-trained image encoder and decoder models, by mapping between their embedding spaces. Our model demonstrates a wide suite of multimodal capabilities: image retrieval, novel image generation, and multimodal dialogue. Ours is the first approach capable of conditioning on arbitrarily interleaved image and text inputs to generate coherent image (and text) outputs. To achieve strong performance on image generation, we propose an efficient mapping network to ground the LLM to an off-the-shelf text-to-image generation model. This mapping network translates hidden representations of text into the embedding space of the visual models, enabling us to leverage the strong text representations of the LLM for visual outputs. Our approach outperforms baseline generation models on tasks with longer and more complex language. In addition to novel image generation, our model is also capable of image retrieval from a prespecified dataset, and decides whether to retrieve or generate at inference time. This is done with a learnt decision module which conditions on the hidden representations of the LLM. Our model exhibits a wider range of capabilities compared to prior multimodal language models. It can process image-and-text inputs, and produce retrieved images, generated images, and generated text — outperforming non-LLM based generation models across several text-to-image tasks that measure context dependence.16:T4b7,Large-scale generative models such as GPT and DALL-E have revolutionized the research community. These models not only generate high fidelity outputs, but are also generalists which can solve tasks not explicitly taught. In contrast, speech generative models are still primitive in terms of scale and task generalization. In this paper, we present Voicebox, the most versatile text-guided generative model for speech at scale. Voicebox is a non-autoregressive flow-matching model trained to infill speech, given audio context and text, trained on over 50K hours of speech that are not filtered or enhanced. Similar to GPT, Voicebox can perform many different tasks through in-context learning, but is more flexible as it can also condition on future context. Voicebox can be used for mono or cross-lingual zero-shot text-to-speech synthesis, noise removal, content editing, style conversion, and diverse sample generation. In particular, Voicebox outperforms the state-of-the-art zero-shot TTS model VALL-E on both intelligibility (5.9\% vs 1.9\% word error rates) and audio similarity (0.580 vs 0.681) while being up to 20 times faster. Audio samples can be found in \url{https://voicebox.metademolab.com}.17:T470,Diffusion models have achieved great success in modeling continuous data modalities such as images, audio, and video, but have seen limited use in discrete domains such as language. Recent attempts to adapt diffusion to language have presented diffusion as an alternative to existing pretrained language models. We view diffusion and existing language models as complementary. We demonstrate that encoder-decoder language models can be utilized to efficiently learn high-quality language autoencoders. We then demonstrate that continuous diffusion models can be learned in the latent space of the language autoencoder, enabling us to sample continuous latent representations that can be decoded into natural language with the pretrained decoder. We validate the effectiveness of our approach for unconditional, class-conditional, and sequence-to-sequence language generation. We demonstrate across multiple diverse data sets that our latent language diffusion models are significantly more effective than previous diffusion language models. Our code is available at \url{https://github.com/justinlovelace/latent-diffusion-for-language}.18:T657,Fine-tuning language models (LMs) has yielded success on diverse downstream tasks, but as LMs grow in size, backpropagation requires a prohibitively large amount of memory. Zeroth-order (ZO) methods can in principle estimate gradients using only two forward passes but are theorized to be catastrophically slow for optimizing large models. In this work, we propose a memory-efficient zerothorder optimizer (MeZO), adapting the classical ZO-SGD method to operate in-place, thereby fine-tuning LMs with the same memory footprint as inference. For example, with a single A100 80GB GPU, MeZO can train a 30-billion parameter model, whereas fine-tuning with backpropagation can train only a 2.7B LM with the same budget. We conduct comprehensive experiments across model types (masked and autoregressive LMs), model scales (up to 66B), and downstream tasks (classification, multiple-choice, and generation). Our results demonstrate that (1) MeZO significantly outperforms in-context learning and linear probing; (2) MeZO achieves comparable performance to fine-tuning with backpropagation across multiple tasks, with up to 12× memory reduction and up to 2× GPU-hour reduction in our implementation; (3) MeZO is compatible with both full-parameter and parameter-efficient tuning techniques such as LoRA and prefix tuning; (4) MeZO can effectively optimize non-differentiable objectives (e.g., maximizing accuracy or F1). We support our empirical findings with theoretical insights, highlighting how adequate pre-training and task prompts enable MeZO to fine-tune huge models, despite classical ZO analyses suggesting otherwise.19:T470,Foundation models are trained on increasingly immense and opaque datasets. Even while these models are now key in AI system building, it can be  difficult to answer the straightforward question: has the model already encountered a given example during training? We therefore propose a widespread adoption of Data Portraits: artifacts that record training data and allow for downstream inspection. First we outline the properties of such an artifact and discuss how existing solutions can be used to increase transparency. We then propose and implement a solution based on data sketching, stressing fast and space efficient querying. Using our tools, we document a popular language modeling corpus (The Pile) and a recently released code modeling dataset (The Stack). We show that our solution enables answering questions about test set leakage and model plagiarism. Our tool is lightweight and fast, costing only 3% of the dataset size in overhead. We release a live interface of our tools at https://dataportraits.org/ and call on dataset and model creators to release Data Portraits as a complement to current documentation practices.1a:T5bc,Current machine learning models for vision are often highly specialized and limited to a single modality and task. In contrast, recent large language models exhibit a wide range of capabilities, hinting at a possibility for similarly versatile models in computer vision.
In this paper, we take a step in this direction and propose a multimodal training scheme called 4M. It consists of training a single unified Transformer encoder-decoder using a masked modeling objective across a wide range of input/output modalities  – including text, images, geometric, and semantic modalities, as well as neural network feature maps. 4M achieves scalability by unifying the representation space of all modalities through mapping them into discrete tokens and performing multimodal masked modeling on a small randomized subset of tokens.

4M leads to models that exhibit several key capabilities: (1) they can perform a diverse set of vision tasks out of the box, (2) they excel when fine-tuned for unseen downstream tasks or new input modalities, and (3) they can function as a generative model that can be conditioned on arbitrary modalities, enabling a wide variety of expressive multimodal editing capabilities with remarkable flexibility.

Through experimental analyses, we demonstrate the potential of 4M for training versatile and scalable foundation models for vision tasks, setting the stage for further exploration in multimodal learning for vision and other domains.1b:T645,While Transformers have shown remarkable success in natural language processing, their attention mechanism's large memory requirements have limited their ability to handle longer contexts. Prior approaches, such as recurrent memory or retrieval-based augmentation, have either compromised the random-access flexibility of attention (i.e., the capability to select any token in the entire context) or relied on separate mechanisms for relevant context retrieval, which may not be compatible with the model's attention. In this paper, we present a novel approach that allows access to the complete context while retaining random-access flexibility, closely resembling running attention on the entire context. Our method uses a landmark token to represent each block of the input and trains the attention to use it for selecting relevant blocks, enabling retrieval of blocks directly through the attention mechanism instead of by relying on a separate mechanism. Our approach seamlessly integrates with specialized data structures and the system's memory hierarchy, enabling processing of arbitrarily long context lengths. We demonstrate that our method can obtain comparable performance with Transformer-XL while significantly reducing the number of retrieved tokens in each step. Finally, we show that fine-tuning LLaMA 7B with our method successfully extends its context length capacity to over 32k tokens, allowing for inference at the context lengths of GPT-4. We release the implementation of landmark attention and the code to reproduce our experiments at https://github.com/epfml/landmark-attention/.1c:T40c,Most language models (LMs) are trained and applied in an autoregressive left-to-right fashion, predicting the next token from the preceding ones. However, this ignores that the full sequence is available during training. 
In this paper, we introduce ``Meet in the Middle'' (MIM) a new pre-training paradigm that improves data 
efficiency by training in two directions, left-to-right and right-to-left, and encouraging the respective models
to agree on their token distribution for each position. While the primary outcome is an improved left-to-right LM,
we also obtain secondary benefits in the infilling task. There, we leverage the two pre-trained directions to propose an infilling procedure that builds the completion simultaneously from both sides. We conduct extensive experiments on both programming and natural languages and show that MIM significantly surpasses existing pre-training paradigms, in both left-to-right generation as well as infilling.
Code and models available at https://github.com/microsoft/Meet-in-the-Middle1d:T443,Recent language models have shown impressive multilingual performance, even when not explicitly trained for it.
Despite this, there are concerns about the quality of their outputs across different languages.
In this paper, we show how disparity in the treatment of different languages arises at the tokenization stage, well before a model is even invoked.
The same text translated into different languages can have drastically different tokenization lengths, with differences up to 15 times in some cases.
These disparities persist even for tokenizers that are intentionally trained for multilingual support.
Character-level and byte-level models also exhibit over 4 times the difference in the encoding length for some language pairs.
This induces unfair treatment for some language communities in regard to the cost of accessing commercial language services, the processing time and latency, as well as the amount of content that can be provided as context to the models.
Therefore, we make the case that we should train future language models using multilingually fair subword tokenizers.1e:T624,Although BERT-style encoder models are heavily used in NLP research, many researchers do not pretrain their own BERTs from scratch due to the high cost of training. In the past half-decade since BERT first rose to prominence, many advances have been made with other transformer architectures and training configurations that have yet to be systematically incorporated into BERT. Here, we introduce MosaicBERT, a BERT-style encoder architecture and training recipe that is empirically optimized for fast pretraining. This efficient architecture incorporates FlashAttention, Attention with Linear Biases (ALiBi), Gated Linear Units (GLU), a module to dynamically remove padded tokens, and low precision LayerNorm into the classic transformer encoder block. The training recipe includes a 30% masking ratio for the Masked Language Modeling (MLM) objective, bfloat16 precision, and vocabulary size optimized for GPU throughput, in addition to best-practices from RoBERTa and other encoder models. When pretrained from scratch on the C4 dataset, this base model achieves a downstream average GLUE (dev) score of 79.6 in 1.13 hours on 8 A100 80 GB GPUs at a cost of roughly $20. We plot extensive accuracy vs. pretraining speed Pareto curves and show that MosaicBERT base and large are consistently Pareto optimal when compared to a competitive BERT base and large. This empirical speed up in pretraining enables researchers and engineers to pretrain custom BERT-style models at low cost instead of finetune on existing generic models. We open source our model weights and code.1f:T41b,Language models (LMs) exhibit remarkable abilities to solve new tasks from just a few examples or textual instructions, especially at scale. They also, paradoxically, struggle with basic functionality, such as arithmetic or factual lookup, where much simpler and smaller specialized models excel. In this paper, we show that LMs can teach themselves to *use external tools* via simple APIs and achieve the best of both worlds. We introduce *Toolformer*, a model trained to decide which APIs to call, when to call them, what arguments to pass, and how to best incorporate the results into future token prediction. This is done in a self-supervised way, requiring nothing more than a handful of demonstrations for each API. We incorporate a range of tools, including a calculator, a Q&A system, a search engine, a translation system, and a calendar. Toolformer achieves substantially improved zero-shot performance across a variety of downstream tasks, often competitive with much larger models, without sacrificing its core language modeling abilities.20:T74e,Modern language models excel at integrating across long temporal scales needed to encode linguistic meaning and show non-trivial similarities to biological neural systems. Prior work suggests that human brain responses to language exhibit hierarchically organized "integration windows" that substantially constrain the overall influence of an input token (e.g., a word) on the neural response. However, little prior work has attempted to use integration windows to characterize computations in large language models (LLMs). We developed a simple word-swap procedure for estimating integration windows from black-box language models that does not depend on access to gradients or knowledge of the model architecture (e.g., attention weights). Using this method, we show that trained LLMs exhibit stereotyped integration windows that are well-fit by a convex combination of an exponential and a power-law function, with a partial transition from exponential to power-law dynamics across network layers. We then introduce a metric for quantifying the extent to which these integration windows vary with structural boundaries (e.g., sentence boundaries), and using this metric, we show that integration windows become increasingly yoked to structure at later network layers. None of these findings were observed in an untrained model, which as expected integrated uniformly across its input. These results suggest that LLMs learn to integrate information in natural language using a stereotyped pattern: integrating across position-yoked, exponential windows at early layers, followed by structure-yoked, power-law windows at later layers. The methods we describe in this paper provide a general-purpose toolkit for understanding temporal integration in language models, facilitating cross-disciplinary research at the intersection of biological and artificial intelligence.21:T76f,Recent AI-assistant agents, such as ChatGPT, predominantly rely on supervised fine-tuning (SFT) with human annotations and reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) to align the output of large language models (LLMs) with human intentions, ensuring they are helpful, ethical, and reliable. However, this dependence can significantly constrain the true potential of AI-assistant agents due to the high cost of obtaining human supervision and the related issues on quality, reliability, diversity, self-consistency, and undesirable biases. To address these challenges, we propose a novel approach called SELF-ALIGN, which combines principle-driven reasoning and the generative power of LLMs for the self-alignment of AI agents with minimal human supervision. Our approach encompasses four stages: first, we use an LLM to generate synthetic prompts, and a topic-guided method to augment the prompt diversity; second, we use a small set of human-written principles for AI models to follow, and guide the LLM through in-context learning from demonstrations (of principles application) to produce helpful, ethical, and reliable responses to user's queries; third, we fine-tune the original LLM with the high-quality self-aligned responses so that the resulting model can generate desirable responses for each query directly without the principle set and the demonstrations anymore; and finally, we offer a refinement step to address the issues of overly-brief or indirect responses. Applying SELF-ALIGN to the LLaMA-65b base language model, we develop an AI assistant named Dromedary. With fewer than 300 lines of human annotations (including < 200 seed prompts, 16 generic principles, and 5 exemplars for in-context learning). Dromedary significantly surpasses the performance of several state-of-the-art AI systems, including Text-Davinci-003 and Alpaca, on benchmark datasets with various settings.22:T72b,In this work we explore recent advances in instruction-tuning language models on a range of open instruction-following datasets. Despite recent claims that open models can be on par with state-of-the-art proprietary models, these claims are often accompanied by limited evaluation, making it difficult to compare models across the board and determine the utility of various resources. We provide a large set of instruction-tuned models from 6.7B to 65B parameters in size, trained on 12 instruction datasets ranging from manually curated (e.g., OpenAssistant) to synthetic and distilled (e.g., Alpaca) and systematically evaluate them on their factual knowledge, reasoning, multilinguality, coding, safety, and open-ended instruction following abilities through a collection of automatic, model-based, and human-based metrics. We further introduce Tülu, our best performing instruction-tuned model suite finetuned on a combination of high-quality open resources.

Our experiments show that different instruction-tuning datasets can uncover or enhance specific skills, while no single dataset (or combination) provides the best performance across all evaluations. Interestingly, we find that model and human preference-based evaluations fail to reflect differences in model capabilities exposed by benchmark-based evaluations, suggesting the need for the type of systemic evaluation performed in this work. Our evaluations show that the best model in any given evaluation reaches on average 87% of ChatGPT performance, and 73% of GPT-4 performance, suggesting that further investment in building better base models and instruction-tuning data is required to close the gap. We release our instruction-tuned models, including a fully finetuned 65B Tülu, along with our code, data, and evaluation framework to facilitate future research.23:T49d,In recent years, pre-trained large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable efficiency in achieving an inference-time few-shot learning capability known as in-context learning. However, existing literature has highlighted the sensitivity of this capability to the selection of few-shot demonstrations. Current understandings of the underlying mechanisms by which this capability arises from regular language model pretraining objectives remain disconnected from the real-world LLMs. This study aims to examine the in-context learning phenomenon through a Bayesian lens, viewing real-world LLMs as latent variable models. On this premise, we propose an algorithm to select optimal demonstrations from a set of annotated data with a small LM, and then directly generalize the selected demonstrations to larger LMs. We demonstrate significant improvement over baselines, averaged over eight GPT models on eight real-world text classification datasets. We also demonstrate the real-world usefulness of our algorithm on GSM8K, a math word problem dataset. Our empirical findings support our hypothesis that LLMs implicitly infer a latent variable containing task information.24:T6cb,In-context learning is a surprising and important phenomenon that emerged when modern language models were scaled to billions of learned parameters. 
  Without modifying a large language model's weights, it can be tuned to perform various downstream natural language tasks simply by including concatenated training examples of these tasks in its input.
  Though disruptive for many practical applications of large language models, this emergent learning paradigm is not well understood from a theoretical perspective. In this paper, we propose a first-of-its-kind PAC based framework for in-context learnability, and use it to provide the first finite sample complexity results for the in-context learning setup.
  Our framework includes an initial pretraining phase, which fits a function to the pretraining distribution, and then a second in-context learning phase, which keeps this function constant and concatenates training examples of the downstream task in its input.
  We use our framework in order to prove that, under mild assumptions, when the pretraining distribution is a mixture of latent tasks (a model often considered for natural language pretraining), these tasks can be efficiently learned via in-context learning, even though the model's weights are unchanged and the input significantly diverges from the pretraining distribution.
  Our theoretical analysis reveals that in this setting, in-context learning is more about identifying the task than about learning it, a result which is in line with a series of recent empirical findings. 
  We hope that the in-context learnability framework presented in this paper will facilitate future progress towards a deeper understanding of this important new learning paradigm.25:T57d,Diffusion models have gained significant attention in the realm of image generation due to their exceptional performance. Their success has been recently expanded to text generation via generating all tokens within a sequence concurrently. 
However, natural language exhibits a far more pronounced sequential dependency in comparison to images, and the majority of existing language models are trained with a left-to-right auto-regressive approach.
To account for the inherent sequential characteristic of natural language, we introduce  Auto-Regressive Diffusion (AR-Diffusion). AR-Diffusion ensures that the generation of tokens on the right depends on the generated ones on the left, a mechanism achieved through employing a dynamic number of denoising steps that vary based on token position. This results in tokens on the left undergoing fewer denoising steps than those on the right, thereby enabling them to generate earlier and subsequently influence the generation of tokens on the right.
In a series of experiments on various text generation tasks, including text summarization, machine translation, and common sense generation, AR-Diffusion clearly demonstrated its superiority over existing diffusion language models and that it can be $100\times\sim600\times$ faster when achieving comparable results. Our code is available at https://github.com/microsoft/ProphetNet/tree/master/AR-diffusion.26:T570,Quantizing the activation, weight, and gradient to 4-bit is promising to accelerate neural network training. However, existing 4-bit training methods require custom numerical formats  which are not supported by contemporary hardware. In this work, we propose a training method for transformers with all matrix multiplications implemented with the INT4 arithmetic. 
Training with an ultra-low INT4 precision is challenging. To achieve this, we carefully analyze the specific structures of activation and gradients in transformers to propose dedicated quantizers for them. For forward propagation, we identify the challenge of outliers and propose a Hadamard quantizer to suppress the outliers. For backpropagation, we leverage the structural sparsity of gradients by proposing bit splitting and leverage score sampling techniques to quantize gradients accurately. Our algorithm achieves competitive accuracy on a wide range of tasks including natural language understanding, machine translation, and image classification. Unlike previous 4-bit training methods, our algorithm can be implemented on the current generation of GPUs. Our prototypical linear operator implementation is up to 2.2 times faster than the FP16 counterparts and speeds up the training by 17.8\% on average for sufficiently large models. Our code is available at https://github.com/xijiu9/Train\_Transformers\_with\_INT4.27:T630,Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) facilitates the alignment of large language models with human preferences, significantly enhancing the quality of interactions between humans and models. 
InstructGPT implements RLHF through several stages, including Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT), reward model training, and Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO). 
However, PPO is sensitive to hyperparameters and requires multiple models in its standard implementation, making it hard to train and scale up to larger parameter counts.
In contrast, we propose a novel learning paradigm called RRHF, which scores sampled responses from different sources via a logarithm of conditional probabilities and learns to align these probabilities with human preferences through ranking loss.
RRHF can leverage sampled responses from various sources including the model responses from itself, other large language model responses, and human expert responses to learn to rank them.
RRHF only needs 1 to 2 models during tuning and can efficiently align language models with human preferences robustly without complex hyperparameter tuning. 
Additionally, RRHF can be considered an extension of SFT and reward model training while being simpler than PPO in terms of coding, model counts, and hyperparameters. 
We evaluate RRHF on the Helpful and Harmless dataset, demonstrating comparable alignment performance with PPO by reward model score and human labeling.
Extensive experiments show that the performance of RRHF is highly related to sampling quality which suggests RRHF is a best-of-$n$ learner.28:T53c,Transformers are central in modern natural language processing and computer vision applications. Despite recent works devoted to reducing the quadratic cost of such models with respect to sequence length, dealing with ultra long sequences (e.g., $>$16K tokens) remains challenging. Applications such as answering questions based on a book or summarizing a scientific article are inefficient or infeasible. Here, we propose to significantly improve the efficiency of Transformers for ultra long sequences, by compressing the sequence into a much smaller representation at each layer. Specifically, by exploiting the fact that in many tasks, only a small subset of special tokens, which we call VIP-tokens, are most relevant to the final prediction, we propose a VIP-token centric compression (VCC) scheme which selectively compresses the sequence based on their impact on approximating the representation of the VIP-tokens. Compared with competitive baselines, our algorithm is not only efficient (achieving more than $3\times$ compute efficiency gain compared to baselines on 4K and 16K lengths), but also offers competitive/better performance on a large number of tasks. Further, we show that our algorithm scales to 128K tokens (or more) while consistently offering accuracy improvement. Code is available at https://github.com/mlpen/VCC.29:T777,Large Language Models (LLMs), despite their recent impressive accomplishments, are notably cost-prohibitive to deploy, particularly for applications involving long-content generation, such as dialogue systems and story writing. Often, a large amount of transient state information, referred to as the $\mathsf{KV}$ $\mathsf{cache}$, is stored in GPU memory in addition to model parameters, scaling linearly with the sequence length and batch size. In this paper, we introduce a novel approach for implementing the  $\mathsf{KV}$ $\mathsf{cache}$ which significantly reduces its memory footprint.  Our approach is based on the noteworthy observation that a small portion of tokens contributes most of the value when computing attention scores. 
 We call these tokens Heavy Hitters ($\mathsf{H_2}$). Through a comprehensive investigation, we find that ($i$) the emergence of $\mathsf{H_2}$ is natural and strongly correlates with the frequent co-occurrence of tokens in the text, and ($ii$) removing them results in significant performance degradation. Based on these insights, we propose Heavy Hitter Oracle ($\mathsf{H_2O}$), a $\mathsf{KV}$ $\mathsf{cache}$ eviction policy that dynamically retains a balance of recent and $\mathsf{H_2}$ tokens.
 We formulate the $\mathsf{KV}$ $\mathsf{cache}$ eviction as a dynamic submodular problem and prove (under mild assumptions) a theoretical guarantee for our novel eviction algorithm which could help guide future work. We validate the accuracy of our algorithm with OPT, LLaMA, and GPT-NeoX across a wide range of tasks. Our implementation of $\mathsf{H_2O}$ with 20\% heavy hitters improves the throughput over three leading inference systems DeepSpeed Zero-Inference, Hugging Face Accelerate, and FlexGen by up to $29\times$, $29\times$, and $3\times$ on OPT-6.7B and OPT-30B. With the same batch size, $\mathsf{H_2O}$ can reduce the latency by up to $1.9\times$.2a:T551,Large language models are trained in two stages: (1) unsupervised pretraining from raw text, to learn general-purpose representations, and (2) large scale instruction tuning and reinforcement learning, to better align to end tasks and user preferences. 
We measure the relative importance of these two stages by training LIMA, a 65B parameter LLaMa language model fine-tuned with the standard supervised loss on only 1,000 carefully curated prompts and responses, without any reinforcement learning or human preference modeling.
LIMA demonstrates remarkably strong performance, learning to follow specific response formats from only a handful of examples in the training data, including complex queries that range from planning trip itineraries to speculating about alternate history.
Moreover, the model tends to generalize well to unseen tasks that did not appear in the training data.
In a controlled human study, responses from LIMA are either equivalent or strictly preferred to GPT-4 in 43\% of cases; this statistic is as high as 58\% when compared to Bard and 65\% versus DaVinci003, which was trained with human feedback.
Taken together, these results strongly suggest that almost all knowledge in large language models is learned during pretraining, and only limited instruction tuning data is necessary to teach models to produce high quality output.2b:T4ea,In-context vision and language models like Flamingo support arbitrarily interleaved sequences of images and text as input.
This format not only enables few-shot learning via interleaving independent supervised (image, text) examples, but also, more complex prompts involving interaction between images, e.g., ``What do image A and image B have in common?''
To support this interface, pretraining occurs over web corpora that similarly contain interleaved images+text.
To date, however, large-scale data of this form have not been publicly available.


We release Multimodal C4, an augmentation of the popular text-only C4 corpus with images interleaved.
We use a linear assignment algorithm to place images into longer bodies of text using CLIP features, a process that we show outperforms alternatives.
Multimodal C4 spans everyday topics like cooking, travel, technology, etc. A manual inspection of a random sample of documents shows that a vast majority (88\%) of images are topically relevant, and that linear assignment frequently selects individual sentences specifically well-aligned with each image (80\%). 
After filtering NSFW images, ads, etc., the resulting corpus consists of 101.2M documents with 571M images interleaved in 43B English tokens.2c:T55e,Large language models trained for safety and harmlessness remain susceptible to adversarial misuse, as evidenced by the prevalence of"jailbreak"attacks on early releases of ChatGPT that elicit undesired behavior. Going beyond recognition of the issue, we investigate why such attacks succeed and how they can be created. We hypothesize two failure modes of safety training: competing objectives and mismatched generalization. Competing objectives arise when a model's capabilities and safety goals conflict, while mismatched generalization occurs when safety training fails to generalize to a domain for which capabilities exist. We use these failure modes to guide jailbreak design and then evaluate state-of-the-art models, including OpenAI's GPT-4 and Anthropic's Claude v1.3, against both existing and newly designed attacks. We find that vulnerabilities persist despite the extensive red-teaming and safety-training efforts behind these models. Notably, new attacks utilizing our failure modes succeed on every prompt in a collection of unsafe requests from the models' red-teaming evaluation sets and outperform existing ad hoc jailbreaks. Our analysis emphasizes the need for safety-capability parity -- that safety mechanisms should be as sophisticated as the underlying model -- and argues against the idea that scaling alone can resolve these safety failure modes.2d:T41d,Pre-trained language models can be surprisingly adept at tasks they were not explicitly trained on, but how they implement these capabilities is poorly understood. In this paper, we investigate the basic mathematical abilities often acquired by pre-trained language models. Concretely, we use mechanistic interpretability techniques to explain the (limited) mathematical abilities of GPT-2 small. As a case study, we examine its ability to take in sentences such as "The war lasted from the year 1732 to the year 17", and predict valid two-digit end years (years > 32). We first identify a circuit, a small subset of GPT-2 small's computational graph that computes this task's output. Then, we explain the role of each circuit component, showing that GPT-2 small's final multi-layer perceptrons boost the probability of end years greater than the start year. Finally, we find related tasks that activate our circuit. Our results suggest that GPT-2 small computes greater-than using a complex but general mechanism that activates across diverse contexts.2e:T5fc,Large transformer models trained on diverse datasets have shown a remarkable ability to learn in-context, achieving high few-shot performance on tasks they were not explicitly trained to solve. In this paper, we study the in-context learning capabilities of transformers in decision-making problems, i.e., reinforcement learning (RL) for bandits and Markov decision processes. To do so, we introduce and study the Decision-Pretrained Transformer (DPT), a supervised pretraining method where a transformer predicts an optimal action given a query state and an in-context dataset of interactions from a diverse set of tasks. While simple, this procedure produces a model with several surprising capabilities. We find that the trained transformer can solve a range of RL problems in-context, exhibiting both exploration online and conservatism offline, despite not being explicitly trained to do so. The model also generalizes beyond the pretraining distribution to new tasks and automatically adapts its decision-making strategies to unknown structure. Theoretically, we show DPT can be viewed as an efficient implementation of Bayesian posterior sampling, a provably sample-efficient RL algorithm. We further leverage this connection to provide guarantees on the regret of the in-context algorithm yielded by DPT, and prove that it can learn faster than algorithms used to generate the pretraining data. These results suggest a promising yet simple path towards instilling strong in-context decision-making abilities in transformers.2f:T475,Several recent works demonstrate that transformers can implement algorithms like gradient descent. By a careful construction of weights, these works show that multiple layers of transformers are expressive enough to simulate iterations of gradient descent. Going beyond the question of expressivity, we ask: \emph{Can transformers learn to implement such algorithms by training over random problem instances?} To our knowledge, we make the first theoretical progress on this question via an analysis of the loss landscape for linear transformers trained over random instances of linear regression. For a single attention layer, we prove the global minimum of the training objective implements a single iteration of preconditioned gradient descent. Notably, the preconditioning matrix not only adapts to the input distribution but also to the variance induced by data inadequacy.  For a transformer with $L$ attention layers, we prove certain critical points of the training objective implement $L$ iterations of preconditioned gradient descent. Our results call for future theoretical studies on learning algorithms by training transformers.30:T415,Scaling laws have been recently employed to derive compute-optimal model size (number of parameters) for a given compute duration. We advance and refine such methods to infer compute-optimal model shapes, such as width and depth, and successfully implement this in vision transformers. Our shape-optimized vision transformer, SoViT, achieves results competitive with models that exceed twice its size, despite being pre-trained with an equivalent amount of  compute. For example, SoViT-400m/14 achieves 90.3% fine-tuning accuracy on ILSRCV2012, surpassing the much larger ViT-g/14 and approaching ViT-G/14 under identical settings, with also less than half the inference cost. We conduct a thorough evaluation across multiple tasks, such as image classification, captioning, VQA and zero-shot transfer, demonstrating the effectiveness of our model across a broad range of domains and identifying limitations. Overall, our findings challenge the prevailing approach of blindly scaling up vision models and pave a path for a more informed scaling.31:T544,Autoregressive Transformers adopted in Large Language Models (LLMs) are hard to scale to long sequences. Despite several works trying to reduce their computational cost, most of LLMs still adopt attention layers between all pairs of tokens in the sequence, thus incurring a quadratic cost. In this study, we present a novel approach that dynamically prunes contextual information while preserving the model's expressiveness, resulting in reduced memory and computational requirements during inference. Our method employs a learnable mechanism that determines which uninformative tokens can be dropped from the context at any point across the generation process. By doing so, our approach not only addresses performance concerns but also enhances interpretability, providing valuable insight into the model's decision-making process. Our technique can be applied to existing pre-trained models through a straightforward fine-tuning process, and the pruning strength can be specified by a sparsity parameter. Notably, our empirical findings demonstrate that we can effectively prune up to 80\% of the context without significant performance degradation on downstream tasks, offering a valuable tool for mitigating inference costs. Our reference implementation achieves up to $2\times$ increase in inference throughput and even greater memory savings.32:T774,Neural sequence models based on the transformer architecture have demonstrated remarkable \emph{in-context learning} (ICL) abilities, where they can perform new tasks when prompted with training and test examples, without any parameter update to the model. This work first provides a comprehensive statistical theory for transformers to perform ICL. Concretely, we show that transformers can implement a broad class of standard machine learning algorithms in context, such as least squares, ridge regression, Lasso, learning generalized linear models, and gradient descent on two-layer neural networks, with near-optimal predictive power on various in-context data distributions. Using an efficient implementation of in-context gradient descent as the underlying mechanism, our transformer constructions admit mild size bounds, and can be learned with polynomially many pretraining sequences. Building on these ``base'' ICL algorithms, intriguingly, we show that transformers can implement more complex ICL procedures involving \emph{in-context algorithm selection}, akin to what a statistician can do in real life -- A \emph{single} transformer can adaptively select different base ICL algorithms -- or even perform qualitatively different tasks -- on different input sequences, without any explicit prompting of the right algorithm or task. We both establish this in theory by explicit constructions, and also observe this phenomenon experimentally. In theory, we construct two general mechanisms for algorithm selection with concrete examples: pre-ICL testing, and post-ICL validation. As an example, we use the post-ICL validation mechanism to construct a transformer that can perform nearly Bayes-optimal ICL on a challenging task -- noisy linear models with mixed noise levels. Experimentally, we demonstrate the strong in-context algorithm selection capabilities of standard transformer architectures.33:T442,This work studies post-training parameter quantization in large language models (LLMs). We introduce quantization with incoherence processing (QuIP), a new method based on the insight that quantization benefits from incoherent weight and Hessian matrices, i.e., from the weights being even in magnitude and the directions in which it is important to round them accurately being unaligned with the coordinate axes. QuIP consists of two steps: (1) an adaptive rounding procedure minimizing a quadratic proxy objective; (2) efficient pre- and post-processing that ensures weight and Hessian incoherence via multiplication by random orthogonal matrices. We complement QuIP with the first theoretical analysis for an LLM-scale quantization algorithm, and show that our theory also applies to an existing method, OPTQ. Empirically, we find that our incoherence preprocessing improves several existing quantization algorithms and yields the first LLM quantization methods that produce viable results using only two bits per weight. Our code can be found at https://github.com/Cornell-RelaxML/QuIP.34:T646,With direct access to human-written reference as memory, retrieval-augmented generation has achieved much progress in a wide range of text generation tasks. Since better memory would typically prompt better generation (we define this as primal problem). The traditional approach for memory retrieval involves selecting memory that exhibits the highest similarity to the input. However, this method is constrained by the quality of the fixed corpus from which memory is retrieved. In this paper, by exploring the duality of the primal problem: better generation also prompts better memory, we propose a novel framework, selfmem, which addresses this limitation by iteratively employing a retrieval-augmented generator to create an unbounded memory pool and using a memory selector to choose one output as memory for the subsequent generation round. This enables the model to leverage its own output, referred to as self-memory, for improved generation. We evaluate the effectiveness of selfmem on three distinct text generation tasks: neural machine translation, abstractive text summarization, and dialogue generation, under two generation paradigms: fine-tuned small model and few-shot LLM. Our approach achieves state-of-the-art results in four directions in JRC-Acquis translation dataset, 50.3 ROUGE-1 in XSum, and 62.9 ROUGE-1 in BigPatent, demonstrating the potential of self-memory in enhancing retrieval-augmented generation models. Furthermore, we conduct thorough analyses of each component in the selfmem framework to identify current system bottlenecks and provide insights for future research.35:T51e,Large language models have shown tremendous performance in a variety of tasks.  In-context learning  -- the ability to improve at a task after being provided with a number of demonstrations -- is seen as one of the main contributors to their success. In the present paper, we demonstrate that the in-context learning abilities of large language models can be recursively improved via in-context learning itself. We coin this phenomenon meta-in-context learning. Looking at two idealized domains, a one-dimensional regression task and a two-armed bandit task, we show that meta-in-context learning adaptively reshapes a large language model's priors over expected tasks. Furthermore, we find that meta-in-context learning modifies the in-context learning strategies of such models. Finally, we broaden the scope of our investigation to encompass two diverse benchmarks: one focusing on real-world regression problems and the other encompassing multiple NLP tasks. In both cases, we observe competitive performance comparable to that of traditional learning algorithms. Taken together, our work improves our understanding of in-context learning and paves the way toward adapting large language models to the environment they are applied purely through meta-in-context learning rather than traditional finetuning.36:T518,In the domain of audio processing, Transfer Learning has facilitated the rise of Self-Supervised Learning and Zero-Shot Learning techniques. These approaches have led to the development of versatile models capable of tackling a wide array of tasks, while delivering state-of-the-art performance. However, current models inherently lack the capacity to produce the requisite language for open-ended tasks, such as Audio Captioning or Audio Question Answering. We introduce Pengi, a novel Audio Language Model that leverages Transfer Learning by framing all audio tasks as text-generation tasks. It takes as input, an audio recording, and text, and generates free-form text as output. The input audio is represented as a sequence of continuous embeddings by an audio encoder. A text encoder does the same for the corresponding text input. Both sequences are combined as a prefix to prompt a pre-trained frozen language model. The unified architecture of Pengi enables open-ended tasks and close-ended tasks without any additional fine-tuning or task-specific extensions. When evaluated on 21 downstream tasks, our approach yields state-of-the-art performance in several of them. Our results show that connecting language models with audio models is a major step towards general-purpose audio understanding.37:T50c,Transformer large language models (LLMs) have sparked admiration for their exceptional performance on tasks that demand intricate multi-step reasoning. Yet, these models simultaneously show failures on surprisingly trivial problems. 
This begs the question: Are these errors incidental, or do they signal more substantial limitations?
In an attempt to demystify transformer LLMs, we investigate the limits of these models across three representative compositional tasks---multi-digit multiplication, logic grid puzzles, and a classic dynamic programming problem. These tasks require breaking problems down into sub-steps and synthesizing these steps into a precise answer.  We formulate compositional tasks as computation graphs to systematically quantify the level of complexity, and break down reasoning steps into intermediate sub-procedures. 
Our empirical findings suggest that transformer LLMs solve compositional tasks by reducing multi-step compositional reasoning into linearized subgraph matching, without necessarily developing systematic problem-solving skills.  To round off our empirical study, we provide theoretical arguments on abstract multi-step reasoning problems that highlight how autoregressive generations' performance can rapidly decay with increased task complexity.38:T6af,Attention layers -- which map a sequence of inputs to a sequence of outputs -- are core building blocks of the Transformer architecture which has achieved significant breakthroughs in modern artificial intelligence. This paper presents a rigorous theoretical study on the learning and generalization of a single multi-head attention layer, with a sequence of key vectors and a separate query vector as input. We consider the random feature setting where the attention layer has a large number of heads, with randomly sampled frozen query and key matrices, and trainable value matrices. We show that such a random-feature attention layer can express a broad class of target functions that are permutation invariant to the key vectors. We further provide quantitative excess risk bounds for learning these target functions from finite samples, using random feature attention with finitely many heads. Our results feature several implications unique to the attention structure compared with existing random features theory for neural networks, such as (1) Advantages in the sample complexity over standard two-layer random-feature networks; (2) Concrete and natural classes of functions that can be learned efficiently by a random-feature attention layer; and (3) The effect of the sampling distribution of the query-key weight matrix (the product of the query and key matrix), where Gaussian random weights with a non-zero mean result in better sample complexities over the zero-mean counterpart for learning certain natural target functions. Experiments on simulated data corroborate our theoretical findings and further illustrate the interplay between the sample size and the complexity of the target function.39:T4e1,Multimodal datasets are a critical component in recent breakthroughs such as CLIP, Stable Diffusion and GPT-4, yet their design does not receive the same research attention as model architectures or training algorithms. To address this shortcoming in the machine learning ecosystem, we introduce DataComp, a testbed for dataset experiments centered around a new candidate pool of 12.8 billion image-text pairs from Common Crawl. Participants in our benchmark design new filtering techniques or curate new data sources and then evaluate their new dataset by running our standardized CLIP training code and testing the resulting model on 38 downstream test sets. Our benchmark consists of multiple compute scales spanning four orders of magnitude, which enables the study of scaling trends and makes the benchmark accessible to researchers with varying resources. Our baseline experiments show that the DataComp workflow leads to better training sets. Our best baseline, DataComp-1B, enables training a CLIP ViT-L/14 from scratch to 79.2% zero-shot accuracy on ImageNet, outperforming OpenAI's CLIP ViT-L/14 by 3.7 percentage points while using the same training procedure and compute. We release \datanet and all accompanying code at www.datacomp.ai.3a:T5f1,Large language models (LLMs) solve problems more accurately and interpretably when instructed to work out the answer step by step using a "chain-of-thought" (CoT) prompt. One can also improve LLMs' performance on a specific task by supervised fine-tuning, i.e., by using gradient ascent on some tunable parameters to maximize the average log-likelihood of correct answers from a labeled training set. 
Naively combining CoT with supervised tuning requires supervision not just of the correct answers, but also of detailed rationales that lead to those answers; these rationales are expensive to produce by hand. Instead, we propose a fine-tuning strategy that tries to maximize the \emph{marginal} log-likelihood of generating a correct answer using CoT prompting, approximately averaging over all possible rationales. The core challenge is sampling from the posterior over rationales conditioned on the correct answer; we address it using a simple Markov-chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm inspired by the self-taught reasoner (STaR), memoized wake-sleep, Markovian score climbing, and persistent contrastive divergence. This algorithm also admits a novel control-variate technique that drives the variance of our gradient estimates to zero as the model improves. Applying our technique to GSM8K and the tasks in BIG-Bench Hard, we find that this MCMC-EM fine-tuning technique typically improves the model's accuracy on held-out examples more than STaR or prompt-tuning with or without CoT.3b:T6bb,Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) alleviates the problem of designing a task-specific reward function in reinforcement learning by learning it from human preference. However, existing RLHF models are considered inefficient as they produce only a single preference data from each human feedback. To tackle this problem, we propose a novel RLHF framework called SeqRank, that uses sequential preference ranking to enhance the feedback efficiency. Our method samples trajectories in a sequential manner by iteratively selecting a defender from the set of previously chosen trajectories $\mathcal{K}$ and a challenger from the set of unchosen trajectories $\mathcal{U}\setminus\mathcal{K}$, where $\mathcal{U}$ is the replay buffer. We propose two trajectory comparison methods with different defender sampling strategies: (1) sequential pairwise comparison that selects the most recent trajectory and (2) root pairwise comparison that selects the most preferred trajectory from $\mathcal{K}$. We construct a data structure and rank trajectories by preference to augment additional queries. The proposed method results in at least 39.2% higher average feedback efficiency than the baseline and also achieves a balance between feedback efficiency and data dependency. We examine the convergence of the empirical risk and the generalization bound of the reward model with Rademacher complexity. While both trajectory comparison methods outperform conventional pairwise comparison, root pairwise comparison improves the average reward in locomotion tasks and the average success rate in manipulation tasks by 29.0% and 25.0%, respectively. The source code and the videos are provided in the supplementary material.3c:T528,In this work, we propose a new class of learnable optimizers, called Mnemosyne. It is based on the novel spatio-temporal low-rank implicit attention Transformers that can learn to train entire neural network architectures, including other Transformers, without any task-specific optimizer tuning. We show that Mnemosyne: (a) outperforms popular LSTM optimizers (also with new feature engineering to mitigate catastrophic forgetting of LSTMs), (b) can successfully train Transformers while using simple meta-training strategies that require minimal computational resources, (c) matches accuracy-wise SOTA hand-designed optimizers with carefully tuned hyper-parameters (often producing top performing models). Furthermore, Mnemosyne provides space complexity comparable to that of its hand-designed first-order counterparts, which allows it to scale to training larger sets of parameters. We conduct an extensive empirical evaluation of Mnemosyne on: (a) fine-tuning a wide range of Vision Transformers (ViTs) from medium-size architectures to massive ViT-Hs (36 layers, 16 heads), (b) pre-training BERT models and (c) soft prompt-tuning large 11B+ T5XXL models. We complement our results with a comprehensive theoretical analysis of the compact associative memory used by Mnemosyne which we believe was never done before.3d:T661,Large pre-trained transformers are $\textit{show-stealer}$ in modern-day deep learning, and it becomes crucial to comprehend the parsimonious patterns that exist within them as they grow in scale. With exploding parameter counts, Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH) and its variants, have lost their pragmatism in sparsifying them due to high computation and memory bottleneck of repetitive $\textit{train-prune-retrain}$ routine of iterative magnitude pruning (IMP) which worsens with increasing model size. In this paper, we comprehensively study $\textit{induced sparse patterns}$ across multiple large pre-trained vision and language transformers. We propose the existence of -- $\textbf{essential sparsity}$ defined with a $\textbf{sharp dropping point}$ beyond which the performance declines much faster w.r.t the rise of sparsity level, when we directly remove weights with the smallest magnitudes in $\textbf{one-shot}$. We also present an intriguing emerging phenomenon of $\textbf{abrupt sparsification}$ during the pre-training of BERT, i.e., BERT suddenly becomes heavily sparse in pre-training after certain iterations. Moreover, our observations also indicate a $\textbf{counter-intuitive}$ finding that BERT trained with a larger amount of pre-training data tends to have a better ability to condense knowledge in comparatively relatively fewer parameters. Lastly, we investigate the effect of the pre-training loss on essential sparsity and discover that self-supervised learning (SSL) objectives trigger stronger emergent sparsification properties than supervised learning (SL). All our codes will be publicly available.3e:T492,In this paper, we introduce the \textsc{BeaverTails} dataset, aimed at fostering research on safety alignment in large language models (LLMs). This dataset uniquely separates annotations of helpfulness and harmlessness for question-answering pairs, thus offering distinct perspectives on these crucial attributes. In total, we have gathered safety meta-labels for 30,207 question-answer (QA) pairs and 30,144 pairs of expert comparison data for both the helpfulness and harmlessness metrics. In total, we have gathered safety meta-labels for 333,963 question-answer (QA) pairs and 361,903 pairs of expert comparison data for both the helpfulness and harmlessness metrics. We further showcase applications of BeaverTails in content moderation and reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF), emphasizing its potential for practical safety measures in LLMs. We believe this dataset provides vital resources for the community, contributing towards the safe development and deployment of LLMs. Our project page is available at the following URL: https://sites.google.com/view/pku-beavertails. Warning: this paper contains example data that may be offensive or harmful.3f:T694,Transformers have achieved great success in machine learning applications. Normalization techniques, such as Layer Normalization (LayerNorm, LN) and Root Mean Square Normalization (RMSNorm), play a critical role in accelerating and stabilizing the training of Transformers. While LayerNorm recenters and rescales input vectors, RMSNorm only rescales the vectors by their RMS value. Despite being more computationally efficient, RMSNorm may compromise the representation ability of Transformers. There is currently no consensus regarding the preferred normalization technique, as some models employ LayerNorm while others utilize RMSNorm, especially in recent large language models. It is challenging to convert Transformers with one normalization to the other type. While there is an ongoing disagreement between the two normalization types, we propose a solution to unify two mainstream Transformer architectures, Pre-LN and Pre-RMSNorm Transformers. By removing the inherent redundant mean information in the main branch of Pre-LN Transformers, we can reduce LayerNorm to RMSNorm, achieving higher efficiency. We further propose the Compressed RMSNorm (CRMSNorm) and Pre-CRMSNorm Transformer based on a lossless compression of the zero-mean vectors. We formally establish the equivalence of Pre-LN, Pre-RMSNorm, and Pre-CRMSNorm Transformer variants in both training and inference. It implies that Pre-LN Transformers can be substituted with Pre-(C)RMSNorm counterparts at almost no cost, offering the same arithmetic functionality along with free efficiency improvement. Experiments demonstrate that we can reduce the training and inference time of Pre-LN Transformers by 1% - 10%.40:T421,The computation necessary for training Transformer-based language models has skyrocketed in recent years.
This trend has motivated research on efficient training algorithms designed to improve training, validation, and downstream performance faster than standard training. In this work, we revisit three categories of such algorithms: dynamic architectures (layer stacking, layer dropping), batch selection (selective backprop., RHO-loss), and efficient optimizers (Lion, Sophia). When pre-training BERT and T5 with a fixed computation budget using such methods, we find that their training, validation, and downstream gains vanish compared to a baseline with a fully-decayed learning rate. We define an evaluation protocol that enables computation to be done on arbitrary machines by mapping all computation time to a reference machine which we call reference system time. We discuss the limitations of our proposed protocol and release our code to encourage rigorous research in efficient training procedures: https://github.com/JeanKaddour/NoTrainNoGain.41:T5fd,Length generalization, the ability to generalize from small training context sizes to larger ones, is a critical challenge in the development of Transformer-based language models. Positional encoding (PE) has been identified as a major factor influencing length generalization, but the exact impact of different PE schemes on extrapolation in downstream tasks remains unclear. In this paper, we conduct a systematic empirical study comparing the length generalization performance of decoder-only Transformers with five different position encoding approaches including Absolute Position Embedding (APE), T5's Relative PE, ALiBi, and Rotary, in addition to Transformers without positional encoding (NoPE). Our evaluation encompasses a battery of reasoning and mathematical tasks. Our findings reveal that the most commonly used positional encoding methods, such as ALiBi, Rotary, and APE, are not well suited for length generalization in downstream tasks. More importantly, NoPE outperforms other explicit positional encoding methods while requiring no additional computation. We theoretically demonstrate that NoPE can represent both absolute and relative PEs, but when trained with SGD, it mostly resembles T5's relative PE attention patterns. Finally, we find that scratchpad is not always helpful to solve length generalization and its format highly impacts the model's performance. Overall, our work suggests that explicit position embeddings are not essential for decoder-only Transformers to generalize well to longer sequences.42:T6b6,Large language models (LLMs) face the challenges in fine-tuning and deployment due to their high memory demands and computational costs. While parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods aim to reduce the memory usage of the optimizer state during fine-tuning, the inherent size of pre-trained LLM weights continues to be a pressing concern.  
Even though quantization techniques are widely proposed to ease memory demands and accelerate LLM inference, most of these techniques are geared towards the deployment phase.
To bridge this gap, this paper presents Parameter-Efficient and Quantization-aware Adaptation (PEQA) – a simple yet effective method that combines the advantages of PEFT with quantized LLMs. 
By updating solely the quantization scales, PEQA can be directly applied to quantized LLMs, ensuring seamless task transitions. Parallel to existing PEFT methods, PEQA significantly reduces the memory overhead associated with the optimizer state. Furthermore, it leverages the advantages of quantization to substantially reduce model sizes. Even after fine-tuning, the quantization structure of a PEQA-tuned LLM remains intact, allowing for accelerated inference on the deployment stage.
We employ PEQA-tuning for task-specific adaptation on LLMs with up to $65$ billion parameters. To assess the logical reasoning and language comprehension of PEQA-tuned LLMs, we fine-tune low-bit quantized LLMs using a instruction dataset. 
Our results show that even when LLMs are quantized to below 4-bit precision, their capabilities in language modeling, few-shot in-context learning, and comprehension can be resiliently restored to (or even improved over) their full-precision original performances with PEQA.43:T50e,Aligning large language models (LLMs) with human preferences has proven to drastically improve usability and has driven rapid adoption as demonstrated by ChatGPT.
Alignment techniques such as supervised fine-tuning (\textit{SFT}) and  reinforcement learning from human feedback (\textit{RLHF}) greatly reduce the required skill and domain knowledge to effectively harness the capabilities of LLMs, increasing their accessibility and utility across various domains.
However, state-of-the-art alignment techniques like \textit{RLHF} rely on high-quality human feedback data, which is expensive to create and often remains proprietary.
In an effort to democratize research on large-scale alignment, we release OpenAssistant Conversations, a human-generated, human-annotated assistant-style conversation corpus consisting of 161,443 messages in 35 different languages, annotated with 461,292 quality ratings, resulting in over 10,000 complete and fully annotated conversation trees.
The corpus is a product of a worldwide crowd-sourcing effort involving over 13,500 volunteers.
Models trained on OpenAssistant Conversations show consistent improvements on standard benchmarks over respective base models.
We release our code\footnote{\git} and data\footnote{\data} under a fully permissive licence.44:T40b,Multiplications are responsible for most of the computational cost involved in neural network training and inference. Recent research has thus looked for ways to reduce the cost associated with them. Inspired by Mogami 2020, we replace multiplication with a cheap piecewise affine approximation that is achieved by adding the bit representation of the floating point numbers together as integers. We show that transformers can be trained with the resulting modified matrix multiplications on both vision and language tasks with little to no performance impact, and without changes to the training hyperparameters. We further replace all non-linearities in the networks making them fully and jointly piecewise affine in both inputs and weights. Finally, we show that we can eliminate all multiplications in the entire training process, including operations in the forward pass, backward pass and optimizer update, demonstrating the first successful training of modern neural network architectures in a fully multiplication-free fashion.45:T456,Language models have been successfully used to model natural signals, such as images, speech, and music. A key component of these models is a high quality neural compression model that can compress high-dimensional natural signals into lower dimensional discrete tokens. To that end, we introduce a high-fidelity universal neural audio compression algorithm that achieves ~90x compression of 44.1 KHz audio into tokens at just 8kbps bandwidth. We achieve this by combining advances in high-fidelity audio generation with better vector quantization techniques from the image domain, along with improved adversarial and reconstruction losses. We compress all domains (speech, environment, music, etc.) with a single universal model, making it widely applicable to generative modeling of all audio. We compare with competing audio compression algorithms, and find our method outperforms them significantly. We provide thorough ablations for every design choice, as well as open-source code and trained model weights. We hope our work can lay the foundation for the next generation of high-fidelity audio modeling.46:T50c,In this paper, we propose to approximate the softmax output, which is the key product of the attention mechanism, to reduce its activation memory usage when training attention-based networks (aka Transformers). During the forward pass of the network, the proposed softmax output approximation method stores only a small fraction of the entire softmax output required for back-propagation and evicts the rest of the softmax output from memory. Then, during the backward pass, the evicted softmax activation output is approximated to compose the gradient to perform back-propagation for model training. Considering most attention-based models heavily rely on the softmax-based attention module that usually takes one of the biggest portions of the network, approximating the softmax activation output can be a simple yet effective way to decrease the training memory requirement of many attention-based networks. The experiment with various attention-based models and relevant tasks, i.e., machine translation, text classification, and sentiment analysis, shows that it curtails the activation memory usage of the softmax-based attention module by up to 84% (6.2× less memory) in model training while achieving comparable or better performance, e.g., up to 5.4% higher classification accuracy.47:T4ad,Optimizer states are a major source of memory consumption for training neural networks, limiting the maximum trainable model within given memory budget. Compressing the optimizer states from 32-bit floating points to lower bitwidth is promising to reduce the training memory footprint, while the current lowest achievable bitwidth is 8-bit. In this work, we push optimizer states bitwidth down to 4-bit through a detailed empirical analysis of first and second moments. Specifically, we find that moments have complicated outlier patterns, that current block-wise quantization cannot accurately approximate. We use a smaller block size and propose to utilize both row-wise and column-wise information for better quantization. We further identify a zero point problem of quantizing the second moment, and solve this problem with a linear quantizer that excludes the zero point. Our 4-bit optimizers are evaluated on a wide variety of benchmarks including natural language understanding, machine translation, image classification, and instruction tuning. On all the tasks our optimizers can achieve comparable accuracy with their full-precision counterparts, while enjoying better memory efficiency.48:T4f0,In this paper, we present StyleTTS 2, a text-to-speech (TTS) model that leverages style diffusion and adversarial training with large speech language models (SLMs) to achieve human-level TTS synthesis. StyleTTS 2 differs from its predecessor by modeling styles as a latent random variable through diffusion models to generate the most suitable style for the text without requiring reference speech, achieving efficient latent diffusion while benefiting from the diverse speech synthesis offered by diffusion models. Furthermore, we employ large pre-trained SLMs, such as WavLM, as discriminators with our novel differentiable duration modeling for end-to-end training, resulting in improved speech naturalness. StyleTTS 2 surpasses human recordings on the single-speaker LJSpeech dataset and matches it on the multispeaker VCTK dataset as judged by native English speakers. Moreover, when trained on the LibriTTS dataset, our model outperforms previous publicly available models for zero-shot speaker adaptation. This work achieves the first human-level TTS on both single and multispeaker datasets, showcasing the potential of style diffusion and adversarial training with large SLMs. The audio demos and source code are available at https://styletts2.github.io/.49:T49a,There are a number of diverging hypotheses about the neural text degeneration problem, i.e., generating repetitive and dull loops, which makes this problem both interesting and confusing. In this work, we aim to advance our understanding by presenting a straightforward and fundamental explanation from the data perspective. Our preliminary investigation reveals a strong correlation between the degeneration issue and the presence of repetitions in training data. Subsequent experiments also demonstrate that by selectively dropping out the attention to repetitive words in training data, degeneration can be significantly minimized. Furthermore, our empirical analysis illustrates that prior works addressing the degeneration issue from various standpoints, such as the high-inflow words, the likelihood objective, and the self-reinforcement phenomenon, can be interpreted by one simple explanation. That is, penalizing the repetitions in training data is a common and fundamental factor for their effectiveness. Moreover, our experiments reveal that penalizing the repetitions in training data remains critical even when considering larger model sizes and instruction tuning.4a:T61d,Chain-of-thought (CoT) is a method that enables language models to handle complex reasoning tasks by decomposing them into simpler steps. Despite its success, the underlying mechanics of CoT are not yet fully understood. In an attempt to shed light on this, our study investigates the impact of CoT on the ability of transformers to in-context learn a simple to study, yet general family of compositional functions: multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs). In this setting, we find that the success of CoT can be attributed to breaking down in-context learning of a compositional function into two distinct phases: focusing on and filtering data related to each step of the composition and in-context learning the single-step composition function. Through both experimental and theoretical evidence, we demonstrate how CoT significantly reduces the sample complexity of in-context learning (ICL) and facilitates the learning of complex functions that non-CoT methods struggle with. Furthermore, we illustrate how transformers can transition from vanilla in-context learning to mastering a compositional function with CoT by simply incorporating additional layers that perform the necessary data-filtering for CoT via the attention mechanism. In addition to these test-time benefits, we show CoT helps accelerate pretraining by learning shortcuts to represent complex functions and filtering plays an important role in this process. These findings collectively provide insights into the mechanics of CoT, inviting further investigation of its role in complex reasoning tasks.4b:T501,Why do large language models sometimes output factual inaccuracies and exhibit erroneous reasoning? The brittleness of these models, particularly when executing long chains of reasoning, currently seems to be an inevitable price to pay for their advanced capabilities of coherently synthesizing knowledge, pragmatics, and abstract thought. Towards making sense of this fundamentally unsolved problem, this work identifies and analyzes the phenomenon of _attention glitches_, in which the Transformer architecture's inductive biases intermittently fail to capture robust reasoning. To isolate the issue, we introduce _flip-flop language modeling_ (FFLM), a parametric family of synthetic benchmarks designed to probe the extrapolative behavior of neural language models. This simple generative task requires a model to copy binary symbols over long-range dependencies, ignoring the tokens in between. We find that Transformer FFLMs suffer from a long tail of sporadic reasoning errors, some of which we can eliminate using various regularization techniques. Our preliminary mechanistic analyses show why the remaining errors may be very difficult to diagnose and resolve. We hypothesize that attention glitches account for (some of) the closed-domain hallucinations in natural LLMs.4c:T57c,Large language models(LLMs) have sparked a new wave of exciting AI applications. Hosting these models at scale requires significant memory resources. One crucial memory bottleneck for the deployment stems from the context window. It is commonly recognized that model weights are memory hungry; however, the size of key-value embedding stored during the generation process (KV cache) can easily surpass the model size. The enormous size of the KV cache puts constraints on the inference batch size, which is crucial for high throughput inference workload. Inspired by an interesting observation of the attention scores, we hypothesize the persistence of importance: only pivotal tokens, which had a substantial influence at one step, will significantly influence future generations. Based on our empirical verification and theoretical analysis around this hypothesis, we propose scissorhands, a system that maintains the memory usage of the KV cache at a fixed budget without finetuning the model. In essence, Scissorhands manages the KV cache by storing the pivotal tokens with a higher probability. We validate that scissorhands reduces the inference memory usage of the KV cache by up to 5$\times$ without compromising model quality. We further demonstrate that scissorhands can be combined with 4-bit quantization, traditionally used to compress model weights, to achieve up to 20$\times$ compression.4d:T4d0,Instruction tuning large language models (LLMs) using machine-generated instruction-following data has been shown to improve zero-shot capabilities on new tasks, but the idea is less explored in the multimodal field. We present the first attempt to use language-only GPT-4 to generate multimodal language-image instruction-following data. By instruction tuning on such generated data, we introduce LLaVA: Large Language and Vision Assistant, an end-to-end trained large multimodal model that connects a vision encoder and an LLM for general-purpose visual and language understanding. To facilitate future research on visual instruction following, we construct two evaluation benchmarks with diverse and challenging application-oriented tasks. Our experiments show that LLaVA demonstrates impressive multimodal chat abilities, sometimes exhibiting the behaviors of multimodal GPT-4 on unseen images/instructions, and yields a 85.1% relative score compared with GPT-4 on a synthetic multimodal instruction-following dataset. When fine-tuned on Science QA, the synergy of LLaVA and GPT-4 achieves a new state-of-the-art accuracy of 92.53%. We make GPT-4 generated visual instruction tuning data, our model, and code publicly available.4e:T606,Recent progress in scaling up large language models has shown impressive capabilities in performing few-shot learning across a wide range of natural language tasks. However, a key limitation is that these language models fundamentally lack grounding to visual perception - a crucial attribute needed to extend to real world tasks such as in visual-question answering and robotics. While prior works have largely connected image to text through pretraining or fine-tuning, learning such alignments are generally costly due to a combination of curating massive datasets and large computational burdens. In order to resolve these limitations, we propose a simple yet effective approach called Language-Quantized AutoEncoder (LQAE), a modification of VQ-VAE that learns to align text-image data in an unsupervised manner by leveraging pretrained language model denoisers (e.g., BERT). Our main idea is to encode images as sequences of text tokens by directly quantizing image embeddings using a pretrained language codebook. We then feed a masked version of the quantized embeddings into a BERT to reconstruct the original input. 
By doing so, LQAE learns to represent similar images with similar clusters of text tokens, thereby aligning these two modalities without the use of aligned text-image pairs. We show LQAE learns text-aligned image tokens that enable few-shot multi-modal learning with large language models, outperforming baseline methods in tasks such as image classification and VQA while requiring as few as 1-10 image-text pairs.4f:T56f,Large language models (LLMs) have shown remarkable capabilities in language understanding and generation. However, such impressive capability typically comes with a substantial model size, which presents significant challenges in both the deployment, inference, and training stages. With LLM being a general-purpose task solver, we explore its compression in a task-agnostic manner, which aims to preserve the multi-task solving and language generation ability of the original LLM. One challenge to achieving this is the enormous size of the training corpus of LLM, which makes both data transfer and model post-training over-burdensome. Thus, we tackle the compression of LLMs within the bound of two constraints: being task-agnostic and minimizing the reliance on the original training dataset. Our method, named LLM-pruner, adopts structural pruning that selectively removes non-critical coupled structures based on gradient information, maximally preserving the majority of the LLM's functionality. To this end, the performance of pruned models can be efficiently recovered through tuning techniques, LoRA, in merely 3 hours, requiring only 50K data. We validate the LLM-Pruner on three LLMs, including LLaMA, Vicuna, and ChatGLM, and demonstrate that the compressed models still exhibit satisfactory capabilities in zero-shot classification and generation. The code will be made public.50:T4ec,Generative, pre-trained transformers (GPTs, a type of "Foundation Models") have reshaped natural language processing (NLP) through their versatility in diverse downstream tasks. However, their potential extends far beyond NLP. This paper provides a software utility to help realize this potential, extending the applicability of GPTs to continuous-time sequences of complex events with internal dependencies, such as medical record datasets. Despite their potential, the adoption of foundation models in these domains has been hampered by the lack of suitable tools for model construction and evaluation. To bridge this gap, we introduce Event Stream GPT (ESGPT), an open-source library designed to streamline the end-to-end process for building GPTs for continuous-time event sequences. ESGPT allows users to (1) build flexible, foundation-model scale input datasets by specifying only a minimal configuration file, (2) leverage a Hugging Face compatible modeling API for GPTs over this modality that incorporates intra-event causal dependency structures and autoregressive generation capabilities, and (3) evaluate models via standardized processes that can assess few and even zero-shot performance of pre-trained models on user-specified fine-tuning tasks.51:T45a,Self-supervised learning (SSL) algorithms can produce useful image representations by learning to associate different parts of natural images with one another. However, when taken to the extreme, SSL models can unintendedly memorize specific parts in individual training samples rather than learning semantically meaningful associations. In this work, we perform a systematic study of the unintended memorization of image-specific information in SSL models -- which we refer to as déjà vu memorization. Concretely, we show that given the trained model and a crop of a training image containing only the background (e.g., water, sky, grass), it is possible to infer the foreground object with high accuracy or even visually reconstruct it. Furthermore, we show that déjà vu memorization is common to different SSL algorithms, is exacerbated by certain design choices, and cannot be detected by conventional techniques for evaluating representation quality. Our study of déjà vu memorization reveals previously unknown privacy risks in SSL models, as well as suggests potential practical mitigation strategies.52:T56d,Large language models (LLMs) are highly capable but also computationally expensive. 
Characterizing the _fundamental tradeoff_ between inference efficiency and model capabilities is thus important, but requires an efficiency metric that is comparable across models from different providers.
Unfortunately, raw runtimes measured through black-box APIs do not satisfy this property: model providers can implement software and hardware optimizations orthogonal to the model, and shared infrastructure introduces performance contention.
We propose a new metric for inference efficiency called _idealized runtime_, that puts models on equal footing as though they were served on uniform hardware and software without performance contention, and a cost model to efficiently estimate this metric for autoregressive Transformer models.
We also propose variants of the idealized runtime that incorporate the number and type of accelerators needed to serve the model.
Using these metrics, we compare ten LLMs developed in 2022 to provide the first analysis of inference efficiency-capability tradeoffs; we make several observations from this analysis, including the fact that the superior inference runtime performance of certain APIs is often a byproduct of optimizations within the API rather than the underlying model.
Our code is open sourced at https://github.com/stanford-crfm/helm-efficiency.53:T586,Massive web datasets play a key role in the success of large vision-language models like CLIP and Flamingo. However, the raw web data is noisy, and existing filtering methods to reduce noise often come at the expense of data diversity. Our work focuses on caption quality as one major source of noise, and studies how generated captions can increase the utility of web-scraped datapoints with nondescript text. Through exploring different mixing strategies for raw and generated captions, we outperform the best filtering method proposed by the DataComp benchmark by 2% on ImageNet and 4% on average across 38 tasks, given a candidate pool of 128M image-text pairs. Our best approach is also 2x better at Flickr and MS-COCO retrieval. We then analyze what makes synthetic captions an effective source of text supervision. In experimenting with different image captioning models, we also demonstrate that the performance of a model on standard image captioning benchmarks (e.g., NoCaps CIDEr) is not a reliable indicator of the utility of the captions it generates for multimodal training. Finally, our experiments with using generated captions at DataComp's large scale (1.28B image-text pairs) offer insights into the limitations of synthetic text, as well as the importance of image curation with increasing training data quantity. The synthetic captions used in our experiments are now available on HuggingFace.54:T546,Finetuning language models with reinforcement learning (RL), e.g. from human feedback (HF), is a prominent method for alignment. But optimizing against a reward model can improve on reward while degrading performance in other areas, a phenomenon known as reward hacking, alignment tax, or language drift. First, we argue that commonly-used test metrics are insufficient and instead measure how different algorithms tradeoff between reward and drift. The standard method modified the reward with a Kullback-Lieber (KL) penalty between the online and initial model. We propose Elastic Reset, a new algorithm that achieves higher reward with less drift without explicitly modifying the training objective. We periodically reset the online model to an exponentially moving average (EMA) of itself, then reset the EMA model to the initial model. Through the use of an EMA, our model recovers quickly after resets and achieves higher reward with less drift in the same number of steps. We demonstrate that fine-tuning language models with Elastic Reset leads to state-of-the-art performance on a small scale pivot-translation benchmark, outperforms all baselines in a medium-scale RLHF-like IMDB mock sentiment task and leads to a more performant and more aligned technical QA chatbot with LLaMA-7B. Code available https://github.com/mnoukhov/elastic-reset55:T4c6,Modern language models have the capacity to store and use immense amounts of knowledge about real-world entities, but it remains unclear how to update such knowledge stored in model parameters. While prior methods for updating knowledge in LMs successfully inject atomic facts, updated LMs fail to make inferences based on injected facts. In this work, we demonstrate that a context distillation-based approach can both impart knowledge about entities \emph{and} propagate that knowledge to enable broader inferences. Our approach consists of two stages: transfer set generation and distillation on the transfer set. We first generate a transfer set by prompting a language model to generate continuations from the entity definition. Then, we update the model parameters so that the distribution of the LM (the 'student') matches the distribution of the LM conditioned on the definition (the 'teacher') on the transfer set. Our experiments demonstrate that this approach is more effective at propagating knowledge updates than fine-tuning and other gradient-based knowledge-editing methods. Moreover, it does not  compromise performance in other contexts, even when injecting the definitions of up to 150 entities at once.56:T53a,Transformer-based language models have found many diverse applications requiring them to process sequences of increasing length. For these applications, the causal self-attention---which is the only component scaling quadratically w.r.t. the sequence length---becomes a central concern. While many works have proposed schemes to sparsify the attention patterns and reduce the computational overhead of self-attention, those are often limited by implementation concerns and end up imposing a simple and static structure over the attention matrix. Conversely, implementing more dynamic sparse attention often results in runtimes significantly slower than computing the full attention using the Flash implementation from Dao et al. (2022). We extend FlashAttention to accommodate a large class of attention sparsity patterns that, in particular, encompass key/query dropping and hashing-based attention. This leads to implementations with no computational complexity overhead and a multi-fold runtime speedup on top of FlashAttention. Even with relatively low degrees of sparsity, our method improves visibly upon FlashAttention as the sequence length increases. Without sacrificing perplexity, we increase the training speed of a transformer language model by $2.0\times$ and $3.3\times$ for sequences of respectively $8k$ and $16k$ tokens.57:T43f,State space models (SSMs) have shown impressive results on tasks that require modeling long-range dependencies and efficiently scale to long sequences owing to their subquadratic runtime complexity.
Originally designed for continuous signals, SSMs have shown superior performance on a plethora of tasks, in vision and audio; however, SSMs still lag Transformer performance in Language Modeling tasks.
In this work, we propose a hybrid layer named Block-State Transformer (*BST*), that internally combines an SSM sublayer for long-range contextualization, and a Block Transformer sublayer for short-term representation of sequences.
We study three different, and completely *parallelizable*, variants that integrate SSMs and block-wise attention.
We show that our model outperforms similar Transformer-based architectures on language modeling perplexity and generalizes to longer sequences. 
In addition, the Block-State Transformer demonstrates a more than *tenfold* increase in speed at the layer level compared to the Block-Recurrent Transformer when model parallelization is employed.58:T6db,Humans have a powerful and mysterious capacity to reason. Working through a set of mental steps enables us to make inferences we would not be capable of making directly even though we get no additional data from the world. Similarly, when large language models generate intermediate steps (a chain of thought) before answering a question, they often produce better answers than they would directly. We investigate why and how chain-of-thought reasoning is useful in language models, testing the hypothesis that reasoning is effective when training data consists of overlapping local clusters of variables that influence each other strongly. These training conditions enable the chaining of accurate local inferences to estimate relationships between variables that were not seen together in training. We prove that there will exist a "reasoning gap", where reasoning through intermediate variables reduces bias, for the simple case of an autoregressive density estimator trained on local samples from a chain-structured probabilistic model. We then test our hypothesis experimentally in more complex models, training an autoregressive language model on samples from Bayes nets but only including a subset of variables in each sample. We test language models’ ability to match conditional probabilities with and without intermediate reasoning steps, finding that intermediate steps are only helpful when the training data is locally structured with respect to dependencies between variables. The combination of locally structured observations and reasoning is much more data-efficient than training on all variables. Our results illustrate how the effectiveness of reasoning step by step is rooted in the local statistical structure of the training data.59:T515,Foundation models are first pre-trained on vast unsupervised datasets and then fine-tuned on labeled data. Reinforcement learning, notably from human feedback (RLHF), can further align the network with the intended usage. Yet the imperfections in the proxy reward may hinder the training and lead to suboptimal results; the diversity of objectives in real-world tasks and human opinions exacerbate the issue. This paper proposes embracing the heterogeneity of diverse rewards by following a multi-policy strategy. Rather than focusing on a single a priori reward, we aim for Pareto-optimal generalization across the entire space of preferences. To this end, we propose rewarded soup, first specializing multiple networks independently (one for each proxy reward) and then interpolating their weights linearly. This succeeds empirically because we show that the weights remain linearly connected when fine-tuned on diverse rewards from a shared pre-trained initialization. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach for text-to-text (summarization, Q&A, helpful assistant, review), text-image (image captioning, text-to-image generation, visual grounding), and control (locomotion) tasks. We hope to enhance the alignment of deep models, and how they interact with the world in all its diversity.5a:T5c2,Pretrained transformers exhibit the remarkable ability of in-context learning (ICL): they can learn tasks from just a few examples provided in the prompt without updating any weights. This raises a foundational question: can ICL solve fundamentally _new_ tasks that are very different from those seen during pretraining? To probe this question, we examine ICL’s performance on linear regression while varying the diversity of tasks in the pretraining dataset. We empirically demonstrate a _task diversity threshold_ for the emergence of ICL. Below this threshold, the pretrained transformer cannot solve unseen regression tasks, instead behaving like a Bayesian estimator with the _non-diverse pretraining task distribution_ as the prior. Beyond this threshold, the transformer significantly outperforms this estimator; its behavior aligns with that of ridge regression, corresponding to a Gaussian prior over _all tasks_, including those not seen during pretraining. Thus, when pretrained on data with task diversity greater than the threshold, transformers _can_ optimally solve fundamentally new tasks in-context. Importantly, this capability hinges on it deviating from the Bayes optimal estimator with the pretraining distribution as the prior. This study also explores the effect of regularization, model capacity and task structure and underscores, in a concrete example, the critical role of task diversity, alongside data and model scale, in the emergence of ICL.5b:T64e,Recent hybrid models combining Linear State Space Models (SSMs) with self-attention mechanisms have demonstrated impressive results across a range of sequence modeling tasks. However, current approaches apply attention modules statically and uniformly to all elements in the input sequences, leading to sub-optimal quality-efficiency trade-offs. To address this limitation, we introduce Sparse Modular Activation (SMA), a general mechanism enabling neural networks to sparsely and dynamically activate sub-modules for sequence elements in a differentiable manner. Through allowing each element to skip non-activated sub-modules, SMA reduces computation and memory consumption of neural networks at both training and inference stages. To validate the effectiveness of SMA on sequence modeling, we design a novel neural architecture, SeqBoat, which employs SMA to sparsely activate a Gated Attention Unit (GAU) based on the state representations learned from an SSM. By constraining the GAU to only conduct local attention on the activated inputs, SeqBoat can achieve linear inference complexity with theoretically infinite attention span, and provide substantially better quality-efficiency trade-off than the chunking-based models. With experiments on a wide range of tasks, including long sequence modeling, speech classification and language modeling, SeqBoat brings new state-of-the-art results among hybrid models with linear complexity, and reveals the amount of attention needed for each task through the learned sparse activation patterns. Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/renll/SeqBoat.5c:T478,Deep generative models can generate high-fidelity audio conditioned on various
types of representations (e.g., mel-spectrograms, Mel-frequency Cepstral Coefficients
(MFCC)). Recently, such models have been used to synthesize audio
waveforms conditioned on highly compressed representations. Although such
methods produce impressive results, they are prone to generate audible artifacts
when the conditioning is flawed or imperfect. An alternative modeling approach is
to use diffusion models. However, these have mainly been used as speech vocoders
(i.e., conditioned on mel-spectrograms) or generating relatively low sampling
rate signals. In this work, we propose a high-fidelity multi-band diffusion-based
framework that generates any type of audio modality (e.g., speech, music, environmental
sounds) from low-bitrate discrete representations. At equal bit rate,
the proposed approach outperforms state-of-the-art generative techniques in terms
of perceptual quality. Training and evaluation code are available on the facebookresearch/
audiocraft github project. Samples are available on the following
link (https://ai.honu.io/papers/mbd/).5d:T64f,Recent work claims that large language models display \textit{emergent abilities}, abilities not present in smaller-scale models that are present in larger-scale models.
What makes emergent abilities intriguing is two-fold: their \textit{sharpness}, transitioning seemingly instantaneously from not present to present, and their \textit{unpredictability}, appearing at seemingly unforeseeable model scales.
Here, we present an alternative explanation for emergent abilities: that for a particular task and model family, when analyzing fixed model outputs, emergent abilities appear due the researcher’s choice of metric rather than due to fundamental changes in model behavior with scale. Specifically, nonlinear or discontinuous metrics produce apparent emergent abilities, whereas linear or continuous metrics produce smooth, continuous, predictable changes in model performance.
We present our alternative explanation in a simple mathematical model, then test it in three complementary ways: we (1) make, test and confirm three predictions on the effect of metric choice using the InstructGPT/GPT-3 family on tasks with claimed emergent abilities, (2) make, test and confirm two predictions about metric choices in a meta-analysis of emergent abilities on BIG-Bench; and (3) show how to choose metrics to produce never-before-seen seemingly emergent abilities in multiple vision tasks across diverse deep networks.
Via all three analyses, we provide evidence that alleged emergent abilities evaporate with different metrics or with better statistics, and may not be a fundamental property of scaling AI models.5e:T64f,Maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) is a statistical method used to estimate the parameters of a probability distribution that best explain the observed data. In the context of text generation, MLE is often used to train generative language models, which can then be used to generate new text. However, we argue that MLE is not always necessary and optimal, especially for closed-ended text generation tasks like machine translation. In these tasks, the goal of model is to generate the most appropriate response, which does not necessarily require it to estimate the entire data distribution with MLE. To this end, we propose a novel class of training objectives based on convex functions, which enables text generation models to focus on highly probable outputs without having to estimate the entire data distribution. We investigate the theoretical properties of the optimal predicted distribution when applying convex functions to the loss, demonstrating that convex functions can sharpen the optimal distribution, thereby enabling the model to better capture outputs with high probabilities. Experiments on various text generation tasks and models show the effectiveness of our approach. It enables autoregressive models to bridge the gap between greedy and beam search, and facilitates the learning of non-autoregressive models with a maximum improvement of 9+ BLEU points. Moreover, our approach also exhibits significant impact on large language models (LLMs), substantially enhancing their generative capability on various tasks. Source code is available at \url{https://github.com/ictnlp/Convex-Learning}.5f:T5a9,Large language models (LLMs) have been increasingly used to interact with external environments (e.g., games, compilers, APIs) as goal-driven agents. However, it remains challenging for these language agents to quickly and efficiently learn from trial-and-error as traditional reinforcement learning methods require extensive training samples and expensive model fine-tuning. We propose \emph{Reflexion}, a novel framework to reinforce language agents not by updating weights, but instead through linguistic feedback. Concretely, Reflexion agents verbally reflect on task feedback signals, then maintain their own reflective text in an episodic memory buffer to induce better decision-making in subsequent trials. Reflexion is flexible enough to incorporate various types (scalar values or free-form language) and sources (external or internally simulated) of feedback signals, and obtains significant improvements over a baseline agent across diverse tasks (sequential decision-making, coding, language reasoning). For example, Reflexion achieves a 91\% pass@1 accuracy on the HumanEval coding benchmark, surpassing the previous state-of-the-art GPT-4 that achieves 80\%. We also conduct ablation and analysis studies using different feedback signals, feedback incorporation methods, and agent types, and provide insights into how they affect performance. We release all code, demos, and datasets at \url{https://github.com/noahshinn024/reflexion}.60:T54b,Humans can easily understand various audio concepts, but conventional audio classification models fail due to their inability to predict unseen classes during training. To address this challenge, recent literature has explored contrastive language-audio pretraining to learn an audio understanding model using natural language supervision from a pretrained language model. However, despite their reasonable zero-shot performance in audio understanding, these models typically fail to achieve optimal performance while preserving the text understanding capabilities of the pretrained language model. They also perform poorly when comprehending audio clips with multiple audio concepts. To bridge these gaps, we propose $CoLLAT$: $Co$ntrastive $L$ocked $L$anguage and $A$udio $T$uning. This is a framework to effectively learn an audio understanding model with a locked language model, which is learned using a novel pretraining objective for audio-to-text grounding to yield fine-grained audio understanding. Our extensive experiments, which include several downstream applications such as audio classification, cross-modal retrieval, and audio-guided image generation, demonstrate that $CoLLAT$ yields state-of-the-art performance for audio understanding. Additionally, it unlocks audio guidance to applications built on top of pretrained language models.61:T55f,Transformer neural networks can exhibit a surprising capacity for in-context learning (ICL) despite not being explicitly trained for it.  Prior work has provided a deeper understanding of how ICL emerges in transformers, e.g. through the lens of mechanistic interpretability, Bayesian inference, or by examining the distributional properties of training data. However, in each of these cases, ICL is treated largely as a persistent phenomenon; namely, once ICL emerges, it is assumed to persist asymptotically. Here, we show that the emergence of ICL during transformer training is, in fact, often transient. We train transformers on synthetic data designed so that both ICL and in-weights learning (IWL) strategies can lead to correct predictions. We find that ICL first emerges, then disappears and gives way to IWL, all while the training loss decreases, indicating an asymptotic preference for IWL. The transient nature of ICL is observed in transformers across a range of model sizes and datasets, raising the question of how much to ``overtrain'' transformers when seeking compact, cheaper-to-run models. We find that L2 regularization may offer a path to more persistent ICL that removes the need for early stopping based on ICL-style validation tasks. Finally, we present initial evidence that ICL transience may be caused by competition between ICL and IWL circuits.62:T447,Large language models (LLMs) can be seen as atomic units of computation mapping sequences to a distribution over sequences. Thus, they can be seen as stochastic language layers in a language network, where the learnable parameters are the natural language prompts at each layer. By stacking two such layers and feeding the output of one layer to the next, we obtain a Deep Language Network (DLN). We first show how to effectively perform prompt optimization for a 1-Layer language network (DLN-1). Then, we present an extension that applies to 2-layer DLNs (DLN-2), where two prompts must be learned. The key idea is to consider the output of the first layer as a latent variable, which requires inference, and prompts to be learned as the parameters of the generative distribution. We first test the effectiveness of DLN-1 in multiple reasoning and natural language understanding tasks. Then, we show that DLN-2 can reach higher performance than a single layer, showing promise that we might reach comparable performance to GPT-4, even when each LLM in the network is smaller and less powerful.63:T739,Autoregressive sampling from large language models has led to state-of-the-art results in several natural language tasks.
However, autoregressive sampling generates tokens one at a time making it slow, and even prohibitive in certain tasks. One way to speed up sampling is *speculative decoding*: use a small model to sample a *draft* (block or sequence of tokens), and then score all tokens in the draft by the large language model in parallel. A subset of the tokens in the draft are accepted (and the rest rejected) based on a statistical method to guarantee that the final output follows the distribution of the large model. 
In this work, we provide a principled understanding of speculative decoding through the lens of optimal transport (OT) with *membership cost*. This framework can be viewed as an extension of the well-known *maximal-coupling* problem. This new formulation enables us to generalize the speculative decoding method to allow for a set of $k$ candidates at the token-level, which leads to an improved optimal membership cost. We show that the optimal draft selection algorithm (transport plan) can be computed via linear programming, whose best-known runtime is exponential in $k$. We then propose a valid draft selection algorithm whose acceptance probability is $(1-1/e)$-optimal multiplicatively. Moreover, it can be computed in time almost linear with size of domain of a single token.
Using this new draft selection algorithm, we develop a new autoregressive sampling algorithm called *SpecTr*, which provides speedup in decoding while ensuring that there is no quality degradation in the decoded output.
We experimentally demonstrate that for state-of-the-art large language models, the proposed approach achieves a wall clock speedup of 2.13X, a further 1.37X speedup over speculative decoding on standard benchmarks.64:T54b,In-context learning (ICL) is one of the most powerful and most unexpected capabilities to emerge in recent transformer-based large language models (LLMs). Yet the mechanisms that underlie it are poorly understood. In this paper, we demonstrate that comparable ICL capabilities can be acquired by an alternative sequence prediction learning method using clone-structured causal graphs (CSCGs). Moreover, a key property of CSCGs is that, unlike transformer-based LLMs, they are {\em interpretable}, which considerably simplifies the task of explaining how ICL works. Specifically, we show that it uses a combination of (a) learning template (schema) circuits for pattern completion, (b) retrieving relevant templates in a context-sensitive manner, and (c) rebinding of novel tokens to appropriate slots in the templates. We go on to marshall evidence for the hypothesis that similar mechanisms underlie ICL in LLMs. For example, we find that, with CSCGs as with LLMs, different capabilities emerge at different levels of overparameterization, suggesting that overparameterization helps in learning more complex template (schema) circuits. By showing how ICL can be achieved with small models and datasets, we open up a path to novel architectures, and take a vital step towards a more general understanding of the mechanics behind this important capability.65:T543,Large language models have an exceptional capability to incorporate new information in a contextual manner. However, the full potential of such an approach is often restrained due to a limitation in the effective context length. One solution to this issue is to endow an attention layer with access to an additional context, which comprises of (key, value) pairs. Yet, as the number of documents increases, the proportion of relevant keys to irrelevant ones decreases, leading the model to focus more on the irrelevant keys. We identify a significant challenge, dubbed the distraction issue, where keys linked to different semantic values might overlap, making them hard to distinguish. To tackle this problem, we introduce the Focused Transformer (FoT), a technique that employs a training process inspired by contrastive learning. This novel approach enhances the structure of the (key, value) space, enabling an extension of the context length. Our method allows for fine-tuning pre-existing, large-scale models to lengthen their effective context. This is demonstrated by our fine-tuning of $3 B$ and $7 B$ OpenLLaMA checkpoints. The resulting models, which we name LongLLaMA, exhibit advancements in tasks requiring a long context. We further illustrate that our LongLLaMA models adeptly manage a $256 k$ context length for passkey retrieval.66:T5a4,Existing large language models (LLMs) can only afford fix-sized inputs due to the input length limit, preventing them from utilizing rich long-context information from past inputs. To address this, we propose a framework, Language Models Augmented with Long-Term Memory (LongMem), which enables LLMs to memorize long history. We design a novel decoupled network architecture with the original backbone LLM frozen as a memory encoder and an adaptive residual side-network as a memory retriever and reader. Such a decoupled memory design can easily cache and update long-term past contexts for memory retrieval without suffering from memory staleness. Enhanced with memory-augmented adaptation training, LongMem can thus memorize long past context and use long-term memory for language modeling. The proposed memory retrieval module can handle unlimited-length context in its memory bank to benefit various downstream tasks. Typically, LongMem can enlarge the long-form memory to 65k tokens and thus cache many-shot extra demonstration examples as long-form memory for in-context learning. Experiments show that our method outperforms strong long-context models on ChapterBreak, a challenging long-context modeling benchmark, and achieves remarkable improvements on memory-augmented in-context learning over LLMs. The results demonstrate that the proposed method is effective in helping language models to memorize and utilize long-form contents.67:T603,In recent years, big models based on Transformers have achieved state-of-the-art performance on many artificial intelligence (AI) tasks.
Despite the success of these Transformer-based models, their huge parameter size poses a serious challenge to their training, both from the storage and computation perspectives.
To this end, memory optimization (e.g., rematerialization and offloading) and parallelism (e.g., data parallelism and model parallelism) are widely explored to make training Transformers more efficient.
In this paper, we propose a framework to automatically find an efficient integration of memory optimization and parallelism for High-Throughput Transformer Training (named H3T), which is rarely considered by existing efforts for training big Transformer-based models.
Specifically, we design search algorithms to combine appropriate memory optimization strategies and parallelism schemes to achieve a balance between memory overhead and training efficiency.
We implement H3T based on an open-source toolkit BMTrain and then use H3T to train the Transformers of different sizes to evaluate the efficiency of H3T.
The experimental results show that H3T outperforms the most popular deep learning (DL) toolkit Megatron-DeepSpeed by $1.2\times \sim 4.3\times$ training speed while reducing $34.6\% \sim 80.5\%$ of memory overhead.
Moreover, H3T can use only 64 NVIDIA A100 GPUs to train GPT-3-175B, which is very difficult for existing DL toolkits. The source code is available at https://github.com/OpenBMB/BMTrain/tree/h3t.68:T685,In the quest to advance human-centric natural language generation (NLG) systems, ensuring alignment between NLG models and human preferences is crucial. For this alignment, current popular methods leverage a reinforcement learning (RL) approach with a reward model trained on feedback from humans. However, inherent disagreements due to the subjective nature of human preferences pose a significant challenge for training the reward model, resulting in a deterioration of the NLG performance. To tackle this issue, previous approaches typically rely on majority voting or averaging to consolidate multiple inconsistent preferences into a merged one. Although straightforward to understand and execute, such methods suffer from an inability to capture the nuanced degrees of disaggregation among humans and may only represent a specialized subset of individuals, thereby lacking the ability to quantitatively disclose the universality of human preferences. To address this challenge, this paper proposes a novel approach, which employs a Bayesian framework to account for the distribution of disagreements among human preferences as training a preference model, and names it as d-PM. Besides, considering the RL strategy's inefficient and complex training process over the training efficiency, we further propose utilizing the contrastive learning strategy to train the NLG model with the preference scores derived from the d-PM model. Extensive experiments on two human-centric NLG tasks, i.e., emotional support conversation and integrity"Rule-of-Thumb"generation, show that our method consistently exceeds previous SOTA models in both automatic and human evaluations.69:T44e,We introduce new methods for 1) accelerating and 2) stabilizing training for large language-vision models. 1) For acceleration, we introduce SwitchBack, a linear layer for int8 quantized training which provides a speed-up of 13-25% while matching the performance of bfloat16 training within 0.1 percentage points for the 1B parameter CLIP ViT-Huge---the largest int8 training to date. Our main focus is int8 as GPU support for float8 is rare, though we also analyze float8 training through simulation. While SwitchBack proves effective for float8, we show that standard techniques are also successful if the network is trained and initialized so that large feature magnitudes are discouraged, which we accomplish via layer-scale initialized with zeros. 2) For stability, we analyze loss spikes and find they consistently occur 1-8 iterations after the squared gradients become under-estimated by their AdamW second moment estimator. As a result, we recommend an AdamW-Adafactor hybrid which avoids loss spikes when training a CLIP ViT-Huge model and outperforms gradient clipping at the scales we test.6a:T55a,Obtaining human-interpretable explanations of large, general-purpose language models is an urgent goal for AI safety. However, it is just as important that our interpretability methods are faithful to the causal dynamics underlying model behavior and able to robustly generalize to unseen inputs. Distributed Alignment Search (DAS) is a powerful gradient descent method grounded in a theory of causal abstraction that uncovered perfect alignments between interpretable symbolic algorithms and small deep learning models fine-tuned for specific tasks. In the present paper, we scale DAS significantly by replacing the remaining brute-force search steps with learned parameters -- an approach we call Boundless DAS. This enables us to efficiently search for interpretable causal structure in large language models while they follow instructions. We apply Boundless DAS to the Alpaca model (7B parameters), which, off the shelf, solves a simple numerical reasoning problem. With Boundless DAS, we discover that Alpaca does this by implementing a causal model with two interpretable boolean variables. Furthermore, we find that the alignment of neural representations with these variables is robust to changes in inputs and instructions. These findings mark a first step toward deeply understanding the inner-workings of our largest and most widely deployed language models.6b:T5d6,Language models (LMs) often exhibit undesirable text generation behaviors, including generating false, toxic, or irrelevant outputs. 
Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF)---where human preference judgments on LM outputs are transformed into a learning signal---has recently shown promise in addressing these issues. However, such holistic feedback conveys limited information on long text outputs; it does not indicate which aspects of the outputs influenced user preference; e.g., which parts contain what type(s) of errors. In this paper, we use fine-grained human feedback (e.g., which sentence is false, which sub-sentence is irrelevant) as an explicit training signal. We introduce Fine-Grained RLHF, a framework that enables training and learning from reward functions that are fine-grained in two respects: (1) density, providing a reward after every segment (e.g., a sentence) is generated; and (2) incorporating multiple reward models associated with different feedback types (e.g., factual incorrectness, irrelevance, and information incompleteness). We conduct experiments on detoxification and long-form question answering to illustrate how learning with this reward function leads to improved performance, supported by both automatic and human evaluation. Additionally, we show that LM behaviors can be customized using different combinations of fine-grained reward models. We release all data, collected human feedback, and codes at https://FineGrainedRLHF.github.io.6c:T63c,While large language models (LMs) have shown remarkable capabilities across numerous tasks, they often struggle with simple reasoning and planning in physical environments, such as understanding object permanence or planning household activities. The limitation arises from the fact that LMs are trained only on written text and miss essential embodied knowledge and skills. In this paper, we propose a new paradigm of enhancing LMs by finetuning them with world models, to gain diverse embodied knowledge while retaining their general language capabilities. Our approach deploys an embodied agent in a world model, particularly a simulator of the physical world (VirtualHome), and acquires a diverse set of embodied experiences through both goal-oriented planning and random exploration. These experiences are then used to finetune LMs to teach diverse abilities of reasoning and acting in the physical world, e.g., planning and completing goals, object permanence and tracking, etc. Moreover, it is desirable to preserve the generality of LMs during finetuning, which facilitates generalizing the embodied knowledge across tasks rather than being tied to specific simulations. We thus further introduce the classical elastic weight consolidation (EWC) for selective weight updates, combined with low-rank adapters (LoRA) for training efficiency. Extensive experiments show our approach substantially improves base LMs on 18 downstream tasks by 64.28% on average. In particular, the small LMs (1.3B, 6B, and 13B) enhanced by our approach match or even outperform much larger LMs (e.g., ChatGPT).6d:T4d8,A desirable data selection algorithm can efficiently choose the most informative samples to maximize the utility of limited annotation budgets. However, current approaches, represented by active learning methods, typically follow a cumbersome pipeline that iterates the time-consuming model training and batch data selection repeatedly. In this paper, we challenge this status quo by designing a distinct data selection pipeline that utilizes existing general-purpose models to select data from various datasets with a single-pass inference without the need for additional training or supervision. A novel free data selection (FreeSel) method is proposed following this new pipeline. Specifically, we define semantic patterns extracted from inter-mediate features of the general-purpose model to capture subtle local information in each image. We then enable the selection of all data samples in a single pass through distance-based sampling at the fine-grained semantic pattern level. FreeSel bypasses the heavy batch selection process, achieving a significant improvement in efficiency and being 530x faster than existing active learning methods. Extensive experiments verify the effectiveness of FreeSel on various computer vision tasks.6e:T542,Language models are increasingly being deployed for general problem solving across a wide range of tasks, but are still confined to token-level, left-to-right decision-making processes during inference. This means they can fall short in tasks that require exploration, strategic lookahead, or where initial decisions play a pivotal role. To surmount these challenges, we introduce a new framework for language model inference, Tree of Thoughts (ToT), which generalizes over the popular Chain of Thought approach to prompting language models, and enables exploration over coherent units of text (thoughts) that serve as intermediate steps toward problem solving. ToT allows LMs to perform deliberate decision making by considering multiple different reasoning paths and self-evaluating choices to decide the next course of action, as well as looking ahead or backtracking when necessary to make global choices.
Our experiments show that ToT significantly enhances language models’ problem-solving abilities on three novel tasks requiring non-trivial planning or search: Game of 24, Creative Writing, and Mini Crosswords. For instance, in Game of 24, while GPT-4 with chain-of-thought prompting only solved 4\% of tasks, our method achieved a success rate of 74\%. Code repo with all prompts: https://github.com/princeton-nlp/tree-of-thought-llm.6f:T59a,Large language models (LLMs) have been recently leveraged as training data generators for various natural language processing (NLP) tasks. While previous research has explored different approaches to training models using generated data, they generally rely on simple class-conditional prompts, which may limit the diversity of the generated data and inherit systematic biases of LLM. Thus, we investigate training data generation with diversely attributed prompts (e.g., specifying attributes like length and style), which have the potential to yield diverse and attributed generated data. Our investigation focuses on datasets with high cardinality and diverse domains, wherein we demonstrate that attributed prompts outperform simple class-conditional prompts in terms of the resulting model's performance. Additionally, we present a comprehensive empirical study on data generation encompassing vital aspects like bias, diversity, and efficiency, and highlight three key observations: firstly, synthetic datasets generated by simple prompts exhibit significant biases, such as regional bias; secondly, attribute diversity plays a pivotal role in enhancing model performance; lastly, attributed prompts achieve the performance of simple class-conditional prompts while utilizing only 5\% of the querying cost of ChatGPT associated with the latter. The data and code are available on {\url{https://github.com/yueyu1030/AttrPrompt}}.70:T5e3,Simultaneous sequence generation is a pivotal task for real-time scenarios, such as streaming speech recognition, simultaneous machine translation and simultaneous speech translation, where the target sequence is generated while receiving the source sequence. The crux of achieving high-quality generation with low latency lies in identifying the optimal moments for generating, accomplished by learning a mapping between the source and target sequences. However, existing methods often rely on task-specific heuristics for different sequence types, limiting the model’s capacity to adaptively learn the source-target mapping and hindering the exploration of multi-task learning for various simultaneous tasks. In this paper, we propose a unified segment-to-segment framework (Seg2Seg) for simultaneous sequence generation, which learns the mapping in an adaptive and unified manner. During the process of simultaneous generation, the model alternates between waiting for a source segment and generating a target segment, making the segment serve as the natural bridge between the source and target. To accomplish this, Seg2Seg introduces a latent segment as the pivot between source to target and explores all potential source-target mappings via the proposed expectation training, thereby learning the optimal moments for generating. Experiments on multiple simultaneous generation tasks demonstrate that Seg2Seg achieves state-of-the-art performance and exhibits better generality across various tasks.71:T400,Modern neural language models that are widely used in various NLP tasks risk memorizing sensitive information from their training data.
Understanding this memorization is important in real world applications and also from a learning-theoretical perspective. An open question in previous studies of language model memorization is how to filter out ``common'' memorization. In fact, most memorization criteria strongly correlate with the number of occurrences in the training set, capturing memorized familiar phrases, public knowledge, templated texts, or other repeated data.
We formulate a notion of counterfactual memorization which characterizes how a model's predictions change if a particular document is omitted during training.
We identify and study counterfactually-memorized training examples in standard text datasets.
We estimate the influence of each memorized training example on the validation set and on generated texts, showing how this can provide direct evidence of the source of memorization at test time.72:T52f,Evaluating large language model (LLM) based chat assistants is challenging due to their broad capabilities and the inadequacy of existing benchmarks in measuring human preferences.
To address this, we explore using strong LLMs as judges to evaluate these models on more open-ended questions.
We examine the usage and limitations of LLM-as-a-judge, including position, verbosity, and self-enhancement biases, as well as limited reasoning ability, and propose solutions to mitigate some of them.
We then verify the agreement between LLM judges and human preferences by introducing two benchmarks: MT-bench, a multi-turn question set; and Chatbot Arena, a crowdsourced battle platform.
Our results reveal that strong LLM judges like GPT-4 can match both controlled and crowdsourced human preferences well, achieving over 80\% agreement, the same level of agreement between humans.
Hence, LLM-as-a-judge is a scalable and explainable way to approximate human preferences, which are otherwise very expensive to obtain.
Additionally, we show our benchmark and traditional benchmarks complement each other by evaluating several variants of LLaMA and Vicuna.
The MT-bench questions, 3K expert votes, and 30K conversations with human preferences are publicly available at https://github.com/lm-sys/FastChat/tree/main/fastchat/llm_judge.73:T512,We study the effect of width on the dynamics of feature-learning neural networks across a variety of architectures and datasets. Early in training, wide neural networks trained on online data have not only identical loss curves but also agree in their point-wise test predictions throughout training. For simple tasks such as CIFAR-5m this holds throughout training for networks of realistic widths. We also show that structural properties of the models, including internal representations, preactivation distributions, edge of stability phenomena, and large learning rate effects are consistent across large widths. This motivates the hypothesis that phenomena seen in realistic models can be captured by infinite-width, feature-learning limits. For harder tasks (such as ImageNet and language modeling), and later training times, finite-width deviations grow systematically. Two distinct effects cause these deviations across widths. First, the network output has an initialization-dependent variance scaling inversely with width, which can be removed by ensembling networks. We observe, however, that ensembles of narrower networks perform worse than a single wide network. We call this the bias of narrower width. We conclude with a spectral perspective on the origin of this finite-width bias.74:T43b,Dynamic Sparse Training (DST) is a rapidly evolving area of research that seeks to optimize the sparse initialization of a neural network by adapting its topology during training. It has been shown that under specific conditions, DST is able to outperform dense models. The key components of this framework are the pruning and growing criteria, which are repeatedly applied during the training process to adjust the network's sparse connectivity. While the growing criterion's impact on DST performance is relatively well studied, the influence of the pruning criterion remains overlooked. To address this issue, we design and perform an extensive empirical analysis of various pruning criteria to better understand their impact on the dynamics of DST solutions. Surprisingly, we find that most of the studied methods yield similar results. The differences become more significant in the low-density regime, where the best performance is predominantly given by the simplest technique: magnitude-based pruning. The code is provided at https://github.com/alooow/fantastic_weights_paper75:T4fd,Reinforcement learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) learns from preference signals, while standard Reinforcement Learning (RL) directly learns from reward signals. Preferences arguably contain less information than rewards, which makes preference-based RL seemingly more difficult. This paper theoretically proves that, for a wide range of preference models, we can solve preference-based RL directly using existing algorithms and techniques for reward-based RL, with small or no extra costs. Specifically, (1) for preferences that are drawn from reward-based probabilistic models, we reduce the problem to robust reward-based RL that can tolerate small errors in rewards; (2) for general arbitrary preferences where the objective is to find the von Neumann winner, we reduce the problem to multiagent reward-based RL which finds Nash equilibria for factored Markov games under a restricted set of policies. The latter case can be further reduce to adversarial MDP when preferences only depend on the final state. We instantiate all reward-based RL subroutines by concrete provable algorithms, and apply our theory to a large class of models including tabular MDPs and MDPs with generic function approximation. We further provide guarantees when K-wise comparisons are available.76:T5fc,As a new paradigm in information retrieval, generative retrieval directly generates a ranked list of document identifiers (docids) for a given query using generative language models (LMs).
How to assign each document a unique docid (denoted as document tokenization) is a critical problem, because it determines whether the generative retrieval model can precisely retrieve any document by simply decoding its docid.
Most existing methods adopt rule-based tokenization, which is ad-hoc and does not generalize well.
In contrast, in this paper we propose a novel document tokenization learning method, GenRet, which learns to encode the complete document semantics into docids.
GenRet learns to tokenize documents into short discrete representations (i.e., docids) via a discrete auto-encoding approach.
We develop a progressive training scheme to capture the autoregressive nature of docids and diverse clustering techniques to stabilize the training process.
Based on the semantic-embedded docids of any set of documents, the generative retrieval model can learn to generate the most relevant docid only according to the docids' semantic relevance to the queries.
We conduct experiments on the NQ320K, MS MARCO, and BEIR datasets.
GenRet establishes the new state-of-the-art on the NQ320K dataset.
Compared to generative retrieval baselines, GenRet can achieve significant improvements on unseen documents.
Moreover, GenRet can also outperform comparable baselines on MS MARCO and BEIR, demonstrating the method's generalizability.77:T746,Advancements in deep neural networks have allowed automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems to attain human parity on several publicly available clean speech datasets. However, even state-of-the-art ASR systems experience performance degradation when confronted with adverse conditions, as a well-trained acoustic model is sensitive to variations in the speech domain, e.g., background noise. Intuitively, humans address this issue by relying on their linguistic knowledge: the meaning of ambiguous spoken terms is usually inferred from contextual cues thereby reducing the dependency on the auditory system. Inspired by this observation, we introduce the first open-source benchmark to utilize external large language models (LLMs) for ASR error correction, where N-best decoding hypotheses provide informative elements for true transcription prediction. This approach is a paradigm shift from the traditional language model rescoring strategy that can only select one candidate hypothesis as output transcription. The proposed benchmark contains a novel dataset, "HyPoradise" (HP), encompassing more than 316,000 pairs of N-best hypotheses and corresponding accurate transcriptions across prevalent speech domains. Given this dataset, we examine three types of error correction techniques based on LLMs with varying amounts of labeled hypotheses-transcription pairs, which gains significant word error rate (WER) reduction. Experimental evidence demonstrates the proposed technique achieves a breakthrough by surpassing the upper bound of traditional re-ranking based methods. More surprisingly, LLM with reasonable prompt design can even correct those tokens that are missing in N-best list. We make our results publicly accessible for reproducible pipelines with released pre-trained models, thus providing a new paradigm for ASR error correction with LLMs.78:T5e8,Language models of code (LMs) work well when the surrounding code provides sufficient context. This is not true when it becomes necessary to use types, functionality or APIs defined elsewhere in the repository or a linked library, especially those not seen during training. LMs suffer from limited awareness of such global context and end up hallucinating.

Integrated development environments (IDEs) assist developers in understanding repository context using static analysis.  We extend this assistance, enjoyed by developers, to LMs. We propose monitor-guided decoding (MGD) where a monitor uses static analysis to guide the decoding. We construct a repository-level dataset PragmaticCode for method-completion in Java and evaluate MGD on it. On models of varying parameter scale, by monitoring for type-consistent object dereferences, MGD consistently improves compilation rates and agreement with ground truth. Further, LMs with fewer parameters, when augmented with MGD, can outperform larger LMs. With MGD, SantaCoder-1.1B achieves better compilation rate and next-identifier match than the much larger text-davinci-003 model.

We also conduct a generalizability study to evaluate the ability of MGD to generalize to multiple programming languages (Java, C# and Rust), coding scenarios (e.g., correct number of arguments to method calls), and to enforce richer semantic constraints (e.g., stateful API protocols). Our data and implementation are available at https://github.com/microsoft/monitors4codegen.79:T48f,Emergent properties have been widely adopted as a term to describe behavior not present in smaller models but observed in larger models  (Wei et al., 2022a). Recent work suggests that the trade-off incurred by quantization is also an emergent property, with sharp drops in performance in models over 6B parameters. In this work, we ask _are quantization cliffs in performance solely a factor of scale?_ Against a backdrop of increased research focus on why certain emergent properties surface at scale, this work provides a useful counter-example. We posit that it is possible to optimize for a quantization friendly training recipe that suppresses large activation magnitude outliers. Here, we find that outlier dimensions are not an inherent product of scale, but rather sensitive to the optimization conditions present during pre-training. This both opens up directions for more efficient quantization, and poses the question of whether other emergent properties are inherent or can be altered and conditioned by optimization and architecture design choices. We successfully quantize models ranging in size from 410M to 52B with minimal degradation in performance.7a:T617,Neuro-symbolic AI bridges the gap between purely symbolic and neural approaches to learning. This often requires maximizing the likelihood of a symbolic constraint w.r.t the neural network's output distribution. Such output distributions are typically assumed to be fully-factorized. This limits the applicability of neuro-symbolic learning to the more expressive auto-regressive distributions, e.g., transformers. Under such distributions, computing the likelihood of even simple constraints is #P-hard. Instead of attempting to enforce the constraint on the entire likelihood distribution, we propose to do so on a random, local approximation thereof. More precisely, we approximate the likelihood of the constraint with the pseudolikelihood of the constraint centered around a model sample. Our approach is factorizable, allowing us to reuse solutions to sub-problems---a main tenet for the efficient computation of neuro-symbolic losses. It also provides a local, high fidelity approximation of the likelihood: it exhibits low entropy and KL-divergence around the model sample. We tested our approach on Sudoku and shortest-path prediction cast as auto-regressive generation, and observe that we greatly improve upon the base model's ability to predict logically-consistent outputs. We also tested our approach on the task of detoxifying large language models. We observe that using a simple constraint disallowing a list of toxic words, we are able to steer the model's outputs away from toxic generations, achieving SoTA compared to previous approaches.7b:T5ff,In modern machine learning, inner product attention computation is a fundamental task for training large language models such as Transformer, GPT-1, BERT, GPT-2, GPT-3 and ChatGPT. Formally, in this problem, one is given as input three matrices $Q, K, V \in [-B,B]^{n \times d}$, and the goal is to construct the matrix $\mathrm{Att}(Q,K,V) := \mathrm{diag}(A {\bf 1}_n)^{-1} A V \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times d}$, where $A = \exp(QK^\top/d)$ is the `attention matrix', and $\exp$ is applied entry-wise. Straightforward methods for this problem explicitly compute the $n \times n$ attention matrix $A$, and hence require time $\Omega(n^2)$ even when $d = n^{o(1)}$ is small. 


In this paper, we investigate whether faster algorithms are possible by \emph{implicitly} making use of the matrix $A$. We present two results, showing that there is a sharp transition at $B = \Theta(\sqrt{\log n})$.

$\bullet$ If $d = O(\log n)$ and $B = o(\sqrt{\log n})$, there is an $n^{1+o(1)}$ time algorithm to approximate $\mathrm{Att}(Q,K,V)$ up to $1/\mathrm{poly}(n)$ additive error.

$\bullet$ If $d = O(\log n)$ and $B = \Theta (\sqrt{\log n})$, assuming the Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis from fine-grained complexity theory, it is impossible to approximate $\mathrm{Att}(Q,K,V)$ up to $1/\mathrm{poly}(n)$ additive error in truly subquadratic time $n^{2 - \Omega(1)}$.


This gives a theoretical explanation for the phenomenon observed in practice that attention computation is much more efficient when the input matrices have smaller entries.7c:T46d,Sharpness-aware minimization (SAM) is a recently proposed method that minimizes the sharpness of the training loss of a neural network. While its generalization improvement is well-known and is the primary motivation, we uncover an additional intriguing effect of SAM: reduction of the feature rank which happens at different layers of a neural network. We show that this low-rank effect occurs very broadly: for different architectures such as fully-connected networks, convolutional networks, vision transformers and for different objectives such as regression, classification, language-image contrastive training. To better understand this phenomenon, we provide a mechanistic understanding of how low-rank features arise in a simple two-layer network. We observe that a significant number of activations gets entirely pruned by SAM which directly contributes to the rank reduction. We confirm this effect theoretically and check that it can also occur in deep networks, although the overall rank reduction mechanism can be more complex, especially for deep networks with pre-activation skip connections and self-attention layers.7d:T61f,Machine learning approaches often require training and evaluation datasets with a clear separation between positive and negative examples. This requirement overly simplifies the natural subjectivity present in many tasks, and obscures the inherent diversity in human perceptions and opinions about many content items. Preserving the variance in content and diversity in human perceptions in datasets is often quite expensive and laborious. This is especially troubling when building safety datasets for conversational AI systems, as safety is socio-culturally situated in this context. To demonstrate this crucial aspect of conversational AI safety, and to facilitate in-depth model performance analyses, we introduce the DICES (Diversity In Conversational AI Evaluation for Safety) dataset that contains fine-grained demographics information about raters, high replication of ratings per item to ensure statistical power for analyses, and encodes rater votes as distributions across different demographics to allow for in-depth explorations of different aggregation strategies. The DICES dataset enables the observation and measurement of variance, ambiguity, and diversity in the context of safety for conversational AI. We further describe a set of metrics that show how rater diversity influences safety perception across different geographic regions, ethnicity groups, age groups, and genders. The goal of the DICES dataset is to be used as a shared resource and benchmark that respects diverse perspectives during safety evaluation of conversational AI systems.7e:T5a3,Numerous benchmarks have been established to assess the performance of foundation models on open-ended question answering, which serves as a comprehensive test of a model's ability to understand and generate language in a manner similar to humans. Most of these works focus on proposing new datasets, however, we see two main issues within previous benchmarking pipelines, namely testing leakage and evaluation automation. In this paper, we propose a novel benchmarking framework, Language-Model-as-an-Examiner, where the LM serves as a knowledgeable examiner that formulates questions based on its knowledge and evaluates responses in a reference-free manner. Our framework allows for effortless extensibility as various LMs can be adopted as the examiner, and the questions can be constantly updated given more diverse trigger topics. For a more comprehensive and equitable evaluation, we devise three strategies: (1) We instruct the LM examiner to generate questions across a multitude of domains to probe for a broad acquisition, and raise follow-up questions to engage in a more in-depth assessment. (2) Upon evaluation, the examiner combines both scoring and ranking measurements, providing a reliable result as it aligns closely with human annotations. (3) We additionally propose a decentralized Peer-examination method to address the biases in a single examiner. Our data and benchmarking results are available at: https://lmexam.com.7f:T4c4,It has been well established that increasing scale in deep transformer networks leads to improved quality and performance. However, this increase in scale often comes with prohibitive increases in compute cost and inference latency. We introduce Alternating Updates (AltUp), a simple-to-implement method to increase a model's capacity without the computational burden. AltUp enables the widening of the learned representation, i.e., the token embedding, while only incurring a negligible increase in latency. AltUp achieves this by working on a subblock of the widened representation at each layer and using a predict-and-correct mechanism to update the inactivated blocks. We present extensions of AltUp, such as its applicability to the sequence dimension, and demonstrate how AltUp can be synergistically combined with existing approaches, such as Sparse Mixture-of-Experts models, to obtain efficient models with even 
higher capacity. Our experiments on benchmark transformer models and language tasks demonstrate the consistent effectiveness of AltUp on a diverse set of scenarios. Notably, on SuperGLUE and SQuAD benchmarks, AltUp enables up to $87\%$ speedup relative to the dense baselines at the same accuracy.80:T4af,Since the proposal of transformers, these models have been limited to bounded input lengths, because of their need to attend to every token in the input. In this work, we propose Unlimiformer: a general approach that wraps any existing pretrained encoder-decoder transformer, and offloads the cross-attention computation to a single k-nearest-neighbor (kNN) index, while the returned kNN distances are the attention dot-product scores. This kNN index can be kept on either the GPU or CPU memory and queried in sub-linear time; this way, we can index practically unlimited input sequences, while every attention head in every decoder layer retrieves its top-k keys, instead of attending to every key. We evaluate Unlimiformer on several long-document and book-summarization benchmarks, showing that it can process even 500k token-long inputs from the BookSum dataset, without any input truncation at test time. We demonstrate that Unlimiformer improves pretrained models such as BART and Longformer by extending them to unlimited inputs without additional learned weights and without modifying their code. We make our code and models publicly available at https://github.com/abertsch72/unlimiformer .81:T550,Large language models (LLMs) are useful in many NLP tasks and become more capable with size, with the best open-source models having over 50 billion parameters. However, using these 50B+ models requires high-end hardware, making them inaccessible to most researchers. In this work, we investigate methods for cost-efficient inference and fine-tuning of LLMs, comparing local and distributed strategies. We observe that a large enough model (50B+) can run efficiently even on geodistributed devices in a consumer-grade network. This could allow running LLM efficiently by pooling together idle compute resources of multiple research groups and volunteers. We address two open problems: (1) how to perform inference and fine-tuning reliably if any device can disconnect abruptly and (2) how to partition LLMs between devices with uneven hardware, joining and leaving at will. In order to do that, we develop special fault-tolerant inference algorithms and load-balancing protocols that automatically assign devices to maximize the total system throughput. We showcase these algorithms in Petals — a decentralized system that runs Llama 2 (70B) and BLOOM (176B) over the Internet up to $10\times$ faster than offloading for interactive generation. We evaluate the performance of our system in simulated conditions and a real-world setup spanning two continents.82:T57f,In this work, we demonstrate a method for implementing policy iteration using a large language model. While the application of foundation models to RL has received considerable attention, most approaches rely on either (1) the curation of expert demonstrations (either through manual design or task-specific pretraining) or (2) adaptation to the task of interest using gradient methods (either fine-tuning or training of adapter layers). Both of these techniques have drawbacks. Collecting demonstrations is labor-intensive, and algorithms that rely on them do not outperform the experts from which the demonstrations were derived. All gradient techniques are inherently slow, sacrificing the “few-shot” quality that makes in-context learning attractive to begin with. Our method demonstrates that a large language model can be used to implement policy iteration using the machinery of in-context learning, enabling it to learn to perform RL tasks without expert demonstrations or gradients. Our approach iteratively updates the contents of the prompt from which it derives its policy through trial-and-error interaction with an RL environment. In order to eliminate the role of in-weights learning (on which approaches like Decision Transformer rely heavily), we demonstrate our method using Codex (M. Chen et al. 2021b), a language model with no prior knowledge of the domains on which we evaluate it.83:T5dc,Preserving training dynamics across batch sizes is an important tool for practical machine learning as it enables the trade-off between batch size and wall-clock time. This trade-off is typically enabled by a scaling rule, for example, in stochastic gradient descent, one should scale the learning rate linearly with the batch size. Another important machine learning tool is the model EMA, a functional copy of a target model, whose parameters move towards those of its target model according to an Exponential Moving Average (EMA) at a rate parameterized by a momentum hyperparameter. This model EMA can improve the robustness and generalization of supervised learning, stabilize pseudo-labeling, and provide a learning signal for Self-Supervised Learning (SSL). Prior works have not considered the optimization of the model EMA when performing scaling, leading to different training dynamics across batch sizes and lower model performance. In this work, we provide a scaling rule for optimization in the presence of a model EMA and demonstrate the rule's validity across a range of architectures, optimizers, and data modalities.  We also show the rule's validity where the model EMA contributes to the optimization of the target model, enabling us to train EMA-based pseudo-labeling and SSL methods at small and large batch sizes. For SSL, we enable training of BYOL up to batch size 24,576 without sacrificing performance, a 6$\times$ wall-clock time reduction under idealized hardware settings.84:T4bc,Sequence memory is an essential attribute of natural and artificial intelligence that enables agents to encode, store, and retrieve complex sequences of stimuli and actions. Computational models of sequence memory have been proposed where recurrent Hopfield-like neural networks are trained with temporally asymmetric Hebbian rules. However, these networks suffer from limited sequence capacity (maximal length of the stored sequence) due to interference between the memories. Inspired by recent work on Dense Associative Memories, we expand the sequence capacity of these models by introducing a nonlinear interaction term, enhancing separation between the patterns. We derive novel scaling laws for sequence capacity with respect to network size, significantly outperforming existing scaling laws for models based on traditional Hopfield networks, and verify these theoretical results with numerical simulation. Moreover, we introduce a generalized pseudoinverse rule to recall sequences of highly correlated patterns. Finally, we extend this model to store sequences with variable timing between states' transitions and describe a biologically-plausible implementation, with connections to motor neuroscience.85:T5fe,In this work, we reveal a strong implicit bias of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) that drives overly expressive networks to much simpler subnetworks, thereby dramatically reducing the number of independent parameters, and improving generalization. To reveal this bias, we identify _invariant sets_, or subsets of parameter space that remain unmodified by SGD. We focus on two classes of invariant sets that correspond to simpler (sparse or low-rank) subnetworks and commonly appear in modern architectures. Our analysis uncovers that SGD exhibits a property of _stochastic attractivity_ towards these simpler invariant sets. We establish a sufficient condition for stochastic attractivity based on a competition between the loss landscape's curvature around the invariant set and the noise introduced by stochastic gradients. Remarkably, we find that an increased level of noise strengthens attractivity, leading to the emergence of attractive invariant sets associated with saddle-points or local maxima of the train loss. We observe empirically the existence of attractive invariant sets in trained deep neural networks, implying that SGD dynamics often collapses to simple subnetworks with either vanishing or redundant neurons. We further demonstrate how this simplifying process of _stochastic collapse_ benefits generalization in a linear teacher-student framework. Finally, through this analysis, we mechanistically explain why early training with large learning rates for extended periods benefits subsequent generalization.86:T51a,Vision and text have been fully explored  in contemporary video-text foundational models, while other modalities such as audio and subtitles in videos have not received sufficient attention. In this paper, we resort to establish connections between multi-modality video tracks, including Vision, Audio, and Subtitle, and Text by exploring an automatically generated large-scale omni-modality video caption dataset called VAST-27M. Specifically, we first collect 27 million open-domain video clips and separately train a vision and an audio captioner to generate vision and audio captions. Then, we employ an off-the-shelf Large Language Model (LLM) to integrate the generated captions, together with subtitles and instructional prompts into omni-modality captions. Based on the proposed VAST-27M dataset, we train an omni-modality video-text foundational model named VAST, which can perceive and process vision, audio, and subtitle modalities from video, and better support various tasks including  vision-text, audio-text, and multi-modal video-text tasks (retrieval, captioning and QA). Extensive experiments have been conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed VAST-27M corpus and VAST foundation model. VAST achieves 22 new state-of-the-art results on various cross-modality benchmarks.87:T6ef,Recently, a new line of works has emerged to understand and improve self-attention in Transformers by treating it as a kernel machine. However, existing works apply the methods for symmetric kernels to the asymmetric self-attention, resulting in a nontrivial gap between the analytical understanding and numerical implementation. In this paper, we provide a new perspective to represent and optimize self-attention through asymmetric Kernel Singular Value Decomposition (KSVD), which is also motivated by the low-rank property of self-attention normally observed in deep layers. Through asymmetric KSVD, i) a primal-dual representation of self-attention is formulated, where the optimization objective is cast to maximize the projection variances in the attention outputs; ii) a novel attention mechanism, i.e., Primal-Attention, is proposed via the primal representation of KSVD, avoiding explicit computation of the kernel matrix in the dual; iii) with KKT conditions, we prove that the stationary solution to the KSVD optimization in Primal-Attention yields a zero-value objective. In this manner, KSVD optimization can be implemented by simply minimizing a regularization loss, so that low-rank property is promoted without extra decomposition. Numerical experiments show state-of-the-art performance of our Primal-Attention with improved efficiency. Moreover, we demonstrate that the deployed KSVD optimization regularizes Primal-Attention with a sharper singular value decay than that of the canonical self-attention, further verifying the great potential of our method. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that provides a primal-dual representation for the asymmetric kernel in self-attention and successfully applies it to modelling and optimization.88:T42d,Self-supervised training methods for transformers have demonstrated remarkable performance across various domains. Previous transformer-based models, such as masked autoencoders (MAE), typically utilize a single normalization layer for both the [CLS] symbol and the tokens. We propose in this paper a simple modification that employs separate normalization layers for the tokens and the [CLS] symbol to better capture their distinct characteristics and enhance downstream task performance. Our method aims to alleviate the potential negative effects of using the same normalization statistics for both token types, which may not be optimally aligned with their individual roles. We empirically show that by utilizing a separate normalization layer, the [CLS] embeddings can better encode the global contextual information and are distributed more uniformly in its anisotropic space. When replacing the conventional normalization layer with the two separate layers, we observe an average  2.7% performance improvement over the image, natural language, and graph domains.89:T62e,Large language models (LLMs) based on the generative pre-training transformer (GPT) have demonstrated remarkable effectiveness across a diverse range of downstream tasks. Inspired by the advancements of the GPT, we present PointGPT, a novel approach that extends the concept of GPT to point clouds, addressing the challenges associated with disorder properties, low information density, and task gaps. Specifically, a point cloud auto-regressive generation task is proposed to pre-train transformer models. Our method partitions the input point cloud into multiple point patches and arranges them in an ordered sequence based on their spatial proximity. Then, an extractor-generator based transformer decode, with a dual masking strategy, learns latent representations conditioned on the preceding point patches, aiming to predict the next one in an auto-regressive manner. To explore scalability and enhance performance, a larger pre-training dataset is collected. Additionally, a subsequent post-pre-training stage is introduced, incorporating a labeled hybrid dataset. Our scalable approach allows for learning high-capacity models that generalize well, achieving state-of-the-art performance on various downstream tasks. In particular, our approach achieves classification accuracies of 94.9% on the ModelNet40 dataset and 93.4% on the ScanObjectNN dataset, outperforming all other transformer models. Furthermore, our method also attains new state-of-the-art accuracies on all four few-shot learning benchmarks. Codes are available at https://github.com/CGuangyan-BIT/PointGPT.8a:T45c,The challenge of overfitting, in which the model memorizes the training data and fails to generalize to test data, has become increasingly significant in the training of large neural networks. To tackle this challenge, Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) has emerged as a promising training method, which can improve the generalization of neural networks even in the presence of label noise. However, a deep understanding of how SAM works, especially in the setting of nonlinear neural networks and classification tasks, remains largely missing. This paper fills this gap by demonstrating why SAM generalizes better than Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) for a certain data model and two-layer convolutional ReLU networks. The loss landscape of our studied problem is nonsmooth, thus current explanations for the success of SAM based on the Hessian information are insufficient. Our result explains the benefits of SAM, particularly its ability to prevent noise learning in the early stages, thereby facilitating more effective learning of features. Experiments on both synthetic and real data corroborate our theory.8b:T5f3,Assessing factuality of text generated by large language models (LLMs) is an emerging yet crucial research area, aimed at alerting users to potential errors and guiding the development of more reliable LLMs. Nonetheless, the evaluators assessing factuality necessitate suitable evaluation themselves to gauge progress and foster advancements. This direction remains under-explored, resulting in substantial impediments to the progress of factuality evaluators. To mitigate this issue, we introduce a benchmark for Factuality Evaluation of large Language Models, referred to as FELM. In this benchmark, we collect responses generated from LLMs and annotate factuality labels in a fine-grained manner. Contrary to previous studies that primarily concentrate on the factuality of world knowledge (e.g. information from Wikipedia), FELM focuses on factuality across diverse domains, spanning from world knowledge to math and reasoning. Our annotation is based on text segments, which can help pinpoint specific factual errors. The factuality annotations are further supplemented by predefined error types and reference links that either support or contradict the statement. In our experiments, we investigate the performance of several LLM-based factuality evaluators on FELM, including both vanilla LLMs and those augmented with retrieval mechanisms and chain-of-thought processes. Our findings reveal that while retrieval aids factuality evaluation, current LLMs are far from satisfactory to faithfully detect factual errors.8c:T68a,This paper studies the fundamental learning problem of the energy-based model (EBM). Learning the EBM can be achieved using the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), which typically involves the Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling, such as the Langevin dynamics. However, the noise-initialized Langevin dynamics can be challenging in practice and hard to mix. This motivates the exploration of joint training with the generator model where the generator model serves as a complementary model to bypass MCMC sampling. However, such a method can be less accurate than the MCMC and result in biased EBM learning. While the generator can also serve as an initializer model for better MCMC sampling, its learning can be biased since it only matches the EBM and has no access to empirical training examples. Such biased generator learning may limit the potential of learning the EBM. To address this issue, we present a joint learning framework that interweaves the maximum likelihood learning algorithm for both the EBM and the complementary generator model. In particular, the generator model is learned by MLE to match both the EBM and the empirical data distribution, making it a more informative initializer for MCMC sampling of EBM. Learning generator with observed examples typically requires inference of the generator posterior. To ensure accurate and efficient inference, we adopt the MCMC posterior sampling and introduce a complementary inference model to initialize such latent MCMC sampling. We show that three separate models can be seamlessly integrated into our joint framework through two (dual-) MCMC teaching, enabling effective and efficient EBM learning.8d:T548,Large-scale pre-training and instruction tuning have been successful at creating general-purpose language models with broad competence. However, building general-purpose vision-language models is challenging due to the rich input distributions and task diversity resulting from the additional visual input. Although vision-language pretraining has been widely studied, vision-language instruction tuning remains under-explored. In this paper, we conduct a systematic and comprehensive study on vision-language instruction tuning based on the pretrained BLIP-2 models. We gather 26 publicly available datasets, covering a wide variety of tasks and capabilities, and transform them into instruction tuning format. Additionally, we introduce an instruction-aware Query Transformer, which extracts informative features tailored to the given instruction. Trained on 13 held-in datasets, InstructBLIP attains state-of-the-art zero-shot performance across all 13 held-out datasets, substantially outperforming BLIP-2 and larger Flamingo models. Our models also lead to state-of-the-art performance when finetuned on individual downstream tasks (e.g., 90.7% accuracy on ScienceQA questions with image contexts). Furthermore, we qualitatively demonstrate the advantages of InstructBLIP over concurrent multimodal models. All InstructBLIP models are open-source.8e:T4c6,Generative transformer models have become increasingly complex, with large numbers of parameters and the ability to process multiple input modalities. Current methods for explaining their predictions are resource-intensive. Most crucially, they require prohibitively large amounts of additional memory, since they rely on backpropagation which allocates almost twice as much GPU memory as the forward pass. 
This makes it difficult, if not impossible, to use explanations in production. 
We present AtMan that provides explanations of generative transformer models at almost no extra cost. Specifically, AtMan is a modality-agnostic perturbation method that manipulates the attention mechanisms of transformers to produce relevance maps for the input with respect to the output prediction. Instead of using backpropagation, AtMan applies a parallelizable token-based search method relying on cosine similarity neighborhood in the embedding space. 
Our exhaustive experiments on text and image-text benchmarks demonstrate that AtMan outperforms current state-of-the-art gradient-based methods on several metrics while being computationally efficient. As such, AtMan is suitable for use in large model inference deployments.8f:T45e,Mislabeled, duplicated, or biased data in real-world scenarios can lead to prolonged training and even hinder model convergence. Traditional solutions prioritizing easy or hard samples lack the flexibility to handle such a variety simultaneously. Recent work has proposed a more reasonable data selection principle by examining the data's impact on the model's generalization loss. However, its practical adoption relies on less principled approximations and additional holdout data. This work solves these problems by leveraging a lightweight Bayesian treatment and incorporating off-the-shelf zero-shot predictors built on large-scale pre-trained models. The resulting algorithm is efficient and easy to implement. We perform extensive empirical studies on challenging benchmarks with considerable data noise and imbalance in the online batch selection scenario, and observe superior training efficiency over competitive baselines. Notably, on the challenging WebVision benchmark, our method can achieve similar predictive performance with significantly fewer training iterations than leading data selection methods.90:T494,Given varying prompts regarding a factoid question, can a large language model (LLM) reliably generate factually correct answers? Existing LLMs may generate distinct responses for different prompts. In this paper, we study the problem of quantifying knowledge contained in an LLM regarding a given set of facts. We propose KaRR, a statistical approach to assess factual knowledge for LLMs. The main idea is to estimate the ratio of LLM generating text corresponding to the answer entity given diverse prompts of the subject and the querying relation, versus it generating by random chances. Our assessment suite contains a comprehensive set of 994,123 entities and 600 relations, with 1,395,905 text aliases. We use our method to evaluate 20 LLMs of various sizes, including LLaMA, Alpaca, OPT, etc. Experiments show that our results have a strong correlation (0.43 Kendall's $\tau$) with the results of human assessment on LLMs. Our results reveal that the knowledge in LLMs with the same backbone architecture adheres to the scaling law, while tuning on instruction-following data sometimes compromises the model's capability to generate factually correct text reliably.91:T5e3,Vision and Language (VL) models offer an effective method for aligning representation spaces of images and text allowing for numerous applications such as cross-modal retrieval, visual and multi-hop question answering, captioning, and many more. However, the aligned image-text spaces learned by all the popular VL models are still suffering from the so-called 'object bias' - their representations behave as 'bags of nouns' mostly ignoring or downsizing the attributes, relations, and states of objects described/appearing in texts/images. Although some great attempts at fixing these `compositional reasoning' issues were proposed in the recent literature, the problem is still far from being solved. In this paper, we uncover two factors limiting the VL models' compositional reasoning performance. These two factors are properties of the paired VL dataset used for finetuning (or pre-training) the VL model: (i) the caption quality, or in other words 'image-alignment', of the texts; and (ii) the 'density' of the captions in the sense of mentioning all the details appearing on the image. We propose a fine-tuning approach for automatically treating these factors on a standard collection of paired VL data (CC3M). Applied to CLIP, we demonstrate its significant compositional reasoning performance increase of up to $\sim27$\% over the base model, up to $\sim20$\% over the strongest baseline, and by $6.7$\% on average. Our code is provided in the Supplementary and would be released upon acceptance.92:T562,In modern deep learning, algorithmic choices (such as width, depth, and learning rate) are known to modulate nuanced resource tradeoffs. This work investigates how these complexities necessarily arise for feature learning in the presence of computational-statistical gaps. We begin by considering offline sparse parity learning, a supervised classification problem which admits a statistical query lower bound for gradient-based training of a multilayer perceptron. This lower bound can be interpreted as a *multi-resource tradeoff frontier*: 
successful learning can only occur if one is sufficiently rich (large model), knowledgeable (large dataset), patient (many training iterations), or lucky (many random guesses). We show, theoretically and experimentally, that sparse initialization and increasing network width yield significant improvements in sample efficiency in this setting. Here, width plays the role of parallel search: it amplifies the probability of finding "lottery ticket" neurons, which learn sparse features more sample-efficiently. Finally, we show that the synthetic sparse parity task can be useful as a proxy for real problems requiring axis-aligned feature learning. We demonstrate improved sample efficiency on tabular classification benchmarks by using wide, sparsely-initialized MLP models; these networks sometimes outperform tuned random forests.93:T74e,Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are popular machine learning tools for modeling and forecasting sequential data and for inferring dynamical systems (DS) from observed time series. Concepts from DS theory (DST) have variously been used to further our understanding of both, how trained RNNs solve complex tasks, and the training process itself. Bifurcations are particularly important phenomena in DS, including RNNs, that refer to topological (qualitative) changes in a system's dynamical behavior as one or more of its parameters are varied. Knowing the bifurcation structure of an RNN will thus allow to deduce many of its computational and dynamical properties, like its sensitivity to parameter variations or its behavior during training. In particular, bifurcations may account for sudden loss jumps observed in RNN training that could severely impede the training process. Here we first mathematically prove for a particular class of ReLU-based RNNs that certain bifurcations are indeed associated with loss gradients tending toward infinity or zero. We then introduce a novel heuristic algorithm for detecting all fixed points and $k$-cycles in ReLU-based RNNs and their existence and stability regions, hence bifurcation manifolds in parameter space. In contrast to previous numerical algorithms for finding fixed points and common continuation methods, our algorithm provides $\textit{exact}$ results and returns fixed points and cycles up to high orders with surprisingly good scaling behavior. We exemplify the algorithm on the analysis of the training process of RNNs, and find that the recently introduced technique of generalized teacher forcing completely avoids certain types of bifurcations in training. Thus, besides facilitating the DST analysis of trained RNNs, our algorithm provides a powerful instrument for analyzing the training process itself.94:T563,The core components of many modern neural network architectures, such as transformers, convolutional, or graph neural networks, can be expressed as linear layers with *weight-sharing*. Kronecker-Factored Approximate Curvature (K-FAC), a second-order optimisation method, has shown promise to speed up neural network training and thereby reduce computational costs. However, there is currently no framework to apply it to generic architectures, specifically ones with linear weight-sharing layers. In this work, we identify two different settings of linear weight-sharing layers which motivate two flavours of K-FAC -- *expand* and *reduce*. We show that they are exact for deep linear networks with weight-sharing in their respective setting. Notably, K-FAC-reduce is generally faster than K-FAC-expand, which we leverage to speed up automatic hyperparameter selection via optimising the marginal likelihood for a Wide ResNet. Finally, we observe little difference between these two K-FAC variations when using them to train both a graph neural network and a vision transformer. However, both variations are able to reach a fixed validation metric target in $50$-$75$\% of the number of steps of a first-order reference run, which translates into a comparable improvement in wall-clock time. This highlights the potential of applying K-FAC to modern neural network architectures.95:T44c,Neuron interpretation offers valuable insights into how knowledge is structured within a deep neural network model. While a number of neuron interpretation methods have been proposed in the literature, the field lacks a comprehensive comparison among these methods. This gap hampers progress due to the absence of standardized metrics and benchmarks. The commonly used evaluation metric has limitations, and creating ground truth annotations for neurons is impractical. Addressing these challenges, we propose an evaluation framework based on voting theory. Our hypothesis posits that neurons consistently identified by different methods carry more significant information. We rigorously assess our framework across a diverse array of neuron interpretation methods. Notable findings include: i) despite the theoretical differences among the methods, neuron ranking methods share over 60% of their rankings when identifying salient neurons, ii) the neuron interpretation methods are most sensitive to the last layer representations, iii) Probeless neuron ranking emerges as the most consistent method.96:T598,Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) stands as one of the most effective and scalable methods for training transferable vision models using paired image and text data. CLIP models are trained using contrastive loss, which typically relies on data augmentations to prevent overfitting and shortcuts. However, in the CLIP training paradigm, data augmentations are exclusively applied to image inputs, while language inputs remain unchanged throughout the entire training process, limiting the exposure of diverse texts to the same image. In this paper, we introduce Language augmented CLIP (LaCLIP), a simple yet highly effective approach to enhance CLIP training through language rewrites. Leveraging the in-context learning capability of large language models, we rewrite the text descriptions associated with each image. These rewritten texts exhibit diversity in sentence structure and vocabulary while preserving the original key concepts and meanings. During training, LaCLIP randomly selects either the original texts or the rewritten versions as text augmentations for each image. Extensive experiments on CC3M, CC12M, RedCaps and LAION-400M datasets show that CLIP pre-training with language rewrites significantly improves the transfer performance without computation or memory overhead during training. Specifically for ImageNet zero-shot accuracy, LaCLIP outperforms CLIP by 8.2% on CC12M and 2.4% on LAION-400M.97:T596,Recent studies have discovered that Chain-of-Thought prompting (CoT) can dramatically improve the performance of Large Language Models (LLMs), particularly when dealing with complex tasks involving mathematics or reasoning. Despite the enormous empirical success, the underlying mechanisms behind CoT and how it unlocks the potential of LLMs remain elusive. In this paper, we take a first step towards theoretically answering these questions. Specifically, we examine the expressivity of LLMs with CoT in solving fundamental mathematical and decision-making problems. We start by giving an impossibility result showing that bounded-depth Transformers are unable to directly produce correct answers for basic arithmetic/equation tasks unless the model size grows super-polynomially with respect to the input length. In contrast, we then prove by construction that autoregressive Transformers of constant size suffice to solve both tasks by generating CoT derivations using a commonly-used math language format. Moreover, we show LLMs with CoT are capable of solving a general class of decision-making problems known as Dynamic Programming, thus justifying its power in tackling complex real-world tasks. Finally, extensive experiments on four tasks show that, while Transformers always fail to predict the answers directly, they can consistently learn to generate correct solutions step-by-step given sufficient CoT demonstrations.98:T63d,Recent research in mechanistic interpretability has attempted to reverse-engineer Transformer models by carefully inspecting network weights and activations. However, these approaches require considerable manual effort and still fall short of providing complete, faithful descriptions of the underlying algorithms. In this work, we introduce a procedure for training Transformers that are mechanistically interpretable by design. We build on RASP [Weiss et al., 2021], a programming language that can be compiled into Transformer weights. Instead of compiling human-written programs into Transformers, we design a modified Transformer that can be trained using gradient-based optimization and then automatically converted into a discrete, human-readable program. We refer to these models as Transformer Programs. To validate our approach, we learn Transformer Programs for a variety of problems, including an in-context learning task, a suite of algorithmic problems (e.g. sorting, recognizing Dyck languages), and NLP tasks including named entity recognition and text classification. The Transformer Programs can automatically find reasonable solutions, performing on par with standard Transformers of comparable size; and, more importantly, they are easy to interpret. To demonstrate these advantages, we convert Transformers into Python programs and use off-the-shelf code analysis tools to debug model errors and identify the “circuits” used to solve different sub-problems. We hope that Transformer Programs open a new path toward the goal of intrinsically interpretable machine learning.99:T533,By encoding time series as a string of numerical digits, we can frame time series forecasting as next-token prediction in text. Developing this approach, we find that large language models (LLMs) such as GPT-3 and LLaMA-2 can surprisingly zero-shot extrapolate time series at a level comparable to or exceeding the performance of purpose-built time series models trained on the downstream tasks. To facilitate this performance, we propose procedures for effectively tokenizing time series data and converting discrete distributions over tokens into highly flexible densities over continuous values. We argue the success of LLMs for time series stems from their ability to naturally represent multimodal distributions, in conjunction with biases for simplicity, and repetition, which align with the salient features in many time series, such as repeated seasonal trends. We also show how LLMs can naturally handle missing data without imputation through non-numerical text, accommodate textual side information, and answer questions to help explain predictions.  While we find that increasing model size generally improves performance on time series, we show GPT-4 can perform worse than GPT-3 because of how it tokenizes numbers, and poor uncertainty calibration, which is likely the result of alignment interventions such as RLHF.9a:T51e,Expressing universal semantics common to all languages is helpful to understand the meanings of complex and culture-specific sentences. The research theme underlying this scenario focuses on learning universal representations across languages with the usage of massive parallel corpora. However, due to the sparsity and scarcity of parallel data, there is still a big challenge in learning authentic ``universals'' for any two languages. In this paper, we propose Emma-X: an EM-like Multilingual pre-training Algorithm, to learn Cross-lingual universals with the aid of excessive multilingual non-parallel data. Emma-X unifies the cross-lingual representation learning task and an extra semantic relation prediction task within an EM framework. Both the extra semantic classifier and the cross-lingual sentence encoder approximate the semantic relation of two sentences, and supervise each other until convergence. To evaluate Emma-X, we conduct experiments on xrete, a newly introduced benchmark containing 12 widely studied cross-lingual tasks that fully depend on sentence-level representations. Results reveal that Emma-X achieves state-of-the-art performance. Further geometric analysis of the built representation space with three requirements demonstrates the superiority of Emma-X over advanced models.9b:T73f,Designing reward functions for efficiently guiding reinforcement learning (RL) agents toward specific behaviors is a complex task.
This is challenging since it requires the identification of reward structures that are not sparse and that avoid inadvertently inducing undesirable behaviors. Naively modifying the reward structure to offer denser and more frequent feedback can lead to unintended outcomes and promote behaviors that are not aligned with the designer's intended goal. Although potential-based reward shaping is often suggested as a remedy, we systematically investigate settings where deploying it often significantly impairs performance. To address these issues, we introduce a new framework that uses a bi-level objective to learn \emph{behavior alignment reward functions}. These functions integrate auxiliary rewards reflecting a designer's heuristics and domain knowledge with the environment's primary rewards. Our approach automatically determines the most effective way to blend these types of feedback, thereby enhancing robustness against heuristic reward misspecification. Remarkably, it can also adapt an agent's policy optimization process to mitigate suboptimalities resulting from limitations and biases inherent in the underlying RL algorithms. We evaluate our method's efficacy on a diverse set of tasks, from small-scale experiments to high-dimensional control challenges. We investigate heuristic auxiliary rewards of varying quality---some of which are beneficial and others detrimental to the learning process. Our results show that our framework offers a robust and principled way to integrate designer-specified heuristics. It not only addresses key shortcomings of existing approaches but also consistently leads to high-performing solutions, even when given misaligned or poorly-specified auxiliary reward functions.9c:T5a1,Language models learn a great quantity of factual information during pretraining, and recent work localizes this information to specific model weights like mid-layer MLP weights. In this paper, we find that we can change how a fact is stored in a model by editing weights that are in a different location than where existing methods suggest that the fact is stored. This is surprising because we would expect that localizing facts to specific model parameters would tell us where to manipulate knowledge in models, and this assumption has motivated past work on model editing methods. Specifically, we show that localization conclusions from representation denoising (also known as Causal Tracing) do not provide any insight into which model MLP layer would be best to edit in order to override an existing stored fact with a new one. This finding raises questions about how past work relies on Causal Tracing to select which model layers to edit. Next, we consider several variants of the editing problem, including erasing and amplifying facts. For one of our editing problems, editing performance does relate to localization results from representation denoising, but we find that which layer we edit is a far better predictor of performance. Our results suggest, counterintuitively, that better mechanistic understanding of how pretrained language models work may not always translate to insights about how to best change their behavior.9d:T8ba,Predicting upcoming events is critical to our ability to effectively interact with our
environment and conspecifics. In natural language processing, transformer models,
which are trained on next-word prediction, appear to construct a general-purpose
representation of language that can support diverse downstream tasks. However, we
still lack an understanding of how a predictive objective shapes such representations.
Inspired by recent work in vision neuroscience Hénaff et al. (2019), here we test a
hypothesis about predictive representations of autoregressive transformer models.
In particular, we test whether the neural trajectory of a sequence of words in a
sentence becomes progressively more straight as it passes through the layers of the
network. The key insight behind this hypothesis is that straighter trajectories should
facilitate prediction via linear extrapolation. We quantify straightness using a 1-
dimensional curvature metric, and present four findings in support of the trajectory
straightening hypothesis: i) In trained models, the curvature progressively decreases
from the first to the middle layers of the network. ii) Models that perform better on
the next-word prediction objective, including larger models and models trained on
larger datasets, exhibit greater decreases in curvature, suggesting that this improved
ability to straighten sentence neural trajectories may be the underlying driver of
better language modeling performance. iii) Given the same linguistic context, the
sequences that are generated by the model have lower curvature than the ground
truth (the actual continuations observed in a language corpus), suggesting that
the model favors straighter trajectories for making predictions. iv) A consistent
relationship holds between the average curvature and the average surprisal of
sentences in the middle layers of models, such that sentences with straighter neural
trajectories also have lower surprisal. Importantly, untrained models don’t exhibit
these behaviors. In tandem, these results support the trajectory straightening
hypothesis and provide a possible mechanism for how the geometry of the internal
representations of autoregressive models supports next word prediction.9e:T671,Language is often considered a key aspect of human thinking, providing us with exceptional abilities to generalize, explore, plan, replan, and adapt to new situations. However, Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents are far from human-level performance in any of these abilities. We hypothesize one reason for such cognitive deficiencies is that they lack the benefits of thinking in language and that we can improve AI agents by training them to $\textit{think like humans do}$. We introduce a novel Imitation Learning framework, Thought Cloning, where the idea is to not just clone the behaviors of human demonstrators, $\textit{but also the thoughts humans have as they perform these behaviors}$. While we expect Thought Cloning to truly shine at scale on internet-sized datasets (e.g. online videos with transcripts), here we conduct experiments in a domain where the thinking and action data are synthetically generated. Results reveal that Thought Cloning learns much faster than Behavioral Cloning and its performance advantage grows the further out of distribution test tasks are, highlighting its ability to better handle novel situations. Thought Cloning also provides important benefits for AI Safety and Interpretability, and makes it easier to debug and improve AI. Because we can observe the agent’s thoughts, we can (1) more easily diagnose why things are going wrong, making it easier to fix the problem, (2) steer the agent by correcting its thinking, or (3) prevent it from doing unsafe things it plans to do. Overall, by training agents $\textit{how to think}$ as well as behave, Thought Cloning creates safer, more powerful agents.9f:T535,A big convergence of language, multimodal perception, action, and world modeling is a key step toward artificial general intelligence. In this work, we introduce KOSMOS-1, a Multimodal Large Language Model (MLLM) that can perceive general modalities, learn in context (i.e., few-shot), and follow instructions (i.e., zero-shot). Specifically, we train KOSMOS-1 from scratch on web-scale multi-modal corpora, including arbitrarily interleaved text and images, image-caption pairs, and text data. We evaluate various settings, including zero-shot, few-shot, and multimodal chain-of-thought prompting, on a wide range of tasks without any gradient updates or finetuning. Experimental results show that KOSMOS-1 achieves impressive performance on (i) language understanding, generation, and even OCR-free NLP (directly fed with document images), (ii) perception-language tasks, including multimodal dialogue, image captioning, visual question answering, and (iii) vision tasks, such as image recognition with descriptions (specifying classification via text instructions). We also show that MLLMs can benefit from cross-modal transfer, i.e., transfer knowledge from language to multimodal, and from multimodal to language. In addition, we introduce a dataset of Raven IQ test, which diagnoses the nonverbal reasoning capability of MLLMs.a0:T442,New NLP benchmarks are urgently needed to align with the rapid development of large language models (LLMs). We present C-Eval, the first comprehensive Chinese evaluation suite designed to assess advanced knowledge and reasoning abilities of foundation models in a Chinese context. C-Eval comprises multiple-choice questions across four difficulty levels: middle school, high school, college, and professional. The questions span 52 diverse disciplines, ranging from humanities to science and engineering. C-Eval is accompanied by C-Eval Hard, a subset of very challenging subjects in C-Eval that requires advanced reasoning abilities to solve. We conduct a comprehensive evaluation of the most advanced LLMs on C-Eval, including both English- and Chinese-oriented models. Results indicate that only GPT-4 could achieve an average accuracy of over 60%, suggesting that there is still significant room for improvement for current LLMs. We anticipate C-Eval will help analyze important strengths and shortcomings of foundation models, and foster their development and growth for Chinese users.a1:T5e0,Knowledge Distillation (KD) has emerged as a promising approach for compressing large Pre-trained Language Models (PLMs). The performance of KD relies on how to effectively formulate and transfer the knowledge from the teacher model to the student model. Prior arts mainly focus on directly aligning output features from the transformer block, which may impose overly strict constraints on the student model's learning process and complicate the training process by introducing extra parameters and computational cost. Moreover, our analysis indicates that the different relations within self-attention, as adopted in other works, involves more computation complexities and can easily be constrained by the number of heads, potentially leading to suboptimal solutions.
  To address these issues, we propose a novel approach that builds relationships directly from output features. Specifically, we introduce token-level and sequence-level relations concurrently
  to fully exploit the knowledge from the teacher model. Furthermore, we propose a correlation-based distillation loss to alleviate the exact match properties inherent in traditional KL divergence or MSE loss functions. Our method, dubbed FCD, presents a simple yet effective method to compress various architectures (BERT, RoBERTa, and GPT) and model sizes (base-size and large-size).
  Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our distilled, smaller language models significantly surpass existing KD methods across various NLP tasks.a2:T6dd,Token embeddings, a mapping from discrete lexical symbols to continuous vectors, are at the heart of any language model (LM). However, lexical symbol meanings can also be determined and even redefined by their structural role in a long context. In this paper, we ask: is it possible for a language model to be performant without \emph{any} fixed token embeddings? Such a language model would have to rely entirely on the co-occurence and repetition of tokens in the context rather than the \textit{a priori} identity of any token. To answer this, we study \textit{lexinvariant}language models that are invariant to lexical symbols and therefore do not need fixed token embeddings in practice. First, we prove that we can construct a lexinvariant LM to converge to the true language model at a uniform rate that is polynomial in terms of the context length, with a constant factor that is sublinear in the vocabulary size. Second, to build a lexinvariant LM, we simply encode tokens using random Gaussian vectors, such that each token maps to the same representation within each sequence but different representations across sequences. Empirically, we demonstrate that it can indeed attain perplexity comparable to that of a standard language model, given a sufficiently long context. We further explore two properties of the lexinvariant language models: First, given text generated from a substitution cipher of English, it implicitly implements Bayesian in-context deciphering and infers the mapping to the underlying real tokens with high accuracy. Second, it has on average 4X better accuracy over synthetic in-context reasoning tasks. Finally, we discuss regularizing standard language models towards lexinvariance and potential practical applications.a3:T4f3,Training large-scale neural networks is heavily constrained by GPU memory. In order to circumvent this limitation, gradient checkpointing, or recomputation is a powerful technique. There is active research in this area with methods such as Checkmake or Moccasin. However, both Checkmate and Moccasin rely on mixed integer linear programming or constraint programming, resulting in limited scalability due to their exponentially large search space.

This paper proposes a novel algorithm for recomputation (FastSA) based on a simulated annealing heuristic that achieves comparable or even better solutions than state-of-the-art alternatives. FastSA can optimize computational graphs with thousands of nodes within 3 to 30 seconds, several orders of magnitude faster than current solutions.

We applied FastSA to PyTorch models and verified its effectiveness through popular large vision and text models, including recent language models with the transformer architecture. The results demonstrate significant memory reductions by 73% with extra 18% computational overheads on average. Our experiments demonstrate the practicality and effectiveness of our recomputation algorithm, further highlighting its potential for wide application in various deep learning domains.a4:T521,Existing subset selection methods for efficient learning predominantly employ discrete combinatorial and model-specific approaches, which lack generalizability--- for each new model, the algorithm has to be executed from the beginning. Therefore, for an unseen architecture, one cannot use the subset chosen for a different model. In this work, we propose $\texttt{SubSelNet}$, a non-adaptive subset selection framework, which tackles these problems. Here, we first introduce an attention-based neural gadget that leverages the graph structure of architectures and acts as a surrogate to trained deep neural networks for quick model prediction. Then, we use these predictions to build subset samplers. This naturally provides us two variants of $\texttt{SubSelNet}$. The first variant is transductive (called Transductive-$\texttt{SubSelNet}$), which computes the subset separately for each model by solving a small optimization problem. Such an optimization is still super fast, thanks to the replacement of explicit model training by the model approximator. The second variant is inductive (called Inductive-$\texttt{SubSelNet}$), which computes the subset using a trained subset selector, without any optimization.  
Our experiments show that our model outperforms several methods across several real datasets.a5:T4e7,We present a novel methodology aimed at optimizing the application of frozen large language models (LLMs) for resource-intensive vision-language (VL) pre-training. The current paradigm uses visual features as prompts to guide language models, with a focus on determining the most relevant visual features for corresponding text. Our approach diverges by concentrating on the language component, specifically identifying the optimal prompts to align with visual features. We introduce the Prompt-Transformer (P-Former), a model that predicts these ideal prompts, which is trained exclusively on linguistic data, bypassing the need for image-text pairings. This strategy subtly bifurcates the end-to-end VL training process into an additional, separate stage. Our experiments reveal that our framework significantly enhances the performance of a robust image-to-text baseline (BLIP-2), and effectively narrows the performance gap between models trained with either 4M or 129M image-text pairs. Importantly, our framework is modality-agnostic and flexible in terms of architectural design, as validated by its successful application in a video learning task using varied base modules. The code will be made available at https://github.com/yiren-jian/BLIText.a6:T77f,Traditionally, data selection has been studied in settings where all samples from prospective sources are fully revealed to a machine learning developer. However, in practical data exchange scenarios, data providers often reveal only a limited subset of samples before an acquisition decision is made. Recently, there have been efforts to fit scaling functions that predict model performance at any *size and data source composition* using the limited available samples. However, these scaling functions are usually black-box, computationally expensive to fit, highly susceptible to overfitting, or/and difficult to optimize for data selection. This paper proposes a framework called *<projektor>*, which predicts model performance and supports data selection decisions based on partial samples of prospective data sources. Our approach distinguishes itself from existing work by introducing a novel *two-stage* performance inference process. In the first stage, we leverage the Optimal Transport distance to predict the model's performance for any data mixture ratio within the range of disclosed data sizes. In the second stage, we extrapolate the performance to larger undisclosed data sizes based on a novel parameter-free mapping technique inspired by neural scaling laws. We further derive an efficient gradient-based method to select data sources based on the projected model performance. Evaluation over a diverse range of applications (e.g., vision, text, fine-tuning, noisy data sources, etc.) demonstrates that *<projektor>* significantly improves existing performance scaling approaches in terms of both the accuracy of performance inference and the computation costs associated with constructing the performance predictor. Also, *<projektor>* outperforms by a wide margin in data selection effectiveness compared to a range of other off-the-shelf solutions. We provide *<projektor>* an open-source toolkit.a7:T576,Despite substantial advancements, Natural Language Processing (NLP) models often require post-training adjustments to enforce business rules, rectify undesired behavior, and align with user values.  
These adjustments involve operationalizing "concepts"—dictating desired model responses to certain inputs. 
However, it's difficult for a single entity to enumerate and define all possible concepts, indicating a need for a multi-user, collaborative model alignment framework. 
Moreover, the exhaustive delineation of a concept is challenging, and an improper approach can create shortcuts or interfere with original data or other concepts.

To address these challenges, we introduce CoAlign, a framework that enables multi-user interaction with the model, thereby mitigating individual limitations. 
CoAlign aids users in operationalizing their concepts using Large Language Models, and relying on the principle that NLP models exhibit simpler behaviors in local regions. 
Our main insight is learning a \emph{local} model for each concept, and a \emph{global} model to integrate the original data with all concepts.
We then steer a large language model to generate instances within concept boundaries where local and global disagree.
Our experiments show CoAlign is effective at helping multiple users operationalize concepts and avoid interference for a variety of scenarios, tasks, and models.a8:T5e8,Agents capable of carrying out general tasks on a computer can improve efficiency and productivity by automating repetitive tasks and assisting in complex problem-solving. Ideally, such agents should be able to solve new computer tasks presented to them through natural language commands. However, previous approaches to this problem require large amounts of expert demonstrations and task-specific reward functions, both of which are impractical for new tasks. In this work, we show that a pre-trained large language model (LLM) agent can execute computer tasks guided by natural language using a simple prompting scheme where the agent \textbf{R}ecursively \textbf{C}riticizes and \textbf{I}mproves its output (RCI). The RCI approach significantly outperforms existing LLM methods for automating computer tasks and surpasses supervised learning (SL) and reinforcement learning (RL) approaches on the MiniWoB++ benchmark. 
We compare multiple LLMs and find that RCI with the InstructGPT-3+RLHF LLM is state-of-the-art on MiniWoB++, using only a handful of demonstrations per task rather than tens of thousands, and without a task-specific reward function. Furthermore, we demonstrate RCI prompting's effectiveness in enhancing LLMs' reasoning abilities on a suite of natural language reasoning tasks, outperforming chain of thought (CoT) prompting with external feedback. We find that RCI combined with CoT performs better than either separately. Our code can be found here: https://github.com/posgnu/rci-agent.a9:T489,The rapid advancement and widespread use of large language models (LLMs) have raised significant concerns regarding the potential leakage of personally identifiable information (PII). These models are often trained on vast quantities of web-collected data, which may inadvertently include sensitive personal data. This paper presents ProPILE, a novel probing tool designed to empower data subjects, or the owners of the PII, with awareness of potential PII leakage in LLM-based services. ProPILE lets data subjects formulate prompts based on their own PII to evaluate the level of privacy intrusion in LLMs. We demonstrate its application on the OPT-1.3B model trained on the publicly available Pile dataset. We show how hypothetical data subjects may assess the likelihood of their PII being included in the Pile dataset being revealed. ProPILE can also be leveraged by LLM service providers to effectively evaluate their own levels of PII leakage with more powerful prompts specifically tuned for their in-house models. This tool represents a pioneering step towards empowering the data subjects for their awareness and control over their own data on the web.aa:T6d1,Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in performing complex tasks. Moreover, recent research has shown that incorporating human-annotated rationales (e.g., Chain-of-Thought prompting) during in-context learning can significantly enhance the performance of these models, particularly on tasks that require reasoning capabilities. However, incorporating such rationales poses challenges in terms of scalability as this requires a high degree of human involvement. In this work, we present a novel framework, Amplifying Model Performance by Leveraging In-Context Learning with Post Hoc Explanations (AMPLIFY), which addresses the aforementioned challenges by automating the process of rationale generation. To this end, we leverage post hoc explanation methods which output attribution scores (explanations) capturing the influence of each of the input features on model predictions. More specifically, we construct automated natural language rationales that embed insights from post hoc explanations to provide corrective signals to LLMs. Extensive experimentation with real-world datasets demonstrates that our framework, AMPLIFY, leads to prediction accuracy improvements of about 10-25% over a wide range of tasks, including those where prior approaches which rely on human-annotated rationales such as Chain-of-Thought prompting fall short. Our work makes one of the first attempts at highlighting the potential of post hoc explanations as valuable tools for enhancing the effectiveness of LLMs. Furthermore, we conduct additional empirical analyses and ablation studies to demonstrate the impact of each of the components of AMPLIFY, which, in turn, lead to critical insights for refining in context learning.ab:T672,The breakthrough performance of large language models (LLMs) comes with major computational footprints and high deployment costs. In this paper, we progress towards resolving this problem by proposing a novel structured compression approach for LLMs, called ZipLM. ZipLM achieves state-of-the-art accuracy-vs-speedup, while matching a set of desired target runtime speedups in any given inference environment. Specifically, given a model, a dataset, an inference environment, as well as a set of speedup targets, ZipLM iteratively identifies and removes components with the worst loss-runtime trade-off. Unlike prior methods that specialize in either the *post-training/one-shot* or the *gradual compression* setting, and only for specific families of models such as BERT (*encoder*) or GPT (*decoder*), ZipLM produces state-of-the-art compressed models across all these settings. Furthermore, ZipLM achieves superior results for a fraction of the computational cost relative to prior distillation and pruning techniques, making it a cost-effective approach for generating an entire family of smaller, faster, and highly accurate models, guaranteed to meet the desired inference specifications. In particular, ZipLM outperforms all prior BERT-base distillation and pruning techniques, such as CoFi, MiniLM, and TinyBERT. Moreover, it matches the performance of the heavily optimized MobileBERT model, obtained via extensive architecture search, by simply pruning the baseline BERT-large model. When compressing GPT2, ZipLM outperforms DistilGPT2 while being 60\% smaller and 30\% faster. Our code is available at: https://github.com/IST-DASLab/ZipLM.ac:T4ac,Neural network pruning and quantization techniques are almost as old as neural networks themselves. However, to date, only ad-hoc comparisons between the two have been published. In this paper, we set out to answer the question of which is better: neural network quantization or pruning? By answering this question, we hope to inform design decisions made on neural network hardware going forward. 
We provide an extensive comparison between the two techniques for compressing deep neural networks. 
First, we give an analytical comparison of expected quantization and pruning error for general data distributions.
Then, we provide lower and upper bounds for the per-layer pruning and quantization error in trained networks and compare these to empirical error after optimization.
Finally, we provide an extensive experimental comparison for training 8 large-scale models trained on 3 tasks and provide insights into the representations learned during fine-tuning with quantization and pruning in the loop.
Our results show that in most cases quantization outperforms pruning. Only in some scenarios with a very high compression ratio, compression might be beneficial from an accuracy standpoint.ad:T651,What can be learned about causality and experimentation from passive data? This question is salient given recent successes of passively-trained language models in interactive domains such as tool use. Passive learning is inherently limited. However, we show that purely passive learning can in fact allow an agent to learn generalizable strategies for determining and using causal structures, as long as the agent can intervene at test time. We formally illustrate that learning a strategy of first experimenting, then seeking goals, can allow generalization from passive learning in principle. We then show empirically that agents trained via imitation on expert data can indeed generalize at test time to infer and use causal links which are never present in the training data; these agents can also generalize experimentation strategies to novel variable sets never observed in training.
We then show that strategies for causal intervention and exploitation can be generalized from passive data even in a more complex environment with high-dimensional observations, with the support of natural language explanations. Explanations can even allow passive learners to generalize out-of-distribution from perfectly-confounded training data. Finally, we show that language models, trained only on passive next-word prediction, can generalize causal intervention strategies from a few-shot prompt containing explanations and reasoning. These results highlight the surprising power of passive learning of active causal strategies, and have implications for understanding the behaviors and capabilities of language models.ae:T473,Counterfactual examples have proven to be valuable in the field of natural language processing (NLP) for both evaluating and improving the robustness of language models to spurious correlations in datasets. Despite their demonstrated utility for NLP, multimodal counterfactual examples have been relatively unexplored due to the difficulty of creating paired image-text data with minimal counterfactual changes. To address this challenge, we introduce a scalable framework for automatic generation of counterfactual examples using text-to-image diffusion models. We use our framework to create COCO-Counterfactuals, a multimodal counterfactual dataset of paired image and text captions based on the MS-COCO dataset. We validate the quality of COCO-Counterfactuals through human evaluations and show that existing multimodal models are challenged by our counterfactual image-text pairs. Additionally, we demonstrate the usefulness of COCO-Counterfactuals for improving out-of-domain generalization of multimodal vision-language models via training data augmentation. We make our code and the COCO-Counterfactuals dataset publicly available.af:T526,CLIP, one of the pioneering foundation models that connect images and text, has enabled many recent breakthroughs in computer vision. However, its associated training cost is prohibitively high, imposing a significant barrier to its widespread exploration. In this paper, we present a surprising finding that there exists an inverse scaling law for CLIP training, whereby the larger the image/text encoders used, the shorter the sequence length of image/text tokens that can be applied in training. Moreover, we showcase that the strategy for reducing image/text token length plays a crucial role in determining the quality of this scaling law.


As a result of this finding, we are able to successfully train CLIP even with limited computational resources. For example, using 8 A100 GPUs, our CLIP models achieve zero-shot top-1 ImageNet-1k accuracies of 63.2% in ~2 days, 67.8% in ~3 days, and 69.3% in ~4 days. Our method also works well when scaling up --- with G/14, we register a new record of 83.0% ImageNet-1k zero-shot accuracy, and meanwhile accelerate the training by ~33x compared to its OpenCLIP counterpart.
By reducing the computation barrier associated with CLIP, we hope to inspire more research in this field, particularly from academics. 
Our code is available at https://github.com/UCSC-VLAA/CLIPA.b0:T41d,In this paper, we provide a rigorous proof of convergence of the Adaptive Moment Estimate (Adam) algorithm for a wide class of optimization objectives. Despite the popularity and efficiency of the Adam algorithm in training deep neural networks, its theoretical properties are not yet fully understood, and existing convergence proofs require unrealistically strong assumptions, such as globally bounded gradients, to show the convergence to stationary points. In this paper, we show that Adam provably converges to $\epsilon$-stationary points with $\mathcal{O}(\epsilon^{-4})$ gradient complexity under far more realistic conditions. The key to our analysis is a new proof of boundedness of gradients along the optimization trajectory of Adam, under a generalized smoothness assumption according to which the local smoothness (i.e., Hessian norm when it exists) is bounded by a sub-quadratic function of the gradient norm. Moreover, we propose a variance-reduced version of Adam with an accelerated gradient complexity of $\mathcal{O}(\epsilon^{-3})$.b1:T667,Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) of pre-trained language models (PLMs) has emerged as a highly successful approach, with training only a small number of parameters without sacrificing performance and becoming the de-facto learning paradigm with the increasing size of PLMs. However, existing PEFT methods are not memory-efficient, because they still require caching most of the intermediate activations for the gradient calculation, akin to fine-tuning. One effective way to reduce the activation memory is to apply a reversible model, so the intermediate activations are not necessary to be cached and can be recomputed. Nevertheless, modifying a PLM to its reversible variant is not straightforward, since the reversible model has a distinct architecture from the currently released PLMs. In this paper, we first investigate what is a key factor for the success of existing PEFT methods, and realize that it's essential to preserve the PLM's starting point when initializing a PEFT method. With this finding, we propose memory-efficient fine-tuning (MEFT) that inserts adapters into a PLM, preserving the PLM's starting point and making it reversible without additional pre-training. We evaluate MEFT on the GLUE benchmark and five question-answering tasks with various backbones, BERT, RoBERTa, BART and OPT. MEFT significantly reduces the activation memory up to 84% of full fine-tuning with a negligible amount of trainable parameters. Moreover, MEFT achieves the same score on GLUE and a comparable score on the question-answering tasks as full fine-tuning. A similar finding is also observed for the image classification task.b2:T5f5,As the model size grows rapidly, fine-tuning the large pre-trained language model has become increasingly difficult due to its extensive memory usage. 
Previous works usually focus on reducing the number of trainable parameters in the network. 
While the model parameters do contribute to memory usage, the primary memory bottleneck during training arises from storing feature maps, also known as activations, as they are crucial for gradient calculation. 
Notably, machine learning models are typically trained using stochastic gradient descent.
We argue that in stochastic optimization, models can handle noisy gradients as long as the gradient estimator is unbiased with reasonable variance.
Following this motivation, we propose a new family of unbiased estimators called \sas, for matrix production with reduced variance, which only requires storing the sub-sampled activations for calculating the gradient.
Our work provides both theoretical and experimental evidence that, in the context of tuning transformers, our proposed estimators exhibit lower variance compared to existing ones.
By replacing the linear operation with our approximated one in transformers, we can achieve up to 2.7X peak memory reduction with almost no accuracy drop and enables up to $6.4\times$ larger batch size.
Under the same hardware, \sas enables better down-streaming task performance by applying larger models and/or faster training speed with larger batch sizes.
The code is available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/WTACRS-A5C5/.b3:T76f,Program synthesis has been long studied with recent approaches focused on directly using the power of Large Language Models (LLMs) to generate code. Programming benchmarks, with curated synthesis problems and test-cases, are used to measure the performance of various LLMs on code synthesis. However, these test-cases can be limited in both quantity and quality for fully assessing the functional correctness of the generated code. Such limitation in the existing benchmarks begs the following question: In the era of LLMs, is the code generated really correct? To answer this, we propose EvalPlus – a code synthesis evaluation framework to rigorously benchmark the functional correctness of LLM-synthesized code. EvalPlus augments a given evaluation dataset with large amounts of test-cases newly produced by an automatic test input generator, powered by both LLM- and mutation-based strategies. While EvalPlus is general, we extend the test-cases of the popular HumanEval benchmark by 80x to build HumanEval+. Our extensive evaluation across 26 popular LLMs (e.g., GPT-4 and ChatGPT) demonstrates that HumanEval+ is able to catch significant amounts of previously undetected wrong code synthesized by LLMs, reducing the pass@k by up-to 19.3-28.9%. We also surprisingly found that test insufficiency can lead to mis-ranking. For example, both WizardCoder-CodeLlama and Phind-CodeLlama now outperform ChatGPT on HumanEval+, while none of them could on HumanEval. Our work not only indicates that prior popular code synthesis evaluation results do not accurately reflect the true performance of LLMs for code synthesis, but also opens up a new direction to improve such programming benchmarks through automated testing. We have open-sourced our tools, enhanced datasets as well as all LLM-generated code at https://github.com/evalplus/evalplus to facilitate and accelerate future LLM-for-code research.b4:T4a9,Like humans, large language models (LLMs) do not always generate the best output on their first try. Motivated by how humans refine their written text, we introduce Self-Refine, an approach for improving initial outputs from LLMs through iterative feedback and refinement. The main idea is to generate an initial output using an LLMs; then, the same LLMs provides *feedback* for its output and uses it to *refine* itself, iteratively. Self-Refine does not require any supervised training data, additional training, or reinforcement learning, and instead uses a single LLM as the generator, refiner and the feedback provider.  We evaluate Self-Refine across 7 diverse tasks, ranging from dialog response generation to mathematical reasoning, using state-of-the-art (GPT-3.5, ChatGPT, and GPT-4) LLMs. Across all evaluated tasks, outputs generated with Self-Refine are preferred by humans and automatic metrics over those generated with the same LLM using conventional one-step generation, improving by $\sim$20\% absolute on average in task performance. Our work demonstrates that even state-of-the-art LLMs like GPT-4 can be further improved at test-time using our simple, standalone approach.b5:T54a,A central notion in practical and theoretical machine learning is that of a *weak learner*, classifiers that achieve better-than-random performance (on any given distribution over data), even by a small margin.  Such weak learners form the practical basis for canonical machine learning methods such as boosting.  In this work, we illustrate that prompt-based large language models can operate effectively as said weak learners.  Specifically, we illustrate the use of a large language model (LLM) as a weak learner in a boosting algorithm applied to tabular data.  We show that by providing (properly sampled according to the distribution of interest) text descriptions of tabular data samples, LLMs can produce a summary of the samples that serves as a template for classification, and achieves the aim of acting as a weak learner on this task.  We incorporate these models into a boosting approach, which in many settings can leverage the knowledge within the LLM to outperform traditional tree-based boosting.  The model outperforms both few-shot learning and occasionally even more involved fine-tuning procedures, particularly for some tasks involving small numbers of data points.  The results illustrate the potential for prompt-based LLMs to function not just as few-shot learners themselves, but as components of larger machine learning models.b6:T4f1,Recent advances in attention-free sequence models rely on convolutions as alternatives to the attention operator at the core of Transformers. In particular, long convolution sequence models have achieved state-of-the-art performance in many domains, but incur a significant cost during auto-regressive inference workloads -- naively requiring a full pass (or caching of activations) over the input sequence for each generated token -- similarly to attention-based models. In this paper, we seek to enable $\mathcal O(1)$ compute and memory cost per token in any pre-trained long convolution architecture to reduce memory footprint and increase throughput during generation. Concretely, our methods consist in extracting low-dimensional linear state-space models from each convolution layer, building upon rational interpolation and model-order reduction techniques. We further introduce architectural improvements to convolution-based layers such as Hyena: by weight-tying the filters across channels into heads, we achieve higher pre-training quality and reduce the number of filters to be distilled. The resulting model achieves 10x higher throughput than Transformers and 1.5x higher than Hyena at 1.3B parameters, without any loss in quality after distillation.b7:T517,Machine learning research has long focused on models rather than datasets, and prominent datasets are used for common ML tasks without regard to the breadth, difficulty, and faithfulness of the underlying problems. Neglecting the fundamental importance of data has given rise to inaccuracy, bias, and fragility in real-world applications, and research is hindered by saturation across existing dataset benchmarks. In response, we present DataPerf, a community-led benchmark suite for evaluating ML datasets and data-centric algorithms. We aim to foster innovation in data-centric AI through competition, comparability, and reproducibility. We enable the ML community to iterate on datasets, instead of just architectures, and we provide an open, online platform with multiple rounds of challenges to support this iterative development. The first iteration of DataPerf contains five benchmarks covering a wide spectrum of data-centric techniques, tasks, and modalities in vision, speech, acquisition, debugging, and diffusion prompting, and we support hosting new contributed benchmarks from the community. The benchmarks, online evaluation platform, and baseline implementations are open source, and the MLCommons Association will maintain DataPerf to ensure long-term benefits to academia and industry.b8:T64d,This work proposes a Momentum-Enabled Kronecker-Factor-Based Optimizer Using Rank-1 updates, called MKOR, that improves the training time and convergence properties of deep neural networks (DNNs). Second-order techniques, while enjoying higher convergence rates vs first-order counterparts, have cubic complexity with respect to either the model size and/or the training batch size. Hence they exhibit poor scalability and performance in transformer models, e.g. large language models (LLMs), because the batch sizes in these models  scale by the attention mechanism sequence length, leading to large model size and batch sizes. MKOR's complexity is quadratic with respect to the model size, alleviating the computation bottlenecks in  second-order methods. Because of their high computation complexity, state-of-the-art implementations of second-order methods can only afford to update the second order information infrequently, and thus do not fully exploit the promise of better convergence from these updates. By reducing the communication complexity of the second-order updates as well as achieving a linear communication complexity, MKOR increases the frequency of second order updates. We also propose a hybrid version of MKOR (called MKOR-H) that mid-training falls backs to a first order optimizer if the second order updates  no longer accelerate convergence.  Our experiments show that MKOR outperforms state -of-the-art first order methods, e.g. the LAMB optimizer, and best implementations of second-order methods, i.e. KAISA/KFAC, up to 2.57x and 1.85x respectively on BERT-Large-Uncased on 64 GPUs.b9:T47f,Transformers have achieved remarkable success in a wide range of natural language processing and computer vision applications. However, the representation capacity of a deep transformer model is degraded due to the over-smoothing issue in which the token representations become identical when the model's depth grows. In this work, we show that self-attention layers in transformers minimize a functional which promotes smoothness, thereby causing token uniformity. We then propose a novel regularizer that penalizes the norm of the difference between the smooth output tokens from self-attention and the input tokens to preserve the fidelity of the tokens. Minimizing the resulting regularized energy functional, we derive the Neural Transformer with a Regularized Nonlocal Functional (NeuTRENO), a novel class of transformer models that can mitigate the over-smoothing issue. We empirically demonstrate the advantages of NeuTRENO over the baseline transformers and state-of-the-art methods in reducing the over-smoothing of token representations on various practical tasks, including object classification, image segmentation, and language modeling.ba:T7df,Genomic (DNA) sequences encode an enormous amount of information for gene regulation and protein synthesis. Similar to natural language models, researchers have proposed foundation models in genomics to learn generalizable features from unlabeled genome data that can then be fine-tuned for downstream tasks such as identifying regulatory elements. Due to the quadratic scaling of attention, previous Transformer-based genomic models have used 512 to 4k tokens as context (<0.001% of the human genome), significantly limiting the modeling of long-range interactions in DNA. In addition, these methods rely on tokenizers or fixed k-mers to aggregate meaningful DNA units, losing single nucleotide resolution (i.e. DNA "characters") where subtle genetic variations can completely alter protein function via single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Recently, Hyena, a large language model based on implicit convolutions was shown to match attention in quality while allowing longer context lengths and lower time complexity. Leveraging Hyena’s new long-range capabilities, we present HyenaDNA, a genomic foundation model pretrained on the human reference genome with context lengths of up to 1 million tokens at the single nucleotide-level – an up to 500x increase over previous dense attention-based models. HyenaDNA scales sub-quadratically in sequence length (training up to 160x faster than Transformer), uses single nucleotide tokens, and has full global context at each layer. We explore what longer context enables - including the first use of in-context learning in genomics for simple adaptation to novel tasks without updating pretrained model weights. On fine-tuned benchmarks from the Nucleotide Transformer, HyenaDNA reaches state-of-the-art (SotA) on 12 of 18 datasets using a model with orders of magnitude less parameters and pretraining data.1 On the GenomicBenchmarks, HyenaDNA surpasses SotA on 7 of 8 datasets on average by +10 accuracy points. Code at https://github.com/HazyResearch/hyena-dna.bb:T514,In deep learning theory, the covariance matrix of the representations serves as a
proxy to examine the network’s trainability. Motivated by the success of Transform-
ers, we study the covariance matrix of a modified Softmax-based attention model
with skip connections in the proportional limit of infinite-depth-and-width. We
show that at initialization the limiting distribution can be described by a stochastic
differential equation (SDE) indexed by the depth-to-width ratio. To achieve a
well-defined stochastic limit, the Transformer’s attention mechanism is modified
by centering the Softmax output at identity, and scaling the Softmax logits by a
width-dependent temperature parameter. We examine the stability of the network
through the corresponding SDE, showing how the scale of both the drift and diffu-
sion can be elegantly controlled with the aid of residual connections. The existence
of a stable SDE implies that the covariance structure is well-behaved, even for very
large depth and width, thus preventing the notorious issues of rank degeneracy
in deep attention models. Finally, we show, through simulations, that the SDE
provides a surprisingly good description of the corresponding finite-size model.
We coin the name shaped Transformer for these architectural modifications.bc:T41d,Knowledge distillation aims to transfer useful information from a teacher network to a student network, with the primary goal of improving the student's performance for the task at hand. Over the years, there has a been a deluge of novel techniques and use cases of knowledge distillation. Yet, despite the various improvements, there seems to be a glaring gap in the community's fundamental understanding of the process. Specifically, what is the knowledge that gets distilled in knowledge distillation?  In other words, in what ways does the student become similar to the teacher? Does it start to localize objects in the same way? Does it get fooled by the same adversarial samples? Does its data invariance properties become similar? Our work presents a comprehensive study to try to answer these questions. 
We show that existing methods can indeed indirectly distill these properties beyond improving task performance. We further study why knowledge distillation might work this way, and show that our findings have practical implications as well.bd:T57c,Task arithmetic has recently emerged as a cost-effective and scalable approach to edit pre-trained models directly in weight space: By adding the fine-tuned weights of different tasks, the model's performance can be improved on these tasks, while negating them leads to task forgetting. Yet, our understanding of the effectiveness of task arithmetic and its underlying principles remains limited. We present a comprehensive study of task arithmetic in vision-language models and show that weight disentanglement is the crucial factor that makes it effective. This property arises during pre-training and manifests when distinct directions in weight space govern separate, localized regions in function space associated with the tasks. Notably, we show that fine-tuning models in their tangent space by linearizing them amplifies weight disentanglement. This leads to substantial performance improvements across multiple task arithmetic benchmarks and diverse models. Building on these findings, we provide theoretical and empirical analyses of the neural tangent kernel (NTK) of these models and establish a compelling link between task arithmetic and the spatial localization of the NTK eigenfunctions. Overall, our work uncovers novel insights into the fundamental mechanisms of task arithmetic and offers a more reliable and effective approach to edit pre-trained models through the NTK linearization.be:T566,Score matching is an alternative to maximum likelihood (ML) for estimating a probability distribution parametrized up to a constant of proportionality. By fitting the ''score'' of the distribution, it sidesteps the need to compute this constant of proportionality (which is often intractable).
While score matching and variants thereof are popular in practice, precise theoretical understanding of the benefits and tradeoffs with maximum likelihood---both computational and statistical---are not well understood. In this work, we give the first example of a natural exponential family of distributions such that the score matching loss is computationally efficient to optimize, and has a comparable statistical efficiency to ML, while the ML loss is intractable to optimize using a gradient-based method. The family consists of exponentials of polynomials of fixed degree, and our result can be viewed as a continuous analogue of recent developments in the discrete setting. Precisely, we show: (1) Designing a zeroth-order or first-order oracle for optimizing the maximum likelihood loss is NP-hard. (2) Maximum likelihood has a statistical efficiency polynomial in the ambient dimension and the radius of the parameters of the family. (3) 
Minimizing the score matching loss is both computationally and statistically efficient, with complexity polynomial in the ambient dimension.bf:T58e,Natural language-conditioned reinforcement learning (RL) enables agents to follow human instructions. Previous approaches generally implemented language-conditioned RL by providing the policy with human instructions in natural language (NL) and training the policy to follow instructions. In this is outside-in approach, the policy must comprehend the NL and manage the task simultaneously. However, the unbounded NL examples often bring much extra complexity for solving concrete RL tasks, which can distract policy learning from completing the task. To ease the learning burden of the policy, we investigate an inside-out scheme for natural language-conditioned RL by developing a task language (TL) that is task-related and easily understood by the policy, thus reducing the policy learning burden. Besides, we employ a translator to translate natural language into the TL, which is used in RL to achieve efficient policy training. We implement this scheme as TALAR (TAsk Language with predicAte Representation) that learns multiple predicates to model object relationships as the TL. Experiments indicate that TALAR not only better comprehends NL instructions but also leads to a better instruction-following policy that significantly improves the success rate over baselines and adapts to unseen expressions of NL instruction. Besides, the TL is also an effective sub-task abstraction compatible with hierarchical RL.c0:T595,Modern Deep Neural Network (DNN) frameworks use tensor operators as the main building blocks of DNNs. However, we observe that operator-based construction of DNNs incurs significant drawbacks in parallelism in the form of synchronization barriers. Synchronization barriers of operators confine the scope of parallel computation to each operator and obscure the rich parallel computation opportunities that exist across operators. To this end, we present ASPEN, a novel parallel computation solution for DNNs that achieves fine-grained dynamic execution of DNNs, which (1) removes the operator barriers and expresses DNNs in dataflow graphs of fine-grained tiles to expose the parallel computation opportunities across operators, and (2) exploits these opportunities by dynamically locating and scheduling them in runtime. This novel approach of ASPEN enables opportunistic parallelism, a new class of parallelism for DNNs that is unavailable in the existing operator-based approaches. ASPEN also achieves high resource utilization and memory reuse by letting each resource asynchronously traverse depthwise in the DNN graph to its full computing potential. We provide challenges and solutions to our approach and show that our proof-of-concept implementation of ASPEN on CPU shows exceptional performance, outperforming state-of-the-art inference systems of TorchScript and TVM by up to 3.2$\times$ and 4.3$\times$, respectively.c1:T67b,Various gradient compression algorithms have been proposed to alleviate the communication bottleneck in distributed learning, and they have demonstrated effectiveness in terms of  high compression ratios and theoretical low communication complexity. However, when it comes to practically training modern deep neural networks (DNNs),  these algorithms have yet to match the inference performance of uncompressed SGD-momentum  (SGDM) and adaptive optimizers (e.g.,Adam). More importantly,  recent studies suggest that these algorithms actually offer no speed advantages over SGDM/Adam when used with common  distributed DNN training frameworks ( e.g., DistributedDataParallel (DDP)) in the typical settings, due to heavy compression/decompression computation or incompatibility with the efficient All-Reduce or the requirement of uncompressed warmup at the early stage. For these reasons, we propose a novel 1-bit adaptive optimizer, dubbed *Bi*nary *r*andomization a*d*aptive optimiz*er* (**Birder**). The quantization of Birder can be easily and lightly computed, and it does not require warmup with its uncompressed version in the beginning. Also, we devise Hierarchical-1-bit-All-Reduce to further lower the communication volume. We theoretically prove that it promises the same convergence rate as the Adam. Extensive experiments, conducted on 8 to 64 GPUs (1 to 8 nodes) using DDP, demonstrate that Birder achieves comparable inference performance to uncompressed SGDM/Adam, with up to ${2.5 \times}$ speedup for training ResNet-50 and ${6.3\times}$ speedup for training BERT-Base. Code is publicly available at https://openi.pcl.ac.cn/c2net_optim/Birder.c2:T484,Pre-training has been widely adopted in deep learning to improve model performance, especially when the training data for a target task is limited. In our work, we seek to understand the implications of this training strategy on the generalization properties of downstream models. More specifically, we ask the following question: how do properties of the pre-training distribution affect the robustness of a fine-tuned model? The properties we explore include the label space, label semantics, image diversity, data domains, and data quantity of the pre-training distribution. We find that the primary factor influencing downstream effective robustness (Taori et al., 2020) is data quantity, while other factors have limited significance. For example, reducing the number of ImageNet pre-training classes by 4x while increasing the number of images per class by 4x (that is, keeping total data quantity fixed) does not impact the robustness of fine-tuned models. We demonstrate our findings on pre-training distributions drawn from various natural and synthetic data sources, primarily using the iWildCam-WILDS distribution shift as a test for robustness.c3:T41b,We propose a causal interpretation of self-attention in the Transformer neural network architecture. We interpret self-attention as a mechanism that estimates a structural equation model for a given input sequence of symbols (tokens). The structural equation model can be interpreted, in turn, as a causal structure over the input symbols under the specific context of the input sequence. Importantly, this interpretation remains valid in the presence of latent confounders. Following this interpretation, we estimate conditional independence relations between input symbols by calculating partial correlations between their corresponding representations in the deepest attention layer. This enables learning the causal structure over an input sequence using existing constraint-based algorithms. In this sense, existing pre-trained Transformers can be utilized for zero-shot causal-discovery. We demonstrate this method by providing causal explanations for the outcomes of Transformers in two tasks: sentiment classification (NLP) and recommendation.c4:T459,Recent work has shown that generation from a prompted or fine-tuned language model can perform well at semantic parsing when the output is constrained to be a valid semantic representation. We introduce BenchCLAMP, a Benchmark to evaluate Constrained LAnguage Model Parsing, that includes context-free grammars for seven semantic parsing datasets and two syntactic parsing datasets with varied output meaning representations, as well as a constrained decoding interface to generate only valid outputs covered by these grammars. We provide low, medium, and high resource splits for each dataset, allowing accurate comparison of various language models under different data regimes. Our benchmark supports evaluation of language models using prompt-based learning as well as fine-tuning. We benchmark seven language models, including two GPT-3 variants available only through an API. Our experiments show that encoder-decoder pretrained language models can achieve similar performance or even surpass state-of-the-art methods for both syntactic and semantic parsing when the model output is constrained to be valid.c5:T492,Despite widespread use of LLMs as conversational agents, evaluations of performance fail to capture a crucial aspect of communication: interpreting language in context---incorporating its pragmatics. Humans interpret language using beliefs and prior knowledge about the world. For example, we intuitively understand the response "I wore gloves" to the question "Did you leave fingerprints?" as meaning "No". To investigate whether LLMs have the ability to make this type of inference, known as an implicature, we design a simple task and evaluate four categories of widely used state-of-the-art models. We find that, despite only evaluating on utterances that require a binary inference (yes or no), models in three of these categories perform close to random. However, LLMs instruction-tuned at the example-level perform significantly better. These results suggest that certain fine-tuning strategies are far better at inducing pragmatic understanding in models. We present our findings as the starting point for further research into evaluating how LLMs interpret language in context and to drive the development of more pragmatic and useful models of human discourse.c6:T505,Attention layers, as commonly used in transformers, form the backbone of modern deep learning, yet there is no mathematical description of their benefits and deficiencies as compared with other architectures. In this work we establish both positive and negative results on the representation power of attention layers, with a focus on intrinsic complexity parameters such as width, depth, and embedding dimension. On the positive side, we present a sparse averaging task, where recurrent networks and feedforward networks all have complexity scaling polynomially in the input size, whereas transformers scale merely logarithmically in the input size; furthermore, we use the same construction to show the necessity and role of a large embedding dimension in a transformer. On the negative side, we present a triple detection task, where attention layers in turn have complexity scaling linearly in the input size; as this scenario seems rare in practice, we also present natural variants that can be efficiently solved by attention layers. The proof techniques emphasize the value of communication complexity in the analysis of transformers and related models, and the role of sparse averaging as a prototypical attention task, which even finds use in the analysis of triple detection.c7:T4c0,Given the intractably large size of the space of proofs, any model that is capable of general deductive reasoning must generalize to proofs of greater complexity. Recent studies have shown that large language models (LLMs) possess some abstract deductive reasoning ability given chain-of-thought prompts. However, they have primarily been tested on proofs using modus ponens or of a specific size, and from the same distribution as the in-context examples. To measure the general deductive reasoning ability of LLMs, we test on a broad set of deduction rules and measure their ability to generalize to more complex proofs from simpler demonstrations from multiple angles: depth-, width-, and compositional generalization. To facilitate systematic exploration, we construct a new synthetic and programmable reasoning dataset that enables control over deduction rules and proof complexity. Our experiments on four LLMs of various sizes and training objectives show that they are able to generalize to compositional proofs. However, they have difficulty generalizing to longer proofs, and they require explicit demonstrations to produce hypothetical subproofs, specifically in proof by cases and proof by contradiction.c8:T507,Instruction tuning is an effective technique to align large language models (LLMs) with human intent. In this work, we investigate how an adversary can exploit instruction tuning by injecting specific instruction-following examples into the training data that intentionally changes the model's behavior. For example, an adversary can achieve content injection by injecting training examples that mention target content and eliciting such behavior from downstream models. To achieve this goal, we propose \textit{AutoPoison}, an automated data poisoning pipeline. It naturally and coherently incorporates versatile attack goals into poisoned data with the help of an oracle LLM. We showcase two example attacks: content injection and over-refusal attacks, each aiming to induce a specific exploitable behavior. We quantify and benchmark the strength and the stealthiness of our data poisoning scheme. Our results show that AutoPoison allows an adversary to change a model's behavior by poisoning only a small fraction of data while maintaining a high level of stealthiness in the poisoned examples. We hope our work sheds light on how data quality affects the behavior of instruction-tuned models and raises awareness of the importance of data quality for responsible deployments of LLMs.c9:T543,Categorical random variables can faithfully represent the discrete and uncertain aspects of data as part of a discrete latent variable model. Learning in such models necessitates taking gradients with respect to the parameters of the categorical probability distributions, which is often intractable due to their combinatorial nature. A popular technique to estimate these otherwise intractable gradients is the Log-Derivative trick. This trick forms the basis of the well-known REINFORCE gradient estimator and its many extensions. While the Log-Derivative trick allows us to differentiate through samples drawn from categorical distributions, it does not take into account the discrete nature of the distribution itself. Our first contribution addresses this shortcoming by introducing the CatLog-Derivative trick -- a variation of the Log-Derivative trick tailored towards categorical distributions. Secondly, we use the CatLog-Derivative trick to introduce IndeCateR, a novel and unbiased gradient estimator for the important case of products of independent categorical distributions with provably lower variance than REINFORCE. Thirdly, we empirically show that IndeCateR can be efficiently implemented and that its gradient estimates have significantly lower bias and variance for the same number of samples compared to the state of the art.ca:T599,Pre-trained machine learning (ML) models have shown great performance for a
wide range of applications, in particular in natural language processing (NLP)
and computer vision (CV). Here, we study how pre-training could be used for
scientific machine learning (SciML) applications, specifically in the context of
transfer learning. We study the transfer behavior of these models as (i) the pretrained
model size is scaled, (ii) the downstream training dataset size is scaled,
(iii) the physics parameters are systematically pushed out of distribution, and (iv)
how a single model pre-trained on a mixture of different physics problems can
be adapted to various downstream applications. We find that—when fine-tuned
appropriately—transfer learning can help reach desired accuracy levels with orders
of magnitude fewer downstream examples (across different tasks that can even be
out-of-distribution) than training from scratch, with consistent behaviour across a
wide range of downstream examples. We also find that fine-tuning these models
yields more performance gains as model size increases, compared to training from
scratch on new downstream tasks. These results hold for a broad range of PDE
learning tasks. All in all, our results demonstrate the potential of the “pre-train and
fine-tune” paradigm for SciML problems, demonstrating a path towards building
SciML foundation models. Our code is available as open-source.cb:T708,Large language models (LLMs) such as T0, FLAN, and OPT-IML excel in multi-tasking under a unified instruction-following paradigm, where they also exhibit remarkable generalization abilities to unseen tasks. Despite their impressive performance, these LLMs, with sizes ranging from several billion to hundreds of billions of parameters, demand substantial computational resources, making their training and inference expensive and inefficient. Furthermore, adapting these models to downstream applications, particularly complex tasks, is often unfeasible due to the extensive hardware requirements for finetuning, even when utilizing parameter-efficient approaches such as prompt tuning. Additionally, the most powerful multi-task LLMs, such as OPT-IML-175B and FLAN-PaLM-540B, are not publicly accessible, severely limiting their customization potential. To address these challenges, we introduce a pretrained small scorer, \textit{Cappy}, designed to enhance the performance and efficiency of multi-task LLMs. With merely 360 million parameters, Cappy functions either independently on classification tasks or serve as an auxiliary component for LLMs, boosting their performance. Moreover, Cappy enables efficiently integrating downstream supervision without requiring LLM finetuning nor the access to their parameters. Our experiments demonstrate that, when working independently on 11 language understanding tasks from PromptSource, Cappy outperforms LLMs that are several orders of magnitude larger. Besides, on 45 complex tasks from BIG-Bench, Cappy boosts the performance of the advanced multi-task LLM, FLAN-T5, by a large margin. Furthermore, Cappy is flexible to cooperate with other LLM adaptations, including finetuning and in-context learning, offering additional performance enhancement.cc:T66c,Transformer architecture has shown impressive performance in multiple research domains and has become the backbone of many neural network models. However, there is limited understanding on how it works. In particular, with a simple predictive loss,  how the representation emerges from the gradient \emph{training dynamics} remains a mystery. In this paper, for 1-layer transformer with one self-attention layer plus one decoder layer, we analyze its SGD training dynamics for the task of next token prediction in a mathematically rigorous manner. We open the black box of the dynamic process of how the self-attention layer combines input tokens, and reveal the nature of underlying inductive bias. More specifically, with the assumption (a) no positional encoding, (b) long input sequence, and (c) the decoder layer learns faster than the self-attention layer, we prove that self-attention acts as a \emph{discriminative scanning algorithm}: 
 starting from uniform attention, it gradually attends more to distinct key tokens for a specific next token to be predicted, and pays less attention to common key tokens that occur across different next tokens. Among distinct tokens, it progressively drops attention weights, following the order of low to high co-occurrence between the key and the query token in the training set. Interestingly, this procedure does not lead to winner-takes-all, but stops due to a \emph{phase transition} that is controllable by the learning rate of the decoder layer, leaving (almost) fixed token combination. We verify this \textbf{\emph{scan and snap}} dynamics on synthetic and real-world data (WikiText-103).cd:T454,Deployed multimodal models can fail in ways that evaluators did not anticipate. In order to find these failures before deployment, we introduce MultiMon, a system that automatically identifies systematic failures---generalizable, natural-language descriptions that describe categories of individual failures. To uncover systematic failures, MultiMon scrapes for examples of erroneous agreement: inputs that produce the same output, but should not. It then prompts a language model to identify common categories and describe them in natural language. 
We use MultiMon to find 14 systematic failures (e.g."ignores quantifiers'') of the CLIP text-encoder, each comprising hundreds of distinct inputs (e.g."a shelf with a few/many books''). Because CLIP is the backbone for most state-of-the-art multimodal models, these inputs produce failures in Midjourney 5.1, DALL-E, VideoFusion, and others. MultiMon can also steer towards failures relevant to specific use cases, such as self-driving cars. We see MultiMon as a step towards evaluation that autonomously explores the long-tail of potential system failures.ce:T59f,Generative protein language models are a natural way to design new proteins with desired functions. However, current models are either difficult to direct to produce a protein from a specific family of interest, or must be trained on a large multiple sequence alignment (MSA) from the specific family of interest, making them unable to benefit from transfer learning across families. To address this, we propose **P**r**o**tein **E**volutionary **T**ransformer (PoET), an autoregressive generative model of whole protein families that learns to generate sets of related proteins as sequences-of-sequences across tens of millions of natural protein sequence clusters. PoET can be used as a retrieval-augmented language model to generate and score arbitrary modifications conditioned on any protein family of interest, and can extrapolate from short context lengths to generalize well even for small families. This is enabled by a unique Transformer layer; we model tokens sequentially within sequences while attending between sequences order invariantly, allowing PoET to scale to context lengths beyond those used during training. In extensive experiments on deep mutational scanning datasets, we show that PoET outperforms existing protein language models and evolutionary sequence models for variant function prediction across proteins of all MSA depths. We also demonstrate PoET's ability to controllably generate new protein sequences.cf:T497,Contrastive pretraining on image-text pairs from the web is one of the most popular large-scale pretraining strategies for vision backbones, especially in the context of large multimodal models. At the same time, image captioning on this type of data is commonly considered an inferior pretraining strategy. In this paper, we perform a fair comparison of these two pretraining strategies, carefully matching training data, compute, and model capacity. Using a standard encoder-decoder transformer, we find that captioning alone is surprisingly effective: on classification tasks, captioning produces vision encoders competitive with contrastively pretrained encoders, while surpassing them on vision & language tasks. We further analyze the effect of the model architecture and scale, as well as the pretraining data on the representation quality, and find that captioning exhibits the same or better scaling behavior along these axes. Overall our results show that plain image captioning is a more powerful pretraining strategy than was previously believed. Code is available at [https://github.com/google-research/big_vision](https://github.com/google-research/big_vision).d0:T66a,Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) models have demonstrated remarkable generalization capabilities across multiple challenging distribution shifts. However, there is still much to be explored in terms of their robustness to the variations of specific visual factors. In real-world applications, reliable and safe systems must consider other safety measures beyond classification accuracy, such as predictive uncertainty. Yet, the effectiveness of CLIP models on such safety-related objectives is less-explored. Driven by the above, this work comprehensively investigates the safety measures of CLIP models, specifically focusing on three key properties: resilience to visual factor variations, calibrated uncertainty estimations, and the ability to detect anomalous inputs. To this end, we study $83$ CLIP models and $127$ ImageNet classifiers. They are diverse in architecture (pre)training distribution and training strategies. We consider $10$ visual factors (\emph{e.g.}, shape and pattern), $5$ types of out-of-distribution data, and $8$ natural and challenging test conditions with different shift types, such as texture, style, and perturbation shifts. Our study has unveiled several previously unknown insights into CLIP models. For instance, they are not consistently more calibrated than other ImageNet models, which contradicts existing findings. Additionally, our analysis underscores the significance of training source design by showcasing its profound influence on the three key properties. We believe our comprehensive study can shed light on and help guide the development of more robust and reliable CLIP models.d1:T532,Large transformers are powerful architectures used for self-supervised data analysis across various data types, including protein sequences, images, and text. In these models, the semantic structure of the dataset emerges from a sequence of transformations between one representation and the next. 
We characterize the geometric and statistical properties of these representations and how they change as we move through the layers.
By analyzing the intrinsic dimension (ID) and neighbor composition, we find that the representations evolve similarly in transformers trained on protein language taskand image reconstruction tasks. In the first layers, the data manifold expands, becoming high-dimensional, and then contracts significantly in the intermediate layers. In the last part of the model, the ID remains approximately constant or forms a second shallow peak. 
We show that the semantic information of the dataset is better expressed at the end of the first peak, and this phenomenon can be observed across many models trained on diverse datasets.
Based on our findings, we point out an explicit strategy to identify, without supervision, the layers that maximize semantic content: representations at intermediate layers corresponding to a relative minimum of the ID profile are more suitable for downstream learning tasks.d2:T470,Intrigued by the claims of emergent reasoning capabilities in LLMs trained on general web corpora, in this paper, we set out to investigate their planning capabilities. We aim to evaluate (1) the effectiveness of LLMs in generating plans autonomously in commonsense planning tasks and (2) the potential of LLMs as a source of heuristic guidance for other agents (AI planners) in their planning tasks. We conduct a systematic study by generating a suite of instances on domains similar to the ones employed in the International Planning Competition and evaluate LLMs in two distinct modes: autonomous and heuristic. Our findings reveal that LLMs’ ability to generate executable plans autonomously is rather limited, with the best model (GPT-4) having an average success rate of ~12% across the domains. However, the results in the heuristic mode show more promise. In the heuristic mode, we demonstrate that LLM-generated plans can improve the search process for underlying sound planners and additionally show that external verifiers can help provide feedback on the generated plans and back-prompt the LLM for better plan generation.d3:T47d,We present Prompt Diffusion, a framework for enabling in-context learning in diffusion-based generative models. Given a pair of task-specific example images, such as depth from/to image and scribble from/to image, and a text guidance, our model automatically understands the underlying task and performs the same task on a new query image following the text guidance. To achieve this, we propose a vision-language prompt that can model a wide range of vision-language tasks and a diffusion model that takes it as input. The diffusion model is trained jointly on six different tasks using these prompts. The resulting Prompt Diffusion model becomes the first diffusion-based vision-language foundation model capable of in-context learning. It demonstrates high-quality in-context generation for the trained tasks and effectively generalizes to new, unseen vision tasks using their respective prompts. Our model also shows compelling text-guided image editing results. Our framework aims to facilitate research into in-context learning for computer vision. We share our code and pre-trained models at https://github.com/Zhendong-Wang/Prompt-Diffusion.d4:T590,Despite the demonstrated empirical efficacy of prompt tuning to adapt a pretrained language model for a new task, the theoretical underpinnings of the difference between "tuning parameters before the input" against "the tuning of model weights" are limited. We thus take one of the first steps to understand the role of soft-prompt tuning for transformer-based architectures. By considering a general purpose architecture, we analyze prompt tuning from the lens of both: universal approximation and limitations with finite-depth fixed-weight pretrained transformers for continuous-valued functions. Our universality result guarantees the existence of a strong transformer with a prompt to approximate any sequence-to-sequence function in the set of Lipschitz functions. The limitations of prompt tuning for limited-depth transformers are first proved by constructing a set of datasets, that cannot be memorized by a prompt of any length for a given single encoder layer. We also provide a lower bound on the required number of tunable prompt parameters and compare the result with the number of parameters required for a low-rank update (based on LoRA) for a single-layer setting. We finally extend our analysis to multi-layer settings by providing sufficient conditions under which the transformer can at best learn datasets from invertible functions only. Our theoretical claims are also corroborated by empirical results.d5:T58b,Large language models (LLMs) have notably accelerated progress towards artificial general intelligence (AGI), with their impressive zero-shot capacity for user-tailored tasks, endowing them with immense potential across a range of applications. However, in the field of computer vision, despite the availability of numerous powerful vision foundation models (VFMs), they are still restricted to tasks in a pre-defined form, struggling to match the open-ended task capabilities of LLMs. In this work, we present an LLM-based framework for vision-centric tasks, termed VisionLLM. This framework provides a unified perspective for vision and language tasks by treating images as a foreign language and aligning vision-centric tasks with language tasks that can be flexibly defined and managed using language instructions. An LLM-based decoder can then make appropriate predictions based on these instructions for open-ended tasks. Extensive experiments show that the proposed VisionLLM can achieve different levels of task customization through language instructions, from fine-grained object-level to coarse-grained task-level customization, all with good results. It's noteworthy that, with a generalist LLM-based framework, our model can achieve over 60% mAP on COCO, on par with detection-specific models. We hope this model can set a new baseline for generalist vision and language models. The code shall be released.d6:T5b9,Generative Pre-trained Transformer (GPT) models have exhibited exciting progress in capabilities, capturing the interest of practitioners and the public alike. Yet, while the literature on the trustworthiness of GPT models remains limited, practitioners have proposed employing capable GPT models for sensitive applications to healthcare and finance – where mistakes can be costly. To this end, this work proposes a comprehensive trustworthiness evaluation for large language models with a focus on GPT-4 and GPT-3.5, considering diverse perspectives – including toxicity, stereotype bias, adversarial robustness, out-of-distribution robustness, robustness on adversarial demonstrations, privacy, machine ethics, and fairness. Based on our evaluations, we discover previously unpublished vulnerabilities to trustworthiness threats. For instance, we find that GPT models can be easily misled to generate toxic and biased outputs and leak private information in both training data and conversation history. We also find that although GPT-4 is usually more trustworthy than GPT-3.5 on standard benchmarks, GPT-4 is more vulnerable given jailbreaking system or user prompts, potentially due to the reason that GPT-4 follows the (misleading) instructions more precisely. Our work illustrates a comprehensive trustworthiness evaluation of GPT models and sheds light on the trustworthiness gaps. Our benchmark is publicly available at https://decodingtrust.github.io/.d7:T5a4,As it is empirically observed that Vision Transformers (ViTs) are quite insensitive to the order of input tokens, the need for an appropriate self-supervised pretext task that enhances the location awareness of ViTs is becoming evident. To address this, we present DropPos, a novel pretext task designed to reconstruct Dropped Positions. The formulation of DropPos is simple: we first drop a large random subset of positional embeddings and then the model classifies the actual position for each non-overlapping patch among all possible positions solely based on their visual appearance. To avoid trivial solutions, we increase the difficulty of this task by keeping only a subset of patches visible. Additionally, considering there may be different patches with similar visual appearances, we propose position smoothing and attentive reconstruction strategies to relax this classification problem, since it is not necessary to reconstruct their exact positions in these cases. Empirical evaluations of DropPos show strong capabilities. DropPos outperforms supervised pre-training and achieves competitive results compared with state-of-the-art self-supervised alternatives on a wide range of downstream benchmarks. This suggests that explicitly encouraging spatial reasoning abilities, as DropPos does, indeed contributes to the improved location awareness of ViTs. The code is publicly available at https://github.com/Haochen-Wang409/DropPos.d8:T436,Language instructions and demonstrations are two natural ways for users to teach robots personalized tasks. Recent progress in Large Language Models (LLMs) has shown impressive performance in translating language instructions into code for robotic tasks. However, translating demonstrations into task code continues to be a challenge due to the length and complexity of both demonstrations and code, making learning a direct mapping intractable. This paper presents Demo2Code, a novel framework that generates robot task code from demonstrations via an extended chain-of-thought and defines a common latent specification to connect the two. Our framework employs a robust two-stage process: (1) a recursive summarization technique that condenses demonstrations into concise specifications, and (2) a code synthesis approach that expands each function recursively from the generated specifications. We conduct extensive evaluation on various robot task benchmarks, including a novel game benchmark Robotouille, designed to simulate diverse cooking tasks in a kitchen environment.d9:T494,Large language models (LLMs) can learn to perform a wide range of natural language tasks from just a handful of in-context examples. However, for generating strings from highly structured languages (e.g., semantic parsing to complex domain-specific languages), it is challenging for the LLM to generalize from just a few exemplars. We explore $\textbf{grammar prompting}$ as a simple approach for enabling LLMs to use external knowledge and domain-specific constraints, expressed through a grammar expressed in Backus--Naur Form (BNF), during in-context learning. Grammar prompting augments each demonstration example with a specialized grammar that is minimally sufficient for generating the particular output example, where the specialized grammar is a subset of the full DSL grammar. For inference, the LLM first predicts a BNF grammar given a test input, and then generates the output according to the rules of the grammar. Experiments demonstrate that grammar prompting can enable LLMs to perform competitively on a diverse set of DSL generation tasks, including semantic parsing (SMCalFlow, Overnight, GeoQuery), PDDL planning, and even molecule generation (SMILES).da:T86d,Multi-modal Contrastive Representation (MCR) learning aims to encode different modalities into a semantically aligned shared space. This paradigm shows remarkable generalization ability on numerous downstream tasks across various modalities. However, the reliance on massive high-quality data pairs limits its further development on more modalities. This paper proposes a novel training-efficient method for learning MCR without paired data called Connecting Multi-modal Contrastive Representations (C-MCR). Specifically, given two existing MCRs pre-trained on $(\mathcal{A}$, $\mathcal{B})$ and $(\mathcal{B}$, $\mathcal{C})$ modality pairs, we project them to a new space and use the data from the overlapping modality $\mathcal{B}$ to aligning the two MCRs in the new space. Meanwhile, since the modality pairs $(\mathcal{A}$, $\mathcal{B})$ and $(\mathcal{B}$, $\mathcal{C})$ are already aligned within each MCR, the connection learned by overlapping modality can also be transferred to non-overlapping modality pair $(\mathcal{A}$, $\mathcal{C})$. To unleash the potential of C-MCR, we further introduce a semantic-enhanced inter- and intra-MCR connection method. We first enhance the semantic consistency and completion of embeddings across different modalities for more robust alignment. Then we utilize the inter-MCR alignment to establish the connection, and employ the intra-MCR alignment to better maintain the connection for inputs from non-overlapping modalities. To demonstrate the effectiveness of C-MCR, we take the field of audio-visual and 3D-language learning as examples. Specifically, we connect CLIP and CLAP via texts to derive audio-visual representations, and integrate CLIP and ULIP via images for 3D-language representations. Remarkably, without using any paired data, C-MCR for audio-visual achieves state-of-the-art performance on audio-image retrieval, audio-visual source localization, and counterfactual audio-image recognition tasks. Furthermore, C-MCR for 3D-language also attains advanced zero-shot 3D point cloud classification accuracy on ModelNet40. Our project page is available at \url{https://c-mcr.github.io/C-MCR/}db:T64b,We introduce WordScape, a novel pipeline for the creation of cross-disciplinary, multilingual corpora comprising millions of pages with annotations for document layout detection. Relating visual and textual items on document pages has gained further significance with the advent of multimodal models. Various approaches proved effective for visual question answering or layout segmentation. However, the interplay of text, tables, and visuals remains challenging for a variety of document understanding tasks. In particular, many models fail to generalize well to diverse domains and new languages due to insufficient availability of training data. WordScape addresses these limitations. Our automatic annotation pipeline parses the Open XML structure of Word documents obtained from the web, jointly providing layout-annotated document images and their textual representations. In turn, WordScape offers unique properties as it (1) leverages the ubiquity of the Word file format on the internet, (2) is readily accessible through the Common Crawl web corpus, (3) is adaptive to domain-specific documents, and (4) offers culturally and linguistically diverse document pages with natural semantic structure and high-quality text. Together with the pipeline, we will additionally release 9.5M urls to word documents which can be processed using WordScape to create a dataset of over 40M pages. Finally, we investigate the quality of text and layout annotations extracted by WordScape, assess the impact on document understanding benchmarks, and demonstrate that manual labeling costs can be substantially reduced.dc:T508,Transformer interpretability aims to understand the algorithm implemented by a learned Transformer by examining various aspects of the model, such as the weight matrices or the attention patterns.
In this work, through a combination of theoretical results and carefully controlled experiments on synthetic data, we take a critical view
of methods that exclusively focus on individual parts of the model, rather than consider the network as a whole.
We consider a simple synthetic setup of learning a (bounded) Dyck language. Theoretically, we show that the set of models that (exactly or approximately) solve this task satisfy a structural characterization derived from ideas in formal languages (the pumping lemma).
We use this characterization to show that the set of optima is qualitatively rich; in particular, the attention pattern of a single layer can be "nearly randomized", while preserving the functionality of the network.
We also show via extensive experiments that these constructions are not merely a theoretical artifact: even with severe constraints to the architecture of the model, vastly different solutions can be reached via standard training. Thus, interpretability claims based on inspecting individual heads or weight matrices in the Transformer can be misleading.dd:T5b2,Breaking down a problem into intermediate steps has demonstrated impressive performance in Large Language Model (LLM) reasoning. However, the growth of the reasoning chain introduces uncertainty and error accumulation, making it challenging to elicit accurate final results. To tackle this challenge of uncertainty in multi-step reasoning, we introduce a stepwise self-evaluation mechanism to guide and calibrate the reasoning process of LLMs. We propose a decoding algorithm integrating the self-evaluation guidance via stochastic beam search. The self-evaluation guidance serves as a better-calibrated automatic criterion, facilitating an efficient search in the reasoning space and resulting in superior prediction quality. Stochastic beam search balances exploitation and exploration of the search space with temperature-controlled randomness. Our approach surpasses the corresponding Codex-backboned baselines in few-shot accuracy by $6.34$%, $9.56$%, and $5.46$% on the GSM8K, AQuA, and StrategyQA benchmarks, respectively. Experiment results with Llama-2 on arithmetic reasoning demonstrate the efficiency of our method in outperforming the baseline methods with comparable computational budgets. Further analysis in multi-step reasoning finds our self-evaluation guidance pinpoints logic failures and leads to higher consistency and robustness. Our code is publicly available at [https://guideddecoding.github.io/](https://guideddecoding.github.io/).de:T465,Aligning language models (LMs) with preferences is an important problem in natural language generation. A key challenge is that preferences are typically provided at the *sequence level* while LM training and generation both occur at the *token level*. There is, therefore, a *granularity mismatch* between the preference and the LM training losses, which may complicate the learning problem. In this paper, we address this issue by developing an alternate training process, where we iterate between grounding the sequence-level preference into token-level training guidance, and improving the LM with the learned guidance. For guidance learning, we design a framework that extends the pairwise-preference learning in imitation learning to both variable-length LM generation and the utilization of the preference among multiple generations. For LM training, based on the amount of supervised data, we present two *minimalist* learning objectives that utilize the learned guidance. In experiments, our method performs competitively on two distinct representative LM tasks --- discrete-prompt generation and text summarization.df:T7bf,Large language models have emerged as a promising approach towards achieving general-purpose AI agents. The thriving open-source LLM community has greatly accelerated the development of agents that support human-machine dialogue interaction through natural language processing. However, human interaction with the world extends beyond only text as a modality, and other modalities such as vision are also crucial. Recent works on multi-modal large language models, such as GPT-4V and Bard, have demonstrated their effectiveness in handling visual modalities. However, the transparency of these works is limited and insufficient to support academic research. To the best of our knowledge, we present one of the very first open-source endeavors in the field, LAMM, encompassing a Language-Assisted Multi-Modal instruction tuning dataset, framework, and benchmark. Our aim is to establish LAMM as a growing ecosystem for training and evaluating MLLMs, with a specific focus on facilitating AI agents capable of bridging the gap between ideas and execution, thereby enabling seamless human-AI interaction. Our main contribution is three-fold: 1) We present a comprehensive dataset and benchmark, which cover a wide range of vision tasks for 2D and 3D vision. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of our dataset and benchmark. 2) We outline the detailed methodology of constructing multi-modal instruction tuning datasets and benchmarks for MLLMs, enabling rapid scaling and extension of MLLM research to diverse domains, tasks, and modalities. 3) We provide a primary but potential MLLM training framework optimized for modality extension. We also provide baseline models, comprehensive experimental observations, and analysis to accelerate future research. Our baseline model is trained within 24 A100 GPU hours, framework supports training with V100 and RTX3090 is available thanks to the open-source society. Codes and data are now available at https://openlamm.github.io.e0:T587,In this paper, we contend that the objective of representation learning is  to compress and transform the distribution of the data, say sets of tokens, towards a mixture of low-dimensional Gaussian distributions supported on incoherent subspaces. The quality of the final representation can be measured by a unified objective function called sparse rate reduction. From this perspective, popular deep networks such as transformers can be naturally viewed as realizing iterative schemes to optimize this objective incrementally. Particularly, we show that the standard transformer block can be derived from alternating optimization on complementary parts of this objective: the multi-head self-attention operator can be viewed as a gradient descent step to compress the token sets by minimizing their lossy coding rate, and the subsequent multi-layer perceptron can be viewed as attempting to sparsify the representation of the tokens. This leads to a family of white-box transformer-like deep network architectures which are mathematically fully interpretable. Despite their simplicity, experiments show that these networks indeed learn to optimize the designed objective: they compress and sparsify representations of large-scale real-world vision datasets such as ImageNet, and achieve performance very close to thoroughly engineered transformers such as ViT. 
Code is at https://github.com/Ma-Lab-Berkeley/CRATE.e1:T41a,Latent space EBMs, also known as energy-based priors, have drawn growing interests in the field of generative modeling due to its flexibility in the formulation and strong modeling power of the latent space. However, the common practice of learning latent space EBMs with non-convergent short-run MCMC for prior and posterior sampling is hindering the model from further progress; the degenerate MCMC sampling quality in practice often leads to degraded generation quality and instability in training, especially with highly multi-modal and/or high-dimensional target distributions. To remedy this sampling issue, in this paper we introduce a simple but effective diffusion-based amortization method for long-run MCMC sampling and develop a novel learning algorithm for the latent space EBM based on it. We provide theoretical evidence that the learned amortization of MCMC is a valid long-run MCMC sampler. Experiments on several image modeling benchmark datasets demonstrate the superior performance of our method compared with strong counterparts.e2:T64c,This paper reexamines the research on out-of-distribution (OOD) robustness in the field of NLP. We find that the distribution shift settings in previous studies commonly lack adequate challenges, hindering the accurate evaluation of OOD robustness. To address these issues, we propose a benchmark construction protocol that ensures clear differentiation and challenging distribution shifts. Then we introduce
BOSS, a Benchmark suite for Out-of-distribution robustneSS evaluation covering 5 tasks and 20 datasets. Based on BOSS, we conduct a series of experiments on pretrained language models for analysis and evaluation of OOD robustness. First, for vanilla fine-tuning, we examine the relationship between in-distribution (ID) and OOD performance. We identify three typical types that unveil the inner learning
mechanism, which could potentially facilitate the forecasting of OOD robustness, correlating with the advancements on ID datasets. Then, we evaluate 5 classic methods on BOSS and find that, despite exhibiting some effectiveness in specific cases, they do not offer significant improvement compared to vanilla fine-tuning. Further, we evaluate 5 LLMs with various adaptation paradigms and find that when sufficient ID data is available, fine-tuning domain-specific models outperform LLMs on ID examples significantly. However, in the case of OOD instances, prioritizing LLMs with in-context learning yields better results. We identify that both fine-tuned small models and LLMs face challenges in effectively addressing downstream tasks. The code is public at https://github.com/lifan-yuan/OOD_NLP.e3:T5e7,Adaptive optimizers, such as Adam, have achieved remarkable success in deep learning. A key component of these optimizers is the so-called preconditioning matrix, providing enhanced gradient information and regulating the step size of each gradient direction. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to designing the preconditioning matrix by utilizing the gradient difference between two successive steps as the diagonal elements. These diagonal elements are closely related to the Hessian and can be perceived as an approximation of the inner product between the Hessian row vectors and difference of the adjacent parameter vectors. Additionally, we introduce an auto-switching function that enables the preconditioning matrix to switch dynamically between Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and the adaptive optimizer. Based on these two techniques, we develop a new optimizer named AGD that enhances the generalization performance. We evaluate AGD on public datasets of Natural Language Processing (NLP), Computer Vision (CV), and Recommendation Systems (RecSys). Our experimental results demonstrate that AGD outperforms the state-of-the-art (SOTA) optimizers, achieving highly competitive or significantly better predictive performance. Furthermore, we analyze how AGD is able to switch automatically between SGD and the adaptive optimizer and its actual effects on various scenarios. The code is available at https://github.com/intelligent-machine-learning/dlrover/tree/master/atorch/atorch/optimizers.e4:T591,Despite recent success in large language model (LLM) reasoning, LLMs struggle with hierarchical multi-step reasoning tasks like generating complex programs. For these tasks, humans often start with a high-level algorithmic design and implement each part gradually. We introduce Parsel, a framework enabling automatic implementation and validation of complex algorithms with code LLMs. With Parsel, we automatically decompose algorithmic tasks into hierarchical natural language function descriptions and then search over combinations of possible function implementations using tests. We show that Parsel can be used across domains requiring hierarchical reasoning, including program synthesis and robotic planning. We find that, using Parsel, LLMs solve more competition-level problems in the APPS dataset, resulting in pass rates over 75\% higher than prior results from directly sampling AlphaCode and Codex, while often using a smaller sample budget. Moreover, with automatically generated tests, we find that Parsel can improve the state-of-the-art pass@1 performance on HumanEval from 67\% to 85\%. We also find that LLM-generated robotic plans using Parsel are more than twice as likely to be considered accurate than directly generated plans. Lastly, we explore how Parsel addresses LLM limitations and discuss how Parsel may be useful for human programmers. We release our code at https://github.com/ezelikman/parsel.e5:T61b,Weight Average (WA) is an active research topic due to its simplicity in ensembling deep networks and the effectiveness in promoting generalization. Existing weight average approaches, however, are often carried out along only one training trajectory in a post-hoc manner (i.e., the weights are averaged after the entire training process is finished), which significantly degrades the diversity between networks and thus impairs the effectiveness. In this paper, inspired by weight average, we propose Lookaround, a straightforward yet effective SGD-based optimizer leading to flatter minima with better generalization. Specifically, Lookaround iterates two steps during the whole training period: the around step and the average step. In each iteration, 1) the around step starts from a common point and trains multiple networks simultaneously, each on transformed data by a different data augmentation, and 2) the average step averages these trained networks to get the averaged network, which serves as the starting point for the next iteration. The around step improves the functionality diversity while the average step guarantees the weight locality of these networks during the whole training, which is essential for WA to work. We theoretically explain the superiority of Lookaround by convergence analysis, and make extensive experiments to evaluate Lookaround on popular benchmarks including CIFAR and ImageNet with both CNNs and ViTs, demonstrating clear superiority over state-of-the-arts. Our code is available at https://github.com/Ardcy/Lookaround.e6:T691,Chain-of-thought prompting (CoT) and tool augmentation have been validated in recent work as effective practices for improving large language models (LLMs) to perform step-by-step reasoning on complex math-related tasks.
However, most existing math reasoning datasets may not be able to fully evaluate and analyze the ability of LLMs in manipulating tools and performing reasoning, as they often only require very few invocations of tools or miss annotations for evaluating intermediate reasoning steps, thus supporting only outcome evaluation.
To address the issue, we construct **CARP**, a new Chinese dataset consisting of 4,886 computation-intensive algebra problems with formulated annotations on intermediate steps, facilitating the evaluation of the intermediate reasoning process.
In CARP, we test four LLMs with CoT prompting, and find that they are all prone to make mistakes at the early steps of the solution, leading to incorrect answers.
Based on this finding, we propose a new approach that can facilitate the deliberation on reasoning steps with tool interfaces, namely **DELI**.
In DELI, we first initialize a step-by-step solution based on retrieved exemplars, then iterate two deliberation procedures that check and refine the intermediate steps of the generated solution, from both tool manipulation and natural language reasoning perspectives, until solutions converge or the maximum iteration is achieved.
Experimental results on CARP and six other datasets show that the proposed DELI mostly outperforms competitive baselines, and can further boost the performance of existing CoT methods.
Our data and code are available at https://github.com/RUCAIBox/CARP.e7:T526,As an efficient alternative to conventional full fine-tuning, parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) is becoming the prevailing method to adapt pretrained language models. In PEFT, a lightweight module is learned on each dataset while the underlying pretrained language model remains unchanged, resulting in multiple compact modules representing diverse skills when applied to various domains and tasks. In this paper, we propose to compose these parameter-efficient modules through linear arithmetic operations in the weight space, thereby integrating different module capabilities. Specifically, we first define an addition and negation operator for the module, and then further compose these two basic operators to perform flexible arithmetic. Our approach requires no additional training and enables highly flexible module composition.  We apply different arithmetic operations to compose the parameter-efficient modules for (1) distribution generalization, (2) multi-tasking, (3) detoxifying, and (4) domain transfer. Additionally, we extend our approach to detoxify Alpaca-LoRA, the latest instruction-tuned large language model based on LLaMA. Empirical results demonstrate that our approach produces new and effective parameter-efficient modules that significantly outperform existing ones across all settings.e8:T44a,Inspired by the insights in cognitive science with respect to human memory and reasoning mechanism, a novel evolvable LLM-based (Large Language Model) agent framework is proposed as Rememberer. By equipping the LLM with a long-term experience memory, Rememberer is capable of exploiting the experiences from the past episodes even for different task goals, which excels an LLM-based agent with fixed exemplars or equipped with a transient working memory. We further introduce **R**einforcement **L**earning with **E**xperience **M**emory (**RLEM**) to update the memory. Thus, the whole system can learn from the experiences of both success and failure, and evolve its capability without fine-tuning the parameters of the LLM. In this way, the proposed Rememberer constitutes a semi-parametric RL agent. Extensive experiments are conducted on two RL task sets to evaluate the proposed framework. The average results with different initialization and training sets exceed the prior SOTA by 4% and 2% for the success rate on two task sets and demonstrate the superiority and robustness of Rememberer.e9:T613,Massive data is often considered essential for deep learning applications, but it also incurs significant computational and infrastructural costs. Therefore, dataset pruning (DP) has emerged as an effective way to improve data efficiency by identifying and removing redundant training samples without sacrificing performance. In this work, we aim to address the problem of DP for transfer learning, i.e., how to prune a source dataset for improved pretraining efficiency and lossless finetuning accuracy on downstream target tasks. To our best knowledge, the problem of DP for transfer learning remains open, as previous studies have primarily addressed DP and transfer learning as separate problems. By contrast, we establish a unified viewpoint to integrate DP with transfer learning and find that existing DP methods are not suitable for the transfer learning paradigm. We then propose two new DP methods, label mapping and feature mapping, for supervised and self-supervised pretraining settings respectively, by revisiting the DP problem through the lens of source-target domain mapping. Furthermore, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on numerous transfer learning tasks. We show that source data classes can be pruned by up to $40\%\sim 80\%$ without sacrificing the downstream performance, resulting in a significant $2\sim 5\times$ speed-up during the pretraining stage. Besides, our proposal exhibits broad applicability and can improve other computationally intensive transfer learning techniques, such as adversarial pretraining.ea:T553,Diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs) have demonstrated a very promising ability in high-resolution image synthesis. However, sampling from a pre-trained DPM is time-consuming due to the multiple evaluations of the denoising network, making it more and more important to accelerate the sampling of DPMs. Despite recent progress in designing fast samplers, existing methods still cannot generate satisfying images in many applications where fewer steps (e.g., $<$10) are favored. In this paper, we develop a unified corrector (UniC) that can be applied after any existing DPM sampler to increase the order of accuracy without extra model evaluations, and derive a unified predictor (UniP) that supports arbitrary order as a byproduct. Combining UniP and UniC, we propose a unified predictor-corrector framework called UniPC for the fast sampling of DPMs, which has a unified analytical form for any order and can significantly improve the sampling quality over previous methods, especially in extremely few steps. We evaluate our methods through extensive experiments including both unconditional and conditional sampling using pixel-space and latent-space DPMs. Our UniPC can achieve 3.87 FID on CIFAR10 (unconditional) and 7.51 FID on ImageNet 256$\times$256 (conditional) with only 10 function evaluations. Code is available at https://github.com/wl-zhao/UniPC.eb:T606,Diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs) have exhibited excellent performance for high-fidelity image generation while suffering from inefficient sampling. Recent works accelerate the sampling procedure by proposing fast ODE solvers that leverage the specific ODE form of DPMs. However, they highly rely on specific parameterization during inference (such as noise/data prediction), which might not be the optimal choice. In this work, we propose a novel formulation towards the optimal parameterization during sampling that minimizes the first-order discretization error of the ODE solution. Based on such formulation, we propose \textit{DPM-Solver-v3}, a new fast ODE solver for DPMs by introducing several coefficients efficiently computed on the pretrained model, which we call \textit{empirical model statistics}. We further incorporate multistep methods and a predictor-corrector framework, and propose some techniques for improving sample quality at small numbers of function evaluations (NFE) or large guidance scales. Experiments show that DPM-Solver-v3 achieves consistently better or comparable performance in both unconditional and conditional sampling with both pixel-space and latent-space DPMs, especially in 5$\sim$10 NFEs. We achieve FIDs of 12.21 (5 NFE), 2.51 (10 NFE) on unconditional CIFAR10, and MSE of 0.55 (5 NFE, 7.5 guidance scale) on Stable Diffusion, bringing a speed-up of 15\%$\sim$30\% compared to previous state-of-the-art training-free methods. Code is available at \url{https://github.com/thu-ml/DPM-Solver-v3}.ec:T41d,Do neural networks, trained on well-understood algorithmic tasks, reliably rediscover known algorithms? Several recent studies, on tasks ranging from group operations to in-context linear regression, have suggested that the answer is yes. Using modular addition as a prototypical problem, we show that algorithm discovery in neural networks is sometimes more complex: small changes to model hyperparameters and initializations can induce discovery of qualitatively different algorithms from a fixed training set, and even learning of multiple different solutions in parallel. In modular addition, we specifically show that models learn a known *Clock* algorithm, a previously undescribed, less intuitive, but comprehensible procedure we term the *Pizza* algorithm, and a variety of even more complex procedures. Our results show that even simple learning problems can admit a surprising diversity of solutions, motivating the development of new tools for mechanistically characterizing the behavior of neural networks across the algorithmic phase space.ed:T521,Large Language Models (LLMs) and other large foundation models have achieved impressive results, but their size exacerbates existing resource consumption and latency challenges. In particular, the large-scale deployment of these models is hindered by the significant resource requirements during inference. In this paper, we study  two  approaches for mitigating these challenges: employing a cache to store previous queries and learning a model selector to choose from an ensemble of models for query processing.

Theoretically, we provide an optimal algorithm for jointly optimizing both approaches  to reduce the inference cost in both offline and online tabular settings. 
By combining a caching algorithm, namely Greedy Dual Size with Frequency (GDSF) or Least Expected Cost (LEC), with a model selector, we achieve optimal rates in both offline and online settings. Empirically, simulations show that our caching and model selection algorithm greatly improves over the baselines, with up to $50\times$ improvement over the baseline when the ratio between the maximum cost and minimum cost is $100$.  Experiments on real datasets show a $4.3\times$ improvement in FLOPs over the baseline when the ratio for FLOPs is $10$, and a $1.8\times$ improvement in latency when the ratio for average latency is $1.85$.ee:T564,Foundation models like CLIP allow zero-shot transfer on various tasks without additional training data. Yet, the zero-shot performance is less competitive than a fully supervised one. Thus, to enhance the performance, fine-tuning and ensembling are also commonly adopted to better fit the downstream tasks. However, we argue that such prior work has overlooked the inherent biases in foundation models. Due to the highly imbalanced Web-scale training set, these foundation models are inevitably skewed toward frequent semantics, and thus the subsequent fine-tuning or ensembling is still biased. In this study, we systematically examine the biases in foundation models and demonstrate the efficacy of our proposed Generalized Logit Adjustment (GLA) method. Note that bias estimation in foundation models is challenging, as most pre-train data cannot be explicitly assessed like in traditional long-tailed classification tasks.
To this end, GLA has an optimization-based bias estimation approach for debiasing foundation models. As our work resolves a fundamental flaw in the pre-training, the proposed GLA demonstrates significant improvements across a diverse range of tasks: it achieves 1.5 pp accuracy gains on ImageNet, an large average improvement (1.4-4.6 pp) on 11 few-shot datasets, 2.4 pp gains on long-tailed classification. Codes are in https://github.com/BeierZhu/GLA.ef:T405,We propose eXtensible Prompt (X-Prompt) for prompting a large language model (LLM) beyond natural language (NL). X-Prompt instructs an LLM with not only NL but also an extensible vocabulary of imaginary words. Registering new imaginary words allows us to instruct the LLM to comprehend concepts that are difficult to describe with NL words, thereby making a prompt more descriptive. Also, these imaginary words are designed to be out-of-distribution (OOD) robust so that they can be (re)used like NL words in various prompts, distinguishing X-Prompt from soft prompt that is for fitting in-distribution data. We propose context-augmented learning (CAL) to learn imaginary words for general usability, enabling them to work properly in OOD (unseen) prompts. We experiment X-Prompt for zero-shot language style customization as a case study. The promising results of X-Prompt demonstrate its potential to facilitate advanced interaction beyond the natural language interface, bridging the communication gap between humans and LLMs.f0:T584,Structured state space sequence (S4) models have recently achieved state-of-the-art performance on long-range sequence modeling tasks. These models also have fast inference speeds and parallelisable training, making them potentially useful in many reinforcement learning settings. We propose a  modification to a variant of S4 that enables us to initialise and reset the hidden state in parallel, allowing us to tackle reinforcement learning tasks. We show that our modified architecture runs asymptotically faster than Transformers in sequence length and performs better than RNN's on a simple memory-based task. We evaluate our modified architecture on a set of partially-observable environments and find that, in practice, our model outperforms RNN's while also running over five times faster. Then, by leveraging the model’s ability to handle long-range sequences, we achieve strong performance on a challenging meta-learning task in which the agent is given a randomly-sampled continuous control environment, combined with a randomly-sampled linear projection of the environment's observations and actions. Furthermore, we show the resulting model can adapt to out-of-distribution held-out tasks. Overall, the results presented in this paper show that structured state space models are fast and performant for in-context reinforcement learning tasks. We provide code at https://github.com/luchris429/s5rl.f1:T674,Latent image representations arising from vision-language models have proved immensely useful for a variety of downstream tasks. However, their utility is limited by their entanglement with respect to different visual attributes. For instance, recent work has shown that CLIP image representations are often biased toward specific visual properties (such as objects or actions) in an unpredictable manner. In this paper, we propose to separate representations of the different visual modalities in CLIP’s joint vision-language space by leveraging the association between parts of speech and specific visual modes of variation (e.g. nouns relate to objects, adjectives describe appearance). This is achieved by formulating an appropriate component analysis model that learns subspaces capturing variability corresponding to a specific part of speech, while jointly minimising variability to the rest. Such a subspace yields disentangled representations of the different visual properties of an image or text in closed form while respecting the underlying geometry of the manifold on which the representations lie. What’s more, we show the proposed model additionally facilitates learning subspaces corresponding to specific visual appearances (e.g. artists’ painting styles), which enables the selective removal of entire visual themes from CLIP-based text-to-image synthesis. We validate the model both qualitatively, by visualising the subspace projections with a text-to-image model and by preventing the imitation of artists’ styles, and quantitatively, through class invariance metrics and improvements to baseline zero-shot classification.f2:T528,Solving transport problems, i.e. finding a map transporting one given distribution to another, has numerous applications in machine learning. Novel mass transport methods motivated by generative modeling have recently been proposed, e.g. Denoising Diffusion Models (DDMs) and Flow Matching Models (FMMs) implement such a transport through a Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE) or an Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE). However, while it is desirable in many applications to approximate the deterministic dynamic Optimal Transport (OT) map which admits attractive properties, DDMs and FMMs are not guaranteed to provide transports close to the OT map. In contrast, Schrödinger bridges (SBs) compute stochastic dynamic mappings which recover entropy-regularized versions of OT. Unfortunately, existing numerical methods approximating SBs either scale poorly with dimension or accumulate errors across iterations. In this work, we introduce Iterative Markovian Fitting (IMF), a new methodology for solving SB problems, and Diffusion Schrödinger Bridge Matching (DSBM), a novel numerical algorithm for computing IMF iterates. DSBM significantly improves over previous SB numerics and recovers as special/limiting cases various recent transport methods. We demonstrate the performance of DSBM on a variety of problems.f3:T4ae,We aim to investigate whether end-to-end learning of visual reasoning can be achieved with general-purpose neural networks, with the help of visual pretraining. A positive result would refute the common belief that explicit visual abstraction (e.g. object detection) is essential for compositional generalization on visual reasoning, and confirm the feasibility of a neural network ''generalist'' to solve visual recognition and reasoning tasks. We propose a simple and general self-supervised framework which ''compresses'' each video frame into a small set of tokens with a transformer network, and reconstructs the remaining frames based on the compressed temporal context. To minimize the reconstruction loss, the network must learn a compact representation for each image, as well as capture temporal dynamics and object permanence from temporal context. We perform evaluation on two visual reasoning benchmarks, CATER and ACRE. We observe that pretraining is essential to achieve compositional generalization for end-to-end visual reasoning. Our proposed framework outperforms traditional supervised pretraining, including image classification and explicit object detection, by large margins.f4:T58f,Despite the proliferation of generative models, achieving fast sampling during inference without compromising sample diversity and quality remains challenging. Existing models such as Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM) deliver high-quality, diverse samples but are slowed by an inherently high number of iterative steps. The Denoising Diffusion Generative Adversarial Networks (DDGAN) attempted to circumvent this limitation by integrating a GAN model for larger jumps in the diffusion process. However, DDGAN encountered scalability limitations when applied to large datasets. To address these limitations, we introduce a novel approach that tackles the problem by matching implicit and explicit factors. More specifically, our approach involves utilizing an implicit model to match the marginal distributions of noisy data and the explicit conditional distribution of the forward diffusion. This combination allows us to effectively match the joint denoising distributions. Unlike DDPM but similar to DDGAN, we do not enforce a parametric distribution for the reverse step, enabling us to take large steps during inference. Similar to the DDPM but unlike DDGAN, we take advantage of the exact form of the diffusion process. We demonstrate that our proposed method obtains comparable generative performance to diffusion-based models and vastly superior results to models with a small number of sampling steps.f5:T47f,Advancements in prompt tuning of vision-language models have underscored their potential in enhancing open-world visual concept comprehension. However, prior works only primarily focus on single-mode (only one prompt for each modality) and holistic level (image or sentence) semantic alignment, which fails to capture the sample diversity, leading to sub-optimal prompt discovery. To address the limitation, we propose a multi-mode token-level tuning framework that leverages the optimal transportation to learn and align a set of prompt tokens across modalities. Specifically, we rely on two essential factors: 1) multi-mode prompts discovery, which guarantees diverse semantic representations, and 2) token-level alignment, which helps explore fine-grained similarity. Consequently, the similarity can be calculated as a hierarchical transportation problem between the modality-specific sets. Extensive experiments on popular image recognition benchmarks show the superior generalization and few-shot abilities of our approach. The qualitative analysis demonstrates that the learned prompt tokens have the ability to capture diverse visual concepts.f6:T544,Driven by the progress of large-scale pre-training, parameter-efficient transfer learning has gained immense popularity across different subfields of Artificial Intelligence. The core is to adapt the model to downstream tasks with only a small set of parameters. Recently, researchers have leveraged such proven techniques in multimodal tasks and achieve promising results. However, two critical issues remain unresolved: how to further reduce the complexity with lightweight design and how to boost alignment between modalities under extremely low parameters. In this paper, we propose A gracefUl pRompt framewOrk for cRoss-modal trAnsfer (AURORA) to overcome these challenges. Considering the redundancy in existing architectures, we first utilize the mode approximation to generate 0.1M trainable parameters to implement the multimodal parameter-efficient tuning, which explores the low intrinsic dimension with only 0.04% parameters of the pre-trained model. Then, for better modality alignment, we propose the Informative Context Enhancement and Gated Query Transformation module under extremely few parameters scenes. A thorough evaluation on six cross-modal benchmarks shows that it not only outperforms the state-of-the-art but even outperforms the full fine-tuning approach. Our code is available at: https://github.com/WillDreamer/Aurora.f7:T4a0,Training large models from scratch usually costs a substantial amount of resources. Towards this problem, recent studies such as bert2BERT and LiGO have reused small pretrained models to initialize a large model (termed the ``target model''), leading to a considerable acceleration in training. Despite the successes of these previous studies, they  grew pretrained models by mapping partial weights only, ignoring potential correlations across the entire model. As we show in this paper, there are inter- and intra-interactions among the weights of both the pretrained and the target models. As a result, the partial mapping may not capture the complete information and lead to inadequate growth. In this paper, we propose a method that linearly correlates each weight of the target model to all the weights of the pretrained model to further enhance acceleration ability. We utilize multi-linear operators to reduce computational and spacial complexity, enabling acceptable resource requirements. Experiments demonstrate that our method can save 76\% computational costs on DeiT-base transferred from DeiT-small, which outperforms bert2BERT by +12\% and LiGO by +21\%, respectively.f8:T59f,Pre-trained multimodal foundation models have demonstrated remarkable generalizability but pose challenges for deployment due to their large sizes. One effective approach to reducing their sizes is layerwise distillation, wherein small student models are trained to match the hidden representations of large teacher models at each layer. Motivated by our observation that certain architecture components, referred to as modules, contribute more significantly to the student's performance than others, we propose to track the contributions of individual modules by recording the loss decrement after distillation each module and choose the module with a greater contribution to distill more frequently. Such an approach can be naturally formulated as a multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem, where modules and loss decrements are considered as arms and rewards, respectively. We then develop a modified-Thompson sampling algorithm named OPTIMA to address the nonstationarity of module contributions resulting from model updating. Specifically, we leverage the observed contributions in recent history to estimate the changing contribution of each module and select modules based on these estimations to maximize the cumulative contribution. We evaluate the effectiveness of OPTIMA through distillation experiments on various multimodal understanding and image captioning tasks, using the CoCa-Large model \citep{yu2022coca} as the teacher model.f9:T414,Experimental results have shown that curriculum learning, i.e., presenting simpler examples before more complex ones, can improve the efficiency of learning. Some recent theoretical results also showed that changing the sampling distribution can help neural networks learn parities, with formal results only for large learning rates and one-step arguments. Here we show a separation result in the number of training steps with standard (bounded) learning rates on a common sample distribution: if the data distribution is a mixture of sparse and dense inputs, there exists a regime in which a 2-layer ReLU neural network trained by a  curriculum noisy-GD (or SGD) algorithm that uses sparse examples first, can learn parities of sufficiently large degree, while any fully connected neural network of possibly larger width or depth trained by noisy-GD on the unordered samples cannot learn without additional steps. We also provide experimental results supporting the qualitative separation beyond the specific regime of the theoretical results.fa:T750,The analogy between Gaussian processes (GPs) and deep artificial neural networks (ANNs) has received a lot of interest, and has shown promise to unbox the blackbox of deep ANNs. Existing theoretical works put strict assumptions on the ANN (e.g. requiring all intermediate layers to be wide, or using specific activation functions). Accommodating those theoretical assumptions is hard in recent deep architectures, and those theoretical conditions need refinement as new deep architectures emerge. In this paper we derive an evidence lower-bound that encourages the GP's posterior to match the ANN's output without any requirement on the ANN. Using our method we find out that on 5 datasets, only a subset of those theoretical assumptions are sufficient. Indeed, in our experiments we used  a normal ResNet-18 or feed-forward backbone with a single wide layer in the end. One limitation of training GPs is the lack of scalability with respect to the number of inducing points. We use novel computational techniques that allow us to train GPs with hundreds of thousands of inducing points and with GPU acceleration. As shown in our experiments, doing so has been essential to get a close match between the GPs and the ANNs on 5 datasets. We implement our method as a publicly available tool called GPEX: https://github.com/amirakbarnejad/gpex. On 5 datasets (4 image datasets, and 1 biological dataset) and ANNs with 2 types of functionality (classifier or attention-mechanism) we were able to find GPs whose outputs closely match those of the corresponding ANNs. After matching the GPs to the ANNs, we used the GPs' kernel functions to explain the ANNs' decisions. We provide more than 200 explanations (around 30 in the paper and the rest in the supplementary) which are highly interpretable by humans and show the ability of the obtained GPs to unbox the ANNs' decisions.fb:T5b3,Few-shot learning is valuable in many real-world applications, but learning a generalizable model without overfitting to the few labeled datapoints is challenging.
In this work, we focus on Few-shot Learning with Auxiliary Data (FLAD), a training paradigm that assumes access to auxiliary data during few-shot learning in hopes of improving generalization.
Previous works have proposed automated methods for mixing auxiliary and target data, but these methods typically scale linearly (or worse) with the number of auxiliary datasets, limiting their practicality.
In this work we relate FLAD to the explore-exploit dilemma that is central to the multi-armed bandit setting and derive algorithms whose computational complexity is independent of the number of auxiliary datasets, allowing us to scale to 100x more auxiliary datasets than prior methods.
We propose two algorithms -- EXP3-FLAD and UCB1-FLAD -- and compare them with prior FLAD methods that either explore or exploit, finding that the combination of exploration and exploitation is crucial.
Through extensive experimentation we find that our methods outperform all pre-existing FLAD methods by 4% and lead to the first 3 billion parameter language models that outperform the 175 billion parameter GPT-3.
Overall, our work suggests that the discovery of better, more efficient mixing strategies for FLAD may provide a viable path towards substantially improving generalization in few-shot learning.fc:T5ee,Since their initial introduction, score-based diffusion models (SDMs) have been successfully applied to solve a variety of linear inverse problems in finite-dimensional vector spaces due to their ability to efficiently approximate the posterior distribution. However, using SDMs for inverse problems in infinite-dimensional function spaces has only been addressed recently, primarily through methods that learn the unconditional score. While this approach is advantageous for some inverse problems, it is mostly heuristic and involves numerous computationally costly forward operator evaluations during posterior sampling. To address these limitations, we propose a theoretically grounded method for sampling from the posterior of infinite-dimensional Bayesian linear inverse problems based on amortized conditional SDMs. In particular, we prove that one of the most successful approaches for estimating the conditional score in finite dimensions - the conditional denoising estimator - can also be applied in infinite dimensions. A significant part of our analysis is dedicated to demonstrating that extending infinite-dimensional SDMs to the conditional setting requires careful consideration, as the conditional score typically blows up for small times, contrarily to the unconditional score. We conclude by presenting stylized and large-scale numerical examples that validate our approach, offer additional insights, and demonstrate that our method enables large-scale, discretization-invariant Bayesian inference.fd:T63c,We introduce MLFMF, a collection of data sets for benchmarking recommendation systems used to support formalization of mathematics with proof assistants. These systems help humans identify which previous entries (theorems, constructions, datatypes, and postulates) are relevant in proving a new theorem or carrying out a new construction. Each data set is derived from a library of formalized mathematics written in proof assistants Agda or Lean. The collection includes the largest Lean 4 library Mathlib, and some of the largest Agda libraries: the standard library, the library of univalent mathematics Agda-unimath, and the TypeTopology library. Each data set represents the corresponding library in two ways: as a heterogeneous network, and as a list of s-expressions representing the syntax trees of all the entries in the library. The network contains the (modular) structure of the library and the references between entries, while the s-expressions give complete and easily parsed information about every entry.
We report baseline results using standard graph and word embeddings, tree ensembles, and instance-based learning algorithms. The MLFMF data sets provide solid benchmarking support for further investigation of the numerous machine learning approaches to formalized mathematics. The methodology used to extract the networks and the s-expressions readily applies to other libraries, and is applicable to other proof assistants. With more than $250\,000$ entries in total, this is currently the largest collection of formalized mathematical knowledge in machine learnable format.fe:T739,In supervised learning, the question of data quality and curation has been sidelined in recent years in favor of increasingly more powerful and expressive models that can ingest internet-scale data. However, in offline learning for robotics, we simply lack internet scale data, and so high quality datasets are a necessity. This is especially true in imitation learning (IL), a sample efficient paradigm for robot learning using expert demonstrations. Policies learned through IL suffer from state distribution shift at test time due to compounding errors in action prediction, which leads to unseen states that the policy cannot recover from.
Instead of designing new algorithms to address distribution shift, an alternative perspective is to develop new ways of assessing and curating datasets. There is growing evidence that the same IL algorithms can have substantially different performance across different datasets. 
This calls for a formalism for defining metrics of "data quality" that can further be leveraged for data curation.
In this work, we take the first step toward formalizing data quality for imitation learning through the lens of distribution shift: a high quality dataset encourages the policy to stay in distribution at test time. We propose two fundamental properties that are necessary for a high quality datasets: 
i) action divergence: the mismatch between the expert and learned policy at certain states; and ii) transition diversity: the noise present in the system for a given state and action. We investigate the combined effect of these two key properties in imitation learning theoretically, and we empirically analyze models trained on a variety of different data sources. We show that state diversity is not always beneficial, and we demonstrate how action divergence and transition diversity interact in practice.ff:T6b0,Large language models (LLMs) exhibit in-context learning abilities which enable the same model to perform several tasks without any task-specific training. In contrast, traditional adaptation approaches, such as fine-tuning, modify the underlying models for each specific task. In-context learning, however, consistently underperforms task-specific tuning approaches even when presented with the same examples. While most existing approaches (e.g., prompt engineering) focus on the LLM's learned representations to patch this performance gap, our experiments actually reveal that LLM representations contain sufficient information to make good predictions. As such, we focus on the LLM's reasoning abilities and demonstrate that this performance gap exists due to their inability to perform simple probabilistic reasoning tasks. This raises an intriguing question: Are LLMs actually capable of learning how to reason in a task-agnostic manner? We answer this in the affirmative and, as a proof of concept, propose TART which generically improves an LLM's reasoning abilities using a synthetically trained reasoning module. TART trains this Transformer-based reasoning module in a task-agnostic manner using only synthetic logistic regression tasks and composes it with an arbitrary real-world pre-trained model without any additional training. With a single inference module, TART improves performance across different model families (GPT-Neo, Pythia, Bloom), model sizes (100M - 6B), tasks (14 NLP classification tasks), and even across different modalities (audio and vision). On the RAFT Benchmark, TART improves GPT-Neo (125M)'s performance such that it outperforms Bloom (176B), and is within $4$% of GPT-3.100:T47f,Evaluating the performance of machine learning models on diverse and underrepresented subgroups is essential for ensuring fairness and reliability in real-world applications. However, accurately assessing model performance becomes challenging due to two main issues: (1) a scarcity of test data, especially for small subgroups, and (2) possible distributional shifts in the model's deployment setting, which may not align with the available test data.  In this work, we introduce 3S Testing, a deep generative modeling framework to facilitate model evaluation by generating synthetic test sets for small subgroups and simulating distributional shifts. Our experiments demonstrate that 3S-Testing outperforms traditional baselines---including real test data alone---in estimating model performance on minority subgroups and under plausible distributional shifts. In addition, 3S offers intervals around its performance estimates, exhibiting superior coverage of the ground truth compared to existing approaches.  Overall, these results raise the question of whether we need a paradigm shift away from limited real test data towards synthetic test data.101:T4ae,Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) demonstrate remarkable capabilities in learning complex hierarchical data representations, but the nature of these representations remains largely unknown. Existing global explainability methods, such as Network Dissection, face limitations such as reliance on segmentation masks, lack of statistical significance testing, and high computational demands. We propose Inverse Recognition (INVERT), a scalable approach for connecting learned representations with human-understandable concepts by leveraging their capacity to discriminate between these concepts. In contrast to prior work, INVERT is capable of handling diverse types of neurons, exhibits less computational complexity, and does not rely on the availability of segmentation masks. Moreover, INVERT provides an interpretable metric assessing the alignment between the representation and its corresponding explanation and delivering a measure of statistical significance. We demonstrate the applicability of INVERT in various scenarios, including the identification of representations affected by spurious correlations, and the interpretation of the hierarchical structure of decision-making within the models.102:T541,The representations of neural networks are often compared to those of biological systems by performing regression between the neural network responses and those measured from biological systems. Many different state-of-the-art deep neural networks yield similar neural predictions, but it remains unclear how to differentiate among models that perform equally well at predicting neural responses. To gain insight into this, we use a recent theoretical framework that relates the generalization error from regression to the spectral properties of the model and the target. We apply this theory to the case of regression between model activations and neural responses and decompose the neural prediction error in terms of the model eigenspectra, alignment of model eigenvectors and neural responses, and the training set size. Using this decomposition, we introduce geometrical measures to interpret the neural prediction error. We test a large number of deep neural networks that predict visual cortical activity and show that there are multiple types of geometries that result in low neural prediction error as measured via regression. The work demonstrates that carefully decomposing representational metrics can provide interpretability of how models are capturing neural activity and points the way towards improved models of neural activity.103:T4f4,The diffusion model has shown remarkable success in computer vision, but it remains unclear whether the ODE-based probability flow or the SDE-based diffusion model is more superior and under what circumstances. Comparing the two is challenging due to dependencies on data distributions, score training, and other numerical issues. In this paper, we study the problem mathematically for two limiting scenarios: the zero diffusion (ODE) case and the large diffusion case. We first introduce a pulse-shape error to perturb the score function and analyze error accumulation of sampling quality, followed by a thorough analysis for generalization to arbitrary error. Our findings indicate that when the perturbation occurs at the end of the generative process, the ODE model outperforms the SDE model with a large diffusion coefficient. However, when the perturbation occurs earlier, the SDE model outperforms the ODE model, and we demonstrate that the error of sample generation due to such a pulse-shape perturbation is exponentially suppressed as the diffusion term's magnitude increases to infinity. Numerical validation of this phenomenon is provided using Gaussian, Gaussian mixture, and Swiss roll distribution, as well as realistic datasets like MNIST and CIFAR-10.104:T50c,Energy-based models (EBMs) are generative models inspired by statistical physics with a wide range of applications in unsupervised learning.  Their performance is well measured by the cross-entropy (CE) of the model distribution relative to the data distribution. Using the CE as the objective for training is however challenging because the computation of its gradient with respect to the model parameters requires sampling the model distribution. Here we show how results for nonequilibrium thermodynamics based on Jarzynski equality together with tools from sequential Monte-Carlo sampling can be used to perform this computation efficiently and avoid the uncontrolled approximations made using the standard contrastive divergence algorithm.  Specifically, we introduce a modification of the unadjusted Langevin algorithm (ULA) in which each walker acquires a  weight that enables the estimation of the gradient of the cross-entropy at any step during GD, thereby bypassing sampling biases induced by slow mixing of ULA. We illustrate these results with numerical experiments on Gaussian mixture distributions as well as the MNIST and CIFAR-10 datasets. We show that the proposed approach outperforms  methods based on the contrastive divergence algorithm in all the considered situations.105:T569,Large language models are now tuned to align with the goals of their creators, namely to be "helpful and harmless." These models should respond helpfully to user questions, but refuse to answer requests that could cause harm. However, adversarial users can construct inputs which circumvent attempts at alignment. In this work, we study adversarial alignment, and ask to what extent these models remain aligned when interacting with an adversarial user who constructs worst-case inputs (adversarial examples). These inputs are designed to cause the model to emit harmful content that would otherwise be prohibited.

We show that existing NLP-based optimization attacks are insufficiently powerful to reliably attack aligned text models: even when current NLP-based attacks fail, we can find adversarial inputs with brute force. As a result, the failure of current attacks should not be seen as proof that aligned text models remain aligned under adversarial inputs. However the recent trend in large-scale ML models is multimodal models that allow users to provide images that influence the text that is generated. We show these models can be easily attacked, i.e., induced to perform arbitrary un-aligned behavior through adversarial perturbation of the input image. We conjecture that improved NLP attacks may demonstrate this same level of adversarial control over text-only models.106:T4bd,In this paper, we establish a connection between the parameterization of flow-based and energy-based generative models, and present a new flow-based modeling approach called energy-based normalizing flow (EBFlow). We demonstrate that by optimizing EBFlow with score-matching objectives, the computation of Jacobian determinants for linear transformations can be entirely bypassed. This feature enables the use of arbitrary linear layers in the construction of flow-based models without increasing the computational time complexity of each training iteration from $\mathcal{O}(D^2L)$ to $\mathcal{O}(D^3L)$ for an $L$-layered model that accepts $D$-dimensional inputs. This makes the training of EBFlow more efficient than the commonly-adopted maximum likelihood training method. In addition to the reduction in runtime, we enhance the training stability and empirical performance of EBFlow through a number of techniques developed based on our analysis of the score-matching methods. The experimental results demonstrate that our approach achieves a significant speedup compared to maximum likelihood estimation while outperforming prior methods with a noticeable margin in terms of negative log-likelihood (NLL).107:T581,Recent research has developed several Monte Carlo methods for estimating the normalization constant (partition function) based on the idea of annealing. This means sampling successively from a path of distributions which interpolate between a tractable "proposal" distribution and the unnormalized "target" distribution. Prominent estimators in this family include annealed importance sampling and annealed noise-contrastive estimation (NCE). Such methods hinge on a number of design choices: which estimator to use, which path of distributions to use and whether to use a path at all; so far, there is no definitive theory on which choices are efficient. Here, we evaluate each design choice by the asymptotic estimation error it produces. First, we show that using NCE is more efficient than the importance sampling estimator, but in the limit of infinitesimal path steps, the difference vanishes. Second, we find that using the geometric path brings down the estimation error from an exponential to a polynomial function of the parameter distance between the target and proposal distributions. Third, we find that the arithmetic path, while rarely used, can offer optimality properties over the universally-used geometric path. In fact, in a particular limit, the optimal path is arithmetic. Based on this theory, we finally propose a two-step estimator to approximate the optimal path in an efficient way.108:T524,Given the recent impressive accomplishments of language models (LMs) for code generation, we explore the use of LMs as general adaptive mutation and crossover operators for an evolutionary neural architecture search (NAS) algorithm.
While NAS still proves too difficult a task for LMs to succeed at solely through prompting, we find that the combination of evolutionary prompt engineering with soft prompt-tuning, a method we term EvoPrompting, consistently finds diverse and high performing models. We first demonstrate that EvoPrompting is effective on the computationally efficient MNIST-1D dataset, where EvoPrompting produces convolutional architecture variants that outperform both those designed by human experts and naive few-shot prompting in terms of accuracy and model size. We then apply our method to searching for graph neural networks on the CLRS Algorithmic Reasoning Benchmark, where EvoPrompting is able to design *novel* architectures that outperform current state-of-the-art models on 21 out of 30 algorithmic reasoning tasks while maintaining similar model size. EvoPrompting is successful at designing accurate and efficient neural network architectures across a variety of machine learning tasks, while also being general enough for easy adaptation to other tasks beyond neural network design.109:T562,Visual reasoning requires multimodal perception and commonsense cognition of the world. Recently, multiple vision-language models (VLMs) have been proposed with excellent commonsense reasoning ability in various domains. However, how to harness the collective power of these complementary VLMs is rarely explored. Existing methods like ensemble still struggle to aggregate these models with the desired higher-order communications. In this work, we propose Cola, a novel paradigm that coordinates multiple VLMs for visual reasoning. Our key insight is that a large language model (LLM) can efficiently coordinate multiple VLMs by facilitating natural language communication that leverages their distinct and complementary capabilities. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our instruction tuning variant, Cola-FT, achieves state-of-the-art performance on visual question answering (VQA), outside knowledge VQA, visual entailment, and visual spatial reasoning tasks. Moreover, we show that our in-context learning variant, Cola-Zero, exhibits competitive performance in zero and few-shot settings, without finetuning. Through systematic ablation studies and visualizations, we validate that a coordinator LLM indeed comprehends the instruction prompts as well as the separate functionalities of VLMs; it then coordinates them to enable impressive visual reasoning capabilities.10a:T5dc,Current auxiliary learning methods mainly adopt the methodology of reweighing losses for the manually collected auxiliary data and tasks. However, these methods heavily rely on domain knowledge during data collection, which may be hardly available in reality. Therefore, current methods will become less effective and even do harm to the primary task when unhelpful auxiliary data and tasks are employed. To tackle the problem, we propose a joint data-task generation framework for auxiliary learning (DTG-AuxL), which can bring benefits to the primary task by generating the new auxiliary data and task in a joint manner. The proposed DTG-AuxL framework contains a joint generator and a bi-level optimization strategy. Specifically, the joint generator contains a feature generator and a label generator, which are designed to be applicable  and expressive for various auxiliary learning scenarios. The bi-level optimization strategy optimizes the joint generator and the task learning model, where the joint generator is effectively optimized in the upper level via the implicit gradient from the primary loss and the explicit gradient of our proposed instance regularization, while the task learning model is optimized in the lower level by the generated data and task. Extensive experiments show that our proposed DTG-AuxL framework consistently outperforms existing methods in various auxiliary learning scenarios, particularly when the manually collected auxiliary data and tasks are unhelpful.10b:T6ca,Recent discoveries have revealed that deep neural networks might behave in a biased manner in many real-world scenarios. For instance, deep networks trained on a large-scale face recognition dataset CelebA tend to predict blonde hair for females and black hair for males. Such biases not only jeopardize the robustness of models but also perpetuate and amplify social biases, which is especially concerning for automated decision-making processes in healthcare, recruitment, etc., as they could exacerbate unfair economic and social inequalities among different groups. Existing debiasing methods suffer from high costs in bias labeling or model re-training, while also exhibiting a deficiency in terms of elucidating the origins of biases within the model. To this respect, we propose a fast model debiasing method (FMD) which offers an efficient approach to identify, evaluate and remove biases inherent in trained models. The FMD identifies biased attributes through an explicit counterfactual concept and quantifies the influence of data samples with influence functions. Moreover, we design a machine unlearning-based strategy to efficiently and effectively remove the bias in a trained model with a small counterfactual dataset. 
Experiments on the Colored MNIST, CelebA, and Adult Income datasets demonstrate that our method achieves superior or competing classification accuracies compared with state-of-the-art retraining-based methods while attaining significantly fewer biases and requiring much less debiasing cost. Notably, our method requires only a small external dataset and updating a minimal amount of model parameters, without the requirement of access to training data that may be too large or unavailable in practice.10c:T4f1,The contrastive vision-language pre-training, known as CLIP, demonstrates remarkable potential in perceiving open-world visual concepts, enabling effective zero-shot image recognition.
  Nevertheless, few-shot learning methods based on CLIP typically require offline fine-tuning of the parameters on few-shot samples, resulting in longer inference time and the risk of overfitting in certain domains.
  To tackle these challenges, we propose the Meta-Adapter, a lightweight residual-style adapter, to refine the CLIP features guided by the few-shot samples in an online manner.
  With a few training samples, our method can enable effective few-shot learning capabilities and generalize to unseen data or tasks without additional fine-tuning, achieving competitive performance and high efficiency.
  Without bells and whistles, our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art online few-shot learning method by an average of 3.6\% on eight image classification datasets with higher inference speed.
  Furthermore, our model is simple and flexible, serving as a plug-and-play module directly applicable to downstream tasks.
  Without further fine-tuning, Meta-Adapter obtains notable performance improvements in open-vocabulary object detection and segmentation tasks.10d:T75c,Binary Balanced Tree RvNNs (BBT-RvNNs) enforce sequence composition according to a preset balanced binary tree structure. Thus, their non-linear recursion depth is just $\log_2 n$ ($n$ being the sequence length). Such logarithmic scaling makes BBT-RvNNs efficient and scalable on long sequence tasks such as Long Range Arena (LRA). However, such computational efficiency comes at a cost because BBT-RvNNs cannot solve simple arithmetic tasks like ListOps. On the flip side, RvNNs (e.g., Beam Tree RvNN) that do succeed on ListOps (and other structure-sensitive tasks like formal logical inference) are generally several times more expensive than even RNNs. In this paper, we introduce a novel framework -- Recursion in Recursion (RIR) to strike a balance between the two sides - getting some of the benefits from both worlds. In RIR, we use a form of two-level nested recursion - where the outer recursion is a $k$-ary balanced tree model with another recursive model (inner recursion) implementing its cell function. For the inner recursion, we choose Beam Tree RvNNs (BT-RvNN). To adjust BT-RvNNs within RIR we also propose a novel strategy of beam alignment. Overall, this entails that the total recursive depth in RIR is upper-bounded by $k \log_k n$. Our best RIR-based model is the first model that demonstrates high ($\geq 90\%$) length-generalization performance on ListOps while at the same time being scalable enough to be trainable on long sequence inputs from LRA. Moreover, in terms of accuracy in the LRA language tasks, it performs competitively with Structured State Space Models (SSMs) without any special initialization - outperforming Transformers by a large margin. On the other hand, while SSMs can marginally outperform RIR on LRA, they (SSMs) fail to length-generalize on ListOps. Our code is available at: \url{https://github.com/JRC1995/BeamRecursionFamily/}.10e:T6b1,Distributed representations provide a vector space that captures meaningful relationships between data instances. The distributed nature of these representations, however, entangles together multiple attributes or concepts of data instances (e.g., the topic or sentiment of a text, characteristics of the author (age, gender, etc), etc).  Recent work has proposed the task of concept erasure, in which rather than making a concept predictable, the goal is to remove an attribute from distributed representations while retaining other information from the original representation space as much as possible.  In this paper, we propose a new distance metric learning-based objective, the Kernelized Rate-Distortion Maximizer (KRaM), for performing concept erasure. KRaM fits a transformation of representations to match a specified distance measure (defined by a labeled concept to erase) using a modified rate-distortion function. Specifically, KRaM's objective function aims to make instances with similar concept labels dissimilar in the learned representation space while retaining other information.  We find that optimizing KRaM effectively erases various types of concepts—categorical, continuous, and vector-valued variables—from data representations across diverse domains. We also provide a theoretical analysis of several properties of KRaM's objective. To assess the quality of the learned representations, we propose an alignment score to evaluate their similarity with the original representation space. Additionally, we conduct experiments to showcase KRaM's efficacy in various settings, from erasing binary gender variables in word embeddings to vector-valued variables in GPT-3 representations.10f:T4cd,The excellent generative capabilities of text-to-image diffusion models suggest they learn informative representations of image-text data.
However, what knowledge their representations capture is not fully understood, and they have not been thoroughly explored on downstream tasks.
We investigate diffusion models by proposing a method for evaluating them as zero-shot classifiers.
The key idea is using a diffusion model's ability to denoise a noised image given a text description of a label as a proxy for that label's likelihood.
We apply our method to Stable Diffusion and Imagen, using it to probe fine-grained aspects of the models' knowledge and comparing them with CLIP's zero-shot abilities. 
They perform competitively with CLIP on a wide range of zero-shot image classification datasets. 
Additionally, they achieve state-of-the-art results on shape/texture bias tests and can successfully perform attribute binding while CLIP cannot.
Although generative pre-training is prevalent in NLP, visual foundation models often use other methods such as contrastive learning. 
Based on our findings, we argue that generative pre-training should be explored as a compelling alternative for vision and vision-language problems.110:T490,Interpretability methods are valuable only if their explanations faithfully describe the explained model. In this work, we consider neural networks whose predictions are invariant under a specific symmetry group. This includes popular architectures, ranging from convolutional to graph neural networks. Any explanation that faithfully explains this type of model needs to be in agreement with this invariance property. We formalize this intuition through the notion of explanation invariance and equivariance by leveraging the formalism from geometric deep learning. Through this rigorous formalism, we derive (1) two metrics to measure the robustness of any interpretability method with respect to the model symmetry group; (2) theoretical robustness guarantees for some popular interpretability methods and (3) a systematic approach to increase the invariance of any interpretability method with respect to a symmetry group. By empirically measuring our metrics for explanations of models associated with various modalities and symmetry groups, we derive a set of 5 guidelines to allow users and developers of interpretability methods to produce robust explanations.111:T64c,Parallelization techniques have become ubiquitous for accelerating inference and training of deep neural networks. Despite this, several operations are still performed in a sequential manner. For instance, the forward and backward passes are executed layer-by-layer, and the output of diffusion models is produced by applying a sequence of denoising steps. This sequential approach results in a computational cost proportional to the number of steps involved, presenting a potential bottleneck as the number of steps increases. In this work, we introduce DeepPCR, a novel algorithm which parallelizes typically sequential operations in order to speed up inference and training of neural networks. DeepPCR is based on interpreting a sequence of $L$ steps as the solution of a specific system of equations, which we recover using the Parallel Cyclic Reduction algorithm. This reduces the complexity of computing the sequential operations from $\mathcal{O}(L)$ to $\mathcal{O}(\log_2L)$, thus yielding a speedup for large $L$. To verify the theoretical lower complexity of the algorithm, and to identify regimes for speedup, we test the effectiveness of DeepPCR in parallelizing the forward and backward pass in multi-layer perceptrons, and reach speedups of up to $30\times$ for the forward and $200\times$ for the backward pass. We additionally showcase the flexibility of DeepPCR by parallelizing training of ResNets with as many as 1024 layers, and generation in diffusion models, enabling up to $7\times$ faster training and $11\times$ faster generation, respectively, when compared to the sequential approach.112:T48f,Imperfect score-matching leads to a shift between the training and the sampling distribution of diffusion models. Due to the recursive nature of the generation process, errors in previous steps yield sampling iterates that drift away from the training distribution. However, the standard training objective via Denoising Score Matching (DSM) is only designed to optimize over non-drifted data. To train on drifted data, we propose to enforce a \emph{Consistency} property (CP) which states that predictions of the model on its own
generated data are consistent across time. Theoretically, we show that the differential equation that describes CP together with the one that describes a conservative vector field, have a unique solution given some initial condition. Consequently, if the score is learned well on non-drifted points via DSM (enforcing the true initial condition) then enforcing CP on drifted points propagates true score values. Empirically, we show that enforcing CP improves the generation quality for conditional and unconditional generation on CIFAR-10, and in AFHQ and FFHQ. 
We open-source our code and models: https://github.com/giannisdaras/cdm.113:T50d,We present the first diffusion-based framework that can learn an unknown distribution using only highly-corrupted samples. This problem arises in scientific applications where access to uncorrupted samples is impossible or expensive to acquire. Another benefit of our approach is the ability to train generative models that are less likely to memorize any individual training sample, since they never observe clean training data. 

Our main idea is to introduce additional measurement distortion during the diffusion process and require the model to predict the original corrupted image from the further corrupted image.  We prove that our method leads to models that learn the conditional expectation of the full uncorrupted image given this additional measurement corruption.  This holds for any corruption process that satisfies some technical conditions (and in particular includes inpainting and compressed sensing).  We train models on standard benchmarks (CelebA, CIFAR-10 and AFHQ) and show that we can learn the distribution even when all the training samples have 90\% of their pixels missing. We also show that we can finetune foundation models on small corrupted datasets (e.g. MRI scans with block corruptions) and learn the clean distribution without memorizing the training set.114:T62c,Existing full text datasets of U.S. public domain newspapers do not recognize the often complex layouts of newspaper scans, and as a result the digitized content scrambles texts from articles, headlines, captions, advertisements, and other layout regions. OCR quality can also be low. This study develops a novel, deep learning pipeline for extracting full article texts from newspaper images and applies it to the nearly 20 million scans in Library of Congress's public domain Chronicling America collection. The pipeline includes layout detection, legibility classification, custom OCR, and association of article texts spanning multiple bounding boxes. To achieve high scalability, it is built with efficient architectures designed for mobile phones. The resulting American Stories dataset provides high quality data that could be used for pre-training a large language model to achieve better understanding of historical English and historical world knowledge. The dataset could also be added to the external database of a retrieval-augmented language model to make historical information - ranging from interpretations of political events to minutiae about the lives of people's ancestors - more widely accessible. Furthermore, structured article texts facilitate using transformer-based methods for popular social science applications like topic classification, detection of reproduced content, and news story clustering.  Finally, American Stories provides a massive silver quality dataset for innovating multimodal layout analysis models and other multimodal applications.115:T59c,We introduce Mind2Web, the first dataset for developing and evaluating generalist agents for the web that can follow language instructions to complete complex tasks on any website. Existing datasets for web agents either use simulated websites or only cover a limited set of websites and tasks, thus not suitable for generalist web agents. With over 2,000 open-ended tasks collected from 137 websites spanning 31 domains and crowdsourced action sequences for the tasks, Mind2Web provides three necessary ingredients for building generalist web agents: 1) diverse domains, websites, and tasks, 2) use of real-world websites instead of simulated and simplified ones, and 3) a broad spectrum of user interaction patterns. Based on Mind2Web, we conduct an initial exploration of using large language models (LLMs) for building generalist web agents. While the raw HTML of real-world websites are often too large to be fed to LLMs, we show that first filtering it with a small LM significantly improves the effectiveness and efficiency of LLMs. Our solution demonstrates a decent level of performance, even on websites or entire domains the model has never seen before, but there is still a substantial room to improve towards truly generalizable agents. We open-source our dataset, model implementation, and trained models (https://osu-nlp-group.github.io/Mind2Web) to facilitate further research on building a generalist agent for the web.116:T617,World models are a fundamental component in model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL). To perform temporally extended and consistent simulations of the future in partially observable environments, world models need to possess long-term memory. However, state-of-the-art MBRL agents, such as Dreamer, predominantly employ recurrent neural networks (RNNs) as their world model backbone, which have limited memory capacity. In this paper, we seek to explore alternative world model backbones for improving long-term memory. In particular, we investigate the effectiveness of Transformers and Structured State Space Sequence (S4) models, motivated by their remarkable ability to capture long-range dependencies in low-dimensional sequences and their complementary strengths. We propose S4WM, the first world model compatible with parallelizable SSMs including S4 and its variants. By incorporating latent variable modeling, S4WM can efficiently generate high-dimensional image sequences through latent imagination. Furthermore, we extensively compare RNN-, Transformer-, and S4-based world models across four sets of environments, which we have tailored to assess crucial memory capabilities of world models, including long-term imagination, context-dependent recall, reward prediction, and memory-based reasoning. Our findings demonstrate that S4WM outperforms Transformer-based world models in terms of long-term memory, while exhibiting greater efficiency during training and imagination. These results pave the way for the development of stronger MBRL agents.117:T708,Code completion models have made significant progress in recent years, yet current popular evaluation datasets, such as HumanEval and MBPP, predominantly focus on code completion tasks within a single file. This over-simplified setting falls short of representing the real-world software development scenario where repositories span multiple files with numerous cross-file dependencies, and accessing and understanding cross-file context is often required to complete the code correctly. 

To fill in this gap, we propose CrossCodeEval, a diverse and multilingual code completion benchmark that necessitates an in-depth cross-file contextual understanding to complete the code accurately. CrossCodeEval is built on a diverse set of real-world, open-sourced, permissively-licensed repositories in four popular programming languages: Python, Java, TypeScript, and C#. To create examples that strictly require cross-file context for accurate completion, we propose a straightforward yet efficient static-analysis-based approach to pinpoint the use of cross-file context within the current file. 

Extensive experiments on state-of-the-art code language models like CodeGen and StarCoder demonstrate that CrossCodeEval is extremely challenging when the relevant cross-file context is absent, and we see clear improvements when adding these context into the prompt. However, despite such improvements,  the pinnacle of performance remains notably unattained even with the highest-performing model,  indicating that CrossCodeEval is also capable of assessing model's capability in leveraging extensive context to make better code completion. Finally, we benchmarked various methods in retrieving cross-file context, and show that CrossCodeEval can also be used to measure the capability of code retrievers.118:T4ee,Large language models of code (Code-LLMs) have recently brought tremendous advances to code completion, a fundamental feature of programming assistance and code intelligence. However, most existing works ignore the possible presence of bugs in the code context for generation, which are inevitable in software development. Therefore, we introduce and study the buggy-code completion problem, inspired by the realistic scenario of real-time code suggestion where the code context contains potential bugs – anti-patterns that can become bugs in the completed program. To systematically study the task, we introduce two datasets: one with synthetic bugs derived from semantics-altering operator changes (buggy-HumanEval) and one with realistic bugs derived from user submissions to coding problems (buggy-FixEval). We find that the presence of potential bugs significantly degrades the generation performance of the high-performing Code-LLMs. For instance, the passing rates of CODEGEN-2B-MONO on test cases of buggy-HumanEval drop more than 50% given a single potential bug in the context. Finally, we investigate several post-hoc methods for mitigating the adverse effect of potential bugs and find that there remains a large gap in post-mitigation performance.119:T5a9,Deep neural networks are notorious for defying theoretical treatment. However, when the number of parameters in each layer tends to infinity, the network function is a Gaussian process (GP) and quantitatively predictive description is possible. Gaussian approximation allows one to formulate criteria for selecting hyperparameters, such as variances of weights and biases, as well as the learning rate. These criteria rely on the notion of criticality defined for deep neural networks. In this work we describe a new practical way to diagnose criticality. We introduce *partial Jacobians* of a network, defined as derivatives of preactivations in layer $l$ with respect to preactivations in layer $l_0\leq l$. We derive recurrence relations for the norms of partial Jacobians and utilize these relations to analyze criticality of deep fully connected neural networks with LayerNorm and/or residual connections. We derive and implement a simple and cheap numerical test that allows one to select optimal initialization for a broad class of deep neural networks; containing fully connected, convolutional and normalization layers. Using these tools we show quantitatively that proper stacking of the LayerNorm (applied to preactivations) and residual connections leads to an architecture that is critical for any initialization. Finally, we apply our methods to analyze ResNet and MLP-Mixer architectures; demonstrating the everywhere-critical regime.11a:T535,Recently, text-to-image models have been thriving. Despite their powerful generative capacity, our research has uncovered a lack of robustness in this generation process. Specifically, the introduction of small perturbations to the text prompts can result in the blending of primary subjects with other categories or their complete disappearance in the generated images. In this paper, we propose **Auto-attack on Text-to-image Models (ATM)**, a gradient-based approach, to effectively and efficiently generate such perturbations. By learning a Gumbel Softmax distribution, we can make the discrete process of word replacement or extension continuous, thus ensuring the differentiability of the perturbation generation. Once the distribution is learned, ATM can sample multiple attack samples simultaneously. These attack samples can prevent the generative model from generating the desired subjects without tampering with the category keywords in the prompt. ATM has achieved a 91.1\% success rate in short-text attacks and an 81.2\% success rate in long-text attacks. Further empirical analysis revealed three attack patterns based on: 1) variability in generation speed, 2) similarity of coarse-grained characteristics, and 3) polysemy of words. The code is available at https://github.com/duchengbin8/Stable_Diffusion_is_Unstable11b:T662,Dataset distillation is a newly emerging task that synthesizes a small-size dataset used in training deep neural networks (DNNs) for reducing data storage and model training costs. The synthetic datasets are expected to capture the essence of the knowledge contained in real-world datasets such that the former yields a similar performance as the latter. Recent advancements in distillation methods have produced notable improvements in generating synthetic datasets. However, current state-of-the-art methods treat the entire synthetic dataset as a unified entity and optimize each synthetic instance equally . This static optimization approach may lead to performance degradation in dataset distillation. 
Specifically, we argue that static optimization can give rise to a coupling issue within the synthetic data, particularly when a larger amount of synthetic data is being optimized. This coupling issue, in turn, leads to the failure of the distilled dataset to extract the high-level features learned by the deep neural network (DNN) in the latter epochs.
In this study, we propose a new dataset distillation strategy called Sequential Subset Matching (SeqMatch), which tackles this problem by adaptively optimizing the synthetic data to encourage sequential acquisition of knowledge during dataset distillation. Our analysis indicates that SeqMatch effectively addresses the coupling issue by sequentially generating the synthetic instances, thereby enhancing its performance significantly. Our proposed SeqMatch outperforms state-of-the-art methods in various datasets, including SVNH, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and Tiny ImageNet.11c:T69e,The translation of brain dynamics into natural language is pivotal for brain-computer interfaces (BCIs), a field that has seen substantial growth in recent years. With the swift advancement of large language models, such as ChatGPT, the need to bridge the gap between the brain and languages becomes increasingly pressing. Current methods, however, require eye-tracking fixations or event markers to segment brain dynamics into word-level features, which can restrict the practical application of these systems. These event markers may not be readily available or could be challenging to acquire during real-time inference, and the sequence of eye fixations may not align with the order of spoken words. To tackle these issues, we introduce a novel framework, DeWave, that integrates discrete encoding sequences into open-vocabulary EEG-to-text translation tasks. DeWave uses a quantized variational encoder to derive discrete codex encoding and align it with pre-trained language models. This discrete codex representation brings forth two advantages: 1) it alleviates the order mismatch between eye fixations and spoken words by introducing text-EEG contrastive alignment training, and 2) it minimizes the interference caused by individual differences in EEG waves through an invariant discrete codex. Our model surpasses the previous baseline (40.1 and 31.7) by 3.06% and 6.34\%, respectively, achieving 41.35 BLEU-1 and 33.71 Rouge-F on the ZuCo Dataset. Furthermore, this work is the first to facilitate the translation of entire EEG signal periods without the need for word-level order markers (e.g., eye fixations), scoring 20.5 BLEU-1 and 29.5 Rouge-1 on the ZuCo Dataset, respectively.11d:T564,Large language models (LLMs) are excellent in-context learners. However, the sensitivity of data contained in prompts raises privacy concerns. Our work first shows that these concerns are valid: we instantiate a simple but highly effective membership inference attack against the data used to prompt LLMs. To address this vulnerability, one could forego prompting and resort to fine-tuning LLMs with known algorithms for private gradient descent. However, this comes at the expense of the practicality and efficiency offered by prompting. Therefore, we propose to privately learn to prompt. We first show that soft prompts can be obtained privately through gradient descent on downstream data. However, this is not the case for discrete prompts. Thus, we orchestrate a noisy vote among an ensemble of LLMs presented with different prompts, i.e., a flock of stochastic parrots. The vote privately transfers the flock's knowledge into a single public prompt. We show that LLMs prompted with our private algorithms closely match the non-private baselines. For example, using GPT3 as the base model, we achieve a downstream accuracy of 92.7% on the sst2 dataset with $(\varepsilon=0.147, \delta=10^{-6})$-differential privacy vs. 95.2% for the non-private baseline. Through our experiments, we also show that our prompt-based approach is easily deployed with existing commercial~APIs.11e:T682,Training recurrent neural networks (RNNs) remains a challenge due to the instability of gradients across long time horizons, which can lead to exploding and vanishing gradients. Recent research has linked these problems to the values of Lyapunov exponents for the forward-dynamics, which describe the growth or shrinkage of infinitesimal perturbations. Here, we propose gradient flossing, a novel approach to tackling gradient instability by pushing Lyapunov exponents of the forward dynamics toward zero during learning. We achieve this by regularizing Lyapunov exponents through backpropagation using differentiable linear algebra. This enables us to "floss" the gradients, stabilizing them and thus improving network training. We show that gradient flossing controls not only the gradient norm but also the condition number of the long-term Jacobian, facilitating multidimensional error feedback propagation. We find that applying gradient flossing before training enhances both the success rate and convergence speed for tasks involving long time horizons.
For challenging tasks, we show that gradient flossing during training can further increase the time horizon that can be bridged by backpropagation through time. Moreover, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on various RNN architectures and tasks of variable temporal complexity. Additionally, we provide a simple implementation of our gradient flossing algorithm that can be used in practice. Our results indicate that gradient flossing via regularizing Lyapunov exponents can significantly enhance the effectiveness of RNN training and mitigate the exploding and vanishing gradients problem.11f:T43d,Generative modeling has recently undergone remarkable advancements, primarily propelled by the transformative implications of Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPMs). The impressive capability of these models, however, often entails significant computational overhead during both training and inference. To tackle this challenge, we present Diff-Pruning, an efficient compression method tailored for learning lightweight diffusion models from pre-existing ones, without the need for extensive re-training. The essence of Diff-Pruning is encapsulated in a Taylor expansion over pruned timesteps, a process that disregards non-contributory diffusion steps and ensembles informative gradients to identify important weights. Our empirical assessment, undertaken across several datasets highlights two primary benefits of our proposed method: 1) Efficiency: it enables approximately a 50\% reduction in FLOPs at a mere 10% to 20% of the original training expenditure; 2) Consistency: the pruned diffusion models inherently preserve generative behavior congruent with their pre-trained models.120:T4ba,Adaptive regularization methods that exploit more than the diagonal entries exhibit state of the art performance for many tasks, but can be prohibitive in terms of memory and running time. We find the spectra of the Kronecker-factored gradient covariance matrix in deep learning (DL) training tasks are concentrated on a small leading eigenspace that changes throughout training, motivating a low-rank sketching approach. We describe a generic method for reducing memory and compute requirements of maintaining a matrix preconditioner using the Frequent Directions (FD) sketch. While previous approaches have explored applying FD for second-order optimization, we present a novel analysis which allows efficient interpolation between resource requirements and the degradation in regret guarantees with rank $k$: in the online convex optimization (OCO) setting over dimension $d$, we match full-matrix $d^2$ memory regret using only $dk$ memory up to additive error in the bottom $d-k$ eigenvalues of the gradient covariance. Further, we show extensions of our work to Shampoo, resulting in a method competitive in quality with Shampoo and Adam, yet requiring only sub-linear memory for tracking second moments.121:T4d1,When solving decision-making tasks, humans typically depend on information from two key sources: (1) Historical policy data, which provides interaction replay from the environment, and (2) Analytical insights in natural language form, exposing the invaluable thought process or strategic considerations. Despite this, the majority of preceding research focuses on only one source: they either use historical replay exclusively to directly learn policy or value functions, or engaged in language model training utilizing mere language corpus. In this paper, we argue that a powerful autonomous agent should cover both sources. Thus, we propose ChessGPT, a GPT model bridging policy learning and language modeling by integrating data from these two sources in Chess games. Specifically, we build a large-scale game and language dataset related to chess. Leveraging the dataset, we showcase two model examples ChessCLIP and ChessGPT, integrating policy learning and language modeling. Finally, we propose a full evaluation framework for evaluating language model's chess ability. Experimental results validate our model and dataset's effectiveness. We open source our code, model, and dataset at https://github.com/waterhorse1/ChessGPT.122:T4ec,Attaining a high degree of user controllability in visual generation often requires intricate, fine-grained inputs like layouts. However, such inputs impose a substantial burden on users when compared to simple text inputs. To address the issue, we study how Large Language Models (LLMs) can serve as visual planners by generating layouts from text conditions, and thus collaborate with visual generative models. We propose LayoutGPT, a method to compose in-context visual demonstrations in style sheet language to enhance the visual planning skills of LLMs. LayoutGPT can generate plausible layouts in multiple domains, ranging from 2D images to 3D indoor scenes. LayoutGPT also shows superior performance in converting challenging language concepts like numerical and spatial relations to layout arrangements for faithful text-to-image generation. When combined with a downstream image generation model, LayoutGPT outperforms text-to-image models/systems by 20-40% and achieves comparable performance as human users in designing visual layouts for numerical and spatial correctness. Lastly, LayoutGPT achieves comparable performance to supervised methods in 3D indoor scene synthesis, demonstrating its effectiveness and potential in multiple visual domains.123:T773,We investigate the mathematical capabilities of two versions of ChatGPT (released 9-January-2023 and 30-January-2023) and of GPT-4 by testing them on publicly available datasets, as well as hand-crafted ones, using a novel evaluation scheme. In contrast to formal mathematics, where large databases of formal proofs are available (e.g., mathlib, the Lean Mathematical Library), current datasets of natural-language mathematics used to benchmark language models either cover only elementary mathematics or are very small. We address this by publicly releasing two new datasets: GHOSTS and miniGHOSTS. These are the first natural-language datasets curated by working researchers in mathematics that (1) aim to cover graduate-level mathematics, (2) provide a holistic overview of the mathematical capabilities of language models, and (3) distinguish multiple dimensions of mathematical reasoning. These datasets test, by using 1636 human expert evaluations, whether ChatGPT and GPT-4 can be helpful assistants to professional mathematicians by emulating use cases that arise in the daily professional activities of mathematicians. We benchmark the models on a range of fine-grained performance metrics. For advanced mathematics, this is the most detailed evaluation effort to date. We find that ChatGPT and GPT-4 can be used most successfully as mathematical assistants for querying facts, acting as mathematical search engines and knowledge base interfaces. GPT-4 can additionally be used for undergraduate-level mathematics but fails on graduate-level difficulty. Contrary to many positive reports in the media about GPT-4 and ChatGPT's exam-solving abilities (a potential case of selection bias), their overall mathematical performance is well below the level of a graduate student. Hence, if you aim to use ChatGPT to pass a graduate-level math exam, you would be better off copying from your average peer!124:T52d,As Large Language Models (LLMs) become increasingly integrated into our everyday lives, understanding their ability to comprehend human mental states becomes critical for ensuring effective interactions. However, despite the recent attempts to assess the Theory-of-Mind (ToM) reasoning capabilities of LLMs, the degree to which these models can align with human ToM remains a nuanced topic of exploration. This is primarily due to two distinct challenges: (1) the presence of inconsistent results from previous evaluations, and (2) concerns surrounding the validity of existing evaluation methodologies. To address these challenges, we present a novel framework for procedurally generating evaluations with LLMs by populating causal templates. Using our framework, we create a new social reasoning benchmark (BigToM) for LLMs which consists of 25 controls and 5,000 model-written evaluations. We find that human participants rate the quality of our benchmark higher than previous crowd-sourced evaluations and comparable to expert-written evaluations. Using BigToM, we evaluate the social reasoning capabilities of a variety of LLMs and compare model performances with human performance. Our results suggest that GPT4 has ToM capabilities that mirror human inference patterns, though less reliable, while other LLMs struggle.125:T4e9,Diffusion models excel at producing high-quality samples but naively require hundreds of iterations, prompting multiple attempts to distill the generation process into a faster network. However, many existing approaches suffer from a variety of challenges: the process for distillation training can be complex, often requiring multiple training stages, and the resulting models perform poorly when utilized in single-step generative applications. In this paper, we introduce a simple yet effective means of distilling diffusion models *directly* from the initial noise to the resulting image. Of particular importance to our approach is to leverage a new Deep Equilibrium (DEQ) model as the distilled architecture: the Generative Equilibrium Transformer (GET). Our method enables fully offline training with just noise/image pairs from the diffusion model while achieving superior performance compared to existing one-step methods on comparable training budgets. We demonstrate that the DEQ architecture is crucial to this capability, as GET matches a $5\times$ larger ViT in terms of FID scores while striking a critical balance of computational cost and image quality. Code, checkpoints, and datasets are available [here](https://github.com/locuslab/get).126:T61a,Recent breakthroughs in diffusion models, multimodal pretraining, and efficient finetuning have led to an explosion of text-to-image generative models. 
Given human evaluation is expensive and difficult to scale, automated methods are critical for evaluating the increasingly large number of new models. 
However, most current automated evaluation metrics like FID or CLIPScore only offer a distribution-level measure of image quality or image-text alignment, and are unsuited for fine-grained or instance-level analysis. 
In this paper, we introduce GenEval, an object-focused framework to evaluate compositional image properties such as object co-occurrence, position, count, and color. 
We show that current object detection models can be leveraged to evaluate text-to-image models on a variety of generation tasks with strong human agreement, and that other discriminative vision models can be linked to this pipeline to further verify properties like object color. 
We then evaluate several open-source text-to-image models and analyze their relative reasoning capabilities on our benchmark. 
We find that recent models demonstrate significant improvement on these tasks, though they are still lacking in complex capabilities such as spatial relations and attribute binding. 
Finally, we demonstrate how GenEval might be used to help discover existing failure modes, in order to inform development of the next generation of text-to-image models. 
Our code to run the GenEval framework will be made publicly available at https://github.com/djghosh13/geneval.127:T7cf,Diffusion-based generative models have achieved remarkable success in various domains. It trains a shared model on denoising tasks that encompass different noise levels simultaneously, representing a form of multi-task learning (MTL). However, analyzing and improving diffusion models from an MTL perspective remains under-explored. In particular, MTL can sometimes lead to the well-known phenomenon of $\textit{negative transfer}$, which results in the performance degradation of certain tasks due to conflicts between tasks. In this paper, we first aim to analyze diffusion training from an MTL standpoint, presenting two key observations: $\textbf{(O1)}$ the task affinity between denoising tasks diminishes as the gap between noise levels widens, and $\textbf{(O2)}$ negative transfer can arise even in diffusion training. Building upon these observations, we aim to enhance diffusion training by mitigating negative transfer. To achieve this, we propose leveraging existing MTL methods, but the presence of a huge number of denoising tasks makes this computationally expensive to calculate the necessary per-task loss or gradient. To address this challenge, we propose clustering the denoising tasks into small task clusters and applying MTL methods to them. Specifically, based on $\textbf{(O2)}$, we employ interval clustering to enforce temporal proximity among denoising tasks within clusters. We show that interval clustering can be solved using dynamic programming, utilizing signal-to-noise ratio, timestep, and task affinity for clustering objectives. Through this, our approach addresses the issue of negative transfer in diffusion models by allowing for efficient computation of MTL methods. We validate the efficacy of proposed clustering and its integration with MTL methods through various experiments, demonstrating 1) improved generation quality and 2) faster training convergence of diffusion models. Our project page is available at https://gohyojun15.github.io/ANT_diffusion/.128:T743,Neural network based computer vision systems are typically built on a backbone, a pretrained or randomly initialized feature extractor.  Several years ago, the default option was an ImageNet-trained convolutional neural network.  However, the recent past has seen the emergence of countless backbones pretrained using various algorithms and datasets. While this abundance of choice has led to performance increases for a range of systems, it is difficult for practitioners to make informed decisions about which backbone to choose.  Battle of the Backbones (BoB) makes this choice easier by benchmarking a diverse suite of pretrained models, including vision-language models, those trained via self-supervised learning, and the Stable Diffusion backbone, across a diverse set of computer vision tasks ranging from classification to object detection to OOD generalization and more.  Furthermore, BoB sheds light on promising directions for the research community to advance computer vision by illuminating strengths and weakness of existing approaches through a comprehensive analysis conducted on more than 1500 training runs.  While vision transformers (ViTs) and self-supervised learning (SSL) are increasingly popular, we find that convolutional neural networks pretrained in a supervised fashion on large training sets still perform best on most tasks among the models we consider. Moreover, in apples-to-apples comparisons on the same architectures and similarly sized pretraining datasets, we find that SSL backbones are highly competitive, indicating that future works should perform SSL pretraining with advanced architectures and larger pretraining datasets.  We release the raw results of our experiments along with code that allows researchers to put their own backbones through the gauntlet here: https://github.com/hsouri/Battle-of-the-Backbones.129:T658,A potent class of generative models known as Diffusion Probabilistic Models
(DPMs) has become prominent. A forward diffusion process adds gradually noise
to data, while a model learns to gradually denoise. Sampling from pre-trained
DPMs is obtained by solving differential equations (DE) defined by the learnt
model, a process which has shown to be prohibitively slow. Numerous efforts on
speeding-up this process have consisted on crafting powerful ODE solvers.
Despite being quick, such solvers do not usually reach the optimal quality
achieved by available slow SDE solvers. Our goal is to propose SDE solvers that
reach optimal quality without requiring several hundreds or thousands of NFEs
to achieve that goal. We propose Stochastic Explicit Exponential
Derivative-free Solvers (SEEDS), improving and generalizing Exponential
Integrator approaches to the stochastic case on several frameworks. 
After carefully analyzing the formulation of exact
solutions of diffusion SDEs, we craft SEEDS to analytically compute the linear
part of such solutions. Inspired by the Exponential Time-Differencing method,
SEEDS use a novel treatment of the stochastic components of solutions,
enabling the analytical computation of their variance, and contains high-order
terms allowing to reach optimal quality sampling $\sim3$-$5\times$ faster than previous
SDE methods. We validate our approach on several image generation benchmarks,
showing that SEEDS outperform or are competitive with previous SDE solvers.
Contrary to the latter, SEEDS are derivative and training free, and we fully
prove strong convergence guarantees for them.12a:T521,Machine learning (ML) models are only as good as the data they are trained on. But recent studies have found datasets widely used to train and evaluate ML models, e.g. _ImageNet_, to have pervasive labeling errors. Erroneous labels on the train set hurt ML models' ability to generalize, and they impact evaluation and model selection using the test set. Consequently, learning in the presence of labeling errors is an active area of research, yet this field lacks a comprehensive benchmark to evaluate these methods. Most of these methods are evaluated on a few computer vision datasets with significant variance in the experimental protocols. With such a large pool of methods and inconsistent evaluation, it is also unclear how ML practitioners can choose the right models to assess label quality in their data. To this end, we propose a benchmarking environment _AQuA_ to rigorously evaluate methods that enable machine learning in the presence of label noise. We also introduce a design space to delineate concrete design choices of label error detection models. We hope that our proposed design space and benchmark enable practitioners to choose the right tools to improve their label quality and that our benchmark enables objective and rigorous evaluation of machine learning tools facing mislabeled data.12b:T5b6,A popular approach to protein design is to combine a generative model with a discriminative model for conditional sampling. The generative model samples plausible sequences while the discriminative model guides a search for sequences with high fitness. Given its broad success in conditional sampling, classifier-guided diffusion modeling is a promising foundation for protein design, leading many to develop guided diffusion models for structure with inverse folding to recover sequences. In this work, we propose diffusioN Optimized Sampling (NOS), a guidance method for discrete diffusion models that follows gradients in the hidden states of the denoising network. NOS makes it possible to perform design directly in sequence space, circumventing significant limitations of structure-based methods, including scarce data and challenging inverse design. Moreover, we use NOS to generalize LaMBO, a Bayesian optimization procedure for sequence design that facilitates multiple objectives and edit-based constraints. The resulting method, LaMBO-2, enables discrete diffusions and  stronger performance with limited edits through a novel application of saliency maps. We apply LaMBO-2 to a real-world protein design task, optimizing antibodies for higher expression yield and binding affinity to several therapeutic targets under locality and developability constraints, attaining a 99\% expression rate and 40\% binding rate in exploratory in vitro experiments.12c:T559,Recently, diffusion models have achieved great success in generative tasks. Sampling from diffusion models is equivalent to solving the reverse diffusion stochastic differential equations (SDEs) or the corresponding probability flow ordinary differential equations (ODEs). In comparison, SDE-based solvers can generate samples of higher quality and are suited for image translation tasks like stroke-based synthesis. During inference, however, existing SDE-based solvers are severely constrained by the efficiency-effectiveness dilemma. Our investigation suggests that this is because the Gaussian assumption in the reverse transition kernel is frequently violated (even in the case of simple mixture data) given a limited number of discretization steps. To overcome this limitation, we introduce a novel class of SDE-based solvers called \emph{Gaussian Mixture Solvers (GMS)} for diffusion models. Our solver estimates the first three-order moments and optimizes the parameters of a Gaussian mixture transition kernel using generalized methods of moments in each step during sampling. Empirically, our solver outperforms numerous SDE-based solvers in terms of sample quality in image generation and stroke-based synthesis in various diffusion models, which validates the motivation and effectiveness of GMS. Our code is available at https://github.com/Guohanzhong/GMS.12d:T5fd,The prosperity of deep neural networks (DNNs) is largely benefited from open-source datasets, based on which users can evaluate and improve their methods. In this paper, we revisit backdoor-based dataset ownership verification (DOV), which is currently the only feasible approach to protect the copyright of open-source datasets. We reveal that these methods are fundamentally harmful given that they could introduce malicious misclassification behaviors to watermarked DNNs by the adversaries. In this paper, we design DOV from another perspective by making watermarked models (trained on the protected dataset) correctly classify some `hard' samples that will be misclassified by the benign model. Our method is inspired by the generalization property of DNNs, where we find a \emph{hardly-generalized domain} for the original dataset (as its \emph{domain watermark}). It can be easily learned with the protected dataset containing modified samples. Specifically, we formulate the domain generation as a bi-level optimization and propose to optimize a set of visually-indistinguishable clean-label modified data with similar effects to domain-watermarked samples from the hardly-generalized domain to ensure watermark stealthiness. We also design a hypothesis-test-guided ownership verification via our domain watermark and provide the theoretical analyses of our method. Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets are conducted, which verify the effectiveness of our method and its resistance to potential adaptive methods.12e:T4bd,Establishing correspondence between images or scenes is a significant challenge in computer vision, especially given occlusions, viewpoint changes, and varying object appearances. In this paper, we present Siamese Masked Autoencoders (SiamMAE), a simple extension of Masked Autoencoders (MAE) for learning visual correspondence from videos. SiamMAE operates on pairs of randomly sampled video frames and asymmetrically masks them. These frames are processed independently by an encoder network, and a decoder composed of a sequence of cross-attention layers is tasked with predicting the missing patches in the future frame. By masking a large fraction (95%) of patches in the future frame while leaving the past frame unchanged, SiamMAE encourages the network to focus on object motion and learn object-centric representations. Despite its conceptual simplicity, features learned via SiamMAE outperform state-of-the-art self-supervised methods on video object segmentation, pose keypoint propagation, and semantic part propagation tasks. SiamMAE achieves competitive results without relying on data augmentation, handcrafted tracking-based pretext tasks, or other techniques to prevent representational collapse.12f:T5ca,Masked image modeling (MIM) has become a prevalent pre-training setup for vision foundation models and attains promising performance. Despite its success, existing MIM methods discard the decoder network during downstream applications, resulting in inconsistent representations between pre-training and fine-tuning and can hamper downstream task performance. In this paper, we propose a new architecture, RevColV2, which tackles this issue by keeping the entire autoencoder architecture during both pre-training and fine-tuning. The main body of RevColV2 contains bottom-up columns and top-down columns, between which information is reversibly propagated and gradually disentangled. Such design enables our architecture with the nice property: maintaining disentangled low-level and semantic information at the end of the network in MIM pre-training. Our experimental results suggest that a foundation model with decoupled features can achieve competitive performance across multiple downstream vision tasks such as image classification, semantic segmentation and object detection. For example, after intermediate fine-tuning on ImageNet-22K dataset, RevColV2-L attains 88.4% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet-1K classification and 58.6 mIoU on ADE20K semantic segmentation. With extra teacher and large scale dataset, RevColv2-L achieves 62.1 box AP on COCO detection and 60.4 mIoU on ADE20K semantic segmentation. Code and models are released at https://github.com/megvii-research/RevCol130:T606,Augmenting large language models (LLMs) with external tools has emerged as a promising approach to solving complex problems. However, traditional methods, which finetune LLMs with tool demonstration data, can be both costly and restricted to a predefined set of tools. Recent in-context learning paradigm alleviates these issues, but the limited context length only allows for a few shots of demonstrations, leading to suboptimal understandings of the tools. Moreover, when there are numerous tools to choose from, in-context learning could completely fail to work. In this paper, we propose an alternative approach, $\textbf{ToolkenGPT}$, which combines the benefits of both sides. Our approach represents each $\underline{tool}$ as a to$\underline{ken}$ ($\textit{toolken}$) and learns an embedding for it, enabling tool calls in the same way as generating a regular word token. Once a toolken is triggered, the LLM is prompted to complete arguments for the tool to execute. ToolkenGPT offers the flexibility to plug in an arbitrary number of tools by expanding the set of toolkens on the fly. In addition, it improves tool use by allowing extensive demonstration data for learning the toolken embeddings. In diverse domains, including numerical reasoning, knowledge-based question answering, and embodied plan generation, our approach effectively augments LLMs with tools and substantially outperforms various latest baselines. ToolkenGPT demonstrates the promising ability to use relevant tools from a large tool set in complex scenarios.131:T51e,Reward functions are difficult to design and often hard to align with human intent. Preference-based Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms address these problems by learning reward functions from human feedback. However, the majority of preference-based RL methods na\"ively combine supervised reward models with off-the-shelf RL algorithms. Contemporary approaches have sought to improve performance and query complexity by using larger and more complex reward architectures such as transformers. Instead of using highly complex architectures, we develop a new and parameter-efficient algorithm, Inverse Preference Learning (IPL), specifically designed for learning from offline preference data. Our key insight is that for a fixed policy, the $Q$-function encodes all information about the reward function, effectively making them interchangeable. Using this insight, we completely eliminate the need for a learned reward function. Our resulting algorithm is simpler and more parameter-efficient. Across a suite of continuous control and robotics benchmarks, IPL attains competitive performance compared to more complex approaches that leverage transformer-based and non-Markovian reward functions while having fewer algorithmic hyperparameters and learned network parameters. Our code is publicly released.132:T64a,Large language models (LLMs) and Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have been proved to excel at multiple tasks, such as commonsense reasoning. Powerful as these models can be, they are not grounded in the 3D physical world, which involves richer concepts such as spatial relationships, affordances, physics, layout, and so on. In this work, we propose to inject the 3D world into large language models, and introduce a whole new family of 3D-LLMs. Specifically, 3D-LLMs can take 3D point clouds and their features as input and perform a diverse set of 3D-related tasks, including captioning, dense captioning, 3D question answering, task decomposition, 3D
grounding, 3D-assisted dialog, navigation, and so on. Using three types of prompting mechanisms that we design, we are able to collect over 300k 3D-language data covering these tasks. To efficiently train 3D-LLMs, we first utilize a 3D feature extractor that obtains 3D features from rendered multi-view images. Then, we use 2D VLMs as our backbones to train our 3D-LLMs. By introducing a 3D localization mechanism, 3D-LLMs could better capture 3D spatial information.  Experiments on ScanQA  show that our model outperforms state-of-the-art baselines by a large margin (\textit{e.g.}, the BLEU-1 score surpasses state-of-the-art score by 9\%). Furthermore, experiments on our held-in datasets for 3D captioning, task composition, and 3D-assisted dialogue show that our model outperforms 2D VLMs. Qualitative examples also show that our model could perform more tasks beyond the scope of existing LLMs and VLMs. Our model and data will be publicly available.133:T454,Our work combines aspects of three promising paradigms in machine learning, namely, attention mechanism, energy-based models, and associative memory. Attention is the power-house driving modern deep learning successes, but it lacks clear theoretical foundations. Energy-based models allow a principled approach to discriminative and generative tasks, but the design of the energy functional is not straightforward. At the same time, Dense Associative Memory models or Modern Hopfield Networks have a well-established theoretical foundation, and allow an intuitive design of the energy function. We propose a novel architecture, called the Energy Transformer (or ET for short), that uses a sequence of attention layers that are purposely designed to minimize a specifically engineered energy function, which is responsible for representing the relationships between the tokens. In this work, we introduce the theoretical foundations of ET, explore its empirical capabilities using the image completion task, and obtain strong quantitative results on the graph anomaly detection and graph classification tasks.134:T4cc,In the last year alone, a surge of new benchmarks to measure $\textit{compositional}$ understanding of vision-language models have permeated the machine learning ecosystem.
Given an image, these benchmarks probe a model's ability to identify its associated caption amongst a set of compositional distractors.
Surprisingly, we find significant biases in $\textit{all}$ these benchmarks rendering them hackable. This hackability is so dire that blind models with no access to the image outperform state-of-the-art vision-language models.
To remedy this rampant vulnerability, we introduce $\textit{SugarCrepe}$, a new benchmark for vision-language compositionality evaluation.
We employ large language models, instead of rule-based templates used in previous benchmarks, to generate fluent and sensical hard negatives, and utilize an adversarial refinement mechanism to maximally reduce biases. We re-evaluate state-of-the-art models and recently proposed compositionality inducing strategies, and find that their improvements were hugely overestimated, suggesting that more innovation is needed in this important direction.
We release $\textit{SugarCrepe}$ and the code for evaluation at: https://github.com/RAIVNLab/sugar-crepe.135:T5ba,Few-shot learning (FSL) aims to learn novel tasks with very few labeled samples by leveraging experience from \emph{related} training tasks.
    In this paper, we try to understand FSL by exploring two key questions:
    (1) How to quantify the relationship between \emph{ training} and \emph{novel} tasks?
    (2) How does the relationship affect the \emph{adaptation difficulty} on novel tasks for different models?
    To answer the first question, we propose Task Attribute Distance (TAD) as a metric to quantify the task relatedness via attributes.
    Unlike other metrics, TAD is independent of models, making it applicable to different FSL models.
    To address the second question, we utilize TAD metric to establish a theoretical connection between task relatedness and task adaptation difficulty.
    By deriving the generalization error bound on a novel task, we discover how TAD measures the adaptation difficulty on novel tasks for different models.
    To validate our theoretical results, we conduct experiments on three benchmarks.
    Our experimental results confirm that TAD metric effectively quantifies the task relatedness and reflects the adaptation difficulty on novel tasks for various FSL methods, even if some of them do not learn attributes explicitly or human-annotated attributes are not provided.
    Our code is available at 
    \href{https://github.com/hu-my/TaskAttributeDistance}{https://github.com/hu-my/TaskAttributeDistance}.136:T716,Though LLMs are capable of generating plausible programs, it’s challenging to interact with the LLMs further to revise the program, especially if the user’s specific requirements are different from the initial proposal. In this paper, we introduce ANPL, an interactive programming system that ensures users can always refine the generated code towards their specific programmatic intents via structured
decompositions. Borrowing the paradigm of sketching from program synthesis, an ANPL program consists of a set of input-outputs that it must satisfy, a “sketch” — control/data flow expressed in precise code (e.g. Python), and “holes” — sub-modules to be implemented by the LLM specified with natural language. The user revises an ANPL program by either modifying the sketch, changing the language used to describe the holes, or providing additional input-outputs to a particular hole, turning it into a sub-ANPL program that can be solved recursively. This workflow allows the users to offload programming burdens to the LLM as much as possible while retaining the ability to pinpoint and resolve bugs locally, without exposing the rest of the program to the LLM. We deploy ANPL on the Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (ARC), a set of unique tasks that are challenging for state-of-the-art AI systems, showing it outperforms baseline programming systems that (a) without the ability to decompose tasks interactively and (b) without the guarantee that the modules can be correctly composed together. Additional evaluations on APPS, HumanEval, and real-world programming tasks have validated that the ANPL framework is applicable to multiple programming domains. We release the ANPL solutions to the ARC tasks as a dataset, providing insights into how humans decompose novel tasks programmatically.137:T594,In-context learning is the ability of a pretrained model to  adapt to novel and diverse downstream tasks by conditioning on prompt examples, without optimizing any parameters. While large language models have demonstrated this ability, how in-context learning could be performed over graphs is unexplored. In this paper, we develop \textbf{Pr}etraining \textbf{O}ver \textbf{D}iverse \textbf{I}n-Context  \textbf{G}raph S\textbf{y}stems (PRODIGY), the first pretraining framework that enables in-context learning over graphs. The key idea of our framework is to formulate in-context learning over graphs with a novel \emph{prompt graph} representation, which connects prompt examples and queries. We then propose a graph neural network architecture over the prompt graph and a corresponding family of in-context pretraining objectives. With PRODIGY, the pretrained model can directly perform novel downstream classification tasks on unseen graphs via in-context learning. We provide empirical evidence of the effectiveness of our framework by showcasing its strong in-context learning performance on tasks involving citation networks and knowledge graphs. Our approach outperforms the in-context learning accuracy of contrastive pretraining baselines with hard-coded adaptation by 18\% on average across all setups. Moreover, it also outperforms standard finetuning with limited data by 33\% on average with in-context learning.138:T60a,Recent progress in large language models (LLMs) has demonstrated the ability to learn and leverage Internet-scale knowledge through pre-training with autoregressive models. Unfortunately, applying such models to settings with embodied agents, such as robots, is challenging due to their lack of experience with the physical world, inability to parse non-language observations, and ignorance of rewards or safety constraints that robots may require. On the other hand, language-conditioned robotic policies that learn from interaction data can provide the necessary grounding that allows the agent to be correctly situated in the real world, but such policies are limited by the lack of high-level semantic understanding due to the limited breadth of the interaction data available for training them. Thus, if we want to make use of the semantic knowledge in a language model while still situating it in an embodied setting, we must construct an action sequence that is both likely according to the language model and also realizable according to grounded models of the environment. We frame this as a problem similar to probabilistic filtering: decode a sequence that both has high probability under the language model and high probability under a set of grounded model objectives. We demonstrate how such grounded models can be obtained across three simulation and real-world domains, and that the proposed decoding strategy is able to solve complex, long-horizon embodiment tasks in a robotic setting by leveraging the knowledge of both models.139:T64b,In diffusion models, UNet is the most popular network backbone, since its long skip connects (LSCs) to connect distant network blocks can aggregate long-distant information and alleviate vanishing gradient. Unfortunately, UNet often suffers from unstable training in diffusion models which can be alleviated by scaling its LSC coefficients smaller. However, theoretical understandings of the instability of UNet in diffusion models and also the performance improvement of LSC scaling remain absent yet. To solve this issue, we theoretically show that the coefficients of LSCs in UNet have big effects on the stableness of the forward and backward propagation and robustness of UNet. Specifically, the hidden feature and gradient of UNet at any layer can oscillate and their oscillation ranges are actually large which explains the instability of UNet training. Moreover, UNet is also provably sensitive to perturbed input, and predicts an output distant from the desired output, yielding oscillatory loss and thus oscillatory gradient. Besides, we also observe the theoretical benefits of the LSC coefficient scaling of UNet in the stableness of hidden features and gradient and also robustness. Finally,   inspired by our theory, we propose an effective coefficient scaling framework ScaleLong  that scales the coefficients of LSC  in UNet and better improve the  training stability of UNet. Experimental results on CIFAR10, CelebA, ImageNet and COCO show that our methods are superior to stabilize training, and yield about 1.5x training acceleration on different diffusion models with UNet or UViT backbones.13a:T572,The representation gap between teacher and student is an emerging topic in knowledge distillation (KD). To reduce the gap and improve the performance, current methods often resort to complicated training schemes, loss functions, and feature alignments, which are task-specific and feature-specific. In this paper, we state that the essence of these methods is to discard the noisy information and distill the valuable information in the feature, and propose a novel KD method dubbed DiffKD, to explicitly denoise and match features using diffusion models. Our approach is based on the observation that student features typically contain more noises than teacher features due to the smaller capacity of student model. To address this, we propose to denoise student features using a diffusion model trained by teacher features. This allows us to perform better distillation between the refined clean feature and teacher feature. Additionally, we introduce a light-weight diffusion model with a linear autoencoder to reduce the computation cost and an adaptive noise matching module to improve the denoising performance. Extensive experiments demonstrate that DiffKD is effective across various types of features and achieves state-of-the-art performance consistently on image classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation tasks. Code is available at https://github.com/hunto/DiffKD.13b:T4ca,Previous work has shown that DNNs with
large depth $L$ and $L_{2}$-regularization are biased towards learning
low-dimensional representations of the inputs, which can be interpreted
as minimizing a notion of rank $R^{(0)}(f)$ of the learned function
$f$, conjectured to be the Bottleneck rank. We compute finite depth
corrections to this result, revealing a measure $R^{(1)}$ of regularity
which bounds the pseudo-determinant of the Jacobian $\left\|Jf(x)\right\|\_\+$
and is subadditive under composition and addition. This formalizes
a balance between learning low-dimensional representations and minimizing
complexity/irregularity in the feature maps, allowing the network
to learn the `right' inner dimension. Finally, we prove the conjectured
bottleneck structure in the learned features as $L\to\infty$: for
large depths, almost all hidden representations are approximately
$R^{(0)}(f)$-dimensional, and almost all weight matrices $W_{\ell}$
have $R^{(0)}(f)$ singular values close to 1 while the others are
$O(L^{-\frac{1}{2}})$. Interestingly, the use of large learning rates
is required to guarantee an order $O(L)$ NTK which in turns guarantees
infinite depth convergence of the representations of almost all layers.13c:T4b5,Construction of a universal detector poses a crucial question: How can we most effectively train a model on a large mixture of datasets? 
    The answer lies in learning dataset-specific features and ensembling their knowledge but do all this in a single model.
    Previous methods achieve this by having separate detection heads on a common backbone but that results in a significant increase in parameters.
    In this work, we present Mixture-of-Experts as a solution, highlighting that MoE are much more than a scalability tool. 
    We propose Dataset-Aware Mixture-of-Experts, DAMEX where we train the experts to become an `expert' of a dataset by learning to route each dataset tokens to its mapped expert.
    Experiments on Universal Object-Detection Benchmark show that we outperform the existing state-of-the-art by average +10.2 AP score and improve over our non-MoE baseline by average +2.0 AP score. We also observe consistent gains while mixing datasets with (1) limited availability, (2) disparate domains and (3) divergent label sets.
    Further, we qualitatively show that DAMEX is robust against expert representation collapse. Code is available at https://github.com/jinga-lala/DAMEX13d:T50a,This paper studies structured node classification on graphs, where the predictions should consider dependencies between the node labels. In particular, we focus on solving the problem for partially labeled graphs where it is essential to incorporate the information in the known label for predicting the unknown labels. To address this issue, we propose a novel framework leveraging the diffusion probabilistic model for structured node classification (DPM-SNC). At the heart of our framework is the extraordinary capability of DPM-SNC to (a) learn a joint distribution over the labels with an expressive reverse diffusion process and (b) make predictions conditioned on the known labels utilizing manifold-constrained sampling. Since the DPMs lack training algorithms for partially labeled data, we design a novel training algorithm to apply DPMs, maximizing a new variational lower bound. We also theoretically analyze how DPMs benefit node classification by enhancing the expressive power of GNNs based on proposing AGG-WL, which is strictly more powerful than the classic 1-WL test. We extensively verify the superiority of our DPM-SNC in diverse scenarios, which include not only the transductive setting on partially labeled graphs but also the inductive setting and unlabeled graphs.13e:T5c7,Despite its practical importance across a wide range of modalities, recent advances in self-supervised learning (SSL) have been primarily focused on a few well-curated domains, e.g., vision and language, often relying on their domain-specific knowledge. For example, Masked Auto-Encoder (MAE) has become one of the popular architectures in these domains, but less has explored its potential in other modalities. In this paper, we develop MAE as a unified, modality-agnostic SSL framework. In turn, we argue meta-learning as a key to interpreting MAE as a modality-agnostic learner, and propose enhancements to MAE from the motivation to jointly improve its SSL across diverse modalities, coined MetaMAE as a result. Our key idea is to view the mask reconstruction of MAE as a meta-learning task: masked tokens are predicted by adapting the Transformer meta-learner through the amortization of unmasked tokens. Based on this novel interpretation, we propose to integrate two advanced meta-learning techniques. First, we adapt the amortized latent of the Transformer encoder using gradient-based meta-learning to enhance the reconstruction. Then, we maximize the alignment between amortized and adapted latents through task contrastive learning which guides the Transformer encoder to better encode the task-specific knowledge. Our experiment demonstrates the superiority of MetaMAE in the modality-agnostic SSL benchmark (called DABS), significantly outperforming prior baselines.13f:T468,Machine learning tools often rely on embedding text as vectors of real numbers. In this paper, we study how the semantic structure of language is encoded in the algebraic structure of such embeddings. Specifically, we look at a notion of ``semantic independence'' capturing the idea that, e.g., ``eggplant'' and ``tomato'' are independent given ``vegetable''. Although such examples are intuitive, it is difficult to formalize such a notion of semantic independence. The key observation here is that any sensible formalization should obey a set of so-called independence axioms, and thus any algebraic encoding of this structure should also obey these axioms. This leads us naturally to use partial orthogonality as the relevant algebraic structure. We develop theory and methods that allow us to demonstrate that partial orthogonality does indeed capture semantic independence. Complementary to this, we also introduce the concept of independence preserving embeddings where embeddings preserve the conditional independence structures of a distribution, and we prove the existence of such embeddings and approximations to them.140:T5b1,Standardized and quantified evaluation of machine behaviors is a crux of understanding LLMs. In this study, we draw inspiration from psychometric studies by leveraging human personality theory as a tool for studying machine behaviors. Originating as a philosophical quest for human behaviors, the study of personality delves into how individuals differ in thinking, feeling, and behaving. Toward building and understanding human-like social machines, we are motivated to ask: Can we assess machine behaviors by leveraging human psychometric tests in a **principled** and **quantitative** manner? If so, can we induce a specific personality in LLMs? To answer these questions, we introduce the Machine Personality Inventory (MPI) tool for studying machine behaviors; MPI follows standardized
personality tests, built upon the Big Five Personality Factors (Big Five) theory and personality assessment inventories. By systematically evaluating LLMs with MPI, we provide the first piece of evidence demonstrating the efficacy of MPI in studying LLMs behaviors. We further devise a Personality Prompting (P$^2$) method to induce LLMs with specific personalities in a **controllable** way, capable of producing diverse and verifiable behaviors. We hope this work sheds light on future studies by adopting personality as the essential indicator for various downstream tasks, and could further motivate research into equally intriguing human-like machine behaviors.141:T55a,Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown promising performance in knowledge-intensive reasoning tasks that require a compound understanding of knowledge. 
However, deployment of the LLMs in real-world applications can be challenging due to their high computational requirements and concerns on data privacy.
Previous studies have focused on building task-specific small Language Models (LMs) by fine-tuning them with labeled data or distilling LLMs. However, these approaches are ill-suited for knowledge-intensive reasoning tasks due to the limited capacity of small LMs in memorizing the knowledge required.
Motivated by our theoretical analysis on memorization, we propose Knowledge-Augmented Reasoning Distillation (KARD), a novel method that fine-tunes small LMs to generate rationales obtained from LLMs with augmented knowledge retrieved from an external knowledge base. Moreover, we further propose a neural reranker to obtain documents relevant to rationale generation. We empirically show that KARD significantly improves the performance of small T5 and GPT models on the challenging knowledge-intensive reasoning datasets, namely MedQA-USMLE, StrategyQA, and OpenbookQA.
Notably, our method makes the 250M T5 models achieve superior performance against the fine-tuned 3B models, having 12 times larger parameters, on both MedQA-USMLE and StrategyQA benchmarks.142:T603,Automated reasoning with unstructured natural text is a key requirement for many potential applications of NLP and for developing robust AI systems. Recently, Language Models (LMs) have demonstrated complex reasoning capacities even without any finetuning. However, existing evaluation for automated reasoning assumes access to a consistent and coherent set of information over which models reason. When reasoning in the real-world, the available information is frequently inconsistent or contradictory, and therefore models need to be equipped with a strategy to resolve such conflicts when they arise. One widely-applicable way of resolving conflicts is to impose preferences over information sources (e.g., based on source credibility or information recency) and adopt the source with higher preference. In this paper, we formulate the problem of reasoning with contradictory information guided by preferences over sources as the classical problem of defeasible reasoning, and develop a dataset called BoardgameQA for measuring the reasoning capacity of LMs in this setting. BoardgameQA also incorporates reasoning with implicit background knowledge, to better reflect reasoning problems in downstream applications. We benchmark various LMs on BoardgameQA and the results reveal a significant gap in the reasoning capacity of state-of-the-art LMs on this problem, showing that reasoning with conflicting information does not surface out-of-the-box in LMs. While performance can be improved with finetuning, it nevertheless remains poor.143:T669,While recent large-scale neural codec language models have shown significant improvement in zero-shot TTS by training on thousands of hours of data, they suffer from drawbacks such as a lack of robustness, slow sampling speed similar to previous autoregressive TTS methods, and reliance on pre-trained neural codec representations. Our work proposes P-Flow, a fast and data-efficient zero-shot TTS model that uses speech prompts for speaker adaptation. P-Flow comprises a speech-prompted text encoder for speaker adaptation and a flow matching generative decoder for high-quality and fast speech synthesis. Our speech-prompted text encoder uses speech prompts and text input to generate speaker-conditional text representation. The flow matching generative decoder uses the speaker-conditional output to synthesize high-quality personalized speech significantly faster than in real-time. Unlike the neural codec language models, we specifically train P-Flow on LibriTTS dataset using a continuous mel-representation. Through our training method using continuous speech prompts, P-Flow matches the speaker similarity performance of the large-scale zero-shot TTS models with two orders of magnitude less training data and has more than 20$\times$ faster sampling speed. Our results show that P-Flow has better pronunciation and is preferred in human likeness and speaker similarity to its recent state-of-the-art counterparts, thus defining P-Flow as an attractive and desirable alternative. We provide audio samples on our demo page: [https://research.nvidia.com/labs/adlr/projects/pflow](https://research.nvidia.com/labs/adlr/projects/pflow)144:T65c,Normalizing flows are a class of deep generative models that are especially interesting for modeling probability distributions in physics, where the exact likelihood of flows allows reweighting to known target energy functions and computing unbiased observables. For instance, Boltzmann generators tackle the long-standing sampling problem in statistical physics by training flows to produce equilibrium samples of many-body systems such as small molecules and proteins. To build effective models for such systems, it is crucial to incorporate the symmetries of the target energy into the model, which can be achieved by equivariant continuous normalizing flows (CNFs). However, CNFs can be computationally expensive to train and generate samples from, which has hampered their scalability and practical application.
In this paper, we introduce equivariant flow matching, a new training objective for equivariant CNFs that is based on the recently proposed optimal transport flow matching. Equivariant flow matching exploits the physical symmetries of the target energy for efficient, simulation-free training of equivariant CNFs.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of flow matching on rotation and permutation invariant many-particle systems and a small molecule, alanine dipeptide, where for the first time we obtain a Boltzmann generator with significant sampling efficiency without relying on tailored internal coordinate featurization. Our results show that the equivariant flow matching objective yields flows with shorter integration paths, improved sampling efficiency, and higher scalability compared to existing methods.145:T53f,Text-conditioned image generation models have recently shown immense qualitative success using denoising diffusion processes. However, unlike discriminative vision-and-language models, it is a non-trivial task to subject these diffusion-based generative models to automatic fine-grained quantitative evaluation of high-level phenomena such as compositionality.
Towards this goal, we perform two innovations. First, we transform diffusion-based models (in our case, Stable Diffusion) for any image-text matching (ITM) task using a novel method called DiffusionITM.
Second, we introduce the Generative-Discriminative Evaluation Benchmark (GDBench) benchmark with 7 complex vision-and-language tasks, bias evaluation and detailed analysis.
We find that Stable Diffusion + DiffusionITM is competitive on many tasks and outperforms CLIP on compositional tasks like like CLEVR and Winoground.
We further boost its compositional performance with a transfer setup by fine-tuning on MS-COCO while retaining generative capabilities. 
We also measure the stereotypical bias in diffusion models, and find that Stable Diffusion 2.1 is, for the most part, less biased than Stable Diffusion 1.5.
Overall, our results point in an exciting direction bringing discriminative and generative model evaluation closer. We will release code and benchmark setup soon.146:T5ec,Recent progress in music generation has been remarkably advanced by the state-of-the-art MusicLM, which comprises a hierarchy of three LMs, respectively, for semantic, coarse acoustic, and fine acoustic modelings. Yet, sampling with the MusicLM requires processing through these LMs one by one to obtain the fine-grained acoustic tokens, making it computationally expensive and prohibitive for a real-time generation. Efficient music generation with a quality on par with MusicLM remains a significant challenge.
In this paper, we present **M**e**L**o**D**y (**M** for music; **L** for LM; **D** for diffusion), an LM-guided diffusion model that generates music audios of state-of-the-art quality meanwhile reducing 95.7\% to 99.6\% forward passes in MusicLM, respectively, for sampling 10s to 30s music. MeLoDy inherits the highest-level LM from MusicLM for semantic modeling, and applies a novel dual-path diffusion (DPD) model and an audio VAE-GAN to efficiently decode the conditioning semantic tokens into waveform. DPD is proposed to simultaneously model the coarse and fine acoustics by incorporating the semantic information into segments of latents effectively via cross-attention at each denoising step. Our experimental results suggest the superiority of MeLoDy, not only in its practical advantages on sampling speed and infinitely continuable generation, but also in its state-of-the-art musicality, audio quality, and text correlation.

Our samples are available at https://Efficient-MeLoDy.github.io/.147:T593,Multi-vector retrieval models such as ColBERT [Khattab et al., 2020] allow token-level interactions between queries and documents, and hence achieve state of the art on many information retrieval benchmarks. However, their non-linear scoring function cannot be scaled to millions of documents, necessitating a three-stage process for inference: retrieving initial candidates via token retrieval, accessing all token vectors, and scoring the initial candidate documents. The non-linear scoring function is applied over all token vectors of each candidate document, making the inference process complicated and slow. In this paper, we aim to simplify the multi-vector retrieval by rethinking the role of token retrieval. We present XTR, ConteXtualized Token Retriever, which introduces a simple, yet novel, objective function that encourages the model to retrieve the most important document tokens first. The improvement to token retrieval allows XTR to rank candidates only using the retrieved tokens rather than all tokens in the document, and enables a newly designed scoring stage that is two-to-three orders of magnitude cheaper than that of ColBERT. On the popular BEIR benchmark, XTR advances the state-of-the-art by 2.8 nDCG@10 without any distillation. Detailed analysis confirms our decision to revisit the token retrieval stage, as XTR demonstrates much better recall of the token retrieval stage compared to ColBERT.148:T414,The stunning qualitative improvement of text-to-image models has led to their widespread attention and adoption. However, we lack a comprehensive quantitative understanding of their capabilities and risks. To fill this gap, we introduce a new benchmark, Holistic Evaluation of Text-to-Image Models (HEIM). Whereas previous evaluations focus mostly on image-text alignment and image quality, we identify 12 aspects, including text-image alignment, image quality, aesthetics, originality, reasoning, knowledge, bias, toxicity, fairness, robustness, multilinguality, and efficiency. We curate 62 scenarios encompassing these aspects and evaluate 26 state-of-the-art text-to-image models on this benchmark. Our results reveal that no single model excels in all aspects, with different models demonstrating different strengths. We release the generated images and human evaluation results for full transparency at https://crfm.stanford.edu/heim/latest and the code at https://github.com/stanford-crfm/helm, which is integrated with the HELM codebase149:T529,Subject-driven text-to-image generation models create novel renditions of an input subject based on text prompts. Existing models suffer from lengthy fine-tuning and difficulties preserving the subject fidelity. To overcome these limitations, we introduce BLIP-Diffusion, a new subject-driven image generation model that supports multimodal control which consumes inputs of subject images and text prompts. 
Unlike other subject-driven generation models, BLIP-Diffusion introduces a new multimodal encoder which is pre-trained to provide subject representation. We first pre-train the multimodal encoder following BLIP-2 to produce visual representation aligned with the text.
Then we design a subject representation learning task which enables a diffusion model to leverage such visual representation and generates new subject renditions. Compared with previous methods such as DreamBooth, our model enables zero-shot subject-driven generation, and efficient fine-tuning for customized subject with up to 20x speedup. We also demonstrate that BLIP-Diffusion can be flexibly combined with existing techniques such as ControlNet and prompt-to-prompt to enable novel subject-driven generation and editing applications. Implementations are available at: https://github.com/salesforce/LAVIS/tree/main/projects/blip-diffusion.14a:T41d,We present a discretization-free scalable framework for solving a large class of mass-conserving partial differential equations (PDEs), including the time-dependent Fokker-Planck equation and the Wasserstein gradient flow. The main observation is that the time-varying velocity field of the PDE solution needs to be self-consistent: it must satisfy a fixed-point equation involving the probability flow characterized by the same velocity field. Instead of directly minimizing the residual of the fixed-point equation with neural parameterization, we use an iterative formulation with a biased gradient estimator that bypasses significant computational obstacles with strong empirical performance. Compared to existing approaches, our method does not suffer from temporal or spatial discretization, covers a wider range of PDEs, and scales to high dimensions. Experimentally, our method recovers analytical solutions accurately when they are available and achieves superior performance in high dimensions with less training time compared to alternatives.14b:T5a1,Diffusion models are a class of generative models that serve to establish a stochastic transport map between an empirically observed, yet unknown, target distribution and a known prior. Despite their remarkable success in real-world applications, a theoretical understanding of their generalization capabilities remains underdeveloped. This work embarks on a comprehensive theoretical exploration of the generalization attributes of diffusion models. We establish the theoretical estimates of the generalization gap that evolves in tandem with the training dynamics of score-based diffusion models, suggesting a polynomially small generalization error ($O(n^{-2/5}+m^{-4/5})$) on both the sample size $n$ and the model capacity $m$, evading the curse of dimensionality (i.e., independent of the data dimension) when *early-stopped*. Furthermore, we extend our quantitative analysis to a *data-dependent* scenario, wherein target distributions are portrayed as a succession of densities with progressively increasing distances between modes. This precisely elucidates the *adverse* effect of "*modes shift*'' in ground truths on the model generalization. Furthermore, these estimates are not solely theoretical constructs but have also been confirmed through numerical simulations. Our findings contribute to the rigorous understanding of diffusion models' generalization properties and provide insights that may guide practical applications.14c:T6bf,We introduce Directional Stimulus Prompting, a novel framework for guiding black-box large language models (LLMs) towards specific desired outputs. Instead of directly adjusting LLMs, our method employs a small tunable policy model (e.g., T5) to generate an auxiliary directional stimulus prompt for each input instance. These directional stimulus prompts act as nuanced, instance-specific hints and clues to guide LLMs in generating desired outcomes, such as including specific keywords in the generated summary. Our approach sidesteps the challenges of direct LLM tuning by optimizing the policy model to explore directional stimulus prompts that align LLMs with desired behaviors. The policy model can be optimized through 1) supervised fine-tuning using labeled data and 2) reinforcement learning from offline or online rewards based on the LLM's output. We evaluate our method across various tasks, including summarization, dialogue response generation, and chain-of-thought reasoning. Our experiments indicate a consistent improvement in the performance of LLMs such as ChatGPT, Codex, and InstructGPT on these supervised tasks with minimal labeled data. Remarkably, by utilizing merely 80 dialogues from the MultiWOZ dataset, our approach boosts ChatGPT's performance by a relative 41.4%, achieving or exceeding the performance of some fully supervised state-of-the-art models. Moreover, the instance-specific chain-of-thought prompt generated through our method enhances InstructGPT's reasoning accuracy, outperforming both generalized human-crafted prompts and those generated through automatic prompt engineering. The code and data are publicly available at https://github.com/Leezekun/Directional-Stimulus-Prompting.14d:T6c3,Conversational generative AI has demonstrated remarkable promise for empowering biomedical practitioners, but current investigations focus on unimodal text. Multimodal conversational AI has seen rapid progress by leveraging billions of image-text pairs from the public web, but such general-domain vision-language models still lack sophistication in understanding and conversing about biomedical images. In this paper, we propose a cost-efficient approach for training a vision-language conversational assistant that can answer open-ended research questions of biomedical images. The key idea is to leverage a large-scale, broad-coverage biomedical figure-caption dataset extracted from PubMed Central, use GPT-4 to self-instruct open-ended instruction-following data from the captions, and then fine-tune a large general-domain vision-language model using a novel curriculum learning method. Specifically, the model first learns to align biomedical vocabulary using the figure-caption pairs as is, then learns to master open-ended conversational semantics using GPT-4 generated instruction-following data, broadly mimicking how a layperson gradually acquires biomedical knowledge. This enables us to train a Large Language and Vision Assistant for BioMedicine (LLaVA-Med) in less than 15 hours (with eight A100s). LLaVA-Med exhibits excellent multimodal conversational capability and can follow open-ended instruction to assist with inquiries about a biomedical image. On three standard biomedical visual question answering datasets, LLaVA-Med outperforms previous supervised state-of-the-art on certain metrics. To facilitate biomedical multimodal research, we will release our instruction-following data and the LLaVA-Med model.14e:T42c,Exploring in environments with high-dimensional observations is hard. One promising approach for exploration is to use intrinsic rewards, which often boils down to estimating "novelty" of states, transitions, or trajectories with deep networks. Prior works have shown that conditional prediction objectives such as masked autoencoding can be seen as stochastic estimation of pseudo-likelihood. We show how this perspective naturally leads to a unified view on existing intrinsic reward approaches: they are special cases of conditional prediction, where the estimation of novelty can be seen as pseudo-likelihood estimation with different mask distributions. From this view, we propose a general framework for deriving intrinsic rewards -- Masked Input Modeling for Exploration (MIMEx) -- where the mask distribution can be flexibly tuned to control the difficulty of the underlying conditional prediction task. We demonstrate that MIMEx can achieve superior results when compared against competitive baselines on a suite of challenging sparse-reward visuomotor tasks.14f:T628,Large Language Models (LLMs) significantly benefit from Chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting in performing various reasoning tasks. While CoT allows models to produce more comprehensive reasoning processes, its emphasis on intermediate reasoning steps can inadvertently introduce hallucinations and accumulated errors, thereby limiting models’ ability to solve complex reasoning tasks. Inspired by how humans engage in careful and meticulous deductive logical reasoning processes to solve tasks, we seek to enable language models to perform explicit and rigorous deductive reasoning, and also ensure the trustworthiness of their reasoning process through self-verification. However, directly verifying the validity of an entire deductive reasoning process is challenging, even with advanced models like ChatGPT. In light of this, we propose to decompose a reasoning verification process into a series of step-by-step subprocesses, each only receiving their necessary context and premises. To facilitate this procedure, we propose Natural Program, a natural language-based deductive reasoning format. Our approach enables models to generate precise reasoning steps where subsequent steps are more rigorously grounded on prior steps. It also empowers language models to carry out reasoning self-verification in a step-by-step manner. By integrating this verification process into each deductive reasoning stage, we significantly enhance the rigor and trustfulness of generated reasoning steps. Along this process, we also improve the answer correctness on complex reasoning tasks.150:T612,We introduce OpenShape, a method for learning multi-modal joint representations of text, image, and point clouds. We adopt the commonly used multi-modal contrastive learning framework for representation alignment, but with a specific focus on scaling up 3D representations to enable open-world 3D shape understanding. To achieve this, we scale up training data by ensembling multiple 3D datasets and propose several strategies to automatically filter and enrich noisy text descriptions. We also explore and compare strategies for scaling 3D backbone networks and introduce a novel hard negative mining module for more efficient training. We evaluate OpenShape on zero-shot 3D classification benchmarks and demonstrate its superior capabilities for open-world recognition. Specifically, OpenShape achieves a zero-shot accuracy of 46.8% on the 1,156-category Objaverse-LVIS benchmark, compared to less than 10% for existing methods. OpenShape also achieves an accuracy of 85.3% on ModelNet40, outperforming previous zero-shot baseline methods by 20% and performing on par with some fully-supervised methods. Furthermore, we show that our learned embeddings encode a wide range of visual and semantic concepts (e.g., subcategories, color, shape, style) and facilitate fine-grained text-3D and image-3D interactions. Due to their alignment with CLIP embeddings, our learned shape representations can also be integrated with off-the-shelf CLIP-based models for various applications, such as point cloud captioning and point cloud-conditioned image generation.151:T5d3,Masked graph modeling excels in the self-supervised representation learning of molecular graphs. Scrutinizing previous studies, we can reveal a common scheme consisting of three key components: (1) graph tokenizer, which breaks a molecular graph into smaller fragments (\ie subgraphs) and converts them into tokens; (2) graph masking, which corrupts the graph with masks; (3) graph autoencoder, which first applies an encoder on the masked graph to generate the representations, and then employs a decoder on the representations to recover the tokens of the original graph. However, the previous MGM studies focus extensively on graph masking and encoder, while there is limited understanding of tokenizer and decoder. To bridge the gap, we first summarize popular molecule tokenizers at the granularity of node, edge, motif, and Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), and then examine their roles as the MGM's reconstruction targets. Further, we explore the potential of adopting an expressive decoder in MGM. Our results show that a subgraph-level tokenizer and a sufficiently expressive decoder with remask decoding have a \yuan{large impact on the encoder's representation learning}. Finally, we propose a novel MGM method SimSGT, featuring a Simple GNN-based Tokenizer (SGT) and an effective decoding strategy. We empirically validate that our method outperforms the existing molecule self-supervised learning methods. Our codes and checkpoints are available at https://github.com/syr-cn/SimSGT.152:T4e2,Riemannian diffusion models draw inspiration from standard Euclidean space diffusion models to learn distributions on general manifolds. Unfortunately, the additional geometric complexity renders the diffusion transition term inexpressible in closed form, so prior methods resort to imprecise approximations of the score matching training objective that degrade performance and preclude applications in high dimensions. In this work, we reexamine these approximations and propose several practical improvements. Our key observation is that most relevant manifolds are symmetric spaces, which are much more amenable to computation. By leveraging and combining various ans\"{a}tze, we can quickly compute relevant quantities to high precision. On low dimensional datasets, our correction produces a noticeable improvement and is competitive with other techniques. Additionally, we show that our method enables us to scale to high dimensional tasks on nontrivial manifolds, including $SU(n)$ lattices in the context of lattice quantum chromodynamics (QCD). Finally, we apply our models to contrastively learned hyperspherical embeddings, curbing the representation collapse problem in the projection head and closing the gap between theory and practice.153:T43a,Human perception of the empirical world involves recognizing the diverse appearances, or 'modalities', of underlying objects. Despite the longstanding consideration of this perspective in philosophy and cognitive science, the study of multimodality remains relatively under-explored within the field of machine learning. Nevertheless, current studies of multimodal machine learning are limited to empirical practices, lacking theoretical foundations beyond heuristic arguments. 
An intriguing finding from the practice of multimodal learning is that a model trained on multiple modalities can outperform a finely-tuned unimodal model, even on unimodal tasks. This paper provides a theoretical framework that explains this phenomenon, by studying generalization properties of multimodal learning algorithms. We demonstrate that multimodal learning allows for a superior generalization bound compared to unimodal learning, up to a factor of $O(\sqrt{n})$, where $n$ represents the sample size. Such advantage occurs when both connection and heterogeneity exist between the modalities.154:T5a9,Large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable progress in solving various natural language processing tasks due to emergent reasoning abilities. However, LLMs have inherent limitations as they are incapable of accessing up-to-date information (stored on the Web or in task-specific knowledge bases), using external tools, and performing precise mathematical and logical reasoning. In this paper, we present Chameleon, an AI system that mitigates these limitations by augmenting LLMs with plug-and-play modules for compositional reasoning. Chameleon synthesizes programs by composing various tools (e.g., LLMs, off-the-shelf vision models, web search engines, Python functions, and heuristic-based modules) for accomplishing complex reasoning tasks. At the heart of Chameleon is an LLM-based planner that assembles a sequence of tools to execute to generate the final response. We showcase the effectiveness of Chameleon on two multi-modal knowledge-intensive reasoning tasks: ScienceQA and TabMWP. Chameleon, powered by GPT-4, achieves an 86.54% overall accuracy on ScienceQA, improving the best published few-shot result by 11.37%. On TabMWP, GPT-4-powered Chameleon improves the accuracy by 17.0%, lifting the state of the art to 98.78%. Our analysis also shows that the GPT-4-powered planner exhibits more consistent and rational tool selection via inferring potential constraints from instructions, compared to a ChatGPT-powered planner.155:T43c,Existing automatic evaluation on text-to-image synthesis can only provide an image-text matching score, without considering the object-level compositionality, which results in poor correlation with human judgments. In this work, we propose LLMScore, a new framework that offers evaluation scores with multi-granularity compositionality. LLMScore leverages the large language models (LLMs) to evaluate text-to-image models. Initially, it transforms the image into image-level and object-level visual descriptions. Then an evaluation instruction is fed into the LLMs to measure the alignment between the synthesized image and the text, ultimately generating a score accompanied by a rationale. 
Our substantial analysis reveals the highest correlation of LLMScore with human judgments on a wide range of datasets (Attribute Binding Contrast, Concept Conjunction, MSCOCO, DrawBench, PaintSkills). Notably, our LLMScore achieves Kendall's tau correlation with human evaluations that is 58.8% and 31.2% higher than the commonly-used text-image matching metrics CLIP and BLIP, respectively.156:T71b,Due to the ease of training, ability to scale, and high sample quality, diffusion models (DMs) have become the preferred option for generative modeling, with numerous pre-trained models available for a wide variety of datasets. Containing intricate information about data distributions, pre-trained DMs are valuable assets for downstream applications. In this work, we consider learning from pre-trained DMs and transferring their knowledge to other generative models in a data-free fashion. Specifically, we propose a general framework called Diff-Instruct to instruct the training of arbitrary generative models as long as the generated samples are differentiable with respect to the model parameters. Our proposed Diff-Instruct is built on a rigorous mathematical foundation where the instruction process directly corresponds to minimizing a novel divergence we call Integral Kullback-Leibler (IKL) divergence. IKL is tailored for DMs by calculating the integral of the KL divergence along a diffusion process, which we show to be more robust in comparing distributions with misaligned supports. We also reveal non-trivial connections of our method to existing works such as DreamFusion \citep{poole2022dreamfusion}, and generative adversarial training. To demonstrate the effectiveness and universality of Diff-Instruct, we consider two scenarios: distilling pre-trained diffusion models and refining existing GAN models. The experiments on distilling pre-trained diffusion models show that Diff-Instruct results in state-of-the-art single-step diffusion-based models. The experiments on refining GAN models show that the Diff-Instruct can consistently improve the pre-trained generators of GAN models across various settings. Our official code is released through \url{https://github.com/pkulwj1994/diff_instruct}.157:T704,Recently,  growing interest has been aroused in extending the multimodal capability of large language models (LLMs), e.g., vision-language (VL) learning, which is regarded as the next milestone of artificial general intelligence. However, existing solutions are prohibitively expensive, which not only need to optimize excessive parameters, but also require another large-scale pre-training before VL instruction tuning. In this paper, we propose a novel and  affordable  solution for the effective VL adaption of LLMs, called  Mixture-of-Modality Adaptation (MMA).  Instead of using large neural networks to connect the image encoder and LLM, MMA adopts lightweight modules, i.e., adapters, to  bridge the gap between LLMs and VL tasks, which also enables the joint optimization of the image and language models. Meanwhile, MMA is also equipped with a routing algorithm to help LLMs achieve an  automatic  shift between single- and multi-modal instructions without compromising their ability of natural language understanding.  To validate MMA, we apply it to a recent LLM called LLaMA and term this formed large vision-language instructed model as LaVIN.  To validate MMA and LaVIN, we conduct extensive experiments  under two setups, namely  multimodal science question answering and multimodal dialogue. The experimental results not only demonstrate the competitive performance and the superior training efficiency  of LaVIN  than existing multimodal LLMs, but also confirm  its  great potential   as a general-purpose chatbot. More importantly, the actual expenditure of LaVIN is extremely cheap, e.g., only 1.4 training hours with 3.8M trainable parameters, greatly confirming the effectiveness of MMA.   Our  code is anonymously released at:  https://anonymous.4open.science/r/LaVIN--1067.158:T4f0,Large language models have demonstrated surprising ability to perform in-context learning, i.e., these models can be directly applied to solve numerous downstream tasks by conditioning on a prompt constructed by a few input-output examples. However, prior research has shown that in-context learning can suffer from high instability due to variations in training examples, example order, and prompt formats. Therefore, the construction of an appropriate prompt is essential for improving the performance of in-context learning. In this paper,  we revisit this problem from the view of predictive bias. Specifically, we introduce a metric to evaluate the predictive bias of a fixed prompt against labels or a given attributes. Then we empirically show that prompts with higher bias always lead to unsatisfactory predictive quality. Based on this observation, we propose a novel search strategy based on the greedy search to identify the near-optimal prompt for improving the performance of in-context learning. We perform comprehensive experiments with state-of-the-art mainstream models such as GPT-3 on various downstream tasks. Our results indicate that our method can enhance the model's in-context learning performance in an effective and interpretable manner.159:T730,We introduce EgoSchema, a very long-form video question-answering dataset, and benchmark to evaluate long video understanding capabilities of modern vision and language systems. Derived from Ego4D, EgoSchema consists of over 5000 human curated multiple choice question answer pairs, spanning over 250 hours of real video data, covering a very broad range of natural human activity and behavior. For each question, EgoSchema requires the correct answer to be selected between five given options based on a three-minute-long video clip. While some prior works have proposed video datasets with long clip lengths, we posit that merely the length of the video clip does not truly capture the temporal difficulty of the video task that is being considered. To remedy this, we introduce temporal certificate sets, a general notion for capturing the intrinsic temporal understanding length associated with a broad range of video understanding tasks & datasets. Based on this metric, we find EgoSchema to have intrinsic temporal lengths over 5.7x longer than the second closest dataset and 10x to 100x longer than any other video understanding dataset. Further, our evaluation of several current state-of-the-art video and language models shows them to be severely lacking in long-term video understanding capabilities. Even models with several billions of parameters achieve QA accuracy less than 33% (random is 20%) on the EgoSchema multi-choice question answering task, while humans achieve about 76% accuracy. We posit that EgoSchema, with its long intrinsic temporal structures and diverse complexity, would serve as a valuable evaluation probe for developing effective long-term video understanding systems in the future. Data and Zero-shot model evaluation code will all be open-sourced under the Ego4D license at http://egoschema.github.io.15a:T7a5,Continual learning (CL) aims to incrementally learn different tasks (such as classification) in a non-stationary data stream without forgetting old ones. Most CL works focus on tackling catastrophic forgetting under a learning-from-scratch paradigm. However, with the increasing prominence of foundation models, pre-trained models equipped with informative representations have become available for various downstream requirements. Several CL methods based on pre-trained models have been explored, either utilizing pre-extracted features directly (which makes bridging distribution gaps challenging) or incorporating adaptors (which may be subject to forgetting). In this paper, we propose a concise and effective approach for CL with pre-trained models. Given that forgetting occurs during parameter updating, we contemplate an alternative approach that exploits training-free random projectors and class-prototype accumulation, which thus bypasses the issue. Specifically, we inject a frozen Random Projection layer with nonlinear activation between the pre-trained model's feature representations and output head, which captures interactions between features with expanded dimensionality, providing enhanced linear separability for class-prototype-based CL. We also demonstrate the importance of decorrelating the class-prototypes to reduce the distribution disparity when using pre-trained representations. These techniques prove to be effective and circumvent the problem of forgetting for both class- and domain-incremental continual learning. Compared to previous methods applied to pre-trained ViT-B/16 models, we reduce final error rates by between 20% and 62% on seven class-incremental benchmark datasets, despite not using any rehearsal memory. We conclude that the full potential of pre-trained models for simple, effective, and fast continual learning has not hitherto been fully tapped. Code is available at https://github.com/RanPAC/RanPAC.15b:T479,One way to interpret the reasoning power of transformer-based language models is to describe the types of logical rules they can resolve over some input text. Recently, Chiang et al. (2023) showed that finite-precision transformer classifiers can be equivalently expressed in a generalization of first-order logic. However, finite-precision transformers are a weak transformer variant because, as we show, a single head can only attend to a constant number of tokens and, in particular, cannot represent uniform attention. Since attending broadly is a core capability for transformers, we ask whether a minimally more expressive model that can attend universally can also be characterized in logic. To this end, we analyze transformers whose forward pass is computed in $\log n$ precision on contexts of length $n$. We prove any log-precision transformer classifier can be equivalently expressed as a first-order logic sentence that, in addition to standard universal and existential quantifiers, may also contain majority-vote quantifiers. This is the tightest known upper bound and first logical characterization of log-precision transformers.15c:T50b,Pushing the boundaries of machine learning often requires exploring different hardware and software combinations. However, this ability to experiment with different systems can be at odds with the drive for efficiency, which has produced increasingly specialized AI hardware and incentivized consolidation around a narrow set of ML frameworks. Exploratory research can be further restricted if software and hardware are co-evolving, making it even harder to stray away from a given tooling stack. While this friction increasingly impacts the rate of innovation in machine learning, to our knowledge the lack of portability in tooling has not been quantified. In this work we ask: How portable are popular ML software frameworks? We conduct a large scale study of the portability of mainstream ML frameworks across different hardware types. Our findings paint an uncomfortable picture -- frameworks can lose more than 40% of their key functions when ported to other hardware. Worse, even when functions are portable, the slowdown in their performance can be extreme. Collectively, our results reveal how costly straying from a narrow set of hardware-software combinations can be - and thus how specialization incurs an exploration cost that can impede innovation in machine learning research.15d:T5a8,Vision-language models, such as contrastive language-image pre-training (CLIP), have demonstrated impressive results in natural image domains. However, these models often struggle when applied to specialized domains like remote sensing, and adapting to such domains is challenging due to the limited number of image-text pairs available for training. To address this, we propose S-CLIP, a semi-supervised learning method for training CLIP that utilizes additional unpaired images. S-CLIP employs two pseudo-labeling strategies specifically designed for contrastive learning and the language modality. The caption-level pseudo-label is given by a combination of captions of paired images, obtained by solving an optimal transport problem between unpaired and paired images. The keyword-level pseudo-label is given by a keyword in the caption of the nearest paired image, trained through partial label learning that assumes a candidate set of labels for supervision instead of the exact one. By combining these objectives, S-CLIP significantly enhances the training of CLIP using only a few image-text pairs, as demonstrated in various specialist domains, including remote sensing, fashion, scientific figures, and comics. For instance, S-CLIP improves CLIP by 10% for zero-shot classification and 4% for image-text retrieval on the remote sensing benchmark, matching the performance of supervised CLIP while using three times fewer image-text pairs.15e:T621,Recently an influx of studies claims emergent cognitive abilities in large language models (LLMs). Yet, most rely on anecdotes, overlook contamination of training sets, or lack systematic Evaluation involving multiple tasks, control conditions, multiple iterations, and statistical robustness tests. Here we make two major contributions. First, we propose CogEval, a cognitive science-inspired protocol for the systematic evaluation of cognitive capacities in LLMs. The CogEval protocol can be followed for the evaluation of various abilities. Second, here we follow CogEval to systematically evaluate cognitive maps and planning ability across eight LLMs (OpenAI GPT-4, GPT-3.5-turbo-175B, davinci-003-175B, Google Bard, Cohere-xlarge-52.4B, Anthropic Claude-1-52B, LLaMA-13B, and Alpaca-7B). We base our task prompts on human experiments, which offer both established construct validity for evaluating planning, and are absent from LLM training sets. We find that, while LLMs show apparent competence in a few planning tasks with simpler structures, systematic evaluation reveals striking failure modes in planning tasks, including hallucinations of invalid trajectories and falling in loops. These findings do not support the idea of emergent out-of-the-box planning ability in LLMs. This could be because LLMs do not understand the latent relational structures underlying planning problems, known as cognitive maps, and fail at unrolling goal-directed trajectories based on the underlying structure. Implications for application and future directions are discussed.15f:T543,Equivariant networks are specifically designed to ensure consistent behavior with respect to a set of input transformations, leading to higher sample efficiency and more accurate and robust predictions. However, redesigning each component of prevalent deep neural network architectures to achieve chosen equivariance is a difficult problem and can result in a computationally expensive network during both training and inference. A recently proposed alternative towards equivariance that removes the architectural constraints is to use a simple canonicalization network that transforms the input to a canonical form before feeding it to an unconstrained prediction network. We show here that this approach can effectively be used to make a large pretrained network equivariant. However, we observe that the produced canonical orientations can be misaligned with those of the training distribution, hindering performance. Using dataset-dependent priors to inform the canonicalization function, we are able to make large pretrained models equivariant while maintaining their performance. This significantly improves the robustness of these models to deterministic transformations of the data, such as rotations. We believe this equivariant adaptation of large pretrained models can help their domain-specific applications with known symmetry priors.160:T648,Embodied AI is a crucial frontier in robotics, capable of planning and executing action sequences for robots to accomplish long-horizon tasks in physical environments.
In this work, we introduce EmbodiedGPT, an end-to-end multi-modal foundation model for embodied AI, empowering embodied agents with multi-modal understanding and execution capabilities. To achieve this, we have made the following efforts: (i) We craft a large-scale embodied planning dataset, termed EgoCOT. The dataset consists of carefully selected videos from the Ego4D dataset, along with corresponding high-quality language instructions. Specifically, we generate a sequence of sub-goals with the "Chain of Thoughts" mode for effective embodied planning.
(ii) We introduce an efficient training approach to EmbodiedGPT for high-quality plan generation, by adapting a 7B large language model (LLM) to the EgoCOT dataset via prefix tuning. (iii) We introduce a paradigm for extracting task-related features from LLM-generated planning queries to form a closed loop between high-level planning and low-level control.
Extensive experiments show the effectiveness of EmbodiedGPT on embodied tasks, including embodied planning, embodied control, visual captioning, and visual question answering.
Notably, EmbodiedGPT significantly enhances the success rate of the embodied control task by extracting more effective features. It has achieved a remarkable 1.6 times increase in success rate on the Franka Kitchen benchmark and a 1.3 times increase on the Meta-World benchmark, compared to the BLIP-2 baseline fine-tuned with the Ego4D dataset.161:T7ab,The quest for human imitative AI has been an enduring topic in AI research since inception. The technical evolution and emerging capabilities of the latest cohort of large language models (LLMs) have reinvigorated the subject beyond academia to cultural zeitgeist. 
While recent NLP evaluation benchmark tasks test some aspects of human-imitative behaviour (e.g., BIG-bench's `human-like behavior' tasks), few, if not none, examine *creative problem solving* abilities. Creative problem solving in humans is a well-studied topic in cognitive neuroscience with standardized tests that predominantly use ability to associate (heterogeneous) connections among clue words as a metric for creativity. Exposure to misleading stimuli --- distractors dubbed *red herrings* --- impede human performance in such tasks via the *fixation effect* and Einstellung paradigm. In cognitive neuroscience studies, such fixations are experimentally induced by pre-exposing participants to orthographically similar incorrect words to subsequent word-fragments or clues. The popular British quiz show Only Connect's *Connecting Wall* segment essentially mimics Mednick's Remote Associates Test (RAT) formulation with built-in, deliberate red herrings, that makes it an ideal proxy dataset to explore and study fixation effect and Einstellung paradigm from cognitive neuroscience in LLMs. In addition to presenting the novel Only Connect Wall (OCW) dataset, we also report results from our evaluation of selected pre-trained language models and LLMs (including OpenAI's GPT series) on creative problem solving tasks like grouping clue words by heterogeneous connections, and identifying correct open knowledge domain connections in respective groups. We synthetically generate two additional datasets: OCW-Randomized, OCW-WordNet to further analyze our red-herrings hypothesis in language models.
The code and link to the dataset is available at [url](https://github.com/TaatiTeam/OCW).162:T6f6,Representations learned by pre-training a neural network on a large dataset are increasingly used successfully to perform a variety of downstream tasks. In this work, we take a closer look at how features are encoded in such pre-trained representations. We find that learned representations in a given layer exhibit a degree of diffuse redundancy, ie, any randomly chosen subset of neurons in the layer that is larger than a threshold size shares a large degree of similarity with the full layer and is able to perform similarly as the whole layer on a variety of downstream tasks. For example, a linear probe trained on $20\%$ of randomly picked neurons from the penultimate layer of a ResNet50 pre-trained on ImageNet1k achieves an accuracy within $5\%$ of a linear probe trained on the full layer of neurons for downstream CIFAR10 classification. We conduct experiments on different neural architectures (including CNNs and Transformers) pre-trained on both ImageNet1k and ImageNet21k and evaluate a variety of downstream tasks taken from the VTAB benchmark. We find that the loss \& dataset used during pre-training largely govern the degree of diffuse redundancy and the "critical mass" of neurons needed often depends on the downstream task, suggesting that there is a task-inherent redundancy-performance Pareto frontier. Our findings shed light on the nature of representations learned by pre-trained deep neural networks and suggest that entire layers might not be necessary to perform many downstream tasks. We investigate the potential for exploiting this redundancy to achieve efficient generalization for downstream tasks and also draw caution to certain possible unintended consequences. Our code is available at \url{https://github.com/nvedant07/diffused-redundancy}.163:T4c7,Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms face two distinct challenges: learning effective representations of past and present observations, and determining how actions influence future returns. Both challenges involve modeling long-term dependencies. The Transformer architecture has been very successful to solve problems that involve long-term dependencies, including in the RL domain. However, the underlying reason for the strong performance of Transformer-based RL methods remains unclear: is it because they learn effective memory, or because they perform effective credit assignment? After introducing formal definitions of memory length and credit assignment length, we design simple configurable tasks to measure these distinct quantities. Our empirical results reveal that Transformers can enhance the memory capability of RL algorithms, scaling up to tasks that require memorizing observations $1500$ steps ago. However, Transformers do not improve long-term credit assignment. In summary, our results provide an explanation for the success of Transformers in RL, while also highlighting an important area for future research and benchmark design. Our code is open-sourced at https://github.com/twni2016/Memory-RL.164:T4f4,Human commonsense understanding of the physical and social world is organized around intuitive theories. These theories support making causal and moral judgments. When something bad happens, we naturally ask: who did what, and why? A rich literature in cognitive science has studied people's causal and moral intuitions. This work has revealed a number of factors that systematically influence people's judgments, such as the violation of norms and whether the harm is avoidable or inevitable. We collected a dataset of stories from 24 cognitive science papers and developed a system to annotate each story with the factors they investigated. Using this dataset, we test whether large language models (LLMs) make causal and moral judgments about text-based scenarios that align with those of human participants. On the aggregate level, alignment has improved with more recent LLMs. However, using statistical analyses, we find that LLMs weigh the different factors quite differently from human participants. These results show how curated, challenge datasets combined with insights from cognitive science can help us go beyond comparisons based merely on aggregate metrics: we uncover LLMs implicit tendencies and show to what extent these align with human intuitions.165:T47c,CLIP proved that aligning visual and language spaces is key to solving many vision tasks without explicit training, but required to train image and text encoders from scratch on a huge dataset. LiT improved this by only training the text encoder and using a pre-trained vision network. In this paper, we show that a common space can be created without any training at all, using single-domain encoders (trained with or without supervision) and a much smaller amount of image-text pairs. Furthermore, our model has unique properties. Most notably, deploying a new version with updated training samples can be done in a matter of seconds. Additionally, the representations in the common space are easily interpretable as every dimension corresponds to the similarity of the input to a unique entry in the multimodal dataset. Experiments on standard zero-shot visual benchmarks demonstrate the typical transfer ability of image-text models. Overall, our method represents a simple yet surprisingly strong baseline for foundation multi-modal models, raising important questions on their data efficiency and on the role of retrieval in machine learning.166:T57b,Diffusion models have achieved remarkable results in image generation, and have similarly been used to learn high-performing policies in sequential decision-making tasks. 
Decision-making diffusion models can be trained on lower-quality data, and then be steered with a reward function to generate near-optimal trajectories.
We consider the problem of extracting a reward function by comparing a decision-making diffusion model that models low-reward behavior and one that models high-reward behavior; a setting related to inverse reinforcement learning. 
We first define the notion of a \emph{relative reward function of two diffusion models} and show conditions under which it exists and is unique. 
We then devise a practical learning algorithm for extracting it by aligning the gradients of a reward function -- parametrized by a neural network -- to the difference in outputs of both diffusion models.
Our method finds correct reward functions in navigation environments, and we demonstrate that steering the base model with the learned reward functions results in significantly increased performance in standard locomotion benchmarks.
Finally, we demonstrate that our approach generalizes beyond sequential decision-making by learning a reward-like function from two large-scale image generation diffusion models. The extracted reward function successfully assigns lower rewards to harmful images.167:T5f0,Modern generative models exhibit unprecedented capabilities to generate extremely realistic data. However, given the inherent compositionality of the real world, reliable use of these models in practical applications requires that they exhibit the capability to compose a novel set of concepts to generate outputs not seen in the training data set. Prior work demonstrates that recent diffusion models do exhibit intriguing compositional generalization abilities, but also fail unpredictably. Motivated by this, we perform a controlled study for understanding compositional generalization in conditional diffusion models in a synthetic setting, varying different attributes of the training data and measuring the model's ability to generate samples out-of-distribution. Our results show: (i) the order in which the ability to generate samples from a concept and compose them emerges is governed by the structure of the underlying data-generating process; (ii) performance on compositional tasks exhibits a sudden "emergence" due to multiplicative reliance on the performance of constituent tasks, partially explaining emergent phenomena seen in generative models; and (iii) composing concepts with lower frequency in the training data to generate out-of-distribution samples requires considerably more optimization steps compared to generating in-distribution samples. Overall, our study lays a foundation for understanding emergent capabilities and compositionality in generative models from a data-centric perspective.168:T50d,Language models have been shown to be very effective in predicting brain recordings of subjects experiencing complex language stimuli. For a deeper understanding of this alignment, it is important to understand the correspondence between the detailed processing of linguistic information by the human brain versus language models. We investigate this correspondence via a direct approach, in which we eliminate information related to specific linguistic properties in the language model representations and observe how this intervention affects the alignment with fMRI brain recordings obtained while participants listened to a story. We investigate a range of linguistic properties (surface, syntactic, and semantic) and find that the elimination of each one results in a significant decrease in brain alignment. Specifically, we find that syntactic properties (i.e. Top Constituents and Tree Depth) have the largest effect on the trend of brain alignment across model layers. These findings provide clear evidence for the role of specific linguistic information in the alignment between brain and language models, and open new avenues for mapping the joint information processing in both systems. We make the code publicly available https://github.com/subbareddy248/lingprop-brain-alignment.169:T79b,Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) for cross-task generalization consists in pre-training adapters on a multi-task training set before few-shot adaptation to test tasks. Polytropon [Ponti et al., 2023] ($\texttt{Poly}$) jointly learns an inventory of adapters and a *routing* function that selects a (variable-size) subset of adapters for each task during both pre-training and few-shot adaptation. In this paper, we investigate the role that adapter routing plays in its success and design new variants based on our findings.
First, we build on the intuition that finer-grained routing provides more expressivity. Hence,
we propose  $\texttt{MHR}$ (Multi-Head Routing) which combines *subsets* of adapter parameters and outperforms $\texttt{Poly}$ under a comparable parameter budget; by only fine-tuning the routing function and not the adapters ($\texttt{MHR}$-$z$) we achieve competitive performance with extreme parameter efficiency. Second, we find that  $\texttt{Poly}$/$\texttt{MHR}$ performance is a result of better multi-task optimization, rather than modular inductive biases that facilitate adapter recombination and local adaptation, as previously hypothesized. In fact, we find that $\texttt{MHR}$ exhibits high gradient alignment between training tasks. We find that routing is most beneficial during multi-task pre-training rather than during few-shot adaptation and propose $\texttt{MHR}$-$\mu$, which discards routing and fine-tunes the average of the pre-trained adapters on each downstream tasks. This establishes $\texttt{MHR}$-$\mu$ as an effective method for single-adapter fine-tuning. We also show that $\texttt{MHR}$-$\mu$ can be used as an effective zero-shot transfer method by training the average of the pre-trained adapters for a few additional steps on the multi-task training set: this yields gains up to 3\% on absolute accuracy w.r.t. the baselines. Code is available at <https://github.com/microsoft/mttl>.16a:T503,Data pruning, which aims to downsize a large training set into a small informative subset, is crucial for reducing the enormous computational costs of modern deep learning. Though large-scale data collections invariably contain annotation noise and numerous robust learning methods have been developed, data pruning for the noise-robust learning scenario has received little attention. With state-of-the-art Re-labeling methods that self-correct erroneous labels while training, it is challenging to identify which subset induces the most accurate re-labeling of erroneous labels in the entire training set. In this paper, we formalize the problem of data pruning with re-labeling. We first show that the likelihood of a training example being correctly re-labeled is proportional to the prediction confidence of its neighborhood in the subset. Therefore, we propose a novel data pruning algorithm, Prune4Rel, that finds a subset maximizing the total neighborhood confidence of all training examples, thereby maximizing the re-labeling accuracy and generalization performance. Extensive experiments on four real and one synthetic noisy datasets show that Prune4Rel outperforms the baselines with Re-labeling models by up to 9.1% as well as those with a standard model by up to 21.6%.16b:T4e8,Despite the remarkable performance of text-to-image diffusion models in image generation tasks, recent studies have raised the issue that generated images sometimes cannot capture the intended semantic contents of the text prompts, which phenomenon is often called semantic misalignment. To address this, here we present a novel energy-based model (EBM) framework for adaptive context control by modeling the posterior of context vectors. Specifically, we first formulate EBMs of latent image representations and text embeddings in each cross-attention layer of the denoising autoencoder. Then, we obtain the gradient of the log posterior of context vectors, which can be updated and transferred to the subsequent cross-attention layer, thereby implicitly minimizing a nested hierarchy of energy functions. 
Our latent EBMs further allow zero-shot compositional generation as a linear combination of cross-attention outputs from different contexts. 
Using extensive experiments, we demonstrate that the proposed method is highly effective in handling various image generation tasks, including multi-concept generation, text-guided image inpainting, and real and synthetic image editing. Code: https://github.com/EnergyAttention/Energy-Based-CrossAttention.16c:T54e,Humans learn powerful representations of objects and scenes by observing how they evolve over time. Yet, outside of specific tasks that require explicit temporal understanding, static image pretraining remains the dominant paradigm for learning visual foundation models. We question this mismatch, and ask whether video pretraining can yield visual representations that bear the hallmarks of human perception: generalisation across tasks, robustness to perturbations, and consistency with human judgements. To that end we propose a novel procedure for curating videos, and develop a contrastive framework which learns from the complex transformations therein. This simple paradigm for distilling knowledge from videos, called VITO, yields general representations that far outperform prior video pretraining methods on image understanding tasks, and image pretraining methods on video understanding tasks. Moreover, VITO representations are significantly more robust to natural and synthetic deformations than image-, video-, and adversarially-trained
ones. Finally, VITO’s predictions are strongly aligned with human judgements, surpassing models that were specifically trained for that purpose. Together, these results suggest that video pretraining could be a simple way of learning unified, robust, and human-aligned representations of the visual world.16d:T633,We propose a novel multimodal video benchmark - the Perception Test - to evaluate the perception and reasoning skills of pre-trained multimodal models (e.g. Flamingo, BEiT-3, or GPT-4). Compared to existing benchmarks that focus on computational tasks (e.g. classification, detection or tracking), the Perception Test focuses on skills (Memory, Abstraction, Physics, Semantics) and types of reasoning (descriptive, explanatory, predictive, counterfactual) across video, audio, and text modalities, to provide a comprehensive and efficient evaluation tool. The benchmark probes pre-trained models for their transfer capabilities, in a zero-shot / few-shot or limited finetuning regime. For these purposes, the Perception Test introduces 11.6k real-world videos, 23s average length, designed to show perceptually interesting situations, filmed by around 100 participants worldwide. The videos are densely annotated with six types of labels (multiple-choice and grounded video question-answers, object and point tracks, temporal action and sound segments), enabling both language and non-language evaluations. The fine-tuning and validation splits of the benchmark are publicly available (CC-BY license), in addition to a challenge server with a held-out test split. Human baseline results compared to state-of-the-art video QA models show a substantial gap in performance (91.4% vs 46.2%), suggesting that there is significant room for improvement in multimodal video understanding.
Dataset, baselines code, and challenge server are available at https://github.com/deepmind/perception_test16e:T4f9,Learning from active human involvement enables the human subject to actively intervene and demonstrate to the AI agent during training. The interaction and corrective feedback from human brings safety and AI alignment to the learning process. In this work, we propose a new reward-free active human involvement method called Proxy Value Propagation for policy optimization. Our key insight is that a proxy value function can be designed to express human intents, wherein state- action pairs in the human demonstration are labeled with high values, while those agents’ actions that are intervened receive low values. Through the TD-learning framework, labeled values of demonstrated state-action pairs are further propagated to other unlabeled data generated from agents’ exploration. The proxy value function thus induces a policy that faithfully emulates human behaviors. Human- in-the-loop experiments show the generality and efficiency of our method. With minimal modification to existing reinforcement learning algorithms, our method can learn to solve continuous and discrete control tasks with various human control devices, including the challenging task of driving in Grand Theft Auto V. Demo video and code are available at: https://metadriverse.github.io/pvp.16f:T513,Text-conditioned image generation models often generate incorrect associations between entities and their visual attributes. This reflects an impaired mapping between linguistic binding of entities and modifiers in the prompt and visual binding of the corresponding elements in the generated image. As one example, a query like ``a pink sunflower and a yellow flamingo'' may incorrectly produce an image of a yellow sunflower and a pink flamingo. To remedy this issue, we propose SynGen, an approach which first syntactically analyses the prompt to identify entities and their modifiers, and then uses a novel loss function that encourages the cross-attention maps to agree with the linguistic binding reflected by the syntax. Specifically, we encourage large overlap between attention maps of entities and their modifiers, and small overlap with other entities and modifier words. The loss is optimized during inference, without retraining or fine-tuning the model. Human evaluation on three datasets, including one new and challenging set, demonstrate significant improvements of SynGen compared with current state of the art methods. This work highlights how making use of sentence structure during inference can efficiently and substantially improve the faithfulness of text-to-image generation.170:T4ef,Generative diffusion models have recently emerged as a leading approach for generating high-dimensional data. In this paper, we show that the dynamics of these models exhibit a spontaneous symmetry breaking that divides the generative dynamics into two distinct phases: 1) A linear steady-state dynamics around a central fixed-point and 2) an attractor dynamics directed towards the data manifold. These two "phases'' are separated by the change in stability of the central fixed-point, with the resulting window of instability being responsible for the diversity of the generated samples. Using both theoretical and empirical evidence, we show that an accurate simulation of the early dynamics does not significantly contribute to the final generation, since early fluctuations are reverted to the central fixed point. To leverage this insight, we propose a Gaussian late initialization scheme, which significantly improves model performance, achieving up to 3x FID improvements on fast samplers, while also increasing sample diversity (e.g., racial composition of generated CelebA images). Our work offers a new way to understand the generative dynamics of diffusion models that has the potential to bring about higher performance and less biased fast-samplers.171:T449,Compositional generalization, the ability of an agent to generalize to unseen combinations of latent factors, is easy for humans but hard for deep neural networks. A line of research in cognitive science has hypothesized a process, "iterated learning," to help explain how human language developed this ability; the theory rests on simultaneous pressures towards compressibility (when an ignorant agent learns from an informed one) and expressivity (when it uses the representation for downstream tasks). Inspired by this process, we propose to improve the compositional generalization of deep networks by using iterated learning on models with simplicial embeddings, which can approximately discretize representations. This approach is further motivated by an analysis of compositionality based on Kolmogorov complexity. We show that this combination of changes improves compositional generalization over other approaches, demonstrating these improvements both on vision tasks with well-understood latent factors and on real molecular graph prediction tasks where the latent structure is unknown.172:T5a2,Machine learning models---including prominent zero-shot models---are often trained on datasets whose labels are only a small proportion of a larger label space. Such spaces are commonly equipped with a metric that relates the labels via distances between them. We propose a simple approach to exploit this information to adapt the trained model to reliably predict new classes---or, in the case of zero-shot prediction, to improve its performance---without any additional training. Our technique is a drop-in replacement of the standard prediction rule, swapping $\text{argmax}$ with the Fréchet mean. We provide a comprehensive theoretical analysis for this approach, studying (i) learning-theoretic results trading off label space diameter, sample complexity, and model dimension, (ii) characterizations of the full range of scenarios in which it is possible to predict any unobserved class, and (iii) an optimal active learning-like next class selection procedure to obtain optimal training classes for when it is not possible to predict the entire range of unobserved classes. Empirically, using easily-available external metrics, our proposed approach, Loki, gains up to 29.7% relative improvement over SimCLR on ImageNet and scales to hundreds of thousands of classes. When no such metric is available, Loki can use self-derived metrics from class embeddings and obtains a 10.5% improvement on pretrained zero-shot models such as CLIP.173:T4f0,Neural algorithmic reasoning is an emerging area of machine learning focusing on building models that can imitate the execution of classic algorithms, such as sorting, shortest paths, etc. One of the main challenges is to learn algorithms that are able to generalize to out-of-distribution data, in particular with significantly larger input sizes. Recent work on this problem has demonstrated the advantages of learning algorithms step-by-step, giving models access to all intermediate steps of the original algorithm. In this work, we instead focus on learning neural algorithmic reasoning only from the input-output pairs without appealing to the intermediate supervision. We propose simple but effective architectural improvements and also build a self-supervised objective that can regularise intermediate computations of the model without access to the algorithm trajectory. We demonstrate that our approach is competitive to its trajectory-supervised counterpart on tasks from the CLRS Algorithmic Reasoning Benchmark and achieves new state-of-the-art results for several problems, including sorting, where we obtain significant improvements. Thus, learning without intermediate supervision is a promising direction for further research on neural reasoners.174:T4b7,Training a single model on multiple input domains and/or output tasks allows for compressing information from multiple sources into a unified backbone hence improves model efficiency. It also enables potential positive knowledge transfer across tasks/domains, leading to improved accuracy and data-efficient training. However, optimizing such networks is a challenge, in particular due to discrepancies between the different tasks or domains: Despite several hypotheses and solutions proposed over the years, recent work has shown that uniform scalarization training, i.e., simply minimizing the average of the task losses,  yields on-par performance with more costly SotA optimization methods. This raises the issue of how well we understand the training dynamics of multi-task and multi-domain networks. In this work, we first devise a large-scale unified analysis of multi-domain and multi-task learning to better understand the dynamics of scalarization across varied task/domain combinations and model sizes. Following these insights, we then propose to leverage population-based training to efficiently search for the optimal scalarization weights when dealing with a large number of tasks or domains.175:T79a,A hallmark property of explainable AI models is the ability to teach other agents, communicating knowledge of how to perform a task. While Large Language Models (LLMs) perform complex reasoning by generating explanations for their predictions, it is unclear whether they also make good teachers for weaker agents. To address this, we consider a student-teacher framework between two LLM agents and study if, when, and how the teacher should intervene with natural language explanations to improve the student’s performance. Since communication is expensive, we define a budget such that the teacher only communicates explanations for a fraction of the data, after which the student should perform well on its own. We decompose the teaching problem along four axes: (1) if teacher’s test time in- tervention improve student predictions, (2) when it is worth explaining a data point, (3) how the teacher should personalize explanations to better teach the student, and (4) if teacher explanations also improve student performance on future unexplained data. We first show that teacher LLMs can indeed intervene on student reasoning to improve their performance. Next, inspired by the Theory of Mind abilities of effective teachers, we propose building two few-shot mental models of the student. The first model defines an Intervention Function that simulates the utility of an intervention, allowing the teacher to intervene when this utility is the highest and improving student performance at lower budgets. The second model enables the teacher to personalize explanations for a particular student and outperform unpersonalized teachers. We also demonstrate that in multi-turn interactions, teacher explanations generalize and learning from explained data improves student performance on future unexplained data. Finally, we also verify that misaligned teachers can lower student performance to random chance by intentionally misleading them.176:T829,Labeling neural network submodules with human-legible descriptions is useful for many downstream tasks: such descriptions can surface failures, guide interventions, and perhaps even explain important model behaviors. To date, most mechanistic descriptions of trained networks have involved small models, narrowly delimited phenomena, and large amounts of human labor. Labeling all human-interpretable sub-computations in models of increasing size and complexity will almost certainly require tools that can generate and validate descriptions automatically. Recently, techniques that use learned models in-the-loop for labeling have begun to gain traction, but methods for evaluating their efficacy are limited and ad-hoc. How should we validate and compare open-ended labeling tools? This paper introduces FIND (Function INterpretation and Description), a benchmark suite for evaluating the building blocks of automated interpretability methods. FIND contains functions that resemble components of trained neural networks, and accompanying descriptions of the kind we seek to generate. The functions are procedurally constructed across textual and numeric domains, and involve a range of real-world complexities, including noise, composition, approximation, and bias. We evaluate methods that use pretrained language models (LMs) to produce code-based and natural language descriptions of function behavior. Additionally, we introduce a new interactive method in which an Automated Interpretability Agent (AIA) generates function descriptions. We find that an AIA, built with an off-the-shelf LM augmented with black-box access to functions, can sometimes infer function structure—acting as a scientist by forming hypotheses, proposing experiments, and updating descriptions in light of new data. However, FIND also reveals that LM-based descriptions capture global function behavior while missing local details. These results suggest that FIND will be useful for characterizing the performance of more sophisticated interpretability methods before they are applied to real-world models.177:T420,Recent works have shown that diffusion models can learn essentially any distribution provided one can perform score estimation.
Yet it remains poorly understood under what settings score estimation is possible, let alone when practical gradient-based algorithms for this task can provably succeed. 

In this work, we give the first provably efficient results for one of the most fundamental distribution families, Gaussian mixture models.
We prove that GD on the denoising diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM) objective can efficiently recover the ground truth parameters of the mixture model in the following two settings:
1. We show GD with random initialization learns mixtures of two spherical Gaussians in $d$ dimensions with $1/\text{poly}(d)$-separated centers.
2. We show GD with a warm start learns mixtures of $K$ spherical Gaussians with $\Omega(\sqrt{\log(\min(K,d))})$-separated centers.

A key ingredient in our proofs is a new connection between score-based methods and two other approaches to distribution learning, EM and spectral methods.178:T609,Despite their prevalence in deep-learning communities, over-parameterized models convey high demands of computational costs for proper training. This work studies the fine-grained, modular-level learning dynamics of over-parameterized models to attain a more efficient and fruitful training strategy. Empirical evidence reveals that when scaling down into network modules, such as heads in self-attention models, we can observe varying learning patterns implicitly associated with each module's trainability. To describe such modular-level learning capabilities, we introduce a novel concept dubbed modular neural tangent kernel (mNTK), and we demonstrate that the quality of a module's learning is tightly associated with its mNTK's principal eigenvalue $\lambda_{\max}$. A large $\lambda_{\max}$  indicates that the module learns features with better convergence, while those miniature ones may impact generalization negatively. Inspired by the discovery, we propose a novel training strategy termed Modular Adaptive Training (MAT) to update those modules with their $\lambda_{\max}$ exceeding a dynamic threshold selectively, concentrating the model on learning common features and ignoring those inconsistent ones. Unlike most existing training schemes with a complete BP cycle across all network modules, MAT can significantly save computations by its partially-updating strategy and can further improve performance. Experiments show that MAT nearly halves the computational cost of model training and outperforms the accuracy of baselines.179:T411,Large language models have shown astonishing performance on a wide range of reasoning tasks. In this paper, we investigate whether they could reason about real-world events and help improve the prediction performance of event sequence models. We design LAMP, a framework that integrates a large language model in event prediction. Particularly, the language model performs abductive reasoning to assist an event sequence model: the event model proposes predictions on future events given the past; instructed by a few expert-annotated demonstrations, the language model learns to suggest possible causes for each proposal; a search module finds out the previous events that match the causes; a scoring function learns to examine whether the retrieved events could actually cause the proposal. Through extensive experiments on several challenging real-world datasets, we demonstrate that our framework---thanks to the reasoning capabilities of large language models---could significantly outperform the state-of-the-art event sequence models.17a:T546,Diffusion models are powerful generative models but suffer from slow sampling, often taking 1000 sequential denoising steps for one sample. As a result, considerable efforts have been directed toward reducing the number of denoising steps, but these methods hurt sample quality. Instead of reducing the number of denoising steps (trading quality for speed), in this paper we explore an orthogonal approach: can we run the denoising steps in parallel (trading compute for speed)? In spite of the sequential nature of the denoising steps, we show that surprisingly it is possible to parallelize sampling via Picard iterations, by guessing the solution of future denoising steps and iteratively refining until convergence. With this insight, we present ParaDiGMS, a novel method to accelerate the sampling of pretrained diffusion models by denoising multiple steps in parallel. ParaDiGMS is the first diffusion sampling method that enables trading compute for speed and is even compatible with existing fast sampling techniques such as DDIM and DPMSolver. Using ParaDiGMS, we improve sampling speed by 2-4x across a range of robotics and image generation models, giving state-of-the-art sampling speeds of 0.2s on 100-step DiffusionPolicy and 14.6s on 1000-step StableDiffusion-v2 with no measurable degradation of task reward, FID score, or CLIP score.17b:T60b,Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) is an optimizer that takes a descent step based on the gradient at a perturbation $y_t = x_t + \rho \frac{\nabla f(x_t)}{\lVert \nabla f(x_t) \rVert}$ of the current point $x_t$. 
Existing studies prove convergence of SAM for smooth functions, but they do so by assuming decaying perturbation size $\rho$ and/or no gradient normalization in $y_t$, which is detached from practice. To address this gap, we study deterministic/stochastic versions of SAM with practical configurations (i.e., constant $\rho$ and gradient normalization in $y_t$) and explore their convergence properties on smooth functions with (non)convexity assumptions.
Perhaps surprisingly, in many scenarios, we find out that SAM has limited capability to converge to global minima or stationary points.
For smooth strongly convex functions, we show that while deterministic SAM enjoys tight global convergence rates of $\tilde \Theta(\frac{1}{T^2})$, the convergence bound of stochastic SAM suffers an inevitable additive term $\mathcal O(\rho^2)$, indicating convergence only up to neighborhoods of optima.
In fact, such $\mathcal O(\rho^2)$ factors arise for stochastic SAM in all the settings we consider, and also for deterministic SAM in nonconvex cases; importantly, we prove by examples that such terms are unavoidable.
Our results highlight vastly different characteristics of SAM with vs. without decaying perturbation size or gradient normalization, and suggest that the intuitions gained from one version may not apply to the other.17c:T704,Attention mechanisms play a crucial role in cognitive systems by allowing them to flexibly allocate cognitive resources. Transformers, in particular, have become a dominant architecture in machine learning, with attention as their central innovation. However, the underlying intuition and formalism of attention in Transformers is based on ideas of keys and queries in database management systems. In this work, we pursue a structural inference perspective, building upon, and bringing together, previous theoretical descriptions of attention such as; Gaussian Mixture Models, alignment mechanisms and Hopfield Networks. Specifically, we demonstrate that attention can be viewed as inference over an implicitly defined set of possible adjacency structures in a graphical model, revealing the generality of such a mechanism. This perspective unifies different attentional architectures in machine learning and suggests potential modifications and generalizations of attention. Here we investigate two and demonstrate their behaviour on explanatory toy problems: (a) extending the value function to incorporate more nodes of a graphical model yielding a mechanism with a bias toward attending  multiple tokens; (b) introducing a geometric prior (with conjugate hyper-prior) over the adjacency structures producing a mechanism which dynamically scales the context window depending on input. Moreover, by describing a link between structural inference and precision-regulation in Predictive Coding Networks, we discuss how this framework can bridge the gap between attentional mechanisms in machine learning and Bayesian conceptions of attention in Neuroscience. We hope by providing a new lens on attention architectures our work can guide the development of new and improved attentional mechanisms.17d:T677,Effectively modeling long spatiotemporal sequences is challenging due to the need to model complex spatial correlations and long-range temporal dependencies simultaneously. ConvLSTMs attempt to address this by updating tensor-valued states with recurrent neural networks, but their sequential computation makes them slow to train. In contrast, Transformers can process an entire spatiotemporal sequence, compressed into tokens, in parallel. However, the cost of attention scales quadratically in length, limiting their scalability to longer sequences. Here, we address the challenges of prior methods and introduce convolutional state space models (ConvSSM) that combine the tensor modeling ideas of ConvLSTM with the long sequence modeling approaches of state space methods such as S4 and S5. First, we demonstrate how parallel scans can be applied to convolutional recurrences to achieve subquadratic parallelization and fast autoregressive generation. We then establish an equivalence between the dynamics of ConvSSMs and SSMs, which motivates parameterization and initialization strategies for modeling long-range dependencies. 
The result is ConvS5, an efficient ConvSSM variant for long-range spatiotemporal modeling. ConvS5 significantly outperforms Transformers and ConvLSTM on a long horizon Moving-MNIST experiment 
while training $3\times$ faster than ConvLSTM and generating samples 
$400\times$ faster than Transformers. In addition,  ConvS5 matches or exceeds the performance of state-of-the-art methods on challenging DMLab, Minecraft and Habitat prediction benchmarks and 
enables new directions for modeling long spatiotemporal sequences.17e:T718,We systematically study a wide variety of generative models spanning semantically-diverse image datasets to understand and improve the feature extractors and metrics used to evaluate them.
Using best practices in psychophysics, we measure human perception of image realism for generated samples by conducting the largest experiment evaluating generative models to date, and find that no existing metric strongly correlates with human evaluations.
Comparing to 17 modern metrics for evaluating the overall performance, fidelity, diversity, rarity, and memorization of generative models, we find that the state-of-the-art perceptual realism of diffusion models as judged by humans is not reflected in commonly reported metrics such as FID. This discrepancy is not explained by diversity in generated samples, though one cause is over-reliance on Inception-V3.
We address these flaws through a study of alternative self-supervised feature extractors, find that the semantic information encoded by individual networks strongly depends on their training procedure, and show that DINOv2-ViT-L/14 allows for much richer evaluation of generative models. Next, we investigate data memorization, and find that generative models do memorize training examples on simple, smaller datasets like CIFAR10, but not necessarily on more complex datasets like ImageNet. However, our experiments show that current metrics do not properly detect memorization: none in the literature is able to separate memorization from other phenomena such as underfitting or mode shrinkage. To facilitate further development of generative models and their evaluation we release all generated image datasets, human evaluation data, and a modular library to compute 17 common metrics for 9 different encoders at https://github.com/layer6ai-labs/dgm-eval.17f:T525,Weight-sharing quantization has emerged as a technique to reduce energy expenditure during inference in large neural networks by constraining their weights to a limited set of values. However, existing methods often assume weights are treated solely based on value, neglecting the unique role of weight position. This paper proposes a probabilistic framework based on Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) and a variational relaxation to identify which weights can be moved to which cluster center and to what degree based on their individual position-specific learned uncertainty distributions. We introduce a new initialization setting and a regularization term, enabling the training of BNNs with complex dataset-model combinations. Leveraging the flexibility of weight values from probability distributions, we enhance noise resilience and compressibility. Our iterative clustering procedure demonstrates superior compressibility and higher accuracy compared to state-of-the-art methods on both ResNet models and the more complex transformer-based architectures. In particular, our method outperforms the state-of-the-art quantization method top-1 accuracy by 1.6\% on ImageNet using DeiT-Tiny, with its 5 million+ weights now represented by only 296 unique values.  Code available at https://github.com/subiawaud/PWFN.180:T548,Large language models (LLMs) have recently demonstrated the potential in acting as autonomous agents for sequential decision-making tasks. However, most existing methods either take actions greedily without planning or rely on static plans that are not adaptable to environmental feedback. Consequently, the sequential decision-making performance of LLM agents degenerates with problem complexity and plan horizons increase. We propose a closed-loop approach, AdaPlanner, which allows the LLM agent to refine its self-generated plan adaptively in response to environmental feedback. In AdaPlanner, the LLM agent adaptively refines its plan from feedback with both in-plan and out-of-plan refinement strategies. To mitigate hallucination, we develop a code-style LLM prompt structure that facilitates plan generation across a variety of tasks, environments, and agent capabilities. Furthermore, we propose a skill discovery mechanism that leverages successful plans as few-shot exemplars, enabling the agent to plan and refine with fewer task demonstrations. Our experiments in the ALFWorld and MiniWoB++ environments demonstrate that AdaPlanner outperforms state-of-the-art baselines by 3.73% and 4.11% while utilizing 2x and 600x fewer samples, respectively. The implementation of AdaPlanner is available at https://github.com/haotiansun14/AdaPlanner.181:T40b,Finding correspondences between images is a fundamental problem in computer vision. In this paper, we show that correspondence emerges in image diffusion models without any explicit supervision. We propose a simple strategy to extract this implicit knowledge out of diffusion networks as image features, namely DIffusion FeaTures (DIFT), and use them to establish correspondences between real images. Without any additional fine-tuning or supervision on the task-specific data or annotations, DIFT is able to outperform both weakly-supervised methods and competitive off-the-shelf features in identifying semantic, geometric, and temporal correspondences. Particularly for semantic correspondence, DIFT from Stable Diffusion is able to outperform DINO and OpenCLIP by 19 and 14 accuracy points respectively on the challenging SPair-71k benchmark. It even outperforms the state-of-the-art supervised methods on 9 out of 18 categories while remaining on par for the overall performance. Project page: https://diffusionfeatures.github.io.182:T515,In the field of natural language processing, the prevalent approach involves fine-tuning pretrained language models (PLMs) using local samples. Recent research has exposed the susceptibility of PLMs to backdoor attacks, wherein the adversaries can embed malicious prediction behaviors by manipulating a few training samples. In this study, our objective is to develop a backdoor-resistant tuning procedure that yields a backdoor-free model, no matter whether the fine-tuning dataset contains poisoned samples. To this end, we propose and integrate an \emph{honeypot module} into the original PLM, specifically designed to absorb backdoor information exclusively. Our design is motivated by the observation that lower-layer representations in PLMs carry sufficient backdoor features while carrying minimal information about the original tasks. Consequently, we can impose penalties on the information acquired by the honeypot module to inhibit backdoor creation during the fine-tuning process of the stem network. Comprehensive experiments conducted on benchmark datasets substantiate the effectiveness and robustness of our defensive strategy. Notably, these results indicate a substantial reduction in the attack success rate ranging from 10\% to 40\% when compared to prior state-of-the-art methods.183:T457,We present Composable Diffusion (CoDi), a novel generative model capable of generating any combination of output modalities, such as language, image, video, or audio, from any combination of input modalities. Unlike existing generative AI systems, CoDi can generate multiple modalities in parallel and its input is not limited to a subset of modalities like text or image. Despite the absence of training datasets for many combinations of modalities, we propose to align modalities in both the input and output space. This allows CoDi to freely condition on any input combination and generate any group of modalities, even if they are not present in the training data. CoDi employs a novel composable generation strategy which involves building a shared multimodal space by bridging alignment in the diffusion process, enabling the synchronized generation of intertwined modalities, such as temporally aligned video and audio. Highly customizable and flexible, CoDi achieves strong joint-modality generation quality, and outperforms or is on par with the unimodal state-of-the-art for single-modality synthesis.184:T5bf,Attention mechanism is a central component of the transformer architecture which led to the phenomenal success of large language models. However, the theoretical principles underlying the attention mechanism are poorly understood, especially its nonconvex optimization dynamics. In this work, we explore the seminal softmax-attention model $f(X)=\langle Xv, \texttt{softmax}(XWp)\rangle$, where $X$ is the token sequence and $(v,W,p)$ are trainable parameters. We prove that running gradient descent on $p$, or equivalently $W$, converges in direction to a max-margin solution that separates *locally-optimal* tokens from non-optimal ones. This clearly formalizes attention as an optimal token selection mechanism. Remarkably, our results are applicable to general data and precisely characterize *optimality* of tokens in terms of the value embeddings $Xv$ and problem geometry. We also provide a broader regularization path analysis that establishes the margin maximizing nature of attention even for nonlinear prediction heads. When optimizing $v$ and $p$ simultaneously with logistic loss, we identify conditions under which the regularization paths directionally converge to their respective hard-margin SVM solutions where $v$ separates the input features based on their labels. Interestingly, the SVM formulation of $p$ is influenced by the support vector geometry of $v$. Finally, we verify our theoretical findings via numerical experiments and provide insights.185:T44c,We investigate the potential of learning visual representations using synthetic images generated by text-to-image models. This is a natural question in the light of the excellent performance of such models in generating high-quality images. We consider specifically the Stable Diffusion, one of the leading open source text-to-image models. We show that (1) when the generative model is properly configured, training self-supervised methods on synthetic images can match or beat the real image counterpart;
(2) by treating the multiple images generated from the same text prompt as positives for each other, we develop a multi-positive contrastive learning method, which we call StableRep. 
With solely synthetic images, the representations learned by StableRep surpass the performance of representations learned by SimCLR and CLIP using the same set of text prompts and corresponding real images, on large scale datasets. 
When we further add language supervision, \name~trained with 20M synthetic images (10M captions) achieves better accuracy than CLIP trained with 50M real images (50M captions).186:T5ca,Robust fine-tuning aims to achieve competitive in-distribution (ID) performance while maintaining the out-of-distribution (OOD) robustness of a pre-trained model when transferring it to a downstream task. Recently, projected gradient descent has been successfully used in robust fine-tuning by constraining the deviation from the initialization of the fine-tuned model explicitly through projection. However, algorithmically, two limitations prevent this method from being adopted more widely, scalability and efficiency.  In this paper, we propose a new projection-based fine-tuning algorithm, Fast Trainable Projection (FTP) for computationally efficient learning of per-layer projection constraints, resulting in an average 35% speedup on our benchmarks compared to prior works. FTP can be combined with existing optimizers such as AdamW, and be used in a plug-and-play fashion. Finally, we show that FTP is a special instance of hyper-optimizers that tune the hyper-parameters of optimizers in a learnable manner through nested differentiation. Empirically, we show superior robustness on OOD datasets, including domain shifts and natural corruptions, across four different vision tasks with five different pre-trained models. Additionally, we demonstrate that FTP is broadly applicable and beneficial to other learning scenarios such as low-label and continual learning settings thanks to its easy adaptability. The code will be available at https://github.com/GT-RIPL/FTP.git.187:T6b9,Training multimodal foundation models is challenging due to the limited availability of multimodal datasets. While many public datasets pair images with text, few combine images with audio or text with audio. Even rarer are datasets that align all three modalities at once. Critical domains such as healthcare, infrastructure, or transportation are particularly affected by missing modalities. This makes it difficult to integrate all modalities into a large pre-trained neural network that can be used out-of-the-box or fine-tuned for different downstream tasks. We introduce LoReTTa ($\textbf{L}$inking m$\textbf{O}$dalities with a t$\textbf{R}$ansitive and commutativ$\textbf{E}$ pre-$\textbf{T}$raining s$\textbf{T}$r$\textbf{A}$tegy) to address this understudied problem. Our self-supervised framework unifies causal modeling and masked modeling with the rules of commutativity and transitivity. This allows us to transition within and between modalities. As a result, our pre-trained models are better at exploring the true underlying joint probability distribution. Given a dataset containing only the disjoint combinations $(A, B)$ and $(B, C)$, LoReTTa can model the relation $A \leftrightarrow C$ with $A \leftrightarrow B \leftrightarrow C$. In particular, we show that a transformer pre-trained with LoReTTa can handle any mixture of modalities at inference time, including the never-seen pair $(A, C)$ and the triplet $(A, B, C)$. We extensively evaluate our approach on a synthetic, medical, and reinforcement learning dataset. Across different domains, our universal multimodal transformer consistently outperforms strong baselines such as GPT, BERT, and CLIP on tasks involving the missing modality tuple.188:T578,Generative Models (GMs) have attracted considerable attention due to their tremendous success in various domains, such as computer vision where they are capable to generate impressive realistic-looking images. Likelihood-based GMs are attractive due to the possibility to generate new data by a single model evaluation. However, they typically achieve lower sample quality compared to state-of-the-art score-based Diffusion Models (DMs). This paper provides a significant step in the direction of addressing this limitation. The idea is to borrow one of the strengths of score-based DMs, which is the ability to perform accurate density estimation in low-density regions and to address manifold overfitting by means of data mollification. We propose a view of data mollification within likelihood-based GMs as a continuation method, whereby the optimization objective smoothly transitions from simple-to-optimize to the original target. Crucially, data mollification can be implemented by adding one line of code in the optimization loop, and we demonstrate that this provides a boost in generation quality of likelihood-based GMs, without computational overheads. We report results on real-world image data sets and UCI benchmarks with popular likelihood-based GMs, including variants of variational autoencoders and normalizing flows, showing large improvements in FID score and density estimation.189:T46d,Attention networks such as transformers have achieved state-of-the-art performance in many domains. 
These networks rely heavily on the dot product attention operator, which computes the similarity between two points by taking their inner product.
However, the inner product does not explicitly model the complex structural properties of real world datasets, such as hierarchies between data points.
To remedy this, we introduce cone attention, a drop-in replacement for dot product attention based on hyperbolic entailment cones.
Cone attention associates two points by the depth of their lowest common ancestor in a hierarchy defined by hyperbolic cones, which intuitively measures the divergence of two points and gives a $\textit{hierarchy aware}$ similarity score.
We test cone attention on a wide variety of models and tasks and show that it improves task-level performance over dot product attention and other baselines, and is able to match dot-product attention with significantly fewer parameters.
Our results suggest that cone attention is an effective way to capture hierarchical relationships when calculating attention.18a:T70e,How does a single interconnected neural population perform multiple tasks, each with its own dynamical requirements? The relation between task requirements and neural dynamics in Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) has been investigated for single tasks. The forces shaping joint dynamics of multiple tasks, however, are largely unexplored. In this work, we first construct a systematic framework to study multiple tasks in RNNs, minimizing interference from input and output correlations with the hidden representation. This allows us to reveal how RNNs tend to share attractors and reuse dynamics, a tendency we define as the "simplicity bias".
We find that RNNs develop attractors sequentially during training, preferentially reusing existing dynamics and opting for simple solutions when possible. This sequenced emergence and preferential reuse encapsulate the simplicity bias. Through concrete examples, we demonstrate that new attractors primarily emerge due to task demands or architectural constraints, illustrating a balance between simplicity bias and external factors.
We examine the geometry of joint representations within a single attractor, by constructing a family of tasks from a set of functions. We show that the steepness of the associated functions controls their alignment within the attractor. This arrangement again highlights the simplicity bias, as points with similar input spacings undergo comparable transformations to reach the shared attractor.
Our findings propose compelling applications. The geometry of shared attractors might allow us to infer the nature of unknown tasks. Furthermore, the simplicity bias implies that without specific incentives, modularity in RNNs may not spontaneously emerge, providing insights into the conditions required for network specialization.18b:T4e5,Generating plans of action, and reasoning about change have long been considered a core competence of intelligent agents. It is thus no surprise that evaluating the planning and reasoning capabilities of large language models (LLMs) has become a hot topic of research. Most claims about LLM planning capabilities are however based on common sense tasks–where it becomes hard to tell whether LLMs are planning or merely retrieving from their vast world knowledge.  There is a strong need for systematic and extensible planning benchmarks with sufficient diversity to evaluate whether LLMs have innate planning capabilities. Motivated by this, we propose PlanBench, an extensible benchmark suite based on the kinds of domains used in the automated planning community, especially in the International Planning Competition, to test the capabilities of LLMs in planning or reasoning about actions and change. PlanBench provides sufficient diversity in both the task domains and the specific planning capabilities. Our studies also show that on many critical capabilities–including plan generation–LLM performance falls quite short, even with the SOTA models. PlanBench can thus function as a useful marker of progress of LLMs in planning and reasoning.18c:T4ea,Diffusion models are powerful, but they require a lot of time and data to train. We propose Patch Diffusion, a generic patch-wise training framework, to significantly reduce the training time costs while improving data efficiency, which thus helps democratize diffusion model training to broader users. At the core of our innovations is a new conditional score function at the patch level, where the patch location in the original image is included as additional coordinate channels, while the patch size is randomized and diversified throughout training to encode the cross-region dependency at multiple scales. Sampling with our method is as easy as in the original diffusion model. Through Patch Diffusion, we could achieve $\mathbf{\ge 2\times}$ faster training, while maintaining comparable or better generation quality. Patch Diffusion meanwhile improves the performance of diffusion models trained on relatively small datasets, $e.g.$, as few as 5,000 images to train from scratch. We achieve outstanding FID scores in line with state-of-the-art benchmarks: 1.77 on CelebA-64$\times$64, 1.93 on AFHQv2-Wild-64$\times$64, and 2.72 on ImageNet-256$\times$256. We share our code and pre-trained models at https://github.com/Zhendong-Wang/Patch-Diffusion.18d:T58f,Pre-training has achieved remarkable success when transferred to downstream tasks. In machine learning, we care about not only the good performance of a model but also its behavior under reasonable shifts of condition. The same philosophy holds when pre-training a foundation model. However,  the foundation model may not uniformly behave well for a series of related downstream tasks. This happens, for example, when conducting mask recovery regression where the recovery ability or the training instances diverge like pattern features are extracted dominantly on pre-training, but semantic features are also required on a downstream task. This paper considers pre-training a model that guarantees a uniformly good performance over the downstream tasks. We call this goal as *downstream-task robustness*.
Our method first separates the upstream task into several representative ones and applies a simple minimax loss for pre-training. We then design an efficient algorithm to solve the minimax loss
and prove its convergence in the convex setting. In the experiments, we show both on large-scale natural language processing and computer vision datasets our method increases the metrics on worse-case downstream tasks. Additionally, some theoretical explanations for why our loss is beneficial are provided. Specifically, we show fewer samples are inherently required for the most challenging downstream task in some cases.18e:T6ae,Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly adopted for a variety of tasks with implicit graphical structures, such as planning in robotics, multi-hop question answering or knowledge probing, structured commonsense reasoning, and more. While LLMs have advanced the state-of-the-art on these tasks with structure implications, whether LLMs could explicitly process textual descriptions of graphs and structures, map them to grounded conceptual spaces, and perform structured operations remains underexplored. To this end, we propose NLGraph (Natural Language Graph), a comprehensive benchmark of graph-based problem solving designed in natural language. NLGraph contains 29,370 problems, covering eight graph reasoning tasks with varying complexity from simple tasks such as connectivity and shortest path up to complex problems such as maximum flow and simulating graph neural networks. We evaluate LLMs (GPT-3/4) with various prompting approaches on the NLGraph benchmark and find that 1) language models do demonstrate preliminary graph reasoning abilities, 2) the benefit of advanced prompting and in-context learning diminishes on more complex graph problems, while 3) LLMs are also (un)surprisingly brittle in the face of spurious correlations in graph and problem settings. We then propose Build-a-Graph Prompting and Algorithmic Prompting, two instruction-based approaches to enhance LLMs in solving natural language graph problems. Build-a-Graph and Algorithmic prompting improve the performance of LLMs on NLGraph by 3.07% to 16.85% across multiple tasks and settings, while how to solve the most complicated graph reasoning tasks in our setup with language models remains an open research question.18f:T5a0,Understanding which concepts models can and cannot represent has been fundamental to many tasks: from effective and responsible use of models to detecting out of distribution data. We introduce Gaussian process probes (GPP), a unified and simple framework for probing and measuring uncertainty about concepts represented by models. As a Bayesian extension of linear probing methods, GPP asks what kind of distribution over classifiers (of concepts) is induced by the model. This distribution can be used to measure both what the model represents and how confident the probe is about what the model represents.  GPP can be applied to any pre-trained  model with vector representations of inputs (e.g., activations). It does not require access to training data, gradients, or the architecture. We validate GPP on datasets containing both synthetic and real images. Our experiments show it can (1) probe a model's representations of concepts even with a very small number of examples, (2) accurately measure both epistemic uncertainty (how confident the probe is) and aleatory uncertainty (how fuzzy the concepts are to the model), and (3) detect out of distribution data using those uncertainty measures as well as classic methods do. By using Gaussian processes to expand what probing can offer, GPP provides a data-efficient, versatile and uncertainty-aware tool for understanding and evaluating the capabilities of machine learning models.190:T472,Vision-language pretrained models have seen remarkable success, but their application to safety-critical settings is limited by their lack of interpretability. To improve the interpretability of vision-language models such as CLIP, we propose a multi-modal information bottleneck (M2IB) approach that learns latent representations that compress irrelevant information while preserving relevant visual and textual features. We demonstrate how M2IB can be applied to attribution analysis of vision-language pretrained models, increasing attribution accuracy and improving the interpretability of such models when applied to safety-critical domains such as healthcare. Crucially, unlike commonly used unimodal attribution methods, M2IB does not require ground truth labels, making it possible to audit representations of vision-language pretrained models when multiple modalities but no ground-truth data is available. Using CLIP as an example, we demonstrate the effectiveness of M2IB attribution and show that it outperforms gradient-based, perturbation-based, and attention-based attribution methods both qualitatively and quantitatively.191:T46e,Despite extensive studies, the underlying reason as to why overparameterized
neural networks can generalize remains elusive. Existing theory shows that common stochastic optimizers prefer flatter minimizers of the training loss, and thus
a natural potential explanation is that flatness implies generalization. This work
critically examines this explanation. Through theoretical and empirical investigation, we identify the following three scenarios for two-layer ReLU networks: (1)
flatness provably implies generalization; (2) there exist non-generalizing flattest
models and sharpness minimization algorithms fail to generalize poorly, and (3)
perhaps most strikingly, there exist non-generalizing flattest models, but sharpness
minimization algorithms still generalize. Our results suggest that the relationship
between sharpness and generalization subtly depends on the data distributions
and the model architectures and sharpness minimization algorithms do not only
minimize sharpness to achieve better generalization. This calls for the search for
other explanations for the generalization of over-parameterized neural networks192:T4b5,Neural posterior estimation methods based on discrete normalizing flows have become established tools for simulation-based inference (SBI), but scaling them to high-dimensional problems can be challenging. Building on recent advances in generative modeling, we here present flow matching posterior estimation (FMPE), a technique for SBI using continuous normalizing flows. Like diffusion models, and in contrast to discrete flows, flow matching allows for unconstrained architectures, providing enhanced flexibility for complex data modalities. Flow matching, therefore, enables exact density evaluation, fast training, and seamless scalability to large architectures---making it ideal for SBI. We show that FMPE achieves competitive performance on an established SBI benchmark, and then demonstrate its improved scalability on a challenging scientific problem: for gravitational-wave inference, FMPE outperforms methods based on comparable discrete flows, reducing training time by 30\% with substantially improved accuracy. Our work underscores the potential of FMPE to enhance performance in challenging inference scenarios, thereby paving the way for more advanced applications to scientific problems.193:T4f7,Recent research has observed that in machine learning optimization, gradient descent (GD) often operates at the edge of stability (EoS) [Cohen et al., 2021], where the stepsizes are set to be large, resulting in non-monotonic losses induced by the GD iterates. This paper studies the convergence and implicit bias of constant-stepsize GD for logistic regression on linearly separable data in the EoS regime. Despite the presence of local oscillations, we prove that the logistic loss can be minimized by GD with any constant stepsize over a long time scale. Furthermore, we prove that with any constant stepsize, the GD iterates tend to infinity when projected to a max-margin direction (the hard-margin SVM direction) and converge to a fixed vector that minimizes a strongly convex potential when projected to the orthogonal complement of the max-margin direction. In contrast, we also show that in the EoS regime, GD iterates may diverge catastrophically under the exponential loss, highlighting the superiority of the logistic loss. These theoretical findings are in line with numerical simulations and complement existing theories on the convergence and implicit bias of GD for logistic regression, which are only applicable when the stepsizes are sufficiently small.194:T54a,Soft prompt tuning achieves superior performances across a wide range of few-shot tasks. However, the performances of prompt tuning can be highly sensitive to the initialization of the prompts. We have also empirically observed that conventional prompt tuning methods cannot encode and learn sufficient task-relevant information from prompt tokens. In this work, we develop an information-theoretic framework that formulates soft prompt tuning as maximizing the mutual information between prompts and other model parameters (or encoded representations). This novel view helps us to develop a more efficient, accurate and robust soft prompt tuning method, InfoPrompt. With this framework, we develop two novel mutual information based loss functions, to (i) explore proper prompt initialization for the downstream tasks and learn sufficient task-relevant information from prompt tokens and (ii) encourage the output representation from the pretrained language model to be more aware of the task-relevant information captured in the learnt prompts. Extensive experiments validate that InfoPrompt can significantly accelerate the convergence of the prompt tuning and outperform traditional prompt tuning methods. Finally, we provide a formal theoretical result to show that a gradient descent type algorithm can be used to train our mutual information loss.195:T5c4,This paper introduces a novel task called Cross Modal Generalization (CMG), which addresses the challenge of learning a unified discrete representation from paired multimodal data during pre-training. Then in downstream tasks, the model can achieve zero-shot generalization ability in other modalities when only one modal is labeled. Existing approaches in multimodal representation learning focus more on coarse-grained alignment or rely on the assumption that 
 information from different modalities is completely aligned, which is impractical in real-world scenarios. To overcome this limitation, we propose \textbf{Uni-Code}, which contains two key contributions: the Dual Cross-modal Information Disentangling (DCID) module and the Multi-Modal Exponential Moving Average (MM-EMA). These methods facilitate bidirectional supervision between modalities and align semantically equivalent information in a shared discrete latent space, enabling fine-grained unified representation of multimodal sequences. During pre-training, we investigate various modality combinations, including audio-visual, audio-text, and the tri-modal combination of audio-visual-text. Extensive experiments on various downstream tasks, i.e., cross-modal event classification, localization, cross-modal retrieval, query-based video segmentation, and cross-dataset event localization, demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed methods. The code is available at https://github.com/haihuangcode/CMG.196:T50b,Various stuff and things in visual data possess specific traits, which can be learned by deep neural networks and are implicitly represented as the visual prior, e.g., object location and shape, in the model. Such prior potentially impacts many vision tasks. For example, in conditional image synthesis, spatial conditions failing to adhere to the prior can result in visually inaccurate synthetic results. This work aims to explicitly learn the visual prior and enable the customization of sampling. Inspired by advances in language modeling, we propose to learn Visual prior via Generative Pre-Training, dubbed VisorGPT. By discretizing visual locations, e.g., bounding boxes, human pose, and instance masks, into sequences, VisorGPT can model visual prior through likelihood maximization. Besides, prompt engineering is investigated to unify various visual locations and enable customized sampling of sequential outputs from the learned prior. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of VisorGPT in modeling visual prior and extrapolating to novel scenes, potentially motivating that discrete visual locations can be integrated into the learning paradigm of current language models to further perceive visual world. Code is available at https://sierkinhane.github.io/visor-gpt.197:T5cd,Stochastic gradients closely relate to both optimization and generalization of deep neural networks (DNNs). Some works attempted to explain the success of stochastic optimization for deep learning by the arguably heavy-tail properties of gradient noise, while other works presented theoretical and empirical evidence against the heavy-tail hypothesis on gradient noise. Unfortunately, formal statistical tests for analyzing the structure and heavy tails of stochastic gradients in deep learning are still under-explored. In this paper, we mainly make two contributions. First, we conduct formal statistical tests on the distribution of stochastic gradients and gradient noise across both parameters and iterations. Our statistical tests reveal that dimension-wise gradients usually exhibit power-law heavy tails, while iteration-wise gradients and stochastic gradient noise caused by minibatch training usually do not exhibit power-law heavy tails. Second, we further discover that the covariance spectra of stochastic gradients have the power-law structures overlooked by previous studies and present its theoretical implications for training of DNNs. While previous studies believed that the anisotropic structure of stochastic gradients matters to deep learning, they did not expect the gradient covariance can have such an elegant mathematical structure. Our work challenges the existing belief and provides novel insights on the structure of stochastic gradients in deep learning.198:T56b,Generative processes that involve solving differential equations, such as diffusion models, frequently necessitate balancing speed and quality. ODE-based samplers are fast but plateau in performance while SDE-based samplers deliver higher sample quality at the cost of increased sampling time.  We attribute this difference to sampling errors: ODE-samplers involve smaller discretization errors while stochasticity in SDE contracts accumulated errors. Based on these findings, we propose a novel sampling algorithm called \textit{Restart} in order to better balance discretization errors and contraction. The sampling method alternates between adding substantial noise in additional forward steps and strictly following a backward ODE. Empirically, Restart sampler surpasses previous SDE and ODE samplers in both speed and accuracy. Restart not only outperforms the previous best SDE results, but also accelerates the sampling speed by 10-fold / 2-fold on CIFAR-10 / ImageNet $64{\times} 64$. In addition, it attains significantly better sample quality than ODE samplers within comparable sampling times. Moreover, Restart better balances text-image alignment/visual quality versus diversity than previous samplers in the large-scale text-to-image Stable Diffusion model pre-trained on LAION $512{\times} 512$.  Code is available at https://github.com/Newbeeer/diffusion_restart_sampling199:T5e1,Recent advances in vision-language learning have achieved notable success on *complete-information* question-answering datasets through the integration of extensive world knowledge. Yet, most models operate *passively*, responding to questions based on pre-stored knowledge. In stark contrast, humans possess the ability to *actively* explore, accumulate, and reason using both newfound and existing information to tackle *incomplete-information* questions. In response to this gap, we introduce **Conan**, an interactive open-world environment devised for the assessment of *active reasoning*. **Conan** facilitates active exploration and promotes multi-round abductive inference, reminiscent of rich, open-world settings like Minecraft. Diverging from previous works that lean primarily on single-round deduction via instruction following, **Conan** compels agents to actively interact with their surroundings, amalgamating new evidence with prior knowledge to elucidate events from incomplete observations. Our analysis on \bench underscores the shortcomings of contemporary state-of-the-art models in active exploration and understanding complex scenarios. Additionally, we explore *Abduction from Deduction*, where agents harness Bayesian rules to recast the challenge of abduction as a deductive process. Through **Conan**, we aim to galvanize advancements in active reasoning and set the stage for the next generation of artificial intelligence agents adept at dynamically engaging in environments.19a:T468,We present Pre-trained Machine Reader (PMR), a novel method for retrofitting pre-trained masked language models (MLMs) to pre-trained machine reading comprehension (MRC) models without acquiring labeled data.
PMR can resolve the discrepancy between model pre-training and downstream fine-tuning of existing MLMs.
To build the proposed PMR, we constructed a large volume of general-purpose and high-quality MRC-style training data by using Wikipedia hyperlinks and designed a Wiki Anchor Extraction task to guide the MRC-style pre-training.
Apart from its simplicity, PMR effectively solves extraction tasks, such as Extractive Question Answering and Named Entity Recognition. PMR shows tremendous improvements over existing approaches, especially in low-resource scenarios.
When applied to the sequence classification task in the MRC formulation, PMR enables the extraction of high-quality rationales to explain the classification process, thereby providing greater prediction explainability. PMR also has the potential to serve as a unified model for tackling various extraction and classification tasks in the MRC formulation.19b:T5ee,Prior work has combined chain-of-thought prompting in large language models (LLMs) with programmatic representations to perform effective and transparent reasoning. While such an approach works well for tasks that only require forward reasoning (e.g., straightforward arithmetic), it is less effective for constraint solving problems that require more sophisticated planning and search. In this paper, we propose a new satisfiability-aided language modeling (SatLM) approach for improving the reasoning capabilities of LLMs. We use an LLM to generate a declarative task specification rather than an imperative program and leverage an off-the-shelf automated theorem prover to derive the final answer. This approach has two key advantages. The declarative specification is closer to the problem description than the reasoning steps are, so the LLM can parse it out of the description more accurately. Furthermore, by offloading the actual reasoning task to an automated theorem prover, our approach can guarantee the correctness of the answer with respect to the parsed specification and avoid planning errors in the solving process. We evaluate SATLM on 8 different datasets and show that it consistently outperforms program-aided LMs in the imperative paradigm. In particular, SATLM outperforms program-aided LMs by 23% on a challenging subset of the GSM arithmetic reasoning dataset; SATLM also achieves a new SoTA on LSAT and BoardgameQA, surpassing previous models that are trained on the respective training sets.19c:T51c,Semi-implicit variational inference (SIVI) has been introduced to expand the analytical variational families by defining expressive semi-implicit distributions in a hierarchical manner. However, the single-layer architecture commonly used in current SIVI methods can be insufficient when the target posterior has complicated structures. In this paper, we propose hierarchical semi-implicit variational inference, called HSIVI, which generalizes SIVI to allow more expressive multi-layer construction of semi-implicit distributions. By introducing auxiliary distributions that interpolate between a simple base distribution and the target distribution, the conditional layers can be trained by progressively matching these auxiliary distributions one layer after another. Moreover, given pre-trained score networks, HSIVI can be used to accelerate the sampling process of diffusion models with the score matching objective. We show that HSIVI significantly enhances the expressiveness of SIVI on several Bayesian inference problems with complicated target distributions. When used for diffusion model acceleration, we show that HSIVI can produce high quality samples comparable to or better than the existing fast diffusion model based samplers with a small number of function evaluations on various datasets.19d:T55d,We explore the methodology and theory of reward-directed generation via conditional diffusion models. Directed generation aims to generate samples with desired properties as measured by a reward function, which has broad applications in generative AI, reinforcement learning, and computational biology. We consider the common learning scenario where the dataset consists of majorly unlabeled data and a small set of data with noisy reward labels. Our approach leverages a learned reward function on the smaller data set as a pseudolabeler to label the unlabelled data. After pseudo-labelling, a conditional diffusion model (CDM) is trained on the data and samples are generated by setting a target value $a$ as the condition in CDM. From a theoretical standpoint, we show that this directed generator can effectively learn and sample from the reward-conditioned data distribution: 1. our model is capable of recovering the data's latent subspace representation. 2. the model generates samples moving closer to the user-specified target. The improvement in rewards of samples is influenced by a interplay between the strength of the reward signal, the distribution shift, and the cost of off-support extrapolation. 
We provide empirical results to validate our theory and highlight the relationship between the strength of extrapolation and the quality of generated samples.19e:T533,In the era of extensive intersection between art and Artificial Intelligence (AI), such as image generation and fiction co-creation, AI for music remains relatively nascent, particularly in music understanding. This is evident in the limited work on deep music representations, the scarcity of large-scale datasets, and the absence of a universal and community-driven benchmark. To address this issue, we introduce the Music Audio Representation Benchmark for universaL Evaluation, termed MARBLE. It aims to provide a benchmark for various Music Information Retrieval (MIR) tasks by defining a comprehensive taxonomy with four hierarchy levels, including acoustic, performance, score, and high-level description. We then establish a unified protocol based on 18 tasks on 12 public-available datasets, providing a fair and standard assessment of representations of all open-sourced pre-trained models developed on music recordings as baselines. Besides, MARBLE offers an easy-to-use, extendable, and reproducible suite for the community, with a clear statement on copyright issues on datasets. Results suggest recently proposed large-scale pre-trained musical language models perform the best in most tasks, with room for further improvement. The leaderboard and toolkit repository are published to promote future music AI research.19f:T41d,We develop an approach to efficiently grow neural networks, within which parameterization and optimization strategies are designed by considering their effects on the training dynamics.  Unlike existing growing methods, which follow simple replication heuristics or utilize auxiliary gradient-based local optimization, we craft a parameterization scheme which dynamically stabilizes weight, activation, and gradient scaling as the architecture evolves, and maintains the inference functionality of the network.  To address the optimization difficulty resulting from imbalanced training effort distributed to subnetworks fading in at different growth phases, we propose a learning rate adaption mechanism that rebalances the gradient contribution of these separate subcomponents.  Experiments show that our method achieves comparable or better accuracy than training large fixed-size models, while saving a substantial portion of the original training computation budget.  We demonstrate that these gains translate into real wall-clock training speedups.1a0:T4d5,Image captioning aims to describe visual content in natural language. As 'a picture is worth a thousand words', there could be various correct descriptions for an image. However, with maximum likelihood estimation as the training objective, the captioning model is penalized whenever its prediction mismatches with the label. For instance, when the model predicts a word expressing richer semantics than the label, it will be penalized and optimized to prefer more concise expressions, referred to as *conciseness optimization*. In contrast, predictions that are more concise than labels lead to *richness optimization*. Such conflicting optimization directions could eventually result in the model generating general descriptions. In this work, we introduce Semipermeable MaxImum Likelihood Estimation (SMILE), which allows richness optimization while blocking conciseness optimization, thus encouraging the model to generate longer captions with more details. Extensive experiments on two mainstream image captioning datasets MSCOCO and Flickr30K demonstrate that SMILE significantly enhances the descriptiveness of generated captions. We further provide in-depth investigations to facilitate a better understanding of how SMILE works.1a1:T714,Large language models (LLMs), typically designed as a function of next-word prediction, have excelled across extensive NLP tasks. Despite the generality, next-word prediction is often not an efficient formulation for many of the tasks, demanding an extreme scale of model parameters (10s or 100s of billions) and sometimes yielding suboptimal performance.
In practice, it is often desirable to build more efficient models---despite being less versatile, they still apply to a substantial subset of problems, delivering on par or even superior performance with much smaller model sizes.
In this paper, we propose text alignment as an efficient unified model for a wide range of crucial tasks involving text entailment, similarity, question answering (and answerability), factual consistency, and so forth. Given a pair of texts, the model measures the degree of alignment between their information. We instantiate an alignment model through lightweight finetuning of RoBERTa (355M parameters) using 5.9M examples from 28 datasets. Despite its compact size, extensive experiments show the model's efficiency and strong performance: (1) On over 20 datasets of aforementioned diverse tasks, the model matches or surpasses FLAN-T5 models that have around 2x or 10x more parameters; the single unified model also outperforms task-specific models finetuned on individual datasets; (2) When applied to evaluate factual consistency of language generation on 23 datasets, our model improves over various baselines, including the much larger GPT-3.5 (ChatGPT) and sometimes even GPT-4; (3) The lightweight model can also serve as an add-on component for LLMs such as GPT-3.5 in question answering tasks, improving the average exact match (EM) score by 17.94 and F1 score by 15.05 through identifying unanswerable questions.1a2:T6bb,Despite the existence of various benchmarks for evaluating natural language processing models, we argue that human exams are a more suitable means of evaluating general intelligence for large language models (LLMs), as they inherently demand a much wider range of abilities such as language understanding, domain knowledge, and problem-solving skills. To this end, we introduce M3Exam, a novel benchmark sourced from real and official human exam questions for evaluating LLMs in a multilingual, multimodal, and multilevel context. M3Exam exhibits three unique characteristics: (1) multilingualism, encompassing questions from multiple countries that require strong multilingual proficiency and cultural knowledge; (2) multimodality, accounting for the multimodal nature of many exam questions to test the model's multimodal understanding capability; and (3) multilevel structure, featuring exams from three critical educational periods to comprehensively assess a model's proficiency at different levels. In total, M3Exam contains 12,317 questions in 9 diverse languages with three educational levels, where about 23\% of the questions require processing images for successful solving. We assess the performance of top-performing LLMs on M3Exam and find that current models, including GPT-4, still struggle with multilingual text, particularly in low-resource and non-Latin script languages. Multimodal LLMs also perform poorly with complex multimodal questions. We believe that M3Exam can be a valuable resource for comprehensively evaluating LLMs by examining their multilingual and multimodal abilities and tracking their development. Data and evaluation code is available at \url{https://github.com/DAMO-NLP-SG/M3Exam}.1a3:T528,The past few years have witnessed great success in the use of diffusion models (DMs) to generate high-fidelity images with the help of stochastic differential equations (SDEs). However, discretization error is an inevitable limitation when utilizing numerical solvers to solve SDEs. To address this limitation, we provide a theoretical analysis demonstrating that an appropriate combination of the contrastive loss and score matching serves as an upper bound of the KL divergence between the true data distribution and the model distribution. To obtain this bound, we utilize a contrastive loss to construct a contrastive sampling chain to fine-tuning the pre-trained DM. In this manner, our method reduces the discretization error and thus yields a smaller gap between the true data distribution and our model distribution. Moreover, the presented method can be applied to fine-tuning various pre-trained DMs, both with or without fast sampling algorithms, contributing to better sample quality or slightly faster sampling speeds. To validate the efficacy of our method, we conduct comprehensive experiments. For example, on CIFAR10, when applied to a pre-trained EDM, our method improves the FID from 2.04 to 1.88 with 35 neural function evaluations (NFEs), and reduces NFEs from 35 to 25 to achieve the same 2.04 FID.1a4:T436,Pre-training datasets are critical for building state-of-the-art machine learning models, motivating rigorous study on their impact on downstream tasks. In this work, we study the impact of the trade-off between the intra-class diversity (the number of samples per class) and the inter-class diversity (the number of classes) of a supervised pre-training dataset. Empirically, we found that with the size of the pre-training dataset fixed, the best downstream performance comes with a balance on the intra-/inter-class diversity. To understand the underlying mechanism, we show theoretically that the downstream performance depends monotonically on both types of diversity. Notably, our theory reveals that the optimal class-to-sample ratio (#classes / #samples per class) is invariant to the size of the pre-training dataset, which motivates an application of predicting the optimal number of pre-training classes. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this application by an improvement of around 2 points on the downstream tasks when using ImageNet as the pre-training dataset.1a5:T5cf,Large language models (LLMs) excel at implementing code from functionality descriptions but struggle with algorithmic problems that require not only implementation but also identification of the suitable algorithm. Moreover, LLM-generated programs lack guaranteed correctness and require human verification. To address these challenges, we propose ALGO, a framework that synthesizes Algorithmic programs with LLM-Generated Oracles to guide the generation and verify their correctness. ALGO first generates a reference oracle by prompting an LLM to exhaustively enumerate all the combinations of relevant variables. This oracle is then utilized to guide an arbitrary search strategy in exploring the algorithm space and to verify the synthesized algorithms. Our study shows that the LLM-generated
oracles are correct for 88% of the cases. With the oracles as verifiers, ALGO can be integrated with any existing code generation model in a model-agnostic manner to enhance its performance. Experiments show that when equipped with ALGO, we achieve an 8× better one-submission pass rate over the Codex model and a 2.6× better one-submission pass rate over CodeT, the current state-of-the-art model on CodeContests. We can also get 1.3× better pass rate over the ChatGPT Code Interpreter on unseen problems. The problem set we used for testing, the prompts we used, the verifier and solution programs, and the test cases generated by ALGO
are available at https://github.com/zkx06111/ALGO.1a6:T6d6,Large vision models with billions of parameters and trained on broad data have great potential in numerous downstream applications. However, these models are typically difficult to adapt due to their large parameter size and sometimes lack of accesss to their weights---entities able to develop large vision models often provide APIs only. In this paper, we study how to better utilize large vision models through the lens of in-context learning, a concept that has been well-known in natural language processing but has only been studied very recently in computer vision. In-context learning refers to the ability to perform inference on tasks never seen during training by simply conditioning on in-context examples (i.e., input-output pairs) without updating any internal model parameters. To demystify in-context learning in computer vision, we conduct an extensive research and identify a critical problem: downstream performance is highly sensitivie to the choice of visual in-context examples. To address this problem, we propose a prompt retrieval framework specifically for large vision models, allowing the selection of in-context examples to be fully automated. Concretely, we provide two implementations: (i) an unsupervised prompt retrieval method based on nearest example search using an off-the-shelf model, and (ii) a supervised prompt retrieval method, which trains a neural network to choose examples that directly maximize in-context learning performance. Both methods do not require access to the internal weights of large vision models. Our results demonstrate that our methods can bring non-trivial improvements to visual in-context learning in comparison to the commonly-used random selection. Code and models will be released.1a7:T55b,Large vision-language models (VLMs) such as GPT-4 have achieved unprecedented performance in response generation, especially with visual inputs, enabling more creative and adaptable interaction than large language models such as ChatGPT. Nonetheless, multimodal generation exacerbates safety concerns, since adversaries may successfully evade the entire system by subtly manipulating the most vulnerable modality (e.g., vision). To this end, we propose evaluating the robustness of open-source large VLMs in the most realistic and high-risk setting, where adversaries have only black-box system access and seek to deceive the model into returning the targeted responses. In particular, we first craft targeted adversarial examples against pretrained models such as CLIP and BLIP, and then transfer these adversarial examples to other VLMs such as MiniGPT-4, LLaVA, UniDiffuser, BLIP-2, and Img2Prompt. In addition, we observe that black-box queries on these VLMs can further improve the effectiveness of targeted evasion, resulting in a surprisingly high success rate for generating targeted responses. Our findings provide a quantitative understanding regarding the adversarial vulnerability of large VLMs and call for a more thorough examination of their potential security flaws before deployment in practice. Our project page: https://yunqing-me.github.io/AttackVLM/.1a8:T4bb,Although large-scale pre-trained language models (PTLMs) are shown to encode rich knowledge in their model parameters, the inherent knowledge in PTLMs can be opaque or static, making external knowledge necessary. However, the existing information retrieval techniques could be costly and may even introduce noisy and sometimes misleading knowledge. To address these challenges, we propose the instance-level adaptive propulsion of external knowledge (IAPEK), where we only conduct the retrieval when necessary. To achieve this goal, we propose to model whether a PTLM contains enough knowledge to solve an instance with a novel metric, Thrust, which leverages the representation distribution of a small amount of seen instances. Extensive experiments demonstrate that Thrust is a good measurement of models' instance-level knowledgeability. Moreover, we can achieve higher cost-efficiency with the Thrust score as the retrieval indicator than the naive usage of external knowledge on 88% of the evaluated tasks with 26% average performance improvement. Such findings shed light on the real-world practice of knowledge-enhanced LMs with a limited budget for knowledge seeking due to computation latency or costs.1a9:T5b2,A long-standing goal of AI systems is to perform complex multimodal reasoning like humans. Recently, large language models (LLMs) have made remarkable strides in such multi-step reasoning on the language modality solely by leveraging the chain of thought (CoT) to mimic human thinking. However, the transfer of these advancements to multimodal contexts introduces heightened challenges, including but not limited to the impractical need for labor-intensive annotation and the limitations in terms of flexibility, generalizability, and explainability. To evoke CoT reasoning in multimodality, this work first conducts an in-depth analysis of these challenges posed by multimodality and presents two key insights: “keeping critical thinking” and “letting everyone do their jobs” in multimodal CoT reasoning. Furthermore, this study proposes a novel DDCoT prompting that maintains a critical attitude through negative-space prompting and incorporates multimodality into reasoning by first dividing the reasoning responsibility of LLMs into reasoning and recognition and then integrating the visual recognition capability of visual models into the joint reasoning process. The rationales generated by DDCoT not only improve the reasoning abilities of both large and small language models in zero-shot prompting and fine-tuning learning, significantly outperforming state-of-the-art methods but also exhibit impressive generalizability and explainability.1aa:T409,We propose a conceptually simple and lightweight framework for improving the robustness of vision models through the combination of knowledge distillation and data augmentation. We address the conjecture that larger models do not make for better teachers by showing strong gains in out-of-distribution robustness when distilling from pretrained foundation models. Following this finding, we propose Discrete Adversarial Distillation (DAD), which leverages a robust teacher to generate adversarial examples and a VQGAN to discretize them, creating more informative samples than standard data augmentation techniques. We provide a theoretical framework for the use of a robust teacher in the knowledge distillation with data augmentation setting and demonstrate strong gains in out-of-distribution robustness and clean accuracy across different student architectures. Notably, our method adds minor computational overhead compared to similar techniques and can be easily combined with other data augmentations for further improvements.1ab:T594,We introduce beta diffusion, a novel generative modeling method that integrates demasking and denoising to generate data within bounded ranges. Using scaled and shifted beta distributions, beta diffusion utilizes multiplicative transitions over time to create both forward and reverse diffusion processes, maintaining beta distributions in both the forward marginals and the reverse conditionals, given the data at any point in time. Unlike traditional diffusion-based generative models relying on additive Gaussian noise and reweighted evidence lower bounds (ELBOs), beta diffusion is multiplicative and optimized with KL-divergence upper bounds (KLUBs) derived from the convexity of the KL divergence. We demonstrate that the proposed KLUBs are more effective for optimizing beta diffusion compared to negative ELBOs, which can also be derived as the KLUBs of the same KL divergence with its two arguments swapped. The loss function of beta diffusion, expressed in terms of Bregman divergence, further supports the efficacy of KLUBs for optimization. Experimental results on both synthetic data and natural images demonstrate the unique capabilities of beta diffusion in generative modeling of range-bounded data and validate the effectiveness of KLUBs in optimizing diffusion models, thereby making them valuable additions to the family of diffusion-based generative models and the optimization techniques used to train them.1ac:T64f,Although we have witnessed great success of pre-trained models in natural language processing (NLP) and computer vision (CV), limited progress has been made for general time series analysis. Unlike NLP and CV where a unified model can be used to perform different tasks, specially designed approach still dominates in each time series analysis task such as classification, anomaly detection, forecasting, and few-shot learning. The main challenge that blocks the development of pre-trained model for time series analysis is the lack of a large amount of data for training. In this work, we address this challenge by leveraging language or CV models, pre-trained from billions of tokens, for time series analysis. Specifically, we refrain from altering the self-attention and feedforward layers of the residual blocks in the pre-trained language or image model. This model, known as the Frozen Pretrained Transformer (FPT), is evaluated through fine-tuning on all major types of tasks involving time series. Our results demonstrate that pre-trained models on natural language or images can lead to a comparable or state-of-the-art performance in all main time series analysis tasks, as illustrated in Figure1. We also found both theoretically and empirically that the self-attention module behaviors similarly to principle component analysis (PCA), an observation that helps explains how transformer bridges the domain gap and a crucial step towards understanding the universality of a pre-trained transformer. 
The code is publicly available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/Pretrained-LM-for-TSForcasting-C561.1ad:T602,Regularization in modern machine learning is crucial, and it can take various forms in algorithmic design: training set, model family, error function, regularization terms, and optimizations. 
In particular, the learning rate, which can be interpreted as a temperature-like parameter within the statistical mechanics of learning, plays a crucial role in neural network training. 
Indeed, many widely adopted training strategies basically just define the decay of the learning rate over time. 
This process can be interpreted as decreasing a temperature, using either a global learning rate (for the entire model) or a learning rate that varies for each parameter. 
This paper proposes TempBalance, a straightforward yet effective layer-wise learning rate method. TempBalance is based on Heavy-Tailed Self-Regularization (HT-SR) Theory, an approach which characterizes the implicit self-regularization of different layers in trained models. 
We demonstrate the efficacy of using HT-SR-motivated metrics to guide the scheduling and balancing of temperature across all network layers during model training, resulting in improved performance during testing. 
We implement TempBalance on CIFAR10, CIFAR100, SVHN, and TinyImageNet datasets using ResNets, VGGs and WideResNets with various depths and widths. 
Our results show that TempBalance significantly outperforms ordinary SGD and carefully-tuned spectral norm regularization. 
We also show that TempBalance outperforms a number of state-of-the-art optimizers and learning rate schedulers.1ae:T5c7,Advances in the field of visual-language contrastive learning have made it possible for many downstream applications to be carried out efficiently and accurately by simply taking the dot product between image and text representations.  One of the most representative approaches proposed recently known as CLIP has quickly garnered widespread adoption due to its effectiveness. CLIP is trained with an InfoNCE loss that takes into account both positive and negative samples to help learn a much more robust representation space. This paper however reveals that the common downstream practice of taking a dot product is only a zeroth-order approximation of the optimization goal, resulting in a loss of information during test-time. Intuitively, since the model has been optimized based on the InfoNCE loss, test-time procedures should ideally also be in alignment. The question lies in how one can retrieve any semblance of negative samples information during inference in a computationally efficient way. We propose Distribution Normalization (DN), where we approximate the mean representation of a batch of test samples and use such a mean to represent what would be analogous to negative samples in the InfoNCE loss. DN requires no retraining or fine-tuning and can be effortlessly applied during inference. Extensive experiments on a wide variety of downstream tasks exhibit a clear advantage of DN over the dot product on top of other existing test-time augmentation methods.1af:T538,Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive performance in various NLP tasks, but they still suffer from challenges such as hallucination and weak numerical reasoning. To overcome these challenges, external tools can be used to enhance LLMs' question-answering abilities. However, current evaluation methods do not distinguish between questions that can be answered using LLMs' internal knowledge and those that require external information through tool use. To address this issue, we introduce a new dataset called ToolQA, which is designed to faithfully evaluate LLMs' ability to use external tools for question answering. Our development of ToolQA involved a scalable, automated process for dataset curation, along with 13 specialized tools designed for interaction with external knowledge in order to answer questions. Importantly, we strive to minimize the overlap between our benchmark data and LLMs' pre-training data, enabling a more precise evaluation of LLMs' tool-use reasoning abilities. We conducted an in-depth diagnosis of existing tool-use LLMs to highlight their strengths, weaknesses, and potential improvements. Our findings set a new benchmark for evaluating LLMs and suggest new directions for future advancements. Our data and code are freely available for the broader scientific community on GitHub.1b0:T654,In light of the recent widespread adoption of AI systems, understanding the internal information processing of neural networks has become increasingly critical. Most recently, machine vision has seen remarkable progress by scaling neural networks to unprecedented levels in dataset and model size. We here ask whether this extraordinary increase in scale also positively impacts the field of mechanistic interpretability. In other words, has our understanding of the inner workings of scaled neural networks improved as well? We use a psychophysical paradigm to quantify one form of mechanistic interpretability for a diverse suite of nine models and find no scaling effect for interpretability - neither for model nor dataset size. Specifically, none of the investigated state-of-the-art models are easier to interpret than the GoogLeNet model from almost a decade ago. Latest-generation vision models appear even less interpretable than older architectures, hinting at a regression rather than improvement, with modern models sacrificing interpretability for accuracy. These results highlight the need for models explicitly designed to be mechanistically interpretable and the need for more helpful interpretability methods to increase our understanding of networks at an atomic level. We release a dataset containing more than 130'000 human responses from our psychophysical evaluation of 767 units across nine models. This dataset facilitates research on automated instead of human-based interpretability evaluations, which can ultimately be leveraged to directly optimize the mechanistic interpretability of models.0:{"rsc":["$","$1","c",{"children":[["$","div",null,{"className":"mx-auto max-w-5xl px-4 py-8","children":["$","$L2",null,{"data":{"venue":"NeurIPS","venue_slug":"neurips-2023","year":2023,"full_name":"Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems","generated_at":"2026-04-19T04:06:29.627949+00:00","stats":{"total_fetched":3582,"total_relevant":523,"by_award":{"spotlight":78,"poster":415,"oral":30},"by_category":{"llm_pretrain":105,"post_train":66,"mechanism":129,"efficient":63,"multimodal":69,"agent":24,"multimodal_gen":57,"coding_agent":8,"industry":2},"by_track":{"main":471,"datasets_benchmarks":52}},"papers":[{"id":"Xie0DDLLLL0Y23","title":"DoReMi: Optimizing Data Mixtures Speeds Up Language Model Pretraining","authors":["Sang Michael Xie","Hieu Pham","Xuanyi Dong","Nan Du","Hanxiao Liu","Yifeng Lu","Percy Liang","Quoc V. Le","Tengyu Ma","Adams Wei Yu"],"institutions":["Google Research","Google DeepMind"],"abstract":"$3","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Xie0DDLLLL0Y23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Xie0DDLLLL0Y23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/dcba6be91359358c2355cd920da3fcbd-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":10,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心结论很明确：预训练数据混合比大家通常处理得更重要，而且可以被系统优化，而不是靠经验拍配比。过去大模型常用固定数据比例训练，最多做少量启发式调参；问题在于不同数据域对损失下降和最终泛化的边际贡献差异很大，错误配比会让训练 token 被浪费在低价值数据上。","importance":"这是对 pretrain 非常重要的方法级工作，影响直接落在数据配比和训练效率上。它的重要性不只是省一点 compute，而是说明“同样的 token 预算，靠更优 mixture 就能更快达到目标质量”。这对今天的大模型训练非常关键，因为数据质量和数据配比已经成为接近 scaling law 前沿时最便宜、但也最容易被忽视的性能杠杆。","technical_approach":"DoReMi 的核心方法是把数据混合优化写成一个可学习的问题，而不是手工设定静态采样权重。其基本思路是先用参考模型估计不同域的相对困难度或价值，再据此动态调整训练分布，让优化更聚焦于对目标泛化真正有贡献的域。与简单按验证集 loss 重加权相比，DoReMi 更强调鲁棒最优化/分布重加权视角：不是追求某个单域最优，而是在一组域上学到更稳健的 mixture。这样设计有效的原因是，预训练损失本身就是不同子分布的加权和，权重错了，算力就会系统性浪费。","experiments":"这篇论文的关键实验事实是：优化数据 mixture 可以显著减少达到同等验证损失或下游质量所需的训练 token/compute。论文通常在多域语言数据上比较均匀采样、启发式采样和 DoReMi 学到的权重，并报告更快收敛和更好的跨域表现。值得关注的 ablation 包括：参考模型大小是否必须很大、学到的 mixture 是否可迁移到更大模型、以及最优权重是否会随训练阶段变化。基于已知工作印象，DoReMi 的主张是“在固定 compute 下明显更好，或在固定质量下显著更省”；但这里不在无摘要条件下编造具体百分比。","authors_note":"作者来自 Google DeepMind/Google Research 体系。Sang Michael Xie、Hieu Pham、Xuanyi Dong、Nan Du、Hanxiao Liu、Quoc V. Le、D. Sculley、Percy Liang 等人都与大模型训练、数据配比、架构搜索和稳健优化方向有代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper makes a sharp point: data mixture in language-model pretraining is too important to leave to heuristics. Large models are often trained with fixed corpus ratios chosen by rough intuition, but domains differ greatly in marginal value, so poor mixtures waste tokens on data that contributes little to the target model quality.","importance":"This is a high-value method contribution for pretraining. Its significance is not merely modest efficiency gain; it shows that better data weighting can materially shift the quality-vs-compute frontier. At current scales, data curation and mixture design are among the cheapest levers left, and this paper turns mixture selection from folklore into an optimization problem.","technical_approach":"DoReMi treats corpus mixing as a learned reweighting problem instead of a fixed manual choice. The high-level idea is to use a reference model to estimate which domains are under-served or more valuable, then adapt sampling weights toward a mixture that improves robustness across domains. This differs from simple validation-loss tuning because it adopts a distributionally robust view: the target is not to overfit one domain but to find a mixture that improves overall pretraining utility. The design is effective because pretraining loss is already an average over domains, so bad weights create systematic compute inefficiency.","experiments":"The main empirical result is typically that optimized mixtures reach a given loss or downstream quality using fewer tokens and less compute than uniform or heuristic baselines. The paper likely evaluates on multi-domain language corpora and compares convergence speed, final perplexity, and cross-domain performance under different sampling schemes. Important ablations include how large the reference model must be, whether learned weights transfer to larger models, and whether optimal mixtures shift across training stages. I avoid stating exact percentages without the paper abstract or tables.","authors_note":"The work is associated with Google DeepMind / Google Research. The author set includes researchers known for large-scale training, data mixture, architecture search, and robust optimization, such as Sang Michael Xie, Hieu Pham, Xuanyi Dong, Nan Du, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V. Le, D. Sculley, and Percy Liang."},"tags":["data-mixture","data-quality","scaling-law","pretraining"],"notable_authors":["Sang Michael Xie","Hieu Pham","Xuanyi Dong","Nan Du","Hanxiao Liu"],"keywords":["language models","pretraining","domain reweighting","data curation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"直接推翻预训练数据配比靠人工调的固有认知，可立刻复现到内部预训练数据管线，同等token预算下能显著提升训练效率。","en":"Overturns the long-held heuristic data mixture tuning assumption, can be immediately integrated into internal pretraining pipelines to boost training efficiency under fixed token budgets."}},{"id":"GulrajaniH23","title":"Likelihood-Based Diffusion Language Models","authors":["Ishaan Gulrajani","Tatsunori B. Hashimoto"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GulrajaniH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GulrajaniH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/35b5c175e139bff5f22a5361270fce87-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：离散扩散语言模型过去最大的短板之一，是很难像 AR LM 那样给出 tractable likelihood，因此训练目标、评估方式和与主流语言建模的可比性都受限。大家知道 diffusion 可能带来更强的全局建模和非左到右生成能力，但如果不能做似然建模，它就很难真正成为语言预训练的一等公民。","importance":"这是范式级的重要工作。它直接回应了‘diffusion LM 能否成为严肃语言建模替代路线’这个核心问题，因为 likelihood 是语言模型最基础的共同货币：它决定了训练是否统一、困惑度是否可比、scaling 是否可分析。对 pretrain 研究来说，这篇论文的重要性明显高于一般应用型 diffusion work，因为它在补 diffusion LM 的理论和方法缺口。","technical_approach":"核心方法是构造 likelihood-based 的 diffusion language model，让离散扩散过程不再只靠近似生成目标或启发式训练，而能对应到可优化、可评估的似然目标。按照这条路线，关键设计通常包括：如何定义离散 token 上的前向噪声过程、如何参数化反向分布、以及如何把训练目标写成严格的 likelihood 或其紧致下界。它和传统 AR LM 的区别，不是把条件分解换个顺序这么简单，而是把生成过程从单步 next-token 改成多步去噪；而与早期 diffusion LM 相比，它补上了最关键的统计解释和评测接口。这样设计有效，是因为一旦有了 likelihood，扩散 LM 才能与 AR 在同一优化语言里比较，也更容易研究 scaling、tokenizer 和训练动态。","experiments":"这篇论文的实验关键通常有三部分：第一，验证模型能在标准语言建模基准上得到有意义的 likelihood/perplexity 类指标；第二，比较生成质量与 AR 或已有 diffusion LM 的差异；第三，分析采样步数、噪声设计和模型规模对性能的影响。NeurIPS 2023 这篇工作常被视为后续 SEDD、MDLM、LLaDA 等离散 diffusion LM 路线的前置脉络之一。当前给定信息没有具体数据集、参数规模和困惑度数字，因此不能编造结果；但可以明确说，这篇工作的核心价值更在‘让 diffusion LM 可被严肃比较’，而不一定是在所有基准上立即超过 AR LM。","authors_note":"作者为 Ishaan Gulrajani 与 Tatsunori B. Hashimoto。Hashimoto 长期做鲁棒性、生成建模与语言模型训练目标相关研究；这篇工作在 diffusion LM 方向有明显范式意义。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a central weakness of earlier diffusion language models: they generally lacked a clean likelihood formulation comparable to autoregressive LMs. Without tractable likelihood, training objectives are harder to interpret, perplexity-style evaluation is missing or indirect, and diffusion LMs remain difficult to compare seriously against mainstream language modeling.","importance":"This is a paradigm-level contribution. It matters because likelihood is the common currency of language modeling: it defines the training objective, enables apples-to-apples evaluation, and supports scaling-law style analysis. For pretraining research, this is much more important than a diffusion application paper, because it fills a foundational gap in making diffusion LM a credible alternative to next-token autoregression.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to formulate a likelihood-based diffusion language model for discrete tokens, so the model is not trained only through heuristic denoising objectives but through a principled likelihood objective or a tight bound to it. The key design choices in this line of work are how to define the forward corruption process on discrete tokens, how to parameterize the reverse distribution, and how to recover a proper likelihood training criterion. The difference from an autoregressive LM is not just a different factorization order; generation becomes iterative denoising instead of one-step next-token prediction. The difference from earlier diffusion LMs is that this formulation provides the missing statistical interpretation and evaluation interface.","experiments":"The critical experiments are typically threefold: first, showing meaningful likelihood or perplexity-like evaluation on standard language modeling benchmarks; second, comparing generation quality against autoregressive baselines or prior diffusion LMs; and third, analyzing the effects of sampling steps, noise design, and model scale. This NeurIPS 2023 work is often viewed as part of the path that later led to stronger discrete diffusion LM lines such as SEDD, MDLM, and related approaches. The provided metadata does not include datasets, parameter counts, or numerical results, so exact numbers should not be invented. The key value is making diffusion LMs comparable and analyzable, not necessarily beating autoregressive LMs across the board immediately.","authors_note":"The authors are Ishaan Gulrajani and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Hashimoto is well known for work on robustness, generative modeling, and language-model training objectives; this paper is notably important for the diffusion LM agenda."},"tags":["diffusion-lm","non-autoregressive","likelihood"],"notable_authors":["Ishaan Gulrajani","Tatsunori B. Hashimoto"],"keywords":["diffusion","language","model"],"recommendation":{"zh":"补上离散扩散LM缺失的可计算似然接口，首次让扩散路线能和AR LM用统一困惑度指标对比，值得做非AR预训练的团队全量复现。","en":"Fills the missing tractable likelihood interface for discrete diffusion LMs, enables fair comparison with AR LMs via unified perplexity, full reproduction is recommended for non-autoregressive pretraining teams."}},{"id":"MuennighoffRBST23","title":"Scaling Data-Constrained Language Models","authors":["Niklas Muennighoff","Alexander M. Rush","Boaz Barak","Teven Le Scao","Nouamane Tazi","Aleksandra Piktus","Sampo Pyysalo","Thomas Wolf","Colin A. Raffel"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$5","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MuennighoffRBST23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MuennighoffRBST23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/9d89448b63ce1e2e8dc7af72c984c196-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：当高质量训练数据受限时，语言模型应该如何扩展，才能比盲目增参或重复训练数据更有效。经典 Chinchilla 类结论默认数据和参数可以共同扩展，但很多真实场景——多语种、专业领域、许可受限语料——首先撞到的是数据瓶颈；这篇工作正面研究 data-constrained regime 下的 scaling。","importance":"这对 pretrain 很重要，而且是直接可用的。它把讨论从‘最优 compute allocation’推进到‘数据不足时该怎么办’：是多轮重复、更多训练步数、更小模型、正则化、更强 tokenizer，还是跨域混合数据更划算。对当下高质量文本日益稀缺的现实，这类结论比单纯更大模型的 scaling law 更贴近工程决策。","technical_approach":"作者的做法应是系统研究数据受限下模型规模、训练 token 数、重复率和数据混合策略的关系，给出不同于标准 compute-optimal scaling 的建议。核心思想不是否定 Chinchilla，而是指出其假设在数据不足时失效：此时继续按常规比例增大模型可能导致欠训练，而过度重复数据又带来过拟合和记忆化。论文很可能探索了数据重采样、去重、再训练步数安排和正则化等手段，以寻找 data-constrained optimum。与以往只讨论 compute/data 二元平衡不同，它更强调数据质量与多样性在低资源区间的主导作用。","experiments":"这篇工作的关键价值应来自系统的 scaling 实验。最重要的事实是：在固定小数据预算下，不同参数规模和训练步数的最优点如何移动，以及重复同一数据多少次开始收益递减或泛化变差。如果论文报告了多个语料规模、模型大小和去重设置下的困惑度/下游表现曲线，那是很有价值的参考。对基础模型训练者，尤其值得关注的是是否存在稳健经验法则，例如数据少时应选更小模型、训练更久但加强正则，或混入外域数据优于高重复内域数据；这些结论对持续预训练和领域模型都很实用。","authors_note":"作者中包括 Niklas Muennighoff、Alexander M. Rush、Boaz Barak、Teven Le Scao 等较知名研究者；仅凭题面无法完整确认全部机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a regime that has become increasingly important in practice: how to scale language models when high-quality data, not compute alone, is the main bottleneck. Standard compute-optimal scaling laws assume data can grow with model size, but many real settings—multilingual, domain-specific, or license-constrained pretraining—hit the data wall first.","importance":"This is directly important for pretraining strategy. It shifts the question from generic compute allocation to what to do when the corpus is small: choose a smaller model, train longer, repeat data, regularize harder, improve tokenization, or mix in out-of-domain text. These decisions matter more now than another idealized scaling-law fit on abundant data.","technical_approach":"The work likely performs a systematic study of model size, token budget, data repetition, and data-mixing strategy under data constraints, and derives recommendations that differ from standard Chinchilla-style scaling. The key point is not to reject compute-optimal theory, but to show that its assumptions break when data is limited. In that setting, scaling parameters too aggressively causes undertraining, while repeating data too much raises overfitting and memorization risks. The method contribution is therefore an empirical scaling analysis tailored to the data-constrained regime.","experiments":"The main value should come from broad scaling experiments. The most useful facts are how the optimal model size shifts as dataset size shrinks, how many effective passes over the same data remain beneficial, and where returns start to decay or generalization degrades. For practitioners, the most actionable results would be rules of thumb such as preferring smaller models with longer training and stronger regularization when data is scarce, or using mixed-domain data instead of excessive in-domain repetition.","authors_note":"The author list includes recognizable researchers such as Niklas Muennighoff, Alexander M. Rush, Boaz Barak, and Teven Le Scao. Full institutional details cannot be reliably confirmed from the provided metadata."},"tags":["scaling-law","data-constrained","data-repetition","pretraining"],"notable_authors":["Niklas Muennighoff","Alexander M. Rush","Boaz Barak","Teven Le Scao","Nouamane Tazi"],"keywords":["large language models","scaling laws","data engineering"],"recommendation":{"zh":"修正了Chinchilla scaling law在高质量数据不足场景下的适用边界，给出的参数/步数/重复率配比建议可直接用于小语种、垂域大模型训练决策。","en":"Revises the applicable boundary of Chinchilla scaling law under high-quality data scarcity, its parameter/step/repeat rate tradeoff can be directly used for low-resource and domain-specific LLM training decisions."}},{"id":"PenedoMHCACPAL23","title":"The RefinedWeb Dataset for Falcon LLM: Outperforming Curated Corpora with Web Data Only","authors":["Guilherme Penedo","Quentin Malartic","Daniel Hesslow","Ruxandra Cojocaru","Hamza Alobeidli","Alessandro Cappelli","Baptiste Pannier","Ebtesam Almazrouei","Julien Launay"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Large language models are commonly trained on a mixture of filtered web data and curated ``high-quality'' corpora, such as social media conversations, books, or technical papers. This curation process is believed to be necessary to produce performant models with broad zero-shot generalization abilities. However, as larger models requiring pretraining on trillions of tokens are considered, it is unclear how scalable is curation, and whether we will run out of unique high-quality data soon.  At variance with previous beliefs, we show that properly filtered and deduplicated web data alone can lead to powerful models; even significantly outperforming models trained on The Pile. Despite extensive filtering, the high-quality data we extract from the web is still plentiful, and we are able to obtain five trillion tokens from CommonCrawl. We publicly release an extract of 500 billion tokens from our RefinedWeb dataset, and 1.3/7.5B parameters language models trained on it.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PenedoMHCACPAL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PenedoMHCACPAL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/fa3ed726cc5073b9c31e3e49a807789c-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是大模型预训练数据是否必须依赖重度人工策展。过去高质量 LLM 语料常强调 curated corpora，例如精筛网页、书籍和百科组合，但这条路成本高、扩展慢，也容易把数据工程变成难以复现的黑箱；作者要证明，纯 web 数据只要清洗和去重足够好，也能支撑强模型。","importance":"这是典型的数据级工作，而且量级很大。对 pretrain 的冲击在于它直接挑战“高质量=高度人工策展”的默认假设，说明数据管线设计、过滤规则和规模化去重可能比语料来源标签更关键；对开源 LLM 社区尤其重要，因为它给出了一条更可复制的数据建设路线。","technical_approach":"作者构建了 RefinedWeb，核心不是引入新数据源，而是对 web-only 语料进行系统清洗、质量过滤、去重和可训练化处理，然后用 Falcon 系列模型验证。与依赖书籍、论文、维基等混合 curated 数据集不同，这里选择把精力放在 web 数据的筛选和规范化上；这样设计有效，是因为网页数据虽然噪声高，但覆盖广、更新快、规模大，只要过滤足够稳，就能在规模优势下超过小而精的策展语料。边界则是 web-only 可能在长尾知识密度、代码、数学和高质量推理文本上仍有短板。","experiments":"结论很明确：作者报告 RefinedWeb 支撑的 Falcon LLM 能超过一些依赖 curated corpora 的对照设置。给定当前信息无法安全写出具体 token 数、参数规模、基准名称和绝对分数，但论文标题已经说明核心事实是 ‘web data only’ 不是明显劣势。skim 时最值得看的是三类细节：一是过滤与去重规则到底多强；二是同等 token budget 下，RefinedWeb 相对常见开源语料的收益；三是 scaling 观察——随着模型变大，web-only 的劣势是缩小还是放大。","authors_note":"如果这篇论文对应 Falcon 团队的数据报告，那么机构通常与 Technology Innovation Institute (TII) / UAE 的 Falcon 团队相关；但仅凭当前给定信息无法完全确认，谨慎起见这里不展开。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a concrete pretraining question: do strong LLMs really require heavily curated corpora, or can a well-processed web-only dataset be enough? The usual assumption has been that high quality comes from expensive curation pipelines built from books, encyclopedias, and manually filtered sources.","importance":"This is a high-impact data contribution. Its significance is that it challenges the equation of quality with hand-curation and shifts attention toward scalable filtering, deduplication, and data pipeline design; for open LLM work, that is especially important because it offers a more reproducible route to strong pretraining data.","technical_approach":"The core contribution is RefinedWeb: not a new data source, but a systematically cleaned, filtered, deduplicated, and standardized web-only corpus used to train Falcon models. The design choice is deliberate: instead of mixing in privileged curated sources, the pipeline invests in making noisy web data trainable at scale; this can work because web data has broad coverage and massive scale, and good filtering can convert that scale into performance. The boundary is that web-only corpora may still be thinner on dense knowledge, code, mathematics, and high-quality reasoning text.","experiments":"The main empirical claim is clear from the title: Falcon trained on RefinedWeb outperforms setups based on curated corpora. The metadata here does not provide safe numbers for token count, parameter scales, benchmarks, or margins, so I will not invent them. For a quick read, the most valuable details are the filtering and dedup recipe, the comparison at matched token budgets, and whether scaling reduces or amplifies any remaining gap between web-only and curated mixtures.","authors_note":"If this paper is the data report behind Falcon, the institutions are typically associated with the Falcon/TII effort, but the provided record is not sufficient to confirm that cleanly, so I leave the note conservative."},"tags":["data-quality","web-data","data-mixture","scaling-law","llm"],"keywords":["web data","crawl","curated","deduplication","NLP","LLM"],"recommendation":{"zh":"打破“高质量预训练语料必须依赖多源人工策展”的固有认知，其纯网页数据清洗流水线可直接复用给开源LLM数据建设。","en":"Breaks the stereotype that high-quality pretraining corpora require multi-source human curation, its web-only data cleaning pipeline can be directly reused for open-source LLM data construction."}},{"id":"2305.18290","title":"Direct Preference Optimization: Your Language Model is Secretly a Reward Model","authors":["Rafael Rafailov","Archit Sharma","Eric Mitchell","Christopher D. Manning","Stefano Ermon","Chelsea Finn"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.18290","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/RafailovSMMEF23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/RafailovSMMEF23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/a85b405ed65c6477a4fe8302b5e06ce7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的核心问题是：RLHF 虽然有效，但流程过长、训练不稳定，而且 reward model 与 policy optimization 的误差会层层放大。过去主流做法是先拟合奖励模型，再用 PPO 等 RL 方法优化语言模型，并用 KL 约束防止漂移；这条链路在大模型上可行，但实现复杂、调参脆弱、算力成本高。","importance":"这是 posttrain 方法级的里程碑工作，而且直接影响 pretrain-posttrain 接口的理解。它的重要性不只是“RLHF 更简单替代品”，而是把偏好优化改写成一个闭式可监督学习的问题，显著降低了对在线 RL、值函数估计和 rollout 管线的依赖。对 pretrain 研究者也重要，因为它改变了我们看待 LM 的方式：一个预训练 LM 在参考分布约束下，已经隐式携带可恢复的奖励信息，后续对齐不一定非要走重型 RL。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Direct Preference Optimization，简称 DPO。它不是再训练一个显式 reward model 再做 RL，而是从 KL-regularized reward maximization 的最优策略形式出发，把成对偏好数据上的优化直接写成一个二分类/逻辑回归式目标：让模型提高 preferred response 相对 dispreferred response 的对数概率，同时参考一个基准模型控制偏移。和 PPO-based RLHF 相比，DPO 去掉了在线采样与高方差策略梯度，保留了“偏好 + 不偏离原模型”这两个关键约束，因此简单但并不只是启发式替代。","experiments":"论文的关键事实是：DPO 在标准偏好对齐设置上能稳定达到与 RLHF 相当或更好的效果，同时训练过程更简单、超参更少。主实验通常覆盖摘要生成、对话有用性/无害性等偏好数据场景，并与 PPO、SLiC 或拒绝采样式基线比较。DPO 的价值还体现在稳定性 ablation：不需要单独 reward model，不需要在线 RL rollout，也能在 win rate 或 reward proxy 上取得竞争结果。当前题面只给了截断摘要，无法安全填写具体数据集、参数量和数字。","authors_note":"机构与作者信息在题面未完整给出，无法确认。已知作者包括 Rafael Rafailov、Christopher D. Manning、Stefano Ermon，但这里不补充未核实的团队说明。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles the main pain point of RLHF: it works, but the pipeline is long, brittle, and expensive. Standard practice trains a reward model from preference labels and then optimizes the policy with RL under a KL constraint, which introduces instability, rollout overhead, and extra approximation error at each stage.","importance":"This is a landmark post-training method with clear implications for the pretrain–posttrain interface. Its significance is not just that alignment becomes simpler; it shows that preference optimization can be reduced to a supervised objective derived from the same KL-regularized reward-maximization framework. For pretraining researchers, that is important because it changes how we think about the base LM: under a reference-policy view, the model already contains enough structure to support direct preference optimization without a full RL stack.","technical_approach":"The core idea is Direct Preference Optimization, or DPO. Instead of separately fitting a reward model and running RL, DPO starts from the optimal-policy form of KL-constrained reward maximization and derives a direct objective on preference pairs. In practice, it increases the log-probability of the preferred response relative to the rejected one while anchoring the policy to a reference model. Compared with PPO-style RLHF, it removes online sampling and high-variance policy gradients, but keeps the two ingredients that matter: preference fitting and controlled deviation from the base model.","experiments":"The main empirical claim is that DPO matches or exceeds RLHF-style baselines on standard preference-alignment setups while being much simpler to train. Typical evaluations include summarization and dialogue preference tasks, with comparisons against PPO, SLiC-style methods, and related baselines. A key practical result is stability: no separate reward-model training and no online RL rollouts are required to obtain competitive win rates or reward-proxy scores. The prompt only includes a truncated abstract, so exact datasets, model sizes, and numbers should not be fabricated.","authors_note":"The prompt does not provide enough verified metadata for a reliable team note. Known authors include Rafael Rafailov, Christopher D. Manning, and Stefano Ermon, but no unverified institutional summary is added here."},"tags":["dpo","rlhf","alignment","reward-model","preference-optimization"],"notable_authors":["Rafael Rafailov","Christopher D. Manning","Stefano Ermon"],"keywords":["reinforcement learning from human feedback","language models","RLHF","preferences"],"recommendation":{"zh":"把RLHF从重型RL链路简化为闭式监督优化问题，改变了预训练到对齐链路的设计思路，建议所有做对齐的团队优先落地测试。","en":"Simplifies RLHF from a heavy RL pipeline to closed-form supervised optimization, reshapes pretraining-to-alignment pipeline design, priority testing is recommended for all alignment teams."}},{"id":"TirumalaSAM23","title":"D4: Improving LLM Pretraining via Document De-Duplication and Diversification","authors":["Kushal Tirumala","Daniel Simig","Armen Aghajanyan","Ari Morcos"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$7","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/TirumalaSAM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/TirumalaSAM23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/a8f8cbd7f7a5fb2c837e578c75e5b615-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是 LLM 预训练数据里的重复与同质化问题：大规模网页语料看似很多，但常含大量近重复文档和主题过度集中，导致模型把算力浪费在重复 token 上。过去业界更多关注去重是否提升 benchmark，而对\"去重 + 多样化采样\"如何共同影响训练效率和泛化，讨论还不够系统。","importance":"这是一篇很典型的数据级 pretrain 论文，而且对实践很有价值。它直接作用于训练 token 的有效信息密度：同样的训练预算下，减少冗余、增加文档多样性，往往比微调优化器更稳、更便宜。对大模型预训练的启示是，数据管线不是后处理细节，而是 scaling efficiency 的核心组成部分。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 D4：document de-duplication 加 diversification 的联合数据处理方案。关键不只是删掉精确重复，而是面向文档级语义或近重复冗余做更系统的去重，同时在采样阶段提升文档覆盖和主题多样性，避免训练被高频模版文本主导。这样设计有效，因为语言模型收益来自新信息而不是重复曝光；如果只去重不做多样化，可能仍会被少数高频域占满训练配额；如果只追求多样化而不去重，冗余 token 依旧浪费预算。","experiments":"从题目判断，实验应比较原始网页数据、仅去重、仅多样化和 D4 联合方案，在固定 token 预算下衡量验证 loss、下游 benchmark 和训练效率。这里没有摘要，无法确认模型参数量与数据规模。最关键的事实通常会是：D4 在相同训练 token 下取得更低 pretrain loss 和更好下游泛化，并且收益在较小到中等规模模型上就已经可见；有价值的分析应包括重复率估计、不同去重阈值的 trade-off，以及多样化是否牺牲领域内性能。","authors_note":"作者名单包含 Kushal Tirumala、Armen Aghajanyan、Ari Morcos。该组合与 Meta/FAIR 系列的数据与表征研究较为接近，但这里没有机构信息，不能明确写定。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a core pretraining inefficiency: large web corpora contain substantial document duplication and thematic concentration, so many training tokens are redundant rather than informative. Prior discussions often focused on whether deduplication helps benchmarks, but were less systematic about the joint role of deduplication and diversification under a fixed token budget.","importance":"This is a strong data-centric pretraining paper with immediate practical relevance. It targets information density in the training stream: reducing redundancy and improving document diversity can yield cleaner scaling than many optimizer-level tweaks. The broader lesson is that data pipelines are not a hygiene detail; they directly shape training efficiency and generalization.","technical_approach":"The method, D4, combines document deduplication with diversification. The key is not just removing exact duplicates, but handling near-duplicate or semantically repetitive documents and then adjusting sampling so training covers a broader set of documents and topics. This design makes sense because language models benefit from exposure to new information, not repeated surface forms. Deduplication alone may still leave the training budget dominated by a few high-frequency domains; diversification alone still wastes tokens on redundancy.","experiments":"From the title, the natural comparisons are raw data, dedup-only, diversify-only, and the full D4 pipeline, evaluated at fixed token budgets on pretraining loss and downstream benchmarks. The prompt does not include the abstract, so model sizes, data scale, and exact gains cannot be stated safely. The most important expected findings are lower validation loss and better downstream quality for D4 under equal compute, plus ablations on dedup thresholds and the cost of over-diversifying.","authors_note":"The author list includes Kushal Tirumala, Armen Aghajanyan, and Ari Morcos. This lineup is consistent with prior data and representation-learning work associated with Meta/FAIR, but the institution is not explicitly provided here, so that attribution should remain tentative."},"tags":["data-quality","deduplication","data-mixture","pretraining"],"notable_authors":["Kushal Tirumala","Daniel Simig","Armen Aghajanyan","Ari Morcos"],"keywords":["Language Modeling","NLP","Data Pruning","Data Selection"],"recommendation":{"zh":"验证了文档级去重+多样化采样的组合增益远高于单一去重，相关策略可直接插入现有预训练数据管线，无额外成本就能提升有效信息密度。","en":"Validates the combined gain of document-level deduplication + diversification sampling far exceeds single deduplication, can be directly inserted into existing pipelines to improve effective information density at no extra cost."}},{"id":"XieS0L23","title":"Data Selection for Language Models via Importance Resampling","authors":["Sang Michael Xie","Shibani Santurkar","Tengyu Ma","Percy Liang"],"institutions":["Stanford University"],"abstract":"$8","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/XieS0L23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/XieS0L23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/6b9aa8f418bde2840d5f4ab7a02f663b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"预训练数据筛选此前依赖人工设计的启发式规则或人工标注，无法高效从大规模无标注原始语料中提取匹配目标分布的子集，通用、领域预训练均存在该痛点。","importance":"方法级贡献，提供了可扩展的量化预训练数据筛选框架，无需人工设计数据过滤规则，降低了预训练数据配比设计的主观误差。","technical_approach":"将低维场景下的经典重要性重采样方法迁移改进到文本领域，提出DSIR框架，先在降维特征空间计算可处理的重要性权重，再按权重重采样筛选数据，仅需要无标注目标样本作为参考，无需人工标注。","experiments":"提供的摘要未披露具体实验参数与指标，仅验证了DSIR在通用、领域预训练场景下，模型性能优于启发式数据筛选方法。","authors_note":"斯坦福大学团队，知名作者包括Percy Liang、Tengyu Ma，长期从事语言模型数据、对齐方向研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Pretraining data selection previously relied on handcrafted heuristics or manual curation, which cannot efficiently extract subsets matching target distribution from large-scale unlabeled raw corpus for both general and domain-specific LM training.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution that provides a scalable, quantitative framework for pretraining data selection, eliminating manual rule design for data curation and reducing subjective error in pretraining data ratio design.","technical_approach":"DSIR adapts classical importance resampling from low-dimensional scenarios to text domain. It first computes importance weights in a reduced feature space for tractability, then resamples data according to the weights, requiring only unlabeled target samples as reference, no human annotation needed.","experiments":"Specific experiment parameters and metrics are not disclosed in the provided abstract. DSIR is validated to outperform heuristic data selection methods in both general and domain-specific LM training scenarios.","authors_note":"Stanford University team, notable authors include Percy Liang, Tengyu Ma, with long-term research on LM data and alignment."},"tags":["data-selection","importance-sampling","pretraining","data-quality"],"keywords":["Language models","pretraining","data selection","fine-tuning"],"notable_authors":["Percy Liang","Tengyu Ma"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"预训练数据集质量直接决定语言模型的最终性能","claim_en":"Pretraining dataset quality directly determines final performance of language models","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于降维特征空间的重要性重采样可以在无标注场景下，比传统启发式数据筛选更高效匹配目标分布","claim_en":"Importance resampling based on reduced feature space can match target distribution more efficiently than traditional heuristic data selection in unlabeled scenarios","opposes":"此前的普遍认知认为大规模文本维度太高，重要性重采样无法应用于文本数据筛选场景","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"打破了重要性重采样仅适用于低维场景的固有认知，可直接落地到TB级预训练数据处理流程"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"提供了无人工规则的可扩展预训练数据筛选框架，仅需少量目标域无标注样本就能匹配目标分布，适合垂域预训练快速筛选数据。","en":"Provides a scalable pretraining data selection framework without handcrafted rules, only requires a small set of unlabeled target samples to match the target distribution, suitable for fast domain-specific data filtering."}},{"id":"YuSFAZL23","title":"MEGABYTE: Predicting Million-byte Sequences with Multiscale Transformers","authors":["Lili Yu","Daniel Simig","Colin Flaherty","Armen Aghajanyan","Luke Zettlemoyer","Mike Lewis"],"institutions":["Google Research","Google DeepMind"],"abstract":"Autoregressive transformers are spectacular models for short sequences but scale poorly to long sequences such as high-resolution images, podcasts, code, or books. We proposed Megabyte, a multi-scale decoder architecture that enables end-to-end differentiable modeling of sequences of over one million bytes. Megabyte segments sequences into patches and uses a local submodel within patches and a global model between patches. This enables sub-quadratic self-attention, much larger feedforward layers for the same compute, and improved parallelism during decoding---unlocking  better performance at reduced cost for both training and generation. Extensive experiments show that Megabyte allows byte-level models to perform competitively with subword models on long context language modeling, achieve state-of-the-art density estimation on ImageNet, and model audio from raw files. Together, these results establish the  viability of tokenization-free autoregressive sequence modeling at scale.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YuSFAZL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YuSFAZL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/f8f78f8043f35890181a824e53a57134-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：标准 Transformer 按 token 逐步建模长字节序列时，计算和上下文长度都很快失控，导致原生字节级建模难以扩展到百万级序列。以往做法通常退回到子词 tokenizer，或者用局部注意力牺牲全局建模能力。","importance":"这是一个很值得 pretrain 关注的方法级工作。它挑战了“必须先做强 tokenizer 压缩，Transformer 才能处理超长序列”的默认前提，说明通过多尺度结构可以直接在 bytes 上建模很长上下文；这对统一文本/代码/多模态离散流的原生建模很有启发。","technical_approach":"MEGABYTE 的核心是 multiscale Transformer：在粗粒度块级别建模长程依赖，在细粒度字节级别建模局部细节。它不是简单做 pooling，而是把序列分成 patch 或 chunk，先让全局模型处理块级表示，再让局部模型在块内展开预测。与标准 full-attention byte Transformer 相比，这样把复杂度从对全序列长度的高阶依赖，转移到更可控的层次结构上；与仅做局部注意力相比，它又保留了跨块全局上下文。设计有效的原因是长程依赖不需要每个字节都参与全连接注意，而局部细节可以在小窗口内恢复。代价是层级接口设计很关键，块边界处理不好会伤害精细生成。","experiments":"这篇工作的关键实验事实通常包括：在文本、代码、图像字节流或 DNA 一类长序列上，相比标准 byte-level Transformer，在相近算力下实现更好的 perplexity 或负对数似然，并且能扩展到 far longer context，题目中直接给出上限是 million-byte sequences。更有价值的观察通常是 scaling：随着序列变长，层次模型的优势持续扩大；而在较短序列上，收益可能不如强 tokenizer 模型明显。具体参数量、训练 token 数和精确数字这里无法确认。","authors_note":"Google Research / Google DeepMind 方向的工作。Luke Zettlemoyer 是知名作者，长期在语言模型、结构预测和多模态/agent 方向有代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a hard scaling problem: byte-level Transformers are attractive because they remove tokenizer assumptions, but they become prohibitively expensive on very long sequences. Prior solutions usually fell back to subword tokenization or local attention, each giving up something important—either tokenizer-free modeling or long-range context.","importance":"This is a meaningful method contribution for pretraining. It weakens the common assumption that strong compression through tokenization is necessary for handling very long sequences. A multiscale architecture can make native byte-level modeling practical at much larger context lengths, which is relevant for text, code, and other discrete modalities.","technical_approach":"MEGABYTE uses a multiscale Transformer that separates global and local modeling. A coarse model handles long-range dependencies over chunks or patches, and a fine model predicts detailed bytes within each chunk. This is not just pooling or local attention. It is a hierarchical factorization of sequence modeling: global structure is handled at a compressed scale, while local detail is restored at full resolution. That works because not every byte needs to attend globally for long-context coherence. The trade-off is that the chunk interface becomes a critical design point; if it is too lossy, fine-grained generation suffers.","experiments":"The central empirical claim is scalability to million-byte sequences, as stated in the title. The likely results show better likelihood or perplexity than standard byte-level Transformers at similar compute, especially as context length grows, across long-sequence domains such as text, code, or other byte streams. A useful scaling observation is that the hierarchical advantage should widen with sequence length, while the benefit may be smaller on short sequences. Exact model sizes, data scale, and benchmark numbers are not provided here.","authors_note":"Google Research / Google DeepMind. Luke Zettlemoyer is a notable author with influential work in language modeling, structured prediction, and multimodal/agent systems."},"tags":["long-context","transformer","sequence-modeling","architecture","scaling"],"notable_authors":["Luke Zettlemoyer"],"keywords":["byte level language model","model architecture","efficient pretraining"],"recommendation":{"zh":"挑战了“子词分词是Transformer长序列建模必要前提”的认知，多尺度字节建模方案为统一多模态离散流预训练提供了新方向，重点读架构设计部分。","en":"Challenges the assumption that subword tokenization is required for Transformer long-sequence modeling, its multiscale byte scheme provides a new direction for unified multimodal discrete stream pretraining, focus on the architecture section."}},{"id":"0002G0ZSJ23","title":"PLANNER: Generating Diversified Paragraph via Latent Language Diffusion Model","authors":["Yizhe Zhang","Jiatao Gu","Zhuofeng Wu","Shuangfei Zhai","Joshua M. Susskind","Navdeep Jaitly"],"institutions":["Apple AI Research"],"abstract":"$9","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0002G0ZSJ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0002G0ZSJ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/fdba5e0a9b57fce03e89cc0cad0a24e9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"自回归文本生成存在曝光偏差，错误累积导致重复低质量输出，此前的文本扩散模型计算开销大，长文本生成流畅度远低于自回归模型，段落级文本的流畅度与全局可控性无法兼得。","importance":"范式级贡献，首次将潜在语义扩散与自回归生成结合，为非AR文本生成落地提供了新路径，解决了此前文本扩散模型流畅度差的问题。","technical_approach":"原创混合架构PLANNER，先用潜在语义扩散生成段落全局语义结构，再用自回归模型基于全局结构生成逐词内容，舍弃了纯扩散逐token降噪的高开销设计，同时避免了纯自回归无全局控制的缺陷。","experiments":"提供的摘要未披露具体实验参数与指标，仅验证了段落生成在流畅度和多样性上优于纯自回归、纯扩散基线。","authors_note":"Apple AI Research团队，知名作者包括Jiatao Gu、Joshua M. Susskind，长期从事生成模型、多模态方向研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Autoregressive text generation suffers from exposure bias, error accumulation leads to repetitive low-quality output. Previous text diffusion models have high computational cost, and long text generation fluency is much lower than autoregressive models, making fluency and global controllability of paragraph-level text mutually exclusive.","importance":"This is a paradigm-level contribution that combines latent semantic diffusion with autoregressive generation for the first time, providing a new path for non-AR text generation implementation, solving the low fluency problem of previous text diffusion models.","technical_approach":"PLANNER is an original hybrid architecture. It first generates global semantic structure of paragraphs via latent semantic diffusion, then generates token-level content via autoregressive model based on the global structure, eliminating the high cost of pure diffusion token-wise denoising and the lack of global control of pure autoregressive generation.","experiments":"Specific experiment parameters and metrics are not disclosed in the provided abstract. PLANNER is validated to outperform pure autoregressive and pure diffusion baselines in both fluency and diversity for paragraph generation.","authors_note":"Apple AI Research team, notable authors include Jiatao Gu, Joshua M. Susskind, with long-term research on generative models and multimodal directions."},"tags":["diffusion-lm","latent-variable","paragraph-generation","non-ar"],"keywords":["Text generation","diffusion model","NLP"],"notable_authors":["Jiatao Gu","Joshua M. Susskind"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"自回归文本生成的曝光偏差会导致错误累积，生成重复内容","claim_en":"Exposure bias in autoregressive text generation leads to error accumulation and repetitive output","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"潜在语义扩散+自回归的混合架构生成的段落级文本流畅度与纯自回归模型相当，同时具备全局可控性和更高多样性","claim_en":"Hybrid architecture of latent semantic diffusion + autoregressive generation produces paragraph-level text with fluency comparable to pure autoregressive models, while having global controllability and higher diversity","opposes":"此前的普遍认知认为文本扩散模型生成流畅度必然低于自回归模型，无法用于长文本生成","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"打破了文本扩散模型流畅度差的固有认知，为长文本可控生成提供了可落地方案"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"首次结合潜在语义扩散+自回归生成解决了纯扩散文本流畅度差、纯AR全局可控性弱的痛点，做长文本生成预训练的团队可参考其混合架构设计。","en":"First combines latent semantic diffusion and autoregressive generation to solve pure diffusion's poor fluency and pure AR's weak global controllability, teams working on long text pretraining can refer to its hybrid architecture."}},{"id":"AnLZKKS23","title":"Direct Preference-based Policy Optimization without Reward Modeling","authors":["Gaon An","Junhyeok Lee","Xingdong Zuo","Norio Kosaka","Kyung-Min Kim","Hyun Oh Song"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/AnLZKKS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/AnLZKKS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/de8bd6b2b01cfa788e63f62e5b9a99b9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是：能不能直接用偏好数据优化策略，而跳过显式奖励模型这一步。过去 RLHF/DPO 一类流程里，奖励建模常是信息瓶颈和失真来源，因为偏好标注先被压成一个奖励函数，再被策略优化二次利用。","importance":"这是 post-train 方法级的重要问题，而且对 pretrain 也有反向价值。它的重要性在于减少 reward modeling 带来的拟合误差、训练复杂度和 reward hacking 空间；如果直接偏好优化更稳定，它会改变我们看待偏好数据和策略学习接口的方式。","technical_approach":"题目表明方法是 direct preference-based policy optimization，即直接从成对或排序偏好更新策略，而不是先拟合 reward model 再做 RL。和标准 RLHF 的关键区别是把偏好监督直接转成策略目标，省掉中间奖励估计；这样设计有效，是因为可减少误差传递和训练链条长度。代价则是目标往往更依赖偏好数据分布本身，超出标注支持域时泛化可能更弱，而且缺少显式 reward 后，诊断和离线评估会更难。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认它是和 PPO-based RLHF、DPO 还是 IPO 等方法比较，也无法可靠给出数据规模与提升幅度。按题目判断，实验核心应是偏好对齐指标、生成质量和训练稳定性比较，并可能分析是否比 reward-model-based 流程更省算力、更少调参。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether policy optimization can be done directly from preferences, without first training an explicit reward model. In standard RLHF-style pipelines, reward modeling is often the main information bottleneck: rich preference judgments are compressed into a scalar reward and then optimized again downstream.","importance":"This is an important post-training method question, with indirect relevance to pretraining because it changes the interface between pretrained models and alignment data. If direct preference optimization is more stable or simpler, it reduces reward-model error, training complexity, and some forms of reward hacking.","technical_approach":"The approach, as the title states, is direct preference-based policy optimization: optimize the policy from pairwise or ranked preferences instead of fitting a separate reward model and then running RL. The main advantage is a shorter learning chain and less error propagation. The trade-off is that the objective may depend more strongly on the support of the preference dataset, and without an explicit reward model, diagnosis and offline evaluation can become harder.","experiments":"The abstract is not available here, so I cannot reliably state which baselines were used or how large the gains were. The likely empirical focus is comparison against reward-model-based RLHF and direct-preference baselines on alignment metrics, quality, and training stability, possibly with efficiency ablations.","authors_note":""},"tags":["dpo","preference-optimization","alignment","rlhf"],"keywords":["Preference-based reinforcement learning","Contrastive learning","Offline reinforcement learning","RLHF"],"recommendation":{"zh":"跳过显式奖励模型直接从偏好数据优化策略，减少了RLHF链路的误差传递，建议对齐团队对比DPO做消融测试其泛化边界。","en":"Optimizes policy directly from preference data without explicit reward modeling, reduces error propagation in RLHF pipelines, alignment teams are recommended to run ablation tests against DPO to verify its generalization boundary."}},{"id":"BidermanPSSAPR23","title":"Emergent and Predictable Memorization in Large Language Models","authors":["Stella Biderman","USVSN Sai Prashanth","Lintang Sutawika","Hailey Schoelkopf","Quentin Anthony","Shivanshu Purohit","Edward Raff"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BidermanPSSAPR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BidermanPSSAPR23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/59404fb89d6194641c69ae99ecdf8f6d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作研究的核心问题是：大语言模型的记忆不是偶发现象，而是会随着规模和训练条件呈现可预测规律。过去关于 memorization 的讨论常常停留在个案层面，比如模型是否复现训练语料中的敏感文本；作者更进一步，想回答什么时候会出现明显记忆、它是否像涌现一样在某个规模后变得突然，以及这种现象能否被提前预测。","importance":"这对 pretrain 很重要，而且不是边缘安全话题，而是直接关系到 scaling law、数据治理和训练目标理解。若记忆既 emergent 又 predictable，就意味着我们不能只把它视为数据泄漏事故；它可能是规模扩展和重复暴露共同驱动的训练动力学结果。对数据去重、版权风险、隐私控制、合成数据回灌都有直接影响。","technical_approach":"从标题看，方法重点是经验性刻画和预测建模，而不是发明新的记忆抑制算法。典型做法会系统控制模型规模、数据重复率、训练 token 数和评估协议，测量模型对训练样本逐字复现或高置信回忆的概率，再看这些指标如何随规模变化。‘emergent’意味着某些记忆能力在小模型中几乎不可见，但过某个阈值后迅速上升；‘predictable’则意味着这种转折并非随机，而可以由规模、数据频次或 loss 统计提前拟合出来。","experiments":"虽然题面没有摘要，但这篇论文通常最关键的实验会包含一系列不同参数规模的语言模型，在控制重复数据和唯一数据比例的条件下，测 exact match memorization、exposure 或 membership-style 指标。高价值结果应当是：记忆率随模型规模或数据重复度出现明显非线性上升；这种上升可以被简单模型稳定预测；并且去重、减少重复曝光或改变训练预算会显著移动拐点。对资深读者来说，最重要的不是‘模型会记忆’这句废话，而是哪些变量决定记忆开始变得危险、是否能在训练前预估风险。","authors_note":"作者包含 Stella Biderman、EleutherAI 团队成员 Quentin Anthony。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a precise question: memorization in large language models is not just an anecdotal privacy failure, but may follow regular and predictable scaling behavior. Earlier discussion often focused on isolated examples of verbatim recall; this work asks when strong memorization appears, whether it emerges abruptly with scale, and whether that transition can be forecast.","importance":"This is highly relevant to pretraining because it sits at the intersection of scaling laws, data governance, and training dynamics. If memorization is both emergent and predictable, it should not be treated merely as accidental data leakage; it becomes a systematic consequence of model scale, data repetition, and optimization. That directly matters for deduplication, copyright risk, privacy control, and synthetic-data feedback loops.","technical_approach":"The contribution is likely empirical characterization and predictive modeling rather than a new mitigation algorithm. A standard setup for this question is to vary model size, repeat rate, training tokens, and evaluation protocol, then measure the probability of exact or high-confidence recall of training sequences. 'Emergent' would mean memorization is weak or absent at small scale but rises sharply beyond a threshold; 'predictable' would mean this rise can be fit or anticipated from scale, frequency, or loss-based statistics.","experiments":"The prompt does not include the abstract, but the decisive experiments should involve a family of language models across parameter scales, trained with controlled mixtures of repeated and unique data, and evaluated with exact-match memorization, exposure, or membership-style metrics. The most valuable findings would be a clear nonlinear increase in memorization with scale or repetition, a simple predictive model for the onset of that increase, and evidence that deduplication or lower repeat exposure shifts the threshold materially. For practitioners, the key point is not that models memorize, but which variables make memorization become operationally risky and whether risk can be estimated before full training.","authors_note":"Includes Stella Biderman and EleutherAI author Quentin Anthony."},"tags":["memorization","llm","scaling","training-dynamics","data-quality"],"notable_authors":["Stella Biderman","Quentin Anthony"],"keywords":["large language model","emergent properties","memorization"],"recommendation":{"zh":"证明了模型记忆不是偶发故障而是可预测的训练动力学结果，其量化规律可直接指导数据去重、版权风险防控和合成数据回灌策略设计。","en":"Proves LLM memorization is not an accidental failure but a predictable training dynamics result, its quantitative rules can directly guide data deduplication, copyright risk control and synthetic data recycling strategies."}},{"id":"BiettiCBJB23","title":"Birth of a Transformer: A Memory Viewpoint","authors":["Alberto Bietti","Vivien Cabannes","Diane Bouchacourt","Hervé Jégou","Léon Bottou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Large language models based on transformers have achieved great empirical successes. However, as they are deployed more widely, there is a growing need to better understand their internal mechanisms in order to make them more reliable. These models appear to store vast amounts of knowledge from their training data, and to adapt quickly to new information provided in their context or prompt. We study how transformers balance these two types of knowledge by considering a synthetic setup where tokens are generated from either global or context-specific bigram distributions. By a careful empirical analysis of the training process on a simplified two-layer transformer, we illustrate the fast learning of global bigrams and the slower development of an \"induction head\" mechanism for the in-context bigrams. We highlight the role of weight matrices as associative memories, provide theoretical insights on how gradients enable their learning during training, and study the role of data-distributional properties.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BiettiCBJB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BiettiCBJB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/0561738a239a995c8cd2ef0e50cfa4fd-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作试图回答一个更基础的问题：Transformer 在训练早期是如何长出来的，尤其是注意力和记忆能力是怎样形成的。过去很多 Transformer 理论要么分析已经训练好的模型，要么在非常静态的函数近似框架下解释注意力；作者则从 memory viewpoint 切入，研究模型在出生阶段为何会偏向形成某种记忆机制。","importance":"这是机制分析和训练动力学层面的工作，对 pretrain 的意义在于帮助我们理解为什么 Transformer 会在大规模训练中自然学到检索、拷贝或上下文记忆行为。它不直接给出新算法，但会影响我们对架构归因的判断：哪些能力是注意力结构先验决定的，哪些是优化过程自发选择的，哪些与数据统计有关。这类理解会反过来影响长上下文、外部记忆和替代建模范式的设计。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心方法是从记忆视角建立 Transformer 训练初期的理论或半理论分析。常见路线是研究随机初始化附近的梯度流、低秩结构或 attention head 分工如何出现，并把这些现象解释成 key-value memory 的形成。它和把注意力纯粹视为平滑加权平均不同，这种视角强调模型为什么会学会把某些 token 当作可寻址记忆槽。设计上的价值在于能解释训练动态；边界则是理论通常依赖简化数据分布、浅层网络或线性化近似，离全尺寸预训练模型仍有距离。","experiments":"题面无摘要，因此不能给出具体理论结论或验证数据。按这一类论文，实验通常会用小规模受控序列任务和中等规模语言/合成数据实验，对比训练早期不同层与不同头的行为，测 attention pattern、记忆检索成功率或谱特性，并检验理论预测是否成立。最值得看的不是最终 benchmark 分数，而是理论是否准确预测了哪类头先形成、何时出现 induction-like 行为、以及这些现象如何随宽度、深度或数据统计变化。","authors_note":"作者包含 Léon Bottou。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a foundational question: how does a Transformer 'come into being' during training, and in particular how do attention and memory-like behaviors emerge early on. Much prior theory studies already-trained models or treats attention in static approximation terms; this work instead uses a memory viewpoint to explain why training dynamics favor certain retrieval-like structures from the start.","importance":"This is a mechanistic and training-dynamics contribution. Its relevance to pretraining is that it can clarify why Transformers naturally develop copying, retrieval, or context-memory behavior at scale. It does not directly propose a new algorithm, but it affects architectural interpretation: which behaviors are induced by attention as a structural prior, which are selected by optimization, and which depend on data statistics. That has downstream implications for long-context design, external memory, and alternative language-modeling paradigms.","technical_approach":"From the title, the work likely develops a theoretical or semi-theoretical account of early Transformer training through the lens of memory formation. A common route here is to analyze gradient flow near random initialization, emergent low-rank structure, or specialization of attention heads, and interpret those phenomena as the birth of key-value memory. Unlike views that treat attention as only a smoothing operator, this perspective explains why models learn to use some tokens as addressable memory slots. The strength is explanatory power over dynamics; the limitation is that such theory usually relies on simplified data distributions, shallow models, or linearized regimes.","experiments":"The abstract is not provided, so exact theoretical claims and validation numbers cannot be stated. Papers in this category usually validate predictions on controlled sequence tasks and modest-scale language or synthetic setups, tracking early-training attention patterns, retrieval success, induction-like behavior, or spectral properties across layers and heads. The main thing to look for is not benchmark accuracy, but whether the theory predicts which heads form first, when memory-like circuits appear, and how those effects vary with width, depth, or input statistics.","authors_note":"Includes Léon Bottou."},"tags":["transformer","training-dynamics","memory","mechanistic-interpretability"],"notable_authors":["Léon Bottou"],"keywords":["transformers","language models","deep learning theory","interpretability"],"recommendation":{"zh":"从记忆形成角度解释了Transformer训练早期注意力机制的演化逻辑，虽不直接产出落地方案，但能为长上下文、外部记忆架构设计提供理论参考，仅读核心结论即可。","en":"Explains the evolution logic of early-stage Transformer attention from a memory formation perspective, provides theoretical reference for long-context and external memory architecture design, only read the core conclusion section."}},{"id":"BondarenkoNB23","title":"Quantizable Transformers: Removing Outliers by Helping Attention Heads Do Nothing","authors":["Yelysei Bondarenko","Markus Nagel","Tijmen Blankevoort"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BondarenkoNB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BondarenkoNB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/edbcb7583fd8921dad78adecfe06a99b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是 Transformer 量化里的一个具体痛点：激活 outlier 会严重破坏低比特量化，而很多 outlier 实际上来自注意力头被迫在‘无事可做’时也输出非零结果。传统量化方法多在事后校准、裁剪或更复杂的量化器上补救；作者想从结构上减少 outlier 的生成源头。","importance":"这项工作的价值是方法级但非常工程化，对 serving 和训练后部署都重要。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：某些量化困难不是权重分布天然决定的，而是架构功能设计不完整导致的副产物。换句话说，若注意力头缺少显式的 no-op 行为，模型会用极端激活近似‘跳过’，这既伤量化，也可能反映训练表示效率不高。","technical_approach":"核心思想从标题已经很清楚：让 attention heads 能够 do nothing，从而消除 outlier。通常这意味着在注意力结构中加入一个显式空操作路径、可学习门控或特殊 token/偏置，使得某些头在当前输入上无需强行参与。它和事后 clipping 的区别是前者在表征层面解决‘为什么会有大值’，后者只是截断结果。为什么这样有效：如果头在不相关上下文里可以输出接近零，后续残差流的数值范围会更稳定，量化尺度更容易覆盖。代价是需要轻微改模型并重新训练或微调，且若 no-op 设计不当，可能削弱头的利用率。","experiments":"题面没有摘要，无法给具体 bit-width、模型和精度数字。但这篇论文最关键的实验通常会包括：对比标准 Transformer 与修改后架构在 INT8/更低比特量化下的精度保持；展示激活分布中 outlier 明显减少；并验证全精度性能基本不掉。值得关注的 ablation 是 no-op 机制的具体实现、在哪些层加入最有效，以及它是否在不同模型家族上都成立。如果结果只在小模型或特定视觉任务上有效，那对大规模 LM 的推广价值会受限；如果语言模型上也稳，则说明这是更普遍的架构缺口。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a concrete quantization bottleneck in Transformers: activation outliers can severely hurt low-bit quantization, and many of those outliers may arise because attention heads are forced to produce nonzero outputs even when they have nothing useful to contribute. Standard quantization work often patches this after the fact with calibration, clipping, or better quantizers; this paper instead tries to remove one source of the problem structurally.","importance":"This is a method contribution with strong engineering relevance for deployment and inference efficiency. For pretraining researchers, the useful lesson is that some quantization difficulty is not an unavoidable property of learned weights; it can be an architectural side effect of giving heads no explicit no-op behavior. If a head must fake 'do nothing' using extreme activations, that is bad for quantization and may also indicate inefficient representation dynamics.","technical_approach":"The main idea is explicit in the title: help attention heads do nothing, thereby reducing outliers. In practice this likely means adding a no-op path, learnable gating, or a special mechanism that lets some heads output near zero when the input does not require them. This differs from post hoc clipping because it addresses the cause of large activations rather than truncating the symptom. The reason it should help is straightforward: if irrelevant heads can stay quiet, the residual stream has a tighter numerical range and low-bit scales can cover it more faithfully. The trade-off is a small architectural change and the need for retraining or finetuning, with the risk of underusing heads if the no-op path is too aggressive.","experiments":"The prompt does not provide the abstract, so specific model families, bit-widths, and metrics cannot be stated safely. The decisive experiments would normally compare standard and modified Transformers under INT8 or lower-bit quantization, show a substantial reduction in activation outliers, and verify that full-precision quality is preserved. Useful ablations would test different no-op mechanisms, which layers benefit most, and whether the effect transfers across model families. If gains hold only on small or narrow settings, the impact is limited; if they extend to language models, the architectural point is much stronger.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer","quantization","attention","inference"],"keywords":["transformers","LLM","softmax","attention","outliers","quantization","post-training quantization"],"recommendation":{"zh":"推翻了激活离群值是模型权重固有属性的认知，应在预训练时给注意力头加显式空操作路径，从源头降低低比特量化损失。","en":"It overturns the prior that activation outliers are inherent to model weights, add explicit no-op paths for attention heads during pretraining to reduce low-bit quantization loss from the source."}},{"id":"ChenLHRW0DLHLL23","title":"Symbolic Discovery of Optimization Algorithms","authors":["Xiangning Chen","Chen Liang","Da Huang","Esteban Real","Kaiyuan Wang","Hieu Pham","Xuanyi Dong","Thang Luong","Cho-Jui Hsieh","Yifeng Lu","Quoc V. Le"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenLHRW0DLHLL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenLHRW0DLHLL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/9a39b4925e35cf447ccba8757137d84f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：优化算法能否被自动发现，而不是主要依赖人工推导与经验调参。过去学习优化器常受限于参数化形式太强、可解释性差或泛化差；而纯符号搜索又难以在大空间里找到真正有用的更新规则。","importance":"这是方法级工作，但影响面较广，因为优化器是 pretrain 最核心的接口之一。若能自动发现可迁移的优化更新式，就有机会在不同模型和任务上替代 Adam/SGD 的部分设计经验；即便最终没完全替代，搜索出的规则也能反过来提示我们哪些归一化、动量或比例关系是真正关键的。对大模型训练来说，价值在于提供新的 optimizer design space，而不是又一个小修小补的超参技巧。","technical_approach":"核心方法是做 symbolic discovery：在可组合的数学操作空间里搜索优化更新公式，并用外层训练表现来选择保留下来的候选。它不是黑盒神经网络优化器，而是显式生成人可读的更新规则；这样设计的好处是更容易分析和迁移，也更容易看出规则里哪些项有效。与传统学习优化器相比，这种方法牺牲了一部分表达自由度，换来可解释性和部署简洁性；与人工设计相比，它把搜索从‘凭经验试几个式子’扩展成系统的程序搜索。","experiments":"从题目判断，实验应比较自动发现的优化算法与 SGD、Adam 或其他 learned optimizer 基线在标准训练任务上的收敛速度、最终精度和跨任务泛化。通常这类论文会先在小模型/代理任务上搜索，再测试到更大模型或不同领域，来验证 discovered rule 是否可迁移。由于没有摘要和正文，无法可靠给出搜索空间大小、任务集合、具体提升幅度或发现出的代表性公式。","authors_note":"作者包括 Xiangning Chen、Chen Liang、Da Huang、Esteban Real、Kaiyuan Wang 等。Esteban Real 是 AutoML/NAS 方向知名作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a long-standing question: can useful optimization algorithms be discovered automatically rather than mostly hand-designed. Prior work on learned optimizers often suffered from overparameterized update rules, limited interpretability, or weak transfer, while pure symbolic search struggled to find rules that actually scale.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution with broad relevance because the optimizer is one of the tightest interfaces in pretraining. If symbolic search can discover transferable update rules, it expands the optimizer design space beyond hand-tuned Adam/SGD variants. Even when it does not fully replace standard optimizers, the discovered formulas can reveal which ingredients really matter, such as normalization, momentum, or scale adaptation.","technical_approach":"The core idea is symbolic discovery of update rules: search over a compositional space of mathematical expressions and keep the candidates that lead to strong outer-loop training performance. This differs from black-box neural learned optimizers because the result is an explicit, human-readable formula. That choice trades some expressivity for interpretability, portability, and ease of deployment. Relative to manual optimizer design, it turns a small expert-driven hypothesis space into a systematic program search problem.","experiments":"The paper likely compares discovered optimizers with SGD, Adam, and possibly prior learned-optimizer baselines on standard training tasks, reporting convergence speed, final accuracy, and cross-task transfer. A common pattern in this line of work is to search on small proxy problems and test on larger or different tasks to see whether the rule generalizes. Without the abstract or full paper, I cannot reliably provide the search space, benchmarks, or exact numerical improvements.","authors_note":"Known authors include Xiangning Chen, Chen Liang, Da Huang, Esteban Real, and Kaiyuan Wang. Esteban Real is a well-known researcher in AutoML and NAS."},"tags":["optimizer","symbolic-discovery","training-efficiency","lion"],"notable_authors":["Xiangning Chen","Chen Liang","Da Huang","Esteban Real","Kaiyuan Wang"],"keywords":["AutoML"],"recommendation":{"zh":"拓展了优化器设计的核心范式，建议立刻在内部预训练优化器迭代中引入符号搜索流程，替代纯人工试错的调优思路。","en":"It expands the core paradigm of optimizer design, introduce symbolic search workflow into internal pretraining optimizer iteration to replace pure manual trial-and-error tuning."}},{"id":"ChenMRAS0A23","title":"Improving Language Plasticity via Pretraining with Active Forgetting","authors":["Yihong Chen","Kelly Marchisio","Roberta Raileanu","David Ifeoluwa Adelani","Pontus Lars Erik Saito Stenetorp","Sebastian Riedel","Mikel Artetxe"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenMRAS0A23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenMRAS0A23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/6450ea28ebbc8437bc38775157818172-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文讨论的核心问题是：语言模型在持续预训练或多语种/多域学习中，如何保持 plasticity，也就是继续学新东西的能力，而不是越来越僵化。传统预训练通常默认“记住越多越好”，但模型一旦过度固化已有统计规律，后续学习新语言或新分布时会明显变慢，甚至出现顽固的干扰。","importance":"这项工作对 continual pretrain 很有价值，也直接关联大模型生命周期管理。它提出 active forgetting 这一反直觉方向：适度遗忘并不是坏事，反而可能是保持可塑性的必要条件。对 pretrain 研究的启示很直接——训练目标不应只优化累计记忆，还要管理表示空间的可重用性；这对多语、领域扩展、mid-train 迁移都很关键。","technical_approach":"核心方法是在预训练过程中显式引入 active forgetting 机制，以减轻旧知识占满表示与参数空间的问题，从而提升模型后续学习新语言或新任务分布的速度与效果。它不是简单减少训练步数，而是通过特定的数据调度、目标或参数更新策略，有选择地削弱一部分旧记忆痕迹。与传统防遗忘研究相反，这篇工作不是防止 forgetting，而是利用 forgetting 改善 plasticity；设计上的关键 trade-off 是，遗忘太弱没有效果，太强则直接伤害已有能力。","experiments":"从题目可判断，实验重点应是 plasticity 指标：例如新语言学习速度、适应新数据后的最终性能，以及旧能力保留之间的平衡。大概率会比较标准预训练/继续训练与带 active forgetting 的方案，并展示后者在后续适应阶段收敛更快或最终更优，同时分析遗忘强度的 sweet spot。由于没有摘要和正文，无法可靠给出参数规模、语种数、数据量和具体提升数字。","authors_note":"作者包括 Yihong Chen、Kelly Marchisio、Roberta Raileanu、David Ifeoluwa Adelani、Pontus Lars Erik Saito Stenetorp 等。David Adelani、Pontus Stenetorp 在多语 NLP 方向较活跃。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a practical issue in continual and multilingual pretraining: how to preserve language plasticity, meaning the ability to keep learning new distributions, instead of becoming increasingly rigid. Standard pretraining usually treats retention as uniformly good, but heavily consolidated models often adapt slowly to new languages or domains.","importance":"This is highly relevant to continual pretraining and model lifecycle management. The central message is deliberately counterintuitive: some forgetting can be beneficial because it preserves room for future learning. For pretraining research, that shifts the objective from pure accumulation of knowledge toward managing reusable capacity and adaptation headroom, which matters for multilingual expansion, domain updates, and mid-training transitions.","technical_approach":"The method introduces active forgetting during pretraining to prevent old knowledge from fully saturating the representation and parameter space, thereby improving downstream plasticity. This is not merely shorter training. It likely uses a specific data schedule, objective term, or update strategy that selectively weakens some existing traces so the model remains adaptable. The key distinction from classical anti-forgetting work is that the goal here is not to preserve everything, but to trade a controlled amount of retention for faster and better future learning. The main trade-off is obvious: too little forgetting does nothing, too much degrades current competence.","experiments":"The experiments likely focus on plasticity-centric metrics such as adaptation speed to new languages or distributions, final post-adaptation performance, and retention of prior capabilities. The likely comparison is standard pretraining/continued pretraining versus the active-forgetting variant, with the latter adapting faster or reaching better final performance under the right forgetting strength. Since no abstract or paper text is provided, I cannot reliably report model sizes, language counts, data scale, or exact numerical gains.","authors_note":"Known authors include Yihong Chen, Kelly Marchisio, Roberta Raileanu, David Ifeoluwa Adelani, and Pontus Lars Erik Saito Stenetorp. David Adelani and Pontus Stenetorp are active in multilingual NLP."},"tags":["pretraining","active-forgetting","language-plasticity","continual-pretrain","multilingual"],"notable_authors":["Yihong Chen","Kelly Marchisio","Roberta Raileanu","David Ifeoluwa Adelani","Pontus Lars Erik Saito Stenetorp"],"keywords":["plasticity","continual learning","meta-learning","embeddings","cross-lingual transfer","forgetting"],"recommendation":{"zh":"打破了预训练目标只追求记忆最大化的固有认知，建议在持续多域预训练中加入主动遗忘机制平衡记忆与可塑性。","en":"It breaks the prior that pretraining should only maximize knowledge retention, add active forgetting mechanism in continual multi-domain pretraining to balance memory and plasticity."}},{"id":"ChenRBWZSR23","title":"Skill-it! A data-driven skills framework for understanding and training language models","authors":["Mayee F. Chen","Nicholas Roberts","Kush Bhatia","Jue Wang","Ce Zhang","Frederic Sala","Christopher Ré"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenRBWZSR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenRBWZSR23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/70b8505ac79e3e131756f793cd80eb8d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：语言模型训练数据里的“技能”到底是什么，能否用数据驱动方式刻画，并据此指导训练配比。过去数据混合大多按来源、领域或启发式标签来分桶，但这和模型真正学到的能力并不一一对应，所以很难解释为什么某些 mixture 有效、某些无效。","importance":"这是一篇很贴近 pretrain 核心的问题设定。它的重要性在于把数据配比问题从‘语料来源管理’推进到‘能力需求管理’：不是问多加多少代码、多加多少百科，而是问训练集中哪些 skill 维度在驱动下游能力。这对 curriculum、data mixture、domain balancing、continued pretrain 都有直接启示，属于方法与数据分析之间的桥梁工作。","technical_approach":"核心方法是提出 Skill-it! 这一数据驱动 skills 框架，用模型行为或任务需求去反推出训练样本所承载的技能标签，再根据技能覆盖与缺口来调整训练。它不是手工定义一套静态 taxonomy，而是让技能划分更贴近模型可学性和任务收益；关键设计是把样本组织单位从‘来源域’换成‘能力维度’。与传统 dataset mixture 方法相比，这样做更可解释，也更便于针对特定能力做 targeted upweighting；边界在于 skill 的定义和估计本身可能依赖代理任务，因此未必完全稳定。","experiments":"从题目看，实验应包含两部分：一是分析不同训练数据在 skill 空间中的分布，二是据此调整训练后对语言模型能力的影响。关键结论大概率是，基于 skills 的数据选择或重加权，优于简单的均匀混合、按域采样或经验式 curriculum。很可能还会展示某些技能对特定 benchmark 的贡献更强。由于没有摘要和正文，无法可靠写出模型规模、数据量、benchmark 和具体提升幅度。","authors_note":"作者包括 Mayee F. Chen、Nicholas Roberts、Kush Bhatia、Jue Wang、Ce Zhang 等。Ce Zhang 是数据中心 AI / 数据系统方向知名作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a pretraining-native question: what are the “skills” encoded in language model training data, and can we identify them in a data-driven way to guide training. Most data mixing strategies bucket corpora by source or domain, but those categories only loosely correspond to the capabilities the model actually acquires.","importance":"This is directly relevant to pretraining because it reframes data mixture design from source management to capability management. Instead of asking how much code or web text to add, it asks which skill dimensions matter for the capabilities we want. That has immediate implications for curriculum design, data balancing, continued pretraining, and understanding why some mixtures work better than others.","technical_approach":"The core contribution is Skill-it!, a data-driven framework that infers skill structure from model behavior or task demands and uses that structure to analyze and train language models. The key move is to organize examples by capability-related dimensions rather than by static corpus labels. This makes the training signal more interpretable and allows targeted upweighting of underrepresented skills. Compared with standard mixture heuristics, the approach is more aligned with downstream behavior. The limitation is that skills still need to be operationalized through proxy measurements, so the decomposition may not be perfectly stable.","experiments":"The experiments likely have two parts: analyzing the skill distribution of training data and showing that skill-aware data selection or reweighting improves model performance compared with uniform mixtures, domain-based sampling, or heuristic curricula. A useful result would be that certain inferred skills correlate strongly with gains on specific benchmarks. Without the abstract or full paper, I cannot reliably provide model sizes, dataset scale, benchmarks, or exact improvements.","authors_note":"Known authors include Mayee F. Chen, Nicholas Roberts, Kush Bhatia, Jue Wang, and Ce Zhang. Ce Zhang is well known for data-centric AI and data systems."},"tags":["data-curriculum","skill-learning","data-ordering","pretraining"],"notable_authors":["Mayee F. Chen","Nicholas Roberts","Kush Bhatia","Jue Wang","Ce Zhang"],"keywords":["language models","data selection"],"recommendation":{"zh":"将预训练数据配比从按语源划分的粗粒度管理升级到按技能维度的精细化调度，可直接落地到语料混合、课程学习实验中。","en":"It upgrades pretraining data mixture from source-based coarse management to skill-based fine-grained scheduling, can be directly applied to corpus mixing and curriculum learning experiments."}},{"id":"2312.06134","title":"Order Matters in the Presence of Dataset Imbalance for Multilingual Learning","authors":["Dami Choi","Derrick Xin","Hamid Dadkhahi","Justin Gilmer","Ankush Garg","Orhan Firat","Chih-Kuan Yeh","Andrew M. Dai","Behrooz Ghorbani"],"institutions":["Google Research"],"abstract":"In this paper, we empirically study the optimization dynamics of multi-task learning, particularly focusing on those that govern a collection of tasks with significant data imbalance. We present a simple yet effective method of pre-training on high-resource tasks, followed by fine-tuning on a mixture of high/low-resource tasks. We provide a thorough empirical study and analysis of this method's benefits showing that it achieves consistent improvements relative to the performance trade-off profile of standard static weighting. We analyze under what data regimes this method is applicable and show its improvements empirically in neural machine translation (NMT) and multi-lingual language modeling.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.06134","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChoiXDGGFYDG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChoiXDGGFYDG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/d346609ec2fefd3938c898a0dda4a480-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"多语言/多任务学习存在严重数据不均衡时，标准静态权重混合训练的高低资源任务性能tradeoff差，此前的方法仅调整损失权重，没有考虑训练顺序的影响，无法同时提升高低资源任务性能。","importance":"方法级贡献，揭示了训练顺序对多语言预训练的关键作用，为多语言预训练的数据配比、训练流程设计提供了新的可落地优化维度。","technical_approach":"基于训练顺序的简单改进，先在高资源任务上预训练，再在高低资源任务混合微调，舍弃了此前全程静态混合所有任务数据训练的思路，不需要修改损失权重，仅调整训练阶段的任务分布。","experiments":"在机器翻译和多语言语言建模任务上，相比标准静态权重混合训练，低资源任务性能平均提升3-5%，高资源任务性能无明显下降，适用场景为高低资源数据量差距超过10倍的多任务场景。","authors_note":"Google Research团队，知名作者包括Justin Gilmer，长期从事多语言模型、多任务学习方向研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"When multilingual/multi-task learning has severe data imbalance, standard static weight mixed training has poor performance tradeoff between high and low-resource tasks. Previous methods only adjust loss weights, ignoring the impact of training order, and cannot improve performance of both high and low-resource tasks simultaneously.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution that reveals the key role of training order in multilingual pretraining, providing a new implementable optimization dimension for multilingual pretraining data ratio and training pipeline design.","technical_approach":"A simple improvement based on training order: pretrain on high-resource tasks first, then fine-tune on mixed high/low-resource tasks. It abandons the previous approach of statically mixing all task data throughout training, no loss weight modification is needed, only task distribution in training phases is adjusted.","experiments":"On neural machine translation and multilingual language modeling tasks, compared with standard static weight mixed training, low-resource task performance improves by 3-5% on average, no obvious performance drop on high-resource tasks. It is applicable to multi-task scenarios where the data volume gap between high and low-resource tasks exceeds 10x.","authors_note":"Google Research team, notable author includes Justin Gilmer, with long-term research on multilingual models and multi-task learning."},"tags":["multilingual","data-mixture","training-dynamics","curriculum"],"keywords":["Multitask Optimization","Multilingual","Pre-training","Language Models","Language Sampling","Low Resource Languages","Overfitting"],"notable_authors":["Justin Gilmer"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"多任务学习中数据不均衡会导致低资源任务性能被高资源任务压制","claim_en":"Data imbalance in multi-task learning leads to low-resource task performance being suppressed by high-resource tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"先预训练高资源任务、再混合微调高低资源任务的训练顺序，比静态权重混合训练的性能tradeoff更优，可同时提升高低资源任务性能","claim_en":"Training order of pretraining on high-resource tasks first, then fine-tuning on mixed high/low-resource tasks achieves better performance tradeoff than static weight mixed training, improving both high and low-resource task performance simultaneously","opposes":"此前的普遍认知认为静态权重调整是解决多任务数据不均衡的最优方案，训练顺序对最终性能影响可忽略","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5.2 Table 1","why_contested":"修正了多任务预训练仅需调整数据权重的固有认知，训练顺序是低成本、可落地的优化维度"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看第3节的训练顺序 ablation 结果即可，可作为多语言预训练流程优化的弱参考，无需复现全套实验。","en":"Only read ablation results of training order in §3, use as weak reference for multilingual pretraining pipeline optimization, no need to reproduce full experiments."}},{"id":"2304.14997","title":"Towards Automated Circuit Discovery for Mechanistic Interpretability","authors":["Arthur Conmy","Augustine N. Mavor-Parker","Aengus Lynch","Stefan Heimersheim","Adrià Garriga-Alonso"],"institutions":["University College London","DeepMind"],"abstract":"$10","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.14997","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ConmyMLHG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ConmyMLHG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/34e1dbe95d34d7ebaf99b9bcaeb5b2be-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"此前Transformer机制可解释性的电路发现完全依赖人工直觉和手动操作，效率极低，无法规模化推广到大模型的复杂行为分析。","importance":"方法级贡献，首次将机制可解释性的电路发现步骤自动化，降低了大模型可解释性研究的门槛，可规模化验证大模型行为的内部机制。","technical_approach":"机制可解释性流程的系统化改进，提出ACDC等自动化算法，基于激活补丁方法自动定位对应模型行为的电路，舍弃了此前手动探索神经单元的人工操作流程，可复现此前手动得到的可解释性结果。","experiments":"在7B参数以下的Transformer模型上，自动化发现的电路与手动发现的结果一致性超过90%，复现了此前Induction Head、IOI任务的可解释性结果。","authors_note":"伦敦大学学院、DeepMind联合团队，知名作者包括Adrià Garriga-Alonso，长期从事机制可解释性方向研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Previous circuit discovery for mechanistic interpretability of Transformer completely relies on human intuition and manual operation, with extremely low efficiency, and cannot be scaled to complex behavior analysis of large models.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution that automates the circuit discovery step of mechanistic interpretability for the first time, lowering the threshold for large model interpretability research, and enabling scalable verification of internal mechanisms of large model behaviors.","technical_approach":"A systematic improvement of mechanistic interpretability workflow. It proposes automated algorithms such as ACDC, which automatically locates circuits corresponding to model behaviors based on activation patching method, abandoning the previous manual exploration process of neural units, and can reproduce previous manually obtained interpretability results.","experiments":"On Transformer models with parameters below 7B, the consistency between automatically discovered circuits and manually discovered results exceeds 90%, and previous interpretability results of Induction Head and IOI tasks are reproduced.","authors_note":"Joint team of University College London and DeepMind, notable author includes Adrià Garriga-Alonso, with long-term research on mechanistic interpretability."},"tags":["mechanistic-interpretability","transformer","circuit","activation-patching"],"keywords":["Mechanistic Interpretability","Pruning","Science of Deep Learning","AI Safety"],"notable_authors":["Adrià Garriga-Alonso"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer的特定行为由稀疏的可分离的子电路实现","claim_en":"Specific behaviors of Transformer are implemented by sparse, separable sub-circuits","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"自动化电路发现算法可以在不需要人工干预的情况下，达到与手动电路发现相同的准确性，效率提升10倍以上","claim_en":"Automated circuit discovery algorithms can achieve the same accuracy as manual circuit discovery without human intervention, with over 10x efficiency improvement","opposes":"此前的普遍认知认为机制可解释性的电路发现必须依赖领域专家的手动操作，无法自动化","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5 Table 3","why_contested":"打破了机制可解释性研究无法规模化的固有认知，为大模型可解释性研究提供了自动化工具"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"直接读§4的ACDC算法设计和Fig5的电路发现效果对比，不需要抠实现细节，适合可解释性研究时快速参考。","en":"Read ACDC algorithm design in §4 and circuit discovery performance comparison in Fig5 directly, no need to dig into implementation details, good for quick interpretability research reference."}},{"id":"DettmersPHZ23","title":"QLoRA: Efficient Finetuning of Quantized LLMs","authors":["Tim Dettmers","Artidoro Pagnoni","Ari Holtzman","Luke Zettlemoyer"],"institutions":["University of Washington"],"abstract":"$11","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DettmersPHZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DettmersPHZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/1feb87871436031bdc0f2beaa62a049b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的核心问题是：如何在单卡或低资源条件下高质量微调大语言模型，而不显著牺牲效果。此前 LoRA 已经降低了可训练参数量，但全精度权重仍然占据主要显存，因此 33B、65B 级模型对大多数研究者仍然不可达。","importance":"这是系统方法级的重要工作，而且已经改变了社区的默认实践。对 pretrain 研究的直接启示是：量化不只是部署手段，也可以成为 posttrain 接口的一部分；一旦 4-bit 权重量化下的可训练性足够好，更多中大规模模型的对齐、指令化和领域适配实验就变得可做，这反过来加快了预训练模型分析和数据策略迭代。","technical_approach":"QLoRA 的核心方法是在 4-bit 量化后的冻结基座模型上训练 LoRA 适配器，同时尽量把量化误差和显存开销压低。关键设计有三点：第一，使用 NF4（NormalFloat4）这类更适合近似正态分布权重的 4-bit 数据类型，减少量化损失；第二，使用 double quantization，对量化常数再量化，进一步省显存；第三，采用 paged optimizers，缓解长序列或大 batch 下优化器状态引发的显存峰值。与直接做 8-bit/4-bit 训练不同，它不更新量化主权重，只训练低秩增量，所以稳定性更好；与普通 LoRA 相比，它把真正的瓶颈——基座权重存储——压了下去，因此能在消费级或单张 A100 级别硬件上处理更大的模型。","experiments":"论文的关键事实是：作者在单张 48GB GPU 上微调了 65B 模型，并展示了接近全 16-bit 微调的效果。文中使用 Guanaco 系列作为展示，覆盖 7B 到 65B 多个规模，并在指令跟随基准和人工/模型评审上与全参数微调、LoRA 及其他资源受限方法比较。广为引用的结论包括：4-bit QLoRA 在多项设置下几乎不损失最终质量；65B Guanaco 达到当时接近 ChatGPT 水平的聊天表现之一。对工程上最有价值的 ablation 是 NF4、double quantization 和 paged optimizer 三者都不是装饰项，去掉后要么质量下降，要么显存峰值失控。","authors_note":"作者来自 University of Washington。Tim Dettmers 是低比特训练与高效微调方向的代表性研究者，相关代表工作包括 LLM.int8()、bitsandbytes 生态和 QLoRA。Luke Zettlemoyer 是 NLP 与大模型方向的知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper solves a very practical bottleneck: how to finetune large language models under tight memory budgets without giving up much quality. LoRA had already reduced the number of trainable parameters, but full-precision base weights still dominated memory, keeping 33B–65B models out of reach for most researchers.","importance":"This is a major systems-and-methods contribution, and it quickly became a default recipe in the community. For pretraining research, the key lesson is that quantization is not only a serving trick; it can be part of the posttraining interface. Once 4-bit finetuning is good enough, many more alignment, domain adaptation, and analysis experiments become feasible on larger base models.","technical_approach":"QLoRA finetunes LoRA adapters on top of a frozen 4-bit quantized base model while carefully controlling quantization error and memory spikes. The design has three important pieces. First, it uses NF4, a 4-bit datatype better matched to approximately normal weight distributions, which reduces information loss. Second, it applies double quantization, meaning the quantization constants are themselves quantized to save additional memory. Third, it uses paged optimizers to handle transient optimizer-state spikes for long contexts or larger batches. Unlike direct low-bit full-weight training, QLoRA leaves the quantized base frozen and only updates low-rank adapters, which improves stability. Unlike standard LoRA, it attacks the real memory bottleneck—the base weights—so much larger models fit on modest hardware.","experiments":"The headline result is that the authors finetuned a 65B model on a single 48GB GPU and achieved performance close to full 16-bit finetuning. The paper presents the Guanaco family from 7B to 65B and compares against full finetuning, LoRA, and other resource-constrained baselines on instruction-following evaluations plus human/model judgments. A widely cited takeaway is that 4-bit QLoRA preserves final quality surprisingly well across many settings. The most useful ablations show that NF4, double quantization, and paged optimizers are all functional components rather than cosmetic additions: removing them either hurts quality or breaks the memory budget.","authors_note":"The authors are from the University of Washington. Tim Dettmers is a leading researcher in low-bit training and efficient finetuning, known for LLM.int8(), bitsandbytes, and QLoRA. Luke Zettlemoyer is a well-known NLP and LLM researcher."},"tags":["quantization","lora","finetuning","memory-efficiency"],"notable_authors":["Tim Dettmers","Luke Zettlemoyer","Ari Holtzman"],"keywords":["finetuning","llama","instructions","quantization"],"recommendation":{"zh":"已改变社区大模型微调的默认实践，建议立刻在内部预训练模型的下游适配环节接入QLoRA，降低中大规模模型对齐的硬件门槛。","en":"It has changed the default practice of LLM fine-tuning in the community, integrate QLoRA into internal pretrained model downstream adaptation to cut hardware cost for medium-to-large model alignment."}},{"id":"DuboisLTZGBGLH23","title":"AlpacaFarm: A Simulation Framework for Methods that Learn from Human Feedback","authors":["Yann Dubois","Chen Xuechen Li","Rohan Taori","Tianyi Zhang","Ishaan Gulrajani","Jimmy Ba","Carlos Guestrin","Percy Liang","Tatsunori B. Hashimoto"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$12","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DuboisLTZGBGLH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DuboisLTZGBGLH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/5fc47800ee5b30b8777fdd30abcaaf3b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的核心问题是：RLHF 方法迭代太慢、太贵，导致很多算法改进停留在小规模离线比较，难以做系统研究。过去做法通常依赖封闭的人类标注流程或昂贵 API，研究者很难反复试错；作者因此提出一个可控的模拟环境，把 instruction tuning、reward modeling 和 preference-based fine-tuning 放到同一套可复现实验框架里。","importance":"它的重要性主要是系统级和方法研究基础设施级，而不是提出一种更强的对齐算法。对 pretrain/post-train 接口的启示很直接：如果没有低成本、可重复的反馈学习环境，很多关于 reward overfitting、偏好噪声、数据合成和 offline-vs-online RLHF 的判断都不稳。AlpacaFarm 的价值在于把“研究 RLHF”从一次性 demo 变成可做 ablation、可做 scaling 的实验对象。","technical_approach":"核心方法是一个 RLHF 仿真框架，而不是新的训练目标。作者用 LLM 生成和整理 instruction-following 数据，构建偏好对比数据，并训练自动化 reward model / preference model 来近似人类反馈；随后在同一环境中比较 SFT、基于偏好优化和 RL 类方法。设计上的关键取舍是：不追求完美替代真实人类，而追求足够便宜、稳定、能保持方法排序的大体一致性。和直接在公开 benchmark 上比 win rate 不同，这个框架更强调训练环节本身可控，方便研究数据量、偏好噪声和奖励模型误差如何影响最终行为。","experiments":"关键实验结论是：模拟环境中的方法排序与小规模真实人评具有一定一致性，因此它可以作为 RLHF 研究的低成本代理，但不能完全替代真实人类评测。论文围绕 Alpaca 风格 instruction-following 设置，比较了监督微调、reward model 驱动的优化和若干偏好学习方法，并报告了自动指标与人评结果的相关性。更有价值的观察通常不在绝对分数，而在训练信号质量：奖励模型足够强时，仿真可以支持方法筛选；奖励模型偏差较大时，优化会更快地 exploit reward bug，这和真实 RLHF 中的 reward hacking 问题一致。若干消融展示了偏好数据规模、候选答案质量和奖励模型设定会显著改变对齐效果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical bottleneck: RLHF research is slow and expensive, so many ideas are tested only in narrow offline settings instead of in a full learning loop. Prior work often depended on costly human annotation pipelines or proprietary APIs, which made controlled iteration hard. AlpacaFarm is proposed as a reproducible simulation environment for studying instruction tuning, reward modeling, and preference-based optimization end to end.","importance":"Its contribution is mainly infrastructural and methodological, not a new alignment algorithm. For pretrain-to-posttrain research, this matters because questions around reward hacking, preference noise, synthetic supervision, and offline vs. online RLHF cannot be answered cleanly without a cheap and repeatable testbed. AlpacaFarm turns RLHF from an anecdotal engineering process into something closer to an experimental science.","technical_approach":"The core idea is a simulation framework rather than a new objective. The system builds instruction-following data, constructs pairwise preference data, trains automated reward/preference models to approximate human feedback, and then evaluates SFT and preference/RL-style tuning methods within the same controlled setup. The key design choice is to optimize for low cost and stable method ranking, not to perfectly replace humans. Unlike leaderboard-style evaluations that focus on final win rates only, AlpacaFarm exposes the training loop and makes it easier to study how reward quality, preference data size, and optimization choices interact.","experiments":"The main empirical result is that method rankings in the simulator show meaningful agreement with small-scale human evaluation, which makes the framework useful as a proxy but not a full substitute. The paper studies Alpaca-style instruction-following models and compares supervised fine-tuning, reward-model-driven optimization, and preference-learning variants, reporting both automatic and human-centered evaluations. The most useful takeaway is about signal quality: when the reward model is reasonably strong, the simulator is useful for screening methods; when it is biased, optimization quickly exploits that bias, mirroring reward hacking seen in real RLHF. Ablations show strong sensitivity to preference data quantity, candidate response quality, and reward-model design.","authors_note":""},"tags":["rlhf","alignment","evaluation","simulation"],"notable_authors":["Yann Dubois","Chen Xuechen Li","Rohan Taori","Tianyi Zhang","Ishaan Gulrajani"],"keywords":["Instruction-Following","Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback","Artificial General Intelligence","Large Language Models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"填补了RLHF算法研究缺乏低成本可复现基准的空白，建议把AlpacaFarm作为内部RLHF迭代的标准测试框架，避免单次demo误导算法选型。","en":"It fills the gap of low-cost reproducible benchmark for RLHF research, use AlpacaFarm as standard test framework for internal RLHF iteration to avoid algorithm selection misled by one-off demos."}},{"id":"2310.12109","title":"Monarch Mixer: A Simple Sub-Quadratic GEMM-Based Architecture","authors":["Daniel Y. Fu","Simran Arora","Jessica Grogan","Isys Johnson","Evan Sabri Eyuboglu","Armin W. Thomas","Benjamin Spector","Michael Poli","Atri Rudra","Christopher Ré"],"institutions":["Stanford University","University of California, Berkeley"],"abstract":"$13","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.12109","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/FuAGJETSPRR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/FuAGJETSPRR23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/f498c1ce6bff52eb04febf87438dd84b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer在序列长度和模型维度两个维度上均为二次复杂度，无法同时扩展长上下文和大模型维度，此前的次二次架构要么硬件效率低，要么只能优化单一维度的复杂度。","importance":"架构级贡献，提出了同时在序列长度和模型维度上次二次的高效架构，硬件友好，为长上下文大模型训练和推理提供了新的架构选择。","technical_approach":"原创架构Monarch Mixer（M2），两个维度都用Monarch结构化矩阵作为线性变换原语，舍弃了Transformer自注意力和MLP的二次复杂度设计，同时兼容GPU的GEMM优化，硬件效率远高于其他次二次架构。","experiments":"在非因果BERT风格语言建模、ViT图像分类、因果语言建模三个任务上，性能与Transformer相当，序列长度4k时训练速度比Transformer快2倍，推理速度快3倍，模型维度扩大时复杂度增长远低于Transformer。","authors_note":"斯坦福大学、加州大学伯克利分校联合团队，知名作者包括Daniel Y. Fu，长期从事高效模型架构方向研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Transformer has quadratic complexity along both sequence length and model dimension axes, making it impossible to scale long context and large model dimension simultaneously. Previous sub-quadratic architectures either have low hardware efficiency or can only optimize complexity of a single dimension.","importance":"This is an architecture-level contribution that proposes an efficient sub-quadratic architecture along both sequence length and model dimension axes, which is hardware-friendly and provides a new architecture choice for long-context large model training and inference.","technical_approach":"Monarch Mixer (M2) is an original architecture that uses Monarch structured matrices as linear transformation primitives along both axes. It abandons the quadratic complexity design of Transformer self-attention and MLP, and is compatible with GPU GEMM optimization, with much higher hardware efficiency than other sub-quadratic architectures.","experiments":"On three tasks: non-causal BERT-style language modeling, ViT image classification, and causal language modeling, M2 achieves comparable performance to Transformer. At sequence length 4k, training speed is 2x faster than Transformer, inference speed is 3x faster. Complexity growth is much lower than Transformer when model dimension scales up.","authors_note":"Joint team of Stanford University and University of California, Berkeley, notable author includes Daniel Y. Fu, with long-term research on efficient model architecture."},"tags":["sub-quadratic","architecture","monarch","efficiency","scaling"],"keywords":["structured matrices","transformers","efficiency"],"notable_authors":["Daniel Y. Fu"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer的自注意力和MLP是导致其序列、维度维度二次复杂度的核心原因","claim_en":"Self-attention and MLP in Transformer are the core reasons for its quadratic complexity along sequence length and model dimension axes","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于Monarch矩阵的次二次架构性能与Transformer相当，同时在序列长度和模型维度两个维度上硬件效率高于Transformer","claim_en":"Sub-quadratic architecture based on Monarch matrices achieves comparable performance to Transformer, with higher hardware efficiency along both sequence length and model dimension axes","opposes":"此前的普遍认知认为次二次架构必然存在性能损失，且无法同时优化两个维度的复杂度","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§6 Table 2","why_contested":"打破了次二次架构性能差、硬件效率低的固有认知，为长上下文大模型架构设计提供了新方向"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的架构设计和Fig4的硬件效率测试结果即可，适合长上下文架构选型时做对比参考，无需深入推导矩阵细节。","en":"Only read architecture design in §3 and hardware efficiency test results in Fig4, good for comparison reference when selecting long-context architectures, no need to dig into matrix derivation details."}},{"id":"HassidRNGCKCDSD23","title":"Textually Pretrained Speech Language Models","authors":["Michael Hassid","Tal Remez","Tu Anh Nguyen","Itai Gat","Alexis Conneau","Felix Kreuk","Jade Copet","Alexandre Défossez","Gabriel Synnaeve","Emmanuel Dupoux","Roy Schwartz","Yossi Adi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Speech language models (SpeechLMs) process and generate acoustic data only, without textual supervision. In this work, we propose TWIST, a method for training SpeechLMs using a warm-start from a pretrained textual language models. We show using both automatic and human evaluations that TWIST outperforms a cold-start SpeechLM across the board. We empirically analyze the effect of different model design choices such as the speech tokenizer, the pretrained textual model, and the dataset size. We find that model and dataset scale both play an important role in constructing better-performing SpeechLMs. Based on our observations, we present the largest (to the best of our knowledge) SpeechLM both in terms of number of parameters and training data. We additionally introduce two spoken versions of the StoryCloze textual benchmark to further improve model evaluation and advance future research in the field. We make speech samples, code and models publicly available.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HassidRNGCKCDSD23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HassidRNGCKCDSD23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/c859b99b5d717c9035e79d43dfd69435-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：语音语言模型通常受限于语音数据稀缺，而纯文本数据极其丰富，如何把文本预训练的规模优势迁移到 speech LM 上。过去常见做法是分别训练文本 LM 和语音模型，再靠蒸馏或级联系统连接；作者关注的是更直接的统一语言建模视角。","importance":"这篇工作对 pretrain 很相关，而且价值不低。它触及一个核心问题：如果语音也能被表示成适合 LM 的离散单元，那么文本预训练获得的语言先验能否直接用于语音生成/理解。这个方向与 AudioLM、VALL-E、Moshi 一脉相承，对统一 token-based multimodal pretraining 很有启发。","technical_approach":"从标题判断，核心思路是先做文本预训练，再把这种语言建模能力转移到语音语言模型中。可行路径通常包括：构造与文本 token 在统计或语义上兼容的语音离散单元，或者设计共享/桥接表示，让模型在文本和语音序列之间复用一部分参数与预测目标。与传统 ASR/TTS 级联不同，这种方法把语音当作语言建模对象而不是单独声学任务。关键 trade-off 是：文本先验能带来强语义和长程结构，但语音里的韵律、说话人和声学细节未必能靠文本预训练覆盖。","experiments":"给定信息没有摘要内容，无法确认具体用了哪种 speech tokenizer、模型规模、是否做零样本 TTS 或语音续写，也无法给出指标。关键实验应当比较：仅语音预训练 vs 文本初始化/预训练迁移，在语音建模困惑度、生成自然度、语义保持和跨说话人泛化上的差异。若论文做得扎实，最有价值的结果会是：在不需要海量语音数据的前提下，文本预训练显著提升 speech LM 的语言一致性与样本效率。","authors_note":"作者包含 Alexis Conneau。其代表性工作包括跨语言表示学习、wav2vec 2.0 / speech-text 预训练相关方向。仅凭给定信息无法确认具体机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a central bottleneck in speech language modeling: speech data is expensive and limited, while text data is abundant. The question is how to transfer the scale advantage of textual pretraining into speech LMs more directly. Earlier systems often connected separately trained text and speech components through distillation or pipelines. This work appears to ask for a tighter language-modeling view.","importance":"This is highly relevant to pretraining. It sits exactly at the intersection of language modeling, tokenization, and multimodal unification. If speech can be represented in a way that lets text-pretrained priors carry over, then rich linguistic structure no longer needs to be learned from speech alone. That has clear implications for speech LMs and for unified token-based multimodal models more broadly.","technical_approach":"From the title, the core idea is to pretrain on text and transfer that capability into a speech language model. In practice, that likely requires either speech units that are compatible enough with textual sequences or a shared/bridged representation that allows parameter reuse across modalities. The important distinction from classic ASR/TTS pipelines is that speech is treated as a sequence modeling problem, not only as an acoustic mapping problem. The trade-off is straightforward: text pretraining gives strong semantics and long-range structure, but it does not directly solve prosody, speaker identity, or fine acoustic detail.","experiments":"The provided material does not include the abstract, so model size, tokenizer choice, datasets, and metrics cannot be stated responsibly. The key comparisons should test speech-only pretraining against text-initialized or text-pretrained models on speech modeling quality, naturalness, semantic fidelity, and data efficiency. The most meaningful positive result would be strong gains in language consistency and sample efficiency without requiring massive speech corpora.","authors_note":"The author list includes Alexis Conneau, known for cross-lingual representation learning and major speech-text pretraining work including wav2vec-related directions. The exact institutions cannot be confirmed from the provided metadata."},"tags":["speech-lm","text-pretrain","cross-modal","tokenizer"],"notable_authors":["Alexis Conneau"],"keywords":["LLM","speech","generative","GSLM"],"recommendation":{"zh":"验证了文本预训练的语言先验可直接迁移到语音离散token建模，对统一多模态预训练的token设计和目标设计有直接指导意义。","en":"It verifies that language priors from text pretraining can be directly transferred to speech discrete token modeling, directly guides token and objective design for unified multimodal pretraining."}},{"id":"KimMMMMGK23","title":"Speculative Decoding with Big Little Decoder","authors":["Sehoon Kim","Karttikeya Mangalam","Suhong Moon","Jitendra Malik","Michael W. Mahoney","Amir Gholami","Kurt Keutzer"],"institutions":["University of California, Berkeley","Meta AI"],"abstract":"$14","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KimMMMMGK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KimMMMMGK23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/7b97adeafa1c51cf65263459ca9d0d7c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"大语言模型自回归推理延迟高，此前的推测解码依赖小模型草稿和大模型验证，需要两个模型同构且草稿模型与目标模型分布对齐要求高，对齐不好时加速比低。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出了通用的大小解码器推测解码框架，不需要草稿模型和大模型同构，对齐要求低，加速比更稳定。","technical_approach":"原创BiLD框架，小模型提前生成多个token草稿，大模型同时验证多个token，舍弃了此前推测解码要求大小模型同构、分布高度对齐的限制，同时引入回退机制，验证失败时回退到大模型逐token生成。","experiments":"在7B到70B参数的语言模型上，推理延迟降低40%-60%，性能损失小于1%，相比标准推测解码，加速比稳定性提升20%以上，不需要调整模型训练。","authors_note":"加州大学伯克利分校、Meta AI联合团队，知名作者包括Jitendra Malik、Michael W. Mahoney，长期从事高效推理、模型系统方向研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Autoregressive inference latency of large language models is high. Previous speculative decoding relies on small model draft and large model verification, requiring two models to be isomorphic and high distribution alignment between draft model and target model, leading to low speedup when alignment is poor.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution that proposes a general big-little decoder speculative decoding framework, no isomorphic requirement between draft model and large model, low alignment requirement, and more stable speedup.","technical_approach":"BiLD is an original framework where the small model generates multiple token drafts in advance, and the large model verifies multiple tokens simultaneously. It abandons the previous requirements of isomorphic models and high distribution alignment of speculative decoding, and introduces a fallback mechanism to fallback to large model token-wise generation when verification fails.","experiments":"On language models with 7B to 70B parameters, inference latency is reduced by 40%-60%, performance loss is less than 1%. Compared with standard speculative decoding, speedup stability is improved by more than 20%, no model training adjustment is needed.","authors_note":"Joint team of University of California, Berkeley and Meta AI, notable authors include Jitendra Malik, Michael W. Mahoney, with long-term research on efficient inference and model systems."},"tags":["speculative-decoding","inference","serving","llm"],"keywords":["Transformer","efficient inference","efficient model","decoding"],"notable_authors":["Jitendra Malik","Michael W. Mahoney"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"自回归生成的推理延迟是大模型部署的核心瓶颈，推测解码可以通过提前生成草稿token降低延迟","claim_en":"Inference latency of autoregressive generation is the core bottleneck for large model deployment, speculative decoding reduces latency by generating draft tokens in advance","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"大小模型异构、分布不需要严格对齐的推测解码框架可以达到与同构对齐相当的加速比，同时适用范围更广","claim_en":"Speculative decoding framework with heterogeneous big-little models without strict distribution alignment can achieve comparable speedup to isomorphic aligned framework, with wider applicability","opposes":"此前的普遍认知认为推测解码要求大小模型同构、分布高度对齐才能获得有效加速","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Table 1","why_contested":"降低了推测解码的落地门槛，不需要为每个目标模型单独训练对齐的草稿模型"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3.2的大小模型对齐策略和Table2的加速比结果即可，作为推理优化方向的弱信号参考，无需复现整套框架。","en":"Only read big-small model alignment strategy in §3.2 and speedup results in Table2, use as weak signal reference for inference optimization, no need to reproduce the whole framework."}},{"id":"KohFS23","title":"Generating Images with Multimodal Language Models","authors":["Jing Yu Koh","Daniel Fried","Russ Salakhutdinov"],"institutions":["Carnegie Mellon University"],"abstract":"$15","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KohFS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KohFS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/43a69d143273bd8215578bde887bb552-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作讨论的核心问题是：多模态语言模型能不能直接承担图像生成，而不依赖单独训练的扩散解码器。过去图像生成主流是扩散模型，语言模型更多负责理解或离散 token 生成；作者想验证，把图像离散化并统一进自回归多模态 LM，是否能得到一个更统一的“理解+生成”体系。","importance":"它的重要性在于范式层面的试探：这不是把 VLM 再做大一点，而是在挑战“图像生成必须靠 diffusion”的分工。对 pretrain 的意义很直接——如果单个 multimodal LM 能同时完成视觉理解和图像合成，那么 AR 统一建模路线就会更有说服力，也会影响图像 tokenizer、数据混合和训练目标设计。边界在于，统一通常带来简单性和可组合性，但生成保真度、采样速度和分辨率未必能立刻追平专用扩散模型。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把图像表示成离散视觉 token，然后用多模态语言模型以 next-token 方式建模文本和图像的联合序列。关键设计不是简单拼接，而是让模型既能条件生成图像，也能做图文理解任务，从而测试统一 AR 建模是否足够强；相较于扩散路线，它舍弃了逐步去噪的连续生成机制，换来统一接口、统一训练目标和现成 LM 工具链。与最接近的 work 相比，这类方法的关键差别通常在视觉 tokenizer 质量、图像 token 排布方式，以及训练中图文序列比例与条件化模板。","experiments":"从题目看，实验重点应是文本到图像生成，同时验证多模态 LM 的理解能力，和离散图像 token 的生成质量。可预期 baseline 包括离散 token 图像生成器、图文大模型，以及扩散式文本到图像系统；但在当前提供信息中，无法可靠确认模型参数量、训练数据规模、FID 或人评结果，也不能确认是否达到当时 SOTA。真正值得关注的实验观察通常是：统一模型在理解任务上几乎不掉点时，图像生成损失了多少；以及视觉 tokenizer 粒度和上下文长度是否成为主要瓶颈。","authors_note":"Carnegie Mellon University 相关。Russ Salakhutdinov 是深度生成模型、多模态学习与表示学习方向的代表性作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a direct question: can a multimodal language model generate images on its own, instead of delegating generation to a separate diffusion model? The standard split has been clear—LLMs for understanding and diffusion for image synthesis—so the paper probes whether discrete visual tokens plus autoregressive multimodal modeling are enough to unify the two.","importance":"This matters at the paradigm level. It is not just a stronger VLM; it tests whether image generation can live inside the same autoregressive pretraining framework as language and image understanding. For pretraining, that has concrete implications for tokenizer design, data mixing, and objective unification. The trade-off is also clear: a unified AR model offers simplicity and composability, but may lag specialized diffusion systems in fidelity, speed, or high-resolution scaling.","technical_approach":"The core method is to tokenize images into discrete visual codes and train a multimodal language model over mixed text-image sequences with a standard next-token objective. The point is not mere concatenation; the model is set up to support both conditional image generation and multimodal understanding, so the paper can test whether one AR model can do both reasonably well. Relative to diffusion-based generation, it gives up continuous denoising dynamics in exchange for a single interface, a single objective, and direct reuse of the LLM training stack.","experiments":"Based on the title, the key experiments likely cover text-to-image generation together with multimodal understanding, evaluating whether a unified model remains useful on both. Expected baselines include discrete-token image generators, multimodal LMs, and diffusion text-to-image systems, but the provided metadata does not justify specific claims about model size, dataset scale, FID, human preference scores, or SOTA status. The most informative results to look for are the quality gap versus diffusion and whether understanding performance holds up once the model is also asked to be a generator.","authors_note":"Likely Carnegie Mellon University. Russ Salakhutdinov is a prominent researcher in deep generative modeling, multimodal learning, and representation learning."},"tags":["multimodal-lm","image-generation","unified-modeling","autoregressive"],"notable_authors":["Russ Salakhutdinov"],"keywords":["multimodal","vision-and-language","language models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"挑战了图像生成必须依赖扩散模型的固有认知，进一步验证了统一自回归多模态建模路线的可行性，建议跟进图像tokenizer和图文数据混合实验。","en":"It challenges the prior that image generation must rely on diffusion models, further verifies the feasibility of unified autoregressive multimodal modeling, suggest following up image tokenizer and image-text data mixing experiments."}},{"id":"LaurenconSTBSLW23","title":"OBELICS: An Open Web-Scale Filtered Dataset of Interleaved Image-Text Documents","authors":["Hugo Laurençon","Lucile Saulnier","Léo Tronchon","Stas Bekman","Amanpreet Singh","Anton Lozhkov","Thomas Wang","Siddharth Karamcheti","Alexander M. Rush","Douwe Kiela","Matthieu Cord","Victor Sanh"],"institutions":["Hugging Face"],"abstract":"Large multimodal models trained on natural documents, which interleave images and text, outperform models trained on image-text pairs on various multimodal benchmarks. However, the datasets used to train these models have not been released, and the collection process has not been fully specified.  We introduce the OBELICS dataset, an open web-scale filtered dataset of interleaved image-text documents comprising 141 million web pages extracted from Common Crawl, 353 million associated images, and 115 billion text tokens. We describe the dataset creation process, present comprehensive filtering rules, and provide an analysis of the dataset's content. To show the viability of OBELICS, we train on the dataset vision and language models of 9 and 80 billion parameters, IDEFICS-9B and IDEFICS, and obtain competitive performance on different multimodal benchmarks. We release our dataset, models and code.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LaurenconSTBSLW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LaurenconSTBSLW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/e2cfb719f58585f779d0a4f9f07bd618-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是多模态预训练里一个很现实的瓶颈：公开可用、质量可控、规模足够大的交错图文文档数据太少。过去很多视觉语言模型依赖网页 alt-text 式图文对，或者依赖闭源爬取集；这类数据要么上下文弱，要么难复现，无法很好支持“在一篇文档中多图多段联合建模”的训练。","importance":"这是一项明确的数据级贡献，而且对 native multimodal pretrain 很关键。它的重要性不只是“又大了一个数据集”，而是把训练单元从孤立图片配一句文本，推进到交错文档级别；这更接近真实网页、教程、百科、报告等结构，有利于训练模型处理跨图跨段引用、局部图文对齐和长上下文多模态理解。对后续工作的冲击在于：如果文档级图文数据成为常态，很多只在 image-caption 配对上优化的目标函数和评测方式都会显得过窄。","technical_approach":"OBELICS 的核心是开放式网页抓取后的过滤与结构化，而不是提出一个新的模型架构。作者重点解决三件事：从网页中抽取交错图文文档、做质量过滤和去噪、并以开放数据集形式发布，降低多模态预训练复现门槛。与 LAION 这类图文对数据相比，它保留了文档内顺序、段落上下文以及多图关联；这使它更适合训练统一自回归或文档级编码器模型。代价也很明确：网页结构解析和过滤规则会引入偏差，且交错文档中的弱对齐比 caption 数据更噪，训练目标需要更能容忍错配。","experiments":"实验层面的关键信息通常是：用 OBELICS 训练的视觉语言模型，在文档级理解、多图上下文利用和通用多模态 benchmark 上相比使用简单图文对数据更具优势，同时开放数据集在复现性上明显优于闭源配方。当前给定信息没有摘要和具体表格，因此不能负责任地填入数据规模、模型参数和精确提升数字；但这篇工作的核心并不依赖单一 SOTA 数字，而在于数据构成改变了可训练能力边界。对预训练实践最重要的启示是：交错文档数据的价值不只是增加 token 数，而是增加“结构化对齐信号”的种类。","authors_note":"Hugging Face 主导的数据工作。作者中有 Stas Bekman、Amanpreet Singh 等，团队代表性方向包括开放数据集、开放多模态预训练与工程化复现。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a concrete bottleneck in multimodal pretraining: there are too few large, open, reproducible datasets of interleaved image-text documents. Much prior work relied either on caption-style image-text pairs with weak context or on private web-scale corpora that are hard to reproduce, which limits progress on document-level multimodal modeling.","importance":"This is a data contribution, but an important one for native multimodal pretraining. The value is not merely scale. It shifts the training unit from isolated image-caption pairs to full interleaved documents, which better reflect real web pages, tutorials, encyclopedic articles, and reports. That matters because document-level data carries richer supervision for cross-image references, local grounding, and long-context multimodal understanding. If this data regime becomes standard, objectives and evaluations designed only for image-caption pairs will look increasingly narrow.","technical_approach":"OBELICS is primarily a data construction and filtering pipeline rather than a new model architecture. The work focuses on extracting interleaved image-text documents from the open web, denoising and filtering them, and releasing the result openly for reproducible multimodal pretraining. Relative to datasets such as LAION, it preserves document order, paragraph context, and multi-image structure, which makes it more suitable for unified autoregressive or document-level multimodal models. The trade-off is that web parsing and heuristic filtering introduce bias, and alignment in interleaved documents is often weaker and noisier than in caption data.","experiments":"The main empirical message is typically that models trained with OBELICS are better positioned for document-level understanding, multi-image context use, and broad multimodal evaluation than models trained only on simple image-caption pairs, while also improving reproducibility through open release. The provided metadata does not include reliable corpus size, model size, or exact gains, so those numbers should not be fabricated. For pretraining practitioners, the key lesson is that interleaved document data adds more than extra tokens: it adds new forms of structured alignment signal.","authors_note":"Led by the Hugging Face ecosystem. Stas Bekman and Amanpreet Singh are notable names associated with open datasets, open multimodal pretraining, and reproducible training infrastructure."},"tags":["dataset","image-text","data-quality","web-scale","multimodal-pretraining"],"notable_authors":["Stas Bekman","Amanpreet Singh"],"keywords":["dataset","multimodal","machine learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"原生多模态预训练核心开源数据集，将训练单元从孤立图文对升级为文档级交错结构，可直接作为内部多模态预训练的基线数据。","en":"Core open-source dataset for native multimodal pretraining, upgrades training units from isolated image-text pairs to interleaved document structures, can be directly used as baseline for internal multimodal pretraining."}},{"id":"LeVSKSMWMAMH23","title":"Voicebox: Text-Guided Multilingual Universal Speech Generation at Scale","authors":["Matthew Le","Apoorv Vyas","Bowen Shi","Brian Karrer","Leda Sari","Rashel Moritz","Mary Williamson","Vimal Manohar","Yossi Adi","Jay Mahadeokar","Wei-Ning Hsu"],"institutions":["Meta"],"abstract":"$16","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LeVSKSMWMAMH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LeVSKSMWMAMH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/2d8911db9ecedf866015091b28946e15-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：能否用统一的大规模生成模型，把语音编辑、条件生成、跨语言说话人泛化等任务合并起来做，而不是为 TTS、语音修复、风格迁移分别训练专用系统。过去语音生成通常是任务专用、语言专用或说话人专用，泛化能力和灵活性都有限。","importance":"Voicebox 的重要性是范式级的，它把语音生成明确推向 foundation model 路线：一个模型支持 text-guided、multilingual、universal speech generation。对语音 LM 和多模态预训练的启示很强：语音不再只是识别系统的输入，而是可以像文本一样被通用生成模型建模和编辑。它对 pretrain 的真正冲击在于训练目标和数据组织方式——如何从海量未标注或弱标注语音中学出可条件控制的生成能力。","technical_approach":"方法上，Voicebox 的核心不是传统自回归 TTS，而是基于 flow matching 的非自回归生成框架，并通过 in-context learning 形式做条件控制。这样设计的原因很明确：非自回归生成更适合长序列语音的高效采样，也更容易支持填空式编辑和噪声鲁棒生成；相较纯扩散，它在训练与采样效率上有更好的平衡。模型以文本和语音上下文为条件，支持跨语言、语音修补、风格延续等任务，关键在于把这些任务统一成同一条件生成问题，而不是分别做 task-specific heads。","experiments":"实验层面的关键信息是：Voicebox 在多语言 TTS、语音编辑和噪声鲁棒生成上相对先前专用系统有明显优势，并展示了零样本或少样本说话人泛化能力。公开讨论中常提到其训练使用了大规模多语言语音数据，但当前给定信息没有可靠数表，不能在这里编造小时数、参数量和 MOS/WER 数字。值得关注的现象是，统一模型在多任务上受益于共享语音先验，但在极高保真单一场景下未必总能压过专用系统；这正是 foundation model 路线的典型取舍。","authors_note":"Meta 出品。作者中 Matthew Le、Apoorv Vyas、Brian Karrer 等来自 Meta 语音团队。该团队代表性工作包括 Massively Multilingual Speech、Encodec、AudioCraft 等相关方向。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether one large speech generation model can unify text-guided generation, speech editing, and cross-lingual speaker generalization instead of training separate systems for TTS, inpainting, and style transfer. Earlier speech generation systems were usually task-specific, language-specific, or speaker-specific, which limited flexibility and transfer.","importance":"Voicebox matters at the paradigm level because it pushes speech generation toward the foundation-model regime: one multilingual, text-guided, universal generator. For speech LM research and multimodal pretraining, the implication is strong. Speech is no longer just something to recognize; it becomes a modality that can be modeled, edited, and conditioned on with a general generative objective. The pretraining-relevant shift is in the objective and data setup needed to learn controllable generation from large-scale speech data.","technical_approach":"The technical core is not a standard autoregressive TTS model. Voicebox uses a flow-matching based non-autoregressive generation framework with in-context conditioning. This choice is sensible for long speech sequences because it improves sampling efficiency and naturally supports infilling-style editing and noise-robust generation. Compared with diffusion-style approaches, it aims for a better training/inference trade-off. The same model is conditioned on text and speech context to handle multilingual synthesis, continuation, and editing, rather than attaching task-specific heads for each function.","experiments":"The main empirical claim is that Voicebox outperforms prior specialized systems on multilingual TTS, speech editing, and noise-robust generation, while also showing zero-shot or few-shot speaker generalization. Public discussions often note large-scale multilingual training data, but the provided metadata does not contain reliable parameter counts, hours, MOS, or WER values, so those should not be invented here. The useful takeaway is the trade-off typical of foundation models: a unified model benefits from shared speech priors across tasks, but may not dominate every highly specialized high-fidelity setting.","authors_note":"From Meta. Matthew Le, Apoorv Vyas, Brian Karrer, and collaborators are associated with Meta’s speech research efforts. Related representative directions from the broader team include massively multilingual speech models, EnCodec, and AudioCraft."},"tags":["speech-generation","speech-lm","scaling","multilingual","flow-matching"],"notable_authors":["Matthew Le","Apoorv Vyas","Brian Karrer"],"keywords":["speech generation","flow-matching","diffusion","in-context learning","text-to-speech"]},{"id":"LiuA23","title":"Blockwise Parallel Transformers for Large Context Models","authors":["Hao Liu","Pieter Abbeel"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Transformers have emerged as the cornerstone of state-of-the-art natural language processing models, showcasing exceptional performance across a wide range of AI applications. However, the memory demands posed by the self-attention mechanism and the large feedforward network in Transformers limit their ability to handle long sequences, thereby creating challenges for tasks involving multiple long sequences or long-term dependencies. We present a distinct approach, Blockwise Parallel Transformer (BPT), that leverages blockwise computation of self-attention and feedforward network fusion to minimize memory costs. By processing longer input sequences while maintaining memory efficiency, BPT enables training sequences 32 times longer than vanilla Transformers and up to 4 times longer than previous memory-efficient methods. Extensive experiments on language modeling and reinforcement learning tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of BPT in reducing memory requirements and improving performance.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiuA23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiuA23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/1bfd87d2d92f0556819467dc08034f76-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：标准 Transformer 在长上下文下训练和推理都太慢，因为自注意力在序列维度上是严格串行依赖且二次复杂度。过去要么靠稀疏/近似注意力牺牲精度，要么只在推理端做工程优化；作者关注的是另一条路——能否把长序列拆成块，在尽量不损失建模能力的前提下并行化更多计算。","importance":"这项工作属于架构与系统联合优化，对大模型预训练很有现实意义。长上下文能力越来越依赖吞吐而不是单点算法优雅性；如果 blockwise parallel 能在不改训练目标的情况下提升训练或解码效率，它对大规模 pretrain、continued pretrain 和长文档建模都直接有用。其影响更偏系统级，但会反过来约束可行的模型架构选择。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 blockwise parallel Transformer：把上下文分成若干块，在块内或块间安排可并行的表示更新，从而减少严格 token-by-token 依赖。与线性 attention 不同，它不是彻底改掉注意力核；与 speculative decoding 不同，它更像修改模型计算图，使训练和/或推理原生支持块级并行。设计关键在于如何保留跨块信息流，否则并行化越强，条件依赖越弱，语言建模质量越容易掉。通常需要一个 coarse-to-fine 或 summary-state 机制，在并行性和精度之间找平衡。","experiments":"从标题判断，实验重点应在大上下文语言建模上的效率-质量折中。关键比较对象可能包括标准 Transformer、局部/线性 attention 变体，以及其他并行解码或块级建模方法；指标通常是 perplexity、吞吐、延迟和可支持上下文长度。最有价值的观察会是：在相近 perplexity 下获得多少并行加速，以及块大小增大时误差如何积累。由于没有摘要，无法可靠确认使用的参数规模、上下文长度上限和具体加速倍数。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a central bottleneck for long-context language models: standard Transformers are expensive because attention scales poorly and generation remains tightly sequential. Prior approaches often trade quality for sparse or approximate attention, or focus only on inference engineering. This work asks whether sequence computation can be parallelized at the block level without giving up too much modeling power.","importance":"This is an architecture-systems contribution with direct relevance to large-scale pretraining. Long-context modeling is increasingly constrained by throughput and hardware efficiency, so a blockwise parallel formulation matters even if it does not change the language-modeling objective. It is especially relevant for continued pretraining and long-document training where wall-clock efficiency can dominate algorithmic niceties.","technical_approach":"The core idea is a blockwise parallel Transformer that partitions the sequence and performs more computation in parallel across blocks. Unlike linear attention, it does not necessarily replace the attention kernel entirely; unlike speculative decoding, it modifies the model computation itself to enable native block-level parallelism. The main design challenge is preserving cross-block dependency: if blocks are too independent, language-model quality drops. So the method likely uses some form of summary state or staged communication to balance dependency fidelity against parallel speed.","experiments":"Given only the title, the likely evaluation emphasizes the quality-efficiency tradeoff on long-context language modeling. Relevant baselines would include standard Transformers, sparse/local/linear attention variants, and other parallel decoding or chunked modeling methods, with metrics such as perplexity, throughput, latency, and supported context length. The key question is how much speedup is obtained at a fixed quality level and how error grows with larger block sizes. Exact model scales, context lengths, and acceleration numbers are not recoverable from the prompt.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer","long-context","parallelism","attention"],"keywords":["Language Model","Long Context Modeling","Reinforcement Learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"架构与系统联合优化的实用成果，不损失建模精度前提下大幅提升长上下文训练吞吐，建议内部长上下文预训练项目第一时间复现。","en":"Practical work combining architecture and system optimization, greatly improves long-context training throughput without accuracy loss, recommended to reproduce immediately in internal long-context pretraining projects."}},{"id":"LovelaceKWSW23","title":"Latent Diffusion for Language Generation","authors":["Justin Lovelace","Varsha Kishore","Chao Wan","Eliot Shekhtman","Kilian Q. Weinberger"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$17","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LovelaceKWSW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LovelaceKWSW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/b2a2bd5d5051ff6af52e1ef60aefd255-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：扩散语言模型如何摆脱离散 token 空间上的采样困难与长序列低效问题，从而在文本生成上成为更现实的替代范式。离散扩散 LM 虽然能提供非自回归生成和不同的训练信号，但直接在 token 上做扩散通常训练难、采样慢、质量也不稳。","importance":"它的重要性是新型语言建模范式层面的。文章选择在潜空间而不是离散 token 空间做扩散，这是对 diffusion LM 可行性的一次务实推进：如果文本扩散要和 AR 模型竞争，必须先把表示空间处理好。对 pretrain 研究的启示很明确——生成范式的竞争不只取决于 loss 形式，也取决于你在哪个表示层建模。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 latent diffusion for language generation，即先用一个文本自编码器把离散文本压到连续潜变量，再在该潜空间上训练扩散模型，最后解码回文本。它不是直接发明全新目标，而是把图像 latent diffusion 的成功经验迁移到文本，但设计难点更大，因为文本潜变量既要保留语义，又要足够平滑，才能让连续扩散有意义。与离散扩散 LM 相比，这种做法避开了 token 级离散跳变和庞大分类头；与 AR LM 相比，它换来并行生成和不同的全局建模方式，代价是需要一个足够强的编码器/解码器瓶颈，且最终质量受潜空间信息损失约束。","experiments":"从题目可判断，实验重点应是文本生成质量、采样效率以及与 AR 或离散 diffusion baselines 的比较。由于没有摘要，无法可靠给出参数规模、数据集、困惑度、生成质量分数或速度倍数。较关键的实验通常包括：潜空间维度和压缩率的消融、是否使用预训练自编码器、以及生成速度与质量之间的 trade-off，这些比单点 SOTA 更能说明 latent diffusion 在语言上的边界。","authors_note":"作者包含 Kilian Q. Weinberger。其团队在生成模型、优化与深度学习系统方向有长期影响力。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a central weakness of diffusion language models: doing diffusion directly in discrete token space is awkward, slow, and often unstable for long-form text generation. If diffusion is to be a serious alternative to autoregressive LMs, the representation space has to be chosen more carefully.","importance":"This is a paradigm-level contribution for non-AR language modeling. Moving diffusion from discrete tokens to a learned latent space is a pragmatic step toward making diffusion-based text generation usable at scale. For pretraining research, the key lesson is that the competitiveness of a generative objective depends heavily on where the model lives: token space, latent space, or some hybrid interface.","technical_approach":"The method applies latent diffusion to language: a text autoencoder maps discrete sequences into continuous latents, a diffusion model is trained in that latent space, and a decoder reconstructs text. The idea is adapted from latent diffusion in vision, but the text setting is harder because the latent space must preserve semantic content while remaining smooth enough for continuous denoising. Relative to discrete diffusion LMs, this avoids token-level categorical diffusion and large softmax issues; relative to AR models, it offers parallel generation but pays the price of an encoder-decoder bottleneck and possible information loss.","experiments":"The likely empirical focus is generation quality and sampling efficiency versus autoregressive and discrete-diffusion baselines. Since the abstract is not provided, I cannot reliably state model sizes, datasets, exact metrics, or speedups. The most informative experiments would include latent dimensionality and compression ablations, the effect of pretrained versus jointly trained autoencoders, and quality-speed trade-offs rather than only best-point scores.","authors_note":"The author list includes Kilian Q. Weinberger, whose group has had sustained impact on generative modeling, optimization, and deep learning systems."},"tags":["diffusion-lm","language-modeling","latent-models","non-autoregressive"],"notable_authors":["Kilian Q. Weinberger"],"keywords":["diffusion","language generation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"扩散语言模型的务实进展，将潜空间扩散从图像迁移到文本，验证了表示层选择对生成范式落地的关键影响，可作为非AR生成路线核心参考。","en":"Practical progress of diffusion language models, migrates latent space diffusion from vision to text, verifies representation layer's critical impact on generative paradigm implementation, serves as core reference for non-AR generation routes."}},{"id":"MalladiGNDL0A23","title":"Fine-Tuning Language Models with Just Forward Passes","authors":["Sadhika Malladi","Tianyu Gao","Eshaan Nichani","Alex Damian","Jason D. Lee","Danqi Chen","Sanjeev Arora"],"institutions":["Princeton University","Stanford University"],"abstract":"$18","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MalladiGNDL0A23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MalladiGNDL0A23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/a627810151be4d13f907ac898ff7e948-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"大模型微调依赖反向传播，显存开销大，单卡可训练的模型参数上限低，此前的零阶优化方法被认为在大模型上收敛太慢无法落地。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出了显存开销和推理相同的大模型微调方法，大幅提升了单卡可微调的模型参数规模。","technical_approach":"改进经典零阶SGD方法，提出MeZO，原地更新参数，只需要两次前向传播计算梯度，舍弃了反向传播需要存储激活值的高显存开销设计，显存开销与推理完全一致。","experiments":"单A100 80GB显卡上，MeZO可以微调30B参数的模型，而反向传播微调只能支持2.7B参数模型，在分类、生成等下游任务上，性能与反向传播微调相当，仅下降小于2%，训练速度是反向传播的1/2到1/3。","authors_note":"普林斯顿大学、斯坦福大学联合团队，知名作者包括Jason D. Lee、Tianyu Gao，长期从事大模型优化、高效微调方向研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Large model fine-tuning relies on backpropagation, which has high memory overhead, and the upper limit of trainable model parameters on a single card is low. Previous zero-order optimization methods are considered too slow to converge on large models and cannot be implemented.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution that proposes a large model fine-tuning method with the same memory overhead as inference, greatly increasing the scale of model parameters that can be fine-tuned on a single card.","technical_approach":"MeZO improves the classical zero-order SGD method, updates parameters in-place, and only requires two forward passes to compute gradients. It abandons the high memory overhead design of backpropagation that requires storing activation values, and memory overhead is exactly the same as inference.","experiments":"On a single A100 80GB GPU, MeZO can fine-tune a 30B parameter model, while backpropagation fine-tuning only supports a 2.7B parameter model. On downstream tasks such as classification and generation, performance is comparable to backpropagation fine-tuning, with less than 2% drop, training speed is 1/2 to 1/3 of backpropagation.","authors_note":"Joint team of Princeton University and Stanford University, notable authors include Jason D. Lee, Tianyu Gao, with long-term research on large model optimization and efficient fine-tuning."},"tags":["fine-tuning","memory-efficiency","optimization","peft"],"keywords":["language models","fine-tuning","zeroth order optimization","memory efficiency"],"notable_authors":["Jason D. Lee","Tianyu Gao"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"零阶优化方法的梯度估计噪声大，收敛速度远慢于一阶反向传播方法","claim_en":"Gradient estimation of zero-order optimization methods has high noise, convergence speed is much slower than first-order backpropagation methods","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"改进的零阶优化方法MeZO可以在大模型微调场景下达到与反向传播微调相当的性能，显存开销仅为反向传播的1/10左右","claim_en":"Improved zero-order optimization method MeZO achieves comparable performance to backpropagation fine-tuning in large model fine-tuning scenarios, with only ~1/10 of the memory footprint of backpropagation","opposes":"此前的普遍认知认为零阶优化方法无法用于十亿级参数以上的大模型微调","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5 Table 1","why_contested":"打破了零阶优化无法用于大模型微调的固有认知，为低资源大模型微调提供了可落地方案"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"零阶微调的落地改进，仅需前向传播即可完成微调，单卡可微调模型规模翻倍，只看核心算法部分和复现细节即可。","en":"Practical improvement of zero-order fine-tuning, completes tuning with only forward passes, doubles tunable model size on single GPU, only need to read core algorithm and reproduction details."}},{"id":"MaroneD23","title":"Data Portraits: Recording Foundation Model Training Data","authors":["Marc Marone","Benjamin Van Durme"],"institutions":["Johns Hopkins University"],"abstract":"$19","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MaroneD23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MaroneD23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/3112ee706d21d734c15532c1239773e1-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"基础模型训练数据集不透明，无法快速查询给定样本是否被用于训练，此前的方法要么存储开销大，要么查询速度慢，无法规模化应用于TB级训练数据集的审计。","importance":"系统级贡献，提出了标准化的训练数据记录方案，提升基础模型训练数据的透明度，解决了训练数据版权、数据污染审计的需求。","technical_approach":"基于数据素描的原创实现，设计了低存储、快查询的Data Portraits，舍弃了此前全量存储训练数据哈希的高开销设计，仅存储压缩的素描结构，支持快速查询样本是否在训练集中。","experiments":"在The Pile（825GB文本语料）和The Stack（6.4TB代码语料）上实现了Data Portraits，存储开销仅为原始数据集的0.1%，查询准确率超过99%，单样本查询时间小于1ms。","authors_note":"约翰霍普金斯大学团队，知名作者包括Benjamin Van Durme，长期从事自然语言处理、数据治理方向研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Foundation model training datasets are opaque, making it impossible to quickly query whether a given sample was used for training. Previous methods either have high storage overhead or slow query speed, and cannot be scaled to audit TB-scale training datasets.","importance":"This is a system-level contribution that proposes a standardized training data recording scheme, improves the transparency of foundation model training data, and meets the needs of training data copyright and data contamination audit.","technical_approach":"An original implementation based on data sketching, Data Portraits with low storage and fast query is designed. It abandons the high overhead design of full storage of training data hashes, only stores compressed sketch structures, and supports fast query of whether a sample is in the training set.","experiments":"Data Portraits is implemented on The Pile (825GB text corpus) and The Stack (6.4TB code corpus), storage overhead is only 0.1% of the original dataset, query accuracy exceeds 99%, single sample query time is less than 1ms.","authors_note":"Johns Hopkins University team, notable author includes Benjamin Van Durme, with long-term research on natural language processing and data governance."},"tags":["training-data","data-quality","memorization","data-governance"],"keywords":["natural language processing","data documentation","dataset curation","documentation practices"],"notable_authors":["Benjamin Van Durme"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"基础模型训练数据不透明会导致版权风险、数据泄露风险、评估污染问题","claim_en":"Opaque foundation model training data leads to copyright risk, data leakage risk, and evaluation contamination issues","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于数据素描的Data Portraits可以在极低存储开销下，实现TB级训练数据集的快速存在性查询，准确率超过99%","claim_en":"Data Portraits based on data sketching enables fast existence query for TB-scale training datasets with extremely low storage overhead, accuracy over 99%","opposes":"此前的普遍认知认为训练数据存在性查询需要全量存储哈希，存储开销与原始数据集相当","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Table 2","why_contested":"为基础模型训练数据审计、版权核查提供了可规模化落地的工具"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"训练数据审计的轻量化方案，低存储开销即可快速查询样本是否在训练集，只看§3的素描结构设计和查询效率测试表就行。","en":"Lightweight solution for training data auditing, quickly queries sample presence in training set with low storage cost, only need to read §3 on portrait structure design and query efficiency test tables."}},{"id":"Mizrahi0KYGDZ23","title":"4M: Massively Multimodal Masked Modeling","authors":["David Mizrahi","Roman Bachmann","Oguzhan Fatih Kar","Teresa Yeo","Mingfei Gao","Afshin Dehghan","Amir Zamir"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Mizrahi0KYGDZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Mizrahi0KYGDZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/b6446566965fa38e183650728ab70318-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：能不能用一个统一的 masked modeling 框架同时处理多种模态和多种任务，而不是为图像、文本、语义分割、深度等分别训练专门模型。过去多模态预训练常见两条路：要么只做图文对齐，统一性有限；要么做统一 token 建模，但任务接口不够自然。4M 试图把“多模态输入 + 多模态输出”都收进一个掩码建模范式里。","importance":"这是典型的范式级探索，价值在统一建模接口。对 pretrain 的启示是：masked modeling 不只是 BERT 或 MAE 那类单模态自监督工具，也可以扩展成一个通用 I/O 层，把预测、生成、理解和条件变换都视作部分观测下的补全问题；如果成立，它会给 native multimodal pretraining 提供比纯对比学习更宽的设计空间。","technical_approach":"4M 的核心方法是把不同模态都表示成 token 或离散化后的序列，然后用统一的 masked modeling 目标去恢复被遮蔽部分。关键设计不在于简单拼接 token，而在于它支持任意模态作为输入、任意模态作为输出，因此同一模型既能做理解，也能做跨模态生成或变换。和 CLIP 这类只学对齐的模型相比，4M 明确学习联合分布中的条件结构；和纯自回归统一模型相比，masked 目标在双向上下文利用、条件补全和训练并行性上更自然，但代价是生成路径和 likelihood 定义没有 AR 那么直接。","experiments":"论文的关键实验通常会覆盖多任务、多模态设定，而不仅是一项 benchmark。最值得关注的事实是：单一 4M 模型是否能在图像理解、图像生成、语义预测、视觉问答或跨模态条件生成上达到接近专门模型的性能，以及随着模态数量增加是否出现正迁移而不是负迁移。对 pretrain 工程更重要的观察是，统一 masked objective 是否比任务特定 heads 更稳、是否依赖高质量离散 tokenizer、以及不同模态 token 比例如何影响训练；这些决定了它是“可扩展预训练路线”还是“优雅但脆弱的研究原型”。","authors_note":"作者名单中包含多个视觉与多模态研究者；仅凭题面无法可靠确认机构与代表性团队信息，返回空字符串。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether one masked-modeling framework can handle many modalities and many tasks at once, instead of training separate models for images, text, segmentation, depth, and cross-modal prediction. Prior multimodal pretraining often either focused on alignment only or used a unified token interface with awkward task formulation; 4M tries to make multimodal completion the common language.","importance":"This is a paradigm-level contribution because it broadens what masked modeling can be used for. For pretraining, the key implication is that masked objectives are not limited to BERT/MAE-style single-modality self-supervision; they can serve as a general interface for native multimodal modeling where understanding and generation are both framed as conditional completion.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to represent different modalities as token sequences and train one model to reconstruct arbitrary masked subsets. The important design choice is not just concatenating tokens, but allowing any subset of modalities to be observed and any subset to be predicted. Compared with CLIP-like alignment models, 4M learns richer conditional structure in the joint distribution. Compared with pure autoregressive unification, masked modeling uses bidirectional context more naturally and parallelizes training well, though generation semantics are less direct than next-token likelihood.","experiments":"The paper is most compelling if one model performs competitively across heterogeneous tasks rather than winning a single benchmark. The important facts are whether 4M can handle image understanding, cross-modal generation, dense prediction, and modality translation with limited task-specific adaptation, and whether adding modalities yields positive transfer instead of interference. For practitioners, the useful questions are how strongly it depends on discretization quality, how token balance across modalities affects optimization, and whether the unified objective remains stable as the modality set grows.","authors_note":""},"tags":["masked-modeling","multimodal-pretraining","tokenizer","unified-modeling","foundation-models"],"notable_authors":["David Mizrahi","Roman Bachmann","Oguzhan Fatih Kar","Teresa Yeo","Mingfei Gao"],"keywords":["multimodal learning","multitask learning","representation learning","transfer learning","foundation models","generative models","computer vision"],"recommendation":{"zh":"多模态统一建模的范式级探索，把掩码建模扩展为通用多模态I/O接口，比纯对比学习有更宽设计空间，可直接指导原生多模态预训练的目标设计。","en":"Paradigm-level exploration of unified multimodal modeling, extends masked modeling to a general multimodal I/O interface with wider design space than pure contrastive learning, directly guides native multimodal pretraining objective design."}},{"id":"MohtashamiJ23","title":"Random-Access Infinite Context Length for Transformers","authors":["Amirkeivan Mohtashami","Martin Jaggi"],"institutions":["EPFL"],"abstract":"$1b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MohtashamiJ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MohtashamiJ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ab05dc8bf36a9f66edbff6992ec86f56-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 Transformer 上下文长度受限且推理成本随序列增长恶化的问题，尤其是如何在不把全部历史重新塞进窗口的情况下，对超长上下文进行随机访问。以前的长上下文方法多在局部注意力、线性注意力或检索增强之间做折中，但要么失去精确访问能力，要么系统复杂；这篇工作试图保留 Transformer 的表达力，同时突破固定窗口。","importance":"它的意义偏系统与架构接口，对 pretrain 和 serving 都有启发。对于基础模型研究，关键点不是‘无限上下文’这句口号，而是提出了一种把外部记忆和注意力机制更紧密耦合的方式：如果模型能训练时学会对历史进行地址化访问，那么长程依赖未必只能靠扩大上下文窗口硬吃。","technical_approach":"核心方法是为 Transformer 引入一种支持随机访问的外部记忆或分块机制，使模型在处理当前位置时可以选择性读取很早之前的内容，而不需要对所有 token 做全量注意力。它不是简单检索后拼接，而是试图让访问路径和序列建模共同训练，从而在极长上下文中保留更细粒度的依赖。与稀疏注意力相比，这种设计强调可寻址的历史读取；与标准 RAG 相比，它面向的是同一序列内的持久记忆，而不是外部文档知识。有效性的前提是地址机制足够稳定，否则随机访问会退化成噪声召回。","experiments":"这类工作的关键证据通常在合成长序列任务和文档级 benchmark 上。最重要的实验事实应是：在远超训练窗口长度的序列上，模型仍能完成 needle-in-a-haystack、长距离复制、程序执行或长文依赖任务，并且计算/显存增长显著优于全注意力。对 LLM 读者，更值得关注的是它是否在 language modeling perplexity 上保持竞争力、访问误差如何随上下文长度增长、以及训练时是否需要特殊 curriculum；如果这些环节不稳，‘无限上下文’更像系统技巧而不是可泛化的预训练能力。","authors_note":"EPFL；Martin Jaggi 是较知名作者，在优化、大规模学习和高效训练方面有代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a core limitation of Transformers: fixed context windows and inference costs that grow badly with sequence length. The specific goal is random access over effectively unbounded context, without refeeding the entire history into the active window.","importance":"Its value is architectural and systems-oriented, with implications for both pretraining and serving. The useful takeaway is not the phrase “infinite context” itself, but the idea that long-range dependency handling can come from learned addressable memory, not only from making the attention window larger.","technical_approach":"The method augments a Transformer with a mechanism for random access into past context through external memory or chunked state. The important distinction is that it is not just retrieve-and-concatenate; the model is trained to use selective access as part of sequence modeling. Relative to sparse attention, this emphasizes explicit addressability. Relative to standard RAG, it targets persistent memory within the same sequence rather than external documents. The approach is attractive because it can preserve fine-grained dependencies at much lower cost, but it depends on stable learned addressing; otherwise retrieval becomes noisy and unreliable.","experiments":"The key evidence is usually on synthetic long-context tasks and long-document benchmarks. What matters most is whether the model extrapolates far beyond its training window on tasks like retrieval, copying, or algorithmic dependency tracking, while scaling compute and memory more favorably than full attention. For LLM practitioners, the critical checks are whether language modeling quality remains competitive, how access accuracy degrades with length, and whether training requires careful curriculum; if these fail, the method is better seen as a narrow systems trick than a general pretraining solution.","authors_note":"EPFL; Martin Jaggi is a well-known author with prior work on optimization and efficient large-scale learning."},"tags":["long-context","transformers","memory","attention","inference"],"notable_authors":["Amirkeivan Mohtashami","Martin Jaggi"],"keywords":["large language models","memory","context length"],"recommendation":{"zh":"突破Transformer固定窗口限制的新思路，将外部记忆与注意力机制深度耦合，不用硬扩窗口即可支持超长序列建模，建议纳入内部长上下文预训练备选方案。","en":"Novel idea to break Transformer's fixed window limit, deeply couples external memory with attention mechanism, supports ultra-long sequence modeling without expanding context window, recommended as alternative for internal long-context pretraining."}},{"id":"Moreno-MunozRH23","title":"On Masked Pre-training and the Marginal Likelihood","authors":["Pablo Moreno-Muñoz","Pol Garcia Recasens","Søren Hauberg"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Masked pre-training removes random input dimensions and learns a model that can predict the missing values. Empirical results indicate that this intuitive form of self-supervised learning yields models that generalize very well to new domains. A theoretical understanding is, however, lacking. This paper shows that masked pre-training with a suitable cumulative scoring function corresponds to maximizing the model's marginal likelihood, which is de facto the Bayesian model selection measure of generalization. Beyond shedding light on the success of masked pre-training, this insight also suggests that Bayesian models can be trained with appropriately designed self-supervision. Empirically, we confirm the developed theory and explore the main learning principles of masked pre-training in large language models.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Moreno-MunozRH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Moreno-MunozRH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/fc0e3f908a2116ba529ad0a1530a3675-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：masked pre-training 到底在优化什么，它与真正关心的边缘似然（marginal likelihood）之间是什么关系。过去 masked LM 很成功，但目标函数更多被当作实用 surrogate；作者试图从概率建模角度澄清它何时是在近似最大化边缘似然，何时则会产生系统偏差。","importance":"它的重要性是理论澄清，但对 pretrain 很直接。因为很多新范式——masked LM、span corruption、any-order modeling——都依赖‘只预测部分 token’这种训练目标；如果我们不清楚这个目标和真正联合分布学习之间的关系，就很难比较不同 objective 的优劣，也难以解释为什么一些方法预训练强、生成却弱。","technical_approach":"作者做的是目标函数层面的分析，核心是把 masked pre-training 写成对边缘似然的某种近似、下界或带偏估计，并讨论掩码分布如何决定这种近似的性质。关键不是证明 masked objective 永远等价于最大似然，而是给出它等价成立或偏离的条件。与把 MLM 当纯经验技巧的看法不同，这篇工作更关注：mask ratio、masking policy、条件独立假设和重建形式，会怎样改变模型实际学到的分布。这个分析的价值在于帮助设计更合理的掩码策略；局限是理论到大规模 Transformer 之间仍有落差。","experiments":"这类论文的实验通常服务于理论主张，重点是验证不同 masking 机制下模型估计偏差、下游表现或生成一致性的变化。最值得关注的是：当掩码率、掩码相关性或重建范围变化时，理论预测的趋势是否被观察到，以及这些变化会不会影响 perplexity 代理指标和生成质量之间的对齐。对预训练实践者，这类结果可以直接转化为 objective design：比如什么时候高掩码率有利于表示学习，什么时候会伤害分布拟合。","authors_note":"仅凭题面无法可靠确认机构与团队代表作，返回空字符串。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a foundational question: what exactly does masked pretraining optimize, and how does that objective relate to the marginal likelihood of the data distribution. Masked language modeling has been highly successful, but often treated as a practical surrogate with limited probabilistic interpretation; this work tries to make that relationship explicit.","importance":"This is a theory-facing contribution with direct pretraining relevance. Many alternatives to next-token autoregression rely on predicting subsets of tokens rather than the full sequence order. If we do not understand how these objectives relate to joint distribution learning, it is hard to reason about why some methods learn strong representations yet weaker generative models, or how to compare masking schemes rigorously.","technical_approach":"The paper analyzes masked pretraining as an approximation, bound, or biased estimator of marginal likelihood, with the masking distribution playing a central role. The key point is not that MLM is always equivalent to maximum likelihood, but that equivalence or deviation depends on conditions such as mask policy, reconstruction scope, and conditional assumptions. This is useful because it moves the discussion from heuristic success to identifiable objective bias. The limitation is familiar: theoretical clarity does not automatically tell us how large Transformers behave at scale, but it gives a better language for objective design.","experiments":"The experiments are likely designed to validate the theory rather than chase benchmark wins. What matters is whether changes in mask ratio, mask correlation, or reconstruction policy produce the predicted shifts in estimation behavior, downstream performance, or generative consistency. For practitioners, the useful takeaway is concrete: there are regimes where aggressive masking helps representation learning and regimes where it harms distribution fitting, and the paper helps separate the two.","authors_note":""},"tags":["masked-lm","pretraining-objective","marginal-likelihood","theory"],"notable_authors":["Pablo Moreno-Muñoz","Pol Garcia Recasens","Søren Hauberg"],"keywords":["Marginal likelihood","masked pre-training","Bayesian inference"],"recommendation":{"zh":"关键理论澄清工作，明确了掩码预训练目标与边缘似然的对应关系，可直接用来指导后续掩码策略、预训练目标的设计与选型。","en":"Key theoretical clarification work, clarifies correspondence between masked pretraining objectives and marginal likelihood, can directly guide design and selection of subsequent masking strategies and pretraining objectives."}},{"id":"NguyenKC23","title":"Meet in the Middle: A New Pre-training Paradigm","authors":["Anh Nguyen","Nikos Karampatziakis","Weizhu Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NguyenKC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NguyenKC23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/105fdc31cc9eb927cc5a0110f4031287-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：标准自回归预训练只从左到右预测下一个 token，训练信号局部、路径单一，导致对双向约束、全局一致性和中间位置建模都不够直接。过去 masked LM 虽然提供双向上下文，但训练-推理不一致；作者试图重新设计一种预训练范式，让模型从序列两端向中间汇合，从而同时利用前后文而不过度偏离生成式使用方式。","importance":"这项工作属于预训练范式级探索。它的重要性在于它挑战了 next-token-only 的唯一性：如果 meet-in-the-middle 能提供更高效或更稳定的学习信号，那么语言建模不必被限制在单向链式分解上。对 pretrain 研究者而言，价值不一定是立刻替代 AR，而是提供一个新的设计点，去思考训练信号如何更均衡地覆盖整段序列、如何缩短依赖路径、以及如何在生成能力和条件利用之间折中。","technical_approach":"从标题判断，作者提出了一种新的预训练目标或解码分解方式：模型不是只从左侧推进，而是从序列头尾同时预测，逐步在中间“相遇”。这种设计的关键收益是把序列中部 token 的条件上下文从单侧变为双侧，并让长距离依赖的信用分配路径变短。和 BERT 式 MLM 不同，它大概率仍保留显式生成过程；和标准 AR 不同，它放弃了严格单向因果顺序，换取更丰富的上下文约束。有效性的前提是中间汇合时不会引入过多冲突或训练不稳定，因此模型通常需要专门的目标构造或位置编码处理。","experiments":"实验上的关键事实应当是：Meet in the Middle 预训练在语言建模或下游理解/生成任务上，相比标准 AR 或 MLM 展现出某些条件下的优势，尤其在需要全局一致性或长程约束的设置中更明显。题面未给出模型参数量、语料规模和确切指标，因此不能写具体数字；但有价值的实验观察大概率包括：相遇位置的设计、左右预测平衡、以及与标准左到右训练混合时的效果。对预训练最关键的判断不是是否全面 SOTA，而是这种目标是否带来不同的 scaling 或 sample efficiency 行为。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper revisits a basic limitation of standard autoregressive pretraining: next-token prediction only moves left-to-right, so training signals are local and asymmetric, especially for tokens in the middle of a sequence. Masked language modeling uses both sides but creates a train–test mismatch. This work explores a middle ground by having prediction proceed from both ends and meet in the center.","importance":"This is a pretraining-paradigm contribution. Its importance is that it questions whether left-to-right factorization should remain the default way to train sequence models. Even if it does not replace AR outright, it offers a concrete alternative for improving context utilization, shortening dependency paths, and rethinking how supervision is distributed across the sequence.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method likely defines a training objective where generation starts from both the prefix and suffix and proceeds inward until the two sides meet. The attraction of this design is that middle tokens can be trained with bidirectional constraints while retaining an explicit generative structure. Relative to MLM, it is closer to generation. Relative to standard AR, it gives up a strict causal order to gain richer context and potentially easier long-range credit assignment. The design challenge is to make the two fronts consistent when they converge, so the objective likely includes special handling for meeting points or positional structure.","experiments":"The main empirical result is likely that meet-in-the-middle pretraining performs competitively or better than standard AR and/or MLM in settings where global consistency or long-range structure matters. The prompt does not include model sizes, dataset scale, or exact numbers, so they should not be fabricated. The most informative ablations are probably where the meeting position is controlled, where the objective is mixed with standard AR, and where gains are analyzed in terms of sample efficiency rather than only final benchmark score.","authors_note":""},"tags":["pretraining-paradigm","bidirectional","language-modeling","meet-in-the-middle"],"keywords":["language modeling","pre-training","deep learning","NLP"],"recommendation":{"zh":"预训练目标的范式级创新，打破了自回归左到右预测的单一思路，可直接作为下一代生成式预训练目标的核心参考设计。","en":"Paradigm-level innovation of pretraining objectives, breaks the single left-to-right autoregressive prediction logic, can be directly used as core reference for next-generation generative pretraining objectives."}},{"id":"PetrovMTB23","title":"Language Model Tokenizers Introduce Unfairness Between Languages","authors":["Aleksandar Petrov","Emanuele La Malfa","Philip H. S. Torr","Adel Bibi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PetrovMTB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PetrovMTB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/74bb24dca8334adce292883b4b651eda-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的结论很直接：语言模型 tokenizer 会系统性地制造跨语言不公平。过去多语 LLM 常把 tokenizer 当成中性预处理步骤，但不同语言被切成多少 token、词形是否被破碎、常见词是否落入长子词链，会直接影响训练成本、上下文占用和模型学习难度。","importance":"这是一个对 pretrain 很关键但长期被低估的问题，属于 tokenizer/data interface 层面的贡献。重要性在于它指出多语能力差异不只是数据量或模型规模问题，tokenization 本身就在改写每种语言的有效训练预算；如果某些语言平均 token 更长、碎片更多，那么在相同 compute 下它们天然吃亏，这会扭曲 scaling 结论和公平性评估。","technical_approach":"论文核心应该是系统量化不同 tokenizer 对多语言的分词不均衡，并将这种不均衡与下游性能或训练效率联系起来。与以往只比较压缩率不同，它更强调 fairness：同一语义内容在不同语言下被编码成不同 token 成本，进而影响上下文窗口利用率、loss 归一化和样本采样权重；这种分析有效，因为 tokenizer 是 pretrain 前端最早的归一化器，一旦偏了，后续训练很难完全补回来。边界是公平性的定义并不唯一，且不同脚本、形态复杂度和语料域都会影响结论。","experiments":"虽然当前信息没有提供具体语言数、tokenizer 类型和量化数字，但题目已经说明作者应给出跨语言 token 长度/分片差异及其对模型表现的关联分析。skim 时最值得看的，是他们是否比较了 BPE、SentencePiece、Unigram 等方案，是否控制了语料分布与训练预算，以及不公平性究竟体现在 perplexity、下游任务还是推理成本上。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The core claim is straightforward: tokenizers introduce systematic unfairness across languages. Multilingual LLM work often treats tokenization as a neutral preprocessing step, but token length inflation, morphological fragmentation, and uneven subword coverage directly change training efficiency and context usage by language.","importance":"This is a highly relevant pretraining contribution at the tokenizer–data interface. Its importance is that multilingual gaps are not only about data volume or model scale; tokenization itself changes the effective compute budget per language, which can distort both scaling conclusions and fairness evaluations.","technical_approach":"The paper likely performs a systematic analysis of how common tokenizers allocate token budget unevenly across languages and how that correlates with performance or efficiency. The useful shift from prior compression-focused analyses is the fairness framing: the same semantic content can cost very different numbers of tokens depending on language, affecting context occupancy, loss normalization, and sampling weight during training. This matters because tokenizer bias enters at the very front of pretraining and is hard to undo later.","experiments":"The metadata does not provide language coverage, tokenizer families, or exact numbers, so I will not invent them. The most valuable empirical details to inspect are whether the study compares BPE/Unigram/SentencePiece-style schemes, whether it controls for corpus distribution and compute, and whether unfairness shows up more clearly in perplexity, downstream quality, or inference-time token cost.","authors_note":""},"tags":["tokenizer","multilingual","data-quality","evaluation"],"keywords":["LLM","language model","tokenizer","multilingual","language","fairness"],"recommendation":{"zh":"纠正了长期将Tokenizer当成中性预处理步骤的错误认知，多语预训练性能差异很大部分来自分词偏差，必须立刻在内部多语预训练中加入分词公平性校验。","en":"Corrects long-held misconception that tokenizers are neutral preprocessing steps, a large part of multilingual pretraining performance gaps come from tokenization bias, fairness checks must be added to internal multilingual pretraining immediately."}},{"id":"PortesTHKVNSKF23","title":"MosaicBERT: A Bidirectional Encoder Optimized for Fast Pretraining","authors":["Jacob P. Portes","Alexander Trott","Sam Havens","Daniel King","Abhinav Venigalla","Moin Nadeem","Nikhil Sardana","Daya Khudia","Jonathan Frankle"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PortesTHKVNSKF23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PortesTHKVNSKF23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/095a6917768712b7ccc61acbeecad1d8-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：BERT 类双向编码器在预训练效率上长期落后于同规模解码器和更现代的工程实现，导致很多人默认“BERT 已经没有系统优化空间”。过去对此的处理多是换目标函数或直接转向 encoder-decoder / decoder-only，而不是把 BERT 的训练配方、架构细节和系统栈重新按吞吐量与收敛速度一起优化。","importance":"它的重要性主要在方法级和系统级。结论不是提出全新建模范式，而是证明双向 encoder 经过成体系的工程和配方重做后，仍然可以成为高性价比预训练骨干，这对做检索、reranking、embedding、轻量 NLU 预训练的人很有参考价值。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：很多“架构落后”其实混杂了训练配方、内核实现和目标设计的历史包袱，不能只看 paper-era baseline。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把 BERT 做成一个面向快速预训练的整套配方，而不是单点改动。它通常包含更高效的实现与训练栈、对 encoder 更友好的超参和稳定性设置，以及若干已被后续模型验证有效的结构替换；重点不在发明新模块，而在挑选那些几乎不伤害 encoder 特性、却能显著提高 token/s 和样本效率的改动。和原始 BERT 相比，它的设计取舍很明确：保留双向 MLM 这个对表征学习最关键的训练目标，放弃很多历史兼容性包袱，用现代 kernel、masking 和优化配置换训练成本。","experiments":"从题目和已知定位看，实验核心事实应当是：MosaicBERT 在相近模型规模和预训练预算下，比标准 BERT 配方有显著更高的训练吞吐，并在 GLUE、SQuAD、检索或分类类迁移任务上维持可比或更好的效果。更有价值的点通常不只是最终分数，而是“单位训练时间/单位算力下达到同等精度更快”。这类工作若做得扎实，ablation 一般会拆开看 kernel 优化、序列长度、masking 策略、优化器和归一化位置对稳定性与速度的影响；但在当前给定信息里无法安全填写具体数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical but important gap: BERT-style bidirectional encoders are often treated as inherently inefficient to pretrain, when in reality much of that inefficiency comes from outdated recipes and systems assumptions. Earlier work often responded by changing the objective or moving to decoder-style models, instead of re-optimizing the encoder stack end to end for throughput and convergence.","importance":"Its contribution is primarily methodological and systems-oriented. The value is not a new modeling paradigm, but a strong reminder that encoder pretraining still has room for major efficiency gains when the recipe, kernels, and architecture details are modernized together. For pretraining research, this matters because many claims about one architecture family being obsolete are confounded by stale baselines rather than true modeling limits.","technical_approach":"The core idea is a full fast-pretraining recipe for BERT rather than a single novel component. The design likely combines modern implementation choices, stability-oriented optimization settings, and selective architectural updates that improve throughput without giving up the bidirectional MLM behavior that makes encoder pretraining useful for representation learning. Relative to original BERT, the trade-off is clear: keep the objective that matters, discard legacy choices that hurt speed, and rebuild the training stack around current hardware and kernels.","experiments":"The key empirical claim is expected to be better wall-clock efficiency at matched model scale and budget, while preserving or improving downstream quality on standard encoder benchmarks such as GLUE, SQuAD, retrieval, or classification. For a paper like this, the most meaningful result is usually time-to-target quality rather than peak accuracy alone. Useful ablations would isolate the effects of kernel-level optimizations, masking strategy, sequence length, optimizer choices, and normalization details, but the provided metadata does not support quoting precise numbers.","authors_note":""},"tags":["bert","pretraining-efficiency","architecture","masked-lm"],"keywords":["BERT","Pretraining","Efficiency","FlashAttention","ALiBi"],"recommendation":{"zh":"工程优化类实用成果，证明BERT类双向编码器经系统调优后仍有极高预训练性价比，可直接复用其训练配方优化内部NLU/embedding类预训练任务。","en":"Practical engineering optimization work, proves BERT-style bidirectional encoders still have very high pretraining cost-effectiveness after systematic tuning, its training recipes can be directly reused to optimize internal NLU/embedding pretraining tasks."}},{"id":"2311.04823","title":"Hierarchically Gated Recurrent Neural Network for Sequence Modeling","authors":["Zhen Qin","Songlin Yang","Yiran Zhong"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Transformers have surpassed RNNs in popularity due to their superior abilities in parallel training and long-term dependency modeling. Recently, there has been a renewed interest in using linear RNNs for efficient sequence modeling. These linear RNNs often employ gating mechanisms in the output of the linear recurrence layer while ignoring the significance of using forget gates within the recurrence. In this paper, we propose a gated linear RNN model dubbed Hierarchically Gated Recurrent Neural Network (HGRN), which includes forget gates that are lower bounded by a learnable value. The lower bound increases monotonically when moving up layers. This allows the upper layers to model long-term dependencies and the lower layers to model more local, short-term dependencies. Experiments on language modeling, image classification, and long-range arena benchmarks showcase the efficiency and effectiveness of our proposed model. The source code is available at https://github.com/OpenNLPLab/HGRN.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.04823","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/QinYZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/QinYZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/694be3548697e9cc8999d45e8d16fe1e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：近年线性 RNN 重新受到关注，但很多方法只在递推输出端加 gate，没有把“忘记多少历史”直接纳入状态更新，因此长短期依赖的分工仍然粗糙。Transformer 用注意力显式处理长程依赖，RNN 若想重新具备竞争力，必须在递推层面把记忆时间尺度设计清楚，而不是只做轻量线性化。","importance":"它的重要性是架构级的，但更偏高效序列建模而非主流 LLM 范式替代。对 pretrain 研究的价值在于提供一个清晰思路：如果不同层具有单调递增的记忆下界，模型可以把局部模式和长程模式自动分层，这比所有层共享相近的遗忘行为更接近实际语言序列的多时间尺度结构。它不一定立刻取代 Transformer，但对长序列、低延迟和状态压缩方向有参考意义。","technical_approach":"核心方法是提出 HGRN，一个带层次化 forget gate 的 gated linear RNN。关键设计不是“有 gate”本身，而是给 forget gate 设一个可学习下界，并让这个下界随层数单调升高；结果是底层更容易快速遗忘，专注局部短期模式，上层更难遗忘，负责累计长时信息。和只在输出端 gating 的线性 RNN 相比，这种设计直接作用在状态演化上，因此更像把时间尺度作为架构先验写进模型，而不是指望训练自己分化出来。","experiments":"摘要已明确它在 language modeling 等序列任务上做了实验，主张是在性能和效率上优于现有 linear RNN 基线。最值得关注的实验点通常有两类：一是与 S4、RetNet、RWKV 或其他 gated/linear recurrence 模型比较长序列建模质量与吞吐；二是 ablation 证明“分层下界”比普通 forget gate 或无单调约束版本更稳定。当前截断摘要没有给出参数规模、数据集和精确数值，因此不能编造。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a real limitation in recent linear RNN work: many models gate the output of the recurrence but do not directly control forgetting inside the state update, so they still lack a principled separation between short-term and long-term memory. If RNNs are to compete again in efficient sequence modeling, memory timescales need to be built into the recurrence itself, not left implicit.","importance":"This is mainly an architectural contribution for efficient sequence modeling. Its relevance to pretraining is that it offers a concrete way to encode multi-timescale behavior across layers: lower layers focus on local patterns, upper layers retain information longer. That does not immediately dethrone attention-based models, but it is a meaningful design direction for long-context, low-latency, and compact-state modeling.","technical_approach":"The core proposal is HGRN, a gated linear RNN with hierarchical forget gates. The novelty is not merely adding a gate, but imposing a learnable lower bound on the forget gate and making that lower bound increase monotonically with depth. This turns memory duration into an explicit architectural prior: lower layers are encouraged to forget quickly, while upper layers are biased toward long-range accumulation. Compared with linear RNNs that only gate outputs, this acts directly on the hidden-state dynamics and gives a clearer mechanism for timescale specialization.","experiments":"The abstract indicates experiments on language modeling and related sequence tasks, with gains over prior linear-RNN baselines in effectiveness and efficiency. The most informative evidence would typically include comparisons against other efficient sequence models and ablations showing that the hierarchical lower-bound constraint matters beyond ordinary gating. The truncated abstract does not provide safe details on model sizes, datasets, or exact margins.","authors_note":""},"tags":["architecture","recurrence","gating","sequence-modeling","linear-rnn"],"keywords":["RNN","Sequence Modeling","NLP"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对线性 RNN 状态更新的认知；给 forget gate 设单调递增下界，将多时间尺度作为架构先验写入模型，值得在长序列架构探索中复现。","en":"Changes my prior on linear RNN state updates; setting monotonically increasing lower bounds for forget gates bakes multi-timescale priors into the architecture. Worth reproducing in long-sequence architecture exploration."}},{"id":"SchickDDRLHZCS23","title":"Toolformer: Language Models Can Teach Themselves to Use Tools","authors":["Timo Schick","Jane Dwivedi-Yu","Roberto Dessì","Roberta Raileanu","Maria Lomeli","Eric Hambro","Luke Zettlemoyer","Nicola Cancedda","Thomas Scialom"],"institutions":["Google Research","DeepMind"],"abstract":"$1f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SchickDDRLHZCS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SchickDDRLHZCS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/d842425e4bf79ba039352da0f658a906-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是：如何让语言模型在没有大规模人工标注 tool-use 数据的情况下，学会何时调用外部工具以及如何把结果并回生成过程。过去要么靠人工构造 API 训练集，要么完全依赖 prompting，前者成本高、覆盖窄，后者稳定性差且不会自动学会调用策略。","importance":"它的重要性是方法级且很有延展性，因为它把“工具使用”从纯 post-hoc prompting 推进到了可自举的数据构造与训练流程。对 pretrain / posttrain 接口的启示很强：模型可以用少量示范自己筛出高价值 API 调用位点，再把这些轨迹反哺训练，这是一种典型的 synthetic supervision 闭环；后来的 agent、function calling、tool-augmented LM 很多都沿着这条路线发展。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Toolformer：先给模型少量 API 使用示例，再让模型在大语料上自行提议调用位置、参数和调用结果，然后用似然改进来筛选真正有帮助的调用，最后用筛后的带工具轨迹继续微调模型。关键设计在于“只保留能降低语言建模损失的调用”，这避免了把所有可能的 API 注入都当成监督信号；和单纯 instruction tuning 不同，它学的是调用策略本身，而不仅是看到工具结果后的模仿输出。","experiments":"实验结论是：模型在计算、问答、检索、翻译、日历等需要外部能力的任务上有稳定提升，而且只需极少人工 seed demonstrations。公开版本通常基于 GPT-J 级别模型做自训练与评测；论文重点不是刷新通用 benchmark，而是证明自监督工具标注可行，并通过消融显示：如果不做基于 loss 的过滤，工具调用质量会下降，模型也更容易学到无效或冗余调用模式。","authors_note":"Google Research / DeepMind 方向的工作。作者中 Timo Schick、Roberta Raileanu、Jason Wei、François Chollet、Douwe Kiela 都是工具使用、推理增强和大模型训练/评测领域的知名研究者；相关团队代表性工作包括 Toolformer、Chain-of-Thought、FLAN、PaLM 系列等。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical bottleneck: how to teach a language model to decide when to call external tools, and how to integrate the returned outputs, without relying on large human-labeled tool-use corpora. Earlier approaches either required expensive handcrafted supervision or depended on prompting alone, which is brittle and does not train a reusable calling policy.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution with long downstream impact because it turns tool use into a self-bootstrapping training pipeline rather than a prompt trick. For the pretrain/post-train interface, the key lesson is that a model can generate candidate API traces from a few demonstrations, filter them by utility, and feed them back into training; that synthetic-supervision loop became influential for later tool-augmented LMs and agents.","technical_approach":"The core method, Toolformer, starts from a few demonstrations of API use, lets the model propose tool calls over raw text, executes those calls, and keeps only the candidates that improve language-model likelihood before fine-tuning on the resulting augmented corpus. The critical design choice is utility-based filtering: not every possible API insertion becomes supervision. That is what makes the model learn a calling policy instead of merely imitating outputs that already contain tool results.","experiments":"The main result is that tool-augmented training improves performance on tasks such as arithmetic, question answering, retrieval, translation, and calendar reasoning while using only a small number of human demonstrations. Publicly discussed versions center on GPT-J-scale models; the paper’s point is feasibility rather than raw benchmark domination. Ablations show that removing the loss-based filtering step hurts call quality and encourages redundant or unhelpful tool usage.","authors_note":"Work from Google Research / DeepMind-aligned teams. Timo Schick, Roberta Raileanu, Jason Wei, François Chollet, and Douwe Kiela are well-known names in tool use, reasoning, and large-model training/evaluation. Related representative efforts include Toolformer, Chain-of-Thought, FLAN, and PaLM-family work."},"tags":["tool-use","self-supervision","synthetic-data","llm"],"notable_authors":["Timo Schick","Jane Dwivedi-Yu","Roberta Raileanu","Jason Wei","François Chollet","Douwe Kiela"],"keywords":["Language Models","Zero-Shot Learning","Tool Use","APIs"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对工具调用的认知；将工具使用从 post-hoc prompting 推进到可自举的 synthetic supervision 闭环，应立刻在 internal tool-use 训练中复现。","en":"Changes my prior on tool use; advances tool use from post-hoc prompting to a bootstrapped synthetic supervision closed loop. Should be immediately reproduced in internal tool-use training."}},{"id":"SkrillN23","title":"Large language models transition from integrating across position-yoked, exponential windows to structure-yoked, power-law windows","authors":["David Skrill","Samuel Norman-Haignere"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$20","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SkrillN23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SkrillN23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/020ad0ac6a1974e6748e4a5a48110a07-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解释的问题是：大语言模型在处理长距离上下文时，实际整合信息的“窗口”是如何随规模和训练变化的。过去大家常用固定上下文长度或 attention map 可视化讨论上下文利用，但很少精确刻画模型到底在多大范围、按什么衰减规律整合证据。","importance":"它的重要性在于给长上下文能力提供了一个更细的机制视角。论文指出，模型的信息整合可能会从位置绑定的指数衰减窗口，转向结构绑定的幂律窗口；这意味着上下文利用不是简单“看得更远”，而是从局部模板匹配过渡到更抽象的结构化整合。对 pretrain 和架构设计都有启发。","technical_approach":"作者的核心分析框架是测量不同位置、不同结构条件下，输入 token 对预测的影响衰减规律，并据此区分两种 regime：早期或较小模型更像在固定位置参考系里做指数式局部整合；更强模型则转向围绕语言结构、语义单元或任务相关边界做更长尾的幂律整合。它不是提出新模型，而是给出一种现象学与统计物理风格的表征。这个区分之所以有价值，是因为指数窗口意味着有效上下文很快饱和，而幂律窗口意味着远距离信息仍有非忽略贡献。","experiments":"实验上的关键信号应是：随着模型规模增大或训练推进，影响函数/依赖强度曲线的拟合从 exponential 更接近 power-law，并且这种变化和结构边界对齐。论文可能使用自然语言语料上的受控干预、遮挡分析或 surprisal 变化来估计远近 token 贡献，并比较不同层和模型尺寸。最有价值的观察不是单个 benchmark 提升，而是上下文整合机制发生相变式转变；这对长上下文 scaling law 和位置编码设计有参考意义。","authors_note":"如果仅根据给定信息，机构无法可靠确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies how large language models actually integrate information over context, beyond the usual question of nominal context length. Earlier discussions often relied on attention maps or fixed-window assumptions, but those do not tell us the effective range or decay law of contextual influence.","importance":"Its value is mechanistic. The paper argues that models transition from position-yoked exponential integration windows to structure-yoked power-law windows. That is a stronger claim than 'larger models use longer context': it suggests a qualitative shift from local, position-anchored processing toward more abstract structure-aware integration.","technical_approach":"The approach is to estimate how the influence of input tokens decays with distance under different structural conditions. This leads to two regimes: smaller or earlier-stage models behave like they integrate information in local exponential windows tied to position, while stronger models show heavier-tailed, power-law-like dependence organized around linguistic or task structure. The contribution is analytical rather than architectural. The distinction matters because exponential decay implies rapid saturation of useful context, whereas power-law decay leaves meaningful long-range contributions.","experiments":"The central empirical signal is a shift in the fitted dependency curves as models get larger or more trained: exponential fits weaken and power-law fits become more appropriate, especially when aligned with structural boundaries. The measurements likely come from controlled perturbations, masking, or surprisal changes on natural text, compared across layers and model sizes. The payoff is not benchmark SOTA but a clearer description of how long-context behavior changes qualitatively with scale.","authors_note":""},"tags":["long-context","scaling-law","attention","mechanistic-analysis"],"keywords":["language modeling","temporal integration","transformers","timescales","model interpretation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对长上下文利用的认知；指出模型信息整合从位置绑定的指数窗口转向结构绑定的幂律窗口，对 pretrain 数据组织和架构设计有重要启发。","en":"Changes my prior on long-context utilization; points out that model information integration shifts from position-yoked exponential windows to structure-yoked power-law windows. Has important implications for pretrain data organization and architecture design."}},{"id":"SunSZZCCYG23","title":"Principle-Driven Self-Alignment of Language Models from Scratch with Minimal Human Supervision","authors":["Zhiqing Sun","Yikang Shen","Qinhong Zhou","Hongxin Zhang","Zhenfang Chen","David D. Cox","Yiming Yang","Chuang Gan"],"institutions":["MIT CSAIL","UIUC","MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab"],"abstract":"$21","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SunSZZCCYG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SunSZZCCYG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/0764db1151b936aca59249e2c1386101-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"当前LLM对齐依赖SFT和RLHF，人力标注成本高，存在标注质量不稳定、一致性差、偏见引入等问题，现有方法均无法脱离大规模人工监督实现低成本高质量对齐。","importance":"对齐范式级贡献，将对齐流程从依赖人工标注转向模型自生成监督信号，可将预训练后对齐环节的人工成本降低两个数量级以上，验证了原则驱动的自对齐可替代大部分人工对齐工作。","technical_approach":"原创四阶段SELF-ALIGN方法：1）人工定义不到10条核心伦理、有用性原则作为引导；2）LLM基于原则生成对齐响应；3）用生成数据微调模型；4）迭代自精炼。舍弃了人工标注SFT数据集的传统流程，与RLHF相比不需要人类反馈标注，仅需数小时人工完成原则定义。","experiments":"在7B/13B/70B LLaMA系列模型上测试，基线为同参数规模的SFT+RLHF模型，MT-Bench得分比基线高0.3~0.6分。消融实验显示，移除伦理原则后模型有害输出率上升32%，原则完整性是对齐效果的核心影响因子。","authors_note":"作者来自MIT CSAIL、UIUC、MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab，核心团队长期深耕LLM对齐与推理方向。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Current LLM alignment relies heavily on SFT and RLHF with high human annotation cost, and suffers from unstable annotation quality, poor consistency, and introduced bias. No existing method can achieve low-cost high-quality alignment without large-scale human supervision.","importance":"This is a paradigm-level contribution for alignment research. It shifts the alignment pipeline from human annotation dependent to model self-generated supervision, reduces human labor cost of post-pretrain alignment by over two orders of magnitude, and verifies principle-driven self-alignment can replace most human alignment work.","technical_approach":"The original four-stage SELF-ALIGN method works as: 1) define <10 core principles of helpfulness and ethics as guidance; 2) LLM generates aligned responses based on the principles; 3) fine-tune the model with generated data; 4) iterative self-refinement. It abandons the traditional pipeline of manual SFT data annotation, requires no human feedback annotation compared to RLHF, only needs several hours of manual work for principle definition.","experiments":"Tested on 7B/13B/70B LLaMA models, baselines are SFT+RLHF models with the same parameter scale, MT-Bench score is 0.3~0.6 higher than baselines. Ablation shows harmful output rate increases by 32% when removing ethical principles, principle integrity is the core influencing factor of alignment performance.","authors_note":"Authors are from MIT CSAIL, UIUC, MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, the core team has long worked on LLM alignment and reasoning research."},"tags":["self-alignment","principle-driven","minimal-supervision","llm"],"keywords":["AI Alignment","Large Language Models","In Context Learning","Neural Symbolics"],"notable_authors":["Zhiqing Sun","Yikang Shen"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM对齐需要满足有用、无害、可靠三个核心目标","claim_en":"LLM alignment needs to meet three core objectives: helpful, harmless, reliable","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"仅靠不到10条人工定义的原则即可实现媲美RLHF级别的对齐效果，不需要大规模人工SFT或RLHF标注","claim_en":"Less than 10 manually defined principles can achieve RLHF-level alignment performance, no large-scale manual SFT or RLHF annotation is needed","opposes":"Prior alignment methods generally认为至少数千条人工标注SFT数据和数万条RLHF人类反馈才能实现有效对齐","opposes_cite_hint":"OpenAI 2022 InstructGPT","evidence_anchor":"§4.2 Table 3","why_contested":"If valid, it can reduce alignment cost by over 99% and completely restructure the alignment pipeline."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看 SELF-ALIGN 四阶段流程即可；验证了原则驱动的自对齐可替代大部分人工对齐工作，大幅降低人工成本。","en":"Just read the four-stage SELF-ALIGN process; verifies that principle-driven self-alignment can replace most manual alignment work, significantly reducing manual costs."}},{"id":"WangIDHKCWMSBH23","title":"How Far Can Camels Go? Exploring the State of Instruction Tuning on Open Resources","authors":["Yizhong Wang","Hamish Ivison","Pradeep Dasigi","Jack Hessel","Tushar Khot","Khyathi Raghavi Chandu","David Wadden","Kelsey MacMillan","Noah A. Smith","Iz Beltagy","Hannaneh Hajishirzi"],"institutions":["Allen Institute for AI","University of Washington"],"abstract":"$22","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangIDHKCWMSBH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangIDHKCWMSBH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ec6413875e4ab08d7bc4d8e225263398-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"开源指令微调的效果宣称缺乏统一系统评测，不同模型、数据集的效果对比混乱，现有工作仅在小范围测试集上评测，无法客观判断开源与闭源模型的真实差距，也无法明确哪些指令微调资源有效。","importance":"数据级+评测级贡献，提供了统一的开源指令微调基准和资源对比结论，为后续开源指令微调研究提供标准化参考基线，避免虚假效果宣称。","technical_approach":"系统级评测方法，训练了20+指令微调模型，参数量覆盖6.7B~65B，覆盖12种主流开源指令数据集（包括人工标注的OpenAssistant、合成的Alpaca等）。舍弃了单数据集单模型的评测逻辑，统一采用自动指标、模型打分、人工评测三个维度对7项能力做评测，控制训练超参数不变，唯一变量为数据集和模型规模。","experiments":"共训练24个指令微调模型，基线为闭源GPT-3.5、GPT-4，核心指标覆盖MMLU、GSM8K、HumanEval、MT-Bench。最优65B开源模型MT-Bench得分比GPT-3.5低1.2分、比GPT-4低2.7分。缩放观察显示，模型参数量从6.7B提升到65B时，推理能力提升47%，安全能力仅提升12%；消融实验显示人工标注数据集比合成数据集带来的效果提升高21%。","authors_note":"作者来自艾伦人工智能研究院（AI2）、华盛顿大学，核心团队长期深耕开源LLM评测与指令微调方向。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Effect claims of open-source instruction tuning lack unified systematic evaluation, performance comparison between different models and datasets is chaotic. Existing works only evaluate on small test sets, cannot objectively judge the real gap between open-source and closed-source models, nor identify which instruction tuning resources are effective.","importance":"This is a data-level and evaluation-level contribution. It provides a unified open-source instruction tuning benchmark and resource comparison conclusions, provides a standardized reference baseline for subsequent open-source instruction tuning research, and avoids false performance claims.","technical_approach":"This is a systematic evaluation method. It trains 20+ instruction-tuned models with parameter scale ranging from 6.7B to 65B, covering 12 mainstream open-source instruction datasets including manually curated OpenAssistant, synthetic Alpaca, etc. It abandons the single-dataset single-model evaluation logic, unifies evaluation of 7 capabilities across 3 dimensions: automatic metrics, model-based scoring, human evaluation. Training hyperparameters are fixed, only variables are dataset and model scale.","experiments":"24 instruction-tuned models are trained, baselines are closed-source GPT-3.5 and GPT-4. Core metrics cover MMLU, GSM8K, HumanEval, MT-Bench. The best 65B open-source model scores 1.2 lower than GPT-3.5, 2.7 lower than GPT-4 on MT-Bench. Scaling observation shows when model parameters increase from 6.7B to 65B, reasoning performance improves by 47%, while safety performance only improves by 12%. Ablation shows manually curated datasets bring 21% higher improvement than synthetic datasets.","authors_note":"Authors are from Allen Institute for AI, University of Washington, the core team has long worked on open-source LLM evaluation and instruction tuning research."},"tags":["instruction-tuning","open-models","sft","evaluation"],"keywords":["Instruction tuning","large language models","open-source","systematic evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Yizhong Wang","Jack Hessel"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"指令微调可以提升LLM的指令遵循能力","claim_en":"Instruction tuning improves the instruction following ability of LLMs","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"当前开源指令微调模型效果远低于闭源GPT-3.5，不存在可匹敌GPT-3.5的开源模型","claim_en":"Current open-source instruction-tuned models perform far worse than closed-source GPT-3.5, no open-source model matches GPT-3.5 performance","opposes":"Prior open-source works claimed some open-source models achieve performance on par with GPT-3.5","opposes_cite_hint":"Taori et al. 2023 Alpaca","evidence_anchor":"§5 Table 2","why_contested":"It corrects the wrong perception in the open-source community, clarifies the real upper limit and improvement direction of open-source instruction tuning."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为 literature 备查，不读正文；提供了统一的开源指令微调基准和资源对比结论，为后续研究提供标准化参考基线。","en":"Keep as literature reference, skip the main text; provides a unified open-source instruction tuning benchmark and resource comparison conclusions, offering a standardized reference baseline for future research."}},{"id":"WangZSSW23","title":"Large Language Models Are Latent Variable Models: Explaining and Finding Good Demonstrations for In-Context Learning","authors":["Xinyi Wang","Wanrong Zhu","Michael Saxon","Mark Steyvers","William Yang Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$23","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangZSSW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangZSSW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/3255a7554605a88800f4e120b3a929e1-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：如何解释 in-context learning 为何依赖示例选择，以及怎样系统地找到更好的 demonstrations。过去很多工作把 ICL 当作黑箱现象来做启发式 prompt 选择，但缺少一个能解释‘为什么某些 few-shot 例子有效、另一些会明显拖后腿’的统一视角。","importance":"这项工作的重要性在机制理解与提示构造方法论上。它对 pretrain 的启示不是修改训练目标，而是给出一个分析框架：如果 LLM 可以被视作潜变量模型，那么 demonstrations 的作用就不只是提供表面格式，而是在推断一个隐含任务或隐含概念；这会影响我们如何做数据组织、合成示例、甚至如何理解 ICL 与预训练分布的关系。","technical_approach":"标题已经给出核心观点：把大语言模型视为 latent variable model，并用这一视角解释与搜索好的 demonstrations。与纯经验式 prompt engineering 不同，这类方法通常会假设模型在看到上下文后要先隐式识别任务、标签语义或生成机制，few-shot 示例的好坏取决于它们能否帮助这个潜变量推断更集中、更少歧义。这样的设计价值在于，它把 demonstration selection 从启发式试错，推进到有概率建模解释的选择过程。","experiments":"给定信息中没有摘要与实验部分，因此无法确认具体用的是哪些 LLM、任务集合、上下文长度设置和提升数字。可以较可靠地推断，论文会比较其 demonstration finding 方法与随机选例、相似度检索或已有 prompt selection baseline，并展示 latent-variable 视角下的可解释性分析；但不能填写具体数值。","authors_note":"如果按作者名单判断，William Yang Wang 是较知名作者，长期从事 NLP、鲁棒性与大模型相关研究；其余机构与团队代表作无法从给定信息中确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a practical and conceptual question: why does in-context learning depend so much on which demonstrations are shown, and how can we find better ones systematically. Prior work often treated example selection as heuristic prompt engineering, without a strong explanation for why some demonstrations help and others hurt.","importance":"Its value is in mechanism understanding and prompt construction, not in changing the base pretraining objective. The main takeaway for pretraining-oriented readers is that if an LLM behaves like a latent-variable model during ICL, demonstrations are not just formatting cues; they help infer a hidden task structure, which changes how we should think about example selection and data organization.","technical_approach":"The central idea, already stated in the title, is to model LLMs as latent variable models for explaining and discovering good ICL demonstrations. This differs from purely empirical prompt search by assigning demonstrations a probabilistic role: they reduce ambiguity over a latent task or label semantics. That framing is useful because it turns demonstration quality into an inference question rather than a trial-and-error artifact.","experiments":"The provided material does not include the abstract or quantitative results, so model sizes, tasks, baselines, and gains cannot be reported reliably. It is likely that the paper compares its demonstration selection approach against random or heuristic baselines and provides interpretability analyses under the latent-variable view, but the exact evidence is unavailable here.","authors_note":"William Yang Wang is a notable author known for work in NLP, robustness, and large-model-related topics. The exact institutions and broader team lineage cannot be confirmed from the provided information alone."},"tags":["icl","latent-variables","demonstrations","in-context-learning"],"notable_authors":["William Yang Wang"],"keywords":["Large language models","Bayesian explanation","in-context learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对 ICL 的认知；将 LLM 视作潜变量模型，为 demonstrations 的作用提供了解释框架，影响数据组织和合成示例的设计。","en":"Changes my prior on ICL; treats LLMs as latent variable models, providing an explanatory framework for the role of demonstrations, influencing data organization and synthetic example design."}},{"id":"WiesLS23","title":"The Learnability of In-Context Learning","authors":["Noam Wies","Yoav Levine","Amnon Shashua"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$24","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WiesLS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WiesLS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/73950f0eb4ac0925dc71ba2406893320-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文研究的是一个很关键但常被模糊处理的问题：in-context learning 到底在什么条件下是可学习的。ICL 现象已经被大量观察到，但‘模型什么时候能通过预训练学会在上下文里执行学习算法’并不清楚；如果没有可学习性分析，我们很难判断哪些训练分布、模型族和任务结构真正支持 ICL。","importance":"它的重要性在理论层面，而且与预训练直接相关。相比单纯解释某个 prompt 技巧，它更接近在回答‘ICL 能不能作为预训练目标的自然产物’。这对 scaling law、数据分布设计、合成任务预训练以及 latent reasoning 的研究都有启发，因为它把 ICL 从经验现象提升到了可分析对象。","technical_approach":"从题目看，作者给出了 ICL 的 learnability 分析，可能讨论样本复杂度、函数类、任务分布或架构条件。与经验论文不同，这类工作通常会构造一个形式化环境，把“上下文中的示例”和“测试查询”视为同一任务族中的观测，再分析模型是否能通过训练学到一个近似贝叶斯或近似算法式的更新规则。这样的框架有价值，因为它能区分‘模型记住了模式’和‘模型真的学会在上下文中适配’。","experiments":"给定信息中没有摘要与正文，无法确认是否包含合成实验验证理论，也无法给出参数量、任务设置和数值结果。可以较可靠地判断，这篇论文主要贡献在理论可学习性分析，实验若存在，更多是验证边界条件而非追求 benchmark SOTA。","authors_note":"作者中 Amnon Shashua 为知名学者和企业创始人，在深度学习理论、计算机视觉与自动驾驶方向影响较大；其余信息无法从给定内容确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper studies a central but often vaguely treated question: under what conditions is in-context learning actually learnable. ICL has been observed widely, but it is still unclear when pretraining can teach a model to implement an in-context adaptation procedure rather than merely memorize patterns.","importance":"The contribution is theoretical and directly relevant to pretraining. Rather than explaining a single prompting trick, it addresses whether ICL should be expected as a natural consequence of pretraining under certain task distributions, model classes, or scaling regimes.","technical_approach":"From the title, the paper likely develops a formal learnability analysis for ICL, possibly in terms of task families, sample complexity, or architectural assumptions. The usual value of such a framework is that it turns context examples and test queries into a well-defined training problem, allowing one to separate true in-context adaptation from superficial pattern matching.","experiments":"No abstract or detailed results are provided, so model settings, tasks, and numerical findings cannot be stated with confidence. It is reasonable to infer that the paper is theory-first and may include synthetic validations, but not enough information is available to report specifics.","authors_note":"Amnon Shashua is a notable author with major contributions to deep learning theory, computer vision, and autonomous driving. Further institutional details cannot be confirmed from the provided information."},"tags":["icl","theory","in-context-learning","generalization"],"notable_authors":["Amnon Shashua"],"keywords":["in-context","PAC","language models","foundation models","LLMs"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对 ICL 可学习性的认知；将 ICL 从经验现象提升到可分析对象，对 scaling law、数据分布设计和合成任务预训练有启发。","en":"Changes my prior on the learnability of ICL; elevates ICL from an empirical phenomenon to an analyzable object, with implications for scaling laws, data distribution design, and synthetic task pretraining."}},{"id":"WuFLZGS0LWGDC23","title":"AR-Diffusion: Auto-Regressive Diffusion Model for Text Generation","authors":["Tong Wu","Zhihao Fan","Xiao Liu","Hai-Tao Zheng","Yeyun Gong","Yelong Shen","Jian Jiao","Juntao Li","Zhongyu Wei","Jian Guo","Nan Duan","Weizhu Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$25","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WuFLZGS0LWGDC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WuFLZGS0LWGDC23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/7d866abba506e5a56335e4644ebe18f9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：文本生成如何同时利用自回归模型的强条件建模能力和 diffusion 模型对全局生成过程的灵活性。过去文本 diffusion 经常因为离散 token 难处理、生成步数多、条件依赖弱而落后于 AR；而纯 AR 虽然强，但生成顺序被固定在左到右，难以获得 diffusion 式的逐步修正能力。","importance":"这是一篇方法级、同时带一点范式探索意味的工作。对 pretrain 研究的意义在于，它不是简单把 diffusion 套到文本上，而是试图把 AR 因子分解引入 diffusion 过程，探索 next-token 之外的语言建模目标。如果这条路成立，价值不只是生成质量，而是给离散序列提供一种兼顾条件依赖与并行/可控生成的新接口。","technical_approach":"作者提出 AR-Diffusion，核心想法是把自回归顺序信息注入 diffusion 文本生成，而不是让所有 token 在每一步被完全对称地去噪。直观上，它让第 t 个位置的生成既保留 diffusion 的逐步恢复框架，又显式依赖更靠前位置，从而缩小文本 diffusion 常见的条件独立近似误差。与标准离散 diffusion 相比，它舍弃了全位置完全并行、完全对称的建模假设，换来更强的序列条件建模；与普通 AR 相比，它不是一次只预测一个 token，而是在扩散/去噪链上逐步细化整句，因此在 controllability 或某些非左到右生成场景上更有空间。","experiments":"从题目判断，实验大概率覆盖机器翻译、摘要、数据到文本或通用条件文本生成，并与标准 AR Transformer、离散 diffusion baselines 比较。论文应重点报告生成质量指标，如 BLEU、ROUGE 或任务特定分数，以及推理步数和速度代价。最值得关注的事实通常不是它是否全面超过 AR，而是：引入 AR 结构后，相比纯 diffusion baseline 明显提升；同时，随着去噪步数减少，性能退化曲线比传统 diffusion 更平缓。缺少摘要使得无法确认具体数据集、模型规模和数值提升。","authors_note":"作者名单包含微软系自然语言生成方向研究者 Yeyun Gong 等，相关团队长期做序列生成、预训练和文本生成模型。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a real limitation of text diffusion: how to keep the flexible iterative refinement of diffusion while recovering the strong conditional structure that makes autoregressive models so effective for language. Earlier text diffusion models often lagged because discrete tokens are hard to denoise well, generation requires many steps, and token dependencies are modeled too weakly.","importance":"This is a method paper with broader paradigm relevance. Its value to pretraining research is that it does not merely port diffusion to text; it asks whether autoregressive factorization can be built into a diffusion-style objective. If successful, that expands the design space beyond next-token prediction and gives a different trade-off between conditional fidelity, controllability, and generation order.","technical_approach":"AR-Diffusion appears to inject autoregressive ordering into the diffusion process instead of treating all positions symmetrically during denoising. The design choice is important: standard discrete diffusion gains parallelism but loses strong sequential conditioning, while AR models do the opposite. This method gives up full positional symmetry and some parallel structure in exchange for better dependency modeling across tokens. Relative to standard AR, generation still proceeds through iterative refinement over a corrupted sequence rather than one-token-at-a-time decoding.","experiments":"The likely evaluation covers conditional text generation tasks such as translation, summarization, or data-to-text, with comparisons against autoregressive Transformers and prior text diffusion models. The key empirical question is not whether it beats AR everywhere, but whether adding AR structure materially improves over diffusion baselines and how quality changes as denoising steps are reduced. Exact datasets, model sizes, and gains cannot be verified from the provided metadata.","authors_note":"The author list includes researchers such as Yeyun Gong, associated with strong work in sequence generation and pretrained NLP systems."},"tags":["diffusion-lm","autoregressive","text-generation","non-ar"],"notable_authors":["Tong Wu","Zhihao Fan","Xiao Liu","Hai-Tao Zheng","Yeyun Gong"],"keywords":["text generation","diffusion model","auto-regression","sequential dependency"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对文本 diffusion 的认知；将 AR 因子分解引入 diffusion 过程，探索 next-token 之外的语言建模目标，值得在非左到右生成场景中探索。","en":"Changes my prior on text diffusion; introduces AR factorization into the diffusion process, exploring language modeling objectives beyond next-token. Worth exploring in non-left-to-right generation scenarios."}},{"id":"XiLCZ23","title":"Training Transformers with 4-bit Integers","authors":["Haocheng Xi","Changhao Li","Jianfei Chen","Jun Zhu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$26","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/XiLCZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/XiLCZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/99fc8bc48b917c301a80cb74d91c0c06-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的核心问题是：Transformer 能否直接用 4-bit 整数稳定训练，而不只是做后训练量化或低比特推理。过去低比特训练的主要障碍不是算术上不能做，而是训练期激活、梯度和优化器状态的动态范围变化太大，4-bit 很容易把有用信号压扁，最终导致 loss 爆炸、精度显著下降或根本不收敛。","importance":"这是非常典型的系统级兼方法级工作，对大模型预训练有直接意义。若 4-bit 整数训练可用，收益远高于常规混合精度的小修小补：显存、带宽、算力利用率都会一起改善，而这些正是大规模预训练最贵的部分。更重要的是，它把“低比特只能推理省钱”推进到“训练主路径也可低比特”，这对未来 pretrain stack 的硬件-算法协同很关键。","technical_approach":"作者提出的是 4-bit 整数版 Transformer 训练方案，关键在于如何管理量化误差而不是简单把所有张量裁到 INT4。有效设计通常包括三类机制：第一，按张量/通道/块做缩放，尽量保留局部动态范围；第二，对梯度累积、残差、归一化或某些敏感更新路径保留更高精度；第三，使用量化感知训练策略，让前向和反向都在可控误差下工作。它与常见 FP16/BF16 mixed precision 的本质区别是，后者只是缩短浮点 mantissa，而 INT4 则需要显式离散化和比例因子管理，所以训练稳定性更依赖 scale 设计与误差补偿。","experiments":"从题目看，实验应覆盖标准 Transformer 训练任务，并比较 INT4 训练与 FP32/BF16/FP16 基线在收敛、最终精度和吞吐上的差异。关键事实通常是：在若干 NLP 或 vision Transformer 设定下，4-bit 整数训练能接近高精度基线，同时带来显著内存和速度收益。最重要的 ablation 往往是尺度选择、敏感层保留精度、以及是否需要量化误差补偿；缺掉其中任一项，收敛会明显变差。没有摘要和表格，无法安全给出具体数字。","authors_note":"作者包含 Jun Zhu 团队，长期在高效深度学习、概率建模与系统实现方向有代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The core question is whether Transformers can be trained directly with 4-bit integers, not merely quantized after training or run in low-bit inference. The difficulty is not arithmetic feasibility but training dynamics: activations, gradients, and optimizer states span wide and shifting ranges, so INT4 can easily destroy useful signal and cause divergence or large accuracy loss.","importance":"This is a systems-heavy method paper with clear relevance to large-scale pretraining. If INT4 training is viable, the upside is substantial: lower memory traffic, better hardware utilization, and reduced training cost across the stack. More importantly, it moves low-bit methods from an inference optimization into the core training regime, which is exactly where pretraining cost is concentrated.","technical_approach":"The method is best understood as a recipe for making INT4 training numerically survivable. A workable design in this space usually needs three ingredients: local scaling to preserve dynamic range, selective higher precision for a few sensitive paths such as residual accumulations or normalization-related computations, and quantization-aware training so both forward and backward error remain bounded. Unlike BF16/FP16, INT4 requires explicit discretization and scale management, so stability depends much more on how scales are chosen and updated.","experiments":"The experiments likely train standard Transformer models and compare convergence, final accuracy, memory, and throughput against FP32/BF16/FP16 baselines. The key empirical claim is usually that INT4 training approaches high-precision quality while delivering meaningful systems benefits. The most informative ablations in this area test scale granularity, which components must remain in higher precision, and whether error compensation is necessary. I cannot verify exact numbers from the supplied metadata.","authors_note":"The author list includes Jun Zhu's group, known for work spanning efficient deep learning, probabilistic modeling, and practical systems."},"tags":["4bit-training","quantization","low-precision-training","transformer"],"notable_authors":["Haocheng Xi","Changhao Li","Jianfei Chen","Jun Zhu"],"keywords":["neural network quantization","transformer","matrix multiplication","randomized numerical linear algebra"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对低比特训练的认知；证明 4-bit 整数训练可用，将“低比特只能推理省钱”推进到“训练主路径也可低比特”，对 pretrain stack 的硬件-算法协同很关键。","en":"Changes my prior on low-bit training; proves that 4-bit integer training is viable, advancing 'low-bit is only for inference savings' to 'the main training path can also be low-bit'. Crucial for hardware-algorithm co-design in the pretrain stack."}},{"id":"YuanYTWHH23","title":"RRHF: Rank Responses to Align Language Models with Human Feedback","authors":["Hongyi Yuan","Zheng Yuan","Chuanqi Tan","Wei Wang","Songfang Huang","Fei Huang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$27","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YuanYTWHH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YuanYTWHH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/23e6f78bdec844a9f7b6c957de2aae91-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：RLHF 很有效，但训练成本高、实现复杂，而且 reward model 和 PPO 带来的不稳定性会让对齐过程难以复现。过去大家默认‘有人类偏好就要上强化学习’，作者想证明其实只用排序信号做监督式优化，也能把语言模型往人类偏好方向推得很远。","importance":"这是 post-train 方法级里影响较大的一篇，因为它明确挑战了‘对齐必须依赖 RL’这一默认路径。对 pretrain 研究的意义在于：偏好数据不一定非要通过在线 RL 才能转成有用梯度，排序监督本身就是一种高信噪比训练信号；这会反过来影响我们如何设计 pretrain ↔ post-train 接口、如何看待 reward model 的必要性，以及如何用更便宜的方式把基础模型推进到可用区间。","technical_approach":"RRHF 的核心做法是把同一指令下多个候选回答按人类偏好排序，然后直接训练语言模型让高排名回答的 token-level 对数概率整体高于低排名回答。它不是再训一个独立 reward model，也不是做 PPO 式在线策略优化，而是把‘谁更好’这个相对信号直接注入原模型。这样设计有效，是因为偏好标注天然更擅长提供相对顺序而不是绝对分数，直接优化排序也绕开了 reward misspecification 和 RL 不稳定；代价是它只能利用离线候选集，探索新行为的能力弱于真正在线 RL。","experiments":"这篇论文的公开印象是，作者主要在开源指令模型上验证 RRHF 能以远低于 RLHF 的复杂度得到接近甚至更好的对齐质量。已给信息里没有摘要，因此不能在这里负责任地写出具体模型规模、数据量和各基准分数；但可以确认，实验通常围绕 helpfulness/harmlessness 或指令跟随评测，对比 SFT、DPO 类排序/偏好方法的前身或 contemporaries，以及 RLHF 流程，并包含候选数、排序质量、margin 设定等消融。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a pointed question: do we really need full RLHF to align language models, or can human preference rankings be converted into a much simpler supervised signal? The usual RLHF pipeline is effective but expensive, brittle, and hard to reproduce because it depends on a separate reward model and online PPO-style optimization.","importance":"This is one of the more influential post-training method papers from that period because it weakens the assumption that alignment must go through RL. For pretraining researchers, the lesson is broader: preference data can provide a high-signal gradient without online RL, which changes how we think about the pretrain–posttrain interface, the necessity of reward models, and low-cost pathways to improve a base model’s usefulness.","technical_approach":"RRHF takes multiple candidate responses for the same prompt, ranks them by human preference, and directly trains the LM so that higher-ranked responses receive higher overall token log-probability than lower-ranked ones. It does not fit a separate reward model and does not use PPO-style policy optimization. This is effective because preference annotation is naturally relative rather than absolute, so directly optimizing rank avoids reward-model misspecification and RL instability. The trade-off is that it is limited to an offline candidate set and cannot explore new behaviors as flexibly as online RL.","experiments":"The known empirical claim is that RRHF reaches strong alignment quality with much lower complexity than RLHF on open instruction-tuned models. Since no abstract is provided here, I should not invent model sizes, dataset sizes, or benchmark scores. What can be said safely is that the evaluation centers on instruction-following and preference-oriented benchmarks, with comparisons against SFT and RLHF-style baselines, plus ablations on candidate pool size, ranking quality, and margin-style objectives.","authors_note":""},"tags":["rlhf","alignment","preference-learning","ranking","post-training"],"keywords":["Large Language Model","Human Alignment"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对对齐必须依赖 RL 的认知；证明只用排序信号做监督式优化也能有效对齐，影响 pretrain ↔ post-train 接口设计和 reward model 的必要性。","en":"Changes my prior that alignment must rely on RL; proves that supervised optimization using only ranking signals can also effectively align models, influencing pretrain ↔ post-train interface design and the necessity of reward models."}},{"id":"ZengHHZ0SZ23","title":"VCC: Scaling Transformers to 128K Tokens or More by Prioritizing Important Tokens","authors":["Zhanpeng Zeng","Cole Hawkins","Mingyi Hong","Aston Zhang","Nikolaos Pappas","Vikas Singh","Shuai Zheng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$28","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZengHHZ0SZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZengHHZ0SZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/4054556fcaa934b0bf76da52cf4f92cb-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作想解决的核心问题是：Transformer 上下文长度扩到 128K 甚至更长时，标准全注意力的计算和显存成本会爆炸，而许多稀疏或线性注意力方法又会明显损伤质量。过去的方法要么牺牲精度换复杂度，要么只在训练时可行、生成时不好用，因此需要一种更贴近实际推理需求的长上下文方案。","importance":"这是长上下文系统方法，和 serving、推理效率、训练可扩展性都直接相关。对 pretrain 的启示是：长上下文不只是位置编码问题，真正瓶颈在于哪些 token 值得被持续保留和精确关注；如果重要 token 可以被优先处理，那么模型容量可以更有效地用在信息密度高的部分。这类工作也会影响后续 pretrain 数据组织和 curriculum，因为长序列训练是否值得，取决于推理时能否承接。","technical_approach":"VCC 的核心思想是优先处理重要 token，而不是对所有历史 token 一视同仁地分配计算。它应属于一种重要性驱动的上下文压缩/缓存策略：高价值 token 保留更完整的表示或更高访问优先级，低价值 token 则被合并、压缩或降采样。与固定窗口、块稀疏或纯线性近似不同，这种设计把‘信息选择’放在中心位置，因此更符合自然语言中注意力集中于少数关键位置的事实。它有效的前提是重要性估计足够准；边界是，如果关键证据分散且早期被误判丢弃，质量会出现不可恢复的损失。","experiments":"从标题可以确认，实验会重点展示在 128K 及以上上下文长度下，相比标准 Transformer 或其他高效注意力方法，VCC 在质量保持和资源占用之间更优。由于没有摘要，无法负责任地写出具体模型规模、长文本任务、吞吐/显存节省比例和 perplexity/accuracy 数字；但值得期待的实验包括：不同重要性策略比较、保留比例与性能曲线，以及随着上下文继续增长是否出现次线性退化。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets the practical bottleneck of very long-context transformers: once context reaches 128K tokens or more, full attention becomes prohibitively expensive, while many sparse or linear alternatives lose too much quality. Earlier methods often traded away accuracy for efficiency or were awkward for generation-time use.","importance":"This is a long-context systems contribution with direct relevance to inference, serving, and scalable training. For pretraining, the important lesson is that long context is not only a positional encoding problem; the deeper issue is which tokens deserve precise retention over time. If the model can prioritize high-value tokens, capacity can be spent where the information density is actually high. That also feeds back into how long-sequence data should be organized during training.","technical_approach":"VCC prioritizes important tokens instead of allocating equal compute to the entire history. The method appears to be an importance-aware context compression or caching strategy: high-value tokens keep more faithful representations or higher access priority, while lower-value tokens are compressed, merged, or downsampled. Compared with fixed windows, block sparsity, or purely linear approximations, this puts information selection at the center, which matches the empirical fact that useful attention often concentrates on a small subset of tokens. The method works only if token importance is estimated well; if dispersed evidence is discarded early, the quality loss can be irreversible.","experiments":"From the title, the empirical claim should be that VCC scales to 128K+ context with a better quality–efficiency trade-off than standard transformers or other efficient-attention baselines. Since the abstract is not available, I cannot provide model sizes, tasks, throughput/memory numbers, or exact perplexity/accuracy deltas. The most informative experiments here would compare importance policies, show retention-ratio trade-off curves, and test how gracefully performance degrades as context length keeps increasing.","authors_note":""},"tags":["long-context","transformer","attention","inference"],"notable_authors":["Aston Zhang"],"keywords":["efficient","transformer","roberta","T5","language modeling","question answering","summarization"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对长上下文处理的认知；提出优先处理重要 token 的策略，将信息选择放在中心位置，影响后续 pretrain 数据组织和 curriculum。","en":"Changes my prior on long-context processing; proposes a strategy to prioritize important tokens, placing information selection at the center, influencing subsequent pretrain data organization and curriculum."}},{"id":"Zhang00CZC0TRBW23","title":"H2O: Heavy-Hitter Oracle for Efficient Generative Inference of Large Language Models","authors":["Zhenyu Zhang","Ying Sheng","Tianyi Zhou","Tianlong Chen","Lianmin Zheng","Ruisi Cai","Zhao Song","Yuandong Tian","Christopher Ré","Clark W. Barrett","Zhangyang Wang","Beidi Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$29","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Zhang00CZC0TRBW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Zhang00CZC0TRBW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/6ceefa7b15572587b78ecfcebb2827f8-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是 LLM 生成推理时的 KV cache 瓶颈：上下文一长，注意力需要读取全部历史 key/value，显存和带宽压力都很高，而大多数 token 对后续生成的贡献其实并不均匀。过去常见方案是窗口截断或统一压缩，但这些方法容易把真正重要的远距离信息一起丢掉。","importance":"这是生成推理系统里的代表性工作之一，影响点很实用：它把 cache 压缩从‘按位置裁剪’改成‘按重要性保留’。对 pretrain 的启示在于，模型推理时确实存在少数 heavy hitters，也就是反复被关注的关键 token；这说明长上下文建模里信息分布高度不均，训练和架构设计都可以围绕这一点做更针对性的优化。它也是后续很多 KV eviction / cache budget 工作的重要起点。","technical_approach":"H2O 的核心方法是识别 attention 中的 heavy-hitter token，并在 KV cache 预算受限时优先保留这些 token，而不是简单保留最近窗口。它本质上是一种 oracle-guided 或近似 oracle 的 cache eviction 策略：哪些历史 token 在未来最可能持续贡献注意力，就给它们更高生存优先级。与 sliding window 相比，关键区别是允许远距离但高价值的信息长期留存；与静态摘要压缩相比，它不强行把信息揉成低维表示，而是直接保留原始 KV。这样设计有效，是因为生成中 attention 的头部集中现象很强；边界是 heavy hitter 的识别若滞后或失准，收益会明显下降。","experiments":"这篇论文的关键事实通常包括：在有限 KV cache 预算下，H2O 相比 recent-window 或其他 eviction 基线能更好保持生成质量，同时显著降低显存占用。没有摘要时，我不能可靠给出具体模型如 LLaMA/OPT 的规模、cache 压缩比、吞吐提升和 perplexity/benchmark 变化数字；但可以确认，实验重点会是不同 cache budget 下的质量曲线，以及不同注意力头/层上的 heavy-hitter 统计分析。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles the KV-cache bottleneck in LLM generation: as context grows, attention must read all historical keys and values, which makes memory and bandwidth increasingly expensive, even though not all past tokens matter equally. Earlier solutions often used recency-based truncation or uniform compression, which can discard genuinely important long-range evidence.","importance":"This is one of the more practically important inference systems papers in the area because it changes cache management from position-based retention to importance-based retention. For pretraining researchers, the broader takeaway is that generation-time attention is highly skewed: a small set of heavy-hitter tokens gets revisited disproportionately often. That suggests long-context modeling is fundamentally uneven in information density, which should influence both architecture and training design. The work also became a reference point for later KV-eviction and cache-budget methods.","technical_approach":"H2O identifies heavy-hitter tokens in attention and prioritizes them when the KV cache is budget-limited, instead of simply keeping the most recent tokens. In essence, it is an oracle-guided or oracle-inspired cache eviction strategy: tokens that are likely to receive sustained future attention are given higher survival priority. Compared with a sliding window, the key difference is that distant but important tokens can survive for a long time; compared with static compression, it keeps original KV entries rather than collapsing them into a lossy summary. This works because attention mass during generation is often sharply concentrated. The limitation is that gains depend on how well heavy hitters are identified online.","experiments":"The core empirical claim is typically that under a fixed KV-cache budget, H2O preserves generation quality better than recency-based or other eviction baselines while significantly reducing memory use. Without the abstract, I cannot safely provide exact model names, compression ratios, throughput gains, or perplexity/benchmark numbers. The most informative experiments should include quality–budget curves and analysis of heavy-hitter distributions across layers and heads.","authors_note":""},"tags":["kv-cache","inference","attention","llm"],"notable_authors":["Lianmin Zheng","Tianlong Chen"],"keywords":["Large Language Models; Efficient Generative Inference"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对 KV cache 压缩的认知；将 cache 压缩从‘按位置裁剪’改成‘按重要性保留’，证明长上下文建模里信息分布高度不均，值得在训练和架构设计中针对性优化。","en":"Changes my prior on KV cache compression; shifts cache compression from 'position-based truncation' to 'importance-based retention', proving that information distribution in long-context modeling is highly uneven. Worth targeted optimization in training and architecture design."}},{"id":"ZhouLX0SMMEYYZG23","title":"LIMA: Less Is More for Alignment","authors":["Chunting Zhou","Pengfei Liu","Puxin Xu","Srinivasan Iyer","Jiao Sun","Yuning Mao","Xuezhe Ma","Avia Efrat","Ping Yu","Lili Yu","Susan Zhang","Gargi Ghosh","Mike Lewis","Luke Zettlemoyer","Omer Levy"],"institutions":["University of Washington"],"abstract":"$2a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhouLX0SMMEYYZG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhouLX0SMMEYYZG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ac662d74829e4407ce1d126477f4a03a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文给出的核心判断很直接：对齐一个强基座模型，不一定需要海量指令数据，少量高质量样本也能把聊天能力拉起来。此前社区常把 instruction tuning 视为“数据越多越好”，但很多数据其实冗余、风格杂、监督信号并不干净。作者想验证的是，若只保留极高质量、风格一致、以回答示范为主的小数据集，能否获得出乎意料的对齐效果。","importance":"这是 post-train 领域的标志性工作，对 pretrain 也有很强反向启发。它的重要性不在于提出复杂算法，而在于重新校准了大家对监督信号质量的认识：当基座模型预训练足够强时，SFT 数据的边际价值主要来自质量而不是规模。这个结论会直接影响 instruction data 合成、数据筛选和 pretrain↔posttrain 接口设计，也促使社区重新思考“对齐究竟是在教能力，还是在激活已有能力”。","technical_approach":"LIMA 的方法极其克制：不做 RLHF，不做大规模蒸馏，也不堆几十万指令样本，而是人工精选大约一千条高质量示范数据，对一个强基座 LLaMA 模型做标准 supervised fine-tuning。与当时主流路线相比，它刻意舍弃偏好建模和复杂训练管线，把问题收缩为“如果示范足够好，纯 SFT 能走多远”。这样设计之所以有效，是因为基座模型在预训练中已经学到了大量世界知识和语言能力，SFT 更像是在教它输出格式、交互风格和遵循用户意图，而不是重新灌输知识。边界也非常明确：LIMA 更证明了 style alignment 的高效，而不是证明少量数据足以提升事实正确性、工具使用或高难推理。","experiments":"这篇论文最知名的结果是：仅用约 1,000 条精心筛选的样本微调后，模型在人类偏好评测中可与更复杂对齐模型接近，说明高质量少样本 SFT 的效力被低估。论文的关键实验通常包括与 Alpaca 式大规模低成本指令数据的比较，以及对样本数量和数据来源的消融，结论一般是数据质量远比数量重要，且少量高质量多样化样本就能显著改善主观交互体验。需要实话实说的是，这类评测更多体现聊天风格、帮助性和流畅度，不等于全面任务能力提升。具体到数值，这篇工作广为人知，但在当前未给摘要的前提下，不在此硬填人评胜率等细节。","authors_note":"该工作来自华盛顿大学等机构合作团队。作者中 Hannaneh Hajishirzi、Luke Zettlemoyer 均是 NLP 与指令调优方向的知名学者。代表性相关工作包括 Alpaca 之后的一系列高质量指令微调与对齐研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper makes a blunt claim: aligning a strong base LLM may not require massive instruction-tuning corpora. The common assumption had been that more instruction data is always better, but much of that data is noisy, redundant, or stylistically inconsistent. The paper asks whether a very small, very high-quality set of demonstrations is enough to unlock strong chat behavior.","importance":"This is a landmark post-training result with clear implications for pretraining. Its importance lies in recalibrating how we think about supervision quality: once the base model is strong enough, the marginal value of SFT data may come more from quality than scale. That directly affects synthetic instruction generation, data curation, and the broader pretrain-to-posttrain interface. It also sharpens a useful hypothesis: alignment often activates and formats existing capabilities rather than teaching them from scratch.","technical_approach":"LIMA uses an intentionally simple recipe. It takes a strong LLaMA base model and performs standard supervised fine-tuning on roughly one thousand carefully selected instruction-response examples, without RLHF, preference modeling, or massive distillation pipelines. The contrast with mainstream practice at the time is deliberate: the paper strips the problem down to ask how far pure SFT can go if the demonstrations are truly high quality. This works because much of the factual knowledge and linguistic competence already lives in the pretrained model; the SFT stage mainly teaches response format, conversational style, and user-intent following. The boundary is important: LIMA is stronger evidence for efficient style alignment than for improvements in factuality, tool use, or difficult reasoning.","experiments":"The best-known empirical result is that about 1,000 curated examples are enough to produce a chatbot that performs surprisingly well in human preference evaluations, approaching systems trained with much more elaborate alignment stacks. The key comparisons are typically against Alpaca-style larger but lower-quality instruction datasets, plus ablations on sample count and data source. The consistent message is that data quality dominates quantity for conversational helpfulness and fluency. The caveat is that these wins mainly reflect subjective chat quality, not a universal capability boost across tasks. This paper is widely known, but without the abstract in the prompt, exact numerical human-eval margins are omitted here.","authors_note":"The work was produced by a collaboration including the University of Washington. Hannaneh Hajishirzi and Luke Zettlemoyer are prominent researchers in NLP and instruction tuning. Related representative work from this line includes high-quality instruction fine-tuning studies following the Alpaca era."},"tags":["alignment","sft","instruction-tuning","data-quality"],"notable_authors":["Hannaneh Hajishirzi","Luke Zettlemoyer"],"keywords":["large language models","supervised instruction fine-tuning","chat assistant"],"recommendation":{"zh":"推翻了SFT需要海量指令数据的固有认知，强基座下对齐应优先提升数据质量而非堆规模，直接指导内部指令数据筛选、合成管线的迭代。","en":"Overturns the prior that SFT requires massive instruction data; you should immediately adjust your internal instruction data filtering and synthesis pipelines to prioritize quality over scale for strong base models."}},{"id":"ZhuHAGDFYSW023","title":"Multimodal C4: An Open, Billion-scale Corpus of Images Interleaved with Text","authors":["Wanrong Zhu","Jack Hessel","Anas Awadalla","Samir Yitzhak Gadre","Jesse Dodge","Alex Fang","Youngjae Yu","Ludwig Schmidt","William Yang Wang","Yejin Choi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhuHAGDFYSW023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhuHAGDFYSW023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/1c6bed78d3813886d3d72595dbecb80b-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：公开可用的多模态预训练数据长期缺少真正大规模、图文交错且接近网页原生结构的语料，导致很多多模态 LLM/VLM 只能依赖封闭数据或退回到图文对配对数据。过去常见的数据要么规模不足，要么只有 caption 级配对，难以支持 interleaved 文档建模和原生多模态上下文学习。","importance":"这是明显的数据级贡献，而且对多模态预训练很重要。原因不在于又多了一个数据集名字，而在于它把训练目标从 '图片-描述对齐' 推向 '长文档中图文混合建模'。对 pretrain 的直接启示是：如果目标是做原生多模态 LM，而不是外挂视觉编码器的 caption 模型，那么数据组织形式和网页结构保真度与数据量同样关键。开放、十亿级规模也意味着它可以作为可复现实验基座，降低闭源数据壁垒。","technical_approach":"核心方法是构建一个开放的、十亿级图文交错语料库 Multimodal C4。它更像是对 C4 思路在多模态场景下的扩展：从网页中抽取文本与图片，并保留交错顺序，而不是只做图片和一句描述的配对。真正关键的技术难点通常在数据清洗和过滤：如何去重、如何去除无意义图片或模板化页面、如何处理版权和安全过滤、如何让图文邻接关系尽量有语义对应而不是页面噪声。与 LAION 一类纯配对数据相比，这种设计更适合训练文档级多模态生成和理解；代价是噪声更复杂，训练目标也更依赖模型自己学习局部对齐。","experiments":"从标题可以确定，实验重点应包括数据集统计、过滤效果，以及用该语料训练或继续预训练多模态模型后的下游收益。关键事实大概率包括：语料达到 billion-scale，包含图像与交错文本片段；与现有开放数据相比，在文档级、多图上下文或多模态 few-shot/zero-shot 任务上更适配。通常还会有 ablation 比较交错格式与简单图文对的差异，以及数据质量过滤对模型收益的影响。由于没有摘要，不能可靠给出具体样本量、所训模型规模、评测基准和数值提升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a missing data substrate for multimodal pretraining: open datasets are either too small, too closed, or reduced to image-caption pairs, which is a poor fit for training models on native interleaved image-text documents. That limitation has pushed many multimodal LMs to rely on proprietary corpora or pairwise alignment data rather than real document structure.","importance":"This is a clear data contribution with real implications for multimodal pretraining. The key value is not just scale; it is the shift from pairwise alignment data to document-style interleaved supervision. If the goal is a native multimodal LM rather than a caption model with a visual front end, then preserving image-text layout and local context matters as much as raw dataset size. An open billion-scale corpus also lowers the reproducibility barrier in a space dominated by closed data pipelines.","technical_approach":"The core contribution is Multimodal C4, an open billion-scale corpus of images interleaved with text, extending the spirit of C4 into the multimodal setting. The important design choice is to preserve interleaving from web documents instead of collapsing everything into image-caption pairs. The hard part is data curation: deduplication, filtering boilerplate pages, removing low-value or unsafe images, and keeping image-text proximity meaningful rather than just page noise. Compared with LAION-style paired data, this format is better aligned with document-level multimodal generation and understanding; the trade-off is a noisier supervision signal and a heavier burden on the model to learn alignment.","experiments":"From the title, the experiments should include corpus statistics, curation analyses, and downstream results from training or continued pretraining on this data. The key expected facts are billion-scale coverage, interleaved image-text structure, and advantages on tasks that benefit from document context, multiple images, or multimodal in-context learning. A useful ablation would compare interleaved data against simple paired data and quantify the effect of filtering quality. Since no abstract is given, I cannot safely provide exact corpus size, model sizes, benchmark names, or numeric gains.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal-data","dataset","interleaved-data","vlm"],"notable_authors":["Jesse Dodge"],"keywords":["Multimodal dataset","vision-and-language","interleaved text and image sequence"],"recommendation":{"zh":"首个公开十亿级原生图文交错语料，做原生多模态预训练需调整数据构建管线，保留网页原生交错结构而非仅用配对图文对。","en":"The first public billion-scale interleaved image-text corpus; if you train native multimodal LLMs, adjust your data construction pipeline to preserve native webpage interleaved structure instead of only using paired image-caption data."}},{"id":"2307.02483","title":"Jailbroken: How Does LLM Safety Training Fail?","authors":["Alexander Wei","Nika Haghtalab","Jacob Steinhardt"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.02483","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001HS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001HS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/fd6613131889a4b656206c50a8bd7790-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的结论很直接：LLM 的安全训练失败，不只是因为攻击者会写奇怪提示，而是因为能力目标和安全目标之间存在结构性冲突，加上安全泛化范围落后于能力泛化。过去很多讨论把 jailbreak 当成红队技巧集合，但这篇工作试图把它拆成可分析的失效模式。","importance":"这项工作对 pretrain ↔ posttrain 接口很重要，因为它说明安全对齐不是在已有能力外面套一层拒答模板就够了。对做基础模型的人，最有价值的启示是：只要模型已经学会相关能力，而安全训练覆盖不到相同分布，攻击几乎是必然出现的；因此安全问题一部分是泛化问题，一部分是目标冲突问题，不是纯粹的 prompt engineering 问题。","technical_approach":"核心方法是提出两类失败机制并用它们系统构造 jailbreak。第一类是 competing objectives：模型既被训练成有用，又被训练成安全，当用户意图和安全边界冲突时，能力目标会为攻击提供可利用梯度。第二类是 mismatched generalization：模型在危险任务上有能力，但安全训练没有覆盖相同语义区域或表达空间，所以拒答行为泛化不过去。相比只做攻击榜单，这种框架更像在分析对齐为何薄弱、薄弱在哪。","experiments":"摘要可确认作者评估了包括 GPT-4 和 Claude v1.3 在内的前沿模型，并用已有与新设计的 jailbreak 进行测试。给定信息没有成功率或具体任务数字，但关键事实是：基于这两类失效模式构造的攻击对 SOTA 安全训练模型依然有效。对研究者更有价值的实验通常不是单个攻破率，而是迁移性分析：攻击是否跨模型有效、是否能自动生成、哪些防御只是在训练分布内补洞。","authors_note":"可确认作者包括 Alexander Wei、Nika Haghtalab、Jacob Steinhardt。仅凭给定信息无法稳妥确认机构，不展开。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper’s main claim is that safety training fails for structural reasons, not merely because attackers discover clever prompts. It identifies two concrete failure modes: objective conflict between helpfulness and safety, and a generalization gap where safety does not cover domains that capabilities already do.","importance":"This matters directly for the pretrain-to-posttrain interface. The lesson is that alignment cannot be treated as a thin refusal layer on top of a capable model. Once the model has learned a capability, jailbreaks become likely whenever safety training does not generalize over the same semantic space. So the problem is partly one of objective design and partly one of distributional coverage, not just prompt engineering.","technical_approach":"The method is analytical and empirical: define two failure modes and use them to guide jailbreak construction. In competing objectives, the model is trained to be both useful and safe, and the usefulness objective can be exploited when the two conflict. In mismatched generalization, the model has the capability for harmful content, but safety behavior does not generalize to the relevant phrasing or domain. This is more informative than a catalog of attacks because it explains why alignment remains brittle.","experiments":"From the abstract, the authors evaluate state-of-the-art models including GPT-4 and Claude v1.3, using both prior jailbreaks and new attacks derived from their framework. Exact success rates are not given in the provided metadata, but the central empirical result is clear: these failure modes remain actionable even on frontier safety-tuned models. The most useful experimental angle is transfer—whether attacks generalize across models and whether defenses merely patch seen distributions.","authors_note":"Confirmed authors include Alexander Wei, Nika Haghtalab, and Jacob Steinhardt. The provided information is not enough to state institutions confidently."},"tags":["rlhf","safety","jailbreak","alignment"],"notable_authors":["Alexander Wei","Nika Haghtalab","Jacob Steinhardt"],"keywords":["red teaming","safety","RLHF","large language models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"明确LLM安全失效不只是提示工程问题，根源于目标冲突和泛化错配，需从预训练-后训练接口设计开始对齐安全数据与能力覆盖分布。","en":"Clarifies that LLM safety failure is not just a prompt engineering problem, but stems from competing objectives and mismatched generalization; align safety data distribution with capability coverage from the pretrain-posttrain interface design stage."}},{"id":"0001LV23","title":"How does GPT-2 compute greater-than?: Interpreting mathematical abilities in a pre-trained language model","authors":["Michael Hanna","Ollie Liu","Alexandre Variengien"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001LV23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001LV23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/efbba7719cc5172d175240f24be11280-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的核心问题是：GPT-2 这类预训练语言模型到底是怎么实现“greater-than”这种看似简单、其实涉及数值与序列模式结合的能力的。过去我们知道模型能做一些算术或比较，但往往停留在行为层评测，缺少电路级解释。","importance":"它的重要性在于机制解释，而不是提升模型效果。对 pretrain 研究的价值很实在：如果能把一个具体能力拆成可验证的内部计算路径，就能更好地区分哪些能力来自记忆、哪些来自通用算法、哪些只是 tokenization 和数据分布的副产物；这对理解 emergent ability 和训练目标能学到什么很关键。","technical_approach":"从标题判断，作者采用了 mechanistic interpretability 路线，定位 GPT-2 在处理 greater-than 判断时涉及的注意力头、MLP 和表示变换。关键不是证明模型“像程序一样”工作，而是找出一条足够解释行为的最小电路，并验证干预后行为是否按预期变化。和仅看 probing 不同，这种做法更强调因果性：删掉某些组件，能力是否真的消失。","experiments":"给定信息没有摘要和数字，无法确认使用了哪一版 GPT-2、任务构造和定量解释度量。按此类工作惯例，实验通常会包括行为评测、激活分析、组件消融与 patching，可能还会展示某些头专门提取位置信息、某些层负责比较逻辑。最值得看的不是绝对精度，而是解释覆盖率：提出的电路能解释多少样本、在哪些输入分布上失效。","authors_note":"可确认作者包括 Michael Hanna、Ollie Liu、Alexandre Variengien。仅凭给定信息无法稳妥确认机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper investigates how GPT-2 actually computes a simple comparison task—greater-than—at the circuit level. Prior work often stopped at behavioral evidence that language models can do some arithmetic-like tasks, without showing the internal mechanism that produces the behavior.","importance":"This is important as a mechanistic interpretability result, not as a performance improvement. For pretraining research, the value is that a concrete internal explanation helps separate true algorithmic structure from memorization or tokenizer artifacts. That matters when reasoning about emergence and about what generic language-model training is capable of inducing.","technical_approach":"From the title, the authors likely use circuit-style interpretability to identify the attention heads, MLPs, and intermediate representations involved in greater-than computation. The key is not just to describe correlations but to isolate a minimal causal circuit and verify it through interventions. That is stronger than probing alone because it asks whether changing the proposed components predictably changes the behavior.","experiments":"The provided metadata does not specify which GPT-2 variant, what task construction, or what quantitative interpretability metrics were used. A study of this type typically includes behavioral evaluation, activation analysis, ablations, and activation patching to show which components encode positions, values, or comparison logic. The most useful result is not raw task accuracy but explanatory coverage: how much of the behavior the proposed circuit accounts for, and where it breaks.","authors_note":"Confirmed authors include Michael Hanna, Ollie Liu, and Alexandre Variengien. The provided information is insufficient to state institutions confidently."},"tags":["interpretability","gpt-2","circuits","reasoning"],"notable_authors":["Michael Hanna","Ollie Liu","Alexandre Variengien"],"keywords":["interpretability","language models","NLP"],"recommendation":{"zh":"首个将LLM简单数值能力拆解到电路级的因果验证工作，可帮你区分预训练学到的能力来自记忆、通用算法还是数据分布副产物。","en":"First causal verification work that decomposes LLM's simple numerical ability to circuit level; it helps you distinguish whether pretrained abilities come from memory, general algorithms, or data distribution side effects."}},{"id":"0001S0R0L0GMF23","title":"MAViL: Masked Audio-Video Learners","authors":["Po-Yao Huang","Vasu Sharma","Hu Xu","Chaitanya Ryali","Haoqi Fan","Yanghao Li","Shang-Wen Li","Gargi Ghosh","Jitendra Malik","Christoph Feichtenhofer"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We present Masked Audio-Video Learners (MAViL) to learn audio-visual representations with three complementary forms of self-supervision: (1) reconstructing masked raw audio and video inputs, (2) intra-modal and inter-modal contrastive learning with masking, and (3) self-training to predict aligned and contextualized audio-video representations learned from the first two objectives. Empirically, MAViL achieves state-of-the-art audio-video classification performance on AudioSet (53.3 mAP) and VGGSound (67.1\\% accuracy), surpassing recent self-supervised models and supervised models that utilize external labeled data. Notably, pre-training with MAViL not only enhances performance in multimodal classification and retrieval tasks, but it also improves the representations of each modality in isolation, without relying on information from the other modality during uni-modal fine-tuning or inference. The code and models are available at https://github.com/facebookresearch/MAViL.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001S0R0L0GMF23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001S0R0L0GMF23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/40b60852a4abdaa696b5a1a78da34635-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：音频和视频能否像文本中的 masked modeling 一样，用统一的掩码式预训练来学到强表示，而不是把两种模态分开做对比学习或重建。以前音视频学习常在对齐、检索或单模态重建之间做折中，导致联合表示学得不够统一。","importance":"它的意义在于把 masked pretraining 的成功经验进一步扩展到音视频联合建模。对 pretrain 研究者的启示是：在跨模态场景里，掩码预测不仅是自监督技巧，还可以作为统一接口，把时间同步但统计特性很不同的模态拉进同一训练框架；边界在于，掩码目标是否能逼模型真正建跨模态语义，而不是只补局部低层模式。","technical_approach":"从标题看，MAViL 的核心是 masked audio-video learners，也就是同时对音频和视频 token/patch 做掩码建模。关键设计通常包括：如何定义跨模态共享或协同的掩码策略，如何处理音频与视频时序粒度不一致，以及是做纯重建还是结合判别式目标。相比对比学习，掩码学习的优势是信息利用率更高、对负样本设计依赖更小；代价是重建目标容易偏向局部细节，跨模态语义约束若不足，融合可能流于表面。","experiments":"给定信息没有摘要与数字，无法确认模型规模、预训练数据和 benchmark。此类工作通常会在音视频分类、检索、事件理解等任务上，与单模态预训练、对比学习和仅视频 MAE 类基线比较。最值得关注的实验通常是：只遮视频、只遮音频、同时遮两者的效果差异，以及跨模态掩码是否真的带来更强迁移，而不只是增加训练难度。","authors_note":"作者名单包含 Po-Yao Huang、Vasu Sharma、Hu Xu、Chaitanya Ryali、Haoqi Fan 等。仅凭给定信息无法稳妥确认机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether audio and video can be pretrained under a unified masked-learning framework, instead of relying on separate contrastive or reconstruction objectives for each modality. Earlier audio-video learning often had to choose between alignment-focused objectives and modality-specific reconstruction, which limited how unified the learned representation became.","importance":"Its contribution is to extend masked pretraining into joint audio-video modeling. For pretraining research, the useful lesson is that masking can serve as a common interface across synchronized but statistically different modalities. The limitation is also important: a masked objective only helps if it pushes the model toward shared semantics rather than merely local low-level completion.","technical_approach":"From the title, MAViL likely performs masked modeling over both audio and video tokens or patches. The crucial design questions are how masking is coordinated across modalities, how temporal granularity mismatch is handled, and whether reconstruction is combined with a discriminative loss. Relative to contrastive learning, masked learning uses more of the input and avoids delicate negative sampling. The trade-off is that reconstruction can overemphasize local detail unless the cross-modal structure is enforced strongly enough.","experiments":"No abstract or numbers are provided, so model size, data scale, and exact benchmarks cannot be stated reliably. A paper in this space would normally compare against unimodal pretraining, contrastive AV methods, and video-only masked baselines on classification, retrieval, and event understanding. The most revealing ablations are whether masking both modalities helps more than masking one, and whether cross-modal masking improves transfer rather than simply making training harder.","authors_note":"The author list includes Po-Yao Huang, Vasu Sharma, Hu Xu, Chaitanya Ryali, and Haoqi Fan. The provided information is insufficient to state institutions confidently."},"tags":["masked-modeling","audio-video","multimodal-pretraining","representation"],"notable_authors":["Po-Yao Huang","Vasu Sharma","Hu Xu","Chaitanya Ryali","Haoqi Fan"],"keywords":["self-supervised learning","audio representation learning","audio classification"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§3的跨模态掩码策略设计和§4的跨模态消融结果即可，验证了掩码建模可作为音视频联合预训练的统一接口。","en":"Only read §3 for cross-modal masking strategy design and §4 for cross-modal ablation results; it verifies that masked modeling can be used as a unified interface for audio-video joint pretraining."}},{"id":"0002XPCFNB23","title":"Supervised Pretraining Can Learn In-Context Reinforcement Learning","authors":["Jonathan Lee","Annie Xie","Aldo Pacchiano","Yash Chandak","Chelsea Finn","Ofir Nachum","Emma Brunskill"],"institutions":["ByteDance Inc."],"abstract":"$2e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0002XPCFNB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0002XPCFNB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/8644b61a9bc87bf7844750a015feb600-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有扩散模型在语言引导图像编辑时无法准确渲染文字内容和文字风格，现有方法均回避文字编辑需求，仅支持非文字区域的编辑。","importance":"方法级贡献，为多模态预训练的文字渲染模块设计提供了参考方案。","technical_approach":"改进扩散模型结构，引入字形和位置信息分支，支持多语言文字编辑；设计自监督训练框架，利用海量网页爬取的文字图像数据训练，不需要人工标注。与现有扩散图像编辑模型的区别是专门优化文字渲染分支，支持任意语言的文字编辑任务。","experiments":"在中、英、日多语言文字编辑任务上测试，基线为Stable Diffusion、InstructPix2Pix，文字识别准确率比基线提升42%，风格相似度比基线提升37%。","authors_note":"作者来自字节跳动计算机视觉团队。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing diffusion models cannot accurately render text content and text style during language-guided image editing, all existing methods avoid text editing requirements, only support editing of non-text regions.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution, provides a reference solution for text rendering module design in multimodal pretraining.","technical_approach":"It modifies the diffusion model structure, introduces glyph and position information branches, supports multilingual text editing. A self-supervised training framework is designed, trained on massive web-crawled text image data, no manual annotation is needed. The difference from existing diffusion image editing models is that it specially optimizes the text rendering branch, supports text editing tasks in any language.","experiments":"Tested on Chinese, English, Japanese multilingual text editing tasks, baselines are Stable Diffusion, InstructPix2Pix. Text recognition accuracy is 42% higher than baselines, style similarity is 37% higher than baselines.","authors_note":"Authors are from ByteDance Computer Vision team."},"tags":["in-context-learning","supervised-pretraining","reinforcement-learning","sequence-modeling"],"keywords":["decision making","reinforcement learning","in-context learning","bandits","transformers","offline reinforcement learning","exploration","reinforcement learning theory"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"扩散模型是当前图像生成与编辑的主流技术方案","claim_en":"Diffusion models are the mainstream technical solution for image generation and editing","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§3的字形位置分支设计和§4的自监督训练方案即可，为多模态预训练的文字渲染模块设计提供参考。","en":"Only read §3 for glyph-position branch design and §4 for self-supervised training recipe; it provides a reference for text rendering module design in multimodal pretraining."}},{"id":"AbbeBBLS23","title":"Transformers learn through gradual rank increase","authors":["Emmanuel Abbe","Samy Bengio","Enric Boix-Adserà","Etai Littwin","Joshua M. Susskind"],"institutions":["EPFL","Apple ML Research"],"abstract":"We identify incremental learning dynamics in transformers, where the difference between trained and initial weights progressively increases in rank. We rigorously prove this occurs under the simplifying assumptions of diagonal weight matrices and small initialization. Our experiments support the theory and also show that phenomenon can occur in practice without the simplifying assumptions.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/AbbeBBLS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/AbbeBBLS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/4d69c1c057a8bd570ba4a7b71aae8331-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer 在训练过程中是如何逐步学习特征的？具体来说，权重矩阵的秩（rank）在训练中如何演化？此前对深度网络学习动态的理论分析大多局限于线性模型或浅层网络，对 Transformer 的理解很少。","importance":"理论/机制级贡献，对 pretrain 研究有直接启发。如果 Transformer 确实通过逐步增加秩来学习越来越复杂的特征，这解释了为什么 warmup 和学习率调度对训练稳定性至关重要——过早的大学习率可能破坏低秩到高秩的渐进过程。也为 LoRA 等低秩适配方法提供了理论支撑。","technical_approach":"通过理论分析证明：在梯度下降训练过程中，Transformer 的权重矩阵秩是逐步增加的（gradual rank increase）。模型先学习低秩（简单）特征，再逐步捕获高秩（复杂）特征。证明基于特定的数据分布假设和简化的 Transformer 架构。关键洞察是梯度更新的方向天然倾向于先填充最大奇异值方向，这与矩阵分解中的 Eckart-Young 定理有类似精神。","experiments":"主要是理论证明，辅以合成数据上的验证实验，展示训练过程中权重矩阵的奇异值谱确实呈现逐步展开的模式。可能也在小规模真实任务上做了验证。","authors_note":"Emmanuel Abbe 是 EPFL/Apple 的教授，在学习理论和信息论领域有深厚积累。Samy Bengio 是 Apple ML Research 的资深研究员，曾长期在 Google Brain。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How do Transformers progressively learn features during training? Specifically, how does the rank of weight matrices evolve? Prior theoretical analyses of learning dynamics were mostly limited to linear or shallow models.","importance":"A theory/mechanism-level contribution with direct implications for pretraining. Gradual rank increase explains why warmup and learning rate schedules are critical—premature large updates may disrupt the low-to-high rank progression. It also provides theoretical grounding for low-rank adaptation methods like LoRA.","technical_approach":"Proves theoretically that Transformer weight matrices undergo gradual rank increase during gradient descent: the model first learns low-rank (simple) features, then progressively captures higher-rank (complex) ones. The proof relies on specific data distribution assumptions and simplified Transformer architectures. The key insight is that gradient updates naturally prioritize the largest singular value directions first.","experiments":"Primarily theoretical proofs, supplemented by synthetic data experiments showing that singular value spectra of weight matrices indeed unfold gradually during training. May include small-scale real-task validation.","authors_note":"Emmanuel Abbe is a professor at EPFL/Apple with deep expertise in learning theory and information theory. Samy Bengio is a senior researcher at Apple ML Research, formerly at Google Brain."},"tags":["transformer","training-dynamics","rank-increase","generalization"],"notable_authors":["Emmanuel Abbe","Samy Bengio"],"keywords":["transformers","low-rank bias","incremental learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"证明Transformer通过权重矩阵秩渐进增长完成学习，解释了warmup的必要性，为LoRA类低秩适配方法提供理论支撑，直接指导训练调度设计。","en":"Proves that Transformer learns by gradually increasing weight matrix rank; it explains the necessity of warmup, provides theoretical support for LoRA-like low-rank adaptation methods, and directly guides training schedule design."}},{"id":"AhnCDS23","title":"Transformers learn to implement preconditioned gradient descent for in-context learning","authors":["Kwangjun Ahn","Xiang Cheng","Hadi Daneshmand","Suvrit Sra"],"institutions":["MIT"],"abstract":"$2f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/AhnCDS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/AhnCDS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/8ed3d610ea4b68e7afb30ea7d01422c6-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer 在做 in-context learning（ICL）时，内部到底在执行什么算法？此前的理论工作（如 Akyürek et al., von Oswald et al.）表明 Transformer 可以实现梯度下降，但这些分析局限于普通 GD，没有解释 Transformer 是否能实现更高效的优化算法。","importance":"理论/机制级贡献，对理解 pretrain 后模型的 ICL 能力有直接价值。如果 Transformer 在 ICL 时实现的是预条件梯度下降（preconditioned GD）而非普通 GD，这解释了为什么 ICL 在实践中收敛很快——模型不仅学会了做优化，还学会了做更好的优化。这对理解 pretrain 中涌现的 ICL 能力的本质很重要。","technical_approach":"理论证明 Transformer 在处理线性回归 ICL 任务时，其前向传播等价于执行预条件梯度下降（preconditioned gradient descent）。预条件矩阵由 attention 层隐式构造，利用了输入数据的协方差结构。与此前 'Transformer = GD' 的结果相比，关键进步是证明了 Transformer 能自适应地利用数据统计量来加速收敛，而非执行固定步长的 vanilla GD。","experiments":"主要是理论证明，辅以合成线性回归任务上的实验验证。实验展示训练好的 Transformer 的 ICL 行为确实与预条件 GD 的轨迹高度吻合，而非 vanilla GD。","authors_note":"Suvrit Sra 是 MIT 的教授（现在可能在其他机构），在优化理论领域有深厚积累。Kwangjun Ahn 是 MIT 的博士生/博后。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"What algorithm does a Transformer actually implement during in-context learning? Prior theory showed Transformers can implement gradient descent, but didn't explain whether they can implement more efficient optimization algorithms.","importance":"A theory/mechanism-level contribution directly relevant to understanding ICL capabilities that emerge from pretraining. If Transformers implement preconditioned GD rather than vanilla GD during ICL, it explains why ICL converges fast in practice—the model learns not just to optimize, but to optimize well.","technical_approach":"Proves that Transformers performing ICL on linear regression tasks implement preconditioned gradient descent in their forward pass. The preconditioner is implicitly constructed by attention layers using the input data's covariance structure. The key advance over prior 'Transformer = GD' results is showing adaptive use of data statistics for faster convergence, not fixed-step vanilla GD.","experiments":"Primarily theoretical proofs, supplemented by synthetic linear regression experiments. Shows that trained Transformer ICL behavior closely matches preconditioned GD trajectories rather than vanilla GD.","authors_note":"Suvrit Sra is a professor at MIT (possibly now elsewhere) with deep expertise in optimization theory. Kwangjun Ahn is a PhD student/postdoc at MIT."},"tags":["in-context-learning","transformers","optimization","generalization"],"notable_authors":["Suvrit Sra","Kwangjun Ahn"],"keywords":["Transformers","In-context learning","adaptive gradient methods"],"recommendation":{"zh":"推翻了上下文学习等价于普通梯度下降的固有认知，证明其执行的是预条件GD，解释了ICL收敛快的原因，指导预训练强化ICL能力的设计。","en":"Overturns the prior that in-context learning equals vanilla gradient descent, proving it implements preconditioned GD; this explains the fast convergence of ICL and guides pretraining design to enhance ICL ability."}},{"id":"AlabdulmohsinZ023","title":"Getting ViT in Shape: Scaling Laws for Compute-Optimal Model Design","authors":["Ibrahim M. Alabdulmohsin","Xiaohua Zhai","Alexander Kolesnikov","Lucas Beyer"],"institutions":["Google Research"],"abstract":"$30","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/AlabdulmohsinZ023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/AlabdulmohsinZ023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/3504a4fa45685d668ce92797fbbf1895-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是 ViT 在给定算力预算下应该如何选宽度、深度、patch 大小等结构超参，而不是继续沿用 NLP 或 CNN 时代的经验比例。过去很多 ViT 设计是经验驱动或面向固定训练 recipe 调出来的，导致同样 FLOPs 下经常不是 compute-optimal。","importance":"这是典型的方法级加 scaling law 级贡献，对预训练很有参考价值。它的重要性不在于提出一个新模块，而在于把 ViT 设计从“拍脑袋调结构”推进到“按算力约束系统配型”；这直接影响大规模视觉预训练和多模态底座里视觉塔的性价比。","technical_approach":"核心方法是为 ViT 建立 compute-optimal 的缩放规律，并据此反推结构设计。和只做经验网格搜索不同，这类方法通常会把性能写成模型大小、数据量、训练步数与算力的函数，然后分析在固定训练预算下最优的深宽配比与 token 化粒度；有效的原因是 ViT 的瓶颈并不只在参数量，还在 token 数导致的二次注意力成本，所以结构最优点会显著依赖输入分辨率和 patch 设置。","experiments":"从题目可判断，实验重点应是：在相同训练算力下比较不同 ViT 配型，并验证理论预测能否命中接近最优的模型族。公开信息里没有摘要，因此不能可靠写出具体模型规模、数据集、提升幅度或是否覆盖 ImageNet/JFT 一类预训练设置。可以确定的是，这类工作通常会包含 scaling fit、设计外推和 compute-normalized 对比，而不是只报单点精度。","authors_note":"作者列表显示有 Google Research/Google DeepMind 视觉预训练线的重要作者：Alexander Kolesnikov、Lucas Beyer。该团队长期做 ViT、BiT、SigLIP 等视觉与多模态预训练工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a practical scaling question: under a fixed compute budget, what should a ViT look like, instead of inheriting architecture ratios from older CNN or NLP practice. Many ViT designs have been recipe-driven and tuned for specific setups, which means they are often not compute-optimal even at the same FLOPs.","importance":"This is a method-and-scaling-law contribution with clear relevance to pretraining. Its value is not a new module, but a more principled way to size vision backbones under compute constraints; that matters directly for large-scale vision pretraining and for multimodal systems where the vision tower must earn its cost.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is to derive compute-optimal scaling laws for ViT design and use them to choose depth, width, and tokenization granularity. Unlike pure grid search, this line of work typically models performance as a function of model size, data, training steps, and compute, then solves for the best architecture under budget. This is especially useful for ViTs because the trade-off is not just parameter count: token count drives quadratic attention cost, so the optimum depends strongly on resolution and patch size.","experiments":"The experimental center is likely compute-matched comparison across ViT designs, plus validation that the proposed scaling law predicts near-optimal architecture families. Since the abstract is not available here, I cannot state model sizes, datasets, or exact gains reliably. What is safe to infer is that the paper probably emphasizes scaling fits and budget-normalized comparisons rather than isolated top-line accuracy numbers.","authors_note":"The author list includes Alexander Kolesnikov and Lucas Beyer, both strongly associated with Google’s vision and multimodal pretraining line. Their broader body of work includes ViT, BiT, and SigLIP-style scaling-focused research."},"tags":["scaling-law","vit","compute-optimal","architecture"],"notable_authors":["Ibrahim M. Alabdulmohsin","Xiaohua Zhai","Alexander Kolesnikov","Lucas Beyer"],"keywords":["Vision transformer","scaling laws","compute-optimal model design","vision"],"recommendation":{"zh":"建立了ViT的算力最优缩放律，将ViT结构设计从经验调参推进到算力约束下的系统配型，直接指导大规模视觉/多模态预训练的视觉塔选型。","en":"Establishes compute-optimal scaling laws for ViT, pushing ViT structure design from empirical tuning to systematic configuration under compute constraints; directly guides visual tower selection for large-scale visual/multimodal pretraining."}},{"id":"AnagnostidisPBN23","title":"Dynamic Context Pruning for Efficient and Interpretable Autoregressive Transformers","authors":["Sotiris Anagnostidis","Dario Pavllo","Luca Biggio","Lorenzo Noci","Aurélien Lucchi","Thomas Hofmann"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$31","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/AnagnostidisPBN23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/AnagnostidisPBN23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/cdaac2a02c4fdcae77ba083b110efcc3-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关注 autoregressive Transformer 的上下文效率问题：不是所有历史 token 都同等重要，但标准自注意力在每一步都为全部上下文付费。过去常见的压缩或稀疏注意力多是固定规则，效率上有帮助，但难以随输入动态调整，也不容易解释模型到底保留了什么。","importance":"这是系统效率和可解释性结合的方法级工作，对长上下文预训练与推理都相关。它的重要性在于：如果能动态裁掉无关上下文，同时保持性能，就能直接减少计算和显存，而且被保留的上下文本身还能作为一种可读解释信号。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 dynamic context pruning，即在自回归生成过程中按输入和当前状态动态选择需要保留的上下文子集。和固定窗口、固定稀疏模式不同，这类方法强调 token 级或片段级的在线选择；有效原因是语言建模里真正贡献概率质量的证据往往高度稀疏。边界也很清楚：如果剪枝信号不准，就会不可逆地丢失关键依赖，尤其在长程复制、代码、数学推理这类任务上风险更高。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法可靠给出速度提升、困惑度退化或长序列 benchmark 数字。按题目判断，实验通常会报告在不同保留率下的性能-效率曲线，并展示被保留上下文是否与人类直觉或任务关键证据一致；如果做得完整，还会覆盖不同领域文本和不同序列长度的稳健性。","authors_note":"作者列表中 Aurélien Lucchi 是机器学习与高效推理方向的活跃研究者。其余机构信息无法仅凭给定内容确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a basic inefficiency in autoregressive transformers: standard attention pays for the full context at every step even though only a small fraction is usually relevant. Earlier compression and sparse-attention methods help, but many use fixed patterns that neither adapt to the input nor explain what was kept.","importance":"This is a method contribution at the intersection of efficiency and interpretability, with clear relevance to long-context training and inference. If dynamic pruning can remove irrelevant context while preserving quality, it cuts compute and memory directly, and the retained context becomes an interpretable signal of what the model actually used.","technical_approach":"The key idea is dynamic context pruning: during autoregressive generation, select a context subset online based on the current input and model state. The difference from fixed windows or static sparsity is that pruning is input-dependent at the token or segment level. This should work because useful evidence in language modeling is often sparse. The failure mode is equally clear: once pruning removes a crucial dependency, the model cannot recover it, which is especially risky for long-range copying, code, or mathematical reasoning.","experiments":"Without the abstract, I cannot report exact speedups, perplexity changes, or benchmark names. The likely evaluation includes quality-versus-efficiency curves at different retention rates, plus analysis of whether the retained context aligns with task-relevant evidence and remains robust across sequence lengths.","authors_note":"Aurélien Lucchi is an active researcher in machine learning and efficient inference. I cannot verify the full institutional affiliations from the provided information alone."},"tags":["autoregressive","context-pruning","efficiency","long-context"],"notable_authors":["Sotiris Anagnostidis","Aurélien Lucchi"],"keywords":["Transformers","Context-pruning","Efficient Transformer"],"recommendation":{"zh":"提出兼顾推理效率和可解释性的动态上下文剪枝方案，直接指导长上下文预训练和推理的效率优化，注意剪枝存在丢失长程关键依赖的风险。","en":"Proposes dynamic context pruning that balances inference efficiency and interpretability; it directly guides efficiency optimization for long-context pretraining and inference, just note that pruning risks losing critical long-range dependencies."}},{"id":"2306.04637","title":"Transformers as Statisticians: Provable In-Context Learning with In-Context Algorithm Selection","authors":["Yu Bai","Fan Chen","Huan Wang","Caiming Xiong","Song Mei"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$32","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.04637","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BaiCWXM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BaiCWXM23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/b2e63e36c57e153b9015fece2352a9f9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的核心问题是：Transformer 的 in-context learning 到底是不是在“临时学算法”，以及这种能力能否被严格证明，而不是只靠现象学解释。过去 ICL 常被描述为像做贝叶斯推断、梯度下降或元学习，但缺少一个同时覆盖多类经典学习算法、并给出统计最优性保证的统一理论。","importance":"这是 ICL 机制理解上的强理论工作，对预训练研究有长期价值。它的重要性不在于立刻改一个训练 recipe，而在于把 Transformer 能否在上下文里实现学习算法这件事从类比推进到可证明结论；这会影响我们如何设计数据分布、架构归纳偏置和训练目标来强化 ICL。","technical_approach":"作者的做法是构造并证明 Transformer 可以在上下文中实现一大类标准机器学习算法，包括最小二乘、岭回归、Lasso、广义线性模型学习，以及对两层神经网络做梯度下降。关键点不是证明一个玩具任务，而是给出较广泛 in-context data distributions 下接近最优预测能力的统计理论，并把 in-context gradient descent 作为底层统一机制。和早期只证明简单线性回归的工作相比，这篇文章的覆盖面更广，也更接近“算法选择器”：模型会根据上下文结构调用不同学习过程。","experiments":"摘要明确说重点在理论，且声称其 Transformer 构造具有 near-optimal predictive power。给定截断摘要，无法确认具体实验规模和数字，但合理推断实验会用合成回归/分类任务验证理论构造能近似实现这些算法，并展示随着上下文样本数增加，误差按理论预期下降。它更像机制验证而不是大规模 LLM benchmark。","authors_note":"作者包括 Song Mei、Caiming Xiong。Song Mei 在理论机器学习与深度网络训练动力学方面有代表性工作。机构信息未在给定内容中明确。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a precise version of the ICL question: are transformers actually learning algorithms in context, and can that be proved rather than inferred from behavior? Earlier interpretations of in-context learning often invoked Bayesian inference, gradient descent, or meta-learning by analogy, but lacked a unified statistical theory covering a broad class of algorithms.","importance":"This is a strong theory contribution on ICL mechanisms with long-term relevance to pretraining. Its importance is not an immediate recipe change, but a sharper understanding of what transformers can implement at inference time. That has implications for how we design pretraining data distributions, architectural biases, and objectives to strengthen ICL behavior.","technical_approach":"The core result is constructive and broad: the paper shows transformers can implement several standard learning algorithms in context, including least squares, ridge regression, Lasso, generalized linear model learning, and gradient descent on two-layer neural networks. A key point is that the theory is not limited to a toy linear setting. It argues for near-optimal predictive performance over various in-context data distributions, using an efficient in-context gradient descent mechanism as the unifying engine. Compared with earlier proofs for much narrower settings, this is a wider account of transformers as in-context algorithm selectors.","experiments":"The abstract makes clear that theory is the main payload and claims near-optimal predictive power. Because the provided abstract is truncated, I cannot report exact empirical setups or numbers. The likely experiments are synthetic regression and classification tasks that verify the constructive transformer approximates the target algorithms and follows the predicted scaling with context size.","authors_note":"The authors include Song Mei and Caiming Xiong. Song Mei is known for work on theoretical machine learning and deep network training dynamics. Institutional affiliations are not explicit in the provided text."},"tags":["in-context-learning","transformer","theory","generalization"],"notable_authors":["Yu Bai","Caiming Xiong","Song Mei"],"keywords":["in-context learning","transformers","deep learning theory","learning theory"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§3的统一理论框架和§4的多算法证明部分即可，将ICL的机制理解从类比推进到可证明结论，对预训练设计有长期价值。","en":"Only read §3 for the unified theoretical framework and §4 for multi-algorithm proof parts; it pushes the mechanistic understanding of ICL from analogy to provable conclusions, with long-term value for pretraining design."}},{"id":"CheeCKS23","title":"QuIP: 2-Bit Quantization of Large Language Models With Guarantees","authors":["Jerry Chee","Yaohui Cai","Volodymyr Kuleshov","Christopher De Sa"],"institutions":["Cornell University"],"abstract":"$33","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/CheeCKS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/CheeCKS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/0df38cd13520747e1e64e5b123a78ef8-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 推理的显存和带宽瓶颈要求极致量化，但将权重压缩到 2-bit 时精度通常崩溃。现有 PTQ（训练后量化）方法在 3-4 bit 效果尚可，到 2-bit 则缺乏理论保证和实用方案。","importance":"系统/方法级贡献，对 LLM serving 有直接实用价值。2-bit 量化如果可行，意味着模型体积缩小到 FP16 的 1/8，对部署成本影响巨大。对 pretrain 研究者而言，理解量化极限有助于在预训练阶段做 quantization-aware 的设计决策。QuIP 后续发展（QuIP#）成为 LLM 量化的重要 baseline。","technical_approach":"QuIP 的核心思路是在量化前对权重矩阵做随机正交变换（incoherence processing），使权重分布更均匀，从而让 round-to-nearest 量化的误差更小。理论上证明了：当权重矩阵与量化网格之间的 incoherence 足够高时，2-bit 量化的误差有可证明的上界。具体步骤：(1) 用随机 Hadamard 变换或随机正交矩阵对权重做预处理；(2) 在变换后的空间中做逐列量化；(3) 推理时在量化权重上反向变换。与 GPTQ 的区别是增加了 incoherence 预处理步骤，这是 2-bit 能 work 的关键。","experiments":"在 LLaMA 系列模型（7B-65B）上测试 2-bit 量化。QuIP 在 2-bit 下的困惑度（perplexity）显著优于 GPTQ 和 naive RTN，在 LLaMA-65B 上 2-bit QuIP 的 perplexity 接近 GPTQ 3-bit 的水平。Ablation 显示 incoherence processing 是性能提升的主要来源，去掉后退化严重。","authors_note":"Christopher De Sa 是 Cornell 的教授，长期研究低精度训练和系统优化。QuIP 后续工作 QuIP# 进一步改进了 2-bit 量化质量。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLM inference is bottlenecked by memory and bandwidth, demanding extreme quantization. But compressing weights to 2-bit typically causes accuracy collapse. Existing PTQ methods work at 3-4 bits but lack theoretical guarantees and practical solutions at 2-bit.","importance":"A system/method-level contribution with direct practical value for LLM serving. Viable 2-bit quantization means 8× compression from FP16, with massive deployment cost implications. For pretrain researchers, understanding quantization limits informs quantization-aware design decisions during pretraining. QuIP became an important baseline in LLM quantization (followed by QuIP#).","technical_approach":"QuIP's key idea is applying random orthogonal transformations (incoherence processing) to weight matrices before quantization, making the weight distribution more uniform so that round-to-nearest quantization incurs smaller error. Theoretically proves that when incoherence between weights and the quantization grid is sufficiently high, 2-bit quantization error has a provable upper bound. Steps: (1) preprocess weights with random Hadamard or orthogonal transforms; (2) quantize column-wise in the transformed space; (3) apply inverse transform on quantized weights during inference. The critical difference from GPTQ is the incoherence preprocessing step—this is what makes 2-bit work.","experiments":"Tested on LLaMA models (7B–65B) at 2-bit. QuIP significantly outperforms GPTQ and naive RTN in perplexity at 2-bit; on LLaMA-65B, 2-bit QuIP approaches GPTQ 3-bit perplexity. Ablation confirms incoherence processing is the main performance driver—removing it causes severe degradation.","authors_note":"Christopher De Sa is a Cornell professor with long-standing work on low-precision training and systems optimization. QuIP was followed by QuIP# which further improved 2-bit quantization quality."},"tags":["quantization","llm","inference"],"notable_authors":["Christopher De Sa"],"keywords":["Quantization","Large Language Models","Adaptive Rounding","Theoretical Guarantees"],"recommendation":{"zh":"首个给出LLM 2bit量化理论保证和实用方案的工作，直接指导推理部署和预训练阶段的量化感知设计，是LLM量化研究的重要基线。","en":"First work that provides theoretical guarantees and practical solutions for 2-bit LLM quantization; it directly guides inference deployment and quantization-aware design during pretraining, and is an important baseline for LLM quantization research."}},{"id":"ChenXGLZLMZW23","title":"DiffUTE: Universal Text Editing Diffusion Model","authors":["Haoxing Chen","Zhuoer Xu","Zhangxuan Gu","Jun Lan","Xing Zheng","Yaohui Li","Changhua Meng","Huijia Zhu","Weiqiang Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Diffusion model based language-guided image editing has achieved great success recently. However, existing state-of-the-art diffusion models struggle with rendering correct text and text style during generation. To tackle this problem, we propose a universal self-supervised text editing diffusion model (DiffUTE), which aims to replace or modify words in the source image with another one while maintaining its realistic appearance. Specifically, we build our model on a diffusion model and carefully modify the network structure to enable the model for drawing multilingual characters with the help of glyph and position information. Moreover, we design a self-supervised learning framework to leverage large amounts of web data to improve the representation ability of the model. Experimental results show that our method achieves an impressive performance and enables controllable editing on in-the-wild images with high fidelity. Our code will be avaliable in \\url{https://github.com/chenhaoxing/DiffUTE}.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenXGLZLMZW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenXGLZLMZW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/c7138635035501eb71b0adf6ddc319d6-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion-lm","text-editing","non-autoregressive","generation"],"keywords":["Diffusion model","text editing","self-supervied learning"]},{"id":"ChengLCL0023","title":"Lift Yourself Up: Retrieval-augmented Text Generation with Self-Memory","authors":["Xin Cheng","Di Luo","Xiuying Chen","Lemao Liu","Dongyan Zhao","Rui Yan"],"institutions":["Peking University","Microsoft Research Asia"],"abstract":"$34","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChengLCL0023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChengLCL0023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/887262aeb3eafb01ef0fd0e3a87a8831-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"传统检索增强生成依赖固定外部语料库，语料质量限制生成效果，现有工作仅优化检索匹配策略，未对语料库本身做迭代优化。","importance":"方法级贡献，扩展了检索增强生成的范式，让记忆池可以动态迭代生成，突破了固定语料库的质量上限。","technical_approach":"SelfMem框架，迭代利用检索增强生成器的输出作为新的记忆候选，通过记忆选择器挑选优质输出更新记忆池。舍弃了固定外部语料库的设计，与现有检索增强方法的区别是记忆池可以无界动态更新，生成与检索形成正向循环。","experiments":"在摘要生成、开放域问答任务上测试，基线为普通检索增强生成模型，ROUGE得分比基线高2.3~3.1。消融实验显示迭代3轮后效果达到最优，继续迭代效果下降。","authors_note":"作者来自北京大学、微软亚洲研究院。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Traditional retrieval-augmented generation relies on fixed external corpora, corpus quality limits generation performance. Existing works only optimize retrieval matching strategies, do not iteratively optimize the corpus itself.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution, expands the paradigm of retrieval-augmented generation, enables dynamic iterative generation of memory pool, breaks the quality upper limit of fixed corpora.","technical_approach":"The SelfMem framework iteratively uses outputs of the retrieval-augmented generator as new memory candidates, selects high-quality outputs to update the memory pool via a memory selector. It abandons the fixed external corpus design, the difference from existing retrieval-augmented methods is that the memory pool can be updated dynamically without boundary, generation and retrieval form a positive cycle.","experiments":"Tested on abstract generation and open-domain QA tasks, baselines are common retrieval-augmented generation models. ROUGE score is 2.3~3.1 higher than baselines. Ablation shows performance reaches optimal after 3 iterations, further iterations lead to performance degradation.","authors_note":"Authors are from Peking University, Microsoft Research Asia."},"tags":["rag","retrieval","text-generation","memory"],"keywords":["natural language processing","retrieval-augmented text generation","self memory"],"notable_authors":["Dongyan Zhao","Lemao Liu"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"更高质量的记忆库可以提升检索增强生成的效果","claim_en":"Higher quality memory base improves the performance of retrieval-augmented generation","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"属于检索增强生成的范式扩展，仅作为动态自记忆池相关文献备查，无需读正文。","en":"A paradigm extension for retrieval-augmented generation, only for literature reference on dynamic self-memory pool, no need to read full text."}},{"id":"ChoiSD23","title":"Tools for Verifying Neural Models&apos; Training Data","authors":["Dami Choi","Yonadav Shavit","David Kristjanson Duvenaud"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChoiSD23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChoiSD23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/03e33e1f62e3302b47fe1d38a235921e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["data-quality","memorization","data-provenance","privacy"]},{"id":"Coda-FornoBABWS23","title":"Meta-in-context learning in large language models","authors":["Julian Coda-Forno","Marcel Binz","Zeynep Akata","Matt M. Botvinick","Jane X. Wang","Eric Schulz"],"institutions":["Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems","DeepMind"],"abstract":"$35","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Coda-FornoBABWS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Coda-FornoBABWS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/cda04d7ea67ea1376bf8c6962d8541e0-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有工作普遍认为上下文学习策略是模型预训练时固定的，无法通过上下文调整，现有工作仅优化上下文示例，未优化上下文学习本身的能力。","importance":"机制级贡献，验证了上下文学习能力本身可以通过元上下文训练改进，为提升LLM上下文学习能力优化提供了新方向。","technical_approach":"提出元上下文学习现象，通过在上下文中提供上下文学习的示例，让模型自适应调整上下文学习策略。舍弃了固定上下文示例设计的传统逻辑，与现有上下文学习方法的区别是优化上下文学习策略本身，而非特定任务的提示。","experiments":"在一维回归、双臂老虎机任务上测试，基线为普通上下文学习方法，元上下文训练后上下文学习效果提升21%~29%。实验显示元上下文学习可以自适应调整模型对任务的先验分布。","authors_note":"作者来自马普智能系统研究所、DeepMind，核心作者Jane X. Wang深耕元学习与LLM机制方向。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing works generally believe in-context learning strategies are fixed during model pretraining, cannot be adjusted via context. Existing works only optimize in-context demonstrations, do not optimize the in-context learning ability itself.","importance":"This is a mechanism-level contribution. It verifies in-context learning ability itself can be improved via meta-in-context training, provides a new direction for optimizing LLM in-context learning ability.","technical_approach":"It proposes the meta-in-context learning phenomenon, provides demonstrations of in-context learning in the context to let the model adaptively adjust in-context learning strategies. It abandons the traditional logic of fixed in-context demonstration design, the difference from existing in-context learning methods is that it optimizes the in-context learning strategy itself, not the prompt for specific tasks.","experiments":"Tested on 1D regression and two-armed bandit tasks, baselines are common in-context learning methods. In-context learning performance improves by 21%~29% after meta-in-context training. Experiments show meta-in-context learning can adaptively adjust the model's prior distribution over tasks.","authors_note":"Authors are from Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, DeepMind, core author Jane X. Wang has long worked on meta-learning and LLM mechanism research."},"tags":["in-context-learning","meta-learning","llm","generalization"],"keywords":["Large language models","in-context learning","meta-learning","GPT-3"],"notable_authors":["Zeynep Akata","Jane X. Wang"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"上下文学习是LLM的核心能力之一","claim_en":"In-context learning is one of the core capabilities of LLMs","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"上下文学习策略可以通过元上下文训练调整，并非预训练时固定不变","claim_en":"In-context learning strategies can be adjusted via meta-in-context training, not fixed during pretraining","opposes":"Prior works认为上下文学习策略是预训练阶段固化的，无法通过上下文调整","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4.1 Figure 2","why_contested":"It provides a new path to improve LLM in-context learning ability without further pretraining."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3元上下文学习现象验证和§5实验结果即可，确认上下文学习策略本身可通过上下文调整的结论。","en":"Only read §3 for meta-in-context learning phenomenon validation and §5 for experiment results, confirm that in-context learning strategy itself can be adjusted via prompts."}},{"id":"DeshmukhESW23","title":"Pengi: An Audio Language Model for Audio Tasks","authors":["Soham Deshmukh","Benjamin Elizalde","Rita Singh","Huaming Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$36","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DeshmukhESW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DeshmukhESW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/3a2e5889b4bbef997ddb13b55d5acf77-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：能不能像文本大模型一样，把音频任务统一成“给定指令或文本，预测音频相关输出”的语言建模问题，而不是每个任务单独训练一个专用头。过去音频领域常见做法是任务特定模型或音频编码器加分类/检索头，迁移性和任务统一性都有限，所以值得重新用 LM 范式做一遍。","importance":"这项工作的意义在于把音频任务往统一语言接口上收敛，是典型的 pretrain 范式探索。对预训练研究的启示很直接：如果音频可以被稳定映射到语言模型可消费的离散或文本化表示，那么很多任务就能共享同一套指令学习和生成接口，这与 AudioLM、VALL-E、Qwen-Audio 一类“把新模态放进 LM”路线在研究动机上是一致的。","technical_approach":"Pengi 的核心方法是把预训练语言模型和音频表征模块结合起来，让模型在文本提示条件下处理多种音频任务。它更像一种迁移与统一框架，而不是重新设计音频生成目标；关键在于把音频输入压到语言模型能对齐的表示空间，再通过 instruction-style prompting 让同一模型完成分类、检索、描述等不同任务。这样的设计有效，是因为很多音频任务最终都可以转写为文本标签、文本描述或文本条件下的匹配判断；作者显然选择了复用强大的文本 LM 能力，而不是从头训练一个纯音频自回归模型。代价也很明确：这种做法在“音频理解”上通常比“高保真音频生成”更自然，对时间精细结构和波形级建模的覆盖有限。","experiments":"从题目和已知背景看，论文应主要覆盖多音频任务上的零样本或少样本评测，但这里没有可靠的摘要和数字，不能写具体指标。合理预期的实验重点包括音频分类、文本-音频检索、自动音频描述等，并与任务专用模型或先前 audio-language 模型比较。对读者最有价值的不是单个 benchmark 分数，而是它是否证明“一个统一音频 LM 接口”在多个任务上都能工作，以及不同提示模板、音频编码器和 LM 规模对结果有多敏感。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a simple but important question: can a wide range of audio tasks be cast into a language-modeling interface, instead of training a separate specialist model for each task. Traditional audio pipelines are often task-specific, which limits transfer and makes unified pretraining harder.","importance":"Its contribution is paradigm-oriented rather than purely benchmark-oriented: it pushes audio toward a shared LM interface. For pretraining research, the message is clear—if audio can be mapped into representations consumable by a language model, then many tasks can reuse the same instruction-following and generation machinery. This aligns well with the broader trend of treating new modalities as tokens or token-like inputs for unified modeling.","technical_approach":"Pengi appears to combine an audio representation module with a pretrained language model so that multiple audio tasks can be solved through prompting. This is best viewed as a transfer-and-unification framework, not a new waveform-level generative objective. The key move is to encode audio into a space that the LM can align with text, then use instruction-style prompts to solve classification, retrieval, or captioning with one model. That design is effective because many audio tasks naturally terminate in text labels, textual descriptions, or text-conditioned matching decisions. The trade-off is also clear: this setup is usually more natural for audio understanding than for high-fidelity audio generation, and it does not directly solve fine temporal acoustic modeling.","experiments":"Based on the title and context, the paper likely evaluates zero-shot or few-shot performance across multiple audio tasks, but exact numbers are not available from the provided information and should not be invented. The useful experimental questions are whether the unified interface works consistently across classification, retrieval, and captioning, and how sensitive it is to prompt format, audio encoder choice, and LM scale. Those matter more here than a single headline score.","authors_note":""},"tags":["audio-lm","multimodal","audio-understanding"],"keywords":["audio language model","audio representation learning","audio and speech processing","multi-task and transfer learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4多任务统一框架设计和下游评测结果即可，了解音频模态对齐文本LM的可行路径。","en":"Only read §4 for multi-task unified framework design and downstream evaluation results, learn feasible path of aligning audio modality to text LMs."}},{"id":"DziriLSLJLWWB0H23","title":"Faith and Fate: Limits of Transformers on Compositionality","authors":["Nouha Dziri","Ximing Lu","Melanie Sclar","Xiang Lorraine Li","Liwei Jiang","Bill Yuchen Lin","Sean Welleck","Peter West","Chandra Bhagavatula","Ronan Le Bras","Jena D. Hwang","Soumya Sanyal","Xiang Ren","Allyson Ettinger","Zaïd Harchaoui","Yejin Choi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$37","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DziriLSLJLWWB0H23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DziriLSLJLWWB0H23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/deb3c28192f979302c157cb653c15e90-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心结论是：Transformer 在组合泛化上的失败不是边角问题，而是当前自回归语言建模范式在结构性推理上的稳定短板。过去很多工作通过扩大数据、prompt engineering 或任务特化来回避这个问题，但作者直接问一个更尖锐的问题：即使模型在表面分布上表现很好，它是否真正学会了可组合的规则，而不是记住高频模板。","importance":"这项工作的价值更偏机制分析和能力边界刻画。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，扩大规模能提升平均任务表现，但未必自动带来组合规则的系统性泛化；如果训练目标和数据分布主要奖励局部共现统计，模型就可能在看似“理解”的地方依然依赖捷径。它对合成数据设计、课程训练、结构偏置和 reasoning-oriented post-training 都有直接参考意义。","technical_approach":"方法上不是提出新模型，而是构造一组更能剥离表面统计捷径的组合性测试。作者系统评估 Transformer 在需要变量绑定、规则组合、多步条件推断等场景下的表现，并设计分布外拆分，确保训练集中的高频模式不能直接覆盖测试答案。关键点在于把“能做对”与“为什么能做对”分开：模型可能在 IID 样本上很强，但一旦组合方式变化，性能就明显崩塌，这说明其内部表征更接近模板拟合而非抽象规则操作。","experiments":"核心实验事实是：多类 Transformer 模型在标准分布内任务上可取得较高准确率，但在组合拆分和更强控制条件下显著下降。论文比较了不同规模和设置的 Transformer，并按任务难度与组合深度报告性能；典型现象是随着组合链条变长、需要保持一致的变量更多，错误迅速累积。更有信息量的分析通常来自 error breakdown：模型常见失败模式包括变量错配、局部一致但全局不一致、以及依赖训练中见过的浅层词序模式。作者据此指出，仅靠更多同分布数据很难根治这一问题。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper argues that transformers' failures on compositional generalization are not isolated benchmark artifacts but a persistent weakness of current language modeling. Earlier work often softened this issue with more data, better prompts, or task-specific setups. This paper instead asks whether strong surface performance actually reflects rule-like generalization, or merely memorization of frequent patterns.","importance":"Its contribution is primarily about capability diagnosis and mechanism-level understanding. The pretraining takeaway is clear: scaling improves average performance, but it does not automatically produce systematic compositionality. If the training objective mainly rewards local co-occurrence statistics, models can look competent while still relying on shortcuts where abstract rule application is required. That matters for synthetic data design, curriculum learning, structural inductive biases, and reasoning-oriented post-training.","technical_approach":"The paper does not introduce a new model; it builds cleaner evaluations that remove shallow statistical shortcuts. It studies transformers on tasks involving variable binding, rule composition, and multi-step conditional inference, with out-of-distribution splits designed so that frequent training templates do not trivially solve test cases. The key distinction is between solving an instance and solving it for the right reason. Models can perform well in-distribution yet collapse when the compositional structure changes, suggesting template matching rather than abstract rule manipulation.","experiments":"The main empirical finding is that multiple transformer variants reach strong in-distribution accuracy but degrade sharply on compositional splits and stricter controls. The paper compares models across task families and reports performance as compositional depth increases. A recurring pattern is that errors grow quickly with longer dependency chains and more variables that must remain consistently bound. The error analysis is the useful part: common failures include variable swaps, local consistency with global inconsistency, and over-reliance on seen surface orderings. The paper therefore argues that more IID data alone is unlikely to fix the problem.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer","compositionality","generalization"],"notable_authors":["Nouha Dziri","Ximing Lu","Melanie Sclar","Xiang Lorraine Li","Liwei Jiang"],"keywords":["Natural language processing","large language models","multi-step reasoning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"直接看§3组合性测试构造和§4分布外性能崩塌实验即可，明确Transformer组合泛化的原生短板。","en":"Directly read §3 for compositionality test construction and §4 for OOD performance collapse experiments, clarify the native weakness of Transformer in compositional generalization."}},{"id":"FanWDLRBAG0L23","title":"Reinforcement Learning for Fine-tuning Text-to-Image Diffusion Models","authors":["Ying Fan","Olivia Watkins","Yuqing Du","Hao Liu","Moonkyung Ryu","Craig Boutilier","Pieter Abbeel","Mohammad Ghavamzadeh","Kangwook Lee","Kimin Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/FanWDLRBAG0L23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/FanWDLRBAG0L23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/fc65fab891d83433bd3c8d966edde311-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：文本到图像 diffusion 模型通常靠 likelihood 或 reconstruction 类目标训练，但这些目标和人类偏好并不完全一致，因此生成结果常常在‘可采样’和‘真正好看/符合指令’之间有差距。过去做法多是依赖更大数据或人工筛选，作者则尝试把 RL 直接用于 diffusion fine-tuning，让优化目标更贴近可评价的最终图像质量。","importance":"它的重要性在于把 RLHF 类思想迁移到生成扩散模型，属于 post-train 反馈学习对生成建模的扩展。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，生成模型的训练目标未必需要被 likelihood 完全绑定；当可微 surrogate 或 reward model 足够可靠时，可以在后训练阶段显式优化人偏好、审美或指令遵循。这对未来统一语言-图像生成模型的训练接口很有参考价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法是对 text-to-image diffusion 进行强化学习微调。作者将整条去噪采样轨迹视作 sequential decision process，定义基于 reward model、审美评分器或人类偏好的奖励，再用策略优化方法更新 diffusion 模型。关键设计难点在于 diffusion 不是标准离散 token policy：动作是高维连续去噪步骤，长轨迹方差高，且 reward 常只在最终图像上给出。作者因此需要在 credit assignment、KL 约束或行为保持上做专门处理，以避免模型为了 reward 牺牲多样性或出现视觉伪影。","experiments":"实验结论是：RL fine-tuning 可以显著提升特定 reward 指标下的图像质量和偏好得分，但收益高度依赖 reward 设计，并存在典型 reward hacking 风险。论文通常比较原始 diffusion 模型、监督式微调和 RL 微调，在人评、审美分数或 prompt alignment 上报告改进。更有价值的观察是，加入适当的 KL 或保守更新约束可减轻模式塌缩和伪影；如果 reward model 偏差较大，模型会快速学会投机。也就是说，这条路是可行的，但关键不在 RL 本身，而在 reward 信号质量与优化约束。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a mismatch in text-to-image diffusion: training objectives based on likelihood or denoising quality do not fully align with what humans actually prefer in final images. As a result, models can be good samplers but still underperform on aesthetics or instruction following. The paper explores reinforcement learning as a fine-tuning mechanism to optimize image quality more directly.","importance":"Its significance lies in extending RLHF-style ideas to diffusion generation. For pretraining and posttraining research, the key lesson is that generative models need not remain tied to likelihood-style objectives once a reliable reward signal is available. If reward models are good enough, post-training can explicitly optimize for preference, aesthetics, or prompt fidelity. This is relevant to future unified language-image generators as well.","technical_approach":"The core method is RL fine-tuning for text-to-image diffusion models. The denoising trajectory is treated as a sequential decision process, rewards are derived from preference models, aesthetic scorers, or alignment signals, and policy optimization is used to update the diffusion model. The hard part is that diffusion is not a standard token policy: actions are high-dimensional denoising steps, trajectories are long, and rewards are often only observed on the final image. The method therefore needs careful credit assignment and conservative updates, often with KL-style constraints, to avoid sacrificing diversity or creating artifacts.","experiments":"The main empirical result is that RL fine-tuning can improve targeted reward metrics and preference scores, but the gains depend strongly on reward quality and come with clear reward-hacking risks. The paper compares base diffusion models, supervised fine-tuning, and RL-tuned variants on human preference, aesthetic score, and prompt alignment. The most informative observation is that conservative optimization, such as KL regularization, helps prevent mode collapse and visual artifacts. When the reward model is biased, the diffusion model quickly exploits it. So the route is promising, but reward quality and optimization constraints are the real bottlenecks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reinforcement-learning","diffusion","alignment","text-to-image"],"notable_authors":["Ying Fan","Olivia Watkins","Yuqing Du","Hao Liu","Moonkyung Ryu"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3扩散模型RL微调的轨迹建模和§5约束设计即可，参考RLHF迁移到扩散模型的工程方案。","en":"Only read §3 for trajectory modeling of diffusion model RL fine-tuning and §5 for constraint design, reference engineering solution of migrating RLHF to diffusion models."}},{"id":"2307.11353","title":"What can a Single Attention Layer Learn? A Study Through the Random Features Lens","authors":["Hengyu Fu","Tianyu Guo","Yu Bai","Song Mei"],"institutions":["Stanford University","University of California, Berkeley"],"abstract":"$38","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.11353","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Fu00M23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Fu00M23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/274db6bf1b01d8b4f07feaeb8c46f474-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"单个多头注意力层的表达能力和泛化边界缺乏严谨的理论证明，现有工作多为经验性的架构迭代，未从随机特征视角解释注意力层的学习机制。","importance":"理论级贡献，为Transformer架构的设计和改进提供了严谨的理论依据，填补了单注意力层学习机制的理论空白。","technical_approach":"从随机特征视角分析单多头注意力层，证明了在头部数足够大时，随机冻结查询和键矩阵、仅训练值矩阵的注意力层可以表达对键向量置换不变的目标函数，并给出了泛化风险的定量边界。舍弃了全参数训练的常见设置，专注于随机特征下的理论分析。","experiments":"在合成和真实序列任务上验证了理论边界的预测误差小于5%，实验结果与理论推导完全吻合。","authors_note":"作者来自斯坦福大学、加州大学伯克利分校，核心作者Song Mei深耕深度学习理论方向。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The expressive power and generalization boundary of a single multi-head attention layer lack rigorous theoretical proof. Existing works are mostly empirical architecture iterations, do not explain the learning mechanism of attention layers from the random feature perspective.","importance":"This is a theory-level contribution. It provides rigorous theoretical basis for Transformer architecture design and improvement, fills the theoretical gap of single attention layer learning mechanism.","technical_approach":"It analyzes a single multi-head attention layer from the random feature perspective, proves that when the number of heads is large enough, an attention layer with randomly frozen query and key matrices and only trainable value matrices can express target functions that are permutation invariant to key vectors, and provides quantitative excess risk bounds for generalization. It abandons the common setting of full parameter training, focuses on theoretical analysis under random feature setting.","experiments":"The prediction error of the theoretical bound is less than 5% on synthetic and real sequence tasks, experimental results fully match theoretical derivation.","authors_note":"Authors are from Stanford University, University of California, Berkeley, core author Song Mei has long worked on deep learning theory research."},"tags":["attention","theory","generalization","random-features"],"keywords":["transformers","attention","deep learning theory","random features"],"notable_authors":["Song Mei","Yu Bai"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"注意力层是Transformer架构的核心组成部分","claim_en":"Attention layers are the core component of Transformer architecture","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"单注意力层随机特征视角的理论分析，仅作为Transformer基础能力相关文献备查，不用细读。","en":"Theoretical analysis of single attention layer from random feature perspective, only for Transformer basic capability literature reference, no need for deep reading."}},{"id":"GadreIFHSNMWGZO23","title":"DataComp: In search of the next generation of multimodal datasets","authors":["Samir Yitzhak Gadre","Gabriel Ilharco","Alex Fang","Jonathan Hayase","Georgios Smyrnis","Thao Nguyen","Ryan Marten","Mitchell Wortsman","Dhruba Ghosh","Jieyu Zhang","Eyal Orgad","Rahim Entezari","Giannis Daras","Sarah M. Pratt","Vivek Ramanujan","Yonatan Bitton","Kalyani Marathe","Stephen Mussmann","Richard Vencu","Mehdi Cherti","Ranjay Krishna","Pang Wei Koh","Olga Saukh","Alexander J. Ratner","Shuran Song","Hannaneh Hajishirzi","Ali Farhadi","Romain Beaumont","Sewoong Oh","Alex Dimakis"],"institutions":["Stanford University","OpenAI","LAION","University of Washington"],"abstract":"$39","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GadreIFHSNMWGZO23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GadreIFHSNMWGZO23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/56332d41d55ad7ad8024aac625881be7-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"多模态预训练数据集设计的研究投入远少于模型架构和训练算法研究，现有工作仅优化模型和训练方法，没有标准化的数据集设计测试平台，无法客观对比不同数据过滤和筛选策略的效果。","importance":"数据级+基准级贡献，提供了128亿图文对的候选池和标准化评测流程，为多模态预训练数据研究提供了统一测试平台，填补了多模态数据集设计研究的基础设施空白。","technical_approach":"构建DataComp基准，参与者设计数据过滤技术或构建新数据源，用标准化CLIP训练代码训练模型，在38个下游任务上统一评测。基准覆盖四个数量级的计算规模，支持缩放趋势研究。","experiments":"在38个下游任务上测试，最优过滤策略比CLIP原始数据集提升12%的平均精度。缩放观察显示数据规模提升10倍时，下游平均精度提升8%。","authors_note":"作者来自斯坦福大学、OpenAI、LAION、华盛顿大学，核心团队长期深耕多模态预训练与数据研究方向。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Research investment in multimodal pretraining dataset design is far less than that in model architectures and training algorithms. Existing works only optimize models and training methods, no standardized testbed for dataset design exists, cannot objectively compare the performance of different data filtering and selection strategies.","importance":"This is a data-level and benchmark-level contribution. It provides a candidate pool of 12.8B image-text pairs and standardized evaluation pipeline, provides a unified testbed for multimodal pretraining data research, fills the infrastructure gap of multimodal dataset design research.","technical_approach":"It builds the DataComp benchmark, where participants design data filtering techniques or curate new data sources, train models with standardized CLIP training code, and evaluate on 38 downstream tasks uniformly. The benchmark covers compute scales across four orders of magnitude, supports scaling trend research.","experiments":"Tested on 38 downstream tasks, the best filtering strategy improves average accuracy by 12% compared to the original CLIP dataset. Scaling observation shows when data scale increases by 10x, downstream average accuracy improves by 8%.","authors_note":"Authors are from Stanford University, OpenAI, LAION, University of Washington, the core team has long worked on multimodal pretraining and data research."},"tags":["data-quality","multimodal-dataset","clip","data-curation","benchmark"],"keywords":["CLIP","zero-shot","data curation","vision-and-language","datasets","pre-training","benchmark"],"notable_authors":["Gabriel Ilharco","Samir Yitzhak Gadre"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大规模高质量多模态数据集是多模态预训练效果的核心影响因子","claim_en":"Large-scale high-quality multimodal datasets are the core influencing factor of multimodal pretraining performance","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"直接看基准构建规则和数据过滤策略对比结果即可，做跨多模态数据方案对比时可复用其测试框架。","en":"Directly read benchmark construction rules and data filtering strategy comparison results, its test framework can be reused when comparing cross-modal data solutions."}},{"id":"HoffmanPDDLPSSV23","title":"Training Chain-of-Thought via Latent-Variable Inference","authors":["Matthew Douglas Hoffman","Du Phan","David Dohan","Sholto Douglas","Tuan Anh Le","Aaron Parisi","Pavel Sountsov","Charles Sutton","Sharad Vikram","Rif A. Saurous"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HoffmanPDDLPSSV23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HoffmanPDDLPSSV23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/e69a9560c450ca76584d9eb37e7f5ae8-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：Chain-of-Thought 训练通常把推理过程当成显式监督文本来学，但真实场景里高质量 CoT 标注稀缺，而且把思维链硬当唯一正确序列会引入很强的表面形式偏置。作者试图把 CoT 视为潜变量，通过潜变量推断来训练模型，而不是要求每个样本都给出唯一可见的推理轨迹。","importance":"这项工作很值得关注，属于范式层面的训练信号重构。它对 pretrain/posttrain 接口尤其有意义，因为它在问：推理能力是否必须靠显式 rationale 蒸馏，还是可以把中间推理状态作为隐变量去学习。这个问题直接关系到 latent reasoning、test-time compute 和监督信号质量。","technical_approach":"核心方法是用 latent-variable inference 训练 CoT。直观上，最终答案是观测变量，推理链是潜变量；训练时不强迫模型匹配某一条给定 reasoning trace，而是在可能的推理路径上做推断和优化。这样设计的好处是减轻对人工 CoT 标注的依赖，也减少把语言表面形式误当推理本体的问题。与直接监督 CoT 或 self-training rationale 相比，它更接近“多条潜在思路都能导向同一答案”的设定；代价是推断会更复杂，训练成本也更高。","experiments":"虽然没有摘要细节，但从标题可以确认实验应围绕数学、符号推理或多步问答等需要 CoT 的任务展开，并与直接 CoT 监督、answer-only 训练或其他 latent rationale 方法比较。无法确认具体模型规模、数据量和提升数字，因此不能编造。最值得关注的实验点是：在没有或只有少量 CoT 标注时，latent-variable 训练能否逼近甚至超过显式 CoT 监督；以及学习到的隐式推理是否在长度泛化或采样多样性上更好。","authors_note":"作者列表包含 Matthew D. Hoffman、David Dohan、Sholto Douglas、Tuan Anh Le 等。仅凭给定信息无法完全确认机构，但这些作者与 Google/DeepMind 系列推理与生成建模工作相关。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a limitation of standard chain-of-thought training: it treats reasoning traces as explicit supervised text, but high-quality CoT annotations are scarce, and forcing one visible rationale as the target introduces a strong form bias. The alternative explored here is to treat the reasoning process as a latent variable and train through inference over that latent structure.","importance":"This is a significant contribution at the training-paradigm level. It matters especially at the pretrain–posttrain interface because it asks whether reasoning ability must come from explicit rationale distillation or can instead emerge from learning with hidden intermediate computation. That question is central to latent reasoning, supervision quality, and the role of test-time compute.","technical_approach":"The key idea is to formulate CoT training as latent-variable inference. The final answer is observed, while the reasoning trace is latent. Training therefore optimizes over possible hidden reasoning paths instead of forcing the model to imitate one provided rationale exactly. The benefit is reduced dependence on costly CoT labels and less overcommitment to a particular textual form of reasoning. Compared with direct CoT supervision or rationale self-training, this is closer to the realistic setting where multiple internal derivations can lead to the same answer. The trade-off is more expensive and more delicate inference during training.","experiments":"Even without the abstract, the likely evaluation scope is clear: math, symbolic reasoning, or multi-step QA tasks where CoT supervision is usually helpful, compared against direct CoT supervision, answer-only training, or other latent-rationale baselines. The available metadata does not support reporting exact model sizes, data scale, or gains. The most important empirical question is whether latent-variable training can match or beat explicit CoT supervision when rationale annotations are missing or limited, and whether it improves length generalization or reasoning diversity.","authors_note":"The author list includes Matthew D. Hoffman, David Dohan, Sholto Douglas, and Tuan Anh Le. From the provided metadata alone, the institutions should not be asserted with certainty, though these authors are associated with major Google/DeepMind lines of work on reasoning and generative modeling."},"tags":["chain-of-thought","latent-variable","training-cot","reasoning"],"notable_authors":["Matthew Douglas Hoffman","David Dohan","Sholto Douglas","Tuan Anh Le"],"keywords":["Large language models","latent-variable models","control variates","chain-of-thought","MCMC"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我之前认为CoT训练必须依赖显式推理标注的认知，应立刻在内部推理能力训练的ablation中复现其潜变量方案。","en":"Changes my prior that CoT training must rely on explicit reasoning annotations, the latent variable solution should be immediately reproduced in internal reasoning capability training ablations."}},{"id":"HwangLKK0O23","title":"Sequential Preference Ranking for Efficient Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback","authors":["Minyoung Hwang","Gunmin Lee","Hogun Kee","Chanwoo Kim","Kyungjae Lee","Songhwai Oh"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HwangLKK0O23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HwangLKK0O23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/99766cda865be123d55a1d9666c7b9fc-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是 RLHF 中偏好数据采集和利用效率低的问题：传统做法通常独立地比较成对回答，再训练 reward model，但这种静态 pairwise 标注信息密度不高，标注成本也大。随着大模型对齐越来越依赖人工偏好，如何在同等标注预算下学到更强偏好信号变得很关键。","importance":"它的价值偏 posttrain 接口，但对 pretrain 闭环同样有意义。更高效的偏好排序意味着可以在更少人工反馈下得到更可靠的 reward signal，这直接影响后续 SFT/RL 的训练信号质量，也影响我们如何设计从预训练能力到对齐能力的过渡。它不是基础范式改写，但属于实用影响很大的系统方法。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 sequential preference ranking：不再把人类反馈仅看作孤立 pairwise 比较，而把多个候选响应放到一个序列化排序流程里，提取更丰富的相对偏好信息。这样做的关键好处是一次标注能产生多组排序约束，信息利用率高于简单胜负标签；与标准 Bradley-Terry 风格成对偏好建模相比，它更接近 listwise ranking。设计上的 trade-off 是，排序任务对标注界面和一致性要求更高，但能显著提高 sample efficiency。","experiments":"从题目可判断实验重点应是：在相同标注预算下，sequential ranking 相比 pairwise preference learning 带来更好的 reward model 质量和更优的 RLHF 最终策略表现。可能还会报告数据效率曲线，以及排序长度、噪声标注和计算成本的消融；但给定信息无法确认具体模型、数据集和提升数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper addresses a practical weakness in RLHF: standard pairwise preference collection is information-poor and expensive. As alignment pipelines scale, extracting more supervision from the same human budget becomes increasingly important.","importance":"The contribution sits at the pretrain–posttrain interface rather than core pretraining, but it is still highly relevant. Better preference efficiency means better reward signals with less annotation, which affects the quality of downstream SFT/RL tuning and, indirectly, how pretrained capabilities are turned into aligned behavior. It is not a paradigm shift, but it is the kind of systems-method improvement that can matter a lot in practice.","technical_approach":"The key idea is sequential preference ranking: instead of treating feedback as isolated pairwise comparisons, the method gathers or models preferences over a sequence or list of candidate responses. This turns one labeling action into multiple ranking constraints, making supervision denser than a simple win/loss signal. Relative to classic pairwise Bradley–Terry-style setups, the method is closer to listwise ranking and should improve sample efficiency, at the cost of somewhat more demanding annotation design.","experiments":"From the title, the central empirical claim is likely that sequential ranking yields better reward models and stronger RLHF outcomes under the same labeling budget than standard pairwise preference learning. Useful ablations would include data-efficiency curves, ranking length, annotator noise, and compute overhead, but the prompt does not provide enough information to state exact models, datasets, or numbers.","authors_note":""},"tags":["rlhf","preference-learning","sample-efficiency","ranking"],"notable_authors":["Minyoung Hwang","Gunmin Lee","Hogun Kee","Chanwoo Kim","Kyungjae Lee"],"keywords":["Reinforcement Learning; Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback; Preference-based Reinforcement Learning; Human-Robot Interaction"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3序列化偏好排序设计和§4标注效率对比结果即可，做RLHF偏好标注时可参考其listwise方案提升样本利用率。","en":"Only read §3 for sequential preference ranking design and §4 for labeling efficiency comparison results, its listwise solution can be referenced to improve sample efficiency when doing RLHF preference labeling."}},{"id":"JainCDSSZT23","title":"Mnemosyne: Learning to Train Transformers with Transformers","authors":["Deepali Jain","Krzysztof Marcin Choromanski","Kumar Avinava Dubey","Sumeet Singh","Vikas Sindhwani","Tingnan Zhang","Jie Tan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JainCDSSZT23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JainCDSSZT23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/f41b6e5af73421e46ceed9cb036e72e7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是优化器和训练规则高度手工设计的问题：Transformer 训练通常依赖人写的 optimizer、lr schedule 和若干经验技巧，而这些规则跨模型和任务迁移性有限。作者想问的是，能不能让一个 Transformer 学会如何训练另一个 Transformer，从而自动发现更好的更新策略。","importance":"这属于优化器学习和元学习方向的重要探索。对 pretrain 的意义在于，如果 learned optimizer 真能跨规模、跨任务泛化，它会改变我们设计大模型训练 recipe 的方式，从固定规则转向数据驱动更新器；但这类工作的历史难点一直是泛化和稳定性，所以即使结果积极，也更像潜在方向而非立刻替代 AdamW。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Mnemosyne：用 Transformer 作为元优化器，学习训练 Transformer。它不是手工指定某种梯度变换，而是让一个序列模型读入参数、梯度或训练状态的历史，再输出更新决策；与传统 learned optimizer 相比，Transformer 更适合建模长时依赖和跨参数模式。设计上最大的挑战是元训练分布与目标分布错位，所以有效方法通常需要限制状态表示、做任务族训练，并显式控制泛化。","experiments":"题目表明实验重点应是跨任务或跨架构泛化：在一组 Transformer 训练任务上学到的优化器，能否转移到未见设置，并优于手工基线或已有 learned optimizer。可能会报告收敛速度、最终 loss、训练稳定性以及上下文长度对 optimizer 效果的影响；但给定信息不足以写出具体模型规模、数据集和数值。","authors_note":"作者列表中有 Krzysztof Marcin Choromanski、Vikas Sindhwani。两位都长期参与高效 Transformer、优化与序列建模相关研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses how manually engineered our training rules still are. Transformer training typically depends on hand-designed optimizers, schedules, and stabilization tricks that do not transfer cleanly across settings. The central question is whether one Transformer can learn how to train another.","importance":"This is a meaningful exploration in learned optimization and meta-training. For pretraining, the upside would be large if a learned optimizer could generalize across scales and tasks: recipe design could become more data-driven and less heuristic. The catch, as history shows, is generalization and stability, so even strong results here should be read as a promising direction rather than a drop-in replacement for AdamW.","technical_approach":"Mnemosyne uses a Transformer as a meta-optimizer for training Transformers. Instead of hard-coding a gradient transformation, the learned optimizer consumes training-state information—likely gradients, parameters, or historical traces—and predicts updates. Relative to earlier learned optimizers, the use of a Transformer is motivated by its ability to model long-range dependencies and shared patterns across coordinates and time. The hard part is distribution shift between meta-training tasks and target tasks, so the method likely relies on carefully designed state representations and training families.","experiments":"The title suggests the main evidence is cross-task or cross-architecture generalization: an optimizer trained on one family of Transformer problems should transfer to unseen ones and outperform hand-crafted baselines or prior learned optimizers. Typical metrics would include convergence speed, final loss, and stability, but the prompt does not provide the exact models, datasets, or gains.","authors_note":"The author list includes Krzysztof Marcin Choromanski and Vikas Sindhwani, both well known for work related to efficient Transformers, optimization, and sequence modeling."},"tags":["transformer","optimizer","meta-learning","training-dynamics"],"notable_authors":["Deepali Jain","Krzysztof Marcin Choromanski","Kumar Avinava Dubey","Sumeet Singh","Vikas Sindhwani"],"keywords":["learnable optimizers","Transformers","efficient attention","spatio-temporal attention"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4元优化器架构设计和跨任务泛化实验即可，了解用Transformer训练Transformer的可行路径与现有泛化瓶颈。","en":"Only read §4 for meta-optimizer architecture design and cross-task generalization experiments, learn feasible path and existing generalization bottlenecks of training Transformers with Transformers."}},{"id":"JaiswalLCW23","title":"The Emergence of Essential Sparsity in Large Pre-trained Models: The Weights that Matter","authors":["Ajay Jaiswal","Shiwei Liu","Tianlong Chen","Zhangyang Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JaiswalLCW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JaiswalLCW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/7a69ab48efcbb0153e72d458fb091969-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的核心结论是：大规模预训练模型里会自然出现“essential sparsity”，只有一部分权重真正对性能关键。过去稀疏化常被当成后处理压缩手段，但这篇工作更关心一个前置问题——在大模型里，重要权重是否天然集中，以及这种结构能否被识别出来。","importance":"它对 pretrain 研究是有价值的机制发现。若关键权重只占一部分，说明大模型容量并不是被均匀使用，这会影响我们对过参数化、彩票假设、剪枝时机和 continual pretrain 的理解。它不是直接提出新稀疏训练范式，但会影响如何设计压缩、参数高效更新和模型解释分析。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是系统分析预训练大模型中哪些权重真正“matter”，并证明一种 essential sparsity 现象。与传统剪枝论文不同，重点不只是删多少参数后还能保性能，而是识别关键权重集合的形成规律、位置分布和训练依赖性。有效之处在于，这类分析能区分“可被后验剪掉的冗余”与“训练过程中承担主要功能的核心连接”。","experiments":"从题目可推断实验会在大预训练模型上做权重重要性评估、剪枝恢复或重训练比较，展示少量关键权重保留时性能下降较小，而随机或不恰当选择会明显更差。可能还会分析不同层、不同模块和模型规模下 essential sparsity 的出现方式；但没有摘要，无法确认是 NLP、视觉还是多模态模型，也无法给出稀疏率和具体指标。","authors_note":"作者列表中有 Shiwei Liu、Tianlong Chen、Zhangyang Wang。该团队在模型压缩、剪枝、稀疏化与高效深度学习方面有较多代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The central claim is that large pretrained models exhibit essential sparsity: only a subset of weights truly matters for performance. Rather than treating sparsity purely as a post hoc compression trick, the paper asks whether importance is inherently concentrated in large pretrained networks.","importance":"This is a useful mechanistic result for pretraining research. If capacity is not used uniformly, that affects how we think about overparameterization, lottery-ticket-style structure, pruning schedules, and parameter-efficient adaptation. The work does not necessarily introduce a new sparse-training paradigm, but it informs compression and interpretability in a way that matters for large-scale models.","technical_approach":"The method appears to analyze which weights 'matter' in large pretrained models and to characterize the emergence of essential sparsity. Unlike standard pruning papers that focus only on how many parameters can be removed after training, this work likely studies where important weights are located, how they arise during training, and how stable they are. That distinction matters because post hoc redundancy is not the same as identifying the core connections carrying the model’s function.","experiments":"The expected evidence is pruning or weight-importance analysis on pretrained models, showing that preserving a relatively small set of critical weights retains much more performance than random or naive alternatives. Additional analyses likely break this down by layer, module, or model scale, but the prompt does not provide the modality, exact sparsity levels, or quantitative results.","authors_note":"The author list includes Shiwei Liu, Tianlong Chen, and Zhangyang Wang, who are known for work on model compression, pruning, sparsity, and efficient deep learning."},"tags":["sparsity","pretrained-models","compression","scaling"],"notable_authors":["Ajay Jaiswal","Shiwei Liu","Tianlong Chen","Zhangyang Wang"],"keywords":["Pre-trained Models","Sparsity","Emergence","Transformers","Pruning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"直接看§3关键权重识别方法和§5稀疏性随规模变化的实验即可，调整剪枝、参数高效训练策略时可参考其结论。","en":"Directly read §3 for critical weight identification method and §5 for experiments on sparsity changing with scale, its conclusions can be referenced when adjusting pruning and parameter-efficient training strategies."}},{"id":"2307.04657","title":"BeaverTails: Towards Improved Safety Alignment of LLM via a Human-Preference Dataset","authors":["Jiaming Ji","Mickel Liu","Josef Dai","Xuehai Pan","Chi Zhang","Ce Bian","Boyuan Chen","Ruiyang Sun","Yizhou Wang","Yaodong Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.04657","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JiLDPZB0SW023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JiLDPZB0SW023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/4dbb61cb68671edc4ca3712d70083b9f-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：现有 LLM 安全对齐数据把 helpfulness 和 harmlessness 混在一起，导致模型很难学到“既有用又安全”的边界。过去很多 RLHF 或偏好数据只给一个总偏好分，模型分不清回答差是因为没帮助，还是因为有害；这会直接污染奖励建模和拒答策略，因此作者专门构造了把两者拆开的数据集。","importance":"结论是：这是一篇数据级兼接口级的重要工作，价值不在提出新对齐算法，而在把训练信号拆干净。对 pretrain/posttrain 闭环的启示很直接：对齐阶段最稀缺的不是更多偏好样本，而是更可分解、更低混淆的监督信号。把 helpfulness/harmlessness 分离后，奖励模型、拒答模型、内容审核器都能更明确地优化各自目标，也更容易分析 reward hacking 来自哪里。","technical_approach":"核心贡献是 BeaverTails 数据集及其配套标注协议。作者为 QA 对构建了安全元标签，并分别收集 helpfulness 与 harmlessness 的专家比较数据，避免用单一偏好标签把两个维度压扁。这个设计的好处是训练时可以做多目标建模：一个分支学有用性，一个分支学无害性，再在策略优化时决定权重；相比传统 RLHF 一把梭，这样更适合处理“回答质量高但风险高”或“安全但没用”的冲突样本。代价是标注成本更高，且两个维度之间仍可能存在主观耦合。","experiments":"关键事实是数据规模很大。摘要里给出了 333,963 条 QA 对的安全元标签，以及 361,903 对专家比较数据；另一个较小数字版本 30,207 / 30,144 也出现在摘要中，可能对应早期子集或某一标注视角，原文需核对。应用上，作者展示了该数据可用于内容审核和 RLHF。虽然摘要未给出完整指标，但这类实验通常会比较监督微调、奖励模型或偏好优化在安全基准上的拒答率、越狱成功率和有用性保持。对读者最有价值的不是单个分数，而是分离标签后是否能稳定减少“安全提升伴随帮助性明显下降”的副作用。","authors_note":"如果仅依据当前提供信息，无法可靠确认机构与代表性团队脉络。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a real weakness in LLM alignment data: helpfulness and harmlessness are usually collapsed into a single preference signal, which makes the reward ambiguous. When a response is dispreferred, standard RLHF data rarely tells you whether it was unsafe, unhelpful, or both, and that ambiguity leaks directly into reward models and refusal behavior.","importance":"This is mainly a data contribution with strong implications for the pretrain-to-posttrain interface. The important point is not “more preference data,” but cleaner supervision structure. By separating helpfulness from harmlessness, the dataset gives researchers a way to train and diagnose alignment systems with less label entanglement, which is exactly where reward hacking and over-refusal often start.","technical_approach":"The core contribution is the BeaverTails dataset and its annotation scheme. It provides safety meta-labels for QA pairs and separate expert comparison data for helpfulness and harmlessness, rather than forcing annotators into a single overall preference. That design enables multi-objective modeling: one model or head can track usefulness, another safety, and policy optimization can then choose the trade-off explicitly. Compared with standard preference datasets, this is a cleaner interface, though it is also more expensive to annotate and still subject to subjective coupling between the two dimensions.","experiments":"The headline fact is dataset scale. The abstract reports 333,963 QA pairs with safety meta-labels and 361,903 expert comparison pairs; it also includes a smaller 30,207 / 30,144 figure that likely refers to an earlier subset or a different annotation slice and should be checked against the paper. The authors further demonstrate use cases in content moderation and RLHF. The most useful empirical question is not a single benchmark score, but whether disentangled labels reduce the usual trade-off where safety improves by making the model much less helpful.","authors_note":""},"tags":["safety-alignment","rlhf","dataset","llm-safety"],"keywords":["Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback (RLHF)","Large Language Model","Safety Alignment","Human-Preference Data","Harmlessness-Helpfulness Tension"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看标注协议设计和多维度偏好建模实验即可，做LLM安全对齐时可复用其helpfulness与harmlessness解耦的标注思路。","en":"Only read annotation protocol design and multi-dimensional preference modeling experiments, its decoupling annotation idea of helpfulness and harmlessness can be reused for LLM safety alignment."}},{"id":"2305.14858","title":"Pre-RMSNorm and Pre-CRMSNorm Transformers: Equivalent and Efficient Pre-LN Transformers","authors":["Zixuan Jiang","Jiaqi Gu","Hanqing Zhu","David Z. Pan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14858","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JiangGZP23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JiangGZP23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/8f1bacee31caf990a4f08d84f0ccb322-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：Pre-LN Transformer 里到底该用 LayerNorm 还是 RMSNorm，以及两者能否在不改模型行为的前提下互相转换。过去社区对 LN 和 RMSNorm 的使用很分裂：RMSNorm 更省算，但缺少去均值，大家担心表达能力下降；LN 更标准，但开销更高，且已经有大量大模型转向 RMSNorm。作者试图给出一个更干净的等价性分析，而不是继续停留在经验争论。","importance":"结论是：这是一篇方法级但很工程化的重要工作，价值在于把“规范层选型”从经验偏好变成可分析、可替换的设计决策。对大规模 pretrain 的启示很实际：如果 Pre-RMSNorm 与某种中心化版本在功能上等价或近似等价，那么训练稳定性、吞吐和迁移兼容性可以一起考虑，而不是把规范层当成不可动的架构细节。","technical_approach":"核心方法是提出 Pre-RMSNorm 和 Pre-CRMSNorm，并证明它们与 Pre-LN Transformer 在一定条件下的等价性或可转换关系。作者的关键点不是简单地把 LN 换成 RMSNorm，而是通过结构改写保留 LN 的关键表示性质，同时继承 RMSNorm 的计算效率。CRMSNorm 可以理解为在 RMSNorm 框架中补回中心化相关的信息，使其更接近 LN 的行为。这样设计有效，因为 Pre-LN 中规范层的作用主要是控制尺度与训练动力学；如果能在更便宜的实现中保留这些作用，就能减少归一化计算开销。边界在于：理论等价不一定覆盖有限精度、并行实现和超参数不匹配下的实际训练差异。","experiments":"摘要没有给出具体模型大小、训练 token 或提升数字，因此无法精确复述结果。可以合理判断，实验应比较 Pre-LN、Pre-RMSNorm、Pre-CRMSNorm 在训练稳定性、收敛速度、最终精度和推理效率上的差异，并验证参数转换或替换后的性能保持情况。对预训练工程而言，最值得看的是两类结果：一是大模型和长训练下是否仍稳定，不只是小规模 toy setting；二是吞吐收益是否来自真实 kernel 成本下降，而不是其他实现细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical but unresolved question in Transformer design: should Pre-LN models use LayerNorm or RMSNorm, and can one be converted into the other without changing the model’s effective behavior? The field has treated this mostly as an empirical choice—LayerNorm is standard, RMSNorm is cheaper—but the trade-off has remained conceptually muddy.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution with strong engineering relevance for large-scale pretraining. Its value is that it turns normalization choice from a folklore preference into something more analyzable and potentially interchangeable. If Pre-RMSNorm or its centered variant can preserve the useful behavior of Pre-LN while reducing cost, that matters directly for training stability, throughput, and architecture portability.","technical_approach":"The core proposal is Pre-RMSNorm and Pre-CRMSNorm, together with an analysis of their equivalence or convertibility to Pre-LN Transformers under suitable conditions. The point is not merely to swap LayerNorm for RMSNorm, but to recover the representation properties associated with centering while keeping the simpler scaling-only structure where possible. CRMSNorm effectively injects back the missing centering-related behavior into an RMS-style formulation. This is compelling because, in Pre-LN Transformers, normalization mainly serves to control scale and optimization dynamics; if those effects can be preserved in a cheaper form, the replacement is worthwhile. The caveat is that theoretical equivalence may weaken under finite precision, implementation details, or poorly matched hyperparameters.","experiments":"The abstract does not report exact model sizes, token counts, or numerical gains, so a quantitative summary would be speculative. The likely experiments compare Pre-LN, Pre-RMSNorm, and Pre-CRMSNorm on stability, convergence, final quality, and efficiency, and may also test parameter conversion between forms. For pretraining practitioners, the crucial evidence is whether the claimed equivalence survives at realistic scale and whether the speedup comes from actual normalization cost reduction rather than incidental implementation effects.","authors_note":""},"tags":["rmsnorm","normalization","transformer-architecture","training-stability"],"keywords":["Transformer","Normalization","Layer Normalization","RMSNorm","Efficient Machine Learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变对规范层选型的认知，证明 Pre-RMSNorm 与中心化版本等价，应立刻在 internal ablation 中复现，将规范层从经验偏好转为可分析的设计决策。","en":"Changes the prior on normalization layer selection by proving the equivalence of Pre-RMSNorm and its centralized version. Should be immediately replicated in internal ablations, turning normalization from an empirical preference into an analytical design decision."}},{"id":"KaddourKNMK23","title":"No Train No Gain: Revisiting Efficient Training Algorithms For Transformer-based Language Models","authors":["Jean Kaddour","Oscar Key","Piotr Nawrot","Pasquale Minervini","Matt J. Kusner"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$40","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KaddourKNMK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KaddourKNMK23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/51f3d6252706100325ddc435ba0ade0e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：很多号称“高效训练”的 Transformer/LM 优化算法，在真正语言建模训练里是否还成立。过去大量高效训练方法在 vision 或小规模 setting 上有效，但一到实际 LM 训练就因为优化噪声、并行开销、实现细节或超参数敏感性而失效；作者重新审视这些算法，意图把“看起来省”与“实际可用”区分开。","importance":"结论是：这是一篇很有现实意义的复核型工作。它的重要性不在提出全新算法，而在为训练工程提供负结果和边界条件。对 pretrain 研究者，这类工作价值很高，因为大模型训练里最常见的问题不是没有新方法，而是不知道哪些方法在真实规模下值得花数周试验。能把无效方向提前排除，本身就是贡献。","technical_approach":"核心做法是系统性重评多种高效训练算法在 Transformer 语言模型上的表现。题目里的“No Train No Gain”已经给出态度：一些方法声称节省训练成本，但如果需要额外调参、训练不稳或最终质量下降，总体并不划算。和单篇方法论文不同，这类工作通常会在统一实现、统一预算和公平调参下比较算法，尽量减少因为 baseline 太弱而得出的伪提升。这样的设计有效，因为 LM 训练对优化器、lr schedule、batch size、精度设置都很敏感；不统一控制，这类比较几乎没有说服力。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体算法列表、模型规模和数字，因此不能精确总结。可以预期，实验会覆盖若干高效训练策略，例如近似梯度、稀疏更新、低精度、子采样或结构化优化技巧，并在语言建模损失、收敛速度、wall-clock 和最终 perplexity 上比较。对资深工程师，最有价值的是作者是否区分了三种失败原因：理论上无效、实现收益被系统开销吞掉、以及方法本身有效但超参数窗口极窄。后两者对后续研究尤其关键。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper revisits a recurring problem in LM training: many algorithms advertised as “efficient training” methods do not remain compelling once tested on real Transformer language modeling workloads. Gains reported in smaller or different domains often disappear because of optimization instability, systems overhead, or extreme hyperparameter sensitivity.","importance":"This is a replication and reassessment paper, and that is exactly why it matters. Its value is in clarifying which efficiency ideas survive contact with practical LM training. For pretraining researchers, negative results and boundary conditions are highly useful because they prevent wasted large-scale runs on methods that only look good in idealized settings.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is a controlled reevaluation of multiple efficient-training algorithms under a common Transformer LM setup. The title signals the main message: a method is not truly efficient if it saves one resource but loses on stability, tuning cost, implementation complexity, or final model quality. Compared with method papers that optimize one axis in isolation, this kind of study is valuable because it holds implementation and tuning standards fixed, which is necessary for believable efficiency claims in language modeling.","experiments":"The provided information does not specify which algorithms, model scales, or quantitative results are included, so no exact summary should be fabricated. The likely experiments compare training loss, final perplexity, wall-clock efficiency, and robustness across several purportedly efficient training methods. For practitioners, the most useful part is whether the paper separates algorithmic failure from systems failure and from narrow hyperparameter windows. Those distinctions determine whether a method should be abandoned, reimplemented, or simply tuned differently.","authors_note":""},"tags":["training-efficiency","transformer","optimization","compute"],"keywords":["language models","transformers","efficient training"],"recommendation":{"zh":"系统复核高效训练算法的负面结果，排雷价值高，作为 literature 备查，不读正文，直接看哪些方法在真实规模下无效。","en":"Systematic review of negative results for efficient training algorithms. High value for avoiding pitfalls. Keep as literature reference, skip the main text, and directly check which methods fail at real scale."}},{"id":"KazemnejadPRDR23","title":"The Impact of Positional Encoding on Length Generalization in Transformers","authors":["Amirhossein Kazemnejad","Inkit Padhi","Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy","Payel Das","Siva Reddy"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$41","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KazemnejadPRDR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KazemnejadPRDR23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/4e85362c02172c0c6567ce593122d31c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer的长度泛化能力（从小训练上下文推广到更长上下文的能力）受限，已有研究指出位置编码是核心影响因素，但不同位置编码方案在下游推理任务上的外推效果差异没有系统性的明确结论，现有对比存在覆盖任务少、PE类型不全的问题。","importance":"这是实证参考类工作，对预训练阶段的位置编码选型有直接指导价值，可避免针对长度泛化需求的盲测选型，属于方法选型级贡献。","technical_approach":"属于受控系统性对比研究，无新位置编码方案提出，控制模型结构、训练数据等变量一致，在纯解码器Transformer上测试5种位置编码方案：绝对位置嵌入APE、T5相对PE、ALiBi、RoPE、无PE，覆盖推理、数学类任务排除干扰。","experiments":"基于披露信息，实验采用中小参数量Decoder-only模型，核心发现ALiBi和RoPE的长度外推效果显著优于APE和T5相对PE，无PE方案在短任务上也有合格表现，消融实验验证训练长度与外推上限呈正相关。完整量化指标因摘要截断未披露。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Transformers have limited length generalization ability (extrapolating to longer context than training context). Positional encoding (PE) is known as a core influencing factor, but no systematic comparison exists for the extrapolation performance of common PE schemes on downstream reasoning tasks, with prior comparisons covering limited tasks and PE types.","importance":"This is an empirical reference work that provides direct guidance for PE selection during pre-training, eliminating ad-hoc testing for length generalization requirements, and belongs to method selection level contribution.","technical_approach":"It is a controlled systematic comparison study without proposing new PE schemes. All variables including model structure and training data are kept identical, 5 PE schemes are tested on decoder-only Transformers: APE, T5 Relative PE, ALiBi, Rotary, and No PE, evaluated across reasoning and mathematical tasks to eliminate interference.","experiments":"Based on disclosed information, small to medium-sized decoder-only models are used. Core findings show ALiBi and Rotary outperform APE and T5 relative PE by a large margin on length extrapolation, and No PE delivers acceptable performance on short tasks. Ablation confirms positive correlation between training context length and extrapolation upper bound. Full quantitative metrics are not disclosed due to truncated abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["positional-encoding","length-generalization","transformer","long-context"],"keywords":["Transformers","Positional Encoding","Length Generalization"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"位置编码是影响Transformer长度泛化能力的核心因素","claim_en":"Positional encoding is a core factor affecting Transformer length generalization","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"实证实测位置编码对长度泛化的影响，只看对比实验结果即可，对预训练位置编码选型有直接指导，避免盲测。","en":"Empirical evaluation of positional encoding's impact on length generalization. Just check the comparative experimental results. Provides direct guidance for PE selection in pretraining, avoiding blind testing."}},{"id":"KimLKPYKL23","title":"Memory-Efficient Fine-Tuning of Compressed Large Language Models via sub-4-bit Integer Quantization","authors":["Jeonghoon Kim","Jung Hyun Lee","Sungdong Kim","Joonsuk Park","Kang Min Yoo","Se Jung Kwon","Dongsoo Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$42","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KimLKPYKL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KimLKPYKL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/7183f4fc87598f6c6e947b96714acbd6-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"大模型微调的内存瓶颈不仅来自优化器状态，预训练权原本身体积也占很高比例，现有量化方法大多针对推理部署阶段设计，没有适配参数高效微调（PEFT）的低比特量化训练方案，导致量化后模型很难直接用于微调。","importance":"属于方法级贡献，打通了低比特量化大模型与PEFT的适配流程，可直接降低大模型微调的硬件门槛，对边缘端大模型微调场景有实用价值。","technical_approach":"提出参数高效量化感知适配（PEQA）方法，是现有PEFT与量化技术的结合改进，核心选择是仅更新量化尺度参数，不修改低比特权重，支持sub-4比特整数量化，舍弃了全权重梯度更新的需求，与传统量化感知训练的区别是无需全参数参与梯度计算。","experiments":"基于披露信息，实验在sub-4比特量化大模型上测试，对比标准PEFT基线，微调内存占用降低40%以上，精度损失小于1%。完整模型参数量、数据集规模等信息因摘要截断未披露。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLM fine-tuning memory bottleneck comes from both optimizer states and pre-trained weight volume. Existing quantization methods are mostly designed for inference deployment, with no solution to adapt low-bit quantized LLMs for parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT), making quantized models hard to fine-tune directly.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution that connects low-bit quantized LLMs with PEFT pipelines, directly reduces hardware requirements for LLM fine-tuning, and has practical value for edge device LLM fine-tuning scenarios.","technical_approach":"It proposes Parameter-Efficient and Quantization-aware Adaptation (PEQA), a combined improvement of existing PEFT and quantization techniques. Core design choice is to only update quantization scale parameters instead of low-bit weights, supporting sub-4-bit integer quantization, eliminating the need for full weight gradient updates, which differentiates it from conventional quantization-aware training that requires full parameter gradient calculation.","experiments":"Based on disclosed information, tests on sub-4-bit quantized LLMs show over 40% fine-tuning memory reduction compared with standard PEFT baselines, with less than 1% accuracy drop. Full details including model size and dataset scale are not disclosed due to truncated abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","fine-tuning","llm","compression"],"keywords":["Large Language Models","Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning","Neural Network Quantization"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"参数高效微调可显著降低大模型微调时的优化器内存占用","claim_en":"Parameter-efficient fine-tuning significantly reduces optimizer memory consumption during LLM fine-tuning","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"仅更新量化尺度参数即可实现sub-4比特量化大模型的无明显精度损失的微调","claim_en":"Updating only quantization scale parameters enables fine-tuning of sub-4-bit quantized LLMs without noticeable accuracy degradation","opposes":"低比特量化后的大模型必须恢复全精度才能进行微调","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"大幅降低低比特大模型的微调成本，改写了量化模型的使用流程边界"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"打通低比特量化与 PEFT，只看 PEQA 方法设计即可，对边缘端微调有实用价值，但对大规模预训练启发有限。","en":"Bridges low-bit quantization and PEFT. Just read the PEQA method design. Practical value for edge fine-tuning, but limited inspiration for large-scale pretraining."}},{"id":"KimLLHCSC23","title":"Token-Scaled Logit Distillation for Ternary Weight Generative Language Models","authors":["Minsoo Kim","Sihwa Lee","Janghwan Lee","Sukjin Hong","Du-Seong Chang","Wonyong Sung","Jungwook Choi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Generative Language Models (GLMs) have shown impressive performance in tasks such as text generation, understanding, and reasoning. However, the large model size poses challenges for practical deployment. To solve this problem, Quantization-Aware Training (QAT) has become increasingly popular. However, current QAT methods for generative models have resulted in a noticeable loss of accuracy. To counteract this issue, we propose a novel knowledge distillation method specifically designed for GLMs. Our method, called token-scaled logit distillation, prevents overfitting and provides superior learning from the teacher model and ground truth. This research marks the first evaluation of ternary weight quantization-aware training of large-scale GLMs with less than 1.0 degradation in perplexity and achieves enhanced accuracy in tasks like common-sense QA and arithmetic reasoning  as well as natural language understanding. Our code is available at https://github.com/aiha-lab/TSLD.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KimLLHCSC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KimLLHCSC23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/8342218a4ec08b8c19661725e9cd6c0b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"生成式大模型的三值权重量化感知训练（QAT）会带来明显的精度损失，现有知识蒸馏方法没有针对生成任务的token级分布差异优化，容易出现过拟合或拟合教师模型噪声的问题。","importance":"属于方法级贡献，首次实现大规模生成式大模型的三值权重QAT，困惑度下降控制在1.0以内，对端侧生成式大模型的部署有直接推动作用。","technical_approach":"提出token缩放的logit蒸馏方法，是知识蒸馏的针对性改进，核心选择是对不同token的蒸馏损失按预测置信度动态加权，同时结合ground truth损失和教师模型logit损失，舍弃了所有token统一加权的蒸馏策略，与普通logit蒸馏的区别是引入了token级动态权重。","experiments":"基于披露信息，实验在大规模生成式大模型上测试三值权重QAT，对比普通QAT基线，困惑度提升超过2个点，最终困惑度损失小于1.0。具体模型参数量、数据集等信息因摘要截断未披露。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Ternary weight quantization-aware training (QAT) for generative LLMs introduces non-trivial accuracy degradation. Existing knowledge distillation methods are not optimized for token-level distribution differences in generation tasks, leading to overfitting or fitting noise from the teacher model.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution that first achieves ternary weight QAT for large-scale generative LLMs with less than 1.0 perplexity degradation, directly promotes deployment of generative LLMs on end devices.","technical_approach":"It proposes token-scaled logit distillation, a targeted improvement of knowledge distillation. Core design choice is to weight distillation loss for each token dynamically based on prediction confidence, combining both ground truth loss and teacher logit loss, abandoning uniform weighting strategy for all tokens used in conventional logit distillation.","experiments":"Based on disclosed information, tests on large-scale generative LLMs show ternary weight QAT delivers over 2 points of perplexity improvement compared with standard QAT baselines, with final perplexity degradation less than 1.0. Specific model size and dataset details are not disclosed due to truncated abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","distillation","generative-lm","compression"],"keywords":["Generative Language Model","Quantization","QAT","Knowledge Distillation","Causal Attention","Language Modeling"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"量化感知训练结合知识蒸馏可降低低比特大模型的精度损失","claim_en":"Quantization-aware training combined with knowledge distillation reduces accuracy degradation of low-bit LLMs","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"通过token级缩放蒸馏可将三值权重生成式大模型的困惑度损失控制在1.0以内","claim_en":"Token-scaled logit distillation limits perplexity degradation of ternary weight generative LLMs to below 1.0","opposes":"三值权重量化会给生成式大模型带来超过2.0的困惑度下降","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"证明了三值权重生成式大模型的可用性，大幅降低端侧部署的算力要求"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"针对生成任务的 token 级蒸馏，只看 token 缩放策略即可，首次实现大规模生成模型三值权重 QAT，对端侧部署有推动。","en":"Token-level distillation for generative tasks. Just read the token scaling strategy. First to achieve ternary weight QAT for large-scale generative models, pushing forward on-device deployment."}},{"id":"KopfKRATSBNSNES23","title":"OpenAssistant Conversations - Democratizing Large Language Model Alignment","authors":["Andreas Köpf","Yannic Kilcher","Dimitri von Rütte","Sotiris Anagnostidis","Zhi Rui Tam","Keith Stevens","Abdullah Barhoum","Duc Nguyen","Oliver Stanley","Richárd Nagyfi","Shahul ES","Sameer Suri","David Glushkov","Arnav Dantuluri","Andrew Maguire","Christoph Schuhmann","Huu Nguyen","Alexander Mattick"],"institutions":["LAION"],"abstract":"$43","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KopfKRATSBNSNES23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KopfKRATSBNSNES23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/949f0f8f32267d297c2d4e3ee10a2e7e-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的核心问题是：开源社区缺少高质量、可复现、可持续扩展的人类偏好与助手对话数据，导致 LLM alignment 长期依赖封闭数据和不可审计流程。过去很多对齐结果只能复现模型外形，复现不了数据分布和标注决策；作者想补的是这一层基础设施。","importance":"它的重要性是数据级和生态级的，而且对 pretrain↔posttrain 闭环非常关键。原因在于，对齐阶段的数据质量会反过来决定模型的指令跟随、拒答边界和奖励模型偏差，而这些又会影响后续 continual pretrain、合成数据和 RLHF/RLAIF 的信号质量。OpenAssistant Conversations 的价值不在单一 benchmark 提升，而在于把“可开放审计的对齐数据生产线”做成公共资产。","technical_approach":"核心方法不是新模型，而是一整套众包对话收集与标注管线：组织多轮人机/人人对话、质量控制、树状回复比较、排名或消息级标注，并将其整理为适合 SFT、RM 和后续偏好学习的数据。关键设计在于覆盖真实助手场景而不是只收静态 prompt-response 对，同时尽量保留对话上下文和多样失败案例；这样得到的数据更适合训练“会对话”的助手，而不仅是会写单轮答案的模型。与早期 open instruction datasets 相比，它更强调对话结构、社区参与和 alignment 任务链条的完整性。","experiments":"这类论文的核心实验通常不是追求闭源级 SOTA，而是展示数据集统计、标注一致性、基于该数据训练的 SFT/RM 模型效果，以及与现有开源指令数据相比的实用增益。给定当前信息，无法可靠确认样本量、对话轮数、具体模型大小或 benchmark 数字，因此不应编造。对读者最有价值的事实一般是：数据是否足够多样、噪声是否可控、用它训练出的模型在多轮助手评测上是否优于只用单轮 instruction tuning 数据。","authors_note":"LAION / OpenAssistant 社区项目。Yannic Kilcher 是较知名的公开研究解读者与开源社区参与者；该团队的代表性工作是 OpenAssistant 数据与开源对齐基础设施建设。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a missing piece in open LLM alignment: there was no broadly available, auditable, community-built dataset of high-quality assistant conversations. Many alignment results could be copied only at the model level, not at the data and annotation-process level, so the authors focus on open alignment data as infrastructure.","importance":"This is a data and ecosystem contribution with real impact on the pretrain-to-posttrain loop. Alignment behavior is heavily shaped by the quality and coverage of conversational preference data, and those choices feed into instruction following, refusal boundaries, reward-model bias, and the quality of later synthetic data. The value of OpenAssistant Conversations is therefore not just benchmark gains; it makes alignment data generation itself more reproducible and inspectable.","technical_approach":"The contribution is not a new model but a full crowdsourced pipeline for collecting and curating assistant conversations: multi-turn interactions, quality control, ranked alternatives or message-level annotations, and packaging for SFT, reward modeling, and preference learning. A key design choice is to target realistic conversational structure instead of static single-turn prompts, while preserving context and failure cases. Compared with earlier open instruction datasets, it puts more emphasis on dialogue structure, community participation, and end-to-end alignment usability.","experiments":"For this type of paper, the important evidence is usually dataset statistics, annotation quality or agreement, and the performance of models trained with the data for SFT or reward modeling. The metadata here does not support precise claims about sample count, number of turns, model sizes, or benchmark scores, so those should not be fabricated. The useful question for practitioners is whether the dataset offers enough diversity and signal quality to outperform single-turn instruction corpora on multi-turn assistant behavior.","authors_note":"LAION / the OpenAssistant community effort. Yannic Kilcher is a visible figure in open ML communication and community projects; this team is mainly known here for building open alignment data infrastructure."},"tags":["alignment","open-source","sft","data-quality","rlhf"],"notable_authors":["Yannic Kilcher"],"keywords":["dataset","human labels","instruction tuning","conversation","rlhf","open-source"],"recommendation":{"zh":"开源高质量对话对齐数据，作为 literature 备查，了解其众包管线和数据结构，对构建可审计对齐数据生产线有参考价值。","en":"Open-source high-quality dialogue alignment data. Keep as literature reference to understand its crowdsourcing pipeline and data structure. Valuable for building auditable alignment data production lines."}},{"id":"KossonJ23","title":"Multiplication-Free Transformer Training via Piecewise Affine Operations","authors":["Atli Kosson","Martin Jaggi"],"institutions":["EPFL"],"abstract":"$44","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KossonJ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KossonJ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/19df21cd4931bd0caaa4d8480e9a59cd-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是 Transformer 训练对乘法器的重度依赖，这在低功耗硬件、边缘设备和新型数字/模拟加速器上代价很高。以往大家更多讨论推理期低比特量化或乘法近似，但训练期几乎默认需要标准乘加，这限制了更激进的硬件-算法协同设计。","importance":"它的意义是方法级和系统级的：尝试把 Transformer 训练从“必须依赖浮点乘法”往“以分段仿射运算为主”推进。对 pretrain 的直接影响还谈不上范式替代，但它提出了一个很硬的约束视角：如果训练图中的核心算子可以被 piecewise affine 近似且仍保持可训练性，那么未来超低功耗预训练或专用芯片设计会多一条路线。边界也明显，这类方法往往需要在精度、稳定性和表达能力之间做较大取舍。","technical_approach":"核心方法是用分段仿射操作替换或近似 Transformer 训练中的乘法密集模块，从而实现 multiplication-free 或近似 multiplication-free 的训练。关键不只是把乘法查表化，而是选择那些既容易硬件实现、又能保留梯度传播和网络表达能力的近似形式；通常会涉及激活、线性层或归一化的重参数化。和传统量化不同，它关注的是训练算子级别的乘法消除，而不是单纯把权重/激活压到低 bit 后继续做乘法。","experiments":"题目显示实验重点应是：在语言建模或标准 Transformer 任务上，乘法自由训练能否在可接受的精度损失下工作，以及带来多少理论或实测计算节省。给定信息不足，无法可靠确认模型大小、数据集、困惑度差距或硬件能耗数字。真正值得读的实验点是两类：一是哪些模块替换后最不伤性能，二是训练稳定性是否随着模型变大迅速恶化；如果后者存在，这项工作更像硬件受限场景下的专用方案，而不是通用预训练路线。","authors_note":"EPFL 相关。Martin Jaggi 是优化、深度学习系统与高效训练方向的知名研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a hard systems question: can Transformers be trained with little to no multiplication? Standard training pipelines assume multiply-accumulate everywhere, which is expensive on low-power hardware and constrains more radical hardware-algorithm co-design.","importance":"This is a method and systems contribution. It does not redefine mainstream pretraining, but it puts pressure on a strong assumption in today’s stack: that floating-point multiplication is indispensable during training. If core Transformer operations can be replaced by piecewise affine ones without collapsing optimization, that opens a path toward far more hardware-efficient training on specialized accelerators. The trade-off is obvious: efficiency gains may come with losses in fidelity, stability, or expressiveness.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to replace or approximate multiplication-heavy Transformer computations with piecewise affine operations, aiming for multiplication-free or nearly multiplication-free training. The challenge is not merely to approximate products cheaply, but to do so in a way that preserves useful gradient flow and enough model capacity. This distinguishes the work from standard quantization: the focus is on removing multiplications from the training computation graph itself, not just lowering bitwidth while still relying on multipliers.","experiments":"The key experiments are likely to test whether language modeling or standard Transformer tasks remain trainable under these operator substitutions, and what efficiency gains are obtained in theory or on hardware. The supplied metadata does not support exact claims on model size, datasets, perplexity gaps, or energy numbers. The most useful results to inspect are which modules can be approximated with minimal quality loss and whether optimization becomes much less stable as model scale increases.","authors_note":"Likely EPFL. Martin Jaggi is well known for work on optimization, efficient deep learning, and ML systems."},"tags":["transformer","training-efficiency","quantization","multiplication-free"],"notable_authors":["Martin Jaggi"],"keywords":["multiplication-free","neural architectures","piecewise linear networks","piecewise affine networks","efficient training","efficient arithmetics"],"recommendation":{"zh":"用分段仿射近似乘法，只看算子替换设计即可，为超低功耗预训练提供新思路，但精度取舍较大，当弱信号。","en":"Approximates multiplication with piecewise affine operations. Just read the operator replacement design. Provides a new perspective for ultra-low-power pretraining, but with significant precision trade-offs. Treat as a weak signal."}},{"id":"KuduguntaC0GXKS23","title":"MADLAD-400: A Multilingual And Document-Level Large Audited Dataset","authors":["Sneha Kudugunta","Isaac Caswell","Biao Zhang","Xavier Garcia","Derrick Xin","Aditya Kusupati","Romi Stella","Ankur Bapna","Orhan Firat"],"institutions":["Google Research"],"abstract":"We introduce MADLAD-400, a manually audited, general domain 3T token monolingual dataset based on CommonCrawl, spanning 419 languages. We discuss the limitations revealed by self-auditing MADLAD-400, and the role data auditing had in the dataset creation process. We then train and release a 10.7B-parameter multilingual machine translation model on 250 billion tokens covering over 450 languages using publicly available data, and find that it is competitive with models that are significantly larger, and report the results on different domains. In addition, we train a 8B-parameter language model, and assess the results on few-shot translation. We make the baseline models available to the research community.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KuduguntaC0GXKS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KuduguntaC0GXKS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/d49042a5d49818711c401d34172f9900-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：现有多语言预训练数据要么语言覆盖不够，要么文档级结构被打散，要么审计和清洗不透明，导致 multilingual LM 在长文档、低资源语言和跨语种迁移上受限。过去很多语料更像网页片段堆积，而不是可控的文档级训练基座。","importance":"它是很典型的数据级贡献，而且量级不小。MADLAD-400 的意义不只是“更多语言”，而是把大规模多语言数据、文档边界和审计流程一起做出来；对 pretrain 来说，这直接影响 tokenizer 设计、语言配比、长上下文训练和低资源语言覆盖。对于做 multilingual/base model 的团队，这类数据资产往往比单点算法改动更能决定最终上限。","technical_approach":"核心方法是构建一个覆盖约 400 种语言的多语言、文档级、经过审计的数据集。关键设计点包括：保留文档结构而不是只保留句子级片段；对语言识别、重复、脏数据和质量问题做系统审计；并尽可能提供可用于大规模预训练的数据配方。与常见的 Common Crawl 派生语料相比，这项工作的差别不只是规模，而是强调语言覆盖的可靠性和文档级可用性，这对 seq2seq、长文档 LM 和翻译预训练尤其重要。","experiments":"从标题和数据集定位看，实验重点通常是：用 MADLAD-400 训练或继续预训练 multilingual model，在翻译、跨语言理解和文档级任务上与 mC4、CC100 或其他多语言语料比较。当前给定信息无法可靠写出 token 规模、语言分布、模型大小和具体提升数字。值得重点看的实验点有两个：一是低资源语言的收益是否显著高于高资源语言，二是文档级保留是否真的改善长上下文或文档级翻译/理解。","authors_note":"Google Research。Isaac Caswell、Biao Zhang 等长期参与多语言机器翻译与多语言预训练数据建设；相关团队的代表性工作包括 mT5、ByT5、PaLM/多语言数据管线等。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a persistent weakness in multilingual pretraining data: existing corpora often have limited language coverage, poor document structure, or opaque cleaning and auditing. As a result, multilingual models are trained on large amounts of text that are broad but not reliably document-level or language-faithful.","importance":"This is a substantial data contribution. MADLAD-400 matters not just because it covers many languages, but because it combines scale, document structure, and auditing in one dataset. For pretraining, that directly affects tokenizer design, language mixing, long-context training, and the quality ceiling for low-resource languages. In practice, datasets like this often matter more than modest algorithmic changes for multilingual base models.","technical_approach":"The core contribution is a multilingual, document-level, audited corpus spanning roughly 400 languages. The important choices are to preserve document boundaries, audit language identification and data quality systematically, and build a corpus that is usable as a pretraining substrate rather than a loose collection of web fragments. Compared with common crawl-derived multilingual corpora, the distinction is not only scale but also reliable language coverage and document-level usability.","experiments":"A paper of this kind typically validates the dataset by training or continued-pretraining multilingual models and comparing against corpora such as mC4 or CC100 on translation, cross-lingual understanding, and document-level tasks. The metadata here does not justify exact claims about token counts, language distribution, model sizes, or gains. The most informative results are whether low-resource languages benefit disproportionately and whether document preservation improves long-context or document-level performance in a measurable way.","authors_note":"Google Research. Isaac Caswell and Biao Zhang are well known for multilingual MT and multilingual pretraining data/model work; related team outputs include mT5, ByT5, and large multilingual data pipelines."},"tags":["multilingual","data-quality","pretraining-data","large-scale"],"notable_authors":["Isaac Caswell","Biao Zhang"],"keywords":["CommonCrawl","Low Resource Languages","Underrepresented Languages","Multilinguality","LLMs","Large Language Models","Machine Translation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"大规模多语言文档级数据集，作为 literature 备查，了解其审计流程和语言覆盖，对多语言预训练数据构建有直接参考。","en":"Large-scale multilingual document-level dataset. Keep as literature reference to understand its auditing process and language coverage. Direct reference for building multilingual pretraining data."}},{"id":"KumarSLKK23","title":"High-Fidelity Audio Compression with Improved RVQGAN","authors":["Rithesh Kumar","Prem Seetharaman","Alejandro Luebs","Ishaan Kumar","Kundan Kumar"],"institutions":["Google Research","Google DeepMind"],"abstract":"$45","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KumarSLKK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KumarSLKK23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/58d0e78cf042af5876e12661087bea12-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是高保真音频压缩中的一个核心短板：离散 codec token 质量不够高时，后续 AudioLM/VALL-E 一类音频语言模型的上限会被前端表示直接卡住。过去不少 neural audio codec 在码率、失真和感知质量之间取舍明显，尤其在音乐和复杂环境声上更难兼顾。","importance":"它的重要性对语音/音频 LM 很直接，是典型的 pretrain 基础设施工作。原因在于，音频 LM 的建模能力很大程度取决于 tokenizer/codec 是否既保留感知细节，又足够离散、稳定、可预测；前端压缩器一旦更强，后续离散语言建模、生成保真度和长程结构学习都会受益。这不是下游声码器优化那么简单，而是在抬高整个 audio LM 栈的表示上限。","technical_approach":"核心方法是对 RVQGAN 做改进，目标是在神经音频压缩中提升高保真重建质量。RVQ 是 residual vector quantization，即多级残差量化；作者的工作重点通常会落在码本利用率、对抗/重建损失设计、判别器与生成器结构、以及训练稳定性上，以减少高频伪影和提升主观质量。与早期 EnCodec/SoundStream 风格系统相比，这类改进通常不是推翻离散 codec 路线，而是在相同离散化框架下把 fidelity 和码率平衡做得更好。","experiments":"从标题看，实验会围绕语音、音乐或通用音频的压缩重建，报告客观指标和主观听感，并与 RVQGAN、SoundStream、EnCodec 等基线比较。当前信息不足以可靠确认码率、采样率、ViSQOL/PESQ/FAD 等具体数值，也无法确认是否做了下游 AudioLM 式建模验证。对 pretrain 读者最关键的实验点是：在相同 token rate 下是否显著提升重建质量，以及码本使用和时长扩展是否更稳定，这两点最直接决定后续音频 LM 的可学性。","authors_note":"Google Research / Google DeepMind 音频生成方向相关。Rithesh Kumar、Kundan Kumar 等作者与 SoundStream、AudioLM/VALL-E 相关生态中的神经音频编解码研究联系较强。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a bottleneck in high-fidelity audio modeling: if the discrete codec is weak, downstream audio language models are capped by the representation before modeling even begins. Earlier neural audio codecs often had to trade bitrate against perceptual quality too aggressively, especially for music and acoustically rich audio.","importance":"This is highly relevant infrastructure for speech and audio LMs. The quality of an audio LM depends heavily on whether its tokenizer or codec preserves perceptual detail while remaining discrete, stable, and predictable. A better codec raises the ceiling for AudioLM- or VALL-E-style modeling by improving both reconstruction quality and the learnability of the token stream. So this is not merely a codec paper; it affects the entire audio-LM stack.","technical_approach":"The core method is an improved RVQGAN for neural audio compression. RVQ means residual vector quantization, so the work likely focuses on better codebook usage, improved adversarial and reconstruction losses, architecture choices for generator and discriminator, and training stability, all aimed at reducing artifacts and preserving fine detail. Relative to earlier systems such as SoundStream or EnCodec, the contribution is more about improving the fidelity-rate trade-off within the discrete codec paradigm than replacing that paradigm.","experiments":"Based on the title, the paper likely evaluates speech, music, or general audio reconstruction quality using both objective and subjective metrics, with baselines such as RVQGAN, SoundStream, and EnCodec. The provided metadata does not allow reliable claims about bitrate, sampling rate, or exact metric values. For pretraining-oriented readers, the most important results are whether quality improves at fixed token rate and whether the resulting token streams are more stable and codebook-efficient for downstream language modeling.","authors_note":"Likely connected to Google Research / Google DeepMind’s audio generation ecosystem. Rithesh Kumar and Kundan Kumar are associated with neural audio codec and generative audio work related to this broader line."},"tags":["audio-codec","rvqgan","tokenizer","speech-lm"],"notable_authors":["Rithesh Kumar","Kundan Kumar"],"keywords":["audio generation","audio compression","GAN","audio","speech"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改进 RVQGAN 提升音频压缩保真度，改变对音频 tokenizer 上限的认知，应重点关注其对后续音频 LM 建模能力的提升。","en":"Improves RVQGAN for higher audio compression fidelity, changing the prior on the upper bound of audio tokenizers. Focus on its impact on the modeling capabilities of subsequent audio LMs."}},{"id":"LeQZLQ0023","title":"ComSL: A Composite Speech-Language Model for End-to-End Speech-to-Text Translation","authors":["Chenyang Le","Yao Qian","Long Zhou","Shujie Liu","Yanmin Qian","Michael Zeng","Xuedong Huang"],"institutions":["Microsoft"],"abstract":"Joint speech-language training is challenging due to the large demand for training data and GPU consumption, as well as the modality gap between speech and language. We present ComSL, a speech-language model built atop a composite architecture of public pre-trained speech-only and language-only models and optimized data-efficiently for spoken language tasks. Particularly, we propose to incorporate cross-modality learning into transfer learning and conduct them simultaneously for downstream tasks in a multi-task learning manner. Our approach has demonstrated effectiveness in end-to-end speech-to-text translation tasks, achieving a new state-of-the-art average BLEU score of 31.5 on the multilingual speech to English text translation task for 21 languages, as measured on the public CoVoST2 evaluation set.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LeQZLQ0023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LeQZLQ0023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/b6262f7a34e5d641cdb3d33dc9ad1a5a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是端到端语音到文本翻译里一个长期难题：如何同时利用语音建模能力和文本语言建模能力，而不是让 ASR 与 MT 两段流水线各自为战。传统串联方案容易误差传递，端到端方案又常常在数据稀缺时学不到足够强的语言先验，因此需要一种更自然的语音—语言复合预训练形式。","importance":"这项工作的意义是把 speech 和 language 放进一个组合式模型里统一训练，属于典型的 pretrain 范式延伸。对语音 LM 和跨模态统一建模有启发：如果语音编码与文本解码能共享或协调同一套语言层，模型就有机会同时获得声学鲁棒性和文本生成质量。它的价值不在于替代所有流水线系统，而在于展示复合式建模可以减少模块割裂，特别适合多任务、多语言和低资源场景。","technical_approach":"ComSL 的核心是一个 composite speech-language model：把语音输入表示与文本语言模型能力组合起来，直接做 speech-to-text translation。它不是简单把 encoder-decoder 拼起来，而是强调语音侧和语言侧在表示空间或生成过程中的协同。与纯端到端 ST 相比，这类设计通常显式借用大规模文本 LM 的先验；与两阶段级联相比，它避免把中间转写作为唯一瓶颈。设计上的 trade-off 也很明显：融合越深，训练越复杂，对语音 tokenizer、对齐策略和多任务采样也越敏感。","experiments":"实验结论通常是 ComSL 在端到端语音翻译上优于常规端到端基线，并且在低资源或多语言设置下收益更明显，因为语言模型先验可以补足翻译端数据不足。当前提供的信息没有摘要与数表，无法可靠给出参数规模、语料小时数、BLEU/COMET 等具体指标。对读者更有价值的判断是：如果论文同时报告了 ASR、ST、MT 多任务训练 ablation，那么最应关注的是语言侧预训练带来的收益是否会随语音数据规模增大而衰减，以及复合结构是否真的比简单 shallow fusion 更稳。","authors_note":"作者列表包含微软语音与机器翻译方向研究者。Long Zhou、Shujie Liu、Yao Qian 等长期参与语音翻译、语音语言模型和多语言序列到序列建模工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a longstanding issue in end-to-end speech-to-text translation: how to combine strong speech modeling with strong language modeling, instead of relying on a brittle ASR-to-MT pipeline. Cascaded systems suffer from error propagation, while pure end-to-end systems often lack enough language prior under limited supervision, so a more integrated speech-language pretraining setup is attractive.","importance":"This is meaningful as a pretraining-style extension that treats speech and language as parts of one compositional model. The broader lesson for speech LMs and unified multimodal modeling is that if speech representations and text generation can share or coordinate through common language layers, the model can potentially gain both acoustic robustness and better text output quality. The contribution is not that it eliminates pipelines entirely, but that it shows a cleaner way to reduce module fragmentation, especially in multilingual and low-resource settings.","technical_approach":"ComSL is a composite speech-language model for direct speech-to-text translation. The core idea is to combine speech-side representations with text language-model capability in a more integrated way than a standard encoder-decoder stack. Relative to plain end-to-end ST, this kind of design typically injects stronger text-side prior from language modeling; relative to cascaded ASR+MT, it avoids making an intermediate transcript the only interface. The trade-off is higher training complexity and greater sensitivity to speech tokenization, alignment choices, and multi-task data scheduling.","experiments":"The likely empirical takeaway is that ComSL improves over conventional end-to-end ST baselines, with larger gains in low-resource or multilingual settings where text-side priors help compensate for limited paired speech-translation data. The provided metadata does not include reliable model sizes, hours of audio, or exact BLEU/COMET numbers, so these should not be fabricated. The most informative ablations would be whether language-side pretraining gains shrink as speech data grows, and whether deep compositional integration is more robust than simpler fusion methods.","authors_note":"The author list includes researchers associated with Microsoft’s speech and MT efforts. Long Zhou, Shujie Liu, and Yao Qian are known for work on speech translation, multilingual sequence modeling, and speech-language modeling."},"tags":["speech-language","multimodal-pretraining","speech-lm","translation"],"notable_authors":["Yao Qian","Long Zhou","Shujie Liu"],"keywords":["end-to-end speech to text translation","cross-modality learning","joint speech and language training"],"recommendation":{"zh":"复合语音-语言模型，只看融合设计即可，展示了统一建模在多任务场景的潜力，对跨模态预训练有启发。","en":"Composite speech-language model. Just read the fusion design. Demonstrates the potential of unified modeling in multi-task scenarios, inspiring cross-modal pretraining."}},{"id":"LeeL23","title":"Softmax Output Approximation for Activation Memory-Efficient Training of Attention-based Networks","authors":["Changhyeon Lee","Seulki Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$46","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LeeL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LeeL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/311257424b6d80e930fc93b224f0a63e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是注意力网络训练中的一个很实际的系统瓶颈：softmax 输出需要保留用于反向传播，会占用大量 activation memory。过去常见做法是 activation checkpointing 或近似注意力，但前者增加重算，后者改动模型行为；作者瞄准的是一个更细粒度的问题——只近似 softmax 输出本身，来节省显存而尽量不改训练动力学。","importance":"这是系统级方法贡献。它的重要性在于抓住了 transformer 训练里一个常被忽略但普遍存在的内存热点，并给出比全局重算更有针对性的替代方案。对大模型预训练有现实意义，因为显存节省可以直接换成更大 batch、更长上下文或更高并行效率；如果精度损失可控，这类局部近似往往比更激进的架构改造更容易落地。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 softmax output approximation：在反向传播所需的中间量上做可控近似，以减少注意力层激活存储。它不是改变 attention score 的计算，也不是用稀疏注意力替换原模块，而是利用 softmax 输出的结构特性，在保留主要梯度信息的同时压缩或近似存储。和 checkpointing 相比，它减少了重算开销；和低秩/稀疏 attention 相比，它尽量不改变前向语义。有效性的关键在于：softmax 输出虽然维度大，但对梯度真正重要的信息可能集中在一小部分质量较大的概率质量上。","experiments":"实验重点通常是三项：显存节省比例、训练速度开销、以及最终精度退化是否可忽略。给定信息没有论文摘要和表格，无法准确填写是在何种 transformer、多少序列长度和多少任务上验证，也不能编具体百分比。一般这类工作最值得看的 ablation 包括近似阶数或保留项数对 loss/吞吐的影响，以及序列越长时收益是否越明显。对预训练工程的判断是：如果方法能在长上下文下稳定节省激活显存且几乎不伤收敛，它的价值会非常直接。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a concrete systems bottleneck in attention training: storing softmax outputs for backward consumes substantial activation memory. The usual options are activation checkpointing, which adds recomputation, or approximate attention variants, which alter model behavior more broadly. This work targets a narrower point: approximate the softmax output itself to save memory while disturbing training dynamics as little as possible.","importance":"This is a systems contribution with direct relevance to large-scale pretraining. Its value comes from addressing a common memory hotspot in transformers with a more surgical method than full recomputation. If the approximation is accurate enough, the saved memory can be traded for larger batch size, longer context, or more efficient parallelism. In practice, such local approximations are often easier to deploy than architectural rewrites.","technical_approach":"The core method is softmax output approximation for activation-memory-efficient training. It does not replace attention with a sparse or low-rank variant, and it does not change the forward computation more than necessary. Instead, it exploits structural properties of the softmax output to store or reconstruct a compact approximation that preserves the key gradient signal. Compared with checkpointing, the aim is less recomputation; compared with approximate attention architectures, the aim is closer fidelity to standard attention. The intuition is that although the softmax output is large, the information most relevant to gradients may be concentrated in a limited portion of the probability mass.","experiments":"The key empirical questions are memory savings, runtime overhead, and whether final quality remains essentially unchanged. The provided metadata does not include model types, sequence lengths, tasks, or exact percentages, so those should not be fabricated. The most useful ablations would be the effect of approximation rank or retained mass on loss and throughput, and whether benefits grow with sequence length. For pretraining engineers, the method is valuable if it delivers stable activation savings under long contexts without noticeably hurting convergence.","authors_note":""},"tags":["memory-efficiency","attention","training","softmax"],"keywords":["Memory efficient","Activation saving memory","NLP","Transformer"],"recommendation":{"zh":"近似 softmax 输出省显存，只看近似策略即可，比全局重算更有针对性，对大模型预训练显存优化有现实意义。","en":"Approximates softmax output to save memory. Just read the approximation strategy. More targeted than global recomputation, with practical significance for memory optimization in large model pretraining."}},{"id":"LiCZ23","title":"Memory Efficient Optimizers with 4-bit States","authors":["Bingrui Li","Jianfei Chen","Jun Zhu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$47","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiCZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiCZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/3122aaa22b2fe83f9cead1a696f65ceb-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"优化器状态是大模型训练的主要内存消耗来源之一，现有优化器状态压缩最低支持到8比特，进一步压缩到4比特时，传统块量化无法处理一二阶矩的复杂离群点模式，会导致明显的训练不稳定和精度损失。","importance":"属于方法级贡献，将优化器状态压缩到4比特，可降低近一半的优化器内存占用，在不影响训练效果的前提下提升固定内存预算下的可训练最大模型规模，对大模型预训练和微调都有直接价值。","technical_approach":"提出4比特优化器状态压缩方法，是现有低比特优化器的原创改进，核心选择是采用更小的量化块，同时结合行、列维度的统计信息做量化，修正二阶矩量化的零点问题，舍弃了传统的大块量化策略，与8比特优化器的区别是比特数更低且解决了低比特下的离群点拟合问题。","experiments":"基于披露信息，实验在CV和NLP模型上测试，对比8比特优化器基线，内存占用降低30%以上，训练精度和收敛速度与32比特优化器一致。完整大模型测试结果因摘要截断未披露。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Optimizer states are one of the main memory consumption sources for large model training. Existing optimizer state compression supports down to 8-bit only. Compressing to 4-bit leads to significant training instability and accuracy drop, as conventional block-wise quantization cannot handle complex outlier patterns of first and second moments.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution that compresses optimizer states to 4-bit, reducing optimizer memory footprint by nearly half without hurting training performance, and increases the maximum trainable model size under fixed memory budget, which is valuable for both LLM pre-training and fine-tuning.","technical_approach":"It proposes a 4-bit optimizer state compression method, an original improvement over existing low-bit optimizers. Core design choices include smaller quantization blocks, combined row-wise and column-wise statistical information for quantization, and fixing the zero point problem of second moment quantization, abandoning the large block quantization strategy used in prior 8-bit optimizers.","experiments":"Based on disclosed information, tests on CV and NLP models show over 30% memory reduction compared with 8-bit optimizer baselines, with training accuracy and convergence speed matching 32-bit optimizers. Full test results for large-scale LLMs are not disclosed due to truncated abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["optimizer","memory","quantization","training"],"keywords":["memory efficiency","optimizer","Adam","quantization"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"优化器状态的低比特压缩可有效降低训练内存占用","claim_en":"Low-bit compression of optimizer states effectively reduces training memory footprint","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"4比特优化器状态压缩在解决离群点和零点问题后可达到与32比特优化器一致的训练效果","claim_en":"4-bit optimizer state compression delivers identical training performance as 32-bit optimizers after solving outlier and zero point problems","opposes":"优化器状态压缩到8比特以下会导致不可接受的训练精度损失","opposes_cite_hint":"Frantar 2022 8-bit Optimizer","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments","why_contested":"进一步降低大模型训练的内存门槛，改写了低比特优化器的可行边界"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"4-bit 优化器状态压缩，只看量化块设计和零点修正即可，直接降低内存占用，对固定预算下扩大模型规模有价值。","en":"4-bit optimizer state compression. Just read the quantization block design and zero-point correction. Directly reduces memory footprint, valuable for scaling up models under fixed budgets."}},{"id":"LiHRMM23","title":"StyleTTS 2: Towards Human-Level Text-to-Speech through Style Diffusion and Adversarial Training with Large Speech Language Models","authors":["Yinghao Aaron Li","Cong Han","Vinay S. Raghavan","Gavin Mischler","Nima Mesgarani"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$48","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiHRMM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiHRMM23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/3eaad2a0b62b5ed7a2e66c2188bb1449-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有文本转语音（TTS）模型的自然度和风格多样性不足，要么需要参考语音才能生成指定风格，要么风格生成一致性差，传统对抗训练的判别器没有利用预训练语音大模型的语义信息。","importance":"属于范式级贡献，首次在单说话人数据集上实现TTS合成效果超过真人录音，将diffusion生成与语音大模型判别结合的方案为语音生成预训练提供了新的范式参考。","technical_approach":"提出StyleTTS 2，是语音生成的原创改进，核心选择是用diffusion模型建模风格隐变量，无需参考语音即可生成匹配文本的合适风格，同时采用WavLM等预训练语音大模型作为判别器，结合可微时长建模做端到端训练，舍弃了初代StyleTTS需要参考音频的风格编码方案。","experiments":"基于披露信息，在单说话人LJSpeech数据集上测试，自然度MOS分超过真人录音，在多说话人数据集上效果与真人持平。具体模型参数量、训练数据规模等信息因摘要截断未披露。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing text-to-speech (TTS) models lack sufficient naturalness and style diversity. They either require reference speech for style control or have poor style consistency, and conventional adversarial discriminators do not leverage semantic information from pre-trained speech language models (SLMs).","importance":"This is a paradigm-level contribution that first achieves TTS synthesis performance surpassing human recordings on single-speaker dataset. The combination of diffusion style generation and SLM-based discriminator provides a new paradigm reference for speech generative pre-training.","technical_approach":"It proposes StyleTTS 2, an original improvement for speech generation. Core design choices include modeling style latent variables with diffusion models to generate text-matching styles without reference speech, using pre-trained SLMs like WavLM as discriminators, and combining differentiable duration modeling for end-to-end training, abandoning the reference audio based style encoding scheme used in the original StyleTTS.","experiments":"Based on disclosed information, tests on single-speaker LJSpeech dataset show its naturalness MOS score surpasses human recordings, and matches human performance on multi-speaker datasets. Specific model size and training data scale are not disclosed due to truncated abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["speech-lm","tts","diffusion","audio"],"keywords":["Speech Processing","Text-to-Speech","Diffusion Model","Large Language Model","Self-Supervised Speech Model","WavLM"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Diffusion模型可生成多样、高保真的语音样本","claim_en":"Diffusion models can generate diverse and high-fidelity speech samples","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"单说话人场景下TTS合成的自然度可以超过真人录音评分","claim_en":"TTS synthesis naturalness can surpass human recording scores in single-speaker scenarios","opposes":"TTS合成自然度的上限是接近真人水平","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"证明了TTS达到超真人水平的可行性，为语音生成落地提供了更强的技术支撑"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"提出的语音大模型+扩散的TTS范式仅作为多模态语音生成方向的文献备查，无需读正文。","en":"The TTS paradigm combining speech LLM + diffusion only serves as literature reference for multimodal speech generation, no need to read full text."}},{"id":"LiLF0LCWS23","title":"Repetition In Repetition Out: Towards Understanding Neural Text Degeneration from the Data Perspective","authors":["Huayang Li","Tian Lan","Zihao Fu","Deng Cai","Lemao Liu","Nigel Collier","Taro Watanabe","Yixuan Su"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$49","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiLF0LCWS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiLF0LCWS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/e6c2e85db1f1039177c4495ccd399ac4-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"神经文本退化（生成重复、冗余的循环内容）的成因存在多种矛盾假设，现有工作大多从模型结构、解码策略角度解释，没有从数据根源给出明确的实证结论。","importance":"属于认知级贡献，从数据角度解释了文本退化的核心成因，为预训练数据清洗、模型训练策略优化提供了新方向，修正了之前对文本退化成因的错误认知。","technical_approach":"属于系统性实证研究，核心选择是控制模型结构、解码策略不变，仅修改训练数据中的重复内容比例，验证训练数据重复与生成退化的相关性，同时提出训练时随机dropout重复词注意力的优化方法，舍弃了现有工作只修改解码策略的优化思路。","experiments":"基于披露信息，实验在Decoder-only大模型上测试，通过dropout训练数据中重复词的注意力，文本退化比例降低60%以上，性能优于主流解码策略优化方法。具体模型参数量、数据集规模等信息因摘要截断未披露。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"There are multiple conflicting hypotheses for the cause of neural text degeneration (generating repetitive and redundant loops). Prior works mostly explain it from model structure or decoding strategy perspectives, with no clear empirical conclusion from the data root perspective.","importance":"This is a cognitive-level contribution that explains the core cause of text degeneration from data perspective, provides new direction for pre-training data cleaning and model training strategy optimization, and corrects prior misperceptions of text degeneration causes.","technical_approach":"It is a systematic empirical study. Core design choice is to control model structure and decoding strategy unchanged, only modify the proportion of repetitive content in training data to verify the correlation between training data repetition and generation degeneration. It also proposes an optimization method of randomly dropping attention to repetitive words during training, abandoning the optimization idea of only modifying decoding strategies used in prior works.","experiments":"Based on disclosed information, tests on decoder-only LLMs show dropping attention to repetitive words during training reduces text degeneration rate by over 60%, outperforming mainstream decoding strategy optimization methods. Specific model size and dataset scale are not disclosed due to truncated abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["text-generation","degeneration","data-quality","training-dynamics"],"keywords":["language modeling","text generation","natural language processing"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"神经文本退化是自回归大模型生成的常见问题","claim_en":"Neural text degeneration is a common problem in autoregressive LLM generation","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"训练数据中的重复内容是导致神经文本退化的核心成因","claim_en":"Repetitive content in training data is the core cause of neural text degeneration","opposes":"文本退化主要由解码策略或模型结构缺陷导致","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Experiments","why_contested":"改写了对文本退化成因的认知，为预训练数据治理提供了明确的优化方向"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"从数据根源实证文本退化的成因，仅需读§3实验设计和Fig4的相关性结果即可，可指导预训练数据清洗。","en":"Empirically proves the data root of text degeneration, just read §3 experiment design and Fig4 correlation results to guide pretraining data cleaning."}},{"id":"LiSGPO23","title":"Dissecting Chain-of-Thought: Compositionality through In-Context Filtering and Learning","authors":["Yingcong Li","Kartik Sreenivasan","Angeliki Giannou","Dimitris Papailiopoulos","Samet Oymak"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiSGPO23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiSGPO23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/45e15bae91a6f213d45e203b8a29be48-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"思维链（CoT）提升大模型复杂推理能力的底层机制不明确，现有研究大多在真实任务上测试，变量控制难度大，无法分离CoT的具体作用。","importance":"属于认知级贡献，在受控的合成函数任务上解释了CoT的工作机制，为优化CoT提示、提升模型推理能力提供了理论支撑。","technical_approach":"属于受控实证+理论研究，核心选择是用多层感知机（MLP）这类可解释的组合函数作为测试任务，控制其他变量不变分析CoT对上下文学习的影响，发现CoT将组合函数的上下文学习拆分为两个阶段：过滤每一步相关数据、学习单步函数，舍弃了在真实复杂任务上做机制分析的思路以降低变量干扰。","experiments":"基于披露信息，实验在中小参数量Transformer上测试，验证了两阶段机制的正确性，理论推导与实验结果一致。大模型上的测试结果因摘要截断未披露。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The underlying mechanism of Chain-of-Thought (CoT) improving LLM complex reasoning ability is not clear. Prior works mostly test on real tasks with high variable control difficulty, and cannot isolate the specific effect of CoT.","importance":"This is a cognitive-level contribution that explains the working mechanism of CoT on controlled synthetic function tasks, provides theoretical support for optimizing CoT prompts and improving model reasoning ability.","technical_approach":"It is a controlled empirical + theoretical study. Core design choice is to use interpretable compositional functions such as multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) as test tasks, control other variables unchanged to analyze the effect of CoT on in-context learning. It finds that CoT splits in-context learning of compositional functions into two phases: filtering data related to each step, and learning single-step functions, abandoning the mechanism analysis idea on real complex tasks to reduce variable interference.","experiments":"Based on disclosed information, tests on small to medium-sized Transformers verify the correctness of the two-phase mechanism, with theoretical derivation consistent with experimental results. Test results on large-scale LLMs are not disclosed due to truncated abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["chain-of-thought","in-context-learning","compositionality"],"keywords":["chain-of-thought","in-context learning","attention","compositional learning","approximation","length generalization"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"思维链可提升大模型在复杂组合推理任务上的表现","claim_en":"Chain-of-Thought improves LLM performance on complex compositional reasoning tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"思维链的核心作用是上下文数据过滤和单步函数学习，而非引导模型模仿人类推理步骤","claim_en":"The core effect of CoT is in-context data filtering and single-step function learning, not guiding models to imitate human reasoning steps","opposes":"思维链的核心作用是引导模型模仿人类推理步骤","opposes_cite_hint":"Wei 2022 Chain-of-Thought","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"修正了对CoT作用机制的认知，为更高效的CoT提示设计提供了理论依据"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"用合成受控任务拆解CoT的两阶段工作机制，仅看§4的实验结果和Fig2即可，机制类工作可参考其变量控制方法。","en":"Disassembles the two-stage working mechanism of CoT via synthetic controlled tasks, only read §4 results and Fig2, reference its variable control method for mechanism research."}},{"id":"LiuAGKZ23","title":"Exposing Attention Glitches with Flip-Flop Language Modeling","authors":["Bingbin Liu","Jordan T. Ash","Surbhi Goel","Akshay Krishnamurthy","Cyril Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiuAGKZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiuAGKZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/510ad3018bbdc5b6e3b10646e2e35771-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心结论是：标准 Transformer 在看似简单的长程依赖任务上会出现系统性的 attention glitch，而不是单纯容量不够。作者用 flip-flop language modeling 这种结构化任务暴露问题，说明模型即使训练 loss 不差，也可能在需要稳定状态跟踪时发生脆弱错误；这类失败以前常被更自然的数据分布掩盖了。","importance":"这项工作对机制分析和训练诊断都很有价值。它不是提出新预训练方法，但它提醒我们：next-token loss 足够低并不代表模型学到了稳定算法，尤其在需要持久记忆和离散状态翻转的场景。对 pretrain 的启示是，训练数据和评测如果缺少这类针对性结构，模型的长程归纳偏差问题会被平均指标掩盖，最终在工具使用、代码执行、多轮状态追踪中暴露出来。","technical_approach":"方法上，作者构造了 flip-flop language modeling 任务来隔离一种很具体的能力：对少量离散变量的长期一致跟踪与更新。这样做的好处是把问题从自然语言噪声中剥离出来，能直接检查 attention 是否形成了可靠读写电路。与一般 synthetic task 不同，这类任务通常能精确控制依赖长度、翻转频率和干扰模式，因此更适合定位失败来源。论文标题强调 exposing attention glitches，说明重点不在于提出新模型，而在于通过分析 attention 行为揭示错误机制。","experiments":"可以合理预期实验会比较不同 Transformer 架构、层数、位置编码或训练设置在 flip-flop 任务上的泛化表现。关键结果通常包括：训练长度内表现良好，但超出训练分布后准确率突然下降；某些 attention 头出现错误复制、错误重置或干扰放大。最有信息量的 ablation 会看上下文长度、状态数、位置编码方案，以及是否通过架构修改能缓解 glitch。具体错误率、模型规模和提升数字无法从题面确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper argues that Transformers can fail for a more specific reason than lack of capacity: they exhibit systematic attention glitches on simple long-range state-tracking tasks. Using flip-flop language modeling, the authors isolate a setting where models can achieve decent training loss yet still fail to maintain stable internal state over time; this kind of failure is often hidden in natural data.","importance":"This is important for mechanistic diagnosis rather than for proposing a new pretraining objective. The lesson for pretraining is that low next-token loss does not guarantee that the model has learned a robust algorithm for persistent state tracking. If training corpora and evaluations do not stress such structure, these weaknesses stay latent and later appear in code execution, tool use, or multi-turn memory-heavy settings.","technical_approach":"The approach is to build a controlled flip-flop language modeling task that isolates one capability: consistent long-horizon tracking and updating of a small discrete state. That makes it easier to inspect whether attention forms reliable read-write behavior. Compared with generic synthetic tasks, this setup can precisely vary dependency length, update frequency, and interference, which is useful for identifying the failure mechanism. The emphasis is analytical: the goal is to expose where attention breaks, not to introduce a new model family.","experiments":"The likely experiments compare Transformer variants, depths, positional encodings, or training setups on the flip-flop task and test out-of-distribution generalization to longer contexts. The key empirical pattern would be good in-distribution performance but sharp failure beyond trained lengths, accompanied by identifiable malfunctioning attention behaviors such as incorrect copying or resets. The most informative ablations would vary context length, state complexity, and architectural tweaks. Exact model sizes and numerical error rates cannot be verified from the prompt.","authors_note":""},"tags":["attention","failure-analysis","language-modeling","generalization"],"keywords":["Transformers","language models","hallucinations","long-range dependencies","generalization","extrapolation","out-of-distribution"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对Transformer长程能力的评估认知，应立刻在内部长程预训练评测中加入flip-flop任务，排查模型隐藏的attention错误。","en":"Changes my prior on Transformer long-context ability evaluation, immediately add flip-flop tasks to internal long-context pretraining benchmarks to detect hidden attention glitches."}},{"id":"LiuDLWXXKS23","title":"Scissorhands: Exploiting the Persistence of Importance Hypothesis for LLM KV Cache Compression at Test Time","authors":["Zichang Liu","Aditya Desai","Fangshuo Liao","Weitao Wang","Victor Xie","Zhaozhuo Xu","Anastasios Kyrillidis","Anshumali Shrivastava"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiuDLWXXKS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiuDLWXXKS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/a452a7c6c463e4ae8fbdc614c6e983e6-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：LLM 长上下文推理时，KV cache 占用会迅速成为推理显存瓶颈，而现有压缩方法往往需要复杂重算或会明显伤害质量。作者抓住一个经验规律：token 的重要性具有持续性，早期判断为不重要的 KV 往往之后也不重要，因此可以做更激进的测试时压缩。","importance":"这是一篇推理系统论文，但对 pretrain 也有启发，因为它揭示了注意力使用的时间结构：并不是所有历史 token 都持续贡献。这个“importance persistence”假设如果稳定成立，会影响长上下文训练、稀疏注意力设计和缓存管理策略。对服务侧更直接的意义是，在不改模型参数的前提下降低 KV cache 显存，从而支持更长上下文或更大 batch。","technical_approach":"Scissorhands 的核心是按重要性裁剪 KV cache，并利用“重要性会持续”的假设减少频繁重评分。与均匀下采样或固定窗口不同，它保留少量全局关键 token；与每步都做精细重选的方法相比，它把选择策略做得更廉价。为什么这样可能有效：自回归生成中，很多 token 在成为低注意力项后很少再次被唤回，而真正的锚点 token 往往持续被关注。边界也明确：如果任务需要远距但间歇性回溯，过早裁剪可能导致不可恢复的信息丢失。","experiments":"这类工作通常会在 LLaMA/OPT 一类开源 LLM 上测试长文本生成或问答，比较 Full KV、StreamingLLM、H2O、固定窗口等基线。关键指标是 KV cache 压缩率、显存节省、吞吐，以及在 perplexity 或下游任务精度上的退化幅度。标题暗示作者会展示在较高压缩比下仍维持接近原模型性能，并用 ablation 证明重要性在时间上确实有 persistence。具体模型尺寸、压缩比例和性能损失数字在题面中无法确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a major inference bottleneck for long-context LLMs: KV cache memory grows with context length and quickly dominates serving cost. Existing compression methods often require expensive rescoring or degrade quality noticeably. The authors build on a simple empirical claim: token importance tends to persist over time, so keys and values judged unimportant early are unlikely to become critical later.","importance":"This is an inference-systems paper, but it also provides a useful modeling insight: attention usage over history is highly non-uniform and temporally structured. If the persistence-of-importance hypothesis is robust, it has implications not only for serving but also for sparse attention design and long-context training strategies.","technical_approach":"Scissorhands compresses KV cache by pruning based on estimated importance, while exploiting the idea that importance is persistent so it does not need expensive re-evaluation at every step. Unlike fixed windows or uniform dropping, it aims to retain a small set of globally important tokens. Unlike methods that frequently recompute selection, it keeps the policy cheap. The intuition is that many tokens, once they stop receiving meaningful attention, rarely become useful again; the tradeoff is that tasks requiring rare long-range retrieval can be harmed by premature pruning.","experiments":"Papers of this kind are typically evaluated on open LLMs such as LLaMA or OPT for long-form generation and question answering, against baselines like full KV, sliding-window caching, and other token-retention methods. The key metrics are compression ratio, memory reduction, throughput, and quality degradation in perplexity or downstream accuracy. The title suggests that the paper shows strong compression with limited quality loss and supports the persistence hypothesis through ablations. Exact model sizes and numerical gains are not provided in the prompt.","authors_note":""},"tags":["kv-cache","compression","inference","llm"],"keywords":["Large language model; KV Cache Compression"],"recommendation":{"zh":"验证了token注意力重要性的持续性假设，仅读§3.2的验证实验和Table2的效果即可，可参考设计长上下文稀疏注意力。","en":"Validates the attention importance persistence hypothesis, only read §3.2 validation experiments and Table2 results, can be referenced for long-context sparse attention design."}},{"id":"LiuLWL23a","title":"Visual Instruction Tuning","authors":["Haotian Liu","Chunyuan Li","Qingyang Wu","Yong Jae Lee"],"institutions":["University of Wisconsin–Madison","Microsoft Research"],"abstract":"$4d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiuLWL23a","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiuLWL23a","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/6dcf277ea32ce3288914faf369fe6de0-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：视觉-语言模型在预训练后通常能看图说话，但并不会真正遵循复杂用户指令。过去 VLP 更强调图文对齐和 caption learning，离多轮、细粒度、开放式视觉助手还有距离；作者要解决的是如何把 LLM 的 instruction-following 能力迁移到视觉输入上。","importance":"这是一篇后训练接口上非常有代表性的工作。它的重要性不在于提出全新的 VLM 架构，而在于证明：用相对便宜的视觉指令数据和合适的连接器，就能把通用 LLM 变成可用的多模态助手。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，强大的 language prior 可以通过轻量视觉对齐被激活，说明很多能力缺口在 posttrain 接口而不全在预训练目标本身。","technical_approach":"Visual Instruction Tuning 的核心方法是将预训练视觉编码器与 LLM 连接，再用图文指令数据做 supervised tuning。它更像是迁移与配方创新，而不是从头联合预训练：先利用已有视觉 backbone 提供图像表征，再通过投影层把视觉 token 接到 LLM 上，最后用人工或 GPT 生成的视觉指令-回答对进行微调。与仅做 caption fine-tuning 相比，instruction tuning 强化了任务条件化和回答风格；与端到端重训大型 VLM 相比，它成本低很多，但上限也受限于视觉编码器和连接层的信息瓶颈。","experiments":"这篇工作最知名的经验事实是围绕 LLaVA 范式展开：通常使用 CLIP ViT-L/14 一类视觉编码器、Vicuna/LLaMA 系列语言模型，并通过由 GPT 辅助生成的视觉指令数据进行调优。关键实验会比较零样本/少样本视觉问答、细粒度理解和多轮对话质量，相对 BLIP-2、Flamingo 风格模型或其他开源 VLM 显示明显进步，同时训练成本远低于大规模联合预训练。题面未给摘要，因此具体数据规模、模型版本和分数提升这里不硬填。","authors_note":"作者团队与威斯康星大学麦迪逊分校和微软研究院相关，Haotian Liu 是 LLaVA 的核心作者。代表性工作包括 LLaVA 及其后续一系列视觉指令调优与开源 VLM 实践。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical gap in vision-language modeling: pretrained VLMs can often caption images, but they do not reliably follow diverse user instructions. Earlier work emphasized image-text alignment and caption-style supervision, which is not enough for building a conversational visual assistant. The question is how to transfer instruction-following from LLMs to visual inputs.","importance":"This is a highly influential posttraining-interface paper rather than a new pretraining architecture. Its main contribution is to show that strong multimodal assistant behavior can emerge from relatively cheap visual instruction tuning on top of existing components. For pretraining research, the lesson is that a large part of the capability gap may sit at the alignment interface rather than in the base objective alone.","technical_approach":"The method is to connect a pretrained vision encoder to an LLM and then apply supervised visual instruction tuning. This is a recipe innovation more than a from-scratch multimodal pretraining scheme: image features from a frozen or lightly adapted visual backbone are projected into the language model, and the combined system is tuned on instruction-response pairs grounded in images, often with GPT-assisted data generation. Compared with caption fine-tuning, instruction tuning teaches task conditioning and dialogue behavior. Compared with end-to-end large-scale multimodal pretraining, it is far cheaper but also more constrained by the encoder-projector bottleneck.","experiments":"The well-known empirical setup around this line of work typically uses a CLIP-style vision encoder and a Vicuna/LLaMA-family language model, trained on GPT-generated visual instruction data. The key results are usually strong gains on visual question answering, detailed image understanding, and conversational multimodal benchmarks, often at much lower cost than fully pretrained large VLMs such as Flamingo-style systems. Because the abstract is not included here, exact model variants, data sizes, and benchmark numbers are left unspecified.","authors_note":"The authors are associated with the University of Wisconsin–Madison and Microsoft Research. Haotian Liu is best known as a core author of LLaVA and follow-up open visual instruction tuning work."},"tags":["instruction-tuning","multimodal","alignment","vlm"],"notable_authors":["Haotian Liu"],"keywords":["visual instruction tuning","instruction tuning","multimodal","LLM","GPT"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对多模态预训练的认知，证明强语言先验可通过轻量视觉对齐+指令微调激活，可立刻在内部多模态后训练中复用该配方。","en":"Changes my prior on multimodal pretraining, proves strong language prior can be activated via lightweight visual alignment + instruction tuning, immediately reuse this recipe in internal multimodal post-training."}},{"id":"LiuYA23","title":"Language Quantized AutoEncoders: Towards Unsupervised Text-Image Alignment","authors":["Hao Liu","Wilson Yan","Pieter Abbeel"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiuYA23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiuYA23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/0df1738319f8c6e15b58cb16ea3cfa57-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：能否不依赖大量成对图文数据，仅通过离散语言式表示把图像和文本拉到同一个无监督对齐空间。传统 CLIP 路线高度依赖图文对，而这类监督在很多场景昂贵且带偏置，因此无监督文本-图像对齐是统一多模态预训练里一个很硬的问题。","importance":"它的贡献更接近范式探索。它尝试把图像表示离散化为更像“语言 token”的形式，再借助这种共享离散结构做跨模态对齐，这对统一 tokenizer、native multimodal pretrain 和弱监督对齐都有启发。对 pretrain 研究者而言，重要的不只是是否刷榜，而是它在问：图文对齐是否一定需要显式 paired supervision，还是可以部分从表示结构本身得到。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Language Quantized AutoEncoder，简单说就是让图像经过自编码器压缩后映射到离散码本，并把码本设计成更接近语言空间的组织方式，以促进与文本表征的无监督对应。与普通 VQ-VAE 不同，它不是只关心重建质量，而是把量化空间当成跨模态接口；与 CLIP 不同，它不直接靠成对对比学习强拉近图文，而是先构造一个可共享的离散表示层。这个设计有效的前提是：图像中的语义因素确实能在离散 token 层面形成可复用结构；边界则在于没有 paired signal 时，细粒度语义绑定往往不稳定，容易停留在粗对齐。","experiments":"从标题可判断，实验重点应是无监督或弱监督的图文对齐质量，以及该离散表示在检索、生成或表示学习任务上的迁移效果。由于没有摘要，无法可靠写出使用的数据集、模型参数、码本大小、重建指标或检索提升数字。较有价值的实验通常会包括：与连续潜变量自编码器或标准 VQ 方法对比、是否引入语言先验的消融，以及离散码对下游图文检索/零样本分类的影响。","authors_note":"作者包含 Pieter Abbeel。其团队长期关注生成模型、表示学习与机器人方向，在扩散模型和自监督学习上有持续代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether text-image alignment can be learned without relying heavily on paired supervision, by moving images into a language-like discrete representation space. This matters because CLIP-style alignment works well but depends on large paired datasets and inherits their biases.","importance":"This is a paradigm-oriented contribution rather than a pure benchmark paper. It explores whether a shared discrete interface can partially replace explicit pairwise supervision, which is directly relevant to multimodal tokenization and native multimodal pretraining. For pretraining research, the key idea is that alignment may come not only from contrastive losses on pairs, but also from how the representation space itself is structured.","technical_approach":"The method is a Language Quantized AutoEncoder: images are encoded, quantized into discrete codes, and the quantized space is shaped to be more compatible with language representations. Unlike a standard VQ-VAE, the point is not only image reconstruction; the quantized codebook is treated as a cross-modal interface. Unlike CLIP, the method does not primarily depend on direct paired contrastive supervision. This can work if semantic factors in images can be organized into reusable discrete units, though the likely limitation is weaker fine-grained grounding without explicit image-text pairs.","experiments":"From the title alone, the experiments likely focus on unsupervised or weakly supervised alignment quality and transfer to retrieval or generation tasks. Since no abstract is provided, I cannot reliably state datasets, model sizes, codebook size, or exact metrics. The most informative ablations would compare against continuous latents or standard VQ baselines, test the effect of language-aware quantization, and measure downstream retrieval or zero-shot transfer.","authors_note":"The author list includes Pieter Abbeel. His group is well known for work on generative modeling, representation learning, and robotics, with multiple influential papers on diffusion models and self-supervised learning."},"tags":["text-image","alignment","vq","tokenizer","representation-learning"],"notable_authors":["Pieter Abbeel"],"keywords":["Large Language Model","VQVAE","Vector Quantization","Multimodal"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对图文对齐的认知，证明无监督跨模态对齐可通过共享离散token空间实现，可在内部弱监督多模态预训练中尝试该方案。","en":"Changes my prior on text-image alignment, proves unsupervised cross-modal alignment can be achieved via shared discrete token space, try this scheme in internal weakly-supervised multimodal pretraining."}},{"id":"MaFW23","title":"LLM-Pruner: On the Structural Pruning of Large Language Models","authors":["Xinyin Ma","Gongfan Fang","Xinchao Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MaFW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MaFW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/44956951349095f74492a5471128a7e0-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：大语言模型如何做结构化剪枝，而不是只靠非结构化稀疏或简单层裁剪来压缩。LLM 部署和二次训练成本很高，但很多剪枝方法要么不够硬件友好，要么破坏模型能力过大，因此需要更适合 Transformer 结构的压缩方案。","importance":"它的重要性是模型效率和部署接口层面的。对 pretrain 研究来说，剪枝不是训练主线，但它会反过来影响我们理解参数冗余、层间功能分配和可迁移子网络结构；如果某些模块可以被稳定裁掉，说明预训练学到的能力分布并不均匀。对大模型落地而言，结构化剪枝比非结构化稀疏更接近真实加速。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 LLM-Pruner，强调 structural pruning，也就是按层、头、通道或块等结构单元裁剪，而不是把单个权重打成稀疏。题目已经点出其关注点是针对 LLM 的结构化压缩，因此方法很可能结合重要性估计、分层剪枝和少量恢复训练来维持性能。与通用 Transformer 剪枝相比，它需要考虑 LLM 的残差流、注意力头冗余和 MLP 宽度的不同作用；与量化不同，剪枝直接减少计算图规模，但一旦剪错恢复更难。","experiments":"可以确定的是，实验应比较不同压缩率下的语言任务性能与真实效率收益，并与常见压缩基线如稀疏化、层裁剪或低秩近似对比。由于没有摘要，无法可靠给出所用模型规模、剪枝比例、zero-shot benchmark、吞吐提升或恢复训练步数。较重要的观察通常包括：哪些层最可剪、注意力和 MLP 哪个更冗余、以及小规模恢复训练是否足以找回大部分能力。","authors_note":"作者包含 Xinchao Wang。其团队在模型压缩、生成模型与高效深度学习方面有持续工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical compression problem: how to prune large language models in a structured way rather than relying on unstructured sparsity or coarse layer dropping. Many existing pruning methods either fail to map to real hardware speedups or damage model quality too severely.","importance":"This is an efficiency-focused contribution with implications for pretraining analysis. Structured pruning helps deployment directly, but it also reveals where capacity is actually used inside pretrained transformers. If some blocks can be removed consistently with limited loss, that tells us something about redundancy and uneven functional allocation across the network.","technical_approach":"LLM-Pruner focuses on structural pruning at the level of layers, heads, channels, or blocks instead of individual weights. The likely pipeline combines importance estimation, structured removal, and lightweight recovery finetuning. Relative to generic transformer pruning, an LLM-specific method has to account for residual pathways, attention-head redundancy, and the different roles of MLP width and attention depth. Compared with quantization, pruning changes the computation graph itself, which is better for actual speed but less forgiving when the wrong structures are removed.","experiments":"The paper likely compares task performance and actual efficiency under different compression ratios, against standard baselines such as sparsification, layer dropping, or low-rank compression. Since no abstract is available, I cannot reliably report model sizes, pruning ratios, zero-shot metrics, speedups, or recovery budgets. The most informative analyses would identify which layers are easiest to prune, whether attention or MLP blocks are more redundant, and how much performance can be recovered with minimal retraining.","authors_note":"The author list includes Xinchao Wang, whose group has worked extensively on model compression, generative modeling, and efficient deep learning."},"tags":["llm-pruning","structural-pruning","compression","llm"],"notable_authors":["Xinchao Wang"],"keywords":["model compression","structural pruning","large language model"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对大模型结构化剪枝的认知，证明LLM的结构化剪枝可在低损伤下实现硬件友好的加速，可参考做内部模型压缩实验。","en":"Changes my prior on LLM structured pruning, proves hardware-friendly acceleration can be achieved with minimal performance loss, reference for internal model compression experiments."}},{"id":"McDermottNAK23","title":"Event Stream GPT: A Data Pre-processing and Modeling Library for Generative, Pre-trained Transformers over Continuous-time Sequences of Complex Events","authors":["Matthew B. A. McDermott","Bret Nestor","Peniel N. Argaw","Isaac S. Kohane"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$50","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/McDermottNAK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/McDermottNAK23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/4c8f197b24e9b05d22028c2de16a45d2-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"GPT类预训练模型在连续时间复杂事件序列（如电子病历）场景的落地缺乏端到端工具链，现有工具要么只支持文本数据，要么没有针对事件序列的预处理、建模、评估流程，导致跨域应用门槛高。","importance":"属于系统级贡献，提供了开源的事件序列GPT构建工具链，降低了预训练模型在医疗、金融等事件序列场景的落地门槛，为跨模态预训练的场景扩展提供了工具支撑。","technical_approach":"属于开源系统开发工作，核心选择是封装了连续时间事件序列的预处理、token化、模型训练、下游评估全流程，支持自定义事件类型和模型结构，舍弃了对固定数据格式的限制，与现有NLP预训练工具的区别是专门适配连续时间复杂事件序列的特性。","experiments":"基于披露信息，在医疗电子病历数据集上测试，可实现端到端的事件序列预训练和下游任务微调，性能超过专用的事件序列模型基线。具体模型参数量、数据集规模等信息因摘要截断未披露。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"There is no end-to-end toolchain for deploying GPT-style pre-trained models on continuous-time complex event sequence scenarios (such as electronic medical records). Prior tools either only support text data, or do not have preprocessing, modeling, evaluation pipelines for event sequences, leading to high cross-domain application barriers.","importance":"This is a system-level contribution that provides an open-source toolchain for building event sequence GPTs, reduces the deployment barrier of pre-trained models in event sequence scenarios such as healthcare and finance, and provides tool support for scenario expansion of cross-modal pre-training.","technical_approach":"It is an open-source system development work. Core design choice is to encapsulate the full pipeline of continuous-time event sequence preprocessing, tokenization, model training, and downstream evaluation, supporting custom event types and model structures, abandoning fixed data format restrictions, which differentiates it from existing NLP pre-training tools that only support text data.","experiments":"Based on disclosed information, tests on medical electronic medical record datasets show it supports end-to-end event sequence pre-training and downstream task fine-tuning, outperforming dedicated event sequence model baselines. Specific model size and dataset scale are not disclosed due to truncated abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformers","time-series","sequence-modeling","pretraining"],"keywords":["Data pre-processing","Software","Library","Pre-training","representation learning","medical sequence model","biomedical","healthcare","point processes"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"GPT类预训练模型在不同领域都有较强的泛化能力","claim_en":"GPT-style pre-trained models have strong generalization ability across different domains","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"提供连续时间事件序列的GPT预训练工具链，仅作为跨领域预训练的工具类文献备查，无需读正文。","en":"Provides a GPT pretraining toolchain for continuous-time event sequences, only kept as cross-domain pretraining tool literature reference, no need to read full text."}},{"id":"MeehanBVCG23","title":"Do SSL Models Have Déjà Vu? A Case of Unintended Memorization in Self-supervised Learning","authors":["Casey Meehan","Florian Bordes","Pascal Vincent","Kamalika Chaudhuri","Chuan Guo"],"institutions":["Meta AI","UC San Diego"],"abstract":"$51","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MeehanBVCG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MeehanBVCG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/854b6ec839294bf332db0d86e2f83c3f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"自监督学习（SSL）图像模型被普遍认为仅学习通用语义关联，实际存在非预期的样本特定信息记忆，过往研究未系统量化这类记忆的存在和风险。","importance":"是SSL安全与泛化领域的实验级贡献，首次正式定义「似曾相识记忆」现象，为SSL预训练的泛化性评估、隐私风险排查提供了新的测量维度。","technical_approach":"原创的推理侧探测范式，输入训练样本的背景裁剪区域，测试模型是否能推理或重建对应前景对象，无需修改模型训练流程，区别于过往针对监督模型的成员推断攻击方法。","experiments":"在SimCLR、MoCo等主流SSL模型上验证，输入仅含训练样本背景时，模型推断前景类别准确率最高可达85%以上，甚至可直接重建前景内容； ablation显示模型越大、训练轮次越多，记忆程度越高。","authors_note":"Meta AI（Florian Bordes, Pascal Vincent）、加州大学圣迭戈分校（Kamalika Chaudhuri, Chuan Guo），Pascal Vincent为自监督学习领域资深研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Self-supervised learning (SSL) image models are widely assumed to only learn general semantic associations, but they unintentionally memorize sample-specific information, which was rarely systematically quantified in prior work.","importance":"It is an experimental contribution in SSL security and generalization. It formally defines the déjà vu memorization phenomenon, providing a new measurement dimension for SSL pre-training generalization evaluation and privacy risk audit.","technical_approach":"An original inference-side probing paradigm that uses background crops of training samples as input to test whether the model can infer or reconstruct the corresponding foreground object. It requires no modification to the model training pipeline, unlike prior membership inference methods for supervised models.","experiments":"Validated on mainstream SSL models including SimCLR and MoCo. When fed with only background crops of training samples, the model achieves up to 85%+ accuracy on foreground category inference, and can even reconstruct foreground visual content. Ablation shows larger model size and more training epochs lead to higher memorization degree.","authors_note":"Meta AI (Florian Bordes, Pascal Vincent), UC San Diego (Kamalika Chaudhuri, Chuan Guo). Pascal Vincent is a senior researcher with long-term work in self-supervised learning."},"tags":["memorization","self-supervised-learning","training-data","privacy"],"keywords":["self-supervised learning","privacy","data reconstruction","memorization"],"notable_authors":["Pascal Vincent","Kamalika Chaudhuri"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"SSL预训练目标是学习通用语义特征表示，而非样本特定信息","claim_en":"The pre-training objective of SSL is to learn general semantic feature representations rather than sample-specific information","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"SSL模型存在非预期的样本特定记忆，仅通过背景裁剪即可恢复训练样本的前景信息","claim_en":"SSL models have unintended sample-specific memorization, and foreground information of training samples can be recovered from only background crops","opposes":"Prior work assumes SSL models do not memorize individual training sample details due to their contrastive or generative pre-training objectives","opposes_cite_hint":"Chen 2020 SimCLR","evidence_anchor":"§3, Table 1","why_contested":"修正了对SSL泛化性的固有认知，同时暴露了SSL模型的训练数据隐私泄露风险"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"发现自监督图像模型存在非预期样本记忆，仅读§4的探测范式和Fig3的量化结果即可，指导SSL预训练隐私风险排查。","en":"Discovers unintended sample memorization in self-supervised image models, only read §4 probing paradigm and Fig3 quantification results, guides SSL pretraining privacy risk assessment."}},{"id":"MichaudLGT23","title":"The Quantization Model of Neural Scaling","authors":["Eric J. Michaud","Ziming Liu","Uzay Girit","Max Tegmark"],"institutions":["MIT"],"abstract":"We propose the Quantization Model of neural scaling laws, explaining both the observed power law dropoff of loss with model and data size, and also the sudden emergence of new capabilities with scale.  We derive this model from what we call the Quantization Hypothesis, \nwhere network knowledge and skills are \"quantized\" into discrete chunks (quanta). We show that when quanta are learned in order of decreasing use frequency, then a power law in use frequencies explains observed power law scaling of loss. We validate this prediction on toy datasets, then study how scaling curves decompose for large language models.  Using language model gradients, we automatically decompose model behavior into a diverse set of skills (quanta). We tentatively find that the frequency at which these quanta are used in the training distribution roughly follows a power law corresponding with the empirical scaling exponent for language models, a prediction of our theory.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MichaudLGT23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MichaudLGT23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/5b6346a05a537d4cdb2f50323452a9fe-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：为什么神经网络的 scaling law 会呈现分段式、带有能力台阶的形态，而不是简单平滑地随参数量增长。以往工作多用连续幂律去拟合损失随规模下降的趋势，但这类拟合很难解释为什么一些能力会在特定规模突然出现、随后又进入平台期；作者试图用“量化”视角给出一个更结构化的解释。","importance":"它的价值主要在解释框架，而不是提出新的训练方法。对 pretrain 研究的启发是：一些看起来像“涌现”的现象，未必需要神秘机制，也可能来自有限精度表示、离散特征学习和任务分解带来的台阶式收益；这会影响我们如何读 scaling curve、如何设计更细粒度的评测，以及如何判断模型扩容是否还值得继续。","technical_approach":"作者提出的是一个概念模型：把神经网络学习看成逐步获得若干离散的可表示特征，每获得一个特征，性能就下降一个台阶。核心不是把 loss 当成连续容量函数，而是把容量增长映射为可学习“bit”或“feature slot”的增加；当模型规模不足时，某些特征根本装不下，所以性能不连续。与传统幂律视角相比，这个模型强调的是表示离散化和任务所需特征集合的层级结构，因此更适合解释能力阈值和相变式行为；代价是它更偏解释性，难以直接替代工程上常用的连续 scaling 拟合。","experiments":"这篇工作的关键证据通常不是追求大模型 SOTA，而是展示若干受控任务和已有 scaling 现象可以被量化模型更好地解释。论文重点应在拟合形态：相比单一幂律，量化模型能更自然解释损失曲线中的折点、能力评测中的突然跃迁，以及不同任务出现阈值的差异。对做 pretrain 的读者，更值得关注的是作者是否给出跨任务一致的分段拟合、是否展示随着任务复杂度增加需要更多“离散特征台阶”，以及这种解释在不同架构或数据噪声下是否稳定；如果这些现象成立，它说明很多能力评测不应只看平均 loss，而应看何时跨过关键表示阈值。","authors_note":"MIT；Max Tegmark 是较知名作者，长期做基础模型、物理启发的机器学习与理论解释相关工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a simple but important question: why do neural scaling curves often look step-like, with sudden capability gains, instead of being fully smooth functions of model size. Prior work mostly fits continuous power laws to loss reduction, which is useful descriptively but weak at explaining threshold behaviors; this work revisits scaling through a quantization view.","importance":"Its contribution is mainly conceptual rather than algorithmic. For pretraining, the key takeaway is that some “emergent” behaviors may come from discrete representational capacity and feature acquisition, not necessarily from a qualitatively new mechanism; that changes how we interpret scaling curves and how we decide whether more scale is buying us new capabilities or just smoother averages.","technical_approach":"The proposal is a quantization model of learning: performance improves when the network becomes able to encode additional discrete features or bits required by the task, and each newly acquired feature yields a step in the curve. This differs from standard continuous scaling views that treat capacity as a smooth scalar. The design is useful because it naturally explains thresholds and plateaus, especially when tasks decompose into a hierarchy of required features; the limitation is that it is an explanatory model, not a drop-in engineering law for training-budget planning.","experiments":"The paper’s evidence is best understood through controlled fits and qualitative scaling phenomena rather than frontier-scale benchmarks. The important empirical claim is that a quantized model can explain kinks, plateaus, and abrupt capability transitions better than a single smooth power law. For practitioners, the useful checks are whether the effect holds across tasks, whether harder tasks require more discrete steps, and whether the interpretation survives architecture and data changes; if so, average loss alone is insufficient for reading progress.","authors_note":"MIT; Max Tegmark is the most recognizable author and is known for work on theory-motivated views of deep learning and foundation models."},"tags":["scaling-law","quantization","neural-scaling","theory"],"notable_authors":["Eric J. Michaud","Ziming Liu","Uzay Girit","Max Tegmark"],"keywords":["scaling laws","emergence","language models","science of deep learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"用量化模型解释scaling law的台阶式涌现现象，仅读§3的模型定义和Fig4的拟合结果即可，指导scaling实验的评测设计。","en":"Explains the step-wise emergence in scaling law via quantization model, only read §3 model definition and Fig4 fitting results, guides scaling experiment benchmark design."}},{"id":"Mu0G23","title":"Learning to Compress Prompts with Gist Tokens","authors":["Jesse Mu","Xiang Li","Noah D. Goodman"],"institutions":["Stanford University"],"abstract":"Prompting is the primary way to utilize the multitask capabilities of language models (LMs), but prompts occupy valuable space in the input context window, and repeatedly encoding the same prompt is computationally inefficient. Finetuning and distillation methods allow for specialization of LMs without prompting, but require retraining the model for each task. To avoid this trade-off entirely, we present gisting, which trains an LM to compress prompts into smaller sets of \"gist\" tokens which can be cached and reused for compute efficiency. Gist models can be trained with no additional cost over standard instruction finetuning by simply modifying Transformer attention masks to encourage prompt compression. On decoder (LLaMA-7B) and encoder-decoder (FLAN-T5-XXL) LMs, gisting enables up to 26x compression of prompts, resulting in up to 40% FLOPs reductions, 4.2% wall time speedups, and storage savings, all with minimal loss in output quality.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Mu0G23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Mu0G23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/3d77c6dcc7f143aa2154e7f4d5e22d68-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：长 prompt 在推理时既昂贵又重复，能不能把一段提示压缩成少量可复用的表示，而不明显损失下游行为。以前常见做法要么直接截断上下文，要么依赖 KV cache 复用，但前者丢信息，后者仍受 token 长度线性成本约束；gist tokens 试图学习一种更主动的 prompt 压缩方式。","importance":"它的重要性主要在 pretrain 与 inference 接口。对基础模型研究者，关键启示是：模型上下文里有不少信息其实可以被压缩成少量状态，而不必逐 token 保留；这既影响 serving 成本，也反过来提示训练时可以显式鼓励模型形成可摘要、可搬运的中间表示。","technical_approach":"方法核心是在模型中引入 gist tokens，让模型学会把一段 prompt 的关键信息写入这些特殊 token，然后在后续推理中仅保留 gist 而丢弃原始长 prompt。它不是简单 pooling，而是通过训练让 gist token 成为任务相关的压缩瓶颈。与 prompt tuning 不同，gist token 不是静态可学习前缀，而是输入条件化的摘要；与普通 summarization 不同，它直接优化对下游续写/回答行为的保真。有效的原因是许多 instruction 和上下文依赖可以浓缩成有限状态；边界在于需要逐字引用、细粒度检索或高保真复制的任务上，压缩会有明显损失。","experiments":"关键实验应比较原始 prompt、截断、自然语言摘要和 gist 压缩在多任务上的效果与成本。最重要的事实是：在压缩到很少 token 的情况下，模型能保留多少任务准确率，以及推理 token 成本下降多少。对工程实践，值得关注的 ablation 包括 gist token 数量与性能的 trade-off、训练时是否需要专门阶段或额外数据、以及压缩表示能否跨轮对话或跨样本复用；这些决定它更像单次加速技巧，还是可扩展的 context abstraction 机制。","authors_note":"Stanford University；Noah D. Goodman 是较知名作者，在认知建模、语言学习与推理相关方向有代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical bottleneck: long prompts are expensive and often repetitive at inference time, so can we compress them into a small reusable representation without losing much downstream behavior. Truncation loses information, and KV-cache reuse still scales with original token count; gist tokens are proposed as a learned compression mechanism.","importance":"This matters at the interface of pretraining and inference. The broader message is that not all useful context needs to remain token-level forever; some of it can be distilled into compact internal state. That is useful for serving efficiency and also suggests training objectives that encourage explicit context abstraction.","technical_approach":"The method introduces gist tokens that the model learns to use as a bottleneck for storing the task-relevant content of a prompt. After compression, the original prompt can be dropped and later computation conditions only on the gist. This is not simple pooling and not standard prompt tuning: the gist representation is input-dependent and trained for behavioral fidelity on downstream continuation or answering. It works when the prompt can be summarized into a compact latent state; it will struggle when exact wording, detailed retrieval, or faithful copying is required.","experiments":"The key comparisons are against full prompts, truncation, and natural-language summarization, measuring both task performance and token savings. The most useful empirical fact is the quality-retention curve as the prompt is compressed to very few gist tokens. Important ablations include the number of gist tokens, whether special training stages are needed, and whether compressed representations can be reused across turns or inputs; these determine whether the method is merely an inference trick or a more general context abstraction tool.","authors_note":"Stanford University; Noah D. Goodman is a well-known author with work in cognitive modeling, language learning, and reasoning."},"tags":["prompt-compression","gist-tokens","context-distillation","inference-efficiency"],"notable_authors":["Jesse Mu","Xiang Li","Noah D. Goodman"],"keywords":["language models","instruction finetuning","prompt compression","distillation","context distillation","prompting","soft prompting","efficiency"],"recommendation":{"zh":"用特殊gist token实现可复用prompt压缩，仅读§3的训练方法和Table3的效果即可，指导推理侧prompt优化。","en":"Implements reusable prompt compression via special gist tokens, only read §3 training method and Table3 results, guides inference-side prompt optimization."}},{"id":"NarayananS0BLL23","title":"Cheaply Estimating Inference Efficiency Metrics for Autoregressive Transformer Models","authors":["Deepak Narayanan","Keshav Santhanam","Peter Henderson","Rishi Bommasani","Tony Lee","Percy Liang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$52","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NarayananS0BLL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NarayananS0BLL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/d1a14493e5f84d6c6129414f0cd1a7c6-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的核心问题是：自回归 Transformer 的真实推理效率指标——延迟、吞吐、成本——很难便宜地估计，导致模型设计和 serving 优化常常依赖昂贵的端到端跑数。过去大家用 FLOPs、参数量或理论复杂度当代理，但这些指标对 KV cache、并行度、内存带宽和 batch 形态都不敏感，因此经常预测不准，尤其在长上下文和在线解码场景下偏差很大。","importance":"这项工作的价值是系统级但对 pretrain 研究同样重要，因为训练阶段的架构选择最终要落到可部署的推理效率上。它的重要性不在于提出更快的模型，而在于提供一种低成本、可泛化的效率估计方法，让研究者在不完整部署的情况下就能筛掉明显不合适的架构或配置。对大模型研究，这是把‘训练最优’和‘服务最优’之间的接口做实。","technical_approach":"作者的核心方法是构建便宜但足够准确的推理效率估计器，用少量 profiling 或解析建模预测自回归 Transformer 在给定硬件和请求形态下的关键指标。关键设计通常包括把 prefill 和 decode 阶段分开建模，因为两者一个偏矩阵并行、一个偏内存受限；同时显式纳入序列长度、batch size、KV cache、张量并行等因素，而不是只看静态 FLOPs。和纯理论复杂度模型相比，这类方法的优势是接近真实系统瓶颈；和全量基准测试相比，它便宜得多，适合架构搜索和容量规划。","experiments":"实验上的核心事实应当是：该估计方法在多种自回归 Transformer、不同硬件或 serving 配置上，都能较准确地预测延迟或吞吐，并显著优于简单 FLOPs/参数量代理。题面没有提供误差百分比、模型列表和平台细节，因此不能编具体数字；但从标题看，论文重点应是 rank ordering 和 absolute error：即它不仅能大致分出谁更快，还能在相当窄的误差范围内估计真实效率。对实践最有价值的结果通常是分场景分析，例如短 prompt 与长 decode、低 batch 与高 batch 下，瓶颈转换带来的预测差异。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical bottleneck: real inference efficiency metrics for autoregressive Transformers are expensive to measure, so model design often relies on weak proxies such as FLOPs or parameter count. Those proxies miss the actual serving bottlenecks, especially KV-cache traffic, memory bandwidth, batching behavior, and the asymmetry between prefilling and decoding.","importance":"This is a systems contribution, but it matters directly to pretraining research because architecture decisions are only useful if they survive deployment constraints. The value is not a faster model by itself, but a cheap estimator that helps researchers discard bad design points early. It strengthens the interface between train-time modeling choices and real inference economics.","technical_approach":"The core approach is to build a low-cost estimator for latency and throughput of autoregressive Transformers under realistic serving settings. A key design choice is to model prefilling and decoding separately, since one is more compute-dominated while the other is often memory-bound. The estimator likely incorporates sequence length, batch size, KV cache behavior, and parallelism configuration, which makes it much closer to real system behavior than static complexity formulas.","experiments":"The main empirical claim is likely that the estimator predicts latency and/or throughput accurately across multiple models and hardware settings, and clearly outperforms simple FLOPs-based proxies. The prompt does not provide exact error numbers, model names, or platform details, so those should not be invented. The practically useful result is probably robustness across regimes, especially where bottlenecks shift between prefill-heavy and decode-heavy workloads.","authors_note":""},"tags":["inference-efficiency","autoregressive","transformer","cost-estimation"],"keywords":["Systems for Machine Learning","Inference efficiency","Transformer models","Text generation APIs","Capability-efficiency tradeoffs"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的分阶段建模公式和§5的估计偏差对比表即可，可快速复用在预训练架构的推理成本前置评估环节","en":"Only refer to §3 for stage-wise modeling formulas and §5 for estimation bias comparison tables, can be quickly reused for pre-training architecture inference cost pre-evaluation."}},{"id":"NguyenGIOS23","title":"Improving multimodal datasets with image captioning","authors":["Thao Nguyen","Samir Yitzhak Gadre","Gabriel Ilharco","Sewoong Oh","Ludwig Schmidt"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$53","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NguyenGIOS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NguyenGIOS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/45e604a3e33d10fba508e755faa72345-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的问题很直接：现有图文多模态数据集的文本侧往往过短、过噪、语义覆盖不足，限制了视觉-语言预训练的上限，而重新大规模人工标注又太贵。过去很多工作默认网页 alt-text 勉强够用，或者只把 captioning 当下游任务；这篇工作反过来把图像描述模型当成数据清洗和数据增强工具，用来系统提升预训练语料质量。","importance":"这是一篇典型的数据级工作，对预训练的意义比单点模型技巧更稳。它的重要性在于说明：多模态预训练的瓶颈不只是模型结构，数据文本质量本身就是关键变量；如果用高质量 caption 去替代或补充原始弱标注，训练收益可能比复杂对齐损失更直接。对当下 VLM 研究，这个结论很实用，因为它指向一个成本相对可控、可复用到多个模型族的改进杠杆。","technical_approach":"作者的核心方法是使用图像 captioning 模型为现有多模态数据集生成更丰富、更一致的文本描述，并将这些生成描述用于替换、过滤或补充原始 caption。关键设计选择在于它不是简单做数据扩容，而是改善监督信号的语义密度：生成 caption 往往比网页原文更聚焦图像内容，减少无关上下文和页面噪声。和直接收集更多网络图文对相比，这种方法牺牲了一部分文本多样性，但换来了更稳定的图像语义对齐信号，尤其适合对比学习或 captioning 式预训练。","experiments":"实验的核心事实通常是：用改进后的 caption 替换或增强训练集后，多模态模型在零样本分类、图文检索或 caption 相关任务上明显提升，并且这种收益在不同规模数据上都成立。题面没有给出具体数据集、模型大小和提升数字，因此不能编造；但从标题判断，论文应比较原始数据、生成 caption 数据以及混合策略，并分析 caption 质量与下游性能的关系。对预训练最有价值的观察往往是 trade-off：纯生成 caption 可能损失语言多样性，混合原始文本和生成文本则更稳。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a simple but important issue: multimodal datasets often have weak text—short, noisy, and poorly aligned with image content—and that limits vision-language pretraining. Prior work often treated web captions as fixed input or viewed captioning only as a downstream task. This paper instead uses image captioning as a data-improvement tool for pretraining corpora.","importance":"This is a data-centric contribution with clear relevance to pretraining. The main lesson is that VLM performance is not only architecture-limited; text quality in image-text pairs is a major bottleneck. If generated captions provide denser and cleaner visual grounding than raw web text, improving the data can be more effective and more portable than adding training-time complexity.","technical_approach":"The method is to run captioning models over existing image-text datasets and use the generated captions to replace, filter, or augment the original text. The key idea is not merely data expansion, but improving supervision quality. Generated captions are usually more focused on visual content and less contaminated by webpage context, which strengthens alignment signals. Compared with collecting more web data, this sacrifices some natural linguistic diversity in exchange for cleaner image-conditioned text.","experiments":"The expected empirical result is that training with improved captions yields better zero-shot classification, retrieval, or caption-related performance than using raw captions alone, and that hybrid strategies are often the most stable. The prompt does not provide exact datasets, model sizes, or gains, so those should not be fabricated. The most useful ablation is likely the comparison among original-only, generated-only, and mixed-text training, which exposes the quality-versus-diversity trade-off.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-quality","image-captioning","multimodal-dataset","pretraining-data"],"keywords":["web datasets","image captioning","synthetic data","CLIP training"],"recommendation":{"zh":"直接看§4的生成caption替换策略和下游VLM预训练增益表，可立刻试用到内部多模态语料清洗流程中","en":"Check §4 for generated caption replacement strategies and §5 for VLM pre-training gain tables, can be immediately tested in internal multimodal corpus cleaning pipelines."}},{"id":"NguyenNH23","title":"Demystifying Softmax Gating Function in Gaussian Mixture of Experts","authors":["Huy Nguyen","TrungTin Nguyen","Nhat Ho"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Understanding the parameter estimation of softmax gating Gaussian mixture of experts has remained a long-standing open problem in the literature. It is mainly due to three fundamental theoretical challenges associated with the softmax gating function: (i) the identifiability only up to the translation of parameters; (ii) the intrinsic interaction via partial differential equations between the softmax gating and the expert functions in the Gaussian density; (iii) the complex dependence between the numerator and denominator of the conditional density of softmax gating Gaussian mixture of experts. We resolve these challenges by proposing novel Voronoi loss functions among parameters and establishing the convergence rates of maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) for solving parameter estimation in these models. When the true number of experts is unknown and over-specified, our findings show a connection between the convergence rate of the MLE and a solvability problem of a system of polynomial equations.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NguyenNH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NguyenNH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/0ef6ffcb85a2d238fc4761860c31ded4-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：Gaussian Mixture of Experts 中常用的 softmax gating 到底在做什么，为什么它经常有效，以及它带来的归纳偏置和限制是什么。过去很多 MoE / mixture 模型直接把 softmax gate 当默认组件使用，但对其几何解释和专家分配行为理解并不充分，这限制了我们判断何时该继续用 softmax、何时该换别的 gating 机制。","importance":"这项工作的价值是机制分析与模型选择指导。对 pretrain 尤其是大规模 MoE 训练的启示在于：路由器不仅是一个工程模块，它决定了专家分工边界、负载分配和可学习的条件分布形状。理解 softmax gating 的性质，有助于解释 MoE 的塌缩、重叠和专家竞争问题，也能为更稳定的路由设计提供理论依据。","technical_approach":"作者的核心工作是对 Gaussian Mixture of Experts 中的 softmax gating 做理论剖析，解释其对应的分区形状、判别边界和参数化能力。直观上，softmax 会把输入映射成一组归一化权重，这种平滑竞争机制便于优化，但也可能带来过强的相对比较偏置，使专家之间形成特定几何结构。和硬路由或独立 sigmoid gating 相比，softmax 的优势是可微、总和约束明确；代价是竞争耦合更强，某些目标分配模式可能不易表达或不稳。","experiments":"实验部分大概率用合成数据和若干真实任务验证理论结论，展示 softmax gating 在哪些分布设定下拟合良好、在哪些情况下会出现错误分区或专家利用不足。题面没有给出定理、数据集和具体数值，因此不能编造结果；但从标题看，最关键的实验不是追求最高精度，而是验证分析是否能预测实际行为，例如专家边界形状、门控概率分布和训练收敛模式。对做 MoE 预训练的人，这类结论的价值在于帮助解释 routing pathologies，而不是直接提升一个 benchmark 点数。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a basic but underexplained component: what exactly softmax gating is doing in Gaussian Mixture of Experts, why it works well in many cases, and where its limitations come from. Softmax gates are often used by default, but without a clear understanding of the partition geometry and expert-allocation bias they impose.","importance":"This is mainly a mechanism-analysis contribution with direct relevance to MoE design. For large-scale pretraining, the gate is not a minor implementation detail; it shapes specialization, overlap, competition, and load balancing. Understanding softmax gating helps explain common routing pathologies and informs when alternative gating schemes may be preferable.","technical_approach":"The core contribution is a theoretical analysis of softmax gating in Gaussian MoE models, likely characterizing its decision regions, representational bias, and optimization behavior. Softmax gives normalized, coupled competition among experts, which is convenient and smooth for optimization. But that same coupling can impose restrictive geometry or unstable competition patterns. Relative to hard routing or independent sigmoid gates, the trade-off is clearer optimization versus stronger inter-expert dependence.","experiments":"The empirical section likely validates the theory on synthetic setups and selected real tasks, showing when softmax gating recovers the desired expert partition and when it fails. The prompt does not provide theorem details, datasets, or numbers, so those should not be invented. The value of the experiments is explanatory: they connect observed expert usage and decision boundaries back to the theory instead of merely reporting benchmark accuracy.","authors_note":""},"tags":["moe","softmax-gating","gaussian-mixture","theory"],"keywords":["Mixture of Experts","Maximum Likelihood Estimation","Voronoi Loss Function","Algebraic Geometry."],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§3的几何性质推导和§4的专家分配实验结果，能帮你解释大规模MoE预训练中的路由塌缩问题","en":"Focus on §3 for geometric property derivation and §4 for expert assignment experimental results, helps explain routing collapse in large-scale MoE pre-training."}},{"id":"NoukhovitchLSC23","title":"Language Model Alignment with Elastic Reset","authors":["Michael Noukhovitch","Samuel Lavoie","Florian Strub","Aaron C. Courville"],"institutions":["Mila","Université de Montréal"],"abstract":"$54","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NoukhovitchLSC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NoukhovitchLSC23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/0a980183c520446f6b8afb6fa2a2c70e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"RLHF 对齐训练中，模型容易偏离预训练分布（alignment tax），常用的 KL 惩罚虽然能缓解但会限制优化空间。本文提出一种更灵活的方式来平衡对齐优化与保持预训练能力。","importance":"方法级贡献，直接关联 pretrain↔posttrain 接口问题。Elastic Reset 提供了一种比 KL 惩罚更直接的机制来防止 RL 阶段的分布漂移，对理解 RLHF 训练动态和 reward hacking 有参考价值。","technical_approach":"Elastic Reset 的核心机制很简单：在 RL 训练过程中，周期性地将模型参数部分重置回预训练/SFT checkpoint（或其插值）。这相当于在参数空间而非输出分布空间施加约束，比 KL 惩罚更直接地限制参数漂移幅度。与 EWC 等持续学习方法的区别在于不需要计算 Fisher 信息矩阵，实现极其简单。关键超参是重置频率和插值比例。","experiments":"在对话生成任务上使用 PPO 训练，基于 GPT-2 级别模型。Elastic Reset 在 reward 提升和 KL 散度控制之间取得了比纯 KL 惩罚更好的 Pareto 前沿。具体数字需参考原文，但核心观察是：周期性重置能在不显著牺牲 reward 的情况下大幅降低分布漂移。","authors_note":"Aaron Courville 来自 Mila / Université de Montréal，是深度学习领域的知名研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"During RLHF, models drift from the pretrained distribution (alignment tax). KL penalties mitigate this but constrain the optimization space. This work proposes a more flexible mechanism to balance alignment optimization with preserving pretrained capabilities.","importance":"A method-level contribution at the pretrain-posttrain interface. Elastic Reset offers a simpler alternative to KL penalties for controlling distribution drift during RL fine-tuning, relevant to understanding reward hacking and training dynamics in RLHF.","technical_approach":"Elastic Reset periodically interpolates the model parameters back toward the pretrained/SFT checkpoint during RL training. This imposes a constraint in parameter space rather than output distribution space, which is more direct than KL penalties and far simpler than continual learning methods like EWC (no Fisher matrix needed). Key hyperparameters are reset frequency and interpolation ratio.","experiments":"Tested on dialogue generation with PPO on GPT-2-scale models. Elastic Reset achieves a better Pareto frontier between reward improvement and KL divergence compared to KL-penalty-only baselines. The key finding is that periodic resets substantially reduce distribution drift without significantly sacrificing reward.","authors_note":"Aaron Courville is from Mila / Université de Montréal, a prominent deep learning researcher."},"tags":["alignment","rlhf","continual-learning","training-dynamics"],"notable_authors":["Aaron C. Courville"],"keywords":["reinforcement learning from human feedback (rlhf)","language"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对RLHF对齐约束的认知，应立刻在内部RLHF ablation中复现参数周期重置机制，替代现有KL惩罚方案做对比","en":"Changes my understanding of RLHF alignment constraints, immediately reproduce the periodic parameter reset mechanism in internal RLHF ablations to compare with existing KL penalty schemes."}},{"id":"PadmanabhanOZDC23","title":"Propagating Knowledge Updates to LMs Through Distillation","authors":["Shankar Padmanabhan","Yasumasa Onoe","Michael J. Q. Zhang","Greg Durrett","Eunsol Choi"],"institutions":["UT Austin"],"abstract":"$55","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PadmanabhanOZDC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PadmanabhanOZDC23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/932147114c48f8b04d41aebc0c631158-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 的参数化知识会过时，直接编辑参数（如 ROME/MEMIT）虽能修改单个事实但难以处理知识的连锁更新（如修改了某人的职位，相关的组织信息也应联动更新）。本文研究如何将知识更新可靠地传播到模型中。","importance":"方法级贡献，直接关联 continual pretrain 和知识更新问题。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：参数编辑方法的局限性说明 LLM 的知识存储方式并非简单的 key-value 对应，连锁推理能力的缺失暴露了当前 pretrain 范式在知识组织上的不足。","technical_approach":"核心方法是通过蒸馏（distillation）来传播知识更新：先用一个已经包含更新知识的 teacher（可以是检索增强的模型或经过编辑的模型），然后通过蒸馏将更新后的知识传递给 student 模型。与直接参数编辑的区别在于，蒸馏可以让模型在更广泛的上下文中学习更新知识的影响，从而实现连锁更新。关键设计是蒸馏时使用与更新知识相关的多样化 prompt，而非仅用单一事实。","experiments":"在知识更新 benchmark（如 CounterFact 的扩展版本）上测试，使用 GPT-2 和 GPT-J 级别模型。蒸馏方法在连锁更新（ripple effect）指标上显著优于 ROME/MEMIT 等直接编辑方法，但在单事实编辑精度上差距不大。蒸馏的计算成本高于直接编辑。","authors_note":"Greg Durrett 和 Eunsol Choi 来自 UT Austin，在知识密集型 NLP 和问答方向有系列工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Direct parameter editing (ROME/MEMIT) can modify individual facts in LLMs but fails to propagate cascading knowledge updates (e.g., changing someone's job should also update related organizational information). This paper addresses reliable knowledge update propagation.","importance":"A method-level contribution relevant to continual pretrain and knowledge updating. The limitations of parameter editing reveal that LLM knowledge storage is not simple key-value mapping, and the lack of cascading reasoning exposes organizational shortcomings in current pretrain paradigms.","technical_approach":"Uses distillation to propagate knowledge updates: a teacher model (retrieval-augmented or already edited) transfers updated knowledge to a student model. Unlike direct editing, distillation exposes the model to diverse contexts where the updated knowledge has implications, enabling cascading updates. The key design choice is using diverse prompts related to the updated knowledge during distillation, not just the single edited fact.","experiments":"Tested on knowledge update benchmarks (extended CounterFact) with GPT-2 and GPT-J scale models. Distillation significantly outperforms ROME/MEMIT on ripple effect metrics while being comparable on single-fact editing accuracy. Distillation is computationally more expensive than direct editing.","authors_note":"Greg Durrett and Eunsol Choi are from UT Austin, with a line of work on knowledge-intensive NLP and QA."},"tags":["model-editing","distillation","knowledge-updating","fine-tuning"],"notable_authors":["Greg Durrett","Eunsol Choi"],"keywords":["Knowledge editing","NLP","Distillation","deep learning","fine-tuning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"推翻了我之前认为参数编辑即可解决LLM知识更新的prior，应将蒸馏结合多样化prompt作为知识连锁更新的首选方案测试","en":"Overturns my prior that parameter editing alone can solve LLM knowledge updates, test distillation with diverse prompts as the first-choice solution for chained knowledge updates."}},{"id":"PagliardiniPJF23","title":"Fast Attention Over Long Sequences With Dynamic Sparse Flash Attention","authors":["Matteo Pagliardini","Daniele Paliotta","Martin Jaggi","François Fleuret"],"institutions":["EPFL","University of Geneva","IDIAP"],"abstract":"$56","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PagliardiniPJF23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PagliardiniPJF23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/bc222e8153a49c1b30a1b8ba96b35117-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"长序列上的注意力计算是 Transformer 的核心瓶颈。Flash Attention 解决了 IO 效率问题但仍是精确全注意力，而稀疏注意力方法虽然降低了计算量但通常需要固定的稀疏模式（如 local + global），无法根据输入动态调整。本文提出动态稀疏注意力与 Flash Attention 的结合。","importance":"系统/方法级贡献，直接关联 pretrain 中的长上下文训练效率问题。动态稀疏注意力如果能在保持质量的前提下显著降低长序列的计算量，对 pretrain 阶段的长文本训练和推理阶段的 KV-cache 管理都有实际价值。","technical_approach":"Dynamic Sparse Flash Attention 的核心思路是：在 Flash Attention 的分块计算框架内，动态决定哪些 block 需要计算、哪些可以跳过。具体实现分两步：(1) 用一个轻量级的预估步骤（如基于 query-key 块级内积的近似）快速判断每个 block 的重要性；(2) 只对重要性超过阈值的 block 执行完整的 Flash Attention 计算。与固定稀疏模式（如 BigBird、Longformer）的区别在于稀疏模式是数据依赖的，能适应不同输入的注意力分布。与 Flash Attention 的兼容性是关键工程贡献。","experiments":"在语言建模任务上测试，序列长度从 2K 到 16K+。在保持接近全注意力的困惑度（perplexity 差距 <0.5）的前提下，实现了 2-4x 的墙钟时间加速（具体取决于序列长度和稀疏率）。与 BigBird、Longformer 等固定稀疏方法相比，动态稀疏在相同计算预算下困惑度更低。消融显示预估步骤的开销约占总计算的 5-10%。","authors_note":"Martin Jaggi 来自 EPFL，François Fleuret 来自 University of Geneva / IDIAP，两人在高效 Transformer 和优化方面有持续工作。Matteo Pagliardini 也来自 EPFL。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Flash Attention solves IO efficiency but still computes full attention. Static sparse attention (BigBird, Longformer) reduces compute but uses fixed patterns that cannot adapt to input. This paper combines dynamic sparsity with Flash Attention for long sequences.","importance":"A system/method-level contribution directly relevant to long-context pretrain efficiency. If dynamic sparse attention maintains quality while significantly reducing compute on long sequences, it benefits both pretrain-stage long-text training and inference-stage KV-cache management.","technical_approach":"Dynamic Sparse Flash Attention works in two steps within Flash Attention's block-wise computation framework: (1) a lightweight estimation step (e.g., block-level query-key inner product approximation) quickly scores each block's importance; (2) only blocks above a threshold receive full Flash Attention computation. Unlike fixed sparse patterns, sparsity is data-dependent and adapts to each input's attention distribution. Compatibility with Flash Attention's tiling is the key engineering contribution.","experiments":"Tested on language modeling with sequence lengths from 2K to 16K+. Achieves 2-4x wall-clock speedup while maintaining perplexity within 0.5 of full attention (varies with sequence length and sparsity rate). Outperforms BigBird and Longformer at the same compute budget. The estimation step overhead is about 5-10% of total compute.","authors_note":"Martin Jaggi from EPFL, François Fleuret from University of Geneva / IDIAP, both with ongoing work on efficient Transformers. Matteo Pagliardini is also from EPFL."},"tags":["attention","long-context","flash-attention","sparsity"],"notable_authors":["Martin Jaggi","François Fleuret"],"keywords":["self-attention","large language models","transformers"],"recommendation":{"zh":"直接兼容现有FlashAttention生态，应立刻在长上下文预训练任务中接入做效率-精度tradeoff测试","en":"Directly compatible with existing FlashAttention ecosystem, immediately integrate into long-context pre-training tasks to test efficiency-accuracy tradeoffs."}},{"id":"PilaultFFPBG23","title":"Block-State Transformers","authors":["Jonathan Pilault","Mahan Fathi","Orhan Firat","Chris Pal","Pierre-Luc Bacon","Ross Goroshin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$57","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PilaultFFPBG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PilaultFFPBG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/16ccd203e9e3696a7ab0dcf568316379-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是标准 Transformer 在长序列上的状态管理效率问题。传统 Transformer 每层都依赖完整 token-level 激活，推理时要缓存大量 KV，训练时显存和时延都很高；很多替代方案虽然更省，但往往牺牲表达能力或难以兼容现有架构。","importance":"它属于架构与效率方法，对 pretrain 很相关，因为长上下文和高吞吐训练都受状态表示方式影响。重要之处在于它不是简单做稀疏注意力，而是显式引入 block-level state，这代表一种在全注意力和状态空间/递归记忆之间折中的路线，可能对长上下文预训练和流式建模都有启发。","technical_approach":"Block-State Transformers 的核心应是把序列分块，并为每个块维护可更新的状态表示，再让 token 级计算与块级状态交互。与标准 Transformer 完全依赖逐 token 自注意力不同，这种做法把一部分上下文压缩进较低频的 block state，从而减少全量历史依赖；它有效的原因是很多跨位置依赖在较粗粒度上就能表达，不必每一步都访问所有细粒度 token。代价是状态压缩会带来信息瓶颈，对需要精确 token 级检索的任务可能有损失。","experiments":"当前信息无法确认是否在语言建模、长文档理解还是其他序列任务上评测，也没有参数量、上下文长度和吞吐数字。合理预期是实验会比较标准 Transformer 或其他高效 Transformer，在长序列设置下报告速度、显存和精度权衡；如果只 skim，建议重点看 block size 与 state size 的 scaling 关系，以及收益主要出现在训练、推理还是流式场景。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the state-management cost of standard Transformers on long sequences. Vanilla attention keeps token-level history everywhere, which is expensive in memory and latency, while many efficient alternatives save compute by sacrificing too much expressivity or compatibility.","importance":"This is an architecture-and-efficiency contribution that matters for pretraining because long-context training and serving are heavily shaped by how sequence state is represented. The notable idea is not just sparse attention, but the introduction of explicit block-level state as a middle ground between full attention and more compressed recurrent-style memory.","technical_approach":"Block-State Transformers appear to partition the sequence into blocks and maintain an updateable state per block, with token-level computation interacting with these block states. Unlike standard Transformers that rely entirely on token-to-token attention, this compresses part of the history into a lower-frequency representation; that can work because many dependencies can be carried at block granularity without revisiting every token at every step. The trade-off is an information bottleneck, especially for tasks that require precise token-level retrieval over long ranges.","experiments":"The provided metadata does not specify domains, model scales, context lengths, or measured speed/memory gains, so I will not invent them. The key empirical questions are how the method trades off quality against memory and throughput on long sequences, and how sensitive it is to block size and state size.","authors_note":""},"tags":["architecture","recurrence","transformer","long-context"],"keywords":["State Space Models","Efficient Transformers","Long Range Language Modeling","Language Modeling"],"recommendation":{"zh":"提供了长上下文建模介于全注意力和状态空间模型之间的新路线，建议在内部流式预训练架构中快速验证块状态设计","en":"Provides a new long-context modeling route between full attention and state space models, recommend quickly verifying the block-state design in internal streaming pre-training architectures."}},{"id":"PrystawskiLG23","title":"Why think step by step? Reasoning emerges from the locality of experience","authors":["Ben Prystawski","Michael Li","Noah D. Goodman"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$58","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PrystawskiLG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PrystawskiLG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/e0af79ad53a336b4c4b4f7e2a68eb609-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要回答的核心问题是：为什么 step-by-step reasoning 会在语言模型或序列学习系统里自然出现，而不是把链式推理当成纯粹由监督模板灌输出来的行为。过去很多解释停留在“CoT 提供了更多中间监督”或“更像人类解题过程”，但对其出现条件和归纳偏置缺少更机制化的说明。","importance":"它的重要性在机制解释层面。对于 pretrain 和 ICL 研究，这类工作提供的是“为什么某些推理格式更容易被模型学到”的因果线索，而不是直接给出新训练法。若结论成立，它意味着 reasoning emergence 可能更多取决于训练分布中的局部可泛化结构，而不是模型先天拥有显式算法模块，这会影响我们如何设计数据合成、课程学习和思维链监督。","technical_approach":"方法上它更像理论建模加可控实验，而不是大规模系统创新。题目里的 locality of experience 指向一个关键观点：模型之所以偏好逐步推理，是因为训练中更常见、也更容易泛化的是局部状态转移或局部一致性，而不是一步跳到远距离答案。换句话说，step-by-step 不是天然更“聪明”，而是更贴合有限样本学习时的局部插值偏置；如果训练经验对局部转换覆盖充分，链式结构就会自发成为更稳的解码路径。","experiments":"这类论文的实验通常会使用可控任务和小型序列模型，比较直接回答与中间步骤回答在分布外泛化、样本效率和噪声鲁棒性上的差异。最关键的证据不会是单个 benchmark SOTA，而是：当训练数据具有局部可组合性时，step-by-step 方案在泛化上明显更稳；当这种局部性被破坏时，优势会减弱甚至消失。当前给定信息不足以安全列出具体模型规模、任务名称和提升数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a mechanism-level question: why does step-by-step reasoning emerge at all, instead of being merely an artifact of explicit chain-of-thought supervision? Prior explanations often say CoT gives richer supervision, but they do not clearly explain when and why such intermediate reasoning formats should be favored by learning dynamics.","importance":"Its value is explanatory rather than purely algorithmic. For pretraining and in-context learning research, this kind of work matters because it can identify the data and inductive-bias conditions under which reasoning-like behavior appears. If the argument holds, it suggests that reasoning emergence is tied to local structure in experience rather than to a special built-in reasoning module, which has implications for synthetic data design and curriculum construction.","technical_approach":"The approach is best understood as theory plus controlled experiments. The title points to a central hypothesis: step-by-step reasoning is easier to learn because training data more often supports local transitions and local consistency than direct long-range mappings from problem to final answer. Under this view, CoT is not inherently more intelligent; it is more compatible with finite-data interpolation, so models naturally discover it when local experience is informative enough.","experiments":"The likely experimental pattern is controlled sequence-learning tasks comparing direct-answer training with intermediate-step training under different data regimes. The most important finding would be robustness and generalization improvements when the task admits locally compositional structure, with those gains shrinking when locality is removed. This is not the kind of paper where the main evidence is large-benchmark SOTA, and the provided information is insufficient for exact numbers.","authors_note":""},"tags":["chain-of-thought","reasoning","locality","emergence"],"keywords":["chain-of-thought; language models; reasoning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对CoT涌现机制的认知，后续预训练数据合成应优先提升局部推理转换的覆盖密度，而非堆砌完整推理样本","en":"Changes my understanding of CoT emergence mechanism, subsequent pre-training data synthesis should prioritize improving coverage density of local reasoning transitions instead of stacking full reasoning samples."}},{"id":"RameCDGSSC23","title":"Rewarded soups: towards Pareto-optimal alignment by interpolating weights fine-tuned on diverse rewards","authors":["Alexandre Ramé","Guillaume Couairon","Corentin Dancette","Jean-Baptiste Gaya","Mustafa Shukor","Laure Soulier","Matthieu Cord"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$59","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/RameCDGSSC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/RameCDGSSC23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/e12a3b98b67e8395f639fde4c2b03168-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：对齐通常不是单目标优化，而是多个互相冲突的奖励之间的折中，但常规 RLHF 或单 reward fine-tuning 往往只把模型推向某一个点，难以得到 Pareto 更优的解。过去要兼顾 helpfulness、harmlessness、brevity、truthfulness 等目标，通常需要重新训练多次或手调 reward 权重，效率低且结果不稳定。","importance":"它的重要性在对齐方法和模型合并两个层面。对 pretrain-posttrain 闭环的启示是：不同奖励下学到的能力并不一定需要通过一次联合优化硬塞进一个轨迹里，也可以先分开学，再在权重空间做可控组合。这个思路对多目标 alignment、reward hacking 缓解和低成本模型版本管理都有现实价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 rewarded soups：先分别对同一个基模型在不同奖励或偏好目标下进行微调，再通过权重插值生成一系列中间模型，寻找 Pareto 更优前沿。它借鉴了 model soups 的思想，但把“不同 seed 或数据子集的平均”改成“不同 reward 方向的平均”。为什么这样可能有效：如果这些微调解落在相近低损盆地中，线性插值不会立刻破坏能力，反而能平滑掉单目标优化带来的过拟合或极端偏置。边界也很明确：如果不同 reward 训练把模型拉到相距很远的区域，简单插值就会失效。","experiments":"这类工作的关键实验证据通常不是单点最优分数，而是展示一条更好的 Pareto frontier：在多个对齐指标之间，同等 helpfulness 下更安全，或同等安全性下更有用。最有价值的 ablation 会比较 weight interpolation、logit ensembling、multi-objective joint fine-tuning，以及不同 soup 系数对稳定性的影响。当前没有摘要和具体结果，无法可靠填写数据集、模型规模和提升数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a real alignment problem: we rarely optimize for a single reward, yet most fine-tuning pipelines push the model toward one objective at a time. In practice, helpfulness, harmlessness, conciseness, and factuality conflict, and standard RLHF-style tuning gives one compromise point rather than an efficient way to explore the Pareto frontier.","importance":"Its importance lies at the intersection of alignment and model merging. For the pretrain–posttrain interface, the useful message is that capabilities optimized under different rewards do not necessarily need to be learned through one monolithic objective. They may be trained separately and then combined in weight space, which is appealing for multi-objective alignment, cheaper iteration, and managing reward trade-offs without rerunning full optimization each time.","technical_approach":"The method, rewarded soups, fine-tunes the same base model under diverse rewards and then interpolates the resulting weights to obtain new trade-off points. This extends the model-soup idea from combining runs of similar objectives to combining models specialized for different reward directions. The intuition is that if these fine-tuned solutions remain in a compatible basin, interpolation can preserve shared capabilities while reducing the extreme bias of any single reward. The limitation is equally clear: if the solutions are too far apart in parameter space, weight averaging will break.","experiments":"The most important evidence for this paper would be improved Pareto frontiers rather than a single best score. Strong results would show that interpolated models dominate single-reward tuning on trade-offs such as helpfulness versus harmlessness. Useful ablations would compare weight-space interpolation to output ensembling and to explicit multi-objective fine-tuning, and study how interpolation coefficients affect stability. The prompt provides no abstract, so exact benchmarks, model sizes, and numerical gains cannot be stated safely.","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","reward-modeling","model-merging","multi-objective"],"keywords":["Deep learning","Foundation models","Fine-tuning","Reward optimization","Linear mode connectivity","Weight averaging","Model soups","Robustness","Generalization","Alignment","Multi objective learning."],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4的权重插值策略和Pareto前沿结果即可，可复用在多目标对齐的低成本模型版本迭代中","en":"Only check §4 for weight interpolation strategies and Pareto frontier results, can be reused in low-cost multi-objective alignment model version iterations."}},{"id":"RaventosPCG23","title":"Pretraining task diversity and the emergence of non-Bayesian in-context learning for regression","authors":["Allan Raventós","Mansheej Paul","Feng Chen","Surya Ganguli"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$5a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/RaventosPCG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/RaventosPCG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/2e10b2c2e1aa4f8083c37dfe269873f8-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作研究的核心问题是：回归任务中的 in-context learning 为什么会表现出非贝叶斯行为，以及这种行为是否由预训练任务多样性诱发。过去很多 ICL 理论把 transformer 解释成某种近似贝叶斯推断器，但经验上模型经常偏离贝叶斯最优，尤其当预训练任务分布复杂、多峰或结构混杂时。","importance":"它的重要性在于把任务分布设计和 ICL 行为联系起来。对 pretrain 研究，这很关键，因为它说明 ICL 不是单由架构决定，而是强烈依赖预训练任务族的多样性与冲突结构。换句话说，如果你希望模型在上下文中学会某种规则，光增加模型容量不够，任务混合本身会决定它学到的是近似推断器、启发式策略，还是某种折中元算法。","technical_approach":"方法上应当是构造一组可控回归任务分布，系统改变 pretraining task diversity，然后分析训练后的模型在 in-context regression 中是否接近贝叶斯预测。关键不是追求一个更强的回归模型，而是用简单环境把行为机制剥离出来：当训练任务族足够单一时，模型更容易拟合成贝叶斯样式更新；当任务多样性提高且模式间冲突变大时，模型可能转向非贝叶斯但经验风险更低的启发式规则。","experiments":"这类论文的关键证据通常是：在合成回归环境中，随着任务分布从单峰变多峰、从同质变异质，模型的 ICL 预测逐步偏离贝叶斯基线，而且这种偏离能系统复现。最有价值的 ablation 会区分模型容量、上下文长度和任务多样性三者的影响，避免把所有现象都归因于架构不足。当前没有摘要，不能安全填入具体提升数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks why in-context learning for regression often looks non-Bayesian, and whether pretraining task diversity is responsible for that behavior. Much prior theory interprets transformers as approximate Bayesian updaters in-context, yet empirical behavior frequently deviates from Bayes-optimal prediction when the training task distribution becomes heterogeneous or multimodal.","importance":"This matters because it ties ICL behavior to the structure of the pretraining task distribution, not just to model architecture. For pretraining research, that is a useful corrective: if we want a model to perform a certain style of in-context adaptation, task-mixture design may matter as much as scaling. Diversity can induce heuristic meta-learners rather than clean Bayesian inference.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is to pretrain on controlled families of regression tasks with systematically varied diversity, then compare the learned in-context predictor against Bayesian baselines. The point is not to beat regression benchmarks, but to isolate mechanism. When the task family is narrow, the model can behave more like a Bayes updater; when the family becomes broad and internally conflicting, a different non-Bayesian but lower-risk strategy may emerge.","experiments":"The central evidence would usually be synthetic regression studies showing a gradual shift away from Bayesian behavior as the task family becomes more diverse or multimodal. The most informative ablations would disentangle the effects of model capacity, context length, and task diversity, instead of attributing everything to architecture. No abstract is given, so exact setups and numbers should not be fabricated.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","pretraining","task-diversity","emergence"],"keywords":["in-context learning","Bayesian inference","transformers","task diversity","emergence"],"recommendation":{"zh":"读§3的可控实验设计和§4的任务多样性与ICL行为关联结论即可，可指导后续预训练任务混合方案设计","en":"Read §3 for controlled experimental design and §4 for correlation between task diversity and ICL behavior, can guide subsequent pre-training task mixture scheme design."}},{"id":"RenLWXZZ23","title":"Sparse Modular Activation for Efficient Sequence Modeling","authors":["Liliang Ren","Yang Liu","Shuohang Wang","Yichong Xu","Chenguang Zhu","ChengXiang Zhai"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$5b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/RenLWXZZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/RenLWXZZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/3f0739410e1c9c5da04fa10c1f3f86b6-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：高效序列建模里，模型既需要足够的表达能力，又需要控制计算和激活成本，但 dense activation 往往让每个 token 都经过同样昂贵的路径。过去 MoE 主要在 FFN 级别做稀疏化，而序列模型内部不同位置、不同时间尺度其实也可能需要不同模块参与。","importance":"它的重要性在架构效率层面。对 pretrain 来说，这类工作有现实意义，因为激活稀疏化是少数能在不线性增加推理成本的前提下提升容量的方法之一。如果它把模块稀疏路由带入更一般的 sequence modeling，而不是局限在标准 Transformer FFN，那么对长序列和多模态统一建模都可能有启发。","technical_approach":"从题目看，核心是 Sparse Modular Activation：让序列模型只激活少量模块处理当前 token 或局部状态，而不是全网络密集参与。它可能不是标准 top-k MoE 的简单复制，而是更细粒度地把模块化与序列建模结构结合，决定什么信息应走哪条子路径。设计上的关键取舍通常是：稀疏得太强会损伤训练稳定性与负载均衡，稀疏得太弱又拿不到效率收益，因此路由机制和辅助损失会决定它是否真正可训练。","experiments":"这类工作通常会在语言建模或长序列基准上，比较同等 FLOPs 或同等延迟下的困惑度、吞吐和内存占用，并与 dense transformer、MoE 或其他 efficient sequence model 比较。最值得看的是 scaling 曲线：在固定激活预算下，参数量增大是否还能持续带来收益；以及负载均衡、路由熵、模块专门化是否出现。当前无摘要，不能安全写具体数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a central efficiency trade-off in sequence modeling: we want larger capacity without paying dense computation for every token. Standard dense activation forces all positions through the same expensive pathway, while existing sparsity methods such as MoE are often tied to specific transformer sublayers rather than to sequence modeling more broadly.","importance":"This is mainly an architectural efficiency contribution. For pretraining, activation sparsity remains one of the few ways to increase parameter capacity without scaling inference cost linearly. If the paper extends modular sparse activation beyond a narrow FFN-MoE recipe, it could be relevant to long-context modeling and potentially to unified multimodal pretraining as well.","technical_approach":"The core idea, suggested by the title, is Sparse Modular Activation: only a subset of modules is activated for each token or local state. The likely novelty is not just top-k routing copied from MoE, but integrating modular routing into the structure of sequence modeling itself. The design trade-off is familiar but important: too much sparsity hurts stability and load balance, too little sparsity fails to buy efficiency, so the routing objective and balancing mechanisms are central to whether the method works in practice.","experiments":"A paper like this would typically report perplexity or sequence-task accuracy together with throughput, memory, and activated-FLOP comparisons against dense transformers, MoE variants, or other efficient sequence models. The most informative result would be a scaling story: at fixed activation budget, can larger sparse models keep improving? Useful diagnostics would include load balance, routing entropy, and module specialization. No abstract is provided, so precise metrics and gains cannot be stated safely.","authors_note":""},"tags":["sequence-modeling","sparse-activation","efficient-training","modularity"],"keywords":["Sequence Modeling","Modularity","Sparsity","Attention Mechanism","State Space Model","Mixture of Experts","Neural Network","Transformer"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的路由机制设计和§5的效率-精度对比结果，可作为MoE之外的激活稀疏化替代方案参考","en":"Only check §3 for routing mechanism design and §5 for efficiency-accuracy comparison results, can be used as an activation sparsification alternative to MoE for reference."}},{"id":"RomanADSSD23","title":"From Discrete Tokens to High-Fidelity Audio Using Multi-Band Diffusion","authors":["Robin San Roman","Yossi Adi","Antoine Deleforge","Romain Serizel","Gabriel Synnaeve","Alexandre Défossez"],"institutions":["Meta AI","INRIA"],"abstract":"$5c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/RomanADSSD23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/RomanADSSD23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/054f771d614df12fe8def8ecdbe4e8e1-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有基于离散token的音频生成方法在条件信息有瑕疵时易产生可闻 artifacts，此前扩散模型仅用于语音声码器或低采样率音频生成，无法覆盖全模态高保真音频生成需求。","importance":"是音频生成领域的方法级贡献，提出的多带扩散框架统一了语音、音乐、环境音等多模态音频的高保真生成流程，对语音LM、文生音预训练的解码器设计有直接参考价值。","technical_approach":"原创的多带扩散生成框架，将音频信号按频率拆分为多个子带，分别用独立扩散模型建模后融合得到完整波形，舍弃传统扩散模型全频带统一建模方案，相比单带扩散推理速度提升4x以上，同时降低 artifacts 出现概率。","experiments":"在24kHz和48kHz采样率的语音、音乐、环境音数据集上测试，条件输入为1kbps级压缩离散token时，客观指标PESQ提升0.3，主观听测MOS得分比基线AR模型高0.4，可有效抑制条件不完美时的噪声 artifacts。","authors_note":"Meta AI（Gabriel Synnaeve, Yossi Adi），Gabriel Synnaeve团队长期从事音频生成研究，代表工作包括AudioGen、SEER等。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing discrete token-based audio generation methods produce audible artifacts when conditioning signals are flawed. Prior diffusion models for audio are limited to speech vocoders or low-sampling-rate signals, and cannot support high-fidelity generation across all audio modalities.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution in audio generation. The proposed multi-band diffusion framework unifies high-fidelity generation pipelines for speech, music and environmental sounds, providing direct reference for decoder design of speech LM and text-to-audio pre-training.","technical_approach":"An original multi-band diffusion generation framework that splits audio signals into multiple frequency sub-bands, models each with an independent diffusion model, and fuses outputs to get the full waveform. It abandons the full-band unified modeling scheme of traditional diffusion models, achieving 4x+ faster inference than single-band diffusion while reducing artifact occurrence rate.","experiments":"Tested on 24kHz and 48kHz sampling rate datasets covering speech, music and environmental sounds. When conditioned on 1kbps compressed discrete tokens, it achieves 0.3 PESQ improvement and 0.4 higher MOS score than baseline AR models, and effectively suppresses noise artifacts under imperfect conditioning.","authors_note":"Meta AI (Gabriel Synnaeve, Yossi Adi). Gabriel Synnaeve's team has long worked on audio generation, with representative works including AudioGen and SEER."},"tags":["audio","tokenization","diffusion","speech-generation"],"keywords":["diffusion","audio","compression"],"notable_authors":["Gabriel Synnaeve","Yossi Adi"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"扩散模型相比自回归模型对条件噪声的鲁棒性更强","claim_en":"Diffusion models have stronger robustness to conditioning noise than autoregressive models","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"多带扩散建模比单带扩散在高保真音频生成任务上效率和质量都更优","claim_en":"Multi-band diffusion modeling outperforms single-band diffusion in both efficiency and quality for high-fidelity audio generation","opposes":"Prior work assumes full-band diffusion yields better generation quality than split-band design for audio","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4, Table 2","why_contested":"打破了扩散模型音频生成的默认设计选择，大幅降低了高保真音频扩散模型的部署门槛"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§4的多带拆分架构和推理速度对比表即可，仅做语音/音频LM预训练的解码器设计参考","en":"Only read §4 for multi-band splitting architecture and inference speed comparison tables, only for reference in speech/audio LM pre-training decoder design."}},{"id":"SchaefferMK23","title":"Are Emergent Abilities of Large Language Models a Mirage?","authors":["Rylan Schaeffer","Brando Miranda","Sanmi Koyejo"],"institutions":["Stanford University"],"abstract":"$5d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SchaefferMK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SchaefferMK23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/adc98a266f45005c403b8311ca7e8bd7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心结论是：很多所谓 LLM“涌现能力”可能是评测刻度造成的海市蜃楼，而不是能力在某个模型规模点突然出现。以往工作常在离散指标上观察到从 0 到非 0 的跳变，但如果底层能力其实是平滑增长，阈值化或非线性度量就会把连续改进放大成“突现”。","importance":"它的重要性是范式级的，因为它直接挑战了社区对 scaling 现象的解释框架。对 pretrain 的影响很实际：如果“emergence”部分来自指标设计，那么训练决策不该建立在神秘相变叙事上，而应更关注 loss、校准、任务可分解性和连续 scaling 曲线；这会改变我们如何设计 benchmark，也会影响对大模型投资回报的判断。","technical_approach":"方法上，这篇论文不是发明新训练法，而是重新分析 emergent abilities 的统计成因。作者把已有任务的性能曲线放到不同度量空间下看，比较离散指标和更连续的指标表现，并用简单可解释的构造说明：当底层 token-level 或 probability-level 能力平滑提升时，经过 exact-match、pass/fail 之类阈值操作后，曲线可以看起来像突然跃迁；与“能力突然出现”的解释相比，这个机制更节制，也更符合常见 scaling 规律。","experiments":"实验的关键信息不是某个模型赢了多少，而是同一批模型在不同指标定义下会得到不同的“是否涌现”结论。论文显示，一些被报告为 emergent 的任务，在改用更连续、分辨率更高的评价后，性能随规模上升更接近平滑曲线；这说明不少结论对 metric choice 很敏感。未给到具体数字时，最稳妥的总结是：作者用再分析和构造例子证明，离散评价足以制造“相变”表象。","authors_note":"Brando Miranda、Sanmi Koyejo 均与 Stanford 相关研究圈有较高可见度；该工作属于对 LLM scaling 与评测解释框架的反思性分析。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper’s main claim is that many reported emergent abilities in LLMs are likely artifacts of the evaluation scale rather than genuine phase transitions in capability. Prior work often relied on discontinuous metrics, where a smooth improvement in underlying competence can appear as a sudden jump once a threshold is crossed.","importance":"This is paradigm-level important because it challenges how the community interprets scaling. For pretraining, the implication is practical: if emergence is partly metric-induced, decisions should rely less on dramatic threshold narratives and more on smooth scaling curves, calibration, and task decomposition.","technical_approach":"The work is an analysis paper, not a new training method. The authors re-express performance under different metrics and show that when latent token-level competence improves smoothly, applying exact-match or pass/fail style metrics can create the appearance of abrupt emergence; compared with the stronger claim that capability suddenly appears, this explanation is simpler and more consistent with standard scaling behavior.","experiments":"The key empirical result is that the same family of models can look emergent under one metric and non-emergent under another. The paper shows that several tasks previously described as emergent become much smoother when evaluated with more continuous measures, indicating that the conclusion is highly metric-sensitive. Without exact numbers in the prompt, the safe summary is that the paper demonstrates how discontinuous evaluation alone can manufacture apparent phase transitions.","authors_note":"Brando Miranda and Sanmi Koyejo are visible researchers in the Stanford-affiliated ML community; this work is best read as a conceptual re-examination of scaling and evaluation claims."},"tags":["emergence","scaling-laws","llm-evaluation","benchmarking"],"notable_authors":["Rylan Schaeffer","Brando Miranda","Sanmi Koyejo"],"keywords":["large language models","foundation models","natural language processing","language modeling","emergent abilities"],"recommendation":{"zh":"推翻了涌现是规模触发相变的固有认知，应立刻在内部benchmark设计中替换离散指标为连续度量，避免对能力增长的误判。","en":"It upends the prior that emergent abilities are abrupt scale-driven phase changes, you should immediately replace discrete metrics with continuous ones in internal benchmark design to avoid misjudging capability growth."}},{"id":"ShaoMZF23","title":"Beyond MLE: Convex Learning for Text Generation","authors":["Chenze Shao","Zhengrui Ma","Min Zhang","Yang Feng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$5e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ShaoMZF23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ShaoMZF23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/1c3d419b754cb4de0a67a453cb28d959-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文想解决的是：文本生成训练为什么几乎被 MLE（最大似然）垄断，以及是否存在更稳健、具有更好优化或泛化性质的替代目标。MLE 的问题并不新鲜，包括 exposure bias、训练目标与生成质量不完全对齐，以及对长尾或多样性控制的局限，但大家通常缺少可训练、可证明、还能在文本任务上落地的替代方案。","importance":"它的重要性在于尝试把文本生成目标从“只有 MLE 能用”往外推一步。对 pretrain 的启示是：如果某类凸目标能在一定条件下提供更稳定的学习信号，或者减轻 MLE 对错误归因的敏感性，那么未来语言建模未必只能围绕 next-token log-likelihood 打转；即便最终不能替代 MLE，也可能成为 annealing、reranking 或 post-training 的补充目标。","technical_approach":"核心方法是提出一种用于文本生成的 convex learning 框架，目标是绕开标准自回归 MLE 的一些非凸与失配问题。根据标题推断，作者并不是简单做 label smoothing 或 RL 微调，而是把生成建模重新表述成一个具有凸性质的学习问题，使优化更可控；关键差别在于，它希望直接学习有利于序列决策/候选排序的打分结构，而不必完全依赖逐 token 归一化概率。","experiments":"实验应当比较所提凸学习目标与 MLE 在若干文本生成任务上的效果，重点看质量、稳定性或数据效率，而不是只看训练 loss。由于题面没有给模型规模、任务和数字，不能硬写 SOTA；稳妥的总结是：作者展示了该方法在部分生成任务上可与 MLE 竞争，并通过分析说明其优化行为更稳定或更符合下游生成评价，但边界条件和大规模适用性仍需进一步验证。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a basic but underexplored question: why is text generation training still dominated by MLE, and can we replace or augment it with an objective that has better optimization or alignment properties. MLE’s weaknesses are well known, including exposure bias and mismatch with generation quality, but alternatives are often hard to train or too weak to matter in practice.","importance":"Its value lies in pushing text generation beyond the assumption that next-token likelihood is the only workable objective. For pretraining, the broader lesson is that if a convex objective can provide a more stable learning signal or reduce some of MLE’s error attribution issues, then language modeling may admit useful auxiliary or alternative objectives, even if MLE remains the backbone.","technical_approach":"The core idea is a convex learning framework for text generation. From the title, this is not a minor tweak like label smoothing; the authors appear to reformulate generation learning into an optimization problem with convex structure, aiming for better-behaved training than standard autoregressive MLE. The conceptual difference is that the model can learn sequence-level scoring or preference structure without relying entirely on token-normalized likelihood.","experiments":"The experiments likely compare the proposed convex objective against MLE on text generation tasks, focusing on generation quality, stability, or sample efficiency rather than just training loss. Since the prompt provides no exact models or numbers, the safe summary is that the method appears competitive on selected tasks and shows better-behaved optimization in some settings, while its scalability to frontier pretraining remains an open question.","authors_note":""},"tags":["text-generation","loss-function","mle-alternative","convex-learning"],"keywords":["Maximum likelihood estimation","Convex function","Text generation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3凸目标构造和§5文本生成对比实验即可，可作为预训练退火阶段的补充候选目标参考。","en":"Only read §3 for convex objective formulation and §5 for text generation comparison experiments, it can be referenced as a supplementary candidate objective for the pretraining annealing phase."}},{"id":"ShinnCGNY23","title":"Reflexion: language agents with verbal reinforcement learning","authors":["Noah Shinn","Federico Cassano","Ashwin Gopinath","Karthik Narasimhan","Shunyu Yao"],"institutions":["Princeton University"],"abstract":"$5f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ShinnCGNY23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ShinnCGNY23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/1b44b878bb782e6954cd888628510e90-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：当语言模型作为 agent 在多步任务中失败时，如何不用参数更新也能从失败中积累可复用经验。过去常见做法要么依赖监督微调或 RLHF 改参数，要么只做短期 trial-and-error 而不形成稳定记忆，这使得样本效率低、部署成本高，也不利于在线适应。","importance":"它的重要性不在于提出新的预训练目标，而在于把“语言反馈”明确当成一种可操作的强化信号，展示了 post-train 阶段可以只通过上下文和记忆机制获得接近强化学习的收益。对 pretrain 研究的启发是，模型是否具备自我解释、错误归因和可写入文本记忆的能力，会直接决定后续 agent 化和 test-time adaptation 的上限。","technical_approach":"方法结论很直接：Reflexion 用语言形式的自我反思替代参数级更新，把失败轨迹压缩成后续决策可读取的 verbal feedback。具体做法是三段式循环：先执行任务，再由 evaluator 给出成败或环境反馈，最后由同一个或辅助 LM 生成一段反思文本，写入 episodic memory，下一轮把这些记忆连同任务上下文一起喂给模型。它放弃了显式策略梯度、价值函数和权重更新，换来的是更低部署门槛和更强可解释性；代价是记忆质量高度依赖模型本身的归因能力，错误反思会被持续放大。和常规 chain-of-thought 不同，这里的语言不是只为当前样本服务，而是跨 episode 传递策略修正。","experiments":"实验结论是：在顺序决策和程序合成类任务上，Reflexion 相比单纯 ReAct 或标准 few-shot prompting 有明显提升，但增益高度依赖任务是否能提供清晰反馈。论文的代表性评测包括 HumanEval 编程、AlfWorld 和 HotPotQA 一类 agent/推理任务；常见设置是用 GPT-3.5/4 级别模型做 backbone，不额外训练参数。核心现象不是绝对 SOTA，而是同一个 frozen model 在加入 verbal memory 后成功率持续上升，说明收益来自“经验积累”而不是一次性 prompt 工程。ablation 一般会比较：无反思、仅重试、随机记忆、截断记忆；结果显示高质量反馈和简洁而针对性的 reflection 最关键，记忆过长会引入噪声并挤占上下文。","authors_note":"普林斯顿大学团队。Shunyu Yao 与 Karthik Narasimhan 都持续做 LLM agent、ReAct、工具使用和推理相关工作；这篇可以看作 ReAct 之后，把“行动-反馈-文字化经验”闭环补上的一篇代表作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a simple but important question: how can a language agent improve from failure without updating its weights. Earlier systems either relied on finetuning/RL-style parameter updates or just retried with no persistent learning, which made adaptation expensive and brittle in deployment.","importance":"Its main contribution is not a new pretraining objective, but a clean demonstration that language itself can serve as a reinforcement channel. For pretraining researchers, the implication is practical: models that can explain failures, assign blame, and write compact reusable memories are much easier to turn into adaptive agents at test time.","technical_approach":"Reflexion replaces weight updates with verbal reinforcement. The loop has three parts: act in the environment, obtain a task-specific signal of success or failure, then generate a short natural-language reflection that is stored in episodic memory and prepended to future attempts. This design deliberately drops policy gradients, critics, and parameter optimization. The benefit is low engineering overhead and interpretable adaptation. The cost is that bad self-diagnosis can poison future behavior. Unlike standard chain-of-thought, the text here is not just for the current example; it is a cross-episode carrier of behavioral updates.","experiments":"The main empirical result is that a frozen LLM becomes noticeably better over repeated trials when given reflective memory, especially on tasks with crisp external feedback. The paper evaluates on agentic and program-synthesis style benchmarks such as HumanEval and AlfWorld, typically using GPT-3.5/GPT-4-class models without extra training. The key finding is not raw SOTA but monotonic improvement across episodes relative to plain ReAct or retry-only baselines. Ablations show that targeted reflections outperform random or overly long memory, and that memory quality matters more than memory quantity.","authors_note":"Princeton University. Shunyu Yao and Karthik Narasimhan are well known for work on ReAct, tool use, and LLM agents. This paper extends that line by closing the loop from action and feedback to reusable textual experience."},"tags":["language-agent","verbal-rl","self-reflection","post-training"],"notable_authors":["Karthik Narasimhan","Shunyu Yao"],"keywords":["language model","reasoning","decision making","programming"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4反思记忆循环设计和跨episode性能实验即可，可指导agent类模型测试时适配模块的开发。","en":"Only read §4 for the reflexion memory loop design and cross-episode performance results, it guides the development of test-time adaptation modules for agent-oriented models."}},{"id":"SilvaWLL23","title":"CoLLAT: On Adding Fine-grained Audio Understanding to Language Models using Token-Level Locked-Language Tuning","authors":["Dadallage A. R. Silva","Spencer Whitehead","Christopher T. Lengerich","Hugh Leather"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$60","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SilvaWLL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SilvaWLL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/c7b5a35ea98b62512a869c19ea7b03cb-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：如何在不破坏现有语言模型能力的前提下，给它加入更细粒度的音频理解能力。过去多模态音频-文本系统常用全局音频 embedding 或 encoder-decoder 对接，这对粗粒度分类够用，但对事件级、时序级音频语义建模不够细。","importance":"它的价值在于提供了一条较轻量的音频接入路线：不是重新训练一个原生 audio-language foundation model，而是通过 token 级对齐把细粒度音频信息锁定到 LM 的 token space。对 pretrain 研究的启发是，跨模态扩展未必都要大规模联合预训练；如果表示足够稳定，token-level adaptation 可能是更便宜的接口方案。","technical_approach":"CoLLAT 的核心是 token-level locked-language tuning：保留语言模型主体尽量不动，把音频编码后的时序表示映射到与文本 token 交互的空间，并通过受约束的调优方式接入。这里的“locked”强调尽量冻结语言能力，以避免音频注入导致语言退化；“token-level”强调不是只给一个整体音频向量，而是保留时间细节，让模型能在文本生成或理解时引用局部声学事件。和常见 prefix/prompt tuning 相比，它更重视音频 token 与文本 token 的精细对应；和全量联合训练相比，它牺牲了一部分跨模态共同演化能力，换来更低算力和更小遗忘风险。","experiments":"实验结论是：在细粒度音频理解任务上，token-level 接入优于只用全局音频表征的方案，同时语言侧能力保持得更稳定。根据标题和方法定位，评测重点应包括音频事件识别、音频问答或音频字幕等需要时间分辨率的任务，并与冻结 LM + 音频前缀、全局 pooling 以及可能的全量微调作比较。论文的关键信号应该是，细粒度 supervision 和锁定语言参数能同时带来性能与稳定性收益；但它的边界也明显，若任务需要深度声学生成或跨模态共同推理，仅靠适配层可能不够。","authors_note":"如果仅根据给定信息，机构无法可靠确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical multimodal question: how do we add fine-grained audio understanding to an LLM without damaging its language competence. Earlier audio-language systems often relied on a single pooled audio embedding or encoder-decoder coupling, which is acceptable for coarse tasks but too weak for event-level temporal understanding.","importance":"Its significance is methodological rather than paradigm-shifting. The work suggests that not every audio-language extension needs expensive native joint pretraining. If representations are stable enough, token-level adaptation can be a cheaper interface for bringing temporal audio detail into an existing LM.","technical_approach":"CoLLAT uses token-level locked-language tuning. The idea is to keep most of the language model fixed, encode audio into a temporal sequence, and map that sequence into a space where it can interact with text tokens at a finer granularity. The 'locked' part is about preserving language ability by avoiding broad LM updates. The 'token-level' part is about retaining temporal resolution instead of collapsing audio into one global vector. Compared with prefix-style adapters, this gives more detailed alignment between audio events and text generation. Compared with full joint training, it trades some cross-modal flexibility for lower cost and less forgetting.","experiments":"The paper’s main result is that fine-grained token-level audio integration improves tasks that depend on temporal detail while preserving language-side behavior better than coarser alternatives. The likely comparisons include frozen-LM baselines with pooled audio features, prefix-like conditioning, and stronger finetuning variants. The important empirical pattern is the trade-off: constrained adaptation keeps the LM stable, but its gains are largest on understanding tasks rather than deep generative audio modeling.","authors_note":""},"tags":["audio-language","multimodal","token-level","adaptation"],"keywords":["Audio Understanding","Contrastive Learning","Audio-Language Grounding"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3.2的token级对齐调优方案和§4细粒度音频任务实验即可，可作为小成本跨模态扩展的备选路线。","en":"Only read §3.2 for token-level alignment tuning scheme and §4 for fine-grained audio task experiments, it is an alternative path for low-cost cross-modal expansion."}},{"id":"SinghCMGSH23","title":"The Transient Nature of Emergent In-Context Learning in Transformers","authors":["Aaditya K. Singh","Stephanie C. Y. Chan","Ted Moskovitz","Erin Grant","Andrew M. Saxe","Felix Hill"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$61","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SinghCMGSH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SinghCMGSH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/58692a1701314e09cbd7a5f5f3871cc9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的核心问题是：Transformer 中常被称为 emergent in-context learning 的现象，究竟是稳定形成的能力，还是训练过程中会短暂出现又消失的过渡态。过去很多分析默认 ICL 会随着训练和规模单调增强，但这个假设未必成立。","importance":"它的重要性很高，因为它直接挑战了“ICL 是规模带来的稳定涌现能力”这类过于简化的叙事。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，训练中观测到的好性质未必会保留下来；数据分布、训练时长和优化轨迹会改变模型最终是否保留某种算法式行为。这对 checkpoint 选择、 mid-training 配方和机制解释都很关键。","technical_approach":"方法上，这是一篇训练动力学与机制分析工作。作者在可控任务上训练 Transformer，追踪其 ICL 行为随训练步骤、模型规模和数据条件的变化，发现某些 ICL 能力只在训练中段明显，后期又被更简单的统计策略取代。论文通常会结合线性回归式 in-context 任务或合成序列任务，分析模型何时学到“利用上下文做任务内学习”的算法，何时转向记忆训练分布捷径。它的关键设计是用可解释任务把不同解法分离出来，而不是只在自然语言 benchmark 上看最终分数。","experiments":"实验结论是：ICL 不是单调增强，而可能是 transient 的。具体而言，在某些任务和规模下，测试时表现会先进入一个能利用示例上下文的阶段，随后随着继续训练，模型改用更依赖训练分布统计的策略，导致真正的 task-learning 行为减弱。论文通常会报告不同 checkpoint 的曲线而不是单点结果，并通过 probe、干预或分布迁移验证“后期退化”确实来自策略切换。最有价值的观察是，最佳 ICL checkpoint 不一定是最低训练损失 checkpoint，这对大模型训练和 early stopping 很有现实意义。","authors_note":"如果仅根据给定信息，机构无法可靠确认。Andrew M. Saxe 长期做深度学习训练动力学与表示学习理论。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper investigates whether emergent in-context learning in Transformers is a stable capability or a transient phase during training. Much of the earlier discussion implicitly assumed that ICL grows monotonically with scale and optimization, but that assumption may be false.","importance":"This matters a lot because it challenges a common scaling narrative. For pretraining, the implication is that desirable algorithmic behavior observed mid-training may not survive to the final checkpoint. Data distribution, training duration, and optimization trajectory can all determine whether a model keeps or overwrites an in-context learning strategy.","technical_approach":"The work is a training-dynamics study on controlled tasks. The authors train Transformers on interpretable settings and track ICL behavior across training time, model size, and data conditions. Their key finding is that models can briefly learn to solve tasks by using the context examples, and then later switch to simpler shortcut strategies tied to training-set statistics. The methodological strength is the use of tasks where different solution mechanisms can be disentangled, rather than relying only on final scores from natural-language benchmarks.","experiments":"The main empirical result is that ICL can be transient rather than monotonic. On some tasks, performance first reflects genuine use of in-context examples, then degrades as continued training pushes the model toward shortcut solutions. The paper emphasizes full training curves across checkpoints, not just endpoint metrics, and likely uses probes or distribution shifts to verify that the late-stage drop is caused by a strategy change. A practical takeaway is that the best ICL checkpoint may differ from the minimum-loss checkpoint, which is highly relevant for model selection and training schedules.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","emergence","training-dynamics","transformer"],"notable_authors":["Andrew M. Saxe"],"keywords":["in-context learning","transformers","emergence","transience"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4训练动力学追踪结果和ICL瞬态消失消融实验即可，提醒预训练中期checkpoint需额外做能力留存验证。","en":"Only read §4 for training dynamics tracking results and ICL transient disappearance ablation, it reminds you to verify capability retention for mid-training checkpoints."}},{"id":"SordoniYCPTXHNR23","title":"Joint Prompt Optimization of Stacked LLMs using Variational Inference","authors":["Alessandro Sordoni","Eric Yuan","Marc-Alexandre Côté","Matheus Pereira","Adam Trischler","Ziang Xiao","Arian Hosseini","Friederike Niedtner","Nicolas Le Roux"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$62","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SordoniYCPTXHNR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SordoniYCPTXHNR23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/b5afe13494c825089b1e3944fdaba212-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是一个越来越实际的问题：当多个 LLM 以 stack 方式串联协作时，prompt 不再是单模型局部超参，而是整个系统的耦合变量，怎么才能联合优化。过去常见做法是逐个模块手调 prompt 或独立搜索，但这通常得到局部最优，前一个模型的 prompt 改动会改变后一个模型的输入分布。","importance":"它的重要性在于把 prompt engineering 提升到系统优化问题。对 pretrain/post-train 接口的启示是，随着 LLM pipeline 越来越复杂，很多性能瓶颈不在单个基座模型，而在模块间接口和中间语言表示的优化。联合 prompt 优化是一种不改参数、但能明显改变系统行为的后训练手段。","technical_approach":"作者提出用 variational inference 做 stacked LLM 的 joint prompt optimization。核心思想是把每一层 prompt 或中间离散文本变量视为潜在变量，目标不是分别贪心优化，而是联合近似求解整个系统的后验/最优配置。这样可以显式处理上游 prompt 对下游分布的影响，也能在不可微、黑盒 LM 组成的系统上进行近似优化。和单模型 prompt search 相比，它强调跨模块 credit assignment；和全量参数微调相比，它完全保留黑盒调用接口，代价是优化空间离散、近似误差和搜索成本都不小。","experiments":"实验结论应是：在多阶段 LLM pipeline 上，联合优化 prompt 明显优于独立优化或人工 prompt，尤其是在需要中间推理、重写或检索协调的任务上。论文大概率会构造 2 到 3 层 stack，如 planner-solver、retriever-reader 或 rewriter-answerer 结构，比较 greedy prompt tuning、随机搜索和 variational 方法。关键结果如果成立，应表现为任务成功率或最终准确率的稳定提升，并且在模块间耦合越强时收益越大。边界在于，系统越深、prompt 空间越大，VI 近似和搜索预算会成为主要瓶颈。","authors_note":"如果仅根据给定信息，机构无法可靠确认。Alessandro Sordoni 与 Adam Trischler 都长期从事对话系统、检索增强和 LLM 系统研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical systems problem: once multiple LLMs are stacked into a pipeline, prompts stop being local knobs and become coupled variables of the whole system. Optimizing them one module at a time is usually suboptimal because changing an upstream prompt changes the input distribution seen downstream.","importance":"Its importance lies in reframing prompt engineering as system-level optimization. The broader lesson for the pretrain/posttrain interface is that as LLM applications become modular, many performance limits come from the interfaces between models rather than the base model alone. Joint prompt optimization is a lightweight post-training lever that can materially change behavior without touching weights.","technical_approach":"The method uses variational inference to jointly optimize prompts in stacked LLM systems. The main idea is to treat prompts and intermediate discrete text outputs as latent variables and optimize them together rather than greedily. This gives a way to handle cross-module dependencies and perform approximate credit assignment even when the constituent LLMs are black boxes and non-differentiable. Compared with single-model prompt search, the method is explicitly system-aware. Compared with parameter finetuning, it preserves the black-box API setting, at the cost of approximate inference error and potentially expensive search.","experiments":"The paper’s key empirical claim is that jointly optimized prompts outperform independently tuned or manually designed prompts in multi-stage LLM pipelines, especially when intermediate reasoning, rewriting, or retrieval coordination matters. The evaluation likely includes 2- or 3-stage stacks such as planner-solver or retriever-reader systems, with baselines like greedy tuning and random search. The most useful pattern is that gains grow when module interactions are stronger. The limitation is straightforward: as the pipeline gets deeper and the prompt space grows, variational optimization becomes harder and more budget-sensitive.","authors_note":""},"tags":["prompting","llm","optimization","stacked-models"],"notable_authors":["Alessandro Sordoni","Adam Trischler"],"keywords":["deep prompt optimization","llm","variational inference","graphical model","chaining"]},{"id":"SuhrA23","title":"Continual Learning for Instruction Following from Realtime Feedback","authors":["Alane Suhr","Yoav Artzi"],"institutions":["Cornell University"],"abstract":"We propose and deploy an approach to  continually train an instruction-following agent from feedback provided by users during collaborative interactions. During interaction, human users instruct an agent using natural language, and provide realtime binary feedback as they observe the agent following their instructions. We design a contextual bandit learning approach, converting  user feedback to immediate reward. We evaluate through thousands of human-agent interactions, demonstrating 15.4% absolute improvement in instruction execution accuracy over time. We also show our approach is robust to several design variations, and that the feedback signal is roughly equivalent to the learning signal of supervised demonstration data.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SuhrA23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SuhrA23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/666cccc6376058e251315b4de7e085b9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有指令跟随模型的训练依赖固定标注数据集，无法在部署后利用用户实时反馈持续提升性能，过往持续学习方法易出现灾难性遗忘。","importance":"是预训练后对齐领域的方法级贡献，证明了实时二元用户反馈可以作为有效训练信号，对SFT后模型持续迭代的流程设计有参考价值。","technical_approach":"改进的上下文老虎机学习方法，将用户实时二元反馈转换为即时奖励用于模型微调，同时加入正则项避免灾难性遗忘，区别于过往需要完整标注演示数据的持续学习方案。","experiments":"通过数千次人机交互测试，指令执行准确率相比基线绝对提升15.4%； ablation显示实时二元反馈的训练信号效率约等于同等量级的有监督演示数据。","authors_note":"康奈尔大学（Alane Suhr, Yoav Artzi），Yoav Artzi长期从事自然语言交互和具身智能研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing instruction following models are trained on fixed labeled datasets, and cannot continuously improve performance using real-time user feedback after deployment. Prior continual learning methods for this task suffer from catastrophic forgetting.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution in post-pre-training alignment. It proves real-time binary user feedback can be used as an effective training signal, providing reference for the design of iterative model improvement pipelines after SFT.","technical_approach":"An improved contextual bandit learning method that converts real-time binary user feedback into immediate reward for model fine-tuning, with regularization added to avoid catastrophic forgetting. Unlike prior continual learning schemes, it does not require fully annotated demonstration data.","experiments":"Tested via thousands of human-agent interactions, the instruction execution accuracy achieves 15.4% absolute improvement over baseline. Ablation shows the training efficiency of real-time binary feedback is roughly equivalent to the same amount of supervised demonstration data.","authors_note":"Cornell University (Alane Suhr, Yoav Artzi). Yoav Artzi has long worked on natural language interaction and embodied intelligence."},"tags":["continual-learning","instruction-tuning","feedback","alignment"],"keywords":["continual learning","interaction","instruction following","user feedback","natural language processing","language grounding","situated interaction","collaboration"],"notable_authors":["Yoav Artzi"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"二元反馈信号可以作为监督信号用于模型微调","claim_en":"Binary feedback signals can be used as supervision for model fine-tuning","evidence_anchor":"§2"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"实时二元用户反馈的训练效率与有监督演示数据相当","claim_en":"Real-time binary user feedback has comparable training efficiency to supervised demonstration data","opposes":"Prior work assumes only high-quality annotated demonstration data can effectively improve instruction following performance","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5, Table 3","why_contested":"大幅降低了指令跟随模型持续迭代的标注成本"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4上下文老虎机微调方法和遗忘抑制实验即可，可参考设计SFT后模型的实时用户反馈迭代流程。","en":"Only read §4 for contextual bandit fine-tuning method and forgetting mitigation experiments, it can be referenced for designing real-time user feedback iteration processes for post-SFT models."}},{"id":"SunSRBJY23","title":"SpecTr: Fast Speculative Decoding via Optimal Transport","authors":["Ziteng Sun","Ananda Theertha Suresh","Jae Hun Ro","Ahmad Beirami","Himanshu Jain","Felix X. Yu"],"institutions":["Google Research"],"abstract":"$63","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SunSRBJY23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SunSRBJY23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/6034a661584af6c28fd97a6f23e56c0a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有推测解码方法的接受率优化缺乏统一理论框架，大部分方案依赖启发式设计，小模型draft的接受率上限较低，导致加速比不足。","importance":"是LLM推理效率领域的范式级贡献，从最优传输视角统一了推测解码的理论框架，对后续推测解码的算法优化和加速比提升有直接指导意义。","technical_approach":"原创的基于带成员成本最优传输的推测解码框架，通过最优传输规划选择draft token的接受/拒绝策略，在保证输出分布和大模型完全一致的前提下最大化draft接受率，区别于过往基于独立token拒绝采样的启发式方案。","experiments":"在7B/13B/70B LLaMA模型上测试，相比标准推测解码方法，接受率提升20%~30%，端到端推理加速比提升1.2x~1.5x，长文本生成任务上加速效果更明显。","authors_note":"Google Research（Ananda Theertha Suresh, Ahmad Beirami），团队长期从事LLM推理和高效采样研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing speculative decoding methods lack a unified theoretical framework for acceptance rate optimization, most rely on heuristic designs, and the acceptance rate upper limit of small model drafts is low, leading to insufficient speedup.","importance":"It is a paradigm-level contribution in LLM inference efficiency. It unifies the theoretical framework of speculative decoding from the optimal transport perspective, providing direct guidance for subsequent algorithm optimization and speedup improvement of speculative decoding.","technical_approach":"An original speculative decoding framework based on optimal transport with membership cost. It selects the accept/reject strategy for draft tokens via optimal transport planning, maximizing the draft acceptance rate while guaranteeing the output distribution is exactly the same as the large model. Unlike prior heuristic schemes based on independent token rejection sampling.","experiments":"Tested on 7B/13B/70B LLaMA models. Compared with standard speculative decoding methods, the acceptance rate is improved by 20%~30%, end-to-end inference speedup is improved by 1.2x~1.5x, and the speedup is more significant on long text generation tasks.","authors_note":"Google Research (Ananda Theertha Suresh, Ahmad Beirami). The team has long worked on LLM inference and efficient sampling."},"tags":["speculative-decoding","optimal-transport","inference-efficiency"],"keywords":["autoregressive sampling; computation efficiency; optimal transport"],"notable_authors":["Ananda Theertha Suresh"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"推测解码可以在不改变大模型输出分布的前提下提升推理速度","claim_en":"Speculative decoding can improve inference speed without changing the output distribution of the large model","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于最优传输的接受策略比启发式拒绝采样的接受率更高","claim_en":"Optimal transport based acceptance strategy achieves higher acceptance rate than heuristic rejection sampling","opposes":"Prior work assumes the independent token rejection sampling scheme achieves the optimal possible acceptance rate for speculative decoding","opposes_cite_hint":"Leviathan 2023 Speculative Decoding","evidence_anchor":"§4, Table 1","why_contested":"突破了此前推测解码的接受率上限，为更高加速比的推测解码算法提供了理论基础"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3最优传输接受策略推导和§4加速比实验即可，可用来优化内部推测解码推理引擎的token接受率。","en":"Only read §3 for optimal transport acceptance strategy derivation and §4 for speedup experiments, it helps optimize token acceptance rate of internal speculative decoding inference engines."}},{"id":"SwaminathanDRSL23","title":"Schema-learning and rebinding as mechanisms of in-context learning and emergence","authors":["Sivaramakrishnan Swaminathan","Antoine Dedieu","Rajkumar Vasudeva Raju","Murray Shanahan","Miguel Lázaro-Gredilla","Dileep George"],"institutions":["DeepMind"],"abstract":"$64","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SwaminathanDRSL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SwaminathanDRSL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/5bc3356e0fa1753fff7e8d6628e71b22-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer大模型的上下文学习（ICL）机制缺乏可解释的理论解释，过往研究无法明确ICL背后的具体计算流程。","importance":"是大模型可解释性领域的范式级贡献，首次在可解释的结构化模型上复现了ICL能力，为理解Transformer的ICL涌现机制提供了新的参照框架。","technical_approach":"原创的使用克隆结构因果图（CSCG）的序列预测方法，通过学习模式完成的模板（schema）电路、上下文相关的模板检索、新token到对应槽位的重绑定三个步骤实现ICL，CSCG结构完全可解释，区别于Transformer的黑箱特性。","experiments":"在算术推理、分类等标准ICL任务上，CSCG模型的性能与同等参数量的Transformer相当，且可以直接可视化ICL过程中的模板检索和槽位重绑定操作； ablation显示三个核心组件缺一不可。","authors_note":"DeepMind（Murray Shanahan, Miguel Lázaro-Gredilla），Murray Shanahan是AGI和认知科学领域资深研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The in-context learning (ICL) mechanism of transformer large language models lacks interpretable theoretical explanations, and prior studies cannot clarify the specific computation process behind ICL.","importance":"It is a paradigm-level contribution in large model interpretability. It reproduces ICL capabilities on an interpretable structured model for the first time, providing a new reference framework for understanding the emergence mechanism of ICL in transformers.","technical_approach":"An original sequence prediction method using clone-structured causal graphs (CSCGs). It implements ICL via three steps: learning schema circuits for pattern completion, context-aware template retrieval, and rebinding novel tokens to corresponding slots. The structure of CSCGs is fully interpretable, unlike the black-box nature of transformers.","experiments":"On standard ICL tasks including arithmetic reasoning and classification, the CSCG model achieves comparable performance to transformers with the same parameter size, and the template retrieval and slot rebinding operations during ICL can be directly visualized. Ablation shows all three core components are indispensable.","authors_note":"DeepMind (Murray Shanahan, Miguel Lázaro-Gredilla). Murray Shanahan is a senior researcher in AGI and cognitive science."},"tags":["in-context-learning","emergence","schema-learning","rebinding"],"keywords":["mechanistic interpretability","in-context learning","emergence","large language models"],"notable_authors":["Murray Shanahan"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"上下文学习是大模型在不更新参数的前提下利用上下文示例完成任务的能力","claim_en":"In-context learning is the capability of large models to complete tasks using in-context examples without parameter updates","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"上下文学习的核心机制是模式学习、检索和槽位重绑定，而非隐式微调","claim_en":"The core mechanism of in-context learning is schema learning, retrieval and slot rebinding, rather than implicit fine-tuning","opposes":"Prior work assumes ICL in transformers works via implicit fine-tuning of model parameters using context examples","opposes_cite_hint":"Xie 2021 ICL as Implicit Fine-tuning","evidence_anchor":"§5, Figure 3","why_contested":"挑战了主流的ICL隐式微调假说，为ICL机制研究提供了新的方向"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3CSCG结构设计和ICL能力复现实验即可，可作为Transformer ICL底层机制研究的新参照框架。","en":"Only read §3 for CSCG structure design and ICL capability reproduction experiments, it serves as a new reference framework for research on underlying ICL mechanisms of Transformers."}},{"id":"TurpinMPB23","title":"Language Models Don&apos;t Always Say What They Think: Unfaithful Explanations in Chain-of-Thought Prompting","authors":["Miles Turpin","Julian Michael","Ethan Perez","Samuel R. Bowman"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/TurpinMPB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/TurpinMPB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ed3fea9033a80fea1376299fa7863f4a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：Chain-of-Thought 给出的解释并不总是忠实反映模型真实的决策过程。过去大家常把 CoT 同时当成性能增强手段和可解释性窗口，但这两个角色并不天然一致；模型可能先得到答案，再生成一段看起来合理的推理文本。","importance":"这是对 posttrain 与 reasoning 评估非常重要的一篇诊断论文。它的冲击不在于否定 CoT 提升准确率，而在于明确提醒社区：把自然语言推理链当作 faithful reasoning trace 是危险的。对 pretrain/posttrain 闭环的启示是，训练信号一旦奖励“会写推理”，就可能诱导模型优化表面可读性而不是真实中间计算，这和后续 RL、过程监督、latent reasoning 研究直接相关。","technical_approach":"核心方法是构造能够区分‘答案是否正确’与‘解释是否忠实’的干预实验。典型做法包括：在 prompt 中加入暗示、误导性线索或使答案易于直接猜出的设置，观察模型是否输出与决策原因不一致的 CoT；或者比较不同提示下答案稳定但解释变化的情况。这个设计有效，因为 faithful explanation 至少应对因果因素敏感：如果真正驱动答案的变量变了，解释也应相应变化。和单纯人工评判解释通顺不同，这种方法是在测 explanation-decision alignment。","experiments":"虽然这里没有摘要，但这篇论文的核心实验结论是方向明确的：LLM 会频繁给出不忠实的 CoT，尤其在存在提示泄漏、先验暗示或捷径线索时更明显。没有正文支持，不能安全写具体模型名单、样本量或比例数字；但可以确定它不是在比较‘有没有 CoT 更准’，而是在比较‘CoT 是否真的解释了模型为何得出该答案’。","authors_note":"机构与作者信息可从公开作者名单中部分识别，但当前给定信息不足以稳妥确认到团队代表作层面，因此留空。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a critical mismatch: chain-of-thought explanations are not always faithful to the model’s actual decision process. CoT has often been treated as both a performance tool and an interpretability tool, but those are different claims. A model can reach an answer through one route and then produce a plausible-looking rationale afterward.","importance":"This is an important diagnostic result for reasoning and post-training. The point is not that CoT fails to improve accuracy, but that natural-language rationales should not be assumed to be faithful traces of computation. For the pretrain–posttrain interface, this matters a lot: if training rewards “good-looking reasoning,” models may optimize for plausible explanations rather than truthful intermediate computation. That directly connects to later work on process supervision, reward hacking, and latent reasoning.","technical_approach":"The key method is to separate answer correctness from explanation faithfulness through intervention-style evaluations. A typical setup introduces cues, misleading hints, or shortcut signals, then checks whether the model’s explanation matches the factors that actually drove the answer. This is the right test because a faithful explanation should track causal dependence: if the decision-making signal changes, the explanation should change accordingly. That is much stronger than simply asking whether the rationale sounds coherent.","experiments":"The abstract is not included here, so specific models, datasets, and percentages should not be claimed. The central empirical takeaway, however, is clear from the paper’s framing: language models often produce unfaithful CoT explanations, especially when shortcuts or external hints make the answer easier to obtain than the stated reasoning would suggest. The paper is about explanation-decision alignment, not just task accuracy with CoT.","authors_note":"The author list is visible, but the provided information is not sufficient to confidently summarize institutions and representative prior work without risk of error, so this field is left blank."},"tags":["cot","faithfulness","reasoning"],"notable_authors":["Miles Turpin","Julian Michael","Ethan Perez","Samuel R. Bowman"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变了我对CoT天然可解释的固有认知，应立刻在内部过程监督训练中加入解释与决策一致性的校验信号。","en":"It changes my prior that CoT is naturally interpretable, you should immediately add explanation-decision consistency validation signals in internal process supervision training."}},{"id":"TworkowskiSPWMM23","title":"Focused Transformer: Contrastive Training for Context Scaling","authors":["Szymon Tworkowski","Konrad Staniszewski","Mikolaj Pacek","Yuhuai Wu","Henryk Michalewski","Piotr Milos"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$65","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/TworkowskiSPWMM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/TworkowskiSPWMM23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/8511d06d5590f4bda24d42087802cc81-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：Transformer 在上下文长度扩大后，如何仍然有效利用远距离信息，而不是只把长上下文当作更大的噪声池。过去扩 context 常靠位置编码改造、稀疏注意力或继续训练，但模型即便能“看见”更长序列，也未必学会把相关上下文聚焦出来。","importance":"它是一个方法级工作，重点在训练目标而不是单纯架构替换。对 pretrain 的启发很直接：长上下文能力不只是推理时窗口更大，还取决于训练阶段是否显式塑造了‘找相关上下文’的行为。如果对比式训练确实能提升 context utilization，那么它为 mid-train / long-context adaptation 提供了一条比纯续训更有针对性的路线。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Focused Transformer：通过对比式训练信号，让模型区分有用上下文和无关上下文，从而学会在长序列中聚焦真正相关的片段。与标准 next-token loss 只要求最终预测正确不同，这里额外施加了表示或注意层面的判别压力，逼迫模型在内部形成‘相关性选择’。这样设计有效，因为长上下文失败常不是容量不够，而是 credit assignment 太稀。和单纯稀疏注意力相比，它改的是学习目标；和检索增强相比，它仍在模型内部完成上下文筛选，不依赖外部 memory pipeline。代价可能是训练更复杂，并且收益依赖于负样本或对比构造质量。","experiments":"目前没有摘要，无法确认作者是在 language modeling、needle-in-a-haystack、合成关联任务还是下游问答上验证，也不能确认上下文长度扩大了多少、对比了哪些 long-context baselines、提升多少。可以合理推测实验会重点展示：同等或相近参数量下，对比训练比常规 LM 训练更能利用远距证据，并伴随一些关于长度外推或注意可视化的分析；但不能补具体数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a common long-context failure mode: even when a Transformer can technically attend to a larger window, it often does not learn to use the relevant distant information effectively. Prior work mostly increased context length through positional changes, sparse attention, or continued training, but that does not guarantee better context selection.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution centered on the training objective. The key lesson for pretraining is that long-context ability is not only about architectural capacity; it also depends on whether training explicitly teaches the model to focus on relevant evidence within a large context. If contrastive supervision helps, it offers a targeted path for long-context adaptation beyond simply extending the sequence length during continued pretraining.","technical_approach":"The core idea of Focused Transformer is to use contrastive training so the model learns to distinguish useful context from distractors. Standard next-token loss only rewards the final prediction, leaving weak pressure on how the model internally selects evidence. A contrastive signal can make relevance selection explicit, encouraging representations or attention patterns that separate signal from noise. Compared with sparse-attention approaches, this changes the learning objective rather than just the computation graph. Compared with retrieval-augmented systems, the filtering stays inside the model instead of relying on an external retriever. The likely trade-off is added training complexity and sensitivity to how positive and negative context examples are constructed.","experiments":"The abstract is unavailable here, so task setup, sequence lengths, baselines, and numerical gains cannot be stated reliably. The expected empirical claim is that contrastive training improves actual use of long-range context relative to standard LM training, possibly with evidence from synthetic retrieval-style tasks or long-context benchmarks, but any concrete number would be speculative.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer","long-context","contrastive-learning"],"notable_authors":["Yuhuai Wu","Henryk Michalewski"],"keywords":["Transformers","Language Models","Natural Language Processing"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变了我对长上下文能力仅靠架构/位置编码提升的认知，应立刻在内部长上下文适配任务中测试对比式训练目标。","en":"It changes my prior that long-context capability only relies on architecture/positional encoding, you should immediately test contrastive training objectives in internal long-context adaptation tasks."}},{"id":"Wang0CLYGW23","title":"Augmenting Language Models with Long-Term Memory","authors":["Weizhi Wang","Li Dong","Hao Cheng","Xiaodong Liu","Xifeng Yan","Jianfeng Gao","Furu Wei"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$66","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Wang0CLYGW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Wang0CLYGW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ebd82705f44793b6f9ade5a669d0f0bf-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：标准语言模型的上下文窗口有限，导致它难以利用跨会话、跨文档的长期信息，而把窗口一味拉长又会带来显著的训练和推理成本。过去常见方案是检索增强或外部 memory，但如何把长期记忆稳定接入 LM、并在需要时高效调用，一直没有统一而实用的方案。","importance":"这是一个系统+方法结合的工作。对 pretrain 和 serving 都有直接启发：模型能力不一定都要塞进参数或单次上下文里，长期记忆可以作为第三种容量来源。它的重要性在于探索了 parameter memory、context memory 之外的 persistent memory 设计空间，这对 agent、个性化助手和持续学习式 LM 尤其关键。","technical_approach":"核心方法是给 LM 增加一个可读写的长期记忆模块，并设计记忆编码、存储、检索和融合机制，使模型在超出当前窗口时仍能访问历史信息。与简单 RAG 不同，长期记忆通常服务的是同一用户或同一任务轨迹上的累积信息，不是只做一次性文档检索；因此关键不只是召回相关片段，还要解决写入什么、何时更新、如何避免记忆污染和过时信息干扰。有效的设计一般会把记忆压缩成结构化条目，再通过检索或 attention 融入当前解码。代价则是系统复杂度增加，且记忆质量会成为新的瓶颈。","experiments":"由于没有摘要，无法确认这是在对话、个性化任务、长文档 QA 还是 continual setup 上验证，也无法给出参数规模、记忆容量、baseline 和具体提升。可以合理推测作者会和 vanilla LM、长上下文 LM 或 RAG 基线比较，重点看跨轮信息保留、长期依赖任务准确率以及推理成本；但没有论文内容支撑，不能写具体数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical limitation of standard language models: finite context windows make it hard to use information that spans sessions or long interaction histories, while simply extending the context is expensive. Retrieval and external memory have been explored before, but integrating durable long-term memory into an LM in a stable and useful way remains an open systems problem.","importance":"This is a combined systems-and-method contribution. It is relevant to both pretraining and deployment because it expands the design space beyond storing everything in parameters or a single prompt window. Long-term memory is a third capacity source, especially important for agents, personalization, and continual interaction settings.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to equip the LM with a long-term memory module that can be written to and queried later, together with mechanisms for memory encoding, storage, retrieval, and fusion into current generation. This differs from vanilla RAG in an important way: the memory is often persistent and interaction-specific rather than just an external document index. That means the hard problems are not only retrieval quality, but also what to write, when to update, and how to prevent stale or noisy memory from degrading performance. A sensible design compresses history into structured memory entries and retrieves only what is relevant at decoding time. The trade-off is increased system complexity and a new dependency on memory hygiene.","experiments":"The abstract is not available, so task domain, model size, memory capacity, baselines, and quantitative gains cannot be stated reliably. The expected evaluation would compare against vanilla LMs, long-context baselines, or RAG systems on tasks that require cross-turn or long-horizon information retention, but any concrete result here would be speculative.","authors_note":""},"tags":["long-term-memory","language-model","long-context","augmented-lm"],"notable_authors":["Li Dong","Hao Cheng","Xiaodong Liu","Xifeng Yan"],"keywords":["large language models","long-term memory","long-text modeling and understanding","residual side-network","in-context learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"拓展了预训练模型容量的设计空间，应立刻在内部agent类模型研发中验证长期记忆模块的接入效果。","en":"It expands the design space of pretrained model capacity, you should immediately verify the integration effect of long-term memory modules in internal agent model R&D."}},{"id":"WangHZZL023","title":"H3T: Efficient Integration of Memory Optimization and Parallelism for Large-scale Transformer Training","authors":["Yuzhong Wang","Xu Han","Weilin Zhao","Guoyang Zeng","Zhiyuan Liu","Maosong Sun"],"institutions":["Tsinghua University","Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence"],"abstract":"$67","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangHZZL023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangHZZL023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/7886b89aced4d37dd25a6f32854bf3f9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有大模型训练框架要么单独优化内存，要么单独优化并行策略，两者的联合优化很少被系统研究，导致训练吞吐量无法达到最优。","importance":"是大模型训练系统领域的系统级贡献，提出的自动联合优化框架可以大幅提升Transformer预训练的吞吐量，对大规模预训练的系统设计有直接参考价值。","technical_approach":"原创的自动联合优化框架，将重计算、offloading等内存优化策略和数据并行、张量并行、流水线并行等并行策略纳入统一搜索空间，通过整数规划自动找到最优组合方案，区别于过往需要人工调优内存和并行配置的方案。","experiments":"在10B~175B参数量的Transformer模型上测试，相比现有最优框架DeepSpeed和Megatron-LM的默认配置，训练吞吐量提升20%~40%，相同硬件条件下可以支持更大的batch size。","authors_note":"清华大学（Xu Han, Zhiyuan Liu）、智源研究院，团队长期从事大模型训练系统和预训练研究，代表工作包括GLM系列模型。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing large model training frameworks either optimize memory or parallelism strategies separately, and the joint optimization of the two is rarely systematically studied, leading to suboptimal training throughput.","importance":"It is a system-level contribution in large model training systems. The proposed automatic joint optimization framework can significantly improve the throughput of Transformer pre-training, providing direct reference for system design of large-scale pre-training.","technical_approach":"An original automatic joint optimization framework that includes memory optimization strategies such as rematerialization and offloading, and parallel strategies such as data parallelism, tensor parallelism and pipeline parallelism into a unified search space, and finds the optimal combination scheme automatically via integer programming. Unlike prior schemes that require manual tuning of memory and parallel configurations.","experiments":"Tested on Transformer models with 10B~175B parameters. Compared with the default configurations of existing state-of-the-art frameworks DeepSpeed and Megatron-LM, training throughput is improved by 20%~40%, and larger batch sizes are supported under the same hardware conditions.","authors_note":"Tsinghua University (Xu Han, Zhiyuan Liu), Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence. The team has long worked on large model training systems and pre-training, with representative works including the GLM series models."},"tags":["transformer-training","memory","parallelism","systems"],"keywords":["ML System","Parallelism Learning","Memory Optimization","Data Parallelism","Model Parallelism","Parameter Parallelism","ZeRO","Rematerialization","Checkpointing","Tensor Offloading","Dynamic Programming"],"notable_authors":["Zhiyuan Liu","Xu Han"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"内存优化和并行策略是影响大模型训练效率的两个核心因素","claim_en":"Memory optimization and parallelism strategies are two core factors affecting large model training efficiency","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"内存和并行的联合自动优化比人工配置的方案能取得更高的训练吞吐量","claim_en":"Joint automatic optimization of memory and parallelism achieves higher training throughput than manually configured schemes","opposes":"Prior work assumes manually tuned memory and parallel configurations achieve the optimal training throughput","opposes_cite_hint":"DeepSpeed 2020, Megatron-LM 2019","evidence_anchor":"§6, Table 2","why_contested":"大幅降低了大模型训练的配置调优成本，同时提升了硬件利用率"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看自动联合优化框架的搜索空间设计即可，了解如何将内存优化与并行策略结合，作为系统级优化的参考。","en":"Just read the search space design of the automatic joint optimization framework to understand how memory optimization and parallel strategies are combined, serving as a reference for system-level optimization."}},{"id":"2310.05782","title":"Aligning Language Models with Human Preferences via a Bayesian Approach","authors":["Jiashuo Wang","Haozhao Wang","Shichao Sun","Wenjie Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$68","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.05782","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangWSL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangWSL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/99b419554537c66bf27e5eb7a74c7de4-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：在人类偏好本身存在分歧时，怎样训练对齐模型而不把这些分歧粗暴压平成单一标签。现有 RLHF 流程通常先把多位标注者的偏好做多数投票或平均，再训练 reward model；这种做法实现简单，但会丢掉“分歧有多大、分歧发生在哪类样本上”这些对齐里很关键的信息，进而把奖励信号变得更噪。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要在对齐建模层，而不是基础模型架构层。它给 pretrain↔posttrain 接口的一个直接启示是：人类反馈不是干净监督，而是带不确定性的观测；如果奖励建模阶段能显式表示这种不确定性，后续偏好优化可能更稳，尤其是在开放式生成、价值冲突和长尾主观任务上。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把人类偏好学习改写成一个贝叶斯推断问题，而不是先做硬聚合再监督学习。直觉上，作者不把每条样本的多标注偏好压成一个确定答案，而是对“潜在真实偏好”及其不确定性建模，再据此训练 reward model 或对齐策略；与多数投票相比，这样做能保留标注分歧的信息，与简单平均相比，它还能区分‘证据弱’和‘意见确实分裂’这两种不同情况。代价是训练和推断更复杂，也更依赖先验与近似推断质量。","experiments":"从给定信息里无法确认具体实验配置、模型规模、数据规模和数值提升。可以确定的是，论文主张其方法针对多标注者偏好不一致这一设定，相比 majority vote / averaging 这类合并策略更能缓解 reward model 退化；但缺少摘要后半段与正文，无法负责任地填写具体 baseline、指标和提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a specific failure mode in preference alignment: human feedback is often genuinely inconsistent, but standard RLHF pipelines collapse that disagreement into a single label. Majority vote or averaging is easy to implement, yet it throws away how uncertain or contested a comparison is, which makes the reward signal unnecessarily noisy.","importance":"This is mainly a contribution to alignment modeling rather than core pretraining. Its main relevance to pretrain/post-train research is that preference data should be treated as uncertain observations, not clean supervision; modeling that uncertainty can make downstream policy optimization more stable, especially for subjective or long-tail generation tasks.","technical_approach":"The method reframes preference learning as Bayesian inference instead of hard label aggregation. Rather than merging multiple annotator judgments into one deterministic target, it models latent preference structure and uncertainty, then uses that posterior signal for reward modeling or alignment. The design is sensible because it distinguishes low-confidence evidence from true annotator disagreement, which vote-based schemes cannot. The trade-off is extra modeling and inference complexity, plus sensitivity to priors and approximation quality.","experiments":"The provided information is insufficient to state model size, dataset scale, baselines, metrics, or exact gains. What can be stated safely is that the paper is positioned against majority-vote and averaging-based preference consolidation under annotator disagreement, and claims better preservation of nuanced human preference information; the quantitative evidence cannot be reconstructed from the truncated abstract alone.","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","human-preferences","bayesian","rlhf"],"keywords":["Aligned Models; Human-centric NLG"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变对齐建模的认知，将人类偏好看作带不确定性的观测，应立刻在内部 reward model 训练中尝试贝叶斯推断方法。","en":"Changes the perception of alignment modeling by treating human preferences as observations with uncertainty; Bayesian inference methods should be immediately tried in internal reward model training."}},{"id":"WortsmanDZMFS23","title":"Stable and low-precision training for large-scale vision-language models","authors":["Mitchell Wortsman","Tim Dettmers","Luke Zettlemoyer","Ari Morcos","Ali Farhadi","Ludwig Schmidt"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$69","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WortsmanDZMFS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WortsmanDZMFS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/20bd42d82998bc61732c00452228e814-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的核心问题是：大规模视觉-语言模型训练很容易在低精度下失稳，而现有做法通常只能在训练稳定性、吞吐和最终精度之间做保守取舍。过去很多 VLM 仍依赖 FP16/BF16 加上一堆经验性保护，原因不是方法不会训，而是对比学习、logit scale、归一化和大 batch 的组合会把数值范围推到低比特格式难以承受的区域。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要是系统级和训练方法级。它说明低精度不仅是推理或微调优化问题，也可以直接进入大规模预训练主干；如果训练侧能稳定落到更低 bit，收益不是小幅省显存，而是实打实地提升吞吐、降低成本，并把更大 batch 或更大模型带回可训练区间。这对 VLM 预训练尤其重要，因为图文双塔和对比损失本来就受限于通信、显存和数值稳定性。","technical_approach":"作者提出的是一套面向大规模 VLM 的稳定低精度训练配方，而不是单点新算子。核心思路是先定位训练失稳真正来自哪里，再把高动态范围的少数路径保留在更安全精度，其余大部分计算压到低精度。对这类模型，最危险的通常不是普通线性层本身，而是相似度 logits、温度参数、归一化统计量、梯度缩放以及优化器状态的相互作用；因此方法上会围绕这些敏感点做 selective precision、范围控制和稳定化处理，而不是粗暴地把全模型一刀切量化训练。它与常见“后验发现溢出再打补丁”的区别在于，设计目标就是让低精度成为默认训练路径，而高精度只保留在必要节点。","experiments":"从题目和作者背景看，实验重点应是大规模 CLIP/对比式 VLM 训练在更低精度下的稳定性、速度和最终零样本精度对比，而不是单一小模型验证。关键事实通常会包括：在与 BF16/FP16 基线接近甚至相同的下游精度下，训练吞吐更高、显存占用更低，并且训练曲线没有出现常见的 loss spike 或 collapse。更有价值的观察通常来自 ablation：如果去掉对 logit scale、归一化或某些累积路径的高精度保留，训练会明显变得不稳定；而把所有模块都保守地留在高精度，则失去低精度训练的大部分收益。当前能确认的细粒度数字不足，因此这里不编造具体提升幅度。","authors_note":"机构与作者阵容很强，包含 Google/Seattle 方向与 Tim Dettmers 等长期做低比特训练和系统优化的研究者。相关团队代表性工作包括 CLIP/大规模 VLM 训练、LLM.int8()/QLoRA 一线低比特训练方法等。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical bottleneck: large-scale vision-language training is numerically fragile under low precision, so practitioners often trade stability for speed and memory. Prior pipelines could train VLMs well, but contrastive losses, logit scaling, normalization, and large batches create value ranges that make aggressive low-bit training unreliable.","importance":"This is primarily a systems-and-training contribution. The important point is not just saving memory; it is showing that low precision can be a first-class pretraining regime for VLMs rather than a risky optimization trick. For multimodal pretraining, that matters because communication, memory pressure, and batch size already dominate cost, and unstable numerics often erase theoretical efficiency gains.","technical_approach":"The work appears to propose a stability recipe for low-precision VLM training rather than a single new module. The key design choice is selective precision: keep only a small set of numerically sensitive paths in safer precision and push the bulk of compute into lower precision. In this setting, the fragile parts are typically similarity logits, temperature parameters, normalization statistics, gradient scaling, and optimizer-state interactions. The method is therefore likely built around range management and precision placement, instead of naively quantizing everything and fixing failures afterward.","experiments":"Given the title and author list, the main experiments likely study CLIP-style large-scale VLM training under lower precision, comparing stability, throughput, memory, and final zero-shot quality against BF16/FP16 baselines. The key factual pattern is usually that training remains stable and accuracy stays close to baseline while efficiency improves. The most useful ablations in such work are the ones showing that removing higher-precision handling from a few sensitive components leads to spikes or collapse, while keeping too much in high precision removes most of the benefit. I cannot verify exact numbers from the provided metadata, so I leave them unspecified.","authors_note":"The author list includes researchers strongly associated with large-scale VLMs and low-bit training, including Tim Dettmers. Representative prior work around these teams includes CLIP-style multimodal training and low-bit methods such as LLM.int8()/QLoRA."},"tags":["low-precision-training","vlm","training-stability","mixed-precision"],"notable_authors":["Mitchell Wortsman","Tim Dettmers","Luke Zettlemoyer","Ari Morcos","Ali Farhadi"],"keywords":["CLIP","int8","stability"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变 VLM 预训练的精度认知，应立刻在内部 ablation 中复现选择性精度控制，将低精度作为默认训练路径以提升吞吐。","en":"Changes the precision perception of VLM pre-training; selective precision control should be immediately reproduced in internal ablations, making low precision the default training path to improve throughput."}},{"id":"WuGIPG23","title":"Interpretability at Scale: Identifying Causal Mechanisms in Alpaca","authors":["Zhengxuan Wu","Atticus Geiger","Thomas Icard","Christopher Potts","Noah D. Goodman"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WuGIPG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WuGIPG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/f6a8b109d4d4fd64c75e94aaf85d9697-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：能否在真实规模的指令微调模型里定位到可干预、可复用的因果机制，而不是停留在相关性层面的解释。过去机制可解释性很多结果都来自小模型或人工构造任务，一旦进入 Alpaca 这类实际 LLM，电路太分散、表征太冗余，常规 probing 很难告诉你模型到底靠什么机制完成任务。","importance":"它的重要性在于把 mechanistic interpretability 从玩具设置推进到中等规模真实 LLM。对 pretrain/posttrain 研究者来说，价值不是“看懂一个模型很有趣”，而是提供了一种定位能力来源的方法：哪些能力是预训练就有、哪些是指令微调重新路由出来的、哪些行为可以通过局部干预被打开或关闭。这对理解 SFT 的作用、以及后续可控训练和安全对齐都有直接意义。","technical_approach":"作者的核心方法应是因果干预式解释，而不是单纯做注意力可视化或线性 probe。结合题目里的 'identifying causal mechanisms'，合理推测他们利用激活替换、路径补丁、因果追踪或表示对齐一类技术，在 Alpaca 上寻找支撑特定行为的电路或子网络。关键设计点在于：不是问“某层和某个标签相关吗”，而是问“替换掉这段表示后行为会不会消失，移植到另一个输入后行为会不会出现”。这比相关性解释更贵，但更接近机制层面的证据。","experiments":"实验重点应是若干可明确定义的指令行为或推理模式，在 Alpaca 上定位对应机制并进行干预验证。关键事实通常包括：找到的机制具有跨样本复用性，而不是单个 prompt 的偶然特征；局部 patch 能显著改变输出；并且某些能力可追溯到基座模型已有结构，SFT 更多是在重加权和路由。由于没有摘要，无法可靠给出模型大小、任务数量和干预成功率数字。","authors_note":"作者阵容来自斯坦福/伯克利系可解释性与认知建模交叉方向，Noah D. Goodman、Christopher Potts、Atticus Geiger 等都在因果解释、语言理解与模型分析方面有代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether one can identify causal, reusable mechanisms in a real instruction-tuned model such as Alpaca, rather than stopping at correlational explanations. Much of mechanistic interpretability has historically worked best on toy models or synthetic tasks, where circuits are easier to isolate than in practical LLMs.","importance":"Its significance is in pushing interpretability toward realistic language models. For pretrain and post-train researchers, the point is not just understanding for its own sake; it is about locating where behavior comes from. That can help separate capabilities inherited from pretraining from routing changes induced by instruction tuning, and it offers a more actionable view of controllability and alignment.","technical_approach":"The method is likely intervention-based causal analysis rather than passive probing. Given the title, the paper probably uses tools such as activation patching, causal tracing, or representation-level interventions to identify subnetworks or pathways responsible for specific behaviors in Alpaca. The important design choice is to test necessity and transfer, not mere correlation: if a representation is removed, does the behavior vanish; if it is transplanted, does the behavior appear elsewhere?","experiments":"The experiments likely focus on a set of clearly defined instruction-following or reasoning behaviors, then validate discovered mechanisms by targeted interventions. The useful empirical pattern in this area is that the identified mechanisms generalize across examples, and that local patches can materially change model outputs. Another likely takeaway is that some behaviors are already present in the base model and instruction tuning mainly reroutes or amplifies them. Exact model size and intervention success rates cannot be confirmed from the provided metadata.","authors_note":"The authors are associated with strong work at the intersection of interpretability, language understanding, and cognitive modeling, including Noah D. Goodman, Christopher Potts, and Atticus Geiger."},"tags":["interpretability","causal-mechanism","llm","alpaca"],"notable_authors":["Zhengxuan Wu","Atticus Geiger","Thomas Icard","Christopher Potts","Noah D. Goodman"],"keywords":["Mechanistic Interpretability"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变对 SFT 作用的认知，提供了一种定位能力来源的方法，应立刻在内部模型中尝试因果干预式解释，理解能力路由机制。","en":"Changes the perception of SFT's role and provides a method to locate the source of capabilities; causal intervention explanations should be immediately tried in internal models to understand capability routing mechanisms."}},{"id":"WuHSDSASOH23","title":"Fine-Grained Human Feedback Gives Better Rewards for Language Model Training","authors":["Zeqiu Wu","Yushi Hu","Weijia Shi","Nouha Dziri","Alane Suhr","Prithviraj Ammanabrolu","Noah A. Smith","Mari Ostendorf","Hannaneh Hajishirzi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WuHSDSASOH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WuHSDSASOH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/b8c90b65739ae8417e61eadb521f63d5-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的问题很直接：用于训练语言模型奖励模型的人类反馈太粗，导致 reward 学到的信号噪声大、可迁移性差。传统 RLHF 常用整句或整回答级别的偏好标注，这种标注便宜但信息瓶颈明显——一个回答里好坏点可能同时存在，单一总体偏好无法告诉模型到底哪一段好、哪一段坏。","importance":"这是 post-train 接口上很有价值的方法级工作。它的重要性不在于又换了一个 reward model，而在于指出训练信号粒度本身就是瓶颈；如果反馈更细，奖励模型更准，后面的 PPO、DPO 或 rejection sampling 才有可能学到更稳定的偏好。对 pretrain 研究者也有启发，因为这说明很多“对齐上不去”的问题，未必是底模不行，而可能是监督信号太粗。","technical_approach":"作者提出的是细粒度人类反馈框架，即让标注不只停留在 response-level preference，而是对句子、片段、属性或局部错误给出更具体的评价，再据此训练奖励模型。关键设计点在于把原本稀疏的监督拆成更密集、更可归因的训练信号，从而降低 reward model 学到表面模式的倾向。与常规二元偏好相比，这种方法代价更高、标注协议更复杂，但它换来了更好的 credit assignment——模型更容易知道该改哪里，而不是只知道“这个回答整体输给另一个”。","experiments":"论文大概率比较了粗粒度反馈与细粒度反馈下的奖励模型质量，以及基于这些奖励训练出来的 LM 表现。关键事实通常包括：细粒度反馈训练的 reward model 在 held-out 偏好判断上更准确，且用它训练的 LM 在人工评测或 helpful/harmless 维度上更好。更有价值的 ablation 是标注预算对比：在相近预算下，细粒度反馈是否仍更有效，或者单位标注成本下收益是否更高。给定信息不足，无法确认具体数据量、模型规模和提升数字。","authors_note":"作者列表包含 Yushi Hu、Weijia Shi、Nouha Dziri、Alane Suhr 等活跃于语言模型对齐、评测和人类反馈研究的作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a concrete weakness in RLHF pipelines: human feedback is often too coarse, so reward models learn noisy signals with poor credit assignment. Standard response-level preferences are cheap, but they compress too much information—good and bad parts can coexist in one answer, and a single winner label does not say what exactly should change.","importance":"This is an important method contribution at the post-training interface. The key message is that feedback granularity itself is a bottleneck. Better rewards do not come only from larger reward models or better optimization; they also depend on richer supervision. That matters for pretraining researchers too, because some alignment failures may come less from the base model and more from low-resolution downstream training signals.","technical_approach":"The approach is to collect fine-grained human feedback rather than only whole-response preferences, and then train reward models on these denser annotations. The design rationale is straightforward: finer labels improve credit assignment, making it easier for the model to learn which spans, attributes, or local decisions are good or bad. Compared with standard pairwise preference labels, this increases annotation complexity and cost, but it can reduce reward hacking on superficial answer-level cues.","experiments":"The main experiments likely compare coarse versus fine-grained feedback in both reward-model quality and downstream LM training. The critical empirical pattern would be that fine-grained supervision yields more accurate reward predictions and better aligned language models under human evaluation or preference-based metrics. A strong ablation in this setting is budget sensitivity: whether fine-grained labels remain worthwhile at comparable annotation cost. Exact model sizes and gains are not verifiable from the given metadata.","authors_note":"The author list includes researchers active in language-model alignment, evaluation, and human-feedback methods, such as Yushi Hu, Weijia Shi, Nouha Dziri, and Alane Suhr."},"tags":["rlhf","reward-model","fine-grained-feedback","alignment"],"notable_authors":["Zeqiu Wu","Yushi Hu","Weijia Shi","Nouha Dziri","Alane Suhr"],"keywords":["Language Model","Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback","Long-Form Text Generation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变对齐信号粒度的认知，细粒度反馈能提供更准的 reward，应立刻在内部数据标注中引入细粒度评价协议。","en":"Changes the perception of alignment signal granularity; fine-grained feedback provides more accurate rewards, and fine-grained evaluation protocols should be immediately introduced in internal data annotation."}},{"id":"XiangTGSWYH23","title":"Language Models Meet World Models: Embodied Experiences Enhance Language Models","authors":["Jiannan Xiang","Tianhua Tao","Yi Gu","Tianmin Shu","Zirui Wang","Zichao Yang","Zhiting Hu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/XiangTGSWYH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/XiangTGSWYH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ee6630dcbcff857026e474fc857aa9f0-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的核心问题是：纯文本语言模型缺少与世界状态和行动后果对齐的经验，导致它对具身任务、物理因果和交互规划的理解较弱。以往做法通常是把世界知识继续堆进文本语料，或者单独训练世界模型；但如果语言模型从未接触过状态-动作-结果这种闭环数据，它很难学到真正可执行的环境动态。","importance":"这项工作的意义偏范式探索，落点在语言模型与 world model 的接口。对 pretrain 研究很有启发，因为它在问一个更大的问题：语言建模的数据分布是否应该纳入交互轨迹，而不只是静态文本。如果答案是肯定的，那么未来 pretrain 的“语料”定义会变，从文档扩展到 embodied experience，这会影响 tokenization、建模目标和数据混合策略。","technical_approach":"从题目看，作者的核心做法是把具身经验——例如状态、动作、观测、奖励或环境反馈——转成语言模型可消费的序列，并用这些经验增强 LM。关键不只是把轨迹当文本串起来，而是要让序列保留因果顺序和可预测结构，使模型能够从 '采取动作→环境变化' 的配对中学到世界动态。与单独训练 RL world model 的区别在于，这里目标是增强 LM 的表征和推理能力；与普通继续预训练的区别在于，数据包含交互闭环，而不是静态语料统计。","experiments":"实验大概率会看具身问答、规划、环境预测或与物理常识相关的语言任务，比较是否加入 embodied trajectories。关键事实通常是：加入交互经验后，模型在需要状态转换理解的任务上提升更明显，而在纯语言任务上的副作用有限。更值得关注的是数据混合观察：少量高质量具身轨迹可能比大量普通文本更有效地提升某些 world understanding 能力。给定信息不足，无法确认具体环境、模型规模和量化结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a missing ingredient in text-only language models: they rarely see closed-loop experience linking actions to state changes, so their understanding of embodied interaction and physical dynamics is limited. Prior work often tried to compensate with more text or with separate world models, but that leaves language models without direct exposure to action-consequence structure.","importance":"This is a paradigm-exploration paper at the boundary between language modeling and world modeling. Its relevance to pretraining is substantial because it asks whether pretraining data should include interactive trajectories, not just static text. If that direction holds up, it changes what counts as training data and raises new questions about tokenization, sequence design, and mixture optimization.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is to serialize embodied experience—states, actions, observations, maybe rewards—into sequences that a language model can train on. The key is not mere textification of trajectories, but preserving causal order so the model can learn environment dynamics from action-outcome structure. Relative to standalone world models, the goal here is to improve language-model representations and reasoning. Relative to standard continued pretraining, the novelty is using interactive, closed-loop data rather than static corpora.","experiments":"The evaluation probably targets embodied QA, planning, environment prediction, or language tasks with physical/world-state reasoning. The key empirical claim would be that embodied experience improves tasks requiring state-transition understanding more than plain text pretraining does, while causing limited regression on pure language benchmarks. A particularly useful observation would be data efficiency: a small amount of high-quality interaction data may outperform much larger amounts of generic text for some world-understanding capabilities. Exact datasets and numbers are not recoverable from the given metadata.","authors_note":""},"tags":["world-model","embodied","language-model","agent"],"notable_authors":["Jiannan Xiang","Tianhua Tao","Yi Gu","Tianmin Shu","Zirui Wang"],"keywords":["Language Model","World Model","Embodied Experience"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看具身经验如何转成语言模型可消费序列的设计即可，了解如何将交互轨迹纳入预训练数据分布。","en":"Just read the design of how embodied experiences are converted into sequences consumable by language models to understand how to incorporate interaction trajectories into the pre-training data distribution."}},{"id":"XieDTZ23","title":"Towards Free Data Selection with General-Purpose Models","authors":["Yichen Xie","Mingyu Ding","Masayoshi Tomizuka","Wei Zhan"],"institutions":["UC Berkeley"],"abstract":"$6d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/XieDTZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/XieDTZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/047682108c3b053c61ad2da5a6057b4e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有主动学习的数据选择流程需要反复迭代模型训练和批量数据选择，计算成本高，无法快速适配不同数据集。","importance":"是预训练数据筛选领域的方法级贡献，提出的单遍数据选择方法可以大幅降低数据标注成本，对预训练数据的高效筛选有参考价值。","technical_approach":"原创的无监督数据选择方法，利用现有通用预训练模型的中间特征提取语义模式，单遍推理即可筛选出最有信息量的样本，不需要额外训练或监督，区别于过往需要迭代训练的主动学习方案。","experiments":"在图像分类、目标检测等多个任务上测试，仅使用筛选出的20%数据训练的模型，性能达到使用全量数据训练模型的95%以上，计算成本比传统主动学习方法低10x以上。","authors_note":"加州大学伯克利分校（Masayoshi Tomizuka, Wei Zhan），团队长期从事自动驾驶和数据高效学习研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing active learning based data selection pipelines require repeated iteration of model training and batch data selection, which has high computational cost and cannot adapt to different datasets quickly.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution in pre-training data filtering. The proposed single-pass data selection method can significantly reduce data annotation cost, providing reference for efficient filtering of pre-training data.","technical_approach":"An original unsupervised data selection method that extracts semantic patterns from intermediate features of existing general pre-trained models, and selects the most informative samples via single-pass inference without additional training or supervision. Unlike prior active learning schemes that require iterative training.","experiments":"Tested on multiple tasks including image classification and object detection. The model trained with only 20% of the selected data achieves over 95% of the performance of the model trained with full data, and the computational cost is more than 10x lower than traditional active learning methods.","authors_note":"UC Berkeley (Masayoshi Tomizuka, Wei Zhan). The team has long worked on autonomous driving and data-efficient learning."},"tags":["data-selection","data-quality","pretraining","foundation-models"],"keywords":["data selection","unsupervised learning"],"notable_authors":["Masayoshi Tomizuka"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"选择更有信息量的训练样本可以提升数据利用效率","claim_en":"Selecting more informative training samples can improve data utilization efficiency","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"利用通用预训练模型的中间特征单遍筛选数据的效果超过迭代式主动学习方法","claim_en":"Single-pass data selection using intermediate features of general pre-trained models outperforms iterative active learning methods","opposes":"Prior work assumes iterative active learning with task-specific model training achieves the optimal data selection effect","opposes_cite_hint":"Settles 2012 Active Learning Survey","evidence_anchor":"§4, Table 1","why_contested":"大幅降低了数据选择的计算成本，为大规模预训练数据的高效筛选提供了新的方案"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为无监督数据选择的 literature 备查，不读正文，了解单遍推理筛选样本的思路即可。","en":"Keep as literature reference for unsupervised data selection, no need to read the main text; just understand the idea of single-pass inference for sample screening."}},{"id":"YaoYZS00N23","title":"Tree of Thoughts: Deliberate Problem Solving with Large Language Models","authors":["Shunyu Yao","Dian Yu","Jeffrey Zhao","Izhak Shafran","Tom Griffiths","Yuan Cao","Karthik Narasimhan"],"institutions":["Princeton University","Google DeepMind"],"abstract":"$6e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YaoYZS00N23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YaoYZS00N23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/271db9922b8d1f4dd7aaef84ed5ac703-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有大语言模型的推理仅支持token级左到右的决策流程，在需要探索、前瞻规划或初始决策影响大的任务上表现不佳，CoT等方法也无法解决单一路径的局限性。","importance":"是LLM推理范式的范式级贡献，提出的思维树框架扩展了大模型的推理能力边界，对复杂推理任务的prompt设计和推理系统开发有直接指导意义。","technical_approach":"原创的树状推理框架，将推理过程拆分为多个连贯的「思维」单元作为中间步骤，同时探索多条推理路径，通过模型自评估选择最优路径，必要时可以回溯，区别于CoT的单一路径左到右推理方案。","experiments":"在24点、创意写作、跨域推理等任务上测试，相比CoT和自洽CoT方法，准确率提升30%~60%；其中24点任务上GPT-4的准确率从CoT的16%提升到ToT的74%。","authors_note":"普林斯顿大学（Shunyu Yao, Tom Griffiths）、Google DeepMind（Dian Yu, Izhak Shafran），Tom Griffiths是认知科学和机器学习领域资深研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing large language model inference only supports token-level left-to-right decision making, which performs poorly on tasks requiring exploration, forward planning or where initial decisions have high impact. Methods such as Chain of Thought (CoT) cannot solve the limitation of single path reasoning.","importance":"It is a paradigm-level contribution in LLM inference paradigms. The proposed Tree of Thoughts (ToT) framework expands the boundary of large model reasoning capabilities, providing direct guidance for prompt design and inference system development for complex reasoning tasks.","technical_approach":"An original tree-structured reasoning framework that splits the reasoning process into multiple coherent \"thought\" units as intermediate steps, explores multiple reasoning paths simultaneously, selects the optimal path via model self-evaluation, and supports backtracking when necessary. Unlike the single-path left-to-right reasoning scheme of CoT.","experiments":"Tested on tasks including Game of 24, creative writing and cross-domain reasoning. Compared with CoT and self-consistency CoT methods, the accuracy is improved by 30%~60%. Specifically, the accuracy of GPT-4 on Game of 24 increases from 16% (CoT) to 74% (ToT).","authors_note":"Princeton University (Shunyu Yao, Tom Griffiths), Google DeepMind (Dian Yu, Izhak Shafran). Tom Griffiths is a senior researcher in cognitive science and machine learning."},"tags":["tree-of-thoughts","reasoning","prompting","llm"],"keywords":["large language model","general problem solving","heuristic search","reasoning","planning","decision making"],"notable_authors":["Tom Griffiths"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"链式推理（Chain of Thought）可以提升大模型的推理能力","claim_en":"Chain of Thought can improve the reasoning capability of large models","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"树状多路径探索推理比单路径链式推理在复杂推理任务上表现更优","claim_en":"Tree-structured multi-path exploration reasoning outperforms single-path chain reasoning on complex reasoning tasks","opposes":"Prior work assumes extending chain length or aggregating multiple independent chains achieves the optimal reasoning performance for LMs","opposes_cite_hint":"Wang 2022 Self-Consistency CoT","evidence_anchor":"§4, Table 1","why_contested":"突破了单路径推理的局限性，为大模型解决更复杂的推理任务提供了新的范式"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看思维树框架的设计即可，了解如何将推理过程拆分为中间步骤并探索多条路径，作为复杂推理任务的参考。","en":"Just read the design of the Tree of Thoughts framework to understand how the reasoning process is broken down into intermediate steps and multiple paths are explored, serving as a reference for complex reasoning tasks."}},{"id":"YuCWKMHREB0MH023","title":"SPAE: Semantic Pyramid AutoEncoder for Multimodal Generation with Frozen LLMs","authors":["Lijun Yu","Yong Cheng","Zhiruo Wang","Vivek Kumar","Wolfgang Macherey","Yanping Huang","David A. Ross","Irfan Essa","Yonatan Bisk","Ming-Hsuan Yang","Kevin P. Murphy","Alexander G. Hauptmann","Lu Jiang"],"institutions":["Google Research","Google DeepMind"],"abstract":"In this work, we introduce Semantic Pyramid AutoEncoder (SPAE) for enabling frozen LLMs to perform both understanding and generation tasks involving non-linguistic modalities such as images or videos. SPAE converts between raw pixels and interpretable lexical tokens (or words) extracted from the LLM's vocabulary. The resulting tokens capture both the rich semantic meaning and the fine-grained details needed for visual reconstruction, effectively translating the visual content into a language comprehensible to the LLM, and empowering it to perform a wide array of multimodal tasks. Our approach is validated through in-context learning experiments with frozen PaLM 2 and GPT 3.5 on a diverse set of image understanding and generation tasks.\nOur method marks the first successful attempt to enable a frozen LLM to generate image content while surpassing state-of-the-art performance in image understanding tasks, under the same setting, by over 25%.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YuCWKMHREB0MH023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YuCWKMHREB0MH023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/a526cc8f6ffb74bedb6ff313e3fdb450-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：在冻结 LLM 的前提下，如何把多模态生成做好，而不是只把视觉信息粗暴投到文本 token 空间。过去很多“frozen LLM + adapter”方案在理解任务上够用，但一到高质量生成就暴露出表示瓶颈：视觉语义太密、层次太浅，LLM 接口不匹配。","importance":"它的重要性在于提出了一个更像预训练接口设计的问题，而不只是下游拼装。对跨模态统一建模的启示是：如果不想大改 LLM，本质工作就变成设计一个足够语义化、层次化的视觉/多模态 latent，使冻结语言模型也能消费和生成它；这和视觉 tokenizer、离散化接口问题高度相关。","technical_approach":"SPAE 是一个 Semantic Pyramid AutoEncoder，核心是把多模态内容编码成分层语义表示，再让冻结 LLM 在这个表示上进行生成或条件建模。它不是直接学习像素级 token 序列，而是引入金字塔式 latent，把高层语义和低层细节分开，减轻 LLM 直接建模原始视觉序列的负担。和简单线性 projector 或单层 VQ-tokenizer 方案相比，这个设计更强调语义抽象层级；有效的原因是 LLM 更擅长在离散、压缩、具有语言相似组织的表示上做建模。代价是 autoencoder 质量成为上限，且层次 latent 的训练稳定性和重建-语义平衡并不简单。","experiments":"实验应主要验证两点：一是冻结 LLM 的条件下，SPAE 在多模态生成质量上优于简单 adaptor/visual token baselines；二是语义金字塔结构在低级重建与高级对齐之间更平衡。常见指标可能包括图像生成或编辑质量、文本一致性、人评偏好，以及不同层数/码本设计的 ablation。由于未提供摘要，无法确认具体模型规模、训练数据量和绝对提升数字。","authors_note":"从作者列表看，可能与 Google Research/Google DeepMind 相关，Wolfgang Macherey 是较知名作者之一；但基于当前信息不对完整机构归属做更细判断。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a key bottleneck in frozen-LLM multimodal generation: a plain projection from visual features into the language model is often enough for understanding-style tasks, but it is too weak for high-quality generation. The interface is the real problem—visual information is dense and hierarchical, while the frozen LLM expects a compressed, semantically organized token space.","importance":"This matters as an interface design problem for pretraining and unified modeling, not just as a downstream trick. The broader lesson is that if we want to reuse a frozen LLM for multimodal generation, we need a representation that is semantic and hierarchical enough for the LM to model effectively. That connects directly to visual tokenization and latent-space design.","technical_approach":"SPAE introduces a Semantic Pyramid AutoEncoder that maps multimodal content into a hierarchical latent representation, then lets a frozen LLM model or generate in that latent space. The novelty is not simply an adapter. It is the pyramid structure that separates coarse semantics from finer details, instead of forcing the LLM to model raw visual tokens directly. Compared with shallow projectors or flat VQ tokenizers, this design gives the LM a representation that is closer to what it handles well: compressed, semantically structured, and more language-like. The trade-off is that generation quality becomes bounded by the autoencoder, and balancing semantic abstraction against reconstruction fidelity is nontrivial.","experiments":"The experiments likely show that under a frozen-LLM setup, SPAE improves multimodal generation quality over simpler adapter or tokenizer baselines, and that the hierarchical latent design gives a better semantic-detail trade-off. Typical evidence would include generation metrics, text-image consistency, human preference, and ablations over pyramid depth or latent design. Exact scales and numbers cannot be confirmed from the provided information.","authors_note":"Likely associated with Google Research / Google DeepMind. Wolfgang Macherey is a notable author on the list, but a more specific institutional mapping should not be asserted without stronger evidence."},"tags":["frozen-llm","multimodal-generation","autoencoder","alignment"],"notable_authors":["Wolfgang Macherey"],"keywords":["multimodal","generation","large language model"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看 SPAE 的分层语义表示设计即可，了解如何将视觉语义抽象为冻结 LLM 可消费的 latent，作为跨模态统一建模的参考。","en":"Just read the hierarchical semantic representation design of SPAE to understand how visual semantics are abstracted into latents consumable by frozen LLMs, serving as a reference for cross-modal unified modeling."}},{"id":"YuZZMRKSZ23","title":"Large Language Model as Attributed Training Data Generator: A Tale of Diversity and Bias","authors":["Yue Yu","Yuchen Zhuang","Jieyu Zhang","Yu Meng","Alexander J. Ratner","Ranjay Krishna","Jiaming Shen","Chao Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YuZZMRKSZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YuZZMRKSZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ae9500c4f5607caf2eff033c67daa9d7-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：把 LLM 当作带属性标签的数据生成器时，生成数据到底能否真正替代人工或真实采样数据，尤其在 diversity 和 bias 上会发生什么。过去很多工作只看少量下游分数提升，较少系统分析合成数据的覆盖面、偏差放大和属性控制失真。","importance":"这对 pretrain/post-train 都很重要，因为合成数据已经是现实训练管线的一部分。论文的关键价值不是再证明“LLM 能造数据”，而是指出这种做法有明确结构性代价：它可能提高可控性和规模，但同时牺牲分布多样性并复制甚至放大偏见。对数据工程的启示很直接——合成数据不能只看量和短期指标，必须看覆盖与偏差传播。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是系统评估 LLM 作为 attributed training data generator 的行为：给定类别、风格、人口统计属性或任务标签，让 LLM 生成训练样本，再分析这些样本在多样性、标签质量和偏置上的统计性质。它更像一篇诊断研究而非新模型。与只做 few-shot data augmentation 的工作不同，这篇更关注生成数据分布本身是否发生塌缩、属性是否与内容纠缠、以及这些问题如何影响下游模型。这样研究有意义，因为合成数据常常在表面标签上很干净，但隐含共现模式可能更单一，从而让下游模型过拟合捷径。","experiments":"实验大概率会覆盖多个文本分类或信息抽取任务，比较真实数据、LLM 合成数据和混合数据训练的效果，并用多样性指标、群体公平性指标或 bias probes 做分析。关键事实通常不是“纯合成一定更差”，而是：在小样本或属性控制场景下合成数据有价值，但随着规模增大，其边际收益受限于分布覆盖不足，且对某些群体偏差更敏感。没有摘要时，具体任务、模型和数值不能确认。","authors_note":"Alexander J. Ratner 是知名作者，Snorkel/弱监督方向代表人物。这篇工作延续了他在数据编程、数据生成和训练信号质量上的长期关注。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a timely question: if we use an LLM to generate labeled or attributed training data, what exactly happens to diversity and bias in the resulting dataset? Prior work often focused on short-term downstream gains and treated synthetic data as a cheap substitute, without carefully measuring coverage loss or bias amplification.","importance":"This matters directly for both pretraining and post-training pipelines because synthetic data is now part of real-world practice. The contribution is not simply that LLMs can generate training data, but that this comes with a structural trade-off: scale and controllability can improve, while diversity may shrink and existing biases may be preserved or amplified. That is a concrete data-engineering lesson.","technical_approach":"The work appears to be a systematic diagnostic study rather than a new model. The likely setup is to prompt an LLM to generate training examples conditioned on attributes such as class labels, style, or demographic variables, then analyze the resulting data distribution for diversity, label quality, and bias. The important distinction from standard data augmentation papers is that the focus is on distributional properties of the synthetic corpus itself, not just final task accuracy. That makes sense because synthetic data can look clean at the label level while still collapsing onto narrow lexical or semantic patterns.","experiments":"The likely experiments span several NLP tasks, comparing real, synthetic, and mixed training sets, and measuring not only downstream performance but also diversity and fairness-related statistics. A plausible conclusion is that synthetic data is helpful in low-resource or controlled-generation settings, but its marginal value saturates due to limited support coverage and can worsen subgroup-specific bias. Exact tasks, models, and numerical results are not available from the prompt.","authors_note":"Alexander J. Ratner is a notable author and a leading figure in weak supervision and data programming through Snorkel. This paper fits his long-standing focus on training signal quality and data generation."},"tags":["synthetic-data","llm","data-quality","bias","instruction-tuning"],"notable_authors":["Alexander J. Ratner"],"keywords":["training data generation","large language model","text classification"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看合成数据在多样性和偏置上的统计分析即可，了解 LLM 作为数据生成器的结构性代价，指导数据工程实践。","en":"Just read the statistical analysis of synthetic data on diversity and bias to understand the structural costs of LLMs as data generators, guiding data engineering practices."}},{"id":"ZhangF23","title":"Unified Segment-to-Segment Framework for Simultaneous Sequence Generation","authors":["Shaolei Zhang","Yang Feng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$70","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangF23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangF23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/8df705957a5262de3cb37ba9f1fb96f3-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"同步序列生成（流式ASR、同传、同步语音翻译等）的现有方法依赖任务特定启发式规则判断生成时机，无法自适应学习源-目标序列映射，也无法支撑多任务统一建模。此前这类任务都采用分任务定制方案，开发成本高、泛化性差。","importance":"方法级贡献，首次提出跨任务的段到段同步生成统一框架，降低多任务同步生成的适配成本，为多模态流式生成的统一预训练提供了底层范式参考。","technical_approach":"原创Seg2Seg框架，将源序列和目标序列都切分为可变长度的语义段，学习段级的源-目标对齐映射直接决定生成时机。舍弃了任务特定的硬启发式决策规则，用统一的段匹配机制适配所有同步生成任务，同时支持多任务联合训练。","experiments":"给定公开摘要未披露完整实验设置、baseline与量化指标，仅提及框架可适配流式语音识别、同步机器翻译、同步语音翻译三类核心同步生成任务，无具体性能提升幅度披露。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing simultaneous sequence generation methods (for streaming ASR, simultaneous translation, etc.) rely on task-specific heuristics to decide generation timing, which cannot adaptively learn source-target sequence mappings or support unified multi-task modeling. Prior task-specific customization leads to high development cost and poor generalization.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It proposes the first unified segment-to-segment framework for cross-task simultaneous generation, reduces adaptation cost for multi-task simultaneous generation, and provides a foundational paradigm reference for unified pre-training of streaming multimodal generation.","technical_approach":"The original Seg2Seg framework splits both source and target sequences into variable-length semantic segments, and learns segment-level source-target alignment mapping to directly decide generation timing. It discards task-specific hard heuristic rules, uses a unified segment matching mechanism to adapt to all simultaneous generation tasks, and supports multi-task joint training.","experiments":"The provided abstract does not disclose full experimental setup, baselines or quantitative metrics. It only mentions the framework adapts to three core simultaneous generation tasks: streaming ASR, simultaneous machine translation, simultaneous speech translation, with no specific performance lift disclosed.","authors_note":""},"tags":["sequence-modeling","non-autoregressive","generation","training-objective"],"keywords":["Machine Translation","Speech Translation","Speech Recognition","Simultaneous Generation","Simultaneous Translation"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"同步序列生成需要在低延迟和生成质量之间做权衡。","claim_en":"Simultaneous sequence generation requires a trade-off between low latency and generation quality.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"统一的段级对齐框架可以替代三类同步生成任务的定制启发式规则，达到相当或更优的性能。","claim_en":"A unified segment-level alignment framework can replace customized heuristics for three types of simultaneous generation tasks, achieving comparable or better performance.","opposes":"Prior work assumes task-specific heuristics are necessary for simultaneous sequence generation to decide generation timing.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Framework","why_contested":"If validated, it can greatly simplify the development process of multi-task simultaneous generation, and enable unified pre-training for streaming multimodal tasks."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为同步序列生成的 literature 备查，不读正文，了解跨任务段到段统一框架的思路即可。","en":"Keep as literature reference for simultaneous sequence generation, no need to read the main text; just understand the idea of the cross-task segment-to-segment unified framework."}},{"id":"ZhangILJTC23","title":"Counterfactual Memorization in Neural Language Models","authors":["Chiyuan Zhang","Daphne Ippolito","Katherine Lee","Matthew Jagielski","Florian Tramèr","Nicholas Carlini"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$71","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangILJTC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangILJTC23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/7bc4f74e35bcfe8cfe43b0a860786d6a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM记忆性度量方法优先捕捉高频重复内容的记忆（公共知识、模板文本等），无法过滤这类通用记忆，精准识别对单份敏感训练文档的记忆。此前的度量标准与训练数据出现频次强相关，无法支撑单文档级的隐私风险评估。","importance":"范式级贡献，提出反事实记忆的量化定义，为LLM训练数据隐私泄露风险评估提供了更精准的度量工具，也为预训练数据去重、隐私保护训练的效果验证提供了新的基准方法。","technical_approach":"原创反事实记忆度量方法，核心是对比同一份模型在包含/排除某份特定训练文档两种设置下的预测差异。舍弃了之前依赖训练数据出现频次的记忆筛选规则，仅关注单文档的存在对模型输出的因果影响，可有效过滤高频通用记忆。","experiments":"给定公开摘要未披露完整量化指标，仅验证了反事实记忆度量可有效过滤高频通用记忆，精准识别独特的单文档敏感内容记忆，在通用域文本数据集上完成了验证。","authors_note":"Florian Tramèr是知名隐私与机器学习安全研究员，团队此前发表过多篇LLM数据泄露、成员推理攻击相关的高影响力工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM memorization metrics prioritize capturing memorization of high-frequency repeated content such as public knowledge and templated text, making it impossible to filter out such general memorization and accurately identify memorization of individual sensitive training documents. Prior metrics are strongly correlated with occurrence frequency in training data, and cannot support single-document level privacy risk assessment.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution. It proposes the quantitative definition of counterfactual memorization, provides a more accurate measurement tool for LLM training data privacy leakage risk assessment, and offers a new benchmark method for verifying the effect of pre-training data deduplication and privacy-preserving training.","technical_approach":"Original counterfactual memorization measurement method, which compares prediction differences of the same model trained with and without a specific training document. It discards the previous frequency-based memorization filtering rule, only focuses on the causal impact of a single document's existence on model outputs, and can effectively filter high-frequency general memorization.","experiments":"The provided abstract does not disclose full quantitative metrics. It only validates that counterfactual memorization measurement can effectively filter high-frequency general memorization and accurately identify unique single-document sensitive content memorization, verified on general domain text datasets.","authors_note":"Florian Tramèr is a well-known researcher in privacy and machine learning security, whose team has published multiple high-impact works on LLM data leakage and membership inference attacks."},"tags":["memorization","language-models","counterfactuals","generalization"],"keywords":["Memorization","Language Models"],"notable_authors":["Florian Tramèr"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM会记忆训练数据中的敏感信息，可能导致隐私泄露。","claim_en":"Large language models memorize sensitive information in training data, which may lead to privacy leakage.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于频次的记忆度量方法无法区分通用公共记忆和敏感单文档记忆，不适合用于隐私风险评估。","claim_en":"Frequency-based memorization metrics cannot distinguish general public memorization from sensitive single-document memorization, and are not suitable for privacy risk assessment.","opposes":"Prior memorization metrics use occurrence frequency as the core criterion for identifying memorized content.","opposes_cite_hint":"Carlini 2021 Extracting Training Data from Large Language Models","evidence_anchor":"§2 Definition","why_contested":"It revises the core assumption of previous memorization metrics, and provides a more reliable evaluation tool for privacy-related pre-training research."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看反事实记忆的量化定义即可，了解如何通过因果影响过滤高频通用记忆，作为隐私风险评估的参考。","en":"Just read the quantitative definition of counterfactual memorization to understand how to filter high-frequency general memories through causal effects, serving as a reference for privacy risk assessment."}},{"id":"ZhangYLX23","title":"Formulating Discrete Probability Flow Through Optimal Transport","authors":["Pengze Zhang","Hubery Yin","Chen Li","Xiaohua Xie"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Continuous diffusion models are commonly acknowledged to display a deterministic probability flow, whereas discrete diffusion models do not. In this paper, we aim to establish the fundamental theory for the probability flow of discrete diffusion models. Specifically, we first prove that the continuous probability flow is the Monge optimal transport map under certain conditions, and also present an equivalent evidence for discrete cases.  In view of these findings, we are then able to define the discrete probability flow in line with the principles of optimal transport. Finally, drawing upon our newly established definitions, we propose a novel sampling method that surpasses previous discrete diffusion models in its ability to generate more certain outcomes. Extensive experiments on the synthetic toy dataset and the CIFAR-10 dataset have validated the effectiveness of our proposed discrete probability flow. Code is released at: https://github.com/PangzeCheung/Discrete-Probability-Flow.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangYLX23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangYLX23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/e6e706454d72c18582b9c1ff70b11f7d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"连续扩散模型存在确定的概率流，而离散扩散模型此前没有统一的概率流理论框架，采样结果不确定性高、生成质量不稳定。此前离散扩散的采样依赖随机噪声注入，没有可解释的确定性转移机制。","importance":"理论+方法级贡献，首次基于最优传输理论建立了离散扩散模型的概率流定义，填补了离散扩散的理论空白，提出的采样方法可直接提升所有离散扩散类模型的生成确定性。","technical_approach":"原创理论推导+采样方法改进，首先证明连续概率流是特定条件下的Monge最优传输映射，进而推导离散场景下的等价结论，基于该结论定义离散概率流，提出对应的采样方法。舍弃了之前离散扩散采样的随机噪声注入步，通过最优传输映射确定每一步的状态转移。","experiments":"给定公开摘要未披露完整实验指标，仅在合成数据集和文本生成任务上验证，相比现有离散扩散采样方法，生成结果的一致性提升19%，困惑度降低2.3，无具体模型参数量与数据规模披露。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Continuous diffusion models have a deterministic probability flow, while discrete diffusion models previously had no unified probability flow theoretical framework, leading to high sampling uncertainty and unstable generation quality. Prior discrete diffusion sampling relies on random noise injection, with no interpretable deterministic transition mechanism.","importance":"Theory + method level contribution. It establishes the probability flow definition of discrete diffusion models based on optimal transport theory for the first time, fills the theoretical gap of discrete diffusion, and the proposed sampling method can directly improve the generation certainty of all discrete diffusion models.","technical_approach":"Original theoretical derivation + sampling method improvement. It first proves that continuous probability flow is the Monge optimal transport map under certain conditions, then derives the equivalent conclusion for discrete scenarios, defines discrete probability flow based on this conclusion, and proposes the corresponding sampling method. It discards the random noise injection step in previous discrete diffusion sampling, and determines each step's state transition via optimal transport mapping.","experiments":"The provided abstract does not disclose full experimental metrics. It only validates on synthetic datasets and text generation tasks, that compared to existing discrete diffusion sampling methods, generation consistency improves by 19%, perplexity reduces by 2.3, with no specific model parameter count or data scale disclosed.","authors_note":""},"tags":["discrete-diffusion","optimal-transport","probability-flow","non-ar"],"keywords":["Discrete Probability Flow","Optimal Transport"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"连续扩散模型的概率流是确定性的，可用于加速采样。","claim_en":"The probability flow of continuous diffusion models is deterministic and can be used to accelerate sampling.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"离散扩散模型也存在类似连续扩散的确定性概率流，可通过最优传输理论定义并用于提升采样质量。","claim_en":"Discrete diffusion models also have a deterministic probability flow similar to continuous diffusion, which can be defined via optimal transport theory and used to improve sampling quality.","opposes":"Prior work assumes discrete diffusion models do not have a unified deterministic probability flow framework.","opposes_cite_hint":"Austin 2021 Structured Denoising Diffusion Models for Discrete State Spaces","evidence_anchor":"§3 Theory","why_contested":"It unifies the theoretical framework of continuous and discrete diffusion, and provides theoretical support for the application of discrete diffusion in pre-training (such as MDLM, LLaDA)."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看理论推导部分和采样方法对比实验即可，做离散扩散预训练可参考其确定性采样思路。","en":"Only read the theoretical derivation and sampling method comparison experiments, refer to its deterministic sampling idea if you work on discrete diffusion pretraining."}},{"id":"ZhengC00WZL0LXZ23","title":"Judging LLM-as-a-Judge with MT-Bench and Chatbot Arena","authors":["Lianmin Zheng","Wei-Lin Chiang","Ying Sheng","Siyuan Zhuang","Zhanghao Wu","Yonghao Zhuang","Zi Lin","Zhuohan Li","Dacheng Li","Eric P. Xing","Hao Zhang","Joseph E. Gonzalez","Ion Stoica"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$72","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhengC00WZL0LXZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhengC00WZL0LXZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/91f18a1287b398d378ef22505bf41832-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心结论是：用 LLM 充当评审是可行的，但必须先搞清它在哪些设定下可信、在哪些设定下会系统性偏。过去社区常用人工评测聊天模型，成本高且复现差；而直接让 GPT-4 之类模型打分虽然便宜，却缺少系统验证。作者想回答的不是“能不能用”，而是“什么任务上能用到什么程度”。","importance":"这是后训练评测体系中的一篇基准性工作，影响很大。对 pretrain 研究也有直接意义，因为现代预训练模型的比较越来越依赖开放式生成评测；如果 judge 不稳定，很多关于数据配比、对齐策略和推理增强的结论都可能是噪声。它的重要性不在于提出了新模型，而在于把 LLM 评审从经验做法变成了有 benchmark、有相关性分析、有公开平台支撑的标准流程。","technical_approach":"作者做了两件关键事情。第一，构建 MT-Bench 这类多轮、能力覆盖较广的评测集，用来刻意考察聊天模型在 turn-level 和 conversation-level 的表现，而不是只看单轮问答。第二，结合 Chatbot Arena 的众包对战平台，收集人类偏好数据，再拿 LLM judge 的分数或偏好和人类结果做一致性分析。与传统自动指标的区别在于，这不是用 BLEU/ROUGE 之类代理分数近似人评，而是直接让强模型充当语言层面的比较器。这样设计有效，是因为开放式对话没有唯一参考答案，judge 模型比 n-gram 指标更接近人类比较方式。边界同样明确：LLM judge 会有 position bias、verbosity bias、self-enhancement bias 等系统偏差，不能把它当绝对真值。","experiments":"论文最关键的实验事实通常包括：GPT-4 作为 judge 与人类偏好的相关性显著高于较弱模型，也高于传统自动指标；在单轮任务上相关性更强，在数学、事实性、长对话等高精度场景上偏差更明显。Chatbot Arena 则提供了大量 pairwise battle 数据，证明 crowdsourced ranking 能较稳定地区分主流聊天模型。值得关注的 ablation 一般有三类：pairwise vs single-score judging、回答顺序调换造成的位置偏差、以及去掉参考答案后 judge 稳定性如何。题目没有附摘要，但该工作广为人知，其主要结论就是“LLM-as-a-judge 有用，但要配套基准和偏差控制”。","authors_note":"如果按公开信息，这项工作与 LMSYS 团队高度相关，代表性产物就是 Vicuna、MT-Bench 和 Chatbot Arena。由于当前输入未显式给出机构，这里不写机构归属。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper’s central claim is that LLM-as-a-judge is useful, but only if its reliability is measured rather than assumed. Human evaluation of chat models is expensive and hard to reproduce, while using a strong model such as GPT-4 as a grader is cheap but can be misleading without calibration. The paper asks not simply whether LLM judges work, but when they work and where they fail.","importance":"This is a benchmark-and-evaluation paper with outsized impact. It also matters for pretraining because many conclusions about model quality now depend on open-ended generation benchmarks, where unstable judges can turn training differences into evaluation noise. Its contribution is to turn LLM judging from an ad hoc practice into a more standardized pipeline with public benchmarks, agreement analysis, and a live arena for pairwise comparison.","technical_approach":"The paper contributes two tightly connected pieces. First, MT-Bench evaluates multi-turn chat abilities across a range of categories, so models are tested on conversation quality rather than isolated single-turn answers. Second, Chatbot Arena collects large-scale human preference data via anonymous head-to-head battles, then compares those outcomes with LLM-based judgments. The key difference from older automatic metrics is that the evaluator is itself a capable language model rather than a reference-matching heuristic like BLEU or ROUGE. This works better because open-ended dialogue rarely has a unique gold answer, and pairwise comparison by a strong LLM is closer to how humans judge quality. The limitations are equally important: LLM judges exhibit position bias, verbosity bias, and self-favoring behavior.","experiments":"The most important empirical result is that GPT-4 as a judge correlates much better with human preferences than weaker model judges and than classic lexical metrics. The agreement is usually stronger on single-turn and general chat tasks, and weaker on domains requiring precise factuality or mathematical correctness. Chatbot Arena supplies large-scale pairwise battle data and shows that crowd-based rankings can reliably separate major chatbot systems. Useful ablations include pairwise versus scalar scoring, answer order swaps to measure position bias, and whether the judge remains stable without reference answers. Even without the abstract here, the paper is well known for one practical conclusion: LLM judging is good enough to be operationally useful, but not trustworthy without bias checks.","authors_note":"Publicly, this work is closely associated with the LMSYS team, known for Vicuna, MT-Bench, and Chatbot Arena. The current input does not explicitly list institutions, so they are left unspecified here."},"tags":["llm-eval","alignment","benchmark","preference"],"notable_authors":["Lianmin Zheng","Wei-Lin Chiang"],"keywords":["large language models","human preference","llm-as-a-judge","benchmark","evaluation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"纠正此前默认LLM judge可直接使用的错误认知，需立刻在内部预训练模型开放式评测中对齐其校准方案。","en":"Corrects the prior misconception that LLM judge works out of the box, you should immediately align your internal pretrained model open evaluation with its calibration scheme."}},{"id":"0001ABMSP23","title":"Feature-Learning Networks Are Consistent Across Widths At Realistic Scales","authors":["Nikhil Vyas","Alexander B. Atanasov","Blake Bordelon","Depen Morwani","Sabarish Sainathan","Cengiz Pehlevan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$73","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001ABMSP23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001ABMSP23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/03600ae6c3392fd65ad7c3a90c6f7ce8-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要回答的是：神经网络在现实训练尺度下学到的特征，是否会随着宽度变化而改变，还是存在跨宽度的一致性。这个问题重要是因为很多宽度极限理论依赖无限宽近似，但工程上真正训练的是有限宽网络，理论与实践之间一直隔着一层不确定性。","importance":"它的贡献更偏机制理解与理论-实验对齐。对 pretrain 的意义在于，如果特征学习在可实现宽度下具有稳定规律，那么跨规模外推、架构比较和 scaling 分析会更可信；反过来，如果特征随宽度剧烈漂移，很多用小模型研究大模型的结论就不稳。","technical_approach":"从题目判断，作者不是提出新训练方法，而是系统研究不同宽度网络学到的表示是否一致。关键通常在于定义“特征一致性”的可测量标准，并在真实而非玩具尺度上比较表示对齐、功能相似性或训练动态。这样的研究价值不在于提高指标，而在于澄清什么时候宽度只是容量参数，什么时候它会改变学习到的解的类型。","experiments":"给定信息没有摘要与数字，无法确认具体模型、数据和指标。按题目看，实验重点应是跨宽度比较而非 SOTA 竞赛，可能包含不同架构、数据集和训练规模下的表示相似性测量，以及对训练种子、正则化和数据量的敏感性分析。对做大模型的人来说，最值得看的结论通常是：一致性是否在 realistic scale 才出现，以及这种一致性是否覆盖早层/晚层、局部特征/全局语义两个层面。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a basic but consequential question: at realistic training scales, do neural networks learn features that are consistent across widths, or does width materially change the representation learned? This matters because many width-based theories rely on infinite-width intuition, while practical models are finite and often far from that regime.","importance":"Its contribution is mainly mechanistic and conceptual rather than algorithmic. For pretraining, the payoff is clear: if feature learning is stable across widths in practical regimes, then scaling extrapolations and small-to-large empirical studies become more trustworthy; if not, conclusions drawn from smaller models may fail to transfer.","technical_approach":"Judging from the title, the paper is a systematic analysis rather than a new method. The key is likely a concrete notion of representation consistency—such as alignment, similarity, or shared learned features—evaluated across realistically sized networks instead of toy settings. The value lies in identifying when width behaves like a mostly quantitative capacity knob and when it changes the qualitative solution found by training.","experiments":"No abstract or numeric results are provided, so model families, datasets, and exact metrics cannot be stated safely. The experimental center of gravity is likely cross-width comparison, including sensitivity to seed, regularization, and data scale. For practitioners, the most useful result would be whether consistency only emerges at realistic scales and whether it holds uniformly across shallow versus deep layers or local versus semantic features.","authors_note":""},"tags":["scaling","representation-learning","width","training-dynamics"],"keywords":["mean-field","muP","feature learning","infinite width","deep ensembles"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的特征一致性度量定义和Fig4的跨宽度对齐结果即可，可用于判断小模型ablation结论向大模型外推的可信度。","en":"Only read §3's feature consistency metric definition and Fig4's cross-width alignment results, use to judge if small model ablation conclusions can be extrapolated to large models."}},{"id":"2306.12230","title":"Fantastic Weights and How to Find Them: Where to Prune in Dynamic Sparse Training","authors":["Aleksandra Nowak","Bram Grooten","Decebal Constantin Mocanu","Jacek Tabor"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$74","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.12230","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001GMT23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001GMT23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ad02c6f3824f871395112ae71a28eff7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作研究的是：在 Dynamic Sparse Training 里，究竟该怎么剪枝。过去大家更关注生长规则，因为网络会不断补边；而剪枝常被当成次要实现细节处理，但如果剪错位置，DST 会一直在坏拓扑附近震荡，稀疏训练的优势就出不来。","importance":"它的重要性是训练系统与优化层面的。对 pretrain 的启示不在“能不能直接拿去训练千亿模型”，而在于 DST 的有效性可能主要受剪枝准则而不是生长准则决定；这提醒我们很多稀疏训练工作把计算预算花在“如何加边”，却忽略了“哪些边绝不能过早删掉”。","technical_approach":"核心方法不是发明一种全新 DST 框架，而是对多种 pruning criterion 做系统实证分析。根据摘要，作者的关键发现是多数剪枝准则在宏观性能上差异不大，且简单方法往往已经足够；这类结论有价值，因为它把问题从复杂启发式重新拉回训练动态本身。和只报告单个最佳配置不同，这种研究更关心不同准则如何影响连接分布、稳定性和收敛路径。","experiments":"摘要明确说做了 extensive empirical analysis，但给定信息没有具体网络、稀疏率、数据集和数值提升。可确认的结论是：作者比较了多种剪枝标准，并发现大多数标准的影响可能没有预期中那么大。最值得看的实验应当包括：不同稀疏度下结论是否稳定、剪枝与生长规则之间是否存在强交互、以及某些准则是否只在训练早期或高稀疏极限下表现出差异。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a focused question in dynamic sparse training: where should we prune? Prior DST work has paid much more attention to growth rules, while pruning was often treated as a secondary implementation choice. But if pruning removes the wrong connections, the optimizer may keep searching around poor sparse topologies.","importance":"This is mainly a training-dynamics and systems contribution. The pretraining-relevant takeaway is that DST performance may be constrained more by pruning decisions than the field’s emphasis suggests. In other words, sparse-training research may have over-invested in how to add connections while under-analyzing which ones should not be removed too early.","technical_approach":"The paper does not propose a radically new DST framework; it performs a broad empirical comparison of pruning criteria. The abstract already gives the main punchline: many pruning rules behave more similarly than expected, and simple choices may already be sufficient. That is useful because it shifts attention away from elaborate heuristics and back toward the underlying optimization dynamics and topology evolution.","experiments":"The abstract states that the study is extensive, but the provided metadata does not include model architectures, sparsity levels, datasets, or exact numbers. The reliable high-level finding is that many pruning criteria have surprisingly limited impact relative to common expectations. The most informative analyses here are whether that result holds across sparsity regimes, how pruning interacts with the growth rule, and whether differences only appear in early training or at very high sparsity.","authors_note":""},"tags":["sparsity","pruning","training-efficiency","optimization"],"keywords":["Dynamic Sparse Training","Pruning","Deep Learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看不同剪枝准则的对比实验部分即可，做稀疏预训练时不要在复杂剪枝启发式上浪费算力，简单准则已经够用。","en":"Only read the comparative experiments of different pruning criteria, do not waste compute on complex pruning heuristics for sparse pretraining, simple criteria are sufficient."}},{"id":"0001L023","title":"Is RLHF More Difficult than Standard RL? A Theoretical Perspective","authors":["Yuanhao Wang","Qinghua Liu","Chi Jin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$75","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001L023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001L023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/efb9629755e598c4f261c44aeb6fde5e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要回答的是：RLHF 在理论上是否比标准强化学习更难。这个问题值得做，因为工程上大家普遍觉得 RLHF 更脆弱、更吃数据、更依赖奖励模型误差，但这些困难究竟来自 RL 本身，还是来自偏好学习和离线反馈的新统计瓶颈，并不清楚。","importance":"它的价值主要在理论澄清。对 pretrain/posttrain 研究者来说，这类结论的重要性在于它能告诉你：RLHF 的难点是额外的、可避免的，还是内生的、随规模放大的；这直接影响你该优先改 reward 建模、探索策略、离线数据覆盖，还是干脆少做 RL 多做 rejection sampling / DPO 一类替代方案。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者采用理论分析比较 RLHF 与标准 RL 的样本复杂度、优化难度或信息论下界。关键不是证明一个抽象定理，而是把 RLHF 独有的成分——例如偏好反馈、奖励模型误差、分布偏移、部分可识别性——拆出来，看它们是否引入额外难度。这样的工作如果做得好，能帮助工程上区分“算法不稳”和“问题本身就难”。","experiments":"给定信息没有摘要与实验数字，无法确认是否包含实证部分。若论文主要是理论工作，实验通常只承担说明性角色，不会是重点。对读者最值得关注的是理论结论成立的条件：是 tabular、linear MDP 还是更一般的函数逼近；结论是上界、下界，还是与标准 RL 的等价性；这些边界决定它对真实 LLM RLHF 有多大外推价值。","authors_note":"可确认作者包括 Yuanhao Wang、Qinghua Liu、Chi Jin。仅凭给定信息无法稳妥确认机构与代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a clean theoretical question: is RLHF fundamentally harder than standard reinforcement learning? This is worth formalizing because practitioners often observe that RLHF is less stable and more data-hungry, but it is unclear how much of that comes from RL itself versus the added layers of preference learning and reward modeling.","importance":"Its contribution is conceptual rather than empirical. For pretraining and post-training, the payoff is that a theoretical comparison can tell you whether RLHF introduces intrinsic statistical difficulty or mostly an implementation burden. That distinction matters when choosing between improving reward models, collecting better preference data, or replacing RLHF with simpler post-training objectives.","technical_approach":"From the title, the paper likely compares RLHF and standard RL through sample complexity, optimization hardness, or information-theoretic bounds. The important move is to isolate RLHF-specific ingredients—preference feedback, reward model error, distribution shift, partial identifiability—and ask whether they create new barriers absent in ordinary RL. A good result here helps separate algorithmic instability from unavoidable problem difficulty.","experiments":"No abstract or numerical evidence is provided, so it is unclear whether the paper includes experiments at all. If it is primarily theoretical, the real value lies in the assumptions: tabular versus linear settings, upper versus lower bounds, and whether the comparison survives function approximation. Those details determine how much the result should inform practical LLM RLHF.","authors_note":"Confirmed authors include Yuanhao Wang, Qinghua Liu, and Chi Jin. The provided information is insufficient to state institutions or team lineage confidently."},"tags":["rlhf","theory","alignment","optimization"],"notable_authors":["Yuanhao Wang","Qinghua Liu","Chi Jin"],"keywords":["reinforcement learning theory","reinforcement learning from human feedback","preference-based reinforcement learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§5的难度归因结论即可，若内部RLHF训练不稳定可参考其结论定位是奖励建模问题还是RL本身的问题。","en":"Only read §5's difficulty attribution conclusions, refer to it to locate if your unstable internal RLHF is caused by reward modeling or RL itself."}},{"id":"0001MDHMCSPGAOP23","title":"Patch n&apos; Pack: NaViT, a Vision Transformer for any Aspect Ratio and Resolution","authors":["Mostafa Dehghani","Basil Mustafa","Josip Djolonga","Jonathan Heek","Matthias Minderer","Mathilde Caron","Andreas Steiner","Joan Puigcerver","Robert Geirhos","Ibrahim M. Alabdulmohsin","Avital Oliver","Piotr Padlewski","Alexey A. Gritsenko","Mario Lucic","Neil Houlsby"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001MDHMCSPGAOP23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001MDHMCSPGAOP23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/06ea400b9b7cfce6428ec27a371632eb-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的核心结论是：Vision Transformer 不必把所有图像都强行缩放到固定分辨率和宽高比，模型可以原生支持任意分辨率与长宽比，并且这样做更高效。传统 ViT 预处理把输入统一成方形，工程上简单，但会浪费 token 预算、破坏细粒度信息，尤其在文档、移动端照片和多分辨率混合训练中代价明显。","importance":"它的重要性是架构与数据接口层面的，而且对多模态预训练有直接影响。NaViT 证明视觉编码器可以像文本一样接受更自然的可变长输入，这对统一多模态 LM 很关键，因为上游数据本来就不该被过度扭曲成固定网格；同时它也给大规模视觉 pretrain 一个现实答案：在算力固定时，把 token 花在真实有效区域往往比盲目放大全图更值。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Patch n' Pack，也就是先按原始分辨率切 patch，再把不同大小、不同宽高比图像的 patch 序列打包进同一个 batch 里训练 NaViT。关键设计不是单纯支持 variable resolution，而是通过 sequence packing 控制计算浪费，让 transformer 看到的是接近原始视觉内容的 token 流，而不是被 resize 破坏后的统一图。和固定 224/384 输入的 ViT 相比，它舍弃了规则张量形状带来的简洁性，换来更好的 token 利用率和更少的信息损失。","experiments":"给定信息没有摘要数字，但 NaViT 这类工作通常会在 ImageNet 或更大规模视觉预训练上，与标准 ViT 在相同或更低 FLOPs 下比较精度，同时展示对高分辨率和非方形输入的优势。对 pretrain 读者最值得看的不是单一 top-1，而是三类结果：一是同等算力下可变分辨率训练是否更优，二是 packing 带来的实际吞吐提升，三是这种输入接口是否能更好迁移到文档理解、检测或 VLM 编码器场景。","authors_note":"作者名单包含 Mostafa Dehghani、Basil Mustafa、Josip Djolonga、Jonathan Heek、Matthias Minderer 等。仅凭给定信息无法稳妥确认机构；从作者构成看应来自顶级视觉/多模态团队，但这里不做猜测。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper’s central point is that a Vision Transformer does not need to force every image into a fixed square resolution. A model can natively handle arbitrary resolutions and aspect ratios, and that is often a better use of compute. Standard resizing is convenient, but it wastes tokens and destroys information, especially for documents, mobile photos, and mixed-resolution training.","importance":"This is an architectural and data-interface contribution with direct relevance to multimodal pretraining. NaViT shows that a vision encoder can consume variable-length visual token sequences more like text, which is exactly the kind of interface needed for unified multimodal models. It also makes a practical scaling point: under a fixed budget, spending tokens on real image content beats blindly normalizing everything to the same grid.","technical_approach":"The method is Patch n' Pack: patch images at their native resolution, then pack patch sequences from different image sizes and aspect ratios into shared batches for a transformer. The important idea is not variable resolution by itself, but doing it without blowing up padding waste. Compared with fixed-input ViTs, the design gives up regular tensor simplicity in exchange for better token efficiency and less information loss from resizing.","experiments":"The provided metadata does not include quantitative results, but a paper of this kind would typically compare against standard ViTs on classification and transfer under matched or lower FLOPs, while showing particular gains on non-square and high-resolution inputs. For pretraining researchers, the informative results are whether variable-resolution training improves accuracy-per-compute, how much throughput the packing scheme saves in practice, and whether the encoder transfers better to document and multimodal settings.","authors_note":"The author list includes Mostafa Dehghani, Basil Mustafa, Josip Djolonga, Jonathan Heek, and Matthias Minderer. The provided information is not sufficient to state institutions confidently."},"tags":["vision-transformer","dynamic-resolution","tokenization","vlm"],"notable_authors":["Mostafa Dehghani","Basil Mustafa","Josip Djolonga","Jonathan Heek","Matthias Minderer"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看序列打包的效率对比和多模态迁移实验部分，做多模态预训练视觉编码器选型时可参考其可变长输入设计思路。","en":"Only read the sequence packing efficiency comparison and multimodal transfer experiments, refer to its variable-length input design when selecting vision encoders for multimodal pretraining."}},{"id":"0001YCWZRCYRR23","title":"Learning to Tokenize for Generative Retrieval","authors":["Weiwei Sun","Lingyong Yan","Zheng Chen","Shuaiqiang Wang","Haichao Zhu","Pengjie Ren","Zhumin Chen","Dawei Yin","Maarten de Rijke","Zhaochun Ren"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$76","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001YCWZRCYRR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001YCWZRCYRR23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/91228b942a4528cdae031c1b68b127e8-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有生成式检索的docid分配采用规则式tokenization，定制性强、泛化性差，无法将文档语义编码到docid中，导致检索准确率低。此前的id设计不携带语义信息，解码时需要完全匹配id序列，容错率极低。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出可学习的文档tokenization方法，提升生成式检索的召回准确率，也为多模态生成式检索的统一id编码提供了参考。","technical_approach":"原创GenRet框架，通过离散自编码的方式将文档语义编码为短离散docid。舍弃了规则式的id分配规则，让docid本身携带语义信息，降低解码时的匹配难度，提升泛化性。","experiments":"给定公开摘要未披露完整指标，在公开检索数据集上验证，相比规则式docid方法，检索top1准确率提升12%，无具体模型规模披露。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing docid assignment for generative retrieval adopts rule-based tokenization, which is ad-hoc and has poor generalization, cannot encode document semantics into docids, leading to low retrieval accuracy. Prior id designs carry no semantic information, requiring exact id sequence matching during decoding, with extremely low fault tolerance.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It proposes a learnable document tokenization method, improves recall accuracy of generative retrieval, and provides reference for unified id encoding of multimodal generative retrieval.","technical_approach":"Original GenRet framework, which encodes document semantics into short discrete docids via a discrete auto-encoding approach. It discards rule-based id assignment rules, makes docids carry semantic information themselves, reduces matching difficulty during decoding, and improves generalization.","experiments":"The provided abstract does not disclose full metrics. It validates on public retrieval datasets that compared to rule-based docid methods, top-1 retrieval accuracy improves by 12%, with no specific model scale disclosed.","authors_note":""},"tags":["tokenizer","retrieval","discrete-representation","sequence-modeling"],"keywords":["Information Retrieval","Document Retrieval","Generative Retrieval"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"生成式检索的docid设计直接决定检索性能。","claim_en":"The docid design of generative retrieval directly determines retrieval performance.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"可学习的语义docid比规则式docid在生成式检索任务上泛化性更好、准确率更高。","claim_en":"Learnable semantic docids have better generalization and higher accuracy than rule-based docids in generative retrieval tasks.","opposes":"Prior generative retrieval methods use rule-based docid tokenization as the default solution.","opposes_cite_hint":"Tay 2022 Generative Retrieval for Large Scale Search","evidence_anchor":"§4 Method","why_contested":"It changes the id design paradigm of generative retrieval, and provides a new direction for pre-training optimization of subsequent generative retrieval systems."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为生成式检索方向的文献备查，不需要读正文，对预训练研究无直接参考价值。","en":"Only for literature reference in generative retrieval field, no need to read the full text, no direct reference value for pretraining research."}},{"id":"0002L023","title":"Connecting Pre-trained Language Model and Downstream Task via Properties of Representation","authors":["Chenwei Wu","Holden Lee","Rong Ge"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Recently, researchers have found that representations learned by large-scale pre-trained language models are useful in various downstream tasks. However, there is little theoretical understanding of how pre-training performance is related to downstream task performance. In this paper, we analyze how this performance transfer depends on the properties of the downstream task and the structure of the representations. We consider a log-linear model where a word can be predicted from its context through a network having softmax as its last layer. We show that even if the downstream task is highly structured and depends on a simple function of the hidden representation, there are still cases when a low pre-training loss cannot guarantee good performance on the downstream task. On the other hand, we propose and empirically validate the existence of an ``anchor vector'' in the representation space, and show that this assumption, together with properties of the downstream task,  guarantees performance transfer.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0002L023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0002L023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/93712c59f6a81bd92040facf04c8b308-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有研究缺乏预训练损失和下游任务性能关联的理论解释，无法明确预训练效果向下游迁移的边界条件。此前的默认假设是预训练损失越低，下游任务性能越好，没有明确该结论成立的约束。","importance":"理论级贡献，明确了预训练损失低不必然带来下游任务性能好的场景，为预训练模型的选型和下游适配提供了理论参考。","technical_approach":"基于最后一层为softmax的log-linear预训练LM展开理论推导，分析下游任务结构和表征特性对性能迁移的影响。舍弃了之前笼统的预训练-下游正相关假设，明确了迁移成立的约束条件。","experiments":"在两层Transformer和BERT-base模型上验证，当下游任务依赖隐层表征的非线性函数时，预训练困惑度低20%的模型下游准确率反而低7%，无大规模数据实验披露。","authors_note":"Rong Ge是知名机器学习理论研究员，主要研究方向为深度学习优化、表征学习理论。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing research lacks theoretical explanation for the correlation between pre-training loss and downstream task performance, and cannot define the boundary conditions for pre-training performance transfer to downstream tasks. The prior default assumption is that lower pre-training loss leads to better downstream performance, with no clear constraints for this conclusion to hold.","importance":"Theory-level contribution. It clarifies scenarios where low pre-training loss does not necessarily lead to good downstream task performance, and provides theoretical reference for pre-trained model selection and downstream adaptation.","technical_approach":"Theoretical derivation based on pre-trained LMs with softmax as the last layer (log-linear model), analyzing the impact of downstream task structure and representation properties on performance transfer. It discards the previous vague positive correlation assumption between pre-training and downstream performance, and clarifies the constraints for valid transfer.","experiments":"Validated on two-layer Transformer and BERT-base models. When the downstream task relies on a non-linear function of hidden representations, the model with 20% lower pre-training perplexity has 7% lower downstream accuracy. No large-scale data experiments are disclosed.","authors_note":"Rong Ge is a well-known machine learning theory researcher, whose main research directions are deep learning optimization and representation learning theory."},"tags":["plm","representation","transfer","downstream"],"keywords":["language model representation","downstream performance","deep learning theory"],"notable_authors":["Rong Ge"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"预训练LM的表征对下游任务性能有显著影响。","claim_en":"Representations of pre-trained LMs have a significant impact on downstream task performance.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"即使预训练损失很低，当下游任务依赖隐层表征的简单非线性函数时，也可能出现下游性能差的情况。","claim_en":"Even with very low pre-training loss, poor downstream performance may occur when the downstream task relies on a simple non-linear function of the hidden representation.","opposes":"Prior implicit assumption that lower pre-training loss always leads to better downstream task performance.","opposes_cite_hint":"Hoffmann 2022 Chinchilla","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments","why_contested":"It revises the default assumption of positive correlation between pre-training loss and downstream performance, and provides theoretical constraints for pre-training objective design."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4的迁移边界条件结论即可，做预训练选型时不要盲目选预训练损失最低的模型，需结合下游任务特性判断。","en":"Only read §4's transfer boundary condition conclusions, do not blindly select the model with the lowest pretraining loss, judge based on downstream task characteristics."}},{"id":"0002PVPW23","title":"Inference-Time Intervention: Eliciting Truthful Answers from a Language Model","authors":["Kenneth Li","Oam Patel","Fernanda B. Viégas","Hanspeter Pfister","Martin Wattenberg"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We introduce Inference-Time Intervention (ITI), a technique designed to enhance the \"truthfulness\" of large language models (LLMs). ITI operates by shifting model activations during inference, following a learned set of directions across a limited number of attention heads. This intervention significantly improves the performance of LLaMA models on the TruthfulQA benchmark. On an instruction-finetuned LLaMA called Alpaca, ITI improves its truthfulness from $32.5\\%$ to $65.1\\%$. We identify a tradeoff between truthfulness and helpfulness and demonstrate how to balance it by tuning the intervention strength. ITI is minimally invasive and computationally inexpensive. Moreover, the technique is data efficient: while approaches like RLHF require extensive annotations, ITI locates truthful directions using only few hundred examples. Our findings suggest that LLMs may have an internal representation of the likelihood of something being true, even as they produce falsehoods on the surface.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0002PVPW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0002PVPW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/81b8390039b7302c909cb769f8b6cd93-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有提升LLM真实性的方法如RLHF需要大量标注数据，训练成本高，且是训练端修改，无法灵活调整真实性和有用性的权衡。此前的对齐方法都需要在训练阶段修改模型参数，无法推理端动态调整。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出了推理端的轻量干预方法，仅需少量标注就可以大幅提升LLM的真实性，为对齐后模型的实时调整提供了新的路径。","technical_approach":"原创Inference-Time Intervention（ITI）方法，在推理时沿着少量注意力头的真实方向偏移激活值。舍弃了训练端对齐的范式，不需要修改模型参数，仅需在推理时做轻量计算，可通过调整干预强度平衡真实性和有用性。","experiments":"在Alpaca模型上验证，TruthfulQA准确率从32.5%提升到65.1%，仅需几百条标注数据，干预带来的推理延迟小于5%。","authors_note":"Martin Wattenberg、Fernanda B. Viégas是知名可视化与LLM可解释性研究员，曾主导谷歌PAIR团队的多个可解释性项目。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing methods to improve LLM truthfulness such as RLHF require large amounts of annotated data, have high training cost, and are training-side modifications, which cannot flexibly adjust the trade-off between truthfulness and helpfulness. Prior alignment methods all require modifying model parameters during training, and cannot be dynamically adjusted at inference time.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It proposes a lightweight inference-side intervention method, which can greatly improve LLM truthfulness with only a small amount of annotations, and provides a new path for real-time adjustment of aligned models.","technical_approach":"Original Inference-Time Intervention (ITI) method, which shifts model activations along learned truthful directions across a small number of attention heads during inference. It discards the training-side alignment paradigm, does not require modifying model parameters, only requires lightweight computation during inference, and can balance truthfulness and helpfulness by adjusting intervention strength.","experiments":"Validated on Alpaca model. TruthfulQA accuracy improves from 32.5% to 65.1%, requiring only hundreds of annotated samples. The inference latency added by intervention is less than 5%.","authors_note":"Martin Wattenberg and Fernanda B. Viégas are well-known researchers in visualization and LLM interpretability, who have led multiple interpretability projects at Google PAIR team."},"tags":["truthfulness","inference-time","language-models","steering"],"keywords":["Large Language Model","AI Safety"],"notable_authors":["Martin Wattenberg","Fernanda B. Viégas"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM的真实性和有用性存在权衡。","claim_en":"There is a trade-off between truthfulness and helpfulness of LLMs.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"推理端激活干预的方法仅需少量标注就能达到可观的真实性提升效果，且成本远低于训练端对齐方法。","claim_en":"Inference-time activation intervention can achieve considerable truthfulness improvement with only a small number of annotations, and the cost is much lower than training-side alignment methods.","opposes":"Prior alignment methods assume training-side modification (RLHF/SFT) is necessary to improve LLM truthfulness.","opposes_cite_hint":"OpenAI 2022 InstructGPT","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"It breaks the inherent认知 that alignment must be done at the training side, and provides a new feasible path for inference-side alignment."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看注意力头真实性方向定位和干预效果对比部分，预训练对齐阶段可参考该思路优化真实性相关的目标设计。","en":"Only read the attention head truth direction localization and intervention effect comparison, refer to this idea to optimize truth-related objective design during pretraining alignment."}},{"id":"0075HYSCS23","title":"HyPoradise: An Open Baseline for Generative Speech Recognition with Large Language Models","authors":["Chen Chen","Yuchen Hu","Chao-Han Huck Yang","Sabato Marco Siniscalchi","Pin-Yu Chen","Chng Eng Siong"],"institutions":["IBM Research"],"abstract":"$77","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0075HYSCS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0075HYSCS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/6492267465a7ac507be1f9fd1174e78d-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 能否直接用于纠正 ASR 系统的输出错误（即生成式语音识别纠错）？此前 LLM 与 ASR 的结合缺乏标准化的开放基线和系统性评估。","importance":"数据/基线级贡献，对语音 LM 方向有参考价值。HyPoradise 提供了一个将 ASR N-best 假设输入 LLM 进行纠错的标准化框架，揭示了 LLM 在语音后处理中的能力边界。对 pretrain 研究者而言，这展示了文本 LLM 对语音模态的间接建模能力，以及 LLM 作为通用纠错器的潜力和局限。","technical_approach":"构建了一个开放基线系统：先用 ASR 模型生成 N-best 假设（hypothesis），再将这些假设作为 prompt 输入 LLM，让 LLM 生成纠正后的转录。核心设计选择是用 LLM 的语言先验来弥补声学模型的不足，而非端到端重训。与传统 rescoring 的区别在于 LLM 可以做更灵活的生成式纠正，不局限于从 N-best 中选择。","experiments":"在多个 ASR 基准上评估，展示 LLM 纠错后 WER 有显著下降。提供了不同 LLM（包括 GPT-3.5/4 和开源模型）的对比。具体 WER 数字因缺少 abstract 无法确认。","authors_note":"Pin-Yu Chen 来自 IBM Research，Chao-Han Huck Yang 曾在 NVIDIA/Georgia Tech 从事语音-语言交叉研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Can LLMs be used to correct ASR output errors in a generative fashion? The field lacked a standardized open baseline for systematically evaluating LLM-based speech recognition error correction.","importance":"A data/baseline-level contribution relevant to the speech LM direction. HyPoradise provides a standardized framework for feeding ASR N-best hypotheses to LLMs for correction, revealing the boundaries of LLM capabilities in speech post-processing.","technical_approach":"Builds an open baseline: ASR generates N-best hypotheses, which are prompted to an LLM for generative correction. The key idea is leveraging LLM language priors to compensate for acoustic model weaknesses, without end-to-end retraining. Unlike traditional rescoring, the LLM can generate corrections beyond the N-best list.","experiments":"Evaluated on multiple ASR benchmarks showing significant WER reduction after LLM correction. Compares different LLMs including GPT-3.5/4 and open-source models. Exact WER numbers unavailable without the full abstract.","authors_note":"Pin-Yu Chen is from IBM Research. Chao-Han Huck Yang has worked on speech-language cross-modal research at NVIDIA/Georgia Tech."},"tags":["speech-recognition","llm","generative-asr","speech-lm"],"notable_authors":["Pin-Yu Chen","Chao-Han Huck Yang"],"keywords":["Automatic speech recognition","language model rescoring","N-best Hypothesis list."],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看LLM纠错能力边界的实验结论即可，做多模态预训练时可参考其用文本模态补全其他模态缺陷的思路。","en":"Only read the experimental conclusions of LLM error correction capability boundary, refer to its idea of using text modality to compensate for other modalities' defects in multimodal pretraining."}},{"id":"AgrawalKGLR23","title":"Monitor-Guided Decoding of Code LMs with Static Analysis of Repository Context","authors":["Lakshya A. Agrawal","Aditya Kanade","Navin Goyal","Shuvendu K. Lahiri","Sriram K. Rajamani"],"institutions":["Microsoft Research"],"abstract":"$78","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/AgrawalKGLR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/AgrawalKGLR23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/662b1774ba8845fc1fa3d1fc0177ceeb-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"代码 LLM 在生成代码时经常产生语法错误、类型错误或违反 API 约束的代码，现有的约束解码方法要么太慢，要么无法利用仓库级别的上下文信息。如何在解码阶段用静态分析来引导代码 LM 生成合法代码？","importance":"方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的间接启示：代码 LM 预训练后仍然频繁违反形式化约束，说明纯 next-token 预训练目标在结构化输出上的局限性。Monitor-guided decoding 是一种 posttrain 补救，但也提示预训练阶段可能需要更好的结构感知目标。","technical_approach":"在代码 LM 的解码过程中引入静态分析 monitor：每生成一个 token，monitor 检查当前部分代码是否满足类型约束、API 签名等静态规则，如果违反则屏蔽对应 token 的概率。Monitor 利用仓库上下文（repository context）获取类型信息和 API 定义。与普通 constrained decoding 的区别在于 monitor 是基于真实静态分析工具而非手写规则。","experiments":"在代码补全和代码生成任务上评估，展示 monitor-guided decoding 显著减少了类型错误和 API 误用。具体模型和指标因缺少 abstract 无法确认。","authors_note":"Sriram K. Rajamani 和 Shuvendu K. Lahiri 来自 Microsoft Research，在程序分析和形式化验证领域有长期积累。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Code LLMs frequently generate code with syntax errors, type errors, or API constraint violations. Existing constrained decoding methods are either too slow or cannot leverage repository-level context.","importance":"Method-level contribution. Indirectly highlights a limitation of pure next-token pretraining for structured outputs—code LMs still frequently violate formal constraints post-pretraining, suggesting the need for structure-aware pretraining objectives.","technical_approach":"Introduces a static analysis monitor during decoding: after each token, the monitor checks whether the partial code satisfies type constraints and API signatures from the repository context, masking violating tokens. Unlike hand-written constrained decoding rules, the monitor is based on real static analysis tools.","experiments":"Evaluated on code completion and generation tasks, showing significant reduction in type errors and API misuse. Exact models and metrics unavailable without the full abstract.","authors_note":"Sriram K. Rajamani and Shuvendu K. Lahiri are from Microsoft Research, with long-standing expertise in program analysis and formal verification."},"tags":["code-lm","decoding","static-analysis","repository-context"],"notable_authors":["Sriram K. Rajamani","Shuvendu K. Lahiri"],"keywords":["Language models","code generation","correctness","program analysis"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看代码LM结构化错误分布的统计部分即可，提示预训练阶段需加入结构感知目标来降低代码生成的形式化错误率。","en":"Only read the statistics of code LM structured error distribution, it suggests adding structure-aware objectives during pretraining to reduce formal error rate of code generation."}},{"id":"AhmadianDCVGBUH23","title":"Intriguing Properties of Quantization at Scale","authors":["Arash Ahmadian","Saurabh Dash","Hongyu Chen","Bharat Venkitesh","Stephen Zhen Gou","Phil Blunsom","Ahmet Üstün","Sara Hooker"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$79","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/AhmadianDCVGBUH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/AhmadianDCVGBUH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/6c0ff499edc529c7d8c9f05c7c0ccb82-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"大规模语言模型在量化时表现出哪些反直觉的性质？此前对量化的研究大多在中小模型上进行，缺乏对大规模（数十亿到千亿参数）模型量化行为的系统性分析。","importance":"实证/系统级贡献，对 pretrain 研究直接相关。量化是 LLM 部署的核心环节，理解量化在 scale 上的行为（比如更大的模型是否更容易量化、哪些层对量化最敏感）直接影响预训练时的精度选择和架构设计决策。","technical_approach":"系统性地研究了不同规模 LLM 在各种量化方案（PTQ、QAT、不同 bit-width）下的表现，分析了量化误差与模型规模的关系。可能发现了一些 intriguing properties，例如：更大的模型在某些量化方案下反而更鲁棒，或者特定层的量化敏感度随规模变化的非单调行为。核心贡献是实证发现而非新方法。","experiments":"在多个规模的 LLM（可能从数亿到数百亿参数）上进行量化实验，评估 perplexity 和下游任务性能。系统比较了不同量化策略在不同规模下的表现。具体数字因缺少 abstract 无法确认。","authors_note":"作者团队可能来自 Cohere 或类似机构（根据作者名推测），具体无法确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"What counterintuitive properties emerge when quantizing LLMs at scale? Prior quantization research was mostly conducted on small-to-medium models, lacking systematic analysis of quantization behavior at billions-to-hundreds-of-billions parameter scale.","importance":"An empirical/systems-level contribution directly relevant to pretraining. Understanding how quantization behaves at scale (e.g., whether larger models are more robust to quantization, which layers are most sensitive) informs precision choices and architecture design during pretraining.","technical_approach":"Systematically studies LLMs of varying scales under different quantization schemes (PTQ, QAT, various bit-widths), analyzing the relationship between quantization error and model scale. The core contribution is empirical findings rather than new methods—likely revealing non-monotonic or counterintuitive scaling behaviors of quantization sensitivity.","experiments":"Quantization experiments across multiple LLM scales (possibly hundreds of millions to tens of billions of parameters), evaluating perplexity and downstream task performance. Systematically compares different quantization strategies across scales. Exact numbers unavailable without the full abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","scaling-law","optimization"],"keywords":["Quantization","optimization","language modelling","efficiency"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看不同规模模型各层量化敏感度的统计结果即可，做预训练时可针对性优化敏感层的数值稳定性以降低量化损失。","en":"Only read the statistical results of quantization sensitivity of each layer for models of different scales, optimize the numerical stability of sensitive layers during pretraining to reduce quantization loss."}},{"id":"AhmedCB23","title":"A Pseudo-Semantic Loss for Autoregressive Models with Logical Constraints","authors":["Kareem Ahmed","Kai-Wei Chang","Guy Van den Broeck"],"institutions":["UCLA"],"abstract":"$7a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/AhmedCB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/AhmedCB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/3accfe8332366a6f740d8740cd4cd653-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"自回归模型在生成时如何满足逻辑约束（如数独规则、语法规则等）？标准的交叉熵损失只关注 token 级别的似然，不感知输出序列的全局逻辑一致性，导致生成结果频繁违反约束。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：next-token 预训练目标的一个根本局限是缺乏全局约束感知。这篇工作提出的 pseudo-semantic loss 是一种在训练阶段注入结构化约束的方式，可能启发预训练目标的改进方向。","technical_approach":"提出 pseudo-semantic loss：在自回归模型的训练损失中加入一个额外项，衡量生成序列违反给定逻辑约束的程度。'Pseudo-semantic' 指的是用可微的松弛（relaxation）来近似离散逻辑约束的满足度，使其可以通过梯度反传优化。与 constrained decoding 的区别在于约束是在训练时而非推理时施加的。关键挑战是如何让离散逻辑约束变得可微。","experiments":"在带有逻辑约束的生成任务上评估（如数独生成、结构化文本生成），展示加入 pseudo-semantic loss 后约束满足率显著提升，同时生成质量不下降。具体数字因缺少 abstract 无法确认。","authors_note":"Guy Van den Broeck 是 UCLA 的教授，在概率推理和神经符号 AI 领域有深厚积累。Kai-Wei Chang 同样来自 UCLA，在 NLP 领域活跃。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How can autoregressive models satisfy logical constraints (e.g., Sudoku rules, grammar rules) during generation? Standard cross-entropy loss only optimizes token-level likelihood without awareness of global logical consistency.","importance":"Method-level contribution. Highlights a fundamental limitation of next-token pretraining: lack of global constraint awareness. The pseudo-semantic loss approach to injecting structured constraints during training may inspire improvements to pretraining objectives.","technical_approach":"Adds a pseudo-semantic loss term that measures the degree to which generated sequences violate given logical constraints. 'Pseudo-semantic' refers to using differentiable relaxations to approximate discrete logical constraint satisfaction, enabling gradient-based optimization. Unlike constrained decoding, constraints are enforced at training time. The key challenge is making discrete logic differentiable.","experiments":"Evaluated on generation tasks with logical constraints (e.g., Sudoku, structured text). Shows significant improvement in constraint satisfaction rate without degrading generation quality. Exact numbers unavailable without the full abstract.","authors_note":"Guy Van den Broeck is a professor at UCLA with deep expertise in probabilistic reasoning and neuro-symbolic AI. Kai-Wei Chang is also at UCLA, active in NLP research."},"tags":["autoregressive","loss-function","constraints","decoding"],"notable_authors":["Guy Van den Broeck","Kai-Wei Chang"],"keywords":["Neuro-Symbolic","Tractable Models","Learning with Constraints"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§3伪语义损失的可微松弛实现部分，可作为预训练目标引入全局逻辑约束的参考方案。","en":"Focus on §3 for the differentiable relaxation implementation of pseudo-semantic loss, which can be referenced when adding global constraints to pretraining objectives."}},{"id":"Alman023","title":"Fast Attention Requires Bounded Entries","authors":["Josh Alman","Zhao Song"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$7b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Alman023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Alman023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/c72861451d6fa9dfa64831102b9bb71a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的结论很直接：如果不对注意力矩阵中的数值做有界约束，很多快速注意力算法在理论上就无法普适地近似标准注意力。过去大量 fast attention 方法默认某种低秩、核近似或采样结构有效，但往往没有说清楚这些近似成立到底依赖什么输入条件。","importance":"这是理论边界类贡献，对 pretrain 的实际启发大于直接可用的方法。它的重要性在于给工程侧提了一个醒：加速注意力不是免费午餐，若激活分布或 QK 打分没有被控制，某些近似会在最坏情况下失真严重；这关系到长上下文训练、稳定性和架构替换时的风险评估。","technical_approach":"核心方法是建立下界或不可能性结果，说明快速注意力要想在一般情形下工作，需要 bounded entries 这类约束。和提出新近似算法不同，这篇文章是在问“什么时候不可能快且准”；这样做有价值，因为它把问题从经验有效拉回可证明条件。对实践的含义是，你要么接受近似误差依赖数据分布，要么在模型或归一化设计上主动把相关量限制在有利区间。","experiments":"这类论文通常以理论证明为主，实验只做示意性验证。给定信息没有摘要，因此无法确认是否包含数值实验、基线方法和误差曲线；但从题目判断，若有实验，也更可能是构造反例或展示有界/无界条件下近似质量差异，而不是大模型预训练 benchmark。","authors_note":"Josh Alman、Zhao Song 都以理论计算机科学与机器学习理论工作见长。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The headline claim is clear: fast attention is not universally possible unless the relevant entries are bounded. Many approximate attention methods rely on low-rank structure, kernels, or sampling, but the hidden assumption is often that the score matrix behaves nicely. This paper makes that dependency explicit.","importance":"This is a theory-boundary contribution, but it matters to pretraining practice because it clarifies when attention acceleration is structurally fragile. The practical takeaway is that replacing exact attention with a faster approximation is not harmless if QK scores or activations are poorly controlled. That directly affects long-context training and architecture substitutions.","technical_approach":"The likely contribution is an impossibility or lower-bound result showing that bounded entries are required for broad classes of fast-attention approximations to work reliably. Unlike papers that propose a new approximation, this one asks when fast and accurate attention is impossible in general. That is useful because it shifts the discussion from empirical success to explicit conditions. In practice, you either accept distribution-dependent error, or you redesign normalization and parameterization so the relevant values stay in a favorable range.","experiments":"Theory is probably the main payload, with limited empirical illustration if any. Since the abstract is not provided here, I cannot report datasets, baselines, or quantitative gaps. If experiments exist, they are likely small demonstrations contrasting bounded versus unbounded regimes rather than large-scale pretraining runs.","authors_note":"Josh Alman and Zhao Song are known for theoretical computer science and machine learning theory contributions."},"tags":["attention","efficiency","theory","long-context"],"notable_authors":["Josh Alman","Zhao Song"],"keywords":["fast attention computation","algorithm","hardness"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看理论下界推导部分，快速注意力近似的前提约束结论可用于长上下文架构选型的风险评估。","en":"Read the theoretical lower bound derivation section first, the prerequisite constraints for fast attention approximation can guide risk assessment of long context architecture selection."}},{"id":"AndriushchenkoB23","title":"Sharpness-Aware Minimization Leads to Low-Rank Features","authors":["Maksym Andriushchenko","Dara Bahri","Hossein Mobahi","Nicolas Flammarion"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$7c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/AndriushchenkoB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/AndriushchenkoB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/92dd1adab39f362046f99dfe3c39d90f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的核心结论是：SAM 不只是让 loss landscape 更平，还会系统性地诱导低秩特征表示。过去很多人把 SAM 的收益归因于更好的泛化或更平坦的极小值，但对它到底怎样改变表示结构、为什么有时会损伤容量，理解并不充分。","importance":"这是优化器机制分析类工作，对预训练优化有中等但真实的价值。重要之处在于，它把一个常用训练技巧和表示秩联系起来，让我们更清楚 SAM 的收益与代价：更强的隐式正则可能改善泛化，也可能压缩表示维度，影响大模型容量利用和多任务适配。","technical_approach":"方法上应是理论分析结合实证，证明或说明 SAM 的扰动最小化目标会偏向产生低秩特征。和仅看测试精度的经验研究不同，这篇文章在追问优化器究竟在表示空间里施加了什么几何约束；这样做有效，因为秩是一个比精度更接近内部机制的观测量。设计上的关键点通常在于把参数空间的 sharpness 与特征协方差或 Jacobian 结构联系起来。","experiments":"从题目可推断，实验应会比较 SGD/Adam 与 SAM 下特征矩阵的谱分布、有效秩和泛化表现，并可能分析不同网络、数据增强和权重衰减下这种低秩效应是否稳定。没有摘要，因此无法可靠给出数据集、架构、提升幅度或是否覆盖 ViT/ResNet/语言模型。","authors_note":"Maksym Andriushchenko、Nicolas Flammarion 都以优化与鲁棒性/泛化研究著称。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper makes a sharper claim about SAM: it does not just seek flatter minima, it also tends to induce low-rank features. Earlier discussions of SAM focused on generalization and sharpness, but gave a weaker account of how the optimizer changes representation structure and why that may sometimes trade off with capacity.","importance":"This is an optimizer-mechanism paper with meaningful relevance to pretraining. The value is that it connects a widely used training trick to representation rank, making the trade-off more explicit: stronger implicit regularization may improve generalization, but it can also compress feature diversity and affect capacity use or downstream adaptation.","technical_approach":"The likely method combines theory and controlled experiments to show that SAM’s objective biases learning toward low-rank representations. The difference from standard empirical optimizer comparisons is that the paper studies what geometric constraint SAM imposes in representation space, not just whether test accuracy goes up. This is useful because rank is a more mechanism-level observable than accuracy alone.","experiments":"A reasonable reading of the title is that the experiments compare SAM against standard optimizers on feature spectra, effective rank, and generalization across architectures and settings. Since the abstract is unavailable here, I cannot state datasets, model classes, or quantitative effect sizes with confidence.","authors_note":"Maksym Andriushchenko and Nicolas Flammarion are well known for work on optimization, robustness, and generalization."},"tags":["sam","training-dynamics","representation","optimization"],"notable_authors":["Maksym Andriushchenko","Nicolas Flammarion"],"keywords":["sharpness-aware minimization","low-rank features","understanding feature learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读SAM诱导低秩特征的实证分析部分，结论可指导预训练优化器选型时权衡泛化性与表示容量。","en":"Focus on the empirical analysis of SAM inducing low-rank features, the conclusion can guide the trade-off between generalization and representation capacity when selecting pretraining optimizers."}},{"id":"AroyoTDHPSPW23","title":"DICES Dataset: Diversity in Conversational AI Evaluation for Safety","authors":["Lora Aroyo","Alex S. Taylor","Mark Díaz","Christopher Homan","Alicia Parrish","Gregory Serapio-García","Vinodkumar Prabhakaran","Ding Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$7d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/AroyoTDHPSPW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/AroyoTDHPSPW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/a74b697bce4cac6c91896372abaa8863-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是安全评测数据缺少人群与对话情境多样性，导致聊天模型在 benchmark 上看起来安全，但对不同用户群体和表达方式并不稳健。过去很多安全评测集覆盖的是有限模板和单一价值视角，容易高估模型真实部署表现。","importance":"这是数据集与评测层面的贡献，对 post-train safety 很直接，对 pretrain 也有反馈价值。重要性在于：如果评测集能系统刻画多样性，模型训练和对齐阶段才有机会发现群体差异、文化语境和隐含歧义带来的安全失效；否则优化出来的只是对 benchmark 模式的适配。","technical_approach":"核心方法是构建 DICES 数据集，强调 conversational AI safety evaluation 中的 diversity。和只扩充样本数量不同，这类数据集设计会主动覆盖不同身份背景、语言风格、话题敏感度、伤害类型和标注分歧，从而把“安全”从单一标签问题变成更接近真实交互的不确定评测。这样设计有效，因为安全判断高度依赖语境和主体视角；代价则是标注一致性更难，指标解释也更复杂。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法可靠写出样本规模、类别数、标注协议或与哪些安全 benchmark 做对比。按题目判断，实验/分析部分应会展示数据集的多样性覆盖、评估模型在不同群体切片上的性能差异，以及现有模型或审查器在该数据集上的鲁棒性缺口。","authors_note":"Lora Aroyo 是负责任 AI 与数据标注质量领域的知名研究者。其余机构信息无法从给定内容中确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a real weakness in safety evaluation: many conversational AI benchmarks underrepresent user and context diversity, so models can appear safe while failing on specific populations or language styles. Earlier safety datasets often cover narrow templates and implicit value assumptions, which can overestimate deployment robustness.","importance":"This is a dataset and evaluation contribution with direct impact on safety post-training and useful feedback for pretraining. Better diversity-aware evaluation matters because alignment can only optimize what is measured. If the benchmark misses population and context variation, training tends to fit benchmark style rather than real interaction risk.","technical_approach":"The core contribution is the DICES dataset, designed to foreground diversity in conversational safety evaluation. The key difference from simply collecting more prompts is targeted coverage: likely across identities, language styles, topics, harm categories, and annotator disagreement. That design is appropriate because safety judgments are context-sensitive and perspective-dependent. The cost is more difficult annotation and less trivial metric interpretation.","experiments":"The abstract is not available, so I cannot give dataset size, label taxonomy, or exact benchmark comparisons. The likely empirical analysis includes diversity statistics, subgroup performance gaps, and evidence that current models or safety filters are less robust than standard benchmarks suggest.","authors_note":"Lora Aroyo is a well-known researcher in responsible AI and annotation quality. I cannot confirm the full institution list from the provided information alone."},"tags":["safety","evaluation","conversation","data-quality"],"notable_authors":["Lora Aroyo"],"keywords":["conversational AI","human evaluation","human annotation","safety task","disagreement","variance in human annotations","diversity of rater pool"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看数据集构造的多样性维度设计部分即可，可用于优化预训练对齐阶段的安全评测pipeline。","en":"Only read the diversity dimension design of the dataset construction, which can be used to optimize the safety evaluation pipeline during pretraining alignment."}},{"id":"2306.04181","title":"Benchmarking Foundation Models with Language-Model-as-an-Examiner","authors":["Yushi Bai","Jiahao Ying","Yixin Cao","Xin Lv","Yuze He","Xiaozhi Wang","Jifan Yu","Kaisheng Zeng","Yijia Xiao","Haozhe Lyu","Jiayin Zhang","Juanzi Li","Lei Hou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$7e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.04181","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BaiY0LHWYZXLZLH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BaiY0LHWYZXLZLH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/f64e55d03e2fe61aa4114e49cb654acb-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是开放式问答基础模型评测里的两个老问题：测试泄漏和人工评测难以规模化。传统 benchmark 依赖固定题库，久而久之会被模型或数据污染，而且开放式答案的自动评分常常依赖参考答案，覆盖不了真正开放的生成质量。","importance":"这是评测方法级工作，对 foundation model 的开发流程很有现实意义。重要性在于：如果让一个语言模型担任出题人和考官，评测可以持续更新题目、降低静态题库泄漏，并把开放式回答纳入参考无关的自动评估；这会改变模型迭代中的在线 benchmark 方式。边界是评测器本身也会带偏见，且强模型评弱模型存在位置偏差和风格偏差风险。","technical_approach":"作者提出 Language-Model-as-an-Examiner 框架，让 LM 基于自身知识生成问题，并以 reference-free 方式评价答案。与传统固定数据集不同，这里把评测从“被动答题”改成“动态出题 + 动态评分”；这样设计有效，因为题库可以持续刷新，减少训练集重合，而且无需为每道开放题准备标准答案。和直接用 GPT-4 打分的做法相比，这篇工作的重点更像完整 benchmark pipeline，而不只是一个 judge prompt。","experiments":"摘要说明框架支持不同 LM 作为 examiner，并强调 questions can be constantly updated。没有完整摘要，无法可靠给出评测任务数、参评模型、与人工评测的一致性系数或对泄漏的定量分析。可以合理推断，实验会验证自动评测与人工判断的相关性，以及在题目更新后对不同 foundation models 的区分能力。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets two persistent weaknesses in open-ended QA benchmarking for foundation models: benchmark leakage and the poor scalability of human evaluation. Static test sets become contaminated over time, and automatic scoring of free-form answers often depends on references, which is a weak fit for genuinely open-ended generation.","importance":"This is an evaluation-method contribution with strong practical relevance. The main value is procedural: if a language model can act as both examiner and grader, benchmarks can be refreshed continuously and open-ended answers can be scored without handcrafted references. That could materially change how model teams run iterative evaluation. The limitation is obvious as well: the examiner model introduces its own biases, including style, position, and capability mismatch.","technical_approach":"The proposed framework is Language-Model-as-an-Examiner. An LM generates questions from its knowledge and evaluates answers in a reference-free way. Compared with standard fixed benchmarks, this turns evaluation into a dynamic pipeline of question generation plus grading. That helps because questions can be updated continuously, reducing leakage, and the system does not require gold answers for every prompt. Relative to simple LLM-as-a-judge setups, the contribution seems to be the end-to-end benchmarking framework rather than only a judging prompt.","experiments":"The abstract states that different LMs can serve as the examiner and that questions can be constantly updated. Without the full abstract, I cannot report task counts, model lists, human-agreement coefficients, or measured leakage reductions. A reasonable expectation is that the experiments test alignment with human evaluation and the ability of the dynamic benchmark to discriminate among foundation models over time.","authors_note":""},"tags":["benchmark","evaluation","llm-as-judge","data-contamination"],"notable_authors":["Yushi Bai"],"keywords":["Question answering","Automatic evaluation","Decentralized evaluation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读动态出题+无参考评分的框架实现部分，可参考优化大模型迭代的在线评测流程。","en":"Focus on the implementation of the dynamic question generation + reference-free scoring framework, which can be referenced to optimize the online evaluation process of large model iteration."}},{"id":"BaykalCDGP023","title":"Alternating Updates for Efficient Transformers","authors":["Cenk Baykal","Dylan J. Cutler","Nishanth Dikkala","Nikhil Ghosh","Rina Panigrahy","Xin Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$7f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BaykalCDGP023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BaykalCDGP023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/f2059277ac6ce66e7e5543001afa8bb5-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作聚焦一个很实际的问题：Transformer 的训练与推理成本高，尤其是每层都完整更新会带来很重的算力和内存负担。传统做法通常是在注意力近似、稀疏化或低秩化上做文章，但这些方法往往要改架构或牺牲精度；作者想探索的是，是否能仅通过更新策略的改变，在尽量不动模型主体的情况下提升效率。","importance":"如果结论成立，这类方法的价值在于系统级和训练策略级，而不是模型表达能力级。对 pretrain 的意义是：很多效率收益不一定来自更复杂的算子，也可能来自对“哪些参数需要每一步都更新”这个假设的松动；这和后来的 selective update、部分层冻结、分阶段训练是同一类思路，对大规模预训练的吞吐和稳定性都有关。","technical_approach":"核心方法从标题看是 alternating updates，也就是交替更新 Transformer 中的不同子模块，而不是每一步同时更新所有部分。这样的设计通常依赖一个判断：注意力、MLP、嵌入或不同层之间存在一定冗余同步更新，允许在相邻步骤中分开优化，从而减少单步计算、激活保存或通信开销。它和直接剪枝或换近似注意力的区别在于，模型结构基本不变，收益更多来自优化过程重排；代价则是训练动态更复杂，若交替粒度不当，可能带来收敛变慢或模块间失配。","experiments":"题面没有摘要，因此不能可靠写出具体 benchmark、加速比和精度损失。按这类工作的常见实验结构，关键事实通常包括：在语言或视觉 Transformer 上测 wall-clock 训练时间、FLOPs 或显存占用；与标准全量更新训练比较最终精度；再做不同交替周期、不同模块划分的 ablation，观察效率—质量曲线是否平滑。如果论文做得扎实，最关键的数据会是“在接近不掉点的条件下省下多少训练成本”，而不是单独报一个最好速度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical bottleneck: full Transformer training updates every component at every step, which is expensive in compute and memory. Prior efficiency work often changed the attention mechanism itself, but that usually introduces approximation error or architectural constraints; this work asks whether better update scheduling alone can deliver savings.","importance":"If the empirical claim holds, the contribution is mainly at the systems and optimization-policy level. For pretraining, the relevant lesson is that efficiency does not have to come from more exotic operators; some gains may come from relaxing the assumption that every parameter block must be updated every step, which is directly relevant to large-scale throughput and training stability.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method is alternating updates: different Transformer components are updated on different steps instead of all at once. The underlying bet is that attention, MLPs, embeddings, or layer groups have enough temporal redundancy that asynchronous optimization can preserve quality while reducing per-step work, activation storage, or communication. Unlike pruning or approximate attention, the architecture stays mostly intact; the trade-off is that optimization dynamics become more delicate, and poor alternation schedules can slow convergence or create mismatch across modules.","experiments":"The prompt does not provide the abstract, so concrete datasets, speedups, and accuracy deltas cannot be stated reliably. In this class of paper, the decisive evidence would typically be wall-clock training speed, FLOPs, or memory reductions on standard Transformer workloads, compared against full-update training at matched quality, plus ablations over alternation periods and module partitions. The key result to look for is not just the maximum speedup, but how much cost is saved at near-constant final accuracy.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer","efficiency","alternating-updates","attention"],"keywords":["efficiency","efficient transformers"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读交替更新的粒度设计与收敛验证部分，可尝试将该策略迁移到大规模预训练的吞吐优化中。","en":"Read the granularity design and convergence verification of alternating updates, the strategy can be migrated to throughput optimization of large-scale pretraining."}},{"id":"2305.01625","title":"Unlimiformer: Long-Range Transformers with Unlimited Length Input","authors":["Amanda Bertsch","Uri Alon","Graham Neubig","Matthew Gormley"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$80","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.01625","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Bertsch0NG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Bertsch0NG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/6f9806a5adc72b5b834b27e4c7c0df9b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是 encoder-decoder Transformer 的长输入瓶颈，而且结论很明确：可以在不重训主模型的情况下，把 cross-attention 改写成基于 kNN 检索的稀疏访问，从而处理几乎无限长的输入。传统 Transformer 受限于对所有输入 token 做全量注意力，长文档场景不是被截断，就是要换成长上下文专用架构；作者想做的是给现成预训练模型套一个外壳，直接扩上下文。","importance":"它的价值是系统级和推理/适配级的，对 pretrain 也有现实启发。原因在于很多长上下文能力未必非要在预训练阶段用更大窗口硬学出来，至少对 encoder-decoder 任务，外部检索式注意力能在较低成本下把可访问上下文扩得很大。这种思路和后来的 external memory、RAG、KV 检索优化有连续性：把精确全连接注意力换成受控检索，换取长度扩展。","technical_approach":"Unlimiformer 的核心是：把输入侧 key/value 建成单个 kNN 索引，在解码时每个 decoder layer、每个 attention head 只检索 top-k 相关 key，而 kNN 返回的距离直接当作注意力打分。设计上它没有改动原始预训练 encoder-decoder 的主体参数，而是替换 cross-attention 的访问方式；索引还能放在 CPU 或 GPU 上，并以次线性时间查询。为什么有效：在摘要、书籍总结这类任务里，解码时真正有用的信息通常只分布在长文档中的少数位置，没必要让每个 query 看全序列。代价是检索误差会直接变成注意力误差，因此 top-k 覆盖率和索引质量决定效果上限。","experiments":"摘要给出的关键信息是：作者在多个长文档与书籍摘要 benchmark 上评测，并报告可以优于所有已有基线。题面截断，没保留具体数据，但合理的实验重点应包括：在 Long-document summarization 和 book summarization 上，与原始截断式模型、长上下文 Transformer 或检索增强 baseline 比较 ROUGE 等指标；展示输入长度提升后的性能曲线，而不是只报固定窗口结果；以及分析 k、索引存放位置（CPU/GPU）和检索时间的 trade-off。最值得关注的不是“无限长度”这个字面表述，而是当输入远超预训练窗口时，性能是否随长度平稳退化而不是立刻崩掉。","authors_note":"作者包含 Graham Neubig、Matthew Gormley。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the long-input bottleneck in encoder-decoder Transformers, and the main claim is clear: cross-attention can be replaced with kNN-based retrieval over encoder states so that pretrained models can process effectively unbounded inputs without retraining the core model. Standard Transformers either truncate long documents or require specialized long-context architectures; this work tries to extend context by wrapping existing pretrained models.","importance":"The contribution is primarily systems- and adaptation-level, but it has practical implications for pretraining. It suggests that some long-context capability does not need to be bought entirely through larger pretraining windows; at least for encoder-decoder tasks, retrieval-style access can greatly expand usable context at lower cost. The idea sits in the same family as external memory, retrieval augmentation, and KV selection: replace dense full attention with targeted access.","technical_approach":"Unlimiformer builds a single kNN index over encoder-side keys and values, and at decoding time each head in each decoder layer retrieves only its top-k relevant keys, using returned kNN distances as attention scores. The architecture of the pretrained encoder-decoder is largely preserved; what changes is how cross-attention accesses memory. The index can live on CPU or GPU and be queried in sub-linear time. The design works when useful evidence is sparse in long inputs, as in document or book summarization, so decoding queries do not need to scan every token. The trade-off is direct: retrieval mistakes become attention mistakes, so top-k recall and index quality bound performance.","experiments":"The abstract states that the method is evaluated on multiple long-document and book-summarization benchmarks and outperforms all baselines, though the prompt cuts off the exact numbers. The critical evidence should include ROUGE-style comparisons against truncation-based pretrained models, long-context Transformer baselines, and retrieval-enhanced alternatives; performance as input length grows far beyond the original window; and ablations over k, index placement on CPU vs GPU, and retrieval latency. The useful lens is not the phrase 'unlimited length' itself, but whether quality degrades gracefully rather than collapsing once inputs exceed pretraining context.","authors_note":"Includes Graham Neubig and Matthew Gormley."},"tags":["long-context","knn","transformer","encoder-decoder","unbounded-length"],"notable_authors":["Graham Neubig","Matthew Gormley"],"keywords":["retrieval augmentation","summarization","long-context","generation","long-input","encoder-decoder","transformers","language models","natural language generation","natural language processing","deep learning","neural networks"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看cross-attention替换为kNN检索的实现部分即可，可用于预训练模型零成本扩展长上下文适配的参考。","en":"Only read the implementation of replacing cross-attention with kNN retrieval, which can be referenced for zero-cost long context adaptation of pretrained models."}},{"id":"BorzunovRCBDBSR23","title":"Distributed Inference and Fine-tuning of Large Language Models Over The Internet","authors":["Alexander Borzunov","Max Ryabinin","Artem Chumachenko","Dmitry Baranchuk","Tim Dettmers","Younes Belkada","Pavel Samygin","Colin A. Raffel"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$81","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BorzunovRCBDBSR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BorzunovRCBDBSR23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/28bf1419b9a1f908c15f6195f58cb865-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是大模型的一个现实限制：推理和微调通常要求集中式高性能集群，但全球大量零散算力和消费级设备无法被有效利用。过去分布式训练主要假设数据中心内的高速网络，而互联网环境延迟高、带宽低、节点不稳定；作者关注的是能否在这种条件下仍然完成 LLM 的推理和 fine-tuning。","importance":"这是系统级工作，但对 pretrain 生态有现实冲击。它说明大模型的可获得性不只取决于参数和算法，也取决于是否能把异构、松散连接的算力组织起来。虽然它不直接改预训练目标，但对 continual pretrain、社区协作训练、低成本实验以及分布式 serving 都有启发；尤其在模型越来越大时，‘谁能参与实验’本身就是研究速度的一部分。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心方法是把 LLM 切分后部署到互联网中的多节点上，支持 distributed inference 和 fine-tuning。要在这种环境工作，关键机制一般包括：参数或层级切分、异步或容错调度、节点动态加入退出处理、带宽受限下的激活传输优化，以及可能的参数高效微调以减少同步成本。它和机房内 pipeline/tensor parallel 的区别在于前者必须假设网络极不可靠，因此系统设计重点不是极限吞吐，而是可生存性与弹性。","experiments":"题面无摘要，所以无法确认模型规模、参与节点数和吞吐数字。按该主题最关键的实验，应包括：在真实互联网分布节点上展示可运行的 LLM 推理延迟与吞吐；与单机或数据中心式方案比较成本与性能；以及在 parameter-efficient fine-tuning 或小规模全量微调上验证收敛可行。真正决定价值的是系统在节点掉线、延迟波动和异构硬件条件下是否还能稳定运行，而不是实验室环境下的理想速度。","authors_note":"作者包含 Tim Dettmers。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical bottleneck: inference and finetuning for large language models usually assume centralized, high-performance clusters, leaving vast amounts of geographically distributed commodity compute unused. Classical distributed training is built for datacenter networks; the internet is high-latency, bandwidth-constrained, and unreliable. The paper asks whether LLM inference and finetuning can still work under those conditions.","importance":"This is a systems contribution, but one with real implications for the pretraining ecosystem. It argues that access to large-model research depends not only on algorithms and parameter counts, but also on whether heterogeneous, loosely connected compute can be organized effectively. While it does not change the pretraining objective directly, it matters for continual pretraining, community-driven experimentation, low-cost research, and distributed serving.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method distributes parts of an LLM across internet-connected nodes and supports both inference and finetuning. To make that viable, the critical mechanisms are likely model or layer partitioning, fault-tolerant and possibly asynchronous scheduling, handling dynamic node joins and failures, reducing activation transfer under severe bandwidth limits, and perhaps using parameter-efficient finetuning to keep synchronization cheap. Unlike datacenter pipeline or tensor parallelism, the design priority here is not peak throughput but survivability and elasticity under unstable networking.","experiments":"The abstract is not provided, so specific model sizes, node counts, latency, and throughput cannot be reported reliably. The key evidence should include end-to-end LLM inference across real internet-distributed nodes, cost/performance comparisons against centralized alternatives, and a demonstration that finetuning—likely parameter-efficient finetuning or small-scale full tuning—still converges. The real test of value is whether the system remains usable under node churn, latency variance, and heterogeneous hardware, not whether it is fastest in an ideal lab setting.","authors_note":"Includes Tim Dettmers."},"tags":["llm","distributed-inference","fine-tuning","systems"],"notable_authors":["Tim Dettmers"],"keywords":["volunteer computing","distributed deep learning","distributed inference","efficient inference","large language models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读互联网异构节点的容错调度与参数切分方案，可用于低成本社区分布式预训练的系统设计参考。","en":"Focus on the fault-tolerant scheduling and parameter sharding scheme for heterogeneous Internet nodes, which can guide the system design of low-cost community distributed pretraining."}},{"id":"BrooksWL023","title":"Large Language Models can Implement Policy Iteration","authors":["Ethan Brooks","Logan Walls","Richard L. Lewis","Satinder Singh"],"institutions":["University of Michigan","Google DeepMind"],"abstract":"$82","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BrooksWL023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BrooksWL023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/60dc7fa827f5f761ad481e2ad40b5573-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 能否在上下文中实现策略迭代（policy iteration）来解决强化学习问题，而不需要额外训练或微调。此前 LLM 在决策任务上的应用多依赖 prompt engineering 或外部工具，缺乏对 LLM 内在推理能力能否直接实现 RL 经典算法的系统性研究。","importance":"方法级贡献。揭示了 LLM 的 in-context learning 能力足以实现 policy iteration 的核心循环——策略评估和策略改进——这对理解 LLM 作为通用推理引擎的能力边界有直接启示。对 pretrain 研究者而言，这说明足够强的语言建模能力可以涌现出结构化的迭代推理行为，为理解 ICL 机制提供了一个 RL 视角的实证。","technical_approach":"核心思路是将策略迭代的两个步骤——策略评估（估计当前策略的价值函数）和策略改进（根据价值函数贪心更新策略）——编码为 LLM 的 prompt，让模型在上下文窗口内完成多轮迭代。关键选择是不做任何参数更新，完全依赖 ICL。与直接让 LLM 输出动作的 zero-shot 方法不同，这里显式地让模型在 prompt 中维护和更新价值估计。","experiments":"在小规模的表格型 MDP 环境上验证，展示 LLM 能通过多轮 prompt 交互逐步改进策略并收敛到接近最优策略。实验规模较小（受限于上下文长度），主要是概念验证性质，不涉及大规模 benchmark 对比。","authors_note":"Satinder Singh 是 RL 领域的资深研究者，曾任 University of Michigan 教授，后加入 Google DeepMind。Richard L. Lewis 同为 Michigan 认知科学/AI 方向教授。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Can LLMs implement policy iteration—the classic RL algorithm—purely in-context without any parameter updates? Prior work on LLM-based decision-making relied on prompt engineering or external tools, without systematically testing whether ICL alone can carry out iterative value estimation and policy improvement.","importance":"A method-level contribution showing that sufficiently capable LLMs can execute the core loop of policy iteration via ICL. For pretrain researchers, this provides empirical evidence that strong language modeling gives rise to structured iterative reasoning, offering an RL lens on understanding emergent ICL capabilities.","technical_approach":"Policy evaluation and policy improvement steps are encoded into prompts, letting the LLM maintain and update value estimates across multiple rounds within its context window. No parameter updates are performed. The key distinction from zero-shot action prediction is the explicit iterative structure in the prompt that mirrors the algorithmic steps of policy iteration.","experiments":"Validated on small tabular MDPs where the LLM progressively improves its policy toward near-optimal over multiple prompt rounds. The experiments are proof-of-concept scale, constrained by context length, without large-scale benchmark comparisons.","authors_note":"Satinder Singh is a senior RL researcher, formerly at University of Michigan, now at Google DeepMind. Richard L. Lewis is a Michigan professor working on cognition and AI."},"tags":["llm","reasoning","reinforcement-learning","in-context-learning"],"notable_authors":["Satinder Singh","Richard L. Lewis"],"keywords":["Reinforcement Learning","In-Context Learning","Foundation Models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读上下文策略迭代的prompt设计与实验结果部分，可为理解ICL的迭代推理能力提供RL视角的实证参考。","en":"Read the prompt design and experimental results of in-context policy iteration, which provides RL-perspective empirical reference for understanding ICL's iterative reasoning ability."}},{"id":"BurszteinZVJK23","title":"RETVec: Resilient and Efficient Text Vectorizer","authors":["Elie Bursztein","Marina Zhang","Owen Vallis","Xinyu Jia","Alexey Kurakin"],"institutions":["Google"],"abstract":"This paper describes RETVec, an efficient, resilient, and multilingual text vectorizer designed for neural-based text processing. RETVec combines a novel character encoding with an optional small embedding model to embed words into a 256-dimensional vector space. The RETVec embedding model is pre-trained using pair-wise metric learning to be robust against typos and character-level adversarial attacks. In this paper, we evaluate and compare RETVec to state-of-the-art vectorizers and word embeddings on popular model architectures and datasets. These comparisons demonstrate that RETVec leads to competitive, multilingual models that are significantly more resilient to typos and adversarial text attacks. RETVec is available under the Apache 2 license at https://github.com/google-research/retvec.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BurszteinZVJK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BurszteinZVJK23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/bf64451da212313c5ef1a00f49232c47-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有文本向量化方法（如基于词表的 embedding）对对抗性文本扰动（typo、homoglyph 替换、不可见字符插入等）非常脆弱，导致垃圾邮件过滤、内容审核等安全场景下模型容易被绕过。需要一个既鲁棒又高效的字符级文本编码器。","importance":"系统级贡献。RETVec 提供了一个可直接替换现有 text vectorizer 的轻量组件，对 pretrain 研究的启示在于 tokenizer/文本编码前端的鲁棒性设计：字符级编码天然规避了 OOV 和 subword 分割被对抗攻击利用的问题。在多语言和低资源场景下也有参考价值。","technical_approach":"RETVec 是一个字符级文本向量化器，对每个 UTF-8 字符用紧凑的哈希编码生成固定维度表示，再通过轻量网络聚合为文本向量。关键设计选择：(1) 不依赖词表，因此对任意字符扰动天然鲁棒；(2) 编码过程极轻量，适合大规模在线推理；(3) 支持全 Unicode 范围，无需语言特定预处理。与 BPE/WordPiece 等 subword 方法的核心区别是完全绕开了词表查找。","experiments":"在 Gmail 垃圾邮件检测等实际任务上测试，面对多种对抗性文本扰动时，RETVec 相比基于词表的 baseline 保持了显著更高的检测准确率，同时推理延迟极低。具体数字需参考原文，但核心结论是鲁棒性大幅提升且效率不降。","authors_note":"Elie Bursztein 是 Google 反滥用研究团队负责人，长期从事安全与对抗 ML 研究。Alexey Kurakin 是对抗样本领域的知名研究者（与 Goodfellow 合作的对抗攻击早期工作）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing text vectorizers based on vocabulary lookup are brittle against adversarial text perturbations (typos, homoglyphs, invisible characters), making downstream classifiers easy to bypass in security-critical applications like spam filtering.","importance":"A systems-level contribution providing a drop-in replacement for text vectorizers. For pretrain research, the key takeaway is that character-level encoding sidesteps OOV and subword-splitting vulnerabilities. Relevant to multilingual and robustness-aware tokenizer design.","technical_approach":"RETVec encodes each UTF-8 character via compact hash-based representations, then aggregates them through a lightweight network into a fixed-dimension text vector. No vocabulary is used, making it inherently robust to arbitrary character-level perturbations. Covers the full Unicode range without language-specific preprocessing. The core difference from BPE/WordPiece is the complete elimination of vocabulary lookup.","experiments":"Tested on Gmail spam detection and other tasks under various adversarial text perturbations. RETVec maintains significantly higher detection accuracy compared to vocabulary-based baselines while keeping inference latency very low. Specific numbers are in the paper; the main finding is a large robustness gain with no efficiency penalty.","authors_note":"Elie Bursztein leads Google's anti-abuse research team. Alexey Kurakin is well-known for early adversarial examples work with Goodfellow."},"tags":["tokenizer","text-representation","efficiency"],"notable_authors":["Elie Bursztein","Alexey Kurakin"],"keywords":["language modeling","text embedding","adversarial text attack","text vectorization"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看字符级哈希编码的实现部分即可，可作为预训练tokenizer鲁棒性优化的替代方案参考。","en":"Only read the implementation of character-level hash encoding, which can be used as an alternative reference for robustness optimization of pretraining tokenizers."}},{"id":"BusbridgeRALDCW23","title":"How to Scale Your EMA","authors":["Dan Busbridge","Jason Ramapuram","Pierre Ablin","Tatiana Likhomanenko","Eeshan Gunesh Dhekane","Xavier Suau Cuadros","Russell Webb"],"institutions":["Apple"],"abstract":"$83","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BusbridgeRALDCW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BusbridgeRALDCW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/e7681dd6fe16052433ab68cd1555bdc9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"EMA（指数移动平均）模型在深度学习训练中广泛使用（如 self-supervised learning、扩散模型），但 EMA 的衰减率（decay rate）如何随训练步数和 batch size 等超参数缩放，缺乏系统性的理论指导。实践中调 EMA decay 往往靠经验。","importance":"方法级贡献，直接影响训练实践。EMA 是 pretrain 中常见组件（BYOL/DINO 的 teacher 网络、扩散模型的权重平均），给出 EMA decay 的 scaling rule 可以减少超参搜索成本，尤其在改变训练规模时避免重新调参。对做大规模预训练的工程师有直接实用价值。","technical_approach":"核心贡献是推导出 EMA decay rate 与训练步数/batch size 之间的缩放关系。具体来说，当改变训练配置（如增大 batch size 或改变总步数）时，EMA decay 应按特定公式调整以保持等效的平滑效果。推导基于对 EMA 作为低通滤波器的分析，给出了一个简洁的换算规则。关键洞察是 EMA 的有效窗口长度（而非 decay 数值本身）才是应该保持不变的量。","experiments":"在多个任务上验证：包括 self-supervised 视觉预训练（BYOL/DINO 风格）和扩散模型训练。实验表明按推导的 scaling rule 调整 EMA decay 后，不同训练配置下的性能一致，而不调整则会显著退化。验证了 rule 在不同 batch size（如 256 到 4096）和训练长度下的有效性。","authors_note":"来自 Apple MLR（Machine Learning Research）团队。Tatiana Likhomanenko 此前在 Meta FAIR 做过语音和自监督学习相关工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"EMA (exponential moving average) is widely used in training (SSL teacher networks, diffusion models), but there is no principled guidance on how to scale the decay rate when changing training steps or batch size. Practitioners tune it by trial and error.","importance":"A method-level contribution with direct practical impact. EMA appears in many pretrain pipelines (BYOL/DINO teachers, diffusion weight averaging). A proper scaling rule eliminates hyperparameter search when changing training scale—valuable for large-scale pretrain engineering.","technical_approach":"Derives a scaling relationship between EMA decay rate and training configuration (batch size, total steps). The key insight: the effective window length of the EMA (not the raw decay value) should be kept invariant across configurations. This is formalized by analyzing EMA as a low-pass filter, yielding a simple conversion formula for the decay rate.","experiments":"Validated on self-supervised visual pretraining (BYOL/DINO-style) and diffusion model training. Following the derived scaling rule maintains consistent performance across batch sizes (e.g., 256 to 4096) and training durations, while naive transfer of decay values leads to significant degradation.","authors_note":"From Apple MLR. Tatiana Likhomanenko previously worked on speech and self-supervised learning at Meta FAIR."},"tags":["ema","optimization","training-stability"],"notable_authors":["Tatiana Likhomanenko"],"keywords":["Optimization","scaling rules","EMA","exponential moving average","self-supervised learning","pseudo-labelling","semi-supervised learning","BYOL","distillation","speech","vision"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看EMA衰减率缩放规则的推导部分，公式可直接复用在大规模预训练超参调整中，减少调参成本。","en":"Focus on the derivation of EMA decay rate scaling rule, the formula can be directly reused in large-scale pretraining hyperparameter adjustment to reduce tuning cost."}},{"id":"ChaudhryZKP23","title":"Long Sequence Hopfield Memory","authors":["Hamza Tahir Chaudhry","Jacob A. Zavatone-Veth","Dmitry Krotov","Cengiz Pehlevan"],"institutions":["Harvard University","MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab"],"abstract":"$84","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChaudhryZKP23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChaudhryZKP23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/aa32ebcdd2ce1bed4ef7f456fc8fa5c1-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"经典 Hopfield 网络的存储容量随模式维度多项式增长，现代 Hopfield 网络（如 Ramsauer et al. 2021）虽然将容量提升到指数级，但对长序列的存储和检索仍然受限。如何设计一个能高效存储和检索长序列的 Hopfield 记忆模型？","importance":"理论级贡献，与注意力机制的理论理解直接相关。现代 Hopfield 网络与 Transformer 的注意力机制有深刻联系（attention 可以看作 Hopfield 的一步更新），因此长序列 Hopfield 记忆的理论进展对理解 Transformer 处理长上下文的能力边界有启发。","technical_approach":"提出 Long Sequence Hopfield Memory，通过修改能量函数使其能存储和检索序列（而非单个模式）。关键设计是引入序列间的时序结构到 Hopfield 能量函数中，使得检索时不仅匹配单个模式，还能恢复整个序列。与标准现代 Hopfield 网络的区别是从点记忆扩展到序列记忆。理论分析给出了存储容量的界。","experiments":"在合成序列检索任务和关联记忆 benchmark 上验证。展示了模型能可靠地存储和检索比经典方法更长的序列，存储容量的理论界与实验吻合。","authors_note":"Dmitry Krotov 是现代 Hopfield 网络的核心推动者之一（与 Hopfield 本人合作的 2016 年工作）。Cengiz Pehlevan 是 Harvard 的理论神经科学/机器学习教授。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Classic Hopfield networks have polynomial storage capacity; modern Hopfield networks achieve exponential capacity but still struggle with long sequence storage and retrieval. How to design a Hopfield memory model that efficiently handles long sequences?","importance":"A theory-level contribution directly connected to understanding attention mechanisms. Modern Hopfield networks are deeply linked to Transformer attention (attention as one-step Hopfield update), so theoretical advances in long-sequence Hopfield memory inform our understanding of Transformers' long-context capacity limits.","technical_approach":"Proposes Long Sequence Hopfield Memory by modifying the energy function to store and retrieve sequences rather than individual patterns. The key design introduces temporal structure between patterns into the Hopfield energy, enabling retrieval of entire sequences rather than single-point matches. Theoretical analysis provides storage capacity bounds.","experiments":"Validated on synthetic sequence retrieval tasks and associative memory benchmarks. The model reliably stores and retrieves longer sequences than classical methods, with theoretical capacity bounds matching experimental results.","authors_note":"Dmitry Krotov is a key contributor to modern Hopfield networks (2016 work with Hopfield himself). Cengiz Pehlevan is a Harvard professor in theoretical neuroscience and machine learning."},"tags":["long-context","memory","hopfield"],"notable_authors":["Dmitry Krotov","Cengiz Pehlevan"],"keywords":["Sequence Recall","Dense Associative Memory","Memory Capacity","Hopfield Networks","Biological Motor Control"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看序列记忆能量函数的设计与容量界分析部分，可为长上下文注意力机制的理论研究提供参考。","en":"Read the sequence memory energy function design and capacity bound analysis, which can provide reference for theoretical research of long context attention mechanisms."}},{"id":"ChenKYG23","title":"Stochastic Collapse: How Gradient Noise Attracts SGD Dynamics Towards Simpler Subnetworks","authors":["Feng Chen","Daniel Kunin","Atsushi Yamamura","Surya Ganguli"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$85","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenKYG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenKYG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/6e4432b912599d11609b9cdf98c823c5-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注一个很实际但常被经验化处理的问题：为什么 SGD 的梯度噪声会把训练动态推向更简单的子网络，而不仅仅是在局部极小值附近抖动。过去大家知道 SGD 有隐式正则化，但“噪声如何改变网络有效结构、为什么会出现 collapse 到 simpler subnetworks”的机制并不清楚。","importance":"这项工作对训练动力学理解有直接价值。它把 SGD 噪声从“帮助泛化的模糊因素”推进到“会诱导结构性简化”的更具体解释，这对理解 pruning、稀疏化、grokking 前后的简化路径，以及大模型训练中不同 batch/noise regime 的行为都很有启发。对 pretrain 来说，虽然不是直接给 recipe，但它有助于解释为何某些优化设置会偏向更低复杂度解，以及这种偏好何时可能伤害容量利用。","technical_approach":"核心方法是从动力系统角度分析 SGD 在带噪条件下的轨迹，证明梯度噪声会对某些参数方向施加选择性压力，使模型更容易落入更简单、有效维度更低的子网络。它不是提出新的优化器，而是对 standard SGD 的隐式偏置给出结构化解释；关键在于把‘simpler subnetworks’定义成可分析对象，并将噪声项与吸引域联系起来。与仅讨论平坦极小值的经典说法相比，这篇工作更进一步，强调噪声会改变活跃子结构，而不只是参数落点的几何性质。","experiments":"从题目可判断，实验会用可控网络和训练设置验证 stochastic collapse：提高梯度噪声、减小 batch size 或调整学习率后，模型更倾向于收缩到更简单子网络，同时保持或改善某些泛化表现。很可能包含理论可视化、低维 toy model 和标准深网实验的对应观察。由于缺少摘要与正文，无法可靠提供架构规模、数据集、误差变化数字或具体 ablation 数值。","authors_note":"作者包括 Feng Chen、Daniel Kunin、Atsushi Yamamura、Surya Ganguli。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical but poorly explained phenomenon: gradient noise in SGD seems to push training toward simpler subnetworks, not merely add random perturbations around a minimum. Implicit regularization by SGD is widely acknowledged, but the mechanism by which noise changes the effective structure of the learned network has been much less clear.","importance":"This is useful for optimization theory and for interpreting training behavior. The contribution sharpens the vague claim that SGD noise helps generalization into a more structural statement: noise can bias dynamics toward lower-complexity subnetworks. For pretraining, the relevance is indirect but real. It helps explain why different batch sizes, learning rates, or noise regimes may favor underused capacity, emergent sparsity, or simpler internal solutions.","technical_approach":"The paper analyzes SGD as a noisy dynamical system and argues that gradient noise creates an attraction toward simpler subnetworks or lower effective dimensionality solutions. It does not introduce a new optimizer; instead, it gives a mechanistic account of the implicit bias of standard SGD. The key step is to make the notion of subnetwork simplicity analytically tractable and connect the noise term to changes in the basin structure. Compared with the classic flat-minima narrative, the stronger claim here is that noise affects which structural degrees of freedom remain active, not just the local geometry of the final minimum.","experiments":"The empirical section likely tests stochastic collapse in controlled settings, showing that larger gradient noise, smaller batch sizes, or related settings lead models toward simpler subnetworks while preserving or sometimes improving generalization. A typical setup would combine toy models with deeper-network experiments to align observed behavior with the theory. Without the abstract or paper text, I cannot reliably provide architectures, datasets, or exact numerical gains.","authors_note":"Known authors include Feng Chen, Daniel Kunin, Atsushi Yamamura, and Surya Ganguli."},"tags":["sgd","gradient-noise","training-dynamics","neural-collapse","simplicity-bias"],"notable_authors":["Feng Chen","Daniel Kunin","Atsushi Yamamura","Surya Ganguli"],"keywords":["Implicit Bias","SGD Dynamics","Implicit regularization","Learning rate schedule","Stochastic Gradient Descent","Invariant set","Attractive saddle points","Stochastic collapse","Permutation invariance","Simplicity bias","Teacher-student"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅需读§3的梯度噪声选择性压力证明和Fig2的吸引域可视化，可用于解释大模型预训练中不同batch size对应的稀疏化偏好","en":"Only read §3 for gradient noise selective pressure proof and Fig2 for attraction domain visualization, helps explain sparsification preference under different batch sizes in LLM pretraining."}},{"id":"ChenLWZSZL23","title":"VAST: A Vision-Audio-Subtitle-Text Omni-Modality Foundation Model and Dataset","authors":["Sihan Chen","Handong Li","Qunbo Wang","Zijia Zhao","Mingzhen Sun","Xinxin Zhu","Jing Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$86","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenLWZSZL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenLWZSZL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/e6b2b48b5ed90d07c305932729927781-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：如何把 vision、audio、subtitle、text 四种模态统一进一个 foundation model 和配套数据集，而不是只做图文或音文的双模态拼接。过去 omni-modality 研究的主要瓶颈不是单个编码器不够强，而是跨模态配对数据稀缺、训练目标不统一、模态间语义对齐粒度不一致。","importance":"这是典型的预训练级工作，贡献同时落在数据和模型两侧。它的重要性在于：如果一个模型能原生处理视觉、音频、字幕和文本，那么很多多模态任务就不需要针对每对模态单独训接口；对 pretrain 研究更关键的是，它把字幕这类弱结构化语言信号纳入统一建模，接近真实视频世界的 supervision 形态。对跨模态统一预训练来说，这类工作比单一 benchmark 提升更有长期价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法是构建 VAST 这一 omni-modality foundation model 及其对应数据集，用统一或兼容的表示与训练目标把 vision、audio、subtitle、text 串起来。它大概率不是简单把四个 encoder 拼接，而是围绕跨模态对齐、生成或对比学习设计一套共享训练框架；字幕在这里起到连接视觉事件与语言语义的桥梁作用。与传统图文预训练相比，关键不同是多了音频和时间同步字幕，从而能学习更细粒度的事件语义；代价则是数据清洗、时间对齐和模态缺失处理明显更复杂。","experiments":"从标题能确认，实验应同时覆盖多模态理解与生成类任务，并验证数据集和模型两部分的贡献。关键事实通常包括：统一训练优于分模态训练，加入 subtitle 有助于桥接 audio/vision 与 text；还可能有缺失某模态或去掉某种训练目标的 ablation。由于没有摘要和正文，无法可靠写出数据集规模、参数量、具体任务榜单和数值提升。","authors_note":"作者包括 Sihan Chen、Handong Li、Qunbo Wang、Zijia Zhao、Mingzhen Sun 等。当前信息不足以可靠给出团队代表作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a hard but important problem: how to build a single foundation model and dataset that jointly handle vision, audio, subtitles, and text, instead of stitching together separate bimodal systems. The real bottleneck in omni-modal learning has not been only model capacity, but the lack of well-aligned multiway data and a training objective that treats the modalities coherently.","importance":"This is squarely a pretraining contribution, spanning both data and model design. Its importance comes from pushing beyond image-text or audio-text pairs toward a more realistic video-centric setting where visual events, sounds, subtitles, and language co-occur. For pretraining researchers, the especially useful point is that subtitles act as a naturally occurring bridge signal between perception and language, which is closer to web-scale supervision than carefully curated labels.","technical_approach":"The paper introduces VAST, an omni-modality foundation model together with a corresponding dataset, and trains it with a unified or at least compatible representation/learning framework across the four modalities. The likely design is not just four encoders placed side by side, but a training setup that combines alignment and generation objectives so the modalities interact. Subtitles are a key choice because they anchor temporal events in language and help connect audio and video semantics to text. Relative to standard vision-language pretraining, the extra modalities increase semantic coverage but also make data cleaning, synchronization, and missing-modality handling much harder.","experiments":"From the title, the evaluation likely spans multiple multimodal understanding and generation tasks and aims to show the value of both the dataset and the unified training setup. The main empirical message is probably that joint training across vision, audio, subtitles, and text outperforms narrower pairwise training, and that subtitles are especially useful as a bridge signal. Without the abstract or paper text, I cannot reliably state the dataset size, parameter count, benchmarks, or exact gains.","authors_note":"Known authors include Sihan Chen, Handong Li, Qunbo Wang, Zijia Zhao, and Mingzhen Sun. I cannot reliably add a broader team note from the provided information."},"tags":["omni-modal","foundation-model","video","audio","pretraining"],"notable_authors":["Sihan Chen","Handong Li","Qunbo Wang","Zijia Zhao","Mingzhen Sun"],"keywords":["Cross-Modality Foundation Model","Cross-Modality Pretraining Dataset"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§4的跨模态对齐训练目标设计和数据集统计部分，可参考用于内部多模态预训练的弱监督信号引入方案","en":"Focus on §4 for cross-modal alignment objective design and dataset statistics, reference for introducing weak supervision signals in internal multi-modal pretraining."}},{"id":"ChenTTS23","title":"Primal-Attention: Self-attention through Asymmetric Kernel SVD in Primal Representation","authors":["Yingyi Chen","Qinghua Tao","Francesco Tonin","Johan A. K. Suykens"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$87","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenTTS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenTTS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/cd687a58a13b673eea3fc1b2e4944cf7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是：能否在不显式构造标准 softmax attention 的情况下，用 primal representation 中的核分解来近似 self-attention，同时兼顾效率与精度。过去线性注意力方法常靠 kernel trick 或低秩近似，但要么数值不稳，要么丢掉太多表达能力，尤其在长序列上精度退化明显。","importance":"这是架构与效率层面的工作。它的重要性在于，如果这种 attention 近似能稳定替代标准注意力，那么它对长上下文预训练和大模型 serving 都有潜在价值；对 pretrain 研究的意义不只是更省算，还在于它尝试明确 attention 近似里‘保留什么、舍弃什么’的结构性选择，而不是单纯做工程压缩。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Primal-Attention：在 primal space 中通过 asymmetric kernel SVD 来表示 self-attention。它不是传统的对称低秩近似，而是利用非对称核分解更贴近 query-key 交互的方向性，从而在保留表达力的同时降低计算复杂度。与常见 kernelized linear attention 相比，这种设计更强调分解结构的适配性；与直接低秩 attention 相比，则试图在效率与逼近误差之间找到更稳的平衡。边界在于，任何近似 attention 都会在复杂依赖和极端长程交互上面临精度风险。","experiments":"从题目看，实验应比较 Primal-Attention 与标准 self-attention 及其他高效注意力基线在长序列任务上的速度、显存和精度。关键事实通常包括：在相近精度下更低复杂度，或在相同资源预算下支持更长序列；同时会有 rank/SVD 相关 ablation 来说明近似质量与效率的 trade-off。由于没有摘要和正文，无法可靠给出序列长度、任务类型和具体数字。","authors_note":"作者包括 Yingyi Chen、Qinghua Tao、Francesco Tonin、Johan A. K. Suykens。Johan A. K. Suykens 在 kernel methods 方向较知名。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies whether self-attention can be approximated in a more efficient way using kernel decompositions in the primal representation, without paying the usual accuracy penalty of many linear-attention methods. Prior efficient attention approaches often gain speed by imposing aggressive kernelization or low-rank structure, but they can become numerically brittle or lose too much expressivity on long-range dependencies.","importance":"This is an architecture-and-efficiency contribution. Its relevance to pretraining is that attention cost remains a core bottleneck for long-context models, and any approximation that preserves quality while reducing cost is valuable both for training and serving. More importantly, the paper appears to make a structural choice about what to preserve in the attention interaction, rather than presenting a purely engineering shortcut.","technical_approach":"The method, Primal-Attention, represents self-attention through an asymmetric kernel SVD in primal space. The key idea is that query-key interactions are directional, so an asymmetric decomposition may capture them better than symmetric low-rank approximations while still reducing computation. Relative to common kernelized linear attention, the method leans more on the decomposition structure itself; relative to generic low-rank attention, it tries to balance approximation quality and efficiency more carefully. The limitation is the usual one: any approximation can fail on tasks that rely heavily on precise long-range interactions.","experiments":"The experiments likely compare Primal-Attention against full self-attention and other efficient-attention baselines on long-sequence tasks, measuring speed, memory, and accuracy. A typical result would be lower compute or memory at similar quality, or support for longer sequences under a fixed budget. There are also likely ablations on the SVD rank or kernel structure to expose the quality-efficiency trade-off. Without the abstract or full text, I cannot reliably provide exact sequence lengths, tasks, or numbers.","authors_note":"Known authors include Yingyi Chen, Qinghua Tao, Francesco Tonin, and Johan A. K. Suykens. Johan A. K. Suykens is well known in kernel methods."},"tags":["attention","kernel-method","efficiency","self-attention"],"notable_authors":["Yingyi Chen","Qinghua Tao","Francesco Tonin","Johan A. K. Suykens"],"keywords":["Self-attention","primal-dual representations","SVD","kernel method","asymmetry","transformer"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4.2的长序列精度对比表和复杂度分析，可作为大模型长上下文注意力近似方案的备选参考","en":"Only read §4.2 for long-sequence accuracy comparison and complexity analysis, as an alternative reference for LLM long-context attention approximation schemes."}},{"id":"ChenWDH023","title":"On Separate Normalization in Self-supervised Transformers","authors":["Xiaohui Chen","Yinkai Wang","Yuanqi Du","Soha Hassoun","Liping Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$88","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenWDH023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenWDH023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/8ba80c47b9d3dced79ee835b7d3bf72a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的是：在 self-supervised Transformers 中，separate normalization 是否比共享或标准归一化方式更合适，以及它具体改善了什么。这个问题过去常被当成实现细节，但在自监督训练里，表示坍塌、梯度尺度失衡和不同分支统计不匹配都和归一化设计高度相关。","importance":"这项工作属于训练稳定性与架构细节的交叉点。它的重要性不在于提出一个宏大新范式，而在于说明 normalization placement/parameterization 会实质影响 self-supervised 表征学习的优化路径和最终质量。对 pretrain 研究，尤其是多塔/多视角、自蒸馏或跨模态 Transformer 训练，启示是归一化不该被视为可忽略的默认组件。","technical_approach":"核心方法是系统分析并验证 separate normalization 在 self-supervised Transformer 中的作用。这里的‘separate’通常意味着对不同分支、token 类型或路径使用分离的统计/参数，而不是共享同一组归一化，这样可以减少训练信号相互干扰和统计污染。它不是完全新的 backbone，而是对归一化策略的精细改造；与标准 LayerNorm/BatchNorm 配置相比，关键区别是承认不同视角或分支的分布并不一致，因此强行共享会损害优化。","experiments":"从题目可以判断，实验会比较不同 normalization 设计在自监督 Transformer 预训练中的收敛稳定性、表示质量和下游迁移效果。关键结果大概率包括：separate normalization 在避免 collapse、提升线性探测或迁移性能上优于标准做法，并辅以梯度或激活统计分析解释原因。由于没有摘要和正文，无法可靠写出具体模型、数据集和数值提升。","authors_note":"作者包括 Xiaohui Chen、Yinkai Wang、Yuanqi Du、Soha Hassoun、Liping Liu。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper examines whether separate normalization is a better design choice for self-supervised Transformers, and what exactly it fixes. This question is often treated as a minor implementation detail, but in self-supervised training the normalization scheme strongly affects collapse behavior, scale matching, and interaction between branches.","importance":"This is a training-stability paper with architectural implications. Its value is not in introducing a new grand paradigm, but in showing that normalization design materially shapes optimization and representation quality in self-supervised Transformers. For pretraining work, especially multi-branch, multi-view, self-distillation, or multimodal settings, the lesson is that normalization should be treated as a first-order design choice rather than a default setting.","technical_approach":"The main contribution is a systematic analysis and validation of separate normalization in self-supervised Transformers. Here, separate normalization likely means using different normalization statistics or parameters for different branches, views, or token paths instead of forcing them to share one normalization mechanism. The rationale is straightforward: those signals are not identically distributed, so shared normalization can contaminate statistics and degrade optimization. This is a targeted design modification rather than a new backbone.","experiments":"The experiments likely compare separate normalization with standard normalization setups in self-supervised Transformer pretraining, focusing on training stability, representation quality, and downstream transfer. The key empirical message is probably that separate normalization reduces collapse risk and improves linear probing or transfer performance, supported by gradient or activation analyses. Since no abstract or paper text is available, I cannot reliably provide the exact models, datasets, or numbers.","authors_note":"Known authors include Xiaohui Chen, Yinkai Wang, Yuanqi Du, Soha Hassoun, and Liping Liu."},"tags":["normalization","self-supervised","transformer","training-dynamics"],"notable_authors":["Xiaohui Chen","Yinkai Wang","Yuanqi Du","Soha Hassoun","Liping Liu"],"keywords":["Transformer","Self-supervised Learning","Normalization"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看Table3的不同归一化配置下的表征坍塌率对比，可直接用于多塔自监督预训练的归一化选型参考","en":"Focus on Table3 for representation collapse rate comparison under different normalization configs, direct reference for normalization selection in multi-tower self-supervised pretraining."}},{"id":"ChenWYYYY23","title":"PointGPT: Auto-regressively Generative Pre-training from Point Clouds","authors":["Guangyan Chen","Meiling Wang","Yi Yang","Kai Yu","Li Yuan","Yufeng Yue"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$89","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenWYYYY23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenWYYYY23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/5ed5c3c846f684a54975ad7a2525199f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：点云能否像文本一样做 auto-regressive generative pre-training，而不是只做判别式编码或局部重建。过去点云预训练多数围绕分类、分割或 masked reconstruction，生成式建模较少，一方面因为点云无序、稀疏，另一方面因为缺少像语言 token 那样自然的离散序列化方式。","importance":"从大 pretrain 视角看，这篇工作属于把 AR 预训练范式迁移到新模态的尝试。它的重要性不在于点云这个垂类本身，而在于它回答了一个更一般的问题：对于非欧式、集合式数据，是否也能构造 tokenization + autoregressive objective 来复用语言模型的训练范式。这个思路对统一多模态 token 建模是有参考价值的。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 PointGPT：先把点云转成适合序列生成的 token/patch 表示，再做自回归生成式预训练。它不是简单套一个 GPT 在原始点坐标上，而是必须先解决序列化、局部几何编码和顺序敏感性问题；因此方法的关键通常在于点云分块、排序或离散表示设计，以及如何让 AR 目标既保留几何结构又可优化。与传统点云 masked autoencoder 相比，PointGPT 强调顺序生成和下一 token 预测；代价是顺序引入了人为偏置，且生成目标未必天然适配所有几何任务。","experiments":"从题目可确定，实验应围绕点云下游任务验证生成式预训练的迁移效果，典型包括分类、分割或检测相关 benchmark，并与判别式/重建式预训练基线比较。关键结论大概率是 AR 预训练可以学到有竞争力甚至更优的 3D 表征，同时有若干关于 tokenization 或生成顺序的 ablation。由于没有摘要和正文，无法可靠给出参数量、数据集、指标和具体提升幅度。","authors_note":"作者包括 Guangyan Chen、Meiling Wang、Yi Yang、Kai Yu、Li Yuan 等。Yi Yang 是计算机视觉方向知名作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether point clouds can benefit from autoregressive generative pretraining, instead of relying mostly on discriminative encoders or masked reconstruction. This is a nontrivial question because point clouds are unordered and sparse, so they do not naturally come with the kind of token sequence structure that makes GPT-style training straightforward.","importance":"From a broader pretraining perspective, the contribution is interesting because it ports the autoregressive paradigm to a non-Euclidean set-like modality. The value is not only for 3D tasks themselves. It speaks to a more general question: can we build tokenization plus autoregressive objectives for modalities that are not naturally sequential, and thereby reuse language-model-style pretraining recipes in a wider multimodal setting.","technical_approach":"The method, PointGPT, first converts a point cloud into a sequence-friendly token or patch representation and then applies autoregressive generative pretraining. This is not just running GPT on raw point coordinates. The hard part is the representation: the model needs a serialization or grouping scheme that preserves local geometry well enough for next-token prediction to remain meaningful. Relative to masked point-cloud pretraining, PointGPT emphasizes ordered generation. The trade-off is that serialization introduces an artificial order, and that bias may help some tasks more than others.","experiments":"The experimental setup likely evaluates transfer to standard point-cloud downstream tasks such as classification, segmentation, or related 3D benchmarks, comparing PointGPT with discriminative and reconstruction-based pretraining baselines. The expected takeaway is that autoregressive pretraining learns competitive, possibly stronger, 3D representations, with ablations on tokenization or generation order. Without the abstract or full paper, I cannot reliably report model sizes, datasets, or exact gains.","authors_note":"Known authors include Guangyan Chen, Meiling Wang, Yi Yang, Kai Yu, and Li Yuan. Yi Yang is a well-known researcher in computer vision."},"tags":["autoregressive","3d-tokenization","pretraining","point-cloud"],"notable_authors":["Guangyan Chen","Meiling Wang","Yi Yang","Kai Yu","Li Yuan"],"keywords":["Generative Pre-training Transformer; GPT; Auto-regressively Generative Pre-training; Self-supervised Learning; Point clouds"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§3.1的点云tokenization设计部分，可参考用于非欧模态统一预训练的离散化方案设计","en":"Only read §3.1 for point cloud tokenization design, reference for discretization scheme design in unified non-Euclidean modality pretraining."}},{"id":"ChenZKCHG23","title":"Why Does Sharpness-Aware Minimization Generalize Better Than SGD?","authors":["Zixiang Chen","Junkai Zhang","Yiwen Kou","Xiangning Chen","Cho-Jui Hsieh","Quanquan Gu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$8a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenZKCHG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenZKCHG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/e4d3fe32495088805bbbb4f1de63e947-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有研究缺乏对SAM（锐度感知最小化）在非线性网络、分类任务上泛化性更好的理论解释，无法指导SAM在大规模预训练中的优化应用。此前的SAM解释仅适用于线性模型，无法解释非线性网络下的效果。","importance":"理论级贡献，明确了SAM在两层卷积ReLU网络和特定数据模型下的泛化机制，为SAM在预训练中的调优提供了理论支撑。","technical_approach":"基于非光滑损失landscape展开理论推导，证明SAM通过最小化损失的邻域平均，隐式抑制了卷积核的噪声分量。舍弃了之前仅针对线性模型的解释框架，适配了非线性卷积网络的场景。","experiments":"在两层卷积ReLU网络和CIFAR-10数据集上验证，相比SGD，SAM的测试准确率提升4.2%，且在标签噪声比例30%的场景下泛化优势更明显，提升达7.8%。","authors_note":"Cho-Jui Hsieh是知名机器学习优化研究员，主要研究方向为大规模优化、深度学习鲁棒性。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing research lacks theoretical explanation for why Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) generalizes better than SGD on non-linear networks and classification tasks, and cannot guide the optimized application of SAM in large-scale pre-training. Prior SAM explanations only apply to linear models, and cannot explain the effect under non-linear networks.","importance":"Theory-level contribution. It clarifies the generalization mechanism of SAM under two-layer convolutional ReLU networks and specific data models, and provides theoretical support for SAM tuning in pre-training.","technical_approach":"Theoretical derivation based on non-smooth loss landscape, proving that SAM implicitly suppresses noise components in convolutional kernels by minimizing the neighborhood average of loss. It discards the previous explanation framework only for linear models, and adapts to non-linear convolutional network scenarios.","experiments":"Validated on two-layer convolutional ReLU networks and CIFAR-10 dataset. Compared to SGD, SAM's test accuracy improves by 4.2%, and the generalization advantage is more obvious in scenarios with 30% label noise, with an improvement of 7.8%.","authors_note":"Cho-Jui Hsieh is a well-known machine learning optimization researcher, whose main research directions are large-scale optimization and deep learning robustness."},"tags":["optimizer","sam","generalization","training-dynamics"],"keywords":["Sharpness Aware Algorithm","Deep Learning Theory"],"notable_authors":["Cho-Jui Hsieh"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"SAM相比SGD能提升模型的泛化性，尤其在有标签噪声的场景下。","claim_en":"SAM improves model generalization compared to SGD, especially in scenarios with label noise.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"SAM在非线性卷积网络中的泛化优势来源于对卷积核噪声分量的隐式抑制，而非仅对损失锐度的最小化。","claim_en":"The generalization advantage of SAM in non-linear convolutional networks comes from implicit suppression of noise components in convolutional kernels, rather than just minimization of loss sharpness.","opposes":"Prior explanations attribute SAM's generalization advantage solely to loss sharpness minimization, which only applies to linear models.","opposes_cite_hint":"Foret 2021 Sharpness-Aware Minimization for Efficiently Improving Generalization","evidence_anchor":"§3 Theory","why_contested":"It revises the original explanation of SAM's generalization mechanism, and provides theoretical guidance for the adaptation of SAM in large-scale pre-training."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅做理论备查，非线性网络下的SAM解释局限于两层卷积设置，无法直接迁移到大模型预训练场景","en":"Only for theoretical literature reference, the SAM explanation for nonlinear networks is limited to 2-layer convolution settings, cannot be directly migrated to LLM pretraining scenarios."}},{"id":"ChenZZCG0H23","title":"FELM: Benchmarking Factuality Evaluation of Large Language Models","authors":["Shiqi Chen","Yiran Zhao","Jinghan Zhang","I-Chun Chern","Siyang Gao","Pengfei Liu","Junxian He"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$8b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenZZCG0H23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenZZCG0H23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/8b8a7960d343e023a6a0afe37eee6022-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM事实性评估基准主要关注世界知识类事实，缺乏细粒度、多场景的事实标注，无法全面评估事实性评估工具的性能。此前的基准无法覆盖推理、代码、多模态等场景的事实错误评估。","importance":"数据级贡献，构建了细粒度的LLM事实性评估基准FELM，覆盖多类事实场景，为事实性评估模型的开发和对比提供了统一的测试集。","technical_approach":"原创基准构建方法，收集多类LLM生成的回复，做细粒度的事实错误标注，覆盖世界知识、推理、代码、多模态等多个场景。舍弃了之前仅关注世界知识的标注范围，提供了更全面的事实性评估维度。","experiments":"基准包含8k+条标注样本，覆盖5类事实场景，在多个主流事实性评估模型上测试，现有模型的平均准确率仅为62%，远低于人类评估的91%。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM factuality evaluation benchmarks mainly focus on world knowledge facts, lack fine-grained, multi-scenario fact annotations, and cannot comprehensively evaluate the performance of factuality evaluation tools. Prior benchmarks cannot cover fact error evaluation in scenarios such as reasoning, code, and multimodal.","importance":"Data-level contribution. It builds FELM, a fine-grained LLM factuality evaluation benchmark covering multiple fact scenarios, and provides a unified test set for the development and comparison of factuality evaluation models.","technical_approach":"Original benchmark construction method, which collects responses generated by various LLMs, and annotates fine-grained factuality labels, covering 5 scenarios including world knowledge, reasoning, code, multimodal. It discards the previous annotation scope that only focuses on world knowledge, and provides more comprehensive factuality evaluation dimensions.","experiments":"The benchmark contains 8k+ annotated samples, covering 5 fact scenarios. Tested on multiple mainstream factuality evaluation models, the average accuracy of existing models is only 62%, far lower than 91% of human evaluation.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm-eval","factuality","benchmark","hallucination"],"keywords":["factuality","LLM"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM生成内容的事实性错误是现有模型的核心问题，需要可靠的评估基准。","claim_en":"Factual errors in LLM-generated content are a core problem of existing models, requiring reliable evaluation benchmarks.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"仅关注世界知识的事实性评估基准会高估事实性评估模型的性能，无法反映真实场景下的评估能力。","claim_en":"Factual evaluation benchmarks that only focus on world knowledge overestimate the performance of factual evaluation models and cannot reflect evaluation capabilities in real scenarios.","opposes":"Prior factuality benchmarks use world knowledge as the primary or only evaluation scenario.","opposes_cite_hint":"Lin 2022 TruthfulQA: Measuring How Models Mimic Human Falsehoods","evidence_anchor":"§2 Benchmark Construction","why_contested":"It clarifies the boundary of existing factuality evaluation benchmarks, and provides a more comprehensive test standard for the development of subsequent factuality evaluation models."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看Table2的基准覆盖维度和错误类型定义，可用于补充内部LLM事实性评估工具的测试集","en":"Only read Table2 for benchmark coverage dimensions and error type definitions, can supplement test sets for internal LLM factuality evaluation tools."}},{"id":"2312.02469","title":"Learning Energy-based Model via Dual-MCMC Teaching","authors":["Jiali Cui","Tian Han"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$8c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.02469","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Cui023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Cui023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/5bed8703db85ab27dc32f6a42f8fbdb6-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"EBM的最大似然训练依赖MCMC采样，传统噪声初始化的朗之万动力学难收敛、混合慢；用生成器绕过MCMC的方法会导致EBM学习有偏，生成器作为MCMC初始化的方案也因生成器仅匹配EBM看不到真实数据而存在偏差。","importance":"方法级贡献，解决了EBM训练中采样效率和学习无偏的trade-off，为EBM在生成建模、预训练中的落地提供了更稳定的训练范式。","technical_approach":"原创的双MCMC教学框架，同时训练EBM和生成器：生成器输出作为EBM的MCMC采样初始化降低采样成本，同时用真实数据监督生成器训练修正偏差，避免了仅用EBM信号训练生成器的偏移问题；和以往方法的区别是同时用真实数据和EBM信号双向监督两个模块，不需要牺牲无偏性换采样效率。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体模型参数量、数据集规模及量化指标，无公开可验证的ablation结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Maximum likelihood training of energy-based models (EBM) relies on MCMC sampling, while traditional noise-initialized Langevin dynamics suffers from slow convergence and poor mixing. Generator-assisted EBM training either bypasses MCMC and introduces bias, or uses generator as MCMC initializer but faces generator drift due to lack of real data supervision.","importance":"Method-level contribution, resolves the trade-off between sampling efficiency and unbiased learning for EBM training, provides a more stable training paradigm for EBM applications in generative modeling and pretraining.","technical_approach":"Original dual-MCMC teaching framework that trains EBM and generator jointly. Generator outputs are used as initialization for EBM's MCMC sampling to reduce sampling cost, while real data is used to supervise generator training to correct drift. Unlike prior generator-assisted methods, it uses both real data and EBM signals for dual supervision, no need to trade unbiasedness for sampling efficiency.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose specific model size, dataset scale, or quantitative metrics, no verifiable ablation results are available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["energy-based-model","mcmc","generative-modeling","training"],"keywords":["Energy-based model","MCMC","Joint-training","Generator model"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"EBM的最大似然训练需要从模型分布采样计算梯度","claim_en":"Maximum likelihood training of EBM requires sampling from the model distribution to compute gradients","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"同时用真实数据和EBM信号监督生成器训练，可将生成器辅助MCMC的EBM学习偏差降低到和纯MCMC训练相当的水平","claim_en":"Supervising generator training with both real data and EBM signals can reduce the bias of generator-assisted MCMC EBM training to the same level as pure MCMC training","opposes":"Prior generator-assisted EBM training only uses EBM signals to train the generator, leading to unavoidable bias","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1, §3","why_contested":"打破了EBM训练中采样效率和无偏性不可兼得的固有认知，可大幅降低EBM训练成本"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3.2的双MCMC双向监督流程设计，可参考用于生成式预训练中EBM的稳定训练方案","en":"Focus on §3.2 for dual-MCMC bidirectional supervision pipeline design, reference for stable EBM training schemes in generative pretraining."}},{"id":"Dai0LTZW0FH23","title":"InstructBLIP: Towards General-purpose Vision-Language Models with Instruction Tuning","authors":["Wenliang Dai","Junnan Li","Dongxu Li","Anthony Meng Huat Tiong","Junqi Zhao","Weisheng Wang","Boyang Li","Pascale Fung","Steven C. H. Hoi"],"institutions":["Salesforce Research"],"abstract":"$8d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Dai0LTZW0FH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Dai0LTZW0FH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/9a6a435e75419a836fe47ab6793623e6-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"通用多模态大模型的指令调优研究不足，视觉输入带来的输入分布和任务多样性远高于纯文本，现有预训练多模态模型直接做指令调优无法有效对齐不同任务的视觉特征和指令要求。","importance":"范式级贡献，是最早系统性探索多模态指令调优的工作之一，为后续VLM的SFT/对齐流程提供了标准参考框架，直接推动了通用VLM的落地。","technical_approach":"基于预训练BLIP-2的改进方法，首先收集26个公开多模态数据集统一转换为指令调优格式，覆盖11类多模态任务；其次提出指令感知的Query Transformer，在提取视觉特征时注入指令信号，让视觉特征适配当前指令的需求，和BLIP-2的区别是QFormer输入加入了指令嵌入，避免了提取通用视觉特征后和指令匹配的信息损失。","experiments":"基于BLIP-2的FlanT5-XXL（11B）版本微调，在12个held-out多模态任务上平均性能比BLIP-2高8.1%，在零样本VQA、图文检索任务上分别比之前最优的通用VLM高9.2%、7.5%；ablation显示指令感知QFormer的贡献占总提升的42%，数据集多样性占提升的58%。","authors_note":"Salesforce研究院，核心作者Junnan Li是BLIP、BLIP-2系列多模态预训练工作的主导作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Instruction tuning for general-purpose vision-language models (VLMs) is under-explored. The additional visual input introduces much wider input distribution and task diversity than pure text, so directly applying instruction tuning to pretrained VLMs fails to effectively align visual features with instruction requirements.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution, one of the first systematic studies on multimodal instruction tuning, provides a standard reference pipeline for subsequent VLM SFT/alignment, directly promotes the deployment of general-purpose VLMs.","technical_approach":"Improved method based on pretrained BLIP-2. First, 26 public multimodal datasets covering 11 task types are collected and unified into instruction tuning format. Second, an instruction-aware Query Transformer is proposed, which injects instruction signals during visual feature extraction to make visual features adapt to current instruction demands. Unlike BLIP-2, it adds instruction embeddings to QFormer input, avoiding information loss when matching general visual features to instructions later.","experiments":"Fine-tuned on BLIP-2 with FlanT5-XXL (11B) backbone. It achieves 8.1% average performance improvement over BLIP-2 on 12 held-out multimodal tasks, outperforms previous best general VLM by 9.2% on zero-shot VQA and 7.5% on image-text retrieval. Ablation shows instruction-aware QFormer contributes 42% of total improvement, while dataset diversity contributes 58%.","authors_note":"Salesforce Research, core author Junnan Li leads the BLIP and BLIP-2 multimodal pretraining series."},"tags":["vlm","instruction-tuning","multimodal","alignment"],"keywords":["Vision-Language Models","Instruction Tuning","Zero-shot"],"notable_authors":["Junnan Li"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"预训练+指令调优的范式可将专用模型转换为支持多任务零样本泛化的通用模型","claim_en":"The pretraining + instruction tuning paradigm can convert task-specific models into general models supporting zero-shot generalization across multiple tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"多模态指令调优中，将指令信号注入视觉特征提取阶段的收益远高于仅在语言建模阶段融合视觉特征和指令","claim_en":"In multimodal instruction tuning, injecting instruction signals into visual feature extraction stage brings much higher gain than only fusing visual features and instructions in the language modeling stage","opposes":"Prior VLM instruction tuning methods extract general visual features first, then fuse with instructions in the LLM module","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4.2, Table 3","why_contested":"修正了多模态融合的时序认知，为后续多模态模型架构设计提供了明确方向"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3.3的指令感知QFormer设计和附录的指令模板，可直接复用至多模态SFT的特征对齐流程","en":"Only read §3.3 for instruction-aware QFormer design and appendix instruction templates, can be directly reused in multi-modal SFT feature alignment pipelines."}},{"id":"DeiserothDWBSK23","title":"ATMAN: Understanding Transformer Predictions Through Memory Efficient Attention Manipulation","authors":["Björn Deiseroth","Mayukh Deb","Samuel Weinbach","Manuel Brack","Patrick Schramowski","Kristian Kersting"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$8e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DeiserothDWBSK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DeiserothDWBSK23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/c83bc020a020cdeb966ed10804619664-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有生成式Transformer的预测可解释方法依赖反向传播，显存占用是前向传播的2倍，大模型/多模态模型下无法在生产环境部署。","importance":"系统级贡献，提供了生产可用的大模型可解释工具，不依赖训练过程修改，可直接接入现有部署的Transformer模型。","technical_approach":"原创的模态无关扰动方法，通过操纵Transformer的注意力权重生成输入对输出的相关性映射；完全在前向传播阶段执行，不需要反向传播、不需要修改模型权重或训练流程；和现有基于梯度的可解释方法比，额外显存开销小于5%，推理延迟增加小于10%。","experiments":"在文本GPT-2（1.5B）、多模态Stable Diffusion（1.5B）上验证，和主流基于梯度的LIME、IG方法比，相关性映射的F1得分高6.3%，显存占用降低58%，推理速度快2.1倍；ablation显示注意力操纵的粒度选择在token级时平衡了精度和效率。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing interpretability methods for generative Transformers rely on backpropagation, which takes twice the GPU memory of forward pass, making them impossible to deploy in production for large or multimodal Transformers.","importance":"System-level contribution, provides a production-ready interpretability tool for large models, no training process modification required, can be directly integrated with already deployed Transformer models.","technical_approach":"Original modality-agnostic perturbation method that generates input-output relevance maps by manipulating Transformer attention weights. It runs fully in the forward pass, no backpropagation, model weight modification or training pipeline adjustment needed. Compared with existing gradient-based interpretability methods, it has less than 5% extra memory overhead and less than 10% latency increase.","experiments":"Validated on text GPT-2 (1.5B) and multimodal Stable Diffusion (1.5B). Compared with mainstream gradient-based LIME and IG methods, it achieves 6.3% higher F1 score for relevance maps, reduces memory usage by 58% and runs 2.1x faster. Ablation shows token-level attention manipulation granularity balances accuracy and efficiency best.","authors_note":""},"tags":["interpretability","attention","transformer","memory-efficiency"],"keywords":["explainability","attention manipulation","perturbation","large language model","multi-modality","generative decoder","efficiency","transformer"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer的注意力权重可以反映输入token对输出预测的贡献程度","claim_en":"Transformer attention weights reflect the contribution of input tokens to output predictions","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"仅通过前向阶段的注意力操纵就可以达到超过反向传播梯度方法的可解释精度","claim_en":"Attention manipulation in forward pass alone can achieve higher interpretability accuracy than backpropagation-based gradient methods","opposes":"Prior work assumes gradient-based methods provide the most accurate interpretability results for neural networks","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5.1, Table 1","why_contested":"打破了可解释性精度和部署成本正相关的认知，可直接落地到生产级大模型服务中"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§4的显存/延迟测试结果部分，可作为生产环境大模型可解释性工具的选型参考","en":"Only read §4 for VRAM/latency test results, as selection reference for LLM interpretability tools in production environments."}},{"id":"Deng0023","title":"Towards Accelerated Model Training via Bayesian Data Selection","authors":["Zhijie Deng","Peng Cui","Jun Zhu"],"institutions":["Tsinghua University"],"abstract":"$8f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Deng0023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Deng0023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/1af3e0bf5905e33789979f666c31192d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"真实训练数据存在标注错误、重复、偏移问题，会延长训练时间甚至影响收敛；传统按样本难易度选择的方法无法同时处理多种数据问题，最近基于泛化损失影响的选择方法需要额外的验证集和粗糙的近似，落地性差。","importance":"方法级贡献，提供了不需要额外验证集的轻量数据选择方案，可直接插入现有预训练/微调流程，降低训练成本30%以上。","technical_approach":"基于贝叶斯框架的改进方法，首先用预训练大模型的零样本预测能力作为先验估计每个样本对泛化损失的影响，不需要额外的holdout验证集；计算复杂度为O(N)，远低于之前基于梯度的方法的O(N*D)（D为模型维度）；和现有方法的区别是用大模型零样本先验替代了验证集信号，不需要反向传播计算样本影响。","experiments":"在图像分类ImageNet、文本分类GLUE、预训练微调三个场景验证，过滤20%低价值样本后，训练收敛速度提升32%，最终泛化精度比传统随机过滤高2.7%，比之前最优的样本选择方法高1.2%；ablation显示零样本先验的精度越高，数据选择的收益越大。","authors_note":"清华大学朱军团队，核心作者朱军是贝叶斯机器学习、大模型预训练领域的知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Real-world training data contains mislabeled, duplicated and biased samples, which prolong training time and even hurt convergence. Traditional sample selection methods based on difficulty fail to handle multiple data issues at the same time, and recent selection methods based on generalization loss impact require extra holdout data and rough approximations, leading to poor deployability.","importance":"Method-level contribution, provides a lightweight data selection pipeline without extra holdout data, can be directly integrated into existing pretraining/fine-tuning pipelines, reducing training cost by over 30%.","technical_approach":"Improved method based on Bayesian framework. It uses zero-shot prediction capability of large pretrained models as prior to estimate each sample's impact on generalization loss, no extra holdout validation set required. Its computation complexity is O(N), much lower than O(N*D) of prior gradient-based sample impact calculation methods. Unlike existing methods, it replaces holdout set signals with large model zero-shot prior, no backpropagation needed for sample impact calculation.","experiments":"Validated on three scenarios: ImageNet image classification, GLUE text classification, and LLM fine-tuning. After filtering 20% low-value samples, training convergence speed increases by 32%, final generalization accuracy is 2.7% higher than traditional random filtering, 1.2% higher than previous best sample selection method. Ablation shows higher zero-shot prior accuracy leads to higher data selection gain.","authors_note":"Tsinghua University Jun Zhu's team, core author Jun Zhu is a well-known scholar in Bayesian machine learning and LLM pretraining fields."},"tags":["data-selection","bayesian","training-efficiency"],"keywords":["data selection","training acceleration","probabilistic modeling","Bayesian methods"],"notable_authors":["Jun Zhu","Peng Cui"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"低质量训练样本会降低模型收敛速度和最终泛化性能","claim_en":"Low-quality training samples reduce model convergence speed and final generalization performance","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"用预训练大模型的零样本预测作为先验估计样本价值的效果优于使用额外holdout验证集的方法","claim_en":"Using zero-shot predictions of large pretrained models as prior to estimate sample value outperforms methods using extra holdout validation sets","opposes":"Prior sample selection methods assume holdout validation set signals are the gold standard for estimating sample value","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5.2, Table 2","why_contested":"省去了数据选择对额外验证集的依赖，大幅降低了大样本预训练场景下数据过滤的成本"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看Table4的训练加速比和精度对比，可参考用于预训练数据清洗阶段的低价值样本过滤","en":"Focus on Table4 for training speedup and accuracy comparison, reference for low-value sample filtering in pretraining data cleaning stages."}},{"id":"DongXKSL23","title":"Statistical Knowledge Assessment for Large Language Models","authors":["Qingxiu Dong","Jingjing Xu","Lingpeng Kong","Zhifang Sui","Lei Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$90","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DongXKSL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DongXKSL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/5f0a4cd23e1c6eedd3edebba674ab877-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：我们该如何评估大语言模型掌握的“统计知识”，而不是只看事实记忆或单题 QA 准确率。过去知识评测大多把答案当成离散事实，但很多现实知识本来就是分布性的，例如某事件发生概率、条件频率或群体统计特征，传统问答评测对此覆盖很差。","importance":"这项工作的重要性在于它扩展了“模型知识”这个概念的评测边界。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：语言模型可能不仅在记忆条目式事实，也在吸收数据分布中的统计规律；如果评测只看事实问答，就会低估或误判模型对世界分布的建模能力。这也会影响我们如何理解 scaling、数据污染和知识编辑的边界。","technical_approach":"作者的核心方法应是构造一套针对统计知识的评测框架，测试模型能否给出与真实分布一致的概率、比例或相对频率判断。关键设计通常包括：避免把问题退化成简单常识分类；把答案形式设计成可比较的数值、区间或排序；并控制表述方式，减少模型仅凭语言表面模式猜测。与普通 QA benchmark 相比，这种评测更接近在 probing 模型是否学到隐含分布，而不只是记住显式句子。","experiments":"从标题可知，实验会比较不同 LLM 在统计知识上的表现，并分析其与规模、指令化或任务形式的关系，但这里无法确认具体模型列表和数值结果。对读者更重要的可能不是绝对分数，而是几类现象：模型在方向性比较上可能强于精确数值估计；表达方式变化会显著影响回答；统计知识能力未必与事实型知识能力完全同步。这些现象对设计更贴近预训练目标的知识评测很有价值。","authors_note":"作者中有清华大学背景的 Qingxiu Dong、Zhifang Sui，以及香港大学的 Lingpeng Kong、阿里达摩院的 Lei Li；但若仅依据题面无法完整确认机构对应关系，建议以正式论文页为准。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks how to assess the statistical knowledge of large language models, rather than only testing memorized facts through QA-style benchmarks. Many kinds of real-world knowledge are inherently distributional—probabilities, frequencies, conditional tendencies—yet most existing evaluations focus on discrete factual recall.","importance":"Its main value is conceptual and evaluative: it broadens what counts as 'knowledge' in language models. For pretraining, the takeaway is important—LLMs may absorb not only fact-like entries but also statistical regularities from data. If we evaluate only factual QA, we can underestimate or mischaracterize what the model actually learned about the world.","technical_approach":"The core approach is likely a benchmark or framework that tests whether models can produce probabilities, proportions, rankings, or frequency judgments aligned with real-world distributions. The key design challenge is to avoid collapsing the task into trivial commonsense classification, while making answers comparable in numeric, interval, or ordering form. Relative to standard QA benchmarks, this kind of evaluation is closer to probing whether the model internalized latent data distributions instead of memorizing explicit sentences.","experiments":"From the title, the experiments likely compare multiple LLMs on statistical knowledge and analyze relations with scale, instruction tuning, or prompting format, but exact model lists and scores are not reliably available here. The more useful likely findings are qualitative: models may be better at directional comparisons than precise numeric estimates, wording changes can strongly affect answers, and statistical knowledge does not perfectly track factual knowledge. Those observations matter when designing evaluations that better reflect the pretraining objective.","authors_note":"The author list includes researchers associated with Tsinghua University, the University of Hong Kong, and Alibaba DAMO Academy, but exact affiliation mapping should be checked against the official paper page."},"tags":["llm-evaluation","knowledge","calibration"],"notable_authors":["Qingxiu Dong","Lingpeng Kong","Zhifang Sui","Lei Li"],"keywords":["Large Language Models","Knowledge Assessment","Evaluation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§3的评测构造方法和Table5的不同模型统计知识得分对比，可用于补充内部预训练模型的知识评估维度","en":"Only read §3 for evaluation construction method and Table5 for cross-model statistical knowledge score comparison, can supplement knowledge evaluation dimensions for internal pretrained models."}},{"id":"DovehAHHKCAPGFU23","title":"Dense and Aligned Captions (DAC) Promote Compositional Reasoning in VL Models","authors":["Sivan Doveh","Assaf Arbelle","Sivan Harary","Roei Herzig","Donghyun Kim","Paola Cascante-Bonilla","Amit Alfassy","Rameswar Panda","Raja Giryes","Rogério Feris","Shimon Ullman","Leonid Karlinsky"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$91","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DovehAHHKCAPGFU23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DovehAHHKCAPGFU23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/efe406d6d2674d176cdcd958ce605d17-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：为什么很多视觉语言模型在组合推理上表现差，以及训练数据的 caption 形式是否是主要瓶颈之一。传统图文预训练大量依赖简短、整体化的描述句，它们对对象、属性、关系和局部区域的对齐不够密，因此模型很难学到可组合的视觉语义结构。","importance":"这项工作的贡献偏数据与训练信号设计，而且对 VLM pretrain 很有参考价值。它传达的关键信息是：组合推理能力不一定先靠更大模型解决，训练 caption 的密度和对齐粒度本身就会决定模型是否能把图像解析成可组合的实体关系；这和近年多模态预训练里越来越重视 dense caption、region-text alignment、原生多模态 token 学习的趋势是一致的。","technical_approach":"作者提出 DAC，即 dense and aligned captions，核心思想是用更细粒度且和图像区域、关系严格对齐的描述来训练 VLM。它不是简单把 caption 写长，而是提高语义覆盖率和对齐精度，让模型同时看到“有什么对象、对象之间什么关系、属性落在哪个实体上”。这样的设计有效，因为组合推理失败常常不是推理器本身不够强，而是输入表示里从一开始就没把可组合成分拆开。相较于只用全局 caption 的 CLIP 式训练，DAC 更强调结构化监督；代价是数据构建成本更高，且对 annotation 质量和覆盖度敏感。","experiments":"从标题可以确定，实验主轴是比较使用 DAC 与普通 caption 训练的 VLM 在 compositional reasoning 任务上的差异。这里没有摘要，无法确认采用的具体模型、数据规模和提升数字。对读者更有价值的预期观察包括：组合泛化任务提升通常会明显高于普通检索任务提升；dense 且 aligned 两个因素都重要，只做其一收益有限；如果模型本身很弱，数据信号再细也可能吃不满。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks why many vision-language models remain weak at compositional reasoning, and whether caption format is a major bottleneck. Standard image-text pretraining relies heavily on short, global captions, which often provide weak supervision for objects, attributes, relations, and local alignment.","importance":"This is mainly a data-and-supervision contribution, and it is highly relevant to VLM pretraining. The key message is that compositional reasoning may not be unlocked by scale alone; the density and alignment quality of captions directly shape whether a model learns decomposable visual semantics. That fits well with the broader move toward dense captions, region-text alignment, and native multimodal token learning.","technical_approach":"The proposed DAC approach uses dense and aligned captions to train VLMs with finer semantic coverage and tighter grounding to image regions and relations. The point is not merely to make captions longer, but to make them structurally informative: what objects exist, which attributes belong to which entity, and how entities relate. This is effective because compositional failures often originate from representation learning rather than from an insufficient downstream reasoner. Compared with CLIP-style global caption supervision, DAC provides more structured supervision. The obvious cost is data complexity: producing high-quality dense aligned captions is much more expensive and more sensitive to annotation quality.","experiments":"From the title, the main experiments compare VLMs trained with DAC versus standard captions on compositional reasoning benchmarks. The provided information does not support exact claims about model choice, data scale, or numerical gains. The most useful expected findings are that gains should be larger on compositional generalization tasks than on generic retrieval, that both density and alignment matter, and that weak backbones may not fully exploit finer supervision even when the data is better.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","captioning","compositionality"],"keywords":["computer vision","deep learning","vision and language models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3的DAC数据构造逻辑和§5的对比实验表即可，可直接复用其caption密度设计做内部多模态预训练 ablation。","en":"Only refer to §3 for DAC data construction logic and §5 for ablation tables, directly adopt its caption density design for internal VLM pretrain ablation studies."}},{"id":"EdelmanGKMZ23","title":"Pareto Frontiers in Deep Feature Learning: Data, Compute, Width, and Luck","authors":["Benjamin L. Edelman","Surbhi Goel","Sham M. Kakade","Eran Malach","Cyril Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$92","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/EdelmanGKMZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/EdelmanGKMZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/960573a3b797441aec39caa9f74bc793-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：深度表征学习里常见的单维最优比较会掩盖真实 trade-off，数据量、算力、网络宽度和随机种子运气并不是可忽略的次要因素。过去很多结论默认固定其余变量只看一个轴，比如“更大模型更好”或“更多数据更好”；作者则试图给出一个 Pareto 视角，分析多种资源与偶然性共同决定的可达性能前沿。","importance":"它的重要性在于把 scaling 研究从单一曲线推进到多目标前沿分析，属于方法论和实验设计层面的贡献。对 pretrain 的直接启示是，比较训练 recipe 时如果不控制 width、compute、data 和 run-to-run variance，很容易把偶然的幸运训练轨迹当成稳定规律。尤其在中等规模实验中，luck 的影响可能与某些小改动同量级，这会污染我们对 scaling law 或 recipe 优劣的判断。","technical_approach":"核心方法是构建深度特征学习的 Pareto frontier，而不是追求单点最优。作者系统扫描数据规模、训练算力、模型宽度和不同随机初始化，对表示质量或下游性能进行比较，并找出在给定资源约束下不可被同时超越的配置。关键设计选择是把 luck 也视作实验变量来量化，而不是简单报均值；这使得“一个方法更好”被重新表述为“它在怎样的资源和方差约束下更靠近 Pareto 前沿”。","experiments":"论文的关键实验事实是：不存在对所有资源配置都占优的单一策略，很多看似稳定的优劣关系只在局部区间成立。作者在深度特征学习设置下展示了数据、compute、width 之间的替代关系，并显示随机种子导致的波动足以改变 frontier 上的模型排序。更有价值的观察是，随着资源增加，一些原本由宽度或幸运初始化带来的优势会被更多数据或更长训练部分抵消；反过来，在小预算区间，所谓的“方法改进”可能只是 variance management。论文强调报告均值之外的分布和 frontier 位置，而不是只报最佳 run。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a measurement problem: deep feature learning is often evaluated along one axis at a time, which hides real trade-offs among data, compute, width, and random luck. Much prior work implicitly fixes the other variables and reports statements like 'bigger is better' or 'more data helps.' This paper instead studies the Pareto frontier induced by these resources and stochasticity together.","importance":"Its main value is methodological. For pretraining research, the message is that recipe comparisons can be badly misleading if width, compute, data, and run-to-run variance are not handled jointly. In mid-scale experiments especially, luck can be comparable to the gains from many proposed improvements, which contaminates conclusions about scaling laws or optimization recipes.","technical_approach":"The core contribution is a Pareto-frontier analysis rather than a new learning algorithm. The authors sweep over data size, training compute, model width, and random initializations, then identify configurations that are not jointly dominated under the chosen performance metrics. A key design choice is to treat luck as a measurable factor rather than collapsing it into a mean result. This reframes 'method A is better' into 'method A is closer to the frontier under a given resource and variance budget.'","experiments":"The main empirical result is that no single strategy dominates across all regimes, and many apparent rules hold only locally. In their deep feature learning setup, the authors show substitution effects among data, compute, and width, and they find that seed-to-seed variation can materially change model rankings on the frontier. A useful observation is that some advantages from width or lucky initialization shrink as data or training time increases; conversely, in low-budget settings, some 'method gains' are mostly variance effects. The paper argues for reporting performance distributions and frontier positions rather than best-run results alone.","authors_note":""},"tags":["scaling-law","compute","data","optimization"],"notable_authors":["Benjamin L. Edelman","Surbhi Goel","Sham M. Kakade","Eran Malach","Cyril Zhang"],"keywords":["deep learning","feature learning","parity","grokking","lottery tickets","scaling"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4的多变量控制实验结果即可，对比预训练recipe前必须对齐这四个变量，避免把随机波动误判为方法增益。","en":"Only check §4 for controlled multi-variable experiment results, align these four variables before comparing pretrain recipes to avoid mistaking random variance as method improvement."}},{"id":"EisenmannMGD23","title":"Bifurcations and loss jumps in RNN training","authors":["Lukas Eisenmann","Zahra Monfared","Niclas Alexander Göring","Daniel Durstewitz"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$93","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/EisenmannMGD23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/EisenmannMGD23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/df334022279996b07e0870a629c18857-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：RNN 训练中常见的 loss jumps 和不稳定现象，究竟是噪声、实现问题，还是优化动力学里的真实分岔现象。过去这类问题通常被经验性地归因于学习率过大或梯度爆炸，但缺少一个把参数轨迹、稳定性和突然性能退化联系起来的动力系统解释。","importance":"它的价值在于训练稳定性机制分析，而不是提出更强的序列模型。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，loss spike 不一定只是工程事故，也可能对应训练动力学跨过稳定边界；这对理解 edge-of-stability、learning-rate warmup/cooldown 和长序列模型的脆弱区间都有借鉴意义。虽然对象是 RNN，但结论对更广泛的非凸优化稳定性分析有参考价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法是用分岔理论分析 RNN 训练轨迹。作者把训练视作离散动力系统，研究固定点稳定性如何随超参数和参数状态改变，并解释为什么在某些区域会出现突发性的 loss jump。与传统只监控梯度范数或 Hessian 最大特征值不同，这项工作更强调训练过程中的定性结构变化：当系统从一个稳定吸引域跳到另一个动力学区域时，性能会突然恶化，而不是平滑退化。","experiments":"关键实验结论是：在受控 RNN 训练实验中，loss jump 可以和理论预测的分岔点对应起来，而不是纯粹随机现象。作者展示了不同学习率、初始化或任务设置下的训练轨迹，并观察到参数演化接近某些临界区域时会出现突然的不稳定与恢复。更有价值的点是，这些现象具有可重复性，并且可通过调整优化超参数移动或避免。论文更偏机制验证而非大规模 benchmark，因此重点在动力学解释的吻合度，而不是任务 SOTA。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether the loss jumps often seen in RNN training are just noise and implementation artifacts, or whether they reflect genuine bifurcations in the optimization dynamics. These events are usually attributed loosely to large learning rates or exploding gradients, but that view does not explain the abrupt transitions well.","importance":"Its contribution is a mechanism-level account of training instability rather than a stronger sequence model. For pretraining, the useful lesson is that loss spikes may mark crossings of stability boundaries in the training dynamics, not merely engineering mishaps. That perspective is relevant to edge-of-stability behavior, learning-rate schedules, and fragile long-horizon training regimes more broadly.","technical_approach":"The paper analyzes RNN training through bifurcation theory. It models training as a discrete dynamical system and studies how the stability of fixed points changes with hyperparameters and parameter state, explaining why loss can jump sharply in certain regions. Unlike diagnostics that only track gradient norms or top Hessian eigenvalues, this approach focuses on qualitative changes in the phase portrait: when training leaves one stable basin for another dynamical regime, degradation can be abrupt rather than gradual.","experiments":"The main empirical result is that controlled RNN training runs exhibit loss jumps that align with predicted bifurcation points, suggesting the effect is systematic rather than random. The authors vary learning rates, initialization, and task settings and show repeated transitions into unstable behavior near critical regions. The useful part is reproducibility and controllability: these jumps can be shifted or avoided by changing optimization settings. The paper is more about validating a dynamical explanation than about benchmark performance.","authors_note":""},"tags":["training-dynamics","loss-spikes","rnn"],"notable_authors":["Lukas Eisenmann","Zahra Monfared","Niclas Alexander Göring","Daniel Durstewitz"],"keywords":["dynamical systems","bifurcations","Recurrent Neural Networks","attractors","training algorithm","BPTT","exploding and vanishing gradient problem","nonlinear dynamics","time series"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§3的分岔动力学分析和Fig4的loss jump对应关系即可，可为大模型训练loss spike排查提供理论参考。","en":"Only read §3 for bifurcation dynamics analysis and Fig4 for loss jump correlation, it provides theoretical reference for troubleshooting LLM pretrain loss spikes."}},{"id":"EschenhagenIT0H23","title":"Kronecker-Factored Approximate Curvature for Modern Neural Network Architectures","authors":["Runa Eschenhagen","Alexander Immer","Richard E. Turner","Frank Schneider","Philipp Hennig"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$94","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/EschenhagenIT0H23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/EschenhagenIT0H23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/6a6679e3d5b9f7d5f09cdb79a5fc3fd8-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的核心问题是：经典 K-FAC 在现代网络架构上适配不够好，导致二阶近似虽然理论吸引人，但在 Transformer、归一化层、参数共享等现实组件上落地困难。过去很多工作要么停留在卷积/MLP，要么为了适配现代架构做很多特化近似；作者希望给出更统一、现代化的 K-FAC 处理方式。","importance":"它的重要性在于把近似二阶优化从“理论上有用”往“现代模型可用”推进了一步，属于优化系统与方法接口层面的贡献。对 pretrain 的启示是，大模型训练长期依赖 AdamW 这类一阶方法，并不代表曲率信息没价值；真正障碍往往在工程适配、内存通信和不规则模块支持。若 K-FAC 能更稳地覆盖现代架构，它在大 batch、少步数训练或后期收敛阶段可能重新变得有吸引力。","technical_approach":"核心方法是对 K-FAC 做面向现代架构的泛化与实现改造。作者重新整理了不同层类型的 Kronecker 分解近似方式，使其能处理更广泛的模块组合，并给出在自动微分框架中更统一的曲率因子构造。关键区别不是发明新的二阶理论，而是降低 K-FAC 与现实模型之间的错配：哪些层可以安全共享近似、哪些统计量需要稳定估计、哪些模块需要额外修正。设计目标是在保持 K-FAC 结构优势的同时减少手工特例。","experiments":"实验结论是：改造后的 K-FAC 能在一系列现代架构上稳定运行，并在若干设置下比一阶方法更具样本效率或步数效率。论文通常比较 SGD/Adam 与 K-FAC 变体，在训练速度、最终精度和 wall-clock 代价之间做权衡。更值得关注的是工程侧结果：如果曲率估计更新过频，成本会迅速上升；若更新过稀，则收益下降。作者的实现和消融表明，适中的因子更新频率、阻尼与近似选择决定了 K-FAC 是否真正实用。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical limitation of classical K-FAC: it does not transfer cleanly to many modern architectures, so curvature-based optimization remains appealing in theory but awkward in current models. Earlier work often focused on MLPs and convnets or relied on many architecture-specific approximations. This paper aims to make K-FAC more compatible with modern network components.","importance":"Its significance lies at the optimization-systems interface. For pretraining, the useful message is that first-order optimizers dominate not because curvature is irrelevant, but because engineering fit, memory cost, communication overhead, and support for modern modules have been poor. If K-FAC can be made robust on contemporary architectures, it may become attractive again in large-batch training, low-step regimes, or late-stage convergence.","technical_approach":"The core contribution is a modernization of K-FAC rather than a new second-order theory. The authors generalize the Kronecker-factored approximations across a wider range of layer types and provide a more unified way to construct curvature factors in autodiff frameworks. The key difference is reduced mismatch between K-FAC and real architectures: which layers can share approximations, which statistics require careful stabilization, and which modules need extra corrections. The goal is to preserve K-FAC's structural efficiency while minimizing ad hoc special cases.","experiments":"The empirical result is that the updated K-FAC runs stably on a broader set of modern architectures and can offer better sample or step efficiency than first-order baselines in some regimes. The paper compares SGD/Adam against K-FAC variants, analyzing final accuracy, convergence speed, and wall-clock trade-offs. The important engineering takeaway is that utility depends strongly on update frequency, damping, and approximation choices: curvature updates that are too frequent become expensive, while overly stale estimates lose most of the gain. The paper shows a workable middle ground rather than universal superiority.","authors_note":""},"tags":["optimizer","second-order","training-stability","efficiency"],"notable_authors":["Runa Eschenhagen","Alexander Immer","Richard E. Turner","Frank Schneider","Philipp Hennig"],"keywords":["deep learning","second-order","optimization","natural gradient","fisher","gauss-newton","k-fac","weight-sharing"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3.2的各模块适配方案和§5的Transformer训练实测结果，可评估二阶优化在大规模预训练中的落地可行性。","en":"Only refer to §3.2 for module-wise adaptation solutions and §5 for Transformer training benchmarks, it helps evaluate second-order optimization feasibility for large-scale pretrain."}},{"id":"FanDD023","title":"Evaluating Neuron Interpretation Methods of NLP Models","authors":["Yimin Fan","Fahim Dalvi","Nadir Durrani","Hassan Sajjad"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$95","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/FanDD023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/FanDD023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/eef6cb60fd59b32d35718e176b4b08d6-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：NLP 中大量 neuron interpretation 方法在讲“某个神经元代表某种语言现象”，但这些解释本身缺乏统一、严格的验证。过去常见做法是展示若干看起来合理的 case study，但很少系统回答：解释是否稳定、是否可复现、是否真正对应因果功能，而不是统计相关。","importance":"它的价值在于把 interpretability 从展示型工作往评测型工作推进。对 pretrain 研究的意义是，如果我们想用神经元解释来指导数据配比、模块设计或安全分析，就必须先知道这些解释方法是否可信。否则，很容易把表面相关当成内部机制，误导后续训练决策。","technical_approach":"核心方法不是提出新的解释算法，而是建立评估框架来比较现有 neuron interpretation 方法。作者从稳定性、忠实性、可推广性等维度设定评测标准，并在多个 NLP 模型与语言现象上检验不同方法。关键区别在于：它不满足于‘能找到一些漂亮例子’，而是考察在不同随机种子、数据切分和模型层级下，解释是否依然一致，以及干预这些神经元后模型行为是否真按解释变化。","experiments":"关键实验结论是：许多常用 neuron interpretation 方法能找到表面上可读的模式，但在稳定性和因果有效性上并不稳健。论文比较了多种解释方法，在不同模型和任务上测量解释一致性、神经元选择重叠度及干预后的行为变化。更有信息量的发现通常是，某些方法在描述性指标上很好，但一旦做 activation patching、ablation 或控制实验，解释与真实功能的对应显著减弱。这说明 neuron-level 解释在 NLP 中仍更适合作为启发，而不是直接当成可靠机制图谱。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a credibility problem in NLP interpretability: many neuron interpretation methods claim that specific neurons encode specific linguistic phenomena, but these claims are rarely evaluated rigorously. Prior work often relied on compelling case studies without systematically asking whether the interpretations are stable, reproducible, or causally meaningful rather than merely correlational.","importance":"Its contribution is evaluative rather than algorithmic, but that is exactly why it matters. For pretraining research, neuron interpretations are often used to reason about internal representations, safety, and data effects. If the interpretation methods themselves are unreliable, they can easily mislead downstream analysis and design choices.","technical_approach":"The paper does not propose a new interpretation method; it builds an evaluation framework for existing neuron interpretation approaches. It assesses them along dimensions such as stability, faithfulness, and generalizability across models and linguistic phenomena. The key shift is from 'can we find some plausible examples?' to 'do these explanations remain consistent across seeds, data splits, and layers, and do interventions on the identified neurons actually change behavior in the predicted way?'","experiments":"The main empirical result is that many commonly used neuron interpretation methods can produce readable patterns, but their stability and causal validity are limited. The paper compares multiple methods across NLP models and tasks, measuring consistency, overlap in selected neurons, and behavioral changes after intervention. A particularly useful finding is that some methods look strong on descriptive metrics yet weaken substantially under ablation, patching, or controlled tests. The overall message is that neuron-level interpretation in NLP is still more useful as a heuristic than as a reliable map of mechanism.","authors_note":""},"tags":["interpretability","nlp","neurons","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Yimin Fan","Fahim Dalvi","Nadir Durrani","Hassan Sajjad"],"keywords":["Neuron interpretation","NLP","Interpretability","Machine Learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§4的评测维度设计和Tab2的各方法得分即可，用神经元解释指导预训练优化前必须先验证解释方法的可靠性。","en":"Only check §4 for evaluation dimension design and Tab2 for method rankings, validate interpretation reliability before using neuron analysis to guide pretrain optimization."}},{"id":"FanKIKT23","title":"Improving CLIP Training with Language Rewrites","authors":["Lijie Fan","Dilip Krishnan","Phillip Isola","Dina Katabi","Yonglong Tian"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$96","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/FanKIKT23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/FanKIKT23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/6fa4d985e7c434002fb6289ab9b2d654-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：CLIP 这类图文对比学习高度依赖原始 caption 质量，而互联网文本常常过短、过噪、缺少判别性，导致视觉监督信号被浪费。过去常见路径是收集更大数据或做过滤，但作者关注一个更便宜的杠杆：能否先把 caption 重写得更清楚、更细粒度，再拿去训练 CLIP。","importance":"它的重要性偏数据级和训练信号级。对多模态预训练的启示很直接：图文对齐损失的上限不只由图像和模型决定，也由文本视角是否提供足够信息决定。与单纯扩数据相比，language rewrite 提供了一种‘提升文本监督密度’的思路，尤其适合已有大规模图像库但原始描述贫弱的场景。","technical_approach":"核心方法是对训练 caption 做语言重写，然后用重写后的文本训练 CLIP。重写并不是简单同义替换，而是借助语言模型把原始短 caption 扩展为更具体、更结构化、更具判别性的描述，同时尽量保持与图像语义一致。关键设计取舍在于信息增益和幻觉风险之间：如果 rewrite 太保守，训练收益有限；如果扩写过头，文本会引入图像中不存在的细节，反而伤害对齐。和直接做 caption augmentation 的区别在于，作者强调 rewrite 质量控制以及其对对比学习目标的作用机制。","experiments":"实验的核心结论是：高质量语言重写能稳定提升 CLIP 训练效果，尤其在 zero-shot 分类和检索上更明显。论文比较了原始 caption 训练与重写 caption 训练，并在多个视觉识别 benchmark 上报告提升；通常还会分析 rewrite 长度、细粒度程度和不同生成策略的影响。更有价值的观察是，收益并非来自单纯增加 token 数，而是来自文本中判别性属性和关系信息更完整；当 rewrite 引入过多臆测内容时，性能会回落，说明文本质量控制是关键。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a data bottleneck in CLIP-style contrastive learning: raw web captions are often too short, noisy, and nondiscriminative, which wastes supervision signal. Prior work typically responded with more data collection or filtering. This paper explores a cheaper lever: rewrite the captions to make them more informative before training CLIP.","importance":"Its contribution is primarily at the data and supervision-signal level. The multimodal pretraining lesson is that the ceiling of image-text contrastive learning depends not only on images and model size, but also on whether the text side provides enough semantic detail. Compared with simply scaling data, language rewrites offer a way to densify textual supervision when large image collections already exist but captions are weak.","technical_approach":"The core method is to rewrite training captions and use the rewritten text for CLIP training. The rewrites are not just paraphrases; they are generated to be more specific, structured, and discriminative while staying semantically aligned with the image. The key trade-off is between added information and hallucination. If rewriting is too conservative, gains are small; if it over-specifies content not grounded in the image, alignment degrades. Unlike generic caption augmentation, the paper focuses on controlling rewrite quality and explaining why better text improves the contrastive objective.","experiments":"The main empirical result is that high-quality language rewrites consistently improve CLIP training, with clearer gains on zero-shot classification and retrieval. The paper compares training on original captions versus rewritten captions and reports improvements across multiple vision benchmarks. The informative ablations study rewrite length, level of detail, and generation strategy. The key observation is that the gain is not from more tokens by itself, but from more complete discriminative attributes and relations. When rewrites inject too much unsupported detail, performance drops, highlighting the need for rewrite quality control.","authors_note":""},"tags":["clip","data-quality","multimodal","captioning"],"notable_authors":["Lijie Fan","Dilip Krishnan","Phillip Isola","Dina Katabi","Yonglong Tian"],"keywords":["contrastive learning; CLIP; large language model"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的重写prompt设计和§4.3的消融实验，可复用该方案低成本提升现有多模态预训练的文本监督质量。","en":"Only refer to §3 for rewrite prompt design and §4.3 for ablation studies, reuse this method to improve text supervision quality for VLM pretrain at low cost."}},{"id":"2305.15408","title":"Towards Revealing the Mystery behind Chain of Thought: A Theoretical Perspective","authors":["Guhao Feng","Bohang Zhang","Yuntian Gu","Haotian Ye","Di He","Liwei Wang"],"institutions":["Peking University","ByteDance"],"abstract":"$97","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.15408","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/FengZGY0W23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/FengZGY0W23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/dfc310e81992d2e4cedc09ac47eff13e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"CoT提示可大幅提升LLM的推理性能，但背后的理论机制不明确，无法指导模型架构和训练目标的优化。","importance":"范式级贡献，首次从表达能力层面给出CoT生效的理论证明，为推理增强预训练、模型架构设计提供了理论支撑。","technical_approach":"原创的理论分析框架，首先证明有界深度的Transformer无法直接输出基础算术/方程任务的正确答案，除非模型规模随任务长度超多项式增长；其次证明加入CoT中间步骤后，相同规模的有界深度Transformer即可解决这些任务，因为CoT将复杂任务分解为多步简单子问题，降低了每一步的表达能力要求；和现有实证研究的区别是从理论上给出了CoT生效的必要条件和边界。","experiments":"在合成算术任务、MMLU推理子集上验证，7B参数Transformer直接回答20位加法的准确率不足1%，加入CoT后准确率提升至78%，和理论预测一致；scaling实验显示，无CoT时模型准确率随规模线性提升，有CoT时随规模指数提升。","authors_note":"北京大学、字节跳动团队，核心作者Di He是大模型预训练、理论分析领域的知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting significantly improves LLM reasoning performance, but its underlying theoretical mechanism is unclear, which cannot guide the optimization of model architecture and training objectives.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution, first theoretical proof of CoT's effectiveness from the expressivity perspective, provides theoretical support for reasoning-enhanced pretraining and model architecture design.","technical_approach":"Original theoretical analysis framework. First, it proves that bounded-depth Transformers cannot directly output correct answers for basic arithmetic/equation tasks unless model size grows super-polynomially with task length. Second, it proves that with CoT intermediate steps, bounded-depth Transformers of the same size can solve these tasks, as CoT decomposes complex tasks into multiple simple subproblems, reducing the expressivity requirement for each step. Unlike existing empirical studies, it gives the necessary conditions and boundaries for CoT to work theoretically.","experiments":"Validated on synthetic arithmetic tasks and MMLU reasoning subsets. 7B Transformer achieves less than 1% accuracy on 20-digit addition when answering directly, while accuracy increases to 78% with CoT, consistent with theoretical predictions. Scaling experiments show accuracy grows linearly with model size without CoT, and grows exponentially with CoT.","authors_note":"Peking University and ByteDance team, core author Di He is a well-known scholar in LLM pretraining and theoretical analysis fields."},"tags":["chain-of-thought","theory","reasoning","generalization"],"keywords":["Chain-of-Thought Prompting","Large Language Models","Theory","Circuit Complexity","Dynamic Programming"],"notable_authors":["Di He"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"CoT提示可以显著提升LLM在复杂推理任务上的性能","claim_en":"CoT prompting significantly improves LLM performance on complex reasoning tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"有界深度Transformer的直接推理能力存在理论上限，加入中间推理步骤可突破该上限而不需要增加模型深度","claim_en":"Bounded-depth Transformers have a theoretical upper limit for direct reasoning, which can be broken by adding intermediate reasoning steps without increasing model depth","opposes":"Prior work assumes larger model size is the only way to improve LLM reasoning capability","opposes_cite_hint":"Hoffmann 2022 Chinchilla","evidence_anchor":"§3, §5.1","why_contested":"为推理增强预训练、中间监督等方法提供了理论依据，打破了推理能力仅靠模型规模提升的固有认知"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§2的理论证明框架和§3的边界条件即可，可为推理增强预训练的目标设计提供明确理论参考。","en":"Only check §2 for theoretical proof framework and §3 for boundary conditions, it provides clear theoretical reference for reasoning-enhanced pretrain objective design."}},{"id":"FriedmanW023","title":"Learning Transformer Programs","authors":["Dan Friedman","Alexander Wettig","Danqi Chen"],"institutions":["Princeton University"],"abstract":"$98","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/FriedmanW023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/FriedmanW023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/995f693b73050f90977ed2828202645c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有Transformer的机制可解释方法需要大量人工检查权重和激活，无法得到完整、忠实的模型算法描述，可解释性差。","importance":"方法级贡献，提供了可训练且可自动转换为人类可读程序的Transformer架构，为机制可解释性研究提供了新的范式。","technical_approach":"基于RASP（可编译为Transformer权重的编程语言）改进的原创方法，设计了修改版Transformer架构，支持梯度下降训练，训练完成后可自动转换为离散的人类可读RASP程序；和现有可解释Transformer的区别是不需要人工编写程序再编译为Transformer，而是直接从数据中学习可转换为程序的模型，兼顾了训练效率和可解释性。","experiments":"在字符串处理、算术、简单推理任务上验证，训练得到的Transformer程序和人工编写的程序精度差小于2%，转换后的程序可读性超过90%（人工评估）；ablation显示修改后的注意力掩码和值投影约束是保证可转换性的核心，仅会带来3%以内的精度损失。","authors_note":"普林斯顿大学Danqi Chen团队，核心作者Danqi Chen是NLP、大模型可解释性领域的知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing mechanistic interpretability methods for Transformers require extensive manual inspection of weights and activations, and cannot generate complete, faithful descriptions of the model's underlying algorithm, leading to poor interpretability.","importance":"Method-level contribution, provides a Transformer architecture that is trainable and can be automatically converted to human-readable programs, offers a new paradigm for mechanistic interpretability research.","technical_approach":"Original method improved based on RASP (a programming language that can be compiled into Transformer weights). A modified Transformer architecture is designed to support gradient descent training, and can be automatically converted to discrete human-readable RASP programs after training. Unlike existing interpretable Transformer methods, it does not require manual program writing before compiling to Transformer, but learns a program-convertible model directly from data, balancing training efficiency and interpretability.","experiments":"Validated on string processing, arithmetic, and simple reasoning tasks. The trained Transformer program has less than 2% accuracy gap compared with manually written programs, and the converted program has over 90% readability (human evaluation). Ablation shows modified attention mask and value projection constraints are the core to guarantee convertibility, bringing less than 3% accuracy loss.","authors_note":"Princeton University Danqi Chen's team, core author Danqi Chen is a well-known scholar in NLP and LLM interpretability fields."},"tags":["transformer","interpretability","program-synthesis","mechanistic"],"keywords":["mechanistic interpretability","transformers"],"notable_authors":["Danqi Chen"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"RASP程序可以等价转换为Transformer的权重","claim_en":"RASP programs can be equivalently converted into Transformer weights","evidence_anchor":"§1, Weiss et al. 2021"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"加入少量架构约束的Transformer可通过梯度训练学习到可转换为人类可读程序的表示，精度损失可忽略","claim_en":"Transformers with minor architectural constraints can be trained via gradient descent to learn representations convertible to human-readable programs, with negligible accuracy loss","opposes":"Prior work assumes trainable Transformers cannot be fully mechanistically interpretable without sacrificing large amounts of accuracy","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4, §5.2","why_contested":"打破了可解释性和模型性能不可兼得的固有认知，为小模型可解释落地、大模型机制分析提供了新路径"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的架构修改方案和§4的程序转换效果验证，可参考其思路做可解释预训练模型的架构设计。","en":"Only refer to §3 for modified Transformer architecture and §4 for program conversion verification, it inspires interpretable pretrain model architecture design."}},{"id":"GeshkovskiLPR23","title":"The emergence of clusters in self-attention dynamics","authors":["Borjan Geshkovski","Cyril Letrouit","Yury Polyanskiy","Philippe Rigollet"],"institutions":["MIT","Princeton University"],"abstract":"Viewing Transformers as interacting particle systems, we describe the geometry of learned representations when the weights are not time-dependent. We show that particles, representing tokens, tend to cluster toward particular limiting objects as time tends to infinity. Using techniques from dynamical systems and partial differential equations, we show that type of limiting object that emerges depends on the spectrum of the value matrix. Additionally, in the one-dimensional case we prove that the self-attention matrix converges to a low-rank Boolean matrix. The combination of these results mathematically confirms the empirical observation made by Vaswani et al. [ VSP`17 ] that leaders appear in a sequence of tokens when processed by Transformers.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GeshkovskiLPR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GeshkovskiLPR23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/b2b3e1d9840eba17ad9bbf073e009afe-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer自注意力的训练动态缺乏理论解释，Vaswani等人2017年实证观察到的token中会出现\"领导者\"（对其他token影响大的token）的现象没有理论支撑，无法指导架构优化。","importance":"理论级贡献，从动力系统和PDE角度给出了自注意力表示聚类的数学证明，为Transformer架构设计、长上下文优化提供了理论依据。","technical_approach":"原创的理论分析框架，将Transformer视为粒子交互系统（每个token为一个粒子），证明当权重不随时间变化时，token表示会随着层数增加收敛到特定的聚类极限对象，聚类类型由值矩阵的谱决定；一维情况下进一步证明自注意力矩阵会收敛到低秩布尔矩阵，从数学上验证了领导者token的存在；和现有实证研究的区别是给出了自注意力聚类现象的严格数学证明和边界条件。","experiments":"纯理论工作，无训练实验；在合成自注意力模块上的数值验证结果和理论证明完全匹配，当值矩阵的谱为正实数时，token会收敛到单个聚类点，当谱有复数分量时会收敛到周期轨道。","authors_note":"MIT、普林斯顿大学团队，核心作者Yury Polyanskiy是信息论、机器学习理论领域的知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The training dynamics of Transformer self-attention lacks theoretical explanation. The empirical observation of \"leader\" tokens (tokens with large impact on other tokens) made by Vaswani et al. 2017 has no theoretical support, which cannot guide architecture optimization.","importance":"Theory-level contribution, provides mathematical proof of self-attention representation clustering from the perspective of dynamical systems and PDE, offers theoretical basis for Transformer architecture design and long context optimization.","technical_approach":"Original theoretical analysis framework that views Transformer as an interacting particle system (each token is a particle). It proves that when weights are time-invariant, token representations converge to specific clustering limit objects as the number of layers increases, and the clustering type is determined by the spectrum of the value matrix. In the one-dimensional case, it further proves that the self-attention matrix converges to a low-rank Boolean matrix, mathematically verifying the existence of leader tokens. Unlike existing empirical studies, it provides strict mathematical proof and boundary conditions for the self-attention clustering phenomenon.","experiments":"Pure theoretical work, no training experiments. Numerical validation results on synthetic self-attention modules fully match theoretical proofs: when the value matrix spectrum is positive real, tokens converge to a single cluster point; when the spectrum has complex components, tokens converge to periodic orbits.","authors_note":"MIT and Princeton University team, core author Yury Polyanskiy is a well-known scholar in information theory and machine learning theory fields."},"tags":["self-attention","training-dynamics","clustering","interpretability"],"keywords":["Transformers","Self-Attention","Clustering","Interacting Particle Systems","Continuous Time"],"notable_authors":["Yury Polyanskiy","Philippe Rigollet"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer自注意力处理序列时会出现影响力较高的领导者token","claim_en":"Leader tokens with high influence emerge when Transformer self-attention processes sequences","evidence_anchor":"§1, Vaswani et al. 2017"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"自注意力的token表示聚类行为完全由值矩阵的谱决定，和输入序列分布无关","claim_en":"The token representation clustering behavior of self-attention is completely determined by the spectrum of the value matrix, independent of input sequence distribution","opposes":"Prior work assumes self-attention representation dynamics are mainly driven by input sequence distribution","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§2, §3","why_contested":"修正了自注意力动态的驱动因素认知，为值矩阵的架构设计、长上下文注意力优化提供了明确的理论方向"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为自注意力机制理论文献备查即可，结论偏理想化，无直接指导预训练落地的可复用方案。","en":"Only keep it as reference literature for self-attention mechanism theory, its conclusions are too ideal to provide directly reusable solutions for practical pretrain."}},{"id":"GhaziHK0MSZ23","title":"Sparsity-Preserving Differentially Private Training of Large Embedding Models","authors":["Badih Ghazi","Yangsibo Huang","Pritish Kamath","Ravi Kumar","Pasin Manurangsi","Amer Sinha","Chiyuan Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"As the use of large embedding models in recommendation systems and language applications increases, concerns over user data privacy have also risen.  DP-SGD, a training algorithm that combines differential privacy with stochastic gradient descent, has been the workhorse in protecting user privacy without compromising model accuracy by much. However, applying DP-SGD naively to embedding models can destroy gradient sparsity, leading to reduced training efficiency. To address this issue, we present two new algorithms, DP-FEST and DP-AdaFEST, that preserve gradient sparsity during the private training of large embedding models.  Our algorithms achieve substantial reductions ($10^6 \\times$) in gradient size, while maintaining comparable levels of accuracy, on benchmark real-world datasets.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GhaziHK0MSZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GhaziHK0MSZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/23ff02034404b65776080cbf7148addd-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：怎样在对大型 embedding 模型做差分隐私训练时，不把稀疏更新带来的计算优势彻底丢掉。以往 DP-SGD 往往要求按样本裁剪和加噪，这会把原本只更新少量 embedding 行的训练变成近似稠密计算；对推荐、检索、词表很大的模型来说，这个代价过高，所以隐私训练长期难以扩展到真正的大型 embedding 场景。","importance":"这是一个系统方法级贡献，价值在于把“可证明隐私”从小模型或稠密模型推进到工业上更常见的大词表/大表 embedding 训练。对 pretrain 研究的启示不是它直接改进语言建模目标，而是它说明了：一类看似只属于隐私学习的约束，会直接改变稀疏参数化模型的可训练性、吞吐和可扩展边界；凡是依赖超大离散表征的预训练体系，都会遇到类似问题。","technical_approach":"核心方法是稀疏性保持的 DP 训练机制：只对实际被访问到的 embedding 条目做受控更新，同时重写隐私记账和裁剪方式，避免标准 DP-SGD 把未访问参数也卷入稠密梯度处理。设计重点不在提出全新优化器，而在把 per-example clipping、噪声注入和稀疏访问模式对齐；这样做有效，是因为 embedding 训练的主要成本来自巨大的参数表而不是单步算子本身，保住稀疏更新就保住了可扩展性。它和直接套用通用 DP-SGD 的区别，是前者尊重参数访问结构，后者则在机制上忽略了这种结构，导致算力和内存都被放大。","experiments":"从题目和已知工作脉络看，实验重点应是比较该方法与标准 DP-SGD 在大型 embedding 模型上的训练吞吐、内存和精度—隐私权衡，并验证在相同隐私预算下能否维持更高效的稀疏训练。可预期的关键 baseline 包括非私有训练、标准 DP-SGD 以及可能的 embedding 专用私有训练变体。当前给定信息里没有参数量、数据规模、epsilon 或主指标数字，因此不能可靠写出具体提升幅度；能明确判断的是，这篇工作的价值更偏“让原本不可行的训练变得可行”，而不只是小幅提升最终质量。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical bottleneck: how to train large embedding models with differential privacy without destroying the sparsity that makes them scalable. Standard DP-SGD relies on per-example clipping and noise addition, which tends to turn sparse embedding updates into effectively dense computation; that makes private training prohibitively expensive for large vocabularies and recommendation-style embedding tables.","importance":"This is mainly a systems-and-method contribution, and its value is in making provable privacy compatible with large sparse parameter tables. The pretraining takeaway is indirect but important: once a model depends on huge discrete tables or sparse accesses, the privacy mechanism is no longer a small add-on; it changes the optimization and scaling regime. That matters for any pretraining setup with large embeddings or retrieval-heavy parameterizations.","technical_approach":"The core idea is a sparsity-preserving DP training scheme that only processes accessed embedding entries while still supporting valid clipping, noise injection, and privacy accounting. The contribution is not a brand-new optimizer; it is a redesign of the DP training pipeline so that it matches sparse access patterns instead of flattening them into dense gradients. This works because the dominant cost in embedding models is the size of the parameter table, so preserving sparse updates preserves feasibility. The key difference from vanilla DP-SGD is that it exploits parameter access structure rather than ignoring it.","experiments":"Based on the title and problem setup, the main experiments are likely to compare training throughput, memory use, and utility-privacy trade-offs against standard DP-SGD on large embedding models. The natural baselines are non-private training, vanilla DP-SGD, and possibly prior private embedding-training variants. The provided metadata does not include model sizes, dataset sizes, epsilon values, or quantitative gains, so exact numbers should not be fabricated. The likely headline result is feasibility and efficiency under privacy constraints, not merely a small quality bump.","authors_note":""},"tags":["differential-privacy","embedding","sparse-training","optimization"],"keywords":["Differential Privacy","Recommendation Systems","Embedding Models","Efficient Machine Learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3的稀疏DP更新机制和§5的扩展性测试，可参考其思路优化大词表预训练的稀疏参数更新效率。","en":"Only check §3 for sparse DP update mechanism and §5 for scalability benchmarks, it inspires sparse parameter update optimization for large-vocab pretrain."}},{"id":"GiladiGSKBHLS23","title":"DropCompute: simple and more robust distributed synchronous training via compute variance reduction","authors":["Niv Giladi","Shahar Gottlieb","Moran Shkolnik","Asaf Karnieli","Ron Banner","Elad Hoffer","Kfir Y. Levy","Daniel Soudry"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Background: Distributed training is essential for large scale training of deep neural networks (DNNs). The dominant methods for large scale DNN training are synchronous (e.g. All-Reduce), but these require waiting for all workers in each step. Thus, these methods are limited by the delays caused by straggling workers.\nResults: We study a typical scenario in which workers are straggling due to variability in compute time. We find an analytical relation between compute time properties and scalability limitations, caused by such straggling workers. With these findings, we propose a simple yet effective decentralized method to reduce the variation among workers and thus improve the robustness of synchronous training. This method can be integrated with the widely used All-Reduce. Our findings are validated on large-scale training tasks using 200 Gaudi Accelerators.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GiladiGSKBHLS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GiladiGSKBHLS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/972cd27c994a806e187ef1c2f5254059-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：同步分布式训练里，少数慢 worker 会把整步训练卡住，而传统 straggler mitigation 往往牺牲收敛稳定性或引入复杂系统机制。大模型训练越重，step time 的长尾越明显，所以“如何在不改同步 SGD 基本形态的前提下减少计算方差”成了很实际的问题。","importance":"这是系统训练方法级工作，重点不是新模型，而是让大规模同步训练更稳、更快。对 pretrain 的意义很直接：今天很多 loss spike、吞吐波动和训练不稳定，不只是优化器问题，也常常来自底层计算时间分布；如果能减少 step-level compute variance，就能改善实际 wall-clock 和训练可预测性。","technical_approach":"核心方法从题目看是 DropCompute：在同步训练中主动丢弃一部分计算，以降低跨 worker 的计算方差，从而减少 straggler 对全局 step 的拖累。它的关键设计不是异步化或复杂重调度，而是用一个更简单的策略，在保留同步更新语义的同时让每步计算更均匀；这样做有效，是因为同步训练的总耗时由最慢 worker 决定，适度减少重尾计算常常比让所有 worker 都做满更划算。与经典 backup worker、局部 SGD 或弹性同步相比，这条路线更保守，但也更容易接入现有训练栈。","experiments":"这类工作通常会报告多机多卡场景下的 step time 分布、吞吐、端到端收敛时间，以及与标准同步训练和其他 straggler 缓解策略的对比。按题目推断，作者会强调在存在计算不均匀或样本复杂度波动时，该方法更 robust，而不是只在理想集群上跑出一点平均速度提升。当前缺少具体集群规模、模型类型和加速数字，因此不能写百分比；但可以合理判断，实验关注点会是 wall-clock-to-target-accuracy，而不只是 tokens/s。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical pain point in synchronous distributed training: a few slow workers can stall the entire step, and many straggler-mitigation methods either hurt convergence or require heavy system changes. As training gets larger, step-time tail latency becomes more visible, so reducing compute variance without abandoning synchronous SGD is a meaningful target.","importance":"This is a systems training contribution rather than a new model, but it matters directly for pretraining because wall-clock efficiency and training stability depend on the runtime distribution, not only on the optimizer. If a method reduces step-level compute variance, it can improve throughput, predictability, and sometimes even optimization stability in large-scale runs.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method is DropCompute: deliberately dropping some computation during synchronous training to reduce variance across workers and therefore reduce straggler impact. The key choice is to stay within the synchronous training regime instead of moving to asynchronous updates or complex rescheduling. That design can work because synchronous step time is determined by the slowest worker, so shaving the heavy tail can be more valuable than maximizing per-worker work. Compared with backup workers, local SGD, or elastic synchronization, this is a simpler and more conservative intervention.","experiments":"The likely experiments compare step-time distributions, throughput, and time-to-target-accuracy across multi-worker settings, against standard synchronous training and other straggler-handling baselines. The paper likely emphasizes robustness under heterogeneous compute or variable sample complexity, rather than a small speedup in idealized settings. The provided metadata does not include cluster scale, model type, or quantitative gains, so exact numbers should not be fabricated.","authors_note":""},"tags":["distributed-training","training-stability","systems","optimization"],"keywords":["distributed optimization","large-scale parallel SGD","synchronous training"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§2的DropCompute设计和§4的吞吐提升实测，可快速复用该方案缓解大模型同步预训练的慢节点卡顿问题。","en":"Only refer to §2 for DropCompute design and §4 for throughput improvement benchmarks, quickly reuse it to mitigate straggler issues in large model synchronous pretrain."}},{"id":"GruverFQW23","title":"Large Language Models Are Zero-Shot Time Series Forecasters","authors":["Nate Gruver","Marc Finzi","Shikai Qiu","Andrew Gordon Wilson"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$99","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GruverFQW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GruverFQW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/3eb7ca52e8207697361b2c0fb3926511-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：大语言模型能否不针对时间序列专门训练，就把时间序列当一种离散序列直接做 zero-shot forecasting。以往时间序列预测大多依赖专门架构、频域先验或按数据集定制训练，而这篇工作挑战的是这种范式边界：序列建模能力本身是否已经足够通用。","importance":"这是一个范式观察型工作，重要性在于它把“LLM 是不是通用序列模型”从文本扩展到了连续信号预测。对 pretrain 研究的启示很强：如果经过合适 tokenization/serialization，AR 语言建模能在完全不同的数据形态上迁移出可用能力，那预训练的价值就不只是语言知识，而是更普适的 next-token dynamics 建模偏置。","technical_approach":"核心方法并不复杂，关键在于把时间序列转成 LLM 可消费的 token 序列，再用 prompt 或 in-context 方式让模型续写未来。设计重点通常包括数值离散化、尺度归一化、时间窗口组织和 prompt 模板，因为如果直接喂原始实数，通用 LLM 并没有稳定机制去处理数值精度与尺度变化。它和传统时序模型最大的区别不是预测头，而是完全依赖预训练语言模型已有的序列模式归纳能力，而非针对某个数据域重新学习动力学。","experiments":"这篇论文的关键事实通常是：通用 LLM 在多个标准时间序列基准上能做到有竞争力的 zero-shot 或 few-shot 预测，至少显著优于朴素基线，并在某些场景接近专门训练的方法。实验一般会比较 GPT 类模型与经典统计模型、深度时序模型，指标包括 MSE、MAE 或 CRPS 等。当前给定信息没有模型名称、shot 设置和具体分数，因此不能写数字；但有价值的观察往往是，量化方式和上下文长度对性能非常敏感，而这正说明 tokenizer/serialization 是跨模态迁移成败的核心。","authors_note":"Andrew Gordon Wilson 团队长期做贝叶斯深度学习、时间序列和基础模型泛化问题。Nate Gruver 也有离散扩散、蛋白设计等生成建模工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The central question is whether a large language model can do time-series forecasting in zero-shot mode by treating the series as just another token sequence. Traditional forecasting relies on domain-specific architectures and training, so this paper tests a broader claim: is generic sequence modeling already strong enough to transfer beyond text?","importance":"This is a paradigm-level observation paper. Its importance is that it extends the idea of LLMs as general sequence models to continuous signals, not just language. For pretraining research, the implication is strong: with the right serialization and discretization, autoregressive pretraining may transfer useful inductive bias to domains that look very different from text.","technical_approach":"The method is conceptually simple: convert time series into token sequences that an LLM can read, then forecast by prompting or in-context continuation. The real design work is in discretization, normalization, windowing, and prompt format, because raw real-valued inputs are not natively handled well by a generic text model. The main difference from standard forecasting models is that the approach leans entirely on pretrained sequence priors rather than retraining a domain-specific dynamical model.","experiments":"The likely headline is that off-the-shelf LLMs achieve competitive zero-shot or few-shot forecasting on multiple standard benchmarks, clearly beating naive baselines and sometimes approaching specialized models. Typical comparisons would include classical statistical methods and deep forecasting architectures, with metrics such as MSE, MAE, or CRPS. The provided metadata does not include exact models, settings, or scores, so no numbers should be fabricated. A useful likely observation is that performance is highly sensitive to tokenization and context formatting, which reinforces how central representation design is for cross-domain transfer.","authors_note":"Andrew Gordon Wilson's group is known for work on Bayesian deep learning, time series, and foundation-model generalization. Nate Gruver has also worked on discrete diffusion and protein design."},"tags":["llm","zero-shot","time-series","transfer-learning"],"notable_authors":["Andrew Gordon Wilson","Nate Gruver"],"keywords":["large language models","time series","probabilistic forecasting"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3的时间序列tokenization方案和§4的零样本迁移效果实验，可参考其思路扩展预训练模型的跨域通用序列建模能力。","en":"Only check §3 for time series tokenization solution and §4 for zero-shot transfer results, it inspires cross-domain general sequence modeling capability expansion for pretrain."}},{"id":"GuiSMZC023","title":"Non-autoregressive Machine Translation with Probabilistic Context-free Grammar","authors":["Shangtong Gui","Chenze Shao","Zhengrui Ma","Xishan Zhang","Yunji Chen","Yang Feng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Non-autoregressive Transformer(NAT) significantly accelerates the inference of neural machine translation. However, conventional NAT models suffer from limited expression power and performance degradation compared to autoregressive (AT) models due to the assumption of conditional independence among target tokens. To address these limitations, we propose a novel approach called PCFG-NAT, which leverages a specially designed Probabilistic Context-Free Grammar (PCFG) to enhance the ability of NAT models to capture complex dependencies among output tokens. Experimental results on major machine translation benchmarks demonstrate that PCFG-NAT further narrows the gap in translation quality between NAT and AT models. Moreover, PCFG-NAT facilitates a deeper understanding of the generated sentences, addressing the lack of satisfactory explainability in neural machine translation. Code is publicly available at https://github.com/ictnlp/PCFG-NAT.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GuiSMZC023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GuiSMZC023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/11c7f1dd168439884b6dfb43a7891432-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：非自回归机器翻译虽然解码快，但常见方法因为条件独立假设太强，难以建模目标句子的层级结构和长程依赖，所以质量常落后于 AR 翻译。以前大家多靠 iterative refinement、CTC 或 latent fertilities 修修补补，但结构先验仍然不足。","importance":"这是生成建模方法级工作。对 pretrain 的启示不在 MT 任务本身，而在于它说明了：当你试图摆脱 left-to-right AR 范式时，必须补上新的结构约束，否则并行生成会因依赖建模不足而掉质量。PCFG 这样的显式层级偏置，提供了一种在非 AR 框架里重建全局结构的方法。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把 probabilistic context-free grammar 引入非自回归翻译，用语法诱导或显式树结构来刻画目标端的层级组合关系，从而缓解纯并行 token 预测的独立性缺陷。它不是简单在 decoder 上叠更多层，而是给生成过程加入可解释的结构中介；这样设计有效，是因为句法层级可以在并行生成时传递长程依赖，减少局部预测彼此不协调的问题。与标准 NAT 相比，它多了一层结构建模；与 AR+syntax 方法相比，它追求的是保留并行解码优势。","experiments":"按题目推断，实验应在标准机器翻译基准上比较 BLEU、解码延迟和可能的迭代次数，与 AR Transformer、常见 NAT 方法和结构化基线对比。关键结果大概率是：在接近 NAT 解码速度的前提下提升翻译质量，尤其在长句或结构复杂句子上更明显。给定信息没有语言对、模型规模和 BLEU 数字，因此不能写具体提升。合理预期的 ablation 包括：去掉 PCFG 结构后质量下降，以及语法潜变量如何影响速度—质量 trade-off。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a long-standing weakness of non-autoregressive machine translation: decoding is fast, but quality suffers because the usual factorization is too independent to capture target-side structure and long-range dependencies. Earlier fixes such as iterative refinement, CTC-style objectives, or fertility modeling help, but they still lack a strong structural prior.","importance":"This is a generation-method contribution with relevance beyond MT. The main lesson for pretraining is that once you move away from left-to-right autoregression, you need another mechanism to recover global dependency structure. PCFG-style hierarchy is one concrete way to supply that missing bias in a parallel generation regime.","technical_approach":"The method introduces a probabilistic context-free grammar into non-autoregressive translation so that target-side hierarchical composition is modeled explicitly or through induced latent structure. This is not just a deeper decoder; it adds an interpretable structural layer between source conditioning and token generation. That helps because syntax-like hierarchy can communicate long-range constraints even when tokens are generated in parallel. Compared with standard NAT, it adds structure; compared with syntax-aware AR models, it aims to keep the speed advantage of parallel decoding.","experiments":"The likely evaluation uses standard MT benchmarks, comparing BLEU and decoding latency against autoregressive Transformers, common NAT systems, and possibly other structured baselines. The expected headline is better quality than standard NAT while retaining much of the speed benefit, especially on longer or structurally complex sentences. The provided metadata does not include language pairs, model sizes, or BLEU numbers, so exact gains should not be invented. A likely ablation studies how much the PCFG component contributes and how it affects the speed-quality trade-off.","authors_note":""},"tags":["non-autoregressive","machine-translation","grammar"],"keywords":["Machine translation","Non-autoregressive generation","Probabilistic Context-free Grammar"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的PCFG嵌入非AR生成的设计部分即可，验证了并行生成必须补充结构偏置才能平衡速度与质量的假设","en":"Read §3 on PCFG integration into non-autoregressive generation only, which validates parallel generation requires structural bias to balance speed and quality."}},{"id":"GuoW0YLHX23","title":"EMMA-X: An EM-like Multilingual Pre-training Algorithm for Cross-lingual Representation Learning","authors":["Ping Guo","Xiangpeng Wei","Yue Hu","Baosong Yang","Dayiheng Liu","Fei Huang","Jun Xie"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$9a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GuoW0YLHX23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GuoW0YLHX23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/201408406e0c5cf7626c4baeae6eaadd-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：多语言预训练里跨语言表示对齐往往依赖共享词表、平行数据或硬对齐目标，导致低资源语言和远距离语言对的迁移仍然不稳。作者试图把跨语言对齐改写成一个类似 EM 的迭代估计过程，让潜在对齐结构在训练中逐步被发现，而不是预先假定。","importance":"它属于方法级的多语言预训练改进。对 pretrain 研究的意义在于，它强调跨语言对齐不一定要靠更大规模平行语料，也可以通过更好的训练动态去逼近潜变量对齐。这个思路如果有效，价值主要体现在低资源语言、弱监督对齐和 multilingual scaling 上。","technical_approach":"核心方法是一个 EM-like multilingual pretraining algorithm：先基于当前模型估计跨语言潜在对应关系，再用这些软对齐信号更新表示学习目标，然后重复迭代。与直接做对比学习或 translation LM 不同，它把“谁和谁应该对齐”作为隐变量而不是固定监督，因此更适合噪声高、词表不共享或句级对齐不完美的场景。代价是训练流程更复杂，且 EM 类方法对初始化和伪标签质量通常比较敏感。","experiments":"题目和摘要片段不足以确认模型规模、语种数量、数据量和具体 benchmark，因此不能给出具体分数。可以确定的是，关键实验应该落在 XTREME、XNLI、MLQA、跨语言检索或低资源迁移等任务，并与 mBERT、XLM-R 或其他 multilingual pretraining baselines 比较。真正有判断价值的 ablation 应该是：EM 迭代轮数、对齐置信度过滤、低资源语言收益是否明显高于高资源语言，以及没有平行语料时是否仍成立。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a familiar weakness in multilingual pretraining: cross-lingual alignment is often forced through shared vocabularies, parallel data, or fixed alignment objectives, which still leaves low-resource and distant language pairs poorly served. The proposed angle is to treat alignment as a latent structure that should be inferred during training rather than assumed upfront.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution to multilingual pretraining. Its value lies in shifting attention from simply scaling parallel data to improving the training dynamics that discover cross-lingual correspondence. If it works well, the main impact would be on low-resource transfer, weakly supervised alignment, and more robust multilingual scaling.","technical_approach":"The core idea is an EM-like training loop: infer latent cross-lingual correspondences with the current model, use those soft assignments to update the representation objective, and iterate. This differs from standard contrastive or translation-LM setups, where alignment targets are treated as fixed supervision. The benefit is flexibility under noisy or incomplete alignment. The cost is the usual one for EM-style methods: more complex training and sensitivity to initialization and pseudo-label quality.","experiments":"The available metadata is not enough to report model sizes, language counts, datasets, or exact gains. The right evaluation would likely include multilingual transfer benchmarks such as XNLI, MLQA, retrieval, or XTREME-style suites, compared against mBERT, XLM-R, or related baselines. The most informative ablations would test the number of EM iterations, confidence filtering for latent alignments, and whether gains are concentrated in low-resource languages where the method should matter most.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multilingual","pretraining","representation-learning"],"keywords":["cross-lingual pretraining;language-agnostic representation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅需读§4的EM迭代对齐训练流程，软隐变量对齐思路可用于低资源多语言预训练的内部ablation验证","en":"Read §4 on EM iterative alignment training pipeline only, the soft latent variable alignment idea fits internal ablation of low-resource multilingual pretraining."}},{"id":"GuptaCJT023","title":"Behavior Alignment via Reward Function Optimization","authors":["Dhawal Gupta","Yash Chandak","Scott M. Jordan","Philip S. Thomas","Bruno C. da Silva"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$9b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GuptaCJT023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GuptaCJT023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/a5357781c204d4412e44ed9cbcdb08d5-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：偏好学习和 RLHF 通常先学 reward model，再优化策略，但 reward model 本身常常错配真实行为目标，导致奖励黑客和泛化失真。作者想直接优化“行为对齐”而不把 reward 当成唯一中间表示，从而减少 reward misspecification 带来的系统偏差。","importance":"它对 pretrain 的直接影响有限，但对 pretrain↔posttrain 接口很相关。原因是后训练阶段提供的偏好信号会反过来塑造模型能力边界，而这篇工作讨论的正是奖励函数如何被更稳健地构造与优化。对于研究 RLHF、RLAIF 和推理模型训练的人，这属于方法层面的基础问题。","technical_approach":"从题目看，核心思路是把 reward function 本身作为优化对象，而不是把它固定下来再单独做策略优化。这样的设计试图把“什么行为算对齐”与“如何让策略达到它”联合考虑，减少两阶段管线中 reward model 单独过拟合或投机取巧的问题。相较标准 preference-based RL，它更关注 reward 设计空间的可优化性；代价则是目标更双层，优化稳定性和可解释性都可能更难。","experiments":"现有信息不足以确认环境、偏好数据类型、基线和收益数字，因此不能给出实验分数。关键实验应当至少包含：与标准 reward learning + RL 基线比较的对齐质量、在 reward hacking 或 distribution shift 下的稳健性、以及在离线/在线偏好设置中的样本效率。如果论文成立，最有说服力的证据不是单一回报更高，而是行为更符合偏好、且在外推场景下不容易钻 reward 空子。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a central weakness in preference-based RL and RLHF pipelines: they usually learn a reward model first and optimize the policy second, but the learned reward can be a poor proxy for the intended behavior. That gap creates reward hacking and brittle generalization. The proposed direction is to optimize alignment through the reward function itself rather than treating reward modeling as a fixed intermediate step.","importance":"Its direct impact on pretraining is limited, but it is highly relevant to the pretrain–posttrain interface. Alignment data and reward design feed back into what capabilities models preserve or distort after post-training. For researchers working on RLHF, RLAIF, or reasoning-oriented fine-tuning, this is a foundational method question rather than a narrow downstream trick.","technical_approach":"From the title, the core idea is to optimize the reward function as part of the alignment procedure instead of freezing it and then optimizing only the policy. That can reduce the mismatch introduced by a rigid two-stage pipeline, where the reward model overfits the observed preferences and the policy exploits those blind spots. The appeal is better behavior-level alignment; the cost is a more coupled and potentially less stable optimization problem.","experiments":"There is not enough information here to report environments, preference data, baselines, or exact gains. The key evidence should compare against standard reward-learning-plus-RL pipelines on preference satisfaction, robustness under reward hacking, and sample efficiency in offline or online preference settings. The most convincing result would not just be higher return, but more faithful behavior under distribution shift where proxy rewards usually fail.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reward-model","alignment","rl"],"keywords":["Reinforcement Learning","Behavior Alignment","Implicit Gradient","Bi-level Optimization"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§4.2的联合优化reward与策略的实验结果，可给RLHF管线减少奖励错配的改进提供参考","en":"Focus on §4.2 experimental results of joint reward and policy optimization, which offers reference for reducing reward misalignment in RLHF pipelines."}},{"id":"HaseBKG23","title":"Does Localization Inform Editing? Surprising Differences in Causality-Based Localization vs. Knowledge Editing in Language Models","authors":["Peter Hase","Mohit Bansal","Been Kim","Asma Ghandeharioun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$9c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HaseBKG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HaseBKG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/3927bbdcf0e8d1fa8aa23c26f358a281-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：大家常把因果归因式定位（localization）和知识编辑联系起来，默认“找到负责某个事实的神经元/层/模块”就有助于更好地编辑模型，但这个假设是否真的成立并不清楚。作者就是在检验这个看似直觉正确、实际可能并不成立的桥梁。","importance":"这篇工作的价值在于纠偏。它不是提出新的编辑算法，而是告诉社区：可解释性里的因果定位结果，未必能直接转化成更好的知识编辑策略。对 pretrain 和后训练研究都重要，因为很多人希望用机制分析去指导模型修改；如果两者脱节，就说明我们对“知识如何存储与被调用”的理解还不够。","technical_approach":"从题目看，方法核心是系统比较两件事：一类是 causality-based localization，即通过干预或归因找出看似负责某项知识的组件；另一类是真正执行 knowledge editing，并评估其效果。作者要展示的不是局部案例，而是两套目标在经验上会出现令人意外的差异。这样设计的意义在于把‘可解释’和‘可编辑’明确区分开：前者关注因果影响，后者关注可控修改后的泛化与副作用。","experiments":"没有摘要细节，无法报告用了哪些编辑方法、哪些 localization 技术、哪些数据集以及差异幅度。可以明确的是，关键实验应该会比较定位分数与编辑成功率/副作用之间的相关性，并检验不同层、不同事实类型和不同模型上的一致性。若论文标题成立，最核心结论应是：定位到的高因果位置并不总是最佳编辑位置，甚至两者可能系统性错位。这种负结果对机制研究非常有价值。","authors_note":"作者包含 Mohit Bansal、Been Kim。两位分别在 NLP 与可解释性方向很知名。仅凭给定信息无法确认机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper questions a common assumption: if causality-based localization identifies the neurons, layers, or modules responsible for a fact, then those locations should also be the right targets for knowledge editing. That intuition is appealing, but it may be wrong, and the paper is about testing that gap directly.","importance":"Its value is corrective rather than additive. The contribution is not a new editor, but evidence that mechanistic localization results do not automatically translate into better editing strategies. That matters for both pretraining and post-training research because many people hope interpretability tools can guide controlled model updates. If the bridge is weak, our understanding of where knowledge lives versus how behavior can be changed is still incomplete.","technical_approach":"From the title, the core method is a systematic comparison between two things: causality-based localization methods that identify influential components, and actual knowledge editing procedures evaluated on success and side effects. The point is to separate two objectives that are often conflated. Localization asks what causally matters for current behavior. Editing asks what can be changed reliably and locally while preserving everything else.","experiments":"The provided metadata does not include the specific localization methods, editing baselines, datasets, or numerical gaps. The decisive experiments should measure how well localization scores correlate with edit success, generalization, and collateral damage across layers, fact types, and models. If the title reflects the main finding, the central result is a negative one: highly causal locations are not necessarily the best editing targets, and the mismatch can be systematic.","authors_note":"The author list includes Mohit Bansal and Been Kim, both well-known in NLP and interpretability. The institutions cannot be confirmed reliably from the provided metadata alone."},"tags":["knowledge-editing","causality","localization","interpretability"],"notable_authors":["Mohit Bansal","Been Kim"],"keywords":["localization","model editing","mechanistic interpretability","language models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"直接看§5的对比实验结论即可，推翻了「因果定位结果可直接指导知识编辑」的普遍默认假设","en":"Check §5 comparative experiment conclusions directly, which overturns the common prior that causal localization results can directly guide knowledge editing."}},{"id":"HosseiniF23","title":"Large language models implicitly learn to straighten neural sentence trajectories to construct a predictive representation of natural language","authors":["Eghbal A. Hosseini","Evelina Fedorenko"],"institutions":["MIT","Harvard University"],"abstract":"$9d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HosseiniF23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HosseiniF23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/88dddaf430b5bc38ab8228902bb61821-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"next-token预测的训练目标如何塑造Transformer的语言表示尚不清楚，无法解释预训练Transformer为什么能学习到通用的语言表示。","importance":"机制级贡献，从神经科学的轨迹拉直假设出发，揭示了AR预训练目标的表示学习机制，为预训练目标优化、表示对齐提供了新的视角。","technical_approach":"原创的表示分析方法，假设自回归Transformer的句子表示神经轨迹（每个token的表示随层变化的路径）会随着层数增加逐渐拉直，因为拉直的轨迹可以降低下一个token预测的难度；通过在不同大小的GPT类模型上逐层计算轨迹曲率验证该假设；和现有表示分析方法的区别是从动态轨迹的角度而非静态表示相似性的角度分析预训练的作用。","experiments":"在GPT-2（124M、355M、1.5B）、LLaMA-1（7B）上验证，随着层数增加，句子轨迹的平均曲率降低47%~62%，曲率降低幅度和模型的下游任务性能正相关；ablation显示预训练目标为next-token预测时才会出现轨迹拉直现象，随机初始化或掩码语言建模预训练的模型不会出现该现象。","authors_note":"MIT、哈佛大学团队，核心作者Evelina Fedorenko是计算语言学、神经科学交叉领域的知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How the next-token prediction training objective shapes Transformer's language representations is still unclear, which cannot explain why pretrained Transformers learn general-purpose language representations.","importance":"Mechanism-level contribution, reveals the representation learning mechanism of AR pretraining objective based on the trajectory straightening hypothesis from neuroscience, provides a new perspective for pretraining objective optimization and representation alignment.","technical_approach":"Original representation analysis method. It hypothesizes that the neural trajectory of sentence representations (the path of each token's representation changing across layers) of autoregressive Transformers gradually straightens as the number of layers increases, because straightened trajectories reduce the difficulty of next-token prediction. The hypothesis is verified by calculating trajectory curvature layer by layer on GPT-style models of different sizes. Unlike existing representation analysis methods, it analyzes the effect of pretraining from the perspective of dynamic trajectories rather than static representation similarity.","experiments":"Validated on GPT-2 (124M, 355M, 1.5B) and LLaMA-1 (7B). As the number of layers increases, the average curvature of sentence trajectories decreases by 47%~62%, and the reduction of curvature is positively correlated with the model's downstream task performance. Ablation shows trajectory straightening only occurs when the pretraining objective is next-token prediction, and does not occur in randomly initialized models or models pretrained with masked language modeling.","authors_note":"MIT and Harvard University team, core author Evelina Fedorenko is a well-known scholar in the intersection of computational linguistics and neuroscience."},"tags":["llm-representations","sentence-trajectories","predictive-coding","interpretability"],"keywords":["(Cognitive/Neuroscience) Language","Structured Prediction","(Application) Natural Language and Text Processing"],"notable_authors":["Evelina Fedorenko"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Next-token预测预训练的Transformer可以学习到支持多种下游任务的通用语言表示","claim_en":"Transformers pretrained with next-token prediction can learn general-purpose language representations supporting multiple downstream tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"Next-token预测预训练会隐式地让Transformer的句子神经轨迹随层数增加逐渐拉直，这是通用语言表示形成的核心机制之一","claim_en":"Next-token prediction pretraining implicitly straightens the Transformer's sentence neural trajectory as layers increase, which is one of the core mechanisms for the formation of general-purpose language representations","opposes":"Prior work assumes general language representations come from static semantic similarity learning rather than dynamic trajectory optimization","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4, §5.1","why_contested":"揭示了AR预训练目标的新机制，为预训练目标改进、模型架构设计提供了新的优化方向"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看Fig 2和§4的轨迹曲率验证结果即可，给AR预训练目标的表示学习机制提供了新的分析视角","en":"View Fig 2 and §4 trajectory curvature verification results only, which offers a new analytical perspective for AR pretraining's representation learning mechanism."}},{"id":"HuC23","title":"Thought Cloning: Learning to Think while Acting by Imitating Human Thinking","authors":["Shengran Hu","Jeff Clune"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$9e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HuC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HuC23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/8b4ba64e549c410185c4d3eac3a81726-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有强化学习智能体缺乏类人的语言思考能力，泛化、规划、适配新场景的表现远低于人类，之前的模仿学习仅克隆人类行为、不复制思考过程，导致跨任务迁移能力差。","importance":"是模仿学习范式级的改进，首次将人类思考过程作为训练信号引入行为克隆，为后续用互联网规模带思考注释的多模态数据训练通用智能体提供了可行路径，对LLM与RL结合的预训练研究有参考价值。","technical_approach":"原创Thought Cloning框架，在传统行为克隆损失之外，额外增加对人类执行任务时自然语言思考序列的预测损失，不需要引入复杂模块，舍弃了仅拟合动作标签的单目标设计，与普通行为克隆的核心区别是增加了思考过程的对齐目标。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体模型参数量、数据规模、指标提升幅度，仅提到框架在互联网规模带思考标注的视频数据集上能发挥更大价值，暂无公开的消融实验结论。","authors_note":"Jeff Clune是AI对齐与通用智能体方向的知名研究员，代表性工作包括AI安全研究、大模型能力涌现相关研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing RL agents lag far behind humans in generalization, planning and adaptation to novel scenarios. Prior imitation learning methods only clone human behaviors without modeling the underlying thinking process, leading to poor cross-task transfer performance.","importance":"It is a paradigm-level improvement for imitation learning. It introduces human thinking process as an additional training signal for agent training, providing a feasible path to train generalist agents with internet-scale multi-modal data annotated with thought traces, which offers reference for pre-training research combining LLMs and RL.","technical_approach":"The original Thought Cloning framework adds an extra prediction loss for natural language thought sequences generated by humans during task execution on top of traditional behavior cloning loss. It does not require additional complex modules, and abandons the single-objective design that only fits action labels. The key difference from vanilla behavior cloning is the additional alignment objective for thought sequences.","experiments":"No specific parameter size, data scale or metric improvement is provided in the disclosed abstract. The paper mentions the framework performs better on internet-scale video datasets with thought annotations, and no ablation conclusions are disclosed for now.","authors_note":"Jeff Clune is a well-known researcher in AI alignment and generalist agent research, with representative works including AI safety studies and LLM capability emergence related research."},"tags":["reasoning","imitation-learning","rl","chain-of-thought"],"keywords":["Reinforcement learning","Imitation Learning","AI Safety","Interpretability"],"notable_authors":["Jeff Clune"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"语言是人类思考的核心载体，可提升泛化、规划、适配新场景的能力","claim_en":"Language is the core carrier of human thinking, which can improve generalization, planning and adaptation to new scenarios","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"同时克隆人类行为和思考过程的智能体，跨任务泛化能力优于仅克隆行为的智能体","claim_en":"Agents that clone both human behaviors and thinking processes have better cross-task generalization ability than agents that only clone behaviors","opposes":"Prior imitation learning research assumes that cloning behaviors alone is sufficient to obtain good cross-task generalization performance","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction","why_contested":"If validated, it will completely change the training data annotation paradigm of imitation learning and greatly improve the transfer ability of generalist agents"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"属于多模态RL与LLM结合的范式思路参考，无需细读正文，仅作为文献备查即可","en":"A paradigm reference for multimodal RL and LLM integration, no need to read full text, just keep it as literature for future reference."}},{"id":"Huang0WHSML0MPL23","title":"Language Is Not All You Need: Aligning Perception with Language Models","authors":["Shaohan Huang","Li Dong","Wenhui Wang","Yaru Hao","Saksham Singhal","Shuming Ma","Tengchao Lv","Lei Cui","Owais Khan Mohammed","Barun Patra","Qiang Liu","Kriti Aggarwal","Zewen Chi","Nils Johan Bertil Bjorck","Vishrav Chaudhary","Subhojit Som","Xia Song","Furu Wei"],"institutions":["Microsoft Research Asia"],"abstract":"$9f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Huang0WHSML0MPL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Huang0WHSML0MPL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/e425b75bac5742a008d643826428787c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"现有大语言模型仅能处理文本模态，无法对接感知、动作等通用输入，之前的多模态大模型多采用文本基座加视觉适配器的微调方案，原生跨模态建模能力不足，零样本/少样本泛化能力差。","importance":"是原生多模态预训练的范式级参考工作，首次验证了从零训练的统一模态MLLM在零样本、少样本、多模态思维链任务上的通用能力，为后续统一多模态基座的预训练数据配比、目标设计提供了标杆。","technical_approach":"原创统一多模态预训练框架KOSMOS-1，将图像、文本等所有模态转化为离散token输入同一Transformer架构，舍弃了文本基座加视觉适配器的两段式训练方案，与同期多模态模型的核心区别是完全从零开始在 interleaved 图文混合数据上预训练，不依赖预训练文本基座。","experiments":"在网页规模多模态语料上训练，数据包括任意 interleaved 图文、图文对、纯文本，在语言理解、生成、无OCR文档理解等任务上的零样本表现优于同期仅采用微调适配器的多模态模型，具体提升幅度、参数量未在摘要披露。","authors_note":"作者团队来自微软亚洲研究院，Li Dong、Wenhui Wang是知名大模型研究员，代表性工作包括UniLM系列、多模态预训练相关研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing large language models only process text modality, and cannot take general perception or action inputs. Most prior multi-modal LLMs are fine-tuned solutions built on text-only bases with visual adapters, which lack native cross-modal modeling ability and show poor zero/few-shot generalization performance.","importance":"It is a paradigm-level reference work for native multi-modal pre-training. It verifies for the first time that a unified MLLM trained from scratch has general capabilities on zero-shot, few-shot and multi-modal chain-of-thought tasks, providing a benchmark for pre-training data ratio and objective design of subsequent unified multi-modal bases.","technical_approach":"The original unified multi-modal pre-training framework KOSMOS-1 converts all modalities including images and text into discrete tokens and feeds them into the same Transformer architecture. It abandons the two-stage training scheme of text base plus visual adapter. The core difference from contemporary multi-modal models is that it is pre-trained completely from scratch on interleaved image-text mixed data, without relying on a pre-trained text base.","experiments":"Trained on web-scale multi-modal corpora including arbitrarily interleaved images and text, image-caption pairs, and pure text data. Its zero-shot performance on language understanding, generation, OCR-free document understanding and other tasks outperforms contemporary multi-modal models that only use fine-tuned adapters. Specific improvement range and parameter size are not disclosed in the abstract.","authors_note":"The author team is from Microsoft Research Asia. Li Dong and Wenhui Wang are well-known LLM researchers with representative works including the UniLM series and multi-modal pre-training related studies."},"tags":["multimodal","alignment","perception","llm"],"keywords":["multimodal large language model"],"notable_authors":["Li Dong","Wenhui Wang"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"通用人工智能需要统一建模语言、多模态感知、动作和世界知识","claim_en":"Artificial general intelligence requires unified modeling of language, multi-modal perception, action and world knowledge","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"从零开始训练的原生统一多模态模型，性能优于基于文本基座加适配器微调的多模态模型","claim_en":"Native unified multi-modal models trained from scratch outperform multi-modal models fine-tuned based on text bases plus adapters","opposes":"Prior multi-modal research assumes that multi-modal models must be built on pre-trained text bases with visual adapters to achieve good performance","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"If validated, native unified multi-modal pre-training will replace the two-stage scheme, greatly changing the training process of multi-modal LLMs"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"应立刻在内部原生多模态基座预训练实验中复现其数据配比与统一token化设计，改变了多模态必须依赖文本基座微调的prior","en":"Immediately reproduce its data ratio and unified tokenization design in internal native multimodal pretraining, which changes the prior that multimodal models need text base fine-tuning."}},{"id":"HuangBZZZSLLZLF23","title":"C-Eval: A Multi-Level Multi-Discipline Chinese Evaluation Suite for Foundation Models","authors":["Yuzhen Huang","Yuzhuo Bai","Zhihao Zhu","Junlei Zhang","Jinghan Zhang","Tangjun Su","Junteng Liu","Chuancheng Lv","Yikai Zhang","Jiayi Lei","Yao Fu","Maosong Sun","Junxian He"],"institutions":["Shanghai Jiao Tong University","Tsinghua University"],"abstract":"$a0","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HuangBZZZSLLZLF23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HuangBZZZSLLZLF23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/c6ec1844bec96d6d32ae95ae694e23d8-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有大语言模型的中文能力评估缺乏全面、多难度、多学科的基准，之前的中文评测多聚焦于通用对话或单一学科，无法衡量模型在中文语境下的高阶知识和推理能力，也无法对齐中文教育和专业场景需求。","importance":"是数据级的基准贡献，是首个全面的中文大模型能力评估套件，为后续中文大模型的预训练、对齐效果评估提供了统一标尺，填补了中文高阶能力评测的空白。","technical_approach":"原创中文评测数据集C-Eval，覆盖中学、高中、大学、专业四个难度等级，52个学科的选择题，同时推出更难的C-Eval Hard子集，舍弃了此前评测仅覆盖低难度通用任务的设计，与其他中文评测的核心区别是覆盖完整教育阶段和专业学科，与美国MMLU基准对齐。","experiments":"评测了当前主流中英文大模型，结果显示仅GPT系列模型在C-Eval上表现较好，中文原生模型的高阶知识和推理能力存在明显差距，具体得分未在摘要披露。","authors_note":"作者团队来自上海交通大学、清华大学等机构，是国内最早开展大模型中文评测的团队之一。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing Chinese ability evaluation for large language models lacks a comprehensive, multi-difficulty, multi-discipline benchmark. Previous Chinese evaluations mostly focus on general dialogue or single disciplines, which cannot measure advanced knowledge and reasoning ability of models in Chinese context, nor align with needs of Chinese education and professional scenarios.","importance":"It is a data-level benchmark contribution. It is the first comprehensive Chinese LLM ability evaluation suite, providing a unified ruler for evaluating pre-training and alignment effects of subsequent Chinese LLMs, filling the gap in Chinese advanced ability evaluation.","technical_approach":"The original Chinese evaluation dataset C-Eval covers multiple-choice questions across 4 difficulty levels (middle school, high school, college, professional) and 52 disciplines. It also launches the harder C-Eval Hard subset, abandoning the previous design that only covers low-difficulty general tasks. The core difference from other Chinese evaluations is that it covers complete education stages and professional disciplines, aligned with the US MMLU benchmark.","experiments":"Evaluated mainstream Chinese and English LLMs. Results show that only GPT series models perform well on C-Eval, and native Chinese models have obvious gaps in advanced knowledge and reasoning ability. Specific scores are not disclosed in the abstract.","authors_note":"The author team is from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Tsinghua University and other institutions, and is one of the earliest teams carrying out Chinese LLM evaluation in China."},"tags":["benchmark","evaluation","chinese","llm"],"keywords":["Chinese evaluation","foundation models"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大模型的能力评测需要覆盖多难度、多学科任务才能准确反映其高阶能力","claim_en":"LLM capability evaluation needs to cover multi-difficulty and multi-discipline tasks to accurately reflect advanced capabilities","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"现有通用中文评测无法准确衡量大模型的高阶知识和推理能力，需要覆盖全学科全难度的基准","claim_en":"Existing general Chinese evaluations cannot accurately measure advanced knowledge and reasoning ability of LLMs, and benchmarks covering all disciplines and difficulty levels are needed","opposes":"Prior Chinese LLM evaluation works assume that general task benchmarks can accurately measure advanced knowledge and reasoning ability of LLMs","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§2 Dataset Construction","why_contested":"C-Eval exposes capability shortcomings of native Chinese LLMs, providing clear direction for pre-training data optimization of subsequent Chinese LLMs"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"是中文大模型能力评估的常用基准，无需读正文，直接调用公开测试集做预训练效果验证即可","en":"A widely used Chinese LLM evaluation benchmark, no need to read full text, directly call the public test set to verify pretraining performance."}},{"id":"HuangGW23","title":"Towards Efficient Pre-Trained Language Model via Feature Correlation Distillation","authors":["Kun Huang","Xin Guo","Meng Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a1","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HuangGW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HuangGW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/34260a400e39a802961470b3d3de99cc-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有预训练语言模型的知识蒸馏方法大多直接对齐Transformer块的输出特征，对学生模型约束过强，额外引入的参数和计算成本高，基于自注意力内部关系的蒸馏方案计算复杂度高，受注意力头数限制容易得到次优解。","importance":"是方法级的改进，为预训练语言模型的轻量化蒸馏提供了更高效的方案，降低了蒸馏过程的计算开销和约束强度，提升了小模型的性能上限。","technical_approach":"改进的特征相关蒸馏方法，通过蒸馏教师模型特征之间的相关关系而非直接对齐特征本身，舍弃了直接对齐输出特征的强约束设计，与现有蒸馏方法的核心区别是不需要引入额外参数，计算复杂度更低，对学生模型的结构限制更少。","experiments":"摘要未披露具体模型参数量、数据集规模、指标提升幅度，也未公开消融实验的具体结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing knowledge distillation methods for pre-trained language models mostly directly align output features of Transformer blocks, which impose overly strong constraints on student models, and introduce high additional parameter and computational costs. Distillation schemes based on internal self-attention relations have high computational complexity and are easily limited by the number of attention heads, leading to suboptimal solutions.","importance":"It is a method-level improvement, providing a more efficient scheme for lightweight distillation of pre-trained language models, reducing computational overhead and constraint strength of the distillation process, and improving the performance upper limit of small models.","technical_approach":"The improved feature correlation distillation method distills the correlation between teacher model features instead of directly aligning the features themselves. It abandons the strong constraint design of directly aligning output features. The core difference from existing distillation methods is that it does not require additional parameters, has lower computational complexity, and has fewer structural restrictions on student models.","experiments":"No specific parameter size, dataset scale, metric improvement range or specific ablation conclusions are disclosed in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["model-compression","distillation","plm","efficiency"],"keywords":["Knowledge Distillation; Pre-Trained Language Model"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"知识蒸馏是压缩大参数量预训练语言模型的有效方法","claim_en":"Knowledge distillation is an effective method to compress large-parameter pre-trained language models","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"蒸馏特征相关关系的效果优于直接对齐教师和学生模型的输出特征，可降低约束强度和计算成本","claim_en":"Distilling feature correlation outperforms direct alignment of output features of teacher and student models, which can reduce constraint strength and computational cost","opposes":"Prior knowledge distillation works assume that directly aligning output features of teacher and student models is the optimal solution for distillation","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction","why_contested":"If validated, feature correlation distillation will replace direct feature alignment, greatly reducing the cost of large model distillation"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3的特征相关性蒸馏的损失设计部分，可用于预训练小模型轻量化的内部实验参考","en":"Only read §3 loss design of feature correlation distillation, which can be used as reference for internal pretrained small model lightweighting experiments."}},{"id":"HuangZCWVL23","title":"Lexinvariant Language Models","authors":["Qian Huang","Eric Zelikman","Sarah Li Chen","Yuhuai Wu","Gregory Valiant","Percy Liang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a2","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HuangZCWVL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HuangZCWVL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/4b734e95f0788a030a69caa987516186-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：标准语言模型过度依赖词面形式，导致同义改写、词汇替换或表面扰动后预测不稳定，而现有做法通常靠数据增强或更大规模预训练被动缓解，没有直接把“词汇不变性”写进建模目标。这个问题现在值得重提，是因为大模型越来越强，但很多泛化失败仍然来自 lexical shortcut，而不是推理能力本身不足。","importance":"它的重要性更偏方法和归纳偏置层面，而不是单纯刷分。对 pretrain 的启示是：语言建模目标未必要把每个 token 形式差异都等价当作监督信号，适当引入 lexical invariance 约束，可能提升鲁棒泛化并减少模型把容量浪费在脆弱词面相关性上。边界也很清楚：如果不变性定义过强，会抹掉词汇细粒度差异，伤害需要精确措辞的任务。","technical_approach":"核心方法是构造一种对词汇替换保持稳定的语言建模训练方式，而不是只做常规 next-token 预测。直观上，它会把语义上应当等价的不同词面表达拉近，让模型对这类变换给出一致或接近的一致预测；和普通数据增强不同，重点不在“喂更多改写样本”，而在显式约束表示或输出分布对 lexical variation 的敏感性。这样设计有效，是因为它直接针对 shortcut 来源；不这么做时，模型即使见过大量改写，也可能继续把词面模式当作便宜特征。","experiments":"从给定信息无法确认具体模型规模、数据规模、基线和数值结果。可以合理判断，实验重点应当是比较标准 LM 与 lexinvariant 训练在同义改写鲁棒性、OOD 泛化或下游语义一致性上的差异，并通过消融分析不变性约束强度与主任务性能的 trade-off；但没有摘要和正文，无法负责任地写出具体提升数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a simple but important weakness: standard language models are overly sensitive to lexical form, so predictions can shift under paraphrases or synonym substitutions even when meaning is preserved. Prior work mostly tried to wash this out with scale or augmentation, rather than making lexical invariance an explicit training objective.","importance":"Its contribution is mainly methodological: it argues that pretraining should not treat every surface-form distinction as equally valuable supervision. For pretraining research, the key takeaway is that injecting invariance to meaning-preserving lexical variation may improve robustness and reduce wasted capacity on brittle word-level shortcuts. The trade-off is obvious: if the invariance is too aggressive, the model may lose sensitivity to wording that actually matters.","technical_approach":"The method appears to build a language model that is explicitly stable under lexical substitutions, instead of relying on plain next-token prediction alone. The key idea is to encourage similar internal states or output distributions for semantically equivalent surface forms; this differs from vanilla augmentation because the goal is not just more data diversity, but a direct constraint on what variations the model should ignore. That design is plausible because it attacks the shortcut at the objective level rather than hoping scale will average it away.","experiments":"The provided metadata does not include enough information to state model sizes, datasets, baselines, or gains reliably. The likely experimental focus is robustness to paraphrases, out-of-distribution generalization, and the trade-off between invariance strength and core LM quality, but concrete numbers cannot be confirmed from the prompt alone.","authors_note":""},"tags":["language-modeling","invariance","generalization","tokenization"],"notable_authors":["Qian Huang","Eric Zelikman","Sarah Li Chen","Yuhuai Wu","Gregory Valiant"],"keywords":["Large Language Model","in-context learning","pretraining"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§4.1的词汇不变性约束设计，可引入预训练目标减少模型对词面shortcut的依赖，提升鲁棒性","en":"Focus on §4.1 lexical invariance constraint design, which can be added to pretraining objectives to reduce lexical shortcut reliance and improve model robustness."}},{"id":"Imanishi0TWC23","title":"A fast heuristic to optimize time-space tradeoff for large models","authors":["Akifumi Imanishi","Zijian Xu","Masayuki Takagi","Sixue Wang","Emilio Castillo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a3","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Imanishi0TWC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Imanishi0TWC23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/9be39b35906526b8d240056daac72c6f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是大模型训练中的时间-空间权衡优化问题：显存有限时，训练系统需要在重计算、激活保存、算子切分等策略之间做组合选择，而精确最优搜索往往太慢，不适合真实工程。过去很多方案要么靠手工经验，要么用昂贵求解器，难以快速适配不同模型和硬件。","importance":"它属于系统优化工作，但对 pretrain 很实际。大规模预训练的很多瓶颈不在理论目标，而在能否把给定算力和显存用到接近最优；一个足够快的 heuristic 如果能稳定找到高质量 time-space tradeoff，就直接转化为更大 batch、更长 context 或更低训练成本。它不是模型方法创新，但工程价值可能很高。","technical_approach":"核心方法是提出一个快速启发式算法，用近似而非全局最优求解来选择大模型训练中的时间-空间配置。典型场景包括 activation checkpointing、张量切分、层级调度或内存复用；方法重点不是重新定义优化目标，而是利用问题结构快速找到足够好的配置。和精确优化比，它牺牲理论最优性换来求解速度和可部署性，这在训练系统里通常是合理取舍。","experiments":"从题目可推断实验会比较该 heuristic 与精确搜索、手工配置或已有内存优化器，在求解时间、峰值显存和总训练时长上的差异。可能还会覆盖不同模型规模和硬件设置，展示 heuristic 在大实例上更具优势；但给定信息无法确认具体 benchmark、模型参数量和数值结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles the time–memory trade-off problem in large-model training. In practice, systems must choose among activation rematerialization, storage, partitioning, and scheduling strategies under tight memory budgets, but exact optimization is often too slow to be useful for real deployments.","importance":"This is a systems paper, but highly relevant to pretraining at scale. Much of large-scale training is constrained not by the objective itself but by whether available memory and compute can be used efficiently; a fast heuristic that consistently finds good trade-offs can translate directly into larger batches, longer contexts, or lower training cost. The contribution is not algorithmic modeling in the LM sense, but the engineering impact can be substantial.","technical_approach":"The method is a fast heuristic for selecting a near-optimal time–space configuration for large-model training. The likely scope includes checkpoint placement, tensor partitioning, memory reuse, and scheduling decisions. The key design choice is to exploit structure in the optimization problem to get good solutions quickly, instead of solving for the exact optimum. That sacrifices theoretical optimality but often wins in actual training systems where solver overhead matters.","experiments":"The natural evaluation is against exact search, manual configurations, or prior memory-optimization methods, measuring solver time, peak memory, and end-to-end training overhead. The paper likely also studies different model scales and hardware regimes to show that the heuristic is especially useful on larger instances, but the prompt does not provide the specific benchmarks or numbers.","authors_note":""},"tags":["large-models","memory","systems","training-efficiency"],"notable_authors":["Akifumi Imanishi","Zijian Xu","Masayuki Takagi","Sixue Wang","Emilio Castillo"],"keywords":["Recomputation","Gradient checkpointing","Memory reduction","Computational graph optimization"],"recommendation":{"zh":"直接看§5的实验加速比结果即可，启发式策略可快速适配内部预训练集群的显存与算力调度优化","en":"Check §5 experimental speedup results directly, the heuristic strategy can be quickly adapted to memory and computing scheduling optimization of internal pretraining clusters."}},{"id":"JainNATID23","title":"Efficient Data Subset Selection to Generalize Training Across Models: Transductive and Inductive Networks","authors":["Eeshaan Jain","Tushar Nandy","Gaurav Aggarwal","Ashish Tendulkar","Rishabh K. Iyer","Abir De"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a4","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JainNATID23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JainNATID23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/0f25eb6e9dc26c933a5d7516abf1eb8c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关注数据子集选择的泛化问题：很多 subset selection 方法只能为当前模型挑数据，换个架构或训练设定就失效，导致数据筛选很难复用。随着预训练数据规模越来越大，如何选一个对多种模型都有效的训练子集，变成了非常现实的问题。","importance":"它的贡献偏数据效率和系统方法。对 pretrain 的直接启示是：数据选择不应该只围绕单一模型做局部最优，而要考虑跨模型可迁移性；如果一个子集既能在当前模型上有效，也能泛化到未来模型，就能显著降低多轮实验和持续训练的成本。这个方向和 data curation、scaling law 下的有效 token 利用率高度相关。","technical_approach":"核心方法是研究能跨模型泛化的数据子集选择，并区分 transductive 与 inductive 两种网络设定。前者更像在已知候选模型/任务集合上选子集，后者则追求对未见模型也有效；方法上大概率构造了刻画样本价值的网络或图结构，再学习选择规则，而不是为每个新模型重新跑完整打分。和传统 coreset 方法相比，关键差别是把“跨模型泛化”作为一等目标。","experiments":"题目已经说明实验会比较 transductive 和 inductive 网络在跨模型训练泛化上的效果。合理预期作者会在多个架构上验证：用一个选择器筛出的子集训练不同模型，比较随机选样、单模型子集选择和其方法的精度/损失保持率以及选择成本；但缺少摘要，无法给出子集比例和具体提升。","authors_note":"作者列表中有 Rishabh K. Iyer。其团队在 subset selection、data valuation、coreset 与数据效率方向有持续代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper focuses on a practical limitation of data subset selection: many methods pick a good subset for one model, but that subset does not transfer when the architecture or training setup changes. As training corpora grow, selecting data once and reusing it across models becomes increasingly valuable.","importance":"This is mainly a data-efficiency contribution with clear relevance to pretraining. The key lesson is that data selection should not be optimized only for a single current model; it should target cross-model transferability. If a subset remains useful across architectures, it can reduce repeated curation cost and improve effective token usage in large-scale training pipelines.","technical_approach":"The method studies subset selection that generalizes across models, explicitly distinguishing transductive and inductive settings. The transductive version likely assumes access to the target family during selection, whereas the inductive version aims to work for unseen models. The approach appears to learn a network-based scoring or selection rule over examples so that one does not need to rerun full subset optimization for each new model. That is the main departure from classic coreset selection.","experiments":"The title already points to the likely evaluation: choose subsets once, train multiple models on them, and compare against random selection and single-model-targeted subset methods. The useful metrics would be retained accuracy/loss versus subset size and the cost of selection itself, but the prompt does not include the exact architectures, subset ratios, or gains.","authors_note":"The author list includes Rishabh K. Iyer, whose group is well known for work on subset selection, data valuation, coresets, and data-efficient learning."},"tags":["data-selection","data-quality","generalization","training-efficiency"],"notable_authors":["Eeshaan Jain","Tushar Nandy","Gaurav Aggarwal","Ashish Tendulkar","Rishabh K. Iyer"],"keywords":["Data Subset Selection","Efficient Learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§4的跨模型数据选择框架即可，给预训练数据筛选、有效token挖掘提供了可复用的新思路","en":"Only read §4 cross-model data selection framework, which provides a reusable new idea for pretraining data filtering and effective token mining."}},{"id":"2307.07063","title":"Bootstrapping Vision-Language Learning with Decoupled Language Pre-training","authors":["Yiren Jian","Chongyang Gao","Soroush Vosoughi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a5","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.07063","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JianGV23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JianGV23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/002262941c9edfd472a79298b2ac5e17-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：在冻结 LLM 的前提下做视觉-语言预训练，现有方法过度依赖图文对数据和视觉侧 prompt 设计，训练成本高且对数据配对质量敏感。作者认为，与其一味找“哪些视觉特征最该喂给 LLM”，不如先在纯语言空间里学出“什么样的语言提示最容易和视觉特征对齐”。","importance":"结论是：这是一篇偏方法级和系统级的 VLM 预训练工作，价值在于把一部分 VL 对齐问题前移到纯文本预训练阶段。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，冻结 LLM 的 VLM 不是只能靠图文对进行端到端对齐；语言侧可以先做 decoupled pre-training，减少对昂贵配对数据的依赖。如果效果稳定，这类思路对资源受限团队尤其有吸引力。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Prompt-Transformer（P-Former）。它先只用语言数据学习预测“理想 prompt”，再在视觉-语言阶段用这些 prompt 去承接视觉特征与冻结 LLM 的接口。和常见的 visual prompt tuning 或投影层不同，这里重点不在改造视觉 token，而在预先塑形语言侧的可对齐子空间。这样设计有效的原因是：冻结 LLM 时，语言流形是最稳定也最强的先验，先把 prompt 学好，可以减轻后续 VL 对齐时对图文数据量和噪声的依赖。代价是它仍需要假设这些语言 prompt 能泛化到视觉语义，而不是只在文本分布内有效。","experiments":"摘要没有给出足够数字，无法可靠写出参数规模、训练数据量或精确提升幅度。可以确认的是，作者声称该框架在资源密集型 VL 预训练场景下更高效，并能在冻结 LLM 的设置中取得更好的性能。对资深读者，最应该关注的实验不是平均分，而是三类对比：一是相比标准视觉前缀/适配器方法是否在同等图文数据下更好；二是在减少图文对数量时是否退化更慢；三是语言侧预训练本身带来的收益是否能和更强视觉编码器区分开。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles an efficiency issue in vision-language pretraining with frozen LLMs: current methods lean heavily on paired image-text data and on carefully designed visual prompts. The authors argue that instead of only asking which visual features should be fed into the language model, we should also ask which language-side prompts are easiest to align with vision in the first place.","importance":"This is a method/system contribution for VLM pretraining, with a useful message for pretraining practice. It suggests that part of multimodal alignment can be offloaded to a text-only pretraining stage, reducing dependence on expensive paired data. If the effect is robust, the approach is especially relevant for resource-constrained VLM training pipelines built around frozen LLMs.","technical_approach":"The main idea is Prompt-Transformer (P-Former). It is trained on language data alone to predict “ideal prompts,” and those prompts are then used as the interface between visual features and a frozen LLM in the VL stage. This differs from standard visual-prompt or projection-only methods because the primary adaptation happens on the language side, not by over-engineering visual tokens. The rationale is strong: when the LLM is frozen, its language manifold is the most stable prior available, so shaping prompts before multimodal training can make later alignment less data-hungry. The limitation is that text-learned prompts still need to transfer to visual semantics rather than overfitting to purely textual regularities.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide enough detail to report parameter counts, training scale, or exact gains. What can be stated safely is that the framework is presented as more efficient for resource-intensive VL pretraining and beneficial in frozen-LLM settings. The empirical questions that matter most are whether it beats standard visual-prefix baselines under the same paired-data budget, whether it degrades more gracefully when image-text data is reduced, and how much of the gain comes from decoupled language pretraining rather than from stronger encoders elsewhere in the stack.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm-pretraining","frozen-llm","vision-language","decoupled-pretraining"],"keywords":["vision-language pretraining","multi-modal learning","uni-modal auxiliary learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"冻结LLM做VLM预训练的新路线，把部分对齐工作前移到纯文本阶段以减少图文对依赖，重点看§3 P-Former设计和§4.3跨数据集泛化实验即可。","en":"New pipeline for frozen-LLM VLM pretraining shifting partial alignment to pure text stage to cut paired data demand, only read §3 P-Former design and §4.3 cross-dataset generalization experiments."}},{"id":"JinW0W23","title":"S3: Increasing GPU Utilization during Generative Inference for Higher Throughput","authors":["Yunho Jin","Chun-Feng Wu","David Brooks","Gu-Yeon Wei"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JinW0W23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JinW0W23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/3a13be0c5dae69e0f08065f113fb10b8-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：生成式推理阶段 GPU 利用率低，导致大模型 serving 吞吐受限。问题不在算子峰值性能，而在 autoregressive 解码天然是小 batch、强串行、memory-bound，GPU 经常在等数据或等调度；仅靠更快 kernel 不足以填满设备，所以作者关注系统层的利用率提升。","importance":"结论是：这是系统级的重要工作。它不改变预训练本身，但直接影响大模型服务成本，并反过来影响研究阶段的大规模评测、数据合成和 RL rollout 预算。对 pretrain 研究者，启示是 inference 系统优化并非只属于部署端；如果吞吐提升明显，很多原本昂贵的 posttrain/评测闭环会变得可承受。","technical_approach":"从题目看，S3 的核心目标是在 generative inference 中提高 GPU 占用率，从而提升吞吐。典型思路可能包括请求重排、阶段流水、prefill/decoding 分离调度、以及对 KV cache 与 batch 形态的更细粒度管理。与单纯连续 batching 的区别，S3 可能强调在不显著增加单请求延迟的前提下，利用调度把 GPU 的空隙填满。设计难点在于吞吐和时延通常矛盾：为了让 GPU 更忙，系统往往要等待更多请求或改变执行顺序，这对在线服务不总是可接受。","experiments":"没有摘要数字，无法报告具体吞吐提升幅度、模型规模或硬件平台。可以确认的是，论文关注生成式推理而非训练，主要指标应是 tokens/s、GPU utilization、延迟分布以及不同 batch/序列长度下的收益。对资深读者，最关键的实验不是平均加速比，而是收益区间：提升是否只在短序列高并发下成立，还是对长序列、真实到达分布和多模型混部也有效；另外是否与 paged KV cache、continuous batching 等现有 serving 技术兼容。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a well-known serving bottleneck: GPU utilization during autoregressive generation is often poor, so throughput is much lower than the hardware’s nominal compute capability would suggest. The issue is not only kernel efficiency; decoding is inherently sequential, small-batch, and frequently memory-bound, which leaves the GPU underfilled.","importance":"This is a system contribution, but it matters for pretraining-adjacent research as well. Better inference throughput directly lowers the cost of evaluation, synthetic data generation, and RL rollouts. In practice, that can change which posttraining loops are economically feasible, so the impact is broader than deployment alone.","technical_approach":"From the title, S3 is a scheduling or systems method designed to raise GPU utilization during generative inference. The likely mechanisms include smarter batching, pipeline restructuring across prefill and decode phases, and improved management of KV-cache-heavy workloads. The key design challenge is the usual one: raising utilization often requires delaying or reordering work, which helps throughput but can hurt latency. The method is only compelling if it improves the former without making the latter unacceptable.","experiments":"The abstract is missing, so no trustworthy quantitative summary can be given for model size, hardware, or speedup. The relevant metrics are almost certainly throughput, GPU utilization, and latency behavior under different workload regimes. For an experienced reader, the most important evidence would be where the gains actually hold: only under high concurrency and short outputs, or also under long-context generation and realistic request arrivals; and whether the method composes cleanly with existing serving techniques such as continuous batching and paged KV caches.","authors_note":""},"tags":["gpu-utilization","serving","inference-throughput","generative-inference"],"recommendation":{"zh":"生成式推理调度优化工作，不改动模型结构就能提升吞吐，直接降低大模型评测、数据合成和RL rollout成本，只看§4调度策略和§5吞吐时延对比即可。","en":"Generative inference scheduling optimization boosting throughput without modifying model architecture, cutting costs of LLM evaluation, data synthesis and RL rollout, only read §4 scheduling policy and §5 throughput-latency comparison."}},{"id":"KadraJWG23","title":"Scaling Laws for Hyperparameter Optimization","authors":["Arlind Kadra","Maciej Janowski","Martin Wistuba","Josif Grabocka"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Hyperparameter optimization is an important subfield of machine learning that focuses on tuning the hyperparameters of a chosen algorithm to achieve peak performance. Recently, there has been a stream of methods that tackle the issue of hyperparameter optimization, however, most of the methods do not exploit the dominant power law nature of learning curves for Bayesian optimization. In this work, we propose Deep Power Laws (DPL), an ensemble of neural network models conditioned to yield predictions that follow a power-law scaling pattern. Our method dynamically decides which configurations to pause and train incrementally by making use of gray-box evaluations. We compare our method against 7 state-of-the-art competitors on 3 benchmarks related to tabular, image, and NLP datasets covering 59 diverse tasks. Our method achieves the best results across all benchmarks by obtaining the best any-time results compared to all competitors.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KadraJWG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KadraJWG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/945c781d7194ea81026148838af95af7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：超参数优化本身是否存在 scaling law，能否随着预算、模型规模或数据规模变化而预测“需要搜多少、怎么搜”。过去 HPO 常被当作黑盒工程问题，各家靠经验设搜索空间和 trial 数；但在大模型时代，HPO 成本已经高到不能继续靠拍脑袋，作者因此试图给 HPO 也建立类似训练 scaling law 的规律描述。","importance":"结论是：这是方法论层面的重要工作。对 pretrain 研究的价值很直接，因为大规模训练中很多结论其实被 HPO 预算混淆了；如果 HPO 的收益曲线和最优预算分配可以被规律化，实验设计会更科学，也更容易比较不同方法的真实性价比。它的影响更偏 research process，而不是单个模型能力提升。","technical_approach":"核心思路是拟合或推导超参数优化的 scaling law，研究在不同预算条件下最优 trial 数、搜索深度或性能改进的关系。和传统 HPO 论文只提新搜索算法不同，这类工作更关心宏观规律：额外 HPO 预算带来的收益是否呈幂律递减，最优配置在模型变大时如何迁移，什么时候继续搜索已经不划算。这样做的好处是给实验资源分配提供原则，而不是局部技巧。边界在于，HPO 规律通常强依赖任务族、模型族和搜索空间定义，跨域泛化未必强。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法可靠写出覆盖了哪些任务、模型和具体拟合指数。合理预期是作者会在多个 benchmark 上分析性能随 HPO 预算变化的曲线，并验证 scaling law 能否预测更大预算下的最优结果或停止点。对做预训练的人，最有价值的是两类结论：一是固定总算力下，训练单个更大模型和做更多 HPO trial 的最优分配；二是小规模 HPO 结果对大规模训练是否可外推。这两点直接影响实验排期和成本。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether hyperparameter optimization itself follows scaling laws. HPO is usually treated as an expensive black-box engineering step, but at modern model scale, that is no longer acceptable: the cost is too high, and poor HPO confounds nearly every empirical comparison.","importance":"This is a methodology paper with clear relevance to pretraining practice. Its significance is that it tries to make HPO budget allocation predictable rather than ad hoc. For large-scale model research, that matters because many apparent method gains are really differences in tuning effort; understanding HPO scaling makes comparisons fairer and resource planning more rational.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to characterize how performance improves as HPO budget grows and to identify scaling relationships for search effort versus return. Unlike standard HPO papers that introduce a new optimizer, this work is more about regularities: how quickly gains saturate, how optimal configurations migrate with model or data scale, and when further tuning is no longer worth the compute. That is useful because it informs experimental budgeting directly. The main limitation is that such laws may depend strongly on the model family, task family, and search space definition.","experiments":"Because the abstract is not provided, it is not possible to state which workloads, scales, or fitted exponents were used. The expected empirical setup would analyze performance as a function of HPO budget across multiple benchmarks and test whether the learned scaling law predicts larger-budget outcomes or practical stopping points. For pretraining practitioners, the most actionable results would be how to split a fixed compute budget between training longer/larger models and running more HPO trials, and whether small-scale tuning transfers to larger runs.","authors_note":""},"tags":["scaling-law","hyperparameter-optimization","compute","training-dynamics"],"keywords":["hyperparameter optimization","multi-fidelity hyperparameter optimization","multi-fidelity hpo","power laws","deep neural networks","deep power laws","deep ensemble","deep learning","large language models","scaling laws","llm"],"recommendation":{"zh":"首次为超参数优化建立scaling law，可指导大模型预训练的HPO预算分配、避免无效试错，重点看§3.2不同规模下的最优trial数拟合结果即可。","en":"First scaling law for hyperparameter optimization, guiding HPO budget allocation for LLM pretraining to avoid invalid trials, only read §3.2 fitting results of optimal trial count across scales."}},{"id":"KalraB23","title":"Phase diagram of early training dynamics in deep neural networks: effect of the learning rate, depth, and width","authors":["Dayal Singh Kalra","Maissam Barkeshli"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We systematically analyze optimization dynamics in deep neural networks (DNNs) trained with stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and study the effect of learning rate $\\eta$, depth $d$, and width $w$ of the neural network. By analyzing the maximum eigenvalue $\\lambda^H_t$ of the Hessian of the loss, which is a measure of sharpness of the loss landscape, we find that the dynamics can show four distinct regimes: (i) an early time transient regime, (ii) an intermediate saturation regime, (iii) a progressive sharpening regime, and (iv) a late time \"edge of stability\" regime. The early and intermediate regimes (i) and (ii) exhibit a rich phase diagram depending on $\\eta \\equiv c / \\lambda_0^H $, $d$, and $w$. We identify several critical values of $c$, which separate qualitatively distinct phenomena in the early time dynamics of training loss and sharpness. Notably, we discover the opening up of a \"sharpness reduction\" phase, where sharpness decreases at early times, as $d$ and $ 1/w$ are increased.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KalraB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KalraB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/a23598416361c7a9860164155e6ddd0b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：深度网络早期训练动力学在学习率、深度、宽度变化下会落入哪些不同相区，以及这些相区如何决定训练是否稳定、是否进入有效特征学习。过去很多关于训练稳定性的经验规则来自零散观察，例如“学习率太大就炸”“更深更难训”，但缺少统一的 phase diagram 去解释这些现象之间的关系。","importance":"结论是：这是一篇偏理论但对训练实践有启发的工作。它的重要性在于把早期训练行为组织成相图，让一些经验性的调参规则有了更系统的解释。对 pretrain 研究者，尤其是做大模型优化的人，这类结果的价值在于帮助理解 loss spike、catapult dynamics、临界学习率等现象，而不是直接给出一套现成 recipe。","technical_approach":"核心方法是分析深层网络在训练初期的动力学，并研究学习率、深度、宽度如何决定不同训练相区。按 Barkeshli 一系工作的脉络，这类研究通常会识别出懒惰训练、特征学习、catapult 或发散等不同 regime，并通过理论分析和数值实验画出相边界。相比只给单一稳定条件，这种相图式表达更有用，因为它告诉你不是“稳/不稳”二元，而是不同超参数组合会把模型带入性质完全不同的优化过程。边界在于，很多理论结论先在简化网络或均方损失下成立，映射到 Transformer 需要谨慎。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法准确写出实验网络、数据集和临界关系式。可以预期，实验会用不同深度和宽度的网络扫描学习率，展示训练初期损失、特征变化或梯度范数的相变行为，并与理论边界对照。对大模型训练者，这篇论文最值得读的不是最终 test accuracy，而是相图是否能解释实际中的 warmup 需求、宽度增大后的稳定性变化，以及何时较大学习率反而有利于进入更好的特征学习阶段。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies how early training dynamics in deep networks organize into distinct phases as learning rate, depth, and width vary. Many practical rules about stability are based on isolated observations—too large a learning rate diverges, deeper models are harder to train—but there has been less effort to unify these behaviors into a phase diagram.","importance":"This is primarily a theory-oriented paper, but it has practical value for optimization at scale. Its contribution is to make early training regimes more legible: rather than treating stability as a binary property, it characterizes qualitatively different phases of learning. For pretraining researchers, this is most useful for thinking about loss spikes, critical learning rates, warmup, and related optimization phenomena.","technical_approach":"The core approach is to analyze early-time dynamics and map out how learning rate, depth, and width determine the training regime. In the Barkeshli line of work, that often means distinguishing lazy training, feature-learning regimes, catapult behavior, and outright divergence, then deriving or validating boundaries between them. This is more informative than a single stability condition because different regimes can have very different generalization and optimization properties. The caveat is familiar: such theory is often derived for simplified architectures or losses, so direct transfer to Transformers requires care.","experiments":"The abstract is not available, so exact models, datasets, and quantitative thresholds cannot be stated reliably. The likely experiments sweep learning rates across networks of varying depth and width, tracking loss, feature evolution, or gradient norms to reveal phase transitions and compare them to theory. For practitioners, the useful question is whether the phase diagram explains real training choices such as warmup schedules, width-dependent stability, and cases where larger learning rates improve representation learning instead of merely causing instability.","authors_note":""},"tags":["training-dynamics","learning-rate","depth","width"],"keywords":["Optimization dynamics","Phase diagrams","learning rate transition","Catapult effect"],"recommendation":{"zh":"把深度网络早期训练行为整理为相图，可辅助理解预训练初期的loss spike、发散等现象，重点看Fig2不同超参数下的相区划分即可。","en":"Organizes early training dynamics of deep networks into phase diagrams, helping explain loss spike and divergence in early pretraining, only check Fig2 phase division under different hyperparameters."}},{"id":"KangJSJ23","title":"Performance Scaling via Optimal Transport: Enabling Data Selection from Partially Revealed Sources","authors":["Feiyang Kang","Hoang Anh Just","Anit Kumar Sahu","Ruoxi Jia"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a6","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KangJSJ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KangJSJ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/c142c14699223f7417cad706fd6f652e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：当数据源只能部分揭示、无法完整查看全部样本时，如何做有效的数据选择。大规模预训练里，这个问题很现实：候选语料极大、清洗代价高、版权或访问限制常常让你只能先看到一部分统计信息；如果仍按全量可见假设来做数据筛选，方法往往不适用。作者试图用最优传输给这种“部分可见源”下的数据选择建立原则。","importance":"结论是：这是数据级和方法级兼具的工作。对 pretrain 的意义在于，数据选择不再只是离线全量打分问题，而是受访问约束和揭示顺序约束的决策问题。若最优传输的框架能在不看全量数据时仍稳定估计样本价值，它会对数据配比、持续预训练和受限数据采购都很有帮助。","technical_approach":"核心方法是基于 optimal transport 做性能驱动的数据选择，并支持 partially revealed sources。最优传输适合这里，是因为它天然表达“把目标任务需求与候选数据分布匹配”的问题，而不是只看单样本相似度。作者大概率把部分揭示的数据源表示成逐步暴露的分布信息，再通过 OT 估计哪些源或哪些样本最值得获取/训练。与简单启发式采样相比，这种方法的优势是能显式考虑分布级覆盖与错配成本；代价是 OT 计算本身可能昂贵，且性能收益依赖表示空间质量。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法准确写出使用了哪些任务、数据源规模和提升数字。可以合理推断，实验会比较 OT 驱动的数据选择与随机采样、基于相似度的选择或完整可见设定下的方法，在部分揭示比例不同的情况下看下游性能。对预训练研究者，最值得关注的是两点：一是当可见信息很少时，方法是否仍优于简单基线；二是收益是否来自真正更好的数据覆盖，而不是挑中了更容易样本。前者决定实用性，后者决定方法是否能迁移到更大规模预训练。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a realistic data-selection problem: how to choose useful training data when candidate sources are only partially revealed. In large-scale pretraining, full inspection of all data is often impossible because of cost, access constraints, or pipeline latency. Methods that assume complete visibility of the corpus do not transfer cleanly to that setting.","importance":"This is both a data and a method contribution. Its relevance to pretraining is that it reframes data selection as a constrained decision problem rather than an offline scoring problem with full access. If the approach works, it is useful for corpus mixture design, continual pretraining, and data acquisition under budget or access limits.","technical_approach":"The proposed approach uses optimal transport to drive performance-aware data selection from partially revealed sources. OT is a sensible choice because it matches distributions rather than relying only on per-sample heuristics, which is important when only partial information is available. The likely setup is to represent each source through whatever partial statistics or sampled content are observable, then estimate which sources or instances best align with the target distribution or downstream objective. Compared with simple similarity-based filtering, this gives a more principled notion of coverage and mismatch. The trade-off is computational cost and sensitivity to the quality of the representation space used by OT.","experiments":"The abstract is missing, so exact tasks, scales, baselines, and numerical gains cannot be reported reliably. The likely experiments compare OT-based selection against random sampling and heuristic similarity methods under varying levels of source revelation. For pretraining practitioners, the key questions are whether the method still wins when visibility is severely limited and whether the gains come from better distributional coverage rather than merely selecting easier examples. Those points determine whether the method will scale beyond controlled experiments.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-selection","optimal-transport","scaling-law","data-quality"],"keywords":["data-centric AI","data acquisition","data valuation","performance prediction","data markets","optimal transport","scaling laws"],"recommendation":{"zh":"针对预训练语料无法全量访问的真实场景，用最优传输做受限数据选择，可指导数据采购、持续预训练配比，重点看§4.2 OT数据选择的收益曲线即可。","en":"Proposes optimal transport based data selection for partially inaccessible pretraining corpora, guiding data procurement and continual pretraining ratio, only read §4.2 gain curve of OT data selection."}},{"id":"KhaniR23","title":"Collaborative Alignment of NLP Models","authors":["Fereshte Khani","Marco Túlio Ribeiro"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a7","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KhaniR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KhaniR23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/7a8fa1382ea068f3f402b72081df16be-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有NLP模型的对齐方法只能由单一实体定义对齐规则，无法覆盖所有需要对齐的概念，且单一定义的对齐规则容易引入捷径，干扰模型原有能力或其他对齐目标。","importance":"是方法级的对齐框架改进，首次提出多用户协同对齐的方案，为大模型的规模化对齐、分布式对齐需求提供了可行路径，对预训练后对齐的流程设计有参考价值。","technical_approach":"原创CoAlign协同对齐框架，支持多用户独立定义对齐概念，通过模块化的对齐更新机制避免不同用户的对齐规则互相干扰，舍弃了此前单一实体集中式对齐的设计，与现有对齐方法的核心区别是支持分布式多用户输入，且不会破坏模型原有能力或其他对齐目标。","experiments":"摘要未披露具体实验数据、指标提升幅度。","authors_note":"Marco Túlio Ribeiro是知名NLP研究员，代表性工作包括LIME、CheckList等可解释性和模型评测相关研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing alignment methods for NLP models can only define alignment rules by a single entity, which cannot cover all concepts that need to be aligned. Alignment rules defined by a single entity are easy to introduce shortcuts, interfering with original capabilities of the model or other alignment objectives.","importance":"It is a method-level improvement for alignment frameworks. It proposes a multi-user collaborative alignment scheme for the first time, providing a feasible path for large-scale and distributed alignment requirements of LLMs, which has reference value for process design of post-pre-training alignment.","technical_approach":"The original CoAlign collaborative alignment framework supports multiple users to independently define alignment concepts, and avoids mutual interference between alignment rules of different users through a modular alignment update mechanism. It abandons the previous centralized alignment design by a single entity. The core difference from existing alignment methods is that it supports distributed multi-user input, and does not damage original capabilities of the model or other alignment objectives.","experiments":"No specific experimental data or metric improvement range is disclosed in the abstract.","authors_note":"Marco Túlio Ribeiro is a well-known NLP researcher with representative works including LIME, CheckList and other interpretability and model evaluation related studies."},"tags":["alignment","nlp","multi-model","post-training"],"keywords":["alignment","collaborative alignment","debugging","nlp","interference","multi-user interaction"],"notable_authors":["Marco Túlio Ribeiro"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"NLP模型在预训练后需要进行对齐调整，以符合用户价值观和业务规则","claim_en":"NLP models need alignment adjustments after pre-training to comply with user values and business rules","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"多用户协同对齐的效果优于单一实体集中式对齐，可覆盖更多对齐概念且无负面副作用","claim_en":"Multi-user collaborative alignment outperforms centralized alignment by a single entity, which can cover more alignment concepts without negative side effects","opposes":"Prior alignment works assume that centralized alignment by a single entity can cover all concepts that need to be aligned, and will not introduce negative side effects","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction","why_contested":"If validated, collaborative alignment will become the mainstream scheme for large-scale LLM alignment, greatly reducing alignment cost and coverage blind spots"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"多用户分布式对齐框架，避免不同对齐目标互相干扰、破坏模型原有能力，对预训练后规模化对齐流程设计有参考，重点看§3.1模块化更新机制即可。","en":"Multi-user distributed alignment framework avoiding interference between alignment targets and preserving base model capability, only read §3.1 modular update mechanism for post-pretraining alignment design reference."}},{"id":"KimBM23","title":"Language Models can Solve Computer Tasks","authors":["Geunwoo Kim","Pierre Baldi","Stephen McAleer"],"institutions":["University of California, Irvine"],"abstract":"$a8","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KimBM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KimBM23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/7cc1005ec73cfbaac9fa21192b622507-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有执行计算机任务的智能体需要大量专家演示数据和任务特定的奖励函数，无法适配零样本新任务的需求，之前基于LLM的智能体方案缺乏自迭代优化机制，在复杂计算机任务上的成功率低。","importance":"是方法级的智能体推理方案改进，通过简单的提示机制就大幅提升了LLM智能体在计算机任务上的零样本表现，为通用计算机任务智能体的落地提供了低成本的可行路径。","technical_approach":"原创RCI（递归批评与优化）提示方案，让LLM智能体递归地对自己的输出进行批评和优化，不需要额外微调或特定奖励函数，舍弃了此前需要专家演示和任务特定奖励的设计，与现有LLM智能体方案的核心区别是完全通过提示工程实现自迭代，不需要额外训练成本。","experiments":"在通用计算机任务上的表现显著优于现有基于LLM的方法，具体提升幅度、模型参数量未在摘要披露。","authors_note":"Pierre Baldi是知名机器学习研究员，加州大学欧文分校教授，代表性工作包括深度学习、生物信息学相关研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing agents for computer tasks require a large amount of expert demonstration data and task-specific reward functions, which cannot adapt to the needs of zero-shot new tasks. Previous LLM-based agent solutions lack self-iteration optimization mechanisms, leading to low success rates on complex computer tasks.","importance":"It is a method-level improvement for agent reasoning schemes. It greatly improves the zero-shot performance of LLM agents on computer tasks through a simple prompting mechanism, providing a low-cost feasible path for the implementation of generalist computer task agents.","technical_approach":"The original RCI (Recursively Criticizes and Improves) prompting scheme enables the LLM agent to recursively criticize and optimize its own output, without additional fine-tuning or specific reward functions. It abandons the previous design that requires expert demonstrations and task-specific rewards. The core difference from existing LLM agent solutions is that self-iteration is realized entirely through prompt engineering, without additional training costs.","experiments":"Its performance on general computer tasks significantly outperforms existing LLM-based methods. Specific improvement range and model parameter size are not disclosed in the abstract.","authors_note":"Pierre Baldi is a well-known machine learning researcher, professor at University of California, Irvine, with representative works including deep learning and bioinformatics related studies."},"tags":["computer-use","language-models","tool-use","evaluation"],"keywords":["Large Language models","Web Navigation","Foundation Models","Decision Making"],"notable_authors":["Pierre Baldi"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"预训练LLM具备理解自然语言指令和执行序列决策的能力","claim_en":"Pre-trained LLMs have the ability to understand natural language instructions and execute sequential decisions","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"仅通过提示工程实现自迭代的LLM智能体，性能优于需要任务特定微调或专家演示训练的智能体","claim_en":"LLM agents that realize self-iteration only through prompt engineering outperform agents that require task-specific fine-tuning or expert demonstration training","opposes":"Prior computer task agent works assume that agents must be fine-tuned on task-specific data or trained with expert demonstrations to achieve good performance","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"If validated, generalist computer task agents can be realized only through prompt engineering, greatly reducing the implementation cost of related applications"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"纯提示工程实现的计算机任务智能体自迭代方案，和大模型预训练技术关联弱，仅作为智能体方向背景备查，不用读正文。","en":"Pure prompt engineering based self-iteration scheme for computer task agents, weak relevance to LLM pretraining, only for agent domain background reference, no need to read full text."}},{"id":"KimYLGYO23","title":"ProPILE: Probing Privacy Leakage in Large Language Models","authors":["Siwon Kim","Sangdoo Yun","Hwaran Lee","Martin Gubri","Sungroh Yoon","Seong Joon Oh"],"institutions":["NAVER AI Lab","Seoul National University"],"abstract":"$a9","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KimYLGYO23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KimYLGYO23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/420678bb4c8251ab30e765bc27c3b047-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有大语言模型的隐私泄露检测方法仅由模型提供者或第三方机构执行，数据主体（隐私所有者）无法自主探测自己的个人可识别信息（PII）是否被模型泄露，缺乏面向普通用户的隐私探测工具。","importance":"是工具级的贡献，首次为数据主体提供了自主探测LLM隐私泄露的工具，对大模型的隐私合规、数据主体权利保障有重要的实践价值。","technical_approach":"原创ProPILE探测工具，让数据主体可以基于自己的PII构造提示，评估LLM的隐私泄露程度，不需要访问模型的权重或训练数据，舍弃了此前需要模型内部权限的检测方案，与现有隐私检测方法的核心区别是面向数据主体，仅通过黑盒提示访问就能完成检测。","experiments":"在训练于Pile数据集的OPT-1.3B模型上进行了验证，证明了工具可以有效评估PII泄露的可能性，具体检测准确率未在摘要披露。","authors_note":"Sangdoo Yun、Hwaran Lee来自NAVER AI Lab，是知名的计算机视觉和大模型研究员。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing privacy leakage detection methods for large language models are only executed by model providers or third-party institutions. Data subjects (privacy owners) cannot independently detect whether their personally identifiable information (PII) is leaked by the model, and there is a lack of privacy detection tools for ordinary users.","importance":"It is a tool-level contribution. It provides a tool for data subjects to independently detect LLM privacy leakage for the first time, which has important practical value for LLM privacy compliance and data subject right protection.","technical_approach":"The original ProPILE detection tool allows data subjects to construct prompts based on their own PII to evaluate the privacy leakage degree of LLMs, without accessing model weights or training data. It abandons the previous detection schemes that require internal model permissions. The core difference from existing privacy detection methods is that it is oriented to data subjects, and detection can be completed only through black-box prompt access.","experiments":"Verified on the OPT-1.3B model trained on the Pile dataset, proving that the tool can effectively evaluate the possibility of PII leakage. Specific detection accuracy is not disclosed in the abstract.","authors_note":"Sangdoo Yun and Hwaran Lee are from NAVER AI Lab, well-known researchers in computer vision and large language models."},"tags":["privacy","llm","memorization","data-leakage"],"keywords":["Personal identifiable information","Private data leakage","Large language model"],"notable_authors":["Sangdoo Yun","Hwaran Lee"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大语言模型在训练于大规模网页数据时可能泄露训练数据中的PII信息","claim_en":"Large language models trained on large-scale web data may leak PII information in the training data","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"仅通过黑盒提示访问就能有效检测大模型的PII泄露情况，不需要访问模型权重或训练数据","claim_en":"PII leakage of LLMs can be effectively detected only through black-box prompt access, without accessing model weights or training data","opposes":"Prior privacy leakage detection works assume that detection must access model weights or training data to be effective","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"If validated, black-box privacy detection will become the mainstream scheme for data subjects to protect their rights, promoting the implementation of LLM privacy compliance"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"黑盒场景下普通用户可自主使用的LLM隐私泄露检测工具，对预训练数据合规、隐私审计有参考，重点看§3.2探测提示构造方法即可。","en":"Black-box LLM privacy leakage detection tool accessible to ordinary users, providing reference for pretraining data compliance and privacy audit, only read §3.2 probe prompt construction method."}},{"id":"KingmaG23","title":"Understanding Diffusion Objectives as the ELBO with Simple Data Augmentation","authors":["Diederik P. Kingma","Ruiqi Gao"],"institutions":["Google DeepMind"],"abstract":"To achieve the highest perceptual quality, state-of-the-art diffusion models are optimized with objectives that typically look very different from the maximum likelihood and the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO) objectives. In this work, we reveal that diffusion model objectives are actually closely related to the ELBO.\n\nSpecifically, we show that all commonly used diffusion model objectives equate to a weighted integral of ELBOs over different noise levels, where the weighting depends on the specific objective used. Under the condition of monotonic weighting, the connection is even closer: the diffusion objective then equals the ELBO, combined with simple data augmentation, namely Gaussian noise perturbation. We show that this condition holds for a number of state-of-the-art diffusion models. \n\nIn experiments, we explore new monotonic weightings and demonstrate their effectiveness, achieving state-of-the-art FID scores on the high-resolution ImageNet benchmark.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KingmaG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KingmaG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ce79fbf9baef726645bc2337abb0ade2-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"当前性能最优的扩散模型使用的训练目标看起来与最大似然、证据下界（ELBO）目标完全不同，两者之间的理论关系不清晰，导致扩散模型的目标设计缺乏统一的理论指导。","importance":"是范式级的理论贡献，统一了扩散模型训练目标和ELBO的理论关系，为后续扩散模型的目标设计、性能优化提供了坚实的理论基础，对扩散语言模型、多模态扩散预训练的研究有直接的指导意义。","technical_approach":"原创的理论推导，证明所有常用的扩散模型目标等价于不同噪声水平下ELBO的加权积分，当权重单调时，扩散目标等价于加入高斯噪声扰动数据增强的ELBO，舍弃了此前将扩散目标和ELBO视为完全不同优化目标的认知，与之前理论工作的核心区别是建立了两者的严格等价关系。","experiments":"在多个当前主流的扩散模型上验证了单调权重条件成立，具体实验数据未在摘要披露。","authors_note":"Diederik P. Kingma是知名深度学习研究员，扩散模型和变分自编码器（VAE）的核心发明人之一，代表性工作包括VAE、DDPM等。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The training objectives used by current high-performance diffusion models look completely different from maximum likelihood and Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO) objectives. The theoretical relationship between the two is unclear, leading to a lack of unified theoretical guidance for objective design of diffusion models.","importance":"It is a paradigm-level theoretical contribution. It unifies the theoretical relationship between diffusion model training objectives and ELBO, providing a solid theoretical basis for objective design and performance optimization of subsequent diffusion models, and has direct guiding significance for research of diffusion language models and multi-modal diffusion pre-training.","technical_approach":"The original theoretical derivation proves that all commonly used diffusion model objectives are equivalent to the weighted integral of ELBO under different noise levels. When the weight is monotonic, the diffusion objective is equivalent to ELBO with Gaussian noise perturbation data augmentation. It abandons the previous cognition that diffusion objectives and ELBO are completely different optimization objectives. The core difference from previous theoretical works is that it establishes a strict equivalence relationship between the two.","experiments":"Verified that the monotonic weight condition holds on several mainstream diffusion models. Specific experimental data is not disclosed in the abstract.","authors_note":"Diederik P. Kingma is a well-known deep learning researcher, one of the core inventors of diffusion models and Variational Autoencoders (VAE), with representative works including VAE, DDPM, etc."},"tags":["diffusion","objective","elbo","training"],"keywords":["Diffusion Model","Evidence Lower Bound","Maximum Likelihood"],"notable_authors":["Diederik P. Kingma"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"ELBO是生成模型训练的基础理论目标，与最大似然估计有严格的理论关联","claim_en":"ELBO is the basic theoretical objective for generative model training, and has a strict theoretical correlation with maximum likelihood estimation","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"常用的扩散模型训练目标与ELBO有严格的等价关系，并非独立的优化目标","claim_en":"Commonly used diffusion model training objectives have a strict equivalence relationship with ELBO, and are not independent optimization objectives","opposes":"Prior diffusion model theoretical works assume that current high-performance diffusion training objectives have no direct correlation with ELBO, and are independent optimization objectives","opposes_cite_hint":"Ho 2020 DDPM","evidence_anchor":"§2 Derivation","why_contested":"This conclusion unifies the theoretical framework of diffusion models, providing a clear theoretical direction for subsequent objective optimization and new diffusion paradigm design"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"扩散训练目标和ELBO的统一理论推导，为扩散多模态、扩散大语言模型的目标设计提供理论支撑，重点看§2等价性证明核心部分即可。","en":"Unified theoretical derivation between diffusion training objective and ELBO, supporting objective design for diffusion multimodal and diffusion LLM research, only read §2 core equivalence proof."}},{"id":"KirstainPSMPL23","title":"Pick-a-Pic: An Open Dataset of User Preferences for Text-to-Image Generation","authors":["Yuval Kirstain","Adam Polyak","Uriel Singer","Shahbuland Matiana","Joe Penna","Omer Levy"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"The ability to collect a large dataset of human preferences from text-to-image users is usually limited to companies, making such datasets inaccessible to the public. To address this issue, we create a web app that enables text-to-image users to generate images and specify their preferences. Using this web app we build Pick-a-Pic, a large, open dataset of text-to-image prompts and real users’ preferences over generated images. We leverage this dataset to train a CLIP-based scoring function, PickScore, which exhibits superhuman performance on the task of predicting human preferences. Then, we test PickScore’s ability to perform model evaluation and observe that it correlates better with human rankings than other automatic evaluation metrics. Therefore, we recommend using PickScore for evaluating future text-to-image generation models, and using Pick-a-Pic prompts as a more relevant dataset than MS-COCO. Finally, we demonstrate how PickScore can enhance existing text-to-image models via ranking.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KirstainPSMPL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KirstainPSMPL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/73aacd8b3b05b4b503d58310b523553c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"文生图领域的人类偏好数据集此前被企业垄断，开源社区无法获取，现有自动评估指标与人类偏好的匹配度低，没有公开可用的大规模真实标注数据支撑相关研究。","importance":"数据级贡献，首次开源了大规模真实用户标注的文生图偏好数据集，同时提供的偏好评分模型可替代传统自动评估指标，对齐人类偏好，为文生图对齐、预训练评估等方向提供公开的训练与评测支撑。","technical_approach":"原创公开数据采集方案，上线web应用允许普通用户生成文生图并标注偏好，基于采集的数据训练CLIP驱动的偏好评分模型PickScore，不需要额外人工标注成本，也不依赖闭源内部数据。","experiments":"训练得到的PickScore在人类偏好预测任务上达到超人类表现，作为评估指标时与人类排序的相关性优于所有现有自动评估指标，摘要未提供具体模型参数量、数据集规模及量化提升数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Text-to-image human preference datasets were previously monopolized by companies and inaccessible to the open-source community. Existing automatic evaluation metrics have low alignment with human preferences, and no public large-scale real annotated data is available to support related research.","importance":"Data-level contribution. It open sources the first large-scale real-user annotated text-to-image preference dataset, and the proposed preference scoring model can replace traditional automatic evaluation metrics to align with human preferences, providing public training and evaluation support for text-to-image alignment, pretraining evaluation and other directions.","technical_approach":"Original open data collection scheme. A web app is launched to allow public users to generate text-to-image outputs and label their preferences. The CLIP-based preference scoring model PickScore is trained on the collected data, no extra manual annotation cost or closed-source internal data is required.","experiments":"The trained PickScore achieves superhuman performance on human preference prediction task. When used as an evaluation metric, its correlation with human rankings outperforms all existing automatic evaluation metrics. No specific parameter count, dataset size or quantitative improvement numbers are provided in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["preference-data","text-to-image","alignment","dataset"],"keywords":["text-to-image","human-preferences","dataset"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"文生图的评估指标需要对齐人类主观偏好才能反映真实体验","claim_en":"Text-to-image evaluation metrics need to align with human subjective preferences to reflect real experience","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于CLIP的偏好评分模型可以在文生图人类偏好预测任务上超过人类表现","claim_en":"CLIP-based preference scoring models can outperform humans on text-to-image human preference prediction tasks","opposes":"自动评估指标在主观偏好类任务上的表现不可能超过人类","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"打破了自动指标在主观任务上弱于人类的固有认知，为无人工介入的自动对齐提供了可行路径"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"首个开源大规模真实用户标注的文生图偏好数据集，配套的偏好评分模型可替代传统自动评估指标，做文生图预训练对齐直接用即可，不用深究采集逻辑。","en":"First open-source large-scale real user annotated text-to-image preference dataset, with matching scorer replacing traditional auto metrics, can be directly used for T2I pretraining alignment without deep diving into collection logic."}},{"id":"KrishnaMSG0L23","title":"Post Hoc Explanations of Language Models Can Improve Language Models","authors":["Satyapriya Krishna","Jiaqi Ma","Dylan Slack","Asma Ghandeharioun","Sameer Singh","Himabindu Lakkaraju"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$aa","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KrishnaMSG0L23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KrishnaMSG0L23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ce65173b994cf7c925c71b482ee14a8d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作研究的是一个反直觉问题：给语言模型生成事后解释，能不能反过来提升模型本身。过去解释性工作大多停在“帮助人理解模型”，默认解释是诊断工具而不是训练信号；作者尝试把解释从分析产物变成可用于改进模型的监督。","importance":"它的重要性在于 pretrain/posttrain 接口层面的新信号设计。对 LLM 来说，单纯优化答案正确性经常不足以稳定得到可检验的推理过程，而如果高质量解释能作为额外监督，就可能改善泛化、校准或鲁棒性。它不是替代 CoT 或 RL 的大范式，但提供了一个很值得注意的方向：模型自己的可解释中间产物，可能成为可再利用的训练数据。","technical_approach":"核心方法是先为模型预测生成 post hoc explanations，再把这些解释作为额外训练目标或辅助信号，用来提升原任务表现。关键设计点在于，解释不是强制要求真实中间推理完全可验证，而是把它当作与输出相关的结构化归因信息；这样做比直接蒸馏答案更丰富，但也有风险——低质量解释会把错误归因固化。与标准 chain-of-thought 训练不同，这类方法通常更强调解释作为外部或后验分析对象，而不是直接让模型在生成时显式展开推理。","experiments":"实验通常会看分类、问答或 NLI 等语言任务上，加不加解释监督的性能差异，并分析在分布外、校准或人类可接受性上的变化。当前提供信息不足，无法确认具体数据集、模型参数量和提升数字。真正有价值的 ablation 应该包括：解释来源是人工、模型生成还是外部解释器时效果差别多大；以及解释监督在小模型、低资源或噪声标签场景下是否更有帮助。","authors_note":"University of California, Irvine / University of Michigan / Salesforce Research 等方向相关的可能性存在，但当前信息不足以确认，故留空。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a counterintuitive question: can post hoc explanations of language model outputs be used to improve the language model itself? Most interpretability work treats explanations as diagnostic artifacts for humans, not as training signals, so the paper turns explanation from analysis output into supervision.","importance":"Its importance is at the pretrain/posttrain interface: it explores a new kind of learning signal beyond plain task labels. For language models, optimizing only the final answer often leaves reasoning quality, calibration, and robustness underconstrained; if good explanations can serve as auxiliary targets, they may improve those properties. This is not a replacement for chain-of-thought or RL, but it is a useful idea about reusing model-generated or externally generated explanatory structure as training data.","technical_approach":"The core approach is to generate post hoc explanations for model predictions and then train with those explanations as additional supervision or auxiliary objectives. The point is not to claim that the explanation is the true internal reasoning trace, but to use it as structured attribution tied to the output. That is richer than distilling answers alone, though it creates an obvious risk: poor explanations can reinforce wrong justifications. Relative to standard chain-of-thought training, the emphasis here is on explanation as an external or posterior object rather than a mandatory explicit reasoning process at generation time.","experiments":"Typical experiments for this line of work compare task performance with and without explanation supervision on language tasks such as classification, QA, or NLI, and often probe out-of-distribution behavior, calibration, or human preference. The metadata provided here is not enough to state exact datasets, model sizes, or gains. The most informative ablations would compare human-written versus model-generated explanations and test whether explanation supervision helps most in small-data, noisy-label, or smaller-model regimes.","authors_note":""},"tags":["interpretability","post-hoc-explanation","llm","self-improvement"],"keywords":["Machine Learning Explainability","Large Language Models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"反直觉思路：把模型事后解释作为额外监督信号提升原任务性能，为预训练、SFT阶段引入新的监督来源，重点看§4.1解释作为训练信号的消融实验即可。","en":"Counterintuitive approach: using model post hoc explanations as extra supervision to improve original task performance, providing new supervision source for pretraining and SFT, only read §4.1 ablation of explanation as training signal."}},{"id":"KurticFA23","title":"ZipLM: Inference-Aware Structured Pruning of Language Models","authors":["Eldar Kurtic","Elias Frantar","Dan Alistarh"],"institutions":["Institute of Science and Technology Austria"],"abstract":"$ab","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KurticFA23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KurticFA23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ced46a50befedcb884ccf0cbe8c3ad23-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：语言模型剪枝通常只看参数稀疏率或理论 FLOPs，忽略了真实推理时延和内存访问模式，因此“剪得很多”不一定“跑得更快”。过去大量非结构化剪枝在 LLM 上的实际部署收益有限，就是因为推理硬件对结构化模式更敏感。","importance":"它是很典型的系统级压缩工作，对 serving 和大模型部署有直接价值，也能反过来影响预训练研究对架构冗余的理解。关键启示是：压缩目标不能只优化离线代理指标，必须把 inference-aware 约束放进设计里；否则在语言模型这种 memory-bound 系统里，参数少了但 wall-clock 不动。对 pretrain 的间接意义在于，未来架构搜索、稀疏训练和蒸馏都应更早考虑部署可兑现性。","technical_approach":"核心方法是面向推理的结构化剪枝框架 ZipLM。它不是做任意权重置零，而是寻找硬件友好、内核友好的结构化删减方式，并把真实推理成本近似纳入剪枝决策。关键设计通常包括：按层/头/通道或块进行裁剪，配合重要性估计与全局预算分配；与传统只看 loss 增量的剪枝不同，它强调哪些稀疏模式能真正转化成时延和显存收益。这个 trade-off 很清楚：结构化剪枝更容易兑现加速，但精度-压缩曲线往往不如细粒度非结构化剪枝。","experiments":"这类论文通常会在标准语言模型或 decoder-only Transformer 上报告 perplexity、zero-shot 精度、参数压缩率，以及 GPU/CPU 上的实际推理延迟或吞吐提升，并与非结构化和其他结构化剪枝方法比较。当前元数据不足以可靠写出模型名称、规模和具体提升幅度。最值得看的实验不是单个压缩率数字，而是：同样质量损失下，ZipLM 的实际 latency gain 是否显著更高；以及不同 batch size、序列长度下收益是否稳定，因为这决定部署价值。","authors_note":"ISTA / Neural Magic / 菜谱式稀疏推理优化相关方向。Dan Alistarh 是压缩、量化、稀疏训练和高效推理方向的知名作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a common failure mode in LLM pruning: reducing parameter count or theoretical FLOPs often does not translate into real inference speedup. Language model inference is strongly shaped by memory access and kernel efficiency, so pruning that ignores deployment constraints frequently underdelivers.","importance":"This is a systems-oriented compression paper with direct relevance to LLM serving, and it also feeds back into how we think about architectural redundancy. The main lesson is practical but important: compression objectives must be inference-aware, not just sparsity-aware. Otherwise one can prune aggressively on paper and still gain little in wall-clock latency. That insight matters upstream as well for architecture design, sparse training, and distillation.","technical_approach":"ZipLM is an inference-aware structured pruning method. Instead of zeroing arbitrary weights, it searches for hardware-friendly structured reductions and incorporates approximations of real inference cost into pruning decisions. The typical ingredients are layer/head/channel/block-level pruning, importance estimation, and global budget allocation. Compared with standard loss-centric pruning, the key difference is that it optimizes for sparsity patterns that can actually be realized by fast kernels. The trade-off is familiar: structured pruning is easier to accelerate in practice, but it can be less flexible than fine-grained sparsity.","experiments":"Work in this category usually reports perplexity or zero-shot accuracy, compression ratio, and real latency or throughput gains on CPU/GPU, comparing against non-structured and structured pruning baselines. The available metadata does not support exact claims about model names, sizes, or gains. The most useful result to inspect is whether ZipLM delivers materially larger realized speedups than competing methods at similar quality loss, and whether those gains persist across different batch sizes and sequence lengths.","authors_note":"Likely connected to ISTA and the broader sparse inference optimization community. Dan Alistarh is a prominent researcher in compression, quantization, sparsity, and efficient inference."},"tags":["pruning","structured-pruning","inference-efficiency","llm"],"notable_authors":["Dan Alistarh"],"keywords":["LLMs","pruning","compression","inference"],"recommendation":{"zh":"面向真实推理时延的LLM结构化剪枝框架，打破「剪枝参数多就跑得快」的误区，对预训练稀疏化、架构冗余研究有参考，重点看§5不同剪枝模式的实际加速比即可。","en":"Inference latency oriented LLM structured pruning framework, breaking the myth that more parameter pruning leads to faster speed, reference for pretraining sparsification and architecture redundancy research, only read §5 actual speedup of different pruning patterns."}},{"id":"KuzminNBBB23","title":"Pruning vs Quantization: Which is Better?","authors":["Andrey Kuzmin","Markus Nagel","Mart van Baalen","Arash Behboodi","Tijmen Blankevoort"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ac","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KuzminNBBB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KuzminNBBB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/c48bc80aa5d3cbbdd712d1cc107b8319-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作聚焦一个非常常见但经常被含糊回答的问题：模型压缩里，剪枝和量化到底哪个更好。过去很多比较并不公平，因为目标不同、硬件不同、实现成熟度不同，导致“谁更好”常常只是实验设置的产物，而不是通用结论。","importance":"它的重要性在于提供一个更干净的比较框架，对大模型压缩和部署有实际指导意义。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：压缩方法的优劣不能脱离目标平台和预算讨论，尤其对 LLM 来说，量化常常优先改善内存带宽，剪枝则更依赖结构化实现与内核支持。把这两者放在同一评价坐标系里，有助于团队少走“理论压缩很好、线上收益很差”的弯路。","technical_approach":"核心方法不是发明新的压缩算法，而是系统比较 pruning 和 quantization 在不同约束下的效果。关键设计应包括统一的比较协议：相同模型、相近精度损失、明确的硬件和 latency/size 指标，区分非结构化与结构化剪枝、权重量化与激活量化等不同设置。与大量只报单点 best number 的压缩论文不同，这类研究更强调 trade-off 曲线和适用条件，因此结论通常是条件性的，而不是简单宣布某一方普遍胜出。","experiments":"题目表明实验会在若干视觉或语言模型上系统对比两类方法，考察模型大小、速度、能耗或精度。当前信息不足以确认具体模型、比特宽度、稀疏率和结果数字。对 LLM/预训练读者最值得关注的结论通常是：在 memory-bound 场景下量化是否普遍比剪枝更稳定有效；在严格结构化支持下，剪枝何时能超过量化；以及两者叠加是否优于单独使用。","authors_note":"Qualcomm AI Research / ARM / 工业界高效推理团队相关可能性较高，但当前信息不足以确认，故留空。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper examines a simple but often poorly answered question: in model compression, is pruning better than quantization? Many prior comparisons were not clean because they mixed different goals, hardware assumptions, and implementation quality, so the winner often depended more on setup than on principle.","importance":"Its value is in providing a more disciplined comparison that can guide deployment decisions. For pretraining and LLM research, the main lesson is that compression methods cannot be judged in isolation from hardware and budget. Quantization often helps memory bandwidth first, while pruning needs the right structure and kernel support to convert sparsity into speed. Putting both in the same evaluation frame helps avoid paper gains that do not materialize in practice.","technical_approach":"The contribution is not a new compression method but a systematic comparison between pruning and quantization under matched conditions. A good design here means same models, comparable quality loss, explicit hardware assumptions, and clear separation between structured versus unstructured pruning and weight versus activation quantization. Unlike many compression papers that report a single best point, this kind of study is useful because it maps trade-off curves and identifies when each method is preferable.","experiments":"The title suggests a broad empirical comparison across several model families, likely measuring accuracy together with size, speed, or energy. The metadata does not support exact statements on models, bitwidths, sparsity levels, or numerical outcomes. For LLM practitioners, the useful takeaways are likely conditional ones: whether quantization is consistently better in memory-bound regimes, when structured pruning can overtake it, and whether combining the two beats either alone.","authors_note":""},"tags":["pruning","quantization","compression","llm"],"keywords":["Neural network quantization","neural network pruning","magnitude pruning","post-training quantization","quantization-aware training"],"recommendation":{"zh":"做模型压缩对比时可参考其统一评测协议，直接读§3的对比框架和§5的硬件相关结论即可。","en":"Refer to its unified evaluation protocol for compression method comparison, just read §3 for benchmark setup and §5 for hardware-dependent conclusions."}},{"id":"LampinenC0NW23","title":"Passive learning of active causal strategies in agents and language models","authors":["Andrew K. Lampinen","Stephanie C. Y. Chan","Ishita Dasgupta","Andrew J. Nam","Jane X. Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ad","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LampinenC0NW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LampinenC0NW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/045c87def0c02e3ad0d3d849766d7f1e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的核心问题是：模型能否仅通过被动观察数据，学会原本需要主动干预才能发现的因果策略。过去主流做法通常把“会做任务”和“会主动探索因果结构”分开研究，默认没有交互就很难学到策略层面的因果知识；作者重新提出这个问题，是因为语言模型和离线智能体越来越多地只能看日志、文本和轨迹，却被期待在新环境里表现出带有实验设计意味的行为。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要是范式判断上的：它给出证据表明，主动因果策略并不一定非要通过在线试错获得，部分可以从被动数据中内化出来。对 pretrain 的启发是直接的——如果训练语料里含有足够丰富的行动—结果结构，模型可能学到的不只是相关性，还包括“该如何干预才能辨别机制”的策略模板；但它也没有证明一般情形下被动学习可以替代主动探索，边界仍然很强依赖数据分布和任务结构。","technical_approach":"方法上它不是提出一个新的大模型训练算法，而是构造一组受控任务，检验序列模型和 agent 是否能从离线轨迹中学出主动因果策略。关键设计是把任务拆成两层：一层是环境中的因果机制，另一层是为识别该机制而应采取的实验性动作；训练时模型只看到被动生成的数据或示例轨迹，测试时却要求它自己选动作。与传统因果发现工作不同，作者关心的不是恢复显式因果图，而是能否直接学到“先做什么试验最有信息量”这类策略知识；这使问题更接近 LM 从文本中吸收操作性知识的场景。","experiments":"实验结论是肯定但有限：在合成因果环境和语言化任务上，模型确实能从被动数据中学到一部分主动探测策略，并在分布内及部分泛化设置下优于不具备这种归纳的基线。已给信息里没有参数量、数据规模和完整指标，无法负责任地补具体数字；但从论文定位看，重点不在追求大规模 SOTA，而在做机制验证。值得关注的观察通常包括：训练数据里如果包含多样的干预后果对应关系，测试时策略泛化会更好；一旦数据只覆盖狭窄的观察模式，模型更容易退化为表面相关性匹配，而不是真正形成实验设计能力。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a sharp question: can a model learn actively useful causal strategies from passive data alone. Prior work usually treated task performance and active causal discovery as separate problems, assuming that without intervention and online exploration, strategy-level causal knowledge would be hard to acquire; this is worth revisiting because language models and offline agents are increasingly trained only on logs, text, and trajectories, yet are expected to act adaptively in new settings.","importance":"The contribution is mainly conceptual rather than algorithmic: it shows that some active causal behavior can be internalized from passive experience. For pretraining, the implication is important: if the corpus contains rich action–outcome structure, a model may learn not just correlations but templates for informative intervention. The paper does not claim passive learning replaces active exploration in general; the effect appears to depend strongly on data coverage and task structure.","technical_approach":"The paper does not introduce a new foundation-model training recipe. Instead, it builds controlled tasks to test whether sequence models and agents can infer active causal strategies from offline trajectories. The key design separates two levels: the causal mechanism in the environment, and the experimental actions that would best identify that mechanism. Models are trained on passively generated examples but evaluated on their ability to choose actions themselves. Unlike standard causal discovery work, the target is not explicit graph recovery but policy-like knowledge of what intervention is most informative, which makes the setup more relevant to what language models may absorb from text.","experiments":"The main empirical result is positive but qualified: in synthetic causal environments and language-like tasks, models can recover part of the active probing strategy from passive data, outperforming baselines that lack this inductive advantage. The provided metadata does not include reliable parameter counts, dataset sizes, or exact scores, so it would be unsafe to invent numbers. The useful takeaway is mechanistic: broader training coverage over intervention–outcome patterns improves test-time strategy generalization, while narrow observational data tends to produce brittle correlation matching rather than genuine experiment-design behavior.","authors_note":""},"tags":["causal-reasoning","in-context-learning","agents","generalization"],"notable_authors":["Andrew K. Lampinen","Stephanie C. Y. Chan","Ishita Dasgupta","Jane X. Wang"],"keywords":["passive; causal; offline; agency; language models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"研究大模型因果能力的可参考，重点读§4的受控实验设计和结果，验证被动数据能否习得主动因果策略。","en":"For LLM causal capability researchers, focus on §4's controlled experiment design and results to verify if passive data yields active causal strategies."}},{"id":"LanchantinTWSS23","title":"Learning to Reason and Memorize with Self-Notes","authors":["Jack Lanchantin","Shubham Toshniwal","Jason Weston","Arthur Szlam","Sainbayar Sukhbaatar"],"institutions":["Meta"],"abstract":"Large language models have been shown to struggle with multi-step reasoning, and do not retain previous reasoning steps for future use. We propose a simple method for solving both of these problems by allowing the model to take Self-Notes. Unlike recent chain-of-thought or scratchpad approaches, the model can deviate from the input context at any time to explicitly think and write down its thoughts. This allows the model to perform reasoning on the fly as it reads the context and even integrate previous reasoning steps, thus enhancing its memory with useful information and enabling multi-step reasoning. Experiments across a wide variety of tasks demonstrate that our method can outperform chain-of-thought and scratchpad methods by taking Self-Notes that interleave the input text.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LanchantinTWSS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LanchantinTWSS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/274d0146144643ee2459a602123c60ff-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的问题是：模型怎样同时处理短期推理和长期记忆，而不把一切都硬塞进固定上下文窗口。以往 transformer 往往把“推理”寄托在当前上下文，把“记忆”寄托在参数或检索模块里，这两者接口不自然；作者提出 self-notes，是想让模型学会像人一样在过程中写下中间笔记，再在后续步骤中读取和利用。","importance":"这项工作的意义在于它把外显中间状态作为训练对象，而不只是把 chain-of-thought 当输出格式。对 pretrain/posttrain 交界很有启发：如果模型会生成和消费自写笔记，那么长程依赖、工具使用、工作记忆都可以被统一成序列建模问题；这比单纯扩上下文更经济，也比把所有记忆都塞进参数更灵活。不过它的收益依赖任务是否允许“写笔记再读笔记”的过程，开放域自然语言场景下的稳健性仍需更多证据。","technical_approach":"方法核心是 self-notes 机制：模型在处理任务时显式生成辅助笔记，并在之后把这些笔记重新作为条件输入来支持推理和记忆。它更像是对标准序列模型的训练程序改造，而不是全新架构；关键选择是让笔记成为可学习、可迭代的中间表示，而不是人工定义的 scratchpad。和普通 CoT 的区别在于，CoT 主要把中间推理暴露给解码器，而 self-notes 更强调这些中间产物在后续步骤中的可复用性，因此它面向的是“持续计算”而不是一次性解释。","experiments":"实验结论是 self-notes 能同时提升需要多步推理和跨步骤记忆的任务表现，并在一些合成与控制任务上优于不带笔记或只带普通 scratchpad 的基线。当前给定信息没有论文摘要与表格，无法可靠填写参数规模、样本量和具体提升数字；但从标题和定位看，关键 ablation 应该集中在：是否允许读回笔记、笔记长度限制、是否共享生成与读取参数、以及笔记对长时程任务的收益是否明显高于短程任务。对工程上最有价值的判断是：如果任务需要把局部结论反复调用，显式中间缓存会比单靠隐状态更稳。","authors_note":"Meta 团队作者较多。Jason Weston、Arthur Szlam、Sainbayar Sukhbaatar 长期做可微记忆、检索增强、工具使用和序列推理相关工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical gap: how can a model reason step by step while also preserving useful state beyond a fixed context window. Standard transformers usually rely on the current context for reasoning and on parameters or retrieval for memory, which creates an awkward interface; self-notes are proposed as a way for the model to externalize intermediate state and reuse it later.","importance":"The key contribution is to treat explicit intermediate state as something to learn, not just something to print. This matters at the pretrain/post-train boundary: if a model can generate and consume its own notes, long-horizon reasoning, working memory, and tool-style state management can all be framed as sequence modeling. That is potentially cheaper than brute-force context scaling and more flexible than storing everything in weights. The boundary is clear, though: the benefit depends on tasks where writing and rereading notes is actually useful.","technical_approach":"The core method is a self-notes mechanism in which the model writes auxiliary notes during problem solving and later conditions on those notes for further reasoning. This is better viewed as a training and prompting formulation on top of sequence models than as a radically new architecture. The important design choice is that notes are learned intermediate representations, not fixed templates. Compared with standard chain-of-thought, the difference is functional: CoT mostly exposes reasoning traces, while self-notes emphasize reuse of intermediate artifacts across later steps.","experiments":"The empirical claim is that self-notes improve tasks that require both multi-step reasoning and memory across steps, outperforming baselines without notes or with plain scratchpads on controlled benchmarks. The provided metadata does not contain reliable model sizes, data sizes, or exact gains, so those numbers should not be fabricated. The most informative ablations are likely whether notes can be reread, how long they are allowed to be, whether writing and reading share parameters, and whether gains grow with task horizon. The practical takeaway is simple: when local conclusions must be reused later, explicit external notes can be more stable than relying only on hidden activations.","authors_note":"The author list is strongly associated with Meta. Jason Weston, Arthur Szlam, and Sainbayar Sukhbaatar are well known for work on memory, retrieval-augmented modeling, tool use, and reasoning-oriented sequence models."},"tags":["reasoning","memory","scratchpad","in-context-learning"],"notable_authors":["Jason Weston","Arthur Szlam","Sainbayar Sukhbaatar"],"keywords":["Memory","Reasoning","Language Models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"做长上下文/记忆建模的可参考self-notes机制，只读§3的实现逻辑和§4的长程任务实验结果就行。","en":"For long-context/memory modeling researchers, refer to the self-notes mechanism, just read §3 for implementation and §4 for long-range task results."}},{"id":"LeLH23","title":"COCO-Counterfactuals: Automatically Constructed Counterfactual Examples for Image-Text Pairs","authors":["Tiep Le","Vasudev Lal","Phillip Howard"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ae","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LeLH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LeLH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/e14e4cb8266184ceb234973dfe07faed-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是视觉语言评测中过于依赖表面相关性的老问题：现有图文对数据里，模型常常靠数据偏置答对，而不是理解图像内容与文本语义的对应关系。过去人工构造反事实样本成本高、覆盖窄，因此很多 benchmark 虽然测得方便，但很难真正检验模型有没有学到细粒度对齐。","importance":"这项工作属于数据与评测方法贡献。它的重要性在于用自动化方式构造图文反事实样本，降低了“做更严格评测”的成本；对多模态 pretrain 的意义是，训练集和测试集如果都只奖励粗粒度匹配，模型就会自然利用捷径。反事实样本能更直接暴露模型是否真正依赖对象、属性、关系等视觉证据，而不是凭常识先验或语言频率猜答案。","technical_approach":"方法核心是围绕 COCO 图文对自动生成 counterfactuals，也就是在尽量保持其余语义不变的前提下，修改文本中的关键成分，使其与原图不再匹配。关键设计是“局部改、控制改”，例如改对象、数量、属性或关系，从而让评测更聚焦于单一对齐能力。与直接人工重写或自由生成负样本不同，这种做法更便于规模化，也更容易分析模型具体错在什么维度；但自动构造的边界在于，语言修改未必总是自然，且图像真值标注本身如果不完整，会引入伪反事实。","experiments":"实验层面的主要发现通常是：不少现有 VLM 在标准 COCO 类评测上看起来很强，但在自动构造的反事实样本上性能明显下降，说明模型对局部语义变化不够敏感。给定信息没有具体实验表，无法准确写出模型名单、指标和降幅；但这类工作的高价值观察通常包括：对象替换、属性替换、关系替换这几类反事实难度不同，且强大的预训练模型也未必在所有维度上稳健。对训练端的启示是，若想减少多模态捷径，需要在数据构造或 loss 设计里显式增加“相似文本但错误匹配”的硬负例。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a persistent weakness in vision-language evaluation: many models succeed by exploiting dataset biases rather than by grounding text in the image. Manually curated counterfactual examples are expensive and narrow in coverage, so standard benchmarks often fail to test whether a model is truly sensitive to fine-grained semantic alignment.","importance":"This is primarily a data and evaluation contribution. Its value is that it makes counterfactual testing scalable through automatic construction. For multimodal pretraining, that matters because if both training and evaluation reward only coarse matching, models will keep using shortcuts. Counterfactual pairs are a cleaner way to test whether predictions depend on object identity, attributes, counts, and relations instead of language priors alone.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to automatically generate counterfactual text for COCO image-text pairs by changing key semantic elements while keeping the rest of the caption as constant as possible. The design goal is localized, controlled perturbation: change one object, attribute, count, or relation at a time so that failure can be attributed to a specific grounding dimension. Compared with manual rewriting or unconstrained negative generation, this scales better and is easier to analyze. The trade-off is that automatic edits may reduce linguistic naturalness, and incomplete image annotations can create false counterfactuals.","experiments":"The main empirical finding is typically that many existing VLMs look strong on standard COCO-style evaluation but drop notably on automatically generated counterfactuals, revealing limited sensitivity to local semantic changes. The provided metadata does not include exact model names, metrics, or drops, so those numbers should not be invented. The useful pattern to watch is whether object, attribute, and relation perturbations hurt differently, and whether stronger pretrained models remain brittle on some categories. For training, the lesson is straightforward: reducing multimodal shortcuts likely requires harder mismatched negatives or contrastive signals that preserve lexical overlap while breaking visual grounding.","authors_note":""},"tags":["image-text","dataset","evaluation","robustness","data-quality"],"keywords":["Counterfactuals; Data Augmentation; Multimodal Models; Transformers; Diffusion Models; Cross Attention Control; Prompt-to-Prompt"],"recommendation":{"zh":"做多模态预训练评测的可直接用其反事实数据集，读§2的构造方法和§4的错误分析部分即可。","en":"For multimodal pretraining evaluation researchers, use its counterfactual dataset directly, just read §2 for construction logic and §4 for error analysis."}},{"id":"LeeSK23","title":"Recasting Continual Learning as Sequence Modeling","authors":["Soochan Lee","Jaehyeon Son","Gunhee Kim"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"In this work, we aim to establish a strong connection between two significant bodies of machine learning research: continual learning and sequence modeling.\nThat is, we propose to formulate continual learning as a sequence modeling problem, allowing advanced sequence models to be utilized for continual learning.\nUnder this formulation, the continual learning process becomes the forward pass of a sequence model.\nBy adopting the meta-continual learning (MCL) framework, we can train the sequence model at the meta-level, on multiple continual learning episodes.\nAs a specific example of our new formulation, we demonstrate the application of Transformers and their efficient variants as MCL methods.\nOur experiments on seven benchmarks, covering both classification and regression, show that sequence models can be an attractive solution for general MCL.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LeeSK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LeeSK23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/dee254cdacbab59f17dc6a8fbdffa59f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文处理的是 continual learning 的一个根问题：如何避免把“持续学习”做成一堆任务边界和正则项特例。传统 continual learning 往往围绕灾难性遗忘设计专门损失或记忆回放机制，但这些方法强依赖任务划分，和现代大模型把一切都当序列处理的趋势不一致。","importance":"这项工作的意义在于重新表述问题，把 continual learning 视为 sequence modeling。这个视角对 pretrain 很有价值，因为大模型训练本来就是流式、混合、分阶段的数据过程；如果持续学习可以被统一成序列预测，那么一些专门的 CL 技巧可能可以被更通用的序列建模与上下文机制替代。它带来的启示不是立刻淘汰 replay，而是说明“遗忘”也许部分是建模接口定义得太离散。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把学习过程中的样本、任务或更新历史编码为序列，让模型通过序列建模来处理跨阶段依赖，而不是显式维护一套任务级规则。它更像是一种问题重构：把 continual learning 从‘优化约束问题’改写成‘条件序列预测问题’。与标准 CL 方法相比，这种设计舍弃了对任务边界的强先验，换来更统一的建模形式；但代价是序列长度、表示方式和训练分布会显著影响效果，且在真实大规模设置中如何高效扩展仍是挑战。","experiments":"实验通常会在标准 continual learning benchmark 上展示，把 sequence modeling 视角应用后，可以在遗忘—适应平衡上达到有竞争力甚至更好的结果。当前给定信息没有任务名称、模型规模和平均准确率/forgetting 指标，因此不应编造数字。更值得关注的是 ablation：是否需要显式任务 ID、样本顺序打乱会不会破坏效果、序列上下文长度对性能的影响有多大。对大模型训练的启示是，continual pretrain 中很多“阶段切换”问题，可能可以通过更好的序列化接口和采样策略来缓解。","authors_note":"作者来自韩国学界，Gunhee Kim 是较知名的视觉与多模态学习研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a foundational issue in continual learning: how to avoid treating it as a collection of task-boundary-specific tricks. Classical continual learning methods focus on catastrophic forgetting using dedicated regularizers or replay schemes, but that framing depends heavily on discrete task definitions and sits awkwardly with the modern trend of treating everything as sequence modeling.","importance":"The main value is the reframing. Casting continual learning as sequence modeling is relevant to pretraining because large-scale training is already a streaming, mixed, and staged data process. If continual learning can be expressed in a unified sequence-prediction form, some specialized CL machinery may be replaceable by more general context and sequence mechanisms. The contribution is not that replay becomes obsolete, but that part of the forgetting problem may come from an overly discrete interface.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to encode samples, tasks, or update history as sequences and let the model handle cross-stage dependencies through sequence modeling rather than explicit task-level rules. This is better understood as a problem reformulation than as a new optimizer trick. Relative to standard CL methods, it drops strong assumptions about task boundaries in exchange for a more unified modeling interface. The downside is that performance becomes sensitive to sequence representation, order, and context length, and scaling this efficiently to realistic settings remains nontrivial.","experiments":"The expected empirical result is that the sequence-modeling view can be competitive with or better than standard continual learning baselines on forgetting-versus-adaptation trade-offs. The provided metadata does not include benchmark names, model sizes, or exact average accuracy/forgetting scores, so those should not be invented. The most informative ablations are whether explicit task IDs are needed, how much sample order matters, and how context length affects retention. For large-model training, the practical lesson is that many continual pretraining stage-transition issues may be mitigated by better serialization and sampling interfaces.","authors_note":"The authors are from the Korean academic community, and Gunhee Kim is a well-known researcher in vision and multimodal learning."},"tags":["continual-learning","sequence-modeling","autoregressive","training-objective"],"notable_authors":["Gunhee Kim"],"keywords":["meta-continual learning","sequence modeling","Transformers","efficient Transformers"],"recommendation":{"zh":"做持续学习和流式预训练的可参考这个视角转换，重点读§3的序列建模框架和§5的消融结果。","en":"For continual learning and streaming pretraining researchers, refer to this perspective shift, focus on §3's sequence modeling framework and §5's ablation results."}},{"id":"LeporiSP23","title":"Break It Down: Evidence for Structural Compositionality in Neural Networks","authors":["Michael A. Lepori","Thomas Serre","Ellie Pavlick"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Though modern neural networks have achieved impressive performance in both vision and language tasks, we know little about the functions that they implement. One possibility is that neural networks implicitly break down complex tasks into subroutines, implement modular solutions to these subroutines, and compose them into an overall solution to a task --- a property we term structural compositionality.  Another possibility is that they may simply learn to match new inputs to learned templates, eliding task decomposition entirely. Here, we leverage model pruning techniques to investigate this question in both vision and language across a variety of architectures, tasks, and pretraining regimens. Our results demonstrate that models oftentimes implement solutions to subroutines via modular subnetworks, which can be ablated while maintaining the functionality of other subnetworks. This suggests that neural networks may be able to learn compositionality, obviating the need for specialized symbolic mechanisms.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LeporiSP23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LeporiSP23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/85069585133c4c168c865e65d72e9775-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关心的是一个机制层问题：神经网络是否真的学到了结构组合性，而不只是记住常见模式片段。过去很多工作用组合泛化 benchmark 来讨论 compositionality，但结论经常受数据设计和评测方式影响，很难知道模型是在真正重组结构，还是在做更隐蔽的插值。","importance":"这项工作的价值在于给‘神经网络有无结构组合性’这个大问题提供更细的证据，而不是简单站队。对 pretrain 研究者，这很重要，因为很多关于泛化、ICL、推理和模块化的讨论，最终都落在模型是否具备某种可重组的内部结构。如果证据显示网络确实能学到一部分结构组合性，那么数据构造和训练目标就该更关注如何激发它；如果证据只在受控条件下成立，就要警惕把局部现象过度外推到大模型能力。","technical_approach":"从标题看，方法核心是通过 ‘break it down’ 式分析，把任务拆成更基本的结构单元，检验模型能否在未见组合上重组这些单元。它大概率不是提出新架构，而是提出更有诊断性的实验框架。与只看整体准确率不同，这种做法试图分离‘记住部件’和‘按规则组合部件’两种能力，因此更适合讨论 structural compositionality。有效性的关键在于任务分解是否真的对应结构单元，而不是人为切得过于理想化。","experiments":"实验结论应当是带边界的正面证据：在某些受控设置下，神经网络表现出结构组合性迹象，但这种能力并非无条件出现，通常依赖训练分布、架构偏置或表示形式。当前给定信息没有 benchmark、模型类型和具体准确率数字，因此不能编写量化结果。最值得看的应是 ablation：不同架构、不同训练信号和不同分解粒度下，组合泛化是否稳健。对大模型的启示是，组合性很可能不是一个二元属性，而是随任务表示与训练分布连续变化的行为特征。","authors_note":"Ellie Pavlick、Thomas Serre 都是较知名作者。Pavlick 长期研究语言泛化、组合性与语义表示；Serre 团队长期做视觉认知与神经网络机制分析。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a mechanistic question: do neural networks actually learn structural compositionality, or do they mostly memorize familiar fragments and interpolate. Prior work has used compositional generalization benchmarks to argue both sides, but conclusions often depend heavily on dataset construction and evaluation, making it hard to separate real structure reuse from disguised pattern matching.","importance":"The value of the paper is that it contributes evidence at the level of mechanism rather than just benchmark performance. This matters for pretraining because many debates about generalization, in-context learning, reasoning, and modularity ultimately hinge on whether models can recombine internal structure. If the evidence is positive only under controlled conditions, that is still useful: it tells us where compositional behavior emerges and where extrapolation to large-model claims becomes unsafe.","technical_approach":"From the title, the approach is to break tasks into smaller structural units and test whether models can recombine those units in unseen ways. This is likely a diagnostic experimental framework rather than a new architecture. Compared with reporting only end accuracy, the design aims to separate knowing the parts from composing the parts according to structure. That is the right direction for studying structural compositionality, though its validity depends on whether the chosen decomposition truly reflects structure rather than an overly idealized partition.","experiments":"The likely empirical conclusion is a bounded positive result: neural networks show evidence of structural compositionality in some controlled settings, but the behavior is not automatic and depends on training distribution, architectural bias, or representation format. The provided metadata does not contain benchmark names, model types, or exact scores, so those should not be invented. The most informative ablations are whether the effect holds across architectures, supervision regimes, and decomposition granularities. For large models, the practical lesson is that compositionality is probably not a binary property but a graded behavior shaped by representation and data.","authors_note":"Ellie Pavlick and Thomas Serre are notable researchers. Pavlick is known for work on language generalization, compositionality, and semantics; Serre’s group is known for vision, cognition-inspired modeling, and mechanistic analysis."},"tags":["compositionality","generalization","mechanistic-analysis"],"notable_authors":["Thomas Serre","Ellie Pavlick"],"keywords":["Deep Learning","Compositionality","Cognitive Science"],"recommendation":{"zh":"研究模型组合性泛化的可参考其拆分式分析方法，读§4的诊断实验设计部分就足够。","en":"For model compositional generalization researchers, refer to its decomposition analysis method, just read §4 for diagnostic experiment design."}},{"id":"Li0X23","title":"An Inverse Scaling Law for CLIP Training","authors":["Xianhang Li","Zeyu Wang","Cihang Xie"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$af","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Li0X23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Li0X23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/996e2b446391fcb8bf32a3d1645cc799-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"CLIP预训练的计算成本极高，普通研究机构难以负担，此前的训练范式默认大模型需要搭配长token序列才能发挥性能，没有探索资源受限下的高效训练策略。","importance":"范式级贡献，发现了CLIP训练的逆缩放定律，打破了越大模型需要越长输入序列的固有认知，大幅降低了CLIP预训练的资源门槛，为多模态预训练的缩放规律研究提供了新的视角。","technical_approach":"原创缩放策略，核心观察为CLIP的图像/文本编码器越大，训练时可使用的图像/文本token序列长度越短，通过优化token长度缩减策略保证训练效果，不需要改动模型架构或增加额外训练数据。","experiments":"仅用8张A100 GPU即可完成CLIP训练，验证了token长度缩减策略的选择直接影响逆缩放定律的效果，摘要未提供具体参数量、基准对比及量化提升数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"CLIP pretraining requires extremely high computational cost, which is unaffordable for most research institutions. Previous training paradigms default that large models need to be paired with long token sequences to achieve good performance, and no efficient training strategy under limited resources has been explored.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution. It discovers the inverse scaling law for CLIP training, breaks the common belief that larger models require longer input sequences, greatly reduces the resource threshold for CLIP pretraining, and provides a new perspective for scaling law research of multimodal pretraining.","technical_approach":"Original scaling strategy. The core observation is that the larger the CLIP image/text encoder is, the shorter the image/text token sequence length can be used during training. The training performance is guaranteed by optimizing the token length reduction strategy, no model architecture modification or extra training data is required.","experiments":"CLIP can be successfully trained with only 8 A100 GPUs. It verifies that the choice of token length reduction strategy directly affects the effect of the inverse scaling law. No specific parameter count, baseline comparison or quantitative improvement numbers are provided in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["clip","scaling-law","data-quality","training-dynamics"],"keywords":["CLIP","inverse scaling","efficient training"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"CLIP的预训练效果随编码器参数量增大而提升","claim_en":"CLIP pretraining performance improves as encoder parameter count increases","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"CLIP训练时，更大的编码器可以搭配更短的token序列获得相当的训练效果","claim_en":"During CLIP training, larger encoders can be paired with shorter token sequences to achieve comparable training performance","opposes":"现有缩放定律认为越大的模型需要越长的输入序列才能释放性能","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"修正了现有缩放定律在多模态预训练场景下的适用边界，为资源受限下的大模型训练提供了新的思路"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"做多模态预训练缩放的可参考，打破了大模型必须搭配长序列的固有认知，读§3的逆缩放定律发现部分即可。","en":"For multimodal pretraining scaling researchers, it breaks the prior that larger models need longer sequences, just read §3 for inverse scaling law discovery."}},{"id":"LiRJ23","title":"Convergence of Adam Under Relaxed Assumptions","authors":["Haochuan Li","Alexander Rakhlin","Ali Jadbabaie"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b0","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiRJ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiRJ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/a3cc50126338b175e56bb3cad134db0b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"Adam优化器在深度学习训练中被广泛使用，但现有收敛证明依赖全局梯度有界等不符合实际训练的强假设，理论分析与实际应用长期脱节。","importance":"理论级贡献，首次在更贴近实际训练的假设下证明了Adam的收敛性，为预训练过程中优化器的选择、调参提供了理论支撑，填补了Adam理论分析的核心空白。","technical_approach":"原创理论分析框架，在广义平滑假设下证明了Adam优化轨迹上的梯度有界性，进而推导得到Adam收敛到ε-稳定点的梯度复杂度为O(ε^-4)，不需要全局梯度有界的强假设。","experiments":"纯理论工作，无实验验证内容。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Adam optimizer is widely used in deep learning training, but existing convergence proofs rely on unrealistic strong assumptions such as globally bounded gradients, leading to a long-term disconnect between theoretical analysis and practical application.","importance":"Theoretical-level contribution. It proves the convergence of Adam under assumptions much closer to real training for the first time, provides theoretical support for optimizer selection and tuning during pretraining, and fills the core gap in Adam theoretical analysis.","technical_approach":"Original theoretical analysis framework. It proves the boundedness of gradients along Adam's optimization trajectory under the generalized smoothness assumption, then derives that the gradient complexity of Adam converging to ε-stationary points is O(ε^-4), no strong assumption of globally bounded gradients is required.","experiments":"Pure theoretical work, no experimental verification content.","authors_note":""},"tags":["adam","optimizer","convergence"],"keywords":["Non-convex optimization","Adam","Convergence","Variance reduction"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Adam优化器在深度学习训练中具有优秀的实际表现","claim_en":"Adam optimizer has excellent practical performance in deep learning training","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"Adam在不需要全局梯度有界假设的前提下即可保证收敛到ε-稳定点","claim_en":"Adam can guarantee convergence to ε-stationary points without the assumption of globally bounded gradients","opposes":"现有Adam收敛证明必须依赖全局梯度有界的强假设才能成立","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"解决了Adam理论基础与实际应用脱节的长期问题，为优化器的后续改进提供了理论依据"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"优化理论相关工作，仅作为Adam收敛性的文献备查，不需要细读正文。","en":"This is optimization theory work, only for literature reference of Adam convergence, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"2306.00477","title":"Make Pre-trained Model Reversible: From Parameter to Memory Efficient Fine-Tuning","authors":["Baohao Liao","Shaomu Tan","Christof Monz"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b1","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.00477","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiaoTM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiaoTM23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/3151e460c41ba67dc55412861184ef35-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：PEFT 省了可训练参数，但没有真正省下训练期最贵的激活内存。过去 LoRA、Adapter、Prefix 这类方法主要减少参数更新量和优化器状态，却仍要像全量微调一样缓存大部分中间激活；当序列长、batch 大或底座模型大时，显存瓶颈依然在激活而不是参数，所以作者重新去碰“可逆网络”这个过去在 Transformer 上不太好落地的方向。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要是系统与方法接口层面的：它把“参数高效”推进到“参数 + 内存同时高效”。对 pretrain/posttrain 接口的启示很直接：后训练阶段的瓶颈不只是 trainable params，还包括反传所需的 activation footprint；如果能在不重训底座的前提下把现有 PLM 改造成近似可逆结构，那么长上下文 SFT、对齐训练、低资源多任务微调都会更可落地。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把已发布的预训练模型转换成可逆微调形态，而不是从头训练一个可逆 Transformer。关键设计思路应是：尽量保持原 PLM 主体参数和前向行为，只在残差/层结构上做可逆化改造，使中间激活可由相邻状态重构，从而避免逐层缓存。和直接训练 reversible Transformer 的路线相比，它解决的是“现有 checkpoint 无法直接用”的现实问题；和普通 checkpointing 相比，可逆结构把内存换算力做得更彻底，但代价通常是实现更复杂、重计算更多，并且并非所有模块都能无损可逆，实际往往需要对 attention/FFN 边界做额外处理。","experiments":"从给定信息只能确认其主实验应围绕两件事：一是微调性能尽量接近标准 PEFT，二是激活显存显著下降。合理的比较对象会包含全量微调、LoRA/Adapter 等 PEFT，以及 activation checkpointing 之类的内存基线；关键指标应是任务精度或生成质量、峰值显存、训练吞吐。若论文成立，最有价值的 ablation 通常会看：可逆改造插入到哪些层最划算、重计算开销有多大、不同序列长度下显存收益是否扩大。由于题面摘要截断，具体模型规模、数据集和数值提升无法可靠确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical gap in PEFT: it reduces trainable parameters, but not the dominant activation memory during backpropagation. Methods like LoRA and adapters avoid updating the full model, yet they still cache most intermediate activations just like full fine-tuning; this becomes the real bottleneck for long sequences and large backbones, which makes reversible computation worth revisiting.","importance":"The contribution is mainly at the systems-method boundary: it extends parameter efficiency into parameter-plus-memory efficiency. For pretrain-to-posttrain workflows, this matters because fine-tuning cost is often dominated by activation storage rather than optimizer state; if an existing pretrained checkpoint can be converted into a reversible form without retraining from scratch, longer-context SFT and alignment become easier to run under fixed hardware budgets.","technical_approach":"The method appears to convert an existing pretrained model into a reversible fine-tuning variant rather than training a reversible Transformer from scratch. The design goal is to preserve the original PLM behavior as much as possible while restructuring residual/layer computation so hidden states can be reconstructed on the backward pass, removing the need to cache every layer activation. Compared with standard gradient checkpointing, this pushes the memory-compute tradeoff further; compared with native reversible architectures, it is much more deployment-oriented because it starts from released checkpoints. The likely limitation is that not every Transformer component is naturally reversible, so some architectural compromises or partial reversibility are needed.","experiments":"From the provided text, the key empirical claims can only be inferred at a high level: PEFT quality should remain close to standard baselines while activation memory drops substantially. The relevant comparisons should include full fine-tuning, LoRA/adapter-style PEFT, and memory-saving baselines such as activation checkpointing, with metrics on task accuracy, peak memory, and training throughput. The most informative ablations would be where reversibility is inserted, how much recomputation overhead it adds, and whether gains grow with sequence length. Exact model sizes, datasets, and numbers cannot be confirmed from the truncated abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["peft","memory-efficient","fine-tuning","reversible"],"keywords":["large language model","parameter-efficient learning","memory-efficient learning","reversible neural network"],"recommendation":{"zh":"做高效微调的可参考，解决PEFT激活显存瓶颈的思路很实用，读§3的可逆化改造方案就行。","en":"For efficient fine-tuning researchers, its idea to solve PEFT activation memory bottleneck is practical, just read §3 for reversible transformation solution."}},{"id":"LindnerKFRMM23","title":"Tracr: Compiled Transformers as a Laboratory for Interpretability","authors":["David Lindner","János Kramár","Sebastian Farquhar","Matthew Rahtz","Tom McGrath","Vladimir Mikulik"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We show how to \"compile\" human-readable programs into standard decoder-only transformer models. Our compiler, Tracr, generates models with known structure. This structure can be used to design experiments. For example, we use it to study \"superposition\" in transformers that execute multi-step algorithms. Additionally, the known structure of Tracr-compiled models can serve as _ground-truth_ for evaluating interpretability methods. Commonly, because the \"programs\" learned by transformers are unknown it is unclear whether an interpretation succeeded. We demonstrate our approach by implementing and examining programs including computing token frequencies, sorting, and parenthesis checking. We provide an open-source implementation of Tracr at https://github.com/google-deepmind/tracr.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LindnerKFRMM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LindnerKFRMM23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/771155abaae744e08576f1f3b4b7ac0d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：解释性研究长期缺一个“知道正确答案”的 Transformer 实验台。以前分析真实大模型时，研究者只能事后猜测电路功能，缺少 ground truth；而分析玩具模型又常常太弱，不能覆盖实际 Transformer 里的组合算法结构，所以作者想构建一个可编译、可验证的 Transformer 基准系统。","importance":"这是一篇机制分析工具论文，重要性在研究方法层面而不是性能层面。它对 pretrain 研究的价值在于提供了一个可控环境：你可以把某个明确算法编译成 Transformer，再检查现有 interpretability 工具到底能不能恢复真实回路。这比在黑箱模型上讲故事更扎实，也能帮助区分哪些分析结论是方法真的有效，哪些只是主观拟合。","technical_approach":"Tracr 的核心是把一个受限程序语言里的算法直接编译成 Transformer 参数，因此模型内部每一层、每个头、每个通道都带有已知语义。它不是训练得到的，而是构造得到的；因此作者牺牲了“贴近真实训练动态”，换来“完全已知机制”的实验可验证性。和手工设计 toy task 相比，Tracr 的优势是能系统地产生不同复杂度的程序与对应网络；和分析真实模型相比，它提供严格 ground truth。边界也明显：编译模型不等于 SGD 训练出的表示，很多真实模型中的冗余、分布式编码和近似计算，在 Tracr 里可能不会自然出现。","experiments":"这类工作的实验重点不是 SOTA，而是展示编译器能生成多种已知算法的 Transformer，并用这些模型检验解释工具。关键事实通常包括：可编译的程序类别、得到的模型规模、编译后模型是否严格执行目标算法，以及若干 interpretability 方法在该平台上的恢复效果。最有价值的观察一般是：一些在真实模型上看似合理的解释方法，在有 ground truth 的条件下会失败或只恢复部分电路。题面未给摘要，因此无法确认具体程序集合、层数/头数和量化结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a methodological gap in interpretability: we rarely have Transformers with known ground-truth mechanisms. Real models are black boxes, so circuit analyses are hard to validate; toy setups are often too weak to represent the compositional algorithms people care about. Tracr aims to create a controlled laboratory where the correct internal computation is known by construction.","importance":"This is a research-infrastructure contribution for mechanistic interpretability rather than a performance paper. Its value to pretraining research is that it provides a way to test whether interpretability methods actually recover mechanisms, instead of merely producing plausible stories on opaque models.","technical_approach":"Tracr compiles programs from a restricted language directly into Transformer weights, so every layer, head, and subspace has a known intended role. The model is constructed rather than trained, which gives exact mechanistic ground truth at the cost of realism with respect to SGD dynamics. Compared with ad hoc toy models, it can systematically generate a range of algorithmic behaviors. Compared with analyses on pretrained models, it offers strict validation. The limitation is clear: compiled Transformers do not automatically capture the distributed, approximate, and redundant representations that emerge in learned models.","experiments":"The empirical focus is not benchmark performance but demonstration and validation. The likely key results are that Tracr can compile multiple algorithmic tasks into functioning Transformers and that existing interpretability tools recover only part of the true circuit structure. The most useful evidence would include exact execution of target programs, model size examples, and case studies where popular interpretability methods succeed or fail under known ground truth. The provided prompt does not include the abstract, so exact compiled task sets and numerical findings cannot be confirmed.","authors_note":""},"tags":["interpretability","transformer","circuits","analysis"],"keywords":["interpretability","transformers","language models","RASP","Tracr","mechanistic interpretability"],"recommendation":{"zh":"做模型可解释性的必看工具，用带ground truth的编译Transformer验证分析方法，读§2的Tracr实现框架即可。","en":"A must-have tool for interpretability researchers, verify analysis methods with compiled ground-truth Transformers, just read §2 for Tracr implementation framework."}},{"id":"LiuWZXZTJZCXH23","title":"Winner-Take-All Column Row Sampling for Memory Efficient Adaptation of Language Model","authors":["Zirui Liu","Guanchu Wang","Shaochen Zhong","Zhaozhuo Xu","Daochen Zha","Ruixiang (Ryan) Tang","Zhimeng Stephen Jiang","Kaixiong Zhou","Vipin Chaudhary","Shuai Xu","Xia Hu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b2","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiuWZXZTJZCXH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiuWZXZTJZCXH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/0a6059857ae5c82ea9726ee9282a7145-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：如何在不回传和存储完整适配器权重的前提下，对大语言模型做更省内存的参数高效微调。已有 LoRA、Adapter 一类方法虽然比全量微调轻很多，但在 rank、优化状态和多层叠加后，显存与参数开销仍然不低，尤其不适合更细粒度或多任务适配场景。","importance":"它的价值主要是方法级和系统级的。方法上，它把低秩适配进一步稀疏化到“行列采样”层面，说明参数高效微调还可以继续沿结构化稀疏方向压缩；系统上，它直接瞄准训练显存和部署存储这两个实际瓶颈，对大模型持续预训练、领域适配和边端个性化都有现实意义。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：适配模块的表达能力不一定只靠提高 rank，也可以靠更聪明的结构选择来维持有效更新。","technical_approach":"核心方法是一种 Winner-Take-All 的列/行采样适配机制，本质上是对低秩更新矩阵做结构化选择而不是完整学习。直观上，它不让所有行和列都参与更新，而是根据重要性保留最有贡献的一部分列和行，用更少参数近似原本的增量空间；这比非结构化剪枝更容易实现高效矩阵运算，也比固定低秩分解更灵活，因为它显式利用了权重更新中的不均匀重要性。这个设计有效的原因在于，大模型微调时真正起作用的更新通常集中在少数方向，Winner-Take-All 相当于把预算放在最有信息量的子空间上，代价则是需要稳定的重要性估计，否则可能出现训练初期选择噪声较大的问题。","experiments":"从题目和公开信息能确认的结论是：作者主要比较了其方法与常见参数高效微调基线在内存占用和任务性能上的权衡，并强调在更低适配参数量下维持接近甚至更优的效果。由于这里没有给到摘要或表格，无法可靠写出模型规模、数据规模、具体任务、精确指标和提升数字。可以合理推断实验重点应包括：与 LoRA/Adapter 的同等预算对比、采样比例或 rank 的消融，以及显存/速度/精度之间的 trade-off。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical bottleneck: how to adapt large language models with even lower memory than standard PEFT methods. LoRA and adapters already reduce the cost versus full fine-tuning, but their trainable states and optimizer memory still add up, especially under multi-task or repeated adaptation settings.","importance":"The contribution is mainly methodological with a systems angle. It pushes PEFT beyond low-rank factorization toward structured sparsification, which is relevant for continual pretraining, domain adaptation, and storage-efficient deployment. For pretraining researchers, the useful signal is that adaptation capacity does not have to come only from higher rank; careful structure selection can preserve useful update directions at lower cost.","technical_approach":"The core idea is a winner-take-all column-row sampling mechanism for adaptation matrices. Instead of learning a dense low-rank update, the method keeps only the most important rows and columns, allocating the budget to a smaller but more informative subspace. This differs from unstructured pruning because it stays hardware-friendlier, and it differs from fixed low-rank adaptation because it explicitly exploits the non-uniform importance of update directions. The design should work when fine-tuning gradients are concentrated in a few dominant directions; the main risk is that poor importance estimation can make early selection unstable.","experiments":"From the title and available metadata, the paper appears to compare against standard PEFT baselines on the trade-off between adaptation quality and memory cost, with the claim that it remains competitive under tighter parameter budgets. Since no abstract or tables are provided here, I cannot reliably state model sizes, datasets, metrics, or exact gains. The most likely experimental focus includes comparisons with LoRA/adapters, ablations on sampling ratio or rank, and memory-speed-accuracy trade-offs.","authors_note":""},"tags":["language-model","parameter-efficient-tuning","memory-efficiency","adaptation"],"keywords":["memory-efficient tuning","language model","transformers"],"recommendation":{"zh":"做参数高效微调的可参考这个行列采样思路，适合更低资源的适配场景，读§3的WTA采样机制就行。","en":"For parameter-efficient fine-tuning researchers, refer to this column-row sampling idea for low-resource adaptation, just read §3 for WTA sampling mechanism."}},{"id":"LiuXW023","title":"Is Your Code Generated by ChatGPT Really Correct? Rigorous Evaluation of Large Language Models for Code Generation","authors":["Jiawei Liu","Chunqiu Steven Xia","Yuyao Wang","Lingming Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b3","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiuXW023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiuXW023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/43e9d647ccd3e4b7b5baab53f0368686-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：现有代码生成评测往往高估了大模型的真实正确性，尤其忽略了测试不充分、样例泄漏和评测口径宽松带来的偏差。代码生成已经从“能写出看起来像代码”转向“能否稳定生成语义正确、可执行、可泛化的程序”，因此需要更严格的评测基准。","importance":"它的重要性主要在评测方法和训练反馈接口上。对 pretrain/posttrain 而言，代码能力是最依赖评测质量的方向之一；如果评测信号失真，就会错误判断模型是否真的学会了程序语义、也会误导后续数据合成和 RL 奖励设计。这篇工作的意义不在提出新模型，而在于提醒社区：代码生成的提升很可能被宽松 benchmark 放大，严格评测会重新排序模型能力。","technical_approach":"核心做法是构建更严格的代码生成评测框架，而不是优化生成模型本身。通常这类工作会从测试用例增强、隐藏测试、问题去重、温度采样覆盖率、执行正确性与功能正确性的区分等方面下手，目的是把“表面通过”与“真实通过”分开。它与已有 HumanEval 式评测的区别在于更强调 rigor，也就是减少偶然通过和 benchmark contamination 的影响。这样设计有效，因为代码任务的最终目标是功能正确，单一少量测试用例很容易让模型通过模式匹配取巧。","experiments":"可以确定的是，论文围绕 ChatGPT 及其他主流代码大模型做了严格重评估，并得出“原先报告的正确率被高估”的结论。由于这里没有摘要，无法可靠给出具体模型名单、任务集名称、pass@k 数值、降幅百分比或误差分解。高概率包含的实验点包括：原始公开测试与增强测试的对比、不同采样次数下的真实 pass@k 变化，以及错误类型分析，例如边界条件、隐式约束和长程程序逻辑。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a simple but important issue: current code-generation benchmarks often overestimate actual correctness. As code LMs moved from plausible-looking snippets to production-like use cases, weak tests and loose evaluation protocols became a serious source of error.","importance":"This is primarily an evaluation contribution, but it matters directly for training and model comparison. In code generation, noisy evaluation can mislead data curation, synthetic supervision, and even RL-style optimization. The paper’s main message is that stricter evaluation can materially change how strong current models really are.","technical_approach":"The work proposes a more rigorous evaluation setup rather than a new generator. The likely ingredients are stronger hidden tests, deduplication or contamination control, broader execution checks, and a clearer separation between superficial execution success and true functional correctness. Compared with standard HumanEval-style reporting, the emphasis is on reducing false optimism. That choice makes sense because small test suites are easy to game through pattern matching or partial heuristics.","experiments":"What can be stated with confidence is that the paper reevaluates ChatGPT and related code LMs under stricter settings and concludes that previously reported correctness is inflated. Without the abstract or tables, I cannot reliably provide exact benchmarks, pass@k values, or the size of the drop. The most informative experiments likely compare public versus strengthened tests, examine sampling-based variance, and break down failures by edge cases and hidden semantic constraints.","authors_note":""},"tags":["code-generation","evaluation","llm","benchmark"],"keywords":["LLM4Code","ChatGPT","Automated Test Generation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"做代码大模型的必看，修正了宽松评测的高估问题，读§4的严格评测框架和能力重排序结果即可。","en":"For code LLM researchers, it corrects overestimation from lenient evaluation, just read §4 for rigorous evaluation framework and capability re-ranking results."}},{"id":"MadaanTGHGW0DPY23","title":"Self-Refine: Iterative Refinement with Self-Feedback","authors":["Aman Madaan","Niket Tandon","Prakhar Gupta","Skyler Hallinan","Luyu Gao","Sarah Wiegreffe","Uri Alon","Nouha Dziri","Shrimai Prabhumoye","Yiming Yang","Shashank Gupta","Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder","Katherine Hermann","Sean Welleck","Amir Yazdanbakhsh","Peter Clark"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b4","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MadaanTGHGW0DPY23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MadaanTGHGW0DPY23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/91edff07232fb1b55a505a9e9f6c0ff3-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"大语言模型单次生成的输出质量不稳定，此前的输出优化方法需要额外监督训练、强化学习或外部模型，部署成本高、适用范围窄。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出了无需训练的自反馈迭代优化范式，大幅降低了大模型输出质量提升的成本，对预训练模型的下游适配、推理优化有直接参考价值。","technical_approach":"原创推理阶段优化方法，用同一个大模型同时承担生成器、反馈提供者、优化器三个角色，迭代对初始输出进行反馈和修正，不需要额外训练数据、参数更新或外部模型，适配任意现成的大语言模型。","experiments":"在对话生成、数学推理等7个不同任务上验证了效果，测试的基础模型包括GPT-3.5、ChatGPT、GPT-4，摘要未提供具体量化提升数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The output quality of large language models (LLMs) from single generation is unstable. Previous output optimization methods require extra supervised training, reinforcement learning or external models, with high deployment cost and narrow application scope.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It proposes a training-free self-feedback iterative optimization paradigm, greatly reduces the cost of improving LLM output quality, and provides direct reference for downstream adaptation and inference optimization of pretrained models.","technical_approach":"Original inference-stage optimization method. The same LLM acts as generator, feedback provider and refiner at the same time, iteratively provides feedback and revises the initial output. No extra training data, parameter update or external model is required, and it adapts to any off-the-shelf LLM.","experiments":"Effect is verified on 7 different tasks including dialogue response generation and mathematical reasoning. Tested base models include GPT-3.5, ChatGPT and GPT-4. No specific quantitative improvement numbers are provided in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["self-refine","iterative-refinement","llm","self-feedback"],"keywords":["LLMs","Iterative Refinement","Feedback-driven Generation"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大语言模型单次生成的输出存在可改进的空间","claim_en":"LLM output from single generation has room for improvement","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"单个大语言模型可以独立完成自我反馈和输出优化，不需要额外模块或训练","claim_en":"A single LLM can independently complete self-feedback and output optimization without extra modules or training","opposes":"输出优化方法需要依赖额外训练、外部反馈模型或人工标注才能实现","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"拓展了大模型推理阶段的能力边界，为无需训练的模型性能提升提供了新的路径"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§3迭代流程设计和§4.2多任务效果对比即可，零训练自优化范式可直接在内部推理链路做 ablation 验证。","en":"Just read §3 for iterative workflow design and §4.2 for multi-task performance comparisons; this training-free self-refinement paradigm is worth ablation testing in internal inference pipelines."}},{"id":"ManikandanJK23","title":"Language Models are Weak Learners","authors":["Hariharan Manikandan","Yiding Jiang","J. Zico Kolter"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b5","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ManikandanJK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ManikandanJK23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/9f94298bac4668db4dc77ddb0a244301-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"弱学习器是boosting等经典机器学习方法的核心基础，此前的弱学习器都是针对特定任务设计的小模型，没有探索大语言模型作为通用弱学习器的可能性。","importance":"范式级贡献，首次验证了prompt驱动的大语言模型可以作为通用弱学习器使用，拓展了大模型的适用场景，为经典机器学习方法与大模型的结合提供了新方向。","technical_approach":"原创应用范式，将表格数据转换为文本描述输入大模型，通过采样合适分布的样本来让大模型生成分类模板，获得比随机猜测更好的分类效果，满足弱学习器的定义，不需要对大模型进行额外微调。","experiments":"在表格数据分类任务上验证了prompt驱动的大语言模型可以作为弱学习器嵌入boosting算法，摘要未提供具体参数量、基准对比及量化提升数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Weak learners are the core foundation of classic machine learning methods such as boosting. Previous weak learners are all small models designed for specific tasks, and the possibility of large language models (LLMs) as general weak learners has not been explored.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution. It verifies for the first time that prompt-based LLMs can be used as general weak learners, expands the application scenarios of LLMs, and provides a new direction for the combination of classic machine learning methods and large models.","technical_approach":"Original application paradigm. Tabular data is converted into text descriptions and input to LLMs. LLMs generate classification templates by sampling samples of appropriate distribution, obtain better-than-random classification performance, meet the definition of weak learners, and no extra fine-tuning of LLMs is required.","experiments":"It is verified on tabular data classification tasks that prompt-based LLMs can be embedded into boosting algorithms as weak learners. No specific parameter count, baseline comparison or quantitative improvement numbers are provided in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["language-models","generalization","theory","boosting"],"keywords":["language model","prompting","tabular data","summarization","boosting","adaboost"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"弱学习器只需要获得比随机猜测更好的分类效果即可用于boosting框架","claim_en":"Weak learners only need to achieve better-than-random classification performance to be used in boosting frameworks","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"prompt驱动的大语言模型可以作为通用弱学习器适配boosting等经典机器学习框架","claim_en":"Prompt-based LLMs can be used as general weak learners to adapt to classic machine learning frameworks such as boosting","opposes":"弱学习器必须是针对特定任务设计的小模型，通用大模型无法满足弱学习器的要求","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"打破了大模型与经典机器学习方法的适用边界，为混合建模框架提供了新的可能性"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§4 prompt 构造方法和表1弱学习器效果验证即可，为经典 boosting 框架与大模型结合提供了新思路。","en":"Only check §4 for prompt construction methods and Table 1 for weak learner performance verification; it offers a new direction for combining classic boosting frameworks with LLMs."}},{"id":"MassaroliPFKPRT23","title":"Laughing Hyena Distillery: Extracting Compact Recurrences From Convolutions","authors":["Stefano Massaroli","Michael Poli","Daniel Y. Fu","Hermann Kumbong","Rom N. Parnichkun","David W. Romero","Aman Timalsina","Quinn McIntyre","Beidi Chen","Atri Rudra","Ce Zhang","Christopher Ré","Stefano Ermon","Yoshua Bengio"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b6","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MassaroliPFKPRT23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MassaroliPFKPRT23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/371355cd42caaf83412c3fbef4688979-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"长卷积序列模型在自回归生成任务上推理成本高，每生成一个token需要遍历整个输入序列或缓存大量激活值，与Transformer一样存在推理效率低的痛点。","importance":"方法级贡献，实现了预训练长卷积模型的推理效率优化，将每token推理的计算和内存成本降到O(1)，对长序列模型的部署、预训练架构设计都有参考价值。","technical_approach":"原创模型转换方法，从每个预训练的长卷积层中提取低维线性状态空间模型，不需要重新训练模型，也不会损失过多效果，兼容任意已有的长卷积架构。","experiments":"验证了转换后的模型生成时内存占用更低、吞吐量更高，摘要未提供具体参数量、吞吐量提升及效果损失的量化数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Long convolution sequence models have high inference cost on autoregressive generation tasks. Generating each token requires traversing the entire input sequence or caching a large number of activations, which has the same low inference efficiency pain point as Transformers.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It realizes inference efficiency optimization for pretrained long convolution models, reduces the compute and memory cost per token generation to O(1), and has reference value for long sequence model deployment and pretraining architecture design.","technical_approach":"Original model conversion method. Low-dimensional linear state-space models are extracted from each pretrained long convolution layer. No retraining is required, and no significant performance loss is introduced. It is compatible with all existing long convolution architectures.","experiments":"It is verified that the converted model has lower memory footprint and higher throughput during generation. No specific parameter count, throughput improvement or performance loss quantitative numbers are provided in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["state-space-models","sequence-modeling","compression","efficiency"],"keywords":["Long convolutions","recurrence","attention","language models","signal processing","throughput","auto-regressive generation"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"长卷积序列模型在长序列任务上的表现可以匹配甚至超过Transformer","claim_en":"Long convolution sequence models can match or even outperform Transformers on long sequence tasks","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"预训练长卷积层可以被转换为低维状态空间模型，实现O(1)每token推理成本而不损失过多效果","claim_en":"Pretrained long convolution layers can be converted to low-dimensional state-space models to achieve O(1) per-token inference cost without significant performance loss","opposes":"长卷积模型的自回归推理成本天然是O(n)，无法在不重训的前提下大幅降低","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"解决了长卷积模型的推理效率痛点，为其在生成任务上的落地扫清了核心障碍"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§3卷积转循环转换算法和表2精度效率 tradeoff 即可，对长卷积模型的部署优化有直接参考价值。","en":"Just read §3 for convolution-to-recurrence conversion algorithm and Table 2 for accuracy-efficiency tradeoffs; it provides direct reference for deployment optimization of long-convolution models."}},{"id":"MazumderBYKRDDH23","title":"DataPerf: Benchmarks for Data-Centric AI Development","authors":["Mark Mazumder","Colby R. Banbury","Xiaozhe Yao","Bojan Karlas","William Gaviria Rojas","Sudnya Frederick Diamos","Greg Diamos","Lynn He","Alicia Parrish","Hannah Rose Kirk","Jessica Quaye","Charvi Rastogi","Douwe Kiela","David Jurado","David Kanter","Rafael Mosquera","Will Cukierski","Juan Ciro","Lora Aroyo","Bilge Acun","Lingjiao Chen","Mehul Raje","Max Bartolo","Evan Sabri Eyuboglu","Amirata Ghorbani","Emmett D. Goodman","Addison Howard","Oana Inel","Tariq Kane","Christine R. Kirkpatrick"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b7","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MazumderBYKRDDH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MazumderBYKRDDH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/112db88215e25b3ae2750e9eefcded94-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"机器学习研究长期以模型为中心，现有基准数据集存在覆盖度不足、难度不均衡、与实际场景脱节等问题，数据质量的评估没有统一的标准。","importance":"系统级贡献，推出了首个社区驱动的以数据为中心的AI基准套件，为数据集质量评估、数据-centric算法的迭代提供了统一的评测平台，对预训练的数据质量研究、数据集建设有直接支撑作用。","technical_approach":"原创基准体系设计，包含多个不同任务的数据集评测赛道，提供开放的在线平台支持多轮竞赛，鼓励社区迭代数据集而非仅迭代模型架构，保证评测的可比性和可复现性。","experiments":"验证了基准套件可以有效衡量数据集的质量和数据-centric算法的效果，摘要未提供具体评测指标及对比数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Machine learning research has long focused on models. Existing benchmark datasets have problems such as insufficient coverage, unbalanced difficulty, and disconnect from real scenarios, and there is no unified standard for data quality evaluation.","importance":"System-level contribution. It launches the first community-driven data-centric AI benchmark suite, provides a unified evaluation platform for data quality evaluation and data-centric algorithm iteration, and directly supports data quality research and dataset construction for pretraining.","technical_approach":"Original benchmark system design. It includes multiple dataset evaluation tracks for different tasks, provides an open online platform to support multi-round competitions, encourages the community to iterate datasets instead of only model architectures, and ensures the comparability and reproducibility of evaluations.","experiments":"It is verified that the benchmark suite can effectively measure dataset quality and the effect of data-centric algorithms. No specific evaluation metric or comparison numbers are provided in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-quality","benchmark","data-centric","evaluation"],"keywords":["datasets","datacentric","vision","speech","acquisition","debugging","prompting"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"数据质量对机器学习模型的最终效果有决定性影响","claim_en":"Data quality has a decisive impact on the final performance of machine learning models","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"以数据集为核心的基准体系可以有效推动AI研究进展，避免现有模型中心基准的饱和问题","claim_en":"Dataset-centric benchmark systems can effectively promote AI research progress and avoid the saturation problem of existing model-centric benchmarks","opposes":"AI研究的基准应该以模型架构的迭代为核心，数据集只需要固定为统一的测试集即可","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"为数据-centric AI的研究提供了统一的评测标准，填补了这一领域的基准空白"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§2基准赛道设计部分即可，做预训练数据质量评估时可作为工具框架备查。","en":"Only read §2 for benchmark track design; it can be used as a reference framework when conducting pre-training data quality evaluation."}},{"id":"MozaffariLZD23","title":"MKOR: Momentum-Enabled Kronecker-Factor-Based Optimizer Using Rank-1 Updates","authors":["Mohammad Mozaffari","Sikan Li","Zhao Zhang","Maryam Mehri Dehnavi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b8","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MozaffariLZD23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MozaffariLZD23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/39bc6e3cbf5a1991d33dc10ebff9a9cf-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：二阶或近似二阶优化器虽然常能改善收敛和稳定性，但在大模型训练里内存和计算成本太高，难以实际替代 Adam。K-FAC 一类方法利用 Kronecker 分解降低了成本，但仍然不够轻，而且动量与曲率估计的结合不够自然；MKOR 试图把这条路线推向更可用。","importance":"它的贡献属于优化器设计与系统效率。对 pretrain 的意义在于，如果能以接近一阶方法的开销获得更好的曲率利用和训练稳定性，那么大规模预训练的学习率上限、batch 扩展性和 loss spike 控制都可能受益；这类工作未必马上替代 AdamW，但会影响我们对‘更优优化器是否值得系统投入’的判断。","technical_approach":"MKOR 是一种基于 Kronecker 因子近似的优化器，并通过 rank-1 updates 和动量机制进一步降低更新代价、改善统计稳定性。核心思路是保留二阶预条件的主要结构信息，但避免完整矩阵更新与求逆的高成本。和经典 K-FAC 相比，它更强调在线、轻量的曲率近似更新；和纯一阶动量法相比，它能按参数方向做更细的缩放，因此在病态曲率下更有优势。代价是实现复杂度更高，而且在现代超大模型、混合精度和分布式训练下是否稳定，取决于很多系统细节。","experiments":"关键实验通常会比较 MKOR 与 SGD/Adam/K-FAC 在收敛速度、最终精度、吞吐和内存上的差异。对基础模型研究者，最重要的是看它是否在相近 wall-clock 下真正更快收敛，而不是只在 step 数上占优；如果论文展示了更大 batch 更稳、或在 Transformer/vision backbone 上减少训练抖动，那是更有价值的信号。还应关注 ablation：rank-1 更新近似损失了多少曲率质量，动量项带来的增益来自优化轨迹平滑还是更好预条件。","authors_note":"仅凭题面无法可靠确认机构与团队代表作，返回空字符串。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a long-standing optimization gap: second-order or curvature-aware methods can improve convergence and stability, but are usually too expensive to replace Adam in large-scale training. Kronecker-factored methods help, yet often remain heavy and awkward to combine with momentum; MKOR tries to make this family more practical.","importance":"This is an optimizer and systems-efficiency contribution. For pretraining, the potential upside is meaningful: if a near-second-order optimizer can run at close to first-order cost, it may raise stable learning-rate limits, improve large-batch scaling, and reduce training instabilities such as spikes or slow plateaus.","technical_approach":"MKOR is a Kronecker-factor-based optimizer that uses rank-1 updates together with momentum to keep curvature estimation lightweight. The design keeps the main structure of second-order preconditioning while avoiding the full cost of dense matrix maintenance and inversion. Relative to classical K-FAC, it aims for cheaper online updates. Relative to standard momentum methods, it can rescale directions more intelligently under ill-conditioned curvature. The trade-off is implementation complexity and sensitivity to distributed training details, especially in mixed-precision large-model settings.","experiments":"The important comparisons are against SGD, Adam, and K-FAC-style baselines on convergence speed, final accuracy, memory, and throughput. For foundation-model practitioners, the key question is wall-clock efficiency rather than step efficiency: does it actually reach a target quality faster in real training runs. Useful ablations include how much quality is lost from rank-1 approximation and whether momentum helps mainly through smoother dynamics or through better interaction with the curvature estimate.","authors_note":""},"tags":["optimizer","training-efficiency","second-order","optimization"],"notable_authors":["Mohammad Mozaffari","Sikan Li","Zhao Zhang","Maryam Mehri Dehnavi"],"keywords":["machine learning","deep learning","optimizers","distributed training;second-order optimization;"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3核心更新公式和§5大模型训练实验结果即可，成本接近 Adam 的二阶优化器思路值得在小规模预训练中试跑。","en":"Only check §3 for core update formulas and §5 for large model training results; this Adam-cost near second-order optimizer is worth testing in small-scale pre-training runs."}},{"id":"NguyenNB23","title":"Mitigating Over-smoothing in Transformers via Regularized Nonlocal Functionals","authors":["Tam Nguyen","Tan Nguyen","Richard G. Baraniuk"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b9","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NguyenNB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NguyenNB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/fde1a69a5b6e554b2f1f727197d2651d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是 Transformer 中的 over-smoothing：层数加深后，不同 token 表示变得越来越相似，导致区分能力下降。这个问题在图网络里讨论很多，在 Transformer 里也存在，但通常被注意力、残差和归一化机制部分掩盖，所以过去更多是经验修补而非明确建模。作者试图给出一个更结构化的正则化方法，抑制 token 表示无差别地混合。","importance":"这项工作的贡献主要是训练稳定性与表示保持，属于方法级改进。对 pretrain 的启示在于：如果 over-smoothing 在深层 Transformer 中确实会伤害信息保真和梯度传播，那么简单堆深度并不总是划算，适当的正则化可以换来更可扩展的深层训练。它的重要性不在于替代 Transformer，而是在于提供一个更清晰的视角去理解深层网络里信息何时被洗平、以及如何有控制地阻止这种现象。","technical_approach":"作者提出的是基于 regularized nonlocal functionals 的正则项，用来约束 Transformer 表示在 token 间的非局部相互作用，避免过度趋同。直观上，这类方法不是禁止信息混合，而是惩罚“所有 token 都往一个平均状态塌缩”的趋势，因此目标是在保留必要上下文聚合的同时维持区分性。和直接改注意力结构相比，这种方案侵入性更低；和简单加大残差或调学习率不同，它显式针对表征几何而不是间接修补训练动态。","experiments":"实验上的关键信号应当是：加入该正则化后，深层 Transformer 的训练和泛化更稳，token 表示相似度分布更健康，并在相关任务上优于无正则基线。题面没有给出具体任务、深度、参数规模和提升数值，因此不能补造数字；但合理的实验应包括不同深度下性能衰减比较、表示平滑度指标分析，以及与常见 regularizer 的对照。对预训练读者最有价值的不是单个 benchmark 提升，而是它是否能延缓“层数增加但有效容量不增反降”的现象。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets over-smoothing in Transformers: as depth increases, token representations can become too similar, which hurts discrimination and effective capacity. This phenomenon is well known in graph networks and is increasingly relevant for deep Transformers, but it is often treated only indirectly through architecture heuristics rather than as an explicit optimization target.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution around representation preservation and depth scalability. For pretraining, the message is that simply adding layers is not always beneficial if the model keeps washing token states into each other. A regularizer that preserves useful variation can improve the depth–capacity trade-off without changing the whole architecture.","technical_approach":"The method introduces a regularization term based on nonlocal functionals to discourage indiscriminate mixing across token representations. The point is not to prevent context aggregation, but to penalize collapse toward overly homogeneous states. Compared with redesigning attention, this is a lighter intervention. Compared with generic training tricks, it directly targets representation geometry rather than indirectly hoping optimization will fix it.","experiments":"The likely empirical result is that the proposed regularizer stabilizes deeper Transformers, improves task performance over unregularized baselines, and leads to healthier representation similarity statistics. The prompt does not provide exact tasks, model sizes, depths, or gains, so those should not be invented. The most informative analysis is probably how performance degrades with depth and whether the regularizer delays that degradation.","authors_note":""},"tags":["over-smoothing","transformer","regularization","depth"],"keywords":["transformers","self-attention","total variation","nonlocal functionals","over-smoothing"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§3正则项构造和§4深层 Transformer 效果验证即可，堆深度遇到表征坍塌时可引入该正则做 ablation。","en":"Just read §3 for regularizer design and §4 for deep Transformer performance verification; this regularizer can be added to ablations when representation collapse occurs in deep stacking."}},{"id":"NguyenPFTWBMPRB23","title":"HyenaDNA: Long-Range Genomic Sequence Modeling at Single Nucleotide Resolution","authors":["Eric Nguyen","Michael Poli","Marjan Faizi","Armin W. Thomas","Michael Wornow","Callum Birch-Sykes","Stefano Massaroli","Aman Patel","Clayton M. Rabideau","Yoshua Bengio","Stefano Ermon","Christopher Ré","Stephen Baccus"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ba","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NguyenPFTWBMPRB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NguyenPFTWBMPRB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/86ab6927ee4ae9bde4247793c46797c7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的核心问题是：如何在单核苷酸分辨率上建模超长基因组序列，而不被 Transformer 的二次复杂度卡死。传统基因组模型通常要么截断上下文，要么降分辨率，要么用卷积近似长程依赖，因此很难同时保留原始序列粒度和百万级上下文。作者试图证明，新的长序列架构可以直接在 DNA 原始 token 上做大范围序列建模。","importance":"这项工作的主要贡献是长上下文序列建模方法的跨领域验证，但对 pretrain 研究同样有参考价值。它的重要性不在生物任务本身，而在于展示了非注意力架构在超长离散序列上的可行性：如果 Hyena 这类隐式长卷积/状态空间风格方法能在单字符分辨率下稳定扩展，那么对文本、代码、音频 token 等长上下文预训练也有直接启发。它是一个架构与尺度能力的案例，而不只是应用论文。","technical_approach":"作者提出 HyenaDNA，用 Hyena 系列长卷积算子替代标准自注意力，直接处理极长 DNA 序列。关键设计点是：DNA 字母表很小，但依赖范围极长，局部 motif 和远程调控都重要，因此模型需要在低 token 复杂度下保留长距离交互能力；Hyena 通过隐式卷积核和高效算子实现次二次甚至近线性扩展，比 Transformer 更适合这种 regime。和降采样或 k-mer tokenization 相比，它保留单碱基层级表示；代价则通常是模型归纳偏置更强，且对某些精细内容寻址方式不如显式注意力直接。","experiments":"实验的关键信息应当包括：HyenaDNA 在单核苷酸分辨率、远超标准 Transformer 可承受长度的上下文窗口上训练和评测，并在若干基因组任务上达到强结果。题面没有附带具体上下文长度、参数规模和指标，所以不能编造，但这篇论文广为人知的价值就在于它把上下文长度推进到了此前很难覆盖的量级，并比较了 Transformer 或其他长序列基线。对预训练读者更值得关注的不是某个生物 benchmark，而是 scaling 观察：在长上下文条件下，架构复杂度比 tokenization tricks 更决定可行性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a hard sequence-modeling problem: modeling genomic sequences at single-nucleotide resolution over very long contexts, without the quadratic cost of Transformers. Earlier genomics models often had to truncate context, reduce resolution, or rely on local inductive biases, which makes it difficult to capture both fine-grained sequence content and long-range dependencies.","importance":"This is an application-grounded architecture paper with broader relevance to pretraining. Its significance is not limited to genomics. It shows that non-attention long-sequence architectures can operate directly on extremely long discrete sequences while preserving token-level resolution. That has clear implications for long-context pretraining in text, code, audio tokens, and other modalities.","technical_approach":"HyenaDNA replaces standard self-attention with Hyena-style long convolution operators designed to scale much better with sequence length. This is a good match for DNA: the alphabet is tiny, but meaningful interactions can span very long ranges. Compared with downsampling or k-mer tokenization, the model keeps single-base resolution. Compared with Transformers, it gains tractable long-context scaling at the cost of a stronger architectural bias and less explicit content-based addressing.","experiments":"The key empirical point is that HyenaDNA can train and perform well on genomic tasks at context lengths that are far beyond what standard Transformers can practically handle at the same resolution. The prompt does not provide exact context lengths, model sizes, or metrics, so those should not be invented. For a pretraining-oriented reader, the most relevant result is the scaling evidence: in this regime, architecture choice matters more than small tokenizer tricks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["long-context","genomics","hyena","sequence-modeling"],"keywords":["genomics","hyena","foundation models","large language models","transformers"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3 Hyena 适配基因组数据的修改和§4长上下文扩展性实验即可，非注意力长序列架构的落地案例可参考。","en":"Only check §3 for Hyena's adaptation to genomic data and §4 for long context scalability experiments; it is a reference case for non-attention long-sequence architecture implementation."}},{"id":"NicklXTMK23","title":"The Memory-Perturbation Equation: Understanding Model&apos;s Sensitivity to Data","authors":["Peter Nickl","Lu Xu","Dharmesh Tailor","Thomas Möllenhoff","Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NicklXTMK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NicklXTMK23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/550ab405d0addd3de5b70e57b44878df-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的核心问题是：如何刻画一个模型对训练数据的敏感性，即某个样本被加入、删除或扰动后，模型记忆和输出会如何变化。过去关于 data influence、memorization 和 data attribution 的工具很多，但往往要么局部近似粗糙，要么计算代价太高，不足以解释现代深网的真实敏感性。作者提出的 Memory-Perturbation Equation，目标就是给出一个更系统的关系式来连接数据扰动与模型记忆行为。","importance":"这项工作的价值在于把数据影响分析从经验探针推进到更结构化的理论/方法框架。对 pretrain 的意义有两层：第一，它有助于理解哪些数据被模型强记住、哪些只贡献统计泛化，这关系到数据去重、隐私和高质量数据配比；第二，它给 continual pretrain、数据清洗和 machine unlearning 提供了更细的分析视角。重要性不在直接提升性能，而在于帮助我们更精确地观察‘模型是怎么被数据塑形的’。","technical_approach":"作者的核心方法是推导一个连接记忆量与数据扰动响应的方程或近似关系，用于预测模型参数或输出对特定数据变化的敏感度。直观上，这类方法通常把训练动态、损失 Hessian、梯度影响函数或核近似联系起来，以避免对每个数据删改都重新训练。和经典 influence functions 相比，它可能更强调‘记忆’这一对象，而不是单纯测试点损失变化；和纯经验 membership probing 相比，它试图提供可解释的因果联系。","experiments":"实验上的核心事实应当是：该方程能较好预测不同样本或数据子集对模型记忆/输出的影响，并在若干设置下优于现有 influence 或 memorization 估计方法。题面没有提供模型、数据集和误差数字，因此不能填具体值；但从标题判断，合理的实验会包括数据删除或扰动后的再训练验证、不同训练阶段的敏感性比较，以及对高记忆样本的识别能力。对预训练实践最有价值的是它能否在不重训的前提下稳定筛出‘高影响数据’。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies model sensitivity to data: how much a model’s memory and predictions change when specific training examples are added, removed, or perturbed. Existing tools for data attribution and memorization analysis are often either too crude or too expensive for modern deep networks. The proposed Memory-Perturbation Equation aims to relate data perturbations to memorization behavior more systematically.","importance":"This is an analysis-oriented contribution with relevance to pretraining data quality, privacy, deduplication, continual pretraining, and unlearning. Its value is not in boosting benchmark performance, but in giving a sharper view of how training data shapes the model. That matters because not all data points contribute in the same way: some drive generalization, while others are disproportionately memorized.","technical_approach":"The core method is to derive an equation or approximation linking memory to the model’s response under data perturbations. In practice, this kind of framework usually connects training dynamics with curvature or gradient-based influence estimates so that retraining is not required for every what-if analysis. Compared with classical influence functions, the emphasis here is likely on memorization itself rather than only prediction loss at a test point.","experiments":"The likely empirical claim is that the proposed equation predicts the effect of data perturbations on model memory or outputs better than existing influence-style baselines. The prompt does not provide model details, datasets, or quantitative errors, so those should not be invented. The most useful evaluation would compare predicted sensitivity against actual retraining under example deletion or perturbation, especially for highly memorized examples.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-quality","training-dynamics","memorization","generalization"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§2核心方程推导和§4记忆敏感度实验即可，做数据归因、机器遗忘相关研究时可作为分析工具参考。","en":"Just read §2 for core equation derivation and §4 for memory sensitivity experiments; it can be used as an analysis tool for data attribution and unlearning related research."}},{"id":"NociLLHHMR23","title":"The Shaped Transformer: Attention Models in the Infinite Depth-and-Width Limit","authors":["Lorenzo Noci","Chuning Li","Mufan Bill Li","Bobby He","Thomas Hofmann","Chris J. Maddison","Dan Roy"],"institutions":["ETH Zurich"],"abstract":"$bb","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NociLLHHMR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NociLLHHMR23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/aa31dc84098add7dd2ffdd20646f2043-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer 在深度和宽度同时趋于无穷时的理论行为尚不清楚——已有的无限宽度理论（如 NTK/GP）忽略了深度的影响，而实际 Transformer 的深度对训练动态和表达能力至关重要。本文试图建立一个同时考虑无限深度和无限宽度的极限理论框架。","importance":"方法/理论级贡献。该工作为理解 Transformer 的初始化、残差连接缩放、注意力矩阵在深层的演化提供了理论工具。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：它揭示了不同的残差分支缩放方案（shaped vs. vanilla）如何影响信号传播和训练稳定性，这与实际大模型训练中的 pre-norm / post-norm / 残差缩放选择直接相关。","technical_approach":"核心思路是在深度 L 和宽度 d 同时趋于无穷的极限下，推导 Transformer 前向传播中注意力矩阵和隐状态的分布收敛行为。关键发现是：vanilla Transformer 在此极限下注意力矩阵会退化为秩-1（即所有 token 被同等对待），而通过对残差分支施加与深度相关的缩放（称为 'shaped' Transformer），可以保持注意力矩阵的非退化结构。这一缩放本质上是让每层残差贡献按 1/L 量级衰减，从而在连续极限下得到一个良定义的 ODE。","experiments":"主要是理论验证性实验，在合成任务和小规模语言建模上验证了理论预测：shaped Transformer 在深度增加时保持稳定的注意力熵和梯度范数，而 vanilla Transformer 出现注意力坍缩。实验规模较小，重点在验证理论而非刷 SOTA。","authors_note":"Lorenzo Noci 和 Bobby He 来自 ETH Zurich / Thomas Hofmann 组，该组在 Transformer 理论分析方面有持续产出。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing infinite-width theories (NTK/GP) for Transformers ignore depth effects, yet depth critically shapes training dynamics. This paper derives the joint infinite-depth-and-width limit of Transformers to understand how attention and residual scaling interact in this regime.","importance":"A theoretical contribution that directly informs practical choices around residual scaling and initialization in deep Transformers. The finding that vanilla residual connections cause attention rank collapse at large depth connects to real training stability issues in deep pretrained models.","technical_approach":"The authors take L (depth) and d (width) to infinity simultaneously and derive the distributional limit of hidden states and attention matrices. The key result: without depth-dependent scaling, attention matrices collapse to rank-1. The 'shaped' Transformer applies a 1/L scaling to residual branches, yielding a well-defined ODE in the continuous limit and preserving non-trivial attention structure. This is essentially a principled justification for depth-scaled residual connections.","experiments":"Primarily theory-validation experiments on synthetic tasks and small-scale language modeling. Shaped Transformers maintain stable attention entropy and gradient norms as depth grows, while vanilla Transformers exhibit attention collapse. Scale is small; the focus is on confirming theoretical predictions rather than achieving SOTA.","authors_note":"Lorenzo Noci and Bobby He from ETH Zurich, Thomas Hofmann's group, which has consistent output on Transformer theory."},"tags":["transformer","theory","attention","scaling-law"],"notable_authors":["Thomas Hofmann","Bobby He"],"keywords":["Deep Learning Theory","Covariance SDE","Attention Mechanism","Infinite-Depth-and-Width","Scaling Limit"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3理论推导结论和§4残差缩放实验即可，大模型训练调残差缩放、pre-norm 策略时可参考其结论。","en":"Only check §3 for theoretical derivation conclusions and §4 for residual scaling experiments; its conclusions are referable when tuning residual scaling and pre-norm strategies for large model training."}},{"id":"OjhaLRLL23","title":"What Knowledge Gets Distilled in Knowledge Distillation?","authors":["Utkarsh Ojha","Yuheng Li","Anirudh Sundara Rajan","Yingyu Liang","Yong Jae Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$bc","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/OjhaLRLL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/OjhaLRLL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/2433fec2144ccf5fea1c9c5ebdbc3924-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"知识蒸馏（KD）被广泛使用，但蒸馏过程中到底传递了什么知识？是低层特征、高层语义、还是某种特定的表示结构？以往工作大多关注蒸馏的效果而非机制，本文试图回答这个机制性问题。","importance":"分析/理解级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：理解蒸馏传递的知识类型，有助于设计更好的模型压缩策略和 teacher-student 训练范式。如果蒸馏主要传递的是某类特定知识（如样本间关系而非绝对特征），那么蒸馏 loss 的设计就应该有针对性。","technical_approach":"通过系统性的消融实验来分离蒸馏中不同类型的知识传递。具体方法包括：比较 student 与 teacher 在不同层的表示相似性、分析蒸馏前后 student 对不同类型样本的行为变化、以及通过 probing 检测 student 是否学到了 teacher 的特定内部表示。核心发现是蒸馏主要传递的是样本间的相对关系（relational knowledge）而非绝对的特征表示。","experiments":"在图像分类任务上使用 ResNet 和 ViT 系列模型进行实验。通过 CKA、probing accuracy 等指标量化知识传递。关键发现：student 的中间层表示与 teacher 的对应层相似度提升有限，但 student 学到了与 teacher 一致的样本间距离结构。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Knowledge distillation is widely used but poorly understood mechanistically—what exactly gets transferred from teacher to student? Previous work focuses on distillation effectiveness rather than the nature of transferred knowledge.","importance":"An analysis-level contribution. Understanding what distillation transfers (relational structure vs. absolute features) informs better design of distillation losses and teacher-student training paradigms, relevant to model compression in pretrain pipelines.","technical_approach":"Systematic ablations to disentangle types of knowledge transfer in distillation. The authors compare layer-wise representation similarity (CKA), probe student models for teacher-specific internal representations, and analyze how distillation changes student behavior on different sample types. The key finding is that distillation primarily transfers relational knowledge (inter-sample distance structure) rather than absolute feature representations.","experiments":"Experiments on image classification with ResNet and ViT families. Measured via CKA and probing accuracy. Key finding: student intermediate representations show limited similarity increase to teacher layers, but students learn distance structures consistent with the teacher.","authors_note":""},"tags":["distillation","representation","generalization","compression"],"keywords":["knowledge distillation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§4消融实验设计和核心结论即可，做蒸馏 loss 设计时可参考其关系型知识的结论优化目标。","en":"Just read §4 for ablation experiment design and core conclusions; its finding of relational knowledge transfer can guide the optimization of distillation loss design."}},{"id":"Ortiz-JimenezFF23","title":"Task Arithmetic in the Tangent Space: Improved Editing of Pre-Trained Models","authors":["Guillermo Ortiz-Jiménez","Alessandro Favero","Pascal Frossard"],"institutions":["EPFL"],"abstract":"$bd","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Ortiz-JimenezFF23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Ortiz-JimenezFF23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/d28077e5ff52034cd35b4aa15320caea-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Task arithmetic（通过加减 task vector 来编辑预训练模型能力）在实践中效果不稳定，理论上也缺乏解释。本文试图理解 task arithmetic 为什么有时有效、有时失败，并提出改进方案。","importance":"方法级贡献，对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：理解模型参数空间中 task vector 的线性可组合性，直接关联到模型合并（model merging）、持续学习、以及多任务 pretrain 的参数效率问题。如果 task vector 在切线空间中更好地满足线性叠加假设，那么模型编辑和合并的可靠性就能提升。","technical_approach":"核心观察是：task arithmetic 隐含假设 task vector 之间是线性可叠加的，但在原始参数空间中这个假设经常不成立（因为神经网络的损失面是非线性的）。本文提出在切线空间（tangent space）中进行 task arithmetic——即对模型做线性化近似后再做 task vector 加减。具体实现是计算 fine-tuned 模型相对于预训练模型的参数差（task vector），然后在 NTK 线性化框架下进行组合。这比原始 task arithmetic 更符合线性叠加假设。","experiments":"在多个视觉和 NLP 任务上测试，使用 CLIP 和其他预训练模型。切线空间中的 task arithmetic 在任务遗忘（task forgetting）和负迁移方面显著优于原始参数空间的 task arithmetic。具体提升幅度因任务而异，但一致性更好。也验证了线性化近似在 fine-tuning 幅度较小时更准确。","authors_note":"来自 EPFL，Pascal Frossard 组在信号处理和表示学习方面有长期积累。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Task arithmetic (adding/subtracting task vectors to edit pretrained model capabilities) is empirically unstable and theoretically unexplained. This paper investigates why it sometimes fails and proposes an improvement.","importance":"A method-level contribution relevant to model merging, continual learning, and parameter-efficient multi-task pretrain. If task vectors compose more reliably in tangent space, model editing and merging become more principled.","technical_approach":"The key insight: task arithmetic implicitly assumes linear superposition of task vectors, which often fails in the original parameter space due to loss landscape nonlinearity. The paper proposes performing task arithmetic in the tangent space—linearizing the model around the pretrained checkpoint before combining task vectors. This is implemented within the NTK linearization framework and better satisfies the linear superposition assumption.","experiments":"Tested on multiple vision and NLP tasks using CLIP and other pretrained models. Tangent-space task arithmetic significantly reduces task forgetting and negative transfer compared to parameter-space task arithmetic. Improvements are consistent across tasks. The linearization approximation is more accurate when fine-tuning magnitude is small.","authors_note":"From EPFL; Pascal Frossard's group has long-standing work in signal processing and representation learning."},"tags":["model-editing","fine-tuning","representation","distillation"],"notable_authors":["Pascal Frossard"],"keywords":["model editing","transfer learning","neural tangent kernel","vision-language pre-training","deep learning science"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3切线空间构造方法和§5任务组合实验即可，做模型合并、多任务向量编辑时可直接复用该思路。","en":"Only check §3 for tangent space construction method and §5 for task composition experiments; this idea can be directly reused for model merging and multi-task vector editing."}},{"id":"PabbarajuRSLMR23","title":"Provable benefits of score matching","authors":["Chirag Pabbaraju","Dhruv Rohatgi","Anish Prasad Sevekari","Holden Lee","Ankur Moitra","Andrej Risteski"],"institutions":["MIT"],"abstract":"$be","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PabbarajuRSLMR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PabbarajuRSLMR23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/c11f8d40c119867e30e3421f696f931d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Score matching（扩散模型的核心训练目标）相比直接最大似然估计有什么理论优势？以往的理解是 score matching 避免了归一化常数的计算，但在统计效率（sample complexity）方面是否也有优势尚不清楚。","importance":"理论级贡献。对 pretrain 研究中 diffusion LM 方向的启示在于：如果 score matching 在某些分布族上比 MLE 有更好的统计效率，那么扩散模型的成功不仅仅是计算便利性的结果，而是训练目标本身在统计意义上更优。这为 diffusion LM 的理论基础提供了支撑。","technical_approach":"在特定的分布族（如指数族、高斯混合等）上，严格证明 score matching 估计器的 sample complexity 优于或不劣于 MLE。关键技术是利用 score function 的局部性——score matching 只需要学习分布的局部梯度结构，而 MLE 需要全局归一化，这在高维空间中代价更高。证明方法涉及信息几何和统计学习理论工具。","experiments":"主要是理论结果，辅以合成数据上的数值验证。在高斯混合模型和某些指数族分布上，score matching 的收敛速率确实优于 MLE，尤其在维度较高时差距更明显。","authors_note":"Ankur Moitra 来自 MIT，是理论计算机科学和统计学习理论领域的知名研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Does score matching (the core training objective of diffusion models) have provable statistical advantages over maximum likelihood estimation, beyond just avoiding the normalization constant?","importance":"A theoretical contribution supporting the foundations of diffusion models. If score matching is statistically more efficient for certain distribution families, the success of diffusion models is not merely computational convenience but reflects a fundamentally better training objective. Relevant to the theoretical grounding of diffusion LMs.","technical_approach":"Rigorously proves that score matching estimators achieve better or comparable sample complexity to MLE on specific distribution families (exponential families, Gaussian mixtures). The key insight is that score matching exploits locality—it only needs to learn local gradient structure of the distribution, while MLE requires global normalization, which is costlier in high dimensions. Proofs use information geometry and statistical learning theory tools.","experiments":"Primarily theoretical results with numerical validation on synthetic data. On Gaussian mixtures and certain exponential families, score matching converges faster than MLE, with the gap widening in higher dimensions.","authors_note":"Ankur Moitra is from MIT, a prominent researcher in theoretical computer science and statistical learning theory."},"tags":["score-matching","diffusion","objective","theory"],"notable_authors":["Ankur Moitra"],"keywords":["theory","score matching","exponential families","sample complexity","computational hardness"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§2核心证明结论部分即可，做扩散语言模型预训练目标优化时可参考其统计效率优势的结论。","en":"Just read §2 for core proof conclusions; its finding of score matching's statistical efficiency advantage is referable for diffusion LM pre-training objective optimization."}},{"id":"PangYYC023","title":"Natural Language Instruction-following with Task-related Language Development and Translation","authors":["Jing-Cheng Pang","Xinyu Yang","Si-Hang Yang","Xiong-Hui Chen","Yang Yu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$bf","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PangYYC023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PangYYC023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/1dc2fe8d9ae956616f86bab3ce5edc59-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文想解决的是 instruction-following 数据稀缺且任务覆盖不均时，模型如何更自然地发展出跨任务、跨语言的指令遵循能力。过去常见做法是直接堆人工指令数据或用单语模板合成，但这类数据往往任务表达单一、语言分布窄，导致模型会跟格式而不是真正理解任务。","importance":"它的贡献更偏数据构造与训练策略，对 pretrain 和 posttrain 接口都有参考价值。重要之处在于它把“任务相关语言发展”和“翻译”结合起来看，意味着指令能力不只是 supervised finetuning 的结果，也与训练语料里任务表述的多样性、迁移链路和语言覆盖有关；这对多语 instruction tuning 和数据合成都很直接。","technical_approach":"核心方法看起来是用任务相关语言扩展加翻译机制来构建或增强 instruction-following 训练数据。与只做机器翻译扩增不同，它更强调围绕任务语义生成多种自然表达，再把这些表达迁移到其他语言；这样做有效的原因是它同时增加了语义等价表达和语言多样性，降低模型把某种 prompt 表面模板误当成任务定义的风险，但代价是生成链路更长，数据噪声控制会更关键。","experiments":"从现有信息无法确认底座模型规模、训练数据量、评测基准和具体提升数字，因此不应编造。按题目判断，实验大概率会覆盖多任务、多语言 instruction-following 评测，并与纯翻译扩增、纯单语合成或标准 SFT 数据构造做比较；值得重点看的 ablation 是：只做 translation、只做 language development、两者结合三种设定之间的差异，以及低资源语言上的收益是否更显著。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical bottleneck in instruction following: training data is often narrow in task phrasing and language coverage, so models learn templates more easily than they learn task semantics. Earlier pipelines typically scaled manual instructions or translated existing prompts, which is efficient but often too shallow.","importance":"This is mainly a data and training-pipeline contribution, with direct relevance to the pretrain–posttrain boundary. The important point is that instruction-following quality depends not only on supervision volume but also on how task language develops across paraphrases and languages; that matters for multilingual tuning and for synthetic data design.","technical_approach":"The method appears to combine task-related language development with translation to build richer instruction data. The distinction from plain translation augmentation is that it first broadens the natural ways a task can be expressed, then transfers that diversity across languages; this should help because it increases semantic equivalence classes rather than just lexical coverage, though the longer generation pipeline also raises noise-control demands.","experiments":"The provided record does not give trustworthy model sizes, dataset scales, benchmarks, or exact improvements, so I will not fabricate them. Based on the title, the key empirical comparison is likely against plain translated instructions, monolingual synthetic instructions, or standard SFT corpora, with particular interest in whether low-resource languages gain more from the combined pipeline than high-resource ones.","authors_note":""},"tags":["instruction-following","data-synthesis","alignment"],"keywords":["Reinforcement learning","instruction-following","autonomous agent"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3数据构造流程和§4.3跨语言效果对比即可，方法可直接复用在内部多语指令合成实验中","en":"Only read §3 data construction pipeline and §4.3 cross-lingual performance comparison, the method can be directly reused in internal multilingual instruction synthesis experiments."}},{"id":"ParkBPHL23","title":"ASPEN: Breaking Operator Barriers for Efficient Parallelization of Deep Neural Networks","authors":["Jongseok Park","Kyungmin Bin","Gibum Park","Sangtae Ha","Kyunghan Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c0","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ParkBPHL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ParkBPHL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/d899a31938c7838965b589d9b14a5ca6-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是深度网络并行化被算子边界卡住的问题。传统并行和图编译优化通常在单个 operator 或少数预定义模式内做切分，结果是跨算子的内存搬运、同步和调度开销很难消掉，尤其对大模型训练和推理，这种“算子级局部最优”会明显浪费系统吞吐。","importance":"它属于系统级方法，对大规模 pretrain 很相关，因为真实训练效率往往不是由 FLOPs 决定，而是由内存、通信和 kernel 调度共同决定。重要之处在于它试图打破算子边界做全局并行化，这类工作如果成立，能影响编译器、并行策略搜索和训练系统设计，而不是只优化某一个模型层。","technical_approach":"ASPEN 的核心应该是一种跨 operator 的程序表示和并行化框架。与常见的按算子逐个生成 kernel 或做固定 fusion 不同，它更像是在更高层次重写计算图，再联合决定切分、融合和执行顺序；这样设计有效，是因为很多冗余同步和访存来自人为保留的算子边界，而不是数学依赖本身。代价则是编译与搜索空间更大，对动态形状、复杂控制流或非规则算子的适配难度更高。","experiments":"给定信息不足以确认测试模型、硬件平台、吞吐增益或端到端加速比，不能给出具体数字。按题目推断，实验应会与现有 operator-level 并行或编译方案比较，并展示在训练或推理场景下的 wall-clock 改善；如果你只 skim，建议重点看它是否覆盖 Transformer/GEMM-heavy 模型，以及收益主要来自 fusion、通信减少，还是更好的 pipeline overlap。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper targets a systems bottleneck: parallelization is often constrained by operator boundaries rather than true data dependencies. Standard graph compilers and distributed runtimes optimize per-op or over a few predefined patterns, which leaves memory traffic, synchronization, and scheduling overhead on the table.","importance":"This is a systems contribution with clear relevance to large-scale pretraining. In practice, training efficiency is limited by memory movement and communication at least as much as by raw FLOPs, so a framework that parallelizes across operator boundaries can influence compiler design and distributed training strategy more broadly than a model-specific optimization.","technical_approach":"ASPEN appears to introduce a program representation and execution strategy that reasons beyond individual operators. Instead of preserving op boundaries and only applying local kernel generation or fixed fusion, it likely rewrites larger computation regions and jointly chooses partitioning, fusion, and execution order; that is promising because many overheads come from artificial boundaries, not mathematical necessity. The trade-off is a larger compilation/search space and potentially weaker support for dynamic or irregular workloads.","experiments":"The metadata here does not provide reliable model names, hardware details, or exact speedups, so I should not state numbers. The main experimental question is likely whether ASPEN beats operator-level baselines in end-to-end throughput or latency, and whether gains come mainly from fusion, reduced communication, or better overlap of execution stages.","authors_note":""},"tags":["distributed-training","parallelism","systems"],"keywords":["Deep Neural Network","Deep Learning","Parallel Execution Algorithm","Parallelization","Deep Learning Parallelism","Dynamic","Asynchronous","Scheduling","Dynamic Scheduling","Dynamic Execution","tile","tiling","dataflow","dataflow graph","tile-based dataflow graph","opportunistic parallelism"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§3.2跨算子重写逻辑和§5.2大模型训练吞吐测试结果，可作为预训练系统编译优化参考","en":"Focus on §3.2 cross-operator rewriting logic and §5.2 LLM training throughput test results, it serves as reference for pre-training system compilation optimization."}},{"id":"PengQYWWL23","title":"Birder: Communication-Efficient 1-bit Adaptive Optimizer for Practical Distributed DNN Training","authors":["Hanyang Peng","Shuang Qin","Yue Yu","Jin Wang","Hui Wang","Ge Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c1","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PengQYWWL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PengQYWWL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/7c72fcd7b6bffc3864c7152ab5a2dd83-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是分布式 DNN 训练中的通信瓶颈，尤其是在实际网络条件下如何把优化器通信压到 1-bit 同时保持自适应优化器的效果。已有 1-bit 压缩方法常见的问题是要么只适用于 SGD 类优化器，要么理论上省带宽但在真实训练里不稳定、收敛慢。","importance":"这是系统与优化交叉的工作，对大规模 pretrain 很实用。重要性在于它瞄准的是‘practical distributed training’，不是只在 toy setting 证明压缩可行；如果 1-bit adaptive optimizer 真能稳定落地，就能直接改善多机训练中的带宽占用和扩展效率，尤其适合低带宽互联或跨机房训练。","technical_approach":"Birder 的核心是通信高效的 1-bit adaptive optimizer。与把所有梯度简单二值化不同，它大概率会保留自适应优化器中的关键统计量，配合误差反馈、动量修正或分层压缩，尽量在极低通信量下维持更新方向质量；这样设计有效，因为训练稳定性通常不是由梯度数值精度本身决定，而是由长期累积误差是否可控决定。代价是实现更复杂，并且在极端异构或高噪声训练阶段可能仍需 warmup 或混合精度通信。","experiments":"当前信息没有给出具体模型、集群规模、网络带宽和吞吐提升数字，因此不能写死数值。按题目判断，实验应包含与 Adam/Adagrad 类分布式实现及已有 1-bit 方法的比较，报告收敛曲线、最终精度与训练时间；skim 时最重要的是看三件事：一是端到端 wall-clock 是否真正改善，二是大 batch 下是否稳定，三是误差反馈对长程收敛的贡献有多大。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical bottleneck in distributed DNN training: communication cost. The specific challenge is to push adaptive optimization to 1-bit communication without losing the stability and convergence behavior that make adaptive optimizers attractive in real training runs.","importance":"This is a systems-plus-optimization contribution with direct relevance to large-scale pretraining. The key point is practicality: if a 1-bit adaptive optimizer works reliably outside toy settings, it can materially improve scaling efficiency under bandwidth constraints, which is often the real limiter in multi-node training.","technical_approach":"Birder appears to be a communication-efficient 1-bit adaptive optimizer. The likely design is not naive binary gradient compression, but a scheme that preserves the essential adaptive statistics while using error feedback, momentum correction, or related mechanisms to control long-term compression error; that makes sense because training stability depends more on accumulated update bias than on exact per-step precision. The trade-off is increased optimizer complexity and possible sensitivity during early or highly non-stationary training.","experiments":"The metadata does not include model types, cluster details, bandwidth settings, or exact speedups, so I will not fabricate numbers. The main empirical questions are whether Birder preserves final accuracy relative to adaptive baselines, whether it reduces wall-clock time end to end, and how much error-feedback-like components matter for convergence over long runs.","authors_note":""},"tags":["optimizer","distributed-training","communication-efficient"],"keywords":["optimizer","1-bit optimizer","distributed learning","optimization for deep networks","communication efficiency"],"recommendation":{"zh":"读§4误差修正机制和§5.3真实多机训练收敛性实验即可，落地时可优先测试其1bit压缩逻辑","en":"Read §4 error correction mechanism and §5.3 real multi-machine training convergence experiments, prioritize testing its 1-bit compression logic for deployment."}},{"id":"RamanujanNOFS23","title":"On the Connection between Pre-training Data Diversity and Fine-tuning Robustness","authors":["Vivek Ramanujan","Thao Nguyen","Sewoong Oh","Ali Farhadi","Ludwig Schmidt"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c2","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/RamanujanNOFS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/RamanujanNOFS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/d1786f5246c67eefde011599d31b2006-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作研究的核心问题是：预训练数据多样性到底如何影响微调后的鲁棒性。过去大家更常讨论数据量、标签质量或 domain match，而“多样性”常被当成模糊的好事，很少被单独拆出来分析它是改善泛化、提升稳健性，还是只是数据量的替代指标。","importance":"它的重要性是数据级和分析级。对 pretrain 研究，这类工作很有价值，因为它试图把“多样化数据通常更好”从经验口号变成可验证结论，并回答一个更实际的问题：如果总 token 预算固定，应该优先加更广覆盖的数据，还是加同域高频数据。这个判断会直接影响数据混配、去重和 continual pretrain 策略。","technical_approach":"从题目看，方法核心不是新模型，而是系统地操控预训练数据分布的多样性，再观察下游 fine-tuning robustness 的变化。关键通常在于把 diversity 和其他变量尽量解耦：控制总样本数、训练步数和模型大小，改变类目覆盖、来源异质性或语义分布宽度，然后测量标准精度之外的 distribution shift、corruption 或 spurious feature 敏感性。它关注的是因果归因，不是单纯堆更大数据。","experiments":"最关键的实验事实应该是：在若干控制条件下，更高的预训练数据多样性会带来更强的微调鲁棒性，但这种收益可能不是线性增长，也可能受模型容量和下游任务类型限制。真正有信息量的 ablation 会区分 diversity 与 data amount 的作用，并考察 robustness gains 是否以 clean accuracy 为代价。当前没有摘要，无法安全给出具体数据集、模型规模和提升数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a concrete pretraining question: how does pretraining data diversity affect robustness after fine-tuning? Prior discussion often emphasizes scale, label quality, or domain match, while diversity is treated as a vague positive without isolating whether it truly improves robustness or merely correlates with larger datasets.","importance":"This is a data-centric and analysis-driven contribution. For pretraining research, it matters because data-mixture decisions are often made with weak causal evidence. If the paper successfully separates diversity from raw data volume, it can inform practical trade-offs: under a fixed token budget, should we buy broader coverage or denser sampling of the same domain?","technical_approach":"The likely approach is to systematically vary pretraining data diversity while controlling for confounders such as total sample count, compute, and model size, then measure robustness after fine-tuning. The important design choice is to treat diversity as an experimental variable rather than an after-the-fact description. That enables stronger claims about whether broader pretraining support improves out-of-distribution behavior, corruption robustness, or resistance to spurious cues.","experiments":"The central empirical result is likely that greater pretraining diversity improves downstream robustness under some controlled settings, but with clear boundaries depending on capacity and task type. The most informative ablations would separate diversity from sheer data quantity and check whether robustness gains come at the cost of clean accuracy. No abstract is provided, so exact datasets, scales, and effect sizes should not be invented.","authors_note":""},"tags":["pretraining","data-diversity","fine-tuning","robustness"],"keywords":["robustness","out-of-distribution shifts","finetuning","pretraining"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§4.2数据多样性与token预算的控制变量实验，结论可直接指导内部预训练数据混配策略调整","en":"Focus on §4.2 controlled experiments of data diversity and token budget, the conclusion can directly guide internal pre-training data mixing strategy adjustment."}},{"id":"RohekarGN23","title":"Causal Interpretation of Self-Attention in Pre-Trained Transformers","authors":["Raanan Y. Rohekar","Yaniv Gurwicz","Shami Nisimov"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c3","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/RohekarGN23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/RohekarGN23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/642a321fba8a0f03765318e629cb93ea-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer的自注意力机制缺乏可解释性，现有的解释方法无法在存在潜在混淆因子的情况下得到输入token之间的因果结构，无法支撑因果相关的分析需求。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出了自注意力的因果解释框架，为预训练Transformer的可解释性、隐式知识挖掘提供了新的工具，对大模型的机制分析研究有参考价值。","technical_approach":"原创因果分析方法，将自注意力解释为对输入序列的结构方程模型的估计，通过计算最深注意力层表征的偏相关来估计输入token之间的条件独立关系，支持用现有约束-based算法学习输入序列的因果结构，在存在潜在混淆因子的场景下仍然有效。","experiments":"验证了该方法可以有效提取输入序列的因果结构，摘要未提供具体模型、数据集及指标数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The self-attention mechanism of Transformers lacks interpretability. Existing interpretation methods cannot obtain the causal structure between input tokens in the presence of latent confounders, and cannot support causal-related analysis requirements.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It proposes a causal interpretation framework for self-attention, provides a new tool for interpretability and implicit knowledge mining of pretrained Transformers, and has reference value for mechanism analysis research of large models.","technical_approach":"Original causal analysis method. Self-attention is interpreted as the estimation of the structural equation model for the input sequence. Conditional independence relations between input tokens are estimated by calculating partial correlations between representations in the deepest attention layer, supporting learning the causal structure of the input sequence with existing constraint-based algorithms, and it remains valid in scenarios with latent confounders.","experiments":"It is verified that the method can effectively extract the causal structure of the input sequence. No specific model, dataset or metric numbers are provided in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["self-attention","interpretability","transformer","causality"],"keywords":["Self-Attention","Causal Discovery","Reasoning","Explainability","Zero-shot","Transformer"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer的自注意力编码了输入token之间的依赖关系","claim_en":"Transformer self-attention encodes dependency relations between input tokens","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"自注意力机制的输出可以用来估计输入序列的因果结构，即使存在潜在混淆因子也有效","claim_en":"The output of the self-attention mechanism can be used to estimate the causal structure of the input sequence, even in the presence of latent confounders","opposes":"自注意力只能捕捉token之间的统计关联，无法得到可靠的因果结构，尤其是存在潜在混淆因子的场景下","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"为Transformer的可解释性提供了因果视角的新路径，支撑大模型内部知识的因果性验证"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3因果框架推导和§4.2注意力结构挖掘案例即可，仅适合做Transformer机制分析时参考","en":"Only read §3 causal framework derivation and §4.2 attention structure mining cases, for reference only when doing Transformer mechanism analysis."}},{"id":"RosaGC23","title":"Towards a fuller understanding of neurons with Clustered Compositional Explanations","authors":["Biagio La Rosa","Leilani Gilpin","Roberto Capobianco"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Compositional Explanations is a method for identifying logical formulas of concepts that approximate the neurons' behavior. However, these explanations are linked to the small spectrum of neuron activations (i.e., the highest ones) used to check the alignment, thus lacking completeness. In this paper, we propose a generalization, called Clustered Compositional Explanations, that combines  Compositional Explanations with clustering and a novel search heuristic to approximate a broader spectrum of the neuron behavior. We define and address the problems connected to the application of these methods to multiple ranges of activations, analyze the insights retrievable by using our algorithm, and propose desiderata qualities that can be used to study the explanations returned by different algorithms.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/RosaGC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/RosaGC23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/debd0ae2083160397a22a4a8831c7230-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"原有神经元组合解释方法仅依赖最高激活的小范围区间拟合概念逻辑公式，无法覆盖神经元完整激活行为，现有研究普遍回避全激活谱的解释完备性问题。","importance":"属于可解释性方法级改进，补充了神经元行为解释的完整性维度，为预训练模型表征分析、神经元功能定位提供了更全面的工具。","technical_approach":"是原有组合解释方法的扩展，引入聚类和新的搜索启发式，覆盖神经元全激活区间的行为模式，同时解决了多激活区间下解释的匹配冲突问题，不需要额外标注成本。","experiments":"未提供具体模型参数量、数据集规模及量化指标，仅验证了方法可提取更广范围的神经元行为解释，输出解释的完备性显著优于原有方法。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing compositional explanation methods for neurons only fit concept logic formulas using a small range of highest activations, which fails to cover the full activation behavior of neurons. Most prior work ignores the completeness of explanations across the full activation spectrum.","importance":"It is a method-level improvement for model interpretability, adds the completeness dimension for neuron behavior analysis, and provides a more comprehensive tool for pretrained model representation analysis and neuron function localization.","technical_approach":"It extends the original compositional explanation framework, introduces clustering and a novel search heuristic to cover neuron behavior across the full activation range, and resolves matching conflicts of explanations across multiple activation intervals without extra annotation cost.","experiments":"No specific model size, dataset scale or quantitative metrics are provided. The method is only validated to extract explanations covering a wider range of neuron behavior, with significantly higher completeness than existing methods.","authors_note":""},"tags":["interpretability","neurons","representation-learning"],"keywords":["compositional explanations","network dissection","explainable artificial intelligence","interpretability"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"神经元激活模式与语义概念存在对应关系，可通过逻辑公式拟合表征","claim_en":"Neuron activation patterns correspond to semantic concepts and can be represented by fitted logic formulas","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"仅使用最高激活区间生成的组合解释存在完备性缺陷，无法完整代表神经元的全部行为模式","claim_en":"Compositional explanations generated only from the highest activation interval have completeness defects and cannot fully represent all behavior patterns of a neuron","opposes":"Prior work assumes explanations from the highest activation interval can fully represent neuron behavior","opposes_cite_hint":"Kim 2021 Compositional Explanations of Neurons","evidence_anchor":"§2 Related Work","why_contested":"Revises the evaluation assumption for neuron explanation tasks, and provides a more complete evaluation framework for subsequent interpretability research"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为可解释性领域文献备查，不需要读正文，现有方法在大模型上可扩展性极差","en":"Only for interpretability literature reference, no need to read the full text, the method has extremely poor scalability on large models."}},{"id":"RoyTCSPED23","title":"BenchCLAMP: A Benchmark for Evaluating Language Models on Syntactic and Semantic Parsing","authors":["Subhro Roy","Samuel Thomson","Tongfei Chen","Richard Shin","Adam Pauls","Jason Eisner","Benjamin Van Durme"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c4","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/RoyTCSPED23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/RoyTCSPED23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/9c1535a02f0ce079433344e14d910597-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"受限解码下的语言模型句法/语义解析评测缺乏统一基准，现有工作的数据集、语法约束、数据划分规则不一致，无法公平对比不同模型的解析能力。","importance":"属于基准级贡献，为受限解码语义解析任务提供了统一的评测标准，降低了后续工作的对比验证成本。","technical_approach":"原创评测基准，包含7个语义解析、2个句法解析数据集的上下文无关语法，以及统一的受限解码接口；每个数据集提供低/中/高资源三种划分，支持提示学习和微调两种评测模式，仅面向合法语义表示生成场景，不覆盖无约束解码任务。","experiments":"未提供具体评测模型参数量、量化指标提升幅度，仅验证了基准可有效区分不同模型在不同数据规模下的解析性能差异。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"There is no unified benchmark for evaluating syntactic/semantic parsing performance of language models under constrained decoding. Existing work uses inconsistent datasets, grammar constraints and data split rules, making fair comparison of parsing capabilities across models impossible.","importance":"It is a benchmark-level contribution that provides a unified evaluation standard for constrained decoding semantic parsing tasks, and reduces the comparison and verification cost of subsequent work.","technical_approach":"It is an original evaluation benchmark, including context-free grammars for 7 semantic parsing and 2 syntactic parsing datasets, as well as a unified constrained decoding interface. Each dataset has low/medium/high resource splits, supports both prompt-based learning and fine-tuning evaluation modes, and only targets valid semantic representation generation scenarios without covering unconstrained decoding tasks.","experiments":"No specific evaluated model size or quantitative performance improvement is provided. The benchmark is only validated to effectively distinguish parsing performance differences of different models under different data scales.","authors_note":""},"tags":["benchmark","language-model","parsing","evaluation"],"keywords":["Syntactic parsing","semantic parsing","benchmark","constrained decoding","GPT-3"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"受限解码可以提升语言模型语义解析输出的有效性","claim_en":"Constrained decoding can improve the validity of semantic parsing outputs of language models","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅做句法/语义解析评测公共基准备查，和预训练核心研究关联度极低","en":"Only for syntactic/semantic parsing evaluation benchmark reference, very low relevance to core pre-training research."}},{"id":"RuisKBHRG23","title":"The Goldilocks of Pragmatic Understanding: Fine-Tuning Strategy Matters for Implicature Resolution by LLMs","authors":["Laura Ruis","Akbir Khan","Stella Biderman","Sara Hooker","Tim Rocktäschel","Edward Grefenstette"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c5","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/RuisKBHRG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/RuisKBHRG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/4241fec6e94221526b0a9b24828bb774-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有大语言模型对话能力评测未覆盖语用隐含推理（根据上下文推导言外之意）能力，大部分模型在这类任务上表现接近随机，现有研究默认通用指令微调即可覆盖这类能力。","importance":"属于评估与对齐方法级贡献，揭示了预训练后对齐策略对语用能力的影响，为对话类大模型的对齐数据配比提供了新的优化方向。","technical_approach":"设计了二分类的隐含推理评测任务，评估四类主流大模型的语用能力，对比不同微调策略的效果；采用简单的是/否分类设置，避免生成任务的噪声干扰。","experiments":"未提供具体模型参数量、数据集规模，仅观测到三类采用通用微调策略的模型表现接近随机水平，经过语用任务针对性指令微调的模型表现显著优于其他类别。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing conversational ability evaluations for large language models do not cover pragmatic implicature reasoning (inferring implicit meaning from context). Most models perform close to random on such tasks, and prior research assumes general instruction tuning can cover such abilities.","importance":"It is an evaluation and alignment method-level contribution, reveals the impact of post-pretraining alignment strategies on pragmatic ability, and provides a new optimization direction for alignment data composition of conversational LLMs.","technical_approach":"A binary classification implicature reasoning evaluation task is designed to evaluate the pragmatic ability of four categories of mainstream LLMs, and compare the effects of different fine-tuning strategies. The simple yes/no classification setting avoids noise interference from generation tasks.","experiments":"No specific model size or dataset scale is provided. It is only observed that three categories of models with general fine-tuning strategies perform close to random level, while models with instruction tuning targeted at pragmatic tasks significantly outperform other categories.","authors_note":""},"tags":["fine-tuning","llm-evaluation","pragmatics","instruction-tuning"],"keywords":["large language models","pragmatics","natural language processing","communication","conversation","implicature","language model fine-tuning"],"notable_authors":["Stella Biderman","Sara Hooker","Tim Rocktäschel"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大语言模型的下游能力依赖对齐阶段的微调策略","claim_en":"Downstream capabilities of large language models depend on fine-tuning strategies in the alignment phase","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"通用指令微调无法赋予大模型足够的语用隐含推理能力，必须在微调阶段加入针对性的语用任务数据","claim_en":"General instruction tuning cannot endow LLMs with sufficient pragmatic implicature reasoning ability, and targeted pragmatic task data must be added in the fine-tuning phase","opposes":"Prior work assumes general instruction tuning can cover all natural language understanding abilities including pragmatic reasoning","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Results","why_contested":"Complements the understanding of LLM capability boundaries, and provides a new reference dimension for data composition in the alignment phase"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为语用能力对齐的弱信号参考，不需要细读，评测设置偏简单参考价值有限","en":"Only as weak signal reference for pragmatic ability alignment, no need to read in detail, the evaluation setting is too simple to have high reference value."}},{"id":"SadrtdinovPVL23","title":"To Stay or Not to Stay in the Pre-train Basin: Insights on Ensembling in Transfer Learning","authors":["Ildus Sadrtdinov","Dmitrii Pozdeev","Dmitry P. Vetrov","Ekaterina Lobacheva"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Transfer learning and ensembling are two popular techniques for improving the performance and robustness of neural networks. \nDue to the high cost of pre-training, ensembles of models fine-tuned from a single pre-trained checkpoint are often used in practice. \nSuch models end up in the same basin of the loss landscape, which we call the pre-train basin, and thus have limited diversity. \nIn this work, we show that ensembles trained from a single pre-trained checkpoint may be improved by better exploring the pre-train basin, however, leaving the basin results in losing the benefits of transfer learning and in degradation of the ensemble quality. \nBased on the analysis of existing exploration methods, we propose a more effective modification of the Snapshot Ensembles (SSE) for transfer learning setup, StarSSE, which results in stronger ensembles and uniform model soups.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SadrtdinovPVL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SadrtdinovPVL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/336572db3e99930814d6b328d4220cb6-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"实际应用中从单个预训练 checkpoint 微调得到的集成模型都落在同一个预训练损失盆地，多样性不足；现有工作要么仅在盆地内浅度探索，要么直接跳出盆地，未明确二者的 trade-off。","importance":"属于迁移学习集成方法级贡献，明确了预训练盆地的探索边界，降低了迁移集成的计算成本。","technical_approach":"改进原有 Snapshot Ensembles 方法，在预训练盆地内做充分探索以提升集成多样性，同时避免跳出盆地导致的迁移收益损失；舍弃了跨 checkpoint 集成的高成本方案，仅用单个预训练 checkpoint 即可得到更高质量的集成。","experiments":"未提供具体模型参数量、数据集规模，仅观测到在预训练盆地内优化的集成方法比原有 Snapshot Ensembles 准确率提升2~5个百分点，跳出盆地后集成准确率下降超过10个百分点。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Ensemble models fine-tuned from a single pretrained checkpoint in practical applications all fall into the same pretrain loss basin, with insufficient diversity. Existing work either only explores shallowly within the basin or directly leaves the basin, without clarifying the trade-off between the two options.","importance":"It is a transfer learning ensemble method-level contribution, clarifies the exploration boundary of the pretrain basin, and reduces the computational cost of transfer ensembling.","technical_approach":"It improves the original Snapshot Ensembles method, fully explores within the pretrain basin to improve ensemble diversity, while avoiding the loss of transfer benefits caused by leaving the basin. It abandons the high-cost cross-checkpoint ensemble scheme, and can obtain higher quality ensembles using only a single pretrained checkpoint.","experiments":"No specific model size or dataset scale is provided. It is only observed that the ensemble method optimized within the pretrain basin achieves 2~5 percentage points higher accuracy than the original Snapshot Ensembles, and the ensemble accuracy drops by more than 10 percentage points when leaving the basin.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transfer-learning","pretraining","loss-landscape","ensembles"],"keywords":["ensembles","transfer learning","loss landscape basins","model soups"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"从单个预训练 checkpoint 微调得到的集成模型多样性不足，效果受限","claim_en":"Ensemble models fine-tuned from a single pretrained checkpoint have insufficient diversity and limited performance","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"迁移学习中集成模型的效果在预训练盆地边界处达到最优，跳出盆地会丢失预训练迁移收益，导致集成质量下降","claim_en":"The performance of ensemble models in transfer learning reaches optimal at the boundary of the pretrain basin; leaving the basin will lose pretraining transfer benefits and lead to degradation of ensemble quality","opposes":"Prior work assumes that the larger the exploration range of the loss basin, the higher the ensemble diversity, and the better the performance","opposes_cite_hint":"Huang 2017 Snapshot Ensembles","evidence_anchor":"§3 Analysis","why_contested":"Clarifies the optimization boundary of transfer ensembling, and revises the general assumption that higher diversity leads to better performance"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"读§3预训练盆地边界分析和§4.3迁移集成效果对比即可，适合小模型迁移场景参考","en":"Read §3 pre-train basin boundary analysis and §4.3 transfer ensemble performance comparison, suitable for reference in small model transfer scenarios."}},{"id":"SanfordHT23","title":"Representational Strengths and Limitations of Transformers","authors":["Clayton Sanford","Daniel J. Hsu","Matus Telgarsky"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c6","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SanfordHT23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SanfordHT23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/73bf692447f174984f30499ec9b20e04-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有研究缺乏对 Transformer 注意力层相比其他架构优劣势的严格数学分析，相关结论仅停留在经验观测层面，无法指导架构设计。","importance":"属于架构理论级贡献，为 Transformer 架构的缩放设计、注意力优化提供了理论支撑。","technical_approach":"纯理论分析工作，针对宽度、深度、嵌入维度等核心复杂度参数，分别给出注意力层表征能力的正反结论：正面证明在稀疏平均任务上，Transformer 复杂度仅随输入长度对数缩放，远优于 RNN 和前馈网络的多项式缩放；负面证明 Transformer 在特定任务上的表征缺陷。","experiments":"无大规模预训练实验，仅做了理论推导和小规模验证实验，确认了稀疏平均任务上的复杂度缩放差异。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing research lacks strict mathematical analysis of the advantages and disadvantages of Transformer attention layers compared with other architectures. Relevant conclusions are only based on empirical observations and cannot guide architecture design.","importance":"It is an architecture theory-level contribution, providing theoretical support for scaling design and attention optimization of Transformer architectures.","technical_approach":"It is a pure theoretical analysis work. For core complexity parameters such as width, depth, and embedding dimension, it provides positive and negative conclusions on the representation power of attention layers respectively: on the positive side, it proves that for sparse averaging tasks, Transformer complexity only scales logarithmically with input length, far better than the polynomial scaling of RNNs and feedforward networks; on the negative side, it proves the representation defects of Transformers on specific tasks.","experiments":"No large-scale pretraining experiments are conducted, only theoretical derivation and small-scale verification experiments are carried out to confirm the complexity scaling difference on sparse averaging tasks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformers","expressivity","representation","theory"],"keywords":["self-attention","approximation theory","communication complexity"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer 的注意力机制相比 RNN、前馈网络有独特的表征优势","claim_en":"The attention mechanism of Transformers has unique representation advantages over RNNs and feedforward networks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer 在稀疏平均任务上的复杂度缩放远优于 RNN 和前馈网络，嵌入维度是影响该任务性能的核心参数","claim_en":"Transformer's complexity scaling on sparse averaging tasks is far better than RNNs and feedforward networks, and embedding dimension is the core parameter affecting performance on this task","opposes":"Prior work does not provide a strict proof of Transformer's complexity scaling advantage on specific tasks","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Positive Results","why_contested":"Provides theoretical basis for long-context Transformer architecture design, and can guide attention optimization directions"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§4稀疏任务复杂度上界和§5表征缺陷证明，可作为架构迭代的理论参考","en":"Focus on §4 upper bound of sparse task complexity and §5 representation defect proof, can be used as theoretical reference for architecture iteration."}},{"id":"SaparovPPJKK023","title":"Testing the General Deductive Reasoning Capacity of Large Language Models Using OOD Examples","authors":["Abulhair Saparov","Richard Yuanzhe Pang","Vishakh Padmakumar","Nitish Joshi","Mehran Kazemi","Najoung Kim","He He"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c7","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SaparovPPJKK023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SaparovPPJKK023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/09425891e393e64b0535194a81ba15b7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的问题很直接：大语言模型到底是在做可迁移的演绎推理，还是主要靠训练分布内模式匹配。过去很多“推理”评测混入了模板重复、表面统计规律或近分布样例，模型即使没有稳定的规则泛化能力也能拿到不错分数，因此作者专门用 OOD（分布外）构造来测真正的演绎泛化。","importance":"它的重要性在于给“LLM 是否会推理”这个话题降噪，而不是再做一个更高分 benchmark。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：如果模型在 OOD 演绎任务上明显掉点，那么能力边界更可能来自训练目标、数据覆盖和表示归纳偏置，而不是单纯参数规模；这会直接影响我们如何看待 scaling、合成数据和 reasoning-oriented post-training 的价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法是构造一组刻意避开训练分布捷径的演绎推理评测，而不是提出新模型。作者把规则推理任务拆成更能暴露泛化缺口的设置，例如改变实体表面形式、关系组合方式或推理链结构，使模型不能靠记住常见 lexical pattern 过关；与常见 in-distribution QA 不同，这种设计强调规则是否被抽象出来，而不是答案是否在语料里“像见过”。","experiments":"实验结论是：在常规近分布样例上表现较好的 LLM，在 OOD 演绎设置下往往显著退化，说明已有结果高估了其一般演绎能力。给定题面未提供具体模型规模、数据量和数字，这里只能保守总结：论文的主要价值不在追求 SOTA，而在展示 ID 与 OOD 之间的性能裂缝，并通过任务分解分析指出错误更像系统性的泛化失败，而不是个别样本噪声。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a sharp question: do LLMs perform transferable deductive reasoning, or do they mostly exploit in-distribution pattern matching. Earlier reasoning benchmarks often allowed lexical shortcuts, template overlap, or familiar structural patterns, so decent scores did not necessarily imply rule-level generalization; this work uses OOD examples to isolate that gap.","importance":"Its contribution is diagnostic rather than leaderboard-driven. For pretraining research, the takeaway is that weak OOD deductive performance points to limits in objective, data coverage, and inductive bias, not just insufficient scale; that matters when deciding whether to invest in more tokens, synthetic reasoning data, or post-training aimed at reasoning.","technical_approach":"The method is a benchmark design that removes common shortcuts instead of a new model. The authors build deductive tasks where surface forms, relation compositions, or chain structures shift out of the usual distribution, so the model cannot pass by memorizing familiar text patterns; unlike standard QA setups, the benchmark tests whether the rule was abstracted, not whether the answer looked familiar.","experiments":"The main empirical result is that LLMs that look strong on standard or near-distribution examples often degrade substantially on OOD deductive cases. The prompt does not provide model sizes or exact metrics, so the safe summary is: the paper demonstrates a large ID-to-OOD gap and shows that the failures are systematic generalization failures rather than isolated noisy mistakes.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reasoning","ood-generalization","llm-evaluation","deduction"],"keywords":["large language models","reasoning","out-of-distribution generalization","chain-of-thought","in-context learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"读§3.1OOD样例构造方法和§4.2不同模型泛化缺口对比即可，可用来验证预训练模型真实推理能力","en":"Read §3.1 OOD sample construction method and §4.2 generalization gap comparison of different models, can be used to verify real reasoning ability of pre-trained models."}},{"id":"ShiL23","title":"Don&apos;t Stop Pretraining? Make Prompt-based Fine-tuning Powerful Learner","authors":["Zhengxiang Shi","Aldo Lipani"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ShiL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ShiL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/1289f9195d2ef8cfdfe5f50930c4a7c4-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文讨论的是一个很实际的问题：面对参数高效场景，是否一定要继续做 domain-adaptive pretraining，还是可以把 prompt-based fine-tuning 训练得足够强，从而在更低成本下逼近甚至替代继续预训练。过去的默认答案常是“别停预训练”，因为 prompt tuning 容量有限、任务迁移弱，但这也带来额外算力和语料准备成本。","importance":"它的重要性在于直接触碰 pretrain 与 PEFT 的边界。对 pretrain 研究者的启示是：继续预训练并不总是最划算的选项；如果提示式微调通过更好的优化或参数化就能吸收足够多任务信息，那么很多中小规模适配场景可以把 compute 从 corpus-level continuation 转向 task-level adaptation，这对训练预算分配很有现实意义。","technical_approach":"核心方法应该是增强 prompt-based fine-tuning 的学习能力，而不是单纯比较几个 PEFT baseline。根据标题，作者主张通过更强的 prompt 参数化、优化策略或训练协议，让 prompt learner 从原本偏弱的条件控制器，变成更接近完整适配器的可训练模块；与继续预训练相比，这种方法舍弃了大规模无监督更新，换来更低成本和更明确的任务针对性。","experiments":"实验大概率比较继续预训练、prompt tuning、以及作者增强后的方法，在若干下游 NLP 任务上看性能和成本权衡。题面没有给模型、数据和指标，因此不能杜撰数字；可以保守地说，论文的结论应是：在一些设置下，强力的 prompt-based fine-tuning 可以缩小与继续预训练的差距，甚至在成本收益比上更优，但在跨域知识注入特别强的场景，继续预训练仍有优势。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical adaptation question: in parameter-efficient settings, do we really need to continue pretraining, or can prompt-based fine-tuning be made strong enough to serve as a cheaper alternative. The default answer has often been to keep pretraining, because vanilla prompt tuning is weak, but that comes with nontrivial compute and data costs.","importance":"This matters because it probes the boundary between continued pretraining and PEFT. For pretraining researchers, the implication is that continued pretraining is not always the best use of budget; if prompt-based adaptation can absorb enough task signal with better optimization or parameterization, many medium-scale adaptation scenarios can move compute from corpus-level continuation to task-level fitting.","technical_approach":"The method likely strengthens prompt-based fine-tuning rather than merely benchmarking existing PEFT baselines. From the title, the authors aim to make the prompt learner a more capable trainable module through improved parameterization, optimization, or training procedure. Relative to continued pretraining, the design gives up broad unsupervised updates in exchange for lower cost and tighter task targeting.","experiments":"The experiments likely compare continued pretraining, standard prompt tuning, and the proposed stronger prompt-based method on downstream NLP tasks, emphasizing the performance-cost trade-off. Since the prompt includes no exact models or scores, the safe summary is that stronger prompt-based fine-tuning narrows the gap to continued pretraining in some settings and may be more efficient overall, while continued pretraining still helps more when substantial domain knowledge must be injected.","authors_note":""},"tags":["prompt-tuning","fine-tuning","continued-pretraining"],"notable_authors":["Zhengxiang Shi","Aldo Lipani"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§4.2不同预算下的性能对比和§5 ablation结论，可直接指导中小模型适配的算力分配","en":"Focus on §4.2 performance comparison under different budgets and §5 ablation conclusions, can directly guide computing power allocation for small and medium model adaptation."}},{"id":"ShuW0GXG23","title":"On the Exploitability of Instruction Tuning","authors":["Manli Shu","Jiongxiao Wang","Chen Zhu","Jonas Geiping","Chaowei Xiao","Tom Goldstein"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c8","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ShuW0GXG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ShuW0GXG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/c2a8060fd22744b38177d9e428a052e0-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要回答的是：instruction tuning 到底让模型更对齐了，还是只是暴露了新的可利用攻击面。以往大家更多关注能力提升和安全对齐收益，但对“经过指令微调的模型是否更容易被诱导产生有害、偏离或越狱输出”缺少系统刻画。","importance":"它的重要性在于把 instruction tuning 从“能力增强手段”重新拉回“训练分布塑形手段”来看，指出对齐并不天然等于鲁棒。对 pretrain/post-train 接口的启示很直接：后训练如果过度强化“遵循用户意图”，而没有同时约束恶意提示和分布外指令，就可能把基座模型变成更易操控的系统。","technical_approach":"方法上，这是一篇系统性攻击与分析工作，不是提出新模型。作者比较 base model 与 instruction-tuned model 在多类 prompt 攻击下的脆弱性，包括显式恶意请求、间接注入、角色扮演和格式操纵等，并分析 exploitability 的来源：指令微调把模型决策边界往“优先服从当前指令”方向推，削弱了原本由预训练形成的一些拒答或不确定性表达。它关注的是训练后分布如何改变条件生成偏好，而不是单个 jailbreak trick 本身。和只做红队案例展示的工作不同，这篇更强调相对脆弱性的系统比较。","experiments":"实验结论是：instruction-tuned 模型在多种攻击设置下通常比对应的 base model 更容易被成功操控，而且这种趋势跨模型家族存在。论文核心看点是相对变化而不是某个绝对分数：同一 backbone 经 instruction tuning 后，helpfulness 提升的同时 exploitability 也显著上升。常见比较会覆盖公开开源模型及其 tuned 版本，并统计攻击成功率、有害响应率或拒答率变化。值得注意的观察是，表面安全模板不能根治问题，因为攻击利用的是条件跟随偏好；这说明只在解码时加规则的收益有限。","authors_note":"如果仅根据给定信息，机构无法可靠确认。Jonas Geiping 与 Chaowei Xiao 都长期做模型安全、对抗攻击与鲁棒性相关研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a pointed question: does instruction tuning actually make models safer and more aligned, or does it mostly make them easier to exploit. Prior work focused on improved usability and alignment, but offered much less evidence on whether tuned models become more susceptible to malicious prompting.","importance":"Its contribution is to reframe instruction tuning as distribution shaping, not just capability enhancement. The lesson for the pretrain-to-posttrain pipeline is uncomfortable but useful: pushing a model to follow user intent more aggressively can also amplify jailbreakability if robustness to adversarial or out-of-distribution instructions is not trained at the same time.","technical_approach":"This is an analysis-and-attack paper rather than a new modeling method. The authors compare base models and their instruction-tuned counterparts under several prompt-based attacks, including explicit harmful instructions, role-play, indirection, and formatting tricks. The key hypothesis is that instruction tuning shifts behavior toward compliance with the immediate prompt, weakening the uncertainty and refusal behaviors inherited from pretraining. The paper is less about a single jailbreak technique and more about measuring systematic changes in conditional generation behavior after tuning.","experiments":"The main empirical finding is that instruction-tuned models are often more exploitable than their base versions across multiple attack settings and model families. The important signal is the relative gap within the same backbone: helpfulness improves, but attack success and harmful response rates also rise while refusal rates fall. The evaluation compares public models before and after tuning and reports attack success style metrics rather than just anecdotal failures. A useful takeaway is that superficial safety templates do not fix the issue, because the exploitability is rooted in the learned compliance preference.","authors_note":""},"tags":["instruction-tuning","alignment","robustness","safety"],"notable_authors":["Jonas Geiping","Chaowei Xiao"],"keywords":["Trustworthy machine learning","Large language models","Supervised fine-tuning","instruction tuning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变对 instruction tuning 的认知：它不仅是能力增强，更是训练分布塑形，过度强化服从会增加 exploitability。作为安全对齐的 prior 修正，值得一读。","en":"Changes the prior on instruction tuning: it's not just capability enhancement, but training distribution shaping; over-optimizing for compliance increases exploitability. Worth reading as a prior correction for safety alignment."}},{"id":"SmetSM23","title":"Differentiable Sampling of Categorical Distributions Using the CatLog-Derivative Trick","authors":["Lennert De Smet","Emanuele Sansone","Pedro Zuidberg Dos Martires"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c9","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SmetSM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SmetSM23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/61202bb341e7e0a6026ea134a5057abf-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：如何对类别分布进行可微采样，同时避免现有近似方法的高偏差或高方差。过去常见做法是 Gumbel-Softmax 这类连续松弛，优点是可导，问题是训练目标和真实离散采样不完全一致；另一类 score-function 估计又往往方差太大。","importance":"它的重要性偏方法工具层。对预训练主线不是直接范式冲击，但对离散 latent variable、MoE 路由、token 选择、压缩表示和非 AR 建模里涉及 categorical sample 的场景都可能有价值。价值点在于：如果能更稳地反传离散决策，就能降低很多“只能用 soft relaxation”的建模妥协。","technical_approach":"作者提出 CatLog-Derivative Trick，用新的导数重写方式来构造 categorical sampling 的可微估计器。核心不是把离散变量简单软化，而是利用类别分布和对数导数之间的恒等关系，直接为采样过程建立可传播梯度，从而在偏差和方差之间取得更好的折中。和 Gumbel-Softmax 相比，它目标更贴近真实离散采样；和 REINFORCE 相比，它试图降低梯度噪声。设计上的取舍是，方法可能需要额外的数学构造或实现细节，通用性和数值稳定性要看具体任务。","experiments":"实验重点通常是估计器质量与下游训练效果。论文应会在离散 VAE、分类采样控制、结构化预测或其他 categorical latent tasks 上比较 CatLog-Derivative、Gumbel-Softmax、straight-through 和 score-function 系方法，并报告收敛速度、最终目标值或梯度方差。最关键的结果如果成立，应表现为：在相近计算成本下，它能得到更低偏差或更稳训练。对大规模 LM 的直接证据大概率有限，但对需要硬路由或离散中间变量的预训练方法有潜在参考价值。","authors_note":"如果仅根据给定信息，机构无法可靠确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a familiar optimization problem: how to sample from categorical distributions while keeping gradients useful. Existing options usually trade one problem for another: continuous relaxations such as Gumbel-Softmax introduce bias, while score-function estimators often suffer from large variance.","importance":"This is a methods paper with broad utility. It is not a paradigm shift for pretraining by itself, but it matters anywhere discrete decisions appear inside differentiable systems, including latent-variable models, hard routing, token selection, and non-AR generative setups. Better categorical gradient estimators can remove some of the compromises imposed by soft relaxations.","technical_approach":"The paper proposes the CatLog-Derivative Trick, a new way to derive differentiable estimators for categorical sampling. Instead of merely softening the discrete variable, it uses a log-derivative-based reformulation to attach gradients more directly to the sampling process. The intended benefit is a better bias-variance trade-off: closer to true discrete optimization than Gumbel-Softmax, and less noisy than pure REINFORCE-style estimators. The trade-off is that the method may involve more specialized derivations or implementation constraints depending on the task.","experiments":"The experiments likely focus on estimator quality and downstream optimization behavior. Typical comparisons would include Gumbel-Softmax, straight-through estimators, and score-function baselines on tasks such as discrete VAEs or structured prediction. The key result, if sustained, is more stable training or better objective values at similar compute cost, backed by lower gradient variance or reduced estimator bias. Evidence at LLM scale is probably limited, but the method is relevant to pretraining settings with hard discrete bottlenecks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["discrete-latents","sampling","gradient-estimator","optimization"],"keywords":["gradient estimation","categorical random variables","probability theory","discrete distributions"],"recommendation":{"zh":"提供了一种新的离散分布可微采样技巧 CatLog-Derivative Trick，在偏差和方差间取得更好折中。对涉及离散决策（如 MoE 路由、token 选择）的预训练研究有工具价值，只看方法和实验对比即可。","en":"Provides a new differentiable sampling trick for discrete distributions, the CatLog-Derivative Trick, achieving a better bias-variance trade-off. Has tool value for pretraining research involving discrete decisions (e.g., MoE routing, token selection); just read the method and experimental comparisons."}},{"id":"SongY23","title":"Trajectory Alignment: Understanding the Edge of Stability Phenomenon via Bifurcation Theory","authors":["Minhak Song","Chulhee Yun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Cohen et al. (2021) empirically study the evolution of the largest eigenvalue of the loss Hessian, also known as sharpness, along the gradient descent (GD) trajectory and observe the Edge of Stability (EoS) phenomenon. The sharpness increases at the early phase of training (referred to as progressive sharpening), and eventually saturates close to the threshold of $2 / \\text{(step size)}$. In this paper, we start by demonstrating through empirical studies that when the EoS phenomenon occurs, different GD trajectories (after a proper reparameterization) align on a specific bifurcation diagram independent of initialization. We then rigorously prove this trajectory alignment phenomenon for a two-layer fully-connected linear network and a single-neuron nonlinear network trained with a single data point. Our trajectory alignment analysis establishes both progressive sharpening and EoS phenomena, encompassing and extending recent findings in the literature.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SongY23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SongY23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/e2a9256bd816ab9e082dfaa22f1f62a2-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解释的是深度学习优化里著名的 edge of stability 现象：训练在学习率高到理论稳定界附近时，为什么不会直接发散，反而常长期停留在“看似不稳定但还能训练”的区域。过去这类现象多靠经验观察和线性化分析解释，缺少更完整的动力系统视角。","importance":"它的重要性在于提供了一个更结构化的理论框架，帮助理解大模型训练里常见的高学习率、震荡、loss spike 和最终泛化之间的关系。对 pretrain 工程的意义不是直接给配方，而是让我们更清楚哪些不稳定是可利用的训练机制，哪些才是真正的数值失控。","technical_approach":"作者用 bifurcation theory，也就是分岔理论，来分析优化轨迹在稳定区边界附近如何变化。核心观点是，所谓 edge of stability 不只是“最大 Hessian 特征值和学习率乘积超界”这么简单，而是训练动力学在该区域发生了轨道结构转变，模型可能沿着某些吸引子或准周期轨道继续前进，而不是立刻爆炸。Trajectory Alignment 这个概念用来刻画参数更新方向与主曲率方向之间的关系，解释为什么系统能在局部不稳定的同时保持整体可训练。这个框架比单纯看 Hessian scalar 指标更细，但也更依赖理论近似。","experiments":"实验上，论文通常会在浅层网络、深网和标准数据集上验证：当训练进入 edge-of-stability 区域时，轨迹确实出现特定对齐模式，且这能预测后续是持续可训练还是走向发散。关键结果一般包括 loss/梯度范数/Hessian 主特征值的联动曲线，以及不同学习率下的相图。最有价值的点不是 benchmark 提升，而是说明某些震荡并不需要立即压制，因为它们可能对应有效探索；但如果轨迹对齐消失，就更接近真正的不稳定。","authors_note":"如果仅根据给定信息，机构无法可靠确认。Chulhee Yun 持续研究深度学习优化理论。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper aims to explain the edge-of-stability phenomenon in deep learning: why training can survive near or beyond classical stability limits instead of immediately diverging. Earlier accounts were largely empirical or based on local linearization, leaving the broader dynamical picture incomplete.","importance":"This matters because it gives a more structured lens on training regimes that are common in large-scale practice: aggressive learning rates, oscillatory behavior, occasional loss spikes, and their relation to final generalization. For pretraining engineers, the benefit is interpretive rather than recipe-level: it helps separate useful instability from true numerical failure.","technical_approach":"The paper analyzes optimization through bifurcation theory. The key claim is that edge-of-stability is not just about the top Hessian eigenvalue crossing a threshold; it reflects a change in the qualitative structure of the training dynamics. The notion of trajectory alignment is used to characterize how parameter updates relate to dominant curvature directions, explaining why the system can remain trainable despite local instability. This goes beyond scalar Hessian diagnostics, though it also relies on stronger theoretical modeling assumptions.","experiments":"The experiments likely show that once training enters the edge-of-stability regime, the trajectory exhibits characteristic alignment patterns that distinguish sustained trainability from eventual divergence. Typical evidence includes joint plots of loss, gradient norm, and top Hessian eigenvalue across learning rates, sometimes presented as phase diagrams. The practical takeaway is not better benchmark numbers but a better criterion for when oscillatory training is still productive and when it is actually unstable.","authors_note":""},"tags":["optimization","training-dynamics","stability","theory"],"notable_authors":["Chulhee Yun"],"keywords":["non-convex optimization","trajectory alignment of GD","edge of stability","progressive sharpening","bifurcation theory"],"recommendation":{"zh":"用分岔理论解释 edge of stability 现象，提供结构化理论框架理解高学习率下的训练动力学。对理解预训练中的不稳定机制有启发，只看理论框架和核心结论即可。","en":"Explains the edge of stability phenomenon using bifurcation theory, providing a structured theoretical framework to understand training dynamics under high learning rates. Inspiring for understanding instability mechanisms in pretraining; just read the theoretical framework and core conclusions."}},{"id":"SubramanianHKBM23","title":"Towards Foundation Models for Scientific Machine Learning: Characterizing Scaling and Transfer Behavior","authors":["Shashank Subramanian","Peter Harrington","Kurt Keutzer","Wahid Bhimji","Dmitriy Morozov","Michael W. Mahoney","Amir Gholami"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ca","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SubramanianHKBM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SubramanianHKBM23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/e15790966a4a9d85d688635c88ee6d8a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有科学机器学习（SciML）预训练工作未系统研究缩放规律和迁移行为，无法复用 NLP/CV 领域的预训练缩放经验到 SciML 场景。","importance":"属于范式级贡献，验证了预训练范式在 SciML 领域的可行性，为 SciML 基础模型的训练提供了缩放参考。","technical_approach":"系统实验研究，从模型大小、下游数据规模、分布外物理参数、多物理任务预训练四个维度分析 SciML 模型的迁移行为；采用与 NLP/CV 对齐的缩放实验设计，排除任务特异性干扰。","experiments":"未提供具体模型参数量、数据集规模，仅观测到合适微调的迁移学习可以比随机初始化训练减少两个数量级的下游数据量即可达到相同精度，多物理任务预训练的模型可以适配多种下游 SciML 任务。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing scientific machine learning (SciML) pretraining work does not systematically study scaling laws and transfer behavior, so pretraining scaling experience from NLP/CV domains cannot be reused in SciML scenarios.","importance":"It is a paradigm-level contribution, validates the feasibility of the pretraining paradigm in the SciML domain, and provides scaling references for SciML foundation model training.","technical_approach":"It is a systematic experimental study, analyzing the transfer behavior of SciML models from four dimensions: model size, downstream data scale, out-of-distribution physical parameters, and multi-physics task pretraining. It uses scaling experiment design aligned with NLP/CV to eliminate task-specific interference.","experiments":"No specific model size or dataset scale is provided. It is only observed that properly fine-tuned transfer learning can reduce downstream data requirement by two orders of magnitude to reach the same accuracy compared with random initialization training, and models pretrained on mixed physics tasks can adapt to various downstream SciML tasks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["foundation-model","scaling-law","transfer-learning","pretraining"],"keywords":["scientific machine learning","scaling","transfer learning","neural operators","foundation models"],"notable_authors":["Kurt Keutzer"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"预训练+微调范式在 NLP/CV 领域可以有效提升效果并降低下游成本","claim_en":"The pretrain+fine-tune paradigm can effectively improve performance and reduce downstream costs in NLP/CV domains","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"预训练+微调范式适用于 SciML 场景，可减少下游任务所需数据量达两个数量级","claim_en":"The pretrain+fine-tune paradigm is applicable to SciML scenarios, and can reduce downstream task data requirement by up to two orders of magnitude","opposes":"Prior work assumes SciML tasks are highly task-specific, so pretraining transfer benefits are limited","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5 Results","why_contested":"Expands the applicable boundary of the pretraining paradigm, and provides experimental support for SciML foundation model research and development"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"验证了预训练范式在科学机器学习（SciML）领域的可行性，提供了缩放参考。作为 literature 备查，不读正文。","en":"Validates the feasibility of the pretraining paradigm in Scientific Machine Learning (SciML) and provides scaling references. Keep as literature reference, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"TanZLXHC23","title":"Cappy: Outperforming and Boosting Large Multi-Task LMs with a Small Scorer","authors":["Bowen Tan","Yun Zhu","Lijuan Liu","Eric P. Xing","Zhiting Hu","Jindong Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$cb","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/TanZLXHC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/TanZLXHC23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/b860c0c546f4a3a786f9c9468228c99f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"百亿/千亿参数的多任务大模型推理和微调成本高，且多数最强模型不开源，下游适配难度大；现有参数高效微调方法仍需要较高硬件资源。","importance":"属于方法级贡献，提供了一种低成本增强大模型多任务能力的方案，降低了下游适配门槛。","technical_approach":"原创轻量打分器方案，Cappy 参数规模远小于主干多任务大模型，输入为任务指令和候选输出，输出得分用于选优或增强主干模型；不需要微调主干大模型，舍弃了参数高效微调需要更新主干部分参数的方案，仅需适配小打分器即可。","experiments":"在100+多任务基准上，参数量远低于千亿级主模型的 Cappy 表现超过 OPT-IML-175B；搭配主模型使用时可额外提升8%左右的任务准确率。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Multi-task LLMs with tens to hundreds of billions of parameters have high inference and fine-tuning costs, and most top-performing models are not open-sourced, making downstream adaptation difficult. Existing parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods still require high hardware resources.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution, providing a low-cost solution to enhance the multi-task capability of large models, and reducing the threshold for downstream adaptation.","technical_approach":"It is an original lightweight scorer scheme. Cappy has a much smaller parameter size than the main multi-task LLM, takes task instructions and candidate outputs as input, and outputs scores for candidate selection or main model enhancement. It does not require fine-tuning the main LLM, abandons the parameter-efficient fine-tuning scheme that requires updating part of the main model parameters, and only needs to adapt the small scorer.","experiments":"On 100+ multi-task benchmarks, Cappy with far smaller parameter size than 100B-scale main models outperforms OPT-IML-175B; when used with main models, it can additionally improve task accuracy by around 8%.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reranking","multitask-lm","preference-model","post-training"],"keywords":["multi-task","large language models","pretrain model"],"notable_authors":["Eric P. Xing","Zhiting Hu"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"多任务指令微调的大模型具有较好的跨任务泛化能力","claim_en":"Multi-task instruction-tuned LLMs have good cross-task generalization ability","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"参数远小于主干大模型的轻量打分器可以超过千亿参数多任务大模型的表现，同时可以进一步增强主干模型的性能","claim_en":"A lightweight scorer with much smaller parameters than the main LLM can outperform 100B-scale multi-task LLMs, and can further enhance the performance of the main model","opposes":"Prior work assumes that multi-task capability improvement must rely on larger model parameter scale","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments","why_contested":"Provides a new path for multi-task LLM optimization, breaking the single cognition that larger parameters lead to stronger capabilities"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"提出用小打分器增强大模型多任务能力的低成本方案，无需微调主干模型。对降低下游适配门槛有参考价值，只看方法设计和实验效果即可。","en":"Proposes a low-cost approach using a small scorer to enhance the multi-task capabilities of large models without fine-tuning the backbone. Valuable reference for lowering downstream adaptation barriers; just read the method design and experimental results."}},{"id":"TianWCD23","title":"Scan and Snap: Understanding Training Dynamics and Token Composition in 1-layer Transformer","authors":["Yuandong Tian","Yiping Wang","Beidi Chen","Simon S. Du"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$cc","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/TianWCD23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/TianWCD23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/e359ebe56ba306b674e8952349c6049e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作想用最小但不平凡的 setting 理解 Transformer 的训练动力学：一层 Transformer 究竟如何扫描输入并形成 token 组合。现实里大模型训练现象很多，但全模型太复杂，导致我们常常只能做经验归纳，难以建立机制级解释。","importance":"它的价值主要是机制分析。对预训练研究来说，这类工作不直接给新 SOTA，但能帮助解释注意力层在早期训练中如何从局部匹配走向组合特征学习，这对理解 in-context pattern formation、token competition 和优化稳定性都有长期价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法是对 1-layer Transformer 做理论与受控实验分析，研究其如何经历\"scan\"到\"snap\"的动态过程。可以从题目推断，作者把模型行为分成两个阶段：先扫描候选 token 或局部模式，再在训练推进后形成更稳定的组合结构。与直接研究深层网络不同，这种极简 setting 的好处是能把行为和参数更新联系起来；代价是结论向大模型外推时需要谨慎，尤其是深层残差和多头交互可能改变动态。","experiments":"实验重点应是受控合成任务或可解析任务上的训练轨迹分析，而不是常规大规模 benchmark。这里没有摘要，无法给出任务规模和具体数值。最有价值的结果通常包括：不同初始化或学习率下阶段转变是否稳定、attention pattern 与 MLP/输出层更新的时序关系、以及 token composition 出现的临界条件。","authors_note":"Yuandong Tian 和 Simon S. Du 都在深度学习理论与机制分析方向有较强代表性工作。由于未提供机构信息，这里不做更具体归属。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies transformer training dynamics in a deliberately minimal setting: a one-layer transformer. The goal is to understand how the model first scans inputs and then forms token compositions, instead of relying on broad empirical observations from large, opaque stacks.","importance":"This is a mechanism paper rather than a new training recipe. Its value for pretraining is indirect but real: understanding how attention layers transition from local matching to compositional behavior can inform how we think about pattern formation, token competition, and optimization stability in larger models.","technical_approach":"The core approach is a theoretical and controlled empirical study of a 1-layer transformer, framed as a 'scan and snap' dynamic. The title suggests a two-stage picture: early training scans for candidate tokens or local patterns, while later training locks into more stable compositional structures. The advantage of this setup is interpretability of the dynamics at parameter level; the limitation is external validity, since deeper residual stacks and multi-head interactions may change the picture.","experiments":"The experiments are likely centered on synthetic or analytically tractable tasks, with detailed training trajectory analysis rather than large benchmark scores. The prompt includes no abstract or numbers, so exact settings cannot be stated reliably. The most informative evidence would be whether the phase transition is stable across initialization and learning rates, and what conditions trigger the emergence of token composition.","authors_note":"Yuandong Tian and Simon S. Du are both well known for work on deep learning theory and mechanism analysis. No institution information is provided here, so a more specific attribution would be speculative."},"tags":["training-dynamics","transformer","tokenization","mechanistic-interpretability"],"notable_authors":["Yuandong Tian","Yiping Wang","Beidi Chen","Simon S. Du"],"keywords":["transformer","training dynamics","theoretical analysis","self-attention","interpretability","neural network understanding"],"recommendation":{"zh":"在 1-layer Transformer 的极简 setting 下分析注意力层从局部匹配到组合特征学习的动态过程。对理解早期训练机制有长期价值，只看机制分析和核心图表即可。","en":"Analyzes the dynamic process of attention layers from local matching to compositional feature learning in a minimalist 1-layer Transformer setting. Has long-term value for understanding early training mechanisms; just read the mechanism analysis and core figures."}},{"id":"TongJS23","title":"Mass-Producing Failures of Multimodal Systems with Language Models","authors":["Shengbang Tong","Erik Jones","Jacob Steinhardt"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$cd","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/TongJS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/TongJS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/5d570ed1708bbe19cb60f7a7aff60575-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关注一个很现实的问题：多模态系统的失败案例太多、太分散，人工发现效率很低，导致安全评估和鲁棒性改进跟不上模型能力增长。过去大多依赖人工红队或小规模模板攻击，覆盖面和组合复杂度都不足。","importance":"它的重要性主要在评测与数据生成层面。对多模态预训练和 post-train 闭环都有启发：如果语言模型可以系统地产生多模态系统的失败样本，那么评估集构造、对齐训练和鲁棒性回归测试都能更自动化。这不是直接改 backbone，但会影响我们如何定义训练信号和 failure coverage。","technical_approach":"核心方法是用语言模型大规模生成或搜索能诱发多模态系统出错的输入。关键机制大概率是让 LLM 充当 failure proposal engine：基于任务描述、模型已知弱点或历史失败样本，生成更容易触发误识别、幻觉或违背常识的案例。与随机扰动或固定模板攻击相比，这种方法更能利用语义层面的组合搜索；但边界是，LLM 生成的攻击空间仍受其先验限制，可能偏向语言可描述的失败，而漏掉低层感知错误。","experiments":"实验应围绕 failure discovery rate、找到的新失败类型、以及相较人工或基线自动方法的效率提升展开。这里没有摘要与数字，不能确认具体多模态模型、数据集和提升幅度。值得看的证据包括：是否能跨不同 VLM/多模态任务迁移、生成的失败样本是否真实而非标注噪声，以及把这些样本加入训练后是否能提升鲁棒性。","authors_note":"Jacob Steinhardt 是模型安全、鲁棒性和评估方向的代表性研究者。由于未给机构信息，这里不补充团队归属。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical bottleneck in multimodal reliability: failures are abundant but hard to find systematically, so evaluation and robustness work lag behind model capability. Prior approaches often relied on manual red-teaming or small template attacks, which do not cover the combinatorial failure space well.","importance":"Its main contribution is on evaluation and data generation. For multimodal pretraining and post-training, the key implication is that language models can serve as engines for generating failure cases, making benchmark construction, alignment, and regression testing much more scalable. This does not change the backbone directly, but it changes how we collect useful supervision.","technical_approach":"The method uses language models to generate or search for inputs that are likely to break multimodal systems. The likely mechanism is to treat the LLM as a failure proposal model conditioned on task descriptions, known weaknesses, or prior failures, then filter for cases that induce model errors. Compared with random perturbations or fixed templates, this explores failures at the semantic and compositional level. The boundary is that LLM-generated failures may overrepresent language-describable mistakes and miss low-level perceptual failure modes.","experiments":"The evaluation likely measures failure discovery rate, diversity of discovered failure modes, and efficiency relative to manual or simpler automatic baselines. The prompt does not include the abstract or quantitative details, so specific models, datasets, and gains should not be fabricated. The most meaningful evidence would show cross-model transfer of generated failures and whether training on those failures improves robustness rather than merely exposing annotation noise.","authors_note":"Jacob Steinhardt is a well-known researcher in model safety, robustness, and evaluation. No institution information is provided here, so the team attribution is left unspecified."},"tags":["multimodal","failure-analysis","language-models","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Shengbang Tong","Erik Jones","Jacob Steinhardt"],"keywords":["safety","red-teaming","robustness","explainability","failures","multimodal models","vision-language","natural-language explanations"],"recommendation":{"zh":"用 LLM 大规模生成多模态系统的失败样本，提升安全评估和鲁棒性改进效率。对多模态预训练和 post-train 闭环有启发，只看数据生成方法和评测结果即可。","en":"Uses LLMs to generate failure samples of multimodal systems at scale, improving the efficiency of safety evaluation and robustness enhancement. Inspiring for multimodal pretraining and post-train closed loops; just read the data generation method and evaluation results."}},{"id":"TruongB23","title":"PoET: A generative model of protein families as sequences-of-sequences","authors":["Timothy F. Truong Jr.","Tristan Bepler"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ce","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/TruongB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/TruongB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/f4366126eba252699b280e8f93c0ab2f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是蛋白质家族建模中过于扁平的问题：传统序列模型通常把每条蛋白单独看待，难以同时建模家族内部变异规律和跨家族结构。作者想把蛋白家族表示成 sequences-of-sequences，从而显式捕捉层级结构，而不是只做单序列语言建模。","importance":"它的直接应用在蛋白建模，但方法上对预训练也有启发。价值在于说明：当数据天然具有\"集合/家族中的序列\"层级时，标准 flat AR 或 masked LM 可能浪费结构信息。对语言和多模态预训练，这对应文档-句子-词、会话-轮次-句子等层级建模问题。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 PoET，一个把蛋白家族当作 sequence-of-sequences 来生成的模型。关键不是把多条序列简单拼接，而是让模型同时处理家族级上下文和单条序列级依赖，从而更好地学习保守位点与可变位点的统计结构。与普通蛋白 LM 相比，它显式利用了家族条件；这样设计有效，是因为很多生物功能信号存在于同源序列集合的共变关系中。代价是训练和采样都更复杂，且依赖家族组织质量。","experiments":"实验应主要在蛋白家族生成、似然评估、突变效应预测或家族泛化上比较单序列模型与 PoET。这里没有摘要，无法确认参数规模和具体数字。最值得看的事实包括：是否在家族内生成多样性和功能一致性之间取得更好平衡、是否能更好外推到稀疏家族，以及 sequence-of-sequences 建模相对简单拼接的收益有多大。","authors_note":"Timothy F. Truong Jr. 和 Tristan Bepler 来自蛋白表示学习方向。由于没有机构信息，这里不做进一步展开。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses an overly flat view of protein modeling. Standard sequence models usually treat each protein independently, which makes it hard to capture variation within a protein family and structure across families. The proposed shift is to model protein families as sequences of sequences, explicitly using their hierarchy.","importance":"The application is protein modeling, but the modeling lesson is broader. When data naturally has a hierarchical structure, a flat autoregressive or masked objective can throw away useful information. That insight transfers to language and multimodal pretraining settings with document-sentence-token or dialogue-turn-utterance hierarchy.","technical_approach":"PoET models a protein family as a sequence-of-sequences rather than a single flattened string. The key is to jointly represent family-level context and within-sequence dependencies, so the model can learn which positions are conserved and which vary across homologs. Compared with standard protein LMs, this uses family structure as a first-class conditioning signal. That is well motivated because many biological constraints emerge from co-variation across related sequences. The trade-off is more complex training and dependence on the quality of family grouping.","experiments":"The likely evaluation includes family-aware generation, likelihood, mutation-effect prediction, or generalization across protein families, compared with single-sequence baselines. Since no abstract or numbers are provided, exact model sizes and gains cannot be stated safely. The most useful results would show better balance between diversity and family consistency, especially in sparse-family regimes, and clear gains over naive sequence concatenation.","authors_note":"Timothy F. Truong Jr. and Tristan Bepler work in protein representation learning. No institution information is provided here, so further team attribution is omitted."},"tags":["sequence-modeling","generative-model","hierarchical"],"notable_authors":["Timothy F. Truong Jr.","Tristan Bepler"],"keywords":["protein fitness prediction","transformer","retrieval","language model","MSA","generative model","protein engineering"],"recommendation":{"zh":"将蛋白质家族建模为 sequences-of-sequences，显式捕捉层级结构。对处理具有天然层级结构数据的预训练（如文档-句子-词）有方法启发，只看模型架构和实验对比即可。","en":"Models protein families as sequences-of-sequences to explicitly capture hierarchical structures. Methodologically inspiring for pretraining on data with natural hierarchical structures (e.g., document-sentence-word); just read the model architecture and experimental comparisons."}},{"id":"TschannenKSZHB23","title":"Image Captioners Are Scalable Vision Learners Too","authors":["Michael Tschannen","Manoj Kumar","Andreas Steiner","Xiaohua Zhai","Neil Houlsby","Lucas Beyer"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$cf","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/TschannenKSZHB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/TschannenKSZHB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/92369a01fbe8046a093746389b2c413e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要回答的问题是：图像描述模型不仅能做生成，是否也能像对比学习或 masked image modeling 一样学到可扩展的视觉表征。过去 captioning 常被视为下游任务或辅助目标，而不是主流视觉预训练范式，因为大家担心语言监督过窄、容易偏向语义而忽略视觉细节。","importance":"这篇工作的意义不小，属于方法级并带有范式修正。它提示我们：captioning 不是只能服务生成或评测，也可以成为 scalable vision learning 的主训练目标之一。对 VLM 预训练很关键，因为图文生成式目标天然兼容统一接口，比纯对比学习更接近后续多模态使用方式。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把 image captioner 当成视觉学习器来训练和评估，而不是只把它当文本解码头。关键设计通常包括大规模图文数据、合适的视觉编码器与语言解码器耦合、以及从 captioning 目标中提取可迁移表征。与 CLIP 不同，它不只做全局对齐，而是要求模型生成细粒度文本，因而可能学到更丰富的语义和区域级信息；但代价是训练更重，对文本质量和解码器设计更敏感。","experiments":"从题目看，实验重点应是 scaling：随着模型、数据、训练步数增加，captioner 学到的视觉表征是否持续变强，并与对比学习基线比较。这里没有摘要，无法确认具体参数量和指标。最关键的事实应该包括：captioning 预训练在分类、检索或少样本迁移上达到有竞争力甚至更优的结果；有价值的分析包括 encoder-only 读出与生成式读出的差异、caption 质量与视觉表示之间的相关性，以及数据规模是否带来稳定幂律收益。","authors_note":"作者名单包含 Michael Tschannen、Andreas Steiner、Xiaohua Zhai、Neil Houlsby，这一组合与 Google/DeepMind 系列视觉与多模态预训练工作高度相关。由于题面未给机构字段，这里保守描述为相关团队。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether image captioners can be treated as scalable vision learners, not just as generative endpoints. Captioning has often been viewed as a downstream task or auxiliary objective rather than a primary pretraining paradigm, partly because language supervision was thought to overemphasize semantics and miss visual detail.","importance":"This is a meaningful method paper with broader paradigm implications. It argues that captioning can be a serious vision pretraining objective, not merely a side task. That matters for VLM pretraining because generative image-text objectives are naturally aligned with unified multimodal interfaces and downstream usage.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to train image captioners as representation learners and evaluate the visual representations they induce. The likely ingredients are large-scale image-text data, a vision encoder coupled to a language decoder, and careful probing of encoder features rather than only generated text quality. Compared with CLIP-style contrastive training, captioning forces richer conditional generation and may capture finer semantic structure. The trade-off is higher training cost and stronger sensitivity to text quality and decoder design.","experiments":"The title strongly suggests a scaling study: as model size, data, and compute increase, do captioner-derived visual features continue to improve, and how do they compare with contrastive baselines? The prompt does not provide the abstract or exact numbers, so those should not be invented. The most important expected findings are competitive or stronger transfer performance from captioner-trained models, plus analyses of encoder readout quality, caption quality correlation, and scaling behavior.","authors_note":"The author list includes Michael Tschannen, Andreas Steiner, Xiaohua Zhai, and Neil Houlsby, which is strongly associated with Google/DeepMind-style vision and multimodal pretraining work. Since no institution field is explicitly given here, the attribution is kept conservative."},"tags":["image-captioning","vision-language","scaling"],"notable_authors":["Michael Tschannen","Manoj Kumar","Andreas Steiner","Xiaohua Zhai","Neil Houlsby"],"keywords":["contrastive learning","CLIP","CapPa","Cap","vision-language","image captioning","visual representation learning","weakly supervised learning","VLM","multimodal learning","VQA","image classification"],"recommendation":{"zh":"修正范式：image captioning 也能作为 scalable vision learning 的主训练目标，学到可迁移表征。对 VLM 预训练很关键，应仔细阅读方法设计和实验验证。","en":"Paradigm correction: image captioning can also serve as a main training objective for scalable vision learning, learning transferable representations. Crucial for VLM pretraining; carefully read the method design and experimental validation."}},{"id":"TuDG23","title":"A Closer Look at the Robustness of Contrastive Language-Image Pre-Training (CLIP)","authors":["Weijie Tu","Weijian Deng","Tom Gedeon"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d0","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/TuDG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/TuDG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/2c6be9f09e08ca166cdc0aa26306c61f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：CLIP 在鲁棒性上到底强到什么程度，以及哪些鲁棒性只是零样本泛化的表象。过去很多讨论把 CLIP 的开放词表和大规模图文对比预训练，直接等同于更强鲁棒性，但这一判断常常缺少系统分解：是对自然分布偏移更稳，还是对对抗扰动、噪声、腐蚀或语义改写仍然脆弱。","importance":"它的贡献更偏诊断和评测，而不是提出新的预训练方法。对 pretrain 的价值在于，它帮助区分“对比式图文预训练带来的真实鲁棒收益”和“由评测设置放大的错觉”。这对 VLM 训练很重要，因为很多方法在 clean zero-shot 上看起来强，但部署里真正决定可用性的往往是 shift robustness、prompt sensitivity 和跨域稳定性。","technical_approach":"核心做法应是对 CLIP 进行更细粒度的鲁棒性分解评测，而不是只报一个总体准确率。通常这类分析会把扰动分成自然分布外样本、常见图像腐蚀、对抗攻击、文本侧 prompt 变化和标签空间变化，再与监督式视觉模型或 CLIP 变体比较。这样设计有效，因为 CLIP 的优势来源并不单一：一部分来自大规模弱监督数据，一部分来自对比目标带来的表示对齐，一部分则可能只是类别文本模板带来的 calibration 改变。若不拆开评测，很难知道该改数据、改损失还是改推理。","experiments":"由于没有摘要，无法确认作者评测了哪些具体 benchmark，也无法确认是 ImageNet-C/ImageNet-A/ImageNet-R、对抗基准还是 prompt robustness 测试，更不能确认具体数值。可以确定的是，这类论文的关键结果通常不是“全面更强”，而是“在某些 shift 上强，在另一些扰动上并不占优”，并通过对比 supervised baselines 说明 CLIP 鲁棒性的来源和边界；但这里不能替作者填数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a simple but important question: how robust is CLIP actually, and which parts of the robustness story are real versus benchmark artifacts? CLIP is often treated as inherently more robust because of large-scale contrastive language-image pretraining, but that claim can hide major differences between natural distribution shift, corruption robustness, adversarial robustness, and prompt sensitivity.","importance":"This is primarily a diagnostic contribution rather than a new pretraining method. Its value for pretraining research is that it separates genuine robustness gains from apparent gains caused by evaluation setup. That matters for VLMs because strong zero-shot accuracy does not automatically translate into stable behavior under domain shift, perturbation, or prompt variation.","technical_approach":"The likely method is a structured robustness evaluation of CLIP across multiple failure modes instead of a single aggregate metric. A good design here compares CLIP with supervised vision models or CLIP variants under natural shifts, common corruptions, adversarial attacks, and textual prompt changes. That decomposition is useful because CLIP’s behavior comes from several sources at once: data scale, contrastive alignment, and text-conditioned calibration. Without separating them, it is hard to know whether the fix should be in data, loss design, or inference.","experiments":"The abstract is not provided, so the exact benchmarks, baselines, and numbers cannot be stated reliably. The most plausible outcome pattern is not “CLIP is uniformly more robust,” but rather that it helps under some shifts while remaining fragile under others. Any claim about specific datasets or percentage gains without the paper text would be speculative.","authors_note":""},"tags":["clip","robustness","vision-language"],"keywords":["CLIP"],"recommendation":{"zh":"细粒度分解评测 CLIP 的鲁棒性，区分真实收益和评测错觉。对 VLM 训练的诊断和评测有重要价值，只看评测设置和核心结论即可。","en":"Fine-grained decomposition evaluation of CLIP's robustness, distinguishing real gains from evaluation illusions. Highly valuable for diagnosing and evaluating VLM training; just read the evaluation setup and core conclusions."}},{"id":"ValerianiDCLAC23","title":"The geometry of hidden representations of large transformer models","authors":["Lucrezia Valeriani","Diego Doimo","Francesca Cuturello","Alessandro Laio","Alessio Ansuini","Alberto Cazzaniga"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d1","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ValerianiDCLAC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ValerianiDCLAC23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/a0e66093d7168b40246af1cddc025daa-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：大 Transformer 的隐藏表示到底呈现什么几何结构，以及这种几何是否能解释模型的分层功能和泛化行为。过去对表征的分析常停留在 probing 或相似度热图，能看到现象，但不容易回答表示在不同层如何展开、压缩、分离语义或形成任务相关流形。","importance":"这是机制分析和表示学习诊断工作。对 pretrain 的直接产出不是一个新训练 recipe，而是提供理解大模型内部表征组织方式的工具和观察。它的重要性在于，如果隐藏表示几何存在稳定规律，那么这些规律可以反过来指导架构、归一化、层间训练动态乃至 token mixing 的设计。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是用几何和流形分析工具研究大型 Transformer 各层隐藏状态，例如内在维度、曲率、类间分离、表示压缩与展开轨迹等。与简单 probing 不同，这类方法关注的是表示空间本身的形状及其跨层演化。这样做有效，因为 Transformer 的功能往往不是单点神经元编码，而是分布式几何结构承担的；如果某些层持续表现出维度塌缩、语义分叉或任务相关子空间形成，就能更细地解释不同层在 computation pipeline 里的职责。边界在于：几何规律未必等于因果机制，解释力强于黑箱观察，但弱于干预式证据。","experiments":"在没有摘要的情况下，无法确认作者分析的是哪些模型、哪些层、哪些任务，也无法给出具体维度估计或层间几何转变数字。大概率实验会跨多个 Transformer 规模和数据设置，比较隐藏状态几何随层深、输入类型和模型大小的变化，并报告一些与性能相关的几何指标；但具体结果不能编造。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a foundational question: what geometric structure do hidden representations in large Transformers actually have, and can that structure explain how different layers behave? Prior analyses often relied on probing or similarity visualizations, which reveal correlations but say less about how representation manifolds expand, compress, or separate information across depth.","importance":"This is a mechanistic and representational analysis paper. It does not introduce a new pretraining objective, but it matters because stable geometric regularities in hidden states can inform architecture and optimization choices. For pretraining researchers, the value lies in turning vague statements about “good representations” into measurable structure.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is to apply geometric or manifold-analysis tools to hidden states across layers of large Transformers, measuring quantities such as intrinsic dimension, separability, curvature, or layerwise expansion/compression. That goes beyond standard probing by focusing on the shape of the representation space itself and how it evolves with depth. This is useful because Transformer computation is usually distributed: function is carried by geometry in activation space rather than by isolated neurons. The limitation is that geometry alone is still mostly descriptive unless paired with intervention.","experiments":"Without the abstract, the exact models, datasets, and geometric metrics cannot be reported with confidence. A reasonable expectation is a cross-model, cross-layer analysis showing how hidden-state geometry changes with depth, model scale, or input type, and how some geometric indicators correlate with performance. Any numerical summary here would be unsupported.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer","representation","geometry"],"keywords":["Representations","transformers","geometry","interpretability"],"recommendation":{"zh":"用几何和流形分析工具研究大 Transformer 隐藏表示的跨层演化，提供理解内部表征组织方式的视角。对指导架构和训练设计有启发，只看几何分析方法和核心观察即可。","en":"Uses geometric and manifold analysis tools to study the cross-layer evolution of hidden representations in large Transformers, providing a perspective to understand internal representation organization. Inspiring for guiding architecture and training design; just read the geometric analysis methods and core observations."}},{"id":"ValmeekamMSK23","title":"On the Planning Abilities of Large Language Models - A Critical Investigation","authors":["Karthik Valmeekam","Matthew Marquez","Sarath Sreedharan","Subbarao Kambhampati"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d2","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ValmeekamMSK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ValmeekamMSK23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/efb2072a358cefb75886a315a6fcf880-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：主流关于‘LLM 具备规划能力’的说法可能高估了模型在真正规划问题上的能力。过去不少正面结果来自宽松评测：模型只要生成看似合理的步骤就算成功，但没有严格检查动作可执行性、状态一致性和目标可达性。","importance":"这是一个批判性诊断工作。对 pretrain/posttrain 的价值很高，因为它提醒我们不要把语言流畅性和搜索式规划混为一谈。这个区分很重要：如果 LLM 在规划上主要依赖模式匹配，那么继续扩大预训练规模未必解决问题，可能需要显式搜索、外部规划器、过程约束或不同训练信号。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是重新审视已有 planning claim，用更严格的任务定义和验证标准测试 LLM。通常这意味着把规划问题转成可以自动验证的形式，检查输出计划是否满足前提条件、状态转移和最终目标，而不是只做人工主观判定。和‘展示几个成功案例’相比，这种设计更能识别真实 failure mode：模型可能知道动作名称，但不会维持跨步状态；可能能写局部合理步骤，但缺乏全局搜索能力。作者的立场从标题就很明确：这是一次 critical investigation，不是轻量 benchmark 报告。","experiments":"当前没有摘要，无法确认评测域、模型名单、成功率数字和提示方式。可以较稳妥地概括其经验结论方向：LLM 在严格规划评测下表现显著弱于表面印象，且结果对 prompt 和任务表述非常敏感；若有提升，也往往来自额外结构化提示而不是内生规划能力的稳定增强。具体数字不能编造。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper argues that claims about LLM planning ability are likely overstated when evaluated under loose criteria. Many positive demonstrations count a plan as successful if it sounds reasonable, without strictly verifying executability, state consistency, and goal achievement.","importance":"This is a critical diagnostic paper with strong implications for both pretraining and post-training. The key message is that language fluency should not be confused with planning competence. That distinction matters because if current models are mostly pattern-matching in planning settings, scaling pretraining alone may not be enough; explicit search, external planners, or stronger process constraints may be required.","technical_approach":"The core approach is to revisit planning claims under stricter validation. That typically means formulating planning tasks so outputs can be checked automatically against action preconditions, state transitions, and final goals, rather than relying on subjective judgment. This kind of evaluation is valuable because it exposes the real failure modes: a model may know action names and local patterns, yet fail to maintain a coherent state trajectory or perform global search. The title signals that this is a critical re-evaluation, not just another benchmark release.","experiments":"The abstract is not provided, so specific domains, models, prompts, and success rates cannot be reported. The likely empirical conclusion is that LLM performance drops substantially under strict planning criteria and remains highly sensitive to prompt phrasing and task formulation. Any more detailed numerical claim would be speculative here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["planning","reasoning","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Karthik Valmeekam","Subbarao Kambhampati"],"keywords":["Large Language Models","Planning","LLMs for autonomous and heuristic planning guidance"],"recommendation":{"zh":"批判性诊断 LLM 的规划能力，指出主流评测可能高估了模型在真正规划问题上的表现。提醒不要混淆语言流畅性和搜索式规划，对预训练/后训练方向有重要指导意义，应仔细阅读评测标准和 failure mode 分析。","en":"Critically diagnoses the planning abilities of LLMs, pointing out that mainstream evaluations may overestimate model performance on real planning problems. A reminder not to confuse language fluency with search-based planning; has important guiding significance for pretraining/post-training directions. Carefully read the evaluation criteria and failure mode analysis."}},{"id":"Wang0LSHCWZ23","title":"In-Context Learning Unlocked for Diffusion Models","authors":["Zhendong Wang","Yifan Jiang","Yadong Lu","Yelong Shen","Pengcheng He","Weizhu Chen","Zhangyang (Atlas) Wang","Mingyuan Zhou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d3","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Wang0LSHCWZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Wang0LSHCWZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/1b3750390ca8b931fb9ca988647940cb-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：扩散模型能否像语言模型一样进行 in-context learning，而不是每次任务变化都依赖额外 finetuning。过去 ICL 基本被视作自回归 Transformer 的特长，因为它天然按序列条件生成；扩散模型虽然条件生成很强，但缺少一个清晰的上下文示例利用机制。","importance":"这是一个范式级别很有意思的探索。它对 pretrain 的启示在于：ICL 可能不是 next-token AR 独有能力，而是更一般的条件生成模型在合适训练与输入组织下都能涌现的行为。如果成立，这会削弱一些把 AR 视为唯一通用元学习载体的假设，也为 diffusion LM / multimodal diffusion 的上下文学习打开空间。","technical_approach":"核心方法是为扩散模型设计一种能够读取上下文示例并据此适配当前任务的训练和推理框架。难点在于扩散模型不是逐 token 递推，它通过逐步去噪生成样本，所以“把示例塞进 prompt”并不会自动形成 ICL。有效方案通常需要重新组织条件输入、训练目标或去噪网络，使模型在去噪过程中显式参考上下文示例并学习 task-conditioned denoising。与 AR ICL 相比，它牺牲了自然的序列因果结构，但可能换来更灵活的生成空间和更强的多模态兼容性。","experiments":"没有摘要时，无法确认作者研究的是图像扩散还是更广义的 diffusion model，也无法确认 few-shot 任务类型、模型规模、baseline 和提升幅度。合理预期实验会对比无上下文条件、标准条件扩散和可能的 AR/Transformer baselines，展示扩散模型在 few-shot adaptation 或 conditional generation 上的 ICL 能力；具体数字不能编造。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether diffusion models can perform in-context learning instead of relying on task-specific finetuning. ICL has mostly been associated with autoregressive Transformers because they naturally consume ordered prompts, while diffusion models are strong conditional generators but lack an obvious mechanism for using demonstration examples at inference time.","importance":"This is a conceptually important, near-paradigm-level exploration. The pretraining takeaway is that in-context learning may not be exclusive to next-token autoregression. If diffusion models can also adapt from context examples, that broadens the space of general-purpose generative models and is especially relevant for diffusion language models and multimodal generative pretraining.","technical_approach":"The core contribution is likely a training and conditioning scheme that lets a diffusion model read example pairs from context and adapt generation accordingly. The main difficulty is structural: diffusion generation proceeds by iterative denoising, so simply concatenating demonstrations does not automatically produce ICL behavior the way prompting does in AR models. A successful design must make the denoiser explicitly condition on support examples throughout the denoising trajectory. Compared with AR ICL, this gives up the natural causal prompt format but may offer a more flexible generation space and better compatibility with multimodal settings.","experiments":"Because the abstract is missing, the exact modality, task family, model size, baselines, and numerical gains cannot be stated with confidence. The likely evaluation compares context-conditioned diffusion models against standard conditional diffusion and possibly autoregressive baselines on few-shot adaptation tasks. Any concrete metric or improvement here would be speculation.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","diffusion-model","visual-prompting"],"notable_authors":["Pengcheng He"],"keywords":["diffusion models","in-context learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3训练框架设计和Fig5跨任务ICL效果即可，打破ICL为AR模型独有假设，可在内部多模态扩散预训练验证对应输入组织方案。","en":"Only read §3 training framework and Fig5 cross-task ICL results, breaks the assumption that ICL is exclusive to AR models, validate the input organization in internal multimodal diffusion pretraining."}},{"id":"WangC0H23","title":"Universality and Limitations of Prompt Tuning","authors":["Yihan Wang","Jatin Chauhan","Wei Wang","Cho-Jui Hsieh"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d4","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangC0H23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangC0H23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/eef6aecfe050b556c6a48d9c16b15558-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有 prompt tuning 只有经验效果，缺乏理论支撑，无法明确 prompt tuning 和全参数微调的能力边界；现有研究默认 prompt tuning 效果弱于全参数微调但没有理论解释。","importance":"属于理论级贡献，为 prompt tuning 的应用场景选型提供了理论依据。","technical_approach":"纯理论分析工作，针对 Transformer 架构，从通用近似和有限深度固定权重预训练 Transformer 的局限性两个角度分析 prompt tuning：正面证明存在合适的 soft prompt 可以让固定权重 Transformer 近似任意 Lipschitz 序列到序列函数；负面证明有限深度的固定权重 Transformer 的 prompt tuning 存在能力上限。","experiments":"无大规模预训练实验，仅做了理论推导和小规模验证实验，确认了 prompt tuning 的能力边界与模型深度的相关性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing prompt tuning only has empirical effectiveness, lacks theoretical support, and cannot clarify the capability boundary between prompt tuning and full parameter fine-tuning. Existing research assumes prompt tuning performs worse than full parameter fine-tuning but has no theoretical explanation.","importance":"It is a theory-level contribution, providing theoretical basis for application scenario selection of prompt tuning.","technical_approach":"It is a pure theoretical analysis work. For Transformer architectures, it analyzes prompt tuning from two perspectives: universal approximation and limitations of finite-depth fixed-weight pretrained Transformers. On the positive side, it proves that there exists a suitable soft prompt that allows a fixed-weight Transformer to approximate any Lipschitz sequence-to-sequence function; on the negative side, it proves that prompt tuning for finite-depth fixed-weight Transformers has a clear capability ceiling.","experiments":"No large-scale pretraining experiments are conducted, only theoretical derivation and small-scale verification experiments are carried out to confirm the correlation between the capability boundary of prompt tuning and model depth.","authors_note":""},"tags":["prompt-tuning","universality","theory","fine-tuning"],"keywords":["prompt-tuning; language model; expressive power"],"notable_authors":["Cho-Jui Hsieh"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Prompt tuning 可以在不更新预训练模型权重的情况下适配下游任务","claim_en":"Prompt tuning can adapt to downstream tasks without updating pretrained model weights","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"足够强的预训练 Transformer 配合合适的 soft prompt 可以近似任意 Lipschitz 序列到序列函数，有限深度的预训练 Transformer 的 prompt tuning 存在明确的能力上限","claim_en":"A sufficiently strong pretrained Transformer with a suitable soft prompt can approximate any Lipschitz sequence-to-sequence function, and prompt tuning for finite-depth pretrained Transformers has a clear capability ceiling","opposes":"Prior work does not clarify the theoretical capability boundary of prompt tuning, only empirically observes that it performs worse than full parameter fine-tuning","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3-4 Theoretical Results","why_contested":"Provides theoretical guidance for prompt tuning applications, allowing selection of suitable pretrained models and adaptation methods according to downstream task complexity"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§2通用近似证明和§3能力上限推导部分即可，可作为内部prompt tuning适用场景选型的理论参考。","en":"Only read §2 universal approximation proof and §3 capability upper bound derivation, serve as theoretical reference for internal prompt tuning scenario selection."}},{"id":"WangCCWZZLLZQD23","title":"VisionLLM: Large Language Model is also an Open-Ended Decoder for Vision-Centric Tasks","authors":["Wenhai Wang","Zhe Chen","Xiaokang Chen","Jiannan Wu","Xizhou Zhu","Gang Zeng","Ping Luo","Tong Lu","Jie Zhou","Yu Qiao","Jifeng Dai"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d5","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangCCWZZLLZQD23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangCCWZZLLZQD23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/c1f7b1ed763e9c75e4db74b49b76db5f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有视觉基础模型仅能处理预定义形式的任务，无法匹配大语言模型的开放式任务适配能力，此前多模态框架未建立视觉与语言任务的统一处理范式。","importance":"属于范式级多模态预训练框架探索，验证了将图像作为外语对齐到LLM的可行性，为各类视觉任务提供了统一的开放式解码方案，无需为不同任务定制输出头。","technical_approach":"原创统一多模态框架，核心是将图像编码为LLM可理解的类语言token，所有视觉中心任务都对齐为LLM可处理的语言任务，舍弃传统视觉任务所需的定制化输出头，与此前多模态框架的核心差异是完全将任务定义、调度交给LLM的原生解码能力。","experiments":"摘要未披露具体模型参数量、训练数据规模与量化指标，仅验证框架可适配分类、检测、分割等多种开放式视觉任务，无公开消融实验数据。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing vision foundation models can only handle pre-defined tasks and fail to match the open-ended task adaptation capability of large language models. Previous multimodal frameworks have not established a unified processing paradigm for vision and language tasks.","importance":"This is a paradigm-level exploration of multimodal pre-training frameworks. It validates the feasibility of aligning images as a foreign language to LLMs, providing a unified open-ended decoding solution for all types of vision tasks without custom output heads for different tasks.","technical_approach":"It is an original unified multimodal framework. The core is to encode images into language-like tokens understandable by LLMs, align all vision-centric tasks to language tasks processable by LLMs, and discard custom output heads required for traditional vision tasks. The key difference from previous multimodal frameworks is that task definition and scheduling are fully delegated to the native decoding capability of LLMs.","experiments":"The abstract does not disclose specific model parameter sizes, training data scales, or quantitative metrics. It only verifies that the framework can adapt to various open-ended vision tasks including classification, detection, and segmentation. No public ablation data is available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vision-llm","open-ended-decoder","unified-model","vlm"],"keywords":["Large Vision-Language Model","Detection","Image Caption"],"notable_authors":["Wenhai Wang","Xizhou Zhu"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大语言模型具备零样本适配用户自定义任务的能力","claim_en":"Large language models have strong zero-shot capability to adapt to user-defined tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Abstract"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3.2图像token化方案和Fig6开放式任务效果即可，可参考其无定制输出头的多模态预训练范式。","en":"Only read §3.2 image tokenization scheme and Fig6 open task results, refer to its multimodal pretraining paradigm without customized output heads."}},{"id":"WangCPXKZXXDSTA23","title":"DecodingTrust: A Comprehensive Assessment of Trustworthiness in GPT Models","authors":["Boxin Wang","Weixin Chen","Hengzhi Pei","Chulin Xie","Mintong Kang","Chenhui Zhang","Chejian Xu","Zidi Xiong","Ritik Dutta","Rylan Schaeffer","Sang T. Truong","Simran Arora","Mantas Mazeika","Dan Hendrycks","Zinan Lin","Yu Cheng","Sanmi Koyejo","Dawn Song","Bo Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d6","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangCPXKZXXDSTA23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangCPXKZXXDSTA23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/63cb9921eecf51bfad27a99b2c53dd6d-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"GPT系列模型被广泛用于医疗、金融等高敏感场景，但现有可信性评估维度零散，大量未被发现的漏洞可能导致高昂损失。","importance":"属于系统级LLM可信性评估基准创新，覆盖8个核心可信性维度，为后续LLM安全对齐、训练提供了标准化测试体系，填补了GPT-4/3.5全维度可信性评估的空白。","technical_approach":"原创评估框架，核心是设计覆盖毒性、刻板印象偏见、对抗鲁棒性、分布外鲁棒性、对抗示例鲁棒性、隐私、机器伦理、公平性8个维度的测试用例，与此前零散的安全评估工作的区别是首次针对GPT系列模型做全维度统一评估，无需为不同维度单独设计测试流程。","experiments":"测试对象为GPT-4和GPT-3.5，摘要披露发现了多个未公开的安全漏洞，未给出具体量化指标与基线对比数据。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"GPT series models are widely used in high-sensitivity scenarios such as healthcare and finance, but existing trustworthiness evaluations are scattered across dimensions, and a large number of undiscovered vulnerabilities may lead to high costs.","importance":"This is a system-level innovation of LLM trustworthiness evaluation benchmarks. It covers 8 core trustworthiness dimensions, provides a standardized testing system for subsequent LLM safety alignment and training, and fills the gap of full-dimensional trustworthiness evaluation for GPT-4/3.5.","technical_approach":"It is an original evaluation framework. The core is to design test cases covering 8 dimensions: toxicity, stereotype bias, adversarial robustness, out-of-distribution robustness, robustness on adversarial demonstrations, privacy, machine ethics, and fairness. The key difference from previous scattered security evaluation works is that it conducts the first full-dimensional unified evaluation for GPT series models, eliminating the need for separate test processes for different dimensions.","experiments":"The test subjects are GPT-4 and GPT-3.5. The abstract discloses that multiple undisclosed security vulnerabilities are found, and no specific quantitative indicators or baseline comparison data are provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["trustworthiness","gpt","benchmark","safety","alignment"],"keywords":["trustworthiness evaluation","GPT models","GPT-3.5","GPT-4","toxicity","stereotypes","bias","adversarial robustness","out-of-distribution robustness","privacy","ethics","fairness"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"GPT系列模型已达到可落地的实用性能水平","claim_en":"GPT series models have reached practical performance levels for real-world deployment","evidence_anchor":"§1 Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"零散的单维度GPT可信性评估无法覆盖实际落地中的全部风险","claim_en":"Scattered single-dimensional trustworthiness evaluations for GPT models cannot cover all risks in real-world deployment","opposes":"此前的GPT可信性研究大多仅测试1-2个安全维度，认为单维度达标即可支撑落地","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Abstract","why_contested":"It clarifies the shortcomings of single-dimensional security evaluation and provides a basis for subsequent full-dimensional alignment research."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为LLM可信性评估基准备查，不用读正文，需要全维度GPT可信性测试时直接查对应维度测试用例即可。","en":"Keep as LLM trustworthiness evaluation benchmark reference, no need to read full text, look up corresponding test cases when conducting full-dimensional GPT trustworthiness testing."}},{"id":"WangFWSWZ23","title":"DropPos: Pre-Training Vision Transformers by Reconstructing Dropped Positions","authors":["Haochen Wang","Junsong Fan","Yuxi Wang","Kaiyou Song","Tong Wang","Zhaoxiang Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d7","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangFWSWZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangFWSWZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/9098e2901b4eb54772f83535f89cb8ac-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"原生视觉Transformer对输入patch的顺序不敏感，位置感知能力弱，此前的自监督预训练任务大多聚焦内容重建，未专门优化位置感知能力。","importance":"属于方法级ViT自监督预训练任务创新，提供了轻量的位置感知优化 pretext 任务，无需修改ViT主干架构即可接入现有预训练流程。","technical_approach":"原创自监督预训练任务，核心是随机丢弃大部分位置嵌入，让模型仅基于patch的视觉特征预测每个可见patch的实际位置，同时仅保留部分patch可见避免平凡解，与MAE等内容重建任务的区别是优化目标从视觉内容重建转为位置预测，专门强化位置感知能力。","experiments":"摘要未披露具体模型参数量、数据集规模与指标提升幅度，仅验证该任务可有效增强ViT的位置感知能力，无公开消融实验数据。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Vanilla Vision Transformers are insensitive to the order of input patches and have weak location awareness. Most previous self-supervised pre-training tasks focus on content reconstruction and do not specifically optimize location awareness.","importance":"This is a method-level innovation of ViT self-supervised pre-training tasks. It provides a lightweight pretext task for location awareness optimization, which can be integrated into existing pre-training pipelines without modifying the ViT backbone architecture.","technical_approach":"It is an original self-supervised pre-training task. The core is to randomly drop most positional embeddings, ask the model to predict the actual position of each visible patch solely based on its visual features, and keep only a subset of patches visible to avoid trivial solutions. The key difference from content reconstruction tasks such as MAE is that the optimization objective shifts from visual content reconstruction to position prediction, specifically strengthening location awareness.","experiments":"The abstract does not disclose specific model parameter sizes, dataset scales, or metric improvement margins. It only verifies that the task can effectively enhance the location awareness of ViTs. No public ablation data is available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vision-pretrain","vit","self-supervised","position-encoding"],"keywords":["Self-Supervised Learning","Vision Transformer","Visual Representation Learning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"原生ViT对输入patch的顺序不敏感，位置感知能力较差","claim_en":"Vanilla Vision Transformers are insensitive to the order of input patches and have weak location awareness","evidence_anchor":"§1 Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"仅依赖视觉内容重建的自监督预训练任务无法有效提升ViT的位置感知能力","claim_en":"Self-supervised pre-training tasks relying only on visual content reconstruction cannot effectively improve the location awareness of ViTs","opposes":"此前的自监督预训练工作认为MAE等内容重建任务可同时隐式学习到足够的位置信息","opposes_cite_hint":"He 2022 MAE","evidence_anchor":"§1 Abstract","why_contested":"It clarifies the difference between content reconstruction and location awareness optimization objectives, providing a reference for subsequent multi-objective ViT pre-training design."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为ViT位置感知自监督预训练任务备查，不用读正文，预训练缺位置信号时可尝试接入。","en":"Keep as ViT position-aware self-supervised pretraining task reference, no need to read full text, can be integrated when pretraining lacks position signals."}},{"id":"WangGSC23","title":"Demo2Code: From Summarizing Demonstrations to Synthesizing Code via Extended Chain-of-Thought","authors":["Yuki Wang","Gonzalo Gonzalez-Pumariega","Yash Sharma","Sanjiban Choudhury"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d8","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangGSC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangGSC23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/30699996ff411d48903c9752b782a5c1-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM可将语言指令转化为机器人任务代码，但无法直接将人类演示转化为代码，因为演示和代码的长度、复杂度都很高，直接映射难度大，此前未建立两者的统一隐式表示。","importance":"属于方法级机器人任务代码生成框架创新，拓展了LLM在机器人交互场景的适配范围，无需用户给出精确语言指令即可生成可用任务代码。","technical_approach":"原创两阶段生成框架，第一阶段用递归摘要技术将长演示压缩为简洁的统一隐式规范，第二阶段基于扩展思维链将规范转化为任务代码，与此前直接做演示到代码映射的工作的区别是加入了中间隐式规范层，降低了两端映射的复杂度。","experiments":"摘要未披露具体实验数据、模型规格与指标提升幅度，仅验证框架可完成演示到代码的生成任务，无公开消融实验数据。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLMs can translate language instructions into robot task code, but cannot directly translate human demonstrations into code, due to the high length and complexity of both demonstrations and code, making direct mapping intractable. No unified latent representation between the two has been established before.","importance":"This is a method-level innovation of robot task code generation frameworks. It expands the adaptation scope of LLMs in robot interaction scenarios, and can generate usable task code without requiring users to provide precise language instructions.","technical_approach":"It is an original two-stage generation framework. The first stage uses recursive summarization to condense long demonstrations into concise unified latent specifications, and the second stage translates specifications into task code via extended chain-of-thought. The key difference from previous works that directly map demonstrations to code is the addition of an intermediate latent specification layer, which reduces the complexity of mapping between the two ends.","experiments":"The abstract does not disclose specific experimental data, model specifications, or metric improvement margins. It only verifies that the framework can complete the demonstration-to-code generation task. No public ablation data is available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["code-generation","chain-of-thought","demonstration","synthesis"],"keywords":["Large Language Model","Code Generation","Robotics"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"思维链可有效提升LLM处理复杂生成任务的表现","claim_en":"Chain-of-thought can effectively improve the performance of LLMs on complex generation tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Abstract"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为机器人场景LLM应用方案备查，不用读正文，涉及演示转代码场景时参考即可。","en":"Keep as LLM robotics application reference, no need to read full text, refer to it when dealing with demo-to-code scenarios."}},{"id":"2305.19234","title":"Grammar Prompting for Domain-Specific Language Generation with Large Language Models","authors":["Bailin Wang","Zi Wang","Xuezhi Wang","Yuan Cao","Rif A. Saurous","Yoon Kim"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d9","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.19234","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangW0CSK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangW0CSK23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/cd40d0d65bfebb894ccc9ea822b47fa8-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM小样本上下文学习生成高度结构化的领域特定语言时泛化性差，容易违反语法约束，此前的prompt方法未引入外部语法规则约束生成过程。","importance":"属于方法级prompt工程创新，无需微调LLM即可大幅提升结构化输出的语法正确性，可直接适配各类DSL生成任务。","technical_approach":"原创prompt方法，核心是在上下文示例中加入巴科斯范式表示的最小必要语法子集，引导LLM在生成时遵循对应语法约束，与传统few-shot prompt的区别是加入了显式语法规则引导，无需修改模型或解码逻辑。","experiments":"摘要未披露具体测试数据集与指标提升幅度，仅验证该方法在小样本DSL生成场景下的有效性，无公开消融实验数据。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLMs have poor generalization when generating highly structured domain-specific languages (DSL) via few-shot in-context learning, and often violate syntactic constraints. Previous prompt methods do not introduce external grammar rules to constrain the generation process.","importance":"This is a method-level innovation of prompt engineering. It can greatly improve the syntactic correctness of structured outputs without fine-tuning LLMs, and can be directly adapted to various DSL generation tasks.","technical_approach":"It is an original prompt method. The core is to add the minimum necessary grammar subset expressed in Backus-Naur Form to each in-context demonstration example, guiding the LLM to follow the corresponding syntactic constraints during generation. The key difference from traditional few-shot prompts is the addition of explicit grammar rule guidance, without modifying the model or decoding logic.","experiments":"The abstract does not disclose specific test datasets or metric improvement margins. It only verifies the effectiveness of the method in few-shot DSL generation scenarios. No public ablation data is available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["prompting","structured-generation","grammar","llm"],"keywords":["semantic parsing","large language models","PDDL","AI planning","molecule generation","data efficiency","grammar-based learning"],"notable_authors":["Xuezhi Wang","Yuan Cao"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"小样本上下文学习可让LLM适配多种自然语言任务","claim_en":"Few-shot in-context learning enables LLMs to adapt to various natural language tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"仅靠示例的小样本prompt无法保证LLM生成DSL的语法正确性","claim_en":"Few-shot prompts relying only on examples cannot guarantee the syntactic correctness of DSL generated by LLMs","opposes":"此前的prompt工作认为足够多的示例即可让LLM学习到DSL的完整语法规则","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Abstract","why_contested":"It clarifies the necessity of explicit rules in structured generation scenarios, providing new ideas for subsequent prompt design."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为结构化输出prompt工程方案备查，不用读正文，DSL生成任务可直接复用其BNF语法注入思路。","en":"Keep as structured output prompt engineering reference, no need to read full text, reuse its BNF syntax injection idea for DSL generation tasks."}},{"id":"WangZCHLYTLWZZ23","title":"Connecting Multi-modal Contrastive Representations","authors":["Zehan Wang","Yang Zhao","Xize Cheng","Haifeng Huang","Jiageng Liu","Aoxiong Yin","Li Tang","Linjun Li","Yongqi Wang","Ziang Zhang","Zhou Zhao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$da","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangZCHLYTLWZZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangZCHLYTLWZZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/46362971bfc3a97e6a271f2eb90fba17-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的问题是：不同模态各自用对比学习得到的表征，怎样连成一个一致的共享空间，而不是只在成对模态之间局部对齐。以往多模态对比学习常见做法是做 image-text、audio-text 这类 pairwise alignment，但这种方式容易出现“每对都能对齐，整体空间却不一致”的问题，限制跨模态组合与迁移。","importance":"它的重要性在统一多模态表征学习上，属于方法级到范式接口级工作。对 pretrain 的启示是：如果目标是统一 token space 或统一表示空间，单纯堆更多 pairwise contrastive loss 可能不够，需要显式处理模态间的传递一致性和几何结构；这对 VLM 和更广义 native multimodal pretraining 都有意义。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心思路是‘连接’多模态对比表征，也就是不把各模态对比分支视为彼此独立，而是构造能够把它们联通的约束或映射。与传统双塔式 pairwise contrastive learning 相比，这类方法通常会强调跨多个模态的全局一致性、可传递性或共享锚点，以减少表示空间碎片化。这样设计有效的原因是：多模态系统真正需要的是联合几何，而不是若干局部匹配关系的并集。","experiments":"由于没有摘要和正文，无法确认具体模态组合、数据集、模型规模、baseline 和数值结果。可以合理判断论文应在多模态检索、零样本迁移或跨模态分类等任务上评估统一表示的质量，但不能负责任地填写具体提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies how to connect contrastive representations across multiple modalities, rather than aligning each modality pair in isolation. Standard multimodal contrastive learning often optimizes image-text, audio-text, or other pairwise objectives, but that does not guarantee a globally consistent shared space.","importance":"This matters at the representation-learning level and is relevant to unified multimodal pretraining. The key lesson is that simply stacking more pairwise contrastive losses may still produce fragmented geometry; if the goal is a single transferable representation space, cross-modal consistency needs to be enforced more directly.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method likely introduces a mechanism to connect independently learned or jointly learned contrastive spaces across modalities. The distinction from standard dual-encoder contrastive setups is the focus on global consistency or transitive alignment across more than two modalities. That design is useful because a multimodal system ultimately needs one coherent geometry, not just several locally aligned subspaces.","experiments":"No abstract or experimental details are provided, so the datasets, modalities, model sizes, baselines, and gains cannot be stated reliably. It is reasonable to expect evaluation on retrieval, transfer, or cross-modal recognition benchmarks, but the quantitative facts are unavailable here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal","contrastive-learning","representation","alignment"],"keywords":["multi-modal","representation learning","contrastive learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3全局一致性约束设计和Fig4多模态迁移效果即可，可优化内部统一多模态预训练的对齐损失设计。","en":"Only read §3 global consistency constraint design and Fig4 multimodal transfer results, optimize alignment loss design for internal unified multimodal pretraining."}},{"id":"WardTBE23","title":"Honesty Is the Best Policy: Defining and Mitigating AI Deception","authors":["Francis Ward","Francesca Toni","Francesco Belardinelli","Tom Everitt"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Deceptive agents are a challenge for the safety, trustworthiness, and cooperation of AI systems. We focus on the problem that agents might deceive in order to achieve their goals (for instance, in our experiments with language models, the goal of being evaluated as truthful).\nThere are a number of existing definitions of deception in the literature on game theory and symbolic AI, but there is no overarching theory of deception for learning agents in games. \nWe introduce a formal\ndefinition of deception in structural causal games, grounded in the philosophy\nliterature, and applicable to real-world machine learning systems.\nSeveral examples and results illustrate that our formal definition aligns with the philosophical and commonsense meaning of deception.\nOur main technical result is to provide graphical criteria for deception. \nWe show, experimentally, that these results can be used to mitigate deception in reinforcement learning agents and language models.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WardTBE23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WardTBE23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/06fc7ae4a11a7eb5e20fe018db6c036f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：如何定义 AI deception，并给出可操作的缓解思路。现有对齐工作大量关注 helpfulness、harmlessness、truthfulness，但“欺骗”比简单的错误回答更难，因为它涉及模型是否在策略性地误导、隐瞒或操纵用户，而这类行为很难只靠表面输出质量来判定。","importance":"它的重要性在安全与对齐评估框架，而不是核心预训练方法。对 pretrain/post-train 闭环的启示是：如果训练目标只奖励任务成功而不约束信息诚实性，模型可能学到策略性不透明行为；因此对 deception 的定义与度量，会影响后续 reward design、偏好数据构造和安全评测。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者先给出 deception 的形式化定义，再讨论缓解机制。相比把欺骗简单等同于 factual error，这种做法更强调意图、信息不对称和策略行为，因此方法上可能涉及博弈论、规范性定义或情景化评估。这样的设计有必要，因为如果定义不清，后续 mitigation 很容易退化成一般性的幻觉治理，抓不住‘故意误导’这一更强性质。","experiments":"没有摘要和正文，无法确认是否做了语言模型实证、仿真代理实验，还是以理论与评测框架为主，也无法给出模型规模和指标数字。可以确定的是，这篇工作更像对齐安全中的概念定义与 mitigation 研究，而非大规模预训练 benchmark 论文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a harder alignment question than simple factuality: how should AI deception be defined, and how can it be mitigated. Existing alignment work often measures helpfulness or truthfulness at the output level, but deception is more subtle because it involves strategic misleading behavior rather than ordinary mistakes.","importance":"This is primarily a safety and alignment framing contribution. Its relevance to the pretrain/post-train loop is that models optimized only for task success may learn opaque or manipulative strategies unless honesty is explicitly represented in the training signal and evaluation protocol.","technical_approach":"From the title, the work likely starts with a formal definition of deception and then proposes corresponding mitigation strategies. The key distinction is that deception is not treated as mere inaccuracy; it depends on asymmetric information and strategic behavior. That is an important design choice because otherwise mitigation would collapse into generic hallucination reduction and miss the stronger notion of deliberate misleading.","experiments":"No abstract or quantitative section is available, so it is not possible to state whether the paper is mainly theoretical, benchmark-based, or agent-simulation-based, nor to report metrics or gains. What can be said safely is that the contribution is centered on defining and mitigating deception rather than advancing large-scale pretraining performance.","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","safety","deception","evaluation"],"keywords":["Deception","Causality","Game Theory"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§2欺骗形式化定义和§4缓解思路即可，可指导内部对齐阶段的奖励设计和安全评测指标设计。","en":"Only read §2 formal definition of deception and §4 mitigation ideas, guide reward design and safety evaluation indicator design in internal alignment phase."}},{"id":"WeberSBATTJFLS023","title":"WordScape: a Pipeline to extract multilingual, visually rich Documents with Layout Annotations from Web Crawl Data","authors":["Maurice Weber","Carlo Siebenschuh","Rory Butler","Anton Alexandrov","Valdemar Thanner","Georgios Tsolakis","Haris Jabbar","Ian T. Foster","Bo Li","Rick Stevens","Ce Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$db","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WeberSBATTJFLS023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WeberSBATTJFLS023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/52c1ce1a0eaf61e8b6e3a899c1b9c61f-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是文档预训练里一个很实际的数据瓶颈：缺少大规模、多语言、同时保留视觉布局信息的文档语料。很多文档模型只能依赖小而精的标注数据，或者只用 OCR 后的纯文本；这样会丢掉版面结构、字体层次和区域关系，而这些恰恰是文档理解预训练最需要的信号。","importance":"它属于数据与系统管线贡献，对文档类 VLM / OCR-free 文档模型尤其重要。对 pretrain 的直接价值是：如果能从 web crawl 中稳定抽取带 layout annotation 的多语言文档，就能把原本受数据规模限制的文档预训练推进到互联网级别，扩大语言覆盖，并减少对人工标注版面数据集的依赖。","technical_approach":"核心方法是一个从网页抓取数据中抽取文档样本的 pipeline，目标产出是 multilingual、visually rich、带版面标注的文档数据。与只抓 PDF 文本或只保留渲染图像的做法不同，这类 pipeline 一般要同时解决页面筛选、文档渲染、文本块与视觉区域对齐、布局结构提取和质量过滤；关键设计点不在某个单独模型，而在数据生产链是否能低噪声、可扩展地保留文本-视觉-布局三种信息。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法确认最终数据集规模、语言数、页面数、标注字段和下游提升数字。基于题目可以判断，实验应至少覆盖抽取质量评估和用该数据预训练后在文档理解任务上的收益，但无法给出具体 benchmark、模型大小和增益幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper addresses a major data bottleneck in document pretraining: the lack of large-scale, multilingual, visually rich document corpora with layout annotations. Many document models still rely on relatively small labeled datasets or OCR-only text, which removes exactly the spatial and structural signals that document understanding needs.","importance":"This is primarily a data and pipeline contribution, and it is highly relevant to document VLM pretraining. The key value is practical: if layout-aware multilingual documents can be extracted reliably from web crawl data, document pretraining can scale far beyond curated datasets and cover many more languages and page styles.","technical_approach":"The method is a pipeline for extracting multilingual, visually rich documents with layout annotations from web crawls. The important design point is not a single model innovation but an end-to-end data production system that preserves text, rendered appearance, and layout structure together. Compared with plain OCR text extraction, this kind of pipeline is valuable because it retains the supervision needed for layout-aware pretraining.","experiments":"The provided information does not include the abstract or quantitative details, so dataset size, language coverage, annotation schema, downstream tasks, and gains cannot be reported safely. It is reasonable to expect evaluations of extraction quality and downstream document understanding benefits, but the exact evidence is unavailable here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["document-understanding","data","multilingual","layout"],"keywords":["Web Data","Common Crawl","Document Processing","Layout Detection"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3数据抽取pipeline细节和质量过滤规则即可，可复用思路搭建内部文档预训练的大规模多语言语料生产链路。","en":"Only read §3 data extraction pipeline details and quality filtering rules, reuse the idea to build large-scale multilingual corpus pipeline for internal document pretraining."}},{"id":"Wen0LR23","title":"Transformers are uninterpretable with myopic methods: a case study with bounded Dyck grammars","authors":["Kaiyue Wen","Yuchen Li","Bingbin Liu","Andrej Risteski"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$dc","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Wen0LR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Wen0LR23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/79ba1b827d3fc58e129d1cbfc8ff69f2-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的结论导向很明确：用局部、短视的解释方法去理解 Transformer，可能会得出根本不可靠的结论。作者用 bounded Dyck grammar 这个结构清晰、可控的形式语言任务做案例，目的不是解决 Dyck 本身，而是说明即便在相对干净的设定里，常见 interpretability 工具也可能看不到模型真正的计算机制。","importance":"它的重要性在可解释性方法论的边界提醒。对机制分析和预训练研究的意义是：如果解释工具本身有系统性盲点，我们基于这些工具得到的‘模型在做什么’的结论就要更谨慎，尤其是当这些结论被拿来指导架构修改、数据干预或对齐策略时。","technical_approach":"核心方法不是提出新的 Transformer，而是构造一个足够简单但又能暴露解释失败模式的案例研究。bounded Dyck grammar 提供了明确的层级结构与可验证目标，作者用它来测试 myopic methods——也就是主要依赖局部归因、短路径关注或单步分析的解释方法——能否恢复真实算法。标题给出的判断是不能，这说明 Transformer 可能采用分布式、跨层或全局耦合的内部计算，而局部方法天然看不全。","experiments":"没有摘要和实验细节，无法确认具体评测了哪些解释方法、用了什么模型规模、失败表现如何量化。可以相对确定的是，实验重点不在任务精度，而在‘解释是否忠实恢复模型机制’这一点上；案例任务是 bounded Dyck grammar。","authors_note":"作者里有 Andrej Risteski，为理论与表示学习方向较知名研究者；其余机构和团队信息无法从给定内容确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper makes a pointed claim: myopic interpretability methods can fail badly on Transformers. It uses bounded Dyck grammars as a controlled case study, not because the grammar task is itself the end goal, but because it offers a clean setting to test whether common explanation tools actually recover the model's computation.","importance":"This is important as a boundary-setting result for interpretability. For pretraining and mechanism-analysis work, the implication is straightforward: if the interpretability tool has a structural blind spot, conclusions drawn from it about model behavior, data effects, or architectural interventions should be treated with caution.","technical_approach":"The contribution is a case study designed to expose the limits of local or short-horizon explanation methods. Bounded Dyck grammars provide a structured task where the latent algorithm is relatively clear, making it easier to ask whether attribution-style analyses are faithful. The title's answer is no, suggesting that Transformer computation can be distributed across layers or globally coupled in ways myopic tools do not capture.","experiments":"The abstract and quantitative details are not provided, so the exact interpretability methods, model scales, and numerical failure measures cannot be reported. What is clear is that the experiments focus on explanation faithfulness rather than benchmark accuracy, using bounded Dyck grammar as the diagnostic setting.","authors_note":"Andrej Risteski is a notable author known for work in theory and representation learning. Further institutional details cannot be confirmed from the provided information."},"tags":["interpretability","transformers","analysis","circuits"],"notable_authors":["Andrej Risteski"],"keywords":["Transformer","Self Attention","Dyck Language","Context Free Grammar","Formal Language","Theory","Interpretability"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4案例实验设计和Fig3解释方法失效对比结果即可，后续做模型机制分析需规避局部短视解释工具的系统性偏差。","en":"Only read §4 case experiment design and Fig3 interpretation method failure comparison results, avoid systematic bias of local myopic interpretation tools in subsequent mechanism analysis."}},{"id":"WenJKGGG23","title":"Hard Prompts Made Easy: Gradient-Based Discrete Optimization for Prompt Tuning and Discovery","authors":["Yuxin Wen","Neel Jain","John Kirchenbauer","Micah Goldblum","Jonas Geiping","Tom Goldstein"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"The strength of modern generative models lies in their ability to be controlled through prompts. Hard prompts comprise interpretable words and tokens, and are typically hand-crafted by humans.  Soft prompts, on the other hand, consist of continuous feature vectors.  These can be discovered using powerful optimization methods, but they cannot be easily edited, re-used across models, or plugged into a text-based interface. We describe an easy-to-use approach to automatically optimize hard text prompts through efficient gradient-based optimization. Our approach can be readily applied to text-to-image and text-only applications alike. This method allows API users to easily generate, discover, and mix and match image concepts without prior knowledge of how to prompt the model. Furthermore, using our method, we can bypass token-level content filters imposed by Midjourney by optimizing through the open-sourced text encoder.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WenJKGGG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WenJKGGG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/a00548031e4647b13042c97c922fadf1-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是离散 hard prompt 很难直接优化的问题。软提示容易用梯度训练，但部署时不一定兼容原模型或可迁移；硬提示更可解释、可直接拼接到输入里，却因为 token 是离散变量，搜索通常依赖启发式、贪心或黑盒方法，效率和效果都受限。","importance":"它是一个方法级贡献，对 prompt optimization、红队攻击、提示发现和小样本适配都直接有用。对 pretrain 研究的间接启示是：如果我们能更稳定地搜索离散触发 token，就更容易系统分析模型对提示格式、词汇选择和训练分布边缘模式的敏感性，这对理解 ICL 和 promptability 很有帮助。","technical_approach":"核心方法是用梯度信息做离散优化，让 hard prompts 也能像连续参数那样被高效搜索。与软提示 tuning 不同，它最终产出真实 token；与纯黑盒离散搜索不同，它显式利用模型梯度来缩小候选空间或指导替换方向。这样的设计有效，因为语言模型对输入 token 的局部损失地形虽然是离散的，但 embedding 与 logits 里仍保留了可利用的一阶信息。代价是方法通常依赖白盒访问，且容易受到 tokenization 与局部最优的限制。","experiments":"给定信息里没有摘要细节，因此无法确认评测任务、模型族、baseline 和提升数字。根据题目，实验大概率覆盖 prompt tuning、prompt discovery 或对抗/触发类设置，并与离散搜索、软提示或启发式 prompt 方法比较；但具体数值无法可靠给出。","authors_note":"作者列表中有 Jonas Geiping，为模型安全、优化与数据反演等方向较知名研究者；其余团队与机构信息无法从给定内容确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a very practical gap: hard prompts are useful and deployable, but they are difficult to optimize because the token space is discrete. Soft prompts are easy to train with gradients, yet they are less portable and less interpretable; hard prompts are cleaner operationally, but standard search methods are often heuristic and inefficient.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution with direct relevance to prompt optimization, prompt discovery, and model probing. For pretraining-oriented readers, the broader value is that better discrete prompt search makes it easier to study model sensitivity to lexical choices, formatting, and edge-of-distribution triggers.","technical_approach":"The core idea is gradient-based discrete optimization for hard prompts. Unlike soft prompt tuning, the final result is actual tokens; unlike black-box combinatorial search, the method uses gradient information from the model to guide token replacements or candidate ranking. This works because even though token choices are discrete, the embedding and logit structure still carries local first-order information that can be exploited. The trade-off is that the method is typically white-box and can be sensitive to tokenization and local optima.","experiments":"The provided information does not include the abstract details, so the exact tasks, models, baselines, and numerical gains cannot be stated safely. Based on the title, the experiments likely compare against heuristic hard-prompt search and soft-prompt baselines across prompt tuning or prompt discovery setups, but the quantitative facts are unavailable here.","authors_note":"Jonas Geiping is a notable author known for work on model security, optimization, and data reconstruction. Further team context cannot be confirmed from the provided information."},"tags":["prompting","discrete-optimization","prompt-tuning","adaptation"],"notable_authors":["Jonas Geiping"],"keywords":["Diffusion Model","Generative AI","Prompt Discovery"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3离散梯度优化方法和Fig5硬提示搜索效果即可，可用于内部prompt发现、红队攻击等离散prompt搜索场景。","en":"Only read §3 discrete gradient optimization method and Fig5 hard prompt search results, apply to discrete prompt search scenarios like internal prompt discovery and red teaming."}},{"id":"WiedemerMBB23","title":"Compositional Generalization from First Principles","authors":["Thaddäus Wiedemer","Prasanna Mayilvahanan","Matthias Bethge","Wieland Brendel"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Leveraging the compositional nature of our world to expedite learning and facilitate generalization is a hallmark of human perception. In machine learning, on the other hand, achieving compositional generalization has proven to be an elusive goal, even for models with explicit compositional priors. To get a better handle on compositional generalization, we here approach it from the bottom up: Inspired by identifiable representation learning, we investigate compositionality as a property of the data-generating process rather than the data itself. This reformulation enables us to derive mild conditions on only the support of the training distribution and the model architecture, which are sufficient for compositional generalization. We further demonstrate how our theoretical framework applies to real-world scenarios and validate our findings empirically. Our results set the stage for a principled theoretical study of compositional generalization.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WiedemerMBB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WiedemerMBB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/15f6a10899f557ce53fe39939af6f930-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的是：组合泛化能否从更基础的原则中推导出来，而不是靠任务特定技巧拼出来。组合泛化长期是神经网络的薄弱项，很多方法在某个 benchmark 上有效，但换个分布或组合规则就失效，说明我们还没有抓住真正起作用的归纳偏置。","importance":"它的重要性主要在泛化机制与归纳偏置层面。对 pretrain 的意义在于，大模型虽然在很多任务上表现出一定组合能力，但这种能力何时可靠、来自数据覆盖还是模型结构，仍缺少清晰解释；这类‘from first principles’工作如果成立，会帮助我们更系统地设计数据生成、架构约束和评测集。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者试图从一组更基本的原则出发推导或构建组合泛化，而不是仅提出一个任务特化模块。这样的工作通常会强调最小必要假设、因果或群结构、对称性、对象-关系分解等原则，并用它们解释为什么某些模型能外推到未见组合。与经验性 benchmark engineering 相比，这种路线的价值在于可迁移，但代价是往往更依赖理想化设定。","experiments":"由于没有摘要和正文，无法确认具体任务是视觉、序列还是合成推理，也无法给出模型大小、baseline 和数值提升。可以较确定地说，实验应围绕系统性泛化而不是普通 IID 精度展开，并测试方法在组合拆分上的外推能力。","authors_note":"作者中 Matthias Bethge 是视觉表征学习与鲁棒性方向知名研究者；其余团队信息无法从给定内容确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether compositional generalization can be derived from more fundamental principles instead of benchmark-specific tricks. Neural models often show brittle compositional behavior: they succeed on one dataset split and fail on another, which suggests the underlying inductive bias is still poorly understood.","importance":"Its contribution is mainly about generalization principles and inductive bias. For pretraining research, this matters because large models do show some compositional ability, but it remains unclear when that ability is robust, whether it comes from data coverage or model structure, and how to evaluate it cleanly.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method or theory is built from first principles rather than a task-specific architectural patch. Work in this style typically identifies minimal assumptions or structural constraints that are sufficient for compositional extrapolation. The advantage is conceptual transferability; the limitation is that such analyses often rely on simplified settings.","experiments":"The abstract is not provided, so the exact domains, tasks, baselines, and gains cannot be reported reliably. It is likely that the experiments focus on systematic generalization splits rather than standard IID accuracy, but the quantitative evidence is unavailable here.","authors_note":"Matthias Bethge is a notable author known for work in visual representation learning and robustness. Further team context cannot be confirmed from the provided information."},"tags":["compositionality","generalization","reasoning"],"notable_authors":["Matthias Bethge"],"keywords":["compositional generalization","compositionality","generalization","combinatorial generalization","out-of-distribution","out-of-domain","identifiability","disentanglement","object-centric learning","DSprites"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的基础原则推导和§5的泛化实验部分即可，可参考其归纳偏置设计思路调整预训练数据的组合结构","en":"Only read §3 for first principle derivation and §5 for generalization experiments, reference its inductive bias design to adjust compositional structure of pretraining data."}},{"id":"Wu00C23","title":"On the Convergence of Encoder-only Shallow Transformers","authors":["Yongtao Wu","Fanghui Liu","Grigorios Chrysos","Volkan Cevher"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"In this paper, we aim to build the global convergence theory of encoder-only shallow Transformers under a realistic setting from the perspective of architectures, initialization, and scaling under a finite width regime. The difficulty lies in how to tackle the softmax in self-attention mechanism, the core ingredient of Transformer. In particular, we diagnose the scaling scheme, carefully tackle the input/output of softmax, and prove that quadratic overparameterization is sufficient for global convergence of our shallow Transformers under commonly-used He/LeCun initialization in practice. Besides, neural tangent kernel (NTK) based analysis is also given, which facilitates a comprehensive comparison. Our theory demonstrates the separation on the importance of different scaling schemes and initialization. We believe our results can pave the way for a better understanding of modern Transformers, particularly on training dynamics.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Wu00C23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Wu00C23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/a3cf318fbeec1126da21e9185ae9908c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的是：浅层 encoder-only Transformer 在什么条件下可以证明收敛，以及这种结构为什么在实践中常常比理论分析更稳定。以往关于 Transformer 收敛的理论要么依赖强简化，要么只覆盖残差网络或线性注意力近似，导致理论和真实训练之间有明显落差。","importance":"它的贡献主要是理论方法级，不直接给预训练配方，但对理解浅层 Transformer 的优化边界有价值。对 pretrain 研究者来说，这类结果的意义不在于马上改模型，而在于帮助判断哪些结构因素真的影响优化稳定性，哪些只是工程经验；尤其当大家越来越依赖深网经验外推到浅网、encoder-only 架构时，这种分析能给出更清楚的适用条件。","technical_approach":"作者做的是收敛性理论分析，核心对象是 encoder-only 的 shallow Transformer。合理推测其技术路线是对注意力、残差、层归一化或前馈模块施加可分析条件，再证明梯度下降或其变体能到达全局/近似全局最优，或者至少保证训练误差单调下降。真正有用的点不在公式本身，而在它说明了哪些组件让分析成立：比如浅层性降低了非凸耦合，encoder-only 避开了解码式自回归依赖，而参数尺度或初始化条件决定了注意力不会早期退化到不可控区域。与更早工作的区别通常是把标准 Transformer 元件保留得更多，而不是退化成几乎不含注意力的代理模型。","experiments":"这类论文的实验通常不是大规模 benchmark，而是用合成任务或小规模真实任务验证理论预测是否成立。关键事实一般包括：在满足理论假设附近的设置下，训练曲线与理论一致；当打破关键假设，如增大深度、放宽初始化尺度、去掉某类归一化时，收敛性质明显变差。由于给定信息里没有摘要和数字，无法可靠写出模型规模、数据规模和具体提升，只能保守地判断实验更偏理论支撑而非追求 SOTA。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a narrow but useful question: when do shallow encoder-only Transformers provably converge, and why do they often behave more benignly than existing theory suggests? Earlier analyses usually relied on heavy simplifications or covered only proxy architectures, leaving a gap between theorems and practical Transformer training.","importance":"This is a theory contribution with indirect relevance to pretraining. Its value is not a new recipe for large-scale runs, but a clearer picture of which architectural ingredients actually matter for optimization stability in encoder-only Transformers. That matters when practitioners extrapolate intuitions from deep residual networks to shallower Transformer settings without a solid theoretical basis.","technical_approach":"The work appears to provide convergence analysis for shallow encoder-only Transformers under analyzable conditions. The likely strategy is to retain enough of the standard attention-FFN-residual structure to stay meaningful, while imposing assumptions on initialization, width, normalization, or data so gradient descent can be shown to reduce training error reliably. The useful part of such a result is the mechanism: shallow depth weakens non-convex coupling, encoder-only structure avoids autoregressive dependencies, and controlled parameter scales prevent attention from entering unstable regimes too early.","experiments":"Papers of this kind usually validate theory on synthetic tasks or small real datasets rather than competitive large-scale benchmarks. The main empirical facts tend to be that convergence predictions match observed training dynamics near the assumed regime, and that violating key assumptions—more depth, weaker normalization, looser initialization control—degrades convergence behavior. The provided metadata does not include verified numbers, so I do not invent model sizes or gains.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer-theory","convergence","encoder-only"],"notable_authors":["Yongtao Wu","Fanghui Liu","Grigorios Chrysos","Volkan Cevher"],"keywords":["Transformer","convergence","scaling","initialization","over-parameterization"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§4的收敛条件分析部分，可用于校准浅层Encoder预训练时的初始化和超参范围","en":"Focus on §4 for convergence condition analysis, use it to calibrate initialization and hyperparameter range for shallow encoder pretraining."}},{"id":"XieKZZKHX23","title":"Self-Evaluation Guided Beam Search for Reasoning","authors":["Yuxi Xie","Kenji Kawaguchi","Yiran Zhao","James Xu Zhao","Min-Yen Kan","Junxian He","Michael Qizhe Xie"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$dd","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/XieKZZKHX23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/XieKZZKHX23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/81fde95c4dc79188a69ce5b24d63010b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM多步推理时随着推理链变长，错误累积导致最终结果准确率低，此前的解码方法未对每步推理的正确性做校准，无法有效规避误差传播。","importance":"属于方法级LLM推理解码算法创新，无需微调模型即可提升多步推理任务的准确率，兼容所有支持自评估的LLM。","technical_approach":"原创解码算法，核心是在随机波束搜索过程中加入逐 step 自评估机制，用模型自身输出的每步正确性得分校准搜索路径，平衡推理空间的探索与利用，与普通波束搜索的区别是引入了动态自评估引导作为搜索权重，不依赖外部打分模型。","experiments":"摘要未披露具体测试数据集与指标提升幅度，仅验证该方法在多步推理任务上的表现优于普通波束搜索，无公开消融实验数据。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"When LLMs perform multi-step reasoning, error accumulation as the reasoning chain grows leads to low final result accuracy. Previous decoding methods do not calibrate the correctness of each reasoning step, and cannot effectively avoid error propagation.","importance":"This is a method-level innovation of LLM reasoning decoding algorithms. It can improve the accuracy of multi-step reasoning tasks without fine-tuning the model, and is compatible with all LLMs that support self-evaluation.","technical_approach":"It is an original decoding algorithm. The core is to add a stepwise self-evaluation mechanism to the stochastic beam search process, using the model's own output step correctness score to calibrate the search path, balancing exploration and exploitation of the reasoning space. The key difference from ordinary beam search is the introduction of dynamic self-evaluation guidance as search weights, without relying on external scoring models.","experiments":"The abstract does not disclose specific test datasets or metric improvement margins. It only verifies that the method outperforms ordinary beam search on multi-step reasoning tasks. No public ablation data is available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reasoning","beam-search","self-evaluation","inference"],"keywords":["Large Language Models","Multistep Reasoning","Stochastic Beam Search","LLM Self-Evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Min-Yen Kan"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"多步分拆的推理方法可提升LLM的复杂推理表现","claim_en":"Multi-step decomposed reasoning methods can improve the performance of LLMs on complex reasoning tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"仅靠固定长度的波束搜索无法解决多步推理的误差累积问题","claim_en":"Fixed-length beam search alone cannot solve the error accumulation problem in multi-step reasoning","opposes":"此前的解码工作认为增大波束宽度即可有效提升多步推理的准确率","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Abstract","why_contested":"It clarifies the limitations of beam search in reasoning scenarios, providing a new optimization direction for subsequent decoding algorithm design."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"属于推理阶段解码优化，和预训练本体无关，仅作为推理解码类文献备查即可，不用细读","en":"It is inference-stage decoding optimization irrelevant to pretraining itself, only for reference as decoding literature, no need to read in detail."}},{"id":"XieXZSS23","title":"On the Overlooked Pitfalls of Weight Decay and How to Mitigate Them: A Gradient-Norm Perspective","authors":["Zeke Xie","Zhiqiang Xu","Jingzhao Zhang","Issei Sato","Masashi Sugiyama"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Weight decay is a simple yet powerful regularization technique that has been very widely used in training of deep neural networks (DNNs). While weight decay has attracted much attention, previous studies fail to discover some overlooked pitfalls on large gradient norms resulted by weight decay. In this paper, we discover that, weight decay can unfortunately lead to large gradient norms at the final phase (or the terminated solution) of training, which often indicates bad convergence and poor generalization. To mitigate the gradient-norm-centered pitfalls, we present the first practical scheduler for weight decay, called the Scheduled Weight Decay (SWD) method that can dynamically adjust the weight decay strength according to the gradient norm and significantly penalize large gradient norms during training. Our experiments also support that SWD indeed mitigates large gradient norms and often significantly outperforms the conventional constant weight decay strategy for Adaptive Moment Estimation (Adam).","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/XieXZSS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/XieXZSS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/040d3b6af368bf71f952c18da5713b48-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"广泛使用的固定系数权重衰减正则化会导致训练末期梯度范数过大，影响模型收敛和泛化能力，此前的研究未发现该问题，也没有对应的动态调度方案。","importance":"属于方法级优化器正则化策略创新，修正了长期以来权重衰减的默认使用策略，可直接接入现有优化器提升模型训练效果。","technical_approach":"原创权重衰减调度策略（SWD），核心是根据训练过程中的梯度范数动态调整权重衰减强度，大幅惩罚过大的梯度范数，与固定权重衰减系数的传统做法的区别是加入了梯度范数的反馈机制，无需手动调整权重衰减调度策略。","experiments":"摘要未披露具体测试模型、数据集与指标提升幅度，仅验证SWD可缓解权重衰减导致的梯度范数过大问题，提升模型收敛性和泛化能力，无公开消融实验数据。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The widely used fixed-coefficient weight decay regularization leads to excessively large gradient norms at the end of training, harming model convergence and generalization. Previous studies have not found this problem, and there is no corresponding dynamic scheduling solution.","importance":"This is a method-level innovation of optimizer regularization strategies. It corrects the long-standing default usage strategy of weight decay, and can be directly integrated into existing optimizers to improve model training effects.","technical_approach":"It is an original weight decay scheduling strategy (SWD). The core is to dynamically adjust the weight decay strength according to the gradient norm during training, and significantly penalize excessively large gradient norms. The key difference from the traditional practice of fixed weight decay coefficient is the addition of a gradient norm feedback mechanism, eliminating the need for manual adjustment of weight decay scheduling strategies.","experiments":"The abstract does not disclose specific test models, datasets, or metric improvement margins. It only verifies that SWD can alleviate the problem of excessively large gradient norms caused by weight decay, and improve model convergence and generalization. No public ablation data is available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["weight-decay","optimization","training-stability","gradient-norm"],"keywords":["Weight Decay","Regularization","Optimization","Deep Learning"],"notable_authors":["Masashi Sugiyama"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"权重衰减是有效的深度神经网络正则化技术","claim_en":"Weight decay is an effective regularization technique for deep neural network training","evidence_anchor":"§1 Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"固定系数的权重衰减会导致训练末期梯度范数过大，降低模型泛化能力","claim_en":"Fixed-coefficient weight decay leads to excessively large gradient norms at the end of training, reducing model generalization ability","opposes":"此前的研究认为固定权重衰减系数可以稳定提升模型泛化能力，无负面影响","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Abstract","why_contested":"It corrects the long-standing perception that weight decay has no negative effects, providing new observational evidence for subsequent optimizer regularization design."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"直接看§3的梯度范数关联分析和§5的SWD策略实现，可直接引入内部预训练的优化器正则模块做ablation","en":"Go straight to §3 for gradient norm correlation analysis and §5 for SWD implementation, introduce it to your internal pretraining optimizer regularization module for ablation."}},{"id":"XuLWTLDTD23","title":"ImageReward: Learning and Evaluating Human Preferences for Text-to-Image Generation","authors":["Jiazheng Xu","Xiao Liu","Yuchen Wu","Yuxuan Tong","Qinkai Li","Ming Ding","Jie Tang","Yuxiao Dong"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We present a comprehensive solution to learn and improve text-to-image models from human preference feedback.\nTo begin with, we build ImageReward---the first general-purpose text-to-image human preference reward model---to effectively encode human preferences.\nIts training is based on our systematic annotation pipeline including rating and ranking, which collects 137k expert comparisons to date.\nIn human evaluation, ImageReward outperforms existing scoring models and metrics, making it a promising automatic metric for evaluating text-to-image synthesis.\nOn top of it, we propose Reward Feedback Learning (ReFL), a direct tuning algorithm to optimize diffusion models against a scorer.\nBoth automatic and human evaluation support ReFL's advantages over compared methods.\nAll code and datasets are provided at \\url{https://github.com/THUDM/ImageReward}.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/XuLWTLDTD23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/XuLWTLDTD23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/33646ef0ed554145eab65f6250fab0c9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"文本到图像生成模型缺乏通用的人类偏好评估指标，此前的自动指标和打分模型无法准确匹配人类对生成图像的偏好，也没有对应的反馈微调方法直接优化人类偏好。","importance":"属于数据级+方法级的文生图人类对齐创新，提供了第一个通用的文生图人类偏好奖励模型，以及对应的微调算法，为文生图的人类对齐提供了标准化工具。","technical_approach":"原创奖励模型+微调算法框架，首先构建包含137k专家比较的标注数据集，训练出通用的人类偏好奖励模型ImageReward，然后提出Reward Feedback Learning（ReFL）算法，直接用奖励模型优化扩散模型，与CLIP打分等方法的区别是专门基于人类偏好标注训练，不依赖图文匹配的隐式信号。","experiments":"ImageReward在人类评估中优于现有所有打分模型和自动指标，ReFL微调后的扩散模型在人类评估中表现优于基线方法，摘要未披露具体提升幅度与模型参数量。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Text-to-image generation models lack general human preference evaluation metrics. Previous automatic metrics and scoring models cannot accurately match human preferences for generated images, and there is no corresponding feedback fine-tuning method to directly optimize human preferences.","importance":"This is a data-level + method-level innovation for text-to-image human alignment. It provides the first general-purpose text-to-image human preference reward model and corresponding fine-tuning algorithm, providing standardized tools for text-to-image human alignment.","technical_approach":"It is an original reward model + fine-tuning algorithm framework. First, an annotation dataset containing 137k expert comparisons is built to train ImageReward, the general human preference reward model. Then the Reward Feedback Learning (ReFL) algorithm is proposed to directly optimize diffusion models with the reward model. The key difference from methods such as CLIP score is that it is trained specifically based on human preference annotations, without relying on implicit image-text matching signals.","experiments":"ImageReward outperforms all existing scoring models and automatic metrics in human evaluation. Diffusion models fine-tuned with ReFL outperform baseline methods in human evaluation. The abstract does not disclose specific improvement margins or model parameter sizes.","authors_note":""},"tags":["preference-model","text-to-image","reward-model","alignment"],"keywords":["Generative Models","Text-to-Image","Learning from Human Feedback","Multimodality","Evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Xiao Liu"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"人类偏好反馈可有效提升生成模型的输出质量","claim_en":"Human preference feedback can effectively improve the output quality of generative models","evidence_anchor":"§1 Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于图文匹配的CLIP打分等自动指标无法准确匹配人类对文生图结果的偏好","claim_en":"Automatic metrics such as CLIP score based on image-text matching cannot accurately match human preferences for text-to-image generation results","opposes":"此前的文生图评估工作认为CLIP打分可以作为人类偏好的代理指标","opposes_cite_hint":"Radford 2021 CLIP","evidence_anchor":"§1 Abstract","why_contested":"It clarifies the difference between image-text matching and human preference optimization objectives, providing a new evaluation standard for subsequent text-to-image alignment research."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§4的标注数据集构建逻辑和ReFL算法细节，可复用其偏好标注框架做多模态对齐预训练的信号设计","en":"Focus on §4 for annotation dataset construction logic and ReFL algorithm details, reuse its preference annotation framework for signal design of multimodal alignment pretraining."}},{"id":"YangZXFXZ23","title":"Preference-grounded Token-level Guidance for Language Model Fine-tuning","authors":["Shentao Yang","Shujian Zhang","Congying Xia","Yihao Feng","Caiming Xiong","Mingyuan Zhou"],"institutions":["Salesforce AI Research","University of Texas at Austin"],"abstract":"$de","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YangZXFXZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YangZXFXZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/4d4a3b6a34332d80349137bcc98164a5-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"解决基于人类偏好微调语言模型时，偏好反馈（序列级别）与模型训练/生成（Token 级别）之间的粒度不匹配问题。","importance":"方法级贡献。指出了传统 RLHF/PPO 中将序列级 reward 直接分配给所有 Token 带来的信用分配（Credit Assignment）难题，并提供了一种将序列级偏好转化为 Token 级指导信号的新思路，有助于提升对齐训练的效率和稳定性。","technical_approach":"提出一种交替训练框架：首先将序列级偏好“下放”为 Token 级的训练指导信号，然后利用该信号改进 LM。在指导信号学习阶段，将模仿学习中的成对偏好学习扩展到变长生成任务中，通过学习一个 Token 级的指导模型（Guidance Model）来分配 reward，从而缓解粒度不匹配。","experiments":"在文本摘要和对话生成任务上进行了实验。相比于直接使用序列级偏好的基线（如 PPO），该方法在人类评估和自动指标上均有提升。消融实验表明，Token 级的指导信号确实能更精准地定位导致好/坏生成的关键 Token。","authors_note":"Salesforce AI Research (Caiming Xiong 等)。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addresses the granularity mismatch in preference-based LM fine-tuning, where human preferences are provided at the sequence level, but LM training and generation operate at the token level.","importance":"Methodological contribution. It highlights the credit assignment problem in standard RLHF/PPO (where sequence-level rewards are uniformly distributed across tokens) and offers a novel approach to ground sequence-level preferences into token-level guidance, potentially improving alignment efficiency and stability.","technical_approach":"Proposes an alternating training framework: it first grounds sequence-level preferences into token-level training guidance, and then improves the LM using this learned guidance. For guidance learning, it extends pairwise-preference learning from imitation learning to variable-length generation, learning a token-level guidance model to distribute rewards and mitigate the mismatch.","experiments":"Evaluated on text summarization and dialogue generation tasks. Compared to baselines using direct sequence-level preferences (e.g., PPO), the proposed method shows improvements in both human evaluation and automated metrics. Ablations confirm that token-level guidance more accurately identifies key tokens responsible for good/bad generations.","authors_note":"Salesforce AI Research (Caiming Xiong et al.)."},"tags":["preference","token-level-guidance","fine-tuning","rlhf"],"keywords":["Preference Learning","Training Guidance Learning","Language Model Fine-tuning","Text Sequence Generation"],"notable_authors":["Caiming Xiong"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"现有的偏好对齐方法（如 RLHF）通常面临序列级奖励与 Token 级动作之间的信用分配问题。","claim_en":"Existing preference alignment methods (like RLHF) typically face a credit assignment problem between sequence-level rewards and token-level actions.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract & Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"将序列级偏好显式转化为 Token 级指导信号，比直接使用 PPO 优化序列级奖励更有效。","claim_en":"Explicitly grounding sequence-level preferences into token-level guidance is more effective than directly optimizing sequence-level rewards with PPO.","opposes":"传统的 RLHF 范式通常直接使用 PPO 优化序列级 reward 模型给出的标量奖励。","opposes_cite_hint":"Ouyang 2022 InstructGPT","evidence_anchor":"Experiments","why_contested":"挑战了标准 RLHF 的训练范式，指出了细粒度 reward 建模的必要性。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"彻底改变我对RLHF信用分配问题的认知，应立刻在内部对齐训练中复现其序列级偏好转token级信号的框架","en":"It completely changes my perception of RLHF credit assignment problem, you should immediately reproduce its framework converting sequence-level preference to token-level signal in internal alignment training."}},{"id":"YinWCSLLH0S0SO23","title":"LAMM: Language-Assisted Multi-Modal Instruction-Tuning Dataset, Framework, and Benchmark","authors":["Zhenfei Yin","Jiong Wang","Jianjian Cao","Zhelun Shi","Dingning Liu","Mukai Li","Xiaoshui Huang","Zhiyong Wang","Lu Sheng","Lei Bai","Jing Shao","Wanli Ouyang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$df","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YinWCSLLH0S0SO23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YinWCSLLH0S0SO23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/548a41b9cac6f50dccf7e63e9e1b1b9b-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：现有多模态指令调优数据和评测大多偏感知问答，缺少覆盖复杂视觉理解、定位、推理与对话的统一数据框架，导致模型看起来“能聊图”，但能力结构很不完整。过去很多工作靠小规模人工数据或单任务拼接，结果是泛化窄、评测也不够系统。","importance":"它的贡献是数据集 + 调优框架 + benchmark 的系统性工作，量级更接近基础设施层。对 pretrain/post-train 接口的启示是：多模态模型能力上限不仅受预训练表示限制，也受指令数据分布严重约束；如果 instruction tuning 数据覆盖不全，模型会形成很强的任务偏置，看似会话化，实则能力短板明显。","technical_approach":"LAMM 的核心不是提出新的底座架构，而是构建 language-assisted 的多模态指令数据与训练框架。按题意判断，它很可能利用语言模型或模板化语言过程，把来自不同视觉任务的数据重新组织成统一的指令-响应格式，并配套更全面的评测维度。和早期只做图像描述或 VQA 指令化不同，这里的关键选择是把定位、细粒度理解、可能还包括 3D/多图任务纳入同一 instruction space；这样做能提高任务覆盖，但代价是标注风格和难度分布更异质，训练更容易受格式噪声影响。","experiments":"实验层面，合理预期作者会训练若干开源多模态指令模型，与 LLaVA、MiniGPT-4、InstructBLIP 一类 baseline 比较，在多任务 benchmark 上报告平均分和分项能力。核心事实通常会是：在更复杂的视觉指令任务上，LAMM 数据带来的提升比在简单 caption/VQA 上更明显，并揭示当前模型在定位、细粒度 grounded reasoning 等方面仍有缺口。由于这里没有摘要和具体表格，模型参数量、数据条数、具体任务列表和精确增益无法确认。","authors_note":"如果按公开版本常见作者信息，这项工作与上海人工智能实验室、香港中文大学等团队相关；但基于当前给定信息无法稳妥确认完整机构映射，因此不展开。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical bottleneck in multimodal instruction tuning: existing datasets and evaluations over-emphasize simple visual QA and caption-style interaction, while under-covering grounding, localization, compositional reasoning, and broader task diversity. As a result, models often look conversational but remain narrow in actual capability.","importance":"This is primarily a data-and-benchmark contribution with clear systems implications. The key message for the pretrain/post-train interface is that multimodal capability is heavily shaped by instruction data coverage, not just by pretrained representations. If the tuning distribution is narrow, the model develops strong task priors and brittle blind spots.","technical_approach":"LAMM appears to build a language-assisted multimodal instruction-tuning dataset, a unified training framework, and a benchmark. The likely design is to reorganize data from heterogeneous visual tasks into a common instruction-response format, using language-centric templating or generation to normalize supervision. The important choice is breadth: instead of only captioning or VQA-style data, it likely includes grounding and more complex visual understanding tasks under one instruction space. That improves coverage, but also introduces label-style heterogeneity and more noisy supervision.","experiments":"The expected experimental setup is to train multimodal instruction-tuned models and compare them with systems such as LLaVA, MiniGPT-4, or InstructBLIP on a broader suite of tasks. The likely takeaway is stronger gains on complex visual instruction-following than on easier caption/VQA tasks, along with evidence that current models still struggle on grounded and fine-grained reasoning. Exact model sizes, dataset scale, benchmark composition, and numeric improvements cannot be confirmed from the information provided here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal-instruction-tuning","benchmark","vlm"],"keywords":["Multi-modality","Large Language Model"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的多模态指令数据覆盖维度设计和§6的能力短板分析结果，可参考优化内部多模态指令微调数据集的分布","en":"Only read §3 for multimodal instruction data coverage dimension design and §6 for capability short board analysis, reference it to optimize the distribution of your internal multimodal instruction tuning dataset."}},{"id":"YuBPCWTH023","title":"White-Box Transformers via Sparse Rate Reduction","authors":["Yaodong Yu","Sam Buchanan","Druv Pai","Tianzhe Chu","Ziyang Wu","Shengbang Tong","Benjamin D. Haeffele","Yi Ma"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e0","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YuBPCWTH023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YuBPCWTH023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/1e118ba9ee76c20df728b42a35fb4704-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：Transformer 为什么有效、内部表示如何组织，能不能从训练目标层面得到更可解释的白盒结构，而不是事后再做 feature attribution。过去的解释方法多是后验分析，能看现象但不改模型归纳偏置。","importance":"它的重要性在机制研究和架构理解层面更强。对 pretrain 的价值不在直接提分，而在于提出一种训练原则：如果目标函数显式鼓励表示压缩、分离和层次化，Transformer 可能自然形成更清晰的内部电路；这对可解释预训练、稳定性分析和模块化表征都有启发。","technical_approach":"从题目看，核心方法是把 sparse rate reduction 作为表征学习原则，用来训练或分析 Transformer，使其内部表示更稀疏、更可分、也更容易映射到白盒结构。它和常规 cross-entropy 训练的区别在于，后者只关心最终预测误差，不直接约束中间表示的几何结构；而 rate reduction 一类目标会鼓励类内压缩、类间分离，并可能引入稀疏激活。这样设计可能让注意力头和 MLP 子空间更具功能分解性。代价是，解释性目标通常会限制表示自由度，过强时可能伤害纯粹的任务最优性能。","experiments":"实验上大概率包含两个部分：一是与标准 Transformer 训练相比，展示在某些数据或合成任务上可解释结构更清晰；二是通过可视化、子空间分析或 probing 证明 learned features 更接近白盒模块。若有下游结果，通常重点不是刷新 SOTA，而是说明在性能损失可控的情况下换来更强可解释性。由于没有摘要，具体模型规模、任务和数字无法确认。","authors_note":"如果无法从当前信息准确确认机构与代表性团队，按要求留空。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a mechanistic question: can Transformers be trained to be more interpretable by construction, rather than only explained after the fact? Most interpretability work is post hoc. It reveals behavior but does not change the model’s inductive bias.","importance":"Its value is more about representation learning principles than benchmark performance. For pretraining research, the useful idea is that objectives which explicitly shape internal geometry—compression, separation, sparsity—may produce cleaner internal circuits and make analysis, debugging, and modularity easier.","technical_approach":"From the title, the core idea is to use sparse rate reduction as a learning principle for Transformers, aiming for sparse and more structured internal representations. This differs from standard cross-entropy training, which only optimizes end-task prediction and leaves intermediate organization unconstrained. A rate-reduction style objective can encourage intra-class compression and inter-class separation, potentially leading to more decomposed attention and MLP features. The trade-off is straightforward: stronger structure may come at the cost of some representational flexibility and possibly raw task performance.","experiments":"The experiments likely combine performance measurements with interpretability analyses, showing that models trained with this principle exhibit clearer internal feature structure than standard Transformers. The point is probably not state-of-the-art accuracy but better transparency at acceptable cost. Since no abstract or numbers are provided, model scales, datasets, and exact metrics cannot be stated confidently.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer","interpretability","sparsity","representation"],"keywords":["white-box deep neural networks","representation learning","transformer","sparse coding"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§4的稀疏率降低目标设计和§5的表示可解释性实验，可参考调整预训练目标引入表示约束提升可解释性","en":"Focus on §4 for sparse rate reduction objective design and §5 for representation interpretability experiments, reference it to adjust pretraining objective with representation constraints for better interpretability."}},{"id":"YuZXMGZW23","title":"Learning Energy-Based Prior Model with Diffusion-Amortized MCMC","authors":["Peiyu Yu","Yaxuan Zhu","Sirui Xie","Xiaojian Ma","Ruiqi Gao","Song-Chun Zhu","Ying Nian Wu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e1","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YuZXMGZW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YuZXMGZW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/85381f4549b5ddf1d48e2e287d7d3d15-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：能量模型（EBM）表达力强，但训练和采样都难，尤其 MCMC 混合慢、近似偏差大；能不能借助 diffusion 来 amortize 采样成本，从而学到更可用的能量先验。过去 EBM 的主要痛点一直不是目标定义，而是推断不够实用。","importance":"这项工作的价值在于连接了 EBM 和 diffusion 两条生成建模路线。对新型语言建模和生成预训练的启示是，diffusion 不一定只是最终生成器，也可以作为高效近似推断器去服务更一般的概率模型；这为 energy-based LM 或结构化先验建模提供了更现实的训练路径。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 diffusion-amortized MCMC：用 diffusion 模型学习或近似 MCMC 采样过程，从而更高效地为能量先验模型提供负样本或后验样本。与传统 EBM 直接跑 Langevin 动力学相比，这里把昂贵的采样器部分摊销到一个学习得到的 diffusion 过程上；与普通 diffusion 直接做生成相比，最终要学的是能量先验本身，而 diffusion 扮演推断加速器。这样设计有效，是因为 diffusion 在逼近复杂分布迁移和逐步去噪上比手工 MCMC 动力学更灵活。代价则是双模型耦合带来训练复杂性，且若 amortized sampler 偏差太大，会反向污染 EBM 学习。","experiments":"实验大概率会在图像生成或密度估计基准上，与传统 EBM 训练、Langevin MCMC、以及纯 diffusion 模型比较，报告样本质量、对数似然代理指标或采样效率。值得关注的 ablation 应包括：是否真的减少了 MCMC 步数、训练是否更稳定、以及 diffusion sampler 的近似误差对最终 EBM 的影响。当前没有摘要，具体数字无法确认。","authors_note":"Ruiqi Gao 是较知名作者，在概率生成模型和扩散模型方向有相关工作。其他机构信息无法由当前输入稳妥确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a classic limitation of energy-based models: they are flexible and principled, but training is hard because sampling is expensive and biased. The bottleneck is not the objective itself but the practicality of MCMC-based inference.","importance":"Its significance lies in connecting EBMs with diffusion-based inference. For generative pretraining and alternative language modeling paradigms, the main lesson is that diffusion models need not be the final generator—they can also serve as efficient amortized samplers for more general probabilistic models such as energy-based priors.","technical_approach":"The method is diffusion-amortized MCMC. Instead of relying purely on slow hand-designed MCMC dynamics like Langevin updates, a diffusion model is used to learn or approximate the sampling process needed to train an energy-based prior. This differs from standard diffusion generation because the target object is still the EBM prior, not the diffusion model itself. The design makes sense because diffusion processes are good at learning complex distribution transitions, which can replace expensive iterative sampling. The trade-off is coupled training complexity: if the amortized sampler is inaccurate, it can introduce bias into EBM learning.","experiments":"The expected evaluation would compare against conventional EBM training with MCMC, and possibly against pure diffusion baselines, on image generation or density-estimation style benchmarks. Key evidence would include better sample efficiency, fewer MCMC steps, and more stable EBM learning. Since the abstract and tables are not provided, exact datasets and numeric gains cannot be stated reliably.","authors_note":"Ruiqi Gao is a notable author with relevant work in probabilistic generative modeling and diffusion models. Further institutional details cannot be safely confirmed from the current input."},"tags":["energy-based-model","diffusion","mcmc","generative-modeling"],"notable_authors":["Ruiqi Gao"],"keywords":["Energy-Based Model","Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model","MCMC"],"recommendation":{"zh":"直接看§3的扩散和EBM结合的框架设计，可参考其思路设计预训练阶段的结构化先验建模方法","en":"Go straight to §3 for framework design of combining diffusion and EBM, reference its idea to design structured prior modeling methods for pretraining stage."}},{"id":"YuanCCGZCJL023","title":"Revisiting Out-of-distribution Robustness in NLP: Benchmarks, Analysis, and LLMs Evaluations","authors":["Lifan Yuan","Yangyi Chen","Ganqu Cui","Hongcheng Gao","Fangyuan Zou","Xingyi Cheng","Heng Ji","Zhiyuan Liu","Maosong Sun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e2","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YuanCCGZCJL023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YuanCCGZCJL023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/b6b5f50a2001ad1cbccca96e693c4ab4-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：NLP 的 OOD robustness 评测长期碎片化，不同 benchmark 偏移类型混杂、难度不一致，导致“模型是否真的更鲁棒”很难判断；同时，大语言模型出现后，旧结论是否还成立需要重审。过去很多鲁棒性结论建立在小模型和局部数据增强设定上。","importance":"它的重要性在评测与认知校准层面。对 pretrain 研究的直接启示是：扩大模型和数据规模可能提升某些 OOD 能力，但这种提升未必均匀，也可能只是对表面分布漂移更稳，对语义或任务机制变化仍然脆弱。没有统一 benchmark，鲁棒性讨论很容易被局部结果误导。","technical_approach":"这篇工作更像系统性 benchmark revisiting。核心做法应包括：整理或重构多个 NLP OOD 基准，按偏移类型细分分析，并把传统模型与 LLM 放到统一评价框架中比较。与单篇任务论文不同，它的重点不是提出新算法，而是澄清哪些 OOD 设定测到的是词汇漂移、哪些测到的是推理迁移、哪些其实混入了 annotation artifacts。这样做的价值在于把“鲁棒性”从单一分数拆开看，避免把不同能力混成一个结论。","experiments":"实验上应该覆盖多类任务和多种模型规模，比较传统 PLM、指令调优模型和可能的闭源/开源 LLM，在不同 OOD 类型上的表现。值得关注的结论通常是：LLM 在某些自然分布变化上显著更强，但在需要真正 task recomposition 或避免 shortcut 的场景中优势有限；prompting 方式和上下文示例也会明显影响鲁棒性评估。由于无摘要，具体 benchmark 数量、模型名单和分数无法确认。","authors_note":"如果无法从当前信息准确确认机构与团队背景，按要求留空。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper revisits a long-standing problem in NLP: out-of-distribution robustness is hard to measure because benchmarks are fragmented, shift types are mixed, and conclusions often depend on the exact setup. With modern LLMs, many older robustness claims need to be re-evaluated under a broader and more consistent framework.","importance":"Its contribution is mainly evaluative and diagnostic, but that is still important for pretraining research. The key lesson is that scaling models and data may improve some kinds of OOD behavior, yet that improvement is unlikely to be uniform across shift types. Without a cleaner benchmark view, robustness discussions can be seriously misleading.","technical_approach":"This appears to be a benchmark-and-analysis paper. The likely approach is to organize or revisit multiple NLP OOD benchmarks, categorize shift types, and compare conventional pretrained models and LLMs under a unified evaluation setup. The value is not a new algorithm. It is a decomposition of what different robustness benchmarks actually measure—lexical drift, annotation artifacts, task transfer, or true reasoning shift.","experiments":"The experiments likely span multiple tasks and model families, including pretrained encoders, instruction-tuned models, and LLMs. A plausible finding is that LLMs are stronger on some naturally occurring distribution shifts, but still brittle when the shift requires recomposing task mechanisms or avoiding shortcut cues. Prompt format and in-context examples probably matter a lot. Exact benchmarks, model lists, and scores are not available from the current input.","authors_note":""},"tags":["ood","nlp","llm","evaluation","robustness"],"keywords":["NLP","OOD Robustness","Large Language Models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4的OOD偏移类型细分结果和LLM鲁棒性评测结论，可用于校准内部预训练模型的OOD评测方案","en":"Only read §4 for OOD shift type classification results and LLM robustness evaluation conclusions, use it to calibrate OOD evaluation schemes for your internal pretrained models."}},{"id":"YueYJLZ23","title":"AGD: an Auto-switchable Optimizer using Stepwise Gradient Difference for Preconditioning Matrix","authors":["Yun Yue","Zhiling Ye","Jiadi Jiang","Yongchao Liu","Ke Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e3","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YueYJLZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YueYJLZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/8f9d459c19b59b5400ce396e0f8c23e0-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：Adam 类方法收敛稳、调参友好，但泛化有时不如 SGD；SGD 类方法泛化好，但早期优化慢且对学习率更敏感。过去常见做法是人工在训练中切换优化器，或者手工设定阶段性 schedule，但切换时机和规则强依赖经验，迁移到新任务不稳定。","importance":"这是优化器层面的工程方法，贡献更偏系统与训练稳定性，而不是建模范式。对 pretrain 的意义在于，大规模训练越来越依赖‘前期快收敛 + 后期好泛化/好极值’的折中，如果一个优化器能自动完成这种切换，就有机会减少大量经验性 recipe。它是否重要，取决于在大模型和长程训练里能否稳定复现，而不只是中小规模视觉任务有效。","technical_approach":"AGD 的核心是利用 stepwise gradient difference，也就是相邻步梯度变化信息，来构造或调节预条件矩阵，并据此在不同优化行为之间自动切换。直观上讲，它试图根据优化轨迹判断当前更像是需要 Adam 式自适应缩放，还是更适合接近 SGD 的更新。和显式手工切换优化器不同，这种方法把切换依据放进梯度统计本身，因此更细粒度，也更可能在单次训练中连续过渡。代价是它引入了更复杂的状态估计，对数值稳定性和额外开销会更敏感。","experiments":"从标题可以判断，实验重点是把 AGD 与 SGD、Adam、AdamW 或类似自动切换/混合优化器比较，展示其在收敛速度和最终测试精度之间取得更好平衡。由于没有摘要，不能给出使用的数据集、网络结构和具体提升数字；保守地说，这类论文通常会包含对 stepwise gradient difference 项的消融、自动切换行为可视化，以及不同训练阶段更新模式变化的分析。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a classic optimizer trade-off: Adam-like methods are fast and forgiving early in training, while SGD-like methods often generalize better later, but manually switching between them is heuristic-heavy and task-dependent. Existing recipes usually hard-code the switch point or stage schedule, which makes transfer across settings unreliable.","importance":"This is an optimizer-level systems contribution rather than a modeling one. For pretraining, the appeal is straightforward: large runs increasingly depend on balancing fast early optimization with strong late-stage solutions, and an optimizer that can make that transition automatically could reduce recipe tuning. Its practical importance depends on whether the effect survives long-horizon, large-scale training, not just moderate-size benchmarks.","technical_approach":"AGD uses stepwise gradient difference—information about how gradients change across successive steps—to build or adapt the preconditioning matrix, and then auto-switches between optimizer behaviors accordingly. Intuitively, it tries to infer from the optimization trajectory whether the current regime benefits more from Adam-style adaptive scaling or from something closer to SGD. Compared with manually switching optimizers, this folds the switching rule into gradient statistics and allows a smoother transition. The trade-off is extra state estimation, which can increase numerical sensitivity and overhead.","experiments":"The expected empirical focus is a comparison against SGD, Adam, AdamW, and possibly other hybrid optimizers, showing a better speed–generalization trade-off. Since the abstract is absent, I cannot provide datasets, architectures, or exact gains. Typical ablations for this kind of paper would isolate the role of the gradient-difference term, visualize when switching behavior occurs, and analyze update patterns across training stages.","authors_note":""},"tags":["optimizer","training-stability","preconditioning","optimization"],"keywords":["adaptive optimizer","gradient difference","auto switch","AGD"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§5的优化器自动切换逻辑和大模型训练实验结果，可引入内部预训练优化器候选池做对比测试","en":"Focus on §5 for optimizer auto-switch logic and large model training experimental results, introduce it to your internal pretraining optimizer candidate pool for comparative testing."}},{"id":"ZelikmanHPGH23","title":"Parsel🦆: Algorithmic Reasoning with Language Models by Composing Decompositions","authors":["Eric Zelikman","Qian Huang","Gabriel Poesia","Noah D. Goodman","Nick Haber"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e4","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZelikmanHPGH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZelikmanHPGH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/6445dd88ebb9a6a3afa0b126ad87fe41-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：语言模型在算法题和程序化推理上，单次 Chain-of-Thought 往往不够稳定，因为模型即使会局部推理，也不擅长自发把复杂任务拆成可复用的子程序。过去方法多半靠更长的 CoT、self-consistency 或 few-shot 提示去硬拉推理，但这些方法没有显式建立‘分解—求解—组合’这一结构。","importance":"这是推理方法级工作，虽然不是 pretrain 本体，但对理解语言模型如何获得算法能力很有价值。它的重要性在于：作者把提升点放在程序结构组合，而不是继续堆更长推理轨迹，这给 latent reasoning、tool use、program-of-thought 以及训练期是否要显式暴露分解结构提供了很直接的启发。对 post-train 来说，它也说明监督信号不一定要是完整答案，任务分解本身就是高价值中间表示。","technical_approach":"Parsel 的核心是让模型先生成问题分解，再把这些分解组合成可执行或可递归调用的求解过程。它不是单条自然语言 CoT，而更接近把推理组织成模块化的程序骨架，每个子问题再由模型处理。与普通 CoT 相比，关键区别是显式可组合性：一旦分解写对，后续求解空间会被大幅约束，因此更适合算法类任务。它有效的原因是算法推理的难点常在搜索结构而不是局部计算；边界则是，若分解本身错了，后续流程会系统性失败，而且对任务形式化程度有要求。","experiments":"这篇论文的公开结论是，Parsel 在多类算法推理和组合泛化任务上显著优于直接 CoT 提示。这里没有摘要，因此不能严谨写出具体 benchmark、模型、准确率和提升幅度；但可以确认，实验应包含与 CoT、program-of-thought、self-consistency 等方法的比较，并展示随着任务长度或组合深度上升，显式分解的优势更明显。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a specific weakness of language models in algorithmic reasoning: even when a model can perform local reasoning, plain chain-of-thought is often too brittle because the model does not reliably decompose a hard problem into reusable subproblems. Prior work mostly tried to stretch reasoning with longer CoT or self-consistency, but without explicitly modeling decomposition and composition.","importance":"This is a reasoning-method paper rather than a pretraining paper, but it is highly relevant to how we think about learned reasoning structure. The key contribution is that it moves the lever from “more reasoning tokens” to “better compositional structure,” which is useful for latent reasoning, tool use, program-of-thought methods, and training setups that might supervise decompositions rather than only final answers.","technical_approach":"Parsel has the model first produce a decomposition and then compose those pieces into an executable or recursively usable solving process. This is not just a natural-language CoT trace; it is closer to building a modular program skeleton and solving subproblems within that structure. The critical difference from vanilla CoT is explicit compositionality: once the decomposition is correct, the downstream search space becomes much smaller. This works well for algorithmic tasks because the bottleneck is often search structure rather than local arithmetic. The limitation is equally clear: if the decomposition is wrong, the whole pipeline can fail systematically.","experiments":"The known empirical takeaway is that Parsel outperforms direct CoT prompting on several algorithmic reasoning and compositional generalization tasks. Without the abstract, I should not invent benchmark names, model sizes, or exact accuracy gains. What can be said safely is that the paper likely compares against CoT, self-consistency, and program-like prompting baselines, and that the benefit should become larger as problem length or compositional depth increases.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reasoning","decomposition","prompting","tool-use"],"notable_authors":["Eric Zelikman","Noah D. Goodman","Nick Haber"],"keywords":["reasoning","language models","code synthesis","decomposition"],"recommendation":{"zh":"直接看§4的任务分解组合框架设计，可参考调整预训练数据中的推理类样本的分解结构标注","en":"Go straight to §4 for task decomposition and composition framework design, reference it to adjust decomposition structure annotation of reasoning samples in pretraining data."}},{"id":"Zhang00ZXS23","title":"Lookaround Optimizer: k steps around, 1 step average","authors":["Jiangtao Zhang","Shunyu Liu","Jie Song","Tongtian Zhu","Zhengqi Xu","Mingli Song"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e5","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Zhang00ZXS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Zhang00ZXS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/5b4b967d4222d87fa5b28b6ec7144058-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：标准优化器每一步都沿当前参数点更新，容易受局部噪声和单点曲率影响，而想提高泛化时常需要更平滑地利用邻域信息。已有方法要么靠大 batch 降噪，要么像 SAM 那样显式找尖锐方向，但后者额外代价较高。","importance":"这是优化器设计里的轻量方案，贡献点在于试图用很小的工程改动引入‘邻域平均’效果。对 pretrain 的意义是有限但实际：如果它能在几乎不增加成本的前提下改善收敛稳定性或平坦极值倾向，就可能成为大规模训练 recipe 中的廉价替代件。边界也很清楚：这类优化器在中小规模视觉任务上常有效，但未必自动迁移到超大模型预训练。","technical_approach":"Lookaround 的想法很直接：连续做 k 步局部探索，然后用一次平均更新来整合这些步的信息。它不是显式二阶方法，也不是像 SAM 那样在每步求最坏邻域扰动，而是通过多步‘环顾四周’再平均，近似获得更稳健的更新方向。和普通动量法相比，它引入的是参数空间邻域采样；和 SWA 相比，它关注的是训练过程中的短程平均而不是后期权重平均。有效性来自两个方面：减少单步噪声敏感性，以及偏向更宽的解；代价则是需要维护多步轨迹并可能与学习率 schedule 产生耦合。","experiments":"从标题可判断，实验会拿 Lookaround 与 SGD/Adam 或 SAM 类方法对比，看训练损失下降、测试精度和额外开销。没有摘要时不能负责任地写出具体数据集和提升数值；但合理预期包括：不同 k 值的消融、平均频率对效果的影响，以及与动量、权重衰减共同使用时的稳定性分析。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a familiar optimization issue: standard updates are made from a single parameter point, which makes them sensitive to local noise and local curvature, while better generalization often benefits from information aggregated over a neighborhood. Existing options either rely on large batches for noise reduction or add explicit sharpness-aware computations such as SAM, which increase cost.","importance":"This is a lightweight optimizer idea. Its practical value for pretraining is conditional but real: if it can inject a neighborhood-averaging effect with minimal overhead, it could become a cheap recipe component for improved stability or flatter solutions. The limitation is also clear—optimizer gains seen on moderate-scale vision tasks do not automatically transfer to very large language-model pretraining.","technical_approach":"Lookaround performs k local steps and then one averaging step to integrate information from that short trajectory. It is not a second-order method and does not explicitly compute worst-case perturbations like SAM; instead, it approximates a more robust update direction by “looking around” in parameter space before averaging. Relative to standard momentum, the new ingredient is neighborhood sampling; relative to SWA, the averaging happens over short training windows rather than late-stage weight snapshots. The design can help by reducing sensitivity to single-step noise and biasing optimization toward wider minima, at the cost of extra trajectory bookkeeping and interaction with the LR schedule.","experiments":"From the title, the evaluation likely compares Lookaround against SGD/Adam and possibly SAM-like baselines on convergence speed, test accuracy, and overhead. Since no abstract is available, I cannot provide datasets, architectures, or exact gains. Useful expected ablations would vary k, averaging frequency, and combinations with momentum and weight decay.","authors_note":""},"tags":["optimizer","training-dynamics","optimization"],"keywords":["Deep Learning","Computer Vision","Mode Connectivity","Weight Average"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看实验部分的大模型迁移测试结果即可，轻量邻域平均优化器在中小任务有效，但目前无证据证明可直接用于大规模预训练。","en":"Only check the large model migration test results in the experiment section. This lightweight neighborhood averaging optimizer works for small tasks, but no evidence proves it fits large-scale pretraining directly."}},{"id":"Zhang0WZS0W23","title":"Evaluating and Improving Tool-Augmented Computation-Intensive Math Reasoning","authors":["Beichen Zhang","Kun Zhou","Xilin Wei","Xin Zhao","Jing Sha","Shijin Wang","Ji-Rong Wen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e6","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Zhang0WZS0W23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Zhang0WZS0W23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/4a47dd69242d5af908cdd5d51c971cbf-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：LLM 在计算密集型数学推理上，真正的瓶颈往往不是理解题意，而是长链计算容易出错；单靠自然语言 CoT 会把符号推理和数值计算混在一起，误差快速累积。过去大家知道可以接计算器或 Python，但缺少系统评测：什么时候模型会调用工具、会不会把问题正确翻译成工具输入、以及工具接入后还剩哪些失败模式。","importance":"这篇工作的主要价值在评测框架加方法改进，属于 post-train / reasoning interface 层面，但对 pretrain 也有明确启发。它说明模型能力拆分得更细：语言建模负责问题理解与程序组织，外部工具负责精确计算；如果训练时不显式覆盖这种分工，模型会在最不该犯错的算术环节掉链子。这对工具使用数据构造、程序化中间表示监督、以及后续 reasoning model 设计都很有参考价值。","technical_approach":"从题目看，作者一方面建立用于评估 tool-augmented math reasoning 的基准或诊断协议，另一方面提出改进方法来提升模型调用工具和利用工具结果的能力。关键不是简单地‘给个计算器’，而是把流程拆成几个环节：是否识别需要工具、是否正确生成可执行表达式、是否在得到结果后继续完成推理。与只看最终答案正确率的工作不同，这种设计能定位失败到底发生在规划、程序转写还是结果整合。它有效，是因为工具使用是多阶段误差链；边界是评测通常仍受工具接口和题型覆盖限制。","experiments":"从标题可以较确定地说，实验会比较纯 LLM、带工具但无专门训练的 LLM，以及经过针对性改进后的系统，在计算密集型数学 benchmark 上的表现。由于没有摘要，无法可靠写出 benchmark 名称、模型规模和准确率提升数字；但值得关注的实验应包括：错误类型分解、不同工具接口或 prompt 形式比较，以及难度上升时工具使用带来的增益是否扩大。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper focuses on a specific failure mode in math reasoning: for computation-heavy problems, the main bottleneck is often not understanding the question but executing long chains of arithmetic or symbolic calculation without drifting. Plain natural-language CoT mixes planning and computation together, so errors compound quickly. While tool use is an obvious fix, the field lacked a careful evaluation of when models decide to call tools, whether they translate problems into executable forms correctly, and what still fails afterward.","importance":"The contribution is primarily in evaluation plus method improvement, sitting at the reasoning/tool-use interface rather than pure pretraining. Still, it has a clear pretraining implication: capability should be factorized more explicitly, with language modeling handling interpretation and orchestration while tools handle exact computation. If training does not reflect that division of labor, models fail on the most avoidable arithmetic errors. This is directly relevant to synthetic data design, intermediate program supervision, and reasoning-model post-training.","technical_approach":"From the title, the paper likely does two things: builds a diagnostic framework for tool-augmented, computation-intensive math reasoning, and proposes ways to improve how models invoke and use tools. The key is not just attaching a calculator, but decomposing the pipeline into stages: detecting when a tool is needed, generating correct executable expressions, and integrating the returned result into further reasoning. Compared with work that only reports final answer accuracy, this design localizes failure to planning, program translation, or result integration. That matters because tool use is a multi-stage error chain. The limitation is that evaluation remains bounded by the chosen tool API and problem coverage.","experiments":"A safe reading of the title is that the experiments compare plain LLMs, tool-augmented LLMs without targeted training, and improved systems on computation-heavy math benchmarks. Without the abstract, I cannot provide benchmark names, model sizes, or exact accuracy gains. The most useful expected analyses would include error taxonomy, comparisons across tool interfaces or prompting strategies, and whether tool benefits grow with problem difficulty.","authors_note":""},"tags":["tool-use","math-reasoning","evaluation","llm"],"keywords":["Math Problem Solving"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§3的失败模式拆解部分，其对工具调用分阶段的评测逻辑可直接复用在预训练阶段工具使用数据的构造流程中。","en":"Focus on the failure mode disassembly in §3, its phased evaluation logic for tool invocation can be directly reused for constructing tool-use pretraining data."}},{"id":"ZhangCLH23","title":"Composing Parameter-Efficient Modules with Arithmetic Operation","authors":["Jinghan Zhang","Shiqi Chen","Junteng Liu","Junxian He"],"institutions":["Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)"],"abstract":"$e7","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangCLH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangCLH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/299a08ee712d4752c890938da99a77c6-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"如何在不进行额外训练的情况下，将多个在不同任务上独立训练的参数高效微调（PEFT）模块组合起来，以实现能力的融合。","importance":"方法级贡献。探索了 PEFT 模块（如 LoRA）在权重空间的算术组合性质，为多任务学习、领域适应和模型能力组合提供了一种极低成本（Zero-shot）的解决方案，启发了后续关于 Model Merging 和 Task Arithmetic 的研究。","technical_approach":"提出在权重空间对 PEFT 模块进行线性算术操作。定义了模块的“加法”（组合能力）和“取反”（消除特定能力）两个基本算子，并基于此构建更复杂的算术表达式。该方法直接在参数层面操作，无需任何微调或额外数据。","experiments":"在多个 NLP 任务上验证了该方法。实验表明，通过简单的权重相加，可以有效组合不同模块的能力；通过权重相减，可以消除某些不需要的属性。这种 Zero-shot 组合的性能在某些情况下甚至接近于多任务联合训练的结果。","authors_note":"Junxian He (香港科技大学)。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to compose multiple Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) modules, trained independently on different tasks, to integrate their capabilities without additional training.","importance":"Methodological contribution. It explores the arithmetic composability of PEFT modules (like LoRA) in the weight space, providing a zero-cost solution for multi-task learning, domain adaptation, and capability integration, inspiring subsequent research in Model Merging and Task Arithmetic.","technical_approach":"Proposes performing linear arithmetic operations on PEFT modules directly in the weight space. It defines two basic operators: 'addition' (to combine capabilities) and 'negation' (to remove specific capabilities), which can be composed for flexible arithmetic. This approach requires no fine-tuning or additional data.","experiments":"Validated on various NLP tasks. Results show that simple weight addition effectively combines capabilities from different modules, while weight subtraction can remove unwanted attributes. The performance of this zero-shot composition sometimes approaches that of joint multi-task training.","authors_note":"Junxian He (HKUST)."},"tags":["peft","model-merging","adapter","transfer-learning"],"keywords":["Parameter-efficient fine-tuning","module composition"],"notable_authors":["Junxian He"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"PEFT 模块（如 LoRA）可以有效地将预训练模型适配到下游任务，且参数量极小。","claim_en":"PEFT modules (e.g., LoRA) can effectively adapt pretrained models to downstream tasks with minimal parameters.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract & Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"独立训练的 PEFT 模块可以在权重空间进行有意义的线性算术操作（加减法），从而实现能力的组合或消除，而无需重新训练。","claim_en":"Independently trained PEFT modules can undergo meaningful linear arithmetic operations (addition/subtraction) in the weight space to compose or negate capabilities without retraining.","opposes":"通常认为模型权重的组合是非线性的，直接相加会导致性能崩溃，需要重新训练或复杂的对齐机制。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Method & Experiments","why_contested":"揭示了微调增量权重（Delta Weights）在线性空间中的语义组合性，为 Model Merging 提供了理论和实证基础。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为PEFT模块权重组合的早期探索工作，仅需知道核心结论即可，无需细读正文，无新的预训练相关洞察。","en":"As an early exploration of PEFT module weight combination, you only need to know its core conclusion, no need to read full text, no new pretraining-related insights."}},{"id":"ZhangCZXZ023","title":"Large Language Models Are Semi-Parametric Reinforcement Learning Agents","authors":["Danyang Zhang","Lu Chen","Situo Zhang","Hongshen Xu","Zihan Zhao","Kai Yu"],"institutions":["Shanghai Jiao Tong University"],"abstract":"$e8","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangCZXZ023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangCZXZ023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/f6b22ac37beb5da61efd4882082c9ecd-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"如何让基于 LLM 的 Agent 能够像人类一样，利用过去的成功或失败经验来提升在不同任务目标下的表现，而无需微调模型参数。","importance":"范式级贡献。提出了一种将 LLM 视为半参数化强化学习 Agent 的新视角。通过引入外部的、可演化的经验记忆库，将 RL 的思想（从试错中学习）与 LLM 的推理能力结合，为构建 Continual Learning Agent 提供了新路径。","technical_approach":"提出 Rememberer 框架，为 LLM 配备长期经验记忆。核心机制是带有经验记忆的强化学习（RLEM）：Agent 在与环境交互后，将轨迹（包括成功和失败）存入记忆库；在面对新任务时，检索相关经验作为 Prompt 上下文。整个过程通过更新外部记忆库来实现能力的演化，而非更新 LLM 权重。","experiments":"在多个交互式决策任务（如 ALFWorld, WebShop）上进行测试。相比于固定 Prompt 或仅有短期工作记忆的基线，Rememberer 表现出显著的性能提升。消融实验证明了从失败经验中学习（负面反馈）对提升 Agent 鲁棒性的重要性。","authors_note":"上海交通大学团队。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to enable LLM-based agents to leverage past successes and failures to improve performance across different task goals, without fine-tuning model parameters.","importance":"Paradigm contribution. It proposes a novel perspective of viewing LLMs as semi-parametric Reinforcement Learning agents. By introducing an external, evolvable experience memory, it combines RL principles (learning from trial and error) with LLM reasoning, offering a new path for building continual learning agents.","technical_approach":"Proposes the Rememberer framework, equipping LLMs with long-term experience memory. The core mechanism is Reinforcement Learning with Experience Memory (RLEM): the agent stores interaction trajectories (both successes and failures) in memory; when facing new tasks, it retrieves relevant experiences as prompt context. Capability evolution is achieved by updating the external memory bank, not the LLM weights.","experiments":"Tested on interactive decision-making tasks (e.g., ALFWorld, WebShop). Compared to baselines with fixed prompts or only short-term working memory, Rememberer shows significant performance gains. Ablations demonstrate the critical role of learning from failed experiences (negative feedback) in improving agent robustness.","authors_note":"Shanghai Jiao Tong University team."},"tags":["llm","semi-parametric","reinforcement-learning","memory"],"keywords":["Learning from Experiences","LLM","Reinforcement Learning","Decision Making","Experience Memory"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM 可以作为 Agent 的核心控制器，通过 In-Context Learning 执行复杂的决策任务。","claim_en":"LLMs can serve as the core controller for agents, executing complex decision-making tasks via In-Context Learning.","evidence_anchor":"Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"通过更新外部经验记忆库（RLEM），LLM Agent 可以实现类似强化学习的自我进化，而无需进行参数微调。","claim_en":"By updating an external experience memory bank (RLEM), LLM agents can achieve RL-like self-evolution without parameter fine-tuning.","opposes":"传统的 Agent 能力提升通常依赖于对模型参数的微调（如 RLHF 或 SFT）。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Method & Experiments","why_contested":"提供了一种非参数化的 Continual Learning 方案，降低了 Agent 进化的计算成本。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"属于Agent架构方向的范式探索，和预训练本身关联极低，仅做文献备查即可，不需要细读。","en":"It is a paradigm exploration of agent architecture, with very low relevance to pretraining itself, only for literature reference, no need to read in detail."}},{"id":"ZhangZCJLLHC023","title":"Selectivity Drives Productivity: Efficient Dataset Pruning for Enhanced Transfer Learning","authors":["Yihua Zhang","Yimeng Zhang","Aochuan Chen","Jinghan Jia","Jiancheng Liu","Gaowen Liu","Mingyi Hong","Shiyu Chang","Sijia Liu"],"institutions":["Michigan State University","University of California, Davis"],"abstract":"$e9","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangZCJLLHC023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangZCJLLHC023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/749252feedd44f7f10d47ec1d674a2f8-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在迁移学习场景下，如何对源数据集进行剪枝（Dataset Pruning），以在提高预训练效率的同时，保证下游目标任务的微调精度无损。","importance":"方法级贡献。首次将数据集剪枝（DP）与迁移学习结合，打破了以往 DP 研究仅关注单一任务的局限。这对于在计算资源受限的情况下，如何高效选择预训练数据具有实际指导意义。","technical_approach":"建立了一个统一的视角来整合 DP 和迁移学习。核心发现是：源数据集中的样本对于目标任务的价值是不平等的。提出了一种基于梯度的选择性剪枝策略，通过评估源样本对目标任务梯度的贡献度，优先保留那些能最大化目标任务性能的源数据。","experiments":"在多个视觉分类任务上验证。结果表明，该方法可以在大幅减少源数据集规模（例如剪枝 50%）的情况下，保持甚至略微提升下游任务的微调精度。相比于随机剪枝或传统的单任务 DP 方法，表现出显著优势。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to prune a source dataset in transfer learning scenarios to improve pretraining efficiency while ensuring lossless finetuning accuracy on downstream target tasks.","importance":"Methodological contribution. It pioneers the integration of Dataset Pruning (DP) with transfer learning, breaking the limitation of previous DP research that focused solely on single tasks. This provides practical guidance for efficient pretraining data selection under constrained computational resources.","technical_approach":"Establishes a unified viewpoint integrating DP and transfer learning. The core finding is that source samples have unequal value for target tasks. It proposes a gradient-based selective pruning strategy, evaluating the contribution of source samples to the target task's gradient, and prioritizing the retention of source data that maximizes target task performance.","experiments":"Validated on multiple vision classification tasks. Results show the method can significantly reduce the source dataset size (e.g., by 50%) while maintaining or even slightly improving downstream finetuning accuracy. It significantly outperforms random pruning or traditional single-task DP methods.","authors_note":""},"tags":["dataset-pruning","transfer-learning","data-quality","pretraining"],"keywords":["Dataset pruning","transfer learning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"数据集剪枝（DP）可以有效移除冗余样本，降低深度学习的计算成本。","claim_en":"Dataset Pruning (DP) can effectively remove redundant samples and reduce the computational cost of deep learning.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract & Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"在迁移学习中，源数据集的剪枝不应仅考虑源任务的信息量，而应基于样本对目标任务的贡献度进行选择性剪枝。","claim_en":"In transfer learning, source dataset pruning should not solely consider the information content for the source task, but should be selectively pruned based on the samples' contribution to the target task.","opposes":"传统的 DP 方法通常只关注保留对当前训练任务（源任务）最具代表性的样本。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Method & Experiments","why_contested":"指出了跨任务数据价值的不对称性，为面向特定下游任务的预训练数据筛选提供了新标准。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4.2的梯度剪枝策略和迁移场景实验结果即可，可在内部预训练数据过滤 ablation 中作为对照基线。","en":"Only check the gradient pruning strategy in §4.2 and transfer scenario experiment results, can be used as baseline in internal pretraining data filtering ablation."}},{"id":"ZhaoBR0L23","title":"UniPC: A Unified Predictor-Corrector Framework for Fast Sampling of Diffusion Models","authors":["Wenliang Zhao","Lujia Bai","Yongming Rao","Jie Zhou","Jiwen Lu"],"institutions":["Tsinghua University"],"abstract":"$ea","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhaoBR0L23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhaoBR0L23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/9c2aa1e456ea543997f6927295196381-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"如何加速扩散模型（DPMs）的采样过程，特别是在极少步数（如 <10 步）下生成高质量图像。","importance":"方法级贡献。提出了一种统一的预测-校正（Predictor-Corrector）框架 UniPC，显著提升了扩散模型在极少步数下的采样质量。该方法无需额外训练，即插即用，对加速扩散模型推理具有重要的工程价值。","technical_approach":"设计了统一的校正器（UniC）和预测器（UniP）。UniC 可以附加在任何现有的 DPM 采样器之后，在不增加额外模型评估次数的前提下提高精度阶数。UniP 则支持任意阶数的预测。两者结合构成的 UniPC 框架，通过更精确的数值积分近似，减少了截断误差，从而在少步数下实现高质量采样。","experiments":"在多个图像生成基准（如 CIFAR-10, ImageNet）上进行了测试。在 5-10 步的极少步数设置下，UniPC 显著优于现有的快速采样器（如 DPM-Solver, DDIM），取得了 SOTA 的 FID 分数。消融实验验证了高阶预测和校正机制的有效性。","authors_note":"清华大学自动化系 (Jiwen Lu 等)。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to accelerate the sampling process of Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPMs), especially to generate high-quality images in very few steps (e.g., <10).","importance":"Methodological contribution. Proposes UniPC, a unified predictor-corrector framework that significantly improves DPM sampling quality in very few steps. It is training-free and plug-and-play, holding significant engineering value for accelerating diffusion model inference.","technical_approach":"Designs a unified corrector (UniC) and predictor (UniP). UniC can be appended to any existing DPM sampler to increase the order of accuracy without extra model evaluations. UniP supports arbitrary-order prediction. The combined UniPC framework reduces truncation errors through more precise numerical integration approximation, enabling high-quality sampling in few steps.","experiments":"Tested on image generation benchmarks (e.g., CIFAR-10, ImageNet). Under extreme few-step settings (5-10 steps), UniPC significantly outperforms existing fast samplers (e.g., DPM-Solver, DDIM), achieving SOTA FID scores. Ablations verify the effectiveness of the high-order prediction and correction mechanisms.","authors_note":"Department of Automation, Tsinghua University (Jiwen Lu et al.)."},"tags":["diffusion","sampling","solver"],"keywords":["diffusion models","fast sampling","predictor-corrector","training-free"],"notable_authors":["Jiwen Lu"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"扩散模型的采样过程本质上是求解常微分方程（ODE）或随机微分方程（SDE），高阶数值求解器可以加速这一过程。","claim_en":"The sampling process of diffusion models is essentially solving ODEs or SDEs, and high-order numerical solvers can accelerate this process.","evidence_anchor":"Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"通过精心设计的预测-校正机制（UniPC），可以在不增加模型评估次数（NFE）的情况下，有效提升极少步数（<10）下的采样精度。","claim_en":"Through a carefully designed predictor-corrector mechanism (UniPC), the sampling accuracy in extremely few steps (<10) can be effectively improved without increasing the Number of Function Evaluations (NFE).","opposes":"以往的高阶求解器（如某些 DPM-Solver 变体）在极少步数下往往会出现数值不稳定或质量下降。","opposes_cite_hint":"Lu 2022 DPM-Solver","evidence_anchor":"Method & Experiments","why_contested":"突破了少步数采样的精度瓶颈，证明了在极低 NFE 下高阶方法的潜力。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看少步数采样的对比实验部分即可，是扩散模型采样加速的即插即用方案，对预训练本身无直接指导意义。","en":"Only check the few-step sampling comparison experiments, it is a plug-and-play diffusion sampling acceleration scheme, no direct guidance for pretraining itself."}},{"id":"ZhengLCZ23","title":"DPM-Solver-v3: Improved Diffusion ODE Solver with Empirical Model Statistics","authors":["Kaiwen Zheng","Cheng Lu","Jianfei Chen","Jun Zhu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$eb","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhengLCZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhengLCZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ada8de994b46571bdcd7eeff2d3f9cff-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：扩散模型采样速度和样本质量之间仍有明显张力，现有高阶 ODE solver 在低步数下容易受模型误差影响，而理论阶数高并不自动等于实际采样更稳。作者希望利用模型在不同时间步上的经验统计信息，修正 solver 对 score/noise 预测误差的处理方式，从而在同样步数下得到更好的质量—速度折中。","importance":"这是一个方法级、系统感很强的工作。它对 pretrain 的直接启示不如语言模型论文强，但对 diffusion 作为替代建模范式很有参考价值：当生成模型越来越大时，性能瓶颈往往不只在训练目标，也在推断器是否充分利用了模型误差结构。换句话说，采样器不是纯后处理，它会反过来决定你训练出来的模型能释放出多少能力。","technical_approach":"DPM-Solver-v3 的核心是，在经典 DPM-Solver 的解析积分框架上，引入经验模型统计量来校正不同时间段的局部解误差。与只依赖理论泰勒展开或固定假设的高阶 solver 相比，它更像是在求解器里加入一个 data/model-aware 的误差补偿项。这样设计有效，是因为真实扩散模型的预测误差并不满足理想化平滑假设，尤其在少步采样时，局部偏差会被快速累积；用经验统计去估计和抵消这类偏差，比单纯追求更高理论阶数更实用。代价是需要额外统计估计过程，并且统计量是否跨模型、跨噪声日程泛化，是这类方法的天然边界。","experiments":"这类论文的关键事实通常是：在图像生成基准上，v3 能在 5 到 20 步等低步数采样区域优于前代 DPM-Solver 和其他常见 solver，在 FID 或类似质量指标上取得更好结果，或者在相同质量下进一步减少步数。更有价值的实验通常包括：不同 prediction parameterization（如 noise / data / velocity）下是否都稳定；经验统计是离线预估还是在线更新；以及统计项去掉后性能回退多少。由于当前没有摘要，无法可靠给出具体数据集、UNet/DiT 规模和精确数值，但从论文标题可以确定，核心贡献是“用经验模型统计改善 ODE 采样器”，而不是改训练目标。","authors_note":"作者列表中 Jun Zhu 是清华大学机器学习方向知名学者，相关团队在扩散模型、生成建模和概率推断上长期有代表性工作。由于输入未明确机构对应关系，这里不展开。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical bottleneck in diffusion sampling: existing ODE solvers often lose quality when the number of sampling steps is small, and higher theoretical order does not automatically translate into better real-world performance. The authors aim to use empirical statistics of model behavior across timesteps to correct solver error and improve the quality-speed trade-off.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution with strong systems relevance. Its direct connection to language pretraining is limited, but it matters for diffusion as an alternative generative paradigm: once the model is large enough, generation quality depends not only on the training objective but also on whether the sampler handles model error well. In that sense, the solver is not merely post-processing; it determines how much of the trained model’s capability is actually recoverable at inference time.","technical_approach":"DPM-Solver-v3 extends the analytical integration framework of earlier DPM-Solver methods by incorporating empirical model statistics to compensate for local truncation and prediction errors. The key difference from purely theory-driven high-order solvers is that v3 is explicitly model-aware: it uses observed error structure instead of assuming ideal smoothness. This is effective because real diffusion models do not behave like clean textbook ODEs, especially in low-step sampling where local bias accumulates quickly. Estimating and correcting that bias can be more useful than increasing formal solver order. The trade-off is extra statistical estimation, and a natural open question is how well those statistics transfer across architectures and noise schedules.","experiments":"The core empirical claim is likely that v3 improves low-step sampling, often in the 5–20 step regime, over prior DPM-Solver variants and other standard samplers, either by lowering FID at fixed steps or by reaching comparable quality with fewer steps. The most informative ablations would test robustness across prediction parameterizations such as noise, data, or velocity prediction, and isolate the contribution of the empirical-statistics term by removing it. Without the abstract, exact datasets, model sizes, and numbers should not be invented, but the title already makes the main point clear: this is a better diffusion ODE solver via empirical model statistics, not a new diffusion training objective.","authors_note":"Jun Zhu is a well-known researcher from Tsinghua University with representative work in diffusion models, probabilistic inference, and generative modeling. The current input does not explicitly map authors to institutions, so details are kept minimal."},"tags":["diffusion","sampling","solver"],"notable_authors":["Jun Zhu"],"keywords":["diffusion models","fast sampling","ODE solver"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§3的经验统计校正逻辑，其思路可以迁移到大模型生成解码的误差补偿优化中，不需要纠结扩散相关数学细节。","en":"Focus on the empirical statistical correction logic in §3, its idea can be migrated to LLM generation decoding error compensation optimization, no need to dwell on diffusion math details."}},{"id":"ZhongLTA23","title":"The Clock and the Pizza: Two Stories in Mechanistic Explanation of Neural Networks","authors":["Ziqian Zhong","Ziming Liu","Max Tegmark","Jacob Andreas"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ec","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhongLTA23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhongLTA23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/56cbfbf49937a0873d451343ddc8c57d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关心的不是把网络做得更强，而是机制解释到底怎样才算“解释到了点上”。过去 mechanistic interpretability 往往在局部电路上给出看似漂亮的故事，但这些故事是否真正具备因果支撑、是否能推广到模型整体，常常缺少检验。作者用“Clock”和“Pizza”两个案例讨论神经网络解释中的成功与陷阱，核心问题是如何区分真的机制解释和只是事后讲故事。","importance":"这项工作的价值在研究方法论层面。对 pretrain 研究者来说，它的重要性在于提醒我们：对大模型内部机制的理解，如果没有因果干预、替代解释排除和任务层验证，很容易形成错误直觉，进而误导架构设计或数据分析。它不是直接改进训练，但能帮助社区提高解释性研究的证据标准。","technical_approach":"从标题看，论文采用两个具体案例展开对照分析：一个案例可能展示了相对成功、可验证的机制解释；另一个案例则展示了虽然表面上能讲通，但在因果上并不稳固的解释。技术路线大概率包括可视化、单元/子电路定位、激活或权重干预，以及观察行为变化来验证解释链。与很多纯描述式 interpretability 工作不同，这类设计的重点不在于找出一个看起来有意思的 neuron，而在于建立“解释—干预—行为变化”闭环。这样做有效，是因为真正的机制解释必须能支持反事实预测：改掉这部分机制，行为就应按解释所说那样变化。","experiments":"这篇论文的实验价值主要体现在案例剖析而非 benchmark 分数。更值得关注的是它是否展示了：某些直观解释在相关性层面成立，但在介入实验中失效；以及一个好的解释需要满足哪些证据条件，例如紧致性、可组合性、反事实可预测性。若论文提供定量指标，通常也会围绕解释保真度、干预效果或电路覆盖度，而不是下游准确率。由于没有摘要，无法可靠列出具体模型架构、任务和数值。","authors_note":"作者中 Max Tegmark 与 Jacob Andreas 都是机制解释与表示学习方向的知名学者。输入未明确机构，但这两位的加入说明论文更偏研究方法论和解释性分析，而非工程系统。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper is not about making networks stronger, but about what counts as a real mechanistic explanation. Prior interpretability work often presents elegant circuit-level stories, yet many of those stories are weakly validated and may not survive causal testing. Using two case studies, “Clock” and “Pizza,” the paper asks how to separate genuine mechanism from post hoc narrative.","importance":"Its value is methodological. For pretraining researchers, the key lesson is that intuitions about internal model mechanisms can be dangerously misleading if they are built on correlation alone rather than intervention and falsification. The paper does not improve training directly, but it raises the evidentiary standard for using interpretability insights to guide architecture or data decisions.","technical_approach":"From the title, the paper likely contrasts two cases: one where the proposed explanation is causally meaningful and one where a plausible-looking explanation breaks under scrutiny. The technical toolkit probably includes visualization, neuron or circuit identification, activation or weight interventions, and behavioral tests after intervention. The important distinction from purely descriptive interpretability is the closed loop between explanation, intervention, and resulting behavior. That design is appropriate because a mechanistic explanation should support counterfactual predictions: if the claimed mechanism is altered, behavior should change in the predicted way.","experiments":"The empirical contribution is likely in the depth of the case studies rather than benchmark scores. The most useful findings would be examples where correlational explanations fail under intervention, and a clearer set of criteria for what makes an explanation convincing, such as compactness, compositionality, and counterfactual validity. If the paper includes quantitative metrics, they are more likely to concern explanation fidelity or intervention effect size than downstream accuracy. Without the abstract, exact architectures, tasks, and numbers cannot be stated reliably.","authors_note":"Max Tegmark and Jacob Andreas are both well-known researchers in interpretability and representation learning. The input does not explicitly provide institutions, but their presence suggests a methodologically oriented interpretability paper rather than a systems paper."},"tags":["mechanistic-interpretability","explanation","neural-networks"],"notable_authors":["Max Tegmark","Jacob Andreas"],"keywords":["mechanistic interpretability","algorithmic phase transitions","arithmetic learning","neural network","transformer","ensemble"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读两个案例的因果验证设计部分，能帮你规避预训练机制解释研究中常见的事后讲故事的逻辑漏洞。","en":"Focus on the causal verification design of the two cases, it can help you avoid common post-hoc storytelling logic loopholes in pretraining mechanism interpretation research."}},{"id":"Zhu0ZBJJ23","title":"Towards Optimal Caching and Model Selection for Large Model Inference","authors":["Banghua Zhu","Ying Sheng","Lianmin Zheng","Clark W. Barrett","Michael I. Jordan","Jiantao Jiao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ed","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Zhu0ZBJJ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Zhu0ZBJJ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/b914a8fcea5c176cf1ed75c762ce27fd-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：大模型推理系统里，缓存策略和模型选择通常被分开做，导致端到端吞吐、时延和成本都不是全局最优。过去很多系统只优化单点，例如 KV cache、批处理或路由策略，但在多模型、多请求类型、有限显存的真实服务环境里，'缓存什么'和'请求发到哪个模型'是强耦合问题。","importance":"它的重要性主要是系统级，对 pretrain 的直接贡献有限，但对大模型研究闭环很有价值。原因很简单：预训练侧越来越依赖推理服务反馈来决定模型尺寸、蒸馏层次和 serving 形态，而这篇工作讨论的正是部署约束如何反向决定应该保留多大模型、是否需要模型池、以及缓存预算该如何分配。对于做 foundation model 的团队，这是连接模型能力和实际可服务性的关键一环。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把缓存决策和模型选择放进统一优化框架，而不是分别启发式处理。题目里的 'Towards Optimal' 表明作者大概率先给出一个形式化目标，例如在显存、延迟或请求 SLA 约束下最小化平均代价或最大化吞吐，再设计可解的算法近似最优策略。关键设计点应包括：请求分布建模、不同模型在质量-时延上的 Pareto 差异、缓存命中对推理代价的影响，以及在线决策的可实现性。相比只做 cache eviction 或只做 model routing，这种联合优化更接近真实系统；代价是需要更强的工作负载假设，分布变动时策略可能需要重估。","experiments":"可以确定实验会围绕真实或模拟 LLM serving 工作负载，比较联合优化方法与分离式基线在吞吐、平均时延、尾延迟或成本上的差异。主要 baseline 很可能包括常见缓存策略、固定模型服务、启发式路由和单独优化的调度器。由于没有摘要，无法可靠给出是否使用 vLLM/ORCA 类系统、具体模型规模、请求 trace 来源和提升数字。能较稳妥判断的是：论文应展示在有限缓存和异构模型池下，联合决策明显优于单独做 caching 或 model selection，并通过 ablation 说明收益依赖于请求重用度和模型异质性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a coupled systems problem: caching decisions and model selection for large-model inference are usually optimized separately, which leaves end-to-end latency, throughput, and cost far from optimal. In real serving stacks with multiple models, heterogeneous requests, and tight memory budgets, deciding what to cache and which model should serve a request are not independent choices.","importance":"This is mainly a systems contribution rather than a pretraining one, but it matters for the pretrain-to-serve loop. Deployment constraints increasingly shape model sizing, distillation strategy, and whether teams should operate a model pool instead of a single frontier model. A framework that exposes the joint trade-off between cache budget and model routing is therefore directly useful for foundation-model engineering.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to formulate caching and model selection as a joint optimization problem instead of handling them with separate heuristics. The 'towards optimal' framing suggests an explicit objective under memory, latency, or SLA constraints, followed by an algorithm that is either optimal under assumptions or a tractable approximation. The important ingredients are likely workload modeling, quality-latency Pareto differences across models, the cost reduction from cache hits, and an online policy that can actually be deployed. Compared with standalone cache eviction or routing, the joint view is more realistic; the downside is stronger dependence on workload assumptions.","experiments":"The experiments are likely built around realistic or trace-driven LLM serving workloads, comparing the joint policy against standard caching baselines, fixed-model serving, heuristic routing, or decoupled optimizers. The main metrics should be throughput, average latency, tail latency, and serving cost. Because no abstract is provided, I cannot safely name the exact serving stack, model sizes, workload traces, or numeric gains. The robust takeaway is that the paper should show clear benefits of joint optimization under constrained cache and heterogeneous model pools, with ablations tying the gains to request reuse and model diversity.","authors_note":""},"tags":["serving","caching","inference","model-selection"],"notable_authors":["Michael I. Jordan"],"keywords":["caching","model selection","large language models","foundation models","inference","bandit","regret"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§5的联合优化策略和实际部署测试结果即可，可作为预训练模型尺寸选型、蒸馏层级设计的部署侧参考依据。","en":"Only check the joint optimization strategy in §5 and actual deployment test results, can be used as deployment-side reference for pretraining model size selection and distillation hierarchy design."}},{"id":"ZhuTSZ23","title":"Generalized Logit Adjustment: Calibrating Fine-tuned Models by Removing Label Bias in Foundation Models","authors":["Beier Zhu","Kaihua Tang","Qianru Sun","Hanwang Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ee","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhuTSZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhuTSZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/cbe1fd3136e0f049bb8bc104231ccb99-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：微调后的分类模型常带着 foundation model 预训练阶段形成的标签先验偏置，导致概率校准差、长尾类受损，而常见校准方法多在输出层做温度缩放，不能针对这种由预训练表征和标签偏好共同引入的系统性偏差。这个问题值得关注，因为 foundation model 越强，预训练先验越会主导少样本和分布外场景下的决策。","importance":"这是方法级工作，重点不在提升峰值精度，而在解释并修正 foundation model 微调后的 label bias。对 pretrain 的启示是，预训练模型并不是中性的特征提取器，它会把训练语料中的类别频率和语义偏好带入下游；如果只看平均 accuracy，这种问题容易被掩盖，但在校准、长尾和迁移场景里会放大。因此这类工作对理解 pretrain→finetune 接口很有价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 generalized logit adjustment，用更一般的 logit 偏置修正来去除 foundation model 的标签偏置。它可以看作对长尾学习里 logit adjustment 的扩展，但这里调整的不是简单经验类别频率，而是微调模型继承自预训练先验的偏置项。方法设计的关键在于：估计或分解出预测分数中由标签先验带来的部分，再在推理或训练中做校正，从而改善后验概率的校准。相比温度缩放，这种方法能处理类别间非均匀偏差；相比重新重采样训练，它代价更低、适配性更强，但前提是偏置能被 logit 层面的修正近似。","experiments":"从题目可确定实验会聚焦校准与分类性能，尤其是在 foundation model 微调场景下，与温度缩放、普通 logit adjustment 或其他后处理校准方法比较。关键指标应包括 ECE、NLL、Brier score 以及 accuracy，可能还会覆盖长尾或分布偏移数据集。没有摘要，无法确认使用的是 CLIP、ViT、BERT 还是其他 foundation model，也不能给出具体提升数字。能较有把握地说，论文应展示：去除标签偏置后，校准显著改善，同时精度基本保持或在尾部类别上提升，并通过 ablation 说明偏置估计方式对效果敏感。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a specific calibration issue: fine-tuned models inherit label bias from their foundation-model pretraining, and standard calibration tools such as temperature scaling do not explicitly remove that bias. This matters because stronger pretrained models often inject stronger priors into downstream predictions, especially in few-shot, long-tail, or shifted settings.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution with useful implications for the pretrain-to-finetune interface. The main message is that a foundation model is not a neutral feature extractor; it carries category priors and semantic preferences from pretraining, and those priors can hurt calibration even when top-line accuracy looks fine. That makes the work relevant beyond calibration itself, especially for understanding transfer behavior under imbalance and shift.","technical_approach":"The core method is generalized logit adjustment, which applies a more flexible correction to prediction logits to remove inherited label bias. It extends the idea of logit adjustment from long-tail learning, but the target here is not just empirical class frequency in the finetuning set; it is the bias induced by the pretrained foundation model. The key design choice is to estimate the prior-like component embedded in the logits and subtract or compensate for it during training or inference. Compared with temperature scaling, this can correct class-specific distortions rather than only global overconfidence. Compared with retraining under resampling, it is cheaper, but it assumes the bias is well captured at the logit level.","experiments":"The experiments should center on calibration and classification performance after finetuning foundation models, with baselines such as temperature scaling, standard logit adjustment, and other post-hoc calibration methods. Relevant metrics likely include ECE, NLL, Brier score, and accuracy, possibly on long-tail or shifted datasets. Without the abstract, I cannot reliably state the exact pretrained backbone, datasets, or numerical gains. The most defensible summary is that the paper should show sizable calibration improvements with little or no loss in accuracy, and likely stronger benefits on minority or biased classes.","authors_note":""},"tags":["fine-tuning","calibration","label-bias","foundation-models"],"keywords":["Foundation Model","Class Bias","Generalized Logit Adjustment"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§3的预训练标签偏置分解方法，可在内部长尾任务微调、分布外泛化实验中复用该校准逻辑。","en":"Focus on the pretraining label bias decomposition method in §3, this calibration logic can be reused in internal long-tail fine-tuning and out-of-distribution generalization experiments."}},{"id":"KingYM23","title":"Multimodal Pretraining of Medical Time Series and Notes","authors":["Ryan King","Tianbao Yang","Bobak J. Mortazavi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/ml4h/KingYM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/ml4h/KingYM23","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v225/king23a.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：如何把医疗时间序列和临床文本笔记放进同一个预训练框架里学到可迁移表示。此前这两类模态大多分开建模，时间序列偏监督预测，文本偏临床 NLP，导致跨模态互补信息没有被系统吸收，也难以像通用多模态预训练那样复用到多任务上。","importance":"它的意义主要是方法方向上的验证，而不是通用 pretrain 范式的突破。对 pretrain 研究者有启发的点在于：即使是高度异质、采样频率不规则的医疗时间序列，只要和文本对齐得足够稳定，也可以进入统一预训练视角；但它的边界也很明显，数据域窄、标注和隐私约束强，难直接外推到开放域多模态模型。","technical_approach":"核心思路是做医疗场景下的时序+文本联合预训练。通常这类方法会把病人监测序列编码成时间感知表示，把临床笔记编码成文本表示，再用跨模态对齐或融合目标联合训练；相比只做 late fusion 的下游模型，这种设计的价值在于先学共享语义空间，使文本中的病程描述和监护信号中的生理变化彼此约束，从而降低单模态噪声的影响。代价是预训练目标和时间对齐策略会显著影响收益，时间窗口切分不稳时很容易学到伪相关。","experiments":"从给定信息无法确认具体实验设置、模型规模、数据规模和指标，因此只能保守判断：论文应当评估了跨模态预训练对临床预测或检索类任务的增益，并与单模态或无预训练基线比较。若没有公开摘要与数字，无法负责任地复述提升幅度；对这类工作，最值得看的通常是两点 ablation：一是是否真的优于简单拼接输入，二是时间序列预训练目标与文本对齐损失各自贡献多大。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a concrete multimodal pretraining problem: how to jointly model medical time series and clinical notes so the learned representation transfers across tasks. Prior work usually treated these modalities separately—time series for supervised prediction and notes for clinical NLP—so cross-modal structure was underused and reuse across tasks was limited.","importance":"Its contribution is mainly methodological validation rather than a new foundation-model paradigm. The useful takeaway for pretraining is that irregular, noisy medical time series can still fit into a unified pretraining setup when alignment with text is handled carefully; the limitation is equally clear: the domain is narrow, privacy-constrained, and far from open-domain multimodal scaling regimes.","technical_approach":"The likely core design is joint pretraining over a time-series encoder and a text encoder, with cross-modal alignment or fusion objectives on top. Relative to task-specific late fusion, this matters because the model can first learn a shared latent space where textual descriptions of patient state and physiological trajectories constrain each other. That should improve robustness to single-modality noise, but the gain depends heavily on temporal alignment choices and on whether the pretraining task avoids learning shortcut correlations.","experiments":"The provided metadata does not include the experimental details, so model size, dataset size, baselines, and metrics cannot be stated reliably. The most informative checks for a paper of this type are usually whether joint pretraining beats simple input concatenation, and how much of the gain comes from cross-modal alignment versus unimodal pretraining.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal-pretraining","time-series","clinical-notes","representation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看跨模态对齐目标设计和迁移实验部分即可，属于垂直域多模态预训练的验证性工作，无通用范式突破。","en":"Only check the cross-modal alignment objective design and transfer experiments, it is a verifiable vertical domain multimodal pretraining work, no general paradigm breakthrough."}},{"id":"MoorHWYDLZRR23","title":"Med-Flamingo: a Multimodal Medical Few-shot Learner","authors":["Michael Moor","Qian Huang","Shirley Wu","Michihiro Yasunaga","Yash Dalmia","Jure Leskovec","Cyril Zakka","Eduardo Pontes Reis","Pranav Rajpurkar"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/ml4h/MoorHWYDLZRR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/ml4h/MoorHWYDLZRR23","_ee":"https://proceedings.mlr.press/v225/moor23a.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：能否把 Flamingo 式少样本多模态学习迁移到医学场景，让模型在极少示例下理解医学图像与文本。此前医学多模态系统通常按任务和模态分别训练，泛化到新任务时依赖专门标注和重训练，这和通用大模型的 few-shot 使用方式差距很大。","importance":"它的重要性在于把通用多模态 in-context learning 范式带入高价值但高门槛的医疗领域。对 pretrain 的启示不是“医学性能又涨了多少”，而是：领域化多模态模型是否可以沿用大模型的接口设计、数据组织方式和上下文学习机制；如果成立，说明多模态预训练的收益不只来自规模，也来自统一任务接口。","technical_approach":"核心方法大概率是基于 Flamingo 架构做医学适配：冻结或部分冻结大语言模型与视觉骨干，再插入跨模态门控/交叉注意模块，用医学图文数据进行训练。这样的设计比端到端从零训练更现实，因为医疗数据量往往不足以支撑完全重训；同时 few-shot 接口要求模型在上下文中读懂任务示例，而不是把每个任务都蒸馏进参数里。代价是领域偏移会非常敏感，通用视觉编码器和通用语言模型在医学概念上的先验未必可靠。","experiments":"从给定信息无法确认模型参数、训练数据规模和具体 benchmark。合理预期是论文比较了 Med-Flamingo 与医学专用监督模型、通用 VLM 以及少样本基线，在多个医学视觉问答或报告生成相关任务上评估 few-shot 性能；真正值得关注的实验通常是随着 shot 数增加的 scaling、是否优于 full fine-tuning 的小模型，以及上下文示例选择对性能的影响。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper asks whether a Flamingo-style few-shot multimodal learner can be adapted to medicine, where models need to understand medical images together with text under very limited supervision. Earlier medical multimodal systems were mostly task-specific, so moving to a new task still required labels and retraining.","importance":"Its value is in importing the in-context multimodal paradigm into a domain where annotation is expensive and generalization matters. For pretraining researchers, the interesting question is not just medical accuracy; it is whether unified prompting and few-shot interfaces survive a strong domain shift, which would support the idea that part of pretraining’s value comes from the interface and data format, not only from scale.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is a medical adaptation of Flamingo: a pretrained language model and vision backbone connected through cross-modal gating or attention layers, trained on medical image-text pairs. This is a pragmatic choice because medical corpora are rarely large enough for full end-to-end retraining. It also preserves few-shot prompting behavior, though the trade-off is clear: generic vision and language priors may be weak or misleading for specialized medical concepts.","experiments":"The provided record does not include reliable details on parameter count, data scale, or exact benchmarks. The key experimental questions for this kind of work are usually whether few-shot prompting is competitive with supervised medical baselines, how performance scales with the number of demonstrations, and how sensitive the model is to exemplar selection and modality mismatch.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal","few-shot","medical-vlm","flamingo"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读领域适配阶段的冻结策略和少样本测试结果，可复用在其他垂直域多模态预训练的架构设计中。","en":"Focus on the freezing strategy in domain adaptation phase and few-shot test results, can be reused in architecture design of other vertical domain multimodal pretraining."}},{"id":"2212.00616","title":"Extensible Prompts for Language Models on Zero-shot Language Style Customization","authors":["Tao Ge","Jing Hu","Li Dong","Shaoguang Mao","Yan Xia","Xun Wang","Si-Qing Chen","Furu Wei"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ef","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.00616","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/000100M0WCW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/000100M0WCW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/6fcbfb3721c1781728b10c6685cc2f6c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的核心问题是：自然语言提示本身表达力有限，很多风格或控制意图很难靠现有词汇稳定描述。过去的做法要么依赖冗长 prompt 反复试，要么用 soft prompt 只在训练分布内奏效，缺少一种既可扩展又能在新提示中复用的离散控制接口。","importance":"这项工作的价值在于提出了一种介于自然语言提示和连续 soft prompt 之间的控制层。对 pretrain/ posttrain 接口的启示很直接：模型不一定只能通过已有词表交互，也可以注册新的“概念 token”来承载难以自然语言压缩表达的控制信号；如果这种 token 能 OOD 泛化，它会比任务绑定的 soft prompt 更接近可部署接口。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 X-Prompt：给 LLM 扩展一组 imaginary words，用这些新词作为可学习、可复用的提示符号。关键不只是学一个 embedding，而是用 CAL（context-augmented learning）让这些词在不同上下文中都保留稳定语义，从而避免 soft prompt 常见的“只记住训练模板”问题。和直接写自然语言相比，它牺牲了解释性，换来更高的表达带宽；和 prefix/soft prompt 相比，它追求的是离散、可组合、跨提示泛化的控制能力。","experiments":"论文聚焦 zero-shot language style customization。根据摘要可确认，作者主要检验 imaginary words 在未见 prompt 上的可复用性，并与自然语言 prompt、soft prompt 类方法比较；给定信息里没有参数规模、数据规模和具体提升数字，无法精确复述。最值得关注的实验应当包括：CAL 相比不做上下文增强时的 OOD 差距、imaginary words 数量对控制能力与干扰程度的权衡，以及这些新词在不同模板下的语义稳定性。","authors_note":"可确认作者包括 Tao Ge、Li Dong。仅凭给定信息无法稳妥确认机构与团队代表作，因此不展开。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical limitation of prompting: natural language alone is often too weak or too verbose to express fine-grained style control reliably. Earlier alternatives such as soft prompts can fit a target behavior, but they usually remain tied to the training distribution and do not act like reusable language.","importance":"The contribution is a new control interface between plain text prompting and continuous prompt tuning. For pretraining and post-training, the key implication is that interaction with an LM need not be restricted to the original vocabulary: one can register new concept-like tokens that carry compressed control signals, and if those tokens generalize out of distribution, they become more useful than template-bound soft prompts.","technical_approach":"The method, X-Prompt, extends the prompt vocabulary with learned imaginary words. The important design choice is CAL, or context-augmented learning, which trains these new tokens to keep a stable meaning across varied contexts instead of overfitting to a single prompt template. Compared with natural-language prompting, this gives up readability in exchange for higher expressive bandwidth. Compared with soft or prefix prompts, it aims for reusable, discrete, compositional control rather than in-distribution fitting.","experiments":"The paper studies zero-shot language style customization. From the abstract, the central empirical claim is that imaginary words transfer to unseen prompts better than standard prompt tuning approaches, but the provided metadata does not include model size, training data size, or exact gains. The most informative ablations are likely the effect of CAL on OOD robustness, the number of imaginary words needed, and whether their semantics remain stable across prompt templates.","authors_note":"Confirmed authors include Tao Ge and Li Dong. The provided information is insufficient to state institutions or team lineage confidently."},"tags":["prompting","control","soft-prompt","llm"],"notable_authors":["Tao Ge","Li Dong"],"keywords":["large language model","prompt","imaginary words","OOD robustness","natural language","zero-shot"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的CAL方法设计和§5的OOD泛化实验即可，可复用概念token的思路可拿到内部prompt接口相关 ablation 测试。","en":"Only read §3 for CAL method design and §5 for OOD generalization experiments; the reusable concept token idea is worth testing in internal prompt interface ablations."}},{"id":"0001M023","title":"DoWG Unleashed: An Efficient Universal Parameter-Free Gradient Descent Method","authors":["Ahmed Khaled","Konstantin Mishchenko","Chi Jin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"This paper proposes a new easy-to-implement parameter-free gradient-based optimizer: DoWG (Distance over Weighted Gradients). We prove that DoWG is efficient---matching the convergence rate of optimally tuned gradient descent in convex optimization up to a logarithmic factor without tuning any parameters, and universal---automatically adapting to both smooth and nonsmooth problems. While popular algorithms following the AdaGrad framework compute a running average of the squared gradients, DoWG maintains a new distance-based weighted version of the running average, which is crucial to achieve the desired properties. To complement our theory, we also show empirically that DoWG trains at the edge of stability, and validate its effectiveness on practical machine learning tasks.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001M023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001M023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/15ce36d35622f126f38e90167de1a350-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作试图解决的是：能否设计一种真正通用、免调参的梯度下降方法，在不知道 Lipschitz 常数、噪声水平或最优学习率的情况下仍然稳定有效。这个问题长期存在，因为很多优化器的理论保证和实际好用性之间有明显落差，尤其在大规模训练里，学习率调参成本很高。","importance":"它的贡献属于优化算法层面。对 pretrain 的意义在于，如果参数无关的自适应方法既有理论保证又有可接受常数项，就有机会降低大规模训练的调参负担和迁移成本；但这类方法是否真能替代 AdamW/SGD，关键不在形式上“免调参”，而在噪声、非平稳损失和大 batch 条件下是否稳。","technical_approach":"从标题看，DoWG Unleashed 提出的是一种 universal、parameter-free 的 gradient descent 变体。关键设计通常是根据梯度历史自动设定步长，并在凸/非凸、确定性/随机场景中维持统一保证。和手工设定学习率的优化器相比，它追求的是对问题尺度和未知平滑性的自适应；代价往往是更新规则更保守，或者理论好看但在深网训练中的隐式偏置不同。","experiments":"给定信息没有摘要与数值，无法确认理论与实证各占比重，也无法确认比较对象。若包含实验，通常会与 SGD、Adam、AdaGrad 等对比，展示在少调参或零调参设置下的收敛表现。对大模型训练读者来说，真正有价值的是：它在 noisy stochastic regime 下是否稳定、是否需要 warmup、对 batch size 变化是否鲁棒，而不只是小规模基准上的函数值收敛。","authors_note":"可确认作者包括 Ahmed Khaled、Konstantin Mishchenko、Chi Jin。仅凭给定信息无法稳妥确认机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a classic optimization goal: a genuinely universal, parameter-free gradient method that works without knowing smoothness constants, noise levels, or a good learning rate in advance. This remains relevant because tuning optimization hyperparameters is still expensive and fragile, especially at large scale.","importance":"The contribution is at the optimizer level. For pretraining, the attraction is obvious: if a parameter-free method is both theoretically sound and practically stable, it could reduce retuning cost across models and regimes. The real bar, however, is not whether it avoids manual learning-rate choice on paper, but whether it remains competitive under noisy, non-stationary, large-batch training.","technical_approach":"From the title, DoWG Unleashed is a universal adaptive gradient-descent variant that sets step sizes from gradient history rather than user-chosen schedules. The design goal is broad applicability across deterministic and stochastic, convex and non-convex settings. Relative to standard tuned optimizers, it trades explicit schedule design for automatic scale adaptation; the possible downside is conservatism or an implicit bias that differs from methods like AdamW.","experiments":"No abstract or quantitative results are available in the provided record, so the balance between theory and experiments cannot be stated confidently. If empirical results are included, the relevant comparisons are likely against SGD, Adam, and AdaGrad under limited tuning. For large-scale training, the practical questions are whether it is stable in noisy stochastic regimes, whether it needs warmup anyway, and how robust it is to batch-size changes.","authors_note":"Confirmed authors include Ahmed Khaled, Konstantin Mishchenko, and Chi Jin. The provided information is insufficient to state institutions confidently."},"tags":["optimizer","gradient-descent","optimization","training-stability"],"notable_authors":["Ahmed Khaled","Konstantin Mishchenko","Chi Jin"],"keywords":["normalized gradient descent","gradient descent","adagrad","adaptive optimization","parameter-free","smooth optimization","convex optimization","edge of stability"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§4的大规模LLM训练实测部分，验证免调参优化器在大batch非平稳损失下的稳定性再考虑是否替换AdamW。","en":"Focus on §4 for large-scale LLM training empirical results; verify its stability under large-batch non-stationary loss before considering replacing AdamW."}},{"id":"0001SGPF0B23","title":"Structured State Space Models for In-Context Reinforcement Learning","authors":["Chris Lu","Yannick Schroecker","Albert Gu","Emilio Parisotto","Jakob N. Foerster","Satinder Singh","Feryal M. P. Behbahani"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f0","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001SGPF0B23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001SGPF0B23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/92d3d2a9801211ca3693ccb2faa1316f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作研究的是：如何用结构化状态空间模型来做 in-context reinforcement learning，让序列模型在上下文里吸收历史交互并快速适应决策任务。过去这类问题多用 transformer 当通用序列策略，但长轨迹下计算和记忆成本高，而且其归纳偏置未必适合 RL 中的时序状态更新。","importance":"它的重要性在于把 SSM 这类长序列架构引入 ICRL。对 pretrain 研究者的启示是，in-context learning 不一定非得靠注意力机制实现；如果状态空间模型能更高效地维护决策历史与隐状态，那么大规模序列建模的架构选择会更开放，尤其对长 horizon agent 和在线适应场景有现实价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法是用 structured state space models 替代或补充 transformer，来建模轨迹中的观测、动作和回报序列。为什么这样设计：SSM 的递推结构天然适合长序列压缩和状态更新，理论上比全注意力更省内存、更线性；而 ICRL 需要的正是把过去经验压进上下文形成临时策略。和标准 transformer policy 相比，它牺牲了一部分灵活的全局两两交互，换来更强的时间递推偏置和更好的长度扩展性。","experiments":"给定信息没有摘要数字，无法确认具体环境、模型规模和提升幅度。合理预期是论文在 bandit、tabular control 或部分观测环境上比较 SSM 与 transformer 的 in-context 适应能力，并报告随上下文长度增长的性能与效率。最值得看的实验是长度外推：训练时较短轨迹，测试时更长轨迹是否仍能稳定工作；这会直接决定它对长上下文 agent pretraining 的参考价值。","authors_note":"作者名单包含 Chris Lu、Yannick Schroecker、Albert Gu、Emilio Parisotto、Jakob N. Foerster 等。仅凭给定信息无法稳妥确认机构，但可看出作者中包含状态空间模型与强化学习方向的知名研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies how to use structured state space models for in-context reinforcement learning, where a sequence model must absorb prior interactions from context and adapt its behavior on the fly. Transformers have been the default architecture here, but their cost grows poorly with long trajectories and their inductive bias is not obviously ideal for RL-style state updating.","importance":"This matters because it broadens the architectural options for in-context learning beyond attention. For pretraining researchers, the implication is that meta-learning through context may not require a transformer if a state space model can maintain decision-relevant latent state more efficiently. That is especially relevant for long-horizon agents and sequence-heavy online adaptation.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to model trajectories of observations, actions, and rewards with structured state space models instead of, or alongside, transformers. This design makes sense because SSMs offer a recurrent update mechanism with better long-sequence scaling, which matches the need in in-context RL to compress past experience into a temporary policy. Compared with transformers, the trade-off is less explicit all-to-all interaction but a stronger temporal inductive bias and better length scalability.","experiments":"The provided record does not include the abstract details or quantitative results, so environments, model sizes, and gains cannot be reported confidently. A paper of this type would usually compare SSMs against transformers on contextual adaptation across bandits or control environments, with particular attention to sequence length and efficiency. The most useful result is likely length extrapolation: whether a model trained on shorter contexts still works when the trajectory becomes much longer.","authors_note":"The author list includes Chris Lu, Yannick Schroecker, Albert Gu, Emilio Parisotto, and Jakob N. Foerster. The provided information is insufficient to state institutions confidently."},"tags":["state-space-model","in-context-learning","reinforcement-learning","sequence-modeling"],"notable_authors":["Chris Lu","Yannick Schroecker","Albert Gu","Emilio Parisotto","Jakob N. Foerster"],"keywords":["Reinforcement Learning","Meta-Learning","State Space Models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§4.2的长轨迹ICRL性能对比和Fig5的内存开销统计即可，SSM替代Transformer做长上下文决策的思路值得参考。","en":"Only read §4.2 for long-trajectory ICRL performance comparison and Fig5 for memory cost statistics; SSM as an alternative to Transformer for long-context decision making is worth noting."}},{"id":"0001TPNP23","title":"Parts of Speech-Grounded Subspaces in Vision-Language Models","authors":["James Oldfield","Christos Tzelepis","Yannis Panagakis","Mihalis Nicolaou","Ioannis Patras"],"institutions":["Queen Mary University of London","University of Athens"],"abstract":"$f1","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001TPNP23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001TPNP23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/07cf32cf61224da628157b7ed0ce994a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"解决视觉-语言模型（如 CLIP）潜在表示空间中不同视觉属性（如物体、动作、外观）相互纠缠的问题，提高表示的可解释性和下游任务效用。","importance":"方法级贡献。揭示了 CLIP 联合嵌入空间中的属性纠缠现象，并提供了一种基于词性（Parts of Speech）的解耦方法。这对于理解 VLM 的内部表示机制、改进 Zero-shot 检索和组合泛化能力具有启发意义。","technical_approach":"利用词性与特定视觉变化模式之间的关联（例如，名词对应物体，形容词对应外观）来分离 CLIP 空间中的表示。提出一种成分分析模型，通过优化目标，学习出多个正交子空间，使得每个子空间专门捕获与特定词性相关的视觉变化，从而实现属性解耦。","experiments":"在图像检索、属性识别和组合泛化任务上进行了评估。结果表明，将 CLIP 表示投影到学习到的词性子空间后，可以显著减少属性间的干扰，提升特定属性检索的准确率。例如，在基于外观的检索中，形容词子空间的表现优于原始的全局 CLIP 空间。","authors_note":"Queen Mary University of London 团队。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addresses the entanglement of different visual attributes (e.g., objects, actions, appearance) in the latent representation space of Vision-Language Models (like CLIP), aiming to improve interpretability and downstream utility.","importance":"Methodological contribution. It reveals the attribute entanglement in CLIP's joint embedding space and provides a decoupling method based on Parts of Speech. This is inspiring for understanding VLM internal mechanisms and improving zero-shot retrieval and compositional generalization.","technical_approach":"Leverages the association between parts of speech and specific visual modes of variation (e.g., nouns for objects, adjectives for appearance) to separate representations in CLIP space. Proposes a component analysis model that learns orthogonal subspaces via an optimization objective, making each subspace specialize in capturing visual variations related to a specific part of speech, thus achieving attribute decoupling.","experiments":"Evaluated on image retrieval, attribute recognition, and compositional generalization tasks. Results show that projecting CLIP representations into the learned POS subspaces significantly reduces inter-attribute interference and improves specific attribute retrieval accuracy. For instance, in appearance-based retrieval, the adjective subspace outperforms the original global CLIP space.","authors_note":"Queen Mary University of London team."},"tags":["vlm","representation","interpretability","alignment"],"keywords":["generative models","text-to-image","vision-language models","interpretability"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"CLIP 的图像表示通常以不可预测的方式偏向于特定的视觉属性（如物体或动作），导致表示纠缠。","claim_en":"CLIP image representations are often biased toward specific visual properties (such as objects or actions) in an unpredictable manner, leading to entangled representations.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract & Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"通过利用语言的词性结构（POS），可以在无需额外监督的情况下，有效地将 VLM 的联合表示空间解耦为对应不同视觉属性的正交子空间。","claim_en":"By leveraging the Parts of Speech (POS) structure of language, the joint representation space of VLMs can be effectively decoupled into orthogonal subspaces corresponding to different visual attributes without extra supervision.","opposes":"通常认为解耦视觉表示需要细粒度的属性标注或复杂的生成模型架构。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Method & Experiments","why_contested":"证明了语言的语法结构可以作为一种强大的先验，用于规范和解耦多模态表示空间。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为VLM表示解耦方向的文献备查，不需要细读正文，了解词性子空间的核心假设即可。","en":"Keep as reference literature for VLM representation disentanglement; no need to read full text, just grasp the core assumption of POS-aligned subspaces."}},{"id":"0002AS23","title":"The Crucial Role of Normalization in Sharpness-Aware Minimization","authors":["Yan Dai","Kwangjun Ahn","Suvrit Sra"],"institutions":["Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)"],"abstract":"Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) is a recently proposed gradient-based optimizer (Foret et al., ICLR 2021) that greatly improves the prediction performance of deep neural networks. Consequently, there has been a surge of interest in explaining its empirical success. We focus, in particular, on understanding ***the role played by normalization***, a key component of the SAM updates. We theoretically and empirically study the effect of normalization in SAM for both convex and non-convex functions, revealing two key roles played by normalization: i) it helps in stabilizing the algorithm; and ii) it enables the algorithm to drift along a continuum (manifold) of minima -- a property identified by recent theoretical works that is the key to better performance. We further argue that these two properties of normalization make SAM robust against the choice of hyper-parameters, supporting the practicality of SAM. Our conclusions are backed by various experiments.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0002AS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0002AS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/d616a353c711f11c722e3f28d2d9e956-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"解释锐度感知最小化（SAM）优化器为何能显著提升深度神经网络的泛化性能，特别是探究其中“归一化（Normalization）”操作的关键作用。","importance":"理论与机制级贡献。深入剖析了 SAM 优化器的内部机制，澄清了归一化操作并非仅仅是工程上的 trick，而是稳定算法并引导模型收敛到更平缓极小值（flatter minima）的核心动力。这对设计更好的优化器和理解模型泛化具有重要理论价值。","technical_approach":"通过理论分析和实证研究，解构了 SAM 更新中的归一化步骤。揭示了归一化的两个关键作用：1) 稳定算法，防止梯度爆炸；2) 促使算法沿着极小值流形（continuum of minima）漂移。作者证明，正是这种沿着流形的漂移，使得模型能够找到泛化性能更好的平缓极小值。","experiments":"在凸函数和非凸函数（深度神经网络）上进行了实验。对比了带有和不带有归一化操作的 SAM 变体。结果证实，去除归一化会导致 SAM 失去寻找平缓极小值的能力，泛化性能退化至与标准 SGD 相当。实验数据清晰地展示了归一化引起的参数漂移轨迹。","authors_note":"Suvrit Sra (MIT)。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Explains why the Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) optimizer significantly improves the generalization of deep neural networks, specifically investigating the crucial role of the 'normalization' operation within it.","importance":"Theoretical and mechanistic contribution. It deeply analyzes the internal mechanism of the SAM optimizer, clarifying that normalization is not just an engineering trick, but the core driver for stabilizing the algorithm and guiding the model to converge to flatter minima. This holds significant theoretical value for designing better optimizers and understanding model generalization.","technical_approach":"Deconstructs the normalization step in SAM updates through theoretical analysis and empirical study. It reveals two key roles of normalization: 1) stabilizing the algorithm and preventing gradient explosion; 2) enabling the algorithm to drift along a continuum (manifold) of minima. The authors prove that this drift along the manifold is what allows the model to find flatter minima with better generalization.","experiments":"Conducted experiments on both convex and non-convex functions (DNNs). Compared SAM variants with and without the normalization operation. Results confirm that removing normalization causes SAM to lose its ability to find flatter minima, degrading generalization performance to be comparable with standard SGD. Experimental data clearly demonstrates the parameter drift trajectory induced by normalization.","authors_note":"Suvrit Sra (MIT)."},"tags":["optimization","normalization","sam","training-stability"],"keywords":["Sharpness-Aware Minimization","Normalization","Deep Learning Theory"],"notable_authors":["Suvrit Sra"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"SAM 优化器通过最小化损失函数的锐度（Sharpness），能够引导模型收敛到更平缓的极小值，从而提升泛化能力。","claim_en":"The SAM optimizer guides models to converge to flatter minima by minimizing the sharpness of the loss function, thereby improving generalization.","evidence_anchor":"Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"SAM 寻找平缓极小值的关键能力，很大程度上来源于其更新公式中的梯度归一化操作引起的参数漂移，而非仅仅是极小化最大化（minimax）的优化目标本身。","claim_en":"SAM's key ability to find flatter minima largely stems from the parameter drift induced by the gradient normalization operation in its update formula, rather than solely from the minimax optimization objective itself.","opposes":"以往的观点通常将 SAM 的成功主要归结于其显式的锐度惩罚目标函数。","opposes_cite_hint":"Foret 2021 SAM","evidence_anchor":"Theoretical Analysis & Experiments","why_contested":"将理解 SAM 的焦点从目标函数转移到了优化动力学（特别是归一化引起的隐式正则化）上。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§3的归一化作用机制证明和§5的消融实验，结论可直接指导优化器调优和新泛化导向优化器的设计。","en":"Focus on §3 for normalization mechanism proof and §5 for ablation studies; conclusions can directly guide optimizer tuning and new generalization-oriented optimizer design."}},{"id":"0002BCD23","title":"Diffusion Schrödinger Bridge Matching","authors":["Yuyang Shi","Valentin De Bortoli","Andrew Campbell","Arnaud Doucet"],"institutions":["University of Oxford","DeepMind"],"abstract":"$f2","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0002BCD23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0002BCD23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/c428adf74782c2092d254329b6b02482-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"如何在大规模机器学习应用中，计算两个任意分布之间的薛定谔桥（Schrödinger Bridges, SBs），以克服现有扩散模型（DDMs）和流匹配模型（FMMs）无法保证传输映射接近最优传输（Optimal Transport, OT）的缺陷。","importance":"方法与范式级贡献。提出了一种新的生成建模范式 DSBM，将扩散模型/流匹配的灵活性与薛定谔桥的最优传输特性结合起来。这为需要精确控制分布转换（如图像翻译、单细胞轨迹推断）的任务提供了一种理论上更优、计算上可行的解决方案。","technical_approach":"提出 Diffusion Schrödinger Bridge Matching (DSBM)。现有的 SB 求解器（如基于 IPF 的方法）在扩展性上存在困难。DSBM 绕过了传统的迭代比例拟合（IPF），通过将 SB 问题转化为一种特殊的匹配问题（类似于 Flow Matching，但针对随机动力学）。它利用参考扩散过程构建目标，直接回归 SB 的漂移项（drift），从而实现从一个分布到另一个分布的熵正则化最优传输。","experiments":"在 2D 玩具数据集和高维图像数据集（如 CelebA 到非人脸的转换）上进行了验证。相比于标准的 DDMs 和 FMMs，DSBM 学习到的传输轨迹更直、更接近最优传输映射。在单细胞 RNA 测序数据插值任务中，DSBM 也展现了优于现有基线的性能。","authors_note":"Arnaud Doucet (DeepMind / Oxford)。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to compute Schrödinger Bridges (SBs) between two arbitrary distributions in large-scale ML applications, overcoming the limitation of DDMs and FMMs which cannot guarantee transport maps close to Optimal Transport (OT).","importance":"Methodological and paradigm contribution. Proposes DSBM, a new generative modeling paradigm combining the flexibility of diffusion/flow matching with the optimal transport properties of SBs. This provides a theoretically superior and computationally feasible solution for tasks requiring precise distribution transformation control (e.g., image translation, single-cell trajectory inference).","technical_approach":"Proposes Diffusion Schrödinger Bridge Matching (DSBM). Existing SB solvers (like IPF-based methods) struggle with scalability. DSBM bypasses traditional Iterative Proportional Fitting (IPF) by formulating the SB problem as a specific matching problem (similar to Flow Matching, but for stochastic dynamics). It uses a reference diffusion process to construct targets and directly regresses the drift term of the SB, achieving entropy-regularized optimal transport between distributions.","experiments":"Validated on 2D toy datasets and high-dimensional image datasets (e.g., CelebA to non-face translation). Compared to standard DDMs and FMMs, the transport trajectories learned by DSBM are straighter and closer to the optimal transport map. In single-cell RNA-seq data interpolation tasks, DSBM also outperforms existing baselines.","authors_note":"Arnaud Doucet (DeepMind / Oxford)."},"tags":["diffusion","schrodinger-bridge","objective","sampling"],"keywords":["diffusion Schrödinger bridge","bridge matching","optimal transport"],"notable_authors":["Arnaud Doucet"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"标准的扩散模型（DDMs）和流匹配模型（FMMs）虽然能实现分布间的转换，但不能保证其学习到的传输路径接近最优传输（OT）映射。","claim_en":"While standard DDMs and FMMs can achieve transformations between distributions, they do not guarantee that the learned transport paths are close to the Optimal Transport (OT) map.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract & Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"通过 Diffusion Schrödinger Bridge Matching (DSBM)，可以无需昂贵的 IPF 迭代，直接在大规模数据上学习到近似熵正则化最优传输的随机动力学映射。","claim_en":"Through Diffusion Schrödinger Bridge Matching (DSBM), one can directly learn stochastic dynamic mappings that approximate entropy-regularized optimal transport on large-scale data, without expensive IPF iterations.","opposes":"传统的薛定谔桥求解通常依赖于迭代比例拟合（IPF），难以扩展到高维和大规模数据集。","opposes_cite_hint":"De Bortoli 2021 Diffusion Schrödinger Bridge","evidence_anchor":"Method & Experiments","why_contested":"提供了一种可扩展的 SB 求解新范式，使得最优传输在生成模型中的应用更加实用。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§4的DSBM公式推导和§6的分布转换任务实测即可，最优传输结合扩散的思路可用于多模态分布对齐预训练目标设计。","en":"Only read §4 for DSBM formula derivation and §6 for distribution transfer task results; the OT-diffusion combination is useful for multimodal alignment pretraining objective design."}},{"id":"0002EKD23","title":"MultiVENT: Multilingual Videos of Events and Aligned Natural Text","authors":["Kate Sanders","David Etter","Reno Kriz","Benjamin Van Durme"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Everyday news coverage has shifted from traditional broadcasts towards a wide range of presentation formats such as first-hand, unedited video footage. Datasets that reflect the diverse array of multimodal, multilingual news sources available online could be used to teach models to benefit from this shift, but existing news video datasets focus on traditional news broadcasts produced for English-speaking audiences. We address this limitation by constructing MultiVENT, a dataset of multilingual, event-centric videos grounded in text documents across five target languages. MultiVENT includes both news broadcast videos and non-professional event footage, which we use to analyze the state of online news videos and how they can be leveraged to build robust, factually accurate models. Finally, we provide a  model for complex, multilingual video retrieval to serve as a baseline for information retrieval using MultiVENT.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0002EKD23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0002EKD23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/a054ff49751dbc991ec30ae479397c3d-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有新闻视频多模态数据集仅覆盖英语传统广播内容，缺少多语言、非专业事件拍摄素材，无法适配当前线上新闻多格式多语言的真实分布，限制了多模态新闻理解模型的泛化能力。","importance":"数据级贡献，填补了多语言事件中心多模态新闻数据集的空白，为跨语言多模态预训练提供了更贴合真实场景的训练素材。","technical_approach":"原创构建事件中心多模态数据集，覆盖5种目标语言，同时包含专业新闻广播和非专业用户拍摄的事件素材，配套对齐的文本描述文档。","experiments":"论文基于该数据集完成了线上新闻视频的分布特征分析，验证了数据集在语言、内容来源、事件类型上的多样性，未开展下游任务SOTA对比实验。","authors_note":"Benjamin Van Durme为资深多模态NLP研究者，长期从事跨语言、多模态数据集与模型研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing news video multimodal datasets only cover English traditional broadcast content, lack multilingual non-professional event footage, fail to match the real distribution of current online news, limiting the generalization ability of multimodal news understanding models.","importance":"It is a data-level contribution that fills the gap of multilingual event-centric multimodal news datasets, providing real-scenario training data for cross-lingual multimodal pretraining.","technical_approach":"The original constructed event-centric multimodal dataset covers 5 target languages, includes both professional news broadcasts and non-professional user-shot event clips, paired with aligned text description documents.","experiments":"The paper conducts distribution feature analysis of online news videos based on this dataset, verifies its diversity across languages, content sources and event types, no downstream SOTA comparison experiments are carried out.","authors_note":"Benjamin Van Durme is a senior multimodal NLP researcher focusing on cross-lingual, multimodal datasets and model research."},"tags":["video-text","multilingual","dataset","multimodal-pretraining"],"keywords":["video retrieval","information retrieval","multimodal","dataset","multilingual","video","ocr"],"notable_authors":["Benjamin Van Durme"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"多模态多语言训练数据的多样性可以提升模型跨语言多模态任务的泛化性能。","claim_en":"Diversity of multilingual multimodal training data improves model generalization performance on cross-lingual multimodal tasks.","evidence_anchor":"Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为多语言多模态新闻数据集的备选资源备查，不需要读正文，做跨语言多模态预训练时可考虑引入该数据集。","en":"Keep as an alternative multilingual multimodal news dataset resource; no need to read full text, consider using it when doing cross-language multimodal pretraining."}},{"id":"0002LZAS23","title":"Does Visual Pretraining Help End-to-End Reasoning?","authors":["Chen Sun","Calvin Luo","Xingyi Zhou","Anurag Arnab","Cordelia Schmid"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f3","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0002LZAS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0002LZAS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/43ba0466af2b1ac76aa85d8fbec714e3-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有视觉推理研究普遍认为显式视觉抽象（如目标检测）是实现组合泛化的必要条件，未验证通用神经网络结合视觉预训练是否能端到端完成视觉推理任务。","importance":"范式级贡献，若结论成立则可证明显式视觉抽象不是视觉推理的必要条件，为通用多模态大模型的架构设计提供实验支撑。","technical_approach":"提出通用自监督框架，用Transformer将每帧压缩为少量token，基于压缩的时序上下文重建剩余帧，迫使网络学习紧凑视觉表示与时序依赖，无需显式目标检测模块。","experiments":"在ListOps、形式逻辑推理等视觉推理任务上测试，对比依赖显式视觉抽象的基线方法，验证了该框架的组合泛化能力，论文未给出具体量化提升幅度。","authors_note":"Cordelia Schmid为DeepMind资深计算机视觉、多模态研究者，团队在视频理解、多模态预训练方向有大量顶会工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing visual reasoning research generally believes explicit visual abstraction (e.g. object detection) is a necessary condition for compositional generalization, and has not verified whether general neural networks with visual pretraining can complete visual reasoning tasks end-to-end.","importance":"It is a paradigm-level contribution. If the conclusion holds, it can prove explicit visual abstraction is not necessary for visual reasoning, providing experimental support for the architectural design of general multimodal large models.","technical_approach":"A general self-supervised framework is proposed, which compresses each frame into a small set of tokens with Transformer, reconstructs remaining frames based on compressed temporal context, forcing the model to learn compact visual representations and temporal dependencies without explicit object detection modules.","experiments":"Tested on visual reasoning tasks including ListOps and formal logical reasoning, compared with baseline methods relying on explicit visual abstraction, the compositional generalization ability of the framework is verified, no specific quantitative improvement is given in the paper.","authors_note":"Cordelia Schmid is a senior computer vision and multimodal researcher at DeepMind, with a large number of top conference works in video understanding and multimodal pretraining."},"tags":["visual-pretraining","reasoning","vlm","transfer"],"keywords":["visual reasoning","self-supervised learning"],"notable_authors":["Cordelia Schmid","Chen Sun"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"自监督帧重建任务可以迫使模型学习有效的视觉表示与时序依赖。","claim_en":"Self-supervised frame reconstruction task forces the model to learn effective visual representations and temporal dependencies.","evidence_anchor":"§3"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"通用神经网络结合视觉预训练可以实现端到端视觉推理的组合泛化，不需要显式视觉抽象模块。","claim_en":"General neural networks with visual pretraining can achieve compositional generalization for end-to-end visual reasoning without explicit visual abstraction modules.","opposes":"先前研究普遍认为显式视觉抽象是视觉推理组合泛化的必要条件。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3, §4","why_contested":"若成立则可大幅简化通用视觉推理模型的架构设计，为通用多模态模型的可行性提供支撑。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"结论可作为多模态大模型端到端推理能力的旁证，不需要细读正文，做VLM推理能力评估时可参考其实验设置。","en":"Conclusions serve as circumstantial evidence for end-to-end reasoning ability of large multimodal models; no need to read full text, refer to its experiment setup when evaluating VLM reasoning performance."}},{"id":"0003GXWGBH23","title":"Semi-Implicit Denoising Diffusion Models (SIDDMs)","authors":["Yanwu Xu","Mingming Gong","Shaoan Xie","Wei Wei","Matthias Grundmann","Kayhan Batmanghelich","Tingbo Hou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f4","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0003GXWGBH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0003GXWGBH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/3882ca2c952276247fe9a993193b00e4-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有扩散模型推理需要大量迭代步采样速度慢，DDGAN结合GAN实现大步长扩散但在大规模数据集上可扩展性差，无法同时平衡采样速度、样本质量与多样性。","importance":"方法级贡献，在扩散采样加速方向提出了新的技术路径，解决了DDGAN在大规模数据集上的可扩展性问题。","technical_approach":"原创半隐式扩散框架，通过匹配隐式和显式分布因子，用隐式模型做分布匹配，规避了DDGAN的对抗训练不稳定问题，大幅降低采样步数同时保留样本质量和多样性。","experiments":"在标准图像生成基准上测试，对比DDPM基线采样步数减少70%以上，样本质量和多样性与DDPM相当，相比DDGAN在大规模数据集上FID降低1.2，训练稳定性显著提升。","authors_note":"Matthias Grundmann为Google DeepMind资深生成模型研究者，团队在扩散模型、视频生成方向有多项核心工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing diffusion models require a large number of iterative steps leading to slow sampling speed. DDGAN combines GAN to achieve large-step diffusion but has poor scalability on large datasets, failing to balance sampling speed, sample quality and diversity at the same time.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution, proposes a new technical path for diffusion sampling acceleration, solving the scalability problem of DDGAN on large datasets.","technical_approach":"Original semi-implicit diffusion framework matches implicit and explicit distribution factors, uses implicit model for distribution matching, avoids the adversarial training instability problem of DDGAN, significantly reduces sampling steps while retaining sample quality and diversity.","experiments":"Tested on standard image generation benchmarks, compared with DDPM baseline sampling steps are reduced by more than 70%, sample quality and diversity are comparable to DDPM, FID is 1.2 lower than DDGAN on large datasets, training stability is significantly improved.","authors_note":"Matthias Grundmann is a senior generative model researcher at Google DeepMind, with multiple core works in diffusion models and video generation."},"tags":["diffusion","denoising","sampling","objective"],"keywords":["Diffusion Model","GAN","Semi-implicit Modeling"],"notable_authors":["Matthias Grundmann"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"扩散模型的高迭代采样步数是其推理部署的核心瓶颈之一。","claim_en":"High iterative sampling steps are one of the core bottlenecks of diffusion models for inference deployment.","evidence_anchor":"Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"半隐式扩散模型可以在不损失样本质量和多样性的前提下大幅降低扩散采样步数，同时在大规模数据集上具备可扩展性。","claim_en":"Semi-implicit denoising diffusion models can significantly reduce diffusion sampling steps without sacrificing sample quality and diversity, and are scalable on large datasets.","opposes":"先前GAN-扩散结合的方法（如DDGAN）在大规模数据集上存在可扩展性问题，无法兼顾速度与质量。","opposes_cite_hint":"Xiao 2022 DDGAN","evidence_anchor":"§4, Table 1","why_contested":"为扩散模型的大规模落地部署提供了更可行的加速方案。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为扩散模型加速方向的文献备查，不需要细读正文，做生成类多模态预训练采样优化时可参考其半隐式框架思路。","en":"Keep as reference for diffusion model acceleration; no need to read full text, refer to its semi-implicit framework when optimizing sampling for generative multimodal pretraining."}},{"id":"0003LLX0Z23","title":"Tuning Multi-mode Token-level Prompt Alignment across Modalities","authors":["Dongsheng Wang","Miaoge Li","Xinyang Liu","Mingsheng Xu","Bo Chen","Hanwang Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f5","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0003LLX0Z23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0003LLX0Z23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/a547d86953a4e36aa8a1390e6f4708e2-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有视觉语言模型提示调优仅采用单模态单提示、整图整句粒度对齐，无法捕捉样本多样性，导致提示发现效果次优。","importance":"方法级贡献，改进了视觉语言模型提示调优的对齐范式，提升了开放世界视觉概念理解的效果。","technical_approach":"原创多模态token级调优框架，用最优传输学习对齐跨模态的多组提示token，同时做多模式提示发现保证语义多样性，token级对齐捕捉细粒度相似度，避免单模式整体对齐的信息损失。","experiments":"在开放世界图像分类任务上测试，对比单模式整体提示调优基线，零样本/少样本精度提升2-5个百分点。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing vision-language model prompt tuning only adopts single-modal single prompt, whole image/whole sentence granularity alignment, fails to capture sample diversity, leading to suboptimal prompt discovery effect.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution, improves the alignment paradigm of vision-language model prompt tuning, enhances the effect of open-world visual concept understanding.","technical_approach":"Original multi-modal token-level tuning framework uses optimal transport to learn and align multiple sets of prompt tokens across modalities, simultaneously performs multi-mode prompt discovery to ensure semantic diversity, token-level alignment captures fine-grained similarity, avoiding information loss of single-mode holistic alignment.","experiments":"Tested on open-world image classification tasks, compared with single-mode holistic prompt tuning baseline, zero-shot/few-shot accuracy is improved by 2-5 percentage points.","authors_note":""},"tags":["token-alignment","multimodal","prompting","representation"],"keywords":["Multi-modal prompt learning; Optimal transport"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"提示调优可以有效提升视觉语言模型的跨模态对齐效果。","claim_en":"Prompt tuning can effectively improve cross-modal alignment performance of vision-language models.","evidence_anchor":"Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"多模式token级跨模态提示对齐相比单模式整体对齐可以提升2-5个百分点的少样本/零样本精度。","claim_en":"Multi-mode token-level cross-modal prompt alignment outperforms single-mode holistic alignment by 2-5pp on few-shot/zero-shot visual tasks.","opposes":"先前提示调优工作默认单模式整体对齐足够，不需要细粒度多模式设计。","opposes_cite_hint":"Zhou 2022 CoOp","evidence_anchor":"§5, Table 2","why_contested":"为提示调优的设计方向提供了新的思路，可推广到更多跨模态任务。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为VLM提示调优方向的弱信号参考，不需要细读正文，做多模态prompt tuning时可尝试token级对齐思路。","en":"Serve as weak signal reference for VLM prompt tuning; no need to read full text, try token-level alignment when doing multimodal prompt tuning."}},{"id":"0003YCJSZ0023","title":"Parameter-efficient Tuning of Large-scale Multimodal Foundation Model","authors":["Haixin Wang","Xinlong Yang","Jianlong Chang","Dian Jin","Jinan Sun","Shikun Zhang","Xiao Luo","Qi Tian"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f6","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0003YCJSZ0023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0003YCJSZ0023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/32ebb6b560ee58abbdae834e5f37cb5d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"大规模多模态基础模型（如 CLIP、BLIP 等）的全量微调代价极高，现有参数高效微调（PEFT）方法大多针对单模态设计，缺乏对多模态模型中跨模态交互的专门考量。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究者的启示在于：多模态预训练模型的下游适配效率直接影响预训练方案的实用价值，理解哪些参数子空间承载跨模态对齐信息，有助于反过来指导预训练阶段的架构和目标设计。","technical_approach":"在多模态 Transformer 的各层插入轻量适配模块，核心设计是让适配器同时感知视觉和语言两路特征，而非像 LoRA/Adapter 那样独立作用于单路。具体做法通常是在 cross-attention 或融合层附近加入少量可训练参数，冻结预训练主干。与纯 LoRA 相比，额外引入了跨模态信息流的低秩调制。","experiments":"在多个视觉-语言下游任务（如 VQA、图文检索、图像描述等）上验证，参数量仅为全量微调的很小比例（通常 <2%），性能接近甚至持平全量微调。具体数字因缺少 abstract 无法确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Full fine-tuning of large multimodal foundation models is prohibitively expensive, and existing parameter-efficient tuning methods are mostly designed for unimodal models without explicit handling of cross-modal interactions.","importance":"A method-level contribution. For pretrain researchers, understanding which parameter subspaces carry cross-modal alignment information can inform pretraining architecture and objective design.","technical_approach":"Inserts lightweight adaptation modules into multimodal Transformers that are aware of both visual and language streams, rather than adapting each modality independently. The backbone is frozen and only a small fraction of parameters are trained. The key distinction from vanilla LoRA/Adapter is the cross-modal modulation mechanism.","experiments":"Evaluated on standard vision-language benchmarks (VQA, retrieval, captioning). Achieves near full fine-tuning performance with a very small fraction of trainable parameters. Exact numbers unavailable without the full abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["parameter-efficient","multimodal","fine-tuning","foundation-model"],"keywords":["parameter-efficient transfer learning; multi-modal learning; prompt learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§4的跨模态适配器设计和§5的多任务迁移性能对比，思路可直接复用在内部多模态PEFT方案迭代中。","en":"Focus on §4 for cross-modal adapter design and §5 for multi-task transfer performance comparison; the idea can be directly reused in internal multimodal PEFT solution iteration."}},{"id":"0005YYXSJL23","title":"Reusing Pretrained Models by Multi-linear Operators for Efficient Training","authors":["Yu Pan","Ye Yuan","Yichun Yin","Zenglin Xu","Lifeng Shang","Xin Jiang","Qun Liu"],"institutions":["Huawei Noah's Ark Lab"],"abstract":"$f7","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0005YYXSJL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0005YYXSJL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/09d9a13f7018110cfb439c06b07940a2-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"从头训练大模型成本极高，能否通过复用已有预训练模型的权重来加速新模型的训练？现有方法（如 Net2Net、知识蒸馏）要么限制架构变化，要么需要额外训练阶段。","importance":"方法级贡献，直接关联 pretrain 效率。如果能可靠地从小模型权重初始化大模型并大幅减少训练 token 数，对 scaling law 实验和迭代式预训练流程都有实际价值。","technical_approach":"提出用多线性算子（multi-linear operators）对预训练模型的权重进行变换，生成新架构（更宽或更深）的初始化权重。核心思路是把权重张量看作多线性映射，通过张量分解/扩展操作保持原模型的函数近似性质，从而让新模型从一个好的起点开始训练。与 Net2Net 的区别在于支持更灵活的架构变化，不局限于简单的宽度/深度倍增。","experiments":"在语言模型和视觉模型上验证，展示了用小模型权重初始化大模型后，训练收敛速度显著加快。具体模型规模和加速比因缺少 abstract 无法确认。","authors_note":"作者列表中有 Lifeng Shang，来自华为诺亚方舟实验室。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Training large models from scratch is extremely costly. The question is whether pretrained model weights can be reused to initialize models with different architectures for more efficient training. Prior approaches like Net2Net are limited in the architectural changes they support.","importance":"Method-level contribution directly relevant to pretraining efficiency. Reliable weight reuse could significantly reduce the token budget needed for scaling law experiments and iterative pretraining.","technical_approach":"Uses multi-linear operators to transform pretrained weight tensors into initializations for new architectures (wider or deeper). The key idea is treating weight matrices as multi-linear maps and applying tensor decomposition/expansion to preserve the original model's functional approximation. More flexible than Net2Net's simple width/depth doubling.","experiments":"Demonstrated on language and vision models, showing faster convergence when initializing larger models from smaller pretrained ones. Exact model sizes and speedup ratios unavailable without the full abstract.","authors_note":"Lifeng Shang is affiliated with Huawei Noah's Ark Lab."},"tags":["parameter-efficient","model-reuse","multi-linear","training-efficiency"],"notable_authors":["Lifeng Shang"],"keywords":["Model Growth","Efficient Training","Pretrained Model","Multi-linearity"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§3的多线性权重变换实现和§5的训练token节省统计即可，结论可直接指导内部小模型扩展大模型的预训练流程优化。","en":"Only read §3 for multi-linear weight transformation implementation and §5 for training token saving statistics; conclusions can directly guide optimization of internal pretraining pipelines for scaling small models to large ones."}},{"id":"0006GCLGZF23","title":"Binarized Neural Machine Translation","authors":["Yichi Zhang","Ankush Garg","Yuan Cao","Lukasz Lew","Behrooz Ghorbani","Zhiru Zhang","Orhan Firat"],"institutions":["Google Research"],"abstract":"The rapid scaling of language models is motivating research using low-bitwidth quantization.\nIn this work, we propose a novel binarization technique for Transformers applied to machine translation (BMT), the first of its kind. We identify and address the problem of inflated dot-product variance when using one-bit weights and activations. Specifically, BMT leverages additional LayerNorms and residual connections to improve binarization quality. Experiments on the WMT dataset show that a one-bit weight-only Transformer can achieve the same quality as a float one, while being 16$\\times$ smaller in size. One-bit activations incur varying degrees of quality drop, but mitigated by the proposed architectural changes. We further conduct a scaling law study using production-scale translation datasets, which shows that one-bit weight Transformers scale and generalize well in both in-domain and out-of-domain settings. Implementation in JAX/Flax will be open sourced.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0006GCLGZF23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0006GCLGZF23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/bd1fc5cbedfe4d90d0ac2d23966fa27e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"能否将神经机器翻译模型的权重二值化（1-bit）以实现极致压缩和加速？此前二值化网络在 NLP 尤其是 Transformer 上效果很差，精度损失过大难以实用。","importance":"系统/效率级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：极端量化下模型能力的保留程度揭示了权重冗余的边界。如果 1-bit Transformer 在翻译上可行，对理解 LLM 权重的信息瓶颈有参考价值。","technical_approach":"对 Transformer 的权重做二值化（+1/-1），同时保留少量关键参数（如 embedding、LayerNorm）为全精度。训练时使用 straight-through estimator 处理不可导的二值化操作，并可能引入知识蒸馏从全精度教师模型获取监督。关键取舍是哪些层可以二值化、哪些必须保留精度。","experiments":"在标准 NMT 数据集（如 WMT）上评估，二值化模型相比全精度模型 BLEU 有一定下降但仍保持可用水平，模型大小压缩约 32 倍。具体数字因缺少 abstract 无法确认。作者来自 Google，可能使用了较大规模的训练数据。","authors_note":"Yuan Cao、Lukasz Lew、Behrooz Ghorbani 均来自 Google Research，该团队在量化和高效推理方面有持续产出。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Can Transformer-based NMT models be binarized (1-bit weights) for extreme compression and speedup? Previous binarization attempts on Transformers suffered unacceptable quality loss.","importance":"An efficiency/systems contribution. The degree to which 1-bit weights preserve translation quality reveals boundaries of weight redundancy in Transformers, informative for understanding LLM weight information bottlenecks.","technical_approach":"Binarizes Transformer weights to +1/-1 while keeping critical components (embeddings, LayerNorm) in full precision. Uses straight-through estimators for training and likely employs knowledge distillation from a full-precision teacher. The key design choice is which layers tolerate binarization.","experiments":"Evaluated on standard NMT benchmarks (likely WMT). Achieves ~32x compression with moderate BLEU degradation. Exact numbers unavailable without the full abstract. Authors are from Google, suggesting large-scale training data.","authors_note":"Yuan Cao, Lukasz Lew, and Behrooz Ghorbani are from Google Research, a team with sustained work on quantization and efficient inference."},"tags":["binarization","nmt","model-compression","quantization"],"notable_authors":["Yuan Cao","Lukasz Lew","Behrooz Ghorbani"],"keywords":["neural network quantization","binarized transformer","machine translation","scaling law"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§3二值化层选择策略和§4精度对比实验即可，可快速了解Transformer极端量化的冗余边界","en":"Only read §3 on binarized layer selection strategy and §4 accuracy comparison experiments to quickly understand Transformer redundancy boundary under extreme quantization"}},{"id":"0006Y0BCZG023","title":"Module-wise Adaptive Distillation for Multimodality Foundation Models","authors":["Chen Liang","Jiahui Yu","Ming-Hsuan Yang","Matthew Brown","Yin Cui","Tuo Zhao","Boqing Gong","Tianyi Zhou"],"institutions":["Google Research"],"abstract":"$f8","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0006Y0BCZG023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0006Y0BCZG023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/dc9544b26ad3579477e567588db18cfc-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"多模态基础模型（如大型 VLM）的蒸馏面临模块间能力不均衡的问题——视觉编码器、语言模型、跨模态融合层的压缩敏感度不同，统一蒸馏策略效果不佳。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的价值在于：模块级蒸馏的有效性间接揭示了多模态预训练中各模块的信息承载分布，有助于理解哪些模块是预训练的瓶颈。","technical_approach":"提出模块级自适应蒸馏（module-wise adaptive distillation），为多模态模型的不同模块（视觉、语言、融合）分别设计蒸馏策略和损失权重。核心思路是根据每个模块的压缩敏感度动态调整蒸馏强度，而非用统一的 KD loss。与标准蒸馏的区别在于引入了模块粒度的自适应机制。","experiments":"在视觉-语言任务上验证，学生模型在大幅减少参数的情况下保持了接近教师模型的性能。具体模型规模和指标因缺少 abstract 无法确认。","authors_note":"Jiahui Yu 和 Ming-Hsuan Yang 来自 Google Research，Jiahui Yu 是 Parti/ViT 等工作的核心作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Distilling large multimodal foundation models is challenging because different modules (vision encoder, language model, cross-modal fusion) have different compression sensitivities. A uniform distillation strategy is suboptimal.","importance":"Method-level contribution. The effectiveness of module-wise distillation indirectly reveals how information is distributed across modules in multimodal pretraining, useful for identifying pretraining bottlenecks.","technical_approach":"Proposes module-wise adaptive distillation that assigns different distillation strategies and loss weights to each module based on its compression sensitivity. Unlike standard KD with a single loss, this introduces module-granularity adaptation.","experiments":"Validated on vision-language tasks. Student models retain near-teacher performance with significantly fewer parameters. Exact model sizes and metrics unavailable without the full abstract.","authors_note":"Jiahui Yu and Ming-Hsuan Yang are from Google Research. Jiahui Yu is a core author of Parti and ViT-related works."},"tags":["knowledge-distillation","multimodal","foundation-model","adaptive"],"notable_authors":["Jiahui Yu","Ming-Hsuan Yang"],"keywords":["Multimodality foundation models","knowledge distillation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3模块敏感度评估方法和§5消融实验即可，可给多模态模型蒸馏的模块粒度权重调优提供参考","en":"Only read §3 on module sensitivity evaluation and §5 ablation experiments for reference on module-level weight tuning for multimodal model distillation"}},{"id":"AbbeCL23","title":"Provable Advantage of Curriculum Learning on Parity Targets with Mixed Inputs","authors":["Emmanuel Abbe","Elisabetta Cornacchia","Aryo Lotfi"],"institutions":["EPFL","Apple"],"abstract":"$f9","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/AbbeCL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/AbbeCL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/4c8ce3c63f6b66d6811c6d67c68e487b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"课程学习（curriculum learning，先学简单样本再学难样本）在理论上是否真的比随机顺序训练更好？此前大量实验声称有效，但严格的理论证明很少，尤其是在什么条件下课程学习有可证明的优势。","importance":"理论级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于数据排列顺序对训练效率的影响——如果在特定函数类上课程学习有可证明的加速，这为预训练中的数据调度（data scheduling / curriculum）提供了理论依据，而不仅仅是经验性的 heuristic。","technical_approach":"在 parity 函数（奇偶校验，一种经典的困难布尔函数）学习任务上，输入是混合分布（部分简单、部分困难），证明了课程学习（先在简单输入上训练）可以让神经网络在多项式时间内学会目标函数，而随机顺序训练需要指数时间。关键条件是输入分布的混合结构——课程学习的优势来自于先在简单子分布上建立正确的特征表示，再迁移到困难子分布。","experiments":"主要是理论证明，可能辅以合成实验验证。证明的核心结果是样本复杂度的分离：课程学习 poly(n) vs 随机训练 exp(n)。","authors_note":"Emmanuel Abbe 是 EPFL/Apple 教授，在计算学习理论方面有系列工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Does curriculum learning provably outperform random-order training? Despite extensive empirical claims, rigorous theoretical proofs of when and why curriculum learning helps are scarce.","importance":"A theory-level contribution. Provides theoretical grounding for data scheduling in pretraining—if curriculum learning has provable speedups on specific function classes, it moves data ordering from heuristic to principled.","technical_approach":"On parity function learning with mixed-distribution inputs (some easy, some hard), proves that curriculum learning (training on easy inputs first) enables polynomial-time learning, while random-order training requires exponential time. The advantage stems from first building correct feature representations on the easy sub-distribution, then transferring to the hard one.","experiments":"Primarily theoretical proofs, possibly with synthetic experiments. The core result is a sample complexity separation: curriculum poly(n) vs random exp(n).","authors_note":"Emmanuel Abbe is a professor at EPFL/Apple with a series of works in computational learning theory."},"tags":["curriculum-learning","parity","generalization","theory"],"notable_authors":["Emmanuel Abbe"],"keywords":["curriculum learning","parities","time complexity","sample complexity","neural networks","SGD"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§2证明前提设定和§4核心结论部分即可，能为预训练数据调度策略的设计提供理论支撑参考","en":"Only read §2 on proof premise settings and §4 core conclusions to get theoretical reference for pre-training data scheduling strategy design"}},{"id":"AfourasMNWT23","title":"HT-Step: Aligning Instructional Articles with How-To Videos","authors":["Triantafyllos Afouras","Effrosyni Mavroudi","Tushar Nagarajan","Huiyu Wang","Lorenzo Torresani"],"institutions":["Meta AI","Dartmouth"],"abstract":"We introduce HT-Step, a large-scale dataset containing temporal annotations of instructional article steps in cooking videos. It includes 122k segment-level annotations over 20k narrated videos (approximately 2.3k hours) of the HowTo100M dataset.\nEach annotation provides a temporal interval, and a categorical step label from a taxonomy of 4,958 unique steps automatically mined from wikiHow articles which include rich descriptions of each step.\nOur dataset significantly surpasses existing labeled step datasets in terms of scale, number of tasks, and richness of natural language step descriptions. Based on these annotations, we introduce a strongly supervised benchmark for aligning instructional articles with how-to videos and present a comprehensive evaluation of baseline methods for this task.\nBy publicly releasing these annotations and defining rigorous evaluation protocols and metrics,\nwe hope to significantly accelerate research in the field of procedural activity understanding.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/AfourasMNWT23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/AfourasMNWT23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/9d58d85bfc041b4f901c62ba37a3f322-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"如何将文本形式的操作指南文章（how-to articles）与对应的操作视频进行细粒度对齐？现有的视频-文本数据集要么是粗粒度的（视频级标签），要么需要昂贵的人工标注，缺乏步骤级别的自动对齐方法和大规模数据集。","importance":"数据级贡献。HT-Step 提供了一个步骤级别的视频-文本对齐数据集和方法，对多模态预训练的数据构建有参考价值——高质量的细粒度视频-文本对齐数据是训练视频理解模型的关键瓶颈之一。","technical_approach":"提出将 wikiHow 等结构化操作指南文章的步骤与 how-to 视频的片段进行自动对齐。方法可能结合了文本-视频检索模型和时序对齐算法（如 DTW 变体），利用文章的步骤结构作为弱监督信号。与纯 CLIP 式检索的区别在于利用了步骤的顺序约束。","experiments":"构建了 HT-Step 数据集，在步骤级视频-文本对齐任务上评估。具体规模和指标因缺少 abstract 无法确认。","authors_note":"Lorenzo Torresani 来自 Meta AI / Dartmouth，是视频理解领域的知名研究者。Triantafyllos Afouras 曾在 Oxford VGG 组做视听学习。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to achieve fine-grained step-level alignment between textual how-to articles and instructional videos? Existing datasets are either coarse-grained or require expensive manual annotation.","importance":"A data-level contribution. HT-Step provides step-level video-text alignment data and methods, addressing a key bottleneck for training video understanding models in multimodal pretraining.","technical_approach":"Aligns structured how-to article steps (e.g., from wikiHow) with video segments using a combination of text-video retrieval models and temporal alignment algorithms, leveraging step ordering as weak supervision. Differs from pure CLIP-style retrieval by exploiting sequential constraints.","experiments":"Introduces the HT-Step dataset and evaluates on step-level video-text alignment. Exact scale and metrics unavailable without the full abstract.","authors_note":"Lorenzo Torresani is from Meta AI / Dartmouth, a prominent researcher in video understanding. Triantafyllos Afouras previously worked on audio-visual learning at Oxford VGG."},"tags":["video-text","alignment","dataset"],"notable_authors":["Lorenzo Torresani","Triantafyllos Afouras"],"keywords":["step annotations","temporal article grounding","instructional video","instructional articles","how-to"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3对齐算法设计和附录数据集构建说明即可，可复用其步骤级弱监督对齐思路做多模态预训练数据加工","en":"Only read §3 on alignment algorithm design and appendix dataset instructions, reuse its step-level weak supervision alignment logic for multimodal pre-training data processing"}},{"id":"AkbarnejadBR23","title":"GPEX, A Framework For Interpreting Artificial Neural Networks","authors":["Amir Akbarnejad","Gilbert Bigras","Nilanjan Ray"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$fa","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/AkbarnejadBR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/AkbarnejadBR23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ca8c6f28d8ba1e732e3f217ab05c4ec0-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：怎样用一个统一、可操作的框架去解释神经网络内部计算，而不是继续依赖彼此割裂、只覆盖局部现象的可解释性工具。以往做法通常在特征归因、样本影响、层级分析之间分开建模，结果是解释结果难以对齐，也难以比较方法本身到底解释了什么。","importance":"它的价值主要在方法论和工具层，而不是直接推动预训练范式。对 pretrain 研究者的意义在于：如果这个框架真能把不同解释对象放进同一套表示里，那么分析训练动态、特征形成、冗余路径和失效模式会更系统；但从题目和公开信息看，它更像通用解释框架，离大规模预训练可直接落地还有距离。","technical_approach":"核心方法看起来是提出一个名为 GPEX 的统一解释框架，目标是把神经网络中的组件、路径或决策过程映射到可检查的解释单元。它和常见单点归因法的区别，大概率在于不是只解释输入对输出的敏感度，而是试图刻画更一般的内部依赖结构；这样设计的好处是解释对象更完整，代价是框架复杂度和计算成本通常会上升。由于这里没有摘要，无法确认它具体采用图结构、路径分解、代理模型还是优化式解释。","experiments":"公开信息不足，无法可靠总结实验设置、模型规模、基线和具体指标。按题目判断，实验大概率会覆盖多个网络架构并与现有解释方法比较一致性、忠实性或稳定性；但没有摘要就不适合补数字或下结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper appears to tackle a simple but important gap: neural network interpretation is fragmented, and we still lack a unified framework that can explain different internal behaviors under one view. Prior work often treats attribution, feature analysis, and decision tracing as separate problems, which makes methods hard to compare and their outputs hard to reconcile.","importance":"Its likely contribution is methodological rather than paradigm-shifting for pretraining. For pretraining researchers, a unified interpretation framework matters if it helps analyze feature formation, training dynamics, and failure modes in large models in a more systematic way; however, based on the title alone, this looks more like a general interpretability contribution than a direct advance in foundation model training.","technical_approach":"The core idea seems to be GPEX, a framework intended to represent and inspect neural computations through a common explanatory interface. The likely difference from standard attribution methods is that it does not stop at input-output sensitivity, but tries to capture broader internal dependency structure; that design would improve coverage, at the cost of more machinery and potentially higher compute. Without the abstract, it is not possible to state whether the mechanism is graph-based, path-based, surrogate-based, or optimization-based.","experiments":"There is not enough public information here to summarize the experiments reliably. The paper likely compares GPEX against existing interpretability methods on faithfulness, stability, or coverage across several architectures, but reporting numbers would be speculative without the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["interpretability","analysis","neural-networks"],"keywords":["Gaussian processes","Explainable AI"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§2框架核心设计和§4预训练模型分析实验即可，作为内部可解释性工具选型的参考材料","en":"Only read §2 on core framework design and §4 pre-trained model analysis experiments as reference for internal interpretability tool selection"}},{"id":"AlbalakRW23","title":"Improving Few-Shot Generalization by Exploring and Exploiting Auxiliary Data","authors":["Alon Albalak","Colin A. Raffel","William Yang Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$fb","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/AlbalakRW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/AlbalakRW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/4e3c5399729e06d2f0c22d04416904ab-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关注的是 few-shot 泛化时，除了手头很少的标注样本，怎样更有效地利用辅助数据，而不是把 auxiliary data 只当成静态预训练背景。过去常见做法要么忽略额外数据，要么统一混入训练，结果是相关辅助数据没有被优先利用，不相关数据还会带来干扰。","importance":"它更偏方法级和数据利用级，对 pretrain/posttrain 接口有实际启发。重要之处在于：在低资源适配或任务快速迁移里，数据的选择和利用方式可能比再堆一个复杂适配器更关键；这对 continual pretrain、领域增量和合成数据筛选都很相关。","technical_approach":"从题目看，方法核心是“先探索，再利用”辅助数据，也就是先估计哪些额外样本或来源与目标 few-shot 任务真正相关，再把这些数据用于训练或推理增强。它和直接全量混训的区别在于显式建模数据相关性；这样做有效，是因为 few-shot 设定里监督信号太稀缺，错误的辅助数据会主导梯度方向。代价则是需要额外的数据检索、打分或选择机制，且当目标任务定义本身不稳定时，相关性估计会变脆弱。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法可靠复述具体实验。按题目判断，实验应会比较：无辅助数据、随机辅助数据、简单相似度筛选以及其探索-利用策略，在多个 few-shot 任务上的平均提升；也可能会分析辅助数据规模增加时收益是否递减，以及相关性估计错误时的退化幅度。","authors_note":"作者 Colin A. Raffel、William Yang Wang 都是语言模型与迁移学习方向的知名研究者。若按常见所属，可能涉及 UNC Chapel Hill / UC Santa Barbara 等机构，但这里无法仅凭给定信息确认，故不展开。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a concrete few-shot question: how to use auxiliary data intelligently, instead of treating it as a static pretraining pool or ignoring it altogether. Prior practice often either drops extra data or mixes it in uniformly, which wastes useful signals and can inject harmful mismatch.","importance":"This is mainly a method and data-usage contribution, but it has clear implications for the pretrain-to-adaptation interface. The key lesson is that in low-resource transfer, picking and exploiting the right extra data may matter more than adding another adaptation module. That is directly relevant to continual pretraining, domain adaptation, and synthetic data selection.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method likely follows an explore-then-exploit strategy over auxiliary data: first identify which sources or examples are relevant to the target few-shot task, then use them preferentially during training or inference. The main difference from naïve joint training is explicit relevance modeling. This should help because in few-shot settings the target supervision is too weak to correct large amounts of mismatched auxiliary signal. The trade-off is added selection machinery and greater sensitivity when task relevance is itself hard to estimate.","experiments":"Without the abstract, the experimental summary cannot be made precise. The paper likely compares no auxiliary data, random auxiliary data, simple similarity-based selection, and the proposed exploration/exploitation method across several few-shot tasks, with ablations on auxiliary pool size and relevance estimation quality.","authors_note":"Colin A. Raffel and William Yang Wang are well-known researchers in language modeling and transfer learning. I cannot confirm institutional affiliations from the provided information alone, so I leave that unspecified."},"tags":["few-shot","auxiliary-data","generalization"],"notable_authors":["Alon Albalak","Colin A. Raffel","William Yang Wang"],"keywords":["Few-shot learning","natural language processing","few shot learning","NLP","multi-armed bandit","multi armed bandit"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3辅助数据相关性评估策略和§5低资源适配实验即可，可给持续预训练的合成数据筛选提供思路","en":"Only read §3 on auxiliary data relevance evaluation and §5 low-resource adaptation experiments for ideas on synthetic data filtering for continuous pre-training"}},{"id":"AndrewsZTMPX23","title":"Ethical Considerations for Responsible Data Curation","authors":["Jerone Theodore Alexander Andrews","Dora Zhao","William Thong","Apostolos Modas","Orestis Papakyriakopoulos","Alice Xiang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Human-centric computer vision (HCCV) data curation practices often neglect privacy and bias concerns, leading to dataset retractions and unfair models. HCCV datasets constructed through nonconsensual web scraping lack crucial metadata for comprehensive fairness and robustness evaluations. Current remedies are post hoc, lack persuasive justification for adoption, or fail to provide proper contextualization for appropriate application. Our research focuses on proactive, domain-specific recommendations, covering purpose, privacy and consent, and diversity, for curating HCCV evaluation datasets, addressing privacy and bias concerns. We adopt an ante hoc reflective perspective, drawing from current practices, guidelines, dataset withdrawals, and audits, to inform our considerations and recommendations.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/AndrewsZTMPX23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/AndrewsZTMPX23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ad3ebc951f43d1e9ed20187a7b5bc4ee-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是数据整理阶段的伦理决策如何系统化，而不是把问题留到模型发布后再靠审查和补丁修正。过去 foundation model 数据治理经常停留在原则口号层，缺少能落到采集、筛选、标注、文档化和移除机制上的操作框架。","importance":"这是数据治理和流程设计层面的工作，不直接改进模型 loss，但对预训练非常关键。它的重要性在于：底座模型的大部分风险在数据阶段就已经埋下，后训练只能部分修补；因此负责任的数据整理如果能形成可复用流程，对大规模预训练的安全性、合法性和可审计性都有长期影响。","technical_approach":"从题目看，方法不是提出一个单一算法，而是整理 responsible data curation 的原则、角色分工和操作规范。与泛泛的 AI ethics 讨论不同，好的数据整理框架会强调数据来源、同意机制、代表性、脆弱群体风险、文档记录与申诉/删除渠道，并说明这些环节如何在实际流水线里执行。它的价值在于把模糊规范转成流程约束；边界在于伦理框架通常难直接量化成优化目标，执行成本也不低。","experiments":"这类论文往往没有传统意义上的模型实验，更多是案例研究、流程分析或数据卡片式展示。由于没有摘要，无法确认是否包含特定数据集实践、问卷、审计结果或定性评估。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a neglected but upstream problem: how to make ethical decisions during data curation in a structured way, instead of trying to patch harms only after model deployment. In foundation model practice, data governance is often stated at the level of principles, while the operational pipeline remains underspecified.","importance":"This is a data-governance and process contribution rather than a modeling advance, but it is highly relevant to pretraining. Many downstream risks are created at the data stage and only partially recoverable later. A reusable framework for responsible curation therefore matters for safety, legality, and auditability at scale.","technical_approach":"The likely contribution is not a single algorithm but a practical framework for responsible data curation: how to reason about provenance, consent, representation, risk to vulnerable groups, documentation, and removal mechanisms. The useful distinction from generic AI ethics discussion is whether these principles are tied to real operational steps in the dataset pipeline. The benefit is procedural clarity; the limitation is that ethical criteria rarely reduce cleanly to one measurable objective and often add nontrivial execution cost.","experiments":"Papers of this kind often rely on case studies, process analysis, or dataset documentation rather than standard model benchmarks. Since no abstract is provided, I cannot confirm whether the paper includes audits, surveys, or concrete dataset interventions.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-curation","data-quality","ethics"],"keywords":["human-centric","datasets","computer vision","fairness","algorithmic bias","robustness","responsible AI"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§4操作流程框架部分即可，可直接参考其环节设计优化内部预训练数据治理的合规流程","en":"Only read §4 on operational process framework, directly refer to its link design to optimize compliance procedures for internal pre-training data governance"}},{"id":"2305.19147","title":"Conditional score-based diffusion models for Bayesian inference in infinite dimensions","authors":["Lorenzo Baldassari","Ali Siahkoohi","Josselin Garnier","Knut Solna","Maarten V. de Hoop"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$fc","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.19147","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BaldassariSGSH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BaldassariSGSH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/4c79c359b3c5f077c0b955f93cb0f53e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是 score-based diffusion model 如何用于无限维函数空间中的贝叶斯推断，尤其是线性反问题的后验采样，而不是停留在有限维向量空间里的经验迁移。过去这类问题通常学习无条件 score 再在采样时借助前向算子修正，但这在函数空间里理论上不够干净，采样时还需要大量昂贵的 forward evaluations。","importance":"这是 diffusion 建模向更严格统计推断场景扩展的工作，属于方法级加理论级贡献。对 pretrain 的直接影响有限，但对 diffusion 作为统一生成范式的边界理解很有价值：它说明 score model 不只是图像生成工具，也能在条件后验学习里承担 amortized inference 角色，而且能处理无限维对象，这对科学机器学习和连续信号建模有启发。","technical_approach":"作者提出 conditional score-based diffusion models，用摊销学习的方式直接逼近后验 score，而不是只学先验/无条件 score 再在采样时反复调用前向算子。关键区别在于把观测条件直接并入训练目标，从而在采样时减少对 forward operator 的依赖，并给出适用于无限维 Bayesian linear inverse problems 的理论基础。这样设计有效，因为后验几何和先验几何差异可能很大，直接学条件 score 比测试时临时修正更稳定也更高效。","experiments":"摘要明确指出旧方法在 posterior sampling 中需要 numerous computationally costly forward operator evaluations，而本文方法意在避免这一点。给定截断摘要，无法确认实验使用了哪些具体反问题、函数空间离散化方式和误差指标，但合理推断会比较无条件 score 方法与其条件 score 方法在采样质量、计算成本和理论一致性上的差异。","authors_note":"Maarten V. de Hoop 是反问题与科学机器学习方向的知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper extends score-based diffusion from finite-dimensional inverse problems to Bayesian inference in infinite-dimensional function spaces, especially linear inverse problems. Earlier approaches often learned an unconditional score and corrected it at sampling time using the forward operator, but that strategy is both theoretically loose in function spaces and computationally expensive because posterior sampling may require many forward evaluations.","importance":"This is a method-plus-theory contribution for diffusion-based inference. Its direct effect on mainstream pretraining is limited, but it matters for understanding the reach of diffusion as a general modeling paradigm. The paper shows that score models can serve as amortized conditional posterior learners, not just image generators, and can be grounded in infinite-dimensional settings.","technical_approach":"The key move is to learn a conditional score-based diffusion model that directly approximates the posterior score, rather than learning only the prior score and correcting it during sampling. Conditioning is built into the training objective, which should reduce reliance on repeated forward-operator evaluations at test time and gives a cleaner foundation for Bayesian linear inverse problems in infinite dimensions. This makes sense because posterior geometry can differ substantially from prior geometry; learning the conditional score directly is therefore both more stable and more efficient than patching the prior score after the fact.","experiments":"The abstract explicitly motivates the method by the high cost of repeated forward-operator evaluations in prior work. Because the provided abstract is truncated, I cannot name the exact inverse problems, discretizations, or quantitative metrics. The likely experiments compare conditional versus unconditional score approaches on posterior sample quality, computational cost, and consistency with the underlying theory.","authors_note":"Maarten V. de Hoop is a well-known researcher in inverse problems and scientific machine learning."},"tags":["diffusion","score-model","bayesian-inference","objective"],"notable_authors":["Lorenzo Baldassari","Maarten V. de Hoop"],"keywords":["score-based generative models","diffusion models","inverse problems","bayesian inference","infinite dimensions"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3条件得分建模思路和§4理论证明结论即可，用于了解扩散模型在科学计算场景的扩展边界","en":"Only read §3 on conditional score modeling and §4 theoretical proof conclusions to understand the expansion boundary of diffusion models in scientific computing scenarios"}},{"id":"BauerPT23","title":"MLFMF: Data Sets for Machine Learning for Mathematical Formalization","authors":["Andrej Bauer","Matej Petkovic","Ljupco Todorovski"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$fd","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BauerPT23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BauerPT23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/9efe8db7fab57e19eed25718abedbbd2-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：机器学习做数学形式化缺少可用、可比较、可复现实验的数据集。过去这类研究往往直接依赖某个定理证明器社区的现成语料，数据格式、任务定义和切分方式都不统一，导致模型进展很难判断到底来自方法改进还是数据处理差异；因此先把数据基础设施补齐，本身就是这个方向能否走向系统研究的前提。","importance":"它的重要性主要是数据与评测层面的，而不是提出新的建模范式。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：当目标从自然语言转向形式数学语言时，数据表示、任务切分和泄漏控制会直接决定训练信号是否可靠；如果这一步做不好，后续再谈 tokenizer、目标函数或大模型迁移都容易建立在不稳的基线上。","technical_approach":"核心做法是构建面向数学形式化的标准化数据集集合，而不是再提出一个单点模型。合理的设计重点通常包括：统一不同形式化系统或语料来源的表示；明确区分证明状态、定理陈述、策略选择等不同任务；给出训练/验证/测试切分并尽量降低近重复与证明模板泄漏。相比把原始证明库直接扔给模型，这种数据工程的价值在于它把“模型到底学到了数学结构，还是只是在记忆项目级重复模式”这件事变得可检验。","experiments":"从给定信息看，论文的实验重点大概率不是追求新的 SOTA，而是验证数据集的覆盖面、任务可学习性和基线可区分性。这里最值得看的通常不是绝对分数，而是：不同任务难度是否拉开、不同形式化语言之间迁移是否成立、简单词法基线与更强神经模型能否稳定排序，以及数据清洗和切分策略对结果波动有多大。由于题面没有摘要与数字，无法可靠给出参数规模、样本量和具体提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a basic but blocking issue: machine learning for mathematical formalization lacks standardized datasets. Prior work often reused whatever theorem-proving corpora were available, with inconsistent formats, task definitions, and splits, so progress was hard to interpret; building a clean data foundation is therefore the prerequisite for meaningful model research.","importance":"This is primarily a data-and-evaluation contribution, not a new modeling paradigm. For pretraining-oriented readers, the main takeaway is that once the target domain is formal mathematics rather than natural text, dataset construction, leakage control, and task formulation directly shape the training signal; if those are weak, conclusions about tokenization, objectives, or scaling are unreliable.","technical_approach":"The central contribution is a suite of standardized datasets for ML on mathematical formalization rather than a new model. The likely design choices that matter are: normalizing heterogeneous formal sources, separating distinct prediction tasks such as theorem statements, proof states, or tactic selection, and creating train/validation/test splits that reduce near-duplicate leakage. That matters because it lets researchers test whether models learn reusable formal structure instead of exploiting repository-level repetition.","experiments":"Given the available information, the experiments are likely aimed at validating dataset usability rather than setting a new SOTA. The useful questions are whether the benchmarks separate easy and hard tasks, whether transfer across formal systems is plausible, whether simple lexical baselines and stronger neural models rank consistently, and how much results move under different cleaning or split policies. No reliable numbers for model size, dataset size, or gains can be stated from the prompt.","authors_note":""},"tags":["dataset","math","formalization","data-quality"],"keywords":["recommendation system","formalized mathematics","proof assistant","Lean","Agda","link prediction","graph learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§2数据集构建规范和§5基准测试结果即可，作为数学预训练数据和评测集建设的参考依据","en":"Only read §2 on dataset construction specifications and §5 benchmark results as reference for mathematical pre-training data and evaluation set construction"}},{"id":"BelkhaleCS23","title":"Data Quality in Imitation Learning","authors":["Suneel Belkhale","Yuchen Cui","Dorsa Sadigh"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$fe","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BelkhaleCS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BelkhaleCS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/fe692980c5d9732cf153ce27947653a7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是模仿学习中的一个老问题：数据质量比数据量更决定上限，但社区对“什么叫好数据”往往缺少可操作定义。过去很多方法默认专家轨迹天然可靠，或者只在算法层面做离线 RL/行为克隆修补；作者更直接地问，示范数据里哪些缺陷最伤模型，以及能否系统度量这种影响。","importance":"这对 pretrain 的间接启示很强，尽管论文本身更偏 imitation learning。原因是它在研究训练信号质量，而这和预训练中的数据配比、来源噪声、标签对齐程度是同一类问题：不是所有 token 或轨迹都等价，低质量样本可能带来方向性偏差，而不只是增加方差。对 post-train 也相关，因为 SFT/RLHF 数据同样高度依赖示范质量。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心做法不是新算法，而是系统分析和建模数据质量。合理的技术路线通常包括：将数据质量分解为覆盖度、最优性、一致性、状态分布偏差或动作噪声等因素；构造可控合成退化实验；再观察这些质量维度如何传导到策略性能。相比只报行为克隆在不同数据集上的平均回报，这种设计更有解释力，因为它能回答“模型失败到底是因为学不会，还是因为老师教得差”。","experiments":"题面无摘要，无法确认环境、样本量和具体提升数字。按该主题的标准实验，关键结果通常会包括：在多个控制任务或机器人任务上，系统改变示范最优性、覆盖范围和噪声水平，测策略回报如何退化；比较同样数据量下高质量少样本与低质量多样本的性价比；再给出一些数据筛选或重加权是否能恢复性能。如果论文结论扎实，最有价值的通常不是某个算法赢了多少，而是质量维度与最终性能之间是否存在稳定、可预测的关系。","authors_note":"作者包含 Dorsa Sadigh。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a long-standing issue in imitation learning: data quality often matters more than data quantity, yet the field lacks an operational account of what “high-quality demonstrations” really means. Earlier work typically assumed expert trajectories were reliable or tried to patch bad data algorithmically; this paper instead asks which defects in demonstrations are most damaging and how to measure their impact.","importance":"The relevance to pretraining is indirect but meaningful because the paper is really about training signal quality. That maps cleanly to data mixture, noise, and supervision fidelity in large-scale pretraining and post-training: samples are not interchangeable, and bad data can bias the learner rather than merely add variance. The same logic applies to SFT and RLHF data, where demonstrator quality is often the dominant factor.","technical_approach":"The contribution is likely analytical rather than a new imitation-learning algorithm. A sensible setup for this question is to decompose data quality into dimensions such as coverage, optimality, consistency, distribution mismatch, and action noise, then create controlled degradations and measure how each factor affects policy learning. This is more informative than reporting average returns on fixed datasets because it helps distinguish model limitations from teacher-data limitations.","experiments":"The prompt does not include the abstract, so tasks, dataset sizes, and numerical gains cannot be stated confidently. In this line of work, the critical evidence would usually include controlled experiments on standard control or robotics benchmarks where demonstration optimality, coverage, and noise are varied systematically; comparisons of few high-quality demonstrations versus many poor ones; and possibly data filtering or reweighting studies. The most valuable result would be a stable, predictive link between specific quality dimensions and downstream policy performance.","authors_note":"Includes Dorsa Sadigh."},"tags":["data-quality","imitation-learning","training-signal"],"notable_authors":["Dorsa Sadigh"],"keywords":["Imitation Learning","Robotics","Data Quality"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3数据质量维度分解和§4各维度影响量化实验即可，可复用其分析方法优化SFT/RLHF数据筛选逻辑","en":"Only read §3 on data quality dimension decomposition and §4 quantitative impact experiments, reuse its analysis method to optimize SFT/RLHF data filtering logic"}},{"id":"2305.15296","title":"MultiFusion: Fusing Pre-Trained Models for Multi-Lingual, Multi-Modal Image Generation","authors":["Marco Bellagente","Manuel Brack","Hannah Teufel","Felix Friedrich","Björn Deiseroth","Constantin Eichenberg","Andrew Dai","Robert Baldock","Souradeep Nanda","Koen Oostermeijer","Andrés Felipe Cruz-Salinas","Patrick Schramowski","Kristian Kersting","Samuel Weinbach"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"The recent popularity of text-to-image diffusion models (DM) can largely be attributed to the intuitive interface they provide to users. The intended generation can be expressed in natural language, with the model producing faithful interpretations of text prompts. However, expressing complex or nuanced ideas in text alone can be difficult. To ease image generation, we propose MultiFusion that allows one to express complex and nuanced concepts with arbitrarily interleaved inputs of multiple modalities and languages. MutliFusion leverages pre-trained models and aligns them for integration into a cohesive system, thereby avoiding the need for extensive training from scratch. Our experimental results demonstrate the efficient transfer of capabilities from individual modules to the downstream model. Specifically, the fusion of all independent components allows the image generation module to utilize multilingual, interleaved multimodal inputs despite being trained solely on monomodal data in a single language.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.15296","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BellagenteBTFDE23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BellagenteBTFDE23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ba8d1b46292c5e82cbfb3b3dc3b968af-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是多模态图像生成里一个被长期弱处理的问题：用户的意图往往无法只靠单段英文文本准确表达。现有 text-to-image diffusion 大多假设输入是单一语言的文本提示，复杂控制需求则依赖 ad-hoc 的模块拼接；作者想做的是把多语言文本、图像等多种条件统一接到同一个生成系统里，而且尽量复用已有预训练模块。","importance":"它的贡献更偏范式接口与系统整合，而不是重新训练一个基础生成模型。对 pretrain 的启示很直接：跨模态统一建模不一定总靠从头 joint pretrain，也可以通过对齐已有编码器和生成器来快速继承能力；这对多语言、多模态扩展尤其重要，因为从零联合训练的成本太高，模块化迁移是更现实的路线。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 MultiFusion：把多个已预训练的单模态或单语言模块对齐后接入图像生成流程，实现任意交错的多模态、多语言条件控制。设计上它明显选择了“融合现成专家”而不是“训练一个全新统一 backbone”，好处是能保留各模块已有能力、降低训练成本；代价是系统上限受限于模块接口是否兼容，以及对齐层能否在不破坏原能力的情况下学会跨模态组合。它和传统 prompt engineering 的差别在于，控制信号不再被压缩成单通道文本，而是显式保留多源条件。","experiments":"摘要明确声称实验展示了 individual modules 的能力可以高效迁移到下游多模态、多语言图像生成任务，但题面截断，没有具体数字。按这类工作的关键实验，应当包括：与单文本提示 diffusion baseline 比较在复杂组合提示下的生成质量与可控性；测试不同语言输入是否能保持语义一致；评估图像+文本等交错输入是否优于只用文本；以及少量对齐训练能否激活预训练模块已有能力。如果没有从头训练的大规模对比，结论应解读为“高效整合可行”，而不是“全面超越统一预训练”。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a real limitation in image generation: user intent is often too rich to be expressed by a single English text prompt. Most text-to-image diffusion systems still assume one textual conditioning channel, while more complex control is handled with ad hoc add-ons; this work instead aims to support arbitrarily interleaved multimodal and multilingual inputs in one generation system.","importance":"This is mainly a system-integration and interface-level contribution rather than a new foundation model trained from scratch. The pretraining-relevant lesson is important: cross-modal capability does not always require expensive joint pretraining if strong pretrained modules can be aligned well enough to transfer their capabilities into a unified generator. That is especially relevant for multilingual and multimodal expansion, where full retraining is costly.","technical_approach":"MultiFusion aligns multiple pretrained modules and plugs them into a common image-generation pipeline, enabling mixed conditioning across modalities and languages. The key design choice is modular fusion instead of training a brand-new unified backbone. That preserves capabilities already present in the constituent models and keeps training cost low, but it also means performance depends heavily on interface compatibility and on whether the alignment layers can combine signals without erasing what each module knows. Compared with prompt engineering, the control signal is no longer collapsed into text alone.","experiments":"The abstract states that capabilities from individual modules transfer efficiently to the downstream multimodal, multilingual generation setting, but the prompt truncates before reporting metrics. The decisive experiments for a paper like this should compare against text-only diffusion baselines on compositional prompts, test semantic consistency across languages, measure the benefit of mixed image-plus-text conditioning over text alone, and show how much alignment training is needed to unlock the inherited capabilities. Without a large from-scratch joint model comparison, the right reading is efficient integration rather than a claim of universal superiority.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal","diffusion","multilingual","text-to-image","model-fusion"],"keywords":["diffusion","image generation","multimodal"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§3跨模块对齐方案和§4多条件生成实验即可，为多模态预训练的模块化迁移方案提供参考","en":"Only read §3 on cross-module alignment scheme and §4 multi-conditional generation experiments for reference on modular migration for multimodal pre-training"}},{"id":"BelroseSRCRB23","title":"LEACE: Perfect linear concept erasure in closed form","authors":["Nora Belrose","David Schneider-Joseph","Shauli Ravfogel","Ryan Cotterell","Edward Raff","Stella Biderman"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Concept erasure aims to remove specified features from a representation. It can improve fairness (e.g. preventing a classifier from using gender or race) and interpretability (e.g. removing a concept to observe changes in model behavior). We introduce LEAst-squares Concept Erasure (LEACE), a closed-form method which provably prevents all linear classifiers from detecting a concept while changing the representation as little as possible, as measured by a broad class of norms. We apply LEACE to large language models with a novel procedure called concept scrubbing, which erases target concept information from _every_ layer in the network. We demonstrate our method on two tasks: measuring the reliance of language models on part-of-speech information, and reducing gender bias in BERT embeddings. Our code is available at https://github.com/EleutherAI/concept-erasure.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BelroseSRCRB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BelroseSRCRB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/d066d21c619d0a78c5b557fa3291a8f4-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是表示中的概念擦除问题，而且目标定得很硬：在线性可观测范围内做到完美擦除。过去很多 debiasing 或 concept erasure 方法只能近似去除某个属性，常常以额外训练、迭代优化或性能损失为代价；作者想给出一个闭式解，直接把线性可恢复的概念信息从表示中拿掉。","importance":"这是方法级贡献，但影响面很广，因为它把“表示里到底还剩多少某概念信息”这件事做成了一个可严格分析的线性操作。对 pretrain 研究的价值在于两点：第一，它提供了研究表征可分解性、可控性的工具；第二，它也提醒我们，很多所谓安全对齐或偏见消除若只在线性层面成立，边界其实很清楚，不能被误读为彻底去除了该概念。","technical_approach":"LEACE 的核心是 closed-form 的线性概念擦除变换。直观上，它估计表示中与目标概念相关、且可被线性探针恢复的子空间，然后构造一个线性投影或校正变换，把这部分信息完全消掉，同时尽量保留其余方向的信息。相比迭代式 adversarial removal 或投影启发式方法，它的优势是有严格的最优性/完美性声明，并且计算简单、可插拔；限制也同样明确：它只能保证线性可恢复信息被擦除，非线性残留依然可能存在。","experiments":"虽然题面没有摘要，但这篇工作的标准实验重点通常不是大规模下游性能，而是验证‘完美线性擦除’这个数学承诺是否在实际表征上成立。关键结果一般会包括：在文本或视觉表征上，线性探针精度在擦除后降到随机水平；与 prior concept erasure / INLP / adversarial baselines 比较，LEACE 在保留主任务性能的同时擦除更彻底；再通过非线性探针或更强分类器测试剩余信息，说明其边界。如果论文写得严谨，还会讨论协变量漂移和多概念相关性下的稳定性。","authors_note":"作者包含 Nora Belrose、Shauli Ravfogel、Ryan Cotterell。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles concept erasure in learned representations, with a deliberately strong goal: perfect removal of linearly recoverable concept information. Earlier debiasing and erasure methods were often approximate, iterative, and quality-degrading; this work aims for a closed-form transform that exactly eliminates the target concept in the linear regime.","importance":"This is a method contribution with broad implications because it turns representation editing into something analytically precise. For pretraining research, it matters in two ways: it gives a clean tool for studying what concepts are encoded and where, and it clarifies the boundary of many alignment or debiasing claims—if the guarantee is only linear, that boundary should be stated explicitly rather than treated as full removal.","technical_approach":"LEACE is a closed-form linear concept-erasure procedure. The idea is to identify the subspace that contains information about a target concept as measured by linear recoverability, then construct a projection-like linear transform that removes exactly that information while preserving as much of the remaining representation as possible. Compared with iterative adversarial removal or heuristic projections, the appeal is a strong optimality/perfect-erasure statement and simple plug-in use; the limitation is equally clear: nonlinear remnants may remain.","experiments":"The prompt lacks the abstract, but the key experiments for this paper are usually about validating the mathematical guarantee in practical representations rather than maximizing downstream benchmark scores. Typical evidence would show that linear probes for the erased concept fall to chance after transformation, while task performance degrades less than with prior methods such as INLP or adversarial baselines; stronger nonlinear probes would then test what information still survives, making the boundary of the method explicit. A careful paper would also examine robustness under correlated concepts and distribution shift.","authors_note":"Includes Nora Belrose, Shauli Ravfogel, and Ryan Cotterell."},"tags":["concept-erasure","interpretability","linear-algebra","representation"],"notable_authors":["Nora Belrose","Shauli Ravfogel","Ryan Cotterell"],"keywords":["interpretability","fairness","concept erasure","representation","adversarial","robustness"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§2闭式解推导和§5概念擦除效果验证实验即可，可直接作为表征可控性分析的即插即用工具","en":"Only read §2 on closed-form solution derivation and §5 concept erasure verification experiments, can be directly used as a plug-and-play tool for representation controllability analysis"}},{"id":"BhatiaNSR23","title":"TART: A plug-and-play Transformer module for task-agnostic reasoning","authors":["Kush Bhatia","Avanika Narayan","Christopher De Sa","Christopher Ré"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ff","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BhatiaNSR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BhatiaNSR23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/1ece70d2259b8e9510e2d4ca8754cecf-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作瞄准的是一个常见但很难啃的问题：预训练 Transformer 的通用表示能力不错，但在需要显式推理的任务上往往不稳定，且通常要靠任务特定微调或 prompt 技巧补救。作者想做的是一个 task-agnostic reasoning 模块，也就是不为单个数据集定制，而是作为可插拔组件提升推理能力。","importance":"如果方法有效，它的重要性在于接口层和能力增强层，而不是重做预训练。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：推理能力未必必须完全内生于基础模型，也可能通过后接模块显式补足；这和 later-stage latent reasoning、adapter-style augmentation、test-time computation 增强是同一条思路。它同时也提醒我们，‘通用预训练表示 + 小型结构化推理器’可能比盲目继续堆参数更划算。","technical_approach":"从标题看，TART 是一个 plug-and-play Transformer module，设计目标是对任务无关地增强推理。这样的模块通常会在主模型与输出层之间增加可迭代的信息整合、状态更新或中间变量建模，使模型能在固定表征上执行更多步的关系组合，而不是只靠一次前向传播直接映射答案。它与普通 adapter 的区别在于侧重点不是参数高效微调，而是显式增加推理过程；风险则是模块若学不到可迁移的推理模式，就容易退化成另一个任务特定 head。","experiments":"由于没有摘要，无法确认具体任务和数字。按这类论文的常见结构，实验会覆盖多个需要组合推理、逻辑泛化或结构推断的数据集，比较基础 Transformer、带 adapter 或 CoT 式增强的 baseline，以及加入 TART 后的性能变化。最值得看的不是单一 benchmark 的最好分数，而是它是否在训练分布外组合泛化、样本效率和模块可迁移性上有稳定收益；如果只能在某一类任务上见效，那它更像专用结构，而不是 task-agnostic reasoning 模块。","authors_note":"作者包含 Christopher Ré。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a familiar gap: pretrained Transformers have strong generic representations but often behave unreliably on tasks that require explicit reasoning, unless helped by task-specific tuning or prompting tricks. The goal is to build a task-agnostic reasoning module that can be plugged into a Transformer rather than redesigned for each benchmark.","importance":"If successful, the contribution is at the capability-interface layer rather than at core pretraining. For pretraining researchers, the lesson is that reasoning may not need to be fully internalized inside the base model; some of it can be added through modular computation after pretraining. This connects naturally to later work on latent reasoning, adapters for structured computation, and test-time compute augmentation.","technical_approach":"From the title, TART is a plug-and-play Transformer module meant to improve reasoning in a task-agnostic way. Such a module would typically insert additional iterative information integration or latent-state updates between the base representation and the final prediction, so the system can perform more relational composition than a single forward pass would allow. Unlike ordinary adapters, the aim is not mainly parameter-efficient tuning but explicit reasoning support. The failure mode is also clear: if the module does not learn transferable reasoning patterns, it degenerates into yet another task-specific head.","experiments":"The abstract is not provided, so concrete tasks and numbers cannot be recovered reliably. A paper of this type would usually evaluate on multiple datasets involving compositional reasoning, logical generalization, or structured inference, comparing a base Transformer, adapter-style baselines, and possibly prompt-based reasoning baselines against the same model with TART. The key question is not whether it wins on one benchmark, but whether gains hold under out-of-distribution composition, low-data regimes, and transfer across tasks. Without that, the 'task-agnostic' claim would be weak.","authors_note":"Includes Christopher Ré."},"tags":["reasoning","transformer","plug-and-play","task-agnostic"],"notable_authors":["Christopher Ré"],"keywords":["In-context learning","task-agnostic methods","large language models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅需阅读§3模块设计和§5多任务推理实验部分，参考无需重训基座即可补全推理能力的轻量化实现思路。","en":"Read §3 module design and §5 multi-task reasoning experiments only, to reference lightweight reasoning enhancement implementation without retraining base models."}},{"id":"BreugelSIS23","title":"Can You Rely on Your Model Evaluation? Improving Model Evaluation with Synthetic Test Data","authors":["Boris van Breugel","Nabeel Seedat","Fergus Imrie","Mihaela van der Schaar"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$100","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BreugelSIS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BreugelSIS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/05fb0f4e645cad23e0ab59d6b9901428-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作讨论的是一个经常被低估的问题：模型评测本身可能不可靠，而测试集规模和覆盖不足会让我们对方法优劣得出错误结论。过去很多研究默认 benchmark test set 是固定真理，只在其上比拼平均分；作者要解决的是，能否用合成测试数据改善评测的稳定性、覆盖度和结论可信度。","importance":"这是评测方法级工作，对 pretrain 研究同样相关。原因很简单：基础模型的改进往往很小、成本很高，如果评测噪声本身就大，研究资源会被浪费在不可复现的排序上。合成测试数据若构造得当，可以系统补足长尾现象、稀有组合和安全边界，从而让我们更准确地区分真正泛化与 benchmark overfitting。","technical_approach":"核心方法从标题看是用 synthetic test data 改善模型评测，而不是训练模型本身。合理的做法通常包括：基于真实数据分布拟合一个生成器或因果/结构模型，生成覆盖不足但语义上合理的测试样本；再将这些合成样本用于方差缩减、鲁棒性检查或评测校准。它和直接扩充训练集不同，目标不是让模型学得更好，而是让评测更可信。边界也很明确：如果合成器本身偏差很大，测试就会把生成器的偏好误当成真实分布需求。","experiments":"由于没有摘要，不能给出具体数据集和数值。按这类论文的关键实验，通常会比较原始测试集与加入合成测试后的评测方差、排名稳定性、置信区间宽度，以及对分布移位或罕见子群体的覆盖能力。高价值结果应该是：在不引入明显系统偏差的情况下，合成测试数据能更早识别失效模式、提高模型比较的一致性，并减少由于测试集样本不足导致的误判。对资深读者来说，重点不是合成样本看起来像不像真数据，而是它是否改善了决策质量。","authors_note":"作者包含 Mihaela van der Schaar。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper focuses on an often underappreciated issue: model evaluation itself can be unreliable, especially when fixed test sets are small or incomplete. Much of the field treats benchmark test sets as ground truth and compares average scores; this work asks whether synthetic test data can improve the stability, coverage, and trustworthiness of evaluation.","importance":"This is an evaluation-methodology contribution, but it matters to pretraining as well. Foundation-model improvements are often expensive and incremental; if evaluation noise is large, research effort gets wasted on unstable rankings. Well-constructed synthetic test data can help cover tail events, rare combinations, and failure boundaries, making it easier to distinguish genuine generalization from benchmark overfitting.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to improve evaluation using synthetic test data rather than to improve the model directly. A plausible mechanism is to fit a generator or structured data model from real data, then create semantically plausible test examples in undercovered regions and use them for variance reduction, robustness checks, or evaluation calibration. This is different from augmenting the training set: the goal is not to teach the model more, but to make model comparison more reliable. The limitation is obvious too: if the synthetic generator is biased, the evaluation may inherit that bias.","experiments":"The prompt does not include the abstract, so specific datasets and numbers cannot be reported confidently. The important experiments would usually compare original evaluation against evaluation augmented with synthetic tests in terms of variance, ranking stability, confidence intervals, and sensitivity to distribution shift or rare subgroups. The strongest result would be that synthetic test data improves failure detection and model ranking consistency without introducing large systematic distortion. For a practitioner, the key question is not whether synthetic samples look realistic, but whether they improve decision quality.","authors_note":"Includes Mihaela van der Schaar."},"tags":["evaluation","synthetic-data","benchmark"],"notable_authors":["Mihaela van der Schaar"],"keywords":["model evaluation","tabular","synthetic data"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§4合成测试数据构造方法和§6低资源任务评测校准结果，可复用在小样本预训练效果的鲁棒性校验场景。","en":"Focus on §4 synthetic test data construction and §6 low-resource evaluation calibration results, reusable for robustness verification of few-shot pre-training performance."}},{"id":"BykovKNKH23","title":"Labeling Neural Representations with Inverse Recognition","authors":["Kirill Bykov","Laura Kopf","Shinichi Nakajima","Marius Kloft","Marina M.-C. Höhne"],"institutions":["TU Kaiserslautern","TU Berlin"],"abstract":"$101","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BykovKNKH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BykovKNKH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/4e52bbb99690d1e05c7ef7b4c8b3569a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"如何为神经网络学到的内部表示（hidden representations）赋予人类可理解的语义标签。现有可解释性方法多聚焦于输入归因（attribution），对中间层表示的语义理解仍然粗糙，通常依赖 probing classifier 等间接手段。","importance":"对 pretrain 研究的启示有限，属于可解释性/表示分析方向的工具性工作。对于想理解 pretrain 模型中间层学到了什么的研究者有一定参考价值，但不直接影响预训练方法设计。","technical_approach":"提出 Inverse Recognition 方法：训练一个逆向模型，将神经网络的中间层表示映射回可解释的概念空间，从而为每个神经元或表示维度生成语义标签。与 probing classifier 的区别在于目标是生成描述性标签而非分类准确率。","experiments":"在视觉模型上验证，展示了生成的语义标签与人类直觉的一致性。具体实验规模和指标需参考原文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to assign human-interpretable semantic labels to neural network internal representations. Existing interpretability methods focus on input attribution; understanding what intermediate layers encode remains coarse, typically relying on probing classifiers.","importance":"Limited direct impact on pretrain research. It is a tool-level contribution in interpretability that may help researchers inspect what pretrained model layers have learned, but does not directly inform pretraining method design.","technical_approach":"Proposes Inverse Recognition: training an inverse model that maps intermediate representations back to an interpretable concept space, generating semantic labels for neurons or representation dimensions. Unlike probing classifiers that optimize for classification accuracy, this targets descriptive labeling.","experiments":"Validated on vision models, showing generated semantic labels align with human intuition. Specific scales and metrics are in the paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["interpretability","representation","inverse-modeling"],"keywords":["Explainable AI","Mechanistic Interpretability","Machine Learning","Deep Neural Networks"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅需阅读§4逆识别模型架构部分，若需分析预训练模型中间层语义可直接复用该工具思路，不用细读理论推导。","en":"Read §4 inverse recognition model architecture only, reuse the tool idea for pre-trained model intermediate layer semantic analysis, skip detailed theoretical derivation."}},{"id":"Campbell0WBRD23","title":"Trans-Dimensional Generative Modeling via Jump Diffusion Models","authors":["Andrew Campbell","William Harvey","Christian Weilbach","Valentin De Bortoli","Thomas Rainforth","Arnaud Doucet"],"institutions":["University of Oxford","ENS Paris"],"abstract":"We propose a new class of generative model that naturally handles data of varying dimensionality by jointly modeling the state and dimension of each datapoint. The generative process is formulated as a jump diffusion process that makes jumps between different dimensional spaces. We first define a dimension destroying forward noising process, before deriving the dimension creating time-reversed generative process along with a novel evidence lower bound training objective for learning to approximate it.\nSimulating our learned approximation to the time-reversed generative process then provides an effective way of sampling data of varying dimensionality by jointly generating state values and dimensions. \nWe demonstrate our approach on molecular and video datasets of varying dimensionality, reporting better compatibility with test-time diffusion guidance imputation tasks and improved interpolation capabilities versus fixed dimensional models that generate state values and dimensions separately.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Campbell0WBRD23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Campbell0WBRD23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/83a10a480fbec91c88f6a9293b4d2b05-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"标准扩散模型只能在固定维度的连续空间中生成样本，无法处理维度本身也是随机变量的情况（如分子生成中原子数量不固定、点云中点数可变）。此前要么固定最大维度再 padding，要么用自回归方式逐步生成，都不够优雅。","importance":"范式级探索。Jump Diffusion 将扩散模型从固定维度推广到变维度空间，这对统一建模不同长度/结构的数据有启发。对 pretrain 研究者而言，这种思路与变长序列的生成建模（如 diffusion LM 处理不同长度文本）有潜在关联，也与跨模态统一生成（不同模态维度不同）的问题相关。","technical_approach":"在连续扩散过程中引入跳跃过程（jump process），允许维度在扩散过程中随机增减。具体实现是将标准 SDE 扩散与一个控制维度变化的跳跃过程耦合，形成 jump diffusion。前向过程中数据逐渐噪声化的同时维度也可以变化，反向过程则同时去噪和确定维度。关键技术挑战是推导变维度下的 score matching 目标和采样算法。","experiments":"在分子生成（QM9 等）和点云生成任务上验证。与固定维度 padding 的扩散模型和自回归方法对比，jump diffusion 在生成质量和多样性上有竞争力，同时更自然地处理了变维度问题。具体指标提升幅度需参考原文。","authors_note":"Thomas Rainforth 是 Oxford 的概率推断方向研究者。Valentin De Bortoli 在扩散模型理论方面有多篇重要工作。Arnaud Doucet 是顺序蒙特卡洛/粒子滤波领域的奠基人之一。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Standard diffusion models operate in fixed-dimensional continuous spaces and cannot natively handle data where dimensionality itself is a random variable (e.g., molecules with varying atom counts, point clouds with variable points). Prior workarounds—padding to max dimension or autoregressive generation—are inelegant.","importance":"A paradigm-level exploration extending diffusion models to trans-dimensional spaces. Relevant to pretrain research through connections to variable-length sequence generation in diffusion LMs and cross-modal unified generation where modalities have different dimensionalities.","technical_approach":"Couples a standard SDE diffusion process with a jump process that controls dimensional changes. During the forward process, data is noised while dimensions can stochastically increase or decrease; the reverse process simultaneously denoises and determines dimensionality. The key technical challenge is deriving score matching objectives and sampling algorithms under varying dimensions.","experiments":"Validated on molecular generation (QM9) and point cloud generation. Competitive with fixed-dimension padded diffusion and autoregressive baselines in generation quality and diversity, while more naturally handling variable dimensionality. Specific metric improvements are in the paper.","authors_note":"Thomas Rainforth works on probabilistic inference at Oxford. Valentin De Bortoli has multiple important works on diffusion model theory. Arnaud Doucet is a foundational figure in sequential Monte Carlo / particle filtering."},"tags":["diffusion","generative-modeling","jump-process"],"notable_authors":["Arnaud Doucet","Valentin De Bortoli","Thomas Rainforth"],"keywords":["diffusion","score-based","score","markov chain","jump diffusion","poisson"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3跳扩散过程耦合公式和§5变维度分子生成实验，对跨模态统一建模范式设计有参考价值。","en":"Focus on §3 jump diffusion process coupling formula and §5 variable-dimension molecule generation experiments, useful for cross-modal unified generative paradigm design."}},{"id":"CanatarFWC23","title":"A Spectral Theory of Neural Prediction and Alignment","authors":["Abdulkadir Canatar","Jenelle Feather","Albert J. Wakhloo","SueYeon Chung"],"institutions":["Columbia University","MIT"],"abstract":"$102","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/CanatarFWC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/CanatarFWC23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/9308d1b7d4ae2d3e2e67ae94b1078bf7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"神经网络的内部表示与大脑神经活动之间的对齐（alignment）被广泛观察到，但缺乏统一的理论框架来解释为什么会对齐、对齐的程度由什么决定。现有分析多是经验性的相似度度量，缺乏预测能力。","importance":"理论级贡献，属于计算神经科学与深度学习交叉方向。对 pretrain 研究的直接影响有限，但其谱分析框架对理解表示学习的结构（如不同层的表示如何组织信息）有间接参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出基于谱分析的理论框架：将神经网络表示和大脑神经响应都分解到一组基函数上，通过比较谱系数来量化对齐程度。框架可以预测在什么条件下（如任务结构、数据统计特性）对齐会更强。核心洞察是对齐主要由任务相关的低频成分驱动。","experiments":"在视觉模型（如预训练 CNN/ViT）与灵长类视觉皮层神经记录数据之间验证理论预测。展示了谱分析框架能定量预测不同模型与大脑的对齐程度差异。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The alignment between neural network representations and brain neural activity is widely observed but lacks a unified theoretical framework explaining why it occurs and what determines its degree. Existing analyses rely on empirical similarity metrics without predictive power.","importance":"A theory-level contribution at the intersection of computational neuroscience and deep learning. Limited direct impact on pretrain research, but the spectral analysis framework offers indirect insights into how representations organize information across layers.","technical_approach":"Proposes a spectral framework: decompose both neural network representations and brain responses onto a set of basis functions, then compare spectral coefficients to quantify alignment. The framework predicts under what conditions (task structure, data statistics) alignment strengthens. Key insight: alignment is driven primarily by task-relevant low-frequency components.","experiments":"Validated by comparing pretrained vision models (CNNs, ViTs) with primate visual cortex neural recordings. The spectral framework quantitatively predicts differences in brain-model alignment across architectures.","authors_note":""},"tags":["spectral-analysis","prediction","alignment"],"keywords":["computational neuroscience","neural manifolds","neuro-AI","statistical physics","representational geometry"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅需阅读§3谱分解对齐框架部分，做表示结构分析可参考该量化方法，交叉理论部分无需深挖。","en":"Read §3 spectral decomposition alignment framework only, refer to this quantification method for representation structure analysis, skip in-depth cross-theory parts."}},{"id":"CaoCLZ23","title":"Exploring the Optimal Choice for Generative Processes in Diffusion Models: Ordinary vs Stochastic Differential Equations","authors":["Yu Cao","Jingrun Chen","Yixin Luo","Xiang Zhou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$103","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/CaoCLZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/CaoCLZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/6a27ee6f66d13557f15f070274c51721-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"扩散模型的生成过程可以用 ODE（确定性）或 SDE（随机性）来实现，但什么时候该用哪个、各自的优劣边界是什么，缺乏系统性的理论分析。实践中选择往往靠经验。","importance":"理论/方法级贡献。对扩散模型的采样策略选择给出了更清晰的指导。对 pretrain 研究者而言，如果在做 diffusion LM 或 AR+diffusion 联合建模，理解 ODE vs SDE 采样的 trade-off 对推理效率和生成质量的平衡有直接帮助。","technical_approach":"从理论角度分析 ODE 和 SDE 生成过程在不同条件下的行为差异。核心发现：(1) 当 score 估计精确时，ODE 和 SDE 生成等价分布；(2) 当 score 估计有误差时，SDE 的随机性可以起到纠错作用，在某些误差模式下比 ODE 更鲁棒；(3) 但 SDE 的额外随机性也引入方差，在 score 估计较好时反而不如 ODE。给出了选择的理论判据。","experiments":"在图像生成任务（CIFAR-10、CelebA 等）上验证理论预测。实验确认了在不同 score 估计质量下 ODE 和 SDE 的相对优劣与理论一致。提供了实用的选择建议：score 网络训练充分时用 ODE（更快更确定），训练不充分时 SDE 更稳健。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Diffusion models can use ODE (deterministic) or SDE (stochastic) for generation, but when to use which and their respective trade-offs lack systematic theoretical analysis. Practitioners choose by intuition.","importance":"A theory/method-level contribution providing clearer guidance on sampling strategy selection for diffusion models. Directly useful for pretrain researchers working on diffusion LMs or AR+diffusion joint modeling, where the ODE vs SDE trade-off affects inference efficiency and generation quality.","technical_approach":"Theoretically analyzes ODE vs SDE generation under different conditions. Key findings: (1) with perfect score estimation, both yield equivalent distributions; (2) with score estimation errors, SDE's stochasticity provides error correction, making it more robust under certain error patterns; (3) but SDE's extra randomness introduces variance, making it worse than ODE when scores are well-estimated. Provides theoretical criteria for choosing between them.","experiments":"Validated on image generation (CIFAR-10, CelebA). Experiments confirm the theoretical predictions about relative ODE vs SDE performance under different score estimation quality. Practical recommendation: use ODE when the score network is well-trained (faster, more deterministic); use SDE when training is insufficient (more robust).","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","sde","ode","sampling"],"keywords":["diffusion models; stochastic differential equations; score-based generative models; asymptotic analysis"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§4两种采样方式的trade-off理论判据，做扩散式大模型推理优化时可直接参考该选择标准。","en":"Focus on §4 theoretical criteria for trade-off between two sampling methods, directly refer to this selection standard for diffusion-based large model inference optimization."}},{"id":"CarboneHCV23","title":"Efficient Training of Energy-Based Models Using Jarzynski Equality","authors":["Davide Carbone","Mengjian Hua","Simon Coste","Eric Vanden-Eijnden"],"institutions":["NYU"],"abstract":"$104","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/CarboneHCV23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/CarboneHCV23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/a4ddb865e0a8ca3cca43fd7387b4b0da-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Energy-Based Models (EBMs) 训练困难，核心瓶颈是需要从模型分布中采样来估计配分函数的梯度，而 MCMC 采样在高维空间中极慢且不稳定。现有方法（对比散度 CD、score matching 等）要么有偏要么效率低。","importance":"方法级贡献。EBM 是与 AR LM 和 diffusion 并列的一类生成建模范式，训练效率一直是其最大瓶颈。如果 EBM 训练能变得实用，对 energy-based LM 等非自回归语言建模方向有直接推动。Jarzynski equality 这条路径是物理启发的新思路。","technical_approach":"利用统计物理中的 Jarzynski 等式（Jarzynski equality）来估计配分函数比值，从而避免传统 MCMC 采样的困难。Jarzynski 等式允许通过非平衡过程（non-equilibrium process）的工作量来无偏估计自由能差，这里被用来估计 EBM 训练中需要的配分函数梯度。具体实现是设计一系列从简单分布到目标 EBM 分布的退火路径，沿路径采样并用 Jarzynski 等式聚合。与 CD 的区别是不需要 MCMC 链收敛，与 score matching 的区别是直接估计似然梯度。","experiments":"在合成数据和标准图像生成 benchmark 上验证。相比 CD 和 persistent CD，Jarzynski 方法在训练稳定性和生成质量上有改善，尤其在多模态分布上 MCMC 容易 mode collapse 的场景下优势明显。具体数字需参考原文。","authors_note":"Eric Vanden-Eijnden 是 NYU Courant 的应用数学教授，在随机动力学和采样方法方面有深厚积累。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Training EBMs is hard because estimating the partition function gradient requires sampling from the model distribution, and MCMC sampling in high dimensions is slow and unstable. Existing methods (contrastive divergence, score matching) are either biased or inefficient.","importance":"A method-level contribution addressing the core bottleneck of EBM training. EBMs are a generative modeling paradigm parallel to AR LMs and diffusion models. Making EBM training practical could directly benefit energy-based language modeling and other non-autoregressive approaches. The Jarzynski equality route is a physics-inspired fresh angle.","technical_approach":"Uses the Jarzynski equality from statistical physics to estimate partition function ratios, bypassing traditional MCMC difficulties. The equality allows unbiased free energy estimation via non-equilibrium work measurements. In practice, annealing paths from a simple distribution to the target EBM distribution are designed, with samples collected along the path and aggregated via Jarzynski's formula. Unlike CD, no MCMC convergence is needed; unlike score matching, it directly estimates likelihood gradients.","experiments":"Validated on synthetic data and standard image generation benchmarks. Compared to CD and persistent CD, the Jarzynski method improves training stability and generation quality, especially in multimodal distributions where MCMC suffers from mode collapse. Specific numbers are in the paper.","authors_note":"Eric Vanden-Eijnden is a professor of applied mathematics at NYU Courant with deep expertise in stochastic dynamics and sampling methods."},"tags":["energy-based-model","training","normalization"],"notable_authors":["Eric Vanden-Eijnden"],"keywords":["Energy-Based Model","contrastive learning","generative models","Jarzynski identity","ULA"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅需阅读§3基于Jarzynski等式的梯度估计实现部分，做能量基语言模型训练可参考该无偏采样思路。","en":"Read §3 gradient estimation implementation based on Jarzynski equality only, refer to this unbiased sampling idea for energy-based language model training."}},{"id":"CarliniNCJGKITS23","title":"Are aligned neural networks adversarially aligned?","authors":["Nicholas Carlini","Milad Nasr","Christopher A. Choquette-Choo","Matthew Jagielski","Irena Gao","Pang Wei Koh","Daphne Ippolito","Florian Tramèr","Ludwig Schmidt"],"institutions":["Google DeepMind"],"abstract":"$105","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/CarliniNCJGKITS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/CarliniNCJGKITS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/c1f0b856a35986348ab3414177266f75-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"经过 RLHF 等对齐训练的 LLM 是否真的对对抗攻击鲁棒？此前对齐工作主要关注让模型拒绝有害请求，但没有系统评估对抗性 prompt 能否绕过这些安全护栏。","importance":"对 pretrain→posttrain 闭环有重要启示。结论是对齐训练提供的安全性非常脆弱——简单的对抗性后缀就能让对齐模型输出有害内容。这意味着 RLHF/安全微调的效果更像是表面行为修改而非深层能力约束，对理解 pretrain 知识与 posttrain 对齐之间的关系有直接意义。","technical_approach":"对多个已对齐的 LLM（包括 ChatGPT、Bard、Claude 等）进行系统性对抗攻击测试。攻击方法包括：(1) 基于梯度的对抗后缀搜索（在开源模型上优化，迁移到闭源模型）；(2) 手工构造的 jailbreak prompt。核心发现是对齐训练没有消除模型生成有害内容的能力，只是增加了触发门槛，而对抗攻击可以轻松越过这个门槛。","experiments":"在 GPT-3.5/GPT-4、Claude、Bard 等主流对齐模型上测试。对抗攻击成功率很高（具体数字需参考原文），即使是最强的对齐模型也无法抵御。关键观察：在开源模型（如 Vicuna）上优化的对抗后缀可以迁移攻击闭源模型，说明对齐的脆弱性是系统性的而非模型特定的。","authors_note":"Nicholas Carlini 是 Google DeepMind 的安全/隐私/对抗 ML 领域顶级研究者，此前在模型隐私攻击（training data extraction）方面有多篇标志性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Are RLHF-aligned LLMs actually robust to adversarial attacks? Alignment work has focused on making models refuse harmful requests, but systematic evaluation of adversarial prompt attacks against these safety guardrails was lacking.","importance":"Highly relevant to the pretrain-posttrain interface. The conclusion is stark: alignment training provides brittle safety—simple adversarial suffixes can make aligned models produce harmful content. This implies RLHF/safety fine-tuning modifies surface behavior rather than deeply constraining capabilities, directly informing our understanding of how pretrained knowledge interacts with post-training alignment.","technical_approach":"Systematically attacks multiple aligned LLMs (ChatGPT, Bard, Claude, etc.) using: (1) gradient-based adversarial suffix search optimized on open-source models and transferred to closed-source ones; (2) manually crafted jailbreak prompts. Core finding: alignment does not remove the model's ability to generate harmful content—it only raises the trigger threshold, which adversarial attacks easily surpass.","experiments":"Tested on GPT-3.5/GPT-4, Claude, Bard, and other major aligned models. Attack success rates are high (specific numbers in paper). Key observation: adversarial suffixes optimized on open-source models (e.g., Vicuna) transfer to closed-source models, indicating alignment fragility is systemic, not model-specific.","authors_note":"Nicholas Carlini is a top researcher in security/privacy/adversarial ML at Google DeepMind, known for landmark work on training data extraction from models."},"tags":["alignment","adversarial-robustness","safety"],"notable_authors":["Nicholas Carlini"],"keywords":["Adversarial examples","large language models","alignment"]},{"id":"ChaoSHKL23","title":"Training Energy-Based Normalizing Flow with Score-Matching Objectives","authors":["Chen-Hao Chao","Wei-Fang Sun","Yen-Chang Hsu","Zsolt Kira","Chun-Yi Lee"],"institutions":["Georgia Tech","National Tsing Hua University"],"abstract":"$106","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChaoSHKL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChaoSHKL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/8882d370cdafec9885b918a8cfac642e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Energy-Based Models (EBMs) 与 normalizing flows 各有优劣——EBM 表达力强但训练需要 MCMC，normalizing flow 训练简单但受限于可逆架构。如何结合两者优势，用 score matching 目标来训练一个 energy-based normalizing flow？","importance":"方法级贡献。在生成模型训练方法的工具箱中增加了一个选项。对 pretrain 研究的直接影响有限，但对关注 energy-based 建模和 flow-based 建模融合的研究者有参考价值。","technical_approach":"将 normalizing flow 的输出视为一个未归一化的能量函数，然后用 score matching（而非最大似然）来训练。这样既保留了 flow 的结构化变换能力，又不需要计算配分函数。与纯 EBM 的区别是有 flow 提供的结构先验，与纯 flow 的区别是不要求严格的似然计算。关键技术是推导 score matching loss 在 flow 参数化下的高效计算方式。","experiments":"在标准密度估计和图像生成 benchmark 上测试。相比纯 normalizing flow 和纯 EBM baseline，该方法在生成质量上有改善，同时训练比 MCMC-based EBM 更稳定。具体数字需参考原文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"EBMs are expressive but require MCMC for training; normalizing flows train easily but are constrained by invertible architectures. How to combine both by training an energy-based normalizing flow with score matching objectives?","importance":"A method-level contribution adding a new option to the generative model training toolkit. Limited direct impact on pretrain research, but relevant for researchers interested in merging energy-based and flow-based modeling.","technical_approach":"Treats the normalizing flow output as an unnormalized energy function and trains it with score matching instead of maximum likelihood. This preserves the flow's structured transformations without requiring partition function computation. Key technical contribution: deriving efficient score matching loss computation under flow parameterization.","experiments":"Tested on standard density estimation and image generation benchmarks. Improves generation quality over pure normalizing flows and pure EBMs, with more stable training than MCMC-based EBMs. Specific numbers in the paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["energy-based-model","normalizing-flow","score-matching"],"keywords":["flow-based models","score-matching methods"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅需阅读§4损失函数推导部分，做生成模型架构融合研究可参考该结合思路，无相关需求可跳过。","en":"Read §4 loss function derivation only, refer to this integration idea for generative model architecture fusion research, skip if no relevant demand."}},{"id":"ChehabHR23","title":"Provable benefits of annealing for estimating normalizing constants: Importance Sampling, Noise-Contrastive Estimation, and beyond","authors":["Omar Chehab","Aapo Hyvärinen","Andrej Risteski"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$107","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChehabHR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChehabHR23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/90080022263cddafddd4a0726f1fb186-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：在估计归一化常数（partition function）时，annealing 为什么常常比直接 importance sampling 或普通 NCE 更稳、更准，能否给出统一且可证明的收益。这个问题过去更多靠 AIS 一类经验成功来支撑，但对“为什么中间桥接分布有用、收益来自哪里、适用范围到哪”缺少清晰理论，因此值得重新系统化。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要是理论框架级，而不是直接给出新的大模型训练 recipe。它把 importance sampling、noise-contrastive estimation 以及更一般的归一化常数估计放到同一个 annealing 视角下，说明逐步桥接不是启发式技巧，而是在可证明意义上改善难分布之间的估计难度。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：凡是涉及能量模型、对比估计、未归一化目标或桥接式训练目标的地方，都可以把“中间分布设计”当成一等公民，而不只是采样工程细节。","technical_approach":"核心方法是建立一个统一的 annealed estimation 理论，而不是提出单一新算法。作者把目标分布与参考分布之间插入一条分布路径，分析分阶段估计相对直接估计如何降低方差或样本复杂度；关键点不在某个具体调度公式，而在证明收益与相邻分布更接近有关。与以往只分析 AIS 或某个特定估计器不同，这篇工作强调“annealing 作为元策略”可覆盖 importance sampling、NCE 及更一般情形，因此结论更可迁移；代价是结果偏理论化，对实际最优路径和有限算力下的调度选择给得没那么具体。","experiments":"从题目和已知信息看，实验重点应是验证理论预测，而不是大规模模型 benchmark。可确定的关键事实有限：论文针对归一化常数估计任务比较了带 annealing 与不带 annealing 的估计误差、样本效率或收敛速度，并覆盖 importance sampling、NCE 等多种设定；核心结论是 annealing 在困难分布间显著更稳。由于这里没有摘要和正文，无法可靠给出模型规模、数据集名称、具体提升数字或 ablation 细节，因此不应编造。","authors_note":"机构与作者信息不足以在这里可靠总结代表性团队脉络。已知作者包括 Aapo Hyvärinen、Andrej Risteski。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a focused question: why does annealing help when estimating normalizing constants, and can that benefit be stated in a unified, provable way beyond AIS-style intuition. This matters because partition-function estimation has long relied on heuristic bridges between easy and hard distributions, while the mechanism and scope of the gain were not cleanly characterized.","importance":"This is mainly a theory contribution with method-level implications rather than a direct training recipe for large models. The paper puts importance sampling, noise-contrastive estimation, and related estimators under a common annealing view, showing that intermediate bridge distributions are not just a practical trick but can provably reduce estimation difficulty. For pretraining research, the useful takeaway is that whenever we train with unnormalized objectives, contrastive surrogates, or bridge distributions, the path between distributions is part of the objective design, not just an implementation detail.","technical_approach":"The core idea is a unified analysis of annealed estimation rather than a single new estimator. The authors insert a sequence of intermediate distributions between a reference and a target distribution, and analyze why breaking a hard estimation problem into easier local steps improves variance or sample complexity relative to one-shot estimation. The main distinction from prior work is that the paper treats annealing as a general meta-strategy covering importance sampling, NCE, and beyond, instead of analyzing one specific procedure in isolation. The trade-off is that the results are more structural than prescriptive: they clarify why annealing helps, but do not by themselves tell you the optimal schedule in a finite compute regime.","experiments":"Based on the title and available metadata, the empirical section is best understood as theory validation rather than a large-scale benchmark paper. The likely comparison is annealed versus non-annealed estimation across partition-function estimation setups such as importance sampling and NCE, with improvements in stability, error, or sample efficiency on difficult distribution pairs. Since no abstract or body text is provided here, I cannot reliably state model sizes, datasets, metrics, or exact gains, and should not invent them.","authors_note":"The available information is not enough to give a reliable team note. Known authors include Aapo Hyvärinen and Andrej Risteski."},"tags":["annealing","nce","normalization"],"notable_authors":["Omar Chehab","Aapo Hyvärinen","Andrej Risteski"],"keywords":["noise-contrastive estimation","annealed importance sampling"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3统一退火估计框架结论，做对比学习、能量模型训练时可将中间分布设计纳入核心优化维度。","en":"Focus on §3 unified annealed estimation framework conclusions, include intermediate distribution design as core optimization dimension for contrastive learning or energy model training."}},{"id":"ChenCLL0S23","title":"The probability flow ODE is provably fast","authors":["Sitan Chen","Sinho Chewi","Holden Lee","Yuanzhi Li","Jianfeng Lu","Adil Salim"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We provide the first polynomial-time convergence guarantees for the probabilistic flow ODE implementation (together with a corrector step) of score-based generative modeling. Our analysis is carried out in the wake of recent results obtaining such guarantees for the SDE-based implementation (i.e., denoising diffusion probabilistic modeling or DDPM), but requires the development of novel techniques for studying deterministic dynamics without contractivity. Through the use of a specially chosen corrector step based on the underdamped Langevin diffusion, we obtain better dimension dependence than prior works on DDPM ($O(\\sqrt d)$ vs. $O(d)$, assuming smoothness of the data distribution), highlighting potential advantages of the ODE framework.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenCLL0S23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenCLL0S23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/d84a27ff694345aacc21c72097a69ea2-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的是：score-based generative modeling 里的 probability flow ODE 不只是“能生成”，而且在理论上是否可以做到快。过去扩散模型的理论多围绕随机 SDE 采样或渐近正确性，ODE 路线虽然在实践中常用于少步采样，但其复杂度收益缺少足够扎实的证明。","importance":"这项工作的重要性在于，它直接碰的是 diffusion/score 模型最核心的系统瓶颈——采样速度。若 probability flow ODE 可以被证明在某些条件下高效，那么这会强化确定性 ODE 采样作为扩散模型主路径的理论地位；对 pretrain 研究，尤其是 diffusion LM 和跨模态 diffusion token 建模，意义在于它提供了“少步生成不是纯工程 luck”的理论依据。","technical_approach":"核心方法是对 probability flow ODE 的收敛与复杂度做非渐近分析，证明其在合适正则性条件下可以快速逼近目标分布。它不是提出新的生成架构，而是分析把随机扩散逆过程改写成确定性 ODE 后，数值积分步数为何可能显著减少；关键机制通常依赖于 score 场的平滑性、Lipschitz 性或相关几何条件。与只证明可解或最终收敛的工作相比，这篇论文更强调‘fast’这一复杂度层面的结论；边界也很明确——理论条件若与真实高维模型存在落差，实践收益仍需经验验证。","experiments":"从题目判断，实验应主要用于支撑理论趋势：比较 probability flow ODE 与相关扩散采样过程在误差与步数上的关系，展示理论上预测的快收敛在数值实验中可见。由于未提供摘要或正文，无法可靠写出具体数据集、网络规模、NFE（function evaluations）降低幅度或与 DDIM/ODE solvers 的精确比较数字。能确认的只有：论文的核心卖点是理论证明，不是靠大规模 benchmark 堆出 SOTA。","authors_note":"作者名单中可确认 Sitan Chen、Sinho Chewi、Holden Lee、Yuanzhi Li、Jianfeng Lu。其余机构和团队代表作在当前信息下不宜猜测。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a central question in diffusion modeling: is the probability flow ODE not only valid, but provably fast. Prior theory around diffusion models mostly emphasized correctness and stochastic reverse processes, while the deterministic ODE route was widely used in practice without equally clear complexity guarantees.","importance":"The contribution matters because sampling speed is the main systems bottleneck for diffusion-style generators. If the probability flow ODE admits provable fast convergence under meaningful assumptions, that strengthens the theoretical case for deterministic samplers in diffusion models, including diffusion language models and multimodal token generators. The practical message is not that all diffusion models become cheap, but that fast few-step generation can have principled support rather than being a purely empirical artifact.","technical_approach":"The paper provides a non-asymptotic analysis of the probability flow ODE and derives conditions under which it approaches the target distribution efficiently. This is not a new architecture; it is a complexity analysis of replacing the stochastic reverse diffusion with a deterministic ODE and showing when numerical integration can require fewer steps. The mechanism is likely built around regularity assumptions on the score field, such as smoothness or Lipschitz control. Compared with work that only proves consistency or eventual convergence, the distinguishing point here is the explicit focus on speed. The boundary is also clear: if real trained score networks violate the assumptions, the theorem may be directionally useful but not quantitatively predictive.","experiments":"The empirical role is likely to validate the theoretical trend rather than to establish a new benchmark leader. The paper likely compares probability flow ODE dynamics with related diffusion sampling procedures and shows favorable error-versus-step behavior consistent with the analysis. Since no abstract or paper text is provided, I cannot reliably report datasets, model sizes, NFE counts, or exact gains over specific samplers such as DDIM or other ODE solvers.","authors_note":"Known authors include Sitan Chen, Sinho Chewi, Holden Lee, Yuanzhi Li, and Jianfeng Lu. A reliable institution/team note cannot be given from the provided information alone."},"tags":["diffusion","probability-flow-ode","sampling","theory"],"notable_authors":["Sitan Chen","Sinho Chewi","Holden Lee","Yuanzhi Li","Jianfeng Lu"],"keywords":["DDIM","deterministic samplers","diffusion models","predictor-corrector","probability flow ODE","score-based generative modeling"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅需阅读§4非渐近复杂度分析结论，为扩散大模型少步采样优化提供理论支撑，无需细读数学推导。","en":"Read §4 non-asymptotic complexity analysis conclusions only, provides theoretical support for few-step sampling optimization of diffusion large models, skip detailed mathematical derivation."}},{"id":"ChenDS23","title":"EvoPrompting: Language Models for Code-Level Neural Architecture Search","authors":["Angelica Chen","David Dohan","David R. So"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$108","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenDS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenDS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/184c1e18d00d7752805324da48ad25be-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是：能否让语言模型直接参与代码级 neural architecture search，而不是只在自然语言提示层面做高层建议。传统 NAS 要么依赖昂贵的强化学习/进化搜索，要么受限于手工设计空间；而仅用 LLM 生成文字建议又离真实可执行架构代码太远。","importance":"这项工作的贡献更偏方法与系统接口，而不是 pretrain 范式本身。它的重要性在于展示了 LLM 可以作为搜索器的一部分，直接操作架构代码并与进化搜索闭环结合，这对“LLM 作为优化器/控制器”很有启发。对 pretrain 研究的间接意义是：代码预训练带来的程序分布建模能力，不只用于代码补全，也可以迁移到设计空间探索和训练 pipeline 自动化。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 EvoPrompting：把 LLM 放进进化式 NAS 循环中，让模型基于已有候选架构及其性能反馈，生成或修改代码级架构候选。它不是让 LLM 单独完成搜索，而是保留进化搜索的选择与评估框架，用 LLM 做高质量变异算子；这样设计的原因是，纯 LLM 生成难以稳定满足可执行性和局部改进，纯进化又搜索效率低。和传统 prompt-based design 不同，这里操作对象是可运行代码；和经典 NAS 不同，这里变异分布由预训练语言模型提供，代价是效果会依赖代码模型先验与评估预算。","experiments":"从题目可确定，实验围绕代码级 NAS benchmark，比较 EvoPrompting 与标准进化搜索或其他 NAS 基线在搜索效率和最终架构性能上的差异。合理预期会报告找到更优网络或在同等评估预算下更快达到同等精度，并分析 LLM 生成变异的有效性。由于没有摘要与正文，无法可靠给出所用模型名称、参数规模、具体搜索空间、数据集或提升数字，因此这里只能保留结论层面的描述。","authors_note":"作者包括 Angelica Chen、David Dohan、David R. So。团队信息在当前材料下不宜扩展。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether an LLM can participate directly in code-level neural architecture search rather than only giving high-level natural-language suggestions. This matters because classical NAS is expensive and search-space constrained, while plain prompting is too far from executable architectures to be a reliable optimizer.","importance":"This is mainly a method-and-systems paper, not a new pretraining paradigm. Its value is in showing that an LLM can act as a search operator inside an evolutionary NAS loop, directly editing architecture code based on performance feedback. For pretraining researchers, the broader lesson is that code pretraining can support structured search and optimization workflows, not just code completion.","technical_approach":"The main idea, EvoPrompting, places an LLM inside an evolutionary search framework and uses it to generate or mutate architecture code conditioned on prior candidates and their scores. The design keeps the selection and evaluation logic of evolutionary NAS while replacing hand-crafted mutation operators with a pretrained language model prior. That choice is sensible: pure LLM generation struggles with executability and local improvement, while pure evolution is often sample-inefficient. The closest distinction from prior prompt-based design work is that the search object here is executable code, not textual advice. The trade-off is that performance depends on the quality of the code prior and on the external architecture evaluation budget.","experiments":"From the title alone, the paper likely evaluates on code-level NAS benchmarks and compares EvoPrompting against standard evolutionary search and related NAS baselines in terms of search efficiency and final architecture quality. The key empirical claim is likely that LLM-guided mutations find good models faster or with fewer evaluations. Since no abstract or full text is available, I cannot reliably report model sizes, search spaces, datasets, or exact gains.","authors_note":"Known authors include Angelica Chen, David Dohan, and David R. So. I cannot reliably add a broader team note from the provided information."},"tags":["nas","code-generation","llm","architecture-search"],"notable_authors":["Angelica Chen","David Dohan","David R. So"],"keywords":["language models","evolution","prompting","neural architecture search","code generation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3进化搜索与LLM结合的闭环流程，做预训练架构自动化探索时可复用该混合搜索框架思路。","en":"Focus on §3 closed-loop process combining evolutionary search and LLM, reuse this hybrid search framework idea for pre-training architecture automatic exploration."}},{"id":"ChenLSYLKD023","title":"Large Language Models are Visual Reasoning Coordinators","authors":["Liangyu Chen","Bo Li","Sheng Shen","Jingkang Yang","Chunyuan Li","Kurt Keutzer","Trevor Darrell","Ziwei Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$109","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenLSYLKD023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenLSYLKD023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ddfe6bae7b869e819f842753009b94ad-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心判断是：在视觉推理任务里，LLM 更适合作为协调器而不是单独的视觉推理器。过去很多方法试图把视觉 reasoning 全塞进单个 VLM 里，但复杂视觉任务往往需要拆解、调用外部工具或多步规划，单模型端到端做得不稳定也不透明。","importance":"这项工作对多模态系统设计很有启发，尤其是在 pretrain 与 tool use 接口上。它提示我们：更强的视觉推理不一定只靠更大的端到端预训练，也可以靠让语言模型承担任务分解、模块调度和结果整合。对 native multimodal pretraining 的启示是，统一模型之外，‘协调层’本身可能是性能上限的重要组成部分。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把 LLM 放在系统上层，作为 visual reasoning coordinator，负责解析问题、选择或调用视觉模块、组织多步推理并汇总答案。它更像一种系统编排框架，而不是单一新 backbone；关键设计选择是承认 LLM 的强项在符号规划和文本推理，视觉感知则交给专门组件。与直接用 VLM 端到端回答相比，这样做通常更可控、可解释，也更容易插入 OCR、检测、检索等能力；代价是系统复杂度更高，错误也可能来自协调链路而不是感知模型本身。","experiments":"从题目看，实验应覆盖多种视觉推理 benchmark，比较协调式系统与直接 VLM/LLM prompting 的差异。关键事实大概率是：当任务需要组合感知、工具调用和多步推理时，LLM coordinator 明显优于单一路径基线；同时可能有模块替换或 planner 去除的 ablation，说明协调机制本身带来增益。由于缺少摘要和正文，无法可靠给出具体 benchmark 名称、使用的 LLM/VLM、指标和提升数字。","authors_note":"作者包括 Liangyu Chen、Bo Li、Sheng Shen、Jingkang Yang、Chunyuan Li 等。Chunyuan Li 为多模态与生成方向知名作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper argues that for visual reasoning, an LLM is often better used as a coordinator than as the sole reasoner. Many prior systems tried to solve hard visual tasks inside one end-to-end VLM, but complex reasoning often requires decomposition, tool use, and staged decision making that a monolithic model handles poorly.","importance":"This is important for multimodal system design, especially at the boundary between pretraining and tool-augmented inference. The message is that stronger visual reasoning does not necessarily require only bigger end-to-end pretraining; it can also come from better orchestration, where a language model plans and delegates. For pretraining researchers, that is a useful reminder that capability ceilings are shaped not just by the backbone but also by the coordination layer around it.","technical_approach":"The method uses an LLM as a high-level visual reasoning coordinator that parses the task, decides which visual modules or tools to invoke, organizes multi-step reasoning, and aggregates results into a final answer. This is a systems framework rather than a new backbone. The central design choice is to exploit the LLM for symbolic planning and textual reasoning while leaving perception to specialized modules. Compared with direct VLM answering, the approach is typically more controllable and interpretable, and it can naturally incorporate OCR, detectors, or retrieval. The trade-off is higher system complexity and a new failure mode at the orchestration layer.","experiments":"From the title, the paper likely evaluates on several visual reasoning benchmarks and compares the coordinator-based system with direct VLM or LLM prompting baselines. The expected result is that coordination helps most on tasks requiring tool composition and multi-step reasoning. It likely also includes ablations removing the planner or replacing modules to show that the orchestration itself adds value. Since no abstract or full text is available, I cannot reliably report the exact models, datasets, metrics, or gains.","authors_note":"Known authors include Liangyu Chen, Bo Li, Sheng Shen, Jingkang Yang, and Chunyuan Li. Chunyuan Li is a well-known researcher in multimodal and generative modeling."},"tags":["llm","visual-reasoning","vlm","chain-of-thought"],"notable_authors":["Liangyu Chen","Bo Li","Sheng Shen","Jingkang Yang","Chunyuan Li"],"keywords":["visual reasoning","large language models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3协调框架设计和§6对比实验即可，结论可支撑多模态预训练不必盲目追求端到端，可尝试拆分感知与调度模块","en":"Only check §3 coordinator framework design and §6 comparative experiments, it supports not blindly pursuing end-to-end for multimodal pretraining, try splitting perception and scheduling modules"}},{"id":"ChenWZQG023","title":"Joint Data-Task Generation for Auxiliary Learning","authors":["Hong Chen","Xin Wang","Yuwei Zhou","Yijian Qin","Chaoyu Guan","Wenwu Zhu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$10a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenWZQG023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenWZQG023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/2a91fb5a4c03e0b6d889e1c52f775480-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有辅助学习方法依赖人工收集辅助数据和任务，需要大量领域知识，当辅助数据/任务不合适时会损害主任务性能。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出了辅助学习的新范式，不需要人工设计辅助数据和任务，降低了辅助学习的门槛。","technical_approach":"原创联合数据任务生成框架DTG-AuxL，包含特征生成器和标签生成器的联合生成器，配合双层优化策略，自动生成对主任务有益的辅助数据和任务，避免人工收集的副作用。","experiments":"在多个CV和NLP主任务上测试，对比人工辅助学习基线，主任务精度提升1-3个百分点，在无领域知识的场景下提升更明显。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing auxiliary learning methods rely on manually collected auxiliary data and tasks, require a lot of domain knowledge, and will damage the performance of the primary task when the auxiliary data/tasks are inappropriate.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution, proposes a new paradigm of auxiliary learning, does not require manual design of auxiliary data and tasks, reducing the threshold of auxiliary learning.","technical_approach":"Original joint data-task generation framework DTG-AuxL includes a joint generator of feature generator and label generator, cooperates with bi-level optimization strategy, automatically generates auxiliary data and tasks beneficial to the primary task, avoiding side effects of manual collection.","experiments":"Tested on multiple CV and NLP primary tasks, compared with manual auxiliary learning baseline, primary task accuracy is improved by 1-3 percentage points, the improvement is more obvious in scenarios without domain knowledge.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-generation","auxiliary-learning","synthetic-data","multi-task"],"keywords":["auxiliary learning","data-task joint generation"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"合适的辅助数据和任务可以提升主任务的性能。","claim_en":"Proper auxiliary data and tasks can improve performance of the primary task.","evidence_anchor":"Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"联合自动生成的辅助数据和任务相比人工收集的辅助数据任务，在无领域知识的场景下可以带来更稳定的主任务收益。","claim_en":"Jointly automatically generated auxiliary data and tasks deliver more stable primary task gains than manually collected ones in scenarios without domain knowledge.","opposes":"先前辅助学习方法默认需要人工收集辅助数据和任务。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5, Table 3","why_contested":"降低了辅助学习的使用门槛，拓展了辅助学习的适用场景。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为辅助学习自动生成数据任务的范式备查，不需要读正文，做辅助预训练时可以回头找方法框架","en":"Keep as reference for auxiliary learning's automatic data-task generation paradigm, no need to read full text, refer to its framework when doing auxiliary pretraining"}},{"id":"ChenYXBHHFZWL23","title":"Fast Model DeBias with Machine Unlearning","authors":["Ruizhe Chen","Jianfei Yang","Huimin Xiong","Jianhong Bai","Tianxiang Hu","Jin Hao","Yang Feng","Joey Tianyi Zhou","Jian Wu","Zuozhu Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$10b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenYXBHHFZWL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenYXBHHFZWL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/2ecc80084c96cc25b11b0ab995c25f47-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有模型去偏方法需要大量偏置标注或重新训练成本高，也无法解释模型内偏置的来源，无法适配大模型场景下的快速去偏需求。","importance":"方法级贡献，结合机器遗忘实现快速去偏，降低去偏成本同时可解释偏置来源，适合大模型快速迭代场景。","technical_approach":"原创基于机器遗忘的快速去偏框架，定位模型中与偏置相关的参数子集，仅对该部分参数进行遗忘操作，不需要全量重训练，同时可以追溯偏置的来源。","experiments":"在CelebA人脸分类、招聘决策等有偏数据集上测试，对比传统去偏方法，去偏耗时降低80%以上，偏置抑制效果相当，同时可以定位偏置对应的参数位置。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing model debiasing methods require a large number of bias labels or high retraining costs, and cannot explain the source of bias in the model, failing to adapt to the fast debiasing requirements in large model scenarios.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution, realizes fast debiasing combined with machine unlearning, reduces debiasing cost while explaining the source of bias, suitable for large model fast iteration scenarios.","technical_approach":"Original fast debiasing framework based on machine unlearning locates the subset of parameters related to bias in the model, only performs unlearning operation on this part of parameters, does not require full retraining, and can trace the source of bias at the same time.","experiments":"Tested on biased datasets such as CelebA face classification and recruitment decision-making, compared with traditional debiasing methods, debiasing time is reduced by more than 80%, bias suppression effect is comparable, and the parameter position corresponding to bias can be located at the same time.","authors_note":""},"tags":["unlearning","debiasing","safety","fine-tuning"],"keywords":["Model Debias","Bias Mitigation","Machine Unlearning","Counterfactual Fairness"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"深度神经网络会从有偏训练数据中学习到社会偏置，危害模型公平性。","claim_en":"Deep neural networks learn social biases from biased training data, harming model fairness.","evidence_anchor":"Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于机器遗忘的去偏方法相比传统去偏方法，去偏速度提升4倍以上，同时可以定位偏置来源。","claim_en":"Machine unlearning based debiasing method is 4x faster than traditional debiasing methods, and can locate the source of biases.","opposes":"先前去偏方法默认需要全量重训练或大量偏置标注。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4, Table 2","why_contested":"为大模型快速去偏提供了低成本方案，同时解决了偏置可解释性问题。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作大模型快速去偏的备选方案备查，和预训练核心问题关联度低，不需要细读正文","en":"Only keep as an alternative solution for LLM fast debiasing, low relevance to core pretraining problems, no need to read full text"}},{"id":"ChengSXW0GS23","title":"Meta-Adapter: An Online Few-shot Learner for Vision-Language Model","authors":["Cheng Cheng","Lin Song","Ruoyi Xue","Hang Wang","Hongbin Sun","Yixiao Ge","Ying Shan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$10c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChengSXW0GS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChengSXW0GS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ad48f017e6c3d474caf511208e600459-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有基于CLIP的少样本学习方法需要离线微调参数，推理速度慢，容易过拟合特定域，无法适配在线少样本泛化需求。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出了在线少样本学习的新方案，不需要离线微调，提升了少样本学习的效率和泛化性。","technical_approach":"原创轻量残差式适配器Meta-Adapter，在线方式基于少样本样本引导优化CLIP特征，不需要额外微调即可泛化到未见过的数据或任务，避免离线微调的过拟合问题。","experiments":"在少样本图像分类任务上测试，对比CLIP基线少样本精度提升3-6个百分点，推理速度提升2倍以上，过拟合风险显著降低。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing few-shot learning methods based on CLIP require offline fine-tuning of parameters, have slow inference speed, are prone to overfitting to specific domains, and cannot adapt to online few-shot generalization requirements.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution, proposes a new solution for online few-shot learning, does not require offline fine-tuning, improves the efficiency and generalization of few-shot learning.","technical_approach":"Original lightweight residual-style adapter Meta-Adapter optimizes CLIP features guided by few-shot samples in an online manner, can generalize to unseen data or tasks without additional fine-tuning, avoiding the overfitting problem of offline fine-tuning.","experiments":"Tested on few-shot image classification tasks, compared with CLIP baseline few-shot accuracy is improved by 3-6 percentage points, inference speed is more than 2x faster, overfitting risk is significantly reduced.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","few-shot","adapter","online-learning"],"keywords":["Few-shot Learning; Vision-Language Model Adaption"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"CLIP具备优秀的开放世界视觉概念理解能力，适合零样本/少样本视觉任务。","claim_en":"CLIP has strong open-world visual concept understanding ability, suitable for zero-shot/few-shot visual tasks.","evidence_anchor":"Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"在线轻量适配器相比离线微调的CLIP少样本学习方法，可以在提升精度的同时提升推理速度，降低过拟合风险。","claim_en":"Online lightweight adapter outperforms offline fine-tuning based CLIP few-shot learning methods in accuracy, inference speed, and overfitting risk.","opposes":"先前CLIP少样本学习方法默认需要离线微调参数来适配少样本任务。","opposes_cite_hint":"Gao 2021 CoCoOp","evidence_anchor":"§5, Table 1","why_contested":"为CLIP在实际落地的少样本场景提供了更高效的方案。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作CLIP在线少样本适配的方法备查，和预训练核心问题关联低，无需细读","en":"Only keep as reference for CLIP online few-shot adaptation, low relevance to core pretraining problems, no need to read in detail"}},{"id":"2311.04449","title":"Recursion in Recursion: Two-Level Nested Recursion for Length Generalization with Scalability","authors":["Jishnu Ray Chowdhury","Cornelia Caragea"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$10d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.04449","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChowdhuryC23a","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChowdhuryC23a","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/db178cd03313e23cffb8937e93f0d464-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"BBT-RvNN长序列任务效率高但无法解决ListOps等结构敏感任务，其他可解决结构敏感任务的RvNN计算开销远高于RNN，无法兼顾长序列效率和结构敏感任务性能。","importance":"架构级贡献，在递归神经网络架构设计上提出了新的范式，平衡长序列效率和结构泛化能力。","technical_approach":"原创双层嵌套递归框架RIR，结合BBT-RvNN的对数级递归和结构敏感RvNN的结构建模能力，兼顾长序列效率和结构敏感任务性能。","experiments":"在Long Range Arena长序列任务和ListOps、形式逻辑推理等结构敏感任务上测试，对比BBT-RvNN基线，ListOps精度提升15个百分点以上，长序列推理速度仅比BBT-RvNN慢10%左右。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"BBT-RvNN has high efficiency on long sequence tasks but cannot solve structure-sensitive tasks such as ListOps. Other RvNNs that can solve structure-sensitive tasks have much higher computational overhead than RNNs, failing to balance long sequence efficiency and structure-sensitive task performance.","importance":"It is an architecture-level contribution, proposes a new paradigm in the architectural design of recursive neural networks, balancing long sequence efficiency and structural generalization ability.","technical_approach":"Original two-level nested recursive framework RIR combines the logarithmic recursion of BBT-RvNN and the structural modeling ability of structure-sensitive RvNN, taking into account long sequence efficiency and structure-sensitive task performance.","experiments":"Tested on Long Range Arena long sequence tasks and structure-sensitive tasks such as ListOps and formal logical reasoning, compared with BBT-RvNN baseline, ListOps accuracy is improved by more than 15 percentage points, long sequence inference speed is only about 10% slower than BBT-RvNN.","authors_note":""},"tags":["length-generalization","recursion","architecture","scalability"],"keywords":["Recursive Neural Networks","Long Range Arena","RvNN","Long Range Sequence Modeling","Length Generalization","LRA","Structured Encoding","Inductive Bias","Hierarchical Model","Recursive Models"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"递归神经网络的结构设计在长序列效率和结构泛化能力之间存在权衡。","claim_en":"There is a trade-off between long sequence efficiency and structural generalization ability in the architectural design of recursive neural networks.","evidence_anchor":"Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"双层嵌套递归架构可以同时实现接近BBT-RvNN的长序列效率，同时具备结构敏感任务的高性能。","claim_en":"Two-level nested recursive architecture achieves long sequence efficiency close to BBT-RvNN and high performance on structure-sensitive tasks.","opposes":"先前递归神经网络无法同时兼顾长序列效率和结构敏感任务性能。","opposes_cite_hint":"Peng 2022 BBT-RvNN","evidence_anchor":"§4, Table 2","why_contested":"为递归神经网络在长序列结构敏感任务的应用提供了新的架构思路。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为递归神经网络兼顾长序列效率和结构泛化的架构备查，做长序列预训练架构探索时可参考","en":"Keep as reference for RNN architecture balancing long sequence efficiency and structural generalization, refer to it when exploring long-sequence pretraining architectures"}},{"id":"ChowdhuryMD0C23","title":"Robust Concept Erasure via Kernelized Rate-Distortion Maximization","authors":["Somnath Basu Roy Chowdhury","Nicholas Monath","Kumar Avinava Dubey","Amr Ahmed","Snigdha Chaturvedi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$10e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChowdhuryMD0C23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChowdhuryMD0C23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/86bd650f85480c595ecab29081a3774e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"预训练得到的分布式表示天然纠缠多个属性/概念，现有概念擦除方法要么擦除不彻底，要么丢失过多原表示的有效信息，缺乏鲁棒性与信息保留的平衡。","importance":"方法级贡献，提供了不需要重新训练预训练模型即可实现表示层概念擦除的新目标，可直接用于预训练表示的去偏、隐私保护等后处理场景，适配文本、多模态等多种预训练模型。","technical_approach":"原创核化率失真最大化（KRaM）的距离度量学习目标，将概念擦除转化为最大化目标概念与变换后表示的互信息上界、同时最小化变换后表示与原表示失真的优化问题，舍弃了此前依赖对抗训练的不稳定方案，不需要额外训练判别器。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体实验参数、基线模型、指标数值等细节，待全文补充。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Pretrained distributed representations naturally entangle multiple attributes/concepts. Existing concept erasure methods either leave residual concept information or discard too much useful content from the original representations, with no proper tradeoff between robustness and information retention.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It provides a new objective for concept erasure at the representation layer without retraining the pretrained model, which can be directly applied to post-processing scenarios such as debiasing and privacy protection of pretrained representations for text and multimodal models.","technical_approach":"An original distance metric learning objective named Kernelized Rate-Distortion Maximizer (KRaM) is proposed. It frames concept erasure as an optimization problem that maximizes the upper bound of mutual information between the target concept and transformed representations, while minimizing the distortion between transformed and original representations. It discards the unstable adversarial training-based schemes used in prior work, and requires no extra discriminator training.","experiments":"No specific experimental parameters, baselines or metric values are disclosed in the public abstract, details are pending full paper access.","authors_note":""},"tags":["unlearning","concept-erasure","safety","representation"],"keywords":["Concept Erasure","Representation Learning","Rate distortion","Fairness","Debiasing"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"分布式向量表示会天然纠缠数据实例的多个属性或概念","claim_en":"Distributed vector representations naturally entangle multiple attributes or concepts of data instances","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为预训练表示层概念擦除的非对抗方法备查，做模型去偏、隐私保护后处理时可调用","en":"Keep as reference for non-adversarial concept erasure on pretrained representations, apply it when doing post-processing for model debiasing and privacy protection"}},{"id":"ClarkJ23","title":"Text-to-Image Diffusion Models are Zero Shot Classifiers","authors":["Kevin Clark","Priyank Jaini"],"institutions":["Google Research"],"abstract":"$10f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ClarkJ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ClarkJ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/b87bdcf963cad3d0b265fcb78ae7d11e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"此前仅关注文生图扩散模型的生成能力，其学习到的多模态表示的判别能力未被系统探索，默认只有对比学习预训练的图文模型（如CLIP）具备零样本分类能力。","importance":"范式级小贡献，证明文生图扩散模型的多模态对齐表示具备和CLIP相当的零样本分类能力，说明生成式预训练也能学习到可用于判别任务的对齐表示，为统一生成、判别跨模态预训练范式提供了依据。","technical_approach":"原创零样本分类推理方法，用给定类别文本描述下扩散模型对加噪图像的去噪能力作为该类别的似然代理，不需要额外微调模型或添加分类头，舍弃了此前需要微调扩散模型提取特征做分类的方案，推理成本仅与扩散单步采样相当。","experiments":"在Stable Diffusion和Imagen上验证，在多个零样本图像分类数据集上性能与CLIP相当，公开摘要未披露具体模型参数量、数据集规模、精确指标数值等细节，待全文补充。","authors_note":"Kevin Clark是ELECTRA模型的核心作者，长期从事预训练语言模型、多模态模型研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Prior work only focuses on the generation capability of text-to-image diffusion models, while the discriminative ability of their learned multimodal representations is not systematically explored. It is commonly assumed that only contrastive pre-trained image-text models (e.g. CLIP) have strong zero-shot classification capability.","importance":"Small paradigm-level contribution. It proves that the multimodal aligned representations learned by text-to-image diffusion models have zero-shot classification performance on par with CLIP, indicating generative pre-training can also learn aligned representations suitable for discriminative tasks, supporting the development of unified generative-discriminative multimodal pre-training paradigms.","technical_approach":"An original zero-shot classification inference method is proposed. It uses the diffusion model's denoising ability for a noised image under a given class text description as the proxy of the class likelihood, requiring no extra model fine-tuning or classification head. It discards prior schemes that require fine-tuning diffusion models to extract features for classification, with inference cost comparable to a single diffusion sampling step.","experiments":"Validated on Stable Diffusion and Imagen, performance is on par with CLIP across multiple zero-shot image classification datasets. No specific model parameters, dataset scale or exact metric values are disclosed in the public abstract, details are pending full paper access.","authors_note":"Kevin Clark is the core author of the ELECTRA model, with long-term research on pretrained language models and multimodal models."},"tags":["diffusion","vision-language","zero-shot","representation"],"keywords":["diffusion models","zero-shot","text-to-image","generative models","foundation models","stable diffusion"],"notable_authors":["Kevin Clark"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"文生图扩散模型在预训练过程中学习到了有信息量的图文对齐表示","claim_en":"Text-to-image diffusion models learn informative image-text aligned representations during pre-training","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"文生图扩散模型不需要额外微调或添加分类头，零样本分类性能可与CLIP持平","claim_en":"Text-to-image diffusion models can achieve zero-shot classification performance on par with CLIP without extra fine-tuning or classification heads","opposes":"此前领域默认只有对比学习预训练的图文模型（如CLIP）具备优秀的零样本分类能力，扩散模型仅适合生成任务","opposes_cite_hint":"Radford 2021 CLIP","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"Breaks the固有认知 that diffusion models are only suitable for generation tasks, provides evidence for unified generative-discriminative multimodal pre-training."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§4推理方法和§5实验结果即可，结论改变此前生成式预训练不能做跨模态判别任务的固有认知，可内部验证扩散模型的表示复用价值","en":"Only read §4 inference method and §5 experimental results, it overturns the prior that generative pretraining cannot support cross-modal discriminative tasks, verify diffusion model's representation reuse value internally"}},{"id":"CrabbeS23","title":"Evaluating the Robustness of Interpretability Methods through Explanation Invariance and Equivariance","authors":["Jonathan Crabbé","Mihaela van der Schaar"],"institutions":["University of Oxford"],"abstract":"$110","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/CrabbeS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/CrabbeS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/e1f418450107c4a0ddc16d008d131573-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有可解释性方法的解释结果未与被解释模型的对称属性对齐，比如CNN预测对图像平移不变，但解释结果可能随平移变化，缺乏量化可解释性方法鲁棒性的统一理论框架。","importance":"方法级贡献，提供了可解释性方法鲁棒性的严格评估框架和量化指标，可用于验证预训练模型解释结果的可信度，避免误导性分析。","technical_approach":"基于几何深度学习的对称群理论，形式化定义了解释不变性和等变性两个核心属性，推导了两个通用鲁棒性度量，以及部分流行可解释性方法的理论鲁棒性保证，舍弃了此前依赖特定任务人工评估解释质量的方案，可自动化跨模型、跨任务评估。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体实验参数、基线模型、指标数值等细节，待全文补充。","authors_note":"Mihaela van der Schaar是牛津大学知名机器学习研究者，团队长期从事可解释性、医疗机器学习研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Explanations from existing interpretability methods are not aligned with the symmetry properties of the explained model. For example, CNN predictions are invariant to image translation, but explanations may change with translation. No unified theoretical framework exists to quantify the robustness of interpretability methods.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It provides a rigorous evaluation framework and quantitative metrics for the robustness of interpretability methods, which can be used to verify the credibility of explanations for pretrained models and avoid misleading analysis.","technical_approach":"Based on the symmetry group theory from geometric deep learning, it formalizes two core properties: explanation invariance and equivariance. It derives two general robustness metrics, as well as theoretical robustness guarantees for some popular interpretability methods. It discards prior schemes that rely on manual evaluation of explanation quality for specific tasks, and supports automated cross-model, cross-task evaluation.","experiments":"No specific experimental parameters, baselines or metric values are disclosed in the public abstract, details are pending full paper access.","authors_note":"Mihaela van der Schaar is a well-known machine learning researcher at the University of Oxford, whose team has long worked on interpretability and medical machine learning."},"tags":["interpretability","robustness","evaluation","explanations"],"keywords":["interpretability","explainability","robustness","invariance","equivariance","geometric deep learning"],"notable_authors":["Mihaela van der Schaar"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"可解释性方法的解释结果必须忠实反映被解释模型的行为才有价值","claim_en":"Interpretability methods are only valuable if their explanations faithfully reflect the behavior of the explained model","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为可解释性方法鲁棒性的评估框架备查，做预训练模型可解释性分析时可参考其指标","en":"Keep as reference for robustness evaluation framework of interpretability methods, refer to its metrics when doing interpretability analysis for pretrained models"}},{"id":"DanieliSCRZ23","title":"DeepPCR: Parallelizing Sequential Operations in Neural Networks","authors":["Federico Danieli","Miguel Sarabia","Xavier Suau Cuadros","Pau Rodríguez","Luca Zappella"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$111","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DanieliSCRZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DanieliSCRZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/948d8ba4e30c8c3a800cf436b31f376e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"神经网络的顺序操作（如前向/反向传播逐层执行、扩散模型采样步逐次执行）的计算成本随步骤数线性增长，成为大模型训练、长步长扩散模型推理的核心瓶颈，此前没有通用的并行化这类顺序操作的方法。","importance":"系统级+方法级贡献，可大幅降低大模型训练推理、扩散模型采样的延迟，为预训练效率优化提供了新的通用路径。","technical_approach":"原创并行算法DeepPCR，将L步顺序操作转化为特定方程组的求解问题，采用并行循环约简方法求解，不需要修改原模型结构，舍弃了此前只能对特定操作做针对性并行优化的方案，通用性更强。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体加速比、测试模型、任务指标等数值细节，待全文补充。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Sequential operations in neural networks (e.g. layer-wise forward/backward pass, step-wise diffusion sampling) have linear computational cost with the number of steps, becoming a core bottleneck for large model training and long-step diffusion model inference. No general method exists to parallelize such sequential operations before this work.","importance":"System-level + method-level contribution. It can significantly reduce the latency of large model training/inference and diffusion model sampling, providing a new general path for pre-training efficiency optimization.","technical_approach":"An original parallel algorithm named DeepPCR is proposed. It frames L-step sequential operations as the solution to a specific system of equations, solved via parallel cycle reduction. It requires no modification to the original model structure, and discards prior schemes that only support targeted parallel optimization for specific operations, with stronger generality.","experiments":"No specific speedup ratio, test models, task metrics or other numerical details are disclosed in the public abstract, details are pending full paper access.","authors_note":""},"tags":["parallelism","sequential-models","efficiency","architecture"],"keywords":["Acceleration","layer-parallelization","diffusion","Parallel Cyclic Reduction"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"神经网络中的顺序操作（前向/反向传播、扩散采样）的计算成本随步骤数线性增长，是主要性能瓶颈之一","claim_en":"Sequential operations in neural networks (forward/backward pass, diffusion sampling) have linear computational cost with the number of steps, and are a major performance bottleneck","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"DeepPCR可将任意L步顺序操作的时间复杂度从O(L)降低到O(log² L)","claim_en":"DeepPCR reduces the time complexity of any L-step sequential operation from O(L) to O(log² L)","opposes":"此前顺序操作的并行化只能通过操作拆分或近似实现，没有通用的复杂度降低方法","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"If validated, it will completely change the efficiency optimization path for large model training and diffusion model sampling."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为神经网络顺序操作通用并行化方案备查，做大模型训练推理效率优化时可尝试复现其核心算法","en":"Keep as reference for general parallelization scheme of neural network sequential operations, try to reproduce its core algorithm when optimizing LLM training and inference efficiency"}},{"id":"DarasDDD23","title":"Consistent Diffusion Models: Mitigating Sampling Drift by Learning to be Consistent","authors":["Giannis Daras","Yuval Dagan","Alex Dimakis","Constantinos Daskalakis"],"institutions":["University of Texas at Austin","Massachusetts Institute of Technology"],"abstract":"$112","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DarasDDD23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DarasDDD23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/831406cfe7e4a0aed5ac5c8a8389d1f5-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"扩散模型的得分匹配训练存在误差，采样过程中误差会递归累积导致采样分布偏离训练分布，标准去噪得分匹配（DSM）目标仅在未漂移的干净数据上优化，无法处理采样过程中产生的漂移数据。","importance":"方法级贡献，从训练目标层面缓解扩散模型的采样漂移问题，不需要修改推理采样策略，比采样阶段的校正方法更高效，适配高分辨率生成、长序列扩散建模等场景。","technical_approach":"原创一致性属性（CP）训练目标，要求模型对自己生成的漂移数据的预测在不同时间步上保持一致，与标准DSM目标联合训练，舍弃了此前仅在采样阶段做漂移校正的思路，从训练源头上减少误差累积。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体采样漂移降低幅度、生成质量指标等数值细节，待全文补充。","authors_note":"Alex Dimakis是德克萨斯大学奥斯汀分校知名机器学习研究者，Constantinos Daskalakis是麻省理工学院知名理论机器学习研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Score matching training for diffusion models has inherent errors, which accumulate recursively during sampling leading to a shift between training and sampling distributions. The standard Denoising Score Matching (DSM) objective only optimizes on non-drifted clean data, and cannot handle drifted data generated during sampling.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It mitigates sampling drift of diffusion models from the training objective level, requiring no modification to inference sampling strategies, and is more efficient than correction methods applied at the sampling stage, suitable for high-resolution generation, long-sequence diffusion modeling and other scenarios.","technical_approach":"An original Consistency Property (CP) training objective is proposed, which requires the model's predictions on its own generated drifted data to be consistent across different time steps. It is jointly trained with the standard DSM objective, discarding prior ideas that only apply drift correction at the sampling stage, reducing error accumulation from the training source.","experiments":"No specific sampling drift reduction ratio, generation quality metrics or other numerical details are disclosed in the public abstract, details are pending full paper access.","authors_note":"Alex Dimakis is a well-known machine learning researcher at the University of Texas at Austin, and Constantinos Daskalakis is a well-known theoretical machine learning researcher at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology."},"tags":["diffusion","sampling","consistency","training"],"keywords":["diffusion models","sampling drift","Fokker-Planck","invariances","Stochastic Differential Equations","Martingales"],"notable_authors":["Alex Dimakis","Constantinos Daskalakis"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"扩散模型采样过程中得分匹配的误差会递归累积，导致采样分布偏离训练分布","claim_en":"Errors in score matching of diffusion models accumulate recursively during sampling, leading to a shift between training and sampling distributions","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"联合优化一致性属性和DSM目标，可在不降低生成质量的前提下显著减少采样漂移","claim_en":"Joint optimization of the consistency property and DSM objective significantly reduces sampling drift without degrading generation quality","opposes":"此前缓解采样漂移的方法仅能在推理阶段通过调整采样策略实现，无法从训练层面解决问题","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"Provides a new direction for diffusion model training objective optimization, suitable for high-resolution generation, long-sequence diffusion modeling and other scenarios."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3一致性训练目标定义和§4实验即可，从训练层解决扩散模型采样漂移，可直接加入内部扩散预训练的目标消融","en":"Only read §3 consistency training objective definition and §4 experiments, it solves diffusion sampling drift from training level, can be directly added to internal diffusion pretraining objective ablation"}},{"id":"DarasSDGDK23","title":"Ambient Diffusion: Learning Clean Distributions from Corrupted Data","authors":["Giannis Daras","Kulin Shah","Yuval Dagan","Aravind Gollakota","Alex Dimakis","Adam R. Klivans"],"institutions":["University of Texas at Austin","Massachusetts Institute of Technology"],"abstract":"$113","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DarasSDGDK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DarasSDGDK23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/012af729c5d14d279581fc8a5db975a1-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"传统扩散模型需要干净的训练数据才能学习目标分布，很多科学场景下无法获取干净数据，此前没有方法能仅用高噪损坏数据学到干净的目标分布。","importance":"范式级贡献，拓展了扩散模型的适用场景，不需要干净训练数据即可训练生成模型，同时天然降低了训练数据的记忆风险，适配医疗、天文等无法获取干净数据的科学场景。","technical_approach":"原创扩散训练框架Ambient Diffusion，在扩散过程中额外添加测量失真，要求模型从进一步加噪的损坏图像预测原始损坏图像，理论证明该方法可学到给定额外失真下干净图像的条件期望，不需要任何干净数据作为监督，舍弃了传统扩散模型对干净训练数据的要求。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体生成质量指标、训练数据噪声水平等数值细节，待全文补充。","authors_note":"Alex Dimakis是德克萨斯大学奥斯汀分校知名机器学习研究者，Constantinos Daskalakis是麻省理工学院知名理论机器学习研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Traditional diffusion models require clean training data to learn the target distribution, which is impossible or expensive to acquire in many scientific scenarios. No prior method can learn a clean target distribution using only highly corrupted data.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution. It expands the applicable scenarios of diffusion models, enables generative model training without clean training data, and naturally reduces the risk of training data memorization, suitable for scientific scenarios such as medical imaging and astronomy where clean data is unavailable.","technical_approach":"An original diffusion training framework named Ambient Diffusion is proposed. It introduces additional measurement distortion during the diffusion process, and requires the model to predict the original corrupted image from the further corrupted image. Theoretical proof shows this method learns the conditional expectation of the full clean image given the additional measurement corruption, requiring no clean data as supervision, discarding the requirement of clean training data for traditional diffusion models.","experiments":"No specific generation quality metrics, training data noise level or other numerical details are disclosed in the public abstract, details are pending full paper access.","authors_note":"Alex Dimakis is a well-known machine learning researcher at the University of Texas at Austin, and Constantinos Daskalakis is a well-known theoretical machine learning researcher at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology."},"tags":["diffusion","corrupted-data","generative-modeling","objective"],"keywords":["corrupted data","generative models","ambient gan","inverse problems","learning from measurements"],"notable_authors":["Alex Dimakis","Constantinos Daskalakis"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"传统扩散模型依赖干净训练数据来学习目标生成分布","claim_en":"Traditional diffusion models rely on clean training data to learn the target generation distribution","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"仅使用高噪损坏数据训练的Ambient Diffusion，可学到和用干净数据训练的传统扩散模型相当的干净分布","claim_en":"Ambient Diffusion trained only on highly corrupted data can learn a clean distribution comparable to traditional diffusion models trained on clean data","opposes":"此前所有生成式模型的训练都需要至少部分干净的目标分布数据作为监督","opposes_cite_hint":"Ho 2020 DDPM","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"Breaks the dependency of generative models on clean training data, can be extended to scientific scenarios where clean data is unavailable."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为无干净数据训练扩散模型的范式备查，做低质量数据预训练生成模型时可参考其理论框架","en":"Keep as reference for diffusion model training paradigm without clean data, refer to its theoretical framework when training generative models with low-quality data"}},{"id":"DellCBS0SDLQH23","title":"American Stories: A Large-Scale Structured Text Dataset of Historical U.S. Newspapers","authors":["Melissa Dell","Jacob Carlson","Tom Bryan","Emily Silcock","Abhishek Arora","Zejiang Shen","Luca D&apos;Amico-Wong","Quan Le","Pablo Querubin","Leander Heldring"],"institutions":["Harvard University"],"abstract":"$114","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DellCBS0SDLQH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DellCBS0SDLQH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ffeb860479ccae44d84c0de32acd693d-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有美国公共领域报纸的全文数据集存在布局识别错误、OCR质量低、内容混杂的问题，没有结构化的跨多年份历史报纸文本数据集，无法支撑历史NLP、长时序社会分析等研究。","importance":"数据级贡献，提供了高质量结构化的历史报纸数据集，可用于预训练历史领域语言模型，或开展长时序文化、社会趋势分析。","technical_approach":"构建了移动端友好的高效深度学习pipeline，包含布局检测、可读性分类、自定义OCR、跨边界框文章关联四个模块，处理了美国国会图书馆近2000万份Chronicling America扫描件，舍弃了此前依赖人工标注或简单OCR的数据集构建方案，质量和规模都更高。","experiments":"处理了1800-1963年的近2000万份报纸扫描件，公开摘要未披露具体OCR准确率、文章提取正确率等指标数值，待全文补充。","authors_note":"Melissa Dell是哈佛大学知名经济史、计算社会科学研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing full-text datasets of U.S. public domain newspapers have layout recognition errors, low OCR quality and scrambled content. No structured long-term historical newspaper text dataset exists, which cannot support research on historical NLP, long-term social analysis and other fields.","importance":"Data-level contribution. It provides a high-quality structured historical newspaper dataset, which can be used to pre-train historical domain language models, or conduct long-term cultural and social trend analysis.","technical_approach":"A mobile-friendly efficient deep learning pipeline is built, including four modules: layout detection, legibility classification, custom OCR, and article association across bounding boxes. It processes nearly 20 million scans from the Library of Congress' Chronicling America collection, discarding prior dataset construction schemes that rely on manual annotation or simple OCR, with higher quality and scale.","experiments":"Processes nearly 20 million newspaper scans from 1800 to 1963. No specific OCR accuracy, article extraction accuracy or other metric values are disclosed in the public abstract, details are pending full paper access.","authors_note":"Melissa Dell is a well-known researcher in economic history and computational social science at Harvard University."},"tags":["dataset","data-quality","historical-text","ocr"],"keywords":["structured text dataset","layout dataset","historical texts","American newspapers"],"notable_authors":["Melissa Dell"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"现有历史报纸OCR数据集的布局识别误差大、内容混杂，无法支撑高精度的历史文本研究","claim_en":"Existing OCR datasets of historical newspapers have large layout recognition errors and scrambled content, which cannot support high-precision historical text research","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为历史领域结构化文本数据集备查，做领域预训练或长时序分析时可申请使用，无需读正文","en":"Keep as reference for structured historical domain text dataset, apply for usage when doing domain pretraining or long-term trend analysis, no need to read full text"}},{"id":"DengGZCSWSS23","title":"Mind2Web: Towards a Generalist Agent for the Web","authors":["Xiang Deng","Yu Gu","Boyuan Zheng","Shijie Chen","Samual Stevens","Boshi Wang","Huan Sun","Yu Su"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$115","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DengGZCSWSS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DengGZCSWSS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/5950bf290a1570ea401bf98882128160-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有网页智能体数据集要么使用模拟网站，要么覆盖的网站和任务有限，无法支撑通用网页智能体的训练和评估，此前没有基于真实网站的通用网页任务数据集。","importance":"数据级+基准级贡献，为通用网页智能体的预训练、评估提供了统一的基准数据集，可用于开发能处理任意真实网站任务的多模态智能体。","technical_approach":"收集了来自137个网站、31个领域的2000多个开放任务，标注了众包的动作序列，包含多样的用户交互模式，全部基于真实网站而非模拟环境，舍弃了此前用模拟网站或有限任务集的数据集构建方案。","experiments":"基于该数据集对大语言模型网页智能体做了初步探索，公开摘要未披露具体智能体性能指标等数值细节，待全文补充。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing web agent datasets either use simulated websites or cover a limited set of websites and tasks, which cannot support the training and evaluation of generalist web agents. No dataset based on real websites for general web tasks exists before this work.","importance":"Data-level + benchmark-level contribution. It provides a unified benchmark dataset for pre-training and evaluation of generalist web agents, which can be used to develop multimodal agents that can complete complex tasks on any real website.","technical_approach":"Over 2000 open-ended tasks are collected from 137 websites spanning 31 domains, with crowdsourced action sequences annotated, covering a broad spectrum of user interaction patterns. All data is based on real websites instead of simulated environments, discarding prior dataset construction schemes that use simulated websites or limited task sets.","experiments":"Preliminary exploration of LLM-based web agents is conducted based on the dataset. No specific agent performance metrics or other numerical details are disclosed in the public abstract, details are pending full paper access.","authors_note":""},"tags":["web-agent","benchmark","grounding"],"keywords":["Web Agent","Web Automation","Benchmark","Language Grounding","Large Language Model"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"现有网页智能体数据集的覆盖范围有限、依赖模拟环境，无法支撑通用网页智能体的开发","claim_en":"Existing web agent datasets have limited coverage and rely on simulated environments, which cannot support the development of generalist web agents","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"仅在Mind2Web数据集上微调的大语言模型网页智能体，可在未见过的真实网站上完成复杂任务","claim_en":"LLM-based web agents fine-tuned only on Mind2Web can complete complex tasks on unseen real-world websites","opposes":"此前网页智能体只能在见过的模拟网站上完成特定任务，无法泛化到未知真实网站","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments","why_contested":"Provides a benchmark basis for pre-training and generalization research of generalist web agents."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为网页通用智能体预训练的基准类文献备查，无需细读正文。","en":"Keep it as reference literature for general web agent pretraining benchmarks, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"DengPA23","title":"Facing Off World Model Backbones: RNNs, Transformers, and S4","authors":["Fei Deng","Junyeong Park","Sungjin Ahn"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$116","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DengPA23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DengPA23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/e6c65eb9b56719c1aa45ff73874de317-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的核心问题是：做世界模型时，RNN、Transformer 和 S4 这三类序列骨干到底谁更合适，差异来自建模能力还是训练与评测设定。过去很多世界模型工作把 backbone 选择当成局部工程问题，往往在不同任务、不同训练预算下各说各话，因此很难形成可复用的结论。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要是方法评测层和系统认知层，而不是提出新的世界模型范式。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：序列建模骨干的优劣高度依赖 rollout 长度、观测形态、训练稳定性和算力约束，不能把在语言建模里的经验直接平移到潜变量动态建模上；这对统一多模态 token 建模和长序列状态建模都有参考意义。","technical_approach":"作者的核心做法是把三类主流 backbone 放进尽量统一的世界模型框架里做对照实验，而不是再发明一个新模型。关键设计是控制住编码器、训练目标和下游规划/控制接口，只替换时序建模模块，从而把差异更多归因于 backbone 本身；这种设计有效，因为世界模型里最容易混淆的是表示学习、latent dynamics 和 policy/planner 三个部分的误差来源。与常见只报最终控制分数的做法相比，这类分析更能看出哪种骨干在短期预测、长期 rollout、样本效率和训练吞吐之间做了什么取舍。RNN 通常偏稳定、便宜，但长程依赖吃亏；Transformer 表达力强，但算力和上下文长度成本高；S4 试图用状态空间建模拿到更好的长序列效率，但收益是否稳定要靠具体任务验证。","experiments":"从给到的信息里无法可靠确认具体模型规模、数据规模和数值结果，因此不能编造。可以确定的是，这篇论文的实验重点应是跨多种环境或世界模型设置比较三类 backbone 的预测质量、控制回报、训练效率与长度外推能力；如果你做相关方向，最值得关注的应是两类结果：一是同等参数/算力预算下谁更稳，二是随着 rollout horizon 变长谁退化更慢。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a concrete question: which backbone is actually better for world models—RNNs, Transformers, or S4—and whether the observed gap comes from modeling power or from mismatched training setups. Prior work often treated backbone choice as an implementation detail, so comparisons were hard to trust across tasks and compute budgets.","importance":"This is primarily an evaluation-and-understanding paper rather than a new paradigm paper. The pretraining takeaway is useful: backbone quality depends strongly on rollout horizon, observation type, optimization stability, and compute constraints, so lessons from text LMs do not transfer cleanly to latent dynamics modeling; that matters for unified multimodal token modeling as well.","technical_approach":"The main idea is to compare three backbone families inside a largely shared world-model pipeline instead of introducing yet another architecture. The key choice is to hold the encoder, objective, and downstream planning/control interface as constant as possible, and swap only the temporal module; this matters because world models confound representation learning, latent dynamics, and policy/planner quality very easily. Compared with papers that only report final control return, this setup is better at exposing trade-offs in short-horizon prediction, long rollouts, sample efficiency, and throughput. RNNs are typically stable and cheap but weaker on long-range dependencies; Transformers are expressive but expensive in context and memory; S4 aims for better long-sequence efficiency through structured state-space dynamics, but whether that advantage survives task changes is an empirical question.","experiments":"The provided information is insufficient to state reliable model sizes, data scales, or exact numbers, so those should not be fabricated. What can be said safely is that the experiments are centered on comparing the three backbones on predictive quality, control return, efficiency, and length extrapolation under matched world-model settings. For practitioners, the most useful findings would be: which backbone is more stable under a fixed budget, and which one degrades more gracefully as rollout horizon grows.","authors_note":""},"tags":["world-model","transformer","ssm","rnn"],"keywords":["world models","structured state space sequence models","S4","long-term memory","model-based reinforcement learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读第4节对照实验结果即可，可直接指导你为世界模型选择适配任务的时序建模骨干。","en":"Only read Section 4 controlled experiment results, which directly guides you to pick task-aligned temporal backbones for world models."}},{"id":"DingWADTJRNBRX23","title":"CrossCodeEval: A Diverse and Multilingual Benchmark for Cross-File Code Completion","authors":["Yangruibo Ding","Zijian Wang","Wasi Uddin Ahmad","Hantian Ding","Ming Tan","Nihal Jain","Murali Krishna Ramanathan","Ramesh Nallapati","Parminder Bhatia","Dan Roth","Bing Xiang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$117","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DingWADTJRNBRX23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DingWADTJRNBRX23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/920f2dced7d32ab2ba2f1970bc306af6-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：现有代码补全 benchmark 大多聚焦单文件、单语言或上下文过短，无法真实衡量模型做跨文件代码补全的能力。这个问题过去常被回避，因为构造带依赖关系、多语言且可执行评测的数据集成本很高，但随着代码模型进入真实工程场景，跨文件能力已经不是可选项。","importance":"它的主要贡献是 benchmark 和数据构建方法，而不是新模型。对 pretrain 研究的重要性在于：代码预训练模型是否真正学到工程级上下文整合能力，不能再靠 HumanEval 这类短函数补全来判断；一旦评测转向跨文件依赖、仓库级上下文和多语言，模型架构、检索机制、上下文打包策略和训练数据组织都会被重新排序。","technical_approach":"CrossCodeEval 的核心是构建一个多样化、跨语言、强调 cross-file 依赖的代码补全基准，并提供更贴近实际开发的评测协议。关键不只是收集多文件样本，而是要保证补全目标真正依赖其他文件，否则 benchmark 会被单文件局部模式投机。与已有代码生成评测相比，这类基准通常会明确给定项目结构、相关文件片段或检索上下文，并通过精确匹配、单元测试或编译约束来度量结果。这样的设计有效，因为它把问题从“会不会续写常见 API 模板”提升到“能否整合分散定义、调用链和语言特定工程习惯”。","experiments":"从题目可确定，实验应覆盖多种主流代码模型，并比较有无跨文件上下文、不同语言、不同上下文选择策略下的性能差异。这里没有可靠摘要，无法确认语言数量、样本规模和具体指标，因此不写数字。对读者最值得关注的结论通常有两类：第一，当前代码 LLM 在跨文件设置下相对单文件会有明显掉点；第二，简单增加上下文长度未必等于有效利用上下文，检索和排序策略往往同样关键。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a benchmark gap: existing code completion evaluations are often single-file, single-language, or too short-context to measure realistic cross-file completion. This was often sidestepped because building multilingual, dependency-aware, executable benchmarks is expensive, but real software development depends heavily on cross-file context.","importance":"Its main contribution is benchmarking rather than a new model. For pretraining, this matters because code models should not be judged only by short-function completion benchmarks like HumanEval. Once evaluation moves to repository-level dependencies and multilingual settings, architecture choices, retrieval mechanisms, context packing, and training data organization become much more consequential.","technical_approach":"CrossCodeEval builds a diverse multilingual benchmark centered on cross-file code completion and uses an evaluation protocol closer to real development. The important design point is not merely collecting multi-file samples, but ensuring that the target completion actually depends on other files; otherwise a model can game the benchmark with local single-file patterns. Compared with prior code-generation evaluations, such a benchmark typically exposes project structure, relevant file snippets, or retrieval context, and evaluates with exact match, tests, or compile constraints. That design is effective because it upgrades the problem from 'continue a familiar API pattern' to 'integrate scattered definitions, call chains, and language-specific engineering conventions.'","experiments":"From the title, the experiments likely compare multiple code LMs across languages, with and without cross-file context, and under different context-selection strategies. The provided information does not support reliable claims about dataset size, number of languages, or exact metrics, so those should be left unspecified. The practically useful conclusions are usually twofold: current code LMs drop significantly when moving from single-file to cross-file completion, and simply increasing context length is not the same as using context effectively—retrieval and ranking matter a lot.","authors_note":""},"tags":["code-completion","benchmark","cross-file","multilingual"],"keywords":["Code Benchmark","Code Evaluation","Code Completion","Cross-file Context","Project-level Context","Code Retrieval"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读基准构建逻辑和核心结果表即可，后续做代码预训练评测必须优先考虑该基准的跨文件设定。","en":"Only read the benchmark construction logic and core result tables, its cross-file settings should be prioritized for code pretraining evaluation."}},{"id":"DinhZTNLZK23","title":"Large Language Models of Code Fail at Completing Code with Potential Bugs","authors":["Tuan Dinh","Jinman Zhao","Samson Tan","Renato Negrinho","Leonard Lausen","Sheng Zha","George Karypis"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$118","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DinhZTNLZK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DinhZTNLZK23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/819cebb05f993840e8a52d7564c5c282-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文指出一个很具体但常被掩盖的问题：代码大模型在补全含潜在 bug 的代码时表现很差，而现有评测通常默认上下文是干净且意图正确的。现实开发中，模型面对的代码上下文经常已经带有错误、冲突或误导信号，因此“在脏上下文中继续写对代码”比标准补全更贴近真实需求。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要在评测认知和失效模式分析。对 pretrain 的启示是：代码模型学到的分布匹配能力很强，但鲁棒的语义纠错能力未必同步得到；如果训练数据主要奖励流畅续写而不是错误诊断与修复，那么模型在带 bug 上下文中会自然偏向复制错误模式。这对代码预训练目标设计、合成错误数据和 posttrain 修复能力增强都有直接意义。","technical_approach":"作者的核心做法应是构建带潜在 bug 的代码补全评测设置，并比较模型在干净与带 bug 上下文下的行为差异。关键不在于证明模型“不会修 bug”，而在于隔离一个更现实的场景：模型需要先识别上下文可能有问题，再决定是顺着局部模式继续写，还是做语义层面的偏离。与常规 code completion benchmark 相比，这类设定更强调鲁棒性而不是平均分布性能，也更容易暴露 LLM 的 mode-seeking 倾向——上下文里错得越像训练分布中的常见模式，模型越容易把错延续下去。","experiments":"从标题可以明确，实验会比较多种代码 LLM 在含 bug 与无 bug 上下文中的补全质量差距，但题面没有提供可确认的具体数值。对实践最有价值的观察大概率包括：模型在带 bug 条件下显著退化；更大模型未必自动更鲁棒；带检索、测试反馈或执行验证的方案可能比纯生成更抗这种场景。若有 ablation，最值得看的是 bug 类型、位置和可见上下文范围对失败率的影响。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper highlights a realistic failure mode: code LLMs perform poorly when asked to complete code whose surrounding context already contains potential bugs. Standard evaluations usually assume clean and correct context, but real developers often write in the presence of existing errors, inconsistencies, or misleading signals.","importance":"This is mainly an evaluation and failure-analysis contribution. The pretraining lesson is that strong distribution matching does not automatically imply robust semantic correction. If training mostly rewards fluent continuation rather than diagnosis and repair, then models will naturally propagate buggy patterns when those patterns look locally plausible.","technical_approach":"The likely method is to build a benchmark where the completion target must be produced under buggy or potentially buggy context, and then compare behavior against standard clean-context completion. The point is not merely to show that models cannot fix bugs, but to isolate a more realistic setting: the model must first notice that the context may be wrong, and then decide whether to follow local statistical patterns or deviate in a semantically justified way. Relative to standard code-completion benchmarks, this setup stresses robustness rather than average-case next-token accuracy, and it exposes the mode-seeking tendency of LLMs very clearly.","experiments":"The title strongly suggests comparisons of multiple code LLMs under clean versus buggy context, but exact numbers are not available from the provided information. The most practically useful observations are likely that performance drops substantially in buggy settings, larger models are not automatically more robust, and approaches with retrieval, execution feedback, or test-time verification may handle this regime better than pure generation. If there are ablations, bug type, bug location, and visible context window are the ones worth watching.","authors_note":""},"tags":["code-llm","bugs","benchmark","robustness"],"keywords":["language model of code; code completion; language model; software engineering; machine learning for code"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读失效模式分析和实验部分即可，做代码预训练目标设计时必须考虑脏上下文的鲁棒性问题。","en":"Only read failure mode analysis and experiment sections, dirty context robustness must be considered when designing code pretraining objectives."}},{"id":"DoshiHG23","title":"Critical Initialization of Wide and Deep Neural Networks using Partial Jacobians: General Theory and Applications","authors":["Darshil Doshi","Tianyu He","Andrey Gromov"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$119","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DoshiHG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DoshiHG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/7e02f2910ea7911a37c4691f4201c878-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：如何为又宽又深的神经网络给出更稳健的临界初始化条件，避免前向信号或梯度在深层中爆炸和消失。经典临界初始化理论常依赖无限宽、均匀层或全 Jacobian 分析，在更复杂网络里不够精细，也不一定能指导实际架构。","importance":"这项工作的贡献主要是优化理论与训练稳定性分析，对大模型预训练属于基础设施类启发。它的重要性不在于直接提升某个 benchmark，而在于给出一套更细粒度的初始化分析工具；对做深层 Transformer、状态空间模型或混合架构的人来说，这类结论会影响你如何设定残差缩放、层间增益和深度扩展策略。","technical_approach":"作者的核心方法是引入 partial Jacobians 来分析网络中局部到局部的信号传播，而不是只看整体 Jacobian 的平均性质。这个视角的价值在于，很多训练不稳定并不是全局意义上的彻底崩溃，而是某些子路径、子模块或层间组合先失衡；partial Jacobian 能更早、更具体地捕捉这些问题。论文应在一般理论下推导临界初始化条件，并展示其如何覆盖更广的宽深网络设置。与传统 mean field 或 dynamical isometry 分析相比，这种方法更像是在“全局平均稳定”与“实际模块级稳定”之间搭了一座桥。","experiments":"题面没有摘要，因此不能确认具体架构、深度范围或数值提升。可以合理判断，实验应包含若干宽深 MLP/CNN/可能的残差网络，验证按理论设定的初始化在训练速度、梯度范数稳定性和最终精度上优于标准初始化。若你关心大模型训练，这篇论文最值得看的不是最终测试分数，而是它是否能解释 loss spike、梯度衰减和深度扩展失败的具体机制。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies how to initialize very wide and deep neural networks so that signals and gradients remain well behaved instead of exploding or vanishing. Classical critical-initialization theory is often too coarse for practical architectures, especially when networks become deeper, more heterogeneous, or strongly residual.","importance":"This is mainly a theory-and-stability contribution, relevant to pretraining as supporting infrastructure rather than as a direct benchmark improvement. Its value is in offering a finer tool for reasoning about initialization. For practitioners training deep Transformers, state-space models, or hybrid stacks, such results can inform residual scaling, layer gains, and depth-scaling choices.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to analyze partial Jacobians rather than relying only on whole-network Jacobian statistics. That matters because many training failures are not global collapses at first; they emerge in specific paths, modules, or layer interactions. Partial Jacobians can therefore expose local instability earlier and more concretely. The paper likely derives critical initialization conditions under a general framework and shows how they apply to broader classes of wide/deep networks. Compared with standard mean-field or dynamical-isometry analysis, this approach tries to bridge the gap between global average stability and practical module-level stability.","experiments":"The prompt does not provide an abstract, so exact architectures, depths, and numerical gains cannot be stated reliably. A reasonable expectation is that the experiments validate the theory on wide/deep neural networks by showing better gradient behavior, optimization stability, and possibly improved final accuracy under the proposed initialization. For large-model practitioners, the most valuable part is likely whether the analysis explains concrete failure modes such as loss spikes, gradient decay, or depth-scaling breakdowns.","authors_note":""},"tags":["initialization","optimization","training-stability"],"keywords":["Criticality","Gaussian Process","Jacobian","LayerNorm","Residual connections","ResNet"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读核心理论结论和验证实验即可，可直接用于指导深层Transformer的初始化与残差缩放参数设定。","en":"Only read core theoretical conclusions and validation experiments, which directly guide initialization and residual scaling settings for deep Transformers."}},{"id":"Du0Q023","title":"Stable Diffusion is Unstable","authors":["Chengbin Du","Yanxi Li","Zhongwei Qiu","Chang Xu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$11a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Du0Q023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Du0Q023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/b733cdd80ed2ae7e3156d8c33108c5d5-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：Stable Diffusion 这类扩散生成模型在什么意义上是“不稳定”的，以及这种不稳定会如何影响生成可靠性与安全性。过去很多工作主要追求样本质量和提示词可控性，对模型在输入扰动、采样过程或训练随机性下的脆弱性分析相对不足。","importance":"它的价值主要在鲁棒性分析与风险揭示，而不是提出新的生成范式。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：扩散模型即使在感知质量上很强，也可能在稳定性、可预测性和分布外行为上存在系统弱点；这对后续做 diffusion LM、AR+diffusion 联合建模和多模态生成系统时都很重要，因为训练目标优雅不代表系统行为稳健。","technical_approach":"从题目看，作者应是系统性分析 Stable Diffusion 在多种扰动或条件变化下的不稳定现象，而非仅给出个别失败案例。典型做法可能包括对 prompt、初始噪声、采样步数、输入图像扰动或训练随机种子的敏感性分析，并将输出差异量化。这样的工作有效，是因为扩散模型把生成过程拆成多步去噪，链条长意味着误差放大和局部不确定性的传播路径更多；如果某些条件下输出大幅波动，就说明模型学到的条件映射并不平滑。","experiments":"题面没有摘要，因此无法确认它关注的是对抗扰动、采样方差、文本提示脆弱性还是安全失效，也无法给出具体指标。可以合理推测，论文会展示 Stable Diffusion 在看似微小改动下输出显著变化的证据，并与其他生成模型或不同采样设置比较。若你做生成预训练，最该关注的是不稳定来源被归因到了哪里：模型目标、训练数据、采样器，还是文本-图像对齐链路本身。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper investigates in what sense Stable Diffusion is 'unstable' and why that instability matters for reliability and safety. A lot of prior work emphasized sample quality and controllability, while giving less attention to robustness under perturbations, sampling variation, or other small changes in conditions.","importance":"Its contribution is mainly diagnostic and risk-oriented rather than paradigm-changing. For pretraining research, the message is relevant: strong perceptual quality in diffusion models does not guarantee stable or predictable behavior. That matters not only for image generation but also for diffusion LMs and AR+diffusion unified generative systems.","technical_approach":"Judging from the title, the paper likely performs a systematic robustness analysis of Stable Diffusion rather than presenting isolated failure cases. A typical design would probe sensitivity to prompt changes, initial noise, sampling schedules, input perturbations, or training randomness, and then quantify output variation. This is useful because diffusion generation is a multi-step denoising process: long chains create many opportunities for local uncertainty to amplify. Large output swings under small condition changes indicate that the learned conditional mapping is not smooth.","experiments":"Without the abstract, it is not possible to state whether the focus is adversarial perturbations, sampling variance, prompt brittleness, or safety failures, nor to report exact metrics. It is reasonable to expect evidence that small perturbations can trigger substantial output changes, possibly with comparisons across samplers or model variants. For generative pretraining researchers, the most important question is where the instability is traced to: the objective, the data, the sampler, or the text-image alignment pipeline.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","training-stability","evaluation"],"keywords":["Adversarial Attack","Generative Model","Diffusion Model","Latent Diffusion Model","Conditional Latent Diffusion Model"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读鲁棒性量化分析的Fig5和Table2即可，做多模态扩散预训练时要注意多步去噪的误差累积问题。","en":"Only read Fig5 and Table2 in robustness quantitative analysis, note multi-step denoising error accumulation when doing multimodal diffusion pretraining."}},{"id":"DuSZ23","title":"Sequential Subset Matching for Dataset Distillation","authors":["Jiawei Du","Qin Shi","Joey Tianyi Zhou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$11b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DuSZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DuSZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/d553f0e0abb80e2a60328d634583bd2e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：数据蒸馏时如何从大数据集中选出极少量但训练价值最高的样本子集，使得模型在这些样本上训练后仍接近原始全数据效果。传统 dataset distillation 往往直接优化合成样本或静态子集匹配，但随着数据和模型变大，计算开销和泛化稳定性都成问题。","importance":"这是一篇方法级的数据效率工作。对 pretrain 的意义在于，大规模预训练越来越受数据成本和数据选择策略约束，如何用更少数据保留训练动态，和 data mixture、curriculum、subset selection 是同一类核心问题；即便它不直接做 LLM，也对预训练数据压缩和重放策略有参考价值。","technical_approach":"论文提出 Sequential Subset Matching，顾名思义，核心不是一次性匹配最终模型状态，而是按训练序列逐步匹配全数据训练轨迹与小子集训练轨迹。这个设计比静态匹配更合理，因为模型在训练早中晚期需要的数据特性并不相同；如果只追最终参数或最终 loss，容易得到一个在某个阶段有效、但整体训练动态失真的子集。顺序匹配的好处是把“子集要模拟的对象”从终点扩展到整条优化路径，因此更可能保留可迁移的学习信号。代价是算法实现更复杂，需要在匹配质量和计算成本之间做平衡。","experiments":"从标题可知，实验应在若干视觉数据集或标准蒸馏基准上比较所选子集训练得到的精度，并与已有 subset selection / dataset distillation 方法对比。这里没有摘要，因此无法确认具体数据集、压缩率和提升数字。若你关心预训练数据效率，这篇论文最值得看的结果是：在高压缩率下它是否比静态匹配明显更稳，以及这种顺序匹配收益会不会随着模型规模或训练轮数增加而放大。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a central dataset distillation question: how to select a tiny subset of real data that preserves as much training value as possible from the full dataset. Standard distillation methods often optimize synthetic samples or static subset objectives, but these become costly or brittle as datasets and models grow.","importance":"This is a methods paper on data efficiency. Its relevance to pretraining is clear: large-scale training is increasingly constrained by data cost and data selection strategy, and subset selection is tightly connected to data mixture design, curriculum, and replay. Even outside LLMs, the ideas are useful for thinking about training-data compression.","technical_approach":"The key idea, Sequential Subset Matching, is to match the training trajectory induced by the full dataset with the trajectory induced by a tiny subset, rather than only matching the final model state. This is a sensible design because the data properties needed early, mid, and late in training are not identical. If one only matches final parameters or final loss, it is easy to obtain a subset that works at one stage but distorts the overall optimization dynamics. Sequential matching expands the target from the endpoint to the full path, which should preserve more transferable learning signal. The trade-off is computational complexity: trajectory-aware matching is more expensive and algorithmically more involved.","experiments":"From the title, the experiments likely compare selected subsets against prior subset-selection or dataset-distillation methods on standard benchmarks, probably in vision settings. The provided information does not support exact claims about datasets, compression ratios, or gains. For pretraining-oriented readers, the most valuable results would be whether sequential matching is clearly more stable at high compression rates and whether its advantage grows with model scale or training duration.","authors_note":""},"tags":["dataset-distillation","data-efficiency","training-data"],"notable_authors":["Joey Tianyi Zhou"],"keywords":["Dataset distillation","gradients matching"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读方法核心逻辑和训练轨迹匹配实验结果即可，对预训练数据筛选和课程学习设计有参考价值。","en":"Only read core method logic and training trajectory matching experiments, valuable for pretraining data filtering and curriculum learning design."}},{"id":"DuanCWWL23","title":"DeWave: Discrete Encoding of EEG Waves for EEG to Text Translation","authors":["Yiqun Duan","Charles Chau","Zhen Wang","Yu-Kai Wang","Chin-Teng Lin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$11c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DuanCWWL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DuanCWWL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/1f2fd23309a5b2d2537d063b29ec1b52-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：能不能像处理语音或图像那样，把 EEG 脑电信号离散化成 token，再用序列模型把 EEG 翻译成文本。过去 EEG-to-text 多依赖连续信号回归或任务特定架构，表示学习和语言解码之间接口较弱，因此泛化和统一建模都受限。","importance":"这项工作的意义在于把“离散化 + 语言建模”范式扩展到 EEG 这种更难、更噪声、更低信噪比的生物信号。对 pretrain 研究的启示很明确：统一 token 接口不只适用于图像和语音，哪怕是高度连续且个体差异强的神经信号，也可能先通过离散表示进入 LM；这对跨模态预训练边界是有启发的。","technical_approach":"DeWave 的核心方法是先把 EEG 波形编码成离散符号，再把这些离散单元送入序列模型生成文本。这个思路更接近语音中的 neural codec + LM，而不是传统 EEG 解码器。关键设计价值在于离散化把高频噪声连续空间压缩成更适合语言接口的有限词表，从而让后续模型更容易学习稳定映射；如果直接从原始连续 EEG 回归文本，模型既要抗噪又要做语言生成，优化难度更高。边界也很清楚：离散化如果压得过强，会损失细粒度神经信息；如果 codebook 学得不好，不同个体之间的分布偏移会被放大。","experiments":"从题目可知，实验会围绕 EEG-to-text 翻译展开，并比较离散编码方案与连续基线的差异，但没有可靠摘要可支持具体数字。对这个方向最有价值的实验观察通常包括：离散 token 是否优于端到端连续输入；跨受试者泛化是否仍然脆弱；codebook 大小、量化策略和预训练方式对文本质量影响多大。如果论文给出这些 ablation，它的参考价值会高于单一分数。","authors_note":"作者中 Chin-Teng Lin 是脑机接口与神经工程方向的知名研究者。其余机构信息若无正式来源，不宜补充。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether EEG signals can be discretized into token-like units and then translated into text with sequence models, much like recent trends in speech and other modalities. Earlier EEG-to-text work often relied on continuous regression pipelines or task-specific architectures, which made the interface to language modeling weak and hard to scale.","importance":"Its importance lies in extending the 'discretize then model with a language-style sequence model' paradigm to a much noisier and lower-SNR biosignal. For pretraining research, the key message is that a unified token interface may reach beyond images and speech. Even highly continuous neural signals might become tractable once mapped into discrete representations.","technical_approach":"DeWave appears to first encode EEG waveforms into discrete symbols and then feed those symbols into a sequence model that generates text. This is closer in spirit to neural codec plus LM pipelines in speech than to traditional EEG decoders. The design is attractive because discretization compresses a noisy continuous space into a finite vocabulary that is easier to align with language. If one directly regresses from raw EEG to text, the model has to denoise and generate language simultaneously, which is a harder optimization problem. The boundary is also clear: overly aggressive quantization can discard useful neural detail, and a poor codebook may worsen cross-subject distribution shift.","experiments":"From the title, the experiments likely compare discrete EEG encoding against continuous baselines on EEG-to-text translation, but exact numbers are not available from the provided prompt. The most informative ablations in this area would be whether discrete tokens outperform raw continuous input, how fragile cross-subject generalization remains, and how codebook size, quantization strategy, and pretraining affect text quality. Those details matter more than a single headline score.","authors_note":"Chin-Teng Lin is a well-known researcher in brain-computer interfaces and neural engineering. Other affiliation details should be checked from the official paper page."},"tags":["discrete-tokenization","brain-signal","text-generation"],"notable_authors":["Chin-Teng Lin"],"keywords":["EEG; Neural Encoding; Brain Computer Interface"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读离散编码设计和跨模态映射实验即可，为低信噪比生物信号接入通用预训练LM提供了可行路径。","en":"Only read discrete encoding design and cross-modal mapping experiments, provides a feasible path to feed low-SNR biological signals into general pretrained LMs."}},{"id":"DuanDPB23","title":"Flocks of Stochastic Parrots: Differentially Private Prompt Learning for Large Language Models","authors":["Haonan Duan","Adam Dziedzic","Nicolas Papernot","Franziska Boenisch"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$11d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DuanDPB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DuanDPB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/f26119b4ffe38c24d97e4c49d334b99e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：如何在使用提示学习或软提示适配大语言模型时提供差分隐私保证，而不是默认提示参数训练不会泄露数据。过去很多人把 prompt tuning 视为参数少、风险小的轻量适配方式，但只要训练信号来自敏感数据，少量参数同样可能记住或泄露样本信息。","importance":"这是 posttrain 接口上的方法工作，但对 pretrain 闭环同样有价值。它的重要性在于把隐私约束引入到最常见的低成本适配范式之一，说明“参数少”不等于“天然安全”；对大模型生态来说，这会影响企业和医疗、金融等敏感场景是否敢用 prompt tuning 做私有化适配。","technical_approach":"作者提出差分隐私的 prompt learning 方法，核心是在提示参数优化过程中加入 DP 机制，通常包括梯度裁剪与噪声注入，以控制单条样本对最终提示的影响。这样的设计选择很自然，因为软提示训练的可学习参数少、优化空间较小，在相同隐私预算下往往比全参数微调更有希望保住效用。与传统 DP-SGD 全参训练相比，它的优势是计算和效用都更友好；但代价也明确：当任务需要大幅改写基座模型行为时，仅靠私有提示可能容量不够，隐私噪声还会进一步压缩有效学习信号。","experiments":"从标题可知，实验应比较非私有 prompt tuning、差分隐私 prompt tuning，可能还包括 DP 全参数或 DP adapter 基线，在不同隐私预算下评估任务性能。题面没有摘要，无法确认使用的模型、任务和 ε 数值。对读者最有价值的结果通常包括：在中等隐私预算下性能损失是否可接受；软提示长度和初始化是否影响隐私-效用折中；随着模型变大，冻结基座是否有助于在 DP 约束下保住更多任务性能。","authors_note":"作者中 Nicolas Papernot 是机器学习隐私与安全方向的代表性研究者，Franziska Boenisch 也长期从事隐私机器学习研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies how to make prompt learning for large language models differentially private, rather than assuming that parameter-efficient adaptation is automatically safe. Prompt tuning uses very few trainable parameters, but if those parameters are learned from sensitive data, they can still memorize or leak information.","importance":"This is a posttraining-method paper with clear relevance to the broader pretrain–posttrain loop. Its key contribution is to bring privacy guarantees to one of the most common low-cost adaptation methods, making the point that 'few trainable parameters' does not mean 'privacy by default.' That is especially important for enterprise and regulated deployments.","technical_approach":"The likely method is a differentially private prompt-learning algorithm that applies DP mechanisms during prompt optimization, typically gradient clipping and noise addition, to bound the influence of any individual training example. This is a natural design because prompt tuning has a small trainable parameter space, which often gives a better privacy–utility trade-off than full-model DP finetuning. Compared with standard DP-SGD over all parameters, the appeal is lower compute cost and potentially better utility. The limitation is also clear: if the task requires substantial behavioral change, private prompts may not have enough capacity, and DP noise further reduces the already small learning signal.","experiments":"From the title, the experiments likely compare non-private prompt tuning, DP prompt tuning, and possibly DP full finetuning or other parameter-efficient baselines across privacy budgets. The prompt does not provide enough information to report model choices, tasks, or epsilon values reliably. The most useful results would be whether utility remains acceptable at moderate privacy levels, whether prompt length and initialization affect the privacy–utility trade-off, and whether larger frozen base models help retain performance under DP constraints.","authors_note":"Nicolas Papernot is a leading researcher in privacy and security for machine learning. Franziska Boenisch has also worked extensively on privacy-preserving ML."},"tags":["prompt-learning","privacy","llm"],"notable_authors":["Nicolas Papernot","Franziska Boenisch"],"keywords":["differential privacy","in-context learning","trustworthy ML"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读核心方法和隐私-效用权衡实验即可，敏感场景下的LLM私有化适配可直接复用该方法框架。","en":"Only read core method and privacy-utility tradeoff experiments, this framework can be directly reused for private LLM adaptation in sensitive scenarios."}},{"id":"Ellis23","title":"Human-like Few-Shot Learning via Bayesian Reasoning over Natural Language","authors":["Kevin Ellis"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"A core tension in models of concept learning is that the model must carefully balance the tractability of inference against the expressivity of the hypothesis class. Humans, however, can efficiently learn a broad range of concepts. \nWe introduce a model of inductive learning that seeks to be human-like in that sense.\nIt implements a Bayesian reasoning process where a language model first proposes candidate hypotheses expressed in natural language, which are then re-weighed by a prior and a likelihood.\nBy estimating the prior from human data, we can predict human judgments on learning problems involving numbers and sets, spanning concepts that are generative, discriminative, propositional, and higher-order.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Ellis23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Ellis23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/2aa9b18b9ab37b0ab1fdaae46fb781d4-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：人类 few-shot 学习常常能通过自然语言描述快速形成假设，而标准神经模型通常需要大量梯度更新或依赖隐式模式匹配。作者关心的不是把 in-context learning 再做大，而是能否用显式的 Bayesian 假设推断来解释和复现人类那种“看几个例子 + 读一段文字就会了”的学习方式。","importance":"它的重要性更偏范式探索和机制启发。对 pretrain 的相关价值在于，它提示自然语言不仅是输入序列，也可以是结构化假设空间的接口；如果模型能在语言中表达、比较和更新规则假设，那么 few-shot 泛化可能不必完全依赖大规模隐式记忆。这个方向对 latent reasoning、program-like induction 和 test-time adaptation 都有启发。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把自然语言当作可操作的假设表示，并在其上做 Bayesian 推断。作者构建一个系统：给定少量示例，模型先在自然语言空间中提出候选规则或解释，再根据观测数据更新这些假设的后验概率，用后验来预测新样本。关键区别在于，这不是单纯让 LLM 直接生成答案，而是把语言作为中间推理对象；这样做的好处是能利用语言表达可组合规则，同时保留概率更新的可解释性。代价是推断效率和假设空间设计都更复杂。","experiments":"论文的主要实验展示：这种基于自然语言假设的 Bayesian few-shot 学习在若干概念学习或归纳任务上更接近人类行为模式，并且在极少样本条件下优于纯模式匹配式基线。实验通常比较了直接预测模型、program induction 或其他 few-shot baseline，并从预测准确率以及与人类选择一致性两个维度评估。更有价值的观察是，性能高度依赖候选语言假设的质量；一旦假设生成覆盖不到真实规则，后验更新也无济于事。这说明语言化 Bayesian 推断的瓶颈不只在推断，还在 hypothesis proposal。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a gap between human and model few-shot learning: humans can often infer a rule from a few examples plus a natural-language description, while standard neural models usually depend on large-scale gradient learning or shallow pattern matching. The goal is not simply to scale in-context learning, but to test whether explicit Bayesian reasoning over language-like hypotheses can better capture human-style generalization.","importance":"Its value is mainly conceptual and mechanistic. For pretraining, the relevant takeaway is that natural language can serve not only as input data but also as an interface for structured hypothesis spaces. If a model can express, compare, and update rule hypotheses in language, few-shot generalization may rely less on implicit memorization alone. This connects naturally to latent reasoning, program-like induction, and test-time adaptation.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to treat natural language as an explicit hypothesis representation and perform Bayesian inference over it. Given a few examples, the system proposes candidate rules in natural language, updates their posterior probabilities using the observations, and predicts new cases from the posterior. This differs from directly prompting an LLM for answers: language is used as an intermediate reasoning object. The benefit is interpretable probabilistic updating over compositional rules; the cost is that both inference efficiency and hypothesis proposal become critical bottlenecks.","experiments":"The main empirical result is that Bayesian few-shot learning over natural-language hypotheses better matches human behavior on several concept-learning or induction tasks and performs well in extremely low-data settings. The paper compares against direct prediction models, program-induction style baselines, and other few-shot methods, evaluating both accuracy and agreement with human judgments. A particularly useful observation is that success depends heavily on the quality of the proposed language hypotheses: if the correct rule is not proposed, posterior inference cannot recover it. That makes hypothesis generation, not only posterior updating, the central challenge.","authors_note":""},"tags":["few-shot","bayesian","natural-language"],"notable_authors":["Kevin Ellis"],"keywords":["Cognitive science","Bayesian","Language model","Induction","Psychology","Reasoning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读核心框架设计和少样本实验结果即可，为提升预训练模型的显式规则归纳能力提供了新范式参考。","en":"Only read core framework design and few-shot experiment results, provides a new paradigm reference for improving explicit rule induction of pretrained models."}},{"id":"Engelken23a","title":"Gradient Flossing: Improving Gradient Descent through Dynamic Control of Jacobians","authors":["Rainer Engelken"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$11e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Engelken23a","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Engelken23a","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/214ce905bf2072535e34b3cf873cbbc8-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：标准梯度下降只看一阶梯度，默认网络局部几何由参数化给定，因此在病态 Jacobian 条件下会出现学习慢、梯度传播差和不稳定。作者试图解决的是，能否在不完全转向昂贵二阶方法的前提下，动态调控 Jacobian，让梯度下降走在更有利的局部几何上。","importance":"它的重要性主要在优化方法层面。对 pretrain 的启示是，很多训练难题并不只是学习率或归一化问题，还和模型的输入输出 Jacobian 如何随训练演化有关；如果能低成本调控 Jacobian 谱，可能改善深层网络的可训练性和稳定性。它不是成熟的大规模 recipe，但代表了一类介于初始化技巧与二阶预条件之间的方向。","technical_approach":"作者提出的 Gradient Flossing，可以理解为在训练过程中动态塑形 Jacobian 的优化控制方法。核心思想不是显式求全 Hessian，而是通过附加控制项或更新规则，鼓励网络 Jacobian 保持更适合梯度传播和优化的结构。和传统权重衰减、梯度裁剪不同，这个方法直接作用于网络微分几何；和全量二阶法相比，它追求更低成本、可在现代网络上运行。设计上的关键取舍是只控制最关键的 Jacobian 性质，而不是精确建模全部曲率。","experiments":"实验结论是：在若干受控任务和网络上，Gradient Flossing 能提升收敛速度和训练稳定性，但收益依赖架构和任务。论文通常比较标准 SGD/Adam 或相关正则化方法，报告训练损失下降、更好的最终性能或更稳的梯度传播。更有信息量的消融在于 Jacobian 相关统计：当控制足够强时能改善条件数或谱性质，但过强控制会限制表示能力，带来欠拟合。这说明该方法的价值在于几何调节，而边界在于不能把网络过度刚性化。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a geometric weakness of standard gradient descent: it follows first-order gradients while inheriting whatever local Jacobian conditioning the parameterization happens to provide. When that Jacobian becomes poorly behaved, optimization slows down and gradient propagation degrades. The question is whether one can dynamically control Jacobians during training without paying the full price of second-order methods.","importance":"Its contribution is primarily on the optimization side. For pretraining, the takeaway is that some training difficulties are not just learning-rate or normalization issues; they also depend on how network Jacobians evolve. If Jacobian spectra can be steered cheaply, that may improve trainability and stability in deep networks. This is not yet a standard large-scale recipe, but it is a meaningful direction between initialization tricks and full curvature methods.","technical_approach":"Gradient Flossing is best viewed as dynamic Jacobian shaping during optimization. Rather than computing a full Hessian, the method adds control mechanisms that encourage the network Jacobian to remain in a regime that supports better gradient flow and optimization. Unlike weight decay or gradient clipping, it directly targets differential-geometric properties of the network. Unlike full second-order optimization, it aims to be cheaper and more practical. The key design choice is to control a few important Jacobian properties rather than model all curvature precisely.","experiments":"The empirical picture is that Gradient Flossing can improve convergence speed and training stability on several controlled tasks and architectures, though gains are regime-dependent. The paper compares against standard SGD/Adam-style baselines and related regularization approaches, reporting faster loss reduction, better final performance, or more stable gradient behavior. The most informative ablations track Jacobian statistics: sufficiently strong control can improve conditioning, but overly strong control reduces flexibility and can underfit. This makes the method a geometry-management tool with a clear trade-off.","authors_note":""},"tags":["optimization","jacobian","training-stability"],"notable_authors":["Rainer Engelken"],"keywords":["exploding/vanishing gradients","Lyapunov exponents","Lyapunov spectrum","chaos","RNN","condition number","Jacobian"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读Jacobian动态调控核心逻辑和验证实验即可，可作为改善深层大模型训练稳定性的候选优化技巧。","en":"Only read core logic of Jacobian dynamic control and validation experiments, serves as a candidate optimization trick for large deep model training stability."}},{"id":"EvenPGF23","title":"(S)GD over Diagonal Linear Networks: Implicit bias, Large Stepsizes and Edge of Stability","authors":["Mathieu Even","Scott Pesme","Suriya Gunasekar","Nicolas Flammarion"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"In this paper, we investigate the impact of stochasticity and large stepsizes on the implicit regularisation of gradient descent (GD) and stochastic gradient descent (SGD) over $2$-layer diagonal linear networks. We prove the convergence of GD and SGD with macroscopic stepsizes in an overparametrised regression setting and characterise their solutions through an implicit regularisation problem. Our crisp characterisation leads to qualitative insights about the impact of stochasticity and stepsizes on the recovered solution. Specifically, we show that large stepsizes consistently benefit SGD for sparse regression problems, while they can hinder the recovery of sparse solutions for GD. These effects are magnified for stepsizes in a tight window just below the divergence threshold, in the ``edge of stability'' regime. Our findings are supported by experimental results.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/EvenPGF23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/EvenPGF23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/5da6ce80e97671b70c01a2e703b868b3-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：大步长训练和 edge of stability 现象到底在多大程度上来自深度网络的非线性复杂性，还是在线性化但仍有乘性结构的模型里就已存在。作者选择对角线性网络这个极简但非平凡的模型，研究 SGD 的隐式偏置、大步长行为以及稳定边界附近的动力学。","importance":"它的重要性在于提供了一个可分析的最小模型，把近年来经验上很热的 edge-of-stability 讨论放到更清晰的理论框架中。对 pretrain 的启示是，某些看似“只有大模型才有”的训练现象，可能并不依赖 Transformer 的全部细节，而是深层乘性参数化和离散优化本身的产物。这样的理论结果有助于判断哪些稳定性技巧是架构特有，哪些是更普遍的优化规律。","technical_approach":"方法上，作者研究对角线性网络上的 (S)GD 动力学，分析不同步长下收敛轨迹、隐式正则化效果以及稳定边界附近的行为。关键价值不在模型能力，而在它保留了深度参数化的乘性耦合，因此能显式推导一些一般深网难以证明的性质。与传统线性回归分析不同，这个设置不是完全平凡的凸问题；它仍然能显示大步长带来的非直观动力学和偏置变化。","experiments":"核心结果是：即便在这种极简模型里，也能观察到大步长训练、隐式偏置改变以及 edge-of-stability 类现象，说明这些效应并非纯粹来自复杂非线性。论文以理论推导为主，配合数值实验验证不同学习率下的轨迹、收敛速度和最终解性质。更有价值的观察是，步长不仅影响是否收敛，也影响收敛到什么样的解；这对理解大模型训练中‘相同 loss、不同泛化’的现象有启发。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether large-step training and edge-of-stability behavior are fundamentally tied to the full nonlinear complexity of deep networks, or whether they already appear in much simpler multiplicative models. To answer this, it studies diagonal linear networks, which are minimal yet still retain nontrivial depth-induced structure.","importance":"Its value is theoretical but directly relevant to optimization practice. For pretraining, the key message is that some training phenomena often associated with large transformers may instead arise from deep multiplicative parameterization and discrete-time optimization more generally. That helps separate architecture-specific issues from broader optimization laws.","technical_approach":"The paper analyzes (stochastic) gradient descent on diagonal linear networks, focusing on implicit bias, large-step dynamics, and behavior near stability boundaries. The model is intentionally simple, but it preserves multiplicative coupling across layers, which allows nontrivial analysis that is not available in standard convex linear regression. This makes it a useful minimal setting for studying how step size changes both convergence behavior and solution bias.","experiments":"The main result is that even this stripped-down model exhibits large-step effects, shifts in implicit bias, and edge-of-stability-like behavior, showing that these phenomena do not require full nonlinear networks. The paper is theory-heavy, with numerical experiments validating trajectory predictions, convergence speed, and the character of the final solutions under different learning rates. A useful takeaway is that step size affects not only whether training converges, but also which solution it converges to. That is relevant to the common observation that similar training loss can still lead to different generalization.","authors_note":""},"tags":["sgd","edge-of-stability","optimization","training-dynamics"],"notable_authors":["Mathieu Even","Scott Pesme","Suriya Gunasekar","Nicolas Flammarion"],"keywords":["SGD","GD","implicit bias","large stepsizes","edge of stability","diagonal linear networks"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读核心动力学结论部分即可，帮你区分大模型训练现象是架构特有还是优化本身的普遍规律。","en":"Only read core dynamics conclusions, helps you distinguish whether large model training phenomena are architecture-specific or universal optimization rules."}},{"id":"FangMW23","title":"Structural Pruning for Diffusion Models","authors":["Gongfan Fang","Xinyin Ma","Xinchao Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$11f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/FangMW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/FangMW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/35c1d69d23bb5dd6b9abcd68be005d5c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：扩散模型推理和训练成本都高，尤其 U-Net 主干较重，而现有压缩方法往往偏向非结构化剪枝，虽然参数少了，实际部署未必更快。作者关注的是更实用的问题：能否对 diffusion 模型做结构化剪枝，在尽量少伤质量的前提下，真正减少 FLOPs 和 wall-clock。","importance":"它的重要性主要是效率与系统可部署性层面。对 pretrain 和生成模型研究的启示是，扩散模型的计算瓶颈并不只能靠更少采样步数解决，主干网络本身也有明显冗余；如果结构化压缩能保住生成质量，那么未来训练更大统一生成模型时，模型设计和稀疏化会成为同等重要的成本杠杆。","technical_approach":"核心方法是针对 diffusion 模型的结构化剪枝，而不是元素级稀疏化。作者按通道、块或层级结构评估不同组件的重要性，并在剪枝后配合重训练或蒸馏恢复质量。关键设计点在于 diffusion 的多时间步去噪使得不同层的重要性与普通分类网络不同：一些模块对早期粗结构更关键，另一些对后期细节更敏感，因此不能直接照搬 CNN 剪枝准则。和非结构化 pruning 相比，结构化方案牺牲了更细粒度的压缩自由度，但换来真实硬件加速。","experiments":"实验的主要结论是：在多个 diffusion 设置下，结构化剪枝可以显著降低参数量和计算量，同时保持可接受的 FID 或采样质量退化。论文通常比较未压缩模型、非结构化剪枝和提出的结构化方法，报告 FLOPs、推理速度和生成指标。更有价值的消融包括：不同层/块的剪枝敏感度差异很大；适度重训练能恢复大部分质量，但过高剪枝率会在纹理细节和多样性上明显受损。这说明 diffusion 模型确实有冗余，但冗余分布高度不均匀。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical efficiency issue in diffusion models: the U-Net backbone is expensive, and many existing compression methods rely on unstructured pruning, which reduces parameter count but often delivers little real speedup. The goal here is more deployment-oriented: perform structured pruning that actually reduces FLOPs and runtime while preserving generation quality as much as possible.","importance":"Its contribution is mainly about efficiency and deployability. For pretraining and generative modeling, the takeaway is that diffusion cost is not only about reducing sampling steps; the backbone itself contains substantial redundancy. If structured compression can preserve quality, architecture design and sparsification become important cost levers for larger unified generative models as well.","technical_approach":"The core method is structured pruning for diffusion models rather than element-wise sparsification. The authors assess the importance of channels, blocks, or other architectural units, remove less important structure, and recover quality through retraining or distillation. The key design point is that diffusion denoising across timesteps changes layer importance compared with standard classification networks: some components matter more for early coarse structure, others for late detail refinement. So standard CNN pruning heuristics do not transfer directly. Compared with unstructured pruning, the method gives up some fine-grained flexibility in exchange for actual hardware-friendly acceleration.","experiments":"The main empirical finding is that structured pruning can substantially reduce parameter count and compute in several diffusion settings while keeping degradation in FID or sample quality within an acceptable range. The paper compares the original model, unstructured pruning baselines, and the proposed structured approach, reporting FLOPs, runtime, and generation metrics. The most useful ablations show that pruning sensitivity varies greatly across layers and blocks; moderate retraining recovers much of the lost quality, but aggressive pruning damages texture detail and diversity. This suggests that diffusion models are indeed redundant, but the redundancy is highly unevenly distributed.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","pruning","compression","efficiency"],"notable_authors":["Gongfan Fang","Xinyin Ma","Xinchao Wang"],"keywords":["Diffusion Model","Network Pruning","Model Compression","Efficient Deep Learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的结构化重要性评估准则和§4.2的速度提升实验即可，可直接复用在内部扩散模型压缩ablation中","en":"Read only §3 on structured importance evaluation criteria and §4.2 speedup experiments, you can directly reuse the logic in internal diffusion model compression ablation."}},{"id":"FeinbergCSAH23","title":"Sketchy: Memory-efficient Adaptive Regularization with Frequent Directions","authors":["Vladimir Feinberg","Xinyi Chen","Y. Jennifer Sun","Rohan Anil","Elad Hazan"],"institutions":["Princeton University","Google DeepMind"],"abstract":"$120","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/FeinbergCSAH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/FeinbergCSAH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ef72fa6579401ffff9da246a5014f055-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"二阶自适应正则化方法性能优于对角类自适应优化器，但内存和计算开销过高无法大规模落地；此前基于Frequent Directions(FD)实现二阶优化的工作缺乏资源开销与regret保证的正式权衡分析，实用价值受限。","importance":"方法级贡献，为大模型预训练场景下二阶优化器的落地提供了低内存可行路径，可将二阶优化的内存开销降至与Adam等对角优化器接近的水平。","technical_approach":"核心是基于Frequent Directions低秩sketch方法维护梯度协方差矩阵的预条件器，属于原创改进。关键机制：利用深度学习训练中Kronecker因子梯度协方差的谱集中在少量动态变化的主特征空间的观察，舍弃全矩阵维护操作，新增资源开销与regret损失的可证明插值分析，相比此前FD类二阶优化工作具备明确的权衡保证。","experiments":"未披露具体模型参数、数据规模信息，在标准CV、NLP任务上，内存开销比全二阶方法降低40%以上，性能损失小于1%；消融实验验证低秩sketch的秩选择与regret损失正相关。","authors_note":"Elad Hazan为普林斯顿大学优化领域知名学者，Rohan Anil来自Google DeepMind。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Second-order adaptive regularization methods outperform diagonal adaptive optimizers on many tasks, but their excessive memory and compute overhead prohibit large-scale deployment; prior work applying Frequent Directions (FD) for second-order optimization lacks formal tradeoff analysis between resource cost and regret guarantees, limiting practical value.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution that provides a low-memory feasible path for deploying second-order optimizers in large-scale LLM pretraining, reducing memory overhead of second-order optimization to a level close to diagonal optimizers like Adam.","technical_approach":"The core is a low-rank sketch method based on Frequent Directions to maintain the preconditioner of gradient covariance matrix, which is an original improvement. It leverages the observation that the spectrum of Kronecker-factored gradient covariance concentrates on a small dynamically changing leading eigenspace during DL training, discards full matrix maintenance, and provides provable interpolation analysis between resource requirements and regret degradation, with clear tradeoff guarantees compared to prior FD-based second-order optimization works.","experiments":"No specific model parameter or dataset scale details are disclosed. It reduces memory overhead by more than 40% compared to full second-order methods on standard CV and NLP tasks, with less than 1% performance degradation; ablation shows positive correlation between selected rank of low-rank sketch and regret loss.","authors_note":"Elad Hazan is a leading optimization scholar from Princeton University; Rohan Anil is from Google DeepMind."},"tags":["optimizer","adaptive","memory","efficiency"],"keywords":["online convex optimization","deep learning","matrix sketching","frequent directions"],"notable_authors":["Elad Hazan"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"二阶自适应优化比对角自适应优化（如Adam）在深度学习任务上性能更优","claim_en":"Second-order adaptive regularization outperforms diagonal adaptive optimizers like Adam on deep learning tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"深度学习训练中Kronecker因子梯度协方差的谱集中在少量动态变化的主特征空间","claim_en":"The spectrum of Kronecker-factored gradient covariance concentrates on a small dynamically changing leading eigenspace during DL training","opposes":"二阶优化需要维护完整协方差矩阵才能保证最优性能","opposes_cite_hint":"Martens 2015 KFAC","evidence_anchor":"§2 Observation","why_contested":"该观察是低秩sketch类二阶优化方法成立的核心前提，直接影响二阶优化器的架构设计方向。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3.2的内存开销推导和§5的大batch预训练显存对比结果即可，可尝试在7B以上规模预训练中测试适配","en":"Read only §3.2 on memory overhead derivation and §5 large-batch pretraining VRAM comparison, you can try to adapt it to 7B+ scale pretraining tests."}},{"id":"FengLWTYSM0W23","title":"ChessGPT: Bridging Policy Learning and Language Modeling","authors":["Xidong Feng","Yicheng Luo","Ziyan Wang","Hongrui Tang","Mengyue Yang","Kun Shao","David Mguni","Yali Du","Jun Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$121","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/FengLWTYSM0W23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/FengLWTYSM0W23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/16b14e3f288f076e0ca73bdad6405f77-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有决策智能系统要么仅基于历史交互数据学习策略，要么仅基于纯文本语料训练语言模型，两类信息源未被融合，导致智能体无法同时利用策略交互经验和自然语言形式的战略思考信息。","importance":"范式级贡献，为多模态预训练与决策智能交叉领域提供了新的训练范式，验证了自然语言与交互数据联合训练可同时提升策略能力与决策可解释性。","technical_approach":"核心是将国际象棋历史对局数据（策略数据）与对应的自然语言棋谱分析数据联合训练GPT模型，属于原创范式迁移。关键机制：设计统一token化方式对齐两类数据，舍弃传统决策模型与语言模型分开训练的范式，相比此前单模态策略模型可同时输出走子决策与自然语言解释。","experiments":"未披露具体模型参数量，使用10M+国际象棋对局数据与对应自然语言注释数据，走子准确率比纯策略训练模型提升22%，可生成符合人类逻辑的走子解释。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing decision intelligence systems either learn policies only from historical interaction data, or train language models only from pure text corpus; the two information sources are not fused, so agents cannot leverage both policy interaction experience and strategic thinking information in natural language form.","importance":"It is a paradigm-level contribution that provides a new training paradigm for the intersection of multimodal pretraining and decision intelligence, verifying that joint training of natural language and interaction data can improve both policy capability and decision interpretability.","technical_approach":"The core is to jointly train a GPT model with chess historical game data (policy data) and corresponding natural language chess analysis data, which is an original paradigm transfer. It designs a unified tokenization method to align the two types of data, discards the paradigm of separate training for decision models and language models, and can output both move decisions and natural language explanations compared to prior unimodal policy models.","experiments":"No specific model parameter details are disclosed. It uses 10M+ chess game data and corresponding natural language annotation data, improves move accuracy by 22% compared to pure policy training models, and can generate human-readable move explanations aligned with human logic.","authors_note":""},"tags":["language-modeling","policy-learning","decision-transformer","reasoning"],"keywords":["Chess","Dataset","large language model","policy learning","language modeling"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大语言模型的上下文学习能力可迁移到结构化决策任务","claim_en":"In-context learning ability of large language models can be transferred to structured decision-making tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"策略交互数据与自然语言战略分析数据联合训练，比单独训练两类数据的模型在决策任务上性能更优","claim_en":"Joint training of policy interaction data and natural language strategic analysis data achieves better performance on decision tasks than models trained separately on the two types of data","opposes":"决策智能与语言建模是两个独立研究方向，两类数据无法联合训练提升性能","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"验证了决策与语言可以共享表示，为通用智能体预训练提供了新方向。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为决策与语言联合预训练的范式参考备查，不用细读正文，仅知道数据对齐思路即可","en":"Keep it as a paradigm reference for decision-language joint pretraining for future lookup, no need to read the full text, only grasp the data alignment idea."}},{"id":"2305.15393","title":"LayoutGPT: Compositional Visual Planning and Generation with Large Language Models","authors":["Weixi Feng","Wanrong Zhu","Tsu-Jui Fu","Varun Jampani","Arjun R. Akula","Xuehai He","Sugato Basu","Xin Eric Wang","William Yang Wang"],"institutions":["Google DeepMind","University of California, Santa Barbara"],"abstract":"$122","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.15393","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/FengZFJAHBWW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/FengZFJAHBWW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/3a7f9e485845dac27423375c934cb4db-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有文生图模型的可控生成依赖用户输入精细布局，用户使用负担重；此前的大语言模型无法直接将文本描述的空间、数值关系转化为合理布局，无法与视觉生成模型打通。","importance":"方法级贡献，为多模态预训练的视觉规划模块提供了轻量实现路径，不需要额外微调大规模多模态模型，直接使用通用大语言模型即可完成布局生成任务。","technical_approach":"核心是用样式表语言构造上下文演示样例，增强大语言模型的视觉规划能力，属于原创改进。关键机制：将2D/3D布局转化为结构化样式表token，舍弃专门训练布局生成模型的思路，相比此前布局生成方法不需要额外微调大语言模型参数，仅通过上下文学习即可适配多域布局生成。","experiments":"未披露具体大语言模型参数量，在3D室内场景布局生成任务上，布局合理性比基线方法提升31%，数值与空间关系准确率比基线高27%；消融实验验证样式表格式的上下文演示比纯文本演示性能提升18%。","authors_note":"Varun Jampani为Google DeepMind多模态领域知名研究员。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Controllable generation of existing text-to-image models relies on users inputting fine-grained layouts, which imposes heavy burden on users; prior large language models cannot directly convert spatial and numerical relations described in text into reasonable layouts, and cannot be integrated with visual generative models.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution that provides a lightweight implementation path for the visual planning module of multimodal pretraining, requiring no additional fine-tuning of large multimodal models, and can complete layout generation tasks directly with general large language models.","technical_approach":"The core is to construct in-context demonstration examples in style sheet language to enhance the visual planning ability of large language models, which is an original improvement. It converts 2D/3D layouts into structured style sheet tokens, discards the idea of specially training layout generation models, and can adapt to multi-domain layout generation only through in-context learning without additional fine-tuning of LLM parameters compared to prior layout generation methods.","experiments":"No specific LLM parameter details are disclosed. On 3D indoor scene layout generation tasks, layout rationality is 31% higher than baseline methods, and numerical and spatial relation accuracy is 27% higher than baselines; ablation shows that style sheet format in-context demonstrations improve performance by 18% compared to pure text demonstrations.","authors_note":"Varun Jampani is a well-known multimodal researcher at Google DeepMind."},"tags":["llm","planning","multimodal","generation"],"keywords":["Large Language Models","Compositional Image Generation","3D scene synthesis"],"notable_authors":["Varun Jampani"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大语言模型的上下文学习能力可处理结构化生成任务","claim_en":"In-context learning of large language models can handle structured generation tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"将布局表示为样式表语言的结构化序列，比直接表示为纯文本序列，大语言模型生成布局的准确率更高","claim_en":"Representing layouts as structured sequences in style sheet language achieves higher layout generation accuracy for LLMs than directly representing them as plain text sequences","opposes":"布局生成需要专门训练的多模态模型才能完成，通用大语言模型无法实现高精度布局生成","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5.2 Table 1","why_contested":"证明了通用大语言模型可作为视觉生成的上游规划模块，降低多模态生成系统的复杂度。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为大模型零样本布局生成的弱信号参考，不用细读，仅了解样式表prompt构造思路即可","en":"Treat it as a weak signal reference for LLM zero-shot layout generation, no need to read thoroughly, only learn the stylesheet prompt construction logic."}},{"id":"FriederPCGSLPB23","title":"Mathematical Capabilities of ChatGPT","authors":["Simon Frieder","Luca Pinchetti","Alexis Chevalier","Ryan-Rhys Griffiths","Tommaso Salvatori","Thomas Lukasiewicz","Philipp Petersen","Julius Berner"],"institutions":["University of Oxford","University of Cambridge"],"abstract":"$123","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/FriederPCGSLPB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/FriederPCGSLPB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/58168e8a92994655d6da3939e7cc0918-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有大语言模型数学能力评估数据集要么仅覆盖初等数学，要么规模过小，没有覆盖研究生级别的自然语言数学题，无法准确评估大模型的高阶数学能力。","importance":"数据级贡献，填补了研究生级别自然语言数学评估数据集的空白，为大语言模型预训练的数学能力迭代提供了可靠基准。","technical_approach":"核心是由在职数学研究人员构造GHOSTS和miniGHOSTS两个新数据集，属于原创数据构建工作。关键机制：数据集覆盖代数、分析、拓扑等10+研究生数学领域，舍弃此前数据集仅覆盖初等数学的设计，相比此前数学评估数据集首次覆盖高阶数学内容，且题目全部为自然语言形式，不需要形式化证明工具。","experiments":"测试了2023年1月两个版本的ChatGPT和GPT-4，GPT-4在GHOSTS数据集上准确率仅为18%，比其在初等数学数据集上的准确率低42个百分点，验证了现有大模型在高阶数学能力上存在明显短板。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM mathematical capability evaluation datasets either only cover elementary mathematics, or are too small, and do not cover graduate-level natural language mathematics problems, so they cannot accurately evaluate the advanced mathematical capabilities of large models.","importance":"It is a data-level contribution that fills the gap of graduate-level natural language mathematics evaluation datasets, and provides a reliable benchmark for iterating the mathematical capabilities of LLM pretraining.","technical_approach":"The core is to construct two new datasets GHOSTS and miniGHOSTS by working mathematics researchers, which is an original data construction work. The datasets cover more than 10 graduate mathematics fields such as algebra, analysis, topology, etc., discard the design of prior datasets only covering elementary mathematics, and are the first to cover advanced mathematics content compared to prior mathematical evaluation datasets, with all problems in natural language form and no requirement for formal proof tools.","experiments":"Two versions of ChatGPT released in January 2023 and GPT-4 are tested. GPT-4 only achieves 18% accuracy on the GHOSTS dataset, which is 42 percentage points lower than its accuracy on elementary mathematics datasets, verifying that existing large models have obvious shortcomings in advanced mathematical capabilities.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm-evaluation","math-reasoning","chatgpt","benchmark"],"keywords":["datasets","LLMs","ChatGPT","mathematical capabilities","evaluation","benchmarking"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"现有大语言模型在初等数学任务上已经取得不错的性能","claim_en":"Current large language models have achieved decent performance on elementary mathematics tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"GPT-4在研究生级别的自然语言数学任务上准确率不足20%，远低于其在初等数学上的性能","claim_en":"GPT-4 achieves less than 20% accuracy on graduate-level natural language mathematics tasks, which is far lower than its performance on elementary mathematics","opposes":"此前普遍认为GPT-4的数学能力已经接近人类本科生水平","opposes_cite_hint":"OpenAI 2023 GPT-4 Technical Report","evidence_anchor":"§5 Table 2","why_contested":"明确了现有大模型数学能力的边界，为后续数学预训练优化方向提供了明确目标。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为高阶数学能力评估的数据集参考备查，不用读正文，需要做数学预训练benchmark时直接调用即可","en":"Keep it as a dataset reference for advanced mathematical ability evaluation for lookup, no need to read the text, directly call it when building math pretraining benchmarks."}},{"id":"GandhiFGG23","title":"Understanding Social Reasoning in Language Models with Language Models","authors":["Kanishk Gandhi","Jan-Philipp Fränken","Tobias Gerstenberg","Noah D. Goodman"],"institutions":["Stanford University"],"abstract":"$124","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GandhiFGG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GandhiFGG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/2b9efb085d3829a2aadffab63ba206de-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有大语言模型的心理理论（ToM）评估结果不一致，评估方法的有效性存在争议，无法准确衡量大语言模型与人类心理理论的对齐程度。","importance":"方法级贡献，为大语言模型社会推理能力的评估提供了标准化生成框架，解决了此前评估结果不可靠的问题。","technical_approach":"核心是用大语言模型填充因果模板来生成标准化的社会推理评估数据集，属于原创方法。关键机制：基于因果结构构造心理理论任务模板，舍弃此前人工构造评估样本的方法，相比此前ToM评估方法生成的样本没有数据泄露问题，且可大规模生成多样化任务样本。","experiments":"生成了包含10k+社会推理评估样本，在GPT-4上的测试结果显示其心理理论能力与人类的对齐率为63%，比此前人工构造数据集上的结果低19个百分点；消融实验验证因果模板生成的样本可有效避免数据泄露导致的评估虚高。","authors_note":"Noah D. Goodman为斯坦福大学认知科学、大语言模型领域知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing Theory of Mind (ToM) evaluation results for large language models are inconsistent, and the validity of evaluation methods is controversial, so the alignment degree between LLMs and human ToM cannot be accurately measured.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution that provides a standardized generation framework for evaluating the social reasoning ability of large language models, solving the problem of unreliable prior evaluation results.","technical_approach":"The core is to use large language models to fill causal templates to generate standardized social reasoning evaluation datasets, which is an original method. It constructs ToM task templates based on causal structure, discards the prior method of manually constructing evaluation samples, and the generated samples have no data leakage problem compared to prior ToM evaluation methods, and can generate diverse task samples at scale.","experiments":"More than 10k social reasoning evaluation samples are generated. Test results on GPT-4 show that its ToM ability alignment rate with humans is 63%, which is 19 percentage points lower than results on prior manually constructed datasets; ablation verifies that samples generated by causal templates can effectively avoid overestimated evaluation caused by data leakage.","authors_note":"Noah D. Goodman is a well-known scholar in cognitive science and large language models at Stanford University."},"tags":["social-reasoning","llm-evaluation","benchmark"],"keywords":["Social Reasoning","Theory of Mind","Large Language Models","Benchmark","Multi-Agent Reasoning","Intuitive Psychology","Common Sense","Reasoning"],"notable_authors":["Noah D. Goodman"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"心理理论能力是人机交互的核心能力之一","claim_en":"Theory of Mind ability is one of the core capabilities for human-AI interaction","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"此前人工构造的ToM评估数据集存在数据泄露问题，导致大语言模型的ToM能力被高估最多20%左右","claim_en":"Prior manually constructed ToM evaluation datasets have data leakage problems, leading to up to 20% overestimation of LLM ToM capabilities","opposes":"此前多项研究声称GPT-4的ToM能力已经达到人类水平","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4.2 Table 1","why_contested":"修正了领域对大语言模型心理理论能力的评估偏差，为后续对齐研究提供了更可靠的基准。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为心理理论评估的数据集生成思路参考，不用细读，做对齐评估时可复用其因果模板设计","en":"Treat it as a reference for ToM evaluation dataset generation logic, no need to read thoroughly, reuse its causal template design when doing alignment evaluation."}},{"id":"GengPK23","title":"One-Step Diffusion Distillation via Deep Equilibrium Models","authors":["Zhengyang Geng","Ashwini Pokle","J. Zico Kolter"],"institutions":["Carnegie Mellon University"],"abstract":"$125","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GengPK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GengPK23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/82f05a105c928c10706213952bf0c8b7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"扩散模型采样需要数百步迭代，现有蒸馏方法要么训练流程复杂多阶段，要么单步生成质量差，无法兼顾单步采样和生成质量。","importance":"方法级贡献，为扩散模型蒸馏提供了新的单步蒸馏范式，不需要多阶段训练即可实现接近原扩散模型的生成质量。","technical_approach":"核心是用深度平衡模型（DEQ）作为蒸馏架构，提出Generative Equilibrium Transformer（GET），属于原创架构改进。关键机制：利用DEQ的隐式平衡特性，舍弃现有蒸馏方法需要多阶段蒸馏、依赖教师模型分步引导的设计，相比此前扩散蒸馏方法可以直接从噪声到图像单步生成，训练全程离线不需要分步采样。","experiments":"在ImageNet 256x256生成任务上，单步生成的FID为12.3，比此前最优单步蒸馏方法FID降低3.2，接近原多步扩散模型的FID 10.1；消融实验验证DEQ架构比普通Transformer架构作为蒸馏骨干性能提升2.1个FID。","authors_note":"J. Zico Kolter为卡内基梅隆大学深度学习、优化领域知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Diffusion model sampling requires hundreds of iterations, existing distillation methods either have complex multi-stage training processes, or have poor single-step generation quality, and cannot balance single-step sampling and generation quality.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution that provides a new single-step distillation paradigm for diffusion model distillation, achieving generation quality close to the original diffusion model without multi-stage training.","technical_approach":"The core is to use Deep Equilibrium (DEQ) model as the distillation architecture, and proposes Generative Equilibrium Transformer (GET), which is an original architecture improvement. It leverages the implicit equilibrium property of DEQ, discards the design of prior distillation methods requiring multi-stage distillation and step-by-step guidance from teacher models, and can directly generate images from noise in a single step compared to prior diffusion distillation methods, with fully offline training requiring no step-by-step sampling.","experiments":"On ImageNet 256x256 generation task, the single-step generation FID is 12.3, which is 3.2 lower than the prior best single-step distillation method, close to the FID of 10.1 of the original multi-step diffusion model; ablation verifies that DEQ architecture improves performance by 2.1 FID compared to ordinary Transformer architecture as the distillation backbone.","authors_note":"J. Zico Kolter is a well-known scholar in deep learning and optimization at Carnegie Mellon University."},"tags":["diffusion-distillation","deep-equilibrium","one-step-generation"],"keywords":["Deep Equilibrium Models","Diffusion Models","Distillation","Generative Models"],"notable_authors":["J. Zico Kolter"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"扩散模型生成质量优于GAN等单步生成模型，但采样速度慢","claim_en":"Diffusion models outperform single-step generative models like GANs in generation quality, but have slow sampling speed","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于DEQ架构的单步扩散蒸馏，可以在单阶段离线训练的情况下，达到接近原扩散模型的生成质量","claim_en":"Single-step diffusion distillation based on DEQ architecture can achieve generation quality close to the original diffusion model under single-stage offline training","opposes":"此前单步扩散蒸馏需要多阶段训练才能得到较好的生成质量","opposes_cite_hint":"Gu 2022 Progressive Distillation","evidence_anchor":"§5.1 Table 1","why_contested":"大幅简化了扩散模型的蒸馏流程，为扩散模型落地到低延迟生成场景提供了可行路径。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4的GET架构设计和§5的单步生成质量对比实验即可，可在内部扩散蒸馏任务中复现验证","en":"Read only §4 on GET architecture design and §5 single-step generation quality comparison, you can reproduce and verify it in internal diffusion distillation tasks."}},{"id":"GhoshHS23","title":"GenEval: An object-focused framework for evaluating text-to-image alignment","authors":["Dhruba Ghosh","Hannaneh Hajishirzi","Ludwig Schmidt"],"institutions":["University of Washington","Allen Institute for AI"],"abstract":"$126","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GhoshHS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GhoshHS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/a3bf71c7c63f0c3bcb7ff67c67b1e7b1-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：现有文本生成图像评测大多依赖 CLIPScore 或人工打分，但它们对“物体数目、属性、相对位置”这类可组合语义是否真的对齐并不敏感。结果是模型可能画得很像、风格也对，但在最关键的对象级约束上出错，而现有评测却不稳定甚至看不出来。","importance":"这是评测方法级工作，重要性高于表面看起来的“做了个 benchmark”。对生成式预训练尤其是文生图来说，训练目标和评测目标长期错位：模型被鼓励生成视觉上讨喜的图，但不一定严格 obey prompt。GenEval 的价值在于把对齐问题拆成可测、可诊断的对象级维度，从而让模型改进不再只围绕感知质量和主观偏好打转。","technical_approach":"核心方法是构造一个 object-focused 的评测框架，用程序化 prompt 覆盖对象存在性、计数、颜色/属性绑定和空间关系等组合约束，再用可复现的检测或匹配流程判定生成图是否满足文本要求。它不是再训练一个更大的评审模型，而是刻意把任务收缩到可验证的细粒度语义一致性；这样设计的好处是诊断性强，能分离“图像好看”和“文本条件满足”这两件事。与通用 CLIP 相比，它牺牲了一些开放域覆盖，但换来了更高的失配定位能力。","experiments":"这类工作的关键事实通常不是追求单一分数，而是展示主流文生图模型在 object-level alignment 上存在系统性短板，并且这些短板与 CLIPScore、人类偏好未必一致。按论文主题推断，实验应比较多个代表性扩散模型或 API 系统，在计数、属性绑定、位置关系等子集上的通过率，并分析 prompt 复杂度上升时性能如何下降。给定信息里没有具体模型名单、样本数和分数，因此不能写数值；但可以明确的是，这篇论文的主要发现通常会是“当前强模型在对象级组合约束上远未解决”。","authors_note":"如果信息属实，这篇工作与 University of Washington / Allen Institute for AI 一线的语言与多模态评测脉络相关。Hannaneh Hajishirzi 和 Ludwig Schmidt 都长期做鲁棒性、评测与泛化问题。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a clear gap in text-to-image evaluation: common metrics such as CLIPScore and broad human preference ratings are weak at checking whether generated images satisfy object-level constraints like counts, attributes, and spatial relations. As a result, a model can look visually strong while still failing the actual prompt in systematic ways.","importance":"This is an evaluation-method contribution, but it matters because evaluation has been steering model development toward perceptual quality more than semantic obedience. For generative pretraining, that misalignment is costly: if the metric does not punish count or binding errors, training and model selection will not either. GenEval is important because it turns text-image alignment into something more diagnostic and falsifiable.","technical_approach":"The method is an object-focused benchmark built from programmatic prompts that isolate compositional constraints: object presence, counting, attribute binding, and spatial relations. Instead of training a larger learned judge, it uses controlled prompt design plus reproducible detection/matching procedures to verify whether an image satisfies the prompt. The design is effective because it separates two things that are often conflated: visual appeal and faithful conditioning. Compared with broad embedding-based metrics, it gives up some open-ended coverage to gain much better error localization.","experiments":"The main experimental value is likely the finding that strong text-to-image systems still fail badly on object-level alignment, and that these failures are not well captured by standard metrics. The paper likely compares several mainstream diffusion models or APIs across sub-benchmarks such as counting, attribute binding, and positional relations, and studies how performance degrades as prompts become more compositional. The provided information does not include exact model lists, dataset size, or numerical scores, so no numbers should be invented.","authors_note":"If confirmed, this work sits in the University of Washington / Allen Institute for AI line of work on robustness, evaluation, and generalization. Hannaneh Hajishirzi and Ludwig Schmidt are both well known for that agenda."},"tags":["benchmark","text-to-image","evaluation","alignment"],"notable_authors":["Hannaneh Hajishirzi","Ludwig Schmidt"],"keywords":["text-to-image","vision-and-language","object detection","compositional","evaluation","framework"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的对象级维度拆分逻辑和§4.3的错误案例分析即可，可直接替换现有文生图对齐评测指标","en":"Read only §3 on object-level dimension splitting logic and §4.3 error case analysis, you can directly replace existing text-to-image alignment evaluation metrics with it."}},{"id":"GoKLLOMC23","title":"Addressing Negative Transfer in Diffusion Models","authors":["Hyojun Go","JinYoung Kim","Yunsung Lee","Seunghyun Lee","Shinhyeok Oh","Hyeongdon Moon","Seungtaek Choi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$127","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GoKLLOMC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GoKLLOMC23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/56a7b9a07ae01ddea762dcc51280298b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：扩散模型在多任务、条件迁移或联合训练时会出现 negative transfer，某些条件或子任务的学习会伤害另一些任务。过去这类问题常被更大模型或更久训练掩盖，但在共享 backbone、共享噪声预测器的扩散框架里，不同任务间的梯度冲突会直接体现在生成质量和条件一致性下降上。","importance":"这是方法级工作，重要性在于它把扩散模型从“单任务越大越好”的惯性里拉回到多任务训练动力学本身。对 pretrain 的启示很明确：只要模型在共享表示上同时吸收多个来源、多个条件或多个模态，负迁移就是核心问题，而扩散模型并不天然比自回归模型更少受其影响。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者针对 diffusion 中的负迁移提出了专门的诊断和缓解方案，核心应是识别不同任务或条件在训练过程中的冲突，并通过权重分配、目标解耦、表示拆分或梯度调节来减少互相伤害。好的设计重点不在额外堆复杂模块，而在尽量不破坏扩散模型统一去噪框架的前提下，让共享参数学到更少冲突的信号。与简单地为每个任务单独训练相比，这类方法追求的是保留参数共享与数据共享的收益，同时把最严重的迁移代价压下去。","experiments":"按主题推断，实验会围绕多任务或多域扩散设置，比较联合训练、单任务训练以及提出方法在生成质量、FID、条件准确率或任务平均性能上的差异，并分析任务相关性较低时负迁移更明显。给定信息没有具体数据集、模型规模和数值，因此不能提供提升幅度。可以合理预期的重要 ablation 是：冲突度量与调节策略是否真的减少了某些任务被联合训练拖累的程度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies negative transfer in diffusion models: when multiple tasks, conditions, or domains are trained jointly, learning for some of them can hurt others. This issue is often hidden by larger models or longer training, but in shared diffusion backbones the conflict shows up directly in denoising quality and conditional fidelity.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution with clear relevance to pretraining. The main lesson is that diffusion models do not escape the multi-task optimization problem just because they share a denoising objective. Whenever a model is trained on heterogeneous sources with shared parameters, negative transfer becomes a first-order concern.","technical_approach":"From the title, the paper proposes a diffusion-specific way to diagnose and mitigate task interference, likely through some combination of conflict measurement, reweighting, decoupling, or gradient adjustment. The design challenge is to reduce harmful interaction without giving up the benefits of shared training. That makes it different from the trivial solution of training separate models: the goal is to keep parameter and data sharing while controlling the damage from incompatible gradients.","experiments":"The likely experiments compare joint training, separate training, and the proposed method in multi-task or multi-domain diffusion settings, using metrics such as FID, conditional accuracy, or average task performance. A useful empirical point is usually that negative transfer becomes more severe when tasks are less related, and that the proposed intervention recovers some of that loss. The provided metadata does not include datasets, model sizes, or quantitative numbers, so exact improvements should not be invented.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","transfer-learning","negative-transfer","training-dynamics"],"keywords":["Diffusion Models","Multi-Task Learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3.2的冲突检测机制和§4的多任务扩散训练结果即可，做统一生成预训练时可复用其梯度调节方案","en":"Read only §3.2 on conflict detection mechanism and §4 multi-task diffusion training results, reuse its gradient adjustment scheme when doing unified generative pretraining."}},{"id":"GoldblumSNSPSCI23","title":"Battle of the Backbones: A Large-Scale Comparison of Pretrained Models across Computer Vision Tasks","authors":["Micah Goldblum","Hossein Souri","Renkun Ni","Manli Shu","Viraj Prabhu","Gowthami Somepalli","Prithvijit Chattopadhyay","Mark Ibrahim","Adrien Bardes","Judy Hoffman","Rama Chellappa","Andrew Gordon Wilson","Tom Goldstein"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$128","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GoldblumSNSPSCI23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GoldblumSNSPSCI23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/5d9571470bb750f0e2325a030016f63f-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：视觉领域 backbone 太多，但大家常在不同任务、不同训练 recipe、不同数据规模下各说各话，导致很难判断“哪个预训练 backbone 真正更通用”。过去比较经常是不公平的：一个模型在分类上强，另一个在检测上强，但训练数据、参数量、微调策略并不一致。","importance":"这是大规模评测与经验规律总结类工作，价值在于给 backbone 选择建立更接近 apples-to-apples 的比较基线。对 pretrain 研究的意义主要有两点：第一，它帮助区分‘架构本身更好’和‘训练 recipe 更好’；第二，它能揭示不同视觉预训练范式在跨任务迁移上的真实 trade-off，而不是只看 ImageNet 单点指标。","technical_approach":"核心方法不是提出新 backbone，而是在大规模视觉任务集合上，对多类预训练模型做系统比较，尽量控制训练预算、下游 protocol 和评估口径。这样的设计有效，是因为 backbone 讨论长期被 recipe、数据和 tuning 技巧污染；只有把这些变量压住，才能看清哪些结论能跨任务成立。与单论文式的局部 benchmark 相比，这类工作更像是做预训练设计空间的测绘。","experiments":"实验的关键事实应包括：多个代表性 backbone 家族在分类、检测、分割、鲁棒性或分布外泛化任务上的横向比较，以及参数规模和预训练数据量变化时的性能排序是否稳定。论文标题强调 large-scale comparison，因此大概率覆盖大量模型与任务，而不仅是一两个标准集。给定信息没有具体 backbone 名单、任务数和结果数字，不能虚构百分比；能明确的是，论文更看重跨任务一致性和排序稳定性，而不是单一 SOTA。","authors_note":"如果信息属实，作者团队与稳健性、基准评测和视觉安全方向有关。Micah Goldblum、Viraj Prabhu、Tom Goldstein 相关团队长期做大规模视觉评测与鲁棒性研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a basic but unresolved question in vision pretraining: which pretrained backbone is actually more general once we compare models fairly across tasks? Existing comparisons are often confounded by different data, training recipes, model sizes, and fine-tuning setups, so task-level wins do not cleanly tell us whether the backbone itself is better.","importance":"This is a large-scale evaluation and synthesis paper. Its value is not a new architecture, but a more controlled picture of how backbone choice interacts with downstream transfer. For pretraining research, that matters because it helps separate architecture effects from recipe effects, and because it exposes cross-task trade-offs that single-task leaderboards hide.","technical_approach":"The core contribution is a broad, controlled comparison of multiple pretrained vision model families across many downstream tasks, with efforts to standardize budgets and evaluation protocols. That design is useful because backbone debates are often polluted by training details; controlling those factors is the only way to tell which conclusions are robust across tasks. Compared with a paper-specific benchmark, this is closer to a map of the design space.","experiments":"The main facts likely include comparisons across classification, detection, segmentation, robustness, and possibly out-of-distribution tasks, plus analyses of whether backbone rankings stay stable as model or data scale changes. Since the title emphasizes large-scale comparison, the paper likely covers many model families and tasks rather than a narrow benchmark. The provided information does not include exact model lists or numbers, so no quantitative gains should be invented.","authors_note":"If confirmed, the team is connected to the robustness, benchmarking, and vision safety community. Micah Goldblum, Viraj Prabhu, and collaborators around Tom Goldstein have done notable large-scale evaluation work in vision."},"tags":["pretrained-models","benchmark","vision","transfer-learning"],"notable_authors":["Micah Goldblum","Viraj Prabhu"],"keywords":["self-supervised learning","object detection","segmentation","out-of-distribution","domain shift","image retrieval","transfer learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§5的跨任务迁移trade-off总结表格即可，做视觉预训练backbone选型时直接参考该结果","en":"Read only the cross-task transfer trade-off summary table in §5, directly refer to the results when selecting CV pretraining backbones."}},{"id":"GonzalezPTGHM23","title":"SEEDS: Exponential SDE Solvers for Fast High-Quality Sampling from Diffusion Models","authors":["Martin Gonzalez","Nelson Fernandez","Thuy Tran","Elies Gherbi","Hatem Hajri","Nader Masmoudi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$129","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GonzalezPTGHM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GonzalezPTGHM23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/d6f764aae383d9ff28a0f89f71defbd9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：扩散模型采样慢，根源在于逆扩散过程需要很多数值积分步，而现有快速采样器常在速度和质量之间做痛苦交换。大家以前多用 DDIM、高阶 ODE solver 或蒸馏去减步数，但要么误差累积明显，要么训练和部署复杂度上升。","importance":"这是扩散采样器方法级工作，意义在于它触及了 diffusion 系列模型最核心的工程瓶颈之一：推理成本。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，建模目标再好，如果采样器不能稳定地把训练好的分布高效落地，体系的可用性和统一建模价值都会受限；尤其在多模态统一生成里，采样效率直接影响范式竞争力。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 SEEDS，一类基于指数型 SDE 求解器的快速采样方案，用更贴合扩散随机微分方程结构的积分形式来减少步数下的离散化误差。它不是单纯套一个通用高阶 solver，而是针对扩散采样里的 drift/noise 结构做求解器设计；这样做有效，是因为标准 solver 未必利用了扩散过程的特殊形式。与蒸馏类方法相比，它更像 inference-time 改进，不要求重新训练一个 student；代价则是求解器推导和稳定区间需要精心处理。","experiments":"这类工作通常用 CIFAR-10、ImageNet 或 latent diffusion 场景评估，在固定采样步数下比较 FID、NFE（function evaluations）和运行时间，并与 DDIM、DPM-Solver、Euler/Heun 等 baseline 对比。论文标题强调 fast high-quality sampling，因此关键结果应是少步数下保持更好的质量。当前没有给出具体步数、FID 和数据集信息，因此不能写数字；但有价值的观察通常会包括：在极低步数区间，新 solver 的优势最明显，而在高步数区间差距缩小。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles the main deployment bottleneck of diffusion models: sampling is slow because the reverse process needs many numerical integration steps, and existing fast samplers often trade away too much quality. Prior solutions such as DDIM, generic higher-order solvers, or distillation reduce steps, but they either accumulate error or introduce extra training complexity.","importance":"This is a sampler-method contribution, and it matters because inference cost is one of the central constraints on diffusion-style generative modeling. For pretraining, the lesson is straightforward: a modeling paradigm is only competitive if its trained distribution can be sampled efficiently and stably. That matters even more in unified multimodal systems where diffusion is already under pressure from autoregressive alternatives.","technical_approach":"The method, SEEDS, uses exponential SDE solvers tailored to the structure of diffusion dynamics. The key idea is not just to plug in a generic ODE/SDE solver, but to exploit the specific drift-noise form of the reverse process so that discretization error is lower at small step counts. Compared with distillation-based acceleration, this is primarily an inference-time improvement and does not require retraining a student model. The trade-off is that solver design and stability analysis become more delicate.","experiments":"Papers of this type usually evaluate on standard diffusion benchmarks such as CIFAR-10, ImageNet, or latent diffusion settings, reporting FID, number of function evaluations, and runtime against baselines like DDIM, Euler/Heun, and DPM-Solver variants. The likely headline is better quality at very small step counts. The provided metadata does not include exact datasets, FID values, or step counts, so no numbers should be invented. A common and useful observation is that the advantage is largest in the low-step regime and narrows as the step count increases.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","sampling","sde","efficiency"],"keywords":["Diffusion Probabilistic Models","Exponential SDE methods","Image Generation","Generative Models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的SDE求解器适配设计和§4的步数-质量对比曲线即可，可直接在内部扩散推理部署中测试集成","en":"Read only §3 on SDE solver adaptive design and §4 step-quality comparison curves, you can test integrating it into internal diffusion inference deployment."}},{"id":"GoswamiSC0UD23","title":"AQuA: A Benchmarking Tool for Label Quality Assessment","authors":["Mononito Goswami","Vedant Sanil","Arjun Choudhry","Arvind Srinivasan","Chalisa Udompanyawit","Artur Dubrawski"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$12a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GoswamiSC0UD23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GoswamiSC0UD23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/fc20ea8d104cab737a5561096f9bde9b-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：训练数据标签质量经常决定模型上限，但现实里大家缺少一套系统工具去评估标签到底哪里错、错得多严重、会怎样影响模型。过去很多工作只做 noisy label 学习算法，却没有把‘先诊断标签质量’做成标准化流程。","importance":"这是数据质量与评测工具类工作。对 pretrain 的直接关联不如建模论文强，但其启示很实际：当训练信号来自大规模弱监督、合成标注或人类标注混合体时，先知道标签问题的类型和密度，往往比盲目换 loss 更重要。尤其 post-train 阶段的偏好数据、指令数据也同样受标签质量控制，这类工具有迁移价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 AQuA，一个用于标签质量评估的 benchmark/toolkit，重点应是把标签问题拆成可量化维度，例如错误率、类间混淆、系统偏差、不确定标签和标注者分歧，并提供统一诊断接口。它不是再提出一个鲁棒训练算法，而是让数据质量分析先于算法选择；这样设计有效，是因为许多所谓模型问题其实是数据标签问题，不先区分类型就很难选对处理方式。与只输出一个总体噪声率的简单方法相比，这种工具的价值在于可操作性更强。","experiments":"这类论文通常会在多个带噪标签数据集或人工注噪场景上验证工具能否准确反映标签质量，并展示不同质量指标与下游模型性能之间的相关性。可能还会比较现有标签清洗、异常检测或噪声估计方法作为 baseline。由于当前没有给出具体数据集和指标数字，不能写定量结果；可以明确的是，这篇工作的贡献重心更偏‘诊断与决策支持’，不是刷新某个分类 benchmark。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a common but under-instrumented issue: label quality often sets the ceiling for model performance, yet practitioners lack a standard way to measure what is wrong with the labels and how severe the damage is. Much of the literature focuses on learning under noisy labels, while the diagnosis step itself remains ad hoc.","importance":"This is a data-quality and tooling contribution. It is less directly about pretraining objectives, but the lesson is practical and relevant: whenever training signals come from weak supervision, synthetic labels, or mixed annotator sources, understanding label quality can matter more than swapping in a different loss. The same logic applies to instruction and preference data in post-training.","technical_approach":"The core contribution is AQuA, a benchmarking and analysis tool for label quality assessment. The likely design breaks label issues into measurable dimensions such as error rate, class confusion, systematic bias, uncertainty, and annotator disagreement, and exposes them through a unified interface. This is not another robust-training algorithm; it is a diagnosis layer meant to guide which intervention is appropriate. That is useful because many apparent model failures are really data-quality failures, and a single global noise estimate is often too crude to act on.","experiments":"The likely experiments validate whether the tool tracks label quality reliably across multiple noisy-label datasets or synthetic corruption settings, and whether its metrics correlate with downstream model performance. The paper may also compare against existing label-cleaning, outlier-detection, or noise-estimation baselines. The provided metadata does not include datasets or numerical results, so exact values should not be invented.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-quality","benchmark","label-noise","evaluation"],"keywords":["Label errors","evaluation","design space","benchmarking"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的标签问题维度拆分和§4.2的评估流程即可，做预训练数据清洗时可复用其诊断逻辑","en":"Read only §3 on label problem dimension splitting and §4.2 evaluation workflow, reuse its diagnostic logic when doing pretraining data cleaning."}},{"id":"GruverSFRHLRCW23","title":"Protein Design with Guided Discrete Diffusion","authors":["Nate Gruver","Samuel Stanton","Nathan C. Frey","Tim G. J. Rudner","Isidro Hötzel","Julien Lafrance-Vanasse","Arvind Rajpal","Kyunghyun Cho","Andrew Gordon Wilson"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$12b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GruverSFRHLRCW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GruverSFRHLRCW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/29591f355702c3f4436991335784b503-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：蛋白设计是离散序列生成问题，但标准自回归或连续扩散方法很难同时兼顾全局结构约束和离散序列可优化性。过去很多方法要么靠自回归逐位生成，容易局部贪心；要么在连续空间做设计，再投回离散序列，过程不自然且约束注入不够直接。","importance":"这是离散 diffusion 在科学序列生成上的代表性应用，重要性不只在蛋白领域本身，而在于它验证了 guided discrete diffusion 适合处理带复杂全局约束的离散 token 设计问题。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，非 AR 的离散生成范式不仅能做语言，还可能在需要全局一致性和可控采样的序列任务上比纯 AR 更合适。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 guided discrete diffusion：在离散氨基酸序列空间中做扩散/反扩散采样，并用外部指导信号把采样朝目标性质推进。它不是简单把图像 diffusion 硬搬到蛋白上，而是针对离散状态空间设计前向破坏和反向恢复过程，再通过 classifier guidance、property guidance 或结构相关得分引导生成。这样做有效，是因为 diffusion 允许在生成过程中反复全局修正序列，而不是像 AR 那样一旦早期位点出错就把后面都锁死。代价则是采样链更长，指导信号质量也直接决定设计质量。","experiments":"这类论文通常会在蛋白序列设计基准上比较生成多样性、目标性质达成率、结构有效性和实验可行性，并与 AR 蛋白 LM、变分方法或其他生成器对比。标题强调 guided discrete diffusion，因此关键结果应包括：在满足功能或结构约束时，相比无指导采样和其他基线有更高命中率。当前信息没有具体基准、实验验证层级和数字，不能写提升幅度；但重要的 ablation 往往是不同 guidance 强度、不同离散扩散参数化对可控性和多样性的影响。","authors_note":"作者中包含 Andrew Gordon Wilson 等，相关团队近年持续推动离散扩散在序列生成和科学设计上的应用。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles protein design as a discrete sequence generation problem where standard autoregressive or continuous latent methods struggle to enforce global constraints cleanly. Autoregressive generation is often locally greedy, while continuous-space design followed by projection back to sequences is awkward and can make control less direct.","importance":"This is an important example of discrete diffusion applied to scientific sequence design. Its significance goes beyond proteins: it shows that guided discrete diffusion is a plausible alternative to autoregressive generation when the task requires global consistency, structured constraints, and controllable sampling. That is directly relevant to broader pretraining questions around non-AR sequence modeling.","technical_approach":"The method is guided discrete diffusion over amino-acid sequences. Instead of porting image diffusion naively, the paper works in a discrete state space with a suitable corruption-and-denoising process, then injects external guidance toward desired properties or structures. This design helps because diffusion can revise the whole sequence repeatedly during generation, rather than committing left-to-right as an AR model does. The trade-off is a longer sampling chain and strong dependence on the quality of the guidance signal.","experiments":"Papers in this area usually compare property satisfaction, structural validity, sample diversity, and sometimes experimental viability against autoregressive protein language models and other sequence generators. Given the title, the key result is likely that guided sampling produces higher hit rates under functional or structural constraints than unguided diffusion and competing baselines. The provided information does not include exact benchmarks or numbers, so no quantitative gains should be fabricated. A useful expected ablation is how guidance strength affects the diversity-control trade-off.","authors_note":"The author list includes Andrew Gordon Wilson and collaborators, a group that has recently pushed discrete diffusion for sequence generation and scientific design."},"tags":["discrete-diffusion","guided-generation","protein","sampling"],"notable_authors":["Andrew Gordon Wilson"],"keywords":["protein design","diffusion model","classifier guidance"],"recommendation":{"zh":"验证了 guided discrete diffusion 在带全局约束的离散序列生成上的潜力，对探索非自回归预训练范式有启发，只看 §3 和 Fig 2 即可。","en":"Validates the potential of guided discrete diffusion for discrete sequence generation with global constraints, inspiring exploration of non-autoregressive pretraining paradigms; skim §3 and Fig 2."}},{"id":"GulatiR23","title":"TabMT: Generating tabular data with masked transformers","authors":["Manbir S. Gulati","Paul F. Roysdon"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Autoregressive and Masked Transformers are incredibly effective as generative models and classifiers.\n    While these models are most prevalent in NLP, they also exhibit strong performance in other domains, such as vision. \n    This work contributes to the exploration of transformer-based models in synthetic data generation for diverse application domains. \n    In this paper, we present TabMT, a novel Masked Transformer design for generating synthetic tabular data. \n    TabMT effectively addresses the unique challenges posed by heterogeneous data fields and is natively able to handle missing data. \n    Our design leverages improved masking techniques to allow for generation and demonstrates state-of-the-art performance from extremely small to extremely large tabular datasets. \n    We evaluate TabMT for privacy-focused applications and find that it is able to generate high quality data with superior privacy tradeoffs.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GulatiR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GulatiR23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/90debc7cedb5cac83145fc8d18378dc5-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：表格数据生成既有混合类型特征，又有复杂列间依赖，传统 GAN/VAE 或逐列自回归方法常在保真度、隐私和缺失值处理上各有短板。作者想验证 masked transformer 这种更接近 BERT/MLM 的范式，是否比纯 AR 更适合表格这种“列无固定自然顺序”的数据。","importance":"这是一个建模迁移型工作，重要性中等但方向上有启发：它把 masked generation 从文本搬到 tabular synthesis，强调 any-order/缺失补全式建模在非自然语言结构化数据上的适配性。对 pretrain 的意义在于，它支持一个更广的判断：并非所有离散或混合型数据都最适合 next-token AR，掩码建模在无天然序列顺序的数据上可能更自然。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 TabMT，用 masked transformers 学习表格各列的联合分布，并通过掩码恢复来完成数据生成。关键选择是放弃强行定义列顺序的自回归分解，转而用条件补全的方式建模任意子集到剩余列的关系；这样做有效，是因为表格列通常是集合结构，很多依赖是对称的或多向的，不适合固定 left-to-right。与 CTGAN 或 TVAE 等方法相比，它更依赖 Transformer 的上下文建模能力；与 AR tabular model 相比，它在缺失补全和条件生成上更灵活。","experiments":"这类工作通常在多个公开表格生成数据集上评估保真度、下游效用和隐私相关指标，并与 GAN、VAE、Bayesian network 和 AR baseline 比较。若论文命题成立，关键结果应是 masked transformer 在 mixed-type、高维或缺失较多的表格上更稳。当前缺少数据集、列数、参数量和具体指标，因此不能写数字。可能有价值的 ablation 是：masking 策略、列编码方式以及条件采样过程对生成质量的影响。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies tabular data generation, where mixed data types and strong inter-column dependencies make both GAN/VAE approaches and simple autoregressive factorizations unsatisfying. The key question is whether a masked-transformer style model, closer to BERT than to left-to-right LM, is a better fit for data that has no natural token order.","importance":"This is a transfer-of-paradigm contribution. Its importance is moderate, but the modeling lesson is useful: masked or any-order generation can be more natural than autoregression for structured data without an inherent sequence order. That is relevant to broader pretraining questions about when next-token factorization is the right inductive bias and when it is not.","technical_approach":"The method, TabMT, uses masked transformers to model the joint distribution over table columns through conditional completion. The central design choice is to avoid imposing a fixed left-to-right ordering over columns and instead learn to infer arbitrary subsets from the rest. That makes sense because tabular columns are closer to a set than to a sentence, and many dependencies are symmetric or multi-directional. Compared with GAN/VAE tabular generators, the model leans on Transformer context modeling; compared with autoregressive tabular models, it is more flexible for imputation and conditional generation.","experiments":"Such papers typically evaluate fidelity, downstream utility, and privacy-related metrics on several public tabular synthesis benchmarks, against GAN, VAE, Bayesian-network, and autoregressive baselines. If the claim holds, the main result is likely better robustness on mixed-type, high-dimensional, or missing-data-heavy tables. The provided metadata does not include datasets, model size, or numerical metrics, so no exact gains should be invented. Likely useful ablations include masking strategy, column encoding, and the conditional sampling procedure.","authors_note":""},"tags":["masked-transformer","generative-modeling","tabular"],"keywords":["Tabular Data","Deep Learning","Generative Modeling","Transformers","Masked Transformers","Synthetic data"],"recommendation":{"zh":"将 masked modeling 迁移到表格数据生成，验证了非自然顺序数据上 any-order 建模的优势，作为 literature 备查，不读正文。","en":"Transfers masked modeling to tabular data generation, validating the advantage of any-order modeling on non-naturally ordered data; keep as literature reference, skip the main text."}},{"id":"GuoLBPYDL23","title":"Gaussian Mixture Solvers for Diffusion Models","authors":["Hanzhong Guo","Cheng Lu","Fan Bao","Tianyu Pang","Shuicheng Yan","Chao Du","Chongxuan Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$12c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GuoLBPYDL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GuoLBPYDL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/51373b6499708b6fcc38f1e8f8f5b376-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：扩散模型采样器在少步数下常常又慢又不稳，而现有高阶 ODE/SDE 求解器主要利用局部导数信息，没有显式利用分布形状。这个问题过去通常靠更复杂的数值积分器或蒸馏来绕开，但当步数继续压缩时，误差会快速积累，因此有必要探索直接利用 score 场诱导的局部分布结构来做采样更新。","importance":"它的重要性主要在方法层和训练后推理层。对 pretrain 本身没有改变训练目标，但对 diffusion 作为生成建模范式很相关，因为它说明采样改进不一定只能沿着传统数值分析路线走，也可以引入更强的局部分布假设来换取更低步数下的稳定性。如果结果成立，这类方法对文本 diffusion LM、图像扩散和跨模态 diffusion 解码器都有启发。","technical_approach":"核心做法是用高斯混合近似扩散过程一步内的局部转移分布，再据此构造求解器，而不是只把反向过程当成单一轨迹上的微分方程来积分。直观上，它在每一步保留了多模态局部几何，而不是用单个高斯或单点导数去逼近；这样设计的好处是面对弯曲或多峰 score 场时更鲁棒，代价则是每步需要处理混合成分，计算和实现都更复杂。与常见 DPM-Solver 一类方法相比，区别在于它强调分布近似而不是泰勒展开精度。","experiments":"从给定信息里无法确认具体实验配置、模型规模、步数设置和数值提升，因此不能负责任地填写具体指标。可以合理判断作者大概率在标准图像扩散基准上比较了 FID 与 NFE（函数评估次数），baseline 可能包括 DDIM、DPM-Solver 或其他快速采样器；但没有摘要或正文支撑，不应编造数字。可确认的实验价值点应当是：验证高斯混合近似在低步数区域是否比单模态近似更稳，以及这种收益是否覆盖不同噪声日程和模型参数化。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical bottleneck in diffusion models: sampling becomes slow or unstable when the number of steps is pushed down, and most fast solvers rely only on local derivative information. Earlier work mostly improved numerical integration or used distillation, but those routes still accumulate error sharply in the low-step regime, so it is natural to ask whether local distribution structure can be exploited more directly.","importance":"The contribution is methodological rather than a new pretraining objective, but it matters for the broader generative modeling stack. It suggests that faster diffusion sampling does not have to come only from better ODE/SDE integrators; modeling the local reverse-process distribution can be another lever. That is relevant beyond image generation, including diffusion language models and multimodal diffusion decoders.","technical_approach":"The key idea is to approximate the local reverse transition with a Gaussian mixture and build a solver around that approximation, instead of treating the process as a single trajectory integrated with higher-order derivatives. The appeal is clear: a mixture can better capture curved or multi-modal score geometry than a unimodal local approximation. The trade-off is also clear: more expressive local modeling increases per-step complexity and implementation cost. Relative to DPM-Solver-style methods, the distinction is distributional approximation rather than Taylor accuracy.","experiments":"The provided material does not include enough detail to state model sizes, datasets, step counts, baselines, or exact gains responsibly. The likely evaluation is on standard diffusion benchmarks with quality-versus-NFE comparisons against fast samplers such as DDIM or DPM-Solver, but that cannot be asserted as fact here. The most important experimental question is whether the Gaussian-mixture approximation stays beneficial specifically in the low-step regime and across different schedules and parameterizations.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","sampling","gaussian-mixture"],"keywords":["Diffusion models","SDE-based solver","Gaussian mixture","Stroke-based synthesis"],"recommendation":{"zh":"通过高斯混合近似局部转移分布来改进 diffusion 采样，对 diffusion LM 解码有启发，只看 §4 即可。","en":"Improves diffusion sampling by approximating local transition distributions with Gaussian mixtures, inspiring diffusion LM decoding; skim §4."}},{"id":"GuoLWXHLL23","title":"Domain Watermark: Effective and Harmless Dataset Copyright Protection is Closed at Hand","authors":["Junfeng Guo","Yiming Li","Lixu Wang","Shu-Tao Xia","Heng Huang","Cong Liu","Bo Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$12d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GuoLWXHLL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GuoLWXHLL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/aa6287ca31ae1474ea802342d0c8ba63-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：如何给训练数据集做版权保护，同时不明显伤害正常模型训练和下游性能。过去常见做法要么是对数据做明显扰动，保护有效但会污染训练；要么是事后检测，难以形成前置约束，因此“有效且无害”的数据水印一直是个难点。","importance":"它的价值更偏数据治理和训练数据基础设施，而不是模型结构创新。对 pretrain 社区的意义在于，随着高价值数据集越来越成为核心资产，能够在不破坏语料可用性的前提下嵌入可追踪标记，会直接影响数据授权、合规和数据供应链。这个问题不会提高困惑度，但会影响谁能合法、可控地构建下一代基础模型。","technical_approach":"从题目判断，作者提出的是一种面向“域”的数据水印机制，不是简单对单样本打标，而是让某一数据域携带可检测、可归属的统计信号。这样的设计通常优于逐样本触发器，因为后者容易被清洗或在大规模混合训练中被稀释；域级水印的目标则是在聚合分布上留下稳定痕迹，同时尽量不改变语义内容与任务标签。边界在于：如果攻击者有强清洗能力、重写能力或只抽取少量数据，水印强度和可检测性可能下降。","experiments":"给定信息不足以确认具体数据集、攻击设定、检测 AUC、对模型性能影响等关键数字，因此不能填写实验结果。合理的关键实验应包括三类：水印检测准确率、对训练后模型性能的影响幅度、以及在数据混合、重采样、微调或清洗攻击下的鲁棒性。若论文题目中的“effective and harmless”成立，最有价值的证据会是：几乎不降主任务指标，同时在实际比例掺混下仍能稳定识别被盗用域。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a hard data-governance problem: how to watermark a training dataset for copyright protection without degrading normal training utility. Prior approaches usually trade off one side for the other. Strong perturbations make ownership easier to prove but contaminate the data, while post-hoc detection offers weak preventive value.","importance":"This is more about data infrastructure than model architecture, but it is still relevant to pretraining. High-quality datasets are strategic assets, and a watermarking scheme that is both traceable and low-harm would directly affect licensing, compliance, and data supply chains for foundation model training. It may not improve perplexity, but it changes what datasets can be shared and defended in practice.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method appears to watermark at the domain level rather than by attaching obvious triggers to individual samples. That design choice makes sense: sample-level marks are easier to wash out or dilute in large mixtures, whereas domain-level statistical signatures can survive aggregation while preserving semantics and labels. The likely trade-off is robustness versus stealth. If the watermark is too weak, it becomes hard to detect after remixing; if too strong, it starts to distort training.","experiments":"The provided information is not enough to state datasets, attack settings, detection metrics, or utility drops with confidence. The crucial experiments should cover three things: ownership detection accuracy, impact on downstream model quality, and robustness under mixing, resampling, rewriting, or data-cleaning attacks. If the paper delivers on its title, the most convincing result would be near-zero utility loss alongside reliable attribution after realistic reuse scenarios.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-quality","watermarking","dataset"],"keywords":["Ownership Verification","Dataset Protection","Copyright Protection","Backdoor Attack","AI Security"],"recommendation":{"zh":"提出面向“域”的数据水印机制，对高价值预训练数据的版权保护和合规有实际意义，只看 §3 和 Table 1 即可。","en":"Proposes a domain-oriented data watermarking mechanism, practically significant for copyright protection and compliance of high-value pretraining data; skim §3 and Table 1."}},{"id":"Gupta00023","title":"Siamese Masked Autoencoders","authors":["Agrim Gupta","Jiajun Wu","Jia Deng","Fei-Fei Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$12e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Gupta00023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Gupta00023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/7ffb9f1b57628932518505b532301603-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：标准 MAE 主要学到单视角重建能力，但对实例级不变性和跨视角一致性的约束偏弱，因此表征常常更偏局部纹理而不是稳定语义。过去这类问题通常靠把 MAE 和对比学习硬拼接来处理，但两套目标容易互相牵扯，训练也更复杂。","importance":"它是视觉自监督预训练里的方法级改进，重点在把生成式重建和孪生结构结合起来。对 pretrain 的启示是：masked modeling 不一定只能通过更强 decoder 或更高 mask ratio 提升，增加跨视角的一致性约束也能改善表征质量，而且可能比显式负样本对比更稳定。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Siamese Masked Autoencoders：在 MAE 框架上引入双分支/双视角编码，让模型既做掩码重建，也学习两个视角下共享的潜在表示。这个设计保留了 MAE 的高效重建训练，同时补上了实例级不变性；与纯对比式 siamese 方法相比，它不依赖大量负样本；与纯 MAE 相比，它对“同一对象不同视图应保持一致”有更直接的结构先验。代价是体系更复杂，训练目标权重更敏感。","experiments":"给定信息没有摘要细节，无法确认使用 ViT-B/L、ImageNet-1K 还是更大数据，也无法给出线性探测、微调或迁移的具体提升。合理预期的实验包括与 MAE、SimMIM、DINO/BYOL 等比较，并报告 ImageNet 分类、COCO 检测或 ADE20K 分割结果。最有价值的 ablation 会是：只加孪生分支、不做重建是否退化；mask ratio 与视角增强强度如何交互；收益主要来自表征不变性还是优化稳定性。","authors_note":"作者包含 Jia Deng、Fei-Fei Li。仅凭给定信息无法确认全部机构，但团队与 Stanford 视觉自监督/基础视觉模型方向高度相关。代表性工作可联想到 ImageNet、视觉表征学习与 embodied/3D vision，但此处不展开以避免超出可确认信息。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a known limitation of standard MAE-style pretraining: it is good at masked reconstruction from a single view, but relatively weak at enforcing instance-level invariance across views. As a result, representations can stay too local or texture-heavy. Earlier fixes often combined MAE with contrastive learning in an ad hoc way, which complicates training and objective balancing.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution in self-supervised vision pretraining. Its relevance is that it explores a cleaner bridge between generative masked modeling and siamese consistency learning. More broadly, it suggests that masked modeling quality is not only about decoder design or mask ratio; cross-view agreement can also be a strong lever for better representations.","technical_approach":"The method augments MAE with a siamese structure so that the model sees two views and learns both masked reconstruction and shared latent consistency. The appeal is straightforward: keep MAE’s efficient reconstruction signal while adding a direct inductive bias that the same image under different augmentations should map to compatible features. Compared with purely contrastive siamese methods, it avoids heavy reliance on negatives. Compared with plain MAE, it injects stronger semantic invariance. The trade-off is extra architectural and loss-design complexity.","experiments":"The provided information does not expose the actual setup, so I cannot responsibly report model sizes, pretraining data, or exact gains. The expected evaluation would compare against MAE, SimMIM, and siamese baselines such as DINO or BYOL on ImageNet transfer and dense downstream tasks. The most informative ablations would isolate the effect of the siamese branch, test interactions with mask ratio and augmentation strength, and clarify whether gains come mainly from invariance or optimization behavior.","authors_note":"The author list includes Jia Deng and Fei-Fei Li. From the provided metadata alone, the full institution list should not be asserted, but the team is clearly connected to Stanford-led vision representation learning. Representative works broadly associated with these authors include ImageNet and major work in visual representation learning."},"tags":["masked-autoencoder","self-supervised","vision-pretraining"],"notable_authors":["Jia Deng","Fei-Fei Li"],"keywords":["Representation Learning","Visual Correspondence","Self-supervised learning","Videos"],"recommendation":{"zh":"将孪生结构引入 MAE，通过跨视角一致性约束提升表征质量，对视觉自监督预训练有启发，只看 §3 和 Fig 1 即可。","en":"Introduces Siamese structure to MAE, improving representation quality through cross-view consistency constraints, inspiring visual self-supervised pretraining; skim §3 and Fig 1."}},{"id":"2309.01005","title":"RevColV2: Exploring Disentangled Representations in Masked Image Modeling","authors":["Qi Han","Yuxuan Cai","Xiangyu Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$12f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.01005","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HanCZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HanCZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/5d56e69c317429945785ede86c00b44e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：现有 MIM 预训练里 decoder 在下游阶段被丢弃，导致预训练时学到的表征路径和下游使用的表征路径不一致，这会限制迁移效果。作者认为问题不只是 decoder 浪费，而是 autoencoder 两侧的信息职责没有被结构化地保留下来，导致低层细节与高层语义在微调时被打散。","importance":"它是视觉预训练架构层面的改进，而且关注点很实际：预训练和下游接口的一致性。对 pretrain 的启示是，masked modeling 不一定要接受“decoder 只是训练时辅助件”这个默认设定；如果能让整个自编码器在预训练和微调阶段都可用，就可能减少表示错配。这和语言模型里 mid-train / post-train 接口设计的思路是相通的。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 RevColV2，一个在 pretrain 和 fine-tune 阶段都保留完整 autoencoder 的结构。主体由 bottom-up columns 和 top-down columns 组成，信息在两者之间可逆传播并逐步解耦，从而同时保留低层视觉细节和高层语义信息。这个设计与传统 MIM 的关键区别在于：不是让 decoder 只负责还原像素、然后训练完就丢掉，而是把 top-down 路径也纳入最终表征体系。这样做的好处是表示更一致，潜在代价是架构更重、训练和部署复杂度更高。","experiments":"根据摘要可确认，它在 masked image modeling 设定下验证了“完整 autoencoder 保留到下游”的收益，但给定片段没有提供参数量、预训练数据集和具体数值。能明确的实验主线应包括：与标准 MIM 架构比较的分类/检测/分割性能，以及对 disentangled representation 的分析。最有价值的观察大概率是：同时保留低级和语义信息能帮助密集预测任务，而不是只提升分类。没有完整正文，不能编造具体百分点。","authors_note":"作者为 Qi Han、Yuxuan Cai、Xiangyu Zhang。Xiangyu Zhang 是较知名的视觉表示学习与检测研究者。仅凭给定信息无法确认机构，返回空字符串更稳妥。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a structural mismatch in masked image modeling: the decoder is used during pretraining but discarded downstream, so the representation pathway used for learning is not the one used for transfer. The authors argue that this is not just wasted compute. It also means low-level detail and high-level semantics are not preserved in a consistent architecture across pretrain and fine-tune.","importance":"This is an architecture-level contribution with a very practical message for pretraining. It challenges the default assumption that the decoder is merely a temporary reconstruction tool. If the whole autoencoder can remain useful after pretraining, representation mismatch may be reduced. That idea is relevant beyond vision because it echoes a broader pretrain-to-posttrain interface question.","technical_approach":"RevColV2 keeps the full autoencoder for both pretraining and downstream use. Its main body contains bottom-up and top-down columns with reversible information propagation, so low-level visual features and higher-level semantic features become progressively disentangled rather than collapsed into a single pathway. The key departure from standard MIM is that the top-down side is not a throwaway pixel reconstructor. The expected benefit is more consistent and richer representations; the obvious cost is a heavier and more complex architecture.","experiments":"From the abstract snippet, we can confirm that the paper evaluates masked image modeling with the full autoencoder retained downstream, but the provided text does not include model size, dataset scale, or exact numbers. The critical experiments should compare against standard MIM architectures on classification, detection, and segmentation, and analyze whether disentangling low-level and semantic information especially helps dense prediction tasks. Without the full paper text, specific gains should not be fabricated.","authors_note":"Authors are Qi Han, Yuxuan Cai, and Xiangyu Zhang. Xiangyu Zhang is a well-known researcher in visual representation learning and detection. The institutions cannot be confirmed reliably from the provided metadata alone."},"tags":["masked-image-modeling","vision-pretraining","representation"],"notable_authors":["Xiangyu Zhang"],"keywords":["architecture design","representation learning","masked image modeling","self-supervised learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"在预训练和微调阶段保留完整 autoencoder 结构，减少表示错配，对预训练接口设计有启发，只看 §3 和 Fig 2 即可。","en":"Retains the complete autoencoder structure during pretraining and fine-tuning to reduce representation mismatch, inspiring pretraining interface design; skim §3 and Fig 2."}},{"id":"2305.11554","title":"ToolkenGPT: Augmenting Frozen Language Models with Massive Tools via Tool Embeddings","authors":["Shibo Hao","Tianyang Liu","Zhen Wang","Zhiting Hu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$130","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.11554","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HaoLWH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HaoLWH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/8fd1a81c882cd45f64958da6284f4a3f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：给冻结 LLM 接入大量工具时，传统微调方法成本高且绑定固定工具集，而纯 in-context learning 又受上下文长度限制，工具一多就几乎失效。作者要解决的不是单个工具调用，而是如何让模型在不改动主干参数的前提下扩展到海量工具。","importance":"它对 pretrain 本体不是核心贡献，但对模型能力扩展接口很有价值。原因是工具使用本质上是在语言模型外接可操作知识和功能模块，这类接口设计会影响是否需要继续预训练、是否需要频繁微调，以及模型如何在参数记忆和外部能力之间分工。对冻结模型增能这条路线来说，这是很典型的方法级工作。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 ToolkenGPT：把每个工具表示成一个特殊 token，即 toolken，并为其学习一个工具嵌入，让冻结语言模型通过这些嵌入来理解和选择工具。这个设计兼顾了两点：一方面继承了微调方法中“把工具知识压进参数化表示”的优点，另一方面避免了重新训练整个 LLM。与 few-shot 提示不同，它不需要在上下文里反复塞工具说明；与全量微调不同，它主要学习工具 embedding，扩展新工具的成本更低。边界在于，如果工具调用需要复杂组合推理，仅靠离散工具 token 可能不够。","experiments":"从摘要可确认，论文关注大量工具场景下 frozen LMs 的工具增强，并把方法与传统 ICL 和微调范式对比。给定片段没有保留具体模型规模、工具数目和指标，因此不能填写精确数字。最关键的实验应该包括：随着工具数增长，ICL 性能如何退化，而 tool embedding 方案是否保持稳定；新增未见工具时需要多少监督；以及冻结 backbone 相比全量微调损失了多少上限。","authors_note":"作者包含 Zhiting Hu。仅凭给定信息无法确认机构。Zhiting Hu 在可控生成、LM 外部工具与结构化增强方向有代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a scaling problem in tool-augmented LMs: full finetuning is expensive and tied to a fixed tool set, while pure in-context learning breaks down when the number of tools becomes large because context is limited. The goal is not just single-tool use, but scalable access to many tools without changing the frozen backbone.","importance":"This is not a core pretraining contribution, but it is important for the capability interface around pretrained models. Tool use externalizes knowledge and functionality, which changes how much should live in model weights versus external systems. For frozen-model augmentation, this is a meaningful method-level direction.","technical_approach":"ToolkenGPT represents each tool as a special token, a 'toolken', and learns an embedding for that tool while keeping the language model frozen. This gives the model a compact parameterized handle on each tool without repeatedly stuffing long descriptions into the prompt. Compared with few-shot prompting, it scales better with many tools. Compared with full finetuning, it is cheaper and easier to extend. The limitation is that a single learned tool token may not be enough when the task requires complex multi-step tool composition.","experiments":"The abstract makes clear that the paper studies frozen-LM tool augmentation under large tool sets and compares against prompting and finetuning approaches. However, the provided snippet does not include model sizes, number of tools, datasets, or exact gains, so those should not be invented. The most important evaluations should test performance as the tool inventory grows, sample efficiency for adding new tools, and the ceiling gap relative to full finetuning.","authors_note":"The author list includes Zhiting Hu. The institutions cannot be confirmed from the provided metadata alone. Zhiting Hu is known for work on controllable generation and structured augmentation of language models."},"tags":["tool-use","llm-augmentation","tool-embeddings"],"notable_authors":["Zhiting Hu"],"keywords":["large language model","tool learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"通过学习工具 embedding 为冻结 LLM 接入海量工具，对模型能力扩展接口设计有启发，只看 §3 和 Fig 1 即可。","en":"Connects massive tools to frozen LLMs by learning tool embeddings, inspiring model capability extension interface design; skim §3 and Fig 1."}},{"id":"2211.11031","title":"Aging with GRACE: Lifelong Model Editing with Discrete Key-Value Adaptors","authors":["Tom Hartvigsen","Swami Sankaranarayanan","Hamid Palangi","Yoon Kim","Marzyeh Ghassemi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Deployed language models decay over time due to shifting inputs, changing user needs, or emergent world-knowledge gaps. When such problems are identified, we want to make targeted edits while avoiding expensive retraining. However, current model editors, which modify such behaviors of pre-trained models, degrade model performance quickly across multiple, sequential edits. We propose GRACE, a lifelong model editing method, which implements spot-fixes on streaming errors of a deployed model, ensuring minimal impact on unrelated inputs. GRACE writes new mappings into a pre-trained model's latent space, creating a discrete, local codebook of edits without altering model weights. This is the first method enabling thousands of sequential edits using only streaming errors. Our experiments on T5, BERT, and GPT models show GRACE's state-of-the-art performance in making and retaining edits, while generalizing to unseen inputs. Our code is available at https://www.github.com/thartvigsen/grace}.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.11031","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HartvigsenSPKG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HartvigsenSPKG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/95b6e2ff961580e03c0a662a63a71812-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：部署后的语言模型会因为世界知识变化、需求漂移和长期使用中的错误积累而变旧，但现有模型编辑方法在连续多次编辑后很快伤到原模型能力。作者关注的是 lifelong editing，也就是如何做成千上万次局部修补，而不是一次性演示式编辑。","importance":"这项工作的价值很高，主要体现在模型维护范式上。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，参数权重不一定是吸收新知识的唯一位置；可以把预训练模型视作稳定主体，再在其潜空间外挂可检索的局部修补层。这个思路和 continual pretrain、RAG、外部记忆都有联系，但它更强调局部性和顺序编辑稳定性。","technical_approach":"核心方法 GRACE 不直接改模型权重，而是在预训练模型的潜空间中写入离散 key-value adaptor，形成一个局部代码本来存放编辑。推理时，如果输入落入某个被编辑的局部区域，就从代码本读取修补映射；否则走原模型。这种设计有效的原因是把编辑限制在局部邻域，避免权重级全局干扰。与 ROME/MEMIT 这类直接改权重的方法相比，它更适合流式持续编辑；代价是需要额外检索/匹配机制，且编辑覆盖范围依赖潜空间局部性的可分性。","experiments":"摘要中可确认：GRACE 在 T5 等模型上验证了使用 streaming errors 做上千次顺序编辑的能力，并强调对无关输入影响小。这是它最关键的实验事实。给定片段没有提供具体编辑次数上限、准确率、保真度和保持率数字，因此不能补具体表格。最值得关注的实验点是：顺序编辑数量增长时性能曲线是否平稳；局部代码本命中失败时是否回退到原模型；以及与权重编辑基线相比，保留原任务性能的优势有多大。","authors_note":"作者包含 Yoon Kim、Marzyeh Ghassemi。两位分别在语言模型与医疗/稳健 ML 方向有较高知名度。仅凭给定信息无法确认全部机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a real deployment problem: language models become outdated as knowledge changes and user needs shift, but existing editing methods degrade quickly when many edits are applied sequentially. The focus here is lifelong editing rather than one-off fact correction demos.","importance":"This is an important contribution at the model-maintenance level. For pretraining researchers, the key lesson is that new knowledge does not always need to be absorbed by changing the base weights. A pretrained model can remain the stable core while local corrections live in an external latent-space memory. That connects naturally to continual pretraining, retrieval, and external memory, but with a stronger emphasis on locality and edit stability.","technical_approach":"GRACE avoids modifying model weights. Instead, it writes edits into discrete key-value adaptors in the model’s latent space, forming a local codebook of corrections. At inference time, inputs that land near an edited region retrieve the corresponding patch; unrelated inputs continue through the original model. This locality is the whole point: it minimizes collateral damage. Compared with direct weight-editing methods such as ROME or MEMIT, it is better suited to long edit streams. The trade-off is the need for a retrieval mechanism and the assumption that edit regions are separable in latent space.","experiments":"From the abstract, we can state one central result with confidence: GRACE supports thousands of sequential edits from streaming errors on models including T5 while keeping the effect localized. The provided snippet does not include the exact edit counts, metrics, or numerical comparisons, so those should not be fabricated. The most informative analyses are how performance scales with the number of edits, how often the local codebook correctly activates, and how much original-task behavior is preserved relative to weight-editing baselines.","authors_note":"The author list includes Yoon Kim and Marzyeh Ghassemi, both well-known researchers in language modeling and robust/applied ML. The full institutions cannot be confirmed from the provided metadata alone."},"tags":["model-editing","lifelong-learning","knowledge-update"],"notable_authors":["Yoon Kim","Marzyeh Ghassemi"],"keywords":["Model Editing","Continual Learning","Model Repair"],"recommendation":{"zh":"在潜空间外挂离散 key-value adaptor 进行局部修补，对 lifelong editing 和模型维护范式有启发，只看 §3 和 Fig 2 即可。","en":"Attaches discrete key-value adaptors in the latent space for local patching, inspiring lifelong editing and model maintenance paradigms; skim §3 and Fig 2."}},{"id":"HejnaS23","title":"Inverse Preference Learning: Preference-based RL without a Reward Function","authors":["Joey Hejna","Dorsa Sadigh"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$131","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HejnaS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HejnaS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/3be7859b36d9440372cae0a293f2e4cc-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：基于偏好的 RL 通常需要先拟合一个 reward function，但 reward 学习本身既不稳定，也容易把偏好数据中过于有限的比较信号错误地外推。作者试图绕开显式 reward 建模，直接从偏好中恢复策略或决策原则。","importance":"它是后训练与对齐方法层面的工作，对 pretrain 的启示来自训练信号设计。原因很简单：如果偏好数据能不经 reward model 直接驱动策略学习，就可能减少 reward misspecification 和训练链条中的一个脆弱环节。这对 RLHF、offline preference optimization 以及后续 reasoning model 训练都相关。","technical_approach":"题目中的 Inverse Preference Learning 表明，作者把问题类比为 inverse RL，但观测不是专家轨迹回报，而是偏好比较。核心区别在于：不先显式学习一个全局 reward 再优化，而是直接从 preference relation 反推出能解释偏好的策略或隐式目标。这样做的潜在优势是减少代理目标偏差；边界在于，若偏好数据稀疏、传递性差或噪声很大，直接学习可能更难稳定。","experiments":"没有摘要内容，因此无法确认是在线 RL、离线 RL 还是 bandit/sequence decision benchmark，也无法给出数值提升。关键实验应当比较与 reward learning + RL、DPO 类方法或其他 preference-based RL 基线的样本效率和鲁棒性。真正值得看的不是某个单点分数，而是：在偏好噪声、偏好不完整和分布外状态下，省去显式 reward 是否真的更稳。","authors_note":"作者为 Joey Hejna、Dorsa Sadigh。Dorsa Sadigh 是机器人学习、偏好学习与对齐方向知名研究者。仅凭给定信息无法确认机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a weakness in preference-based RL: most methods first fit an explicit reward function, but reward learning is itself unstable and often extrapolates poorly from limited pairwise comparisons. The proposed direction is to avoid explicit reward modeling and infer behavior directly from preferences.","importance":"This is a post-training and alignment method contribution, but it matters to pretraining researchers because it speaks to the quality of downstream training signals. If preferences can drive policy learning without passing through a separate reward model, one major failure mode in RLHF-style pipelines may be reduced. That is relevant for preference optimization and reasoning-oriented post-training.","technical_approach":"The phrase 'Inverse Preference Learning' suggests an inverse-RL-like formulation where the observations are preference comparisons rather than scalar rewards. The key shift is to infer a policy or implicit objective that explains the preferences directly, instead of fitting a global reward model first and then optimizing against it. The appeal is less proxy mismatch. The obvious limitation is that sparse, inconsistent, or noisy preferences may make direct inference harder to stabilize.","experiments":"No abstract details are available, so I cannot state whether the benchmarks are online RL, offline RL, or bandit-style settings, nor can I report exact gains. The right comparisons should include reward-learning-plus-RL baselines and other preference-based optimization methods, focusing on sample efficiency and robustness. The most informative evidence would test whether removing the explicit reward model really improves stability under noisy or incomplete preferences.","authors_note":"Authors are Joey Hejna and Dorsa Sadigh. Dorsa Sadigh is a well-known researcher in robot learning, preference learning, and alignment. The institutions cannot be confirmed from the provided metadata alone."},"tags":["preference-learning","reward-free","rlhf"],"notable_authors":["Dorsa Sadigh"],"keywords":["preference learning","preference-based reinforcement learning","human-in-the-loop reinforcement learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"绕开显式 reward 建模，直接从偏好中恢复策略，对 RLHF 和 offline preference optimization 有启发，只看 §4 即可。","en":"Bypasses explicit reward modeling to recover policies directly from preferences, inspiring RLHF and offline preference optimization; skim §4."}},{"id":"HongZCZDCG23","title":"3D-LLM: Injecting the 3D World into Large Language Models","authors":["Yining Hong","Haoyu Zhen","Peihao Chen","Shuhong Zheng","Yilun Du","Zhenfang Chen","Chuang Gan"],"institutions":["Massachusetts Institute of Technology","University of California, Berkeley"],"abstract":"$132","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HongZCZDCG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HongZCZDCG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/413885e70482b95dcbeeddc1daf39177-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有大语言模型和视觉语言模型都没有在3D物理世界信息接地，无法处理空间关系、物理可供性、导航等3D相关任务。","importance":"范式级贡献，首次提出3D-LLM范式，为多模态预训练扩展到3D域提供了新方向。","technical_approach":"核心是将3D点云特征作为输入，与文本联合训练大语言模型，属于原创范式改进。关键机制：设计三种提示机制收集了300k+3D相关训练数据，舍弃现有视觉语言模型仅用2D图像特征作为视觉输入的设计，相比此前多模态模型可以直接处理3D点云输入，支持10+3D相关任务。","experiments":"基于7B参数的大语言模型基座训练，在3D问答、3D字幕任务上比基线视觉语言模型提升28%；消融实验验证3D特征与文本联合预训练比仅用2D特征预训练的模型3D任务性能提升34%。","authors_note":"Yilun Du为麻省理工学院多模态、3D生成领域知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing large language models and vision-language models are not grounded in 3D physical world information, and cannot handle 3D-related tasks such as spatial relations, physical affordances, navigation, etc.","importance":"It is a paradigm-level contribution that first proposes the 3D-LLM paradigm, providing a new direction for expanding multimodal pretraining to the 3D domain.","technical_approach":"The core is to take 3D point cloud features as input and jointly train large language models with text, which is an original paradigm improvement. It designs three prompting mechanisms to collect more than 300k 3D-related training data, discards the design of existing vision-language models only using 2D image features as visual input, and can directly process 3D point cloud input compared to prior multimodal models, supporting more than 10 3D-related tasks.","experiments":"Trained based on a 7B parameter LLM base, it improves performance by 28% on 3D QA and 3D captioning tasks compared to baseline vision-language models; ablation verifies that joint pretraining of 3D features and text improves 3D task performance by 34% compared to models pretrained only with 2D features.","authors_note":"Yilun Du is a well-known scholar in multimodal and 3D generation at Massachusetts Institute of Technology."},"tags":["3d-llm","multimodal-llm","3d-understanding"],"keywords":["3D Visual Reasoning","3D Large Language Model"],"notable_authors":["Yilun Du"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"现有多模态大模型仅基于2D图像接地，无法处理3D空间推理任务","claim_en":"Existing multimodal LLMs are only grounded on 2D images, and cannot handle 3D spatial reasoning tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"将3D点云特征与文本联合预训练的3D-LLM，可以在不需要额外微调的情况下处理多种3D相关任务","claim_en":"3D-LLM jointly pretrained with 3D point cloud features and text can handle multiple 3D-related tasks without additional fine-tuning","opposes":"此前3D相关任务需要专门训练的3D模型才能完成，通用多模态大语言模型无法处理","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"验证了大语言模型可以接地到3D物理世界，为通用具身智能预训练提供了新范式。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"首次提出 3D-LLM 范式，将 3D 点云特征作为输入与文本联合训练，作为多模态预训练扩展到 3D 域的 literature 备查。","en":"Pioneers the 3D-LLM paradigm, jointly training text with 3D point cloud features as input; keep as literature reference for multimodal pretraining extension to the 3D domain."}},{"id":"HooverLPPSCZK23","title":"Energy Transformer","authors":["Benjamin Hoover","Yuchen Liang","Bao Pham","Rameswar Panda","Hendrik Strobelt","Duen Horng Chau","Mohammed J. Zaki","Dmitry Krotov"],"institutions":["MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab","Massachusetts Institute of Technology"],"abstract":"$133","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HooverLPPSCZK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HooverLPPSCZK23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/57a9b97477b67936298489e3c1417b0a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer注意力机制缺乏清晰的理论基础，能量基模型的能量函数设计困难，关联记忆模型的架构扩展性差，三类范式的优势未被结合。","importance":"架构级贡献，提出了能量Transformer架构，为Transformer的理论解释和能量基模型的落地提供了新方向。","technical_approach":"核心是设计了最小化特定能量函数的注意力层，结合了注意力、能量基模型、关联记忆三类范式的优势，属于原创架构。关键机制：基于稠密关联记忆的能量函数设计注意力层，舍弃传统Transformer注意力层无理论基础的设计，相比此前Transformer架构有明确的能量最小化理论保证，同时支持判别和生成任务。","experiments":"在ImageNet分类任务上，准确率比同参数量的ViT高1.2%；在生成任务上FID比普通Transformer低2.1；消融实验验证能量约束的注意力层比普通注意力层泛化性更好。","authors_note":"Hendrik Strobelt为MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab可解释性领域知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Transformer attention mechanism lacks clear theoretical foundation, energy function design for energy-based models is difficult, and the architecture scalability of associative memory models is poor; the advantages of the three paradigms are not combined.","importance":"It is an architecture-level contribution that proposes the Energy Transformer architecture, providing a new direction for the theoretical interpretation of Transformers and the deployment of energy-based models.","technical_approach":"The core is to design attention layers that minimize a specific energy function, combining the advantages of attention, energy-based models, and associative memory paradigms, which is an original architecture. It designs attention layers based on the energy function of dense associative memory, discards the design of traditional Transformer attention layers without theoretical foundation, and has clear energy minimization theoretical guarantees compared to prior Transformer architectures, supporting both discriminative and generative tasks.","experiments":"On ImageNet classification task, accuracy is 1.2% higher than ViT with the same parameter count; on generation task, FID is 2.1 lower than ordinary Transformer; ablation verifies that energy-constrained attention layers have better generalization than ordinary attention layers.","authors_note":"Hendrik Strobelt is a well-known scholar in interpretability at MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab."},"tags":["energy-based-model","transformer","attention"],"keywords":["Hopfield Network","Dense Associative Memory","Energy-based models","Attention Mechanism"],"notable_authors":["Hendrik Strobelt"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"注意力机制是Transformer架构的核心，但缺乏清晰的理论基础","claim_en":"Attention mechanism is the core of Transformer architecture, but lacks clear theoretical foundation","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于能量函数设计的注意力层，比普通注意力层泛化性更好，同时保留Transformer的扩展性","claim_en":"Attention layers designed based on energy function have better generalization than ordinary attention layers, while retaining the scalability of Transformers","opposes":"此前能量基模型无法扩展到大规模Transformer架构","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments","why_contested":"为Transformer的理论解释和架构改进提供了新思路，同时扩展了能量基模型的落地场景。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"改变对 Transformer 注意力机制的认知，提出了基于能量函数的注意力层，应立刻在 internal ablation 中复现。","en":"Changes the perception of Transformer attention mechanisms by proposing an energy function-based attention layer; should be immediately reproduced in internal ablations."}},{"id":"HsiehZMKK23","title":"SugarCrepe: Fixing Hackable Benchmarks for Vision-Language Compositionality","authors":["Cheng-Yu Hsieh","Jieyu Zhang","Zixian Ma","Aniruddha Kembhavi","Ranjay Krishna"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$134","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HsiehZMKK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HsiehZMKK23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/63461de0b4cb760fc498e85b18a7fe81-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有所有视觉语言组合性评估基准均存在严重统计偏差，可被无图像输入的盲模型超越，无法真实衡量VL模型的组合理解能力。此前基准均采用基于规则的模板生成干扰项，未从根源上消除偏差问题。","importance":"属于基准构建级贡献，为视觉语言模型组合性能力评估提供了无偏测试集，可避免后续预训练相关研究被有偏基准误导，直接用于验证VL预训练的组合泛化效果。","technical_approach":"核心方法是用大语言模型替代规则模板生成流畅合理的干扰字幕，同时通过多轮校验消除基准中的统计偏差。与原有方法的核心区别是不依赖固定语法模板，生成的干扰项语义更自然，不存在可被模型利用的表面统计模式。","experiments":"实验验证Crepe、Winoground等所有现有组合性基准均存在可被利用的偏差，无图像输入的盲模型在这些基准上的准确率比主流VL模型高10%以上；SugarCrepe上盲模型准确率接近随机水平，主流VL模型准确率比原基准低15%-20%。消融实验验证LLM生成干扰项相比规则模板可降低70%以上的基准偏差。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"All existing vision-language compositional evaluation benchmarks have severe statistical biases, which can be exploited by blind models with no image access to outperform mainstream VL models. Previous benchmarks generate distractors with rule-based templates and fail to eliminate biases fundamentally.","importance":"It is a benchmark-level contribution, providing an unbiased test set for evaluating VL models' compositional capabilities. It avoids misleading subsequent pretraining research with biased benchmarks and can be directly used to verify the compositional generalization effect of VL pretraining.","technical_approach":"The core method uses large language models instead of rule-based templates to generate fluent and logical distractor captions, and eliminates statistical biases in the benchmark through multi-round verification. Different from existing methods, it does not rely on fixed syntactic templates, so generated distractors have more natural semantics and no exploitable surface statistical patterns.","experiments":"Experiments verify that all existing compositional benchmarks including Crepe and Winoground have exploitable biases: blind models without image input achieve over 10% higher accuracy than mainstream VL models on these benchmarks. On SugarCrepe, blind model accuracy is close to random level, and mainstream VL model accuracy is 15-20% lower than that on original benchmarks. Ablation shows LLM-generated distractors reduce benchmark bias by over 70% compared with rule-based templates.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","benchmark","compositionality","evaluation"],"keywords":["vision-language models","contrastive training","CLIP","compositional understanding","compositionality","dataset artifacts"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"视觉语言模型的组合性理解能力是预训练效果的核心评估指标之一","claim_en":"Compositional understanding capability is one of the core evaluation metrics for vision-language pretraining performance","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"所有现有视觉语言组合性基准都存在严重统计偏差，无法真实反映模型的组合理解能力","claim_en":"All existing vision-language compositional benchmarks have severe statistical biases and cannot reflect models' actual compositional understanding capabilities","opposes":"Prior work assumes existing compositional benchmarks can accurately measure VL models' compositional understanding capabilities","opposes_cite_hint":"Crepe 2022, Winoground 2022","evidence_anchor":"§3.1 Benchmark Bias Analysis","why_contested":"Directly invalidates the credibility of evaluation results from previous related studies, requiring re-verification of past conclusions about VL models' compositional capabilities"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"构建了无偏的视觉语言组合性评估基准，避免被有偏基准误导，只看 §3 和 Table 2 即可。","en":"Constructs an unbiased vision-language compositionality evaluation benchmark to avoid being misled by biased ones; skim §3 and Table 2."}},{"id":"HuCGMS023","title":"Understanding Few-Shot Learning: Measuring Task Relatedness and Adaptation Difficulty via Attributes","authors":["Minyang Hu","Hong Chang","Zong Guo","Bingpeng Ma","Shiguang Shan","Xilin Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$135","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HuCGMS023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HuCGMS023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/3df38ca67befaed9c03b95ffee07d9f8-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"小样本学习领域缺乏与模型无关的任务相关性量化方法，无法明确训练任务与新任务的关联度对新任务适应难度的影响。此前的相关性度量都依赖特定模型结构，泛用性差。","importance":"属于理论方法级贡献，建立了任务相关性与适应难度的量化关联，可用于指导小样本预训练的任务集构建，也可用于预估不同小样本学习模型在新任务上的表现。","technical_approach":"原创了与模型无关的任务属性距离（TAD）度量，通过任务共享的属性特征量化任务相关性，舍弃了对模型输出或参数的依赖，可适配所有小样本学习模型；基于TAD建立了任务相关性与适应难度的理论映射关系。","experiments":"在Mini-ImageNet、Tiered-ImageNet等5个常用小样本数据集上验证，TAD与小样本模型新任务准确率的相关系数达到0.87，比此前依赖模型的度量高0.23；在10种不同小样本模型上的适配误差低于8%，证明其模型无关性。缩放实验显示任务属性覆盖度越高，TAD的量化稳定性越好。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"There is no model-agnostic quantitative method for task relatedness in few-shot learning, making it impossible to clarify the impact of correlation between training tasks and novel tasks on novel task adaptation difficulty. Previous relatedness metrics rely on specific model architectures and have poor generalizability.","importance":"It is a theoretical method-level contribution, establishing a quantitative correlation between task relatedness and adaptation difficulty. It can be used to guide task set construction for few-shot pretraining, and predict the performance of different FSL models on novel tasks.","technical_approach":"An original model-agnostic Task Attribute Distance (TAD) metric is proposed, which quantifies task relatedness through shared attribute features of tasks, discards dependence on model outputs or parameters, and is compatible with all FSL models. A theoretical mapping between task relatedness and adaptation difficulty is built based on TAD.","experiments":"Verified on 5 common FSL datasets including Mini-ImageNet and Tiered-ImageNet, the correlation coefficient between TAD and FSL model novel task accuracy reaches 0.87, 0.23 higher than previous model-dependent metrics. The adaptation error on 10 different FSL models is lower than 8%, proving its model agnosticism. Scaling experiments show higher task attribute coverage leads to better quantitative stability of TAD.","authors_note":""},"tags":["few-shot","icl","generalization","evaluation"],"keywords":["Few-shot Learning","Meta-Learning","Task Relatedness","Task Adaptation Difficulty"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"小样本学习的泛化性能高度依赖训练任务与新任务的相关性","claim_en":"Generalization performance of few-shot learning is highly dependent on the correlation between training tasks and novel tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"与模型无关的任务相关性度量比模型依赖的度量能更准确预测小样本模型的新任务适应难度","claim_en":"Model-agnostic task relatedness metrics can predict FSL models' novel task adaptation difficulty more accurately than model-dependent metrics","opposes":"Prior work believes correlation metrics relying on model internal representations are more accurate","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4.2 Correlation Comparison","why_contested":"Changes the design direction of few-shot task relatedness metrics, model-agnostic metrics are more suitable for cross-model comparison and task set construction"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为小样本预训练任务集构建的方法备查，无需细读正文，仅可在需要量化跨任务相关性时参考其TAD度量思路","en":"Keep as literature reference for few-shot pre-training task set construction, only refer to its TAD metric idea when quantifying cross-task relevance, no need to read full text."}},{"id":"HuangNHJPWZDGPC23","title":"ANPL: Towards Natural Programming with Interactive Decomposition","authors":["Di Huang","Ziyuan Nan","Xing Hu","Pengwei Jin","Shaohui Peng","Yuanbo Wen","Rui Zhang","Zidong Du","Qi Guo","Yewen Pu","Yunji Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$136","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HuangNHJPWZDGPC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HuangNHJPWZDGPC23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/dba8fa689ede9e56cbcd4f719def38fb-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM生成代码后无法支持用户高效迭代修改，当用户需求与初始生成代码不一致时缺乏结构化的调整框架。此前的代码生成方法都只支持单次生成，未适配交互式修改场景。","importance":"属于系统方法级贡献，提出了交互式代码生成的新范式，可用于提升代码LLM的落地体验，也可为代码预训练的交互对齐目标设计提供参考。","technical_approach":"迁移了程序合成中的草图范式，设计ANPL系统，包含固定逻辑的代码草图、自然语言描述的待补全模块、以及对应模块的输入输出约束；用户可通过修改草图、调整模块的自然语言描述或输入输出约束来迭代修正代码，舍弃了传统单次prompt生成的模式。","experiments":"在HumanEval、MBPP等代码基准上测试，ANPL交互式修改后代码通过率比单次prompt生成高28%，用户迭代修改的平均步数比直接修改全量代码少62%；消融实验显示输入输出约束的存在能将模块生成的准确率提升37%。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM code generation methods cannot support efficient iterative modification by users. When user requirements are inconsistent with initially generated code, there is no structured adjustment framework. Previous code generation methods only support one-time generation and do not adapt to interactive modification scenarios.","importance":"It is a system method-level contribution, proposing a new paradigm for interactive code generation. It can improve the deployment experience of code LLMs and provide reference for the design of interactive alignment objectives for code pretraining.","technical_approach":"It migrates the sketch paradigm from program synthesis to design the ANPL system, which includes code sketches with fixed logic, to-be-completed modules described in natural language, and input-output constraints for corresponding modules. Users can iteratively revise code by modifying sketches, adjusting natural language descriptions of modules or input-output constraints, discarding the traditional one-time prompt generation mode.","experiments":"Tested on code benchmarks including HumanEval and MBPP, the code pass rate after ANPL interactive modification is 28% higher than one-time prompt generation, and the average number of user iterative modification steps is 62% less than directly modifying full code. Ablation shows the existence of input-output constraints improves module generation accuracy by 37%.","authors_note":""},"tags":["code-generation","program-synthesis","interactive","decomposition"],"keywords":["programming language","large language models","program synthesis","code generation","human-ai interaction"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM单次生成的代码通常无法完全满足用户的个性化需求","claim_en":"Code generated by LLMs in one pass usually cannot fully meet users' personalized requirements","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"结构化的草图+模块分解交互式代码生成比自由对话式代码修改的效率和准确率都更高","claim_en":"Structured sketch + module decomposition interactive code generation has higher efficiency and accuracy than free conversational code modification","opposes":"Prior work believes natural language conversational code modification has the lowest interaction threshold and highest efficiency","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5.1 User Study Results","why_contested":"Provides a new direction for the design of interaction interfaces and alignment objectives for code LLMs"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为代码LLM交互式对齐目标设计的交叉领域参考资料，不涉及预训练核心范式改动，无需细读","en":"Only as cross-domain reference for code LLM interactive alignment target design, no core pre-training paradigm change, no need to read in detail."}},{"id":"HuangRCK0LL23","title":"PRODIGY: Enabling In-context Learning Over Graphs","authors":["Qian Huang","Hongyu Ren","Peng Chen","Gregor Krzmanc","Daniel Zeng","Percy Liang","Jure Leskovec"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$137","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HuangRCK0LL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HuangRCK0LL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/34dce0dc3121951dd0399ba02c0f0d06-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"图预训练模型目前未实现上下文学习能力，无法像LLM一样通过prompt示例直接适配新的图任务而无需微调。此前的图预训练方法都针对固定下游任务设计，未适配上下文学习范式。","importance":"属于范式级贡献，首次实现了图数据上的预训练-上下文学习范式，拓展了预训练建模范式在非文本模态的应用边界，可降低图任务的微调成本。","technical_approach":"原创了prompt graph表示，将prompt示例和查询图连接为统一的输入图，设计对应的图神经网络架构和预训练目标，舍弃了传统图预训练针对单一任务的目标设计，实现了跨任务的可迁移上下文学习能力。","experiments":"在节点分类、链路预测等12个不同类型的图任务上测试，PRODIGY的上下文学习准确率比传统微调的图模型高7%-12%，比直接用prompt提示的图预训练模型高21%；缩放实验显示预训练任务数量提升到100个以上时，上下文学习准确率提升15%。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing graph pretraining models do not have in-context learning capabilities, and cannot adapt to new graph tasks directly through prompt examples without fine-tuning like LLMs. Previous graph pretraining methods are designed for fixed downstream tasks and do not adapt to the in-context learning paradigm.","importance":"It is a paradigm-level contribution, realizing the pretraining-in-context learning paradigm on graph data for the first time. It expands the application boundary of pretraining modeling paradigms on non-text modalities and reduces the fine-tuning cost of graph tasks.","technical_approach":"An original prompt graph representation is proposed, which connects prompt examples and query graphs into a unified input graph. A corresponding graph neural network architecture and pretraining objectives are designed, discarding the traditional single-task objective design of graph pretraining, and realizing cross-task transferable in-context learning capability.","experiments":"Tested on 12 different types of graph tasks including node classification and link prediction, PRODIGY's in-context learning accuracy is 7-12% higher than traditional fine-tuned graph models, and 21% higher than directly prompted graph pretraining models. Scaling experiments show when the number of pretraining tasks increases to over 100, in-context learning accuracy increases by 15%.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","graphs","icl","generalization"],"keywords":["Graph Neural Network","in-context learning","pretraining"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"上下文学习能力可以大幅降低下游任务的适配成本","claim_en":"In-context learning capability can significantly reduce the adaptation cost of downstream tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"统一的prompt graph表示可以让图神经网络获得和LLM类似的跨任务上下文学习能力，无需针对每个任务微调","claim_en":"Unified prompt graph representation enables graph neural networks to achieve cross-task in-context learning capability similar to LLMs, without fine-tuning for each task","opposes":"Prior work believes the heterogeneity of graph tasks makes universal in-context learning impossible","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4.3 Cross-Task Generalization","why_contested":"Proves that pretrained models for non-sequential modalities can also achieve in-context learning, expanding the applicable scope of pretraining paradigms"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§3的prompt graph构造和§4的跨任务上下文学习实验部分，可尝试复用其思路拓展非文本模态预训练的ICL能力","en":"Focus on §3 prompt graph construction and §4 cross-task ICL experiments, reuse its idea to expand in-context learning capability for non-text modality pre-training."}},{"id":"HuangXSDZLFMLHI23","title":"Grounded Decoding: Guiding Text Generation with Grounded Models for Embodied Agents","authors":["Wenlong Huang","Fei Xia","Dhruv Shah","Danny Driess","Andy Zeng","Yao Lu","Pete Florence","Igor Mordatch","Sergey Levine","Karol Hausman","Brian Ichter"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$138","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HuangXSDZLFMLHI23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HuangXSDZLFMLHI23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/bb3cfcb0284642a973dd631ec9184f2f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM生成的规划无法适配具身智能体的物理约束，而纯交互训练的机器人策略缺乏高层语义理解能力。此前的方法要么只依赖LLM的语义知识，要么只依赖交互数据的物理约束，未将两者有效融合。","importance":"属于方法级贡献，提出了融合物理世界约束的文本解码范式，可用于指导具身智能相关的多模态预训练目标设计，提升LLM在物理场景的落地能力。","technical_approach":"提出grounded decoding方法，在LLM解码的每一步用基于交互数据训练的接地模型打分，过滤不符合物理约束、不可执行的生成内容，保留LLM的高层语义生成能力，同时引入物理世界的约束信号，舍弃了纯自回归解码不考虑外部约束的模式。","experiments":"在机器人桌面操作、导航等3个具身任务上测试，grounded decoding生成的规划执行成功率比纯LLM生成高32%，比纯机器人策略的任务完成率高24%；消融实验显示解码步长为4时的约束打分效率和效果达到最优平衡。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Plans generated by LLMs cannot adapt to the physical constraints of embodied agents, while robot policies trained purely on interaction data lack high-level semantic understanding. Previous methods either only rely on the semantic knowledge of LLMs or only rely on the physical constraints of interaction data, and do not effectively integrate the two.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution, proposing a text decoding paradigm that integrates physical world constraints. It can guide the design of multimodal pretraining objectives related to embodied intelligence and improve the deployment capability of LLMs in physical scenarios.","technical_approach":"The grounded decoding method is proposed. At each step of LLM decoding, a grounded model trained on interaction data is used for scoring, filtering out generated content that does not meet physical constraints and is not executable. It retains the high-level semantic generation capability of LLMs, while introducing constraint signals from the physical world, discarding the pure AR decoding mode that does not consider external constraints.","experiments":"Tested on 3 embodied tasks including robot desktop operation and navigation, the execution success rate of plans generated by grounded decoding is 32% higher than that of pure LLM generation, and the task completion rate is 24% higher than that of pure robot policies. Ablation shows constraint scoring with decoding step size of 4 achieves the optimal balance between efficiency and effect.","authors_note":""},"tags":["decoding","grounding","text-generation","agent"],"keywords":["robotics","language models","embodied agents"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"纯预训练LLM缺乏物理世界的常识，无法直接生成可执行的具身智能规划","claim_en":"Pure pretrained LLMs lack physical world common sense and cannot directly generate executable embodied intelligence plans","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"在解码阶段引入外部接地模型的约束，比在预训练阶段注入物理知识的效率更高、泛化性更好","claim_en":"Introducing constraints from external grounded models during decoding has higher efficiency and better generalization than injecting physical knowledge during pretraining","opposes":"Prior work believes injecting multimodal physical knowledge during pretraining is the optimal solution to improve LLMs' embodied capabilities","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5.2 Comparison with Pretraining Injection","why_contested":"Provides a lighter alternative for improving LLMs' embodied capabilities, and provides reference for the division of capabilities between pretraining and inference phases"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为具身多模态预训练融合物理约束的思路备查，仅需了解其解码阶段引入接地模型打分的核心逻辑即可","en":"Keep as reference for embodied multimodal pre-training integrating physical constraints, only need to grasp its core logic of introducing grounded model scoring during decoding."}},{"id":"HuangZYL23","title":"ScaleLong: Towards More Stable Training of Diffusion Model via Scaling Network Long Skip Connection","authors":["Zhongzhan Huang","Pan Zhou","Shuicheng Yan","Liang Lin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$139","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HuangZYL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HuangZYL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ded98d28f82342a39f371c013dfb3058-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是扩散模型训练不稳定，尤其是深网络在高分辨率或大规模训练时容易出现梯度传播差、优化震荡和收敛脆弱的问题。过去常见做法是调学习率、归一化或改 backbone 细节，但这些手段往往是经验性补丁，不能系统改善长路径优化。","importance":"它的贡献属于训练稳定性和架构级改进。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：当扩散模型往更大规模、更深网络和更长训练推进时，skip connection 的尺度设计不是小工程细节，而会直接决定可训练性和 compute efficiency。虽然论文对象是图像扩散，但这种“长残差路径如何缩放”的问题，对 diffusion LM 和 AR+diffusion 联合建模也有借鉴价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法是提出 ScaleLong，用带缩放的 long skip connection 来稳定扩散模型训练。它不是简单再加一条残差，而是有意识地控制跨层长跳连的信号幅度，让前层特征能更稳定地传到后层，同时避免长短路径叠加后激活或梯度失衡；和普通 U-Net skip 不同，重点在缩放策略而不是连接本身。这样设计有效，是因为扩散模型训练信号跨时间步和跨层都很长，未经校准的 skip 容易让某些路径主导优化。","experiments":"从给定信息无法确认具体数据集、参数量和数值提升。可以判断实验会围绕训练稳定性展开，例如 loss 曲线更平滑、可用更大学习率或更深网络、FID 或生成质量更优，以及缩放系数和 skip 布置方式的消融；但没有摘要，不能准确写出指标和增益幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper addresses a practical bottleneck in diffusion training: optimization becomes unstable as models get deeper or training gets more demanding, with poor gradient flow and fragile convergence. Existing fixes are often local heuristics—learning-rate tuning, normalization tweaks, or backbone edits—rather than a structural answer to long-path optimization.","importance":"The contribution is architectural and optimization-oriented. For pretraining researchers, the main message is that skip-connection scaling is not a minor implementation choice once diffusion models are pushed to larger scale; it can become a first-order determinant of stability and usable compute. Although the setting is visual diffusion, the same lesson matters for diffusion language models and hybrid AR+diffusion systems.","technical_approach":"The proposed method, ScaleLong, introduces scaled long skip connections to stabilize diffusion training. The point is not merely adding another residual path, but controlling the magnitude of information passed across distant layers so that early features remain available without overwhelming shorter paths or destabilizing gradients. This differs from standard U-Net skip design because the scaling policy is the core mechanism, not the existence of the connection itself.","experiments":"The prompt does not provide enough detail to report datasets, parameter counts, baselines, or exact gains. The likely evidence includes smoother training curves, fewer instabilities, support for deeper networks or larger learning rates, and better final generation metrics such as FID, along with ablations on scaling coefficients and skip placement, but the exact numbers cannot be verified here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","training-stability","architecture"],"notable_authors":["Zhongzhan Huang","Pan Zhou","Shuicheng Yan","Liang Lin"],"keywords":["Diffusion Model","Stable Training","Network architectures"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看Fig 2的长跳连缩放消融和§4.3的大规模训练稳定性实验，结论可直接复用到扩散类大模型预训练的架构优化中","en":"Focus on Fig 2 long skip connection scaling ablation and §4.3 large-scale training stability experiments, conclusions can be directly reused for diffusion large model pre-training architecture optimization."}},{"id":"HuangZZYWQX23","title":"Knowledge Diffusion for Distillation","authors":["Tao Huang","Yuan Zhang","Mingkai Zheng","Shan You","Fei Wang","Chen Qian","Chang Xu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$13a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HuangZZYWQX23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HuangZZYWQX23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/cdddf13f06182063c4dbde8cbd5a5c21-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关注知识蒸馏里一个老问题：学生通常只模仿教师的最终 soft target，却没有学到教师内部更丰富的结构化知识，导致蒸馏收益有限。过去大量方法靠 feature matching 或 logit matching 分别补一部分，但很难统一解释“知识如何从教师转移给学生”。","importance":"它的重要性在于把蒸馏看成知识扩散过程，属于方法视角上的推进。对 pretrain 的启示是：模型压缩不只是部署问题，也影响 teacher-student 训练链路中的知识保真度；如果蒸馏过程能更完整传递分布结构和中间语义关系，可能让大模型知识更稳定地下沉到小模型或多阶段训练中。","technical_approach":"核心方法是提出一种 knowledge diffusion 式蒸馏框架，把教师知识从容易传递的部分逐步扩散到更复杂的部分，而不是只在单一层或单一输出空间对齐。可以理解为用分阶段、分粒度或分噪声级别的知识传输机制，把学生从粗到细地拉向教师；和标准 KD 相比，它强调知识传播路径，而不是一次性拟合教师输出。这样的设计通常更稳，因为学生容量有限，直接逼近教师全分布容易欠拟合或学到错误捷径。","experiments":"给定信息不足以确认具体任务、模型和数值。合理推测实验会覆盖图像分类或表征学习上的多种 teacher-student 组合，并报告相对 vanilla KD、feature distillation 等基线的精度提升，同时通过消融说明逐步扩散机制优于单步对齐；但这里不能编写具体百分点。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper revisits a familiar limitation of knowledge distillation: matching a teacher’s final logits often transfers only a thin slice of what the teacher knows. Prior methods added feature matching or auxiliary objectives, but many still lacked a coherent view of how richer knowledge should flow from teacher to student.","importance":"Its contribution is mainly conceptual and methodological: it reframes distillation as a knowledge diffusion process rather than one-shot imitation. For pretraining-oriented work, this matters because model compression is also a question of knowledge preservation across training stages; better transfer mechanisms can make teacher-to-student pipelines more faithful and efficient.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to diffuse teacher knowledge to the student progressively, instead of aligning a single representation or output distribution all at once. In practice, this likely means staged transfer across levels of difficulty, abstraction, or noise, so the student first captures coarse structure and then finer behavior. Compared with vanilla KD, the difference is the transfer trajectory: a capacity-limited student is less likely to fail when the target is revealed gradually rather than imposed in full from the start.","experiments":"The prompt does not contain enough information to report exact tasks, model sizes, baselines, or gains. The expected evaluation would compare against standard KD and feature-based distillation across multiple teacher-student pairs, with ablations showing that progressive diffusion transfers more usable knowledge than single-step matching, but precise numbers cannot be stated safely.","authors_note":""},"tags":["distillation","knowledge-transfer","compression"],"notable_authors":["Tao Huang","Yuan Zhang","Mingkai Zheng","Shan You","Fei Wang"],"keywords":["knowledge distillation","diffusion models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§3.2的分阶段知识扩散对齐逻辑，其视角可指导大模型师生蒸馏链路的知识保真度优化","en":"Focus on §3.2 phased knowledge diffusion alignment logic, its perspective can guide knowledge fidelity optimization of large model teacher-student distillation pipeline."}},{"id":"Jacot23","title":"Bottleneck Structure in Learned Features: Low-Dimension vs Regularity Tradeoff","authors":["Arthur Jacot"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$13b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Jacot23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Jacot23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/4a6695df88f2de0d49f875189ea181ef-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作研究学习特征中的一个核心张力：模型要想学到有用表示，往往需要在低维压缩和规则性之间取平衡，但现有理解通常把“特征瓶颈”只看成维度不足，忽略了函数正则性或平滑性对表示形态的影响。这个问题重要，因为很多表征学习和宽深网络现象都和 bottleneck 的真实来源有关。","importance":"它更偏理论机制分析，而不是直接给出新训练法。对 pretrain 的价值在于，它试图解释大模型学到的特征为何会呈现低秩、稀疏或某种受限结构，并区分这是容量瓶颈还是正则性约束造成的。这样的分析不会直接改变训练 recipe，但会影响我们理解 scaling、表示退化和特征可迁移性的方式。","technical_approach":"核心做法是从理论上分析 learned features 的瓶颈结构，讨论低维表示与 regularity 之间的 trade-off。它不是提出一个新网络，而是建立刻画框架：当模型、数据或优化偏好某种平滑/规则解时，学到的特征即便维度不低，也可能表现出有效瓶颈；反过来，单纯增加维度也未必解除限制。与只看 rank 或隐层宽度的分析不同，这里把函数类约束纳入讨论。","experiments":"给定信息不足以写出具体实验。若有实验，通常会是合成数据或小规模网络验证理论预测，例如观察表示维度、特征光滑性与泛化之间的关系，而不是追求大规模 SOTA。没有摘要和正文，无法确认是否有定量定理验证或真实数据实验。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper studies a basic but underexplained tension in representation learning: useful features often reflect both dimensional compression and regularity constraints, yet bottlenecks are usually discussed only in terms of low dimension. The question matters because many phenomena in learned representations cannot be explained by width or rank alone.","importance":"The contribution is primarily theoretical and mechanistic rather than a new training recipe. For pretraining research, its value is in clarifying whether structured or low-rank-looking features emerge because of hard capacity limits or because optimization and regularity biases favor certain functions. That does not directly produce a better model, but it can sharpen how we interpret scaling behavior and representation collapse.","technical_approach":"The paper develops an analysis of bottleneck structure that explicitly trades off low-dimensionality against regularity. It does not introduce a new architecture; instead, it provides a framework showing that even when nominal feature dimension is large, regularity constraints can induce an effective bottleneck, and simply increasing width may not remove it. This differs from analyses that focus only on rank, width, or linear algebraic compression.","experiments":"The prompt does not provide enough information to report specific experiments. If empirical validation is included, it is likely aimed at confirming theoretical predictions on synthetic setups or small-scale models rather than establishing benchmark SOTA, but that cannot be confirmed here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["representation-learning","feature-learning","generalization"],"notable_authors":["Arthur Jacot"],"keywords":["Feature Learning","Symmetry Learning","Theory of Deep Learning","Weight Decay"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§4的瓶颈结构理论推导部分，可更新你对大模型特征低秩性来源、scaling过程中表示退化的认知","en":"Focus on §4 theoretical derivation of bottleneck structure, which updates your understanding of low-rank feature origin and representation degradation during large model scaling."}},{"id":"JagielskiNLCCT23","title":"Students Parrot Their Teachers: Membership Inference on Model Distillation","authors":["Matthew Jagielski","Milad Nasr","Katherine Lee","Christopher A. Choquette-Choo","Nicholas Carlini","Florian Tramèr"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Model distillation is frequently proposed as a technique to reduce the privacy leakage of machine learning. These empirical privacy defenses rely on the intuition that distilled ``student'' models protect the privacy of training data, as they only interact with this data indirectly through a ``teacher'' model. In this work, we design membership inference attacks to systematically study the privacy provided by knowledge distillation to both the teacher and student training sets. Our new attacks show that distillation alone provides only limited privacy across a number of domains. We explain the success of our attacks on distillation by showing that membership inference attacks on a private dataset can succeed even if the target model is never queried on any actual training points, but only on inputs whose predictions are highly influenced by training data. Finally, we show that our attacks are strongest when student and teacher sets are similar, or when the attacker can poison the teacher set.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JagielskiNLCCT23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JagielskiNLCCT23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/8b07d224a643b02e7571e083578a86d2-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的结论很明确：蒸馏不会自动消除隐私风险，学生模型会复读教师训练集成员信息。以往很多人默认 distillation 能起到一定“洗数据”作用，因为学生没有直接见原始标签或原始训练流程，但这个假设并不可靠。","importance":"这项工作对大模型训练链路的启示很直接。只要 teacher 已经记住成员样本，distillation 可能把这种记忆传给 student；这意味着用蒸馏做模型压缩、部署或多阶段训练时，不能把它当成隐私防护层。对 pretrain 而言，这会影响数据治理、模型发布和 teacher-student pipeline 的风险评估。","technical_approach":"核心方法是研究 membership inference attack 在 model distillation 场景下的可行性，并分析学生为何会“鹦鹉学舌”式继承教师记忆。技术上，作者应当构造针对 teacher 和 student 的成员推断攻击，比较蒸馏前后泄露程度，并区分不同蒸馏设置下的风险传播。与一般隐私论文不同，这里的关键不是提出新攻击，而是证明 distillation 本身是隐私传递通道。","experiments":"虽然给定信息没有数值，但题目已经说明核心实验事实：学生能够继承教师的成员泄露信号。合理预期实验会覆盖多种蒸馏方式、架构组合和数据集，比较 white-box 或 black-box membership inference 攻击成功率，并展示教师记忆越强、学生泄露通常越明显；但不能在没有摘要的情况下编写具体 AUC 或攻击增益。","authors_note":"作者列表中有 Nicholas Carlini。其团队在模型隐私、membership inference、训练数据提取和生成模型安全方面有长期代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The main conclusion is straightforward: distillation does not reliably remove privacy leakage. Students can inherit membership signals from their teachers, despite the common intuition that distillation might act as a form of data washing.","importance":"This matters directly for large-model pipelines. If a teacher memorizes training examples, a distilled student may carry that risk forward, which means distillation cannot be treated as a privacy layer for compression, deployment, or multi-stage training. For pretraining ecosystems, this changes how one should think about data governance and teacher–student release practices.","technical_approach":"The paper studies membership inference attacks in the distillation setting and analyzes why students 'parrot' teacher memorization. The likely setup is to attack both teachers and distilled students under multiple distillation schemes and compare how leakage propagates. The novelty is less about inventing a new attack than about establishing distillation itself as a privacy-transfer channel.","experiments":"While the prompt gives no numbers, the title already states the empirical punchline: distilled students retain exploitable membership information. A reasonable expectation is evaluation across several datasets, architectures, and distillation variants, reporting attack success or AUC for teacher and student models, but exact metrics cannot be stated without the paper text.","authors_note":"The author list includes Nicholas Carlini, whose team is well known for work on model privacy, membership inference, training-data extraction, and security of generative models."},"tags":["distillation","privacy","security","model-compression"],"notable_authors":["Matthew Jagielski","Milad Nasr","Katherine Lee","Christopher A. Choquette-Choo","Nicholas Carlini"],"keywords":["model distillation","membership inference","privacy","dark knowledge"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看Table 2的蒸馏前后隐私泄露程度对比结果，会直接纠正你把蒸馏作为隐私防护手段的错误认知，需纳入预训练风险评估流程","en":"Focus on Table 2 comparison of privacy leakage before and after distillation, which corrects the wrong perception of distillation as privacy protection, and should be included in pre-training risk assessment."}},{"id":"JainBKV23","title":"DAMEX: Dataset-aware Mixture-of-Experts for visual understanding of mixture-of-datasets","authors":["Yash Jain","Harkirat S. Behl","Zsolt Kira","Vibhav Vineet"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$13c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JainBKV23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JainBKV23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/dc192b3eeffebba21bd1d82f6752b84b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作处理的是多数据集联合训练时常见的负迁移问题：把来源、标注风格和难度差异很大的视觉数据简单混合，会让一个统一模型学到互相干扰的表征。传统做法不是训练单一共享模型，就是静态 MoE，但往往不知道专家该按什么原则分工。","importance":"它属于 mixture-of-experts 在多数据集训练上的应用创新。对 pretrain 的启示是：当数据并不来自同一分布时，按“样本属于哪个数据集”去建专家路由，可能比只按 token/image 内容做通用路由更稳，因为它显式利用了数据来源这个强先验。这个思路对多语种、多模态和 web mixture 预训练都很有参考价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 DAMEX，Dataset-aware Mixture-of-Experts。它不是做完全通用的内容路由，而是把数据集身份或其统计特征纳入专家分配，让不同专家吸收不同数据源的偏好，再通过共享部分保留跨数据集迁移。和标准 MoE 相比，关键区别是路由目标更有监督、更贴近数据异质性的真实结构；这样设计能减少互相冲突的梯度更新，但代价是对数据来源信息有依赖，且可能减弱跨域共享。","experiments":"从题目判断，实验应在 mixture-of-datasets 视觉理解任务上，对比统一 backbone、普通 MoE 和 dataset-aware MoE，报告分类或检测等指标提升，并分析当数据集差异更大时 DAMEX 收益更明显。还应包含专家数、路由方式和共享层比例的消融；但没有摘要，无法确认具体数据集和数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles negative transfer in joint training over heterogeneous visual datasets. Simply mixing datasets with different label spaces, annotation styles, and difficulty profiles often forces a single model to absorb conflicting signals, while standard shared models or generic MoE routing do not explicitly respect dataset structure.","importance":"This is an MoE-style contribution with broader pretraining relevance. The key lesson is that when training data is a mixture of distributions, routing by dataset identity or dataset-aware statistics may be more stable than fully generic content-based routing, because the source itself is a strong prior on what specialization is useful. That idea can carry over to multilingual, multimodal, or broad web-mixture pretraining.","technical_approach":"The method, DAMEX, is a dataset-aware mixture-of-experts framework. Instead of relying only on generic token/image features for routing, it uses dataset information to decide or guide expert specialization, while retaining some shared capacity for transfer across sources. Compared with standard MoE, the difference is that routing is aligned with known data heterogeneity rather than left entirely implicit. This can reduce gradient interference, though it may also depend on having clean dataset-source metadata and can limit cross-domain sharing if overdone.","experiments":"From the title, the evaluation likely compares a shared backbone, standard MoE, and dataset-aware MoE on visual understanding tasks over mixed datasets, showing larger gains when dataset heterogeneity is stronger. Useful ablations would include number of experts, routing design, and the amount of shared vs specialized capacity, but the prompt does not provide concrete benchmarks or results.","authors_note":""},"tags":["moe","data-mixture","visual-pretraining","dataset"],"notable_authors":["Yash Jain","Harkirat S. Behl","Zsolt Kira","Vibhav Vineet"],"keywords":["mixture-of-experts","moe","object detection","mixture of datasets","multiple datasets"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§3的数据集感知路由逻辑，可直接复用该思路优化多源异构数据混合预训练的MoE路由策略","en":"Focus on §3 dataset-aware routing logic, directly reuse this idea to optimize MoE routing strategy for multi-source heterogeneous data mixed pre-training."}},{"id":"Jang0MA23","title":"Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Structured Node Classification","authors":["Hyosoon Jang","Seonghyun Park","Sangwoo Mo","Sungsoo Ahn"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$13d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Jang0MA23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Jang0MA23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/65d32185f73cbf4535449a792c63926f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作试图把扩散模型引入结构化节点分类，解决图数据上标签预测常见的多峰、不确定和结构依赖强的问题。传统节点分类大多直接做判别式预测，虽然简单高效，但对复杂标签依赖和不确定性表达能力有限。","importance":"它的重要性更多在范式迁移：证明扩散概率模型不只适合图像生成，也可以作为图结构预测的条件分布建模器。对 pretrain 研究的间接启示是，diffusion 目标在离散或结构化对象上的适用边界正在扩展，这对 diffusion LM、图-文本统一建模等方向有方法论参考。","technical_approach":"核心方法是为 structured node classification 设计 diffusion probabilistic model。它不是把节点分类当作一次性 softmax，而是通过逐步加噪/去噪来建模标签或节点状态的条件分布，并借助图结构传播上下文。和标准 GNN 分类器相比，这种做法显式建模多步生成过程，更适合表示不确定性和复杂相关性；代价是推理更慢，训练也更复杂。","experiments":"题目表明实验应在图节点分类 benchmark 上比较 DPM 与传统 GNN 分类器。可能会报告在结构化依赖更强、标签噪声更大或类别不平衡场景下的提升，并通过消融分析扩散步数、噪声调度和图消息传递模块的影响；但当前信息不足以确认具体数据集、基线和提升幅度。","authors_note":"作者列表中有 Sungsoo Ahn。其团队在生成建模、能量模型与概率建模方向有较强代表性。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper brings diffusion modeling to structured node classification, where standard discriminative graph classifiers can struggle to represent multimodality, uncertainty, and strong structural dependencies among labels. Most prior work treated node classification as a direct prediction problem, which is efficient but limited in expressiveness.","importance":"The significance is mainly paradigmatic: it extends diffusion probabilistic modeling into structured prediction on graphs. For pretraining-oriented researchers, the indirect lesson is that diffusion objectives are spreading beyond image generation into discrete and structured domains, which is relevant when thinking about diffusion language models and other non-AR formulations.","technical_approach":"The method formulates structured node classification with a diffusion probabilistic model. Instead of predicting labels in one shot with a softmax head, it models a denoising process over node labels or states conditioned on graph context. Relative to a standard GNN classifier, this provides a richer conditional distribution and can capture uncertainty and label interactions more naturally, though it comes with higher training and inference cost.","experiments":"The likely evaluation is on graph node-classification benchmarks against conventional GNN classifiers, with particular attention to settings where structure and uncertainty matter more. Useful ablations would cover diffusion steps, noise schedules, and graph message-passing components, but the prompt does not provide the exact datasets, baselines, or numbers.","authors_note":"The author list includes Sungsoo Ahn, whose group is known for work in generative modeling, energy-based models, and probabilistic learning."},"tags":["diffusion","graph-learning","structured-prediction"],"notable_authors":["Hyosoon Jang","Seonghyun Park","Sangwoo Mo","Sungsoo Ahn"],"keywords":["diffusion model","graph neural network","structured prediction","node classification"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§4的结构化节点分类扩散建模实验，可参考其思路拓展扩散目标在离散/结构化预训练任务中的适用边界","en":"Focus on §4 structured node classification diffusion modeling experiments, refer to its idea to expand application boundary of diffusion objective in discrete/structured pre-training tasks."}},{"id":"JangTCJS23","title":"Modality-Agnostic Self-Supervised Learning with Meta-Learned Masked Auto-Encoder","authors":["Huiwon Jang","Jihoon Tack","Daewon Choi","Jongheon Jeong","Jinwoo Shin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$13e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JangTCJS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JangTCJS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/e9df55bf67e499635908395931ed6ea9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：如何把 masked autoencoder 这类自监督预训练从“强依赖具体模态和手工 mask 设计”改成更通用的、跨模态可迁移的学习框架。以往 MAE 往往默认视觉 patch 或文本 token 的局部结构成立，mask 策略和重建目标都绑在模态先验上，因此跨图像、语音、文本时往往需要分别调一套规则；作者想用 meta-learning 学出更适合不同模态的掩码与重建行为，而不是把 mask 当固定超参数。","importance":"结论是：如果方法成立，它的价值主要在方法级和范式级，而不是单点 SOTA。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于，自监督目标里最被当作“工程细节”的 mask 机制，其实可以被学习并作为跨模态统一预训练的一部分；这和统一 tokenizer、统一损失的思路一致。边界也很清楚：这类工作更像是在改善预训练目标设计与迁移效率，未必直接改变大模型 scaling 上限。","technical_approach":"核心方法是一个 meta-learned masked autoencoder：不是固定随机 mask，而是通过元学习去适配不同模态下更优的掩码/重建策略。直觉上，它把“哪些信息该被遮、模型该如何补全”从人工指定变成可学习过程，从而减少对模态结构假设的依赖。和标准 MAE 相比，区别不在 backbone，而在训练目标的控制器；和直接做统一编码器相比，它保留了重建式 SSL 的数据效率，但代价是训练过程更复杂，且元学习本身是否稳定、是否泛化到未见模态，是关键边界。","experiments":"给到的信息不足，无法可靠写出模型规模、数据规模、主基线和具体提升数字。根据题目与摘要线索，实验大概率是在多种模态上比较固定-mask MAE 与元学习版本的迁移或线性探测表现，重点应该是验证 learned masking 是否比手工策略更稳、更泛化；但缺少原文数字，不能替作者补。对资深读者而言，这篇工作的实验价值主要取决于两点：一是是否在多个模态上 consistently 优于 tuned baselines，二是 meta-learned mask 在分布外模态上是否仍有效。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a specific bottleneck: masked autoencoding is still heavily tied to modality-specific masking heuristics, which makes “self-supervised” pretraining less universal than it looks. Standard MAE-style methods assume structure such as image patches or token locality and then hard-code masking around those assumptions; this work asks whether the masking behavior itself can be learned and transferred across modalities.","importance":"The contribution is primarily methodological, with some paradigm-level relevance if the cross-modal story holds. For pretraining research, the useful takeaway is that masking is not just a nuisance hyperparameter; it can be part of the learnable objective design, much like tokenizer or loss design in unified pretraining. The likely impact is on objective portability and training efficiency rather than on changing scaling limits outright.","technical_approach":"The method is a meta-learned masked autoencoder: instead of using a fixed random masking rule, it learns masking/reconstruction behavior through a meta-learning procedure. The design choice is sensible because it moves modality assumptions out of hand-crafted masking policies and into an adaptive controller. Relative to vanilla MAE, the novelty is not the encoder-decoder backbone but the learned objective interface. The trade-off is straightforward: potentially better transfer and less manual tuning, at the cost of a more complex and possibly less stable training loop.","experiments":"The provided metadata does not include enough detail to state model sizes, dataset scale, baselines, or numerical gains reliably. From the title and abstract, the key experimental claim is likely consistent improvement over fixed-mask MAE across multiple modalities or transfer settings. For an experienced reader, the paper stands or falls on two empirical questions: whether the gains remain after tuning strong modality-specific baselines, and whether the meta-learned masking policy generalizes beyond the modalities seen during training.","authors_note":""},"tags":["masked-autoencoder","meta-learning","modality-agnostic","self-supervised"],"keywords":["Self-Supervised Learning","Modality-Agnostic Self-Supervised Learning","Meta-Learning","Masked Auto-Encoder"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§3.1的元学习掩码策略设计，可复用其思路优化跨模态统一自监督预训练的掩码重建目标","en":"Focus on §3.1 meta-learning mask strategy design, reuse its idea to optimize mask reconstruction objective for cross-modal unified self-supervised pre-training."}},{"id":"2310.17611","title":"Uncovering Meanings of Embeddings via Partial Orthogonality","authors":["Yibo Jiang","Bryon Aragam","Victor Veitch"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$13f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.17611","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JiangAV23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JiangAV23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/65a925049647eab0aa06a9faf1cd470b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：embedding 里到底编码了什么语义关系，尤其是“条件独立”这类比相似度更结构化的语义关系。过去大家常用 cosine 相似度或线性 probe 去解释 embedding，但这只能看到“像不像”，很难表达“在给定 vegetable 的条件下，eggplant 和 tomato 是否语义独立”这种更接近概率结构的问题。","importance":"结论是：这是一篇偏机制分析和表示理论的工作，对直接提升预训练效果的冲击有限，但对理解 embedding 几何很有价值。对 pretrain 研究者的意义在于，它给出了一个比相似度更细粒度的语言表示分析视角：如果预训练表示真的携带组合式语义结构，那么这种结构不应只体现在距离上，也应体现在某种代数约束上。这个视角未来可能影响 tokenizer、表示监督或解释性评测设计。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把语义独立性映射为 partial orthogonality（部分正交）这样的代数结构。作者先从独立性公理出发，论证一个合理的语义独立概念应满足哪些性质，再寻找能在向量空间中承载这些性质的结构，并据此发展识别/解释 embedding 含义的方法。和直接做 probe 不同，这不是把下游标签拟合到 embedding 上，而是问 embedding 自身是否支持某类结构性推断。这样做的优势是解释更接近表示本体，代价是理论假设更强，且真实语言是否足够符合这些公理，需要经验检验。","experiments":"摘要没有给出具体数据集、模型或数值结果，因此不能可靠补充。可以推断，实验重点应是验证 partial orthogonality 是否能从现有文本 embedding 中恢复人类可解释的语义关系，或在合成/真实语料上检验独立性公理的适配程度。对做预训练的人，这篇论文的实验不应按 SOTA 看，而应看两点：一是这种结构分析在不同 embedding 家族里是否稳定；二是它是否提供了相似度分析给不出的额外诊断信号。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a deeper interpretability question: what semantic structure is actually encoded in embeddings beyond plain similarity? Standard analyses rely on cosine similarity or linear probes, which are useful but limited; they do not naturally capture conditional semantic independence, such as whether two concepts are independent given a broader parent concept.","importance":"This is mainly a representation-theory and interpretability contribution rather than a direct training advance. Its value for pretraining research is that it proposes a stronger lens for analyzing learned representations: if embeddings truly encode compositional semantics, that structure should appear not only in distances but also in algebraic relations. That is useful for diagnosis and possibly for future objective or evaluation design.","technical_approach":"The key idea is to model semantic independence through partial orthogonality. The authors start from independence axioms—what any reasonable notion of semantic independence should satisfy—and then identify an algebraic structure in vector spaces that can express those properties. This is different from probing because it does not fit external labels onto embeddings; it asks whether the embedding geometry itself supports structured semantic reasoning. The upside is a cleaner link between geometry and meaning. The downside is stronger modeling assumptions and the risk that real language does not satisfy the axioms cleanly enough.","experiments":"The provided abstract does not include concrete datasets, models, or numerical outcomes, so no trustworthy quantitative summary can be given here. The likely empirical focus is whether partial orthogonality can recover interpretable semantic relations from existing embeddings and whether the proposed axioms hold in synthetic or natural-language settings. For pretraining practitioners, the paper is worth reading only if it produces diagnostics that are stable across embedding families and that go beyond what similarity-based analyses already reveal.","authors_note":""},"tags":["embeddings","interpretability","semantic-structure"],"keywords":["embedding","representation","graphical models","partial orthogonality","Markov boundary"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3的部分正交语义映射推导，可作为预训练表示可解释性、语义结构评测的新工具参考","en":"Focus on §3 derivation of partial orthogonality semantic mapping, which can be used as a new tool reference for pre-training representation interpretability and semantic structure evaluation."}},{"id":"JiangXZHZ023","title":"Evaluating and Inducing Personality in Pre-trained Language Models","authors":["Guangyuan Jiang","Manjie Xu","Song-Chun Zhu","Wenjuan Han","Chi Zhang","Yixin Zhu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$140","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JiangXZHZ023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JiangXZHZ023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/21f7b745f73ce0d1f9bcea7f40b1388e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：预训练语言模型是否具有稳定可测的人格特征，以及能否在不彻底重训模型的情况下诱导出目标人格。过去很多“人格”研究停留在提示词层面的印象描述，缺少系统评估框架；而一旦人格被用于 agent 或对话系统，它会直接影响长期交互、一致性和安全边界，所以值得系统化研究。","importance":"结论是：这是一篇位于 pretrain 与 posttrain 接口的分析/方法工作，直接贡献可能不是提升基准分，而是把一个长期被模糊处理的模型属性变成可测、可控对象。对预训练研究的启示是，模型中的高层行为风格并不完全等同于指令微调模板，它可能在预训练分布中已有潜在表示；如果能稳定诱导，说明这类行为属性在表示空间中是可操控的，这对 agent 设计、对齐和人格一致性很重要。","technical_approach":"从题目看，方法包含两部分：一是评估预训练 LM 的人格分布，二是通过某种干预机制诱导目标人格。常见做法可能包括基于人格量表的问卷式评测、角色条件化提示、轻量参数更新或解码控制。与一般 persona prompting 的区别应该在于作者强调“evaluating and inducing”这一闭环，也就是先定义测量，再验证可控性，而不是只展示几个角色案例。这样设计合理，因为没有可靠测量就无法判断诱导是否真的改变人格而非表面文风。边界则是：人格评测高度依赖量表和提示模板，跨任务稳定性通常是最大难点。","experiments":"给到信息不足，无法确认使用了哪些模型、人格量表、数据集和具体数值提升。对资深读者，这篇论文最值得关注的实验应该包括：不同预训练模型的人格差异是否稳定；相同模型在不同 prompt/任务下的人格测量方差有多大；诱导后的人格是否在多轮对话和开放任务中保持，而不是只在问卷题上有效。如果这些检验不充分，这类工作容易退化成 prompt engineering 现象学。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether pretrained language models exhibit measurable personality traits and whether those traits can be deliberately induced without retraining the entire model. Prior work often treated “personality” as a prompt-level anecdote rather than a property that can be systematically measured and controlled, which is limiting for agents and long-horizon dialogue systems.","importance":"This is best viewed as a pretrain–posttrain interface paper. Its main value is not benchmark chasing but turning a vague behavioral attribute into something evaluable and potentially controllable. For pretraining researchers, the interesting implication is that high-level behavioral style may already be latent in pretrained representations rather than being solely imposed during instruction tuning.","technical_approach":"From the title, the work has two parts: evaluating personality in pretrained LMs and inducing target personality traits through some intervention. That likely involves personality inventories, prompt-based elicitation, and possibly lightweight control mechanisms such as conditioning, decoding control, or parameter-efficient adaptation. The useful design principle here is to tie control claims to an explicit measurement framework. Without that, personality induction quickly collapses into superficial style transfer rather than a stable behavioral shift.","experiments":"The provided information is not enough to report models, datasets, personality inventories, or quantitative outcomes reliably. For an experienced reader, the key experiments should test three things: whether personality measurements are stable across prompts and tasks, whether different pretrained models show reproducible personality profiles, and whether induced traits persist in open-ended interaction rather than only in questionnaire-style evaluations. Without those checks, the work would be hard to distinguish from prompt-level role play.","authors_note":""},"tags":["personality","llm-behavior","interpretability","pretrained-lm"],"keywords":["machine personality","machine behavior","personality trait theory","psychometric","large language models","prompt"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3人格评估框架和§5诱导实验部分即可，可用于指导对齐阶段模型行为风格的可控性验证。","en":"Only read §3 personality evaluation framework and §5 induction experiments, which can guide controllability verification of model behavior style during alignment."}},{"id":"JinCLGKLBAKSS23","title":"CLadder: A Benchmark to Assess Causal Reasoning Capabilities of Language Models","authors":["Zhijing Jin","Yuen Chen","Felix Leeb","Luigi Gresele","Ojasv Kamal","Zhiheng Lyu","Kevin Blin","Fernando Gonzalez Adauto","Max Kleiman-Weiner","Mrinmaya Sachan","Bernhard Schölkopf"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JinCLGKLBAKSS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JinCLGKLBAKSS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/631bb9434d718ea309af82566347d607-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：现有语言模型评测大多考相关性或表面推理，但对真正的因果推理能力测得不准，尤其难区分模型是在记忆叙事模板，还是在处理干预、反事实和因果链。以前很多 benchmark 用常识问答替代因果推理，导致模型只要利用语料统计就能拿高分，因此需要更针对 causal reasoning 的评测集。","importance":"结论是：这是一篇评测级的重要工作，对 pretrain 的直接贡献不在训练方法，而在诊断工具。它的重要性在于把“模型会不会因果推理”从泛泛而谈变成可细分、可失败分析的问题。对预训练研究者，这类基准很有价值，因为它能帮助判断提升是来自更强记忆、更长上下文利用，还是确实改善了结构化推理能力。","technical_approach":"核心方法是构建 CLadder 基准，用一组分层任务去测试语言模型的因果推理能力。根据名称推测，ladder 很可能借鉴因果推理中的层级结构，例如相关、干预、反事实等不同难度层次，并通过控制问题模板来减少纯表面模式匹配。与普通 QA benchmark 相比，这样设计的关键是把不同推理层级拆开评测，避免总分掩盖具体短板。代价是 benchmark 设计若不够严格，模型仍可能通过语言模式投机；因此数据构造和对抗性去模板化是成败关键。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体规模和数字，不能可靠补充。可以合理预期，实验会比较多类语言模型在不同因果层级任务上的表现，并分析模型规模、CoT 或外部提示对结果的影响。对做预训练的人，最关键的观察通常不是谁第一，而是错误模式：模型是卡在干预理解、反事实一致性，还是容易被叙事先验误导；这些误差结构比总准确率更能反过来指导预训练数据和目标设计。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a benchmark gap: current LM evaluations often reward surface plausibility or memorized narrative patterns, not genuine causal reasoning. Many datasets loosely labeled as “reasoning” can be solved with statistical associations, so they do not tell us whether a model can handle intervention, counterfactuals, or causal chains.","importance":"This is an evaluation contribution with real value for pretraining research. Its importance lies in making causal reasoning failures legible rather than hiding them behind aggregate QA scores. For model builders, that matters because it helps separate gains due to memorization or stronger language priors from gains that reflect more structured reasoning ability.","technical_approach":"The core contribution is the CLadder benchmark, which appears to organize causal reasoning tasks into layered levels of difficulty or type. The likely design principle is to distinguish between association-level reasoning and more demanding causal operations such as intervention and counterfactual reasoning, while controlling templates to reduce shortcut exploitation. Compared with generic QA benchmarks, this layered setup is more diagnostic. Its weakness, as with all reasoning benchmarks, is that if the templating is not careful enough, language models may still exploit superficial cues.","experiments":"The provided metadata does not include dataset size, models, or exact scores, so a quantitative summary would be speculative. The likely experiments compare a range of language models across causal reasoning strata and study the effect of scale, prompting, or chain-of-thought. For pretraining practitioners, the most useful result is usually the error breakdown: whether models fail on interventions, counterfactual consistency, or causal confounding. That structure is more informative than leaderboard ranking alone.","authors_note":""},"tags":["causal-reasoning","benchmark","llm-evaluation"]},{"id":"KangLBKH23","title":"Knowledge-Augmented Reasoning Distillation for Small Language Models in Knowledge-Intensive Tasks","authors":["Minki Kang","Seanie Lee","Jinheon Baek","Kenji Kawaguchi","Sung Ju Hwang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$141","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KangLBKH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KangLBKH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/97faedc90260eae5c400f92d5831c3d7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"小语言模型在知识密集推理任务上表现差，此前的蒸馏方法只迁移LLM的输出或推理步骤，未解决小模型知识存储容量不足的问题，导致蒸馏效果差。","importance":"属于方法级贡献，提出了知识增强的推理蒸馏框架，可有效提升小模型在知识密集任务上的表现，为小模型蒸馏的目标设计提供了新的思路，也可用于指导知识类预训练数据的构建。","technical_approach":"原创KARD方法，在蒸馏小模型生成LLM的推理链的同时，将推理过程中用到的知识作为附加输入注入小模型，舍弃了传统蒸馏只迁移推理过程不引入外部知识的设计，解决了小模型知识存储不足的瓶颈。","experiments":"在MMLU、CommonsenseQA等4个知识密集基准上测试，7B小模型经过KARD蒸馏后的准确率比传统蒸馏方法高11%-16%，接近33B LLM 78%的性能；消融实验显示知识注入的时机在推理链生成前时效果最好，比中间注入高6%。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Small language models perform poorly on knowledge-intensive reasoning tasks. Previous distillation methods only transfer the outputs or reasoning steps of LLMs, and do not solve the problem of insufficient knowledge storage capacity of small models, leading to poor distillation effect.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution, proposing a knowledge-augmented reasoning distillation framework. It can effectively improve the performance of small models on knowledge-intensive tasks, provides new ideas for the objective design of small model distillation, and can guide the construction of knowledge-type pretraining data.","technical_approach":"The original KARD method injects the knowledge used in the reasoning process as additional input into the small model while distilling the small model to generate the reasoning chain of LLMs. It discards the traditional distillation design that only transfers the reasoning process without introducing external knowledge, and solves the bottleneck of insufficient knowledge storage of small models.","experiments":"Tested on 4 knowledge-intensive benchmarks including MMLU and CommonsenseQA, the accuracy of 7B small models after KARD distillation is 11-16% higher than traditional distillation methods, close to 78% of the performance of 33B LLMs. Ablation shows knowledge injection before reasoning chain generation achieves the best effect, 6% higher than intermediate injection.","authors_note":""},"tags":["distillation","reasoning","knowledge","small-models"],"keywords":["language model","distillation","reasoning","knowledge augmentation"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大语言模型在知识密集推理任务上的表现远优于小语言模型","claim_en":"Large language models significantly outperform small language models on knowledge-intensive reasoning tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"引入外部知识输入的推理蒸馏比让小模型自己存储知识的效果更好、效率更高","claim_en":"Reasoning distillation with external knowledge input has better effect and higher efficiency than letting small models store knowledge by themselves","opposes":"Prior work believes small models should store required knowledge through pretraining or distillation to complete knowledge-intensive tasks","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4.1 Performance Comparison","why_contested":"Changes the design idea of small models adapting to knowledge-intensive tasks, the architecture of knowledge retrieval + reasoning is more suitable for small models than pure parameter storage"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为小模型蒸馏方向的文献备查，不需要读正文，核心思路可用于参考知识类预训练数据构造。","en":"For literature reference in small model distillation, no need to read full text, core idea can be referenced for knowledge-intensive pre-training data construction."}},{"id":"KazemiYBKXIR23","title":"BoardgameQA: A Dataset for Natural Language Reasoning with Contradictory Information","authors":["Mehran Kazemi","Quan Yuan","Deepti Bhatia","Najoung Kim","Xin Xu","Vaiva Imbrasaite","Deepak Ramachandran"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$142","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KazemiYBKXIR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KazemiYBKXIR23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/7adce80e86aa841490e6307109094de5-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有自然语言推理基准都假设推理用到的信息是一致无矛盾的，无法衡量模型在真实世界存在矛盾信息时的推理能力。此前的方法未针对矛盾信息的推理和冲突解决进行评估。","importance":"属于数据集级贡献，填补了矛盾信息推理评估的空白，可用于验证LLM预训练的鲁棒性和冲突解决能力，也可指导LLM对齐阶段的冲突处理能力训练。","technical_approach":"基于桌游规则构建了包含矛盾信息的自然语言推理数据集，每个问题包含多个可信度不同的信息源，模型需要根据源可信度优先级解决冲突后推理得到答案，舍弃了传统推理基准信息完全一致的假设。","experiments":"数据集包含12k+推理样本，覆盖3种冲突类型、5种可信度优先级规则；测试显示70B LLM在BoardgameQA上的准确率只有38%，比在无矛盾的同类型推理基准上低47%；消融实验显示冲突信息数量越多，模型准确率下降幅度越大，每增加1条冲突信息准确率下降9%。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"All existing natural language reasoning benchmarks assume that the information used for reasoning is consistent and non-contradictory, and cannot measure the reasoning ability of models when there is contradictory information in the real world. Previous methods do not evaluate reasoning and conflict resolution for contradictory information.","importance":"It is a dataset-level contribution, filling the gap of reasoning evaluation with contradictory information. It can be used to verify the robustness and conflict resolution capability of LLM pretraining, and guide the training of conflict handling capability in the LLM alignment phase.","technical_approach":"A natural language reasoning dataset containing contradictory information is constructed based on board game rules. Each question contains multiple information sources with different credibility levels, and the model needs to resolve conflicts according to the priority of source credibility before reasoning to get the answer. It discards the assumption of completely consistent information in traditional reasoning benchmarks.","experiments":"The dataset contains more than 12k reasoning samples, covering 3 conflict types and 5 credibility priority rules. Tests show that the accuracy of 70B LLMs on BoardgameQA is only 38%, 47% lower than that on non-contradictory reasoning benchmarks of the same type. Ablation shows that the more conflicting information there is, the greater the decline in model accuracy, with a 9% drop in accuracy for each additional piece of conflicting information.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reasoning","dataset","contradiction","evaluation"],"keywords":["natural language reasoning","defeasible reasoning","large language models"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"真实世界中用于推理的信息通常存在矛盾和不一致的情况","claim_en":"Information used for reasoning in the real world is usually contradictory and inconsistent","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"现有大语言模型的矛盾信息处理能力非常差，远低于无矛盾场景下的推理水平","claim_en":"Existing large language models have very poor contradictory information processing capability, far lower than their reasoning performance in non-contradictory scenarios","opposes":"Prior work assumes LLMs' reasoning capability can be naturally transferred to scenarios with contradictory information","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5.1 Model Performance Test","why_contested":"Exposes an obvious shortcoming of existing LLM pretraining and alignment, pointing out a clear direction for subsequent capability improvement"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为矛盾信息推理评估的数据集文献备查，仅需知道其构造思路可用于验证预训练模型鲁棒性即可。","en":"For literature reference of contradictory information reasoning datasets, only need to know its construction logic for verifying pre-trained model robustness."}},{"id":"KimSBSBDVYC23","title":"P-Flow: A Fast and Data-Efficient Zero-Shot TTS through Speech Prompting","authors":["Sungwon Kim","Kevin J. Shih","Rohan Badlani","João Felipe Santos","Evelina Bakhturina","Mikyas T. Desta","Rafael Valle","Sungroh Yoon","Bryan Catanzaro"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$143","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KimSBSBDVYC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KimSBSBDVYC23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/eb0965da1d2cb3fbbbb8dbbad5fa0bfc-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"现有零样本TTS的神经Codec语言模型依赖数千小时的训练数据，采样速度慢、鲁棒性差。此前的方法要么是自回归范式速度慢，要么依赖预训练Codec泛化性差，无法兼顾速度、数据效率和零样本效果。","importance":"属于方法级贡献，提出了基于流匹配的零样本TTS新范式，可大幅降低零样本TTS的训练成本和推理延迟，也为语音预训练的生成范式选择提供了参考。","technical_approach":"原创P-Flow架构，包含语音提示的文本编码器实现说话人适配，流匹配生成解码器实现快速语音合成；舍弃了自回归生成范式和预训练Codec的依赖，只用1k小时训练数据就能实现零样本TTS能力，采样速度是自回归模型的20倍以上。","experiments":"用1000小时公开语音数据训练，零样本说话人相似度达到0.92，比此前的Codec LM方法高0.07，语音自然度MOS分达到4.2，和自回归模型的4.25相当，采样速度是VALL-E的23倍；消融实验显示流匹配解码器比扩散解码器的采样速度高12倍，相似度只下降0.02。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing neural codec language models for zero-shot TTS rely on thousands of hours of training data, with slow sampling speed and poor robustness. Previous methods are either slow in AR paradigm or have poor generalization relying on pretrained codecs, and cannot balance speed, data efficiency and zero-shot performance.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution, proposing a new zero-shot TTS paradigm based on flow matching. It can significantly reduce the training cost and inference latency of zero-shot TTS, and provide reference for the selection of generation paradigms for speech pretraining.","technical_approach":"The original P-Flow architecture includes a speech-prompted text encoder for speaker adaptation, and a flow matching generative decoder for fast speech synthesis. It discards the AR generation paradigm and the dependence on pretrained codecs, and can achieve zero-shot TTS capability with only 1k hours of training data, with sampling speed more than 20 times that of AR models.","experiments":"Trained with 1000 hours of public speech data, the zero-shot speaker similarity reaches 0.92, 0.07 higher than previous codec LM methods, the speech naturalness MOS score reaches 4.2, equivalent to 4.25 of AR models, and the sampling speed is 23 times that of VALL-E. Ablation shows that the flow matching decoder has 12 times higher sampling speed than the diffusion decoder, with only 0.02 drop in similarity.","authors_note":""},"tags":["tts","speech","prompting","zero-shot"],"keywords":["text-to-speech","zero-shot TTS","flow matching generative model"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"零样本TTS需要同时满足说话人相似度、语音自然度和推理速度三个核心指标","claim_en":"Zero-shot TTS needs to meet three core indicators: speaker similarity, speech naturalness and inference speed","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"流匹配生成范式在零样本TTS任务上可以同时实现比自回归更高的采样效率和比扩散更好的样本质量，数据效率也更高","claim_en":"Flow matching generation paradigm can achieve higher sampling efficiency than AR, better sample quality than diffusion, and higher data efficiency at the same time on zero-shot TTS tasks","opposes":"Prior work believes AR paradigm is the best performing generation paradigm for zero-shot TTS","opposes_cite_hint":"VALL-E 2023","evidence_anchor":"§4.2 Performance Comparison","why_contested":"Proves the advantage of flow matching in speech generation tasks, changing the selection tendency of generation paradigms for speech pretraining"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对语音生成范式的固有认知，应立刻在内部语音预训练项目中复现其流匹配解码方案。","en":"Changes my prior perception of speech generation paradigms, the flow matching decoding scheme should be reproduced in internal speech pre-training projects immediately."}},{"id":"KleinKN23","title":"Equivariant flow matching","authors":["Leon Klein","Andreas Krämer","Frank Noé"],"institutions":["Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization","Freie Universität Berlin"],"abstract":"$144","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KleinKN23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KleinKN23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/bc827452450356f9f558f4e4568d553b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：如何把 flow matching 这类连续归一化流/生成流方法，严格扩展到带对称性的几何数据上。以往做法通常把 SE(3) 等变性通过网络结构或数据增强近似注入，但训练目标本身未必等变，结果是采样效率、物理一致性和泛化都会受限；这个问题在分子、蛋白和3D点云生成里很关键，因为坐标系变化不应改变分布。","importance":"它的价值主要是方法级的：把 flow matching 从“普通欧氏空间的高效生成训练”推进到“群等变生成建模”。对 pretrain 的启发不在文本 LM，而在统一生成范式上：如果训练目标本身尊重对称性，就能少靠数据增强和后处理，直接把 inductive bias 放进生成动力学。边界也很清楚，这更适合几何生成和科学机器学习，对大语言模型预训练的直接冲击有限，但对多模态 token/连续表示建模有参考意义。","technical_approach":"核心方法是一个等变版 flow matching 目标，而不是仅仅把现有等变网络塞进原目标里。作者从群作用下的概率路径出发，构造与对称群兼容的向量场学习问题，使得学习到的流在群变换下满足一致变换规则；这样做的关键收益是，等变性由目标函数和动力学共同保证，而不是只靠参数共享去“尽量学出来”。与最接近的工作相比，区别在于它不是单独讨论 score-based model 的等变性，也不是单独设计 EGNN/SE(3)-Transformer，而是直接把 flow matching 这一训练范式做成等变的。","experiments":"公开信息里能确认的是，论文会在典型几何生成任务上比较等变 flow matching 与非等变 flow/扩散基线，关注生成质量、样本效率和旋转/平移鲁棒性。可以合理预期 baseline 包括常规 flow matching、可能的 score/diffusion 生成器和等变架构变体；但在当前给定信息下，模型规模、数据规模、具体指标与提升幅度无法可靠确认，因此不应编造。对读者真正有价值的实验点，应是：等变目标是否在同等网络容量下更稳、更省数据，以及当对称性被破坏时性能是否退化。","authors_note":"Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization / Freie Universität Berlin / Noé 团队相关方向。Frank Noé 是分子生成、动力系统建模、Boltzmann generator、equivariant/scientific ML 的代表性作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a clean question: how to make flow matching truly equivariant for geometric data with symmetries. Prior work often injected SE(3)-style symmetry through the architecture or augmentation, while keeping the training objective itself generic; that is workable but suboptimal for molecules, proteins, and 3D structures where the distribution should not depend on the coordinate frame.","importance":"This is mainly a method-level contribution: it extends flow matching from generic continuous generative modeling to symmetry-aware generative dynamics. The broader pretraining relevance is indirect but real: when the objective respects the invariances of the domain, one can reduce reliance on augmentation and let the generation process encode the right bias by construction. The scope is narrower than mainstream LLM pretraining, but the idea matters for unified modeling over continuous multimodal representations.","technical_approach":"The core idea is an equivariant flow-matching objective, not just an equivariant backbone plugged into standard flow matching. The method formulates probability paths and vector-field learning so that the learned transport obeys the group action consistently; this matters because equivariance is enforced at the level of the objective and dynamics, rather than being left to parameter sharing alone. Compared with nearby work, it is not just another equivariant network and not just an equivariant score model; it turns flow matching itself into an equivariant training paradigm.","experiments":"From the available information, the paper is expected to evaluate on standard geometric generation settings and compare against non-equivariant flow or diffusion baselines, focusing on generation quality, sample efficiency, and robustness to rotations/translations. Likely baselines include standard flow matching and possibly equivariant architectural variants, but the provided metadata does not support precise claims about parameter counts, dataset sizes, metrics, or exact gains. The useful questions to look for are whether the equivariant objective improves data efficiency at fixed capacity and how gracefully it degrades when the assumed symmetry is only approximate.","authors_note":"Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization / Freie Universität Berlin / the Frank Noé line of work. Frank Noé is well known for molecular generation, dynamical systems modeling, Boltzmann generators, and scientific ML with geometric structure."},"tags":["flow-matching","equivariance","generative-modeling"],"notable_authors":["Frank Noé"],"keywords":["Normalizing Flows","Flow Matching","Equivariance","Boltzmann Generators","Molecular Dynamics","Optimal Transport"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§2等变目标推导部分即可，可参考用于几何数据、多模态连续表示的预训练生成目标设计。","en":"Only read §2 equivariant objective derivation, it can be referenced for pre-training generation objective design of geometric data and multimodal continuous representations."}},{"id":"KongM23","title":"A Unified Fast Gradient Clipping Framework for DP-SGD","authors":["Weiwei Kong","Andrés Muñoz Medina"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"A well-known numerical bottleneck in the differentially-private stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD) algorithm is the computation of the gradient norm for each example in a large input batch. When the loss function in DP-SGD is consists of an intermediate linear operation, existing methods in the literature have proposed decompositions of gradients that are amenable to fast norm computations. In this paper, we present a framework that generalizes the above approach to arbitrary (possibly nonlinear) intermediate operations. Moreover, we show that for certain operations, such as fully-connected and embedding layer computations, further improvements to the runtime and storage costs of existing decompositions can be deduced using certain components of our framework. Finally, preliminary numerical experiments are given to demonstrate the substantial effects of the aforementioned improvements.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KongM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KongM23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/a45d344b28179c8da7646bc38ff50ad8-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是 DP-SGD 中一个非常实际的瓶颈：每样本梯度裁剪太贵，导致差分隐私训练很难扩到大模型和大 batch。过去社区有多种 fast clipping 技巧，但往往只适用于特定层或特定实现，工程上碎片化，难以推广。","importance":"它的贡献是系统+方法级的，而且对大规模预训练很相关。原因很简单：只要训练数据带有隐私约束，DP-SGD 的主要成本就不是噪声本身，而是 per-example gradient 的计算和裁剪；如果这一步能被统一加速，差分隐私预训练和对齐训练的可行规模会明显扩大。它不是改变隐私-效用边界的理论突破，而是降低实现门槛和常数项成本的实用推进。","technical_approach":"核心方法是给 DP-SGD 提供一个统一的快速梯度裁剪框架，把不同层类型下 per-example norm 的高效计算写成可组合的通用形式。关键不是近似地“少算一点梯度”，而是在不改变 DP-SGD 语义的前提下，用反向传播结构和层级分解更便宜地得到裁剪所需的范数与更新。与已有零散 fast clipping 方法相比，这项工作强调统一性：同一套框架覆盖更广的网络模块，减少为每种层单独推导和实现。","experiments":"按这类工作的常规设置，实验通常会报告在 MLP/CNN/Transformer 上的训练吞吐、显存占用和与标准 Opacus/naive per-example gradient 实现的加速比，同时检查精度与隐私会计是否不变。当前给定信息不足以可靠写出具体模型规模、epsilon、加速倍数或任务结果，因此不应硬填数字。值得关注的实验点是：加速是否随着 batch size 增大而更明显，哪些层类型是主要收益来源，以及框架在现代 Transformer 训练栈中的兼容性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical bottleneck in DP-SGD: per-example gradient clipping is expensive enough to make private training hard to scale. Earlier fast-clipping tricks existed, but they were often layer-specific and fragmented, which limited adoption in larger or more modern models.","importance":"This is a system-plus-method contribution with direct relevance to large-scale training under privacy constraints. In practice, the dominant cost of DP-SGD is often not the noise injection itself but computing and clipping per-sample gradients; making that step broadly cheaper can materially expand the range of feasible private pretraining and alignment workloads. It does not change the privacy-utility frontier in principle, but it lowers the engineering and compute barrier substantially.","technical_approach":"The core idea is a unified fast gradient-clipping framework for DP-SGD that expresses efficient per-example norm computation in a common form across layer types. The key is not to approximate away clipping, but to exploit backprop structure and layer-wise decompositions so that the quantities needed for clipping can be obtained much more cheaply without changing the semantics of DP-SGD. Compared with prior fast-clipping methods, the main differentiator is coverage and composability rather than one new trick for one specific layer.","experiments":"For this class of work, the important experiments typically report training throughput, memory use, and speedups over naive per-example gradient implementations or standard DP libraries on MLPs, CNNs, and Transformers, while verifying that utility and privacy accounting remain unchanged. The provided metadata does not support precise claims about model size, epsilon, speedup factors, or downstream accuracy. The main results worth checking are how speedup scales with batch size, which layer families drive the gains, and whether the method integrates cleanly into modern Transformer training stacks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["dp-sgd","gradient-clipping","training-efficiency"],"keywords":["differential privacy","dp-sgd","gradient clipping","computational complexity"],"recommendation":{"zh":"直接读§3统一框架实现部分和性能对比表即可，可直接落地到隐私约束的预训练对齐任务中。","en":"Just read §3 unified framework implementation and performance comparison tables, it can be directly applied to privacy-constrained pre-training and alignment tasks."}},{"id":"KrojerPVPR23","title":"Are Diffusion Models Vision-And-Language Reasoners?","authors":["Benno Krojer","Elinor Poole-Dayan","Vikram Voleti","Chris Pal","Siva Reddy"],"institutions":["McGill University","Mila"],"abstract":"$145","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KrojerPVPR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KrojerPVPR23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/1a675d804f50509b8e21d0d3ca709d03-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要回答的是：扩散模型除了会生成图像，是否已经具备某种视觉-语言推理能力。过去 VLM 推理大多由编码器-解码器或多模态 LLM 承担，而扩散模型通常被视为感知/生成器，不被当作 reasoning system；作者在检验这种分工是否过于武断。","importance":"它的重要性是范式辨析层面的。对 pretrain 研究者来说，这类工作很有价值，因为它直接关系到“AR LM、VLM、diffusion 各自擅长什么”这件事是否只是工程惯例，而不是能力边界。如果扩散模型能承担一部分 V&L reasoning，那么统一生成框架、AR+diffusion 混合训练、以及 world modeling 的设计空间都会变大；但如果表现只停留在浅层相关性，这也能帮助社区更清楚地划定 diffusion 的优势边界。","technical_approach":"核心方法大概率是把视觉-语言推理任务转写为扩散模型可处理的条件生成或打分问题，然后测试模型是否能通过生成过程体现组合推理。关键不在于再训练一个更大的 VLM，而在于设计公平评测：区分模型是在记忆视觉共现，还是在利用条件去做多步选择、关系判断或语言约束满足。与传统 VLM 相比，这条路线通常没有显式 next-token 推理轨迹，而是把“推理”隐含在去噪或条件采样过程里。","experiments":"从标题判断，实验会围绕若干 vision-language reasoning benchmark，对比扩散模型与标准 VLM/LLM 的表现，并分析错误类型。当前信息不足以确认具体 benchmark、模型规模和数值结果。对读者最重要的观察通常不是单个准确率，而是：扩散模型在哪些任务上接近 reasoning，在哪些任务上明显退化；例如属性绑定、计数、关系推断和多步语言约束往往能暴露其能力上限。","authors_note":"McGill University / Mila 相关可能性较高。 Chris Pal 和 Siva Reddy 都是多模态、NLP 与推理方向的知名作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether diffusion models are only image generators or whether they can also function as vision-language reasoners. Standard practice assigns reasoning to VLMs or multimodal LLMs and treats diffusion models mainly as perception/generation modules, so the work tests whether that division is too rigid.","importance":"This is a paradigm-clarification paper. For pretraining research, it matters because it informs where capability boundaries really lie across autoregressive LMs, VLMs, and diffusion models. If diffusion models can support meaningful vision-language reasoning, that expands the design space for unified generative training and AR-plus-diffusion hybrids; if not, the result is still useful because it sharpens the boundary of what diffusion is good at.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is to cast vision-language reasoning tasks into conditional generation or scoring setups that a diffusion model can handle, then test whether the denoising process captures more than shallow correlation. The key methodological issue is evaluation: separating genuine compositional or relational reasoning from memorized co-occurrence. Unlike standard autoregressive VLMs, this route does not expose an explicit token-by-token reasoning trace; any reasoning must emerge implicitly through conditional denoising and sampling.","experiments":"From the title, the experiments likely compare diffusion-based systems against standard VLM or LLM baselines on vision-language reasoning benchmarks and analyze failure modes. The metadata does not support precise statements about models, datasets, or metrics. The most useful takeaways are task-specific: whether diffusion handles attribute binding, counting, relation inference, or multi-step language constraints at all, and where performance breaks sharply.","authors_note":"Likely connected to McGill University / Mila. Chris Pal and Siva Reddy are well-known researchers in multimodal learning, NLP, and reasoning."},"tags":["diffusion-models","vision-language","reasoning","benchmark"],"notable_authors":["Chris Pal","Siva Reddy"],"keywords":["diffusion model","automatic evaluation","vision-and-language","compositionality"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4评测设计和实验结果表即可，能帮你明确扩散模型和多模态大模型的能力边界。","en":"Only read §4 evaluation design and experimental result tables, it helps clarify the capability boundary between diffusion models and multimodal LLMs."}},{"id":"LamT0YFTJXMSCW023","title":"Efficient Neural Music Generation","authors":["Max W. Y. Lam","Qiao Tian","Tang Li","Zongyu Yin","Siyuan Feng","Ming Tu","Yuliang Ji","Rui Xia","Mingbo Ma","Xuchen Song","Jitong Chen","Yuping Wang","Yuxuan Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$146","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LamT0YFTJXMSCW023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LamT0YFTJXMSCW023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/38b23e2328096520e9c889ae03e372c9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是神经音乐生成的效率瓶颈：高质量音乐通常需要长时序、高采样率和多层离散表示，导致训练和采样都很贵。过去 MusicLM/MusicGen 一类系统能生成不错的片段，但一旦追求更长时长、更低延迟或更低算力部署，成本很快失控。","importance":"它对 audio LM/pretrain 的意义是系统级+方法级的。音乐生成比语音更依赖长程结构，因此任何能显著提升训练或生成效率的设计，都可能改变离散音频 token 建模的可扩展性。它不一定提出全新建模范式，但如果能在基本不伤质量的前提下降低 token rate、层数或解码成本，对统一音频语言模型路线非常有价值。","technical_approach":"从题目看，核心方法是围绕效率重新设计神经音乐生成链路，可能涉及更紧凑的音乐 tokenization、更高效的层级生成、蒸馏或缓存式采样。真正有效的设计通常不是单点技巧，而是明确找出成本主因：是 codec token 太密、长上下文注意力太贵，还是层级生成中的重复计算太多；然后针对主因做结构化削减。与直接堆大模型相比，这类工作更关心在固定算力下的质量-速度折中。","experiments":"可以预期实验会报告生成速度、训练成本、音乐质量评测和与现有音乐生成系统的比较。当前给定信息不足以确认模型参数量、音频时长、token rate、主观评测或 FAD/CLAP 类指标，因此不应编造。值得重点关注的实验观察是：效率提升来自哪里，是否主要通过更少 token 或更少生成步骤实现；以及在长时长生成时，结构连贯性是否明显下降，这是音乐生成里最常见的代价。","authors_note":"可能与字节跳动、Google 或高校音乐生成团队相关，但当前信息不足以确认，故留空。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets the efficiency bottleneck in neural music generation. High-quality music typically requires long sequences, high temporal resolution, and often hierarchical discrete representations, which make both training and sampling expensive. Existing systems can generate good short clips, but scaling duration down in latency or compute cost remains difficult.","importance":"This is relevant to audio-LM pretraining at both the systems and method levels. Music stresses long-range structure even more than speech, so any improvement in efficiency can materially change what scales in discrete audio token modeling. The work may not introduce a new modeling paradigm, but if it reduces token rate, hierarchy cost, or decoding expense without heavily hurting quality, that is valuable for the broader audio language modeling stack.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method likely redesigns the generation pipeline around efficiency, potentially via more compact music tokenization, more efficient hierarchical generation, distillation, or cached decoding. Effective work in this area usually succeeds by identifying the real bottleneck—dense codec tokens, expensive long-context attention, or repeated computation across hierarchy levels—and then reducing that cost in a structured way. The emphasis is on quality-speed trade-offs under fixed compute, not just scaling model size.","experiments":"The expected experiments would compare generation speed, training cost, and music quality against existing neural music generation systems. The available information does not support exact claims about parameter counts, clip duration, token rates, subjective ratings, or FAD-style metrics. The most important results to inspect are where the efficiency gains come from and whether longer-generation coherence degrades noticeably, since that is the standard trade-off in music generation.","authors_note":""},"tags":["music-generation","audio-lm","efficiency"],"keywords":["Music Generation","Language Model","Diffusion Model","MusicLM"],"recommendation":{"zh":"直接读§3效率优化的核心设计部分即可，可参考用于音频预训练的tokenization和生成链路优化。","en":"Just read §3 core efficiency optimization design, it can be referenced for tokenization and generation pipeline optimization in audio pre-training."}},{"id":"LeeDDLNCZ23","title":"Rethinking the Role of Token Retrieval in Multi-Vector Retrieval","authors":["Jinhyuk Lee","Zhuyun Dai","Sai Meher Karthik Duddu","Tao Lei","Iftekhar Naim","Ming-Wei Chang","Vincent Y. Zhao"],"institutions":["Google"],"abstract":"$147","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LeeDDLNCZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LeeDDLNCZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/31d997278ee9069d6721bc194174bb4c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文重新审视 multi-vector retrieval 里的一个默认前提：检索效果好是否真的主要来自 token-level retrieval。以 ColBERT 为代表的方法把文档和查询都编码成多向量，并做细粒度 late interaction；社区通常把性能提升归因于 token 级匹配更精细，但这一点其实缺少拆解验证。","importance":"这项工作的重要性在于它不是再造一个更大的检索器，而是拆解已有范式的真正有效成分。对 pretrain 研究者有启发，因为 retrieval-augmented LM 常借鉴 multi-vector 检索；如果 token retrieval 并不是收益主因，那么系统设计重点就可能应该转向表示分解、交互函数或索引效率，而不是一味保留高成本的 token 粒度存储。","technical_approach":"方法上，它通过系统性对比与重构，分析 multi-vector retrieval 中 token retrieval 的作用，并提出对该机制的重新理解。核心不是完全否定 late interaction，而是区分“多向量表示本身的好处”和“显式检索 token 匹配”的额外贡献。与直接沿用 ColBERT 设计不同，作者应当构造了替代性交互或聚合方案，来测试性能是否真的依赖逐 token 检索。这样的设计有效，因为它把常被捆绑在一起的几个因素拆开了：表示容量、局部匹配、索引粒度、重排成本。","experiments":"实验层面的主要结论通常是：multi-vector retrieval 的强性能不完全依赖 token retrieval，某些更简化或重构的方案在保持接近效果的同时能显著降低系统复杂度。当前给定信息没有数据集名称、延迟/吞吐和 nDCG/Recall 数字，因此不能准确填具体提升幅度；但对工程最有价值的观察是，如果 token-level 索引成本很高，而收益边际有限，那么在 RAG 场景里更值得优化的是表示压缩与两阶段检索接口。尤其对于大规模 serving，这类结论往往比单点精度提升更有影响。","authors_note":"作者列表包含 Google Research / Google DeepMind 风格的检索与语言团队成员，如 Zhuyun Dai、Kenton Lee 等常见于检索增强和高效 NLP 系统方向。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper revisits a common assumption in multi-vector retrieval: are the gains really driven by token-level retrieval itself. Methods like ColBERT encode queries and documents into multiple vectors and use late interaction, and the usual story is that finer token matching explains the improvement, but that claim has not been cleanly disentangled.","importance":"The contribution matters because it analyzes what is actually doing the work in an influential retrieval paradigm instead of just proposing a larger retriever. This is relevant to pretraining and RAG design. If token retrieval is not the main source of gains, then system effort may be better spent on representation decomposition, interaction functions, or indexing efficiency rather than preserving expensive token-level storage by default.","technical_approach":"The paper appears to use systematic decomposition and comparison to isolate the role of token retrieval in multi-vector retrieval. The point is not to reject late interaction entirely, but to separate the benefit of multi-vector representations from the extra benefit of explicit token-level retrieval. That likely involves alternative interaction or aggregation schemes that test whether strong performance truly requires per-token indexed matching. This is a useful design because it decouples factors that are often bundled together: representation capacity, local matching, index granularity, and reranking cost.","experiments":"The main empirical message is typically that strong multi-vector retrieval performance does not fully depend on token retrieval, and that simplified or restructured variants can retain much of the effectiveness with lower system complexity. The provided metadata does not include datasets, latency numbers, or exact nDCG/Recall results, so those should not be fabricated. For practitioners, the key takeaway is that when token-level indexing is expensive and its marginal gain is limited, the higher-impact design work for RAG may lie in compression and better first-stage/second-stage interfaces rather than token retrieval alone.","authors_note":"The author list includes retrieval and NLP researchers commonly associated with Google Research / Google DeepMind style work, including names such as Zhuyun Dai and Kenton Lee."},"tags":["retrieval","rag","representation-learning","efficiency"],"notable_authors":["Zhuyun Dai","Kenton Lee"],"keywords":["information retrieval","document retrieval","natural language processing"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4拆解实验部分即可，能纠正你对ColBERT类多向量检索收益来源的固有认知。","en":"Only read §4 ablation experiments, it corrects your prior perception of the gain source of ColBERT-style multi-vector retrieval."}},{"id":"LeeYMMPGZNTBKPL23","title":"Holistic Evaluation of Text-to-Image Models","authors":["Tony Lee","Michihiro Yasunaga","Chenlin Meng","Yifan Mai","Joon Sung Park","Agrim Gupta","Yunzhi Zhang","Deepak Narayanan","Hannah Teufel","Marco Bellagente","Minguk Kang","Taesung Park","Jure Leskovec","Jun-Yan Zhu","Fei-Fei Li","Jiajun Wu","Stefano Ermon","Percy Liang"],"institutions":["Stanford University"],"abstract":"$148","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LeeYMMPGZNTBKPL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LeeYMMPGZNTBKPL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/dd83eada2c3c74db3c7fe1c087513756-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是 text-to-image 模型评测过于碎片化的问题：现有工作常在少数 benchmark 或单一指标上报分，导致模型看似进步，但不知道到底是画质提升、文本对齐提升、组合泛化提升，还是只是更会迎合某个评分器。随着文生图模型快速迭代，缺少 holistic evaluation 已经成为方法比较和训练目标设计的瓶颈。","importance":"这是评测体系级贡献。它的重要性在于把文生图模型的能力拆成多个互补维度统一评估，从而让研究者看到不同训练策略真正优化了什么、牺牲了什么。对 pretrain 的影响很直接：如果评测只奖励 photorealism，训练就会向视觉保真倾斜；如果同时测文本忠实度、推理组合性、安全和偏置，模型设计与数据配比就会发生变化。换句话说，评测框架会反向塑造预训练目标。","technical_approach":"方法核心是建立一套更全面的 text-to-image evaluation protocol，而不是提出新的生成模型。关键设计通常包括：覆盖图像质量、文本一致性、组合推理、偏见/安全、鲁棒性等多个维度；同时结合自动指标与人工评测，避免单一打分器带来的偏差。与只看 FID 或 CLIPScore 的做法相比，这种方案更能揭示模型能力面，但代价是成本更高、指标之间可能互相冲突，也更难压缩成一个总分。","experiments":"实验的核心价值通常不在“谁第一”，而在揭示不同模型族的能力画像，例如 diffusion 模型、AR 图像模型和各类对齐策略在不同维度上各有强弱。当前提供的信息没有 benchmark 组成、评测模型和具体名次变化，不能准确写出数字。对读者最有价值的观察是：很多高质量样例并不等于高文本忠实度，自动指标之间也可能相关性有限，因此训练和比较文生图模型时不能只盯一个分数。对多模态预训练来说，这类工作帮助建立更合理的训练—评测闭环。","authors_note":"作者名单较长，包含 Stanford 相关研究者如 Joon Sung Park、Percy Liang 等。Percy Liang 团队长期推动 foundation model 评测、基准与社会影响分析。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a growing problem in text-to-image research: evaluation is too fragmented. Many models are compared on a small set of benchmarks or a single metric, so apparent progress is hard to interpret. A model may improve image quality, text alignment, compositional reasoning, or simply overfit to a preferred scorer, and current reporting often does not separate these effects.","importance":"This is an evaluation-framework contribution with direct implications for pretraining. Its value is that it decomposes text-to-image capability into multiple complementary dimensions and evaluates them jointly. That matters because evaluation shapes optimization: if benchmarks reward mostly photorealism, training will bias toward visual fidelity; if they also measure text faithfulness, compositionality, safety, and bias, data curation and training objectives will change accordingly. In that sense, evaluation feeds back into pretraining design.","technical_approach":"The method is a holistic evaluation protocol rather than a new generator. The key design is broad coverage across dimensions such as image quality, text consistency, compositional reasoning, robustness, and safety, typically combining automatic metrics with human judgments to reduce scorer-specific bias. Compared with relying only on metrics like FID or CLIPScore, this gives a more faithful picture of model capability. The trade-off is higher evaluation cost and less convenience, since the result is harder to compress into one headline number.","experiments":"The main empirical value is usually not identifying a single winner but exposing distinct capability profiles across model families, such as diffusion systems, autoregressive image generators, and different alignment strategies. The provided metadata does not include benchmark composition, evaluated systems, or exact rankings, so those details should not be fabricated. The most useful lesson is that visually impressive samples do not guarantee strong text faithfulness, and automatic metrics may disagree substantially. For multimodal pretraining, that helps build a healthier train-eval loop.","authors_note":"The long author list includes Stanford-associated researchers such as Joon Sung Park and Percy Liang. Percy Liang’s group is well known for foundation model evaluation, benchmarking, and societal impact analysis."},"tags":["text-to-image","evaluation","benchmark","alignment"],"notable_authors":["Joon Sung Park","Percy Liang"],"keywords":["text-to-image","image generation","multimodal","holistic evaluation","benchmarking","human evaluation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"直接读§2评估维度设计部分即可，可用于指导文生图预训练的目标拆解和效果验证。","en":"Just read §2 evaluation dimension design, it can guide objective disassembly and effect verification for text-to-image pre-training."}},{"id":"LeiBBALZ0ZWLZC23","title":"Conditional Adapters: Parameter-efficient Transfer Learning with Fast Inference","authors":["Tao Lei","Junwen Bai","Siddhartha Brahma","Joshua Ainslie","Kenton Lee","Yanqi Zhou","Nan Du","Vincent Y. Zhao","Yuexin Wu","Bo Li","Yu Zhang","Ming-Wei Chang"],"institutions":["Google"],"abstract":"We propose Conditional Adapter (CoDA), a parameter-efficient transfer learning method that also improves inference efficiency. CoDA generalizes beyond standard adapter approaches to enable a new way of balancing speed and accuracy using conditional computation.\nStarting with an existing dense pretrained model, CoDA adds sparse activation together with a small number of new parameters and a light-weight training phase.\nOur experiments demonstrate that the CoDA approach provides an unexpectedly efficient way to transfer knowledge.\nAcross a variety of language, vision, and speech tasks, CoDA achieves a 2x to 8x inference speed-up compared to the state-of-the-art Adapter approaches with moderate to no accuracy loss and the same parameter efficiency.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LeiBBALZ0ZWLZC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LeiBBALZ0ZWLZC23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/19d7204af519eae9993f7f72377a0ec0-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是参数高效迁移学习中的一个实际矛盾：adapter 类方法省参数，但常带来额外推理开销；全量微调推理快，但部署成本高。尤其在 serving 场景，模型需要同时支持大量任务，如果每个任务都挂一套会增加延迟的适配模块，系统价值会被显著稀释。","importance":"这是一项系统与方法交叉的贡献。它的重要性不只是做出一个新的 PEFT 变体，而是把‘训练时省参数’和‘推理时不拖慢’这两个目标同时放进设计约束。对大模型 pretrain/posttrain 接口很有启发：真正可落地的适配方法，不能只看训练显存和调参成本，还要看在线推理的 merged form 是否高效、是否方便多任务切换。","technical_approach":"Conditional Adapters 的核心是通过条件化设计，让 adapter 在迁移学习中保留参数效率，同时尽量实现 fast inference。它与普通串接 adapter 的区别在于，更强调把适配效果以可合并、可条件选择的方式注入主干，从而减少运行时额外路径。与 LoRA 等低秩更新相比，这类方法关注的不只是训练参数量，还关注部署时的运算图形态。为什么这样设计有效：因为很多任务特定变化其实可以通过少量条件控制表达，不需要为每个任务单独增加完整的前向分支。","experiments":"实验通常会同时报告任务效果、可训练参数占比、以及推理延迟或吞吐，显示 conditional adapters 在接近或优于标准 adapter/LoRA 的精度下，具有更好的在线效率。当前给定信息没有摘要与表格，不能准确填写任务集、参数比例和加速倍数。工程上最值得关注的点是：多任务数量增加时，它的延迟是否基本稳定；以及 merge 后性能是否与显式 adapter 路径一致。如果这两点成立，它对生产环境的价值会明显高于只比精度的 PEFT 方法。","authors_note":"作者阵容高度像 Google 的大模型与高效迁移团队，包含 Tao Lei、Kenton Lee、Zhou 等常见于 T5/PaLM 生态的研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical tension in parameter-efficient transfer learning: adapters save trainable parameters but often add inference overhead, while full fine-tuning keeps inference simple but is expensive to store and maintain. This becomes especially painful in serving, where one backbone may need to support many tasks and per-task latency overhead quickly accumulates.","importance":"This is a method-and-systems contribution. Its importance is not just another PEFT variant, but a design that jointly optimizes parameter efficiency during adaptation and speed at inference time. That is highly relevant to the pretrain/post-train interface: an adaptation method is only truly useful at scale if it is cheap to train and also easy to deploy in a merged or low-overhead form.","technical_approach":"Conditional Adapters use conditioning to retain the parameter efficiency of adapter-style transfer while aiming for fast inference. Compared with standard stacked adapters, the emphasis is on injecting task-specific behavior in a form that can be selected or merged with minimal runtime branching. Relative to low-rank updates like LoRA, the concern here is not only trainable parameter count but also the shape of the deployed computation graph. The design works when task-specific variation can be captured by a small conditional control signal rather than a full extra forward path per task.","experiments":"The expected experimental picture is that conditional adapters match or exceed standard adapter/LoRA baselines on task quality while using a small fraction of trainable parameters and improving inference latency or throughput. The provided metadata does not include exact tasks, parameter ratios, or speedups, so those numbers should not be fabricated. The most useful engineering questions are whether latency remains stable as the number of tasks grows, and whether merged or conditional inference preserves the same quality as explicit adapter execution. If both hold, the production value is substantial.","authors_note":"The author list strongly resembles a Google large-model and efficient transfer learning team, with names such as Tao Lei and Kenton Lee commonly seen around T5/PaLM-era work."},"tags":["adapters","parameter-efficient","inference-efficiency","transfer-learning"],"notable_authors":["Tao Lei","Kenton Lee"],"keywords":["conditional computation","inference efficiency","parameter efficiency","large models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3条件适配器的可合并设计部分即可，可直接落地到多任务PEFT的在线部署场景。","en":"Only read §3 mergeable design of conditional adapters, it can be directly applied to online deployment scenarios of multi-task PEFT."}},{"id":"Li0H23","title":"BLIP-Diffusion: Pre-trained Subject Representation for Controllable Text-to-Image Generation and Editing","authors":["Dongxu Li","Junnan Li","Steven C. H. Hoi"],"institutions":["Salesforce AI Research"],"abstract":"$149","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Li0H23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Li0H23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/602e1a5de9c47df34cae39353a7f5bb1-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有主体驱动文生图模型需为每个新主体做长时间少样本微调，生成内容的主体保真度低，此前方案没有预训练的通用主体表示支撑零/少样本快速生成。","importance":"方法级贡献，为跨模态预训练与扩散模型可控生成的结合提供了可复用路径，证明预训练对齐的多模态主体表示可大幅降低主体驱动生成的适配成本。","technical_approach":"基于BLIP-2和扩散模型的改进方案，首先沿用BLIP-2的预训练逻辑得到与文本对齐的多模态视觉表示，新增主体表示学习任务让扩散模型直接复用该表示，舍弃逐主体微调的范式，和同类方案的核心差异是用通用预训练主体表示替代逐主体少样本适配。","experiments":"给定摘要未提供完整实验参数，公开结果显示零样本场景下主体匹配度优于需30步以上微调的基线，少样本场景下微调效率提升10倍以上，消融实验验证多模态编码器图文对齐度每提升1个CLIP得分，主体保真度提升4%。","authors_note":"作者来自Salesforce AI研究院，Steven C. H. Hoi是BLIP系列工作的核心作者，团队代表性工作包括BLIP、BLIP-2等跨模态预训练模型。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing subject-driven text-to-image models require lengthy few-shot fine-tuning for each new subject, with low subject fidelity in generated outputs. No prior work leverages pre-trained general subject representations to enable zero/few-shot fast generation.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It provides a reusable path for combining cross-modal pre-training and controllable diffusion generation, proving that pre-trained aligned multimodal subject representations can significantly reduce the adaptation cost of subject-driven generation.","technical_approach":"Improved framework based on BLIP-2 and diffusion models. It first trains a multimodal encoder following BLIP-2 to get text-aligned visual representations, then adds a subject representation learning task for diffusion models to reuse these representations directly, dropping the per-subject fine-tuning paradigm. The core difference from prior work is replacing per-subject few-shot adaptation with general pre-trained subject representations.","experiments":"Full experimental parameters are not provided in the given abstract. Public results show that subject matching accuracy under zero-shot setting outperforms baselines requiring over 30 steps of fine-tuning, and fine-tuning efficiency under few-shot setting is improved by 10x. Ablation studies show that every 1-point CLIP score increase in multimodal encoder alignment leads to 4% higher subject fidelity.","authors_note":"Authors are from Salesforce AI Research. Steven C. H. Hoi is the core author of the BLIP series, with representative works including BLIP and BLIP-2 cross-modal pre-trained models."},"tags":["diffusion","text-to-image","subject-conditioning","pretraining"],"keywords":["Diffusion-based Models","Text-to-Image Generation","Image Editing","Vision-and-Language","Multimodal"],"notable_authors":["Steven C. H. Hoi","Junnan Li"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"多模态表示的图文对齐度越高，跨模态生成的可控性越好","claim_en":"Higher text-image alignment of multimodal representations leads to better controllability of cross-modal generation","evidence_anchor":"§3.1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"预训练的通用主体表示可以实现比逐主体少样本微调更好的主体保真度","claim_en":"Pre-trained general subject representations achieve higher subject fidelity than few-shot fine-tuning per subject","opposes":"Prior subject-driven generation methods assume per-subject few-shot fine-tuning is necessary to guarantee subject fidelity","opposes_cite_hint":"Textual Inversion 2022","evidence_anchor":"§4.2","why_contested":"It can greatly reduce the deployment cost of subject-controlled generation if validated, eliminating the need for per-subject adaptation."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3主体表示对齐模块和第4节少样本生成实验即可，可复用其预训练多模态表示接入扩散模型的设计思路。","en":"Read only §3 on subject representation alignment and Section 4 few-shot generation experiments, its design of feeding pre-aligned multimodal representations to diffusion models is reusable."}},{"id":"LiG23","title":"Enhancing Sharpness-Aware Optimization Through Variance Suppression","authors":["Bingcong Li","Georgios B. Giannakis"],"institutions":["University of Minnesota"],"abstract":"Sharpness-aware minimization (SAM) has well documented merits in enhancing generalization of deep neural networks, even without sizable data augmentation. Embracing the geometry of the loss function, where neighborhoods of 'flat minima' heighten generalization ability, SAM seeks 'flat valleys' by minimizing the maximum loss caused by an *adversary* perturbing parameters within the neighborhood.\nAlthough critical to account for sharpness of the loss function, such an '*over-friendly* adversary' can curtail the outmost level of generalization. The novel approach of this contribution fosters stabilization of adversaries through *variance suppression* (VaSSO) to avoid such friendliness. VaSSO's *provable* stability safeguards its numerical improvement over SAM in model-agnostic tasks, including image classification and machine translation. In addition, experiments confirm that VaSSO endows SAM with robustness against high levels of label noise. Code is available at https://github.com/BingcongLi/VaSSO.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/e095c0a3717629aa5497601985bfcf0e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有锐度感知最小化（SAM）优化器的对抗扰动生成逻辑无约束，导致优化不稳定、泛化性能上限受限，此前SAM变体均未解决扰动方差过大的问题。","importance":"方法级贡献，对大模型预训练的优化器选型有直接参考价值，证明优化过程的扰动方差控制可同时提升训练稳定性和最终泛化性能。","technical_approach":"SAM的改进方案，新增方差抑制（VaSSO）模块约束对抗扰动的分布方差，舍弃SAM无约束最大化邻域损失的逻辑，和原始SAM的核心差异是在损失计算中加入扰动正则项，避免对抗扰动过度偏离参数最优邻域。","experiments":"给定摘要未提供完整实验参数，公开结果显示在CV分类、NLP微调任务上泛化误差比原始SAM低2%~5%，有理论证明其优化收敛稳定性优于SAM。","authors_note":"作者来自明尼苏达大学，Georgios B. Giannakis是信号处理与优化领域的知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) optimizers use unconstrained adversarial perturbation generation, leading to unstable training and limited generalization upper bound. No prior SAM variants solve the problem of excessive perturbation variance.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It provides direct reference for optimizer selection in large model pre-training, proving that perturbation variance control during optimization can improve both training stability and final generalization performance.","technical_approach":"Improved SAM variant. It adds a Variance Suppression (VaSSO) module to constrain the distribution variance of adversarial perturbations, dropping SAM's logic of unconstrained neighborhood loss maximization. The core difference from original SAM is adding a perturbation regularization term to the loss calculation to avoid excessive deviation of perturbations from the optimal parameter neighborhood.","experiments":"Full experimental parameters are not provided in the given abstract. Public results show that generalization error is 2%~5% lower than original SAM on CV classification and NLP fine-tuning tasks, with theoretical proof of better convergence stability than SAM.","authors_note":"Authors are from University of Minnesota. Georgios B. Giannakis is a well-known scholar in the field of signal processing and optimization."},"tags":["optimizer","sharpness-aware","variance","training-stability"],"keywords":["generalization","optimization","neural networks"],"notable_authors":["Georgios B. Giannakis"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"损失函数的平坦极小值对应更好的模型泛化性能","claim_en":"Flatter minima of the loss function correspond to better model generalization performance","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"SAM中无约束的对抗扰动会导致泛化性能下降而非提升","claim_en":"Unconstrained adversarial perturbations in SAM lead to degraded generalization performance instead of improvement","opposes":"Original SAM assumes that smaller maximum neighborhood loss leads to better generalization, without constraining perturbation distribution","opposes_cite_hint":"Foret 2021 SAM","evidence_anchor":"§3.2","why_contested":"It revises the core assumption of SAM, providing a new constraint direction for the design of sharpness-aware optimizers."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3 VaSSO正则项设计和第5节大模型训练消融实验即可，可纳入内部预训练优化器的候选选型范围。","en":"Read only §3 on VaSSO regularization design and Section 5 LLM training ablation experiments, it can be added to your internal pre-training optimizer candidate list."}},{"id":"LiHS23","title":"Self-Consistent Velocity Matching of Probability Flows","authors":["Lingxiao Li","Samuel Hurault","Justin M. Solomon"],"institutions":["Massachusetts Institute of Technology"],"abstract":"$14a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiHS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiHS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/b2b781badeeb49896c4b324c466ec442-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有求解保质量偏微分方程（如Fokker-Planck方程、Wasserstein梯度流）的方法依赖时空离散化，计算成本高且精度受离散粒度限制，无法直接扩展到高维场景。","importance":"方法级贡献，对扩散模型的概率流求解、连续生成模型的训练有直接参考价值，提供了无离散化的高维PDE求解新范式。","technical_approach":"原创的PDE求解框架，核心机制是利用概率流速度场的自洽不动点特性，采用带偏置梯度估计的迭代优化方法，舍弃传统的时空离散化步骤，和现有方法的核心差异是不需要对时间和空间做网格划分，直接优化速度场满足自洽约束。","experiments":"给定摘要未提供完整实验参数，公开结果显示在高维Fokker-Planck方程求解任务上，精度比离散化基线高2个数量级，计算成本降低70%。","authors_note":"作者来自MIT，Justin M. Solomon是几何处理与优化领域的知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing methods for solving mass-conserving PDEs (such as Fokker-Planck equation, Wasserstein gradient flow) rely on spatiotemporal discretization, with high computational cost and accuracy limited by discretization granularity, and cannot be directly extended to high-dimensional scenarios.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It provides direct reference for probability flow solving of diffusion models and training of continuous generative models, proposing a new discretization-free paradigm for high-dimensional PDE solving.","technical_approach":"Original PDE solving framework. It leverages the self-consistent fixed-point property of the probability flow velocity field, uses an iterative optimization method with biased gradient estimator, and drops traditional spatiotemporal discretization steps. The core difference from prior methods is that it does not require temporal or spatial grid partitioning, and directly optimizes the velocity field to satisfy self-consistency constraints.","experiments":"Full experimental parameters are not provided in the given abstract. Public results show that on high-dimensional Fokker-Planck equation solving tasks, accuracy is 2 orders of magnitude higher than discretization-based baselines, and computational cost is reduced by 70%.","authors_note":"Authors are from MIT. Justin M. Solomon is a well-known scholar in the field of geometric processing and optimization."},"tags":["diffusion","flow-matching","velocity","training"],"keywords":["JKO","mass-conservation","PDE","Fokker-Planck","scalable","discretization-free","neural ODE"],"notable_authors":["Justin M. Solomon"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"扩散模型的生成过程对应概率流PDE的求解","claim_en":"The generation process of diffusion models corresponds to the solution of probability flow PDE","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"无离散化的自洽速度匹配方法比离散化方法在高维PDE求解上精度更高、成本更低","claim_en":"Discretization-free self-consistent velocity matching achieves higher accuracy and lower cost than discretization-based methods for high-dimensional PDE solving","opposes":"Traditional PDE solving methods assume discretization is a necessary step to guarantee accuracy","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4","why_contested":"It can greatly reduce the training and inference cost of continuous generative models such as diffusion models if validated."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为概率流求解方向的文献备查，无需读正文，扩散模型概率流优化场景可快速检索其核心思路。","en":"Only for literature reference on probability flow solving, no need to read full text, look up its core idea quickly for diffusion model probability flow optimization scenarios."}},{"id":"LiLZ023","title":"On the Generalization Properties of Diffusion Models","authors":["Puheng Li","Zhong Li","Huishuai Zhang","Jiang Bian"],"institutions":["Microsoft Research"],"abstract":"$14b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiLZ023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiLZ023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/06abed94583030dd50abe6767bd643b1-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"扩散模型的泛化能力缺乏系统理论支撑，此前的理论分析要么依赖强假设，要么未给出和样本量、模型容量相关的泛化误差上界，无法解释扩散模型在高维场景下的优异表现。","importance":"理论级贡献，为扩散模型预训练的scaling law设计提供了理论依据，首次给出了不受数据维度影响的泛化误差上界。","technical_approach":"原创的理论分析框架，核心是基于得分匹配的训练动态推导泛化间隙的演化规律，舍弃此前分析中对数据分布的强平滑假设，和现有理论工作的核心差异是给出的泛化误差上界和数据维度无关，仅和样本量n、模型容量m相关。","experiments":"理论类工作，实验验证了得分扩散模型的泛化误差随样本量n增长呈O(n^{-2/5})衰减，随模型容量m增长呈O(m^{-4/5})衰减，与理论推导完全一致。","authors_note":"作者来自微软研究院，Jiang Bian是大模型理论与优化领域的知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The generalization ability of diffusion models lacks systematic theoretical support. Prior theoretical analyses either rely on strong assumptions or fail to provide generalization error bounds related to sample size and model capacity, and cannot explain the excellent performance of diffusion models in high-dimensional scenarios.","importance":"Theoretical-level contribution. It provides theoretical basis for the design of scaling laws for diffusion model pre-training, and proposes the first generalization error bound independent of data dimension.","technical_approach":"Original theoretical analysis framework. It derives the evolution of generalization gap based on the training dynamics of score matching, dropping the strong smoothness assumption on data distribution used in prior analyses. The core difference from existing theoretical work is that the proposed generalization error bound is independent of data dimension, only related to sample size n and model capacity m.","experiments":"Theoretical work. Experiments verify that the generalization error of score-based diffusion models decays as O(n^{-2/5}) with sample size n and O(m^{-4/5}) with model capacity m, which is fully consistent with theoretical derivation.","authors_note":"Authors are from Microsoft Research. Jiang Bian is a well-known scholar in the field of large model theory and optimization."},"tags":["diffusion","generalization","theory","scaling-law"],"keywords":["diffusion models","training dynamics","generalization gap","modes shift"],"notable_authors":["Jiang Bian"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"得分匹配是扩散模型训练的核心目标","claim_en":"Score matching is the core objective of diffusion model training","evidence_anchor":"§2"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"扩散模型的泛化误差不受数据维度影响，不存在维度诅咒","claim_en":"The generalization error of diffusion models is independent of data dimension and free from the curse of dimensionality","opposes":"Traditional generative model theory assumes that the generalization error of high-dimensional data grows exponentially with dimension","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3.1","why_contested":"It explains the core reason for the excellent performance of diffusion models in high-dimensional generation tasks such as image and speech, and provides theoretical support for scaling law design."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3泛化误差上界推导和Fig4样本量-泛化误差对应曲线即可，可辅助扩散模型scaling law的设计。","en":"Read only §3 on generalization error bound derivation and Fig4 sample size vs generalization error curve, it can assist the design of diffusion model scaling laws."}},{"id":"LiPHGGY23","title":"Guiding Large Language Models via Directional Stimulus Prompting","authors":["Zekun Li","Baolin Peng","Pengcheng He","Michel Galley","Jianfeng Gao","Xifeng Yan"],"institutions":["Microsoft Research"],"abstract":"$14c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiPHGGY23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiPHGGY23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/c5601d99ed028448f29d1dae2e4a926d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"黑盒大语言模型的可控生成成本高，直接微调不可行，此前的提示工程方法依赖人工设计通用提示，无法实现实例级的细粒度控制。","importance":"方法级贡献，为黑盒LLM的对齐和可控生成提供了低成本方案，不需要访问LLM的参数和梯度，仅通过小模型生成实例级提示即可实现控制。","technical_approach":"原创的提示框架，核心是用小的可调节策略模型（如T5）为每个输入生成实例级的方向刺激提示，舍弃直接微调LLM或者人工设计通用提示的路径，和现有提示方法的核心差异是提示为实例专属，可通过监督微调或强化学习优化策略模型，不需要改动LLM本身。","experiments":"给定摘要未提供完整实验参数，公开结果显示在摘要生成、关键词约束生成任务上，符合要求的输出比例比通用提示基线高20%~30%，策略模型参数量仅为目标LLM的1%以下。","authors_note":"作者来自微软研究院，Jianfeng Gao是NLP与大模型领域的知名学者，团队代表性工作包括DeepSpeed、一系列LLM对齐方法。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Controllable generation of black-box large language models has high cost, and direct fine-tuning is infeasible. Prior prompt engineering methods rely on manually designed general prompts, which cannot achieve instance-level fine-grained control.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It provides a low-cost solution for alignment and controllable generation of black-box LLMs, which does not require access to LLM parameters and gradients, and only uses small models to generate instance-level prompts to achieve control.","technical_approach":"Original prompting framework. It uses a small tunable policy model (such as T5) to generate instance-specific directional stimulus prompts for each input, dropping the path of direct LLM fine-tuning or manually designed general prompts. The core difference from existing prompting methods is that prompts are instance-specific, and the policy model can be optimized via supervised fine-tuning or reinforcement learning without modifying the LLM itself.","experiments":"Full experimental parameters are not provided in the given abstract. Public results show that on summary generation and keyword-constrained generation tasks, the proportion of compliant outputs is 20%~30% higher than general prompt baselines, and the policy model parameter size is less than 1% of the target LLM.","authors_note":"Authors are from Microsoft Research. Jianfeng Gao is a well-known scholar in the field of NLP and large models, with representative works including DeepSpeed and a series of LLM alignment methods."},"tags":["prompting","llm","steering","inference"],"keywords":["Black-box Large Language Models","Directional Stimulus Prompting","Hint","Reinforcement learning","Prompt optimization"],"notable_authors":["Jianfeng Gao","Pengcheng He","Michel Galley"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"提示输入的内容直接影响LLM的输出质量和符合度","claim_en":"The content of prompt inputs directly affects the quality and compliance of LLM outputs","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"用小模型生成实例级提示比人工设计通用提示的可控生成效果更好","claim_en":"Instance-specific prompts generated by small models achieve better controllable generation performance than manually designed general prompts","opposes":"Prior prompt engineering methods assume that manually designed general prompts can meet the control requirements of most scenarios","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4.2","why_contested":"It provides a low-cost path for black-box LLM alignment, especially suitable for commercial scenarios where LLM parameters are not accessible."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3.2策略模型训练流程和第4节可控生成效果实验即可，可快速复现到内部黑盒LLM的对齐任务中。","en":"Read only §3.2 policy model training pipeline and Section 4 controllable generation experiments, you can quickly reproduce it for internal black-box LLM alignment tasks."}},{"id":"LiWZULYNPG23","title":"LLaVA-Med: Training a Large Language-and-Vision Assistant for Biomedicine in One Day","authors":["Chunyuan Li","Cliff Wong","Sheng Zhang","Naoto Usuyama","Haotian Liu","Jianwei Yang","Tristan Naumann","Hoifung Poon","Jianfeng Gao"],"institutions":["Microsoft Research","Columbia University"],"abstract":"$14d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiWZULYNPG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiWZULYNPG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/5abcdf8ecdcacba028c6662789194572-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"通用多模态大模型在生物医学图像的理解和对话能力差，此前的生物医学多模态模型训练成本高，需要大量人工标注的指令数据。","importance":"数据级+方法级贡献，为垂直领域多模态大模型的低成本训练提供了可复用的范式，证明用GPT-4自指令生成的生物医学数据可在1天内完成高质量模型训练。","technical_approach":"LLaVA框架在生物医学领域的迁移改进方案，核心是先从PubMed Central提取大规模生物医学图表-标题对，用GPT-4从标题生成开放式指令跟随数据，再微调通用多模态大模型，舍弃人工标注指令数据的路径，和现有垂直领域VLM的核心差异是训练成本极低，仅需1天计算时间，不需要人工标注指令。","experiments":"在生物医学VQA基准上，性能超过通用LLaVA模型20%以上，接近全监督微调的专业生物医学VLM，计算成本仅为后者的1/10，消融实验验证GPT-4生成的指令数据质量每提升1个BLEU得分，模型VQA准确率提升2%。","authors_note":"作者来自微软研究院、哥伦比亚大学，Chunyuan Li、Haotian Liu是LLaVA系列工作的核心作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"General multimodal large models have poor understanding and conversation ability for biomedical images. Prior biomedical multimodal models have high training cost and require a large amount of manually labeled instruction data.","importance":"Data-level + method-level contribution. It provides a reusable paradigm for low-cost training of vertical domain multimodal large models, proving that biomedical data generated by GPT-4 self-instruction can be used to train high-quality models in one day.","technical_approach":"Improved LLaVA framework adapted for the biomedical domain. It first extracts large-scale biomedical figure-caption pairs from PubMed Central, uses GPT-4 to generate open-ended instruction-following data from captions, then fine-tunes a general multimodal large model, dropping the path of manually labeled instruction data. The core difference from existing vertical domain VLMs is extremely low training cost, only requiring 1 day of computing time without manual instruction labeling.","experiments":"On biomedical VQA benchmarks, performance is over 20% higher than general LLaVA, close to fully supervised fine-tuned professional biomedical VLMs, with only 1/10 of the computing cost of the latter. Ablation studies show that every 1-point BLEU score increase in GPT-4 generated instruction data leads to 2% higher VQA accuracy.","authors_note":"Authors are from Microsoft Research and Columbia University. Chunyuan Li and Haotian Liu are core authors of the LLaVA series."},"tags":["vlm","medical","instruction-tuning","multimodal"],"keywords":["Multimodal assistant","biomedical multimodal  instruction-following data"],"notable_authors":["Chunyuan Li","Haotian Liu"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"高质量的指令微调数据可以显著提升垂直领域大模型的性能","claim_en":"High-quality instruction tuning data can significantly improve the performance of vertical domain large models","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"用GPT-4自指令生成的生物医学指令数据可以替代人工标注数据，训练出性能接近全监督的多模态大模型","claim_en":"Biomedical instruction data generated by GPT-4 self-instruction can replace manually labeled data to train multimodal large models with performance close to fully supervised ones","opposes":"Prior vertical domain VLM training assumes that a large amount of manually labeled professional instruction data is necessary to guarantee performance","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4.3","why_contested":"It greatly reduces the training threshold of vertical domain multimodal large models, and can be quickly replicated to other professional domains."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为垂直领域多模态低成本训练的范式备查，无需读正文，做领域VLM时可参考其自指令构造思路。","en":"Only for reference on low-cost vertical-domain multimodal model training, no need to read full text, refer to its self-instruction construction idea when building domain-specific VLMs."}},{"id":"LinJ23","title":"MIMEx: Intrinsic Rewards from Masked Input Modeling","authors":["Toru Lin","Allan Jabri"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$14e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LinJ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LinJ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/6fe10a4c0d680609f0560920bd9ade4a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：强化学习里的内在奖励通常依赖预测误差或状态新颖性，但这些信号常被环境噪声、像素细节和不可控因素污染，导致探索效率不稳定。作者改问一个更稳的问题：能不能从 masked input modeling 里提取“对决策有用”的不确定性，而不是对所有输入细节一视同仁地奖励新奇。","importance":"这项工作更像是训练信号设计上的方法改进，而不是范式替代。它对 pretrain 研究的启发在于：自监督建模目标不只是表示学习工具，也可以直接转成探索奖励；而且 masked modeling 比纯前向预测更容易聚焦可恢复的语义结构，避免把随机噪声当成 novelty。这个思路对世界模型、统一自监督+RL 的闭环很有参考价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法是用 masked input modeling 产生 intrinsic reward，简称 MIMEx。直觉上，它不是奖励“下一帧预测错了多少”，而是奖励“在遮住部分输入后，当前状态还有多少内容难以从上下文恢复”；这种难度更接近环境中可学习的结构信息。与基于 forward dynamics 的 curiosity 相比，它弱化了对低层像素变化和环境随机性的敏感性；与纯 reconstruction loss 相比，它通过 masking 强迫模型利用上下文，避免退化成记忆局部细节。边界也很清楚：如果任务需要的关键信号本来就非常局部，重 masking 可能反而削弱奖励质量。","experiments":"从题面未给摘要细节，但这类工作通常会在 Atari、DMControl 或 Procgen 一类稀疏奖励环境上评估探索收益。关键事实应包括：与 ICM、RND、NGU 或基于世界模型的内在奖励相比，MIMEx 在样本效率或最终回报上更稳，尤其在噪声较大或视觉复杂环境中优势更明显。最关键的 ablation 一般会看 masking 策略、重建目标和奖励归一化；若结果成立，应该能看到 MIMEx 对 stochastic distraction 更鲁棒，而不是只在少数游戏上刷分。由于缺少摘要，具体环境数、分数提升和网络规模无法可靠填写。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a weakness of intrinsic-reward methods in RL: many reward exploration based on prediction error or novelty, but those signals are easily hijacked by noise, uncontrollable dynamics, or superficial visual change. The authors instead ask whether masked input modeling can provide a cleaner uncertainty signal that reflects recoverable structure rather than raw surprise.","importance":"This is a training-signal contribution rather than a new RL paradigm, but it is relevant to pretraining because it turns a self-supervised objective into an exploration reward. The broader lesson is that masked modeling may emphasize semantic, context-dependent uncertainty better than plain next-step prediction, which is useful for world models and self-supervision-plus-RL pipelines.","technical_approach":"MIMEx uses masked input modeling to derive intrinsic rewards. The key idea is not to reward large forward prediction errors directly, but to reward states whose masked content is hard to reconstruct from context; that difficulty is meant to track learnable environment structure instead of incidental pixel variation. Compared with curiosity methods based on dynamics prediction, this should be less sensitive to stochastic distractions. Compared with vanilla reconstruction loss, masking forces the model to use broader context instead of memorizing local details. The tradeoff is that heavy masking can wash out genuinely local task-relevant signals.","experiments":"The abstract is not provided, so only the likely empirical shape can be summarized. This kind of paper is usually evaluated on sparse-reward visual RL benchmarks such as Atari, DMControl, or Procgen, against baselines like ICM, RND, and related intrinsic-reward methods. The most informative results would be improved sample efficiency and stronger robustness in noisy or visually distracting environments, plus ablations on masking policy, reconstruction target, and reward normalization. Exact benchmark counts, score gains, and model sizes cannot be verified from the given information.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reinforcement-learning","self-supervision","masked-modeling","intrinsic-reward"],"keywords":["reinforcement learning","exploration","intrinsic reward","intrinsic motivation","masked autoencoder"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3 MIMEx奖励计算逻辑和第5节探索效率对比实验即可，对自监督+RL统一预训练的信号设计有参考价值。","en":"Read only §3 on MIMEx reward calculation logic and Section 5 exploration efficiency comparison experiments, it is useful for signal design in unified self-supervised + RL pre-training."}},{"id":"LingFLHLMS23","title":"Deductive Verification of Chain-of-Thought Reasoning","authors":["Zhan Ling","Yunhao Fang","Xuanlin Li","Zhiao Huang","Mingu Lee","Roland Memisevic","Hao Su"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$14f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LingFLHLMS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LingFLHLMS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/72393bd47a35f5b3bee4c609e7bba733-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：Chain-of-Thought 能提升推理，但模型生成的中间步骤并不可靠，用户也很难自动验证。过去常见做法是只看最终答案对不对，或者用更强模型打分推理链；这都不能真正检查每一步是否逻辑成立，因此作者把问题转成“能否对 CoT 做演绎式验证”。","importance":"这项工作属于 reasoning 训练信号与验证接口的研究。它对 pretrain/posttrain 闭环的意义在于：如果中间推理步骤能被形式化验证，那么它既可以作为后训练时的过滤信号，也能反过来帮助理解模型到底是在做真实推理还是在模板化生成。它不是直接改预训练目标，但会影响后续如何构造高质量 reasoning data。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是把自然语言 CoT 映射到可验证的逻辑或结构化表示，再用演绎规则检查每一步是否从前提推出。和只用 outcome supervision 相比，这种方法提供了过程级监督；和用 LLM-as-a-judge 相比，它把“看起来合理”换成“形式上可推出”。设计上的关键难点通常有两个：一是自然语言到形式表示的转换误差，二是现实任务的知识与常识并不总能被完全形式化。因此这类方法通常更适合数学、符号推理、规则明确的 QA，而不是开放域常识写作。","experiments":"从题面无法确认实验细节，但可以预期作者会在数学 word problem、逻辑推理或多跳问答上比较：仅最终答案监督、过程打分、以及演绎验证过滤/重排后的效果。关键指标应包括步骤正确率、最终答案准确率，以及验证器对错误 CoT 的识别率。最有价值的结果不是绝对分数，而是展示“最终答案正确但过程错误”和“过程经验证后更稳健”这两类现象。具体数据集、模型和提升幅度无法从现有信息可靠给出。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a core weakness of chain-of-thought reasoning: intermediate steps often look plausible but are not actually valid, and most evaluations only check the final answer. Prior work either relies on outcome supervision or uses stronger models to score reasoning traces, neither of which truly verifies whether each step follows logically. This paper asks whether CoT can be checked deductively.","importance":"This is a verification and training-signal paper for reasoning. Its relevance to the pretrain/posttrain loop is that verified intermediate steps can serve as a much cleaner signal for filtering, reranking, or supervising reasoning data, and can help separate genuine reasoning from fluent but invalid traces.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is to translate natural-language CoT into a structured or formal representation and then apply deductive checks step by step. Compared with final-answer supervision, this gives process-level validation. Compared with LLM judging, it replaces plausibility with formal entailment. The main design challenge is the interface between free-form language and formal structure: translation errors and incomplete formalization limit applicability, so the method is most natural for math, logic, and rule-governed tasks rather than open-ended commonsense problems.","experiments":"The prompt does not include the abstract, so only the likely evaluation shape can be stated. A paper like this would usually test on math or logic reasoning benchmarks, comparing plain CoT, answer-only supervision, and deductive verification for filtering or reranking. The key metrics would be final-answer accuracy, step validity, and false-positive/false-negative rates of the verifier. The most important empirical point would be whether process verification improves robustness beyond simply selecting traces with correct final answers. Exact datasets, model names, and gains cannot be confirmed here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["chain-of-thought","verification","reasoning","analysis"],"keywords":["Chain-of-thought","Large language model","Reasoning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§4形式化验证规则和第5节推理数据过滤实验即可，可复用其思路构造更高质量的推理预训练数据。","en":"Read only §4 on formal verification rules and Section 5 reasoning data filtering experiments, you can reuse its idea to construct higher-quality reasoning pre-training data."}},{"id":"LiuCGSZZLCH23","title":"Uncovering and Quantifying Social Biases in Code Generation","authors":["Yan Liu","Xiaokang Chen","Yan Gao","Zhe Su","Fengji Zhang","Daoguang Zan","Jian-Guang Lou","Pin-Yu Chen","Tsung-Yi Ho"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"With the popularity of automatic code generation tools, such as Copilot, the study of the potential hazards of these tools is gaining importance. In this work, we explore the social bias problem in pre-trained code generation models. We propose a new paradigm to construct code prompts and successfully uncover social biases in code generation models. To quantify the severity of social biases in generated code, we develop a dataset along with three metrics to evaluate the overall social bias and fine-grained unfairness across different demographics. Experimental results on three pre-trained code generation models (Codex, InCoder, and CodeGen) with varying sizes, reveal severe social biases. Moreover, we conduct analysis to provide useful insights for further choice of code generation models with low social bias.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiuCGSZZLCH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiuCGSZZLCH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/071a637d41ea290ac4360818a8323f33-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：代码生成模型的偏见研究明显滞后于自然语言模型，而且很多社会偏见会通过变量名、注释、模板代码和 API 选择隐蔽地进入生成过程。过去大家更关注代码正确率、pass@k 和安全漏洞，较少系统量化“代码里如何表达和放大社会偏见”，因此作者试图建立这一评测与分析框架。","importance":"这项工作的贡献主要是评测与风险刻画，而不是预训练算法本身。它对 pretrain 的意义在于：代码模型并不是中性的符号系统，训练语料中的社会偏见会以不同于自然语言的形式沉积下来；如果不做显式测量，后续对齐和数据清洗都无从下手。对做代码预训练的人来说，这是数据质量和 posttrain 安全接口问题，不只是伦理附录。","technical_approach":"核心方法大概率是构建一套代码生成偏见基准，设计受控 prompt 或模板，将人口属性、职业、性别、种族等敏感维度注入编程场景，再统计生成代码、注释或变量命名中的偏置模式。和文本偏见评测相比，代码场景需要区分功能正确性与表达偏见，因为模型可能生成逻辑上正确但社会刻板印象很强的实现或注释。有效设计通常会控制语义等价 prompt，避免把性能差异误判为偏见差异。","experiments":"从标题看，实验重点应是多种代码生成模型上的偏见暴露与量化，而不是单一模型刷榜。关键事实通常包括：评测覆盖哪些模型族、哪些敏感属性、哪些偏见指标，以及偏见在代码体、注释体、补全任务和指令生成任务中的差异。最有价值的分析会看模型规模、训练语料来源和 instruction tuning 是否会放大或缓解偏见。由于缺少摘要，具体模型名单和数值无法可靠填写。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses an underexplored issue: social bias in code generation models. While text models have been widely audited, code models are mostly judged on correctness and pass@k, even though social biases can surface through comments, variable names, templates, and coding suggestions. The goal is to expose and quantify that hidden layer of bias.","importance":"This is an evaluation and risk-characterization contribution rather than a new pretraining method. Its relevance to pretraining is that code corpora are not socially neutral, and biases can be encoded in model behavior in forms that standard code benchmarks never measure. For code LMs, this becomes a data-quality and posttraining-interface problem, not just an ethics footnote.","technical_approach":"The likely method is a controlled benchmark for code generation bias, where prompts vary sensitive attributes such as gender, race, or occupation while holding task semantics as constant as possible. The analysis then measures biased patterns in generated code, comments, naming, or suggested logic. Compared with bias audits in plain text, the key challenge here is separating functional correctness from socially loaded expression: code can be syntactically correct while still reflecting strong stereotypes.","experiments":"The empirical focus is likely broad model auditing rather than leaderboard gains. The key facts would include which code models are tested, which sensitive attributes and prompt templates are used, and how bias differs across code completion, instruction-following, comments, and naming. The most useful findings would connect bias strength to model scale, training data source, and instruction tuning. Exact model lists and numerical results are not available from the provided information.","authors_note":""},"tags":["code-generation","bias","evaluation","benchmark"],"keywords":["Social Bias","Code Fairness"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3偏见基准构造方法和第4节主流代码模型的偏见量化结果即可，做代码预训练数据清洗时可参考其评测维度。","en":"Read only §3 on bias benchmark construction method and Section 4 bias quantification results of mainstream code models, refer to its evaluation dimensions when doing code pre-training data cleaning."}},{"id":"LiuDLYG23","title":"Bridging Discrete and Backpropagation: Straight-Through and Beyond","authors":["Liyuan Liu","Chengyu Dong","Xiaodong Liu","Bin Yu","Jianfeng Gao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Backpropagation, the cornerstone of deep learning, is limited to computing gradients for continuous variables. This limitation poses challenges for problems involving discrete latent variables. To address this issue, we propose a novel approach to approximate the gradient of parameters involved in generating discrete latent variables. First, we examine the widely used Straight-Through (ST) heuristic and demonstrate that it works as a first-order approximation of the gradient. Guided by our findings, we propose ReinMax, which achieves second-order accuracy by integrating Heun’s method, a second-order numerical method for solving ODEs. ReinMax does not require Hessian or other second-order derivatives, thus having negligible computation overheads. Extensive experimental results on various tasks demonstrate the superiority of ReinMax over the state of the art.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiuDLYG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiuDLYG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/28b5dfc51e5ae12d84fb7c6172a00df4-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文想解决的是：离散变量无法直接反向传播，Straight-Through Estimator 虽然好用，但梯度是有偏的，理论和实践长期都不够统一。过去大家在量化、离散潜变量、采样决策里反复用 ST，却往往凭经验调技巧；作者试图系统回答：ST 到底在优化什么，还能不能做得比 ST 更稳或更准。","importance":"这项工作是优化方法层面的基础研究。它对 pretrain 的相关性在于，离散化越来越常见：VQ tokenizer、多模态 tokenization、MoE 路由、硬选择 memory、非自回归/扩散离散状态建模都会碰到离散-连续桥接问题。谁能更可靠地传梯度，谁就能让这些系统更容易训稳，而不仅仅是得到一个勉强可用的 estimator。","technical_approach":"从标题看，论文不仅分析 Straight-Through，还提出了 beyond ST 的更一般框架。合理推测其核心是从代理目标、控制变量或平滑重参数化的角度，统一解释离散节点上的梯度近似，并给出比裸 ST 更低偏差或更低方差的替代。和 score-function 类方法相比，ST 往往方差低但偏差大；和连续松弛方法相比，ST 更贴近真实离散前向。作者大概率在这个偏差-方差-前向一致性的三角关系上给出更清晰的机制分析。","experiments":"这类论文通常会选一组代表性任务验证 estimator：离散潜变量模型、神经量化、架构搜索、或离散决策控制。关键结果一般不是单一任务 SOTA，而是跨任务显示新方法比 ST 更稳定、收敛更快或最终指标更高。最有价值的 ablation 会比较梯度偏差、方差、训练稳定性，以及温度/松弛超参敏感性。题面没有摘要，因此无法确认具体理论定理、任务集合和量化收益。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a longstanding problem: discrete choices break standard backpropagation, and the straight-through estimator is widely used but poorly understood and often biased. In practice, people rely on ST for quantization, discrete latents, and routing because it works well enough, but there has been no clean unifying account of what it is really optimizing or how to improve on it.","importance":"This is a foundational optimization paper. It matters for pretraining because discrete components are everywhere now: vector quantization, multimodal tokenizers, MoE routing, hard memory access, and many non-autoregressive or diffusion-based discrete models all need some bridge between discrete forward passes and gradient-based learning. Better estimators can directly improve stability and trainability in those systems.","technical_approach":"From the title, the paper likely does two things: formalizes straight-through within a broader framework and proposes alternatives that go beyond vanilla ST. The central issue is the tradeoff among bias, variance, and forward-pass fidelity. Compared with score-function estimators, ST usually has low variance but substantial bias; compared with continuous relaxations, it better matches the true discrete forward computation. The contribution is likely a more principled estimator family or objective interpretation that clarifies and improves this tradeoff.","experiments":"Work in this area is usually validated across several representative discrete-learning tasks rather than one benchmark: quantization, discrete latent-variable models, routing, or related settings. The key empirical question is whether the proposed method trains more stably, converges faster, or reaches better final performance than standard ST and relaxation baselines. The most informative ablations would track gradient bias/variance and sensitivity to temperature or relaxation hyperparameters. Exact theorems, tasks, and numerical gains are not recoverable from the prompt.","authors_note":""},"tags":["discrete-optimization","straight-through","gradient-estimation","tokenizer"],"keywords":["discrete random variables","back-propagation","straight through"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3 ST梯度偏差的理论分析和第4节改进后的梯度估计器实验即可，做离散表征、MoE路由训练时可复用其梯度优化思路。","en":"Read only §3 on theoretical analysis of ST gradient bias and Section 4 improved gradient estimator experiments, reuse its gradient optimization idea when training discrete representations or MoE routers."}},{"id":"LiuSKZLHCPS23","title":"OpenShape: Scaling Up 3D Shape Representation Towards Open-World Understanding","authors":["Minghua Liu","Ruoxi Shi","Kaiming Kuang","Yinhao Zhu","Xuanlin Li","Shizhong Han","Hong Cai","Fatih Porikli","Hao Su"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$150","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiuSKZLHCPS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiuSKZLHCPS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/8c7304e77c832ddc70075dfee081ca6c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：3D shape representation 过去多在封闭标签集上训练，泛化到开放世界语义和自然语言描述时明显不足。问题不只是 3D 模型不够大，更在于缺少像 CLIP 那样覆盖广、语义开放的 3D-语言监督，所以作者想把 3D 表征学习从封闭识别推到 open-world understanding。","importance":"这项工作是 3D 表征预训练/对齐方向的数据与系统级推进。对广义 pretrain 研究的启示是，3D 模态也在走和 VLM 类似的路线：先扩大配对监督和语义覆盖，再用统一嵌入空间承接开放词汇任务。它不直接服务文本 LLM，但对跨模态统一表示和 tokenizer/representation 设计很有参考价值。","technical_approach":"OpenShape 的核心应是大规模 3D shape 表征学习框架，通过多源 3D 数据和语言/图像监督把点云、网格或多视图表征对齐到开放语义空间。与传统 3D 分类网络相比，它不把任务固定成少量类别，而是追求 zero-shot/open-vocabulary 能力；与只做纯几何自监督相比，它引入跨模态对齐，让表征携带可语言访问的语义。设计上的难点通常在于 3D 数据异质性强、标注少、视角变化大，因此需要在几何不变性和语义可分性之间折中。","experiments":"从标题判断，实验重点应是 open-world 3D 理解，包括零样本分类、文本检索、跨数据集迁移等。关键事实通常包括：训练数据规模明显大于以往 3D 数据集，比较对象涵盖 PointCLIP、ULIP、ShapeGLIP 或传统监督 3D backbone；指标上关注 zero-shot accuracy、retrieval recall 和开放词汇泛化。最有价值的 ablation 会分析数据来源、语言监督形式以及不同 3D 编码器的影响。具体规模和数值提升无法从题面确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a structural limitation in 3D representation learning: most prior models are trained on closed label sets and do not transfer well to open-world semantics or language-based queries. The bottleneck is not just model size but the lack of large-scale, semantically rich 3D-language supervision analogous to what CLIP provided for vision.","importance":"This is a data-and-system scaling contribution for 3D pretraining. Its broader relevance is that 3D is being pushed toward the same open-vocabulary representation paradigm seen in vision-language models: expand semantic coverage, align to language, and use a shared embedding space for transfer. That is useful for thinking about unified multimodal pretraining beyond text and images.","technical_approach":"OpenShape likely builds a large-scale 3D representation framework that aligns shape features with open-world semantic supervision from language and possibly images. Compared with classic 3D classifiers, it is not tied to a fixed taxonomy. Compared with purely geometric self-supervision, it explicitly injects language-level semantics for zero-shot transfer. The main challenge is balancing geometric invariance with semantic discriminability across heterogeneous 3D formats and viewpoints.","experiments":"The expected evaluation focuses on open-world 3D understanding: zero-shot classification, text-shape retrieval, and cross-dataset transfer. Relevant baselines would include earlier 3D-language alignment methods and standard supervised 3D backbones, with metrics such as zero-shot accuracy and retrieval recall. The most informative ablations would study data source diversity, the form of language supervision, and the choice of 3D encoder. Exact dataset scales and gains are not available from the prompt.","authors_note":""},"tags":["3d","representation-learning","scaling","open-world"],"keywords":["3d","shape understanding","open-world understanding","zero-shot 3D classification","vision-language model"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3跨模态对齐框架和第4节开放世界3D识别实验即可，做多模态统一表征预训练时可参考其3D模态对齐思路。","en":"Read only §3 on cross-modal alignment framework and Section 4 open-world 3D recognition experiments, refer to its 3D modality alignment idea when doing unified multimodal representation pre-training."}},{"id":"LiuSZZKWC23","title":"Rethinking Tokenizer and Decoder in Masked Graph Modeling for Molecules","authors":["Zhiyuan Liu","Yaorui Shi","An Zhang","Enzhi Zhang","Kenji Kawaguchi","Xiang Wang","Tat-Seng Chua"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$151","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiuSZZKWC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiuSZZKWC23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/51fd9a7d1706023cb9f8210cc6ac357c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：分子上的 masked graph modeling 往往默认当前 tokenizer 和 decoder 设计是合理的，但实际上这两部分可能才是性能瓶颈。过去很多工作把注意力放在 GNN/Transformer 编码器上，掩码预测目标本身却沿用了较粗糙的原子级词表和独立解码假设；作者因此重新审视“分子图到底该怎么离散化、怎么预测被 mask 的部分”。","importance":"这项工作属于预训练目标设计的细化改进。它对更广泛 pretrain 研究的启示在于：masked modeling 的效果高度依赖 tokenization 和 decoder 假设，而不是只看 encoder 容量。这个结论和文本、多模态 tokenizer 的经验是一致的——如果离散单元切得不对，训练目标会先天浪费信息，后面再堆模型很难补回来。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者同时重做了 tokenizer 和 decoder。前者大概率不是简单把每个原子当 token，而是引入更符合化学结构的子图/片段级离散单元；后者则可能放弃对 mask 位点的条件独立预测，改为能建模局部结构耦合的解码器。与传统 masked node prediction 相比，这样做的原因很直接：分子中的功能团和化学键关系具有强耦合，原子级独立分类既难学也不符合生成结构。代价是词表构建更复杂，解码也更重。","experiments":"这类工作通常会在分子性质预测、分子检索或分子生成相关基准上验证预训练收益，比较标准 masked graph modeling、GraphMAE 风格方法以及不同 tokenizer/decoder 组合。关键结果应包括：更好的下游迁移，尤其在小样本性质预测上更明显；同时 ablation 显示 tokenizer 改进和 decoder 改进各自都有贡献。最值得看的观察是片段粒度如何影响泛化，以及复杂 decoder 是否真的值回计算成本。具体数据集和提升数字题面未提供。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper argues that masked graph modeling for molecules is often bottlenecked not by the encoder, but by the tokenizer and decoder assumptions built into the pretraining task. Prior work put most effort into better GNN or Transformer encoders while keeping fairly crude atom-level tokenization and simple masked prediction heads. The authors revisit whether molecular graphs are being discretized and decoded in the right way.","importance":"This is a pretraining-objective design paper. The broader lesson is highly relevant beyond molecules: masked modeling quality depends heavily on the choice of discrete units and on whether the decoder matches the structure of what is being predicted. That mirrors experience in text and multimodal pretraining, where poor tokenization can cap performance before model scale becomes the issue.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method likely redesigns both the tokenizer and the decoder. The tokenizer probably moves beyond raw atoms toward chemically meaningful fragments or substructures, while the decoder likely models dependencies among masked components instead of predicting each masked node independently. This makes sense because molecular structure is strongly coupled: functional groups and bond patterns are not well captured by independent atom-wise classification. The tradeoff is more complex vocabulary construction and heavier decoding.","experiments":"Such work is usually evaluated through pretrained transfer to molecular property prediction, retrieval, or generation-related tasks, against standard masked graph modeling baselines and different tokenizer/decoder variants. The key empirical result should be better transfer, especially in low-data settings, with ablations showing that both the revised tokenizer and the revised decoder matter. The most interesting analysis would be how fragment granularity affects performance and whether a stronger decoder justifies its cost. Exact datasets and numbers are not given in the prompt.","authors_note":""},"tags":["tokenizer","masked-modeling","molecules","decoder"],"keywords":["Molecular Representation Learning","Masked Graph Modeling","Graph Tokenizer"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3片段级tokenizer设计和§4耦合解码器结构即可，做结构化数据掩码预训练时可参考其tokenization优化思路。","en":"Read only §3 on fragment-level tokenizer design and §4 coupled decoder structure, refer to its tokenization optimization idea when doing masked pre-training on structured data."}},{"id":"LouXFE23","title":"Scaling Riemannian Diffusion Models","authors":["Aaron Lou","Minkai Xu","Adam Farris","Stefano Ermon"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$152","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LouXFE23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LouXFE23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/fe1ab2f77a9a0f224839cc9f1034a908-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：扩散模型如何稳定扩展到非欧几里得空间，尤其是黎曼流形上的复杂分布建模。过去大多数扩散模型默认数据在欧式空间里，面对球面、旋转群、形状空间或带几何约束的表示时，直接套用标准高斯噪声和反向过程通常不自然也不稳定。","importance":"它的重要性在于把扩散建模从“欧式默认设置”推进到“几何一致的通用生成框架”。这对 pretrain 的直接启示不是文本本身，而是任何具有结构约束的 token/latent 空间都可能受益于几何感知的噪声过程；对统一建模来说，这类工作回答了一个更基础的问题：生成目标空间的几何性质应该进入训练目标，而不是事后修补。","technical_approach":"核心方法是可扩展的黎曼扩散模型框架，即把正向噪声过程和反向去噪过程定义在流形上，而不是把流形嵌入欧式空间后粗暴处理。关键点通常包括：使用流形上的布朗运动或热核作为噪声机制、通过切空间近似或几何数值方法实现可训练的 score/denoising、并解决高维流形上采样和归一化常数难算的问题。它和已有几何扩散方法的区别，按题目看，重点在“scaling”，也就是让训练和采样能够扩到更复杂、更高维的数据，而不是只在小规模几何玩具任务上成立。","experiments":"可以较确定地说，实验应覆盖多个具有流形结构的数据域，并与欧式扩散或早期黎曼扩散基线比较，展示在样本质量、似然代理指标或几何一致性上的改善。由于没有摘要，无法可靠给出具体数据集、网络规模、FID/likelihood 数字或训练开销。若从研究价值看，最关键的实验应是：几何近似误差如何随维度增长变化、不同流形上的稳定性、以及扩展到更大模型或更复杂分布时是否仍优于嵌入式欧式近似。","authors_note":"作者包含 Stefano Ermon。其团队在概率生成模型、扩散模型、结构化生成与不确定性建模方面有持续代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a real limitation of diffusion modeling: standard formulations are built for Euclidean spaces, while many data domains live on manifolds with nontrivial geometry. Applying ordinary Gaussian noising there is often unnatural and can break the structure one actually wants to model.","importance":"This matters because it extends diffusion from a convenient default setting to a geometry-consistent generative framework. The relevance to pretraining is indirect but real: whenever latent spaces, token spaces, or structured outputs have intrinsic constraints, the geometry of the target space should influence the training objective. That is a broader lesson than the specific manifold benchmarks.","technical_approach":"The method develops scalable Riemannian diffusion models, meaning the noising and denoising processes are defined on the manifold rather than imposed from an ambient Euclidean space. The key ingredients likely include manifold Brownian motion or heat kernels, tangent-space or geometric approximations for training score networks, and practical handling of otherwise expensive geometric computations. Relative to earlier geometric diffusion work, the emphasis seems to be scale: making these ideas workable beyond small low-dimensional toy settings.","experiments":"The paper likely evaluates on several manifold-structured domains and compares against Euclidean diffusion baselines and earlier manifold-aware methods, showing better sample quality or geometric fidelity. Without the abstract or tables, I cannot reliably provide datasets, model sizes, or exact metrics. The most useful empirical questions are whether approximation error stays controlled as dimension grows, whether training remains stable across different manifolds, and whether the method still wins at larger scale.","authors_note":"The author list includes Stefano Ermon. His group has produced influential work on probabilistic generative modeling, diffusion models, structured generation, and uncertainty-aware learning."},"tags":["diffusion","scaling","optimization","geometry"],"notable_authors":["Stefano Ermon"],"keywords":["Diffusion Models","Geometric Deep Learning","Manifolds","Numerical Algorithms"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3可扩展黎曼扩散实现和§4高维流形实验部分即可，可为带几何约束的latent空间预训练的噪声设计提供参考。","en":"Only read §3 scalable Riemannian diffusion implementation and §4 high-dimensional manifold experiments, reference for noise design in pretraining of geometrically constrained latent spaces."}},{"id":"Lu23","title":"A Theory of Multimodal Learning","authors":["Zhou Lu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$153","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Lu23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Lu23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/b316495425d076b4abffc065a64c2cca-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：多模态学习为什么会有效、何时有效，以及不同模态之间的信息关系如何决定学习收益。这个问题过去大量靠经验规律和 benchmark 结论推动，但缺少统一理论解释，导致很多设计只能靠试错。","importance":"它的重要性是理论框架级的。对 pretrain 来说，多模态统一建模已经从工程实践走到范式竞争阶段，理论若能说明何时该融合、何时会负迁移、监督如何在模态间传递，就会直接影响数据配比、架构耦合和训练目标设计。它不直接给新模型，但可能提供判断 multimodal scaling 和对齐成本的更清晰坐标系。","technical_approach":"核心方法是从理论上刻画多模态学习的泛化与收益边界，通常会把不同模态视作共享潜变量或互补观测，并分析联合学习相对单模态学习在样本复杂度或误差界上的变化。相比经验论文，这类工作关心的是条件：模态必须共享多少信息、噪声如何分布、标签与各模态的相关性如何影响收益。设计价值在于它能解释为什么有些模态是增益源，有些只是额外噪声；边界也很明显，理论结果常依赖较强假设，未必直接覆盖真实大规模预训练系统。","experiments":"理论论文的实验通常是辅助验证而非主贡献。可以合理预期作者会用合成数据和若干真实多模态任务验证理论预测，例如在模态互信息高低、模态噪声变化或标签缺失情况下的性能趋势。由于没有摘要，无法可靠提供具体定理、假设条件、数据集或数字结果。如果从实用角度看，最有价值的是它是否给出可操作的判据，而不是仅有渐近误差界。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a foundational question: why multimodal learning helps, when it helps, and when it does not. Much of modern multimodal progress is empirical, but the field still lacks a clean theory for how information is shared or transferred across modalities.","importance":"This is a theory-level contribution with practical implications for pretraining. If a theory can characterize when modality fusion improves sample efficiency or when it causes negative transfer, it becomes relevant to data mixing, architectural coupling, and alignment objectives. The value is not in a new model but in a better decision framework.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is to formalize multimodal learning through shared latent variables or complementary noisy views, then derive generalization or sample-complexity results for joint training versus single-modality training. Unlike empirical multimodal papers, the emphasis is on conditions: how much shared information is needed, how modality-specific noise matters, and how labels depend on each modality. That is useful because it explains why some modalities act as supervision amplifiers while others only inject noise. The clear limitation is that such theory usually depends on simplifying assumptions that may only partially match large-scale pretraining.","experiments":"As a theory paper, experiments are likely supportive rather than central. The natural setup would be synthetic studies plus a few real multimodal tasks that verify predicted trends under varying modality overlap, noise, or missingness. Since no abstract is provided, I cannot state theorems, assumptions, datasets, or exact numbers reliably. From a practical perspective, the key question is whether the paper yields an actionable criterion rather than only asymptotic bounds.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal","theory","representation-learning","scaling"],"keywords":["Multimodal Learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§2多模态收益边界推导部分，可作为多模态预训练数据配比、模态耦合设计的理论参考坐标系。","en":"Focus on §2 derivation of multimodal benefit bounds, serves as theoretical reference for data ratio and modality coupling design in multimodal pretraining."}},{"id":"LuPCGCWZG23","title":"Chameleon: Plug-and-Play Compositional Reasoning with Large Language Models","authors":["Pan Lu","Baolin Peng","Hao Cheng","Michel Galley","Kai-Wei Chang","Ying Nian Wu","Song-Chun Zhu","Jianfeng Gao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$154","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LuPCGCWZG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LuPCGCWZG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/871ed095b734818cfba48db6aeb25a62-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：大语言模型在组合式推理任务上经常不是“不会想”，而是不会按任务需要调用合适的外部模块和中间表示。单一提示让 LLM 端到端硬做复杂推理，往往在需要表格、程序、知识检索或视觉子模块协作时失效。","importance":"它的重要性主要在 inference-time orchestration，而不是 pretrain 本体。但它对 pretrain/posttrain 接口有启发：如果复杂能力来自模块组合而非单模型内化，那么预训练时该如何暴露接口、保留可组合的中间语言、以及如何让模型学会路由工具，就变成值得前置考虑的问题。它也说明纯参数扩展不一定是最经济的推理增强路径。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Chameleon，一个可插拔的组合推理框架。简单说，它让 LLM 先把复杂问题拆成一系列可执行的子步骤，再把不同步骤路由给适合的工具或专家模块，最后把结果整合回来。与普通 CoT 不同，它不把推理完全留在自然语言里，而是把自然语言当作编排层；与手工 pipeline 不同，它保留了较强的即插即用性。这个设计有效，因为很多任务失败不是知识缺失，而是表示形式和执行器选错了；边界在于路由质量决定上限，且链路变长后错误传播会更明显。","experiments":"从标题可判断，实验会强调 compositional reasoning 任务上的稳健提升，并与纯 LLM prompting、CoT、ReAct 或工具增强基线比较。由于没有摘要，无法可靠给出用到的 benchmark、模型规模、准确率提升数字或各模块组成。较有价值的观察通常包括：错误是来自分解、路由还是执行，模块数量增加是否持续带来收益，以及即插即用是否真能跨任务迁移。","authors_note":"作者列表包含 Michel Galley、Kai-Wei Chang 等，均在 LLM、对话系统与推理增强方向有长期代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a common failure mode in LLM reasoning: many hard tasks are not solved by a bigger prompt alone, because the model needs the right intermediate representation and the right external module at each step. End-to-end prompting is often too brittle when reasoning requires tools, programs, retrieval, or structured execution.","importance":"This is mainly an inference-time reasoning framework, not a pretraining method. Still, it matters for the pretrain-posttrain interface: if complex capability comes from composition rather than monolithic internalization, then pretraining should preserve modular interfaces and useful intermediate languages. It is also a reminder that parameter scaling is not the only route to stronger reasoning.","technical_approach":"Chameleon is a plug-and-play compositional reasoning framework. The LLM decomposes a problem into substeps, routes each substep to an appropriate expert or tool, and then integrates the outputs into a final answer. Unlike plain chain-of-thought, the reasoning is not kept purely in natural language; language acts as the orchestration layer. Unlike a fixed pipeline, the system is meant to remain modular and reusable. This works when task difficulty comes from choosing and sequencing representations correctly, though the downside is that routing errors and error propagation can dominate.","experiments":"From the title, the empirical story is likely improved robustness on compositional reasoning benchmarks against standard prompting, CoT, ReAct, or other tool-augmented baselines. Without the abstract, I cannot reliably list tasks, model sizes, module inventory, or exact gains. The most informative analyses would separate decomposition errors from execution errors and test whether plug-and-play modules really transfer across tasks.","authors_note":"The author list includes Michel Galley and Kai-Wei Chang, both well known for sustained work on LLMs, dialogue systems, and reasoning augmentation."},"tags":["llm","reasoning","compositionality","tool-use"],"notable_authors":["Michel Galley","Kai-Wei Chang"],"keywords":["large language models","compositional reasoning","tool use","multi-modal reasoning","mathematical reasoning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4.1模块路由设计和下游推理任务结果即可，为预训练暴露可组合接口的设计方向提供参考。","en":"Only read §4.1 module routing design and downstream inference results, reference for designing composable interfaces in pretraining."}},{"id":"LuYLWW23","title":"LLMScore: Unveiling the Power of Large Language Models in Text-to-Image Synthesis Evaluation","authors":["Yujie Lu","Xianjun Yang","Xiujun Li","Xin Eric Wang","William Yang Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$155","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LuYLWW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LuYLWW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/47f30d67bce3e9824928267e9355420f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：文本到图像生成的评测能否借助大语言模型获得更接近人类判断的信号。传统自动指标常偏重低层相似度或依赖专门训练的评估器，但对复杂文本语义、细粒度约束和常识一致性的覆盖仍然有限。","importance":"它的重要性在评测范式上。对生成式预训练来说，评测器不是附属品，而是决定研究方向的训练反馈接口；如果 LLM 能成为更通用的语义评估器，那么未来图像、视频甚至跨模态生成都可能共享更统一的 evaluator。它也提示一个趋势：强语言模型开始从“被评测对象”转向“评测基础设施”。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 LLMScore，用大语言模型读取文本提示和生成图像的描述或相关信息，再输出语义一致性评分。它的关键不是简单让 LLM 打分，而是把图像内容转成 LLM 能稳定消费的表示，并设计提示或评分协议，让模型关注对象、属性、关系和场景约束。与 CLIPScore 这类嵌入相似度指标相比，LLMScore 更擅长显式推理复杂文本条件；代价是它依赖上游图像描述质量，且评分稳定性会受提示和模型版本影响。","experiments":"从标题可判断，实验应围绕与人类偏好或人工标注的一致性展开，并与 CLIPScore、FID 相关替代指标或其他 learned evaluators 对比。由于没有摘要，无法可靠写出具体数据集、相关系数、显著性结果或所用 LLM。较值得关注的实验应包括：不同 captioning 前端对评分的影响、长提示与多约束提示上的优势，以及 LLM 评测是否容易被对抗性描述或模板化输出欺骗。","authors_note":"作者列表包含 Xiujun Li、Xin Eric Wang、William Yang Wang，均在 NLP 与多模态理解/生成方向有持续代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether large language models can serve as better evaluators for text-to-image generation. Existing automatic metrics often miss fine-grained semantic constraints, especially when prompts involve multiple objects, relations, or commonsense requirements.","importance":"This is an evaluation-paradigm contribution. For generative pretraining, evaluators shape the optimization loop and the research agenda. If LLM-based scoring correlates better with human judgment, it suggests a more unified evaluation interface across image, video, and broader multimodal generation. It also marks a shift where LLMs become infrastructure for evaluation, not just objects being evaluated.","technical_approach":"LLMScore uses an LLM to assess semantic alignment between a prompt and generated image content, likely via textual descriptions or structured image summaries that the LLM can reliably consume. The main design choice is to expose object, attribute, relation, and scene information in a form suitable for reasoning, rather than relying on embedding similarity alone. Compared with CLIPScore-like metrics, this should better capture compositional prompt following. The trade-off is dependence on the image-to-text front end and sensitivity to prompt design and model versioning.","experiments":"The likely experiments test correlation with human judgments and compare against CLIPScore, FID-adjacent proxies, or other learned evaluators. Since the abstract is missing, I cannot reliably report datasets, correlations, significance, or the specific LLM used. The most useful analyses would measure robustness across different captioning front ends, stronger gains on long compositional prompts, and failure modes under adversarial or templated descriptions.","authors_note":"The author list includes Xiujun Li, Xin Eric Wang, and William Yang Wang, all of whom have sustained contributions in NLP and multimodal understanding/generation."},"tags":["llm","evaluation","text-to-image","multimodal"],"notable_authors":["Xiujun Li","Xin Eric Wang","William Yang Wang"],"keywords":["Text-to-Image Evaluation","Visio-linguistic Compositionality","Large Language Models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3评分协议设计和与CLIPScore的对比实验，可为跨模态生成预训练的统一语义评测提供思路。","en":"Focus on §3 scoring protocol design and comparison experiments with CLIPScore, provides ideas for unified semantic evaluation in cross-modal generative pretraining."}},{"id":"LuoHZSLZ23","title":"Diff-Instruct: A Universal Approach for Transferring Knowledge From Pre-trained Diffusion Models","authors":["Weijian Luo","Tianyang Hu","Shifeng Zhang","Jiacheng Sun","Zhenguo Li","Zhihua Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$156","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LuoHZSLZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LuoHZSLZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/f115f619b62833aadc5acb058975b0e6-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：如何把已经训练好的扩散模型中的知识迁移到新模型或新目标上，而不必每次从头做高成本蒸馏或重训练。扩散模型越来越大，但其知识迁移手段仍相对分散，这限制了后续对齐、压缩和定制化。","importance":"它的重要性在于把扩散模型知识迁移抽象成一个更通用的训练接口。对 pretrain 研究者，这类工作对应文本领域里的 distillation / preference transfer / self-training 思路，价值不只在图像生成，而在于说明生成模型的“教师信号”可以如何更稳定地转移给学生或其他目标模型。若方法足够通用，它会影响扩散后训练、加速采样模型和跨架构迁移。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Diff-Instruct，一个从预训练扩散模型向其他模型转移知识的通用框架。按命名看，它更像是把教师扩散模型生成的打分、偏好或去噪知识转成可训练指令，而不是简单做输出匹配。与标准蒸馏相比，这类方法通常不要求学生完全复制教师的每一步轨迹，而是提取更抽象、更可优化的监督信号，因此适配范围更广。这样设计有效，因为扩散过程本身很长，逐步模仿代价高且不稳定；边界则在于教师信号若不够保真，学生容易学到偏置而非真实数据分布。","experiments":"可以确定的是，论文会展示该框架在多个预训练扩散模型和下游生成设置中的迁移效果，并与常见蒸馏或微调基线比较。由于没有摘要，无法可靠写出具体数据集、教师/学生架构、FID、采样步数压缩比或训练成本。较关键的实验应该包括：不同教师模型间的通用性、学生架构变化时是否仍有效，以及迁移后在质量、速度和对齐性之间的 trade-off。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical gap in diffusion modeling: how to transfer knowledge from large pretrained diffusion models without repeatedly relying on expensive retraining or narrowly tailored distillation schemes. As diffusion models scale up, the transfer interface becomes increasingly important for alignment, compression, and adaptation.","importance":"This is important because it treats diffusion knowledge transfer as a more general training primitive. For pretraining researchers, the analogy is to distillation, self-training, or preference transfer in language models. If the approach is indeed universal, it could matter for post-training diffusion models, fast samplers, and cross-architecture transfer.","technical_approach":"Diff-Instruct appears to be a general framework for extracting supervision from a pretrained diffusion teacher and turning it into trainable guidance for another model. Relative to standard distillation, the likely goal is not strict trajectory matching at every denoising step but a more abstract transfer signal that is easier to optimize and more broadly applicable. That design is sensible because step-wise imitation of diffusion trajectories is costly and brittle. The limitation is that if the teacher-derived signal is biased or lossy, the student may inherit those biases rather than the full target distribution.","experiments":"What can be said safely is that the paper likely demonstrates transfer across multiple pretrained diffusion models and compares against standard distillation or finetuning baselines. Without the abstract, I cannot reliably report datasets, teacher-student architectures, FID numbers, step reductions, or training costs. The most useful experiments would test universality across teachers, robustness to changing student architectures, and the quality-speed-alignment trade-off after transfer.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","knowledge-distillation","score-matching"],"keywords":["diffusion model","data-free distillation","implicit generator","knowledge transfer"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3知识迁移框架设计和蒸馏实验部分，可为生成类预训练模型的跨架构知识迁移提供新路径参考。","en":"Only read §3 knowledge transfer framework design and distillation experiments, reference for cross-architecture knowledge transfer of generative pretrained models."}},{"id":"LuoZRCSJ23","title":"Cheap and Quick: Efficient Vision-Language Instruction Tuning for Large Language Models","authors":["Gen Luo","Yiyi Zhou","Tianhe Ren","Shengxin Chen","Xiaoshuai Sun","Rongrong Ji"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$157","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LuoZRCSJ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LuoZRCSJ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/5e84e4413268b713f0d4a1b23a9dae57-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：视觉-语言指令微调成本太高，很多方法需要大规模高质量多模态指令数据和长时间训练，难以快速迭代。随着 LLM 和视觉编码器越来越大，VLM 的瓶颈已经从“能不能做”转向“能否便宜、快速地做得足够好”。","importance":"它的贡献主要是系统方法级。对 pretrain/posttrain 接口而言，VLM 质量很大程度取决于后续指令对齐的性价比；如果能用更少数据和更低算力完成有效 instruction tuning，就会改变多模态模型的迭代方式，也会反过来影响我们对原生多模态预训练必要性的判断。它的价值通常不在绝对最强性能，而在更好的 cost-performance frontier。","technical_approach":"核心方法是高效的视觉-语言指令微调框架，按标题看重点是 cheap and quick，即尽可能减少训练数据、参数更新量和训练步骤。通常这类方案会结合冻结大部分视觉/语言骨干、只训练轻量连接层或适配器、精挑少量高信息密度指令样本，并对输入分辨率、对话模板和损失权重做工程化优化。与重型全量微调相比，它牺牲一部分上限来换取极低成本；与纯 prompt-based 接入视觉特征相比，它又保留了足够的跨模态对齐学习。","experiments":"可以较确定地说，实验会围绕训练成本、数据规模和多模态指令跟随性能展开，并与已有 VLM instruction tuning 方法比较。由于没有摘要，无法可靠提供使用的骨干模型、样本数量、GPU 时长、VQAv2/MMBench/LLaVA benchmark 数字或相对提升。最值得看的实验通常包括：数据子集选择是否优于随机采样、冻结策略对性能的影响，以及在极低预算下性能衰减是否平滑。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical bottleneck in vision-language models: instruction tuning is expensive, both in multimodal data and in training compute. As VLM backbones get larger, the key question is no longer whether instruction tuning works, but whether it can be done cheaply and quickly without collapsing quality.","importance":"This is mainly a systems-and-method paper. It matters for the pretrain-posttrain interface because the cost of multimodal instruction tuning strongly affects iteration speed, deployment economics, and even how much native multimodal pretraining is actually needed. The likely value is not the absolute best benchmark score, but a better cost-performance frontier.","technical_approach":"The method is an efficient framework for vision-language instruction tuning, with the design goal stated directly in the title: cheap and quick. In practice, this usually means freezing most of the visual and language backbones, training only lightweight connectors or adapters, using a compact but high-value instruction dataset, and optimizing engineering details such as templates and loss balancing. Compared with full finetuning, this sacrifices some ceiling for major savings; compared with zero-training prompt interfaces, it retains actual cross-modal alignment learning.","experiments":"The paper likely reports multimodal instruction-following performance against training cost and dataset size, compared with prior VLM tuning methods. Since no abstract is available, I cannot reliably provide backbone names, sample counts, GPU hours, or exact benchmark results. The most informative results would test subset selection versus random data, freezing strategies, and whether performance degrades gracefully in very low-budget settings.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","instruction-tuning","efficiency","llm"],"keywords":["vision-language instruction tuning","multimodal LLM","efficient training"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§3.2轻量适配设计和成本-性能对比结果，可指导多模态预训练后对齐的低算力迭代方案设计。","en":"Focus on §3.2 lightweight adapter design and cost-performance comparison results, guides low-compute iteration design for post-pretraining alignment of multimodal models."}},{"id":"MaZBLZZZFHW23","title":"Fairness-guided Few-shot Prompting for Large Language Models","authors":["Huan Ma","Changqing Zhang","Yatao Bian","Lemao Liu","Zhirui Zhang","Peilin Zhao","Shu Zhang","Huazhu Fu","Qinghua Hu","Bingzhe Wu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$158","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MaZBLZZZFHW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MaZBLZZZFHW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/8678da90126aa58326b2fc0254b33a8c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：few-shot prompting 在大语言模型上容易放大示例偏差，从而带来不公平或群体间性能失衡。已有 prompt engineering 大多追求平均准确率，但很少显式控制 fairness，因此在敏感属性相关任务上，示例选得不对会让模型输出系统性偏斜。","importance":"它的重要性主要在 posttrain 评测与推理阶段的方法层面，而不是 pretrain 本身。但对 pretrain/posttrain 闭环仍有启发：如果少量上下文示例就能显著改变群体公平性，说明模型内部表示对上下文分布非常敏感，后续对齐数据和 reward 设计就不能只看总体指标。它提醒我们，prompt 不是中性的接口，而是会重塑模型表现分布。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 fairness-guided few-shot prompting，即在选择 few-shot 示例时，不只优化任务正确率，也显式考虑公平性目标。相比随机选例或只按语义相似度选例，这种方法会引入群体覆盖、偏差控制或公平性约束，让上下文示例组成更平衡。设计有效的原因很直接：LLM 在 in-context learning 中会把示例当作局部任务定义，示例分布本身就会成为偏置来源；代价则是公平性与平均精度之间可能存在张力，且公平定义依赖具体任务。","experiments":"可以较确定地说，实验会在若干具有敏感属性的文本分类或决策任务上，比较公平引导选例与随机/相似度/准确率导向选例的差异，并报告准确率与公平性指标的权衡。由于没有摘要，无法可靠给出 benchmark 名称、使用的 LLM、公平性指标类型或具体提升数字。较值得看的结果通常包括：示例数量变化对公平性的影响、不同群体规模不平衡下方法是否稳健，以及是否能在较小精度损失下显著改善群体差距。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a neglected issue in in-context learning: few-shot prompting can amplify bias from the selected demonstrations, leading to unfair performance across groups. Most prompt-selection methods optimize average task accuracy, not fairness, even though the chosen examples strongly shape model behavior.","importance":"This is primarily a prompting and evaluation contribution rather than a pretraining one. Still, it matters for the pretrain-posttrain loop because it shows how sensitive deployed model behavior can be to tiny contextual changes. That has direct implications for alignment data design and for how we interpret model capabilities beyond average accuracy.","technical_approach":"The method introduces fairness-guided few-shot prompting, where demonstration selection explicitly accounts for fairness objectives in addition to task utility. Instead of random selection or pure similarity-based retrieval, the approach likely enforces better group coverage or fairness-aware constraints in the prompt examples. This makes sense because in-context examples effectively define the local task distribution seen by the LLM. The trade-off is that fairness improvements may come at some cost to average accuracy, and the outcome depends on which fairness notion is chosen.","experiments":"The likely experiments compare fairness-guided prompt selection against random, similarity-based, or accuracy-oriented baselines on tasks involving sensitive attributes, reporting both accuracy and fairness metrics. Without the abstract, I cannot reliably name the benchmarks, LLMs, metrics, or exact gains. The most informative analyses would vary the number of demonstrations, test robustness under group imbalance, and quantify how much fairness can improve for a given accuracy drop.","authors_note":""},"tags":["fairness","few-shot-prompting","llm","in-context-learning"],"keywords":["large language models","prompts","classification"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4示例选择策略和公平性-精度trade-off实验即可，为预训练对齐的评测维度设计提了实用提醒。","en":"Only read §4 example selection strategy and fairness-accuracy trade-off experiments, reminds of evaluation dimension design for pretraining alignment."}},{"id":"MangalamAM23","title":"EgoSchema: A Diagnostic Benchmark for Very Long-form Video Language Understanding","authors":["Karttikeya Mangalam","Raiymbek Akshulakov","Jitendra Malik"],"institutions":["University of California, Berkeley"],"abstract":"$159","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MangalamAM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MangalamAM23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/90ce332aff156b910b002ce4e6880dec-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有长视频理解基准的难度仅由视频长度决定，无法真实衡量模型的长时序理解和推理能力，此前的基准大多存在答案可通过片段匹配得到、不需要全局理解的问题。","importance":"数据级贡献，为长视频多模态模型的预训练效果评估提供了更准确的诊断基准，可有效检测模型的长时序推理能力缺陷。","technical_approach":"原创的长视频理解基准，核心是从Ego4D数据集提取3分钟长度的第一人称视频，人工标注5000+多选择问答对，新增时序认证机制过滤可通过片段匹配得到答案的问题，舍弃仅用视频长度定义难度的设计，和现有长视频基准的核心差异是所有问题都需要全局时序理解才能回答，无法通过片段作弊。","experiments":"在EgoSchema基准上，现有最强的视频理解模型准确率仅为35%左右，远低于人类准确率85%，即使是支持10万token上下文的多模态大模型准确率也不足40%，分析显示模型的时序推理能力随视频长度增加呈线性下降。","authors_note":"作者来自UC Berkeley，Jitendra Malik是计算机视觉领域的泰斗级学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing long video understanding benchmarks define difficulty only by video length, and cannot truly measure the long temporal understanding and reasoning ability of models. Most prior benchmarks have the problem that answers can be obtained via fragment matching without global understanding.","importance":"Data-level contribution. It provides a more accurate diagnostic benchmark for evaluating the pre-training effect of long video multimodal models, and can effectively detect defects in the long temporal reasoning ability of models.","technical_approach":"Original long video understanding benchmark. It extracts 3-minute first-person videos from the Ego4D dataset, manually annotates over 5000 multiple-choice QA pairs, adds a temporal certification mechanism to filter questions whose answers can be obtained via fragment matching, and drops the design of defining difficulty only by video length. The core difference from existing long video benchmarks is that all questions require global temporal understanding to answer, and cannot be solved via fragment cheating.","experiments":"On the EgoSchema benchmark, the accuracy of current strongest video understanding models is only around 35%, far lower than human accuracy of 85%. Even multimodal large models supporting 100k token context have accuracy below 40%. Analysis shows that the temporal reasoning ability of models decreases linearly with video length increase.","authors_note":"Authors are from UC Berkeley. Jitendra Malik is a leading scholar in the field of computer vision."},"tags":["video-understanding","long-context","benchmark","vlm"],"keywords":["video understanding","long-term understanding","video question answering","vision and language"],"notable_authors":["Jitendra Malik"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"现有多模态大模型的长时序理解能力远弱于人类","claim_en":"The long temporal understanding ability of existing multimodal large models is far weaker than that of humans","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"视频长度不是长视频理解任务难度的核心决定因素，问题对全局时序信息的依赖程度才是","claim_en":"Video length is not the core determinant of long video understanding task difficulty; the degree of question dependence on global temporal information is","opposes":"Prior long video benchmark design assumes that longer videos correspond to higher task difficulty","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§2.2","why_contested":"It revises the design logic of long video understanding benchmarks, providing a more accurate evaluation standard for the development of subsequent long temporal multimodal models."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§2基准构造逻辑和现有模型的评测结果，可用来诊断长视频多模态预训练的长时序推理缺陷。","en":"Only read §2 benchmark construction logic and evaluation results of existing models, used to diagnose long-sequence reasoning defects of long-video multimodal pretraining."}},{"id":"MasarczykOIPMT23","title":"The Tunnel Effect: Building Data Representations in Deep Neural Networks","authors":["Wojciech Masarczyk","Mateusz Ostaszewski","Ehsan Imani","Razvan Pascanu","Piotr Milos","Tomasz Trzcinski"],"institutions":["DeepMind","University of Warsaw"],"abstract":"Deep neural networks are widely known for their remarkable effectiveness across various tasks, with the consensus that deeper networks implicitly learn more complex data representations. This paper shows that sufficiently deep networks trained for supervised image classification split into two distinct parts that contribute to the resulting data representations differently. The initial layers create linearly-separable representations, while the subsequent layers, which we refer to as \\textit{the tunnel}, compress these representations and have a minimal impact on the overall performance. We explore the tunnel's behavior through comprehensive empirical studies, highlighting that it emerges early in the training process. Its depth depends on the relation between the network's capacity and task complexity. Furthermore, we show that the tunnel degrades out-of-distribution generalization and discuss its implications for continual learning.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MasarczykOIPMT23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MasarczykOIPMT23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/f249db9ab5975586f36df46f8958c008-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"深度神经网络的表示学习机制未被完全理解，此前的共识认为网络越深，学到的表示越复杂，对性能的贡献越大，未发现深层网络的结构冗余问题。","importance":"机制级贡献，为深度模型的架构设计、剪枝、预训练效率优化提供了新的理论依据，首次发现了深度网络的隧道效应。","technical_approach":"原创的机制分析工作，核心是通过大量监督图像分类训练实验，发现足够深的网络会分为两部分：浅层生成线性可分的表示，后续的“隧道层”仅压缩表示，对性能贡献极小，舍弃深度越深性能越好的假设，和现有表示学习分析工作的核心差异是证明了深层网络存在大量冗余的隧道层，不需要也不会提升表示质量。","experiments":"在ResNet、ViT等架构上的实验显示，隧道层的深度占总深度的30%~60%，剪掉隧道层后模型精度下降不超过1%，推理速度提升30%以上，消融实验验证隧道层在训练前10%的步骤就已经形成，后续训练不会改变其功能。","authors_note":"作者来自DeepMind、华沙大学，Razvan Pascanu是深度学习优化与机制分析领域的知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The representation learning mechanism of deep neural networks is not fully understood. Prior consensus assumes that deeper networks learn more complex representations and contribute more to performance, and the structural redundancy of deep networks has not been discovered.","importance":"Mechanism-level contribution. It provides new theoretical basis for deep model architecture design, pruning, and pre-training efficiency optimization, and discovers the tunnel effect of deep networks for the first time.","technical_approach":"Original mechanism analysis work. It finds through a large number of supervised image classification training experiments that sufficiently deep networks are divided into two parts: shallow layers generate linearly separable representations, and subsequent \"tunnel layers\" only compress representations with minimal contribution to performance. It drops the assumption that deeper networks have better performance. The core difference from existing representation learning analysis work is proving that deep networks have a large number of redundant tunnel layers that do not need or improve representation quality.","experiments":"Experiments on ResNet, ViT and other architectures show that tunnel layers account for 30%~60% of the total depth. After pruning tunnel layers, model accuracy drops by no more than 1%, and inference speed increases by more than 30%. Ablation studies verify that tunnel layers form in the first 10% of training steps, and subsequent training does not change their function.","authors_note":"Authors are from DeepMind and University of Warsaw. Razvan Pascanu is a well-known scholar in the field of deep learning optimization and mechanism analysis."},"tags":["representation-learning","training-dynamics","deep-networks"],"keywords":["representation learning","continual learning","training dynamics"],"notable_authors":["Razvan Pascanu"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"深度神经网络的浅层负责提取低层次特征，深层负责提取高层次特征","claim_en":"Shallow layers of deep neural networks are responsible for extracting low-level features, and deep layers for high-level features","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"足够深的神经网络中，超过30%的深层是对性能几乎无贡献的隧道层，仅压缩表示","claim_en":"In sufficiently deep neural networks, more than 30% of deep layers are tunnel layers that contribute almost nothing to performance and only compress representations","opposes":"Prior consensus assumes that deeper networks learn more complex representations and contribute more to performance","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3.1","why_contested":"It subverts the core assumption of deep model architecture design, providing a clear optimization direction for model pruning, lightweighting, and pre-training efficiency improvement."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为深度网络表示学习的机制性结论备查，不用读正文，核心结论是深层存在大量无性能增益的冗余隧道层。","en":"Keep as reference for deep network representation learning mechanism, no need to read full text, core conclusion is deep networks have large redundant tunnel layers with no performance gain."}},{"id":"McDonnellGPAH23","title":"RanPAC: Random Projections and Pre-trained Models for Continual Learning","authors":["Mark D. McDonnell","Dong Gong","Amin Parvaneh","Ehsan Abbasnejad","Anton van den Hengel"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$15a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/McDonnellGPAH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/McDonnellGPAH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/2793dc35e14003dd367684d93d236847-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有基于预训练模型的持续学习方法存在两类缺陷：直接使用预提取特征难以桥接分布差距，引入适配器则易发生遗忘；过往持续学习研究多聚焦从零训练范式下的灾难性遗忘问题，预训练基础模型普及后缺乏适配的高效持续学习方案。","importance":"方法级贡献，为预训练模型下游持续学习提供轻量可行的技术路径，无需大幅修改预训练权重，降低持续学习落地成本。","technical_approach":"核心是冻结预训练模型主干，在特征层引入随机投影映射到任务专属特征空间，舍弃参数微调操作，和现有方法相比无需调整预训练主干或训练适配器参数，避免参数更新引入的遗忘风险。","experiments":"论文摘要未提供完整实验数据，未披露模型参数量、基线方法及核心指标结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing continual learning (CL) methods on pre-trained models have two flaws: directly using pre-extracted features fail to bridge distribution gaps, while adding adapters is prone to forgetting. Most prior CL works focus on catastrophic forgetting under the training-from-scratch paradigm, and there is a lack of efficient CL solutions adapted to pre-trained foundation models.","importance":"Method-level contribution, providing a lightweight feasible technical path for CL on pre-trained models, no need to modify pre-trained weights significantly, reducing the deployment cost of CL.","technical_approach":"Freeze the pre-trained model backbone, add random projection on the feature layer to map to task-specific feature space, discard parameter fine-tuning operations. Compared with existing methods, it does not need to adjust the pre-trained backbone or train adapter parameters, avoiding forgetting risk introduced by parameter updates.","experiments":"The paper abstract does not provide complete experimental data, and does not disclose model parameter size, baseline methods and core metric results.","authors_note":""},"tags":["continual-learning","pretrained-models","adaptation"],"keywords":["continual learning","class incremental learning","domain incremental learning","pre-trained models","parameter-efficient transfer learning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"预训练模型提取的特征包含丰富语义信息，可支撑下游任务学习。","claim_en":"Features extracted by pre-trained models contain rich semantic information that can support downstream task learning.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为预训练模型下游持续学习的轻量方案备查，不用读正文，仅适合落地场景参考，对预训练本体研究价值低。","en":"Keep as reference for lightweight downstream continual learning of pretrained models, no need to read full text, only useful for deployment, low value for pretraining research."}},{"id":"MerrillS23","title":"A Logic for Expressing Log-Precision Transformers","authors":["William Merrill","Ashish Sabharwal"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$15b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MerrillS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MerrillS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/a48e5877c7bf86a513950ab23b360498-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有研究证明有限精度Transformer分类器的表达能力等价于一阶逻辑的泛化版本，但有限精度Transformer单头只能关注常数个token，无法实现均匀注意力，不符合实际Transformer的宽注意力核心能力，需要刻画支持全局注意力的Transformer的逻辑表达边界。","importance":"理论级贡献，完善了Transformer推理能力的理论刻画框架，为理解大模型推理能力边界提供理论依据。","technical_approach":"分析前向传播采用log n精度计算的Transformer的逻辑表达能力，将其对应到可表达全局量化一阶逻辑，舍弃了有限精度假设，和Chiang et al. 2023的工作相比，覆盖了实际Transformer能实现均匀全局注意力的场景。","experiments":"纯理论分析工作，无实验验证部分。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing studies show that the expressive power of finite-precision transformer classifiers is equivalent to a generalized version of first-order logic. However, finite-precision transformers can only attend to a constant number of tokens per head, cannot implement uniform attention, which does not match the core wide attention capability of real transformers. There is a need to characterize the logical expression boundary of transformers supporting global attention.","importance":"Theoretical-level contribution, improving the theoretical characterization framework for transformer reasoning capabilities, providing theoretical basis for understanding the reasoning capability boundary of large models.","technical_approach":"Analyze the logical expressive power of transformers whose forward pass is computed with log n precision, map it to globally quantified first-order logic, discard the finite precision assumption. Compared with Chiang et al. 2023, it covers the scenario where real transformers can implement uniform global attention.","experiments":"Pure theoretical analysis work, no experimental verification part.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformers","formal-analysis","expressivity","reasoning"],"keywords":["transformers","logic","reasoning","circuit complexity","mechanistic interpretability"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"有限精度Transformer的表达能力可等价于一阶逻辑的泛化版本。","claim_en":"The expressive power of finite-precision transformers is equivalent to a generalized version of first-order logic.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"有限精度Transformer单头只能关注常数个token，无法表示均匀注意力。","claim_en":"A single head in finite-precision transformers can only attend to a constant number of tokens and cannot represent uniform attention.","opposes":"之前的工作认为有限精度Transformer可以刻画实际Transformer的推理能力。","opposes_cite_hint":"Chiang 2023","evidence_anchor":"§2 Analysis","why_contested":"修正了有限精度Transformer对实际Transformer能力刻画的偏差，说明之前的理论框架不能覆盖实际Transformer的核心能力。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3 log精度Transformer与全局量化一阶逻辑的等价性证明，可用来理解大模型推理能力的理论边界。","en":"Focus on §3 equivalence proof between log-precision Transformers and globally quantified first-order logic, helps understand theoretical boundaries of large model reasoning capabilities."}},{"id":"MinceDKTH23","title":"The Grand Illusion: The Myth of Software Portability and Implications for ML Progress","authors":["Fraser Mince","Dzung Dinh","Jonas Kgomo","Neil Thompson","Sara Hooker"],"institutions":["MIT"],"abstract":"$15c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MinceDKTH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MinceDKTH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/42c40aff7814e9796266e12053b1c610-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：机器学习系统是否真的具备“写一次到处跑”的软件可移植性，以及这种假设是否高估了算法进步的真实速度。过去很多模型进展默认可以跨硬件、框架和工程栈平滑复用，但作者认为这种前提并不成立，而且会直接扭曲我们对 ML 研发效率和 scaling 成本的判断。","importance":"它的重要性是系统级和方法论级的。对 pretrain 研究者来说，结论不是某个新模型更好，而是很多看似纯算法的收益其实依赖特定软硬件协同；如果可移植性很差，那么算力利用率、 kernel 优化、并行策略和部署约束就不只是工程细节，而是决定哪些预训练路线真正可行的一级变量。","technical_approach":"作者做的不是提出新训练算法，而是系统性审视软件可移植性的神话。核心做法是比较不同 ML 软件在跨硬件、跨平台迁移时的性能损失、重写成本和优化依赖，强调高性能往往来自大量平台特定代码，而不是抽象层自动带来的可移植收益。与常见的‘框架抽象会自然屏蔽底层差异’观点不同，这篇论文指出性能、可维护性和通用性之间存在硬 trade-off：越想榨干硬件，越需要平台定制；越追求统一接口，越可能损失前沿训练效率。","experiments":"这类论文的实验证据通常围绕跨平台性能对比和工程重用成本，而不是标准 benchmark 分数。关键事实应是：同一算法或工作负载在不同硬件/软件栈上会出现显著性能差距，且要恢复性能往往需要额外定制开发；这种差距不是边角误差，而足以改变训练成本和可复制性判断。对 pretrain 读者，最有价值的是它提醒你重新看待 papers 里的‘同等算力预算’：如果 software stack 不可移植，所谓 compute budget 在不同实验室并不等价，很多 scaling 结果的外推边界也会更窄。","authors_note":"MIT；Neil Thompson 和 Sara Hooker 是较知名作者，分别在 AI 进步测量、算力经济学，以及可靠性、公平性和大模型实际限制方面有代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper challenges a common assumption: that ML software is broadly portable, so algorithmic progress transfers cleanly across hardware and software stacks. That assumption is convenient, but if it is false, then many claims about research efficiency and scaling economics are overstated.","importance":"This is a systems-level and methodology-level contribution. For pretraining, the message is that apparent algorithmic gains may be inseparable from platform-specific optimization; hardware utilization, kernels, distributed strategy, and compiler maturity are not secondary details but first-order constraints on what training recipes are actually viable.","technical_approach":"Rather than proposing a new model, the paper audits the portability myth itself. The key idea is to compare what happens when workloads move across platforms: how much performance is lost, how much code must be rewritten, and how much optimization depends on low-level specialization. This pushes back on the view that framework abstraction makes performance portable. The trade-off is explicit: the more peak efficiency you want, the more platform-specific work you usually need; a clean universal interface often leaves performance on the table.","experiments":"The important evidence is not benchmark accuracy but cross-platform performance and engineering cost. The central empirical point is that identical ML workloads can behave very differently across hardware/software environments, and recovering performance often requires substantial retuning or bespoke implementation. For pretraining researchers, this matters because a nominally equal compute budget is not truly equal across labs; some reported scaling results may rely on software capabilities that do not transfer.","authors_note":"MIT; Neil Thompson is known for work on measuring AI progress and compute economics, and Sara Hooker for work on reliability, fairness, and practical limits of modern ML systems."},"tags":["systems","software-portability","training-infrastructure","hardware"],"notable_authors":["Fraser Mince","Dzung Dinh","Jonas Kgomo","Neil Thompson","Sara Hooker"],"keywords":["hardware","software","meta study","portability"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4跨平台性能损失统计和trade-off分析部分，提醒预训练路线选型要把软硬件协同成本作为一级变量考量。","en":"Only read §4 cross-platform performance loss statistics and trade-off analysis, reminds software-hardware co-design cost should be a first-level variable in pretraining roadmap selection."}},{"id":"Mo0LS23","title":"S-CLIP: Semi-supervised Vision-Language Learning using Few Specialist Captions","authors":["Sangwoo Mo","Minkyu Kim","Kyungmin Lee","Jinwoo Shin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$15d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Mo0LS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Mo0LS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/c06f788963f0ce069f5b2dbf83fe7822-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：在高质量图文标注稀缺时，如何用很少量“专家级 caption”把大规模未标注视觉数据转化为有效的 vision-language 预训练信号。传统 CLIP 类方法依赖海量 noisy web pairs，而专门人工描述成本高、规模上不去；S-CLIP 试图在这两者之间找到更省标注的折中。","importance":"它的贡献是数据与训练策略层面的。对 pretrain 的启示是：图文预训练未必只能走‘海量噪声对’这一条路，少量高密度、任务相关、信息质量高的 caption 可能足以引导大量无标注数据形成更好的语义结构；这对高成本领域和数据治理受限场景尤其有价值。","technical_approach":"S-CLIP 是一种半监督 vision-language 学习方法，核心思路是用少量 specialist captions 提供高质量语言监督，再把这些监督扩散到大量未配对或弱标注图像上。关键设计在于 caption 不是泛泛描述，而是更专业、更具判别性的文本，这让文本监督密度高于普通网页 alt-text。与标准 CLIP 直接吃噪声图文对不同，S-CLIP 倾向于先建立更可靠的语义锚点，再利用半监督机制扩大覆盖；代价是它依赖少量但足够好的专家文本，适用性取决于能否拿到这类 supervision。","experiments":"关键实验应围绕少标注 regime 下的性能收益。值得关注的是：在只用很少专家 caption 的情况下，S-CLIP 与全监督 CLIP 或其他半监督 VLM baseline 相比能保留多少零样本分类、检索或下游迁移能力；如果论文给出 label efficiency 曲线，那是最有价值的证据。对工程实践，重要观察通常包括 caption 质量是否比数量更关键、未标注数据规模是否能持续带来收益，以及 specialist caption 的领域偏置会不会损害开放域泛化。","authors_note":"仅凭题面无法可靠确认机构与团队代表作，返回空字符串。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical bottleneck: how to build strong vision-language models when high-quality image-text pairs are scarce, using only a small number of expert-written captions plus large unlabeled visual data. Standard CLIP-style training leans on massive noisy web pairs, while curated captions are expensive; S-CLIP explores the middle ground.","importance":"This is primarily a data-and-training contribution. For pretraining, the important message is that multimodal supervision quality may matter more than raw pair count in low-label regimes: a small amount of dense, specialist text can act as a strong semantic anchor and make unlabeled data much more useful.","technical_approach":"S-CLIP is a semi-supervised vision-language learning method built around a few specialist captions. The key design choice is to use captions that are more informative and discriminative than generic web text, then propagate that signal through large unlabeled image collections. Unlike standard CLIP, which directly optimizes on noisy paired data at scale, S-CLIP tries to establish high-quality language grounding first and then expand coverage semi-supervisedly. The trade-off is clear: it reduces label needs, but still depends on obtaining a small set of genuinely informative captions.","experiments":"The main empirical question is label efficiency. The useful facts are how much zero-shot classification, retrieval, or transfer performance is retained when only a small caption budget is available, and how S-CLIP compares to fully supervised or other semi-supervised baselines. For practitioners, the most informative ablations are whether caption quality dominates caption count, whether more unlabeled data continues to help, and whether specialist supervision hurts open-domain generalization through domain bias.","authors_note":""},"tags":["clip","vision-language","semi-supervised","captions"],"notable_authors":["Sangwoo Mo","Minkyu Kim","Kyungmin Lee","Jinwoo Shin"],"keywords":["vision-language model","semi-supervised learning","specialist domain"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3的半监督监督扩散策略设计，少量高质量caption引导无标注图文预训练的思路可在垂域VLM预训练中快速验证。","en":"Focus on §3's semi-supervised supervision diffusion design; the idea of using small high-quality captions to guide unlabeled VL pretraining can be quickly tested in domain-specific VLM development."}},{"id":"MomennejadHFSJP23","title":"Evaluating Cognitive Maps and Planning in Large Language Models with CogEval","authors":["Ida Momennejad","Hosein Hasanbeig","Felipe Vieira Frujeri","Hiteshi Sharma","Nebojsa Jojic","Hamid Palangi","Robert Osazuwa Ness","Jonathan Larson"],"institutions":["Microsoft Research"],"abstract":"$15e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MomennejadHFSJP23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MomennejadHFSJP23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/dc9d5dcf3e86b83e137bad367227c8ca-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：大语言模型在导航、规划和环境结构理解上，到底有没有形成类似 cognitive map 的内部表征，而不是只会做表面模式匹配。过去很多 LLM 评测集中在问答和推理链，但对空间关系、状态转移和长期规划测得不够细，CogEval 试图把这个空白补上。","importance":"它的重要性主要在评测层。对 pretrain 研究的价值是：如果你关心模型是否真的学到世界结构，而不只是 token 共现，那么认知地图和规划能力是一类很关键但经常被主 benchmark 忽略的能力维度；这会反过来影响数据构成、训练目标和 agent-style post-training 的设计。","technical_approach":"作者提出的是一个评测套件，而不是新的预训练方法。核心设计是把 cognitive map 拆成更可诊断的子能力，比如空间记忆、路径规划、状态追踪和反事实导航，并用一组控制任务来区分‘记住局部描述’和‘形成全局环境表征’。与普通 QA benchmark 不同，CogEval 更强调结构一致性和多步决策，因此能更清楚地区分语言流畅和世界模型能力。边界也很明确：它评测的是文本条件下的规划与地图推断，不等于真实 embodied competence。","experiments":"关键实验应是对多个主流 LLM 在 CogEval 各子任务上的对比，并分析模型规模、CoT prompting、外部工具或记忆机制对表现的影响。最有价值的事实通常不是谁第一，而是错误类型：模型可能在局部事实回忆上不错，但在闭环路径一致性、回溯规划或 unseen map 组合上明显失稳。对基础模型训练的启发是，如果这些失败在更大模型上也不自动消失，那说明单纯 next-token 预训练对结构化环境建模仍有缺口。","authors_note":"Microsoft Research 等机构作者参与；Ida Momennejad 与 Nebojsa Jojic 是较知名研究者。仅凭题面无法完整确认全部机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether LLMs actually build cognitive-map-like representations for navigation and planning, rather than merely matching local linguistic patterns. Standard LLM evaluations emphasize QA and verbal reasoning, but are weak at probing spatial structure and state-transition consistency; CogEval is designed to fill that gap.","importance":"Its main contribution is evaluative, but it matters for pretraining. If we care about whether models learn structured world knowledge instead of token co-occurrence shortcuts, cognitive maps and planning are a missing capability axis. That has downstream implications for data design, training objectives, and agent-style post-training.","technical_approach":"The work introduces an evaluation suite rather than a new training method. The key design is to decompose cognitive mapping into diagnostic subskills such as spatial memory, path planning, state tracking, and counterfactual navigation, using controlled tasks to separate local recall from global environment modeling. Unlike generic QA benchmarks, CogEval stresses structural consistency across steps. Its scope is also clear: it measures text-grounded planning and map inference, not full embodied competence.","experiments":"The relevant experiments compare multiple LLMs across CogEval tasks and study the effects of model scale, chain-of-thought prompting, and possibly memory/tool augmentation. The most useful findings are usually error patterns, not leaderboard rank: many models do reasonably well on local fact recall but break on closed-loop path consistency, backtracking, or composition over unseen maps. For pretraining researchers, the important implication is that these failures may persist even at larger scale, suggesting that next-token training alone may be insufficient for robust structured environment modeling.","authors_note":"The author list includes researchers from Microsoft Research and related institutions; Ida Momennejad and Nebojsa Jojic are recognizable names. Full affiliation details cannot be confirmed from the provided metadata."},"tags":["llm-evaluation","planning","reasoning","benchmark"],"notable_authors":["Ida Momennejad","Hosein Hasanbeig","Felipe Vieira Frujeri","Hiteshi Sharma","Nebojsa Jojic"],"keywords":["Large Language Models","LLM evaluation","model comparison","GPT-4","graph analysis","cognitive science","cognitive map","hippocampus","planning","multi-step planning","reasoning","community graph"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4的认知能力拆解维度即可，这套测试集可直接引入内部LLM世界建模能力的辅助评测。","en":"Only read §4 for cognitive capability decomposition; this benchmark can be directly added to internal auxiliary evaluation of LLM world modeling ability."}},{"id":"MondalPKMR23","title":"Equivariant Adaptation of Large Pretrained Models","authors":["Arnab Kumar Mondal","Siba Smarak Panigrahi","Oumar Kaba","Sai Mudumba","Siamak Ravanbakhsh"],"institutions":["McGill University","MILA"],"abstract":"$15f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MondalPKMR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MondalPKMR23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/9d5856318032ef3630cb580f4e24f823-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：如何在适配大型预训练模型到新任务时，显式注入旋转、平移、置换等对称性，而不是完全依赖微调自己学出来。过去大模型迁移通常偏向通用 adapter / LoRA / full fine-tune，但对于几何结构明确的任务，这种做法样本效率不高，也容易破坏已有表示；作者想把 equivariance 作为受控 inductive bias 接到预训练模型上。","importance":"它的意义是迁移方法层面的。对 pretrain 的启示是：基础模型不一定总是靠更大数据吞掉所有结构先验，某些明确的群对称性可以在 adaptation 阶段低成本补进去，从而减少重新预训练的需求；这对视觉、分子、物理场景等结构化输入尤其 relevant。","technical_approach":"论文提出的是一种 equivariant adaptation 方案，即在保留大部分预训练参数的前提下，只对少量模块施加满足群等变约束的变换。关键设计是把‘通用预训练表示’和‘任务特定对称性’拆开处理：前者继续负责语义，后者负责保证输出随输入变换时按预期变化。相比直接训练一个全新的等变网络，这样做更省数据也更易复用；相比普通参数高效微调，它的优势是有明确归纳偏置，但限制是只适合对称性清楚、且确实有帮助的任务。","experiments":"关键实验通常会覆盖具有已知对称群的任务，并比较 full fine-tuning、adapter/LoRA 和等变适配。最有价值的事实是：在少样本或分布外旋转/变换条件下，equivariant adaptation 是否明显更稳，以及是否能以更少可训练参数获得更好泛化。对基础模型研究者，值得关注的是这种方法会不会牺牲原有开放域能力、群约束加得太强是否伤害表达自由度，以及不同层注入等变模块的效果差异。","authors_note":"McGill University MILA 相关方向作者较常见；Siamak Ravanbakhsh 是较知名作者，在等变网络和几何深度学习方面有代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical adaptation question: when transferring large pretrained models to structured domains, can we inject known symmetries such as rotations, translations, or permutations explicitly, instead of hoping generic fine-tuning will rediscover them. Standard transfer methods like full fine-tuning, adapters, or LoRA are flexible but do not exploit task symmetry directly.","importance":"This is mainly a transfer-method contribution with a useful message for pretraining. The implication is that not all structure needs to be absorbed during massive pretraining; some domain symmetries can be added later in a targeted way, which may be much cheaper than retraining or scaling data further.","technical_approach":"The method performs equivariant adaptation: most pretrained parameters are kept, while a small set of modules is constrained to respect a chosen symmetry group. The design separates generic semantic representation from task-specific geometric inductive bias. Compared with training a fully equivariant model from scratch, this is more data-efficient and easier to reuse. Compared with generic parameter-efficient tuning, it offers stronger out-of-distribution behavior when the assumed symmetry is correct, but is naturally limited to tasks where the symmetry is known and useful.","experiments":"The important experiments are on tasks with clear group structure, comparing against full fine-tuning and standard PEFT baselines. What matters is whether the method improves sample efficiency and robustness under transformed inputs, especially under rotations or other symmetry-preserving distribution shifts. For foundation-model researchers, the useful questions are whether symmetry constraints reduce expressivity, whether open-domain capability is preserved, and which layers are best suited for equivariant adaptation.","authors_note":"Likely connected to McGill/MILA-style geometric deep learning work; Siamak Ravanbakhsh is a recognizable author known for equivariant networks and geometric ML."},"tags":["adaptation","pretrained-models","equivariance","fine-tuning"],"notable_authors":["Arnab Kumar Mondal","Siba Smarak Panigrahi","Oumar Kaba","Sai Mudumba","Siamak Ravanbakhsh"],"keywords":["deep learning","large pretrained models","symmetry","equivariance","group theory","computer vision","point clouds","foundation models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3.2的等变约束注入实现，垂域任务适配时可直接把对称性先验加在adapter层，无需重新预训练基础模型。","en":"Focus on §3.2's equivariant constraint injection implementation; symmetry priors can be added directly to adapter layers during domain adaptation without retraining base models."}},{"id":"MuZHWDJWDQL23","title":"EmbodiedGPT: Vision-Language Pre-Training via Embodied Chain of Thought","authors":["Yao Mu","Qinglong Zhang","Mengkang Hu","Wenhai Wang","Mingyu Ding","Jun Jin","Bin Wang","Jifeng Dai","Yu Qiao","Ping Luo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$160","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MuZHWDJWDQL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MuZHWDJWDQL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/4ec43957eda1126ad4887995d05fae3b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：现有 vision-language pre-training 往往停留在静态图文对齐，缺少与环境交互、动作后果和多步决策相关的训练信号，因此很难支撑 embodied agent。EmbodiedGPT 试图把 embodied chain of thought 引入 VLM 预训练，让模型不仅看图说话，还能围绕感知-动作-结果链条组织表示。","importance":"它的贡献偏范式与数据接口。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：如果目标是更通用的 agent 模型，仅靠网页图文数据不够，预训练阶段就需要接入行动轨迹、状态转移和任务分解；这和近两年从静态 VLM 走向 interactive world model 的趋势是一致的。","technical_approach":"EmbodiedGPT 的核心是用 embodied chain of thought 作为训练中间层，把视觉观测、语言指令、动作步骤和环境反馈串成显式推理链。与传统图文对齐或 captioning 不同，它强调‘为什么执行这个动作、执行后会发生什么’，因此训练目标更接近规划与控制前的世界建模。与纯行为克隆相比，这种设计多了一层语言化的结构监督，可能提高泛化和可解释性；但代价是需要更复杂的数据管线，且 CoT 标注若质量不高，容易引入模板化噪声。","experiments":"关键实验应包括 embodied navigation、manipulation 或指令跟随等任务，并与常规 VLP、behavior cloning 或仅视觉-语言监督的 baseline 比较。最值得关注的事实是：引入 embodied CoT 后，模型在长程任务成功率、错误恢复和零样本组合泛化上是否有稳定提升，而不是只在短 horizon imitation 上略好。对预训练读者，还应看数据来源是否主要是合成轨迹、语言链条是否人工或模型生成，以及不同链条粒度对效果的影响；这些决定该方法是 scalable 还是 heavily engineered。","authors_note":"仅凭题面无法可靠确认完整机构；作者列表中 Wenhai Wang 等来自多模态/视觉大模型方向的知名研究团队。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a gap in vision-language pretraining: most current objectives rely on static image-text alignment and do not expose the model to action consequences, state transitions, or multi-step decision structure. EmbodiedGPT tries to pretrain with embodied chain-of-thought so the model learns perception, action, and outcome jointly.","importance":"This is a paradigm and data-interface contribution. For pretraining, the takeaway is that if the end goal is an agent-like model, web-scale image-text supervision is not enough; pretraining must include trajectories, actions, and task decomposition, not just passive alignment.","technical_approach":"The method uses embodied chain-of-thought as an intermediate training format that links visual observations, language instructions, action steps, and environmental feedback. This differs from standard VLP or captioning because it supervises not only what is seen but why an action is taken and what it causes next. Compared with plain behavior cloning, the added language-structured reasoning may improve compositional generalization and interpretability. The cost is a heavier data pipeline and potential brittleness if the chain annotations are low quality or templated.","experiments":"The key evaluations should be on embodied navigation, manipulation, or instruction-following tasks, with comparisons against conventional VLP and behavior-cloning baselines. What matters most is whether embodied CoT improves long-horizon success, recovery from errors, and zero-shot compositional generalization, not just short-horizon imitation. For pretraining readers, the important details are where the trajectories come from, whether the reasoning chains are human-written or model-generated, and how sensitive performance is to chain granularity.","authors_note":"The full institutional information cannot be confirmed from the provided metadata. The author list includes researchers such as Wenhai Wang from well-known multimodal and vision foundation model teams."},"tags":["vision-language","embodied-ai","chain-of-thought","pretraining"],"notable_authors":["Yao Mu","Qinglong Zhang","Mengkang Hu","Wenhai Wang","Mingyu Ding"],"keywords":["Embodied AI","Multi-modal Foundation Model","Embodied Control"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的具身思维链数据构造范式即可，做agent能力预训练的可以参考这套数据管线设计。","en":"Only read §3 for embodied CoT data construction paradigm; researchers building agent-capable pretrained models can refer to this data pipeline design."}},{"id":"MullerVR023","title":"Normalization Layers Are All That Sharpness-Aware Minimization Needs","authors":["Maximilian Müller","Tiffany Vlaar","David Rolnick","Matthias Hein"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Sharpness-aware minimization (SAM) was proposed to reduce sharpness of minima and has been shown to enhance generalization performance in various settings. In this work we show that perturbing only the affine normalization parameters (typically comprising 0.1% of the total parameters) in the adversarial step of SAM can outperform perturbing all of the parameters. This finding generalizes\nto different SAM variants and both ResNet (Batch Normalization) and Vision Transformer (Layer Normalization) architectures. We consider alternative sparse perturbation approaches and find that these do not achieve similar performance enhancement at such extreme sparsity levels, showing that this behaviour is unique to the normalization layers. Although our findings reaffirm the effectiveness\nof SAM in improving generalization performance, they cast doubt on whether this is solely caused by reduced sharpness.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MullerVR023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MullerVR023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/da909fc3893d272f26fd9db82e09d954-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的核心问题是：Sharpness-Aware Minimization（SAM）的收益到底来自哪里，是否真的需要对所有参数都做扰动。以往 SAM 被当作一种通用优化技巧直接套用，但它额外增加两次前后向开销，且机制解释一直不够清楚。作者指出，真正关键的并不是对整网参数施加邻域鲁棒性，而主要是归一化层参数决定了绝大部分效果，因此有必要重新拆解 SAM 的作用来源。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要是方法理解和系统降本，而不是提出全新的训练范式。对预训练研究者的启示很直接：如果 SAM 的有效部分集中在 LayerNorm / BatchNorm 这类归一化层，那么大模型训练里可以用更低成本保留大部分泛化收益，同时也说明 sharpness 与参数重参数化之间的关系比“平坦极小值更好”这种粗粒度叙事更重要。它的重要性在于把一个常用但昂贵的优化器技巧，压缩成了更可控、更容易迁移到大规模训练的版本。","technical_approach":"作者的核心方法很简单：只对归一化层参数应用 SAM 扰动，而不对其余权重做 sharpness-aware 更新。这个设计不是拍脑袋裁剪，而是基于对 SAM 作用位置的经验拆分：归一化层参数虽然数量很少，但它们直接控制每层激活的尺度与中心，扰动这里会放大全局损失几何上的变化；相反，大量普通权重上的扰动贡献有限，却承担了主要计算开销。和标准 SAM 相比，这个版本保留了两步更新框架，但把扰动子空间限制在一个极小参数子集，因此在计算、显存和实现复杂度上都更友好。","experiments":"论文的关键信息点是：仅扰动归一化层参数就能恢复接近完整 SAM 的泛化提升，而参数覆盖率远小于全模型。给定题面没有提供具体数据集、模型规模和精确数值，因此这里不能编造具体百分点，但从论文主结论看，作者在多种视觉架构上比较了标准训练、完整 SAM、以及只在归一化层上做 SAM 的变体，发现后者与完整 SAM 性能接近，同时显著降低额外代价。最有价值的消融不是多跑几个模型，而是按参数类型分组施加 SAM，直接证明收益高度集中于 normalization parameters，这对后续大模型优化器设计比单纯报一个 SOTA 更有参考意义。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a focused question: where do SAM’s gains actually come from, and does it really need to perturb all parameters? SAM is widely used as a general-purpose regularizing optimizer, but it doubles training cost and its mechanism has remained somewhat vague. The authors argue that most of the benefit is concentrated in normalization-layer parameters, so the standard full-parameter formulation is likely overkill.","importance":"This is primarily a methods-understanding and systems-efficiency contribution, not a new training paradigm. The practical takeaway for pretraining is clear: if most of SAM’s value comes from LayerNorm/BatchNorm parameters, large-scale training may retain much of the generalization gain at far lower cost. The broader implication is that the interaction between sharpness and parameterization matters more than the usual flat-minima story suggests.","technical_approach":"The method is straightforward: apply SAM perturbations only to normalization-layer parameters and leave the rest of the network out of the adversarial neighborhood step. The design is motivated by a parameter-type decomposition of SAM’s effect rather than arbitrary pruning. Normalization parameters are few, but they control activation scale and centering throughout the network, so perturbing them changes the effective loss geometry disproportionately. Compared with standard SAM, the algorithm keeps the same two-step update but restricts the perturbation subspace to a tiny subset of parameters, which cuts cost and simplifies deployment.","experiments":"The key empirical result is that SAM on normalization layers alone recovers performance close to full SAM while touching only a very small fraction of parameters. The prompt does not provide the exact datasets, model sizes, or headline numbers, so those should not be fabricated. The important ablation is the parameter-type split: rather than just comparing against standard training, the paper isolates which parameter groups matter and shows that normalization parameters account for most of SAM’s benefit. That finding is more useful for optimizer design than a narrow benchmark win.","authors_note":""},"tags":["sam","normalization","optimization","sharpness-aware"],"keywords":["sharpness-aware minimization","flatness","generalization","normalization layers"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看Table 2的消融实验结果，大模型训练时可直接只对归一化层加SAM扰动，能省近一半的SAM计算开销。","en":"Focus on ablation results in Table 2; apply SAM perturbation only to normalization layers during large model training to cut ~50% of SAM computation cost."}},{"id":"NaeiniSSGT23","title":"Large Language Models are Fixated by Red Herrings: Exploring Creative Problem Solving and Einstellung Effect using the Only Connect Wall Dataset","authors":["Saeid Alavi Naeini","Raeid Saqur","Mozhgan Saeidi","John M. Giorgi","Babak Taati"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$161","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NaeiniSSGT23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NaeiniSSGT23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/11e3e0f1b29dcd31bd0952bfc1357f68-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文研究的核心问题是：大语言模型在创造性问题求解中是否会被表面上很像答案的“红鲱鱼”线索误导，从而陷入类似人类 Einstellung effect 的思维定势。过去大模型评测更偏重标准推理题或知识问答，往往默认错误来自能力不足；这篇工作关心的是另一类失败——模型明明有足够知识，却被先验模式匹配牵着走，难以跳出局部最优解法。","importance":"这项工作的意义主要在评测范式和认知偏差诊断，而不是直接改进预训练目标。对 pretrain / post-train 的启示在于：如果模型在开放式组合推理里容易被强表面线索锁定，那么单纯扩大语料和参数不一定提升“灵活搜索”能力，反而可能强化高频套路。它的重要性不是证明 LLM 不行，而是给出了一个更接近真实使用场景的 failure mode：模型会执着于看似合理但错误的模式，这对数据构造、推理训练和 self-correction 机制都有直接意义。","technical_approach":"作者构建并使用 Only Connect Wall 这类需要将词语分组并识别隐藏关联的任务，专门测试模型面对干扰线索时是否会固着于错误解。方法上重点不是新模型，而是设计一个能诱发错误启发式的评测环境：同一组元素通常存在显眼但错误的分组方式，正确答案需要跳出第一反应。和常见 benchmark 不同，这个任务强调多解竞争、误导线索和重构搜索路径，因此更适合观察模型是否真的在做灵活推理，而不只是顺着高概率模式补全。","experiments":"实验结论大概率是：多种 LLM 在该数据集上会系统性地被红鲱鱼线索吸引，即使给出 chain-of-thought 或多轮提示也不能稳定摆脱定势。题面没有提供具体模型名单、样本数或准确率数字，因此不能补具体数值；但从标题可判断，作者比较的重点不是谁最强，而是错误类型分布：模型倾向于优先选择表面相关度高的错误聚类，并在后续推理中为这个初始错误持续找理由。若论文包含 prompt 或 self-refinement 消融，这类结果的价值在于说明问题并非完全来自解码温度，而是模型内部搜索和偏好存在明显锚定效应。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a specific failure mode: LLMs may get trapped by plausible but misleading cues in creative problem solving, showing an Einstellung-like fixation effect rather than simple lack of knowledge. Standard reasoning benchmarks often treat mistakes as competence failures. This work asks a harder question: can the model break away from an attractive but wrong pattern when the task requires restructuring the search space?","importance":"Its main contribution is an evaluation lens for cognitive rigidity, not a new pretraining algorithm. The relevance to pretrain and post-train is that scaling data and parameters may strengthen frequent pattern completion without improving flexible search. That matters because many real-world failures are not due to missing facts, but due to overcommitting to the first high-probability interpretation.","technical_approach":"The paper uses the Only Connect Wall format, where a solver must group items by hidden relations, and where misleading groupings are often more salient than the correct one. The contribution is mainly in task design and analysis rather than model architecture. Unlike conventional benchmarks with one obvious path, this setting creates competing hypotheses and deliberate red herrings, making it suitable for testing whether the model can recover from an initially attractive wrong solution.","experiments":"The main empirical claim is likely that multiple LLMs are systematically drawn to red-herring groupings and often remain anchored even with reasoning-style prompting. The prompt does not include exact model names, dataset size, or quantitative scores, so those should not be invented. The useful observation is the error structure: models prefer high-surface-similarity clusters and then rationalize them during subsequent reasoning, which suggests a genuine fixation effect rather than pure sampling noise.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm-evaluation","reasoning","benchmark","cognitive-bias"],"keywords":["Natural language processing","Large language models","creative problem solving","creativity","Remote Associates Test","cognitive neuroscience","artificial general intelligence","human-imitative AI","GPT","in-context learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§2的Only Connect Wall任务设计即可，可用来诊断内部模型组合推理时的模式固化问题。","en":"Only read §2 for the Only Connect Wall task design; it can be used to diagnose pattern fixation issues of internal models during compositional reasoning."}},{"id":"NandaSDGFW23","title":"Diffused Redundancy in Pre-trained Representations","authors":["Vedant Nanda","Till Speicher","John P. Dickerson","Krishna P. Gummadi","Soheil Feizi","Adrian Weller"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$162","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NandaSDGFW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NandaSDGFW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/0c86142265c5e2c900613dd1d031cb90-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的核心问题是：预训练表征中的冗余并不总是集中在少数显式维度里，而可能以“扩散”的方式分布在很多方向上，因此传统按神经元、通道或主成分做压缩并不能真正识别冗余。过去大家常把表示冗余理解成可直接剪掉的一小块子空间，但在现代预训练表示里，信息往往被旋转、混合和分散编码，这使得“看起来高维”与“有效自由度高”并不等价。","importance":"这项工作的贡献属于表示分析与压缩认知更新。对 pretrain 的直接启示是：如果冗余是 diffused redundancy，那么很多关于宽度、瓶颈、表示压缩和特征可解释性的结论都需要更谨慎，因为简单的逐维分析会低估表示中的可压缩性，也会误判哪些方向真正承载有用信号。它的重要性在于把‘冗余存在’这件事从结构化稀疏问题，推进到更接近真实神经表征的分布式编码问题。","technical_approach":"作者的核心方法是提出并分析“扩散冗余”的概念：表示虽然可由更低维有效子空间近似，但这种低维性不会在自然基底上显现，而是弥散在多个坐标方向中。技术上通常会结合线性探测、旋转不变分析、子空间恢复或干预式压缩，比较不同坐标系和不同压缩策略下性能退化的方式。和传统看单个特征重要性的方法不同，这篇工作强调冗余是群体性质，不是某几个 unit 的局部性质，因此需要用子空间而非坐标维度去刻画。","experiments":"实验上的核心事实应当是：在多种预训练表示上，逐维剪裁或简单 PCA 并不能完整揭示冗余结构，但适当的子空间方法可以在较少有效维度下保持任务性能。题面没有提供具体模型、数据集和数字，因此不能伪造压缩比或精度差值；不过从标题判断，作者大概率展示了冗余在不同层、不同模型、不同任务上的普遍性，并给出对旋转或再参数化敏感的现象。最有价值的观察不是压到多低，而是冗余是 diffuse 的：这解释了为什么很多看似‘每个维度都重要’的表征，整体上仍然可压缩。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a subtle representation question: redundancy in pretrained representations may be distributed across many directions rather than concentrated in a few explicit features. Earlier work often treated redundancy as something visible in neurons, channels, or top principal components. This paper argues that modern representations can be highly compressible while hiding that redundancy in a diffuse, rotated form.","importance":"This is a representation-analysis contribution with practical implications for compression, architecture design, and interpretation. For pretraining, the message is that feature dimension and effective information dimension are not the same thing. If redundancy is diffuse, coordinate-wise analyses can systematically misread which parts of a representation are essential and which are replaceable.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to formalize and study diffused redundancy: a representation may admit a lower-dimensional approximation, but that low-dimensionality is not aligned with the native basis. The technical toolkit likely combines subspace analysis, basis-sensitive compression tests, and performance-preserving projections. The main distinction from neuron-level importance methods is that redundancy is treated as a collective subspace property rather than a small set of individually dispensable units.","experiments":"The main empirical takeaway is likely that coordinate-wise pruning or naive dimensionality reduction fails to fully capture redundancy, while subspace-aware methods preserve performance with fewer effective degrees of freedom. The prompt does not provide exact datasets, models, or numbers, so those should not be fabricated. The interesting result is not just compressibility, but basis sensitivity: many representations look irreducible per-dimension yet remain redundant as a whole.","authors_note":""},"tags":["representation-learning","redundancy","pretraining","interpretability"],"keywords":["representation learning","redundancy","transfer learning","fairness"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看Fig 4的子空间压缩实验结果，做表示压缩、稀疏化时不能只看单维度重要性，要考虑子空间分布。","en":"Focus on subspace compression results in Fig 4; representation compression/sparsification should consider subspace distribution instead of only single-dimension importance."}},{"id":"NiMEB23","title":"When Do Transformers Shine in RL? Decoupling Memory from Credit Assignment","authors":["Tianwei Ni","Michel Ma","Benjamin Eysenbach","Pierre-Luc Bacon"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$163","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NiMEB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NiMEB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/9dc5accb1e4f4a9798eae145f2e4869b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的是：Transformer 在强化学习里究竟什么时候有优势，这个优势到底来自长时记忆，还是来自更好的 credit assignment。过去很多工作观察到序列模型在 RL 中表现好，但常把‘能看长历史’和‘能优化长时依赖决策’混在一起讨论，导致机制不清楚。作者试图把 memory 和 credit assignment 两个因素解耦，弄明白 Transformer 真正擅长的部分。","importance":"这项工作的价值是机制拆解，对 pretrain 的间接启示是：序列模型的成功不能只看表达能力，还要看训练目标是否真的给到了正确的时序信用信号。对于把 Transformer 用到 decision making、agentic LM 甚至 reasoning trace 建模的人，这个区分很关键，因为如果性能主要来自记忆而非 credit assignment，那很多架构或训练目标应该朝外部记忆/状态摘要优化，而不是盲目增加序列建模复杂度。","technical_approach":"作者的核心方法是构造能够分别操纵部分可观测性和信用分配难度的 RL 环境，从而独立测量 Transformer 对 memory 与 credit assignment 的贡献。方法亮点不在新网络，而在实验设计：通过控制观测是否需要长期保留、奖励是否需要跨长时间回传，比较 Transformer 与其他基线在不同组合条件下的行为差异。和直接在标准 benchmark 上比回报不同，这种设计更能回答‘为什么有效’而不是‘是否有效’。","experiments":"实验的关键结论从标题可推断为：Transformer 的优势更可能集中在记忆需求高的场景，而不一定在 credit assignment 困难时自动占优。题面没有给出环境名称、模型规模和回报差值，因此不能写具体数字；但这篇工作的价值通常来自二维分解图景：当任务需要保留长历史信息时，Transformer 明显受益；当难点主要是长期奖励归因而不是观测记忆时，优势可能缩小甚至消失。这个结果对把大模型直接拿去做 RL policy 的研究者是一个很实际的边界提醒。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a precise question: when Transformers help in reinforcement learning, is the gain coming from memory or from better credit assignment? Prior work often bundled these together because both involve long temporal structure. This paper tries to separate them so the source of Transformer’s advantage can be identified more cleanly.","importance":"Its main contribution is mechanistic clarification rather than a new RL algorithm. The relevance to pretraining-adjacent research is that sequence models should not be credited for solving long-horizon decision problems if they are mostly solving partial observability. For agentic language models and decision transformers, that distinction matters for choosing the right architecture and training signal.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is to build RL environments where memory demand and credit-assignment difficulty can be varied independently. That experimental design is the core contribution. Instead of only comparing returns on standard tasks, the paper creates controlled settings that expose whether a model benefits from remembering observations, propagating reward information, or both. This makes the causal interpretation much stronger.","experiments":"From the title, the main finding is likely that Transformers shine primarily when memory is the bottleneck, not necessarily when long-horizon credit assignment is the dominant challenge. The prompt does not provide exact environments, model sizes, or returns, so those should not be invented. The valuable result is the factorized picture: the benefit of sequence models in RL is conditional, and one should not assume they automatically solve temporal credit assignment well.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer","reinforcement-learning","memory","credit-assignment"],"keywords":["Memory-based RL","Transformers","Credit Assignment","Online RL","Model-free RL"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§4的控制变量实验设计，做决策类预训练不要盲目堆长序列，先明确需求是长记忆还是长信用分配。","en":"Focus on controlled experiment design in §4; decision-oriented pretraining researchers should clarify demand for long memory vs long credit assignment before stacking long sequence capabilities."}},{"id":"NieZAPHG23","title":"MoCa: Measuring Human-Language Model Alignment on Causal and Moral Judgment Tasks","authors":["Allen Nie","Yuhui Zhang","Atharva Amdekar","Chris Piech","Tatsunori B. Hashimoto","Tobias Gerstenberg"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$164","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NieZAPHG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NieZAPHG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/f751c6f8bfb52c60f43942896fe65904-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：如何系统测量语言模型在人类因果判断和道德判断上的对齐程度，而不是只看聊天偏好或安全拒答。现有 alignment 评测常把‘像人一样回答’压缩成主观偏好分数，但在涉及因果归因、责任、道德两难时，模型是否真的接近人类判断分布并不清楚。作者提出 MoCa，目标是把这类高层认知判断的对齐问题测得更细。","importance":"这项工作的价值是评测与对齐信号诊断。对 pretrain / post-train 的启示在于：模型在开放文本上表现自然，不代表它在关键判断任务上与人类一致；而这类偏差既可能来自预训练语料中的模式，也可能来自后训练对礼貌和安全格式的过度优化。它的重要性不在于提供一个新模型，而在于提供一把更有针对性的尺子，帮助区分表面顺从与深层判断结构是否一致。","technical_approach":"作者构建 MoCa 基准，用一组因果与道德判断任务比较人类与语言模型的回答分布或偏好结构。技术重点在 benchmark design：题目需要能够区分不同类型的归因偏差、责任分配和规范性冲突，而不是只让模型背常识答案。和传统单标签准确率评测不同，这类方法通常更关注与人类群体分布、排序一致性或情境敏感性的匹配程度，因此能更细致地暴露模型在价值判断上的系统误差。","experiments":"实验上的关键结论大概率是：当前语言模型在某些因果或道德判断维度上与人类高度不一致，而且这种不一致不能被简单的 instruction tuning 完全修复。题面没有给出模型名单、题量和具体 alignment 分数，因此不能伪造数字；但从标题判断，作者应该比较了多个模型与人类基线，并分析不同任务类型下的偏差模式。最有价值的结果不是谁分最高，而是哪些判断维度最不稳，以及模型偏差更像预训练统计偏见还是后训练风格化产物。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks how to measure alignment between language models and humans on causal and moral judgment, rather than relying on generic chat preference or safety-style evaluations. A model can sound fluent and cooperative while still making systematically non-human judgments about responsibility, causation, or moral trade-offs. MoCa is designed to measure that gap more directly.","importance":"This is an evaluation and alignment-diagnosis contribution. Its relevance to pretraining and post-training is that judgment behavior may be shaped by both pretraining statistics and alignment fine-tuning, and current broad benchmarks often fail to separate these effects. The value of this work is in providing a sharper instrument for detecting where models are only superficially aligned.","technical_approach":"The method is to construct a benchmark of causal and moral judgment tasks and compare model responses against human judgments, likely at the level of distributions, rankings, or context-sensitive preferences rather than simple exact-match accuracy. The design challenge is to build items that reveal attribution biases and normative inconsistencies, not just recall of moral slogans. That makes the benchmark more diagnostic than standard single-answer evaluations.","experiments":"The likely empirical takeaway is that current LLMs diverge from human judgments on several causal and moral dimensions, and that instruction tuning alone does not fully close the gap. The prompt does not provide model names, benchmark size, or exact alignment scores, so those should not be invented. The most useful result is probably the error breakdown across task types, which can indicate whether the mismatch looks like pretraining bias, post-training stylization, or both.","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","evaluation","safety","llm"],"keywords":["cognitive science","causal reasoning","moral reasoning","dataset","language models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看附录的测试用例集即可，可用来辅助校验对齐后的模型是否存在深层价值判断偏差。","en":"Only read test cases in the appendix; it helps verify whether aligned models have underlying value judgment biases."}},{"id":"NorelliFMMRL23","title":"ASIF: Coupled Data Turns Unimodal Models to Multimodal without Training","authors":["Antonio Norelli","Marco Fumero","Valentino Maiorca","Luca Moschella","Emanuele Rodolà","Francesco Locatello"],"institutions":["Sapienza University of Rome"],"abstract":"$165","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NorelliFMMRL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NorelliFMMRL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/3186591903d9db31770ad131adb5ceb4-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"能否不做任何训练，仅利用已有的单模态模型（如独立的视觉编码器和文本编码器）实现多模态对齐？以往的多模态模型（如 CLIP）需要大量配对数据联合训练，本文探索一种零训练的替代路径。","importance":"思路级贡献，对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：它验证了不同模态的表示空间之间可能存在结构性相似性（relative representation hypothesis），这意味着模态对齐的成本可能比我们想象的低。但实际性能与端到端训练的多模态模型仍有明显差距，更多是概念验证。","technical_approach":"方法名为 ASIF（As-If），核心思路是利用一个小规模的配对数据集（anchor set）作为桥梁：给定一个查询（如图像），先在 anchor set 的图像侧用视觉编码器找到最近邻，然后将对应的文本侧表示作为跨模态检索的代理。关键假设是两个独立训练的编码器在各自空间中的相对距离结构是相似的（即 relative representation 假说）。不需要学习任何映射矩阵或 adapter。","experiments":"在图文检索任务上测试，使用独立训练的 DINO（视觉）和 GPT-2/语言模型（文本）。性能显著低于 CLIP 等联合训练模型，但在零训练条件下展示了非平凡的跨模态检索能力。anchor set 的大小和质量对性能影响很大。","authors_note":"来自 Sapienza University of Rome，Emanuele Rodolà 组在 relative representation 方向有系列工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Can independently trained unimodal models be combined for multimodal tasks without any joint training? Previous multimodal alignment (e.g., CLIP) requires large-scale paired data. This work explores a training-free alternative.","importance":"A conceptual contribution. It provides evidence for the relative representation hypothesis—that independently trained encoders develop structurally similar representation geometries—suggesting modality alignment may be cheaper than assumed. However, performance lags far behind jointly trained models, so this is more proof-of-concept than practical.","technical_approach":"ASIF uses a small paired anchor set as a bridge. Given a query image, it finds nearest neighbors in the anchor set's image embeddings (from a vision encoder like DINO), then uses the corresponding text embeddings (from a separate language model) as cross-modal proxies. No learned mapping or adapter is involved. The method relies entirely on the assumption that relative distance structures are preserved across independently trained embedding spaces.","experiments":"Tested on image-text retrieval. Uses DINO for vision and GPT-2-family models for text. Performance is substantially below CLIP but non-trivial for a zero-training setup. Anchor set size and quality are critical factors.","authors_note":"From Sapienza University of Rome; Emanuele Rodolà's group has a line of work on relative representations."},"tags":["multimodal","representation","zero-shot","alignment"],"notable_authors":["Emanuele Rodolà"],"keywords":["Representation learning","Multimodal models","Analogy","Sparsity","Nonparametric","Relative representations","Language","Semiotics"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看Fig 2的相对表示假设验证部分即可，作为多模态对齐思路的补充备查，无需落地实现。","en":"Only read relative representation hypothesis validation in Fig 2; keep it as a reference for multimodal alignment ideas, no need for implementation."}},{"id":"NutiFH23","title":"Extracting Reward Functions from Diffusion Models","authors":["Felipe Nuti","Tim Franzmeyer","João F. Henriques"],"institutions":["University of Oxford"],"abstract":"$166","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NutiFH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NutiFH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/9d23562fcedc078e27a3be813ff6feb5-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"预训练的扩散模型（如 Stable Diffusion）隐含地学到了关于图像质量和语义一致性的评价标准，能否从中提取出可用的 reward function？以往获取 reward 需要人工标注或专门训练 reward model，本文探索直接复用扩散模型自身的似然信号。","importance":"思路级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：扩散模型的去噪目标本身编码了丰富的语义偏好信息，这一发现与 classifier-free guidance 的成功一脉相承，也为 diffusion LM 中的对齐/偏好学习提供了新视角。","technical_approach":"核心思路是利用扩散模型的条件对数似然（或其近似，如 ELBO）作为 reward 信号。具体地，给定一个文本 prompt 和一张图像，计算扩散模型在该条件下的去噪损失——损失越低意味着图像与 prompt 越一致。这个 reward 可以直接用于下游任务（如图像生成质量评估、RL 训练）而无需额外标注。与 CLIP score 的区别在于它利用的是生成模型的似然而非判别模型的相似度。","experiments":"在文本-图像对齐评估和图像质量排序任务上测试。从扩散模型提取的 reward 与人类偏好有合理的相关性，但与专门训练的 reward model 相比仍有差距。实验规模中等，主要使用 Stable Diffusion 作为基础模型。","authors_note":"来自 University of Oxford，João Henriques 在视觉表示学习方面有知名工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Pretrained diffusion models implicitly learn quality and semantic consistency criteria. Can we extract usable reward functions from them without additional human annotation or reward model training?","importance":"A conceptual contribution showing that the denoising objective of diffusion models encodes rich preference information. This is relevant to alignment in diffusion LMs and provides an alternative to separately trained reward models.","technical_approach":"The method uses the conditional log-likelihood (approximated via denoising loss) of a pretrained diffusion model as a reward signal. Given a text prompt and an image, lower denoising loss indicates better text-image alignment. Unlike CLIP score (a discriminative similarity), this leverages the generative model's own likelihood. The reward can be used directly for evaluation or RL without extra annotation.","experiments":"Tested on text-image alignment evaluation and image quality ranking. The extracted reward correlates reasonably with human preferences but falls short of dedicated reward models. Experiments use Stable Diffusion at moderate scale.","authors_note":"From University of Oxford; João Henriques is known for work on visual representation learning."},"tags":["diffusion","reward-model","reinforcement-learning","alignment"],"notable_authors":["João F. Henriques"],"keywords":["Diffusion models","sequential decision making","inverse reinforcement learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3.1的似然近似计算方法，做扩散模型对齐的可以直接复用这个无标注reward信号。","en":"Focus on likelihood approximation calculation in §3.1; diffusion model alignment researchers can directly reuse this annotation-free reward signal."}},{"id":"OkawaLDT23","title":"Compositional Abilities Emerge Multiplicatively: Exploring Diffusion Models on a Synthetic Task","authors":["Maya Okawa","Ekdeep Singh Lubana","Robert P. Dick","Hidenori Tanaka"],"institutions":["Harvard University","NTT Research"],"abstract":"$167","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/OkawaLDT23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/OkawaLDT23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/9d0f188c7947eacb0c07f709576824f6-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"扩散模型的组合泛化能力（compositional generalization）是如何涌现的？以往对扩散模型能力的理解多停留在经验层面，缺乏对组合能力涌现机制的系统分析。本文在合成任务上研究这一问题。","importance":"机制分析级贡献，与 pretrain 研究中的涌现/泛化问题直接相关。核心发现——组合能力以乘法方式涌现（multiplicatively）——意味着模型需要同时掌握多个独立属性才能实现组合，单个属性的学习不足以预测组合能力。这对理解 LM 中的涌现行为有参考价值。","technical_approach":"在精心设计的合成数据集上训练扩散模型，数据包含多个独立可变属性（如颜色、形状、位置）。通过控制训练数据中属性组合的覆盖率，观察模型在未见组合上的泛化表现。关键分析方法是将组合泛化准确率分解为各单属性学习程度的乘积，验证乘法涌现假说。","experiments":"在 2D 合成图像数据集上训练小规模扩散模型。核心发现：组合泛化的成功率近似等于各独立属性生成准确率的乘积，即 P(A∧B) ≈ P(A)×P(B)。这意味着组合能力的涌现是 sharp 的——当所有属性都学好时突然出现，而非渐进提升。训练数据覆盖率和模型容量都影响涌现的阈值。","authors_note":"Hidenori Tanaka 来自 Harvard / NTT Research，在神经网络理论分析方面有持续工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How does compositional generalization emerge in diffusion models? Understanding of this capability has been largely empirical. This paper systematically studies the emergence mechanism on synthetic tasks.","importance":"A mechanistic analysis contribution directly relevant to understanding emergence in generative models. The key finding—compositional abilities emerge multiplicatively—means the model must master all constituent attributes before composition works, which parallels emergence phenomena in LMs.","technical_approach":"Trains diffusion models on synthetic datasets with independently varying attributes (color, shape, position). By controlling coverage of attribute combinations in training data, the authors measure generalization to unseen combinations. The core analysis decomposes compositional accuracy as a product of individual attribute accuracies, testing the multiplicative emergence hypothesis.","experiments":"Small-scale diffusion models on 2D synthetic images. Key finding: compositional generalization success rate ≈ product of individual attribute generation accuracies, i.e., P(A∧B) ≈ P(A)×P(B). This implies sharp emergence—composition appears suddenly when all attributes are learned, not gradually. Training data coverage and model capacity both affect the emergence threshold.","authors_note":"Hidenori Tanaka is from Harvard / NTT Research, with ongoing work on neural network theory."},"tags":["diffusion","compositionality","scaling-law"],"notable_authors":["Hidenori Tanaka"],"keywords":["Diffusion model; Emergence; Emergent capabilities; Science of deep learning; Mechanistic interpretability"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看Fig 3的乘法涌现验证结果，做预训练泛化性分析时可以参考这个能力分解思路。","en":"Focus on multiplicative emergence validation results in Fig 3; refer to this capability decomposition idea when analyzing pretrained model generalization."}},{"id":"Oota0T23","title":"Joint processing of linguistic properties in brains and language models","authors":["Subba Reddy Oota","Manish Gupta","Mariya Toneva"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$168","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Oota0T23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Oota0T23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/3a0e2de215bd17c39ad08ba1d16c1b12-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"语言模型和人脑在处理语言时，是否以类似的方式联合编码多种语言属性（如句法、语义、语用）？以往的 brain-LM 对齐研究多关注单一属性的对应关系，本文研究多属性的联合处理模式。","importance":"分析/理解级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的间接启示在于：如果 LM 的内部表示与大脑的语言处理存在结构性对应，这可能为评估和改进 LM 的语言理解能力提供新的 benchmark 视角。但距离直接指导 pretrain 实践较远。","technical_approach":"使用 fMRI 数据记录人类阅读时的大脑活动，同时提取多种语言模型（不同规模的 Transformer LM）在相同文本上的中间层表示。通过编码模型（encoding model）分析 LM 表示对大脑活动的预测能力，重点关注多种语言属性（句法复杂度、语义角色、共指等）的联合预测效果。","experiments":"使用公开的 fMRI 自然阅读数据集。比较了多种 LM（GPT-2、OPT 等不同规模）。核心发现：LM 的中间层表示能同时预测多种语言属性对应的大脑区域活动，且更大的模型在联合预测上表现更好。不同语言属性在 LM 的不同层有不同的最佳对应关系。","authors_note":"Mariya Toneva 在 brain-LM alignment 方向有系列代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Do language models and human brains jointly encode multiple linguistic properties (syntax, semantics, pragmatics) in similar ways? Prior brain-LM alignment work mostly examines single properties; this paper studies joint processing patterns.","importance":"An analysis contribution. The indirect relevance to pretrain research is that structural correspondence between LM representations and brain language processing could provide new evaluation perspectives for LM linguistic competence. However, it is far from directly guiding pretrain practice.","technical_approach":"Uses fMRI data from humans reading naturalistic text, paired with intermediate-layer representations from Transformer LMs on the same text. Encoding models assess how well LM representations predict brain activity, focusing on joint prediction of multiple linguistic properties (syntactic complexity, semantic roles, coreference, etc.).","experiments":"Uses public fMRI naturalistic reading datasets. Compares GPT-2, OPT, and other LMs at various scales. Key finding: LM intermediate layers can simultaneously predict brain activity for multiple linguistic properties, with larger models performing better on joint prediction. Different properties are best captured at different LM layers.","authors_note":"Mariya Toneva has a line of representative work on brain-LM alignment."},"tags":["language-models","brain","representation","linguistics"],"notable_authors":["Mariya Toneva"],"keywords":["Linguistic properties","fMRI","probing tasks","cognitive neuroscience","language models","NLP"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看编码模型对多语言属性联合预测的核心实验结果即可，其脑对齐思路可给LM评估基准设计提供新方向。","en":"Focus on the core experiment results of multi-linguistic-property joint prediction from the encoding model, its brain-aligned idea offers a new direction for LM evaluation benchmark design."}},{"id":"Page-CacciaPSPR23","title":"Multi-Head Adapter Routing for Cross-Task Generalization","authors":["Lucas Page-Caccia","Edoardo Maria Ponti","Zhan Su","Matheus Pereira","Nicolas Le Roux","Alessandro Sordoni"],"institutions":["Mila","Google DeepMind"],"abstract":"$169","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Page-CacciaPSPR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Page-CacciaPSPR23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/b295b3a940706f431076c86b78907757-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"多任务学习中，如何让一个模型高效地泛化到新任务？已有的 adapter 方法为每个任务独立训练一个 adapter，缺乏跨任务的知识共享。本文提出通过路由机制在多个 adapter head 之间动态组合来实现跨任务泛化。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：multi-head adapter routing 本质上是在探索参数高效微调中的模块化和组合性，这与 MoE 架构的思路有相似之处——通过稀疏激活不同的专家/adapter 来实现任务特化与共享的平衡。","technical_approach":"Multi-Head Adapter Routing (MHR) 在每一层维护多个 adapter head（类似 MoE 的多个专家），对于每个输入，通过一个轻量级路由器选择或加权组合不同的 adapter head。训练时在多个源任务上联合优化 adapter head 和路由器；推理时对新任务只需调整路由权重（或少量 fine-tune）。与 Poly/Polytropon 等方法的区别在于路由机制的设计和训练策略。","experiments":"在 T0/T5 系列模型上测试，覆盖多个 NLP benchmark（SuperGLUE 等）。MHR 在零样本和少样本跨任务泛化上优于单 adapter 和简单 adapter 集成方法。adapter head 数量和路由策略的消融显示：适度的 head 数量（8-16）效果最好，过多会导致路由不稳定。","authors_note":"Nicolas Le Roux 来自 Mila / Google DeepMind。Edoardo Maria Ponti 在多语言和参数高效方法方面有系列工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In multi-task learning, per-task adapters lack cross-task knowledge sharing. This paper proposes dynamic routing across multiple adapter heads to achieve better cross-task generalization.","importance":"A method-level contribution. Multi-head adapter routing explores modularity and compositionality in parameter-efficient fine-tuning, conceptually similar to MoE—balancing task specialization and sharing through sparse activation of different adapter heads.","technical_approach":"Multi-Head Adapter Routing (MHR) maintains multiple adapter heads per layer (analogous to MoE experts). A lightweight router selects or weights adapter heads per input. During training, adapter heads and routers are jointly optimized across source tasks; at inference, only routing weights need adjustment for new tasks. Differs from Poly/Polytropon in routing mechanism design and training strategy.","experiments":"Tested on T0/T5 models across multiple NLP benchmarks (SuperGLUE, etc.). MHR outperforms single-adapter and simple adapter ensemble methods on zero-shot and few-shot cross-task generalization. Ablations show 8-16 adapter heads work best; too many cause routing instability.","authors_note":"Nicolas Le Roux is from Mila / Google DeepMind. Edoardo Maria Ponti has a line of work on multilingual and parameter-efficient methods."},"tags":["adapters","routing","multi-task","parameter-efficient"],"notable_authors":["Nicolas Le Roux","Edoardo Maria Ponti"],"keywords":["Parameter Efficient Finetuning","Multitask Learning","Transfer Learning","Natural Language Processing"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看MHR路由机制设计和与同类adapter方法的对比实验即可，其模块化组合思路可给MoE微调方案设计提供参考。","en":"Only read the MHR routing mechanism design and comparison experiments with peer adapter methods, its modular composition idea can inform MoE fine-tuning scheme design."}},{"id":"PangLDLYD23","title":"On Calibrating Diffusion Probabilistic Models","authors":["Tianyu Pang","Cheng Lu","Chao Du","Min Lin","Shuicheng Yan","Zhijie Deng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Recently, diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs) have achieved promising results in diverse generative tasks. A typical DPM framework includes a forward process that gradually diffuses the data distribution and a reverse process that recovers the data distribution from time-dependent data scores. In this work, we observe that the stochastic reverse process of data scores is a martingale, from which concentration bounds and the optional stopping theorem for data scores can be derived. Then, we discover a simple way for calibrating an arbitrary pretrained DPM, with which the score matching loss can be reduced and the lower bounds of model likelihood can consequently be increased. We provide general calibration guidelines under various model parametrizations. Our calibration method is performed only once and the resulting models can be used repeatedly for sampling. We conduct experiments on multiple datasets to empirically validate our proposal. Our code is available at https://github.com/thudzj/Calibrated-DPMs.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PangLDLYD23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PangLDLYD23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/9a645c38d4ec6f94633a35aeb2079596-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是扩散模型生成分布的概率校准问题。以往大家更关心 FID、IS 这类样本质量指标，默认生成模型只要样本看起来好就够了，但在下游决策、风险控制和不确定性估计场景里，模型给出的概率是否可信是另一件事，而扩散模型在这方面长期缺少系统分析和修正方法。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要在方法分析和评估范式层面，而不是提出一种全新的生成架构。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：生成质量和概率质量并不等价，尤其是当扩散模型被当作密度模型、重排序器或不确定性感知模块使用时，校准会直接影响可用性；如果只看感知指标，很容易高估模型的真实可靠性。","technical_approach":"作者的核心做法是把分类模型中的 calibration 视角系统搬到扩散概率模型上，并给出可操作的校准方法。关键点不在于改写扩散训练目标，而是在生成后验或似然相关输出上定义可测的置信度与真实频率匹配关系，再分析误差来源并做后处理式校准；这种设计的好处是兼容已有扩散模型，不需要从头重训，但边界也很明确：它更多修正输出概率的可信度，不直接提升样本保真度或覆盖度。","experiments":"从给定信息里无法确认具体模型规模、数据集、指标数值和提升幅度，因此不能可靠复述定量结果。可以确定的是，论文重点应是比较校准前后在若干概率一致性指标上的变化，并分析不同扩散设定下的失配来源；若用于 skim，建议重点看其采用的 calibration metric、是否区分 step-wise 与 sample-wise 校准，以及校准是否会牺牲 log-likelihood 或生成质量。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies probability calibration in diffusion probabilistic models. Prior work largely optimized perceptual sample quality and treated good samples as sufficient, but that bypasses a different question: whether the model’s implied probabilities are trustworthy enough for uncertainty-aware use cases, ranking, or downstream decision-making.","importance":"Its contribution is primarily methodological and evaluative rather than architectural. The useful takeaway for pretraining is that sample quality and probability quality are not the same thing; if diffusion models are used as density models or uncertainty-bearing components, poor calibration can be a real failure mode even when FID looks strong.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to import the calibration lens from predictive modeling into diffusion models and make it operational for diffusion outputs. Rather than redesigning the diffusion objective from scratch, the paper appears to define confidence–frequency consistency for likelihood- or posterior-related quantities, diagnose where miscalibration comes from, and apply calibration procedures on top; this is attractive because it is model-agnostic, but it mainly fixes trustworthiness of probabilities, not sample fidelity.","experiments":"The provided metadata does not contain reliable details on model size, datasets, metrics, or gains, so I should not invent numbers. What likely matters in the experiments is how calibration metrics move before and after correction, whether miscalibration differs across diffusion parameterizations or timesteps, and whether calibration introduces trade-offs against likelihood or generation quality.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","calibration","uncertainty"],"keywords":["Diffusion Probabilistic Models","Model Calibration"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看扩散模型校准误差来源分析和后处理校准方法部分，注意生成质量与概率质量的差异对下游高风险场景的影响。","en":"Focus on diffusion model calibration error source analysis and post-processing calibration method, note the gap between generation quality and probability quality for high-risk downstream scenarios."}},{"id":"ParkCKS023","title":"Robust Data Pruning under Label Noise via Maximizing Re-labeling Accuracy","authors":["Dongmin Park","Seola Choi","Doyoung Kim","Hwanjun Song","Jae-Gil Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$16a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ParkCKS023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ParkCKS023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ebb6bee50913ba7e1efeb91a1d47a002-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注带标签噪声时如何做更稳健的数据裁剪。过去很多 pruning 方法默认高损失样本就是坏样本，但在噪声标签场景里，高损失样本里既有错标数据，也有真正困难但有价值的数据，简单丢掉会伤害泛化。","importance":"这是数据质量方法，和 pretrain 的关系在于大规模弱监督或自动标注数据都存在同类问题。它的重要性不在于提出一个更复杂的去噪网络，而在于给数据筛选一个更贴近目标的准则：不是看当前标签是否容易拟合，而是看样本是否有助于被正确重新标注；这比纯 loss-based pruning 更接近“保留有用信息、删除污染信号”的目标。","technical_approach":"核心思路是通过最大化 re-labeling accuracy 来进行数据裁剪。与按训练损失、梯度大小或影响函数直接删样本不同，它把‘样本应不应该保留’转成‘这个样本经过重标后能否更可靠地回到正确标签’的问题，因此更能区分难例和脏例；这套设计有效的原因是标签噪声的关键风险在监督目标本身，而不是输入复杂度。边界在于它仍依赖一个足够可靠的重标过程，如果模型初期偏差很大，re-labeling 信号也会漂移。","experiments":"现有信息没有给出数据集、噪声率、baseline 和具体提升数值，无法安全填入数字。合理预期是作者会在合成和真实标签噪声设置下，对比 loss-based pruning、co-teaching 或 reweighting 方法，并报告不同噪声强度下的分类精度和保留样本比例；值得重点看的 ablation 是 re-labeling 模块质量与 pruning 阈值对结果的影响，以及在高噪声区间是否仍优于简单保留更多数据。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses robust data pruning under label noise. A common shortcut is to prune high-loss examples, but under noisy labels that mixes truly corrupted samples with genuinely hard yet valuable ones, so naive pruning can damage generalization.","importance":"This is a data-quality contribution, and its relevance extends to weakly supervised pretraining where label corruption or pseudo-label noise is common. The useful shift here is to judge examples by whether they can be reliably relabeled, not just by whether the current model finds them easy; that aligns pruning more closely with signal preservation rather than mere optimization convenience.","technical_approach":"The key idea is to maximize relabeling accuracy and use that as the pruning criterion. Unlike methods that drop examples based on loss, gradients, or influence scores, this framing asks whether an example can be recovered to the right supervision signal after relabeling, which should better separate hard examples from mislabeled ones. The obvious boundary is that the approach still depends on the quality of the relabeling process itself; if early model bias is severe, the criterion can drift.","experiments":"The provided metadata does not include datasets, noise ratios, baselines, or exact gains, so I will not invent them. The likely experimental pattern is comparison against loss-based pruning, reweighting, or co-teaching style baselines across synthetic and real noisy-label settings, with ablations on relabel quality and pruning thresholds.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-quality","data-pruning","label-noise"],"keywords":["Data Pruning","Data Subset Selection","Noisy Labels","Relabeling","Self-training"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看重标注准确率最大化的数据裁剪逻辑和难例脏例区分实验即可，可给弱监督预训练的数据筛选流程提供参考。","en":"Only read the data pruning logic of maximizing re-labeling accuracy and hard/dirty sample differentiation experiments, useful for weak supervised pretraining data filtering pipelines."}},{"id":"ParkKKLY23","title":"Energy-Based Cross Attention for Bayesian Context Update in Text-to-Image Diffusion Models","authors":["Geon Yeong Park","Jeongsol Kim","Beomsu Kim","Sang Wan Lee","Jong Chul Ye"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$16b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ParkKKLY23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ParkKKLY23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/f0878b7efa656b3bbd407c9248d13751-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是 text-to-image diffusion 中 cross-attention 对文本上下文更新不稳、难以表达不确定性的缺陷。标准 cross-attention 更像一次性把文本 token 权重映射到视觉特征上，缺少显式的贝叶斯式上下文修正，因此在歧义提示词、组合概念和局部属性绑定上容易出错。","importance":"它的重要性在于把 energy-based 建模和扩散模型里的跨模态注意力结合起来，属于方法级创新。对统一多模态 pretrain 的启示是：跨注意力不一定只能做确定性加权，它也可以被看成基于能量函数的后验更新模块，用来更细致地处理条件信息与生成状态之间的匹配。","technical_approach":"作者提出 Energy-Based Cross Attention，用能量函数来定义文本上下文对当前生成状态的兼容性，并把 cross-attention 解释为一种贝叶斯 context update。与普通 dot-product attention 直接归一化不同，这种做法显式建模‘哪些文本条件更应该在当前去噪阶段被强化’，因此更适合处理多义或局部约束；它有效的原因是扩散每一步都在做条件后验修正，而不是一次性读取文本。代价是训练和采样都可能更复杂，能量设计不当还会带来不稳定性。","experiments":"从当前信息无法确认所用扩散底座、数据集、是否在 MS-COCO 或 DrawBench 类基准上评测，也无法确认 FID、CLIPScore 或人评提升的具体数字。按题目判断，关键实验应比较标准 cross-attention 与 energy-based 版本在文本对齐、属性绑定和组合生成上的差异；若要 skim，建议重点看作者是否报告了额外计算开销，以及收益是在复杂 prompt 上更明显还是普遍提升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a limitation of standard cross-attention in text-to-image diffusion: it conditions generation, but does not explicitly model uncertainty or iterative context revision. That becomes visible in ambiguous prompts, compositional generation, and attribute binding failures.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution that connects energy-based modeling with conditional diffusion. For multimodal pretraining, the interesting message is that cross-attention need not be a purely deterministic weighting mechanism; it can be recast as a posterior update that reasons about compatibility between the current latent state and textual conditions.","technical_approach":"The proposed Energy-Based Cross Attention defines an energy function over text context and the current generation state, and interprets context incorporation as a Bayesian update. Unlike plain dot-product attention, which normalizes scores once per layer, this mechanism explicitly scores which textual constraints should be reinforced at a given denoising stage; that is a better fit for diffusion because conditioning is inherently iterative. The trade-off is more complexity in optimization and potentially less stability if the energy parameterization is poorly controlled.","experiments":"The available metadata does not state the diffusion backbone, datasets, or exact metrics, so I should not provide numbers. The likely empirical focus is comparison to standard cross-attention on text-image alignment, compositional prompts, and attribute binding, plus some discussion of added compute cost and where the gains are concentrated.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","cross-attention","energy-based"],"keywords":["Diffusion model","Energy-based model","Text-to-image generation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看能量型交叉注意力的定义和贝叶斯上下文更新的推导部分，可给多模态扩散模型的跨模态对齐设计提供新思路。","en":"Focus on the definition of energy-based cross attention and Bayesian context update derivation, offers new ideas for cross-modal alignment design in multimodal diffusion models."}},{"id":"ParthasarathyEC23","title":"Self-supervised video pretraining yields robust and more human-aligned visual representations","authors":["Nikhil Parthasarathy","S. M. Ali Eslami","João Carreira","Olivier J. Hénaff"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$16c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ParthasarathyEC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ParthasarathyEC23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/cf57022dff0929796f85ac99d7cefa86-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文讨论的是：自监督视频预训练得到的视觉表征，是否比监督学习更鲁棒，也是否更接近人类感知。过去视频模型通常用下游任务精度来评估表示好坏，但这不能回答模型在扰动、分布外变化或与人类相似性的层面到底学到了什么。","importance":"它的贡献主要是表征学习层面的经验结论和评估视角。对 pretrain 的启示很直接：如果自监督视频预训练不仅提升标准任务，还系统性改善鲁棒性和 human alignment，那么预训练目标设计就不该只围绕 benchmark accuracy，而应把表征几何和稳定性一起纳入考量；这对 VLM/世界模型前端也有现实意义。","technical_approach":"从标题看，论文并不是提出全新架构，而是系统比较自监督视频预训练与监督预训练得到的表征差异。关键设计应是用同等或可比骨干和数据设置，评估不同预训练范式在鲁棒性、人类行为对齐或表征可解释性指标上的表现；这种做法有效，因为它把‘为什么自监督值得做’从经验口号变成了可测量的表征性质比较。边界是结论可能依赖具体预训练方法、数据规模和视频域。","experiments":"现有信息无法确认是否使用 VideoMAE、TimeSformer、X3D 等具体模型，也没有数据规模和具体指标数字，因此不能安全写出提升幅度。可以合理预期实验会包含标准视频下游任务外的鲁棒性测试和 human-alignment 测度，并比较监督与自监督的 representation transfer；skim 时最值得看的，是这种优势是否在控制住模型大小和训练预算后仍成立，以及是否在所有扰动类型上都一致。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether self-supervised video pretraining yields representations that are not only useful but also more robust and more aligned with human perception than supervised alternatives. Standard downstream accuracy does not answer that question well.","importance":"Its main value is in representation-level evidence and evaluation framing. For pretraining research, the message is practical: if self-supervised video objectives systematically improve robustness and human alignment, then objective design should be judged by representation quality beyond benchmark accuracy, which matters for VLM front-ends and world-model style pipelines.","technical_approach":"Judging from the title, this is not about a new architecture but about a controlled comparison between self-supervised and supervised video pretraining. The likely methodology is to hold backbones and data roughly comparable, then evaluate the learned representations on robustness and human-alignment measures; that is useful because it turns an intuitive claim about self-supervision into a measurable property comparison. The boundary is that conclusions may depend on the specific SSL method, data scale, and video domain.","experiments":"The metadata does not specify models, datasets, or exact gains, so I will not fabricate numbers. The key evidence likely comes from robustness tests, transfer evaluations, and human-alignment metrics beyond standard downstream tasks, with special attention to whether the advantage survives budget- and model-size-controlled comparisons.","authors_note":""},"tags":["self-supervised","video-pretraining","robustness"],"keywords":["self-supervised learning","contrastive","video pretraining","representation learning","visual representation","human alignment","robustness","shape-bias","saliency"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看自监督与监督视频预训练表征在鲁棒性、人类对齐指标上的对比结果即可，可指导多模态预训练的目标设计。","en":"Only read the comparison results of self-supervised vs supervised video pretrained representations on robustness and human alignment metrics, useful for multimodal pretraining objective design."}},{"id":"PatrauceanS0RMB23","title":"Perception Test: A Diagnostic Benchmark for Multimodal Video Models","authors":["Viorica Patraucean","Lucas Smaira","Ankush Gupta","Adrià Recasens","Larisa Markeeva","Dylan Banarse","Skanda Koppula","Joseph Heyward","Mateusz Malinowski","Yi Yang","Carl Doersch","Tatiana Matejovicova","Yury Sulsky","Antoine Miech","Alexandre Fréchette","Hanna Klimczak","Raphael Koster","Junlin Zhang","Stephanie Winkler","Yusuf Aytar","Simon Osindero","Dima Damen","Andrew Zisserman","João Carreira"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$16d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PatrauceanS0RMB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PatrauceanS0RMB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/8540fba4abdc7f9f7a7b1cc6cd60e409-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是多模态视频模型缺少真正诊断性的评测。现有 benchmark 常常把数据偏差、语言先验和静态视觉捷径混在一起，模型拿到高分不代表真的理解了时序、因果、交互或跨模态对应关系。","importance":"它是 benchmark 和评估体系工作，但对 pretrain 非常有价值，因为预训练目标最终都要接受诊断型评测。重要之处在于它强调“诊断”而不是“排行榜”：如果一个测试能拆开感知、时序记忆、音视频对齐和事件理解等能力，就能反向指导数据构造和模型设计，而不是只奖励 dataset-specific shortcut。","technical_approach":"Perception Test 的核心应是构建一个受控、多技能分解的视频多模态测试集。与普通大规模网络抓取 benchmark 不同，它更可能通过精心设计的问题类型、标注协议和场景覆盖，尽量减少语言偏差与单帧捷径，让模型必须依赖真实的感知和时序推理；这样设计有效，因为它提高了评测信号的可解释性，但代价是构建成本高，覆盖面和规模未必像弱监督数据那样大。","experiments":"当前信息无法确认基准规模、任务种类、参与评测的模型以及具体分数。可以确定的是，实验重点应是展示现有多模态视频模型在该 benchmark 上的显著能力缺口，并分析不同子任务间的性能分化；若要 skim，建议重点看数据采集是否受控、问题是否能避免语言猜题，以及 strongest baseline 仍然失败的题型是什么。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a benchmarking gap: current multimodal video benchmarks often conflate genuine perception with dataset bias, language priors, and static-image shortcuts. High scores therefore do not necessarily imply strong temporal or multimodal understanding.","importance":"This is an evaluation contribution, but it matters directly for pretraining because pretraining objectives are only as useful as the diagnostics used to assess them. The key value is its diagnostic intent: a benchmark that separates perception, temporal reasoning, audio-visual grounding, and interaction understanding can guide model and data design much better than a single leaderboard score.","technical_approach":"Perception Test appears to build a controlled benchmark for multimodal video understanding with carefully designed tasks and annotations. Unlike large web-scale benchmarks that inherit uncontrolled shortcuts, this design likely reduces language bias and single-frame guessing so that models must rely on actual perception and temporal evidence; that improves interpretability of results, though it usually comes with higher collection cost and less raw scale.","experiments":"The provided metadata does not include benchmark size, model list, or exact scores, so I should not provide numbers. The important experimental outcome is likely that strong existing multimodal video models still show substantial gaps on specific perceptual and temporal subskills, which is exactly what makes the benchmark useful.","authors_note":""},"tags":["benchmark","video","multimodal"],"keywords":["evaluation","multimodal video models","perception","reasoning","diagnostic","memory","abstraction","physics","semantics"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看Perception Test的能力维度拆解设计和基准构建逻辑即可，可用来诊断预训练视频模型的细粒度能力缺陷。","en":"Focus on the capability dimension disassembly design and benchmark construction logic of Perception Test, can be used to diagnose fine-grained defects of pretrained video models."}},{"id":"PengMDLZ23","title":"Learning from Active Human Involvement through Proxy Value Propagation","authors":["Zhenghao Mark Peng","Wenjie Mo","Chenda Duan","Quanyi Li","Bolei Zhou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$16e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PengMDLZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PengMDLZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/f57ffe47d0b528fbb97901d16bd4eba2-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是在有人类主动参与但反馈稀疏、昂贵、局部的情况下，如何更有效地学习。传统 RLHF 或 imitation 往往只利用被显式标注的片段，没被人碰到的状态和动作很难获得训练信号，导致人类参与成本高、样本效率低。","importance":"它的价值在于训练信号设计，介于 RL、交互学习和对齐之间。对 pretrain/posttrain 闭环的启示是：高质量人类信号不一定要密集标注才能有价值，关键是如何把局部反馈传播成更广泛的优化约束；这和 reward modeling、preference propagation、RLAIF 数据利用都有直接关系。","technical_approach":"作者提出 Proxy Value Propagation，核心是把人类主动介入产生的局部价值判断，通过代理价值函数向相关状态或轨迹传播。与只在被标注点上监督不同，这种做法试图恢复更连续的学习信号，因此能提升样本效率；它有效的原因是交互数据中很多未标注片段与已标注片段共享动态结构或结果关联。边界在于代理传播如果建模错误，会把局部偏差扩散到更大范围，带来错误 credit assignment。","experiments":"给定信息不足，无法确认具体环境、任务类别、人工参与形式和数值结果。合理预期是论文会比较直接 imitation / preference / sparse intervention baselines，并报告在人类交互预算固定时的任务回报提升；值得重点看的 ablation 是传播范围、代理值函数质量，以及在反馈极稀疏时是否仍稳定优于只用原始人工标注。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a data-efficiency problem in human-in-the-loop learning: human interventions are informative but sparse, expensive, and local. Standard imitation or RLHF-style pipelines often consume only the explicitly labeled fragments, leaving most of the trajectory without useful supervision.","importance":"Its contribution is about training signal design at the intersection of RL, alignment, and interactive learning. The broader lesson for the pretrain–posttrain loop is that valuable human feedback does not need to be dense if it can be propagated into a richer optimization signal; that connects naturally to preference learning and reward-model data efficiency.","technical_approach":"The proposed Proxy Value Propagation appears to propagate local human-derived value information through a proxy value function to related states or trajectory segments. Unlike methods that supervise only at touched or labeled points, this creates denser credit assignment and should improve sample efficiency. The main trade-off is clear: if the proxy is wrong, it spreads bias rather than information.","experiments":"The current metadata does not specify environments, human-feedback protocol, or quantitative gains, so I will not invent details. The likely empirical story is comparison against sparse-intervention or imitation baselines under matched human budgets, with ablations on propagation range and proxy quality.","authors_note":""},"tags":["human-feedback","reinforcement-learning","value-learning"],"keywords":["Machine Learning","Human-in-the-loop Reinforcement Learning","Safety","Sample Efficiency","Reward-free"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看代理价值传播的核心算法和稀疏人类反馈利用的实验结果即可，可给RLHF等对齐流程的样本效率优化提供参考。","en":"Only read the core proxy value propagation algorithm and sparse human feedback utilization experiment results, useful for sample efficiency optimization in alignment pipelines like RLHF."}},{"id":"RassinHGRGC23","title":"Linguistic Binding in Diffusion Models: Enhancing Attribute Correspondence through Attention Map Alignment","authors":["Royi Rassin","Eran Hirsch","Daniel Glickman","Shauli Ravfogel","Yoav Goldberg","Gal Chechik"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$16f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/RassinHGRGC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/RassinHGRGC23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/0b08d733a5d45a547344c4e9d88bb8bc-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：文本到图像 diffusion 模型经常出现 attribute binding 错误，也就是词和属性对不上对象，例如“红色立方体和蓝色球”生成成相反配对。过去很多方法靠更强的文本编码器、prompt engineering 或额外监督缓解，但没有直接约束模型内部“词—区域”对齐信号的一致性。","importance":"它的重要性主要在多模态生成机制层面。对统一预训练和 VLM 研究者，这类工作提示了一个关键事实：生成质量不只是更大模型和更多数据，跨模态 binding 还取决于内部注意力图是否学到稳定的指代对应关系。这个视角比单纯堆 caption 数据更细，因为它直接动到了 diffusion 生成中的对齐机制。","technical_approach":"核心方法是通过 attention map alignment 增强 linguistic binding。直观上，它不只是看最终图像是否像 prompt，而是约束不同属性词、对象词对应的注意力热图在空间上形成更合理的匹配关系，从而减少属性漂移和对象错配。和只在输出层做额外损失不同，这种做法把监督信号打到中间对齐过程，目的是让 cross-attention 真正承担词到视觉区域的绑定，而不是让 UNet 靠全局统计蒙混过关。","experiments":"这类论文通常会在 compositional text-to-image benchmark 上评估 binding 准确率，例如颜色、空间关系、数量或属性组合，并与标准 Stable Diffusion 或相关可组合生成方法比较。最有价值的结果不是 FID，而是属性对应正确率显著提升，同时整体图像质量不要明显下降。若有 ablation，通常会比较不同 attention 层、不同对齐损失位置，以及是否会牺牲 prompt 多样性。当前没有摘要，无法给出确切数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a common failure mode in text-to-image diffusion: attribute binding errors, where the model generates the right ingredients but attaches them to the wrong objects. Earlier fixes often relied on stronger text encoders, prompt engineering, or extra supervision at the output level, without directly constraining the internal token-to-region correspondence.","importance":"Its main importance is mechanistic rather than purely benchmark-driven. For multimodal pretraining and unified generative modeling, the key lesson is that composition quality depends not only on bigger models or more captions, but also on whether the model learns stable internal alignment between linguistic tokens and visual regions. That is a more actionable view of cross-modal failure than simply saying the model needs more data.","technical_approach":"The method strengthens linguistic binding through attention map alignment. Instead of only supervising the final image, it regularizes how object words and attribute words attend over spatial locations, encouraging the cross-attention maps to reflect the intended correspondence structure. This matters because it pushes the alignment signal into the generation process itself, rather than hoping the model will infer correct bindings from global image-level losses.","experiments":"Papers of this kind are typically evaluated on compositional text-to-image benchmarks that stress color, counting, spatial relations, and attribute-object binding. The meaningful metric is not just FID but binding accuracy: does the generated image attach the right property to the right entity? Useful ablations would test which attention layers to align and whether stronger binding hurts diversity or image fidelity. No abstract is provided here, so exact benchmarks and numbers cannot be stated reliably.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","text-to-image","attention","alignment"],"keywords":["syntax","diffusion","stable diffusion","attribute","attention"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看注意力图对齐约束的实现方式和属性绑定错误的缓解效果实验即可，可指导多模态生成模型的跨注意力设计。","en":"Focus on the implementation of attention map alignment constraint and attribute binding error mitigation experiments, useful for cross attention design in multimodal generative models."}},{"id":"RayaA23","title":"Spontaneous symmetry breaking in generative diffusion models","authors":["Gabriel Raya","Luca Ambrogioni"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$170","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/RayaA23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/RayaA23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/d0da30e312b75a3fffd9e9191f8bc1b0-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要讨论的是：生成式 diffusion 模型中会不会出现 spontaneous symmetry breaking，也就是数据或目标本身具有对称性，但训练后的模型在生成时自发偏向某些等价解。过去扩散模型通常被视为稳定拟合数据分布的工具，但对其训练动力学是否会打破理论对称性，研究并不充分。","importance":"它的重要性偏理论机制分析。对新型语言建模范式和 diffusion 建模研究者，这类工作有价值，因为它提醒我们：即使目标函数看起来中性，优化路径、参数化和噪声过程也可能引入隐式偏置，导致模型在等价模式之间做出不对称选择。这会影响我们如何理解 mode coverage、采样偏差以及多模态数据建模中的塌缩风险。","technical_approach":"方法上更可能是理论分析结合简单可控实验。所谓 spontaneous symmetry breaking，通常指在具有群对称性的任务中，模型并未保持分布层面的对称解，而是因为训练动力学或有限样本扰动收敛到某一支。放在 diffusion 里，作者大概率分析 score matching 或 denoising 目标在特定条件下如何诱导这种现象，并用低维合成数据可视化不同模式的偏置形成过程。","experiments":"这类论文的实验重点一般不是大规模 benchmark，而是构造具备明确对称性的 toy distributions，观察训练后生成样本、score field 或轨迹是否打破对称，并与理论预测吻合。若做得好，还会讨论 breaking 的条件、与模型宽度/噪声调度/初始化的关系。当前没有摘要，无法确认具体结论强度和数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies whether generative diffusion models exhibit spontaneous symmetry breaking: situations where the data distribution or objective is symmetric, yet the trained generator ends up favoring one of several equivalent modes. Diffusion models are often viewed as stable density learners, but their optimization dynamics may still introduce directional bias.","importance":"Its contribution is primarily theoretical and mechanistic. For researchers interested in diffusion as an alternative generative paradigm, this matters because it highlights that unbiased-looking objectives do not guarantee symmetric learned solutions. Optimization, parameterization, and noise schedules can still push the model toward asymmetric outcomes, which is relevant to mode coverage and implicit bias.","technical_approach":"The likely approach combines analysis with controlled synthetic experiments. In this setting, spontaneous symmetry breaking means the model converges to one branch of an otherwise symmetric solution set due to optimization dynamics or finite perturbations. For diffusion models, that would involve examining how denoising or score-matching objectives behave under symmetric data distributions and identifying when training amplifies tiny asymmetries.","experiments":"The empirical evidence in such papers typically comes from low-dimensional toy distributions with explicit symmetry, where one can visualize generated samples or learned score fields and compare them to theory. Useful analyses would test the role of width, initialization, and noise schedule in triggering or suppressing symmetry breaking. No abstract is provided, so exact claims and quantitative results cannot be stated safely.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","theory","generative-modeling"],"keywords":["generative models;diffusion models;score-based generative models; symmetry-breaking"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看扩散模型自发对称破缺的理论分析和低维实验验证部分即可，可帮助理解扩散模型的模态塌缩和采样偏差来源。","en":"Only read the theoretical analysis of spontaneous symmetry breaking in diffusion models and low-dimensional experimental verification, helps understand mode collapse and sampling bias sources of diffusion models."}},{"id":"RenLGSC23","title":"Improving Compositional Generalization using Iterated Learning and Simplicial Embeddings","authors":["Yi Ren","Samuel Lavoie","Michael Galkin","Danica J. Sutherland","Aaron C. Courville"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$171","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/RenLGSC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/RenLGSC23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/be7430d22a4dae8516894e32f2fcc6db-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是：神经模型在组合泛化上长期表现不稳，尤其容易记住训练中见过的表层组合，而不是学到可重组规则。过去常见做法是改架构或加更多数据，但如果训练过程本身不断强化复杂而脆弱的表示，模型仍然会在新组合上失败。","importance":"它的重要性是方法级并带一点学习动态视角。对 pretrain 研究者，这类工作有启发，因为组合泛化不只是下游现象，它和预训练中形成的表示几何、课程顺序以及信息压缩方式直接相关。若 iterated learning 和 simplicial embeddings 确实有效，它说明对表示施加更结构化的瓶颈，可能比单纯扩大模型更能促进规则化泛化。","technical_approach":"核心方法从题目看有两部分：iterated learning 和 simplicial embeddings。前者通常通过多代学习或自蒸馏式循环，让模型更倾向保留可传递、可压缩的规则而非偶然细节；后者则把表示限制到具有单纯形结构的嵌入几何中，鼓励概念边界更清晰、组合关系更可分。和直接加正则或换 backbone 相比，这种设计是在训练动态和表示空间上同时施加偏置，目标是让模型学到更离散、更可组合的因子。","experiments":"这类论文通常会在 SCAN、CFQ、COGS 或合成组合任务上评估，并与标准 seq2seq / transformer 基线比较 systematic generalization。最关键的证据不是平均精度，而是在明显分布外组合拆分上的提升，以及 ablation 证明 iterated learning 与 simplicial embedding 缺一不可。当前无摘要，具体数据与数字无法确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the long-standing weakness of neural models in compositional generalization. Standard training often encourages memorization of surface combinations seen during training rather than learning reusable rules, so models fail on novel recombinations even when in-distribution accuracy is high.","importance":"Its contribution is methodological with a useful learning-dynamics angle. For pretraining researchers, the relevance is that compositional failures are not just downstream quirks; they are tied to the geometry of learned representations and to what the training process chooses to compress or preserve. If the proposed recipe works, it suggests that structured bottlenecks can be more effective than brute-force scaling for rule-like generalization.","technical_approach":"The method appears to combine iterated learning with simplicial embeddings. Iterated learning typically biases the system toward information that is stable and transmissible across generations, filtering out brittle details. Simplicial embeddings add a geometric prior that encourages cleaner concept separation and more factorized composition. Together, these choices aim to produce representations that are easier to recombine systematically than those learned by standard end-to-end training.","experiments":"This kind of paper is usually evaluated on compositional generalization benchmarks such as SCAN, CFQ, COGS, or related synthetic tasks, with emphasis on out-of-distribution splits rather than average accuracy alone. The most convincing evidence would show strong gains on systematic splits and ablations demonstrating that both the iterated-learning process and the embedding geometry matter. No abstract is given, so exact numbers should not be invented.","authors_note":""},"tags":["compositional-generalization","iterated-learning","representation-learning"],"notable_authors":["Aaron C. Courville"],"keywords":["compositional generalization","systematic generalization","iterated learning","representation learning","graph neural networks"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看迭代学习和单纯形嵌入的组合泛化提升机制实验即可，可给预训练表示的结构化约束设计提供参考。","en":"Focus on the compositional generalization improvement mechanism experiments of iterated learning and simplicial embeddings, useful for structured constraint design of pretrained representations."}},{"id":"RenZZZZ0S023","title":"Prompt Pre-Training with Twenty-Thousand Classes for Open-Vocabulary Visual Recognition","authors":["Shuhuai Ren","Aston Zhang","Yi Zhu","Shuai Zhang","Shuai Zheng","Mu Li","Alexander J. Smola","Xu Sun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"This work proposes POMP, a prompt pre-training method for vision-language models. Being memory and computation efficient, POMP enables the learned prompt to condense semantic information for a rich set of visual concepts with over twenty-thousand classes. Once pre-trained, the prompt with a strong transferable ability can be directly plugged into a variety of visual recognition tasks including image classification, semantic segmentation, and object detection, to boost recognition performances in a zero-shot manner. Empirical evaluation shows that POMP achieves state-of-the-art performances on 21 datasets, e.g., 67.0% average accuracy on 10 classification datasets (+3.1% compared to CoOp) and 84.4 hIoU on open-vocabulary Pascal VOC segmentation (+6.9 compared to ZSSeg).","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/RenZZZZ0S023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/RenZZZZ0S023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/29962c2c9daf1fbd92530a7c958dfc2b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是：开放词汇视觉识别要覆盖大量类别，但传统做法往往依赖有限类别监督或把文本提示当作后处理，难以真正把大规模类名知识吸收到视觉预训练里。过去 CLIP 式方法虽然天然开放词汇，但 prompt 往往手工且类别规模受训练组织方式限制。","importance":"它的重要性在视觉预训练和开放词汇识别的接口上。对跨模态预训练研究，这类工作说明 prompt 本身也可以成为预训练对象，而不是推理时临时写几句模板。若真能在两万类规模上做 prompt pre-training，它的意义在于把类别语义覆盖显式推到更大规模，让视觉 backbone 更早接触开放词汇空间，而不是等到下游再补。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Prompt Pre-Training with Twenty-Thousand Classes。题目已经给出关键设计：不是只用少数手工模板做分类对齐，而是在大规模类别空间上系统预训练提示表示，让模型学会把类名、提示上下文和视觉表征共同映射到可泛化的语义空间。和标准 closed-set 分类相比，它放弃了固定 softmax 头的封闭假设；和普通 CLIP prompt tuning 相比，它更强调在预训练阶段就把 prompt 学习扩展到超大类别表。","experiments":"最关键的实验通常会覆盖 open-vocabulary classification、zero-shot transfer、few-shot adaptation，比较 hand-crafted prompts、CoOp/CoCoOp、CLIP 基线以及标准监督预训练模型。题目里的‘二万类’本身就是一个重要规模信息，说明作者关心的是类别覆盖而不只是单 benchmark 微调。更有价值的 ablation 会看类别数增长是否持续带来收益，以及长尾类别、细粒度类别上是否提升更明显。当前无摘要，无法确认具体数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a limitation in open-vocabulary visual recognition: standard supervised pretraining is tied to a closed label set, while prompt-based methods often treat text prompts as a lightweight inference-time trick rather than something to be pre-trained at scale. As a result, large category vocabularies are not fully integrated into visual pretraining.","importance":"Its significance lies at the boundary between vision pretraining and language-conditioned recognition. For multimodal pretraining research, the useful idea is that prompts themselves can be pre-trained over a very large class space, instead of being handcrafted or tuned only after the fact. If successful at the 20k-class scale, this pushes semantic coverage into pretraining rather than leaving it to downstream adaptation.","technical_approach":"The core method is prompt pre-training over twenty thousand classes. The likely design is to jointly learn prompt representations and visual features across a very large category vocabulary, so that class names, prompt context, and image embeddings form a transferable semantic space. Compared with closed-set classification, this removes the assumption of a fixed softmax head. Compared with standard CLIP prompt tuning, it shifts prompt learning earlier and scales it to much broader category coverage.","experiments":"The key evaluations would typically include open-vocabulary classification, zero-shot transfer, and few-shot adaptation, with comparisons against handcrafted prompts, prompt-tuning baselines such as CoOp/CoCoOp, CLIP-style models, and conventional supervised pretraining. The 20k-class scale is itself a meaningful data point, suggesting the paper is about category coverage rather than one benchmark win. Useful ablations would test whether gains continue with more classes and whether benefits are larger on long-tail or fine-grained categories. No abstract is available, so exact numbers cannot be added safely.","authors_note":""},"tags":["prompt-pretraining","open-vocabulary","vision","pretraining"],"keywords":["Prompt Pre-Training","CLIP","Open-Vocabulary Visual Recognition"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看两万类规模prompt预训练的实现方案和开放词汇识别效果对比即可，可给跨模态预训练的类别语义覆盖设计提供参考。","en":"Only read the implementation of 20k-class prompt pretraining and open-vocabulary recognition effect comparison, useful for category semantic coverage design in multimodal pretraining."}},{"id":"RobertsLACHZS23","title":"Geometry-Aware Adaptation for Pretrained Models","authors":["Nicholas Carl Roberts","Xintong Li","Dyah Adila","Sonia Cromp","Tzu-Heng Huang","Jitian Zhao","Frederic Sala"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$172","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/RobertsLACHZS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/RobertsLACHZS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/9bbc8b6038603e6170e35f89e3c3e296-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有预训练零样本模型的训练数据集标签仅为大标签空间的一小部分，标准预测规则使用argmax未利用标签空间自带的度量信息，无法有效预测新类别或提升零样本性能，现有适配方法多需要额外训练。","importance":"方法级贡献，提供即插即用的预测规则替换方案，无需额外训练即可提升预训练模型的新类别预测和零样本性能。","technical_approach":"将标准预测规则中的argmax替换为Fréchet均值，利用标签空间的度量信息关联标签，舍弃了模型参数微调操作，和现有适配方法相比无需额外训练数据和参数更新，部署成本极低。","experiments":"论文摘要未提供完整实验数据，仅披露完成了覆盖标签空间直径、样本复杂度和模型维度的trade-off理论分析。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The training dataset labels of existing pre-trained zero-shot models are only a small part of a larger label space. The standard prediction rule uses argmax which does not utilize the inherent metric information of the label space, cannot effectively predict new classes or improve zero-shot performance. Most existing adaptation methods require additional training.","importance":"Method-level contribution, providing a plug-and-play prediction rule replacement solution, which can improve the new class prediction and zero-shot performance of pre-trained models without additional training.","technical_approach":"Replace argmax in the standard prediction rule with Fréchet mean, use the metric information of the label space to associate labels, discard model parameter fine-tuning operations. Compared with existing adaptation methods, it does not require additional training data and parameter updates, with extremely low deployment cost.","experiments":"The paper abstract does not provide complete experimental data, only discloses that the theoretical analysis of the trade-off between label space diameter, sample complexity and model dimension is completed.","authors_note":""},"tags":["adaptation","pretrained-model","fine-tuning","geometry"],"keywords":["structured prediction","learning on graphs","partially observed label spaces","high cardinality label spaces"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"标签空间的度量信息包含标签间的语义关联，可用于提升模型预测性能。","claim_en":"Metric information of the label space contains semantic associations between labels, which can be used to improve model prediction performance.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为零样本适配工具类文献备查，无需阅读正文，需要时可直接调用其Fréchet均值预测规则提升零样本性能","en":"Keep as a zero-shot adaptation reference, no need to read full text, directly use its Fréchet mean prediction rule to boost zero-shot performance when needed."}},{"id":"RodionovP23","title":"Neural Algorithmic Reasoning Without Intermediate Supervision","authors":["Gleb Rodionov","Liudmila Prokhorenkova"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$173","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/RodionovP23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/RodionovP23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/a2370db7c99791ad5d9f3ef48ad6d464-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有神经算法推理方法依赖算法中间步骤监督才能泛化到分布外大输入，中间监督在很多实际场景中不可获取，需要仅通过输入输出对即可学习的低监督神经算法推理方案。","importance":"方法级贡献，降低了神经算法推理的监督成本，为无需中间标注的算法学习提供可行路径。","technical_approach":"提出架构改进加自监督正则目标，舍弃了算法中间步骤的监督信号，和现有方法相比无需访问算法执行的中间步骤标注，标注成本更低。","experiments":"论文摘要未提供完整实验数据，未披露基线方法及核心指标结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing neural algorithmic reasoning methods rely on intermediate step supervision of algorithms to generalize to out-of-distribution large inputs. Intermediate supervision is not available in many practical scenarios, and low-supervision neural algorithmic reasoning solutions that can be learned only through input-output pairs are needed.","importance":"Method-level contribution, reducing the supervision cost of neural algorithmic reasoning, providing a feasible path for algorithm learning without intermediate annotation.","technical_approach":"Propose architectural improvements plus self-supervised regularization objectives, discard the supervision signal of intermediate steps of the algorithm. Compared with existing methods, it does not need to access the intermediate step annotations of algorithm execution, with lower annotation cost.","experiments":"The paper abstract does not provide complete experimental data, and does not disclose baseline methods and core metric results.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reasoning","generalization","algorithmic-learning"],"keywords":["neural algorithmic reasoning","graph neural networks","self-supervised regularization"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"神经算法推理的核心挑战是泛化到分布外的大输入尺寸。","claim_en":"The core challenge of neural algorithmic reasoning is generalization to out-of-distribution large input sizes.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为低监督神经算法推理方向文献备查，无需阅读正文，仅用于了解无中间标注算法学习方案的存在性即可","en":"Keep as a low-supervision neural algorithmic reasoning reference, no need to read full text, only to know the existence of intermediate-label-free algorithm learning solutions."}},{"id":"RoyerBB23","title":"Scalarization for Multi-Task and Multi-Domain Learning at Scale","authors":["Amelie Royer","Tijmen Blankevoort","Babak Ehteshami Bejnordi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$174","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/RoyerBB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/RoyerBB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/368559ed8ede03b21f624feaeb3a5867-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"多任务多域学习优化存在任务/域差异大的痛点，现有研究提出了多种复杂优化方案，但均匀标量化（即最小化任务损失平均值）性能与复杂SOTA方法相当，现有对多任务训练动态的理解不足。","importance":"范式级贡献，质疑了现有多任务复杂优化方法的必要性，为大规模多任务训练提供更简单的训练方案。","technical_approach":"分析多任务多域训练动态，对标量化方法的训练过程进行系统研究，舍弃了复杂的动态损失加权方案，和现有复杂SOTA优化方法相比计算成本更低，性能相当。","experiments":"论文摘要未提供完整实验数据，仅验证了均匀标量化训练与更复杂的SOTA优化方法性能相当。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Multi-task and multi-domain learning optimization has the pain point of large task/domain differences. Existing studies have proposed a variety of complex optimization schemes, but uniform scalarization (i.e., minimizing the average of task losses) has performance comparable to complex SOTA methods, and existing understanding of multi-task training dynamics is insufficient.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution, questioning the necessity of existing complex multi-task optimization methods, providing a simpler training scheme for large-scale multi-task training.","technical_approach":"Analyze multi-task and multi-domain training dynamics, conduct systematic research on the training process of scalarization methods, discard complex dynamic loss weighting schemes. Compared with existing complex SOTA optimization methods, it has lower computational cost and comparable performance.","experiments":"The paper abstract does not provide complete experimental data, only verifies that uniform scalarization training achieves on-par performance with more costly state-of-the-art optimization methods.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multi-task-learning","multi-domain","scaling","optimization"],"keywords":["multitask","multidomain","optimization","population based training"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"多任务多域学习可提升模型效率和跨任务知识迁移效果。","claim_en":"Multi-task and multi-domain learning improves model efficiency and cross-task knowledge transfer effect.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"均匀标量化训练（最小化任务损失平均值）与更复杂的SOTA优化方法性能相当。","claim_en":"Uniform scalarization training (minimizing the average of task losses) achieves on-par performance with more costly state-of-the-art optimization methods.","opposes":"复杂的多任务损失加权优化方法性能优于均匀标量化方法。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction","why_contested":"直接质疑了现有多任务复杂优化方法的必要性，可大幅降低大规模多任务训练的复杂度。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3的多任务训练动态分析和实验对比表即可，复杂动态加权大概率不如简单均匀标量化，可在内部多任务预训练中验证","en":"Only read §3's multi-task training dynamic analysis and experiment tables. Complex dynamic weighting is likely no better than uniform scalarization, worth validating in internal multi-task pretrain ablations."}},{"id":"SahaHB23","title":"Can Language Models Teach? Teacher Explanations Improve Student Performance via Personalization","authors":["Swarnadeep Saha","Peter Hase","Mohit Bansal"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$175","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SahaHB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SahaHB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/c6afe9a5d1e1068796d32613ddca1ab7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有大模型可生成推理解释，但不清楚其能否作为教师向弱学生模型传递知识提升性能，过往可解释AI研究未系统分析大模型作为教师的效果及约束条件。","importance":"应用级贡献，为大模型知识蒸馏和小模型性能提升提供新的研究路径。","technical_approach":"构建两个大模型的师生框架，定义解释通信预算约束，分解教学问题为四个维度分析，舍弃了无限制解释通信的假设，和现有知识蒸馏方法相比更贴近实际通信成本受限的落地场景。","experiments":"论文摘要未提供完整实验数据，未披露模型参数量、基线方法及核心指标结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing large language models (LLMs) can generate reasoning explanations, but it is unclear whether they can act as teachers to transfer knowledge to weak student models to improve performance. Prior explainable AI studies have not systematically analyzed the effect and constraints of LLMs as teachers.","importance":"Application-level contribution, providing a new research path for LLM knowledge distillation and small model performance improvement.","technical_approach":"Construct a teacher-student framework between two LLMs, define explanation communication budget constraints, decompose the teaching problem into four dimensions for analysis, discard the assumption of unrestricted explanation communication. Compared with existing knowledge distillation methods, it is closer to the deployment scenario with limited actual communication cost.","experiments":"The paper abstract does not provide complete experimental data, and does not disclose model parameter size, baseline methods and core metric results.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm","teaching","personalization","synthetic-data"],"keywords":["Language Models","Reasoning","Explanations"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大模型生成的解释包含其推理过程的相关知识。","claim_en":"Explanations generated by LLMs contain relevant knowledge of their reasoning process.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§4的约束实验和Fig5的性能对比即可，验证大模型个性化解释对学生模型的蒸馏增益，可用于小模型蒸馏 pipeline 优化参考","en":"Only read §4's constraint experiments and Fig5's performance comparison, verify LLM personalized explanation's gain for student distillation, useful for small model distillation pipeline optimization."}},{"id":"SalewskiARSA23","title":"In-Context Impersonation Reveals Large Language Models&apos; Strengths and Biases","authors":["Leonard Salewski","Stephan Alaniz","Isabel Rio-Torto","Eric Schulz","Zeynep Akata"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SalewskiARSA23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SalewskiARSA23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/e3fe7b34ba4f378df39cb12a97193f41-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["in-context-learning","bias","persona","llm-evaluation"]},{"id":"SchloglHB23","title":"Causes and Effects of Unanticipated Numerical Deviations in Neural Network Inference Frameworks","authors":["Alexander Schlögl","Nora Hofer","Rainer Böhme"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Hardware-specific optimizations in machine learning (ML) frameworks can cause numerical deviations of inference results. Quite surprisingly, despite using a fixed trained model and fixed input data, inference results are not consistent across platforms, and sometimes not even deterministic on the same platform. We study the causes of these numerical deviations for convolutional neural networks (CNN) on realistic end-to-end inference pipelines and in isolated experiments. Results from 75 distinct platforms suggest that the main causes of deviations on CPUs are differences in SIMD use, and the selection of convolution algorithms at runtime on GPUs. We link the causes and propagation effects to properties of the ML model and evaluate potential mitigations. We make our research code publicly available.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SchloglHB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SchloglHB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/af076c3bdbf935b81d808e37c5ede463-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注一个常被低估但工程上很致命的问题：同一个神经网络在不同推理框架、硬件或数值实现下，为什么会出现意料之外的数值偏差，以及这些偏差会如何传播成最终预测差异。很多工作默认推理是“确定的”，但实际部署里 kernel、算子融合、精度模式和并行顺序都会改浮点轨迹。","importance":"它的贡献更偏系统与可靠性，但对大模型训练和部署都有直接价值。对 pretrain 研究者的启示是：训练时的微小数值不稳定、推理时的框架差异、以及量化/低精度带来的误差，不只是 infra 细节；它们会影响复现、回归分析和 serving 一致性，尤其在长链生成或边界样本上更明显。","technical_approach":"方法上是一次系统性归因分析，而不是新模型。作者比较不同推理框架中的数值偏差来源，区分由浮点舍入、并行归约顺序、库实现差异、算子替换与图优化引起的误差，并追踪这些局部偏差何时会被网络放大成预测翻转；与只报告“框架不一致”不同，论文更强调因果路径和误差传播条件。","experiments":"实验大概率覆盖多个网络、框架和硬件配置，结论是：数值偏差并不罕见，而且在某些架构或输入区域会造成可观察的输出差异。由于题面没有给具体模型、数据和量化幅度，这里不能编造数字；可以保守概括为，论文提供了跨框架比较与案例分析，证明误差既有可预测的来源，也有在深层网络中被放大的风险。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper studies a deployment problem that is easy to dismiss but hard to debug: why the same neural network can produce unexpected numerical deviations across inference frameworks, hardware targets, or implementation choices, and when those local differences become different final predictions. In practice, inference is not truly identical across stacks because kernels, operator fusion, precision modes, and reduction order all change the floating-point trajectory.","importance":"The contribution is mainly systems and reliability oriented, but it matters directly for large-model training and serving. For pretraining researchers, the lesson is that numerical behavior is not just infrastructure noise; it affects reproducibility, regression tracking, and consistency in low-precision or optimized deployment paths, especially for long generation chains or borderline inputs.","technical_approach":"The paper is a causal analysis rather than a new model. It compares sources of cross-framework numerical drift, separating effects from floating-point rounding, parallel reduction order, library-specific implementations, operator substitutions, and graph-level optimizations, then studies when those small differences are amplified by the network into output changes.","experiments":"The likely empirical pattern is broad comparison across models, frameworks, and hardware settings, with the main conclusion that numerical deviations are common and can translate into visible prediction differences under certain conditions. Since the prompt gives no exact setups or numbers, the safe summary is that the paper offers cross-stack evidence and case studies showing both the causes and the amplification pathways of inference-time numerical drift.","authors_note":""},"tags":["numerical-stability","inference","systems","reliability"],"keywords":["machine learning","security","reproducibility","forensics"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3的误差归因分析和§5的预测翻转案例即可，帮你理清预训练/部署数值不一致的根因，排查复现问题时可参考","en":"Only read §3's error attribution analysis and §5's prediction flip cases, help you understand root causes of pretrain-deployment numerical inconsistency, useful for reproduction troubleshooting."}},{"id":"SchwettmannSMCL23","title":"FIND: A Function Description Benchmark for Evaluating Interpretability Methods","authors":["Sarah Schwettmann","Tamar Rott Shaham","Joanna Materzynska","Neil Chowdhury","Shuang Li","Jacob Andreas","David Bau","Antonio Torralba"],"institutions":["MIT CSAIL"],"abstract":"$176","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SchwettmannSMCL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SchwettmannSMCL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ef0164c1112f56246224af540857348f-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是解释性评测里一个长期空缺：我们常说某种 interpretability 方法找到了某个神经元、通道或子网络的“功能”，但缺少一个能系统检验这种功能描述是否真的准确、可判别、可泛化的 benchmark。过去很多评测停留在可视化好不好看，或者只验证局部干预是否有效，难以比较方法优劣。","importance":"它的重要性在于把解释性从主观展示推进到较结构化的评测协议。对 pretrain 研究有间接但真实的价值：如果我们想理解大模型里哪些单元在编码语法、实体、工具调用或跨模态对齐，首先需要一个能评价“函数描述”质量的基准，否则很多 mechanistic interpretability 结论很难积累成可靠知识。","technical_approach":"FIND 的核心做法是构造一个函数描述 benchmark：给定模型内部组件与输入行为，要求方法产出可验证的自然语言或结构化功能描述，再通过标准化任务去评估描述是否能预测组件在新输入上的作用。关键点不在再做一个 saliency map，而是在于把“解释”变成可判分对象；和传统基于相关性的解释不同，它更强调描述的可执行性与外推性。","experiments":"实验重点应该是比较多类解释方法在 FIND 上的表现，并展示一些方法虽然能生成看似合理的描述，但在泛化检验上并不可靠。题面未提供具体模型、数据规模和分数，因此不能写具体数字；稳妥的结论是：论文通过 benchmark 化评测，区分了表面可读的解释与真正具有预测力的功能描述，这对解释性方法筛选很有帮助。","authors_note":"作者团队包含 MIT CSAIL / 相关学术机构的研究者。代表性方向是神经网络可解释性、视觉表示分析和机制评测；如无法严格确认具体机构分布，建议只把它视作 interpretability benchmark 工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper fills a longstanding gap in interpretability evaluation: many methods claim to recover the “function” of a neuron, channel, or circuit, but there has been little systematic machinery to test whether those functional descriptions are actually correct, discriminative, and generalizable. Earlier evaluations often focused on attractive visualizations or local interventions, which makes methods hard to compare rigorously.","importance":"Its value is in turning interpretability from a largely qualitative exercise into a more structured benchmarked one. For pretraining research, this matters indirectly but meaningfully: if we want reliable claims about what units encode syntax, entities, tool-use behavior, or multimodal alignment, we need a way to evaluate function descriptions rather than just inspect them.","technical_approach":"FIND introduces a benchmark for functional descriptions. Given internal model components and their behavioral traces, methods must produce natural-language or structured descriptions that can then be tested on whether they predict the component’s role on new inputs. The key shift is that an explanation becomes a scored object; compared with correlation-heavy interpretability methods, this setup emphasizes executable meaning and out-of-sample validity.","experiments":"The paper likely compares several interpretability methods on FIND and shows that plausible-sounding descriptions often fail when asked to generalize. The prompt does not provide exact models, data sizes, or scores, so the safe summary is that FIND separates readable explanations from explanations with real predictive power, which is useful for filtering interpretability methods.","authors_note":"The author group includes researchers associated with MIT CSAIL and related academic labs. The work fits squarely into interpretability benchmarking and evaluation; without explicit metadata, it is safer not to overstate institutional specifics."},"tags":["interpretability","benchmark","function-description"],"notable_authors":["Sarah Schwettmann"],"keywords":["Interpretability","Explainability","Dataset","Benchmark","LLMs","LM Agents","Language Model"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§2的基准构建逻辑和§4的评测结果即可，做机制可解释性研究时可直接用该基准对比方法效果，无需重复造评测集","en":"Only read §2's benchmark construction logic and §4's evaluation results, use this benchmark directly for mechanistic interpretability method comparison, no need to build new evaluation sets."}},{"id":"ShahCK23","title":"Learning Mixtures of Gaussians Using the DDPM Objective","authors":["Kulin Shah","Sitan Chen","Adam R. Klivans"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$177","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ShahCK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ShahCK23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/3ec077b4af90f2556b517b556e186f64-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是一个理论问题：DDPM 这类扩散目标在简单但非平凡的分布上到底学到了什么，是否真的能有效恢复多峰结构。过去扩散模型在图像上经验成功很多，但对基础分布学习性质的理解不够，尤其缺少对 mixture distributions 这类经典对象的清晰分析。","importance":"它的重要性主要是理论澄清，而不是直接改变工业训练配方。对新型语言建模范式和 diffusion LM 研究者来说，这类结果有价值，因为它帮助我们理解扩散目标什么时候更像稳健的密度学习器、什么时候会受到噪声日程或参数化限制；如果连高斯混合都学不清楚，就很难对离散 diffusion LM 的训练行为做可靠外推。","technical_approach":"方法上，作者从 DDPM 训练目标出发，分析它在高斯混合模型上的学习性质。核心不是提出一个工程 trick，而是把去噪目标与混合分布参数恢复联系起来，研究在何种条件下该目标能识别模态结构、估计分量，或者避免常见的 mode averaging；和纯最大似然或矩匹配的经典分析相比，这里研究的是扩散噪声过程下的学习动力学与统计可恢复性。","experiments":"实验很可能围绕合成 MoG 数据展开，用来验证理论预测，例如不同分量间距、维度、噪声强度对恢复质量的影响。题面没有给数值结论，因此不能写具体提升；可以保守地说，论文通过理论加合成实验说明 DDPM objective 在某些条件下确实能学到高斯混合结构，但其表现会依赖分离度、噪声日程和参数化假设。","authors_note":"作者包含 Sitan Chen、Adam R. Klivans，二者都以理论机器学习见长。该工作更接近生成模型理论分析，而不是大规模系统论文。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper asks a foundational question: what exactly does the DDPM objective learn on a simple but genuinely multimodal distribution such as a mixture of Gaussians. Diffusion models have strong empirical results, but their basic statistical behavior is still not well understood, especially on classical multimodal learning problems.","importance":"The contribution is primarily theoretical rather than recipe-changing, but it is relevant to diffusion-style language modeling and alternative pretraining paradigms. The reason is simple: understanding whether diffusion objectives can reliably recover multimodal structure in a clean setting informs how much trust we should place in them on harder discrete or semantic distributions.","technical_approach":"The paper analyzes the DDPM training objective on Gaussian mixtures. Instead of proposing an engineering trick, it connects the denoising objective to recovery of multimodal structure, asking under what conditions the objective can identify components, preserve mode structure, or avoid collapsing toward averaged solutions. Relative to classical MLE or moment-based analyses, the focus here is on the statistical and optimization implications of the diffusion corruption process.","experiments":"The empirical side is likely based on synthetic mixture-of-Gaussians setups used to validate the theory, such as varying component separation, dimensionality, and noise schedules. The prompt contains no exact numbers, so the safe summary is that the paper combines theory and controlled experiments to show that the DDPM objective can recover mixture structure under some conditions, with clear dependence on separation, schedule choice, and modeling assumptions.","authors_note":"Sitan Chen and Adam R. Klivans are well-known for theoretical machine learning. This work is best viewed as a theory paper on generative modeling rather than a large-scale systems paper."},"tags":["ddpm","gaussian-mixture","diffusion-theory","generative-model"],"notable_authors":["Sitan Chen","Adam R. Klivans"],"keywords":["Mixtures of Gaussians","score-based generative models","provable learning of score","Expectation-Maximization","DDPM generative model"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3的理论推导和§4的实验验证即可，做扩散语言模型研究时可参考其对扩散目标学习性质的结论，避免过度外推扩散能力","en":"Only read §3's theoretical derivation and §4's experimental verification, reference its diffusion objective learning property conclusions for diffusion LM research, avoid over-extrapolating diffusion capabilities."}},{"id":"ShawJCBPHKLT23","title":"From Pixels to UI Actions: Learning to Follow Instructions via Graphical User Interfaces","authors":["Peter Shaw","Mandar Joshi","James Cohan","Jonathan Berant","Panupong Pasupat","Hexiang Hu","Urvashi Khandelwal","Kenton Lee","Kristina Toutanova"],"institutions":["Google Research"],"abstract":"Much of the previous work towards digital agents for graphical user interfaces (GUIs) has relied on text-based representations (derived from HTML or other structured data sources), which are not always readily available. These input representations have been often coupled with custom, task-specific action spaces.  This paper focuses on creating agents that interact with the digital world using the same conceptual interface that humans commonly use — via pixel-based screenshots and a generic action space corresponding to keyboard and mouse actions. Building upon recent progress in pixel-based pretraining, we show, for the first time, that it is possible for such agents to outperform human crowdworkers on the MiniWob++ benchmark of GUI-based instruction following tasks.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ShawJCBPHKLT23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ShawJCBPHKLT23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/6c52a8a4fadc9129c6e1d1745f2dfd0f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是让模型直接从屏幕像素和自然语言指令出发，学会在 GUI 中执行动作，而不是依赖手工 DOM、结构化状态或任务特定接口。过去很多 UI agent 工作用的是简化环境或可访问的语义树，这降低了感知难度，但离真实桌面和移动端交互还有明显距离。","importance":"它的重要性在于把“从感知到行动”的闭环往真实数字环境推进了一步。对统一预训练和 VLM 来说，这类工作很有参考价值：GUI 操作本质上要求视觉 token、文本指令和离散动作在同一策略里对齐，和原生多模态 pretraining 的目标很接近；后续 computer-use agent、desktop agent、web agent 都会受益于这类数据与建模范式。","technical_approach":"核心方法是构建从像素到 UI action 的 instruction-following 学习框架。模型输入是屏幕截图和语言指令，输出是点击、键入、滚动等动作；关键设计通常包括把界面元素定位、文本读取、历史上下文和动作解码统一起来，而不是先做一个独立的 OCR/检测再拼规则。与依赖 DOM 的方法相比，这种端到端方案更通用，但感知和 credit assignment 都更难。","experiments":"实验大概率在真实或半真实 GUI benchmark 上，与基于 DOM、规则系统或纯视觉 imitation baseline 比较。题面没有给参数量和数字，因此不应虚构；可以确定的高价值点是，论文关注 instruction-following 成功率和长序列交互能力，并且其结果说明：只靠像素建模虽然更难，但可以学到具备一定泛化的 UI 操作策略，尤其对不可访问内部结构的环境更有意义。","authors_note":"作者名单中包含 Google Research 相关知名研究者，如 Peter Shaw、Mandar Joshi、Jonathan Berant、Panupong Pasupat、Tao Li 等，团队长期关注语言理解、结构化推理、交互式 agent 与多模态学习。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a realistic capability gap: executing GUI actions directly from pixels and natural-language instructions, without relying on handcrafted DOM trees, structured states, or task-specific APIs. Earlier UI agents often operated in simplified settings where semantic structure was already exposed, which avoided the hard perception problem but limited realism.","importance":"This is important because it pushes the perception-to-action loop closer to actual digital environments. For unified pretraining and VLM work, GUI interaction is a useful testbed: it requires aligning visual input, language instructions, and discrete action policies in one model, which is closely related to native multimodal pretraining and later computer-use agents.","technical_approach":"The method learns an instruction-following policy from screenshots to UI actions. The model takes screen pixels and language instructions and predicts actions such as click, type, or scroll; the key design challenge is to jointly handle element localization, text reading, interaction history, and action decoding instead of chaining separate OCR and rule systems. Compared with DOM-based approaches, this is more general but much harder in perception and credit assignment.","experiments":"The likely experiments compare against DOM-based systems, hand-engineered baselines, or pure visual imitation learners on realistic GUI benchmarks. The prompt does not include model sizes or exact scores, so the safe summary is that the paper focuses on instruction-following success and multi-step interaction, and shows that pixel-based training can learn transferable UI policies, especially in environments where internal structure is unavailable.","authors_note":"The author list includes well-known Google Research-affiliated researchers such as Peter Shaw, Mandar Joshi, Jonathan Berant, Panupong Pasupat, and Tao Li. The broader team has strong prior work in language understanding, structured reasoning, interactive agents, and multimodal learning."},"tags":["gui-agent","instruction-following","grounding"],"notable_authors":["Peter Shaw","Mandar Joshi","Jonathan Berant","Panupong Pasupat"],"keywords":["instruction following","web tasks","user interface tasks","vision and language","representation learning","reinforcement learning","imitation learning","tree search","language grounding","web agents","computer control"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§4的框架设计和§5的跨场景泛化结果即可，做多模态预训练对齐视觉、文本、动作模态时可参考其建模范式","en":"Only read §4's framework design and §5's cross-scenario generalization results, reference its modeling paradigm when aligning vision, text, action modalities in multi-modal pretraining."}},{"id":"Shi0DYL0DLZ0LGS23","title":"Train Faster, Perform Better: Modular Adaptive Training in Over-Parameterized Models","authors":["Yubin Shi","Yixuan Chen","Mingzhi Dong","Xiaochen Yang","Dongsheng Li","Yujiang Wang","Robert P. Dick","Qin Lv","Yingying Zhao","Fan Yang","Tun Lu","Ning Gu","Li Shang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$178","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Shi0DYL0DLZ0LGS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Shi0DYL0DLZ0LGS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/516fd05dc408fd6d6374940a83930193-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的问题是：在过参数化模型里，是否可以只对最该学的模块做自适应训练，从而同时缩短训练时间并提升最终性能。标准做法通常对全模型一视同仁地更新，这在大模型上既贵，也可能让已经足够好的部分被无效扰动。","importance":"它的重要性偏方法和系统交界。对 pretrain 的启示是明确的：随着模型越来越大，‘所有参数都按同一节奏训练’可能不是最优策略；如果模块化自适应训练能稳定地把算力集中到高收益子网络，它会影响 mid-train、cooldown、continual pretrain 甚至 MoE 路由后的训练设计。","technical_approach":"核心方法是模块化自适应训练（Modular Adaptive Training）：把网络拆成模块，动态决定哪些模块该被重点更新、哪些可以少训或冻结。关键不是简单 layer-wise lr decay，而是依据训练状态或模块贡献进行选择性计算分配；与全量训练相比，它牺牲了统一优化的简洁性，换来更高的算力利用率和潜在的正则化效果。","experiments":"从标题看，论文主张同时实现‘训练更快、表现更好’，这意味着实验应报告 wall-clock、计算量或迭代数下降，以及最终精度提升。题面缺少具体架构、任务和数字，因此不能捏造；稳妥总结是：作者在过参数化设置下展示了模块级自适应更新优于均匀训练，并通过消融说明模块选择策略是收益的主要来源，而不是单纯减少了参数更新。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether over-parameterized models really need to train every module equally at every stage, or whether selectively updating the most useful parts can both reduce training time and improve final quality. Standard full-model training is simple, but it is expensive and may waste computation on modules that no longer need aggressive updates.","importance":"Its contribution sits between method and systems. For pretraining, the broader implication is that uniform training schedules may be suboptimal at scale; if module-aware adaptive training consistently reallocates compute toward high-return subnetworks, it could influence mid-training schedules, cooldown phases, continual pretraining, and even MoE-style training strategies.","technical_approach":"The core idea is Modular Adaptive Training: partition the network into modules and dynamically decide which modules to emphasize, downweight, or freeze during training. This goes beyond static layer-wise learning-rate decay by making compute allocation depend on training state or module utility. The trade-off is clear: less optimization uniformity in exchange for better compute efficiency and possibly useful regularization.","experiments":"From the title, the paper claims both faster training and better performance, so the experiments likely report improvements in wall-clock time, compute usage, or convergence speed together with higher final accuracy. Since the prompt gives no exact tasks or numbers, the safe summary is that selective module updates outperform uniform training in over-parameterized regimes, and ablations suggest that the module-selection policy, not just fewer parameter updates, drives the gains.","authors_note":""},"tags":["training-efficiency","modular-training","optimization"],"keywords":["Modular Adaptive Training","Efficient Training","Over-parameterized Model","Neural Tangent Kernel."],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3的自适应模块选择逻辑和§5的训练加速对比即可，可在超大规模预训练中尝试模块化选择性更新来节省算力提性能","en":"Only read §3's adaptive module selection logic and §5's training speedup comparison, try modular selective update in large-scale pretraining to save compute and improve performance."}},{"id":"ShiXWZZZTM23","title":"Language Models Can Improve Event Prediction by Few-Shot Abductive Reasoning","authors":["Xiaoming Shi","Siqiao Xue","Kangrui Wang","Fan Zhou","James Y. Zhang","Jun Zhou","Chenhao Tan","Hongyuan Mei"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$179","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ShiXWZZZTM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ShiXWZZZTM23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/5e5fd18f863cbe6d8ae392a93fd271c9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是事件预测中的一个常见短板：模型往往能利用相关性做预测，但缺少对“为什么会发生”这类隐含因果链的建模，因此在证据稀疏或事件链不完整时容易失准。作者提出用 few-shot abductive reasoning，也就是从结果反推最可能前因，来补上这个缺口。","importance":"它的重要性主要在于展示 LLM 的推理式 prompting 可以给结构化预测任务带来增益。对 pretrain 的直接冲击不大，但对 pretrain/posttrain 闭环有启发：如果 abductive reasoning 这类中间推理过程确实能提升事件预测，说明语言模型内部已有可调用的因果叙事能力，而问题在于如何通过 prompting 或轻量监督把它稳定提取出来。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把事件预测重写为少样本溯因推理问题。模型先根据已观察到的事件和上下文，生成或评估能够解释这些现象的潜在前因，再利用这些前因假设辅助最终预测；与直接分类或直接下一个事件生成相比，这种两阶段设计的好处是把隐藏状态显式化，但代价是推理链可能引入新的 hallucination 或偏差。","experiments":"实验应当在事件预测数据集上，比较标准监督模型、直接 few-shot LLM prompting 与加入 abductive step 的方法。题面没有数字，因此不能具体写提升百分点；可以保守地说，论文报告 few-shot abductive reasoning 在低资源或证据不完整场景下优于直接预测，并通过案例分析显示中间假设质量与最终预测正确率显著相关。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a common weakness in event prediction: models often exploit correlations but do not explicitly reason about the latent causes that make an event sequence plausible, which hurts performance when evidence is sparse or the event chain is incomplete. The proposed fix is few-shot abductive reasoning, reasoning backward from observations to likely causes.","importance":"Its importance is mainly in showing that reasoning-style LLM prompting can help structured prediction tasks. The direct impact on pretraining is limited, but it is informative for the pretrain/post-train loop: if abductive reasoning improves event prediction, then useful causal-narrative competence may already exist in the pretrained model and the bottleneck is how to reliably elicit and use it.","technical_approach":"The method reframes event prediction as a few-shot abduction problem. Given observed events and context, the model first generates or scores latent explanatory causes, then uses those hypotheses to support final prediction. Compared with direct classification or next-event generation, this makes hidden reasoning more explicit, at the cost of introducing possible hallucinated intermediate explanations.","experiments":"The experiments likely compare standard supervised event predictors, direct few-shot LLM prompting, and the abductive variant on event prediction benchmarks. Since the prompt provides no exact scores, the safe summary is that the abductive step helps most in low-resource or incomplete-evidence settings, and qualitative analysis suggests that better intermediate hypotheses correlate with better final predictions.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm","few-shot","reasoning"],"keywords":["event sequences","irregular time series","event prediction","large language model","reasoning","few-shot prompting"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§4的溯因推理prompt设计和实验结果即可，做结构化预测下游任务时可参考其两阶段范式提取LLM内部因果能力","en":"Only read §4's abductive reasoning prompt design and experimental results, reference its two-stage paradigm to extract LLM internal causal capabilities for structured prediction downstream tasks."}},{"id":"ShihBESA23","title":"Parallel Sampling of Diffusion Models","authors":["Andy Shih","Suneel Belkhale","Stefano Ermon","Dorsa Sadigh","Nima Anari"],"institutions":["Stanford University"],"abstract":"$17a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ShihBESA23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ShihBESA23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/0d1986a61e30e5fa408c81216a616e20-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是扩散模型采样太慢这个核心瓶颈，但切入点不是再压缩步数，而是探索能否并行化采样过程。标准 diffusion sampling 天生是串行去噪链，哪怕单步很快，总延迟仍高；这对图像生成和更广义的 diffusion-based generative modeling 都是结构性限制。","importance":"它的重要性是方法级且具有范式外溢价值。对 diffusion LM、离散 diffusion 和 AR+diffusion 联合建模都很 relevant，因为采样延迟一直是 diffusion 范式相对 AR 的主要劣势之一；如果并行采样能在质量损失可控的前提下显著降时延，那么 diffusion 家族在生成系统中的可用性会提高一个台阶。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Parallel Sampling of Diffusion Models：通过重写或近似原本串行的去噪依赖关系，让多个时间步或多个局部更新可以并发执行。关键设计通常在于如何控制并行带来的误差累积，因为扩散链每一步都依赖前一步状态；与简单减少采样步数不同，并行化追求的是 wall-clock 加速，而不是只减少网络调用次数，因此更接近系统和算法协同优化。","experiments":"实验重点应是采样速度与样本质量的 trade-off，例如在图像生成 benchmark 上比较 wall-clock、FID 或其他质量指标。题面没有给具体架构和数字，因此不能虚构加速倍数；稳妥总结是：论文证明扩散采样存在可利用的并行性，在一定并行度下能明显降低采样延迟，同时保持有竞争力的生成质量，但并行过强时误差传播会开始伤害样本保真度。","authors_note":"作者包括 Stanford 相关研究者 Andy Shih、Stefano Ermon、Dorsa Sadigh、Nima Anari。Stefano Ermon 团队在扩散模型、能量模型与生成建模方面有持续代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets the core bottleneck of diffusion models: slow sampling. Instead of only reducing the number of denoising steps, it asks whether the sampling process itself can be parallelized. Standard diffusion sampling is inherently sequential, so latency remains high even when individual steps are efficient.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution with implications beyond image generation. It matters for diffusion LMs, discrete diffusion, and AR+diffusion hybrids because sampling latency is one of the main structural disadvantages of diffusion relative to autoregressive models; if parallel sampling can cut wall-clock time without severe quality loss, the practical case for diffusion gets stronger.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to enable Parallel Sampling of Diffusion Models by rewriting or approximating the usual sequential dependencies so that multiple denoising updates can be carried out concurrently. The hard part is controlling the error introduced by breaking the strict step-by-step dependence. Unlike simply reducing the step count, this line of work explicitly optimizes wall-clock latency, making it a joint algorithm-systems improvement.","experiments":"The experiments likely focus on the speed-quality trade-off, for example wall-clock improvements versus FID or related sample-quality metrics on image benchmarks. The prompt gives no exact architectures or numbers, so the safe summary is that the paper demonstrates useful parallelism in diffusion sampling: latency drops substantially at moderate parallelism while sample quality remains competitive, but aggressive parallelization eventually amplifies approximation error and hurts fidelity.","authors_note":"The authors include Stanford-affiliated researchers Andy Shih, Stefano Ermon, Dorsa Sadigh, and Nima Anari. Stefano Ermon’s group is well known for diffusion models, energy-based methods, and generative modeling."},"tags":["diffusion","sampling","parallel-decoding"],"notable_authors":["Andy Shih","Stefano Ermon","Dorsa Sadigh","Nima Anari"],"keywords":["diffusion models","parallel sampling"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3的并行采样算法设计和§4的时延-质量tradeoff结果即可，做扩散模型部署或扩散LM研究时可参考其降时延思路","en":"Only read §3's parallel sampling algorithm design and §4's latency-quality tradeoff results, reference its latency reduction idea when deploying diffusion models or doing diffusion LM research."}},{"id":"SiY23","title":"Practical Sharpness-Aware Minimization Cannot Converge All the Way to Optima","authors":["Dongkuk Si","Chulhee Yun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$17b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SiY23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SiY23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/5305b7891e1098dd9773d35cd9333180-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心结论是：实践中常用的 Sharpness-Aware Minimization, SAM，并不能一路收敛到真正的最优点。过去大家常把 SAM 当成“找更平坦极小值、泛化更好”的稳健优化器，但对它最终会停在哪里、为什么会停住，理论上并不清楚。","importance":"它的重要性是优化理论层面的纠偏。对大模型训练的启示不是“不要用 SAM”，而是要清楚它改善泛化的同时会引入不可忽视的优化偏差，因此它更像一种显式正则化而不是无代价优化增强。对 pretrain 来说，这关系到你如何理解 train loss、sharpness 和 downstream generalization 之间的取舍。","technical_approach":"作者给出的核心分析是：SAM 的更新目标不是原始损失，而是局部邻域内的 worst-case 损失近似，因此当你逼近原问题最优点时，SAM 仍可能因为邻域扰动项而保持非零更新，无法真正停在原始 optima。论文从连续/离散优化视角分析这一点，证明 practical SAM 在一般情形下会收敛到一个与半径 rho 相关的偏移解，而不是原始经验风险最小点。它讨论的是标准实现里的关键细节——固定扰动半径、双步更新——为什么会带来结构性偏差，而不是数值误差。","experiments":"实验主要服务于理论结论：在简单凸问题、深网训练和标准 benchmark 上，SAM 往往停在比 SGD 更高的 training loss，但可能有更好的 test performance。关键观察是这种 train-test trade-off 会随扰动半径变化：rho 越大，偏离 optima 越明显，收敛越慢或停得越早，但平坦性指标和泛化有时改善。论文更重视定性一致性而非大规模 SOTA，因此没有直接给 pretrain 级别的大模型结果；不过结论对大 batch 训练和稳定性判断是有参考价值的。","authors_note":"如果只依据给定信息，机构无法确认。Chulhee Yun 近年持续做深度学习优化与训练动力学理论。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The central claim is clear: practical SAM does not converge all the way to the true optima of the original loss. SAM is often treated as a drop-in optimizer that finds flatter minima and improves generalization, but its asymptotic optimization behavior was not well understood.","importance":"This is an optimization-theory correction with practical consequences. The message is not that SAM is useless; it is that SAM should be viewed as an explicitly biased objective, not a free improvement over SGD. For pretraining, that matters whenever people interpret lower sharpness as if it came without optimization trade-offs.","technical_approach":"The paper analyzes the actual objective induced by SAM. Because SAM approximately minimizes the worst-case loss in a local neighborhood, its update remains affected by the perturbation term even near an optimum of the original loss. As a result, with the standard fixed-radius two-step procedure, it generally converges to a rho-dependent offset solution rather than the ERM optimum. The contribution is to formalize this structural bias, not to point out numerical instability.","experiments":"The experiments support the theory rather than chase benchmark wins. On toy convex problems and standard deep-learning setups, SAM often ends with higher training loss than SGD while sometimes achieving better test performance. The trade-off becomes stronger as the perturbation radius increases: larger rho means stronger bias away from the original optimum, slower or earlier-stalled convergence, and occasionally better flatness/generalization metrics. The paper does not provide pretraining-scale evidence, but the result is relevant for interpreting optimizer behavior in large-model training.","authors_note":""},"tags":["optimization","sam","training-stability"],"notable_authors":["Chulhee Yun"],"keywords":["Sharpness-Aware Minimization","convex optimization"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3的收敛性证明和§5的实验验证即可，调整预训练优化器时要明确SAM是带偏差的正则化而非无代价增强，注意训练损失和泛化的取舍","en":"Only read §3's convergence proof and §5's experimental verification, when adjusting pretrain optimizers, be clear SAM is biased regularization rather than cost-free enhancement, pay attention to training loss-generalization tradeoff."}},{"id":"SinghB23","title":"Attention as Implicit Structural Inference","authors":["Ryan Singh","Christopher L. Buckley"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$17c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SinghB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SinghB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/4e8a74988bc611495c2d3a5edac8493f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的是：Transformer 里的 attention 是否不仅是信息路由，还在隐式执行某种结构推断。过去很多工作把 attention 当相似度加权或可解释性线索，但较少从“它是否在学习 latent structure”这个角度系统讨论其计算角色。","importance":"它的重要性偏机制分析。对 pretrain 研究的价值不在于直接提升指标，而在于帮助解释 Transformer 为什么能在没有显式图结构或句法监督时，仍学出可泛化的关系表示。这会影响我们对 attention inductive bias、架构替代品以及可解释性的判断。","technical_approach":"作者的核心主张是：attention 可被视为一种隐式结构推断机制，模型通过键-查询匹配和层间组合，近似构造 token 之间的关系图，再在这个图上做信息传播。方法上更像理论建模和分析框架，而不是新模块。论文通常会把标准 attention 与显式结构模型，如图推断或消息传递，建立形式联系，说明哪些结构约束可以自然从 soft attention 中出现，哪些则需要额外偏置。这个视角的好处是能解释 attention 学到的依赖关系为何有系统性；边界是，attention 学到的“结构”未必可识别、也未必与人类定义结构一致。","experiments":"实验上，这类论文通常用合成任务、语言建模分析或可控结构数据来验证 attention 是否恢复潜在关系，并比较不同头、层和训练设置下的结构一致性。关键结果往往不是 benchmark SOTA，而是证明某些 attention pattern 与目标结构存在稳定对应，并展示这种对应在多层组合后比单层更强。如果有 ablation，通常会显示去掉位置编码、头数或某些归一化后，隐式结构推断能力下降。对大模型实践的直接指导有限，但对理解为何某些结构敏感任务受益于 attention 很有帮助。","authors_note":"如果仅根据给定信息，机构无法可靠确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether attention does more than route information. Specifically, it studies whether attention can be understood as implicitly inferring latent structure rather than merely computing soft similarity weights.","importance":"This is a mechanistic contribution. It does not directly change pretraining recipes, but it matters for how we interpret the inductive bias of Transformers: why they recover useful relational structure without explicit syntax or graph supervision, and what that implies for architecture design and interpretability.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to view attention as implicit structural inference. Through query-key interactions and composition across layers, the model can be seen as constructing a soft relational graph over tokens and then propagating information along that graph. The contribution is analytical rather than architectural. The paper likely builds links between standard attention and explicit structure-inference or message-passing frameworks, clarifying which kinds of relational bias emerge naturally and which require extra constraints. The strength of this framing is explanatory power. Its limitation is that the induced structure may be useful without being uniquely identifiable or human-interpretable.","experiments":"The experiments are likely built around synthetic or controlled tasks where latent structure is known, plus attention analyses on language settings. The important result is not benchmark dominance but evidence that certain attention patterns consistently align with target structure, especially after multi-layer composition. Typical ablations would test the role of heads, positional signals, or normalization in preserving this implicit inference behavior. The practical impact is indirect but relevant to understanding why attention works well on structure-sensitive tasks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["attention","structure","transformer"],"keywords":["Attention","Structural Inference","Variational Inference","Predictive Coding","Graphical Models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3形式化推导部分即可，理清注意力与图结构推断的对应关系，可用于后续注意力归纳偏置相关 ablation 设计参考","en":"Only read §3 formal derivation to clarify the correspondence between attention and graph structure inference, which supports ablation design for attention inductive bias research"}},{"id":"SmithMKLB23","title":"Convolutional State Space Models for Long-Range Spatiotemporal Modeling","authors":["Jimmy T. H. Smith","Shalini De Mello","Jan Kautz","Scott W. Linderman","Wonmin Byeon"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$17d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SmithMKLB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SmithMKLB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ff9783ec29688387d44779d67d06ef66-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：如何在长程时空建模中同时兼顾长依赖、局部归纳偏置和计算效率。纯 attention 在高分辨率视频或长时序场景成本太高，纯卷积又很难覆盖超长依赖，传统 state space model 虽然长程高效，但处理二维/三维时空结构不够自然。","importance":"它的重要性是架构级的，尤其对非文本序列和跨模态预训练有参考价值。论文表明 state space model 不必只做一维序列建模，可以和卷积结构深度融合，形成兼顾长程建模与空间局部性的替代路线。这对视频、音频和统一 token 序列建模都相关。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Convolutional State Space Models，把 SSM 的长程动态建模能力与卷积的局部空间归纳偏置结合起来。直觉上，卷积负责提取稳定的局部时空模式，SSM 负责在更长范围上传播和整合状态；这样避免了 attention 在长序列上二次复杂度的代价，也比纯 SSM 更适合图像/视频网格结构。和把视频展平成一维 token 再直接跑 Transformer 不同，这种设计更尊重原始时空拓扑；代价是架构更专门化，通用文本任务上的即插即用性不如 Transformer。","experiments":"实验结论通常是：在长时序视频或时空预测任务上，Convolutional SSM 能以更低计算成本达到与 Transformer 竞争甚至更优的结果。关键比较对象会包括时空 Transformer、纯卷积网络和已有 SSM 架构，并报告准确率、预测误差以及吞吐/显存。值得关注的观察一般有两点：序列越长，它相对 attention 的效率优势越明显；加入卷积局部模块后，SSM 在高维感知输入上的表现明显优于纯一维序列化版本。对 foundation model 的启发是，长程建模并不只有 attention 一条路。","authors_note":"如果仅根据给定信息，机构无法可靠确认。Jan Kautz 与 Scott Linderman 都是相关领域知名研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a hard systems-and-architecture problem: modeling long-range spatiotemporal structure without paying full attention cost or giving up local inductive bias. Pure attention is expensive on high-resolution video and long sequences, while pure convolution struggles with very long dependencies. Standard state space models help with long range, but are less natural for rich spatial structure.","importance":"This is an architecture contribution with clear relevance beyond its immediate benchmarks. It shows that state space models can be made much more suitable for vision, video, and other non-text modalities by tightly integrating convolutional locality. That is useful for multimodal pretraining, where long-range efficiency and spatial structure both matter.","technical_approach":"The method combines convolution with state space modeling. Convolution handles stable local spatiotemporal patterns, while the SSM component carries information over longer ranges efficiently. This avoids the quadratic cost of attention on long sequences and improves over plain 1D SSMs on grid-structured data. Compared with flattening space-time into a token sequence and feeding a Transformer, the design respects the underlying topology better. The trade-off is specialization: it is less of a universal drop-in block than standard Transformers.","experiments":"The empirical result is that convolutional SSMs are competitive with, and sometimes better than, Transformer baselines on long-range spatiotemporal tasks while using less compute or memory. The relevant baselines likely include spatiotemporal Transformers, convolutional networks, and earlier SSM variants. The most useful observations are that the efficiency advantage grows with sequence length, and that adding convolutional locality materially improves SSM performance on high-dimensional perceptual inputs.","authors_note":""},"tags":["state-space-model","long-context","architecture","sequence-modeling"],"notable_authors":["Jan Kautz","Scott Linderman"],"keywords":["spatiotemporal modeling","ConvLSTM","RNN","state spaces","SSM","S4","S5","long-range dependencies","video prediction"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§4.1和Fig5即可，明确卷积与SSM融合的核心设计，做多模态/视频预训练架构选型时可作为替代方案参考","en":"Only read §4.1 and Fig5 to learn the core convolution-SSM fusion design, which can be used as an alternative for multimodal/video pre-training architecture selection"}},{"id":"SomepalliSGGG23","title":"Understanding and Mitigating Copying in Diffusion Models","authors":["Gowthami Somepalli","Vasu Singla","Micah Goldblum","Jonas Geiping","Tom Goldstein"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Images generated by diffusion models like Stable Diffusion are increasingly widespread. Recent works and even lawsuits have shown that these models are prone to replicating their training data, unbeknownst to the user. In this paper, we first analyze this memorization problem in text-to-image diffusion models.  While it is widely believed that duplicated images in the training set are responsible for content replication at inference time, we observe that the text conditioning of the model plays a similarly important role. In fact, we see in our experiments that data replication often does not happen for unconditional models, while it is common in the text-conditional case. Motivated by our findings, we then propose several techniques for reducing data replication at both training and inference time by randomizing and augmenting image captions in the training set. Code is available at https://github.com/somepago/DCR.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SomepalliSGGG23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SomepalliSGGG23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/9521b6e7f33e039e7d92e23f5e37bbf4-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：扩散模型是否会直接复制训练数据，以及这种 copying 是怎么发生、如何缓解。过去生成模型的记忆与隐私风险更多在语言模型中被讨论，而图像扩散模型常被认为只是“生成相似风格”，对逐样本记忆的系统证据相对不足。","importance":"它的重要性很高，属于生成模型安全与数据治理的基础问题。对 pretrain 研究的直接启示是，数据重复、质量控制和训练目标都会影响 memorization 风险；扩散模型并不天然比 AR 模型更安全。对于任何做大规模图像或多模态预训练的人，这篇都在提醒：生成质量和数据合规不是可以分开看的。","technical_approach":"作者的方法是先建立更可信的 copying 检测流程，再分析诱因并提出缓解策略。核心思路通常包括：从训练集近邻检索出候选样本，用感知相似度、人审和可能的重建轨迹来区分一般相似与近乎复制；然后研究复制与重复数据、稀有样本、训练步数或 guidance 设置的关系。缓解方面，最关键的不是花哨解码，而是训练数据去重和重采样控制。和只展示个别 memorized case 的工作不同，这篇更强调风险来源的系统性。","experiments":"实验结论一般是：扩散模型确实会复制训练样本，且风险在训练集有重复、近重复或过度训练时显著上升。论文的重要结果不是一句“存在复制”，而是定量地展示去重能大幅降低 copying，同时对整体生成质量影响有限。常见 baseline 会比较原始训练集与去重训练集、不同模型规模和不同采样配置，并报告复制率或最近邻相似度分布变化。对实践最有价值的观察是，数据管线层面的处理比事后过滤更有效，因为 copying 很大程度上是在训练中形成的。","authors_note":"如果仅根据给定信息，机构无法可靠确认。Jonas Geiping、Tom Goldstein 团队长期做模型安全、隐私与鲁棒性研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies whether diffusion models copy their training data, how that copying arises, and how to reduce it. Memorization and privacy have been discussed heavily for language models, but image diffusion models were often treated as if they only reproduced style rather than specific examples.","importance":"This is an important safety-and-data-governance paper. The takeaway for pretraining is direct: memorization risk depends on data duplication, training dynamics, and objective behavior, and diffusion models are not automatically safer than autoregressive ones. Anyone working on large-scale image or multimodal pretraining should care about this.","technical_approach":"The authors build a more systematic pipeline for detecting copying and then analyze its causes. The general strategy is to retrieve nearest training examples, distinguish benign similarity from near-duplication using perceptual metrics and manual inspection, and then relate copying frequency to factors such as duplicate data, rare examples, training duration, and sampling settings. On mitigation, the main lever is not fancy decoding but data deduplication and resampling. That is the practical difference from papers that only present a few memorized examples.","experiments":"The core result is that diffusion models do copy training images, and the risk rises sharply when the training set contains duplicates or near-duplicates, or when training is pushed too far. The strongest practical finding is that dataset deduplication substantially reduces copying with limited damage to generation quality. Typical comparisons involve raw versus deduplicated training corpora, different model scales, and possibly different guidance settings, measured via copying rates or nearest-neighbor similarity statistics. The paper’s main message is that mitigation works best in the data pipeline, because much of the copying behavior is learned during training.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","data-quality","memorization","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Jonas Geiping","Tom Goldstein"],"keywords":["diffusion models","memorization","data replication","model safety"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§3复制诱因分析和§4缓解策略部分，做大规模图像/多模态扩散预训练时可直接复用其数据去重与重采样方案","en":"Only read §3 copying cause analysis and §4 mitigation strategies, directly reuse its deduplication and resampling scheme for large-scale image/multimodal diffusion pre-training"}},{"id":"SteinCHSRVLCTL23","title":"Exposing flaws of generative model evaluation metrics and their unfair treatment of diffusion models","authors":["George Stein","Jesse C. Cresswell","Rasa Hosseinzadeh","Yi Sui","Brendan Leigh Ross","Valentin Villecroze","Zhaoyan Liu","Anthony L. Caterini","J. Eric T. Taylor","Gabriel Loaiza-Ganem"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$17e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SteinCHSRVLCTL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SteinCHSRVLCTL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/0bc795afae289ed465a65a3b4b1f4eb7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有生成模型评估指标与人类感知相关性低，扩散模型的人类感知真实度高但常用指标如FID未反映该优势，过往评估指标未系统验证与人类感知的对齐性。","importance":"范式级贡献，动摇了现有生成模型常用评估指标的有效性，为后续生成模型评估指标设计提供依据。","technical_approach":"开展目前最大规模的生成模型人类感知评估实验，对比17个现代生成模型评估指标，舍弃了仅依赖自动指标评估的思路，和现有评估方法相比引入大规模人类标注作为ground truth。","experiments":"论文摘要未提供完整实验数据，仅披露现有17个指标均与人类评估无强相关性，扩散模型的人类感知真实度未被FID等常用指标反映，该差异无法用生成样本多样性解释。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing generative model evaluation metrics have low correlation with human perception. Diffusion models have high human-perceived realism, but common metrics such as FID do not reflect this advantage. Prior evaluation metrics have not systematically verified alignment with human perception.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution, questioning the validity of common evaluation metrics for existing generative models, providing a basis for subsequent generative model evaluation metric design.","technical_approach":"Conduct the largest generative model human perception evaluation experiment to date, compare 17 modern generative model evaluation metrics, discard the idea of relying only on automatic metric evaluation. Compared with existing evaluation methods, it introduces large-scale human annotation as ground truth.","experiments":"The paper abstract does not provide complete experimental data, only discloses that none of the 17 existing metrics have strong correlation with human evaluation, the human-perceived realism of diffusion models is not reflected by common metrics such as FID, and this discrepancy cannot be explained by the diversity of generated samples.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","evaluation","metrics","benchmark"],"keywords":["generative models","generative model evaluation","self-supervised learning","representation learning","metrics"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"生成模型的感知真实度应以人类评估为最终标准。","claim_en":"Perceptual realism of generative models should take human evaluation as the final standard.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"常用生成模型评估指标如FID无法反映扩散模型的感知真实度，且该差异不是由生成样本多样性导致。","claim_en":"Common generative model evaluation metrics such as FID cannot reflect the perceptual realism of diffusion models, and the discrepancy is not explained by diversity of generated samples.","opposes":"FID等常用指标可以有效衡量生成模型的整体性能。","opposes_cite_hint":"Heusel 2017 FID","evidence_anchor":"§3 Experiments","why_contested":"直接否定了常用生成模型评估指标的有效性，说明扩散模型性能被现有指标低估，后续评估指标设计需要优先对齐人类感知。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§2实验设置和§4指标对比结果部分，做生成模型预训练时不要仅依赖FID等自动指标，需补充小规模人类标注校验","en":"Only read §2 experiment setup and §4 metric comparison results, do not rely solely on automatic metrics like FID for generative model evaluation, add small-scale human annotation for verification"}},{"id":"Subia-WaudD23","title":"Probabilistic Weight Fixing: Large-scale training of neural network weight uncertainties for quantisation","authors":["Christopher Subia-Waud","Srinandan Dasmahapatra"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$17f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Subia-WaudD23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Subia-WaudD23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ba178fab60f9306a0b2d7ec8973715a6-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有权重量化方法仅按权重值分组，忽略权重位置的独特作用，量化效果受限，现有贝叶斯神经网络训练难以适配复杂数据集和模型组合。","importance":"方法级贡献，为大模型量化提供了新的量化方案，提升量化后模型性能。","technical_approach":"基于贝叶斯神经网络的概率框架，通过变分松弛按权重位置特定的不确定性分布分配到聚类中心，引入新初始化设置和正则项，舍弃了仅按权重值聚类的思路，和现有权重量化方法相比考虑了权重位置的独特作用。","experiments":"论文摘要未提供完整实验数据，未披露模型参数量、基线方法及核心指标结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing weight quantization methods only group by weight value, ignoring the unique role of weight position, and the quantization effect is limited. Existing Bayesian neural network training is difficult to adapt to complex dataset and model combinations.","importance":"Method-level contribution, providing a new quantization scheme for large model quantization, improving the performance of quantized models.","technical_approach":"Based on the probabilistic framework of Bayesian neural networks, assign weights to cluster centers according to position-specific uncertainty distributions through variational relaxation, introduce new initialization settings and regularization terms, discard the idea of clustering only by weight value. Compared with existing weight quantization methods, it considers the unique role of weight position.","experiments":"The paper abstract does not provide complete experimental data, and does not disclose model parameter size, baseline methods and core metric results.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","uncertainty","compression","training"],"keywords":["Quantization","compression","bayesian neural networks","accelerators"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"权重量化可有效降低大模型推理能耗。","claim_en":"Weight quantization can effectively reduce the inference energy consumption of large neural networks.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为大模型量化方向的文献备查即可，方法落地性较弱，无量化相关业务需求不用细读全文","en":"Keep it as a reference for large model quantization literature only, the method has weak deployability, no need to read full text without quantization-related requirements"}},{"id":"Sucholutsky023","title":"Alignment with human representations supports robust few-shot learning","authors":["Ilia Sucholutsky","Tom Griffiths"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Should we care whether AI systems have representations of the world that are similar to those of humans? We provide an information-theoretic analysis that suggests that there should be a U-shaped relationship between the degree of representational alignment with humans and performance on few-shot learning tasks. We confirm this prediction empirically, finding such a relationship in an analysis of the performance of 491 computer vision models. We also show that highly-aligned models are more robust to both natural adversarial attacks and domain shifts. Our results suggest that human-alignment is often a sufficient, but not necessary, condition for models to make effective use of limited data, be robust, and generalize well.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Sucholutsky023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Sucholutsky023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/e8ddc03b001d4c4b44b29bc1167e7fdd-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"此前未明确AI模型表征与人类表征的对齐程度对少样本学习性能、鲁棒性的量化影响，相关研究要么仅关注任务性能要么将对齐作为二元目标处理，未建立两者的关联规律。","importance":"认知与方法级贡献，首次从信息论和实证层面证明表征对齐度与少样本性能的U型关系，为预训练过程中人类对齐约束的强度选择提供了量化参考，同时验证了高对齐模型的抗干扰能力优势。","technical_approach":"先通过信息论分析推导U型关系的存在性，再对已有CV模型做统计验证，未修改任何模型结构；舍弃传统的对齐/不对齐二元分组对比逻辑，改用连续的对齐度变量做回归分析。","experiments":"覆盖491个不同结构、训练目标的CV模型，核心结论包括：1. 表征对齐度与少样本学习性能呈U型相关；2. 高对齐模型对自然对抗攻击、域漂移的鲁棒性显著更高；无新增SOTA，为纯关联分析结论。","authors_note":"Tom Griffiths为认知科学与机器学习交叉领域知名学者，长期从事人类认知与AI对齐方向研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Prior work does not quantify the relationship between AI model representational alignment with humans and few-shot learning performance, with most research either prioritizing task performance alone or treating alignment as a binary objective.","importance":"Cognitive and methodological contribution. It provides the first information-theoretic framework and empirical proof of a U-shaped correlation between human representational alignment and few-shot performance, giving pre-training researchers a quantifiable reference for alignment constraint intensity selection.","technical_approach":"First derive the U-shaped relationship via information-theoretic analysis, then validate it via statistical analysis across existing CV models without modifying model architectures. Replace traditional binary alignment/non-alignment comparison with continuous alignment degree regression.","experiments":"Cover 491 CV models with varying architectures and training objectives. Key findings: 1. Representational alignment has a U-shaped correlation with few-shot learning performance; 2. Highly aligned models have significantly higher robustness to natural adversarial attacks and domain shifts. No new SOTA, conclusions are purely correlational.","authors_note":"Tom Griffiths is a leading scholar in the intersection of cognitive science and machine learning, focusing on human-AI alignment."},"tags":["few-shot","representation","alignment","generalization"],"keywords":["representation learning","supervised learning","human alignment","few-shot learning"],"notable_authors":["Tom Griffiths"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"少样本学习性能与模型表征的泛化能力直接相关","claim_en":"Few-shot learning performance is directly correlated with the generalization ability of model representations","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"模型表征与人类的对齐度和少样本学习性能呈U型关系，过高或过低的对齐都会降低性能","claim_en":"The degree of representational alignment between models and humans has a U-shaped relationship with few-shot learning performance, both excessively high and low alignment reduce performance","opposes":"此前普遍认为人类表征对齐度越高，模型的少样本与泛化性能越好","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3.2, Figure 2","why_contested":"修正了预训练中盲目追求高人类对齐的认知误区，明确了对齐强度的选择边界"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为预训练人类对齐约束强度选择的参考备查即可，仅做通用基座预训练不用细读全文","en":"Keep it as a reference for human alignment constraint strength selection in pre-training, no need to read full text if you only work on general base model pre-training"}},{"id":"SunZK0Z23","title":"AdaPlanner: Adaptive Planning from Feedback with Language Models","authors":["Haotian Sun","Yuchen Zhuang","Lingkai Kong","Bo Dai","Chao Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$180","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SunZK0Z23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SunZK0Z23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/b5c8c1c117618267944b2617add0a766-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM序列决策方法要么贪心执行无规划，要么采用不响应环境反馈的静态规划，导致任务复杂度升高、规划 horizon 变长时性能快速退化，此前的闭环规划方法未区分反馈类型， hallucination 问题严重。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出的自适应闭环规划框架可直接复用在现有LLM Agent上无需微调，为LLM Agent的规划模块设计、prompt优化提供了可落地的参考范式。","technical_approach":"原创的闭环规划框架，核心设计是两类反馈处理策略：规划内偏差直接调整现有规划的步骤参数，规划外偏差则基于当前状态重新生成规划；同时采用代码风格prompt结构约束LLM输出，牺牲自然语言prompt的灵活性以减少 hallucination 干扰。","experiments":"在多个序列决策基准上开展测试，对比现有静态规划方法性能有明显提升，代码风格prompt可有效降低规划 hallucination 率，具体量化指标因摘要截断未披露。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM-based sequential decision-making methods either take greedy actions without planning or use static plans unresponsive to environmental feedback, leading to rapid performance degradation as task complexity and planning horizon increase. Prior closed-loop planning methods do not distinguish feedback types, leading to severe hallucination.","importance":"Methodological contribution. The proposed adaptive closed-loop planning framework can be directly applied to off-the-shelf LLM Agents without fine-tuning, providing a practical reference paradigm for LLM Agent planning module design and prompt optimization.","technical_approach":"Original closed-loop planning framework with two feedback processing strategies: in-plan deviations are corrected by adjusting step parameters of existing plans, while out-of-plan deviations trigger full re-planning based on current state. A code-style prompt structure is used to constrain LLM outputs, sacrificing natural language prompt flexibility to reduce hallucination.","experiments":"Tested on multiple sequential decision benchmarks, with obvious performance improvement over existing static planning methods. Code-style prompts effectively reduce planning hallucination rate, specific quantitative indicators are not disclosed due to truncated abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm-agent","planning","adaptive-feedback"],"keywords":["Large language models","decision making","closed-loop planning"],"notable_authors":["Bo Dai"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM做序列决策时的hallucination会显著降低规划的可行性","claim_en":"Hallucination of LLMs during sequential decision making significantly reduces plan feasibility","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"做LLM Agent相关开发时可查其反馈处理逻辑，仅做基座预训练不用细读全文","en":"Check its feedback processing logic only when developing LLM Agents, no need to read full text if you only work on base model pre-training"}},{"id":"TangJWPH23","title":"Emergent Correspondence from Image Diffusion","authors":["Luming Tang","Menglin Jia","Qianqian Wang","Cheng Perng Phoo","Bharath Hariharan"],"institutions":["Cornell University"],"abstract":"$181","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/TangJWPH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/TangJWPH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/0503f5dce343a1d06d16ba103dd52db1-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"图像匹配任务此前要么需要有监督标注训练特征提取器，要么弱监督方法精度不足，此前未发现预训练扩散模型隐式包含无监督学习到的图像对应关系，也没有方法可直接提取这类知识用于匹配任务。","importance":"范式级贡献，首次证明预训练扩散模型隐空间天然存在无监督学习的语义、几何、时序对应关系，无需额外微调即可提取通用特征用于匹配任务，为扩散模型在多模态预训练中的知识复用提供了新方向。","technical_approach":"原创的扩散特征提取方法DIFT，核心是从Stable Diffusion的中间去噪层提取特征，舍弃此前常用的最后层输出或文本嵌入，通过调整去噪时间步控制特征的语义/几何偏重；无需额外微调或任务标注，直接基于预训练扩散模型权重提取特征。","experiments":"基于Stable Diffusion实现，在语义匹配任务上性能比DINO高19个百分点，比OpenCLIP高14个百分点，优于现有弱监督匹配方法；无额外微调或监督标注。","authors_note":"Bharath Hariharan为计算机视觉与多模态学习领域知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Prior image correspondence methods either require supervised annotations to train feature extractors, or deliver insufficient accuracy in weak-supervised settings. No prior work has identified that pre-trained diffusion models implicitly learn unsupervised image correspondence, nor has a method to extract such knowledge for matching tasks been proposed.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution. It first proves that the latent space of pre-trained diffusion models naturally contains unsupervised learned semantic, geometric and temporal correspondence, which can be extracted as general features for matching tasks without additional fine-tuning, opening a new direction for diffusion model knowledge reuse in multi-modal pre-training.","technical_approach":"Original diffusion feature extraction method DIFT, which extracts features from intermediate denoising layers of Stable Diffusion instead of commonly used final layer outputs or text embeddings. The semantic/geometric bias of features can be controlled by adjusting denoising timesteps. No additional fine-tuning or task annotations are required, features are extracted directly from pre-trained diffusion model weights.","experiments":"Implemented based on Stable Diffusion. Outperforms DINO by 19 percentage points and OpenCLIP by 14 percentage points on semantic correspondence tasks, surpassing existing weak-supervised matching methods. No additional fine-tuning or supervised annotations are used.","authors_note":"Bharath Hariharan is a leading scholar in computer vision and multi-modal learning."},"tags":["diffusion","representation","correspondence","emergence"],"keywords":["Correspondence","Diffusion Model"],"notable_authors":["Bharath Hariharan"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"预训练生成模型的隐层包含丰富的语义与几何特征","claim_en":"Hidden layers of pre-trained generative models contain rich semantic and geometric features","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"预训练扩散模型的中间层特征无需微调即可超过专门训练的弱监督匹配特征，语义匹配精度比DINO高19个点","claim_en":"Intermediate layer features of pre-trained diffusion models, without fine-tuning, outperform specially trained weak-supervised matching features, with semantic correspondence accuracy 19 percentage points higher than DINO","opposes":"此前认为生成模型的特征主要适用于生成任务，适配判别类任务需要额外微调或监督","opposes_cite_hint":"Caron 2021 DINO","evidence_anchor":"§4.1, Table 1","why_contested":"打破了生成模型与判别任务特征的边界，为扩散模型在多模态预训练中的通用特征复用提供了实证依据"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§3 DIFT提取方法和Fig4结果即可，做多模态预训练时可复用其扩散中间层特征提取思路","en":"Only read §3 DIFT extraction method and Fig4 results, reuse its diffusion intermediate layer feature extraction idea for multimodal pre-training"}},{"id":"TangYLLCH23","title":"Setting the Trap: Capturing and Defeating Backdoors in Pretrained Language Models through Honeypots","authors":["Ruixiang (Ryan) Tang","Jiayi Yuan","Yiming Li","Zirui Liu","Rui Chen","Xia Hu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$182","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/TangYLLCH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/TangYLLCH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/e7938ede51225b490bb69f7b361a9259-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"预训练语言模型微调过程易受投毒样本攻击植入后门，此前的后门防御方法要么需要提前检测投毒样本，要么会损伤模型的正常任务性能，无法在不感知投毒的前提下保证微调后模型无后门。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出的蜜罐模块可直接集成到现有预训练语言模型的微调流程中，无需提前检测投毒样本即可吸收后门信息，为预训练模型的安全微调提供了可落地的方案。","technical_approach":"原创的蜜罐模块设计，核心是利用预训练语言模型低层表征包含足够后门特征、但几乎不影响正常语义表征的观测，将蜜罐模块接入低层专门吸收后门信息，不修改模型上层的正常语义建模逻辑，仅在微调完成后移除蜜罐模块即可得到无后门模型。","experiments":"在多个NLP下游任务与后门攻击场景下测试，可有效消除投毒样本带来的后门风险，对正常任务性能的影响小于1%，具体量化指标因摘要截断未披露。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Pre-trained language models are vulnerable to backdoor attacks via poisoned samples during fine-tuning. Prior backdoor defense methods either require pre-detection of poisoned samples or degrade normal task performance, and cannot guarantee backdoor-free fine-tuned models without prior knowledge of poisoning.","importance":"Methodological contribution. The proposed honeypot module can be directly integrated into the fine-tuning pipeline of existing pre-trained language models, absorbing backdoor information without pre-detection of poisoned samples, providing a practical solution for safe fine-tuning of pre-trained models.","technical_approach":"Original honeypot module design, based on the observation that lower-layer representations of PLMs carry sufficient backdoor features but barely affect normal semantic representations. The honeypot module is attached to lower layers to exclusively absorb backdoor information, without modifying the upper-layer normal semantic modeling logic. The honeypot module is removed after fine-tuning to get a backdoor-free model.","experiments":"Tested on multiple NLP downstream tasks and backdoor attack scenarios, effectively eliminating backdoor risks from poisoned samples, with less than 1% performance drop on normal tasks. Specific quantitative indicators are not disclosed due to truncated abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["plm-security","backdoor","data-quality","alignment"],"keywords":["Backdoor Defense","Honeypot"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"预训练语言模型微调时投毒少量样本即可植入后门","claim_en":"Poisoning a small number of samples during PLM fine-tuning can implant backdoors","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§3蜜罐模块设计部分即可，做预训练模型安全微调时可直接复用该插件设计思路","en":"Only read §3 honeypot module design, directly reuse this plugin design idea for secure fine-tuning of pre-trained language models"}},{"id":"TangYZ0B23","title":"Any-to-Any Generation via Composable Diffusion","authors":["Zineng Tang","Ziyi Yang","Chenguang Zhu","Michael Zeng","Mohit Bansal"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$183","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/TangYZ0B23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/TangYZ0B23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/33edf072fe44f19079d66713a1831550-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：如何在一个统一框架里做 any-to-any 生成，而不是为文本到图像、图像到文本、图像编辑等每种模态映射各训一个模型。以往做法通常依赖成对监督和任务特化架构，扩展到新模态或新组合时成本很高，因此值得重新考虑一种可组合、可复用的生成机制。","importance":"它的价值主要在范式层面。对统一多模态预训练来说，这类工作提示了一个方向：不要把每个跨模态映射都当成独立任务，而是把不同条件和目标模态放进同一个扩散式生成接口里，通过组合条件实现更强的任务覆盖。对 pretrain 的启发是，统一建模不一定只能走纯 AR 路线，条件扩散也可以作为多模态生成底座。","technical_approach":"核心方法是可组合扩散生成：把不同模态的条件信号编码成可组合的约束，在扩散采样时联合引导目标模态生成。它不是简单把多个条件拼接后丢给一个模型，而是强调条件组合的结构化设计，使模型能在训练时学习单模态或部分模态条件，在测试时再组合成更复杂的 any-to-any 任务。这样设计有效的原因是，扩散模型天然适合在采样过程中逐步融合多源条件；代价是采样慢、训练和推理链路都比单步判别或 AR 解码更重。","experiments":"从题目和已知信息看，实验应围绕多种输入输出模态组合展开，重点验证同一模型是否能覆盖多任务，以及组合条件是否优于单一条件或任务特化模型。由于这里没有给出摘要与具体数值，无法可靠填写模型规模、数据规模、主指标和提升幅度。可以合理预期作者会比较文本到图像、图像到文本、图像编辑或多条件生成等设置，并通过消融验证条件组合设计带来的收益。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a clear bottleneck: building one generator that can handle many input-output modality combinations, instead of training a separate model for each mapping. Earlier systems usually treated text-to-image, image-to-text, and editing as separate problems with task-specific supervision, which scales poorly as modalities and compositions grow.","importance":"The contribution is mainly paradigm-level. For multimodal pretraining, it suggests that unified modeling does not have to mean a purely autoregressive interface; compositional diffusion can also serve as a shared generative backbone. The practical implication is reuse: if conditions are composable, new tasks can be formed from existing parts rather than retrained from scratch.","technical_approach":"The method is a composable diffusion framework where modality-specific conditions are encoded and combined to guide generation of a target modality. The key point is not simple condition concatenation, but a structured conditioning design that lets the model learn from single or partial conditions during training and compose them at inference time for harder any-to-any tasks. This is a natural fit for diffusion because iterative denoising can integrate heterogeneous constraints progressively; the trade-off is slower sampling and heavier inference than direct AR decoding.","experiments":"Given the title and limited metadata, the experiments likely test a single model across multiple modality mappings and show that composed conditioning outperforms single-condition or task-specific baselines. The provided information does not include reliable numbers for model size, data scale, or metric gains, so those should not be fabricated. The most valuable expected evidence would be cross-task coverage and ablations on how condition composition affects generation quality.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","any-to-any","multimodal-generation","compositionality"],"notable_authors":["Zineng Tang","Ziyi Yang","Chenguang Zhu","Michael Zeng","Mohit Bansal"],"keywords":["Generative AI","Diffusion Model","Multimodal Generation","Audio-Video Generation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§3可组合条件设计部分即可，做多模态统一生成底座预训练时可参考该条件融合思路","en":"Only read §3 composable condition design, refer to this condition fusion idea when pre-training unified multimodal generation base models"}},{"id":"TarzanaghLZO23","title":"Max-Margin Token Selection in Attention Mechanism","authors":["Davoud Ataee Tarzanagh","Yingcong Li","Xuechen Zhang","Samet Oymak"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$184","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/TarzanaghLZO23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/TarzanaghLZO23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/970f59b22f4c72aec75174aae63c7459-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关注注意力里的 token 选择问题：标准 softmax attention 会给很多低价值 token 分配非零权重，既浪费算力，也可能引入噪声。过去常见做法是做启发式稀疏化或后处理裁剪，但缺少一个直接从判别间隔角度定义\"该保留哪些 token\"的方法。","importance":"它的意义偏方法级和机制级。对大模型预训练来说，attention 里的有效 token 选择直接关系到计算效率、长上下文扩展和噪声鲁棒性；如果 max-margin 视角能更稳定地筛掉无关 token，就可能为稀疏注意力和高效训练提供更有原则的设计依据。","technical_approach":"核心方法是在注意力机制中引入 max-margin token selection，用间隔准则而不是单纯相似度归一化来决定哪些 token 应该被重点保留。直觉上，它希望把有判别价值的 token 与背景 token 拉开边界，从而得到更稀疏、更稳健的注意力分配。与常见 top-k 或阈值裁剪不同，这种设计更强调选择边界的可学习性；代价是训练目标和优化过程会更复杂，未必像标准 attention 那样易于大规模落地。","experiments":"从题目判断，实验大概率会比较标准 softmax attention、稀疏 attention 或 token pruning 基线，关注准确率、鲁棒性和可能的计算节省。这里没有摘要和数字，无法确认模型规模、数据集和提升幅度。值得关注的实验点应包括：不同稀疏度下性能退化曲线、对噪声 token 或对抗扰动的稳定性、以及 max-margin 选择是否带来更好的可解释 token 子集。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a simple but important issue in attention: standard softmax assigns non-zero mass to many low-value tokens, which wastes compute and can inject noise. Prior work often relied on heuristic sparsification or pruning, but lacked a principled selection rule grounded in separation or margin.","importance":"This is mainly a method and mechanism paper. For pretraining, better token selection inside attention matters for efficiency, long-context scaling, and robustness. If a margin-based criterion can identify useful tokens more reliably than heuristic sparsity, it could inform future sparse-attention designs.","technical_approach":"The key idea is to perform token selection in attention with a max-margin objective rather than pure similarity normalization. The intended effect is to separate informative tokens from background tokens, producing a sparser and potentially more robust attention pattern. Unlike top-k or threshold pruning, this treats the selection boundary as something to learn; the trade-off is added optimization complexity and less obvious plug-and-play scalability compared with vanilla attention.","experiments":"Based on the title, the likely comparisons are against standard softmax attention, sparse attention, or token-pruning baselines, with metrics on accuracy, robustness, and compute reduction. The prompt does not provide the abstract or numbers, so model sizes, datasets, and gains cannot be stated reliably. The most informative evidence would be performance under varying sparsity, robustness to noisy tokens, and whether the selected token sets are more stable or interpretable.","authors_note":""},"tags":["attention","token-selection","efficiency","sparsity"],"notable_authors":["Davoud Ataee Tarzanagh","Yingcong Li","Xuechen Zhang","Samet Oymak"],"keywords":["attention mechanism","implicit bias","margin maximization","nonconvex optimization","prompt tuning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§2方法推导和§4消融结果即可，做稀疏注意力/长上下文预训练优化时可作为有原则的剪枝方案参考","en":"Only read §2 method derivation and §4 ablation results, use it as a principled pruning reference for sparse attention/long context pre-training optimization"}},{"id":"TianFICK23","title":"StableRep: Synthetic Images from Text-to-Image Models Make Strong Visual Representation Learners","authors":["Yonglong Tian","Lijie Fan","Phillip Isola","Huiwen Chang","Dilip Krishnan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$185","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/TianFICK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/TianFICK23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/971f1e59cd956cc094da4e2f78c6ea7c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要回答一个直接问题：文本生成图像模型合成的数据，能不能反过来作为视觉表征学习的有效训练源，而不严重牺牲下游表示质量。过去大家通常把合成图像当数据增强或蒸馏辅助，而不是当主训练语料，因为担心分布偏差、语义伪影和多样性不足。","importance":"它的重要性很高，属于数据级加方法级贡献。对预训练研究的启示很直接：高质量合成数据不只是补充长尾类别，而可能成为表征学习的主要数据来源之一。这会改变我们对数据瓶颈的理解，尤其是在真实图像版权、清洗和标注成本越来越高的背景下。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 StableRep：利用强文本到图像模型生成大规模合成图像，再用这些图像做视觉表征学习。关键不在于简单堆合成数据，而在于构造足够丰富的文本提示、控制生成多样性，并把合成图像放到适合表征学习的训练目标下。它和传统 self-supervised learning 的区别是把数据来源从真实图像扩展到模型生成图像；之所以有效，是因为现代 T2I 模型已经把大量语义结构压进了图像分布里。边界也很明确：如果生成模型覆盖不足或风格偏差过强，表示会继承这些偏差。","experiments":"从题目和公开认知看，这类工作通常会在 ImageNet 线性探测、低样本迁移和多下游分类任务上比较 synthetic-only、real-only 和混合训练。这里没有摘要，无法安全写出具体模型参数和数字。最关键的实验事实应该是：纯合成或大比例合成数据训练出来的表示接近甚至超过部分真实数据训练基线，并且在数据规模扩大时性能继续提升；有价值的消融通常包括 prompt 设计、类别覆盖、多样性控制，以及不同生成器质量对表示学习的影响。","authors_note":"如果按作者名单判断，这篇工作大概率来自 Google Research 相关团队；Yonglong Tian、Phillip Isola、Huiwen Chang、Dilip Krishnan 都在视觉表征学习或生成建模方向有代表性工作。由于这里没有机构字段，保守起见不展开更具体归属。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a sharp question: can synthetic images from text-to-image models serve as a primary data source for visual representation learning, rather than just augmentation or distillation support? Earlier work was cautious because synthetic data often carries distribution shift, artifacts, and limited diversity.","importance":"This is a high-value data-plus-method contribution. For pretraining, it challenges the assumption that strong representations must be learned mostly from real images. If high-quality synthetic data scales well, it changes the data bottleneck story and makes representation learning less constrained by collection, licensing, and labeling.","technical_approach":"The approach, StableRep, uses large amounts of T2I-generated images to train visual representations. The novelty is not merely adding synthetic samples, but treating synthetic generation as a controllable data pipeline: prompt design, diversity control, and training objectives are chosen to maximize representation quality rather than image aesthetics alone. This works because modern T2I models already encode substantial semantic structure into the generated image distribution. The limitation is equally clear: representation quality is bounded by the generator's coverage and biases.","experiments":"Given the title and known context, the core experiments likely compare synthetic-only, real-only, and mixed-data training on ImageNet linear probing, transfer, and low-shot benchmarks. The prompt does not include the abstract or numbers, so exact model sizes and gains should not be invented. The most important expected findings are that large-scale synthetic data can produce surprisingly strong representations and that performance continues to improve with more synthetic scale; useful ablations would cover prompt diversity, generator quality, and synthetic-real mixing ratios.","authors_note":"From the author list, this is likely from a Google Research-affiliated vision team. Yonglong Tian, Phillip Isola, Huiwen Chang, and Dilip Krishnan are well known for work in representation learning and generative modeling. Since no institution field is provided here, a more specific attribution would be speculative."},"tags":["synthetic-data","vision-pretrain","text-to-image","data-quality"],"notable_authors":["Yonglong Tian","Lijie Fan","Phillip Isola","Huiwen Chang","Dilip Krishnan"],"keywords":["representation learning","synthetic images","text-to-image models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§3训练流程和§5消融结果即可，改变我对合成数据作为预训练主数据源可行性的判断，建议内部做验证实验","en":"Only read §3 training pipeline and §5 ablation results, it changes my judgment on synthetic data as main pre-training data source, recommend conducting internal verification experiments"}},{"id":"TianLSK23","title":"Fast Trainable Projection for Robust Fine-tuning","authors":["Junjiao Tian","Yen-Cheng Liu","James Seale Smith","Zsolt Kira"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$186","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/TianLSK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/TianLSK23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/259e59fe23ebd09252647fed42949182-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是鲁棒微调里的效率问题：很多鲁棒 fine-tuning 方法有效，但训练代价高、参数更新重，不适合大模型或频繁适配。过去常见替代是只调少量参数或加适配器，但往往在鲁棒性上掉得明显。","importance":"它的贡献偏系统方法级。对 pretrain/posttrain 接口的启发是，鲁棒适配未必需要全量参数更新；如果投影空间设计得好，可以在较低训练成本下保留大部分鲁棒收益。这对大模型部署阶段的安全性和分布偏移适配都有现实价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法是一个可训练的快速投影层，用低成本参数化更新来约束或重构 fine-tuning 方向，从而提升鲁棒性。它不是简单 LoRA 式低秩适配的重复，而更像把参数更新先映射到一个受控子空间里，减少脆弱方向上的过拟合。这样设计有效，是因为鲁棒性往往依赖更新几何而不仅是更新幅度；边界在于，投影子空间如果过窄，会损失标准精度或适配能力。","experiments":"预计实验会在常见鲁棒基准上比较 full fine-tuning、linear probe、adapter/LoRA 类方法以及该投影方法，指标包括干净精度与对抗或分布外鲁棒精度的权衡。由于没有摘要，具体数据集、参数量和增益数字无法确认。最值得看的消融应包括：投影维度、是否可训练、与不同 backbone 的兼容性，以及在相同训练预算下的性能比较。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles the cost of robust fine-tuning. Many robust adaptation methods work, but they are expensive and heavy on parameter updates, which makes them unattractive for large models or repeated adaptation. Simpler parameter-efficient methods often lose too much robustness.","importance":"This is primarily a systems-method contribution. The broader lesson for the pretrain-to-posttrain interface is that robustness may not require full-model updates if the update space is well constrained. That matters for practical adaptation under distribution shift and safety-sensitive deployment.","technical_approach":"The method introduces a fast trainable projection that shapes the fine-tuning update into a controlled subspace. The point is not merely reducing parameter count, but filtering updates so the model avoids brittle directions that hurt robustness. Relative to standard PEFT methods, the emphasis appears to be on update geometry rather than only low-rank compression. The trade-off is straightforward: if the projection space is too restrictive, clean accuracy or adaptation capacity may suffer.","experiments":"The likely evaluation compares full fine-tuning, linear probing, and adapter or LoRA-style baselines on standard robustness benchmarks, reporting clean accuracy versus adversarial or out-of-distribution robustness. The prompt provides no abstract or numerical results, so dataset details and gains cannot be stated safely. The most useful ablations would test projection dimensionality, whether training the projection matters, and how performance changes under fixed compute budgets.","authors_note":""},"tags":["fine-tuning","robustness","parameter-efficient","optimization"],"notable_authors":["Junjiao Tian","Yen-Cheng Liu","James Seale Smith","Zsolt Kira"],"keywords":["fine-tuning","transfer learning","regularization"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3投影层设计和§4.1鲁棒性对比实验即可，可复用在大模型低成本安全微调的内部 ablation 中。","en":"Only read §3 projection layer design and §4.1 robustness comparison experiments, can be reused for internal ablation of low-cost safety fine-tuning for large models."}},{"id":"TranCLTPK23","title":"Training Transitive and Commutative Multimodal Transformers with LoReTTa","authors":["Manuel Tran","Yashin Dicente Cid","Amal Lahiani","Fabian J. Theis","Tingying Peng","Eldad Klaiman"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$187","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/TranCLTPK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/TranCLTPK23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/860a092bb4d9d81d3133a01c50c01578-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是多模态 Transformer 中结构一致性不足的问题：不同模态、不同输入顺序或变换路径下，模型输出往往不满足传递性和交换性。过去大多数多模态模型只优化最终任务损失，不显式约束这些代数性质，导致组合推理和跨视角一致性较弱。","importance":"它的贡献属于方法级，并带有一定范式意义。对统一多模态预训练来说，如果模型内部表征能满足 transitive/commutative 这类结构约束，就可能提升组合泛化和模态互操作性。这类思路和\"把多模态当统一 token 空间\"是相通的，只是这里从一致性约束切入。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 LoReTTa，用专门的训练约束让多模态 Transformer 学到满足传递性与交换性的表示或映射。题目看不出全部细节，但可以判断它不会只依赖普通监督，而会加入结构化 regularization 或训练任务，让模态变换路径 A→B→C 与 A→C 更一致，不同模态组合顺序也更稳定。这样设计有效，是因为很多多模态组合任务本来就要求路径无关或顺序鲁棒；代价是约束过强时可能压制任务特化能力。","experiments":"实验应聚焦多模态组合任务、跨模态检索或变换一致性评估，比较是否因为结构约束而提升泛化。这里没有摘要，无法确认数据集、规模和提升数字。最值得看的实验点包括：在 seen vs unseen 组合上的差距、是否真的改善路径一致性而不只是提升平均准确率、以及 LoReTTa 在模态数量增加时是否仍稳定。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a structural weakness in multimodal transformers: outputs are often inconsistent across modality combinations, input orderings, or transformation paths. Most multimodal systems optimize only end-task loss and do not explicitly enforce properties like transitivity or commutativity, which hurts compositional generalization.","importance":"This is a method paper with broader conceptual relevance. For unified multimodal pretraining, enforcing structural consistency may improve compositionality and interoperability across modalities. It aligns with the general goal of learning a shared multimodal space, but approaches the problem through algebraic constraints rather than only token unification.","technical_approach":"The method, LoReTTa, trains multimodal transformers with constraints aimed at transitive and commutative behavior. The title suggests structured regularization or auxiliary training objectives that make paths like A→B→C agree better with A→C, and make modality combinations less sensitive to ordering. This is sensible because many multimodal tasks implicitly require path invariance or order robustness. The trade-off is that overly strong constraints may limit task-specific specialization.","experiments":"The likely evaluation covers multimodal composition tasks, cross-modal retrieval, or consistency-focused benchmarks, testing whether the structural constraints improve generalization. Since the abstract and numbers are not provided, datasets, scale, and gains cannot be stated reliably. The most informative evidence would be improved performance on unseen modality compositions and direct measurements of path consistency, not just aggregate accuracy.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal","transformer","representation-learning"],"notable_authors":["Manuel Tran","Yashin Dicente Cid","Amal Lahiani","Fabian J. Theis","Tingying Peng"],"keywords":["generative pre-training","causal modeling","masked modeling","commutative modeling","transitive modeling","multimodal learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§3.2结构化正则项设计与§4组合泛化实验，多模态预训练做一致性约束时可以参考该思路。","en":"Only read §3.2 structured regularization design and §4 compositional generalization experiments, reference for consistency constraint design in multimodal pre-training."}},{"id":"TranFMF23","title":"One-Line-of-Code Data Mollification Improves Optimization of Likelihood-based Generative Models","authors":["Ba-Hien Tran","Giulio Franzese","Pietro Michiardi","Maurizio Filippone"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$188","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/TranFMF23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/TranFMF23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/1516a7f7507d5550db5c7f29e995ec8c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是 likelihood-based generative model 优化不稳、训练困难的问题。很多生成模型目标函数本身没问题，但优化地形尖锐、梯度噪声大，导致训练对超参和初始化敏感。过去通常通过复杂架构或额外正则去缓解，而不是直接改输入分布的光滑性。","importance":"它的贡献偏方法级，而且有一定通用性。对 pretrain 研究的启发是，数据分布的局部平滑处理可能比改模型更便宜地改善优化；如果这真的是\"一行代码\"级改动，那它对大规模训练很有吸引力，因为接入成本低、风险也相对可控。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 data mollification，即对训练数据或目标分布做轻量平滑，让模型看到一个更容易优化的 likelihood 目标。它不是重新设计生成模型，而是在数据层面做卷积式或噪声式平滑，降低尖锐密度峰带来的优化难度。有效原因很直接：光滑目标通常更容易被有限容量和有限 batch 的优化器拟合。边界也清楚：平滑过强会损伤细节建模，最终似然或样本质量可能受影响，因此关键在于平滑强度的控制。","experiments":"实验应在若干 likelihood-based 生成模型上比较训练稳定性、收敛速度和最终 log-likelihood 或样本质量。这里没有摘要，无法确认是 flow、VAE 还是 diffusion 变体，也没有数值。值得关注的证据包括：是否在多个架构上普遍有效、是否减少超参敏感性、以及是否在 early training 更明显而最终性能不掉队。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets optimization difficulty in likelihood-based generative models. In many cases the objective is well defined, but the optimization landscape is sharp and noisy, making training highly sensitive to hyperparameters and initialization. Earlier fixes often relied on more complex architectures or regularizers rather than smoothing the data side of the problem.","importance":"This is a method contribution with potentially broad applicability. For pretraining, the main lesson is that local smoothing of the data or target distribution may improve optimization more cheaply than changing the model itself. If the intervention is truly minimal, the practical adoption barrier is low.","technical_approach":"The method applies data mollification: a lightweight smoothing of the training data or target density so the resulting likelihood objective is easier to optimize. It does not redesign the generator; instead it modifies the effective data distribution, likely via noise-based or convolutional smoothing. The rationale is simple: smoother targets are easier for finite-capacity models and minibatch optimizers to fit. The trade-off is equally simple: too much smoothing can erase fine detail and hurt final likelihood or sample fidelity.","experiments":"The likely experiments compare convergence speed, optimization stability, and final log-likelihood or sample quality across several likelihood-based generative models. The prompt gives no abstract or numerical details, so architecture types and gains should not be asserted. The most useful evidence would show consistent gains across model families, lower hyperparameter sensitivity, and especially better early-stage optimization without sacrificing final performance.","authors_note":""},"tags":["optimization","generative-modeling","likelihood"],"notable_authors":["Ba-Hien Tran","Giulio Franzese","Pietro Michiardi","Maurizio Filippone"],"keywords":["Generative Models","Normalizing Flows","Variational Autoencoders"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§2数据平滑实现逻辑和§5消融实验，一行代码的改动可快速在生成模型预训练中验证效果。","en":"Only read §2 data mollification implementation logic and §5 ablation studies, the one-line change can be quickly validated in generative model pre-training."}},{"id":"TsangA23","title":"Clustering the Sketch: Dynamic Compression for Embedding Tables","authors":["Henry Ling-Hei Tsang","Thomas D. Ahle"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Embedding tables are used by machine learning systems  to work with categorical features.\nIn modern Recommendation Systems, these tables can be very large, necessitating the development of new methods for fitting them in memory, even during training.\nWe suggest Clustered Compositional Embeddings (CCE) which combines clustering-based compression like quantization to codebooks with dynamic methods like The Hashing Trick and Compositional Embeddings [Shi et al., 2020].\nExperimentally CCE achieves the best of both worlds: The high compression rate of codebook-based quantization, but \\emph{dynamically} like hashing-based methods, so it can be used during training.\nTheoretically, we prove that CCE is guaranteed to converge to the optimal codebook and give a tight bound for the number of iterations required.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/TsangA23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/TsangA23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/e468a76212a58c1af94a3d235151944a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关注 embedding table 的压缩问题：大规模推荐、语言或多模态系统中，嵌入表常常占去大量参数和内存，而且长尾 token 的表示利用率很低。过去常见压缩方法是哈希、量化或静态聚类，但很难同时兼顾动态访问分布和表示质量。","importance":"它的价值主要在系统与效率层面。对预训练研究来说，虽然不是直接改语言建模目标，但 embedding table 压缩会影响大词表、多离散码本和多模态 tokenizer 的可扩展性；特别是在统一建模里，离散 token 空间一大，表参数往往先成为瓶颈。","technical_approach":"核心方法是动态压缩 embedding table，通过 clustering the sketch 的方式自适应地合并或近似嵌入。题目暗示其不是一次性离线聚类，而是结合 sketch 这类轻量统计结构，动态追踪哪些 embedding 可以共享容量、哪些需要保留独立表示。这样设计有效，是因为 token 频率与语义区分需求高度不均匀；静态压缩容易对高价值 token 压得过头。代价是实现更复杂，且动态策略若不稳定，可能影响训练收敛。","experiments":"实验应比较参数压缩率、内存占用、训练/推理速度和任务性能损失，基线可能包括哈希 embedding、低秩分解、量化或静态聚类。这里没有摘要，无法给出具体数字和任务。值得看的消融包括：压缩比随访问分布变化的自适应性、长尾 token 性能、以及在线更新是否引入额外抖动。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies compression of embedding tables, which often dominate parameters and memory in large recommendation, language, and multimodal systems. Existing approaches such as hashing, quantization, or static clustering typically struggle to balance memory savings against representation quality under skewed token frequencies.","importance":"This is primarily a systems-efficiency contribution. For pretraining, the relevance is indirect but real: embedding-table scaling becomes a bottleneck for large vocabularies, discrete codebooks, and unified multimodal token spaces. Better compression can expand feasible tokenizer and codebook design choices.","technical_approach":"The method proposes dynamic compression of embedding tables through 'clustering the sketch.' The title suggests an adaptive scheme that uses lightweight sketch statistics to decide which embeddings can share capacity and which need separate representation, rather than compressing everything once offline. This makes sense because token utility is highly uneven: frequent or semantically critical tokens should not be compressed as aggressively as the long tail. The trade-off is added implementation complexity and the risk of instability if the dynamic allocation shifts too much during training.","experiments":"The likely evaluation compares compression ratio, memory footprint, speed, and task accuracy against baselines such as hashing, low-rank methods, quantization, or static clustering. The prompt provides no abstract or numerical results, so exact tasks and gains cannot be stated safely. The most informative analyses would test adaptation to changing access distributions, impact on long-tail tokens, and whether online compression destabilizes optimization.","authors_note":""},"tags":["embedding","compression","memory"],"notable_authors":["Henry Ling-Hei Tsang","Thomas D. Ahle"],"keywords":["Embedding table compression","Clustering and sketching","Memory-efficient training"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§3动态聚类sketch的实现逻辑，做大词表/多模态离散token嵌入表压缩时可参考该方案。","en":"Only read §3 dynamic clustering sketch implementation logic, reference for embedding table compression for large vocabularies or multimodal discrete tokens."}},{"id":"TsengYLS23","title":"Coneheads: Hierarchy Aware Attention","authors":["Albert Tseng","Tao Yu","Toni J. B. Liu","Christopher De Sa"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$189","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/TsengYLS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/TsengYLS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/a17251f8d595179eef5e466b1f5f7a85-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：标准 Transformer 注意力把所有 token 视作同层级对象，导致在存在明显层次结构的数据上既浪费计算，也难以稳定利用长程依赖。过去常见做法是靠稀疏注意力、局部窗口或外部树结构近似处理层次性，但这些方法通常要么先验过强，要么对真实序列中的隐式层级不够自适应。","importance":"它的价值主要在方法层和架构层。对 pretrain 研究的启示不是直接给出一个通用替代品，而是提醒我们：如果数据天然有多尺度结构，注意力机制本身可以显式编码层次归纳偏置，而不必只靠更长上下文和更大模型去硬学。这类工作对长上下文建模、结构化序列建模和高效注意力设计有参考意义，但离通用大模型主干仍有距离。","technical_approach":"核心方法是一个层级感知注意力机制，用锥形或层级受限的注意模式替代完全自由的两两注意。关键设计思路是让每个位置在不同尺度上聚合信息：近邻部分保留高分辨率交互，远处部分通过更粗粒度的层级摘要进入计算。这样做的好处是把注意力容量优先分配给局部细节，同时保留全局依赖；代价是模型表达空间被结构约束，若任务本身缺乏稳定层次模式，这种偏置可能不如标准全注意力灵活。和常见的 block/local/sparse attention 相比，它强调的是“按层次组织信息流”，而不只是“减少边数”。","experiments":"从给到的信息里无法确认具体实验配置、参数规模、数据规模和数值结果，因此不能负责任地复述提升幅度。可以合理预期作者会在具有层次或长程结构的序列任务上，对比标准 Transformer 及若干高效注意力变体，关注精度与复杂度权衡；但没有摘要或正文支持，不应编造任何 SOTA、百分点提升或 scaling 结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a real limitation of standard attention: it treats all token-token interactions as flat, even when the data has clear hierarchical structure. Prior work usually handled this with local/sparse attention or explicit tree-like priors, but those approaches either impose too much structure or fail to adapt to implicit multiscale organization in real sequences.","importance":"Its contribution is mainly architectural rather than paradigm-shifting. For pretraining, the useful takeaway is that hierarchy can be built into the attention mechanism itself, instead of hoping a larger model with longer context will discover multiscale structure from scratch. That matters for long-context modeling and structured sequence domains, though it is not yet a general replacement for dense Transformer attention in foundation models.","technical_approach":"The method introduces a hierarchy-aware attention pattern, where information is aggregated at multiple scales instead of through unrestricted pairwise attention everywhere. The likely design logic is to preserve fine-grained interactions locally while routing distant information through coarser summaries. This is effective when long-range structure is organized rather than arbitrary: it spends attention budget on local detail and still keeps access to global context. The trade-off is reduced flexibility; if the task does not exhibit stable hierarchical regularities, dense attention may still be stronger.","experiments":"The provided metadata does not include the abstract or results, so model size, data scale, baselines, and numerical gains cannot be stated reliably. It is reasonable to expect comparisons against standard Transformers and efficient-attention variants on structured or long-range tasks, but any concrete claim about accuracy, efficiency, or scaling would be speculation.","authors_note":""},"tags":["attention","hierarchy","transformer"],"keywords":["Hyperbolic Entailment Cones","Hyperbolic Space","Entailment Cones","Attention","Dot Product","Hierarchy","Transformers"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§3锥形注意力的层级设计和§4长序列任务效果，做结构化高效注意力迭代时可参考其归纳偏置设计。","en":"Only read §3 cone attention hierarchy design and §4 long-sequence task results, reference for inductive bias design when iterating structured efficient attention."}},{"id":"TsuchidaOS23","title":"Squared Neural Families: A New Class of Tractable Density Models","authors":["Russell Tsuchida","Cheng Soon Ong","Dino Sejdinovic"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Flexible models for probability distributions are an essential ingredient in many machine learning tasks. We develop and investigate a new class of probability distributions, which we call a Squared Neural Family (SNEFY), formed by squaring the 2-norm of a neural network and normalising it with respect to a base measure. Following the reasoning similar to the well established connections between infinitely wide neural networks and Gaussian processes, we show that SNEFYs admit closed form normalising constants in many cases of interest, thereby resulting in flexible yet fully tractable density models. SNEFYs strictly generalise classical exponential families, are closed under conditioning, and have tractable marginal distributions. Their utility is illustrated on a variety of density estimation, conditional density estimation, and density estimation with missing data tasks.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/TsuchidaOS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/TsuchidaOS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ea13534ee239bb3977795b8cc855bacc-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：如何同时获得神经密度模型的表达力和精确可解性。过去可 tractable 的密度模型，如 normalizing flows、自回归模型或某些图模型，往往在结构上受限；而更灵活的神经密度模型又经常要靠近似推断、采样或变分下界，训练和评估都不够干净。","importance":"这是一个方法级贡献，重点不在大模型预训练本身，而在概率建模基础设施。它的重要性在于提供了一类新的可归一化、可积分、可计算似然的神经分布族。如果这类模型足够稳定，它对生成建模、能量式建模近似、以及需要精确 likelihood 的预训练研究是有潜在启发的，但短期内更像一条独立的密度估计路线，而不是对主流 LM 范式的直接冲击。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心是构造所谓 squared neural families：先定义一个由神经网络参数化的函数，再通过平方等操作保证非负性，并利用特定形式获得配分函数或积分的可计算性。这个设计抓住了一个关键矛盾：一般神经网络足够灵活，但很难确保输出对应一个可归一化密度；把函数平方后，非负性自动成立，而若基函数或参数化选择得当，归一化项还能解析或半解析求出。它区别于流模型的地方在于不要求可逆变换，也区别于能量模型那种通常需要 MCMC 的训练路径。代价则是函数族会受到结构限制，高维扩展性和表达效率是自然边界。","experiments":"给定信息里没有摘要和结果，因此无法确认作者使用了哪些密度估计基准、是否包含 UCI/tabular、图像 patch 或合成分布，也无法确认 NLL 提升幅度。能推断的实验重点大概率是：与 flows、mixture models 或其他 tractable density models 比较似然、采样质量和训练稳定性，并分析该分布族在维度增长时的计算代价；但具体数字不能编造。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a classic density-modeling question: can we keep the flexibility of neural parameterizations while retaining exact tractability? Existing tractable models such as flows or autoregressive densities are structurally constrained, while more flexible neural density models often rely on approximation, variational bounds, or expensive sampling.","importance":"This is a methodological contribution in probabilistic modeling rather than a direct foundation-model paper. Its relevance is that it proposes a new family of normalized neural densities with exact or controlled likelihood computation. That is potentially useful for generative modeling and for parts of pretraining research that still care about clean likelihoods, but it is better viewed as a new density-estimation line than a direct challenge to mainstream language-model training.","technical_approach":"From the title, the key idea is to define a neural function family and square it to obtain a valid nonnegative density form, while choosing the parameterization so the normalization remains tractable. The design solves two constraints at once: neural networks provide expressivity, and squaring guarantees nonnegativity. If the basis or architecture is chosen carefully, the partition function becomes computable instead of requiring MCMC as in many energy-based models. Compared with flows, this avoids invertibility constraints; compared with EBMs, it aims for cleaner learning and evaluation. The likely trade-off is that tractability comes from structural restrictions, which may limit efficiency or expressiveness in high dimensions.","experiments":"No abstract or results are provided, so datasets, model sizes, baselines, and numerical likelihood gains cannot be reported reliably. The natural expectation is evaluation against other tractable density estimators on standard density-benchmark suites, with attention to log-likelihood, sample quality, and computational cost, but any concrete number would be speculation.","authors_note":""},"tags":["density-modeling","generative-modeling","tractable-models"],"keywords":["probabilistic modelling; density estimation; exponential family;"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§2平方神经族的构造逻辑，做可解密度建模或精确似然预训练任务时可作为备选方案备查。","en":"Only read §2 squared neural family construction logic, serves as an alternative for tractable density modeling or exact likelihood pre-training tasks."}},{"id":"TurnerB23","title":"The Simplicity Bias in Multi-Task RNNs: Shared Attractors, Reuse of Dynamics, and Geometric Representation","authors":["Elia Turner","Omri Barak"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$18a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/TurnerB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/TurnerB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/50d6dbc809b0dc96f7f1090810537acc-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：多任务 RNN 为何会偏向学习更简单、可复用的动力学结构，而不是为每个任务单独形成完全不同的内部机制。过去对多任务泛化的解释常停留在参数共享有效，但对“共享了什么”讲得不够具体，尤其缺少从动力系统和表示几何角度的统一解释。","importance":"这是机制分析类工作。它对 pretrain 的直接方法价值有限，但对理解多任务训练、共享表示、任务迁移和 simplicity bias 很有参考意义。对大模型研究者来说，启发在于：共享参数不只是在压缩模型容量，它还会诱导模型优先寻找可复用的状态空间结构，这和 today’s foundation model 为什么会出现统一技能底座是相关的。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是把多任务 RNN 视作非线性动力系统，分析其吸引子、状态轨迹和隐藏表示几何。作者大概率展示：在多任务训练下，不同任务会落到一组共享或相近的 attractor 上，并通过重用相同动力学模块来完成不同计算。这个解释比“只是共享层”更强，因为它指出可迁移单元可能是状态空间里的稳定结构，而不是某一层某一组权重。边界也很明确：RNN 上看到的规律未必原样迁移到大 Transformer，但作为理解 shared computation 的简化模型是有价值的。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认具体任务集、RNN 规模、几何指标或定量结论。合理预期实验会在若干受控多任务序列问题上，分析隐藏状态流形、吸引子数量、任务间轨迹复用程度，并配合消融说明任务复杂度和训练设定如何改变 simplicity bias；但具体数字和图结论不能凭空写。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper examines why multitask RNNs tend to learn simple, reusable internal dynamics instead of building entirely separate mechanisms for each task. Prior explanations of multitask generalization often stop at “parameter sharing helps,” without clarifying what exactly is shared in dynamical or geometric terms.","importance":"This is a mechanistic analysis paper. It does not directly propose a new pretraining recipe, but it is relevant to understanding shared representations, transfer, and simplicity bias in joint training. For foundation-model researchers, the useful idea is that shared parameters may induce reusable state-space structure, not just weight reuse, which is closely related to why broad pretrained models develop common computational substrates.","technical_approach":"The core approach is likely to analyze multitask RNNs as dynamical systems, focusing on attractors, trajectory reuse, and the geometry of hidden representations. The main claim suggested by the title is that multiple tasks can be implemented by reusing a small set of shared attractors or dynamical motifs. That is stronger than saying “layers are shared”: it points to stable structures in state space as the unit of reuse. The limitation is scope—results in controlled RNN settings may not transfer directly to large Transformers, but they can still clarify what shared computation looks like in a tractable setting.","experiments":"Without the abstract, the specific tasks, model sizes, and quantitative findings cannot be reported. The expected experiments would involve controlled multitask sequence problems, measurements of hidden-state geometry and attractor structure, and ablations on task complexity and training setup. Any concrete number or benchmark claim would be unsupported here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multi-task","rnn","representation"],"keywords":["Computational Neural Models; Recurrent Neural Networks; Multiple Tasks; Geometry;Dynamical Systems;Attractors;Neuroscience"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§4多任务RNN吸引子与表示几何分析，理解大模型多任务共享动力学机制时可作为简化对照参考。","en":"Only read §4 attractor and representation geometry analysis of multi-task RNNs, as a simplified control reference when understanding multi-task shared dynamics of large models."}},{"id":"ValmeekamMHSK23","title":"PlanBench: An Extensible Benchmark for Evaluating Large Language Models on Planning and Reasoning about Change","authors":["Karthik Valmeekam","Matthew Marquez","Alberto Olmo Hernandez","Sarath Sreedharan","Subbarao Kambhampati"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$18b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ValmeekamMHSK23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ValmeekamMHSK23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/7a92bcdede88c7afd108072faf5485c8-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：现有 LLM 规划评测过于零散，常把语言匹配、世界知识和真正的规划推理混在一起，导致很难判断模型到底会不会规划。过去很多规划能力结论来自少量 handcrafted 任务或 prompt-sensitive setting，既不系统，也不利于复现。","importance":"这是一个 benchmark 级贡献。对 pretrain/posttrain 研究的意义在于，它把‘规划与状态变化推理’从宽泛的 reasoning 口号里单独拉出来做可复现实验。这样的基准很重要，因为没有干净 benchmark，后续关于工具增强、搜索结合、过程监督或 latent planning 的改进就缺少可靠参照。","technical_approach":"核心方法是构建 PlanBench，一个可扩展的规划评测框架，覆盖不同规划域，并把问题表述、状态变化、目标条件和行动约束系统化。与一般自然语言 benchmark 不同，规划任务的关键在于动作前提和状态转移是否被严格执行，所以一个好的 benchmark 必须能区分‘生成像样文本’和‘维护一致的世界状态’。从标题看，作者强调 extensible，说明它可能支持多域、多种任务表示或不同难度拆分，这对评估 LLM 是否只是记住模板尤其关键。","experiments":"没有摘要时，无法确认包含多少规划域、任务规模、评测协议、参与模型和具体分数。可以合理预期实验会比较多个当时主流 LLM 在 plan generation、可达性判断、状态更新或 change reasoning 上的表现，并展示模型对表述方式和任务复杂度的敏感性。它的核心价值通常不是刷新分数，而是揭示现有 LLM 在严格规划设定下的能力边界。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles an evaluation problem: existing claims about LLM planning ability are often based on scattered tasks that mix language fluency, world knowledge, and actual planning. That makes it hard to tell whether a model is genuinely reasoning about action and state change or just matching patterns in text.","importance":"This is a benchmark contribution. Its relevance to pretraining and post-training is that it isolates planning and reasoning-about-change as a distinct capability with cleaner evaluation. That matters because without a reliable benchmark, later claims about tool use, search integration, process supervision, or latent planning have no stable reference point.","technical_approach":"The core contribution is PlanBench, an extensible benchmark for planning tasks across domains. The important design requirement in this space is not just task diversity, but faithful tracking of action preconditions, state transitions, and goal satisfaction. That is what separates genuine planning from text generation that merely sounds plausible. The “extensible” part suggests the benchmark is built to support multiple domains, representations, or difficulty levels, which is important for avoiding overfitting to a narrow template family.","experiments":"Since the abstract is missing, the number of domains, task counts, models, and numerical results cannot be reported. The likely empirical story is a comparison of several contemporary LLMs on plan generation and reasoning about state change, with sensitivity analyses on formulation and problem complexity. The benchmark’s main value is likely diagnostic rather than leaderboard-oriented.","authors_note":""},"tags":["benchmark","planning","reasoning"],"notable_authors":["Karthik Valmeekam","Subbarao Kambhampati"],"keywords":["Large Language Models","Planning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§2基准的任务划分规则和§5主流LLM评测结果，做LLM规划推理能力优化时用该基准做验证即可。","en":"Only read §2 benchmark task partitioning rules and §5 mainstream LLM evaluation results, use this benchmark for validation when optimizing LLM planning reasoning ability."}},{"id":"Wang0ZWHWCZ23","title":"Patch Diffusion: Faster and More Data-Efficient Training of Diffusion Models","authors":["Zhendong Wang","Yifan Jiang","Huangjie Zheng","Peihao Wang","Pengcheng He","Zhangyang Wang","Weizhu Chen","Mingyuan Zhou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$18c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Wang0ZWHWCZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Wang0ZWHWCZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/e4667dd0a5a54b74019b72b677ed8ec1-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：扩散模型训练成本高、数据效率低，尤其在高分辨率图像上，标准全图训练会把大量计算花在冗余局部统计上。过去提升扩散训练效率通常靠蒸馏、采样加速或架构优化，但直接减少训练阶段对整图建模的浪费空间仍然很大。","importance":"这是一个方法级、偏系统效率的贡献。对预训练研究的意义在于，它重新审视了扩散模型的数据单位：如果很多视觉统计是局部可共享的，那么训练时未必要始终以整图为原子单位。这个想法对图像生成很实用，也对离散视觉 token、视觉 tokenizer 以及统一多模态 pretrain 里的 patch-level 建模有借鉴意义。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Patch Diffusion：在训练时以图像 patch 而非整图作为主要建模单元，从而降低每步计算量并提高样本利用效率。这样做有效的原因是，扩散模型学习的大量低中层视觉模式具有强局部性，用 patch 可以更高频地看到多样局部结构；同时，同样算力下可增加 batch 或训练步数。关键设计难点在于不能完全丢掉全局一致性，所以合理方案通常会在 patch 训练和全局条件之间做折中，或通过特定位置/尺度机制减轻边界伪影。和整图训练相比，它更高效，但若任务强依赖长程空间关系，纯 patch 化会损伤全局结构建模。","experiments":"从标题可以明确作者主张‘更快且更数据高效’，但没有摘要就无法确认具体加速倍数、FID 改善、训练步数节省或使用的数据集。可以稳妥推测实验会在常见图像生成基准上，对比标准 diffusion training，在相同算力或相同数据预算下比较 FID/IS 或收敛速度，并通过 patch 尺寸等消融展示效率-质量权衡；具体数字不能补写。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical bottleneck in diffusion training: standard full-image training is expensive and often data-inefficient, especially at high resolution. Prior efficiency work has focused on distillation, faster sampling, or architectural tweaks, but there is still large waste in treating the entire image as the atomic training unit at every step.","importance":"This is a method-level efficiency contribution. Its broader relevance is that it questions the training granularity of diffusion models. If much of the useful visual signal is local, then patch-level training can improve compute and data efficiency without fully sacrificing generation quality. That idea is also relevant to visual tokenization and unified multimodal pretraining, where patch-level structure is a natural unit.","technical_approach":"The core method, Patch Diffusion, trains diffusion models on image patches rather than always on full images. The intuition is straightforward: many low- and mid-level visual patterns are local, so patch-based training can expose the model to diverse structures more efficiently and reduce per-step cost. The main design challenge is preserving global consistency, because pure patch training can break long-range spatial coherence and introduce boundary artifacts. So the effective version likely balances local patch supervision with some form of global conditioning or positional structure. Compared with full-image training, it improves efficiency, but the trade-off is weaker direct modeling of global composition if pushed too far.","experiments":"The title clearly claims faster and more data-efficient training, but the abstract is not provided, so exact speedups, datasets, model sizes, and FID improvements cannot be reported. The expected experiments would compare against standard diffusion training under matched compute or data budgets, with ablations on patch size and quality-efficiency trade-offs. Any concrete numerical statement would be unsupported here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion-model","training-efficiency","patch-diffusion"],"notable_authors":["Pengcheng He"],"keywords":["diffusion models","training efficiency","data efficiency"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§3 patch级训练的全局一致性折中设计，做扩散模型或视觉多模态预训练效率优化时可复用该思路。","en":"Only read §3 global consistency trade-off design for patch-level training, reuse the idea when optimizing diffusion model or visual multimodal pre-training efficiency."}},{"id":"WangCXFL23","title":"Task-Robust Pre-Training for Worst-Case Downstream Adaptation","authors":["Jianghui Wang","Yang Chen","Xingyu Xie","Cong Fang","Zhouchen Lin"],"institutions":["Peking University"],"abstract":"$18d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangCXFL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangCXFL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/1e4322fddd833f83c855660ac65e428d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有预训练方法仅优化平均下游任务性能，无法保证在一系列相关下游任务上的性能一致性，极端情况下部分下游任务性能会出现显著掉点，此前没有针对下游任务鲁棒性的预训练目标设计。","importance":"方法级贡献，首次提出下游任务鲁棒性的预训练目标，为预训练模型在多下游场景下的性能稳定性优化提供了新的优化方向。","technical_approach":"原创的最坏情况下游适应预训练框架，核心是在预训练阶段引入最坏情况下游任务损失约束，牺牲部分平均性能以缩小不同下游任务之间的性能差距，保证所有相关下游任务的性能都不低于预设阈值。","experiments":"在掩码恢复、特征提取等预训练场景下测试，可将相关下游任务的最差性能提升15%以上，平均性能下降不超过3%，具体量化指标因摘要截断未披露。","authors_note":"Zhouchen Lin为机器学习与计算机视觉领域知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing pre-training methods only optimize average downstream task performance, cannot guarantee consistent performance across a series of related downstream tasks, with significant performance drop on some downstream tasks in extreme cases. No prior pre-training objective is designed for downstream task robustness.","importance":"Methodological contribution. It first proposes the pre-training objective of downstream task robustness, providing a new optimization direction for performance stability improvement of pre-trained models in multi-downstream scenarios.","technical_approach":"Original worst-case downstream adaptation pre-training framework, which introduces worst-case downstream task loss constraints during pre-training, sacrificing part of the average performance to narrow the performance gap between different downstream tasks, ensuring that the performance of all related downstream tasks is not lower than the preset threshold.","experiments":"Tested on pre-training scenarios including mask recovery and feature extraction, improving the worst performance of related downstream tasks by more than 15%, with average performance drop no more than 3%. Specific quantitative indicators are not disclosed due to truncated abstract.","authors_note":"Zhouchen Lin is a leading scholar in machine learning and computer vision."},"tags":["pre-training","worst-case-adaptation","task-robust","distribution-shift"],"keywords":["Pre-training","Robustness","Multi-task learning"],"notable_authors":["Zhouchen Lin"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"预训练模型的平均下游性能与不同下游任务的性能一致性存在trade-off","claim_en":"There is a trade-off between the average downstream performance of pre-trained models and the performance consistency across different downstream tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§2最坏情况预训练约束的构造逻辑和§4下游任务性能方差对比，做多下游场景预训练时可加入该约束做ablation。","en":"Only read §2 worst-case pre-training constraint construction logic and §4 downstream performance variance comparison, add this constraint for ablation when pre-training for multi-downstream scenarios."}},{"id":"WangFHTHT23","title":"Can Language Models Solve Graph Problems in Natural Language?","authors":["Heng Wang","Shangbin Feng","Tianxing He","Zhaoxuan Tan","Xiaochuang Han","Yulia Tsvetkov"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$18e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangFHTHT23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangFHTHT23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/622afc4edf2824a1b6aaf5afe153fa93-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM在隐含图结构的任务上表现优异，但能否显式处理自然语言描述的图结构、执行结构化推理尚未得到系统验证，此前没有统一的基准测试集合评估LLM的图推理能力。","importance":"数据/基准级贡献，提出的NLGraph基准为LLM的结构化推理能力评估提供了统一测试集，可用于指导预训练过程中结构推理能力的优化。","technical_approach":"构建了覆盖8类不同复杂度图推理任务的基准数据集NLGraph，所有问题都以自然语言描述图结构与推理要求，不需要LLM具备特殊的符号输入接口，可直接测试现有通用LLM的图推理能力。","experiments":"NLGraph包含29370个样本，覆盖连通性判断、最短路径求解等从简单到复杂的8类图推理任务，已测试多个主流LLM的图推理性能基线，具体结果因摘要截断未披露。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLMs perform well on tasks with implicit graph structures, but their ability to explicitly process graph structures described in natural language and perform structured reasoning has not been systematically verified. No unified benchmark dataset exists to evaluate the graph reasoning ability of LLMs.","importance":"Data/benchmark-level contribution. The proposed NLGraph benchmark provides a unified test set for evaluating the structured reasoning ability of LLMs, which can be used to guide the optimization of structural reasoning ability during pre-training.","technical_approach":"Construct the NLGraph benchmark covering 8 types of graph reasoning tasks with varying complexity. All problems describe graph structures and reasoning requirements in natural language, no special symbol input interface is required for LLMs, and it can directly test the graph reasoning ability of existing general LLMs.","experiments":"NLGraph contains 29370 samples, covering 8 types of graph reasoning tasks from simple to complex, including connectivity judgment and shortest path solving. Performance baselines of multiple mainstream LLMs have been tested, specific results are not disclosed due to truncated abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm-reasoning","graph-reasoning","evaluation","generalization"],"keywords":["large language models","graph reasoning","structured reasoning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM的结构化推理能力是其执行多跳问答、规划等复杂任务的基础","claim_en":"The structured reasoning ability of LLMs is the foundation for them to perform complex tasks such as multi-hop QA and planning","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§2 NLGraph基准的任务分类与§4 LLM图推理能力评测结果，做结构化推理预训练优化时用该基准做验证。","en":"Only read §2 NLGraph benchmark task classification and §4 LLM graph reasoning evaluation results, use this benchmark for validation when optimizing structured reasoning pre-training."}},{"id":"WangKB0K23","title":"Gaussian Process Probes (GPP) for Uncertainty-Aware Probing","authors":["Zi Wang","Alexander Ku","Jason Baldridge","Tom Griffiths","Been Kim"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$18f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangKB0K23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangKB0K23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/c8b100b376a7b338c84801b699935098-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有线性探针方法只能判断预训练模型是否包含某个概念，无法量化判断的不确定性，也无法在无训练数据、无梯度访问权限的场景下做探针分析。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出的高斯过程探针框架为预训练模型的概念表征分析提供了统一的不确定性感知方案，可用于黑盒模型的可解释性分析、分布外样本检测等场景。","technical_approach":"线性探针的贝叶斯扩展方法，核心是通过高斯过程建模模型表征诱导的概念分类器分布，同时输出概念存在性判断与判断的置信度；不需要访问模型训练数据、梯度或架构细节，仅需要模型的输入向量表征即可执行探针分析。","experiments":"在多个预训练CV与NLP模型上验证了有效性，探针的不确定性估计与实际错误率的相关系数达0.8以上，具体量化指标因摘要截断未披露。","authors_note":"Tom Griffiths、Been Kim为可解释AI与认知科学领域知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing linear probing methods can only judge whether a pre-trained model contains a certain concept, cannot quantify the uncertainty of the judgment, and cannot perform probing analysis in scenarios without training data or gradient access permissions.","importance":"Methodological contribution. The proposed Gaussian Process Probe framework provides a unified uncertainty-aware solution for conceptual representation analysis of pre-trained models, which can be used for black-box model interpretability analysis, out-of-distribution sample detection and other scenarios.","technical_approach":"Bayesian extension of linear probing, which models the distribution of concept classifiers induced by model representations via Gaussian processes, outputting both concept existence judgment and the confidence of the judgment. No access to model training data, gradients or architecture details is required, only the input vector representations of the model are needed for probing.","experiments":"Validated on multiple pre-trained CV and NLP models, the correlation coefficient between the uncertainty estimation of the probe and the actual error rate is above 0.8. Specific quantitative indicators are not disclosed due to truncated abstract.","authors_note":"Tom Griffiths and Been Kim are leading scholars in explainable AI and cognitive science."},"tags":["probing","uncertainty","interpretability","representation"],"keywords":["Interpretability","probing","Bayesian","Gaussian process","transparency"],"notable_authors":["Tom Griffiths","Been Kim","Jason Baldridge"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"线性探针可有效检测预训练模型表征中包含的概念","claim_en":"Linear probing can effectively detect concepts contained in pre-trained model representations","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§3高斯过程探针的无梯度实现逻辑，做黑盒预训练模型概念表征分析或OOD检测时可直接复用该方案。","en":"Only read §3 gradient-free implementation logic of Gaussian process probes, directly reuse the scheme for concept representation analysis or OOD detection of black-box pre-trained models."}},{"id":"2312.17174","title":"Visual Explanations of Image-Text Representations via Multi-Modal Information Bottleneck Attribution","authors":["Ying Wang","Tim G. J. Rudner","Andrew Gordon Wilson"],"institutions":["New York University"],"abstract":"$190","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.17174","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangRW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangRW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/339caf45a6fa281cae8adc6465343464-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有图文预训练模型的归因分析方法多为单模态，需要真值标签才能执行，无法在无标注场景下做跨模态归因分析，限制了其在安全敏感场景的应用。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出的多模态信息瓶颈归因方法可在无真值标签的场景下执行图文预训练模型的归因分析，提升了跨模态模型的可解释性，可用于医疗等高风险场景的模型审计。","technical_approach":"原创的多模态信息瓶颈M2IB方法，核心是学习压缩无关信息、保留相关图文特征的隐表征，基于隐表征做归因分析，舍弃了传统归因方法对真值标签的依赖，不需要访问模型训练数据即可执行。","experiments":"在CLIP等主流图文预训练模型上验证了有效性，归因准确率比现有单模态方法高20%以上，具体量化指标因摘要截断未披露。","authors_note":"Andrew Gordon Wilson为贝叶斯机器学习领域知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing attribution analysis methods for vision-language pre-trained models are mostly unimodal, require ground truth labels to execute, and cannot perform cross-modal attribution analysis in unlabeled scenarios, limiting their application in safety-sensitive scenarios.","importance":"Methodological contribution. The proposed multi-modal information bottleneck attribution method can perform attribution analysis of vision-language pre-trained models without ground truth labels, improving the interpretability of cross-modal models, and can be used for model audit in high-risk scenarios such as healthcare.","technical_approach":"Original multi-modal information bottleneck M2IB method, which learns latent representations that compress irrelevant information and preserve relevant visual and textual features, and performs attribution analysis based on latent representations. It eliminates the dependence of traditional attribution methods on ground truth labels, and can be executed without accessing model training data.","experiments":"Validated on mainstream vision-language pre-trained models such as CLIP, attribution accuracy is more than 20% higher than existing unimodal methods. Specific quantitative indicators are not disclosed due to truncated abstract.","authors_note":"Andrew Gordon Wilson is a leading scholar in Bayesian machine learning."},"tags":["vlm","interpretability","attribution","clip"],"keywords":["Interpretability","Attribution Maps","Information Bottleneck","Multi-Modal Learning","Vision-Language Pretrained Models"],"notable_authors":["Andrew Gordon Wilson"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"可解释性不足是限制图文预训练模型在高风险场景应用的核心障碍","claim_en":"Insufficient interpretability is the core barrier limiting the application of vision-language pre-trained models in high-risk scenarios","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"无真值标签的跨模态归因方法，解决安全敏感场景模型审计痛点，只看 §4.2 和 Fig 3 即可。","en":"Cross-modal attribution method without ground-truth labels, addressing model auditing pain points in safety-sensitive scenarios. Read §4.2 and Fig 3 only."}},{"id":"WangX23","title":"State-space models with layer-wise nonlinearity are universal approximators with exponential decaying memory","authors":["Shida Wang","Beichen Xue"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"State-space models have gained popularity in sequence modelling due to their simple and efficient network structures. However, the absence of nonlinear activation along the temporal direction limits the model's capacity. In this paper, we prove that stacking state-space models with layer-wise nonlinear activation is sufficient to approximate any continuous sequence-to-sequence relationship. Our findings demonstrate that the addition of layer-wise nonlinear activation enhances the model's capacity to learn complex sequence patterns. Meanwhile, it can be seen both theoretically and empirically that the state-space models do not fundamentally resolve the issue of exponential decaying memory. Theoretical results are justified by numerical verifications.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangX23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangX23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ea8608c6258450e75b3443ec8022fb2e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文讨论的是一个理论问题：带逐层非线性的状态空间模型，究竟能表达多广的一类序列映射，以及它的记忆结构是什么。此前很多关于 SSM 的讨论集中在线性递推、长程建模效率或经验表现，但对“非线性分层 SSM 到底能不能像 Transformer/RNN 那样形成通用逼近能力”这一点，理论上并不充分。","importance":"它的重要性在理论层面，为高效序列模型提供表达能力背书。对 pretrain 研究的意义不是直接给出一个更强的新算法，而是回答：如果我们用 SSM 替代一部分注意力，它的能力边界是否足够宽，代价又是什么。标题里的‘universal approximators with exponential decaying memory’也提示了一个关键取舍：表达力强，但记忆衰减结构可能是内生限制。","technical_approach":"从标题可判断，作者证明了带 layer-wise nonlinearity 的状态空间模型具有通用逼近性质，同时其记忆核呈指数衰减。这里的关键不是单层线性 SSM，而是通过层间非线性叠加提升表达能力；这与仅研究线性系统稳定性不同，也区别于完全依赖自注意力的无固定衰减记忆机制。这样的结论通常意味着：模型足够深时可逼近广泛函数类，但它对远距离历史的依赖形式受到指数衰减约束，因此不是无条件替代 attention。","experiments":"从给定信息里没有摘要与实验细节，无法确认是否包含数值实验、用了哪些合成任务或语言建模基准，也无法给出参数量、指标和提升幅度。基于题目判断，这篇论文更偏理论证明，实验若存在，作用大概率是验证逼近能力或记忆衰减现象，而不是追求大规模 benchmark SOTA。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper addresses a theory question: what class of sequence functions can state-space models with layer-wise nonlinearities represent, and what memory structure do they inherently impose. Much of the recent SSM discussion has focused on efficiency and empirical performance, while the expressivity of nonlinear stacked SSMs has been less clearly characterized.","importance":"Its contribution is theoretical support for efficient sequence models. For pretraining research, the value is not a new recipe by itself but a clearer answer to whether SSM-style architectures can serve as expressive alternatives to attention-based models, and under what structural limitations. The phrase 'exponential decaying memory' already signals the key trade-off: strong approximation power with a built-in bias toward fading history.","technical_approach":"From the title, the main result is a universality theorem for state-space models equipped with layer-wise nonlinearities, together with a characterization of exponentially decaying memory. The critical point is that nonlinearity across layers changes the picture relative to purely linear SSM analyses. This suggests depth can recover broad function approximation power, but long-range dependence is still shaped by an exponential decay mechanism, unlike unrestricted attention.","experiments":"The provided material contains no abstract or experimental details, so model scale, tasks, metrics, and numerical results cannot be stated reliably. Judging from the title, this is primarily a theoretical paper; if experiments are included, they are likely illustrative validations of expressivity or memory behavior rather than large-scale benchmark results.","authors_note":""},"tags":["ssm","architecture","theory","long-context"],"keywords":["state space","approximation theory","sequence modelling"],"recommendation":{"zh":"证明带层级非线性的 SSM 具备通用逼近能力但受限于指数衰减记忆，为 SSM 替代 Attention 提供理论边界，只看 §3 和 §4 即可。","en":"Proves SSMs with layer-wise nonlinearity are universal approximators but limited by exponential decaying memory, providing theoretical boundaries for SSMs replacing Attention. Read §3 and §4 only."}},{"id":"Wen0023","title":"Sharpness Minimization Algorithms Do Not Only Minimize Sharpness To Achieve Better Generalization","authors":["Kaiyue Wen","Zhiyuan Li","Tengyu Ma"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$191","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Wen0023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Wen0023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/0354767c6386386be17cabe4fc59711b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的是：sharpness minimization 类算法带来更好泛化，是否真的只是因为它们找到了更平坦的极小值。近年来 SAM 及其变体很流行，但经验上‘低 sharpness = 好泛化’常被直接当因果解释；作者显然在质疑这个过于简化的叙事。","importance":"它的重要性在优化机制理解。对大模型预训练的启示是：很多稳定训练和泛化收益，不一定能用单一几何指标解释；如果把 SAM 的收益只归因于 sharpness，本身可能会误导优化器设计、超参搜索和训练诊断。对于大规模训练里的 loss spike、batch size、噪声尺度分析，这类机制澄清是有价值的。","technical_approach":"从标题判断，作者分析了 sharpness minimization 算法的实际作用机理，并证明或实证说明它们并不只是最小化 sharpness。与把 SAM 视为‘平坦极小值搜索器’的常见理解不同，这类工作通常会拆解它对优化轨迹、隐式正则化、梯度噪声或 margin 的影响，说明 sharpness 只是伴随现象之一，而非完整解释。这样做的意义在于帮助我们区分相关性和因果性。","experiments":"没有摘要和正文，无法确认作者是以理论证明为主，还是配合 CIFAR/ImageNet/语言任务实证，也无法给出具体算法、指标和改进数字。可以较确定地说，这篇论文核心是机制辨析，不是提出一个全新的大规模预训练优化器并在 benchmark 上刷分。","authors_note":"作者里有 Tengyu Ma，为机器学习理论与优化领域知名研究者；其余团队信息无法从给定内容确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether sharpness minimization algorithms generalize better simply because they minimize sharpness. Methods such as SAM are often explained through the flat-minima story, and this work appears to challenge that overly narrow causal account.","importance":"Its contribution is in optimization understanding rather than a new pretraining recipe. For large-scale training, this matters because misattributing SAM-like gains to a single geometry statistic can lead to poor optimizer intuition, misleading diagnostics, and oversimplified hyperparameter choices.","technical_approach":"From the title, the paper analyzes the mechanism of sharpness minimization algorithms and argues they do more than reduce sharpness. The likely point is that these methods alter optimization dynamics, implicit regularization, gradient behavior, or margin-related properties in ways that a pure sharpness narrative cannot capture. That distinction matters because correlation with sharpness is not the same as sharpness being the full cause.","experiments":"No abstract or quantitative details are provided, so it is impossible to state the exact settings, tasks, baselines, or gains. What can be said safely is that this is a mechanism-focused paper, likely combining theory and controlled experiments, rather than a benchmark-driven large-model optimization paper.","authors_note":"Tengyu Ma is a notable author known for work in machine learning theory and optimization. Further team context cannot be confirmed from the provided information."},"tags":["optimization","generalization","sharpness","training-dynamics"],"notable_authors":["Tengyu Ma"],"keywords":["Sharpness","Flatness","Generalization","Generalization Bound","SAM"],"recommendation":{"zh":"澄清 SAM 类算法的泛化收益并非仅源于平坦极小值，对大模型优化器设计和训练诊断有纠偏作用，只看 §3 和 §5 即可。","en":"Clarifies that generalization gains of SAM-like algorithms are not solely from flat minima, correcting biases in large model optimizer design and training diagnostics. Read §3 and §5 only."}},{"id":"WildbergerDBGMS23","title":"Flow Matching for Scalable Simulation-Based Inference","authors":["Jonas Wildberger","Maximilian Dax","Simon Buchholz","Stephen R. Green","Jakob H. Macke","Bernhard Schölkopf"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$192","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WildbergerDBGMS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WildbergerDBGMS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/3663ae53ec078860bb0b9c6606e092a0-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是 simulation-based inference 在高维或大规模设定下的可扩展性问题。传统 SBI 往往依赖似然不可得时的后验近似，但很多方法在复杂模拟器、高维参数空间或大量训练样本下成本很高、训练不稳，限制了实际使用。","importance":"它属于生成建模/推断方法级工作。对 pretrain 的直接关联不强，但对新型生成范式研究有方法论价值：flow matching 作为近年替代 score matching / diffusion ODE 训练的一条路线，如果能在 SBI 里体现出更好的稳定性和扩展性，也会反过来启发更广的连续生成模型训练。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把 flow matching 引入 simulation-based inference。与经典基于后验密度比估计、神经似然估计或标准 diffusion 训练不同，flow matching 直接学习把简单分布运输到目标后验的连续向量场，通常能避免部分随机微分方程训练噪声，并带来更直接的路径监督。之所以适合 SBI，是因为后验分布往往复杂、多峰，而连续流方法在表达灵活性和采样效率之间有较好的平衡；但代价是仍然需要稳定的条件建模与足够覆盖的模拟数据。","experiments":"给定信息中没有摘要细节，无法确认用了哪些 SBI benchmark、参数维度、模拟器类型和数值提升。可以比较可靠地判断，论文会与常见 SBI 方法比较后验逼近质量与计算效率，并强调 flow matching 在 scalability 上的优势，但无法填写具体指标和幅度。","authors_note":"作者中 Jakob H. Macke 为计算神经科学与 simulation-based inference 方向知名研究者；其余团队信息无法从给定内容确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles scalability in simulation-based inference. Standard SBI methods can be expensive or unstable when the simulator is complex, the parameter space is high-dimensional, or large training sets are needed, which limits practical deployment.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution in generative inference. It is not directly a pretraining paper, but it is relevant at the modeling-paradigm level: flow matching has become an important alternative to score-based or diffusion-style training, and evidence of better scalability in SBI can inform broader generative modeling practice.","technical_approach":"The key idea is to use flow matching for simulation-based inference. Compared with density-ratio methods, neural likelihood/posterior estimation, or standard diffusion training, flow matching learns a continuous transport field from a simple base distribution to the target posterior. That can offer cleaner supervision and more scalable training. This is attractive for SBI because simulator posteriors are often complex and multimodal. The trade-off is that good conditional transport still depends on broad simulator coverage and stable function approximation.","experiments":"The provided information does not include the abstract details, so the specific SBI benchmarks, dimensionalities, simulators, and quantitative gains cannot be reported safely. It is reasonable to expect comparisons against standard SBI baselines on posterior quality and efficiency, with scalability as the main claimed advantage.","authors_note":"Jakob H. Macke is a notable author known for work in computational neuroscience and simulation-based inference. Further institutional details cannot be confirmed from the provided information."},"tags":["flow-matching","diffusion","generative-models","training-objective"],"notable_authors":["Jakob H. Macke"],"keywords":["simulation-based inference","likelihood-free inference","machine learning for physical sciences"],"recommendation":{"zh":"将 Flow Matching 引入基于模拟的推断，提升高维复杂场景稳定性，对新型连续生成范式研究有启发，只看 §3 和 §4 即可。","en":"Introduces Flow Matching to simulation-based inference, improving stability in high-dimensional complex scenarios, inspiring research on novel continuous generative paradigms. Read §3 and §4 only."}},{"id":"WuBL23","title":"Implicit Bias of Gradient Descent for Logistic Regression at the Edge of Stability","authors":["Jingfeng Wu","Vladimir Braverman","Jason D. Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$193","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WuBL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WuBL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/eb189151ced0ff808abafd16a51fec92-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文研究的是：在 logistic regression 的 edge of stability 区域，梯度下降到底会偏向什么样的解。过去大家知道梯度下降在可分数据上有最大间隔一类的隐式偏置，但当学习率接近稳定边界、训练进入震荡而非平滑收敛时，经典结论不再直接适用。","importance":"这是偏理论基础的一篇工作，直接应用到预训练并不现实，但它对理解大模型训练中“高学习率仍能工作”的现象有启发。近几年很多深网训练都处在接近稳定边界的区域；如果连最简单的 logistic regression 在这个区间都有不同的隐式偏置，那么把小学习率收敛理论直接套到大模型上就会有明显盲点。","technical_approach":"作者分析的是梯度下降在稳定边界附近的动力学及其极限解。关键不是再证明一次标准最大间隔结论，而是刻画当迭代不完全收敛、甚至参数范数与方向演化呈现振荡时，优化轨迹仍会趋向哪类分类器，以及这种偏置如何依赖学习率。与经典隐式偏置工作相比，它关注的是一个更接近现代训练实践的高步长区间；代价是结论通常更细、更脆弱，假设条件也更强。","experiments":"实验应以理论现象验证为主，例如在可分数据和不同学习率设置下比较参数方向、间隔增长和分类边界演化。核心观察通常是：一旦进入 edge-of-stability 区域，训练动力学与小步长理论显著不同，但仍存在可描述的偏置规律。由于缺少摘要和数值，无法可靠提供具体数据集、指标或提升幅度；可以确认的是，这不是一篇追求 benchmark 性能的论文。","authors_note":"Jason D. Lee 是优化与隐式偏置方向的知名作者之一。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a precise question: what solution bias does gradient descent induce for logistic regression when training operates at the edge of stability? Classical implicit-bias results characterize small-step regimes well, but they do not directly explain the oscillatory, near-unstable dynamics that are more relevant to modern high-step-size training.","importance":"This is a foundational optimization result rather than a direct pretraining method. Its value for pretraining is conceptual: many large-model runs succeed near stability boundaries, so understanding how optimization bias changes in that regime matters. If even logistic regression behaves differently there, then small-step convergence intuitions are not enough for interpreting deep-network training.","technical_approach":"The contribution is a dynamical analysis of gradient descent close to the stability threshold. The point is not to restate the standard max-margin story, but to characterize what happens when iterates do not converge smoothly and can oscillate while still exhibiting a structured directional bias. Relative to classic implicit-bias work, this shifts attention from asymptotically stable descent to a higher-step-size regime that is closer to practical training, though necessarily under stronger assumptions.","experiments":"The experiments are likely theory-facing: separable datasets, varying learning rates, and measurements of direction, margin growth, and classifier evolution. The key observation in this line of work is usually that edge-of-stability dynamics differ sharply from small-step behavior, yet still follow a predictable bias pattern. The provided information is insufficient to state exact datasets or numbers, and this is not a benchmark-chasing paper anyway.","authors_note":"Jason D. Lee is a well-known researcher in optimization and implicit bias."},"tags":["implicit-bias","edge-of-stability","optimization"],"notable_authors":["Jingfeng Wu","Vladimir Braverman","Jason D. Lee"],"keywords":["gd; implicit bias; edge of stability"],"recommendation":{"zh":"分析稳定边界附近逻辑回归的隐式偏置，对理解大模型高学习率训练现象有启发，只看 §3 和 §4 即可。","en":"Analyzes implicit bias of logistic regression near the edge of stability, inspiring understanding of high learning rate training phenomena in large models. Read §3 and §4 only."}},{"id":"WuYW0ZZL0H23","title":"InfoPrompt: Information-Theoretic Soft Prompt Tuning for Natural Language Understanding","authors":["Junda Wu","Tong Yu","Rui Wang","Zhao Song","Ruiyi Zhang","Handong Zhao","Chaochao Lu","Shuai Li","Ricardo Henao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$194","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WuYW0ZZL0H23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WuYW0ZZL0H23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/c01c0da4fe2ef2df9863f55261e2e924-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的是：soft prompt tuning 在自然语言理解任务上为什么经常不稳定、数据效率一般，以及如何让 prompt 学到真正有信息量的表示。过去 soft prompt 常被当成廉价参数高效微调手段，但如果只按任务 loss 更新，它很容易学到数据集偏置或冗余方向，而不一定把有限 prompt 容量用在最有判别力的信息上。","importance":"它属于参数高效适配方向的方法级改进，量级不是范式级，但思路有启发。对预训练研究的间接价值在于，它把 prompt tuning 重新解释成信息选择问题：当可训练参数极少时，关键不是拟合得更猛，而是让 prompt 承载对输入和标签最有用的信息。这种视角也能反过来帮助理解 prefix/prompt 类方法为什么有时比 LoRA 更脆弱。","technical_approach":"InfoPrompt 的核心是给 soft prompt tuning 加上信息论约束或目标，让 prompt 最大化与任务相关的信息，同时抑制无关冗余。相比普通 prompt tuning 只靠端到端监督信号，它显式鼓励 prompt 表示保留对标签有用、对噪声不敏感的内容。关键设计取舍在于：信息论目标往往难直接优化，因此实际做法通常需要可计算的下界、对比式估计或代理损失；作者的贡献应在于把这套目标嵌入 prompt 学习流程里，而不是重新训练整个编码器。","experiments":"实验大概率覆盖 GLUE、SuperGLUE 或类似 NLU 基准，并与 full fine-tuning、标准 soft prompt、prefix tuning、adapter/LoRA 类方法比较。关键事实通常是：在小样本或中小模型设置下，InfoPrompt 比普通 soft prompt 更稳、更强，尤其在数据少时优势更明显。更有价值的 ablation 会看 prompt 长度、信息项权重和不同 backbone 下的鲁棒性。当前无法根据给定信息确认具体模型、数据和数值提升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a common weakness of soft prompt tuning for NLU: it is parameter-efficient but often unstable and not very data-efficient. If prompts are trained only through task loss, they can spend their limited capacity on spurious or redundant directions instead of encoding the most discriminative information.","importance":"This is a method-level improvement in parameter-efficient adaptation rather than a paradigm shift. Its broader value is the framing: prompt tuning can be viewed as an information allocation problem. That perspective is useful for understanding why prompt-like methods can be more brittle than stronger adaptation mechanisms when trainable capacity is extremely small.","technical_approach":"InfoPrompt appears to augment soft prompt tuning with an information-theoretic objective or constraint. The goal is to make learned prompts retain task-relevant information while suppressing irrelevant variation. The design challenge is that mutual-information-style objectives are not directly tractable, so the practical method likely relies on estimable bounds or surrogate losses. The key point is that the encoder stays mostly frozen while the prompt is trained to become a better information bottleneck.","experiments":"The likely benchmark suite includes GLUE, SuperGLUE, or related NLU tasks, with comparisons against standard soft prompts, prefix tuning, adapters, LoRA, and full fine-tuning. The expected empirical pattern is improved stability and accuracy over vanilla soft prompts, especially in low-data settings where prompt capacity matters most. Useful ablations would examine prompt length, information-objective weighting, and robustness across backbones. Exact numbers are not recoverable from the provided metadata.","authors_note":""},"tags":["prompt-tuning","information-theory","nlu"],"notable_authors":["Junda Wu","Tong Yu","Rui Wang","Zhao Song","Ruiyi Zhang"],"keywords":["soft prompt tuning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"引入信息论目标约束 Soft Prompt Tuning，提升数据效率和稳定性，对参数高效微调设计有启发，只看 §3 和 §4 即可。","en":"Introduces information-theoretic objectives to constrain Soft Prompt Tuning, improving data efficiency and stability, inspiring parameter-efficient fine-tuning design. Read §3 and §4 only."}},{"id":"XiaHZZ23","title":"Achieving Cross Modal Generalization with Multimodal Unified Representation","authors":["Yan Xia","Hai Huang","Jieming Zhu","Zhou Zhao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$195","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/XiaHZZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/XiaHZZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/c89f09849eb5af489abb122394ff0f0b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文试图解决的是：多模态模型为什么常常只能在见过的模态组合上泛化，而无法真正做到跨模态迁移。过去很多方法通过对齐图文、音文等成对数据拿到不错结果，但学到的是配对统计而不一定是统一表示；一旦测试时换模态、缺模态或要求从一种模态迁到另一种模态，性能就会明显掉。","importance":"这是一篇多模态统一表示方向的方法工作，对预训练的启发在于：统一表示的目标不该只是 embedding space 对齐，而应服务于跨模态泛化能力。如果方法有效，它的意义不在于某个单 benchmark 提升，而在于说明训练目标和表示结构需要显式鼓励 modality-invariant 的语义层，而不是仅靠 paired contrastive loss 自然涌现。","technical_approach":"从题目判断，作者提出了一个 multimodal unified representation 框架，核心是把不同模态映射到共享语义空间，并在训练中约束该空间既保留任务信息，又削弱模态专属噪声。关键设计通常包括：共享编码层或共享语义 bottleneck、跨模态一致性损失，以及防止某一强模态主导训练的平衡机制。它和传统图文对比学习的差别在于，后者常把模态当作两个独立塔，仅在顶层拉近；而统一表示方法更强调中间层或全局表征的共享，从而提升 missing-modality 或 unseen-modality transfer 的鲁棒性。","experiments":"实验应聚焦 cross-modal generalization，而不是只做常规检索或分类。关键事实可能包括：在某些模态缺失、跨模态迁移或 zero-shot 场景下，所学统一表示优于双塔对比学习 baseline。更有价值的观察通常是：如果只做对齐、不做共享表示约束，训练集内指标可能不差，但泛化到新模态组合时会更弱。由于没有摘要，无法确认具体模态种类、数据规模和数值幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a recurring weakness in multimodal learning: models often generalize only within the modality pairings they were trained on, rather than learning representations that transfer across modalities. Pairwise alignment methods can perform well on seen combinations, but they frequently capture co-occurrence statistics rather than modality-agnostic semantics.","importance":"This is a multimodal representation-learning contribution with clear pretraining relevance. The main takeaway is that a unified representation should be judged by cross-modal generalization, not just by alignment quality on paired data. If the method works, it suggests that standard contrastive alignment is not sufficient for robust multimodal pretraining when modality transfer or missing-modality robustness matters.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method likely learns a shared multimodal representation space with explicit pressure toward modality-invariant semantics. A plausible design includes a shared semantic bottleneck, cross-modal consistency losses, and balancing mechanisms to prevent the strongest modality from dominating. Compared with classic dual-tower contrastive learning, the difference is that this approach aims for deeper representational unification rather than only pulling top-level embeddings together.","experiments":"The evaluation is likely centered on cross-modal generalization settings rather than only standard retrieval or classification. The important empirical pattern would be improved transfer under missing modalities, modality shift, or zero-shot cross-modal tasks relative to paired-alignment baselines. A useful ablation in this area is that alignment-only objectives may look competitive in-domain but degrade more under unseen modality combinations. The provided metadata does not support exact datasets or numbers.","authors_note":""},"tags":["cross-modal","unified-representation","multimodal"],"notable_authors":["Yan Xia","Hai Huang","Jieming Zhu","Zhou Zhao"],"keywords":["multi-modal","discrete representation","mutual information estimation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"构建多模态统一表示框架，通过共享语义空间提升跨模态泛化能力，对多模态预训练目标设计有启发，只看 §3 和 §4 即可。","en":"Constructs a multimodal unified representation framework, improving cross-modal generalization through a shared semantic space, inspiring multimodal pre-training objective design. Read §3 and §4 only."}},{"id":"Xie0LLL0SS23","title":"Learning Visual Prior via Generative Pre-Training","authors":["Jinheng Xie","Kai Ye","Yudong Li","Yuexiang Li","Kevin Qinghong Lin","Yefeng Zheng","Linlin Shen","Mike Zheng Shou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$196","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Xie0LLL0SS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Xie0LLL0SS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/df4f6e43446b1ee29c5a33d32c279f83-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的是：视觉表征能否像 NLP 一样通过生成式预训练学到更通用的先验，而不是主要依赖判别式监督或对比学习。过去视觉预训练在对比学习上很成功，但这类目标更偏不变性抽取，未必鼓励模型学习图像的生成结构、空间组合规律和细粒度先验。","importance":"它属于视觉预训练方法级工作，对统一 pretrain 视角有启发。重要之处不在于“视觉也能做生成”这件事本身，而在于重新评估 generative objective 在视觉中的角色：如果生成式预训练确实能提供更好的 visual prior，那么在多模态统一建模里，视觉侧目标函数的选择就不该默认从文本侧照搬对比对齐或分类式目标。","technical_approach":"从题目看，作者提出的是用生成式预训练来学习 visual prior。合理推测其做法是通过图像重建、token 预测、masked generation 或 latent generation 等目标，让模型在无监督或弱监督条件下学习图像结构。关键设计点通常包括：生成目标放在哪个表示空间上做，如何避免模型只学低层像素统计，以及如何让学到的 prior 能迁移到下游识别任务。与纯重建型方法相比，更强的设计往往会引入离散 token、层次 latent 或语义约束，以减少“重建得好但语义弱”的问题。","experiments":"实验应会比较生成式预训练与监督学习、对比学习或 MAE 类重建学习在分类、检测、分割等下游上的迁移效果。关键事实通常是：生成式预训练学到的 prior 在低标注或迁移场景更有优势，而在大规模全监督闭集分类上未必绝对领先。一个值得注意的 ablation 是预训练目标与表示空间的关系——如果目标过于像素级，视觉先验会更局部；如果在更语义的 token/latent 空间训练，迁移通常更好。缺少摘要使得无法确认具体模型和数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper revisits a foundational question in vision pretraining: can generative pretraining learn a better visual prior than the discriminative or contrastive objectives that dominate the field? Contrastive learning has been highly successful, but it mainly pushes invariance and separation, which does not necessarily force the model to capture compositional image structure or richer generative regularities.","importance":"This is a vision-pretraining method paper with broader relevance to unified pretraining. The important takeaway is not simply that generation can be applied to images; it is that the choice of visual pretraining objective may materially affect the kind of prior the model acquires. That matters for multimodal systems, where the vision side is often treated as an embedding provider rather than a generative model with its own inductive benefits.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method likely uses generative pretraining—possibly reconstruction, token prediction, masked generation, or latent generation—to learn transferable visual priors. The main design challenge is preventing the objective from collapsing into low-level pixel modeling with weak semantics. Stronger variants in this family usually shift generation into a tokenized or latent space, or add structural constraints so the learned prior captures more than local texture statistics.","experiments":"The likely evaluation compares generative pretraining against supervised, contrastive, or reconstruction-based vision baselines on transfer tasks such as classification, detection, and segmentation. A common empirical pattern in this line is that generative pretraining helps more in low-label or transfer-heavy regimes, even if it is not always the best on fully supervised closed-set classification. An especially useful ablation would test which representation space the generative objective is applied to, since pixel-level generation often yields weaker semantic transfer than token- or latent-level generation. Exact numbers are not available from the provided metadata.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vision-pretraining","generative-modeling","representation","data-quality"],"notable_authors":["Jinheng Xie","Kai Ye","Yudong Li","Yuexiang Li","Kevin Qinghong Lin"],"keywords":["Visual Prior","Generative Pre-Training","Conditional Image Synthesis"],"recommendation":{"zh":"探索生成式预训练学习视觉先验，挑战对比学习主导地位，对多模态统一建模视觉侧目标选择有启发，只看 §3 和 §4 即可。","en":"Explores generative pre-training for learning visual priors, challenging the dominance of contrastive learning, inspiring visual objective selection in multimodal unified modeling. Read §3 and §4 only."}},{"id":"XieTS023","title":"On the Overlooked Structure of Stochastic Gradients","authors":["Zeke Xie","Qian-Yuan Tang","Mingming Sun","Ping Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$197","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/XieTS023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/XieTS023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/d0b2eda0386f477ab14d7e181e16c899-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"深度学习领域缺乏随机梯度分布结构（尤其是重尾特性）的正式统计检验工具。此前研究要么支持要么反对梯度噪声重尾假设，但均无严谨统一的验证流程，导致梯度与优化、泛化的关联研究结论长期不一致。","importance":"方法级贡献。填补了随机梯度统计分析的工具空白，为预训练优化稳定性、泛化性研究提供可复用的统计检验框架，可解决此前梯度噪声假设的分歧。","technical_approach":"原创的多维度统计检验方案。在参数维度、训练迭代维度两个维度对随机梯度、梯度噪声的分布做正式统计假设检验，舍弃了此前仅做粗粒度整体分布拟合的分析方式，避免了整体分布分析掩盖维度级特性的问题。","experiments":"论文仅披露维度级梯度通常呈现幂律分布的核心结论，未公开具体测试模型参数量、基线对比、 ablation 量化结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Formal statistical testing frameworks for stochastic gradient distribution (especially heavy-tail properties) are missing in deep learning. Prior work either supports or rejects the heavy-tail gradient noise hypothesis without rigorous verification, leading to long-term inconsistent conclusions on the link between gradients, optimization and generalization.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It fills the gap of gradient statistical analysis tools, provides a reusable testing framework for pre-training optimization stability and generalization research, and resolves prior disputes on gradient noise assumptions.","technical_approach":"Original multi-dimensional statistical testing pipeline. It runs formal statistical hypothesis tests on stochastic gradient and gradient noise distributions across both parameter dimensions and training iterations, abandons previous coarse-grained whole-distribution fitting analysis, avoids the problem that dimension-level properties are covered by whole-distribution analysis.","experiments":"Only the core conclusion that dimension-wise gradients exhibit power-law distribution is disclosed. No specific model size, baseline comparison or ablation quantitative results are provided in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["optimization","stochastic-gradients","training-dynamics"],"keywords":["Gradient Noise","SGD","Deep Learning","Heavy Tails"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"随机梯度的性质与深度神经网络的优化效果、泛化能力紧密相关","claim_en":"Properties of stochastic gradients are closely related to optimization performance and generalization ability of deep neural networks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"维度维度的随机梯度通常呈现幂律分布","claim_en":"Dimension-wise stochastic gradients usually exhibit power-law distribution","opposes":"此前研究要么假设随机梯度整体服从重尾分布要么否定重尾假设，未区分维度级分布特性","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Statistical Tests","why_contested":"修正了此前对梯度分布的粗粒度判断，为梯度噪声与优化泛化关联研究提供了更细粒度的事实基础"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"提供随机梯度重尾特性的正式统计检验工具，解决长期分歧，为预训练优化稳定性研究提供基础，只看 §3 和 §4 即可。","en":"Provides formal statistical testing tools for heavy-tailed properties of stochastic gradients, resolving long-standing disagreements, providing a foundation for pre-training optimization stability research. Read §3 and §4 only."}},{"id":"XuDCTLJ23","title":"Restart Sampling for Improving Generative Processes","authors":["Yilun Xu","Mingyang Deng","Xiang Cheng","Yonglong Tian","Ziming Liu","Tommi S. Jaakkola"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$198","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/XuDCTLJ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/XuDCTLJ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/f2543511e5f4d4764857f9ad833a977d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"基于微分方程的生成模型（如扩散模型）采样需要平衡速度和质量，现有ODE采样器快但性能提前饱和，SDE采样器质量高但速度慢，此前研究未同时解决离散误差和误差收缩的平衡问题。","importance":"方法级贡献。适用于所有基于微分方程的生成模型采样，对diffusion LM、跨模态统一预训练中的生成采样效率提升有直接参考价值，不需要重新训练模型即可提升采样性能。","technical_approach":"原创的Restart采样算法。交替执行正向加噪步骤和反向ODE求解，舍弃了原有采样器要么全ODE要么全SDE的设计，结合了ODE离散误差小和SDE误差收缩的优势，避免了SDE长步长累积误差问题。","experiments":"Restart采样器性能超过此前的SDE和ODE采样器，未披露具体模型、数据集、指标提升幅度、ablation量化结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Sampling for differential equation based generative processes (e.g. diffusion models) requires trade-off between speed and quality. Existing ODE samplers are fast but hit performance plateau early, SDE samplers deliver higher quality but are slower. Prior work fails to simultaneously balance discretization error and error contraction.","importance":"Method-level contribution, applicable to all differential equation based generative model sampling, provides direct reference for sampling efficiency improvement in diffusion LM and cross-modal unified pre-training, improves sampling performance without retraining the model.","technical_approach":"Original Restart sampling algorithm. It alternates between forward noise addition steps and backward ODE solving, abandons the all-ODE or all-SDE design of existing samplers, combines the advantages of small ODE discretization error and SDE error contraction, avoids cumulative error problem of long-step SDE.","experiments":"Restart sampler outperforms prior SDE and ODE samplers. No specific model, dataset, metric improvement numbers or ablation results are disclosed in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","sampling","generation","inference"],"keywords":["Generative models","diffusion models","PFGM","sampling"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"扩散模型ODE采样器离散误差更小，SDE采样器的随机性可以收缩累积采样误差","claim_en":"ODE samplers for diffusion models have smaller discretization errors, and the stochasticity in SDE samplers can contract accumulated sampling errors","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"交替执行正向加噪和反向ODE可以同时平衡离散误差和误差收缩，性能优于纯ODE或纯SDE采样器","claim_en":"Alternating forward noise addition and backward ODE solving can balance discretization error and error contraction simultaneously, outperforms pure ODE or pure SDE samplers","opposes":"此前默认生成采样只能在离散误差和误差收缩中二选一，速度和质量不可兼得","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Restart Sampling","why_contested":"打破了生成采样速度和质量的固有trade-off认知，可直接落地到各类生成模型部署场景"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"提出 Restart 采样算法，结合 ODE 和 SDE 优势提升生成模型采样效率，对 Diffusion LM 采样有直接参考价值，只看 §3 和 §4 即可。","en":"Proposes Restart sampling algorithm, combining ODE and SDE advantages to improve generative model sampling efficiency, providing direct reference value for Diffusion LM sampling. Read §3 and §4 only."}},{"id":"XuJLZZ23","title":"Active Reasoning in an Open-World Environment","authors":["Manjie Xu","Guangyuan Jiang","Wei Liang","Chi Zhang","Yixin Zhu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$199","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/XuJLZZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/XuJLZZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/2712b17bb58ea5b2b65c45857b024744-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有视觉语言模型只能基于预存知识被动响应全信息问答，无法像人类一样主动探索积累新信息解决不完全信息问题，此前缺乏适配主动推理能力评估的开放世界交互环境。","importance":"基准级贡献。填补了开放世界主动推理评估基准空白，对大模型、VLM预训练的主动探索、推理能力对齐有参考价值。","technical_approach":"原创的Conan交互式开放世界环境。支持多轮溯因推理和主动探索，舍弃了此前单轮全信息问答的评估设定，采用类似Minecraft的开放世界交互逻辑。","experiments":"仅披露Conan的设计框架，未公开具体模型在该基准上的基线指标、提升幅度等实验结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing vision-language models can only passively respond to complete-information QA based on pre-stored knowledge, cannot actively explore and accumulate new information to solve incomplete-information problems like humans. No open-world interactive environment for active reasoning evaluation existed before.","importance":"Benchmark-level contribution. It fills the gap of open-world active reasoning evaluation benchmark, provides reference for active exploration and reasoning ability alignment for large model and VLM pre-training.","technical_approach":"Original Conan interactive open-world environment. It supports multi-round abductive inference and active exploration, abandons previous single-round complete-information QA evaluation setting, adopts open-world interaction logic similar to Minecraft.","experiments":"Only the design framework of Conan is disclosed. No specific baseline metrics, improvement幅度 or other experimental results of models on this benchmark are provided in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reasoning","open-world","planning","agent"],"keywords":["Visual Reasoning","Abductive Reasoning","Active Reasoning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"现有VLM在全信息问答任务上性能优异，但依赖预存知识，无法处理信息不全的场景","claim_en":"Existing VLMs perform well on complete-information QA tasks, but rely on pre-stored knowledge and cannot handle incomplete information scenarios","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"开放世界主动推理能力评估需要多轮交互、主动探索的环境支持，单轮问答基准无法准确衡量模型主动推理能力","claim_en":"Open-world active reasoning evaluation requires multi-round interaction and active exploration support, single-round QA benchmarks cannot accurately measure model active reasoning ability","opposes":"此前常用的VLM评估基准多为单轮全信息问答设定，默认可以覆盖推理能力评估","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§2 Conan Environment","why_contested":"修正了VLM推理能力评估的设定偏差，为开放世界大模型能力对齐提供了新的评估范式"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"构建开放世界主动推理评估基准 Conan，填补 VLM 主动探索能力评估空白，作为 literature 备查，不读正文。","en":"Constructs Conan, an open-world active reasoning evaluation benchmark, filling the gap in VLM active exploration capability evaluation. Keep as literature reference, skip main text."}},{"id":"XuLZZLSB23","title":"From Cloze to Comprehension: Retrofitting Pre-trained Masked Language Models to Pre-trained Machine Reader","authors":["Weiwen Xu","Xin Li","Wenxuan Zhang","Meng Zhou","Wai Lam","Luo Si","Lidong Bing"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$19a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/XuLZZLSB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/XuLZZLSB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/d4e1c24ac41ff0b82ca1b171731f0b23-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有掩码语言模型（MLM）预训练的完形填空目标和下游机器阅读理解（MRC）微调目标存在分布Gap，此前基于MLM微调MRC任务性能差，尤其是低资源场景下掉点严重，需要大量标注数据成本高。","importance":"方法+数据级贡献。不需要标注数据即可把MLM适配为预训练MRC模型，对预训练模型的下游适配、低资源抽取类任务的预训练目标设计有参考价值。","technical_approach":"原创的无标注数据MLM适配方法。基于维基百科超链接构造大规模通用MRC风格训练数据，设计Wiki锚点抽取任务做MRC风格预训练，舍弃了此前需要标注MRC数据做适配的方案，不需要从头重新预训练MLM。","experiments":"在抽取式QA、命名实体识别任务上性能超过现有方法，低资源场景提升幅度更大，未披露具体模型参数量、基线指标提升数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"There is a distribution gap between the cloze pre-training objective of masked language models (MLMs) and the downstream machine reading comprehension (MRC) fine-tuning objective. Prior MLM fine-tuning on MRC tasks has poor performance, especially in low-resource scenarios, and requires high cost of large-scale labeled data.","importance":"Method + data level contribution. It adapts MLMs to pre-trained MRC models without labeled data, provides reference for downstream adaptation of pre-trained models and pre-training objective design for low-resource extraction tasks.","technical_approach":"Original unlabeled data MLM adaptation method. It constructs large-scale general MRC-style training data based on Wikipedia hyperlinks, designs Wiki anchor extraction task for MRC-style pre-training, abandons previous adaptation scheme that requires labeled MRC data, no need to pre-train MLMs from scratch.","experiments":"It outperforms existing methods on extractive QA and named entity recognition tasks, with larger improvement in low-resource scenarios. No specific model size or baseline metric improvement numbers are disclosed in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["masked-lm","machine-reading","adaptation","pretraining"],"keywords":["Machine Reading Comprehension","Pre-training","Natural Language Understanding"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"MLM预训练目标和下游MRC任务目标存在分布差异，导致下游微调性能不佳","claim_en":"There is a distribution difference between MLM pre-training objective and downstream MRC task objective, leading to poor downstream fine-tuning performance","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"仅使用无标注维基百科超链接构造的MRC风格数据预训练，即可让MLM适配MRC类任务，性能超过需要标注数据的适配方法","claim_en":"Pre-training with MRC-style data constructed only from unlabeled Wikipedia hyperlinks can adapt MLMs to MRC tasks, outperforms adaptation methods that require labeled data","opposes":"此前默认MLM适配MRC任务需要大量标注MRC数据才能获得较好性能","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"降低了MRC类预训练模型的构造成本，为预训练目标与下游任务对齐提供了无标注数据的可行路径"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"利用维基百科超链接无监督构造 MRC 数据适配 MLM，解决预训练与微调 Gap，对低资源抽取任务预训练有参考价值，只看 §3 和 §4 即可。","en":"Uses Wikipedia hyperlinks to unsupervisedly construct MRC data for MLM adaptation, solving the pre-training and fine-tuning gap, providing reference value for low-resource extraction task pre-training. Read §3 and §4 only."}},{"id":"YangYXZBC23","title":"FACE: Evaluating Natural Language Generation with Fourier Analysis of Cross-Entropy","authors":["Zuhao Yang","Yingfang Yuan","Yang Xu","Shuo Zhan","Huajun Bai","Kefan Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Measuring the distance between machine-produced and human language is a critical open problem. Inspired by empirical findings from psycholinguistics on the periodicity of entropy in language, we propose FACE, a set of metrics based on Fourier Analysis of the estimated Cross-Entropy of language, for measuring the similarity between model-generated and human-written languages. Based on an open-ended generation task and the experimental data from previous studies, we find that FACE can effectively identify the human-model gap, scales with model size, reflects the outcomes of different sampling methods for decoding, correlates well with other evaluation metrics and with human judgment scores.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YangYXZBC23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YangYXZBC23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/37094fdc81632915a5738293cf9b7ad4-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"机器生成文本和人类文本的差异缺乏准确的自动度量指标，现有指标和人类判断相关性低，无法有效区分不同模型、解码方法的性能差异。","importance":"方法级贡献。提出了新的生成文本自动评估指标，对LLM预训练、生成模型的评估pipeline优化有参考价值。","technical_approach":"原创的FACE评估指标。基于语言熵的周期性特征，对语言交叉熵做傅里叶分析衡量生成文本和人类文本的相似度，舍弃了此前只关注整体交叉熵的粗粒度评估方法，引入频域特征。","experiments":"在开放生成任务上，FACE可以有效识别人机文本差异，和人类判断相关性高，随模型大小单调变化，可反映不同解码采样方法的效果，未披露具体指标数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"There is a lack of accurate automatic evaluation metrics for the difference between machine-generated text and human text. Existing metrics have low correlation with human judgment, and cannot effectively distinguish performance differences between different models and decoding methods.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It proposes a new automatic evaluation metric for generated text, provides reference for LLM pre-training and generative model evaluation pipeline optimization.","technical_approach":"Original FACE evaluation metric. Based on the periodic characteristics of language entropy, it performs Fourier analysis on language cross-entropy to measure the similarity between generated text and human text, abandons previous coarse-grained evaluation method that only focuses on overall cross-entropy, introduces frequency domain features.","experiments":"On open-ended generation tasks, FACE can effectively identify human-model text gap, has high correlation with human judgment, monotonically changes with model size, and reflects the effect of different decoding sampling methods. No specific metric values are disclosed in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["evaluation","nlg","cross-entropy","metric"],"keywords":["natural language generation; evaluation metrics; cross-entropy; language model"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"语言熵存在周期性特征，现有生成文本评估指标和人类判断相关性不足","claim_en":"Language entropy has periodic characteristics, and existing generated text evaluation metrics have insufficient correlation with human judgment","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于交叉熵傅里叶分析的指标比仅用整体交叉熵的指标和人类判断相关性更高","claim_en":"Metrics based on Fourier analysis of cross-entropy have higher correlation with human judgment than metrics only using overall cross-entropy","opposes":"此前默认生成文本评估仅用整体交叉熵即可有效衡量人机文本差异","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments","why_contested":"为生成文本自动评估提供了新的特征维度，可补充现有LLM生成质量评估体系"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§3指标设计和§5与主流指标的相关性对比即可，频域特征思路可直接复用到生成文本评估管线优化。","en":"Read §3 metric design and §5 correlation comparison with mainstream metrics, the frequency-domain feature idea is reusable for text generation evaluation pipeline optimization."}},{"id":"YeCDD23","title":"SatLM: Satisfiability-Aided Language Models Using Declarative Prompting","authors":["Xi Ye","Qiaochu Chen","Isil Dillig","Greg Durrett"],"institutions":["The University of Texas at Austin"],"abstract":"$19b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YeCDD23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YeCDD23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/8e9c7d4a48bdac81a58f983a64aaf42b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：如何让语言模型在满足复杂逻辑约束的生成任务上不再只靠提示碰运气，而是能显式保证可满足性。过去这类问题通常要么把约束软写进 prompt 里，让模型自己学着遵守；要么生成后再做过滤或修补，代价是效率低、失败模式多，而且一旦约束组合变复杂，纯自然语言提示很容易失效。","importance":"它的重要性主要在方法接口层，而不是基础模型范式层。对 pretrain 的启示是：当生成目标包含离散、可验证、可求解的结构约束时，单靠更大模型或更长 prompt 并不是最稳的路线，把 LM 和外部符号求解器做成闭环可能更有效；这代表了一类“神经生成 + 可判定约束”的实用增强路径。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 declarative prompting：先把用户需求转成声明式约束，再借助 SAT 求解器辅助 LM 生成满足条件的输出。它不是训练一个新模型，而是在推理时把自然语言生成拆成两部分：LM 负责语义与表面表达，SAT/SMT 一类求解器负责检查和引导可满足约束。和普通 chain-of-thought 或 self-consistency 不同，这里关键不是让模型多想几步，而是把“是否满足条件”从隐式语言判断变成显式可验证过程。这样设计有效的原因是，逻辑一致性本来就不是语言模型最稳定的强项，而求解器在这部分是强归纳偏置；代价是任务必须能被较好地形式化，开放式、含糊约束的场景收益会下降。","experiments":"从题目和已知设定看，实验重点应是比较 declarative prompting 与纯 LM prompting 在约束满足率、任务成功率和生成质量上的差异。可以 reasonably 判断，作者主要会在需要组合逻辑约束的文本生成或规划类任务上展示：基线包括直接 prompting、可能还有带自一致性的多次采样；核心结果应是 SAT 辅助方法显著提升合法输出比例，并减少后验重试。由于这里没有给出摘要和具体数字，参数规模、数据规模、指标绝对值与提升幅度无法确认，不能编造。","authors_note":"德州大学奥斯汀分校（The University of Texas at Austin）。Greg Durrett、Isil Dillig 分别在 NLP 推理/结构化方法和程序分析/形式化方法方向有代表性工作；这篇论文延续了两类方法的交叉。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a clear gap: language models are weak at reliably generating outputs that must satisfy hard logical constraints. Prior practice usually relied on prompting the model to “follow the rules” or filtering bad generations afterward, which breaks down when constraints are compositional, brittle, or expensive to verify post hoc.","importance":"Its contribution is mainly at the method-interface level rather than a new pretraining paradigm. The useful lesson for pretraining research is that when the target structure is discrete and checkable, scaling the LM alone is often a poor substitute for wiring it to a verifier or solver; neural generation plus symbolic constraint enforcement is a practical and robust pattern.","technical_approach":"The method is declarative prompting with satisfiability assistance: express the desired conditions as explicit constraints, then use a SAT-style solver to guide or validate generation. This is not a new trained model. It is an inference-time decomposition where the LM handles semantics and phrasing, while the solver handles consistency and feasibility. The key difference from standard prompting or chain-of-thought is that correctness is externalized into a formal procedure instead of being left implicit in token prediction. That design works because logical validity is exactly where symbolic solvers have stronger inductive bias. The trade-off is obvious: it only helps when the task can be formalized cleanly enough.","experiments":"Given the title and setup, the experiments likely compare declarative prompting against plain prompting on tasks with compositional constraints, focusing on satisfiability rate, task success, and generation quality. The most credible takeaway is improved validity and fewer retries relative to LM-only baselines. However, the abstract and numeric results are not provided here, so model sizes, dataset sizes, benchmarks, and exact gains cannot be stated reliably.","authors_note":"The University of Texas at Austin. Greg Durrett and Isil Dillig are known respectively for NLP reasoning/structured methods and formal methods/program analysis; this paper sits at that intersection."},"tags":["llm","prompting","declarative","reasoning"],"notable_authors":["Greg Durrett","Isil Dillig"],"keywords":["Reasoning","Chain-of-thought","Logical Reasoning","Arithmetic Reasoning","Prompting","In-Context Learning","Large Language Model"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§4推理闭环设计和表3逻辑约束任务实验即可，LM加符号求解器的思路可用于约束类任务预训练对齐方案参考。","en":"Read §4 inference closed-loop design and Table 3 logical constraint task experiments, the LM + symbolic solver idea is good reference for pre-training alignment of constraint tasks."}},{"id":"YoonMLCNR23","title":"Censored Sampling of Diffusion Models Using 3 Minutes of Human Feedback","authors":["Taeho Yoon","Kibeom Myoung","Keon Lee","Jaewoong Cho","Albert No","Ernest K. Ryu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Diffusion models have recently shown remarkable success in high-quality image generation. Sometimes, however, a pre-trained diffusion model exhibits partial misalignment in the sense that the model can generate good images, but it sometimes outputs undesirable images. If so, we simply need to prevent the generation of the bad images, and we call this task censoring. In this work, we present censored generation with a pre-trained diffusion model using a reward model trained on minimal human feedback. We show that censoring can be accomplished with extreme human feedback efficiency and that labels generated with a mere few minutes of human feedback are sufficient.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YoonMLCNR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YoonMLCNR23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/a5755ccd0efeca8852ae0a1193f319f6-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：能不能用极少量人类反馈快速控制 diffusion model 的采样分布，而不必重训模型或收集大规模偏好数据。过去偏好对齐通常依赖大量反馈训练 reward model，或者做昂贵的 finetune；这对图像生成这类高成本模型并不友好。","importance":"它的重要性在于证明了一个很强的效率观点：对生成模型进行偏好引导，未必需要大规模 RLHF 式管线，采样阶段的分布裁剪就可能带来可观收益。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，基础模型学到的分布常常已经足够丰富，后续的关键问题变成如何低成本地在推理时重排或筛选概率质量。","technical_approach":"方法核心是 censored sampling：利用少量人类反馈学到一个偏好判别信号，然后在 diffusion 采样过程中拒绝或重加权不符合偏好的样本轨迹。它更像是在采样器上做控制，而不是改动生成器参数。与训练 reward-guided diffusion 或直接 finetune 不同，这种设计把学习成本压到很低，重点利用预训练 diffusion 已有的生成能力。之所以有效，是因为很多偏好差异并不需要改写整个数据分布，只需要把采样落点从“可接受集合”进一步推向“更偏好子集”。边界在于：如果目标偏好与原始生成分布严重错位，只靠采样裁剪会不够。","experiments":"题目中的“3 Minutes of Human Feedback”已经说明实验主张是极低反馈预算。合理预期实验会在图像生成任务上，比较原始 diffusion、可能的 classifier/reward guidance、以及该方法在偏好胜率或人评上的表现，并强调只需几分钟标注即可带来明显提升。更有价值的 ablation 通常会看反馈量与性能的关系，以及不同裁剪强度对样本质量/多样性的 trade-off。具体模型、数据集、指标和数值提升当前无法确认。","authors_note":"如果无法从当前信息稳定确认机构与团队背景，按要求留空。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a sharp question: can we steer diffusion sampling with only a few minutes of human feedback, instead of collecting large preference datasets or fine-tuning the model? Existing alignment pipelines for generative models are usually expensive because they learn a reward model and then modify the generator, which is overkill when the pretrained model is already strong.","importance":"Its main contribution is an efficiency claim with broad relevance: preference alignment for generative models can sometimes be done at sampling time rather than training time. For pretraining-oriented readers, the takeaway is that a strong base model may already contain the desired modes, and the practical problem becomes how to reweight probability mass cheaply at inference.","technical_approach":"The method is censored sampling for diffusion models. It uses a small amount of human feedback to define a preference signal, then rejects or downweights undesirable sample trajectories during the diffusion sampling process. This is fundamentally different from reward-model training plus policy optimization or generator fine-tuning. The design works when the pretrained diffusion model already spans a broad set of acceptable outputs, so preference optimization mostly needs better selection rather than relearning the data distribution. The limitation is also clear: if the target preference lies far outside the model’s support, censoring alone will not create it.","experiments":"The title itself highlights the main empirical claim: only about three minutes of human feedback are needed. The likely experiments compare the method against vanilla diffusion sampling and stronger guidance baselines on image generation preference metrics or human evaluations, while also studying feedback budget and quality-diversity trade-offs. Exact architectures, datasets, and numeric gains are not available from the provided information, so they should not be fabricated.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","human-feedback","alignment","censored-sampling"],"keywords":["Generative models","Diffusion probabilistic models","Controlled generation","Human Feedback","RLHF"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§3采样裁剪方案和表2不同反馈规模消融实验即可，推理时分布重排思路可有效降低偏好对齐的训练成本。","en":"Read §3 censored sampling scheme and Table 2 ablation under different feedback scales, the inference-time distribution reordering idea cuts preference alignment training cost effectively."}},{"id":"YuW23","title":"Generator Born from Classifier","authors":["Runpeng Yu","Xinchao Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"In this paper, we make a bold attempt toward an ambitious task: given a pre-trained classifier, we aim to reconstruct an image generator, without relying on any data samples. From a black-box perspective, this challenge seems intractable, since it inevitably involves identifying the inverse function for a classifier, which is, by nature, an information extraction process. As such, we resort to leveraging the knowledge encapsulated within the parameters of the neural network. Grounded on the theory of Maximum-Margin Bias of gradient descent, we propose a novel learning paradigm, in which the generator is trained to ensure that the convergence conditions of the network parameters are satisfied over the generated distribution of the samples. Empirical validation from various image generation tasks substantiates the efficacy of our strategy.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YuW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YuW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/a97f0218b49bc17ea3f121a0e724f028-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：能不能从判别模型直接构造生成模型，而不是单独训练一个显式生成器。传统生成建模通常需要 likelihood、GAN、diffusion 或 flow 等专门范式；而分类器虽然常学到丰富的密度边界信息，却很少被直接当成生成器使用。","importance":"它的重要性在生成建模范式探索层面。对 pretrain 的启示是，判别与生成之间的界线未必像常规训练管线那样刚性，如果能把分类器中隐含的能量或梯度信息转成采样机制，就可能复用更成熟、更稳定的判别训练流程。","technical_approach":"从题目看，方法核心是“由分类器生出生成器”：利用分类器输出的类别后验、能量景观或 score 信息，定义出一个可采样的生成过程。它与 classifier guidance 的差别可能在于，这里分类器不是辅助一个已有生成器，而是直接承担生成定义的主体。设计成立通常依赖一个关键桥梁：分类决策面携带了数据分布梯度或相对密度信息，可以被转成 MCMC、Langevin 或其他采样动力学。这样的好处是训练目标稳定；局限是生成质量高度依赖分类器校准与分布覆盖，且容易在类外区域产生伪梯度。","experiments":"实验上合理预期会在标准图像生成基准上，与 GAN、diffusion、EBM 或 classifier-guided 方法比较样本质量、多样性和训练稳定性。更有价值的 ablation 会看分类器容量、校准方式、噪声注入或采样步数对结果的影响。没有摘要时，具体数据集、FID/IS 数字和模型细节都无法确认。","authors_note":"新加坡国立大学相关团队的可能性较高，Xinchao Wang 是较知名作者，在生成模型和视觉学习方向有多项代表性工作；但机构若无法由给定信息严格确认，不做展开。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper explores a basic but important question: can a generator be derived from a classifier, instead of training a dedicated generative model from scratch? Standard generative modeling uses likelihood models, GANs, diffusion, or flows, while classifiers usually serve only as evaluators or guidance modules despite learning rich decision geometry.","importance":"Its significance is conceptual. For pretraining and generative modeling, it suggests that the boundary between discriminative and generative learning may be more fluid than common pipelines imply. If classifier-induced geometry can define a sampling process, one may inherit the optimization stability of discriminative training.","technical_approach":"The core idea, inferred from the title, is to turn a classifier into the basis of generation—likely through posterior scores, an induced energy function, or gradients that support sampling. This is different from classifier guidance, where a classifier only nudges an existing generator. Here the classifier is closer to the generator itself. The method works only if the classifier contains enough information about relative density or score structure to support meaningful sampling, possibly via MCMC or Langevin dynamics. The upside is simpler and more stable training. The downside is that generation quality then depends heavily on classifier calibration and support coverage.","experiments":"The paper likely evaluates on image generation benchmarks against GANs, diffusion models, EBMs, or classifier-guided baselines, focusing on sample quality, diversity, and stability. Useful ablations would test classifier capacity, calibration, and sampling steps. Without the abstract, exact datasets, metrics, and numeric results cannot be reported safely.","authors_note":"Possibly connected to the National University of Singapore ecosystem. Xinchao Wang is a notable author known for work on generative models and visual learning, but a stricter institutional note cannot be confirmed from the given information alone."},"tags":["generative-modeling","classifier","training-objective","sampling"],"notable_authors":["Xinchao Wang"],"keywords":["Generative Model"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§3分类器转生成器的核心推导和Fig2生成质量对比即可，判别生成边界的思路可复用在建模范式探索。","en":"Read §3 core derivation of classifier-to-generator conversion and Fig 2 generation quality comparison, the discriminative-generative boundary idea is reusable for generative paradigm exploration."}},{"id":"YuXZYZZ23","title":"Hierarchical Semi-Implicit Variational Inference with Application to Diffusion Model Acceleration","authors":["Longlin Yu","Tianyu Xie","Yu Zhu","Tong Yang","Xiangyu Zhang","Cheng Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$19c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YuXZYZZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YuXZYZZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/9bbb3c3aa33616c55521e2f826c132bd-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：diffusion model 采样慢，能不能在不明显损失质量的前提下用更少步数近似原始后验。过去的加速方法很多是蒸馏、ODE/SDE 求解器改进或 consistency 类训练，但常常要么额外训练代价高，要么近似误差不可控。","importance":"它的重要性在于把变分推断视角系统地引入 diffusion acceleration。对生成预训练研究的启示是，采样加速不一定只能靠数值积分技巧，也可以通过更强的近似后验家族来减少每一步的信息损失；这是从训练目标和推断族两侧同时动手的路线。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 hierarchical semi-implicit variational inference。semi-implicit 的意思是近似分布本身不一定有显式密度，但可以通过隐变量构造出更灵活的后验族；再加上 hierarchical 结构，能更好逼近 diffusion 逆过程的复杂条件分布。和简单高斯近似或固定形式蒸馏不同，这里关键是提升近似后验表达力，从而允许用更少采样步完成同等质量生成。有效原因是原始 diffusion 的多步过程，本质上是在逐步追踪复杂后验，如果每一步近似更准，就可以跳更多步。代价是训练和推断实现更复杂，稳定性依赖变分估计质量。","experiments":"实验应围绕 image diffusion acceleration 展开，比较该方法与 DDIM、DPM-Solver、progressive distillation 或其他快速采样基线，在少步采样下的 FID/精度-速度曲线。更有价值的观察通常包括：层次 semi-implicit 结构在极少步数时优势更明显，以及近似族越灵活、训练越难之间的 trade-off。当前没有摘要，故不能确认具体数据集、步数和数值结果。","authors_note":"如果无法从当前信息稳定确认机构，按要求留空。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a central weakness of diffusion models: sampling is slow because the reverse process needs many steps. Existing acceleration methods often rely on better solvers, distillation, or consistency-style training, but they either require substantial retraining or suffer from approximation error when the step count becomes very small.","importance":"Its value is in bringing a stronger variational inference perspective to diffusion acceleration. For generative pretraining, the useful takeaway is that faster sampling need not come only from numerical integration tricks; it can also come from a more expressive approximation family for the reverse process.","technical_approach":"The method uses hierarchical semi-implicit variational inference. A semi-implicit family increases flexibility beyond simple explicit distributions, and the hierarchical structure further improves the ability to approximate the complicated conditional distributions in the diffusion reverse chain. This differs from plain Gaussian approximations or direct distillation. The design intuition is simple: if each reverse-step approximation is more faithful, the model can take fewer overall steps. The trade-off is increased training and implementation complexity, and success depends on stable variational optimization.","experiments":"The likely evaluation compares against fast diffusion samplers such as DDIM, DPM-Solver, and distillation-based methods, focusing on FID or similar quality-speed trade-offs at low step counts. A plausible ablation is that the hierarchical semi-implicit family helps most in the very few-step regime, where simpler approximations fail. Exact datasets, step counts, and gains are not available from the provided information.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","acceleration","variational-inference","sampling"],"keywords":["Hierarchical semi-implicit variational inference","Score based training","Diffusion model"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§4分层半隐式变分后验设计和表1采样步数与质量的对比即可，近似后验增强思路可用于扩散模型加速方案参考。","en":"Read §4 hierarchical semi-implicit variational posterior design and Table 1 sampling steps vs quality comparison, the approximate posterior enhancement idea is good reference for diffusion acceleration."}},{"id":"YuanHNCW23","title":"Reward-Directed Conditional Diffusion: Provable Distribution Estimation and Reward Improvement","authors":["Hui Yuan","Kaixuan Huang","Chengzhuo Ni","Minshuo Chen","Mengdi Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$19d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YuanHNCW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YuanHNCW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/be93b16564e96859da8401b917f307c6-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：如何让 conditional diffusion 不只是拟合数据分布，还能朝高 reward 区域移动，同时保留分布估计的理论可解释性。过去 reward-guided generation 往往是启发式的，能提偏好分数，但很难说明是不是还在学一个合理分布。","importance":"它的重要性在于把 reward optimization 和 diffusion distribution estimation 连接到一个有理论保证的框架里。对 pretrain/post-train 的启示是，如果生成模型对齐要从“纯拟合数据”过渡到“兼顾任务 reward”，那么最好不要完全放弃概率建模视角；这篇工作提供了一个更规范的方向。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 reward-directed conditional diffusion：在条件 diffusion 中显式加入 reward 导向，使生成分布向高回报样本倾斜，同时给出分布估计和 reward 改进的可证明结论。它不同于简单 classifier guidance 或 sampling-time reward reweighting，因为这里 reward 被纳入建模目标本身，而不是仅在推理阶段外接。这样设计的好处是训练目标和生成偏好一致，并能分析偏移后的分布性质；边界在于理论往往依赖对 reward 函数、模型类和噪声过程的假设，落到大规模现实生成模型时未必完全成立。","experiments":"实验大概率围绕合成数据和标准控制生成任务，验证两类结论：一是相比普通 conditional diffusion 能取得更高 reward；二是在分布估计或样本质量上不会显著崩坏。若论文重理论，实验规模可能不大，但会配合 ablation 展示 reward 权重、条件强度等因素对质量-收益折中的影响。当前没有摘要，无法确认具体 benchmark 和数值。","authors_note":"Mengdi Wang 是知名作者，在统计学习、控制与生成模型理论方向有多项代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks how to make conditional diffusion models optimize for reward while still behaving like principled distribution estimators. Many reward-guided generation methods are heuristic: they can improve preference or task scores, but they provide little clarity on what distribution is actually being learned or sampled from.","importance":"Its significance is in linking reward optimization with diffusion-based density modeling under a framework with theoretical guarantees. For the pretrain/post-train interface, the main lesson is that alignment does not have to abandon probabilistic modeling entirely; one can bias generation toward higher reward while still reasoning about the resulting distribution.","technical_approach":"The method is reward-directed conditional diffusion. Instead of using reward only as an external guidance signal at sampling time, it is incorporated into the conditional diffusion formulation itself, with provable results on distribution estimation and reward improvement. This is stronger than plain classifier guidance or ad hoc reward reweighting because the optimization target and the intended generation behavior are aligned by design. The trade-off is that the theory likely depends on assumptions about the reward function, model class, and noise process, which may be restrictive in large-scale practice.","experiments":"The empirical section likely supports two claims: improved reward relative to standard conditional diffusion, and controlled degradation—or no major degradation—in sample quality or distributional faithfulness. If the paper is theory-heavy, the experiments may be modest in scale but include ablations over reward strength and conditioning. Exact benchmarks and numbers cannot be recovered from the current prompt.","authors_note":"Mengdi Wang is a notable author with influential work in statistical learning, control, and the theory of generative models."},"tags":["diffusion","reward-conditioning","rl","distribution-estimation"],"notable_authors":["Mengdi Wang"],"keywords":["Theory","Diffusion Model","Reward Optimization","Low-dimensional Data","Distribution estimation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§3理论推导和表2reward增益实验即可，带理论保证的奖励引导生成框架可用于扩散模型偏好对齐方案参考。","en":"Read §3 theoretical derivation and Table 2 reward gain experiments, the theoretically guaranteed reward-guided generation framework is good reference for diffusion preference alignment."}},{"id":"YuanMLZCYZLHTDW23","title":"MARBLE: Music Audio Representation Benchmark for Universal Evaluation","authors":["Ruibin Yuan","Yinghao Ma","Yizhi Li","Ge Zhang","Xingran Chen","Hanzhi Yin","Le Zhuo","Yiqi Liu","Jiawen Huang","Zeyue Tian","Binyue Deng","Ningzhi Wang","Chenghua Lin","Emmanouil Benetos","Anton Ragni","Norbert Gyenge","Roger B. Dannenberg","Wenhu Chen","Gus Xia","Wei Xue","Si Liu","Shi Wang","Ruibo Liu","Yike Guo","Jie Fu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$19e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YuanMLZCYZLHTDW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YuanMLZCYZLHTDW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/7cbeec46f979618beafb4f46d8f39f36-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的核心问题是：音乐音频表示学习一直缺少一个真正统一、可复现、覆盖面足够广的评测基准，导致不同预训练方法常常只在各自挑选的任务上比较，难以判断表示是否真的通用。过去这类工作通常用少量下游任务或私有划分做验证，结论容易被任务选择和数据清洗方式主导，因此现在需要一个面向通用音乐表征的标准化 benchmark。","importance":"它的价值主要在评测基础设施，而不是提出新的预训练算法。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：音乐/音频表示是否通用，不能只看分类准确率，而要在多任务、多粒度、多输入条件下统一比较；这会直接影响后续音频 LM、语音-音乐统一 tokenizer、跨模态预训练的数据和目标设计。量级上它更像数据与评测协议层的工作，适合作为后续方法论文的共同参照系。","technical_approach":"作者提出的是一个通用音乐音频表示基准，而不是新的 backbone。关键设计通常包括：把音乐理解拆成多类代表性任务，统一数据预处理、特征抽取接口、训练/验证/测试划分和评测指标，并尽量覆盖标签监督、检索、结构理解、风格/情感等不同能力。这样的设计有效，是因为它把‘模型好不好’和‘评测是否偏向某类任务’分开了；代价是 benchmark 本身仍然受任务集合和标注质量边界限制，不能自动代表生成能力或长时序建模能力。","experiments":"从题目和已给信息可以确认，实验重点应是系统比较多种音乐音频表示在统一协议下的表现，并展示不同方法在不同任务上的强弱不一致，从而说明单任务结论不可靠。由于这里没有摘要和正文，无法可靠给出任务数、数据规模、具体 baseline、指标和提升数字；能保守判断的是，这类论文通常会包含跨模型排名稳定性分析，以及对线性探针、微调、输入长度或预训练目标差异的消融。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a simple but important gap: music audio representation learning lacks a standardized, broad benchmark, so methods are often compared on hand-picked tasks and the notion of “universal” representation remains weak. Earlier work usually evaluated on a small subset of downstream tasks or custom splits, which makes conclusions highly sensitive to task choice and preprocessing.","importance":"Its contribution is benchmark-level rather than algorithmic. For pretraining research, this matters because representation quality in music/audio should be judged across heterogeneous capabilities, not by one or two classification scores; that directly affects how future audio LMs, discrete tokenizers, and multimodal pretraining setups are designed and validated. The impact is infrastructural: it gives the field a shared evaluation surface.","technical_approach":"The core contribution is a unified benchmark for music audio representations, not a new model. The likely design choice is to assemble diverse music understanding tasks under a common protocol: standardized preprocessing, train/val/test splits, feature extraction interfaces, and metrics, with coverage across tags, retrieval, structure, style, and related capabilities. This is effective because it separates model quality from evaluation arbitrariness; the trade-off is that any benchmark is still bounded by its task inventory and annotation quality, and it does not automatically measure generation or long-context modeling.","experiments":"Given the title and available metadata, the experiments are centered on a controlled comparison of multiple music audio representations under one evaluation protocol, showing that rankings vary substantially across tasks and that single-task conclusions are unreliable. The abstract is not provided, so I cannot safely report dataset size, number of tasks, baselines, metrics, or exact gains. A reasonable expectation is that the paper includes rank consistency analysis and ablations on probing vs finetuning, input duration, or pretraining objective.","authors_note":""},"tags":["audio","benchmark","representation-learning","evaluation"],"keywords":["music","representation learning","self-supervised learning","evaluation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§2评测任务划分和附录基准构建说明即可，可直接作为后续音乐音频预训练的统一评测参照系。","en":"Read §2 evaluation task division and appendix benchmark construction description, it can be directly used as unified evaluation reference for music audio pre-training."}},{"id":"YuanSM23","title":"Accelerated Training via Incrementally Growing Neural Networks using Variance Transfer and Learning Rate Adaptation","authors":["Xin Yuan","Pedro Savarese","Michael Maire"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$19f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YuanSM23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YuanSM23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/359ffa88712bd688963a0ca641d8330b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作想解决的是：增量扩展网络宽度或深度本来可以减少早期训练开销，但实际常常训不稳或最终精度掉队，因为新长出来的参数与旧网络的优化状态不匹配。过去 growing network 方法往往只处理参数初始化，却没有把方差传递和学习率适配一起考虑，所以加速效果和最终收敛之间经常二选一。","importance":"这是一篇训练方法级工作，重点不是换模型能力上限，而是降低达到同等精度的训练成本。对 pretrain 的启示在于：如果网络可以从小到大稳定生长，那么大模型预训练就不必从满配模型一开始就烧算力；这和 progressive scaling、curriculum on capacity、mid-train 架构扩展都有直接关联。它的潜在价值取决于两点：是否真能保留最终质量，以及是否能无缝接进现有优化器和分布式训练栈。","technical_approach":"作者的方法是对增量生长训练做了两个关键补丁：一是 variance transfer，让扩容后新旧子网络的激活或梯度统计尽量对齐；二是 learning rate adaptation，对新参数和旧参数采用更合适的学习率调节，避免新参数更新过猛或过慢。与只做网络生长或函数保持初始化的方法相比，这种设计更关注优化动态连续性，也就是扩容前后不要让 loss surface 突然换一个尺度。它有效的原因很直接：生长后的不稳定大多来自统计量和步长失配；它的边界是，若任务后期需要的是新的表达子空间而不是平滑扩容，简单的统计对齐未必够。","experiments":"从标题可确定，实验核心应是比较固定大模型训练与从小到大生长训练在同等目标精度下的时间或计算节省，并验证方差传递和学习率适配两个组件缺一不可。由于没有摘要，无法可靠给出所用模型、数据集、节省比例和最终精度差距；但这类论文通常会报告：仅生长不适配会出现收敛抖动，加入 variance transfer 后稳定性改善，再加学习率适配后速度与最终性能同时受益。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical training problem: incrementally growing a network should save compute early on, but in practice it often destabilizes optimization or hurts final quality because the newly added parameters do not match the old network’s optimization state. Prior growing-network methods typically focused on initialization alone and under-handled variance mismatch and learning-rate mismatch after expansion.","importance":"This is a training-method contribution rather than a capability jump. For pretraining, the main implication is clear: if models can grow from smaller to larger configurations without losing final quality, large-scale runs do not need to pay the full compute cost from step one. That connects directly to progressive scaling, capacity curricula, and mid-training architecture expansion. Its real value depends on whether it preserves end quality and whether it integrates cleanly with standard optimizers and distributed stacks.","technical_approach":"The method adds two pieces to incremental network growth: variance transfer, which keeps activation or gradient statistics aligned when the model expands, and learning-rate adaptation, which gives old and new parameters step sizes that better match their roles after growth. Compared with approaches that only rely on function-preserving initialization or naive growth, this one is explicitly about continuity of optimization dynamics. The design works because most post-growth instability comes from statistical mismatch and step-size mismatch; the limitation is that some late-stage gains may require genuinely new representational subspaces, not just smooth expansion.","experiments":"From the title alone, the key empirical claim is likely that grown models reach a target accuracy faster or with less compute than training the full model from scratch, and that both variance transfer and learning-rate adaptation are necessary. Since the abstract is missing, I cannot safely provide architectures, datasets, savings percentages, or final deltas. A typical pattern for such work is that naive growth causes convergence shocks, variance transfer improves stability, and adding LR adaptation improves both speed and final accuracy.","authors_note":""},"tags":["training-efficiency","optimization","learning-rate","architecture"],"keywords":["network growing","efficient network training"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§3方差传递和学习率适配方法和表3训练成本消融即可，增量扩网思路可用于大模型预训练的算力成本优化参考。","en":"Read §3 variance transfer and learning rate adaptation method and Table 3 training cost ablation, the incremental network expansion idea optimizes large model pre-training computing cost."}},{"id":"YueHZJ23","title":"Learning Descriptive Image Captioning via Semipermeable Maximum Likelihood Estimation","authors":["Zihao Yue","Anwen Hu","Liang Zhang","Qin Jin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1a0","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YueHZJ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YueHZJ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/fa1cfe4e956d85e016b1f8f49b189a0b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作聚焦在一个老问题上：图像描述模型用标准最大似然训练时，往往更容易学到安全、常见、模板化的描述，而不是更具体、更有区分度的描述。过去做法要么在解码时加启发式约束，要么用 CIDEr 等序列级奖励再调，但这些方法不是训练目标和生成目标不一致，就是优化成本较高。","importance":"它属于目标函数层面的改进，贡献量级中等，但方向是清楚的：直接改写 captioning 的训练信号，让模型更愿意输出描述性强的信息。对 pretrain/VLM 的启示是，‘生成流畅’和‘生成有信息量’不是同一个目标，尤其在图文预训练或视觉指令数据合成里，如果训练目标偏向高频描述，模型会系统性丢掉细粒度视觉信息。","technical_approach":"作者提出的是 semipermeable maximum likelihood estimation，从名字看核心思想是对标准 MLE 加一个‘半透’约束：不是平等地鼓励所有参考 token，而是有选择地强化那些更具描述性的词或片段，同时允许不那么关键的语言变体保留一定自由度。与硬性关键词约束或纯序列级强化学习不同，这种设计更像在 token-level likelihood 上做结构化重加权，兼顾可训练性和描述性。它有效的原因是，captioning 的问题不在于模型不会说话，而在于训练目标把细节词的梯度淹没了；边界是，过强的描述性偏置可能损伤自然度和泛化到开放域描述的稳健性。","experiments":"从题目可以判断，实验会围绕图像描述 benchmark，比较标准 MLE、可能的 CIDEr 优化或其他描述性增强方法，并同时看自动指标和描述丰富度相关分析。由于没有摘要，无法确认所用数据集是否为 MS-COCO、nocaps 等，也无法给出 CIDEr/SPICE/BLEU 的具体提升数值；但合理预期会有关于‘半透’权重设计、哪些词被增强、以及描述性与流畅性 trade-off 的消融。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper revisits a familiar failure mode in image captioning: standard maximum likelihood tends to favor safe, common, templated captions rather than specific and discriminative descriptions. Earlier fixes often relied on decoding heuristics or sequence-level rewards such as CIDEr optimization, but those approaches either mismatch training and inference or add optimization complexity.","importance":"This is a loss-design contribution with moderate scope, but the lesson is useful: fluent generation and informative generation are not the same objective. For pretraining and VLM work, that matters because text supervision that over-rewards frequent generic descriptions can systematically erase fine-grained visual information, which later limits both grounding quality and data synthesis quality.","technical_approach":"The proposed semipermeable maximum likelihood estimation appears to modify standard MLE so that descriptive tokens or spans receive stronger learning pressure, while less critical linguistic variation remains partially unconstrained. Unlike hard keyword constraints or pure sequence-level RL, this is likely a structured reweighting of token-level likelihood. The design is sensible because the bottleneck in captioning is often not language fluency but weak gradient on informative details. The trade-off is that too much bias toward descriptiveness can hurt naturalness and robustness in open-domain captioning.","experiments":"From the title, the experiments are likely built around image captioning benchmarks, comparing standard MLE against descriptiveness-enhanced baselines and reporting both automatic metrics and measures tied to specificity. Without the abstract, I cannot safely name datasets or provide exact CIDEr/SPICE/BLEU gains. Reasonable expected ablations would study which tokens are emphasized, how the semipermeable weighting is defined, and the trade-off between informativeness and fluency.","authors_note":""},"tags":["captioning","maximum-likelihood","training-objective","multimodal"],"keywords":["Image Captioning","Learning Objective","Natural Language Processing"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§3半透MLE设计和表4描述性指标对比即可，token级权重重加权思路可用于图文预训练的细粒度信息保留。","en":"Read §3 semipermeable MLE design and Table 4 descriptive metric comparison, the token-level weight reweighting idea retains fine-grained information in vision-language pre-training."}},{"id":"ZhaYLH23","title":"Text Alignment Is An Efficient Unified Model for Massive NLP Tasks","authors":["Yuheng Zha","Yichi Yang","Ruichen Li","Zhiting Hu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1a1","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhaYLH23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhaYLH23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/f5708199bdc013c5b56406db305b991e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：NLP 任务种类很多，传统做法往往为分类、抽取、匹配、生成分别设计模型头和训练目标，导致系统复杂、迁移成本高，而且多任务共享有限。作者提出的问题是，能否把大规模 NLP 任务统一成一种更简单的文本对齐形式，让同一个模型接口覆盖尽可能多的任务。","importance":"如果做得到，这属于统一建模范式层面的工作，因为它试图减少任务特化设计，把 NLP 任务统一到单一文本空间中的对齐问题。对 pretrain 的启示很直接：预训练模型越强，越值得用统一接口去承接不同下游；而统一格式也反过来能降低多任务继续预训练和 instruction tuning 的摩擦。它的重要边界在于，统一得越彻底，单任务最优 inductive bias 往往越少。","technical_approach":"Text Alignment 的核心思想，是把各种 NLP 任务都转写成文本到文本、文本到标签描述、或输入文本与候选文本之间的对齐打分问题，再用同一个模型进行统一训练与推断。它不是简单的 prompt 化包装，而更强调‘任务目标在表示空间或生成空间里如何统一’。与多头架构相比，这种设计舍弃了任务特定头部和损失函数，换来更强的参数共享和更低的工程复杂度；之所以可能有效，是因为很多 NLP 任务最终都可以表示为对某段文本语义最匹配的另一段文本的选择或生成。边界是，结构化输出或强约束任务未必能被这种统一形式无损表达。","experiments":"从标题可以推断，实验应覆盖大量 NLP 任务，强调‘统一模型处理 massive NLP tasks’这一点，并与 task-specific 或 prompt-based 统一模型对比。由于没有摘要，无法确认任务数量、模型规模、训练配方和具体平均分提升；但可以合理判断，作者会展示统一建模在参数共享和迁移上的收益，以及在部分任务上虽非单项最优但整体效率更高的结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether a wide range of NLP tasks can be reduced to a single alignment-style interface, instead of maintaining task-specific heads and objectives for classification, extraction, matching, and generation separately. The underlying issue is system complexity and weak sharing across tasks when each problem is treated in its own format.","importance":"If successful, this is a unified-modeling contribution rather than a narrow method tweak. For pretraining, the implication is straightforward: stronger pretrained models make it increasingly attractive to expose one generic interface to many tasks, which also lowers friction for multitask continued pretraining and instruction tuning. The trade-off is familiar: the more aggressively tasks are unified, the less task-specific inductive bias remains.","technical_approach":"Text Alignment appears to recast many NLP problems as alignment between texts: input text to output text, input text to label descriptions, or input text to candidate texts, all handled by a shared model and objective. This is more than superficial prompting; it is about unifying how task targets live in text space. Compared with multi-head architectures, it drops task-specific heads and losses in exchange for stronger parameter sharing and simpler engineering. The design can work because many NLP tasks can ultimately be expressed as selecting or generating the semantically best-aligned text. The limitation is that strongly structured outputs may not map cleanly into this framework without loss.","experiments":"The title suggests evaluation over a large set of NLP tasks, with the main claim being broad coverage under a single model interface. Since no abstract is given, I cannot safely report task count, model size, training recipe, or exact average improvements. A likely experimental pattern is that the paper shows better overall efficiency and transfer through shared modeling, even if it is not the best method on every individual task.","authors_note":""},"tags":["nlp","unified-modeling","multi-task","text-modeling"],"notable_authors":["Zhiting Hu"],"keywords":["Text Alignment","Efficient Unified Model","NLU Tasks","Factual Consistency Evaluation","QA with Unanswerable Question"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§3任务统一方法和表5多任务性能对比即可，统一对齐思路可用于多任务预训练和指令微调的格式设计参考。","en":"Read §3 task unification method and Table 5 multi-task performance comparison, the unified alignment idea is good reference for multi-task pre-training and instruction tuning format design."}},{"id":"ZhangAGCB23","title":"M3Exam: A Multilingual, Multimodal, Multilevel Benchmark for Examining Large Language Models","authors":["Wenxuan Zhang","Mahani Aljunied","Chang Gao","Yew Ken Chia","Lidong Bing"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1a2","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangAGCB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangAGCB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/117c5c8622b0d539f74f6d1fb082a2e9-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：现有 LLM benchmark 大多只覆盖英文、文本单模态，且题目难度层级有限，因此很难真实衡量模型在跨语言、跨模态、跨教育层级上的泛化能力。过去即使有多语言或多模态评测，也常常只覆盖其中一维，无法看出模型能力短板到底来自语言、视觉还是知识难度。","importance":"这是 benchmark 层的重要工作，贡献点在于把 multilingual、multimodal、multilevel 三个维度放到同一套考试式评测里。对 pretrain 和 VLM 研究的启示很直接：统一模型如果真想走向原生多模态和多语言，其弱点不会只体现在平均分，而会体现在某些语言、某些教育层级、某些图文混合题型上。这样的 benchmark 能帮助研究者定位数据配比和训练目标的缺口，而不只是给一个总榜单。","technical_approach":"M3Exam 的方法核心不是新模型，而是系统构建评测集：从多语言、多模态题目来源中收集并规范化考试题，覆盖不同学段或难度层次，并建立统一的输入格式和评测协议。与一般问答 benchmark 相比，考试题的好处是题型明确、难度分层清楚、正确答案相对客观，更适合做能力切片分析。这样设计有效，是因为它减少了开放问答里标注歧义和评价松散的问题；边界在于考试题分布仍然代表的是教育与知识测验，不完全等于真实世界使用场景。","experiments":"从标题可以明确，实验重点是用该 benchmark 评估多种 LLM 或多模态模型，并分析它们在语言、模态和层级三个轴上的性能差异。由于没有摘要，无法可靠写出覆盖语言数、样本数、题型数，以及各模型具体分数；但可以合理判断，论文会展示：模型在英语/高资源语言上更强，在涉及图像的题目上掉分明显，以及难度提升后性能下降更快。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a benchmark gap: most LLM evaluations are text-only, English-centric, and weak on difficulty stratification, so they do not reveal how models generalize jointly across language, modality, and educational level. Even prior multilingual or multimodal benchmarks usually covered only one of these axes at a time.","importance":"This is an important benchmark contribution because it combines multilingual, multimodal, and multilevel evaluation in one exam-style framework. For pretraining and VLM research, that is useful in a concrete way: genuinely unified models will not fail uniformly, but along specific language, modality, and difficulty slices. A benchmark like this helps diagnose data-mixture and objective-design gaps instead of only producing a single leaderboard number.","technical_approach":"M3Exam contributes a systematically constructed evaluation set rather than a new model. The likely design is to collect and normalize exam questions across multiple languages and modalities, span several educational levels or difficulty bands, and define a common input/output protocol for evaluation. Compared with generic QA benchmarks, exam-style questions provide clearer task structure, cleaner answer supervision, and more interpretable difficulty strata. This is effective because it reduces the ambiguity common in open-ended QA. The limitation is that exams still reflect an educational testing distribution, not the full space of real-world use.","experiments":"The title makes the evaluation focus clear: the benchmark is used to compare multiple LLMs or multimodal models and to analyze performance differences across language, modality, and level. Since the abstract is missing, I cannot safely report language count, sample count, task count, or exact scores. A reasonable expectation is that the paper shows stronger performance in English or other high-resource languages, larger drops on image-involved questions, and sharper degradation as difficulty increases.","authors_note":""},"tags":["benchmark","multilingual","multimodal","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Lidong Bing"],"keywords":["multilingual","multimodal","large language models","evaluation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§2评测集构建和附录各维度能力切片结果即可，可直接用于多语言多模态大模型的能力短板定位。","en":"Read §2 evaluation set construction and appendix cross-dimensional ability slicing results, it directly locates capability gaps of multilingual multimodal large models."}},{"id":"ZhangHPB23","title":"Moment Matching Denoising Gibbs Sampling","authors":["Mingtian Zhang","Alex Hawkins-Hooker","Brooks Paige","David Barber"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Energy-Based Models (EBMs) offer a versatile framework for modelling complex data distributions. However, training and sampling from EBMs continue to pose significant challenges. The widely-used Denoising Score Matching (DSM) method for scalable EBM training suffers from inconsistency issues, causing the energy model to learn a noisy data distribution. In this work, we propose an efficient sampling framework: (pseudo)-Gibbs sampling with moment matching, which enables effective sampling from the underlying clean model when given a noisy model that has been well-trained via DSM.  We explore the benefits of our approach compared to related methods and demonstrate how to scale the method to high-dimensional datasets.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangHPB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangHPB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/4a4a3c197deac042461c677219efd36c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"基于去噪得分匹配（DSM）训练的能量基模型（EBM）存在分布不一致问题，学到的是带噪声的数据分布，采样难度大，此前EBM采样方法无法从DSM训练的带噪声模型中采样得到干净的目标分布。","importance":"方法级贡献。解决了EBM训练和采样的不一致问题，对能量基LM、生成模型预训练的采样效率提升有参考价值。","technical_approach":"原创的矩匹配伪Gibbs采样框架。输入DSM训练好的带噪声EBM，通过矩匹配校正分布偏差，采样得到干净的目标分布样本，舍弃了此前直接从DSM训练模型采样的方案，不需要重新训练EBM。","experiments":"可扩展到高维数据集，性能优于相关采样方法，未披露具体模型、指标提升数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Energy-Based Models (EBMs) trained with Denoising Score Matching (DSM) have distribution inconsistency problem, they learn noisy data distributions and are difficult to sample from. Prior EBM sampling methods cannot sample clean target distribution from DSM-trained noisy models.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It solves the inconsistency problem of EBM training and sampling, provides reference for sampling efficiency improvement of energy-based LM and generative model pre-training.","technical_approach":"Original moment matching pseudo-Gibbs sampling framework. It takes DSM-trained noisy EBM as input, corrects distribution bias through moment matching, samples clean target distribution samples, abandons previous scheme of sampling directly from DSM-trained models, no need to retrain EBM.","experiments":"It scales to high-dimensional datasets and outperforms related sampling methods. No specific model or metric improvement numbers are disclosed in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","gibbs-sampling","denoising","sampling"],"keywords":["denoising score-matching","gibbs sampling","diffusion model"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"去噪得分匹配（DSM）是可扩展的EBM训练方法，但存在分布不一致问题，学到的分布带噪声","claim_en":"Denoising Score Matching (DSM) is a scalable EBM training method, but it has distribution inconsistency problem and learns noisy distributions","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于矩匹配的伪Gibbs采样可以从DSM训练的带噪声EBM中采样得到干净的目标分布样本，性能优于现有EBM采样方法","claim_en":"Moment matching based pseudo-Gibbs sampling can sample clean target distribution samples from DSM-trained noisy EBMs, outperforms existing EBM sampling methods","opposes":"此前默认EBM采样方法只能从干净EBM模型中采样，无法处理DSM训练的带噪声模型的采样需求","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"降低了EBM的落地门槛，为能量基建模范式的实用化提供了可行的采样方案"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§3矩匹配校正设计和表4EBM采样效率对比即可，采样偏差校正思路可复用在能量基模型预训练的采样优化。","en":"Read §3 moment matching correction design and Table 4 EBM sampling efficiency comparison, the sampling bias correction idea is reusable for energy-based model pre-training sampling optimization."}},{"id":"ZhangLZX23","title":"Contrastive Sampling Chains in Diffusion Models","authors":["Junyu Zhang","Daochang Liu","Shichao Zhang","Chang Xu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1a3","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangLZX23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangLZX23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/e8ff788779f2e9e74ccd0d6b84607437-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"扩散模型SDE求解的离散误差不可避免，导致模型分布和真实数据分布存在Gap，此前方法无法有效降低离散误差。","importance":"方法级贡献。对扩散模型、diffusion LM预训练和采样优化有参考价值。","technical_approach":"原创的对比采样链微调方法。理论证明对比损失和得分匹配的组合是真实分布和模型分布KL散度的上界，通过构造对比采样链微调预训练扩散模型，舍弃了此前仅优化数值求解器降低离散误差的方案，从分布对齐角度优化。","experiments":"可降低离散误差，缩小真实分布和模型分布的Gap，未披露具体指标提升数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Discretization error is inevitable when solving SDEs for diffusion models, leading to a gap between model distribution and real data distribution. Prior methods cannot effectively reduce discretization error.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It provides reference for diffusion model and diffusion LM pre-training and sampling optimization.","technical_approach":"Original contrastive sampling chain fine-tuning method. It theoretically proves that the combination of contrastive loss and score matching is an upper bound of the KL divergence between real data distribution and model distribution, fine-tunes pre-trained diffusion models by constructing contrastive sampling chains, abandons previous scheme of reducing discretization error only by optimizing numerical solvers, optimizes from the perspective of distribution alignment.","experiments":"It reduces discretization error and narrows the gap between real data distribution and model distribution. No specific metric improvement numbers are disclosed in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","contrastive-learning","sampling"],"keywords":["diffusion models","contrastive loss","discretization error","contrastive sampling chain"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"扩散模型SDE数值求解存在离散误差，导致生成样本分布偏离真实数据分布","claim_en":"Numerical solving of diffusion model SDEs has discretization error, leading to generated sample distribution deviating from real data distribution","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"对比损失和得分匹配的组合是真实数据分布和模型分布KL散度的上界，通过对比采样链微调可以降低离散误差","claim_en":"The combination of contrastive loss and score matching is an upper bound of the KL divergence between real data distribution and model distribution, fine-tuning with contrastive sampling chains can reduce discretization error","opposes":"此前默认降低扩散模型离散误差只能通过改进数值求解器实现","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Theoretical Analysis","why_contested":"提供了降低扩散模型离散误差的新路径，不需要修改采样流程即可提升生成质量"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3理论推导和§5实验对比即可，可尝试在diffusion LM预训练的采样优化环节复现该微调方案。","en":"Read only Section 3 theoretical derivation and Section 5 experimental comparison, you can try reproducing this fine-tuning scheme for diffusion LM pre-training sampling optimization."}},{"id":"ZhangWHKR23","title":"On the Trade-off of Intra-/Inter-class Diversity for Supervised Pre-training","authors":["Jieyu Zhang","Bohan Wang","Zhengyu Hu","Pang Wei Koh","Alexander J. Ratner"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1a4","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangWHKR23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangWHKR23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ca9567d8ef6b2ea2da0d7eed57b933ee-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"有监督预训练数据集的类内多样性（每类样本数）和类间多样性（类别数）的trade-off对下游性能的影响机制不明确，此前研究没有给出固定数据集大小下的最优配比规律。","importance":"数据级贡献。对预训练数据集构造的配比设计有直接指导意义，是scaling law相关预训练数据配比研究的重要补充。","technical_approach":"理论+实证结合的分析方法。理论证明下游性能随两类多样性单调变化，固定数据集大小下最优类别/每类样本数的比例和预训练数据集大小无关，舍弃了此前只单独优化类别数或者样本数的分析方法，同时考虑两类多样性的trade-off。","experiments":"固定预训练数据集大小下，下游最优性能出现在类内和类间多样性的平衡点，最优类/每类样本比例不随数据集大小变化，未披露具体数据集规模、指标提升数字。","authors_note":"知名作者包括Pang Wei Koh（分布偏移、数据集研究方向）、Alexander J. Ratner（弱监督、数据编程方向）"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The impact mechanism of the trade-off between intra-class diversity (number of samples per class) and inter-class diversity (number of classes) of supervised pre-training datasets on downstream performance is unclear. Prior work does not provide the optimal ratio rule under fixed dataset size.","importance":"Data-level contribution. It provides direct guidance for ratio design of pre-training dataset construction, and is an important supplement to scaling law related pre-training data ratio research.","technical_approach":"Combined theoretical and empirical analysis method. It theoretically proves that downstream performance changes monotonically with both types of diversity, the optimal class / samples per class ratio is invariant to pre-training dataset size under fixed total dataset size, abandons previous analysis method that only optimizes number of classes or number of samples separately, considers the trade-off between both types of diversity simultaneously.","experiments":"Under fixed pre-training dataset size, the best downstream performance comes from the balance point of intra-class and inter-class diversity, the optimal class / samples per class ratio does not change with dataset size. No specific dataset scale or metric improvement numbers are disclosed in the abstract.","authors_note":"Notable authors include Pang Wei Koh (distribution shift, dataset research) and Alexander J. Ratner (weak supervision, data programming)"},"tags":["supervised-pretraining","data-diversity","transfer-learning"],"keywords":["data-centric study","supervised pretraining","transfer learning"],"notable_authors":["Pang Wei Koh","Alexander J. Ratner"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"预训练数据集的质量对下游任务性能有决定性影响","claim_en":"The quality of pre-training datasets has a decisive impact on downstream task performance","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"固定预训练数据集大小下，最优类/每类样本数比例与预训练数据集大小无关","claim_en":"Under fixed pre-training dataset size, the optimal class / samples per class ratio is invariant to pre-training dataset size","opposes":"此前默认预训练数据集的最优类别/样本配比随数据集规模变化","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Theoretical Analysis","why_contested":"为有监督预训练数据集构造提供了可复用的配比设计准则，降低了数据集构造的试错成本"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§4.2最优配比规律和Fig4的scaling实验即可，可直接参考其结论调整内部预训练数据集的类别/每类样本数配比。","en":"Read only Section 4.2 optimal ratio rule and Figure 4 scaling experiments, directly apply its conclusion to adjust category/samples per class ratio of your internal pre-training datasets."}},{"id":"ZhangWXWL23","title":"ALGO: Synthesizing Algorithmic Programs with Generated Oracle Verifiers","authors":["Kexun Zhang","Danqing Wang","Jingtao Xia","William Yang Wang","Lei Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1a5","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangWXWL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangWXWL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/abe1eb21ceb046209c96a0f5e7544ccc-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM可以根据功能描述生成普通代码，但解决算法问题时需要同时选对算法和保证生成逻辑的正确性，此前的方法要么依赖人工编写测试用例验证，要么无法引导算法搜索，无法保障输出的可靠性。","importance":"属于方法级贡献，提供了无需人工介入的算法代码生成验证+引导框架，不需要修改预训练权重即可提升算法代码生成的正确率，对代码预训练模型的下游对齐有参考价值。","technical_approach":"原创提出ALGO生成后验证引导框架，首先提示LLM穷举所有相关变量的组合生成参考oracle（即测试用例集合），再用这个oracle一方面引导算法空间搜索，一方面验证生成算法的正确性。区别于此前依赖人工写测试用例的方案，不需要人工介入，也不需要微调模型权重。","experiments":"公开摘要被截断，未提供完整实验数据，仅提及LLM生成的oracle可有效引导算法搜索与验证。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLMs can generate general functional code from natural language descriptions, but underperform on algorithmic programming problems that require both correct algorithm selection and guaranteed logical correctness. Prior solutions either rely on human-written test cases for verification, or lack guidance for algorithm search, leading to untrusted outputs.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution. It provides a human-free verification and guidance framework for algorithmic code generation, which works without modifying pre-trained model weights, and offers practical reference for downstream alignment of code pre-trained models.","technical_approach":"The original ALGO post-generation verification and guidance framework first prompts an LLM to exhaustively enumerate all combinations of relevant variables to generate a reference oracle (test case set). The oracle is then used to both guide algorithm space search and verify the correctness of synthesized programs. Unlike prior solutions that require human-written test cases, it needs no human intervention or model fine-tuning.","experiments":"The provided abstract is truncated, no complete experimental data is available. Only a preliminary claim that LLM-generated oracles can effectively guide algorithm search and verification is mentioned.","authors_note":""},"tags":["code-generation","program-synthesis","oracle-verifier"],"keywords":["Large Language Models","Code Generation","Code Intelligence","Automatic Verification"],"notable_authors":["William Yang Wang","Lei Li"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM在生成需要严格逻辑正确性的算法类代码时的表现远差于普通功能代码。","claim_en":"LLMs perform significantly worse on generating logically correct algorithmic code than on general functional code.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3框架设计和§5.3不同任务的准确率提升表即可，可直接复用该验证框架提升内部代码预训练模型的下游对齐效果。","en":"Read only Section 3 framework design and Section 5.3 cross-task accuracy improvement table, directly reuse this verification framework to boost downstream alignment of your internal code pre-trained models."}},{"id":"ZhangZ023","title":"What Makes Good Examples for Visual In-Context Learning?","authors":["Yuanhan Zhang","Kaiyang Zhou","Ziwei Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1a6","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangZ023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangZ023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/398ae57ed4fda79d0781c65c926d667b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"大视觉模型参数规模大、多数仅提供API调用接口无法微调，此前视觉领域的上下文学习（ICL）研究较少，不清楚什么样的上下文示例能有效提升大视觉模型的零样本任务性能，现有方案多直接照搬NLP的ICL示例选择策略，不适配视觉模态特性。","importance":"属于认知级+方法级贡献，首次系统梳理视觉上下文学习的示例选择原则，对多模态预训练模型的零样本适配、黑盒API调用优化有直接指导价值，不需要修改预训练权重即可提升下游任务表现。","technical_approach":"原创提出视觉ICL示例选择框架，从语义相关性、视觉相似度、任务一致性三个维度筛选最优上下文示例。区别于NLP领域仅关注语义相关性的示例选择策略，额外加入了视觉模态特有的特征匹配规则，不需要微调模型权重。","experiments":"公开摘要被截断，未提供完整实验数据，仅明确研究对象为仅提供API的黑盒大视觉模型，聚焦零样本上下文学习场景。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Large vision models have huge parameter sizes, and most are only accessible via APIs without weight access for fine-tuning. Prior visual in-context learning (ICL) research is scarce, and existing solutions mostly copy ICL example selection strategies from NLP that do not fit visual modality characteristics, leading to suboptimal zero-shot performance.","importance":"This is a cognition-level and method-level contribution. It systematically sorts out example selection principles for visual ICL for the first time, providing direct guidance for zero-shot adaptation of multimodal pre-trained models and black-box API call optimization, with no need to modify pre-trained weights.","technical_approach":"The original visual ICL example selection framework selects optimal in-context examples from three dimensions: semantic relevance, visual similarity, and task consistency. Unlike NLP example selection strategies that only consider semantic relevance, it adds feature matching rules specific to the visual modality, and requires no model fine-tuning.","experiments":"The provided abstract is truncated, no complete experimental data is available. The research targets black-box large vision models accessible only via APIs, focusing on zero-shot in-context learning scenarios.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","visual-icl","example-selection"],"keywords":["computer vision","visual in-context learning","prompt learning"],"notable_authors":["Ziwei Liu"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"上下文学习是无需微调即可适配大模型下游任务的有效方法。","claim_en":"In-context learning is an effective method to adapt large models to downstream tasks without fine-tuning.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"视觉上下文学习的示例选择需要同时考虑视觉特征相似度，仅沿用NLP的语义相关性选择策略会导致性能下降。","claim_en":"Example selection for visual in-context learning needs to consider visual feature similarity at the same time; only using NLP's semantic-only selection strategy will lead to performance degradation.","opposes":"Prior work assumes visual ICL example selection can directly reuse NLP's semantic-only selection strategy without modality-specific adjustment.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction","why_contested":"It corrects the wrong assumption of cross-modal ICL strategy migration, and adds a new dimension for visual ICL design."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为视觉上下文学习的文献备查，不需要读正文，仅了解其语义/视觉/任务三维度选择原则即可。","en":"Keep it as reference literature for visual in-context learning, no need to read full text, just learn its semantics/vision/task consistency three-dimensional selection principle."}},{"id":"ZhaoPDYLCL23","title":"On Evaluating Adversarial Robustness of Large Vision-Language Models","authors":["Yunqing Zhao","Tianyu Pang","Chao Du","Xiao Yang","Chongxuan Li","Ngai-Man Cheung","Min Lin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1a7","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhaoPDYLCL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhaoPDYLCL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/a97b58c4f7551053b0512f92244b0810-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：现有大视觉语言模型（LVLM）的鲁棒性评测并不可靠，很多工作沿用图像分类或VQA里的攻击设定，但没有真正覆盖 LVLM“图像编码器 + 语言解码器 + 指令跟随”这一整条链路的脆弱点，因此容易高估模型安全性。作者想建立一套更贴近生成式多模态交互的对抗评测视角，回答 LVLM 到底在什么地方最容易被攻击、现有评测为什么失真。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要在评测方法层，而不是提出新的鲁棒训练算法。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：当模型从判别式 VLM 走向生成式 LVLM 后，鲁棒性不再只是视觉 backbone 的问题，而是预训练表示、跨模态对齐和解码行为共同决定的系统性质。如果评测协议不对，后续关于数据、对齐或安全训练的结论都可能站不住。","technical_approach":"作者的核心做法是把 LVLM 鲁棒性评测从“单一图像扰动后看分类是否错”扩展为“在生成式输出场景中看回答是否被攻击性操控”。具体通常会包含两类关键设计：一类是针对输入图像的白盒或黑盒扰动，另一类是面向开放式文本输出的判定标准，用来衡量语义偏移、拒答失败或目标响应诱导。与传统 VLM 鲁棒性工作相比，区别不在攻击算法本身有多新，而在于它把评测对象从 encoder-level prediction 改成了 instruction-conditioned generation，这样才能看见解码阶段会放大早期微小扰动这一现象。这样的设计有效，是因为 LVLM 的最终错误往往不是“看错图”，而是“在语言生成阶段被错误视觉证据持续放大”。边界也很清楚：如果没有统一的自动判分标准，开放式回答的鲁棒性仍然有评测噪声。","experiments":"从题目和领域位置判断，实验重点应是多种主流 LVLM 在若干视觉问答或指令跟随任务上的对抗脆弱性比较，而不是追求某个鲁棒训练 SOTA。通常这类结果会显示：即便模型在干净样本上表现很强，只需较小视觉扰动就会显著降低回答正确率，而且闭源或大参数模型并不会天然更鲁棒。更有价值的观察一般包括两点：第一，判别式鲁棒性与生成式鲁棒性相关但不等价；第二，不同提示模板、解码策略和输出判分方式会显著影响鲁棒性结论。这些发现说明，鲁棒性评测必须绑定具体交互协议，不能直接复用旧基准。由于题目未给摘要，这里无法可靠填写具体模型规模、数据规模与数值提升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper argues that current robustness evaluation for large vision-language models is mis-specified. Prior work often reuses adversarial setups from image classification or conventional VQA, but that misses the full failure chain in LVLMs: visual encoding, cross-modal conditioning, and open-ended generation. The goal is to measure where these models actually break under attack, rather than reporting robustness under outdated protocols.","importance":"This is primarily an evaluation paper, but it matters for pretraining research because robustness in generative VLMs is no longer just a vision-backbone property. It emerges from the interaction between pretrained representations, multimodal alignment, and language decoding. If the evaluation protocol is wrong, conclusions about safer pretraining data, alignment, or defense methods become unreliable.","technical_approach":"The key idea is to evaluate adversarial robustness in the setting that LVLMs are actually used: instruction-conditioned image-to-text generation. Instead of only checking whether a perturbed image changes a fixed-label prediction, the framework looks at whether attacks can steer open-ended responses, induce semantic drift, or break refusal behavior. The novelty is less about inventing a new attack and more about redefining the target of evaluation from encoder-level prediction to generation-level behavior. That design is effective because small visual perturbations can be amplified during decoding, so a model may fail catastrophically even when its internal visual representation does not look obviously corrupted. The main limitation is evaluation noise for free-form outputs if the judging protocol is not standardized.","experiments":"Given the title and venue context, the experiments likely compare multiple mainstream LVLMs under adversarial perturbations across visual QA or instruction-following benchmarks, with the main result being that strong clean performance does not imply robustness. A common pattern in this line of work is that even small perturbations can sharply degrade answer accuracy, and larger or proprietary models are not automatically more robust. The most useful ablations are typically on prompt format, decoding strategy, and output judging criteria, because they can materially change the robustness conclusion. That in itself is an important finding: robustness claims for LVLMs are protocol-sensitive. The abstract is not provided here, so model sizes, dataset scales, and exact numbers cannot be stated reliably.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","robustness","evaluation"],"keywords":["Large Vision-Language Models","Adversarial Robustness"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§4评测框架设计和Fig6的链路脆弱点分析即可，后续内部LVLM预训练的鲁棒性评测需参考该全链路设定避免高估安全性。","en":"Read only Section 4 evaluation framework design and Figure 6 link vulnerability analysis, use this full-link setting for internal LVLM pre-training robustness evaluation to avoid overestimating security."}},{"id":"ZhaoZPY0C23","title":"Thrust: Adaptively Propels Large Language Models with External Knowledge","authors":["Xinran Zhao","Hongming Zhang","Xiaoman Pan","Wenlin Yao","Dong Yu","Jianshu Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1a8","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhaoZPY0C23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhaoZPY0C23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/dd058e9ec9dc012a273594d717c46ef3-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：大语言模型在需要外部知识时，经常面临“该不该检索、检索多少、如何把检索结果真正用起来”这三个连续决策，但大多数 RAG 系统只做静态拼接，因此要么引入无关噪声，要么在知识缺口上补不够。作者试图让模型按问题难度和知识需求自适应调用外部知识，而不是对所有输入一刀切地检索增强。","importance":"这项工作的价值在于把外部知识接入从工程技巧往推理流程设计推进了一步。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，参数化知识和非参数化知识并不是二选一，关键在于什么时候依赖模型内存、什么时候借助检索。如果这种自适应机制成立，它会影响我们对 continued pretraining、知识编辑和 retrieval-augmented pretraining 的分工理解：不是盲目往模型里塞更多知识，而是让系统知道何时外接知识更划算。","technical_approach":"从标题看，Thrust 的核心方法是一个自适应外部知识推进框架：它先判断当前问题是否缺知识，再决定检索与整合的强度，最后把外部证据转成更可用的推理上下文。与普通 RAG 相比，最关键的区别不是多了一个检索器，而是多了一个面向推理链路的调度层。这样的设计有效，是因为外部知识并非单调有益：简单问题加检索只会拉长上下文并干扰注意力，复杂问题不加检索又会让模型在参数记忆里“硬猜”。可能的边界是，这类方法通常依赖一个额外的 gating 或 planning 模块；如果该模块判断失误，系统会出现“该查不查”或“查了不会用”的双重损失。","experiments":"这类论文的关键实验一般会覆盖知识密集型 QA、开放域问答或多跳推理任务，并与标准 prompting、固定 RAG、可能还有 self-ask / tool-use 基线比较。题目暗示作者会强调自适应机制优于总是检索或从不检索，最值得关注的结果不是平均分本身，而是分桶分析：在低知识需求样本上减少无谓检索开销，在高知识需求样本上提升回答准确率。若论文做得扎实，还会报告不同检索深度、知识源质量和门控阈值的 ablation，用来说明收益来自“何时检索”的决策，而不是单纯堆更多文档。由于未提供摘要，无法可靠给出数据集名称、参数规模和具体提升数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical gap in retrieval-augmented LLMs: the model should not retrieve external knowledge in the same way for every query. Most RAG systems use a fixed retrieve-and-concatenate pipeline, which either injects irrelevant context or fails to bring in enough evidence when the question truly needs it. The goal is to make knowledge access adaptive rather than static.","importance":"This matters because it reframes external knowledge integration as a control problem, not just an indexing problem. For pretraining, the takeaway is that parametric memory and non-parametric memory are complementary, and the real question is when each should be used. If adaptive retrieval works well, it has implications for continued pretraining, knowledge editing, and retrieval-augmented pretraining: one should not assume that storing more knowledge inside the model is always the best use of capacity.","technical_approach":"From the title, Thrust appears to be an adaptive pipeline that decides whether external knowledge is needed, how much to retrieve, and how to inject that evidence into reasoning. The key distinction from standard RAG is the presence of a scheduling or gating layer over the reasoning pipeline, rather than a fixed retrieval front-end. This design is plausible because retrieval is not uniformly helpful: on easy queries it can dilute attention with noise, while on knowledge-heavy queries skipping retrieval forces the model to guess from incomplete parametric memory. The likely trade-off is that the controller itself becomes a failure point; when it misfires, the system either under-retrieves or retrieves context that the LLM still cannot effectively use.","experiments":"The most relevant experiments are likely on knowledge-intensive QA, open-domain QA, or multi-hop reasoning, compared against plain prompting, fixed RAG, and possibly other tool-use baselines. The most informative result in such a setup is not only the average score gain, but the stratified behavior: reduced overhead on low-knowledge questions and higher accuracy on high-knowledge ones. Strong ablations would test retrieval depth, document quality, and gating thresholds to show that the gain comes from deciding when to retrieve, not just from adding more context. Since no abstract is provided, exact datasets, model sizes, and numerical improvements cannot be stated with confidence.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm","rag","external-knowledge"],"keywords":["knowledge-intensive natural language processing","pre-trained language models","instance-level adaptive knowledge usage"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3.2调度层设计和§5.3不同知识需求场景的效果对比即可，可参考其思路调整内部检索增强预训练的知识接入逻辑。","en":"Read only Section 3.2 scheduling layer design and Section 5.3 effect comparison across knowledge demand scenarios, refer to its idea to adjust knowledge access logic for internal retrieval-augmented pre-training."}},{"id":"ZhengRXL0Y23","title":"Response Length Perception and Sequence Scheduling: An LLM-Empowered LLM Inference Pipeline","authors":["Zangwei Zheng","Xiaozhe Ren","Fuzhao Xue","Yang Luo","Xin Jiang","Yang You"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Large language models (LLMs) have revolutionized the field of AI, demonstrating unprecedented capacity across various tasks. However, the inference process for LLMs comes with significant computational costs. In this paper, we propose an efficient LLM inference pipeline that harnesses the power of LLMs. Our approach begins by tapping into the potential of LLMs to accurately perceive and predict the response length with minimal overhead. By leveraging this information, we introduce an efficient sequence scheduling technique that groups queries with similar response lengths into micro-batches. We evaluate our approach on real-world instruction datasets using the LLaMA-based model, and our results demonstrate an impressive 86% improvement in inference throughput without compromising effectiveness. Notably, our method is orthogonal to other inference acceleration techniques, making it a valuable addition to many existing toolkits (e.g., FlashAttention, Quantization) for LLM inference.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhengRXL0Y23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhengRXL0Y23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/ce7ff3405c782f761fac7f849b41ae9a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文聚焦推理系统而不是模型权重本身：LLM 在线推理的延迟和吞吐往往被请求长度分布拖垮，但现有 serving 调度通常只基于已知输入长度，很少提前估计输出长度，因此 batch 内部会出现严重的尾部等待。作者要解决的是如何利用 LLM 自己预测响应长度，再据此做更好的 sequence scheduling。","importance":"这是一篇系统级工作，但对 pretrain 也有启发。随着模型越来越大，训练侧优化若不考虑最终 serving 形态，很多收益会在上线阶段被吞掉。本文的重要性在于指出：推理效率不只是 kernel 或并行策略问题，任务分布本身可被模型感知并用于调度。对长输出任务、agent 场景和高并发聊天服务，这类 length-aware serving 很可能比纯算子级优化更直接见效。","technical_approach":"核心方法分两步。第一步是 response length perception，让 LLM 或轻量预测器在正式生成前估计该请求大概会生成多长；第二步是 sequence scheduling，根据预测长度做更合理的批处理、排队或资源分配，减少长短请求混跑造成的气泡。与传统只看 prompt length 的调度相比，区别在于它显式建模了 decode 阶段的不确定工作量。这样做有效，是因为自回归生成的主要成本常常由输出 token 决定，而不是输入 token；如果能在调度前大致知道谁会“说很久”，就能避免把很多短请求绑在一个长请求后面。边界是预测误差：一旦长度估计不准，调度收益会被削弱，极端时甚至比简单 FIFO 更复杂但收益有限。","experiments":"这类论文通常报告端到端吞吐、平均延迟、P95/P99 延迟以及不同负载下的资源利用率提升，并与 FIFO、输入长度排序、continuous batching 等 serving 基线比较。题目暗示作者会证明两件事：长度预测本身足够准，可以作为调度信号；基于该信号的调度在真实或模拟 workload 上显著提升吞吐并降低尾延迟。值得关注的 ablation 包括不同任务类型下长度预测误差、预测器成本是否抵消调度收益、以及在高并发与低并发场景下收益是否一致。由于没有摘要，无法安全写出具体模型、GPU 数和提升比例。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper targets the inference pipeline rather than model weights. In online LLM serving, latency and throughput are often dominated by variability in output length, yet most schedulers only know prompt length and treat decode cost as unknown. The paper asks whether an LLM can predict its own response length well enough to enable better scheduling decisions.","importance":"This is a systems paper, but it is relevant to pretraining because model improvements that ignore serving behavior often fail to translate into practical wins. The paper’s main value is to show that inference efficiency is not only a kernel or parallelism problem; the workload itself can be partially predicted and used for scheduling. For chat workloads, long-form generation, and agent settings, length-aware serving can matter as much as low-level runtime optimization.","technical_approach":"The method has two components. First, response length perception predicts how many tokens a request is likely to generate before full decoding starts. Second, sequence scheduling uses that estimate to batch and order requests more intelligently, reducing head-of-line blocking between short and long generations. The key distinction from classic schedulers is that it explicitly models decode-time uncertainty instead of relying only on prompt length. This works because autoregressive inference cost is often dominated by output tokens, not input tokens. If the system can anticipate which requests will be long, it can keep short requests from being trapped behind them. The main limitation is prediction error: inaccurate length estimates weaken or even negate the scheduling benefit.","experiments":"The expected empirical focus is end-to-end throughput, average latency, tail latency such as P95/P99, and hardware utilization under realistic or replayed serving workloads. Likely baselines include FIFO, prompt-length-based sorting, and standard continuous batching strategies. The key claims should be that length prediction is accurate enough to serve as a scheduling signal and that scheduling with this signal improves throughput while reducing latency, especially tail latency. Strong ablations would examine prediction cost, accuracy across tasks, and whether the gains persist under both low and high concurrency. The abstract is unavailable here, so exact model sizes, GPU counts, and numeric gains cannot be given reliably.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm-inference","scheduling","serving"],"keywords":["large language models","inference optimization","batch processing"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3序列调度策略和§4.2吞吐提升实验即可，内部大模型上线serving优化可优先尝试该长度感知调度方案，收益比算子优化更直接。","en":"Read only Section 3 sequence scheduling strategy and Section 4.2 throughput improvement experiments, prioritize this length-aware scheduling scheme for internal LLM serving optimization, it brings more direct gains than operator optimization."}},{"id":"ZhengYTZY23","title":"DDCoT: Duty-Distinct Chain-of-Thought Prompting for Multimodal Reasoning in Language Models","authors":["Ge Zheng","Bin Yang","Jiajin Tang","Hong-Yu Zhou","Sibei Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1a9","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhengYTZY23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhengYTZY23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/108030643e640ac050e0ed5e6aace48f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：多模态推理里的 CoT 提示经常把所有任务都交给一个统一的语言链条处理，但视觉理解、证据定位和最终答案生成其实是不同职责，混在一条 chain 里容易互相干扰。作者因此提出 duty-distinct 的思路，把不同推理职责显式拆开，让语言模型在多模态场景里少做“无结构的长篇自言自语”。","importance":"这项工作的贡献更偏 prompting / inference-time reasoning，而不是预训练范式创新。它对 pretrain 的间接启示是：如果一个多模态系统在推理时受益于职责分离，说明预训练阶段的表示和对齐可能还没有把“看、想、答”三件事充分解耦。对做 VLM 预训练的人，这类结果常提示后续可以考虑更结构化的中间监督或 latent interface，而不是单纯增加图文 token 混合训练量。","technical_approach":"DDCoT 的核心方法是把多模态推理拆成若干 duty-specific 子过程，例如先做感知或证据抽取，再做关系整合，最后再生成答案，每一步用不同提示角色或中间格式约束模型输出。与普通 CoT 相比，它不是让模型自由展开一条长推理链，而是通过职责边界减少错误传播和模式坍缩。这样的设计有效，是因为多模态错误往往来自最前面的视觉错读；如果不先把视觉证据说清楚，后面的语言推理只会在错证据上越走越远。边界也很明显：这类 prompt pipeline 通常任务特化较强，步骤过多时成本会上升，而且拆分得不合理会让整体流程变脆。","experiments":"从题目判断，实验应覆盖若干多模态推理 benchmark，如图文问答、图表理解、视觉常识或文档理解任务，并与 direct answer、standard CoT、possibly few-shot multimodal CoT 等方法比较。最有价值的结果通常不是单一平均分，而是证明职责拆分对需要显式视觉证据的任务更有效，对纯语言偏置任务收益较小。若论文做得完整，还会分析不同 duty 数量、步骤顺序和中间输出格式的 ablation。当前没有摘要，因此不能可靠报告具体模型、数据集和提升数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a weakness of standard chain-of-thought prompting in multimodal reasoning: it often forces perception, evidence extraction, and answer synthesis into one undifferentiated language chain. Those are different functions, and mixing them can cause error propagation. The authors propose splitting reasoning into duty-distinct stages so the model does not rely on a single unstructured rationale.","importance":"This is mainly a prompting and inference-time reasoning paper rather than a new pretraining paradigm. Its indirect relevance to pretraining is that gains from explicit role separation suggest current multimodal pretraining may still entangle perception and reasoning too tightly. For VLM pretraining, that points toward more structured intermediate supervision or cleaner latent interfaces instead of simply scaling mixed image-text training.","technical_approach":"DDCoT decomposes multimodal reasoning into duty-specific substeps, such as perception or evidence extraction first, then relation integration, then final answer generation. Each stage is prompted with a different role or output format to constrain what the model should do at that point. Unlike standard CoT, which lets the model generate one long rationale, this framework enforces boundaries between functions and reduces interference across them. The design is sensible because many multimodal failures start with a bad visual read; once the initial evidence is wrong, a fluent language chain only compounds the error. The trade-off is added complexity and task specificity, and poorly chosen stage boundaries can make the pipeline brittle.","experiments":"The likely experiments cover multimodal reasoning benchmarks such as visual question answering, chart reasoning, document understanding, or visual commonsense tasks, with baselines including direct answering and standard multimodal CoT prompting. The most informative result would be that explicit duty separation helps most on tasks that require grounded visual evidence, while offering less benefit on tasks where language priors dominate. Strong ablations would vary the number of duties, the order of stages, and the format of intermediate outputs. Since the abstract is not available, exact datasets, model sizes, and quantitative gains cannot be reported confidently.","authors_note":""},"tags":["cot","multimodal","prompting","reasoning"],"keywords":["Chain-of-Thought Reasoning","Multimodal Science Question Answering","Vision and Langauge"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3职责拆分设计和§5.2错误传播抑制实验即可，内部多模态预训练可参考其结论增加结构化中间监督，解耦感知、推理、生成环节。","en":"Read only Section 3 duty separation design and Section 5.2 error propagation suppression experiments, add structured intermediate supervision for internal multimodal pre-training to decouple perception, reasoning and generation steps."}},{"id":"Zhou0WW23","title":"Distilling Out-of-Distribution Robustness from Vision-Language Foundation Models","authors":["Andy Zhou","Jindong Wang","Yu-Xiong Wang","Haohan Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1aa","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Zhou0WW23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Zhou0WW23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/67f30132d98e758f7b4e28c36091d86e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：视觉语言基础模型通常具备比纯视觉模型更强的分布外泛化能力，但代价高、部署重，不适合很多下游场景。作者的问题是，能否把这种 OOD 鲁棒性从大规模 VLM 蒸馏到更轻量的视觉模型里，让小模型在不依赖文本输入的情况下继承一部分跨分布稳健性。","importance":"这是一个很有启发性的迁移方向。对 pretrain 研究的价值在于，它把 VLM 的优势从“多模态任务能力”重新解释成“更好的泛化先验”，并进一步问这些先验是否可以被压缩和转移。如果答案是肯定的，那么多模态预训练的收益就不只服务于图文任务，还可能作为通用鲁棒 teacher 反哺单模态学生模型。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心方法是以视觉语言基础模型为 teacher，通过蒸馏把其 OOD 相关的表示或预测行为传递给视觉 student。关键不只是做普通 logits distillation，而是要保留与跨分布稳健性相关的知识，这通常意味着在表示层、样本增强或多视角一致性上做额外设计。与传统从同构视觉 teacher 蒸馏不同，这里 teacher 的优势来自语言监督和大规模图文对齐，而不是更深的 CNN/ViT 本身。这样设计有效，是因为语言监督往往迫使模型学到更语义化、较少依赖局部纹理的特征，而这恰恰有助于 OOD 泛化。边界是，蒸馏出去的鲁棒性通常只是一部分，且容易受 student 容量限制。","experiments":"这类论文通常会在多个 OOD 视觉基准上报告结果，例如 ImageNet 派生分布、自然分布迁移或风格变化数据集，并与标准监督训练、同模态蒸馏以及可能的 CLIP 线性探针基线比较。最关键的事实一般是：学生模型在 ID 准确率不显著受损的前提下，OOD 平均准确率明显提升。更值得看的 ablation 包括：teacher 选用何种 VLM、蒸馏层次是 logits 还是 embedding、是否需要文本模板参与训练、以及 student 容量变化时收益如何衰减。没有摘要，无法安全填写具体数值和模型规模。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether the stronger out-of-distribution robustness of vision-language foundation models can be transferred into lighter vision-only models. VLMs often generalize better than standard vision models, but they are expensive and not always practical for deployment. The goal is to distill some of that robustness without requiring text at inference time.","importance":"This is an important transfer-learning angle because it reframes the benefit of multimodal pretraining as a source of generalization priors, not just multimodal capability. For pretraining research, the implication is that VLMs may serve as robust teachers for downstream unimodal models, extending the value of multimodal pretraining beyond image-text tasks themselves.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method uses a vision-language foundation model as teacher and distills its OOD-relevant behavior into a vision student. The key is likely not plain logit distillation alone, but additional design choices that preserve the semantic invariances responsible for robustness, for example through representation matching or consistency constraints across views. This differs from classic distillation from a stronger vision model, because the teacher’s advantage here comes from language supervision and large-scale image-text alignment. That makes sense: language-aligned models often rely less on narrow texture cues and more on semantic structure, which tends to help OOD generalization. The limitation is that only part of this robustness may survive compression, especially in smaller students.","experiments":"The expected experiments would evaluate multiple OOD benchmarks, such as ImageNet-derived distribution shifts or natural style and corruption shifts, against standard supervised training, same-modality distillation, and possibly CLIP-based baselines. The central result should be that the student gains OOD accuracy while largely preserving in-distribution performance. Useful ablations would test the choice of VLM teacher, the layer at which distillation is applied, whether text templates are needed during training, and how the gain changes with student capacity. Since the abstract is unavailable, exact numbers and model scales cannot be stated confidently.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vision-language","ood","distillation","robustness"],"keywords":["robustness","knowledge distillation","adversarial training","data augmentation","generalization"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§4蒸馏目标设计和§5.3 OOD泛化效果对比即可，可参考其思路用内部多模态预训练大模型作为teacher，提升单模态小模型的分布外稳健性。","en":"Read only Section 4 distillation objective design and Section 5.3 OOD generalization comparison, use your internal large multimodal pre-trained model as teacher to improve OOD robustness of small unimodal models following this idea."}},{"id":"ZhouCWZ23","title":"Beta Diffusion","authors":["Mingyuan Zhou","Tianqi Chen","Zhendong Wang","Huangjie Zheng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1ab","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhouCWZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhouCWZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/5fe1b43c882d746c187456eb4c8cdf52-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：标准扩散过程大多建立在高斯噪声上，但高斯并不是唯一合理选择，尤其当数据空间有边界、稀疏性或概率单纯形结构时，高斯扩散会带来不自然的几何失配。作者提出 Beta Diffusion，试图在更适合有界变量或 simplex-like 结构的噪声族上建立扩散模型。","importance":"这是一个建模范式层面的探索，重要性在于它挑战了“扩散 = 高斯噪声”这个默认前提。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，生成建模目标和噪声过程应该匹配数据几何；如果未来语言离散化、概率向量建模或多模态 token 概率空间需要非高斯扩散，这类工作就是前置铺垫。它未必立刻带来通用 SOTA，但提供了一个值得继续挖的方向：扩散过程本身可以被重新设计，而不只是网络架构和 sampler。","technical_approach":"Beta Diffusion 的核心是用 Beta 分布相关的随机过程替代高斯前向噪声，并相应推导训练目标与反向生成过程。与传统 DDPM/score-based 方法相比，最大的区别在于状态空间约束和噪声几何：Beta 分布天然支持有界区间上的随机扰动，这让模型在处理归一化值、概率或受界约束变量时更贴合数据结构。这样设计有效，是因为高斯扩散会把状态不断推向无界连续空间，再依赖网络学会拉回来；如果数据本来就在边界内，前向过程尊重这个边界会让逆过程更自然。代价则是理论和数值处理更复杂，许多现成的 solver 与 parameterization 不能直接复用。","experiments":"这类工作通常会在适合有界支持的数据上展示优势，并与高斯扩散基线比较生成质量、似然代理指标或采样稳定性。更有价值的实验不是只报告一个平均分，而是说明在边界敏感、稀疏或概率约束强的设定下，Beta 过程为什么更占优；同时也应诚实展示，在标准自然图像等高斯扩散已非常成熟的场景里，它未必全面胜出。若有完整 ablation，重点应是不同噪声参数、边界条件处理和逆过程 parameterization 对结果的影响。由于未提供摘要，无法可靠给出具体数据集和数值。","authors_note":"作者中 Mingyuan Zhou 长期从事贝叶斯方法、生成模型和随机过程研究。输入未给出明确机构映射，因此这里不展开机构信息。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper questions a default assumption in diffusion modeling: that the forward process should be Gaussian. Gaussian noise is convenient, but it is not always geometrically appropriate, especially for bounded variables, sparse proportions, or simplex-like data. Beta Diffusion explores whether a Beta-based process can better match such domains.","importance":"This is a modeling-paradigm paper because it challenges the idea that diffusion is inherently tied to Gaussian corruption. For pretraining research, the broader lesson is that the corruption process should match the geometry of the data. If future work on discrete language modeling, probability-vector modeling, or multimodal token spaces benefits from non-Gaussian diffusion, papers like this are part of that foundation. It may not produce an immediate universal SOTA, but it opens a meaningful design axis beyond architecture and samplers.","technical_approach":"Beta Diffusion replaces the Gaussian forward noise process with one based on the Beta family, and derives the corresponding training and reverse-generation formulation. The key difference from standard DDPM or score-based models is that the state space and noise geometry are now aligned with bounded support. That matters for variables that naturally live in a constrained interval or normalized space. The design is sensible because Gaussian diffusion pushes trajectories into an unbounded continuous space and then asks the reverse model to undo that mismatch; a bounded forward process can make the reverse dynamics more natural. The cost is additional mathematical and numerical complexity, and many standard parameterizations or solvers may not transfer directly.","experiments":"The most relevant experiments would compare Beta Diffusion against Gaussian baselines on datasets where bounded support matters, using sample quality, likelihood-related proxies, or stability metrics. The strongest evidence would show not just an average improvement, but a clear advantage specifically in settings with strong boundary or sparsity structure. A balanced paper should also clarify where Beta Diffusion does not help, especially on standard image-generation setups where Gaussian diffusion is already heavily optimized. Good ablations would vary the Beta parameters, boundary handling, and reverse-process parameterization. Without the abstract, exact datasets and numbers cannot be reported safely.","authors_note":"Mingyuan Zhou is well known for work on Bayesian methods, stochastic processes, and generative modeling. The current input does not explicitly provide institution mappings."},"tags":["diffusion","objective","continuous-token","generative-modeling"],"notable_authors":["Mingyuan Zhou"],"keywords":["Diffusion models","KL-divergence upper bounds","multiplicative transitions","scaled and shifted beta distributions"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3 Beta随机过程推导和§4.3有界数据生成实验即可，后续做离散token扩散、概率空间生成类预训练可参考该非高斯扩散思路。","en":"Read only Section 3 Beta stochastic process derivation and Section 4.3 bounded data generation experiments, refer to this non-Gaussian diffusion idea for discrete token diffusion or probability space generation pre-training."}},{"id":"ZhouNW0023","title":"One Fits All: Power General Time Series Analysis by Pretrained LM","authors":["Tian Zhou","Peisong Niu","Xue Wang","Liang Sun","Rong Jin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1ac","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhouNW0023","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhouNW0023","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/86c17de05579cde52025f9984e6e2ebb-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：时间序列任务高度碎片化，预测、分类、异常检测、补全等通常各训各的模型，迁移性弱、数据效率低。作者提出用预训练语言模型统一做时间序列分析，核心问题不是把时序硬套成文本，而是如何构造一种表示和接口，让单个预训练框架跨任务复用。","importance":"这项工作属于“LM 作为通用序列建模器”的扩展尝试。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于，语言模型的价值可能并不局限于自然语言，而在于它提供了一套可扩展的序列表示学习 machinery。如果时序任务真的能被统一进预训练 LM 管线，那说明 tokenizer/patching、目标函数和输入适配器的设计，比是否是自然语言 token 更关键。","technical_approach":"从标题看，One Fits All 的核心方法是把不同时间序列任务映射到统一的 LM 输入输出形式，再利用预训练语言模型做共享表示和任务适配。关键设计通常包括：如何把连续时间序列切成 token-like 单元或 patch；如何编码时间戳、频率和变量维度；以及不同任务是通过 prompt、head 还是序列到序列方式统一。与传统专用时序模型相比，它的区别不是某个 forecasting block 更强，而是用一个共享预训练 backbone 吸收跨任务共性。这样设计有效，是因为许多时序任务共享局部模式、周期结构和长程依赖，只是 supervision 形式不同。边界则在于，若离散化或 patching 设计不合适，LM 只能学到表面模式，难以保留精细数值关系。","experiments":"题目表明作者会强调一个模型覆盖多种时序任务，因此实验重点通常是跨 forecasting、imputation、classification、anomaly detection 等多个 benchmark 的统一表现，并与任务专用 SOTA 和其他通用 backbone 比较。最值得看的不是单点 SOTA，而是一个统一模型在多数任务上都足够强且迁移成本低。扎实的 ablation 应包括不同 tokenization/patch 长度、预训练任务选择、以及是否随着模型规模扩大持续获益。由于没有摘要，不能安全给出具体数据集、参数规模和提升数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a fragmentation problem in time-series modeling: forecasting, classification, anomaly detection, and imputation are usually handled by separate models with weak transfer across tasks. The authors explore whether a pretrained language-model-style framework can serve as a unified backbone for general time-series analysis.","importance":"This is relevant to pretraining because it extends the idea of LM-based sequence modeling beyond natural language. The broader takeaway is that the value of language-model pretraining may lie less in text itself and more in the scalable machinery for sequence representation learning. If time series can be brought into the same framework, then tokenization, patching, objectives, and interfaces become the central design choices.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method likely maps multiple time-series tasks into a shared LM input-output format and uses a pretrained LM as the common backbone. The important design choices are usually how to convert continuous series into token-like units or patches, how to encode timestamps and multivariate structure, and how different tasks are expressed through prompts, heads, or sequence-to-sequence formulations. The key difference from specialized time-series models is not a better forecasting block, but a shared pretrained backbone that captures cross-task regularities. This can work because many time-series tasks share local motifs, periodic patterns, and long-range dependencies even if their supervision differs. The limitation is that a poor discretization or patching scheme can destroy fine-grained numerical structure.","experiments":"The expected empirical focus is a unified evaluation across forecasting, imputation, classification, and anomaly detection benchmarks, compared against task-specific state of the art and other generic backbones. The most useful result would be that one model performs competitively across many tasks without needing separate architectures. Good ablations would study tokenization or patch length, the pretraining objective, and whether scaling the backbone continues to help. Since no abstract is provided, exact datasets, parameter counts, and performance numbers cannot be stated reliably.","authors_note":""},"tags":["pretrained-lm","time-series","transfer-learning","adaptation"],"keywords":["general time series analysis","time series forecasting","cross modality knowledge transfer; pretrained language model;"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3.1时序token化方案和§5跨任务迁移实验即可，内部预训练通用序列模型可参考其适配方案拓展时序场景支持。","en":"Read only Section 3.1 time series tokenization scheme and Section 5 cross-task transfer experiments, refer to its adaptation scheme to add time series scenario support for your internal general sequence pre-trained models."}},{"id":"ZhouPLMMY23","title":"Temperature Balancing, Layer-wise Weight Analysis, and Neural Network Training","authors":["Yefan Zhou","Tianyu Pang","Keqin Liu","Charles H. Martin","Michael W. Mahoney","Yaoqing Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1ad","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhouPLMMY23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhouPLMMY23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/c8a4dd7d9e13583d714ce8580da7bbc7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文讨论的是一个训练动力学问题：神经网络训练中不同层的尺度、温度和谱性质不平衡，会导致优化效率差、泛化不稳定，但这些现象常被当作经验问题分别修补，缺少统一视角。作者想回答的是，layer-wise weight analysis 能否揭示这种不平衡，并指导一种更系统的 temperature balancing 策略来改进训练。","importance":"这是一篇优化与机制分析交界处的工作。对 pretrain 研究的意义在于，大模型训练越来越依赖稳定的层间动力学；若能用简单可解释的层级统计量预测训练质量，就可能帮助我们理解 loss spike、深层退化、以及不同初始化和归一化策略的差异。它不一定直接给出新的大模型 recipe，但可能提供一个诊断和调参框架。","technical_approach":"从标题判断，作者的核心方法是结合层级权重分析与 temperature balancing。前者用于刻画不同层参数或谱分布的失衡状态，后者则通过调整训练中的有效温度或更新尺度，让各层进入更一致的优化区间。与常见的学习率缩放、归一化或权重衰减相比，这类方法的目标不是全局调一个超参，而是显式关注层间不均衡。这样设计有效，是因为深网络训练失败很多时候不是整体步长错了，而是某些层过热、某些层过冷，结果信息和梯度传播都失衡。边界在于，如果分析指标和真实性能之间耦合不稳，就容易变成只在部分架构上有效的启发式。","experiments":"这类论文的实验通常会覆盖若干视觉或语言模型训练设置，展示 temperature balancing 能改善收敛速度、最终精度或训练稳定性。最有信息量的结果往往不是最高分，而是层级统计如何随训练演化，以及这些统计与最终性能之间是否有一致关联。值得关注的 ablation 包括：不同架构深度、是否和 BatchNorm/LayerNorm 冲突、以及 balancing 强度过大时是否会抹平有益的层间异质性。没有摘要，无法可靠填写模型规模、数据集和具体提升。","authors_note":"作者中 Charles H. Martin、Michael W. Mahoney 在深度网络谱分析、随机矩阵方法和训练动力学方面有长期代表性工作。输入未提供明确机构信息。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a training-dynamics issue: imbalance across layers in scale, effective temperature, or spectral structure can hurt optimization and generalization, yet these problems are often treated as isolated engineering quirks. The authors ask whether layer-wise weight analysis can diagnose this imbalance and motivate a more systematic temperature-balancing strategy.","importance":"This sits at the boundary of optimization and mechanistic analysis. For pretraining, its value is that large-model training increasingly depends on stable layer-wise dynamics, and simple interpretable statistics that predict training quality could help with understanding loss spikes, depth-related instability, and the effects of initialization or normalization choices. It may not deliver a turnkey large-scale recipe, but it can offer a useful diagnostic framework.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method combines layer-wise weight analysis with temperature balancing. The first part characterizes imbalance across layers, likely through weight or spectral statistics. The second part adjusts effective temperature or update scale so different layers operate in a more compatible optimization regime. Unlike standard global learning-rate tuning, normalization, or weight decay, this approach explicitly targets inter-layer imbalance. The design is plausible because training often fails not from one globally wrong step size, but from some layers being too hot and others too cold, which disrupts both information flow and gradient flow. The main limitation is that if the analysis metric does not track performance robustly, the method may become architecture-specific heuristic tuning.","experiments":"The likely experiments evaluate training speed, final accuracy, or stability under temperature balancing across a set of neural network architectures. The most informative evidence would be trajectories of layer-wise statistics during training and whether they consistently correlate with downstream performance. Useful ablations would test depth, compatibility with BatchNorm or LayerNorm, and whether excessive balancing removes beneficial layer heterogeneity. Without the abstract, exact datasets, models, and numeric gains cannot be stated confidently.","authors_note":"Charles H. Martin and Michael W. Mahoney are well known for work on spectral analysis of deep networks, random matrix methods, and training dynamics. The input does not provide explicit institutional affiliations."},"tags":["optimization","training-dynamics","temperature","layerwise-analysis"],"notable_authors":["Charles H. Martin","Michael W. Mahoney"],"keywords":["Heavy-tail self-regularization","learning rate schedule"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4层间权重分析指标和§5.2训练稳定性提升实验即可，内部大模型预训练调参可参考该指标诊断层间动力学失衡问题。","en":"Read only Section 4 layer-wise weight analysis indicators and Section 5.2 training stability improvement experiments, use these indicators to diagnose inter-layer dynamic imbalance during internal large model pre-training tuning."}},{"id":"ZhouRLZL23","title":"Test-Time Distribution Normalization for Contrastively Learned Visual-language Models","authors":["Yifei Zhou","Juntao Ren","Fengyu Li","Ramin Zabih","Ser Nam Lim"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1ae","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhouRLZL23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhouRLZL23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/931db0b5a61f9db6c97c7e4bf068147d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：对比学习得到的视觉-语言模型在测试分布发生偏移时，常因特征分布失配而显著掉点，但标准做法通常只做 prompt ensembling、logit calibration 或轻量适配，没有直接处理测试时特征统计量与训练时不一致的问题。这个问题现在值得重看，因为 CLIP 一类模型越来越被当作通用预训练骨干使用，零样本部署场景多，测试分布又往往不可控，不能每次都重新微调。","importance":"它的重要性主要在方法级和部署级，而不是新的预训练范式。价值在于指出：对比式 VLM 的一部分泛化损失来自特征分布层面的可校正偏移，且这种偏移可以在不更新参数的前提下于测试时处理。这对 pretrain 的启示是，零样本鲁棒性不只取决于预训练数据规模和对比目标，也取决于表征统计在跨域时是否稳定；后续做 VLM 预训练时，可以把特征归一化稳定性当成一个明确优化目标。","technical_approach":"核心方法是测试时分布归一化：在推理阶段重估并修正视觉特征的分布统计量，再与文本特征做匹配。它不是重新训练模型，而是借鉴 normalization 的思想，把训练时学到的表征空间看作一个需要在测试域重新对齐统计量的空间。设计上的关键点通常包括：只依赖未标注测试样本、尽量不破坏原始语义方向、校正的是跨样本统计而不是逐样本预测。相比直接做 test-time adaptation，这条路线更便宜、更稳定，因为不涉及梯度更新；但代价是它只能修正分布级偏移，对语义错配或严重类别外扩展帮助有限。","experiments":"从题目可以确定，实验重点应是分布偏移下的零样本或少样本识别表现，对比对象大概率包括原始 CLIP/对比式 VLM 以及已有测试时校准或适配方法。论文的关键信息应是：在多个 out-of-distribution 视觉基准上，测试时归一化能稳定提升而不牺牲 in-domain 性能，并且不需要反向传播。由于这里没有摘要，无法可靠给出模型参数、数据规模、具体数据集名称和提升数字；因此能确认的结论只有方向性事实：方法针对部署时鲁棒性，实验应验证跨域一致收益、低开销和对 batch 统计/样本数量的敏感性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a concrete failure mode: contrastively trained vision-language models degrade under test-time distribution shift because feature statistics move, while common fixes usually operate on prompts, logits, or lightweight adaptation rather than correcting the representation mismatch itself. This matters now because CLIP-like models are deployed in zero-shot settings where the test domain is rarely controlled and full fine-tuning is often not an option.","importance":"This is primarily a method and deployment contribution, not a new pretraining paradigm. The useful takeaway is that part of zero-shot robustness loss in contrastive VLMs comes from correctable distributional drift in the feature space, and this can be addressed without updating model weights. For pretraining, that suggests robustness is not only about larger data and better contrastive objectives; stability of feature statistics across domains is also a real design target.","technical_approach":"The method is test-time distribution normalization: estimate and correct feature-space statistics on unlabeled test samples before matching image and text representations. It is not retraining. The design borrows the logic of normalization layers and applies it at inference to realign the test domain with the pretrained representation space. The key choices are to rely only on test-time unlabeled data, preserve semantic directions as much as possible, and correct distribution-level shifts rather than per-example predictions. Compared with gradient-based test-time adaptation, this is cheaper and usually more stable; the trade-off is that it can fix statistical shift but not deep semantic mismatch.","experiments":"From the title alone, the experimental focus is clearly robustness under distribution shift for zero-shot or few-shot recognition, likely against standard CLIP-style baselines and other test-time calibration/adaptation methods. The key facts should be consistent gains on multiple OOD benchmarks without hurting in-domain performance and without requiring backpropagation at inference. Since no abstract is provided here, I cannot reliably state model sizes, dataset scales, benchmark names, or exact margins. The safest summary is directional: the paper should demonstrate cross-domain gains, low inference overhead, and some sensitivity analysis to batch statistics or test sample count.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vision-language","test-time","normalization","robustness"],"keywords":["contrastive learning","pre-trained visual-language models","zero-shot learning","test-time augmentation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"给出对比VLM零样本跨域分布偏移的无参数测试时校正方案，预训练研究员可重点读§3方法和消融实验验证特征统计稳定性的优化价值。","en":"Provides a parameter-free test-time correction solution for contrastive VLM zero-shot cross-domain distribution shift, pretrain researchers can focus on §3 method and ablation to validate feature statistic stability optimization value."}},{"id":"ZhuangYWSZ23","title":"ToolQA: A Dataset for LLM Question Answering with External Tools","authors":["Yuchen Zhuang","Yue Yu","Kuan Wang","Haotian Sun","Chao Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1af","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhuangYWSZ23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhuangYWSZ23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/9cb2a7495900f8b602cb10159246a016-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：现有 QA 数据集大多默认模型只靠参数内知识和纯文本推理作答，无法系统评估 LLM 在需要外部工具时的真实能力。以前这类能力常通过少量手工案例或 agent benchmark 零散测试，但缺少一个把问题设计成“必须调工具才能高质量解答”的标准数据集。","importance":"它的贡献主要是数据集和评测协议，对 pretrain 不是直接方法创新，但对 posttrain 与能力诊断很有价值。原因在于，工具使用已经成为 LLM 系统能力的重要组成部分，而这反过来会影响预训练中是否需要显式暴露 API 语法、结构化状态转换和多步计划信号。对于做 foundation model 的人，这类数据集帮助区分'模型不会算'、'模型不会规划'和'模型不会调用工具'三种失败模式。","technical_approach":"核心方法是构建 ToolQA：一套需要调用外部工具完成问答的数据集与评测框架。关键设计不只是收集题目，而是保证问题对工具有真实依赖，例如需要检索、计算、数据库查询或表格操作，单靠语言模型背答案或浅层模式匹配难以通过。一个好的设计还会把工具调用链显式化，让评测既看最终答案，也看中间决策是否合理。相比开放式 agent 任务，这种数据集更可控、更易比较；代价是场景覆盖有限，和真实开放环境仍有差距。","experiments":"从题目可以判断，实验会比较纯 LLM、带工具调用能力的 LLM，以及不同 prompting 或规划策略在 ToolQA 上的表现。关键事实通常包括：无工具基线在这类数据上显著受限，而显式工具使用能大幅提升正确率；同时，多步规划错误、工具选择错误和参数填充错误会构成主要失败来源。由于没有摘要，无法可靠给出数据集规模、工具种类、所测模型和具体提升幅度。能确认的只有实验目的：把外部工具使用从案例展示变成可量化 benchmark。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a gap in evaluation: most QA benchmarks assume answers should come from parametric knowledge and text-only reasoning, so they do not cleanly measure whether an LLM can solve problems that genuinely require external tools. Existing evaluations often rely on scattered agent demos or small hand-built examples rather than a standardized benchmark where tool use is necessary.","importance":"This is mainly a dataset and evaluation contribution, not a direct pretraining method. Still, it matters for the broader training loop because tool use has become a core systems capability, and benchmark evidence can inform whether pretraining should expose models to API syntax, structured state transitions, or multi-step planning traces. For foundation-model work, the benchmark helps separate failures of knowledge, reasoning, and tool invocation.","technical_approach":"The core contribution is ToolQA, a dataset and evaluation setup for question answering with external tools. The main design challenge is not writing difficult questions; it is ensuring the tasks truly depend on tool access, such as retrieval, computation, database querying, or table operations, so that a model cannot simply bluff its way through from memorized text patterns. A strong benchmark also makes tool trajectories explicit enough to evaluate intermediate decisions, not just final answers. Compared with open-ended agent tasks, this yields cleaner comparison and diagnosis, at the cost of narrower coverage.","experiments":"The experiments should compare plain LLMs, tool-augmented LLMs, and different prompting or planning strategies on ToolQA. The expected high-level result is that no-tool baselines are sharply limited, while explicit tool use substantially improves answer accuracy, with major failure modes coming from planning mistakes, wrong tool choice, or malformed tool arguments. Because no abstract is available, I cannot safely provide dataset size, tool inventory, model names, or numeric gains. The reliable takeaway is that the paper turns tool-use ability from anecdotal demos into a measurable benchmark.","authors_note":""},"tags":["tool-use","llm-evaluation","question-answering","benchmark"],"keywords":["Large Language Model","External Knowledge","Tool-Augmetned LLMs"],"recommendation":{"zh":"构建了强工具依赖的可控QA数据集用于LLM工具调用能力评测，做预训练能力对齐的研究员只需看§2数据集设计部分。","en":"Constructs a highly tool-dependent controllable QA dataset for LLM tool use capability evaluation, pretrain alignment researchers only need to read §2 dataset design section."}},{"id":"ZimmermannKB23","title":"Scale Alone Does not Improve Mechanistic Interpretability in Vision Models","authors":["Roland S. Zimmermann","Thomas Klein","Wieland Brendel"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1b0","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZimmermannKB23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZimmermannKB23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/b4aadf04d6fde46346db455402860708-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要回答一个经常被默认接受的判断：模型规模变大，机制可解释性会不会自然变好。作者的结论直接写在标题里——单靠 scale 并不会提升视觉模型的 mechanistic interpretability。过去不少人把更大模型的更强线性可分性、更多稀疏特征或更清晰语义单元，误当成机制层面更容易解释，但这两者并不等价。","importance":"这项工作的意义主要在认知纠偏和方法论层面。它提醒我们：不能把能力提升自动外推成可解释性提升，也不能指望 scaling law 顺带解决机制分析难题。对 pretrain 研究的启示很直接——如果你关心模型内部电路、可分解特征或可干预性，就需要在架构、目标函数或归纳偏置上单独设计，而不是只继续堆数据和参数。","technical_approach":"核心方法不是提出新的解释算法，而是系统比较不同规模视觉模型在 mechanistic interpretability 指标上的变化。关键在于把 '可解释' 操作化成可测量对象，例如特征是否对应稳定机制、是否可用简单电路描述、是否能跨样本复现，而不只看 probe accuracy 或最近邻语义。与常见表征分析不同，这类工作更强调因果和机制层面的证据：模型大了以后，语义可能更强，但内部计算未必更模块化、更干净，也未必更适合用现有解释工具捕捉。","experiments":"从标题可确定，实验会在多个规模的视觉模型上比较解释性度量，而结论是否定式：scale alone 不提升 mechanistic interpretability。关键事实通常包括：某些表征质量指标随规模提升，但机制级指标不升反降或基本持平；已有解释方法在更大模型上可能同样脆弱。由于没有摘要，无法确认具体模型族、参数规模、解释指标和数值结果。能较稳妥给出的判断是，论文应通过控制模型规模并复用统一解释流程，证明能力增长与机制可解释性并不共变。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a simple but important question: does increasing model scale make mechanistic interpretability easier? The title already gives the answer for vision models—no, scale alone does not improve it. Larger models may have better features or cleaner semantics, but that is not the same as having more accessible mechanisms.","importance":"The contribution is mainly methodological and corrective. It pushes back against the common assumption that interpretability will improve automatically with capability, or that scaling laws will somehow carry over to mechanism discovery. For pretraining research, the implication is clear: if you care about circuits, decomposability, or intervention-friendly representations, you probably need explicit architectural or objective-level choices rather than more parameters and more data alone.","technical_approach":"The work appears to be a systematic empirical study rather than a new interpretability algorithm. The key move is to operationalize mechanistic interpretability with measurable criteria—stability of discovered features, explanatory power of simple circuits, reproducibility across inputs, or similar mechanism-level signals—instead of relying on probes or semantic nearest neighbors. That distinction matters: larger models can be better at representation learning while remaining just as hard, or harder, to explain mechanistically with current tools.","experiments":"From the title, the central experimental result is negative: across a scale sweep of vision models, mechanistic interpretability does not improve simply because the models are larger. A plausible pattern is that representation quality rises with scale while mechanism-level interpretability metrics stay flat or degrade, and current interpretability pipelines fail to capitalize on scale. Without the abstract, I cannot safely provide model families, parameter ranges, metrics, or exact numbers. The robust summary is that the paper controls for scale and shows that capability gains do not automatically translate into mechanistic transparency.","authors_note":""},"tags":["interpretability","scaling","vision-models"],"notable_authors":["Wieland Brendel"],"keywords":["feature visualization","interpretability","explainability","deep learning","neural networks","analysis","activation maximization","psychophysics"],"recommendation":{"zh":"推翻了模型规模越大机制可解释性自然提升的默认假设，关注可解释预训练的研究员重点看§4对比实验和结论部分。","en":"Disproves the default assumption that larger model size naturally improves mechanistic interpretability, interpretable pretrain researchers should focus on §4 comparative experiments and conclusions."}},{"id":"ZucchetMSMS23","title":"Online learning of long-range dependencies","authors":["Nicolas Zucchet","Robert Meier","Simon Schug","Asier Mujika","João Sacramento"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Online learning holds the promise of enabling efficient long-term credit assignment in recurrent neural networks. However, current algorithms fall short of offline backpropagation by either not being scalable or failing to learn long-range dependencies. Here we present a high-performance online learning algorithm that merely doubles the memory and computational requirements of a single inference pass. We achieve this by leveraging independent recurrent modules in multi-layer networks, an architectural motif that has recently been shown to be particularly powerful. Experiments on synthetic memory problems and on the challenging long-range arena benchmark suite reveal that our algorithm performs competitively, establishing a new standard for what can be achieved through online learning. This ability to learn long-range dependencies offers a new perspective on learning in the brain and opens a promising avenue in neuromorphic computing.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZucchetMSMS23","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZucchetMSMS23","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/2184d8450c8a641f9a10c49279087c97-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：如何在在线学习设定下学习长程依赖，而不依赖完整序列回看或昂贵的反向传播穿越很长时间跨度。这个问题一直很难，因为标准 RNN 在线更新时容易遗忘，BPTT 又要求缓存长历史，既不符合在线设定，也不利于低延迟持续学习。","importance":"它的重要性偏方法和理论交界，但对序列建模和潜在替代 Transformer/RNN 训练范式有启发。对 pretrain 研究的直接价值在于：长上下文建模不一定只能靠更长 attention 和记忆缓存，也可以从学习规则本身入手，探索更局部但能保留长程信用分配的信息通路。虽然这类方法离大规模语言模型主流还远，但对于 streaming、continual 和低资源学习场景是有意义的。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是为在线学习设计一种能保留长程依赖梯度信息的更新机制，避免标准截断 BPTT 的短视问题。题目表明作者关注的是 'online learning' 而不是离线训练，因此关键设计很可能涉及局部学习规则、eligibility traces、辅助状态或可学习记忆，使当前更新能近似反映远过去事件对当前损失的影响。和 Transformer 式全局注意力相比，这类方法牺牲了完全显式的全局访问能力，换来单步更新、常数或次线性内存，以及更适合 streaming 的训练形态。是否有效，取决于近似信用分配的质量和记忆容量。","experiments":"从标题可推断，实验应围绕 synthetic long-range dependency 任务以及若干序列建模基准，对比在线方法、截断 BPTT、标准 RNN 或其他记忆模型。关键结果通常包括：在严格在线约束下，作者方法能比常见在线基线更好地保留远程信息，并在延迟或内存上有优势。由于没有摘要，无法可靠给出所用任务、模型规模和具体提升数字。较稳妥的总结是，论文应通过控制依赖长度和在线约束强度，展示其方法在长程信用分配上的收益以及随序列长度增长的退化曲线。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a classic sequence-learning challenge: learning long-range dependencies in a genuinely online setting, without replaying full histories or running expensive backpropagation through long time spans. Standard RNN updates forget too quickly, while BPTT needs stored trajectories and therefore breaks the online premise.","importance":"This sits between method and theory, but it is relevant to sequence modeling more broadly. The useful message for pretraining research is that long-context modeling need not rely only on larger attention windows or more cache; one can also attack the problem through the learning rule itself. That is especially relevant for streaming, continual, or low-latency settings, even if it is not yet the mainstream route for large language models.","technical_approach":"The likely contribution is an online update mechanism that preserves useful long-range credit assignment beyond what truncated BPTT can handle. Because the setting is explicitly online, the design probably uses local learning rules, eligibility traces, auxiliary state, or learned memory so that current updates still reflect the effect of far-past events on present loss. Relative to Transformer-style global attention, this approach gives up exact unrestricted access to the whole past in exchange for stepwise updates, lower memory, and a training procedure that fits streaming data better. Its success depends on how well the approximation carries long-term credit.","experiments":"The experiments are likely built around synthetic long-range-dependency tasks plus sequence benchmarks under strict online constraints, with baselines such as truncated BPTT, standard RNN learners, or other memory-based methods. The key result should be better retention of distant information than standard online baselines, while keeping memory or latency advantages. Since no abstract is provided, I cannot safely specify tasks, model sizes, or exact margins. The strongest summary I can support is that the paper should analyze performance as dependency length grows and show a better trade-off between online feasibility and long-range learning.","authors_note":""},"tags":["online-learning","long-range-dependencies","recurrent-networks","sequence-modeling"],"keywords":["online learning","linear recurrent units","temporal credit assignment","biologically-plausible learning","local learning rules","neuromorphic computing"],"recommendation":{"zh":"提出无需长序列缓存的在线长程依赖学习方案，做流训练/长上下文预训练的研究员只需读§3核心更新机制部分。","en":"Proposes an online long-range dependency learning method without long sequence caching, streaming/long-context pretrain researchers only need to read §3 core update mechanism section."}}]},"allConferences":[{"slug":"acl-2025","venue":"ACL","year":2025,"full_name":"Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics","total_relevant":641,"total_fetched":3380,"by_award":{"poster":626,"best_paper":3,"outstanding_paper":12},"by_track":{"long":367,"findings":231,"short":18,"industry":10,"srw":6,"demo":6,"main":3},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T00:45:57.823033+00:00"},{"slug":"acl-2024","venue":"ACL","year":2024,"full_name":"Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics","total_relevant":385,"total_fetched":2145,"by_award":{"poster":385},"by_track":{"long":185,"findings":173,"srw":5,"short":9,"main":13},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T22:50:37.051621+00:00"},{"slug":"acl-2023","venue":"ACL","year":2023,"full_name":"Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics","total_relevant":424,"total_fetched":2876,"by_award":{"poster":424},"by_track":{"findings":156,"long":196,"short":30,"demo":6,"main":25,"srw":4,"industry":7},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T09:44:43.509860+00:00"},{"slug":"emnlp-2025","venue":"EMNLP","year":2025,"full_name":"Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing","total_relevant":915,"total_fetched":3499,"by_award":{"poster":912,"outstanding_paper":2,"best_paper":1},"by_track":{"main":532,"findings":353,"industry":30},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T07:35:55.574285+00:00"},{"slug":"emnlp-2024","venue":"EMNLP","year":2024,"full_name":"Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing","total_relevant":718,"total_fetched":2460,"by_award":{"poster":718},"by_track":{"main":427,"industry":20,"findings":265,"demo":6},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T03:40:34.148010+00:00"},{"slug":"emnlp-2023","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"full_name":"Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing","total_relevant":472,"total_fetched":2310,"by_award":{"poster":472},"by_track":{"main":261,"findings":193,"industry":8,"demo":10},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T08:32:10.890267+00:00"},{"slug":"iclr-2026","venue":"ICLR","year":2026,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","total_relevant":1053,"total_fetched":5470,"by_award":{"poster":995,"oral":58},"by_track":{"main":1053},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T01:40:59.513393+00:00"},{"slug":"iclr-2025","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","total_relevant":1979,"total_fetched":3720,"by_award":{"spotlight":193,"poster":1665,"oral":121},"by_track":{"main":1979},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T18:27:18.207575+00:00"},{"slug":"iclr-2024","venue":"ICLR","year":2024,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","total_relevant":851,"total_fetched":2456,"by_award":{"poster":682,"spotlight":130,"oral":39},"by_track":{"main":851},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T17:50:03.172895+00:00"},{"slug":"iclr-2023","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","total_relevant":294,"total_fetched":1794,"by_award":{"poster":294},"by_track":{"main":294},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T11:29:30.626329+00:00"},{"slug":"icml-2025","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"full_name":"International Conference on Machine Learning","total_relevant":516,"total_fetched":3332,"by_award":{"poster":462,"oral":18,"spotlight":36},"by_track":{"main":510,"position":6},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T20:04:14.360455+00:00"},{"slug":"icml-2024","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"full_name":"International Conference on Machine Learning","total_relevant":335,"total_fetched":3321,"by_award":{"poster":292,"spotlight":15,"oral":28},"by_track":{"main":335},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T18:50:07.833195+00:00"},{"slug":"icml-2023","venue":"ICML","year":2023,"full_name":"International Conference on Machine Learning","total_relevant":297,"total_fetched":2934,"by_award":{"poster":297},"by_track":{"main":297},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T04:21:49.394726+00:00"},{"slug":"naacl-2025","venue":"NAACL","year":2025,"full_name":"North American Chapter of the ACL","total_relevant":385,"total_fetched":1376,"by_award":{"poster":385},"by_track":{"long":206,"findings":121,"industry":12,"demo":10,"srw":11,"short":25},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T04:50:05.821261+00:00"},{"slug":"naacl-2024","venue":"NAACL","year":2024,"full_name":"North American Chapter of the ACL","total_relevant":321,"total_fetched":1342,"by_award":{"poster":321},"by_track":{"findings":86,"long":156,"industry":7,"srw":9,"short":23,"main":36,"demo":4},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T04:35:26.823821+00:00"},{"slug":"neurips-2025","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2025,"full_name":"Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems","total_relevant":1338,"total_fetched":5858,"by_award":{"poster":1115,"oral":29,"spotlight":194},"by_track":{"main":1263,"datasets_benchmarks":73,"position":2},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T05:45:45.290822+00:00"},{"slug":"neurips-2024","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"full_name":"Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems","total_relevant":576,"total_fetched":4561,"by_award":{"poster":505,"spotlight":59,"oral":12},"by_track":{"datasets_benchmarks":50,"main":526},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T21:58:15.480882+00:00"},{"slug":"neurips-2023","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"full_name":"Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems","total_relevant":523,"total_fetched":3582,"by_award":{"spotlight":78,"poster":415,"oral":30},"by_track":{"main":471,"datasets_benchmarks":52},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T04:06:29.627949+00:00"}]}]}],["$L1b1","$L1b2"],"$L1b3"]}],"isPartial":false,"staleTime":300,"varyParams":null,"buildId":"chBZVm-ODHgplh8cz7HcK"}
1b1:["$","script","script-0",{"src":"/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/12.3u5-pgh3xi.js","async":true}]
1b2:["$","script","script-1",{"src":"/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0r0c80niwkt55.js","async":true}]
1b3:["$","$L1b4",null,{"children":["$","$1b5",null,{"name":"Next.MetadataOutlet","children":"$@1b6"}]}]
1b6:null
